B1565 12325671 59545
THE THEATRE OF GODS JUDGEMENTS: Wherein is represented the admirable Justice of GOD against all notorious sinners, great and small, specially against the most eminent Persons in the World whose exorbitant power had broke through the barres of Divine and Humane Law. Collected out of Sacred, Ecclesiasticall, and Pagan Historie by two most reverend Doctors in Divinity, THOMAS BEARD of Huntington, and THO. TAYLOR, the famous late Preacher of Mary Aldermanbury in LONDON. The incomparable use of this Book for Ministers and others is largely expressed in the Preface. The fourth Edition, With Additions. God hath Woollen feet, but Iron hands. Aug. LONDON, Printed by S. I &: M. Hand are to be sold by Thomas Whitaker at the signe of the KINGS ARMES in St Pauls Churchyard, MDCXLVIII.
To His Highnesse IAMES Duke of YORK. SIR, IN the lowliest posture of Humility these Historicall Examples, ex∣tracted out of the choicest Au∣thors both Ancient and Moderne by two learned Doctors, are pre∣sented to Your Highnesse; Nei∣ther would they presume to put themselves under so high a Patronage, did I not humbly conceive, that being Historicall Peeces, they might be fit for Your Highnesse perusall, History being the proper'st and most advantagious Study that Princes can ap∣ply themselves unto, because it containes examples of all sorts; In History Brave men stand as Mar∣ble Statues erected in the Temple of Immortality, and Bad men as Malefactors upon Gibbets, ex∣pos'd to the publick view of the world to all Poste∣rity. Although Your Highnesse hath a Royall Father for an incomparable living Patterne of all the
Cardinall Vertues with their Attendants, (which breaking through these late Clouds of Civill Confu∣sions) shin'd with an advantage of lustre to the won∣derment of the world) as also against any thing that may have the least vicinity with Vice, to imitate, yet, humbly under favour, variety of Examples, as of Witnesses in Law, cannot doe amisse, the one for confirmation of Truth, the other for di∣rection of Life; In which opinion I rest, Your Highnesse most Humble, and most obedient Servant, M. HERON.
THE PREFACE. IF to avoid and eschew vice (according to the saying of the Poet) be a chiefe vertue, and as it were the first degree of wisedome; then it is a necessary point, to know what vice and vertue is, and to discerne the evill and good which either of them bring forth, to the end to beware lest we dash our selves unawares against vice in stead of vertue, and be caught with the deceitfull baits thereof. For this cause the great and famous Philosopher, about to lay open the nature of Morall vertues (according to that knowledge and light which nature afforded him) contented not himselfe with a simple narration of the properties, essence, and object of them, but opposed to every vertue on each side the contrary and repugnant vice; to the end that the sight of them, being so out of square, so hurtfull and pernicious, vertue it selfe might be more admirable, and in greater esteem. And for this cause also God himself, our soveraigne and per∣fect Law-giver, that he might fashion and fit us to the mould of true and so∣lid vertue, useth ostner negative prohibitons then affirmative command∣ments in his Law; to the end above all things to distract and turne us from cvill; whereunto we are of our selves too too much inclined. And as by this, meane sin is discovered and made knowne unto us, so is the pnnishment al∣so of sin set before our eyes, by those threatnings and curses which are there denounced: to the end that whom the promises of life and salvation could not allure and perswade to doe well, them the feare of punishment (which followeth sin as a shadow doth the body) might bridle and restraine from giving them over to impiety. Now then if the very threatnings ought to serve for such good use, shall not the execution and performance of them serve much more? to wit, when the tempest of Gods wrath is not onely de∣nounced, but also throwne downe effectually upon the heads of the mighty ones of the world, when they are disobedient and rebellious against God. And hereupon the Prophet saith, That when Gods judgements are upon earth, then the Inhabitants learne justice. And doubtlesse it is most true, that every one ought to reap profit to himself by such examples, as well them wch are presented daily to their view by experience, as them which have been done in times past, and are by benefit of History preserved from oblivion. And in this regard History is accounted a very necessary and profitable thing, for that in recalling to minde the truth of things past, which otherwise would be buried in silence, it setteth before us such effects (as warnings and admonitions touching good and evill) and layeth vertue and vice so naked before our eyes, with the punishments or rewards inflicted or bestowed up∣on the followers of each of them, that it may justly bee called an easie and profitable Apprentiship or Schoole for every man to learne to get wise∣dome at another mans cost. Hence it is that History is termed of the anci∣ent Philosophers, The record and register of Time, the light of Truth, and the mistresse and looking-glasse of mans life: insomuch as under the person of another man it teacheth and instructeth all those that apply their mindes unto it, to governe and carry themselves vertuously and honestly in this life.
Wherefore they deserve great praise and commendation, that have taken paines to inroll and put in writing the memorable acts and occurrents of their times, to communicate the same to their posterity: for there the high and wonderfull works of God doe most clearely, and as it were to the view, present themselves, as his justice and providence: whereby albeit hee guideth and directeth especially his owne, to wit, those that in a speciall and singular manner worship and trust in him (as by the sacred Histories, touching the state and government of the ancient and Primitive Church, it may appeare) yet hee ceaseth not for all that to stretch the arme of his power over all, and to handle and rule the prophane and unbeleeving ones at his pleasure; for he hath a soveraign Empire and predominance over all the World; And unto him belongeth the direction and principall conduct of humane matters, in such sort that nothing in the world commeth to passe by chance or adventure, but onely and alwayes by the prescription of his will; according to the which he ordereth and disposeth by a strait and direct motion, as well the generall as the particular, and that after a strange and admirable order. And this a man may perceive, if he would but mark and consider the whole body, but especially the end and issue of things: wherein the great and marvailous vertues of God, as his bounty, justice, and power, doe most clearely shine; when he exalteth and favoureth some, and debaseth and frowneth upon others, blesseth and prospereth whom hee please; and on the contrarie, curseth and destroyeth whom he please, and that deserve it It is hee also which erecteth principalities, and which maintaineth Common-wealths, Kingdomes, and Empires, untill by the sum and weight of their iniquities they sink themselves into ruine and de∣struction. And herein is he glorified by the execution of his most just and righteous judgements, when the wicked after the long abuse of his lenety, benignity, and patience, doe receive the wages and reward of their iniqui∣ties. In this (I say once again) shineth out the wonderfull and incompre∣hensible wisedome of God, when by the due ordering of things so different and so many, hee commeth still to one and the same marke which hee once prescribed, to wit, the punishment of the world according to their deme∣rits. And this same is most manifest and apparant even in the Histories of prophane Writers, albeit in their purpose it was never intended nor thought upon, nor yet regarded almost of any that read the same; men con∣tenting themselves for the most part with the simple recitall of the story, therein to take pleasure and passe away time, without respecting any fur∣ther matter: Notwithstanding, the true and principall use of their writings ought to be, diligently to marke the effects of Gods Providence, and of his justice, whereby to learne to conteine our selves within the bounds of mo∣desty and the feare of God; seeing that they which have carried themselves any thing uprightly in equity, temperance, and other naturall vertues, have been in some sort spared: and the rest (bearing the punishment of their ini∣quities) have falne into destruction. This consideration ought to perswade every man to turne from evill, and to follow that which is good, seeing that the Lord sheweth himselfe so in∣censed against all them which lead a wicked, damnable, and perverse life. And this is the cause why I, having noted the great and horrible punish∣ments wherewith the Lord in most righteous judgement hath scourged the world for sin, according to that which is contained as well in sacred as pro∣phane
Histories; having gathered them together, and sorted them one af∣ter another in their severall rooms, according to the diversity of the offen∣ces, and order and course of time, which as neare as I could I endeavoured to sollow, to the end to lay downe, as it were in one Table, and under one Aspect, the great and fearefull judgements of God upon them that have re∣belled or repugned his holy will. And this I do not with purpose to com∣prehend them all (for that were not onely difficult but impossible) but to lay open the most notable & remarkable ones that came to my knowledge; to the end that the most wicked, dissolute, and disordered sinners, that with loose reines runne fiercely after their lust, if the manifest tokens of Gods severity presented before their eyes doe not touch them, yet the cloud and multitude of examples, through the sight of the inevitable anger and ven∣geance of God upon evill livers, might terrifie and somewhat curb them: Perjurers, Idolaters, Blasphemers, and other such wicked and prophane wretches, with murderers, whoremongers, adulterers, ravishers, & tyrants, shall here see by the mischiefe that hath falne upon their likes, that which hangeth before their eyes, and is ready to lay hold of them also. For albeit for a time they sleep in their sins and blindnesse, delighting in their plea∣sures, and taking sport in cruelties and evill deeds, yet they draw after them the line wherewith (being more ensnared then they were aware) they are taken and drawne to their finall destruction. And this may teach and advertise both those that are not yet obstinate in their sins, to bring themselves to some amendment; and those that feare God already, to strengthen and encourage them in the pursuit and continu∣ance in their good course. For if God shew himselfe so severe a revenger of their sinnes that take pleasure in displeasing him, there is no doubt but on the contrary he will shew himselfe bountifull, gracious, and liberall in re∣warding all them according to his promise which seeke to please him, and conforme their lives unto his will. Great and small, young and old, men and women, and all other, of what degree and condition soever, may here learne at other mens charges, how to governe themselves in duty towards God, and betwixt themselves, by a holy and unblameable life in mutuall peace and unity; and by shunning and eschewing sin, against the which God (a most just Judge) powreth forth his vengeance, even upon the heads of them that are guilty thereof. Beside, here is ample matter and argument to stop the mouthes of all Epicures and Atheists of our age, and to leave them confounded in their errors, seeing that such and so many occurrents and punishmēts are manifest proofs, that there is a God above that guideth the stern of the world, and that taketh care of humane matters, & that is just in punishing the unjust and malicious. Againe, whereas so much evill, and so many sins have reigned and swayed so long time, and do yet reign and sway upon the earth, we may behold the huge corruption and perversity of man∣kinde, and the rotten fruits of that worme-eaten root, Originall sin: when we are not directed nor guided by the holy Spirit of God, but lest unto our owne nature. And hereby true faithfull Christians may take occasion so much the more to acknowledge the great mercy and singular favour of God toward them, in that they being received to mercy, are renewed to a better conversation of life then others. In brief, a man may here learne (if he be not altogether void of judgement and understanding) to have sin in hatred and detestation, considering the wages and reward thereof; and how
the justice of God pursueth it continually, even to the extreamest executi∣on, which is both sharp and rigorous. Touching the word Iudgement, I have imitated the language of Holy Scripture: wherein as the Ordinances and Commandements of God are called Judgements, because in them is contained nothing but that which is just, right, and equall: so likewise the punishments inflicted by God up∣on the despisers of his Commandements are called by the same name, as in Exod. 6. 6. 2 Chron. 20. 12. & 22. 8. Ezech. 5. 8. & 11. 9. and elsewhere, because they also are as just as the former, proceeding from none other fountaine save the most righteous judgement of God; whereof none can complaine but unjustly. The Names of the Authors from whom the most part of the Examples contained in this book are collected. Moses and other sa∣cred Writers. Tertullian. Cyprian. Eusebius. Socrates. Theodoret. Sozomenes. Nicephor. Ruffinus. Suidas Chrysostome. Luther. Illyricus. Herodotus. Thucydides. Dion. Halycarnasseus. Diodorus Siculus. Polybeus. Plutarch. Herodian. Dyon. Procopius. Iornandes. Agathius. Aelianus. Tit. Livius. Salustius. Suetonius. Corn. Tacitus. Amm. Marcellinus. Iustinus. Eutropius. Lampridius. Spartianus. Flavius Vopiscus. Cuspinianus. Orosius. Aimoinus. Gregor. Turonensis. Anton Volscus. Paulus Diaconus. Luitprandus. Olaus magnus Gothus. Sabellicus. Anton. Panormitanus. Aeneus Silvius. Ravisius. Hieronymus Marius. Alexander ab Alexandro. Petrus Pramonstratensis. Mich. Ritius Neapolita∣nus. Fulgosius. Fran. Picus Mirandula Bembus. Antonius Bonfinus. Munsterus. Iohan. Wierus. Platina. Nauclerus. Vincentius. Hugo Cluniacensis. Benno Baleus. Gagninus. Paulus Aemilius. Discipulus de Tempore. Acts and Monuments. Carion. Chronicon. Beza. Iosephus. Manlii Collectanea. Stow Chronica. Froyssard. Enguerran de Monstrel. Philip de Comines. Nicholas Gilles. Guicciardine. Paulus Iovius. Benzoin Milanois. Iob. Fincelius. Centuriae Magdeburg. Abbas Vrispurgensis. Philippus. Melancthon. Sleidanus. Lanquet. Chronica.
The first Booke, OF THE WORTHY AND MEMORABLE HISTORIES of the great and marvellous Iudgements of God sent upon the World for their mis∣deeds against the Commandements of the first and second Table. CHAP. 1. Touching the Corruption and Perversity of this World, how great it is. EVen as one that taketh pleasure to be∣hold a pleasant and delightsome place, a piece of ground covered and painted with all manner of fine flowers, a garden decked, and as it were cloathed with exquisite plants and fruitfull trees, is much grieved so soone as he perceiveth all this beauty and pleasure suddenly to be withered and scorched by the vio∣lence of some outragious tempest: or if he be constrained to cast his eyes from them, upon some other place by, all cragged and parched, full of briers and brambles. In like sort, a man cannot chuse but be sore grieved and discontent, when hee beholdeth on the one side the wholsome light of the Sunne, whereby the heavens doe many wayes distill their favours upon this World, gloriously to advance it selfe: on the other side he per∣ceiveth such an army of thicke clouds and palpable darknesse, from whence such a number of disorders and hurliburlies do arise, that most strangely disfigure the face of the whole World: when that he which ought to be gentle and peaceable, is become mischievous and quarrellous: in stead of being true and single hearted, disloyall and deceirfull: in stead of being modest, well governed, and courteous, is proud, cruell, and dissolute: in stead of serving God, serveth his owne humors and affections: Which kinde
of behaviour is too common and usuall; for there is not any kind of wic∣kednesse which is not found in this ranke. Vngodlinesse vomiteth up his fury together with injustice, in those men of whom it is said, There is none Psal. 14. that understandeth or secketh after God: their throat is an open sepulchre, they use deceit in their tongues, the poyson of Aspes is under their lips, they have no∣thing in their mouths but cursing and bitternesse, their feet are swift to shed bloud: destruction and misery is in their waies, and they have not knowne the way of peace: In summe, the feare of God is not before their eyes. From whence it commeth, that being not restrained by any bridle, like untamed colts broke loose, they give the full swinge to their bold and violent affections, running fiercely to all filthinesse and mischiese: and being thus enraged, some of them with horrible blasphemies (most villanously) speake and doe in de∣spight of God, and deny him that created them, and sent them into the World: Others are not ashamed to be open forswearers of themselves, violating and breaking every promise, without regard of faith or honesty: Others, as they are of cruell and bloudy natures, so they doe not cease to exercise these their natures by outragious practises: to some of them whoredomes and adulteries are no more esteemed, than as sports and pastimes, whereof they boast themselves: to another sort, cousenings, extor∣tions, and robberies, are ordinary exercises, whereof they make their best occupations. All which evils are so common and so usuall at this time amongst men, that the World seemeth truly to be nothing else but an ocean full of hideous monsters, or a thicke forrest full of theeves and rob∣bers, or some horrible wildernesse wherein the inhabitants of the earth, being savage and unnaturall, void of sence and reason, are transformed into bruit beasts, some like Tygres or Lyons, others like Wolves or Foxes, others like Dogges and Swine: Oh sinfull nation (would the man of God say if hee lived at this houre) a people laden with iniquity, a seed of the wicked, corrupt children, they have forsaken the Lord, they have provoked the Holy One of Isay. 14. Israel to anger. The noble and high minded are proud to disdaine the lower, and ready alwaies to smite them, making their countenance pale with vices and oathes: the Magistrate partiall and full of brides, overthroweth equity: the Merchant covetous and desirous of gaine remembreth not his integrity: nor the labourer his simplicity. And so vertue in most men lyeth buried, piety banished, justice oppressed, and honesty troden under foot: in such sort, that all things being as it were overthrowne and turned upside downe, men speake evill of good, and good of evill, accounting darknesse light, and light darknesse, sowre sweet, and sweet sowre. And by such dis∣order it commeth to passe, that the most vertuous are despised, whilest naughty-packs and vitious fellowes are esteemed and made much of.
CHAP. II. What is the cause of the great overflow of Vice in this age. IF wee would consider from whence it is that this great disorder and corruption of manners doth arise, we should finde especially that it is because the world every day groweth worse and worse, according to the saying of our Saviour and Redeemer (Christ Iesus the Sonne of God) That in the latter dayes (which are these wherein we live) Iniquity shall be increased. And herein wee shall perceive even the just ven∣geance of God to light upon the malice and unthankfulnesse of men, to whom when hee would draw neere, to doe good unto by offering them the cleere light of his favour, the more they strive to alienate and keep themselves aloofe from him, and are so farre from being bettered thereby, that they shew themselves a great deale more malitious and obstinate than ever they did before: not unlike to those who by nature being bleare eyed, and tender sighted, are rather dazled and dimmed by the Sunne beames, than any wayes enlightened: so men in stead of grow∣ing better, grow worse, and every adde some increase to their wicked∣nesse: to whom also many great men give elbow-roome and permission to sinne, whilest justice slumbreth, and the not punishing of misdeeds giveth them liberty and boldnesse to commit their wickednesse: so that some of these mighty ones shew themselves but little better than the other. A mischiefe to be lamented above the rest, drawing after it an horrible overflow of all evils, and like a violent streame spoyling every where as it goeth: when as they that ought to governe the sterne of the Commonwealth, let all goe at randome, suffering themselves to be roc∣ked asleep with the false and deceitfull lullaby of effeminate pleasures and delights of the flesh; or at least letting themselves be carried head∣long by the tempest of their owne strong and furious passions, into im∣minent danger and shipwrackes: when as their carefull watch fulnesse and modesty, accompanied with the traine of other good and commendable vertues, ought to serve them for saliscables, ankers, masts, and skuttles, whereby to governe and direct the Vessell whose steersman they are ap∣pointed, and those that are their charge, to whom they ought to give a good example of life, and to bee unto them as it were a glasse of ver∣tue: for they are set aloft, as it were upon a stage, to bee gazed at of eve∣ry commer. Their faults and vices are like foule spots and scars in the face, which cannot by any means bee hid. And therefore they ought to be carefull to lead an honest and vertuous life, that thereby they might perswade and move the meaner sort of people to doe the like: For it is a true saying of the Philosopher, Like Prince, like People; insomuch that every one desireth to frame himselfe according to the humour of his superiour, whose will and manners serve simply for a law to do evill: to the which men use by taking any occasion too hastily to give them∣selves over with too much liberty: whereupon followeth an unrecoverable
ruine, no lesse than the fall of a great house, which for want of pillars and supporters that should uphold it, suddenly falleth to the ground; so this ship being deprived of her governour, is set loose and layd open to the mercy of the waves, violence of windes, and rage of tempests, without any direction and government: and so the body of man, not having any more the light of his owne eyes, abideth in darknesse all blinded, not able to do any thing that is right and good, but ready every minute to fall into some pit. And this is the perversity and corruption of this world. CHAP. III. That Great men which will not abide to be admonished of their faults, cannot escape punishment by the hand of God. IN this poore and miserable estate every man rocketh him∣selfe asleep, and flattereth his owne humour, every man pursueth his accustomed course of life, with an obstinate minde to doe evill: yea many of those that have power and authority over others, according as they are indued and perswaded with a foolish conceit of them∣selves, make themselves beleeve, that for them every thing is lawfull, and that they may doe whatsoever they please; never imagining, that they shall give up an account of their actions, to receive any cha∣stisement or correction for them; even as though there were no God at all that did behold them. And being thus abused by this vaine and fickle security, they swimme in their sinnes, and plunge them∣selves over head and eares in all kinde of security; giving hearty wel∣come and entertainment to all that approve and applaud their man∣ners, and that study to feed and please their humour. As contrariwise none lesse welcome unto them, than they that tell them of their faults, and contradict them never so little: for they cannot abide in any case to bee reprooved, whatsoever they doe. And now adayes every base companion will forsooth storme and fume as soone, if hee be reproved of a fault, as if hee had received the greatest wrong in the world: so much is every man pleased with himselfe, and puffed up with his owne vice and foolish vanities. And what should a man doe in this case? It is as hard to redresse those great mischiefes, as if wee should goe about to stop and hinder the course of a mighty streame there where the banke or causey is broken downe: if it bee not by applying extreame and desperate medicines, as to de∣sperate diseases, which are as it were given over by the Physitian, and to the which a light purgation will doe no good. For as for admonitions and warnings, they are not a whit regarded: but they that give them, are derided or laughed to scorne, or reviled for their labours. What must wee therefore doe? it is necessary that
wee assay by all means to bring these men (if it be possible) to some mo∣desty and feare of God; which if it cannot bee done by willing and gentle means, force and violence must be used to plucke them out of the fire of Gods wrath, to the end they be not consumed: if not all, yet at least those that are not grown to that height of stubbornnesse, and of whom there is yet left some hope of amendment. For even as when a Captaine hath not prevailed by summoning a city to yeeld up it selfe, he by and by placeth his cannon against their walls, to put them in seare; in like sort must we bring forth against the proud and high minded men of this world, an army of Gods terrible judgements throwne downe by mighty and puissant hand on the wicked, more terrible and searefull than all the roaring or double canons in the World, whereby the most proud are destroyed and consumed even in this life, all their pride and power, how great soever it be, being not able to turne backe the vengeance of God from lighting upon their heads, to their utter destruction and confusion. And it is ma∣nifest by infinite examples. Now because that the nature of man is fleshly, and given to be touched with things that are presented before their faces, or hath been done before time; it is a more forcible motive to stirre them up, than that which as yet cannot be made manifest, but is to come. There∣fore I purpose here to set down the great and fearfull judgments, wherwith God hath already plagued many in this world, especially them of high degree, whose example will serve for a glasse both for these that live now, or shall live hereafter. And to the end that the justice of God may more cleerely appeare and shew it selfe in such strange events; before we go any further, we will run over certaine necessary points concerning this matter. CHAP. IIII. How the Iustice of God is more evidently declared upon the mighty ones of this world, than upon any other, and the cause why. SEeing then that these men are more guilty and culpa∣ble of sinne than any other, they deserve so much a more grievous punishment, by how much their mis∣deeds are more grievous: for doubtlesse, There is a God that judgeth the earth (as the Psalmist saith) who as hee is benigne and mercifull towards those that feare and obey him, so he will not suffer iniquity to goe unpuni∣shed: This is hee (saith the Prophet) that executeth justice, mercy, and judgement upon the earth: for if it be the duty of an earthly Prince, to exercise not only clemency & gentlenesse, but also sharpnes and severity, therby punishing & chastising malefactors, to suppresse all disorders in the common wealth; then it is very necessary, that the justice of our great God, to whom all soveraign rule & authority belongs, and who is the Iudge over al the world, should either manifest it self in this world, or in the world to come: & chiefly towards them which are in the highest places of acount,
who being more hardened and bold to sin, do as boldly exempt themselves from all corrections and punishments due unto them, being altogether un∣willing to be subject to any order of justice or law whatsoever: and there∣fore by how much the more they cannot be punished by man, and that hu∣mane lawes can lay no hold upon them; so much the rather God himselfe becommeth executioner of his owne justice upon their pates: and in such sort, that every man may perceive his hand to be on them. Let any adversity or affliction light upon a man of low degree, or which is poore and desolate, no man considereth of it rightly; but talking thereof, mn cease not to impute the cause of this poore soules misery, either to poverty, or want of succour, or some other such like cause. Therefore if any such be in griefe, or by chance fallen into some pit and drowned, or robbed and killed in the way by theeves: straightway this is the saying of the world, That it com∣meth thus to passe, either because he was alone without company, or desti∣tute of help, or not well looked to and regarded: and thus they passe over the matter. But as concerning great men, when they are any way afflicted, no such pretences or excuses can be alleadged; seeing they want neither servants to attend upon them, nor any other means of help to succor them: therefore when these men are overtaken and surprised with any great evill, which by no means they can eschew, and when their bold and wicked enter∣prises are pursued and concluded with strange and lamentable events, in this we must acknowledge an especiall hand of God, who can intangle and pull downe the proudest and arrogantest He that lives, and those whom the world feareth to meddle withall. These proud gallants are they against whom God displaieth his banner of power more openly, than against meaner and baser persons: because these poore soules finde oftentimes to their paines, that they are punished without cause, and tormented and vex∣ed by those tyrants, not having committed any offence at all, to deserve it: whereas (as Philip Comine saith) who dare be so bold as to controll or repre∣hend a King and his favorites, or to make enquiry of his misdeeds: or ha∣ving made inquisition of them, who dare presume to informe the Iudge therof? who dare stand up to accuse them? who dare sit down to judge them? Nay who dare take knowledge of them? and lastly, who dare assay to pu∣nish them? Seeing then in this case, that our worldly justice hath her hands bound behind her from executing that which is right; it must needs be that the sovereigne Monarch of heaven and earth should mount up into his Throne of Iudgement, and from thence give his definitive unchangable sentence, to deliver up the most guilty and hainous sinners to those paines and torments which they have deserved; and that after a strange and extra∣ordinary manner, which may serve for an example to all others.
CHAP. V. How all men, both by the Law of God and Nature, are inexcusable in their sinnes. NOw to the end that no man should pretend ignorance for an excuse, God hath bestowed upon every one a certaine knowledge and judgement of good and evill, which being naturally engraven in the tables of mans heart, is commonly called the Law of Nature, wherby every mans owne conscience giveth sufficient testimo∣ny unto it selfe, when in his most secret thoughts, it ei∣ther accuseth or excuseth him: for there is not a man living, which doth not know in his heart, that he doth an evill deed, when he wrongeth another, although he had never been instructed elsewhere in that point. So, although that in Tarquinius Superbus time (Cicero saith) there was no written Law established in Rome, forbidding the ravishing and deflouring of wives and virgins, yet the wicked sonne of this Tarquine was not therefore lesse guilty of an hainous crime, when contrary to the Law of Nature he violently robbed Lucrece of her chastity: for no man can be ignorant, that it is a most grievous crime to lay siege to the chastity of a married woman, with such outrage: and so the whole people of Rome did esteeme of it, as a crime most wicked, strange, and intolerable, and worthy of grievous punishment. Every man knoweth thus much, that hee ought not to doe that to another, which he would not another should do to him: which sentence the Emperour Severus made alwaies to bee spoken aloud, and declared by the sound of the trumpet, in the way of advertisement, as often as punishment was taken upon any offendor, as if it were a generall Law pertaining to all men. This is that equity and justice which ought to be ingraffed in our hearts, & whereof nature her self is the schoolmistresse: from this fountaine all humane and civill Lawes are derived: if we had not rather say that they are derived from that true spring of equity, which is in the Law of God, which Law he hath given for a plaine and familiar ma∣nifestation of his will, concerning just, holy, and reasonable things, tou∣ching the service, honour, and glory, which is due unto himselfe, and the mutuall duty, friendship, and good will, which men owe one to another: whereunto he exhorteth and enticeth every one by faire and gracious pro∣mises, and forbiddeth the contrary by great and terrible threatnings (so gentle and mercifull is he towards us, and desirous of our good.) This is that Law which was published before the face of more than six hundred thousand persons, with the mighty and resounding noise of Trumpet, with earthquake, fire, and smoake, and with thunders and lightnings, to make men more attentive to heare; and more prepared to receive it with all hu∣mility, feare, and reverence; and also to put them in minde, that if they were disobedient and rebellious, he wanted no power and ability to punish them; for he hath lightning, thunder, and fire, prepared instruments to exe∣cute his just vengeance, which no creature under heaven is able to avoid,
when by the obstinate transgression of wicked men he is provoked to anger and indignation against them. This is that holy law which hath been set forth by the Prophets; by the rule whereof, all their warnings, exhortings, and reproovings have been squared. To this Law, the onely begotten Son of God, our Saviour and Redeemer Iesus Christ, conformed his most holy doctrine, bringing men to the true use and observation thereof, from which they had declined, and whereof he is the end, the scope, and perfect accom∣plishment: so that so farre it is that a Christian man may be ignorant of it, and have it in contempt, that none can be counted and reputed a true Christian, if hee frame not his life by the rule thereof; if not fully, yet at least as farre forth as hee is able: otherwise, what a shame and reproach is it for men to call themselves by the name of Gods children, Christians, and Catholiques, and yet to doe every thing clean contrary to the will of God, to make no reckoning of his Law, to lead a dissolute and disordered life, and to be as evill, if not worse than the vilest miscreants and Infidels in the world? God willeth and requireth that he alone should bee worshipped and prayed unto; and yet the greater part of the world are Idolaters, and full of superstition, worship Images, stockes, and stones, and pray to crea∣tures, in stead of the Creator. God forbiddeth us to sweare by his name in vaine: and yet what is more rise than that? so that a man can heare no∣thing else but oaths and blasphemies. Many for the least trifle in the world sticke not to sweare and forsweare themselves. God forbiddeth theft, mur∣ther, adultery, and false witnesse bearing, and yet nothing so common as backbitings, slanders, forgeries, false reports, whoredomes, cousenings, robberies, extortions, and all manner of envies & enmities. God hath com∣manded, that we love our neighbours as our selves; but we, in stead of love, hate, despise, and seeke to procure the hurt and damage of one another, not regarding any thing but our owne peculiar profit and advantage. Is not this a manifest and profest disobedience, and intolerable rebellion against our Maker? What childe is there that is not bound to honour and reverence his father? What servant, that is not bound to obey his master, and to doe all that he shall will him? What subject, that is not tied in subjection to his Prince and Soveraigne? Yet there is not one which will not confesse, yea and sweare too with his mouth, That God is his Lord and Father. Which if it be true, what is then the cause that in stead of serving and pleasing him, they doe nothing else but displease and offend his Majesty? Is not this the way to provoke his wrath, and stirre up his indignation against them? Is it any marvell if he be incensed with anger, if hee be ar∣med with revenge, and send abroad his cruell scourges upon the earth, to strike and whip it withall? Is it any wonder, if hee pile up the wicked ones on heaps, and shoot out his revengefull arrowes against them, and make them drunken with their owne bloud, and make his sword of justice as sharp as a rasor, to punish those Rebels that have rebelled against him? For vengeance is mine (saith he) and belongeth only unto me. Whosoever there∣fore he be that followeth the desires and concupiscence of his owne flesh, and this wicked world, and shall lead a life contrary to the instruction and ordinance of the law of God, yea although he never heard there∣of, yet is hee guilty thereof, and worthy to be accursed; for so much as his owne conscience ought to serve for a law unto himselfe, by the which he is condemned in those evill actions which hee committeth:
even as Paul saith, All that have sinned without the Law, shall likewise perish with∣out the Law. Rom. 2. 12. CHAP. VI. How the greatest Monarchs in the World ought to be subject to the Law of God, and consequently the Lawes of Man and Nature. EVery man confesseth this to be true, That by how much the more benefits and dignity he hath received from another, by so much he is the more bounden and beholden to him: now it is so, that Kings and Princes are those upon whom God hath bestowed more plentifully his gifts and graces, than upon any other, whom hee hath made as it were his Lievtenants in the world: for hee hath extolled and placed them above others, and bedecked them with honour, giving them power and authority to rule and raigne, by putting people in subjection to them; and therefore so much the more are they bound to re-acknowledge him againe, to the end to doe him all honour and homage which is required at their hands. Therefore David exhorteth them, to serve the Lord even with reve∣rence. Psal. 2. 11. This then their high and superintendent estate is no priviledge to exempt them from the subjection and obedience which they owe unto God, whom they ought to reverence above all things. Yee Princes and high Lords (saith the Prophet) give you unto the Lord eternall glory and strength: Psal. 29. 1. give unto him glory due unto his name, and cast your selves before him to do him reverence. If they owe so much honour unto God as to their Soveraigne, then surely it must follow, that they ought to obey his voice, and feare to offend him; and so much the rather, because hee is a great deale more strong and terrible than they, able to cause his horrible thunderbolts to tumble upon their heads, they being not able once to withstand his puis∣sance, but constrained very often to tremble thereat. In all that prescrip∣tion Deut. 17. 15. and ordinance ordained and set down by God concerning the office of Kings, there is no mention made of any liberty he giveth them to live after their owne lusts, and to doe every thing that seemeth good in their own eyes: but hee enjoyneth them expresly, to have alwaies with them the booke of his Law, delighteth to reade and meditate therein, and thereby to learne to feare and reverence his name, by observing all the precepts that are contained in that booke. As for civill and naturall Lawes, inso∣much as they are founded upon equity and right (for otherwise they were no Lawes) therein they are agreeable to, and as it were dependents on the Law of God; as is well declared by Cicero in the first and second booke of his Lawes; for even they also condemne theeves, adulterers, murtherers, parricides, and such like. If then Princes be subject to the Law of God, (as I am about to shew) there is no doubt but that they are likewise sub∣ject to those civill Lawes, by reason of the equity and justice which there∣in is commended unto us. And if (as Plato saith) the Lawes ought to be Dial. 4. de Legib. above the Prince, not the Prince above the Lawes, it is then most manifest,
that the Prince is tyed unto the Lawes, even in such sort, that without the same, the government which hee swayeth can never be lawfull and com∣mendable. And if it be true, that the Magistrate is or ought to be a spea∣king Law (as it is said) and ought to maintaine the authority and credit thereof, by the due and upright administration of Iustice (for if hee did not this, he were a dumbe Law, and without life) how is it possible that he should make it of authority and force with others, if hee despiseth and transgresseth it himselfe? David did never assume so much to himselfe, as to desire to have liberty to doe what hee listed in his Kingdome, but wil∣lingly submitted himselfe to that which his office and duty required; ma∣king, even then when he was installed and established King over the whole Land, a Covenant of peace with the Princes and Deputies of the people: 2. Sam. 5. and we know, that in every covenant and bargaine both parties are bound to each other, by a mutuall bond to performe the conditions which they are agreed upon. The like is used at the coronation of Christian Kings, whereas the people is bound and sworne to doe their alleagance to their Kings; so the Kings are also solemnely sworne to maintaine and defend true Religion, the estate of Iustice, the peace and tranquillity of their sub∣jects, and the right and priviledges (which are nothing but the Lawes) of the Realme: whereas David was by the Prophet Nathan reproved for the adultery and murder which he had committed, he neither used any excuse, nor alledged any priviledge whereby he was exempted from the rigour of the law to justifie his fact, but freely confessed without any cloake, that he had sinned. Whereby it appeareth of how small strength and authority their opinion and words be, which thinke or affirme that a Prince may dispense with the lawes at his pleasure: by this opinion was the mother in law of Antonius Caracalla seduced; who having by her lascivious and filthy allurements enticed her sonne in law to lust, and love her, and to de∣sire her for his wife, perswaded him that he might bring his purpose to passe, and that it was lawfull enough for him, if hee would, though for other it was unlawfull, seeing that hee was Emperour, and that it belon∣geth not to him to receive, but to give lawes: by which perswasion, that brave marriage was concluded and made up, contrary to the law of nature and nations, and to all honesty and vertue. So it was reported how Cam∣byses Herod. li 3. tooke his owne sister to wife, whom notwithstanding a little after hee put to death: which thing being not usuall then among the Persians, not daring to enterprise it (although hee was a most wicked man) with∣out the advice of the Magistrates and Counsellors of his Realme; he called them together, and demanded whether it was lawfull for him to make such a marriage or no? to whom they answered freely, That there was no prescript law which did allow of it: yet (that they might sooth him up, fearing to incurre his displeasure) they said further, that though there was no law to command it, yet such a mighty King as hee, might doe what he pleased. In like manner the trencher Philosopher Anaxarchus, after that he had told Alexander the Great with a loud voice, that hee ought not to Plutarch. feare the penalty of any law, nor the reproach nor blame of any man, be∣cause it belonged onely to his office to create lawes for all other to live by, and to prescribe the limits of lawfull and lawlesse things; and that it be∣came him, being a conquerour, to rule like a lord and a master, and not to obey any vaine conceit of law whatsoever; and that what thing soever the
King did, the same was sacred, just and lawful, without exception. And by this means made his proceedings farre more dissolute and outragious in many things than ever they were before. Dion in the Epitome of Xiphiline reporteth, how the Emperours were wont to usurpe this priviledge, to be exempted from all law, that they might not be tyed to any necessity of doing or leaving undone any thing, and how in no case they would endure to be subject to any written ordinances: the which thing is manifest even in the behaviour of the chiefest of them, as well in regard of their life and manners, as of the government that they used in their Common-wealths. For first of all, Augustus Caesar having kept in his owne hand the office of the Triumvir ten yeares (as Suetonius testifieth) hee also usurped the Tri∣bunes office and authority, and that till his dying day: and likewise tooke upon him the Censorship; namely, the office of correcting and governing manners and lawes, if need required: whose successors (a man may truly say for the most part) trampled under their feet all sincere and sacred lawes, by their notorious intemperance, dissolutenesse, and cruelties. And yet for all this there wanted not a parasiticall Lawyer, who to please the Emperor his lord and master the better, and to underprop, and as it were seele over with a faire shew that tyrannicall government used by other Emperours; foisted in this as a law amongst the rest, Princeps legibus solutus est, That the Prince was exempted from all law. As for that which they alleadge out of Aristotles Politiques, it maketh nothing to set a colour upon this counter∣feit: (for saith Aristotle) If there be any man that excelleth so in vertue above all others, that none is able to compare with him, that man is to be accounted as a God amongst men, to whom no law may be prescribed, be∣cause he is a law unto himselfe: all which I grant to be true, if that which was presupposed could take place: for where no transgression is found, there no law is necessary; according as Saint Paul said, The law was not gi∣ven for the just, but for the unjust and offendors: but where is it possible to find such a Prince so excellent and so vertuous, that standeth not in need of some law to be ruled by? Of the like force and strength is that which is written in the first booke of Institutions, tit. 2. the words are these: The Princes pleasure serveth for a law, because the whole body of the people hath translated all their authority, power, and jurisdiction unto him. This is spoken of the Romane Emperours, but upon the ground of so slender and silly reason, that upon so weake a foun∣dation it can never stand: for if it be demanded, whether this action of the people, of giving over their right and prerogative to their Prince, be willing or constrained, what answer will they make? If it be by con∣straint and feare (as it is indeed) who will not judge this usurping of their liberty utterly unjust and tyrannicall, when one man shall arrogate that to himselfe which pertaineth to many, yea to the whole body of the people? And admit that this reason was effectuall, yet the glosse upon the place saith very notably, That the Princes pleasure may be held for a law, so farre forth as that which pleaseth him be just and honest: giving us to know thus much thereby, That every will and pleasure of a Prince may not indifferently be allowed for a law, if it be an unjust and dishonest acti∣on, and contrary to the rule of good manners. Moreover, it appeareth by the Customes of many antient people and Realmes, That Princes had ne∣ver this license given them, to doe what they listed: for let them be never
so mighty, yea as mighty as Darius, under whose raigne the Persian Mo∣narchy was abolished; yet hee must be content (acording to the law of the Medes and Persians) not to be able to infringe that law which was by the advice of his Peers and Privy Councell enacted, and by his owne con∣sent and authority established: no, though for Daniels deliverance sake, Dan. . 8. whom he loved, he greatly desired and tooke paines either to disannull, or at least to give a favourable interpretation of it. Such in old time was the custome of the Kings of Aegypt, not to follow Did. lib. 2 c▪ 2. their owne affections in any actions they went about, but to be directed by the advice of their lawes: for they had not so much authority as to judge betwixt man and man, or to levy subsidies and such like by their owne powers; neither to punish any man through choler, or any over∣weening conceit, but were alwayes tyed to observe justice and equity in all causes: neither did it grieve them so to doe, being perswaded that whilest they obeyed their lawes, nothing could betide them but good. The Lacedemonian Kings were in such bondage to the lawes of their Th▪ucyd. lib. 1. countrey, that the Ephori, which were set up to none other end but to be a bridle to hold them backe from doing what they listed, had absolute au∣thority to correct them when they had committed any fault; which sub∣jection nothing displeased King Theopompus, as it is apparent by the answer he made his wise, that reproved him once in anger, saying, By his cowar∣dise he would leave a lesse kingdome to his children, than he had received of his Ancestors. Nay (saith he) a greater, forsomuch as more durable and permanent. Plutarch praising the uprightnesse of King Alcamenes, who, for feare to breake the law, refused divers presents that were sent him, bur∣steth into this speech: O heart worthy of a King, that hath preferred the authority of the law before his owne profit! Where are those fellowes now that cry, Kings pleasures ought to be observed for Lawes, and that a Prince may make a law, but is not subject to it himselfe? And this is that which Plutarch saith as concerning that matter, who lived under Trajan the Emperor. Cornelius Tacitus discovering the beginning and originall of the Romane Civill Law, saith, That Servius the third King of Rome after Romulus and Lib. 3. Annal. Numa, was the only man that most established those lawes, whereunto Kings themselves ought to yeeld and be obedient. And admit that the Emperours swayed with great power and authority almost all the world; yet for all their fiercenesse and haughtinesse of minde, Pliny durst tell Tra∣jan, In Panegyr. That an Emperour ought to use to carry himselfe with such good go∣vernment in his Empire, as if he were sure to give up an account of all his actions: Thou must not (saith hee) desire more liberty to follow thine owne lust, than any one of us doe: a Prince is not set over the law, but the law placed in authority above the Prince. This was the admonition of that heathen man. Likewise Antonius and Severus, two mighty Emperours, although by reason of an opinion of their owne greatnesse and haughti∣nesse, wherewith they flattered themselves, bragged that they were not subject to any law; yet they added this clause withall, That notwithstan∣ding they would live according to the direction of the law. This (saith Theodosius and Valentinion, two no lesse mighty Emperours) is a voice be∣comming the Royall Majesty and greatnesse of a King, To confesse him∣selfe Lib. 4. ti. 17. to live under a law; and in truth it is a thing of greater importance
than the imperiall dignity it selfe, to put soveraignty under the authority of law. Amongst many other good lessons and exhortations which Lewis that good King gave unto his sonne on his death-bed, this was Lib. 1. cod. Nicol. Gil. vol. . Chronic. Franc. one worthy the remembring, how he commanded him to love and feare God with all his strength, and to take heed of doing any thing that should be contrary to his law, whatsoever should befall him; and to provide that the good lawes and statutes of his kingdome might be ob∣served, and the priviledges of his subjects maintained: to forbid Iudges to favour him more than any others, when any cause of his owne came in tryall. Thereby giving us thus much to understand, That every good King ought to submit himselfe in obedience under the hand of God, and under the rule of justice and equity. Wherefore there is neither King nor Keisar that can or ought to exempt himselfe from the observance of sa∣cred and upright lawes; which if they resist or disanull, doubtlesse they are culpable of a most hainous crime, and especially of Rebellion against the King of Kings. CHAP. VII. Of the punishment that seised upon Pharaoh King of Aegypt, for resisting God, and transgressing the first commandement of the Law. WEe have sufficiently declared in the premisses, that the mightiest potentates of this world are bound to range themselves under the obedience of Gods law: it re∣maineth now that we produce examples of those pu∣nishments that have fallen upon the heads of the transgressours of the same, according to the manner of their transgression, of what sort soever: which that we may the better describe, it behooveth us to follow the order of the Commandements, as the examples wee bring may be fitly referred to any of them. And first we are to understand, that when God said, Thou shalt have none other Gods before me, hee condemneth under these words the vanity of men that have forged to themselves a multitude of gods: hee forbiddeth all false Religion, and declareth, That hee would be acknowledged to be the sole and true God; and that we should serve, worship, love, feare, and obey him in and above all things; and who∣soever it be that doth otherwise, either by hindring his worship, or afflicting those that worship him, the same man provoketh his heavy wrath to bee throwne upon him, to his utter ruine and destruction. This is the indignation that lighted upon Pharaoh King of Aegypt, as wee read in the booke of God: who being one of the most puissant Kings of the earth in his age, God chose him for an object to shew his wonderfull power, by the means of horrible plagues and scourges which
hee cast upon him, and by destroying him with all his armies at the length, as his rebellion well deserved: For he like a cruell Tyrant conti∣nuing to oppresse the children of Israel, without giving them any release or breathing time from their misery, or liberty to serve God, although by Moses in the name and authority of God (who made himselfe well enough knowne unto him, without the help of any written law) hee was many times instantly urged and requested thereunto: so many judgements and punishments assayled him one in the necke of another, in such sort, that at length he was overtaken and ensnared therewith. First of all, the very waters of Aegypt being converted into bloud, proclaimed warre against him: then the frogges which covered the face of the earth, climbed up even to his chamber and bed, and filling every corner of his land, soun∣ded him an alarme: next a muster of lice and gnats, and such other trou∣blesome and stinking creatures, summoned him to combate: an handfull of embers seattered in the aire by Moses, were unto him as the strokes of a stone or a shaft, which did wonderfully disfigure their bodies with boyles and most noysome scabbes: afterward the grashoppers were put in battell array against him, together with the hailestones, horrible thun∣ders and lightenings, wasting and spoyling, and running up and downe grievously through his whole land. After all these bitter blowes, the Ty∣rant being cut short, and being so besieged on every side with hideous and palpable darknesse, that he could not tell which wayes to turne him∣selfe, yet would hee not be brought to any reason, but continued obsti∣nate and hardened against God, though all the elements, with heaven and earth, had taken armour together, and conspired his destruction. There∣fore while hee remained in this wretched state, Gods Angell punished him in the person of his eldest sonne, which died suddenly in one night, to∣gether with all the first borne of Aegypt; wherewithall both hee and all his people being greatly moved and grieved, at length gave the Israelites not onely leave, but also hasted them to depart: but anon, as he saw them going, like a man bestraught he ranne after them againe, and pursued them with a mighty army, untill God in the meane while opening a passage for his children overthwart the deep Red sea, attended him in the mid way, where hee surprised and ensnared him, overthrew and violently overtur∣ned the wheeles of his chariots, and put his whole army to a burly burly; and that he might utterly destroy him, caused the sea from each side to re∣turne to his channell, which drowned and devoured him and all his army. And this is one of the noblest and fearfullest judgements of God that can be mentioned, and therefore is very often recounted in many places of the Scripture, as a thing most memorable above others. Neither ought wee to marvell, if so notable a History as this is not set downe among the wri∣tings of prophane authors: for that besides their Histories doe not ordi∣narily stretch so farre, as to record such antient acts, there is also no doubt but the successors of that Tyrant, and all the Aegyptians, sought all means possible to cancell and blot out the memory of their so great and horrible ruine. And if by chance any Historiographer make mention of the departure of the Israelites out of Aegypt, it is done in such sort, that the truth is not onely disguised, but wholly per∣verted by them, and in place thereof nothing but lies and falshood foi∣sted in.
Like as Pharaoh by his unjust and outragious persecuting of the chil∣dren of God, made himselfe so guilty of Gods wrath, that he deser∣ved to be utterly destroyed, with the greatest part of his people: so also after their miraculous deliverance, whosoever laboured either to hurt, hinder, or resist them, did no lesse incurre Gods displeasure and fierce wrath against them, wherewith they were consumed: whereof the overthrow and discomfiture of Amalech is a plaine example; who, admit all the great wonders which God had done for the Israelites in Exod. 17. Aegypt and in the red sea (whereof the brute being blowne into all corners of the earth, hee could not be ignorant;) yet was he so ma∣litious and foolish hardy, as to take up armour against them, and to meet them to bid them battell; but he and his wicked complices were by Ioshuah and his poore people (though unwarliking and unacquain∣ted with such actions, lately crept out of bondage, wherein they had been only exercised to make mortar and bricke, and not to handle wea∣pons) discomfited and overthrowne: for the Lord of Hosts (who is the divider of victories to whom he pleaseth) at the servent prayers of his servant Moses, fought for them, to the confusion of Amalech and all his traine; and therefore he commanded Moses to put this deed of his in writing, as a thing worthy to be remembred; who also erected an Altar in the same place, for a perpetuall monument of so noble a vi∣ctory. As Amalech, and for the like sinne, were Arad a King of the Num 2. 1. Canaanites, Sehon King of Amorites, and Og King of Basan, with their people and cities, destroyed and rased downe; so the Madi∣anites enterprising to withstand the foresaid Israelites, by the wicked and pernicious counsell of Balaam, were subdued and put to the Num. 31. sword, even five Kings of them together, not one escaping save the young Virgins which had never committed fornication with man. After that the Children of Israel had continued a season peaceably in the Land of Canaan which the Lord had bestowed upon them, then did Eglon King of Moab rise up, and subdued them by warre, and tyrannized over them eighteene yeares. And although it was Gods Iudg. 3. will that they should be thus chastised, because of their corruption, and iniquity, neverthelesse this Moabite (his Rod) hee caused (in re∣gard of his love to his people) to be slaine by Ahud an Israelite, as hee was taking his case in his chamber. In like manner was his wrath stirred up against Iabin King of Asor, who had oppressed Israel twenty yeares: whose army, though it was great and well appointed, was not∣withstanding by Baraks handfull of men, under the conduct and rule of Deborah the Prophetesse, wondrously discomfited; in such sort, that of all the multitude there remained not one that felt not the edge of the sword, except Sisera their Captaine; who escaping from the battell by betaking him to his heeles, turned in by chance into the house of a woman called Iahel; who hating him, as he slept, with a hammer fastened a naile into his temples; and thus escaping from those whom he feared, he was murthered by her whom he trusted. And so this valiant warriour, as he was overcome in battell by the conduct of a woman, so was he put to death by the hand of a woman.
That which happened to the Madianites in the time of Gideon, is admi∣rable and very strange; who being furnished with a mighty army of soul∣diers, with the Amalekites and other their Allyes, to destroy Israel, were so Iudg. 7. scarred and scattered at the sound of the trumpets, and brightnesse of tor∣ches of three hundred men at the most that were with Gideon, that through the marvellous astonishment they were in, they turned their blades into their owne bosomes, and murthered one another, till the greatest part of them were destroyed; and the residue being put to flight, and pursued by the men of Ephraim, two of their Kings, Oreb and Zeb, were taken and slaine. A while after it came to passe, that the Princes of the Philistims, who Iudg 16. had oppressed the people of God by the space of forty yeares, being assem∣bled together with all their people in the Temple of Dagon their god even then when after their sacrifices, they thought to make themselves most sport and pastime with poore Sampson, whose eyes in mockery & contempt they had put out, were altogether massacred by the fall of the house which Sampson by his strength pulled upon their heads: which was the greatest overthrow that before times by his means they had received. In the raigne of Saul King of Israel, Agag King of Amalech, the poste∣rity 1 Sam 15. of those that laid wait for Israel in the desart, as they came out of Aegypt, were by Saul (following the commandement of the Lord) set upon; who running upon him and his people, made a great slaughter and butche∣ry of them, not sparing man, woman, nor childe, but the King onely, whom he tooke to mercy, and led captive, which he ought not to have done. This Captaine being thus spared by one that was but little better than himself, could not so escape; for the Prophet, Samuel became the executioner of Gods vengeance upon him, since Saul refused it, and with his own hand flew him, even then when he thought he should live. A little while after, Goliah a gyant of the Philistims, who as well through 1 Sam. 17. the hugenesse of his stature, and strength of body, as through the horrible cruelty which appeared in him, seemed in mans eyes invincible, proudly and presumptuously defied the army of the living God, offering and da∣ring any one man of Israel to enter combate with him: This proud fellow was, notwithstanding all his brags, by young and unarmed David, save a little sticke and a few stones which he had in his hands; vanquished and trod under foot; for he gave this great beast such a knocke with one of his stones on the forehead, that at the first blow he tumbled him groveling on the earth, and quickly leaping upon him, caught hold of his huge sword, and therwithall cut off his monstrous head: which the Philistims per∣ceiving, turned their backes and fled, and were pursued and slaine by the Israelites.
CHAP. VIII. More Examples like unto the former. IN the time of Achab, Benhadad King of Syria accom∣panied 1. King. 20. with two and thirty Kings, came very proudly against Israel, as it were in despight of God to bid him battell, but it turned to his owne shame and con∣fusion, being first dishonourably put to flight by 230 servants of the Princes of Israel (a small handfull to encounter so mighty an army:) and secondly, returning to seeke revenge, found the losse of 100000 footmen at one clap, besides 27000 which escaping by flight, were crushed in pieces by the ruine of a wall in the city Aphec. And so this brave gallant, that erst bragged, that the gold and silver of Israel, yea their wives and children were his, was now glad to fly for his life amongst the rest, and in his returne to hide himselfe, all dismaied in a little chamber; and from thence (being advised thereto by his servants) to send to intreat Achab for his owne life, which a little before thought him sure of the lives of all Is∣rael. Yet for all this, ere long hee enterprised a new practise against the Prophet Elizeus, and besieged also the city of Samaria so long, that cer∣taine 2 King. 6. 2. King 7. women (constrained by extreme famine) devoured their children: but in the end he was compelled (through fearfull terror which God sent into his army by the noise of infinite Chariots and Horses which sounded in their eares, as if some puissant host of men of warre had been marching towards them) to forsake the siege, and flee with all his forces, leaving be∣hinde them their tents, horses, carriages, victuals, and munitions, to be a prey for them that pursued them not. And lastly, falling ficke, Hazael one 2. King. 8. of his owne servants, that succeeded him in the kingdome, to the end hee might dispatch him quickly, and without tumult, early in the morning tooke a thick cloth dipt in water, and spreading it over his face, stifled him to death. When the Moabites and Ammonites rose up in arms against Iehosaphat 2. Chron. 20. King of Iuda, as soone as this good King humbled himselfe together with all his people before the face of God by fasting and prayer, forthwith God sent such a giddinesse of spirit amongst his enemies, that they killed one another: and the men of Iuda without being troubled with fighting, gathe∣red the spoile which they had scattered, and enriched themselves with their reliques. Aman, promoted in honour and credit above all the Princes of the Est▪ 17, & 9. Court of King Assuerus, conceived so beastly an hatred against the poore dispersed Iewes (being at that time the only Church of God) that maliti∣ously he conspired, in one day to destroy and put to death the whole nation, to the very women and infants: and in accomplishing this his purpose, he mightily abused the authority of the King, whom he falsly informed. That this nation would not be subject to his ordinances and lawes which his other people were subject unto; and that therefore hee ought not to permit and suffer them any longer. But God that carrieth alwayes a watchfull eye over his Church, and knoweth how to breake and dash all
the enterprises of his enemies, brought all this wretches purposes to nought, by preserving miraculously those whom he would have destroyed, and making him doe reverence to Mordecheus, whom hee specially sought to bring to infamy, and for whom he had of purpose provided a gibbet to hang him on, but was hanged thereon himselfe, with ten of his sons: beside, all those which had conspired with him against the Iewes, were upon the same day which they had set downe for their massacre, by the kings commandement slaine by the hands of them whom they had appoin∣ted to the slaughter. Balthasar King of Babylon, as he was feasting among his Princes, com∣manded Dan. 5. amidst his cups, the golden and silver Vessels which Nebuchad∣nezzar had taken out of the Temple of Ierusalem, to be brought, that both he, and his princes, and his wives and concubines might drinke there∣in; exalting himselfe thus against the Lord of Heaven, and boasting in his idols of earth; therefore God being stirred up to wrath against him, ap∣pointed his destruction even whilest he thus dranke and made merry in the midst of his jollity, and caused a strange and fearefull signe to appeare be∣fore his eyes, a bodilesse hand writing upon the wall over against the can∣dlesticke; the words of which writing portended the destruction of his kingdome, which presently ensued; for the very same night hee was murthered, and the Scepter seised upon by Darius King of the Medes. Antiochus, by sirname Epiphanes, or Excellent (though by truer report of . Macch. 2 & 6. people, contemptuously entituled the Furious) King of Asia, being veno∣mously Epimaes. enraged against the Iewes, began at the first marvellously to op∣presse them, to rob and spoile their Temple, and to slaughter the people. About ten yeares after, deceiving the poore people with faire and smooth words, covers of most vile and wretched treason, whilest they imagined no mischiefe, hee set upon them in such cruell sort, that the losse and desolation which they endured at that time was inestimable; for besides the destruction of Ierusalem their City, the slaughter of infinite multi∣tudes of their people, and the captivity of women and infants; as if all these were not enough, there was yet another misery to make up the full summe, worse than all the rest: which was this; The cursed tyrant see∣ing his purpose not to take the full effect, commanded every where, That all his subjects (I meane the Iewes) should forsake and abjure the Law of God, and be united into one Religion with the Infidels. By means of which Edict the Religion of God was defaced, the books of his Law rent and burned, and those with whom any such books were found, rigorously put to death: Which fearefull cruelty when the Iewes perceived, it caused many of them to wax faint hearted, and to give themselves over to wal∣low in the dirty fashions of the uncircumcised Idolaters, and in their mad∣nesse to subscribe to the unjust lawes of the vile monster. Now after he had committed all these outrages, he was repulsed with dishonour from the city of Elymais in Persia, which he went about to spoile and rob, and forced to fly to Babylon; where after tidings of the overthrow of his two armies in Iudea, with griefe and despight he ended his dayes. Antiochus the sonne of this wretched father succeeding him as in his . Macch. 6. kingdome, so in wickednesse, perjury and disloyalty; when, to the end to consult about his owne affaires, he concluded a peace with the Iewes, and
by solemne oath as well of himselfe as his princes, confirmed the free exer∣cise of their Religion: behold, suddenly he falsied his plighted and sworne faith, and undid all that ever he had done; but it was not long ere hee also was overtaken by the army of Demetrius, and together with Lysias his Go∣vernour, put to death. A while after reigned Alexander his brother, who whilest he was encom∣bred 1. Macch. 11. with the troubles of Cilicla, that revolted from him, the King of Aegypt his father in law came traiterously to forestall him of his king∣dome, tooke his wife, and gave her to hi deadliest enemy, and afterward gave him battell, discomfited his forces, and drove him to fly into Arabia for safety; where in stead of helpe, he found an hatchet to chop off his head, which was sent for a Present to gratifie the King of Aegypt withall. Not long after, Antiochus his sonne recovered the Scepter of his Father; 1. Macch. 13. but alas his raigne endured but a small space; for being yet but a young childe, hee was slaine by Tryphon in the way as he led him to warre against the Iewes. And thus perished the cursed race of Antiochus, which felt Gods wrath upon it even in the third generation. Antiochus the sonne of Demetrius (of whom mention was made but a 2. Macch. 5. little before) after hee had chased Tryphon from the kingdome of Asia, which he usurped, and broken the league which he had made with the Iewes, gave himselfe wholly to worke them mischiefe. Therefore comming against Ierusalem, he tooke it by force, commanding his souldiers to put all to death that were within the same▪ so that within three days there was such a massacre of young and old men, women, and children, that the num∣ber of the slaine arose to foure score thousand carkasses. After this, having executed many more villanies against this people, in so much as to make them renounce the law of God, putting them cruelly to death that did not obey his commandement, it came to passe, that this cruell tyrant was first of all put to flight by the inhabitants of Persepolis a city of Persia, for going aboue to rob their temple of their treasures: next endamaged by an overthrow of his army in Iudaea: which hee no sooner understood, but he tooke counsell in his fury how to be revenged of Ierusalem, and belched forth bitter threats against it. But in the meane time the Lord stroke him with a sudden and incurable plague, and surprised him with a horrible tor∣ment of his entrails. Howbeit, for all this he ceased not his malicious en∣terprise, but hasted forward his journey towards the Iewes with such ca∣gernesse, that in the way he fell out of his chariot, and bruised so his body, that it became putrified and so full of corruption, that very vermine scraw∣led out thereof, and the rotten flesh dropping piecemeale away, no man, no not himselfe being able to endure the stinch thereof. Then was he constrai∣ned in the midst of his torments to confesse, that it was meet that he should submit himself unto God, that he which is mortall, ought not to exalt him∣selfe so high, as to compare with the immortall God: and in this estate this reprobate ended his wicked dayes by a strange and most miserable kind of death.
CHAP. IX. Of those that persecuted the Sonne of God and his Church. IF they who in the law injured and persecuted the Church of God, were punished according to their deserts, as we have already heard; is it any marvell then if the enemies and persecuters of our Lord and Saviour Christ Iesus, which labour by all means to discountenance and frustrate his Religion, and to oppresse his Church, doe feele the heavy and fearefull vengeance of God upon them for their very wic∣kednesse and unbeliee? No verily, for he that honoureth not the Sonne, honoureth not the Father which sent him, and is guilty therefore before God, of impiety and prophanenesse. From this hainous crime King Herod in Mat. 2. no wise can be exempted, that caused all the Infants of Bethlehem of two yeares old and under, to be cruelly murthered, in hope thereby to put the true Messias and Saviour of the world to death. For which deed, accom∣pained This example belongeth al∣so (in regard of cruelty) to the sixth com∣mandement. Lib. 2. Cap. 11. 17. Booke of the Iewish an∣tiquity, cap. 8. with many other strange cruelties, as by killing the ordinary Iud∣ges of the house of David, and his owne wife and children, this Caitise was tormented with sundry intolerable griefes, and at last devoured by an horrible and most fearefull death. For (as Iosephus reporteth) his body was boyled, and his bowels gnawne in two by a soft and slow fire, fretting in∣wardly, without any outward appearance of heate: besides the rave∣nous and insatiable desire of eating, which so possessed him, that with∣out chewing, his meat in whole lumps descended into his body, devou∣ring it so fast as it could be throwne into his mouth, and never ceasing to farse his greedy throat with continuall sustenance: moreover, his feet were so swolne and pust up with such a flegme, that a man might see through them; his privy parts so rotten and full of vermine, and his breath so stinking, that few or none durst approach neer unto him; yea his owne servants for sooke him. Now lying in this wretched plight, when this wic∣ked man saw no remedy could be found to asswage his griefe, hee went about to kill himselfe, and being not able to performe it, he was constrained to endure all the pangs of a most horrible, lingring, and languishing death, and at last mad and miserable bestraught of sense and reason, to end his dayes. As for Herod the Tetrarch, sirnamed Antipas (who to please Herodias, Luke 9. 7. had caused Iohn Baptist to be beheaded) when hee had likewise prepared snares for our Saviours feet, and being sent to him by Pilate, to quit himself, and gratifie him withall, had jeasted and mocked at him his belly full, This example in regard of divorce, be longeth to the seventh Com∣mandement. Lib 2. cap. 29. Ioseph. of the Iewish Anti∣quity, l. 8. c. 6. Euseb. behold, his reproaches and mockes (was he never so subtle) turned into his owne bosome: for first, after that his army had been discomfited by the souldiers of King Aretas, whose daughter (in regard of Herodias his brother Philips wife) he had repudiated; a further shame and dishonour befell him, even to be deprived of his Royall dignity; and not only to be brought into a low and base estate, but also being robbed of his goods, to be banished into a farre countrey, and there to make an end of the rest of his life.
As touching Pilate the governour of Iudea, he did so excell in wicked∣nesse and injustice, that notwithstanding the restraint of his owne con∣science, the law of civill equity, and the advertisement of his own wise, Euseb. yet he condemned Christ Iesus, the just and innocent, to the death of the crosse: albeit hee could not but know the power of his miracles, the re∣nowne whereof was spread into all places. But ere long having been con∣strained to erect the image of the Emperour Caligula in the Temple of Ie∣rusalem to be worshipped, he was sent for to make personall appearance at Rome, to answer to certaine accusations of cruelty which were by the Iewes objected against him: And in this journey being afflicted in consci∣ence, Euseb. Eutrop. lib. 7. with the number and weight of his misdeeds, like a desperate man, to prevent the punishment which he feared, willingly offered violence to his owne life, and killed himselfe. The first Emperour that tooke in hand to persecute the Christians, was Nero the Tyrant; picking a quarrell against them for setting the City on Tertul, Niceph. 8 Comman∣dement. Calumniation Lib. 2. cap. 44. fire; which being himselfe guilty of, hee charged them withall, as desirous to finde out any occasion to doe them hurt: wherefore under pretence of the same crime, discharging his owne guilt upon their backs, hee exposed them to the fury of the people, that tormented them very sore, as if they had been common burners and destroyers of Cities and the deadliest ene∣mies of mankinde. Hereupon the poore Innocents were apprehended, Tacit. Ann. l. 5. and some of them clad with skinnes of wilde beasts, were torne in pieces by dogges; others crucified, or made bone-fires of on such heapes, that the flame arising from their bodies, served in stead of torches for the night. To conclude, such horrible cruelty was used towards them, that many of their very enemies did pitty their miseries. But at last this wretch, the causer of all, seeing himselfe in danger to be murthered by one appointed for that purpose (a just reward for his horrible and unjust dealing) hastened his death by killing himselfe, as it shall be shewed more at large in the se∣cond booke. The author of the second persecution against the Christians, was Domi∣tian, Suet. Refer this also to the 4. ch. of this booke. Suet. Eutrop. who was so puft up and swolne with pride, that he would needs ascribe unto himselfe the name of God. Against this man rose up his houshold servants, who by his wives consent slue him with daggers in his privy cham∣ber: his body was buried without honour, his memory cursed to posterity, and his ensignes and trophies throwne downe and defaced. Trajan, who albeit in all things, and in the government of the Empire also, shewed himselfe a good and sage Prince, yet did hee dash and bruise himselfe against this stone with the rest, and was reckoned the third perse∣cuter of the Church of Christ: for which cause he underwent also the cruell Dion. vengeance of God, and felt his heavy hand upon him: for first he fell into a palsie, and when he had lost the use of his sences (perswading himselfe that he was poisoned) got a dropsy also, and so died in great anguish. Hadrian in the ninth yeare of his Empire caused tenne thousand Chri∣stians to be crucified in Armenia at one time; and after that ceased not to stirre up a very hot persecution against them in all places. But God perse∣cuted him, and that to his destruction; first with an issue of bloud, where∣with he was so weakned and disquieted, that oftentimes he would faine Mandat. 7. l. . c. 12. Spart. have made away himselfe: next with a consumption of the lungs & lights, which he spate out of his mouth continually; and thirdly with an unsati∣able
dropsie: so that seeing himselfe in this horrible torment, he desired poi∣son to hasten his death, or a knife to make quicke riddance; but when all those means were kept backe, he was inforced to endure still, and at last to die in great misery. Whilest Marcus Antonius, sirnamed Verus, swayed the empire, there were exceeding cruelties set abroach against the poore Christians every Euseb. Spart. where, but especially at Lions and Vienna in Daulphin (as Eusebius in his Ecclesiasticall History recordeth;) wherefore he wanted not his punish∣ment, for he died of an Apoplexy, after he had lien speechlesse three dayes. After that Severus had proclaimed himselfe a profest enemy to Gods Church, his affaires began to decline, and he found himselfe pestered with divers extremities, and set upon with many warres; and at length as∣saulted with such an extreme paine throughout his whole body, that lan∣guishing and consuming, he desired oft to poison himself, and at last died in great distresse. Vitellius Saturninus one of his Lievtenants in those exploits Tert. d Scap. became blinde: another called Clandius Herminianus Governour of Capa∣docia, who in hatred of his owne wife that was a Christian, had extremely afflicted many of the faithfull, was afterwards himselfe afflicted with the pestilence, persecuted wih vermine bred in his owne bowels, and devoured of them alive in most miserable sort. Now lying in this misery, he desired not to be knowne or spoken of by any, lest the Christians that were lest un∣murthered, should rejoice at his destruction, confessing also that those plagues did justly betide him for his cruelties sake. Dicius, in hatred of Philip his predecessor, that had made some profession Oros. l. 7. c. 14. of Christianity, wrought tooth and naile to destroy the Church of Christ, using all the cruelties and torments which his wit could devise, against all those which before time had offered themselves to be persecuted for that cause. But his devillish practises were cut short by means of the war which he waged against the Scythians; wherein, when he had raigned not full two Euseb. l. 7. c. 1. Ecclesiast. Hist. yeares, his army was discomfited, and he with his son cruelly killed, Others Pomponim. say, that to escape the hands of his enemies, he ran into a whirlpit, and that his body was never found after. Neither did the just hand of God plague the Emperour onely, but also as well the heathen Gentiles throughout all Provinces and dominions of the Romane Empire. For immediately after the death of this Tyrant, God Euseb. l. 7. c. 21. sent such a plague and pestilence amongst them, lasting for the space of ten yeares together, that horrible it is to heare, and almost incredible to be∣leeve. Dionysius writing to Hierax a Bishop of Aegypt, declareth the mor∣tality of this plague to have been so great at Alexandria, where hee was Bishop, that there was no house in the whole city free. And although the greatnesse of the plague touched also the Christians somewhat, yet it scourged the heathen Idolaters much more: beside that, the behaviour of the one and the other was most divers: for as the foresaid Dionysius doth record, the Christians through brotherly love and piety did not refuse one to visit and comfort another, and to minister to him what need required: notwithstanding it was to them great danger; for divers there were, who in closing up their eies, in washing their bodies, and intrring them in the ground, were next themselves which followed them to their graves. Yet all this sayed not them from doing their duty, and shewing mercy one to
another. Whereas the Gentiles contrarily being extremely visited by the hand of God, felt the plague, but considered not the striker; neither yet considered they their neighbour, but every man shifting for himselfe, ca∣red not for one another. Such as were infected, some they would cast out of the doores halfe dead, to be devoured of dogs and beasts; some they let die within their houses, without all succor; some they suffered to lie un∣buried, for that no man durst come neere them: and yet notwithstanding, for all their voyding and shifting, the postilence followed them whither∣soever they went, and miserably consumed them. Insomuch that Dionysius reporteth of his owne city Alexandria, That there was not left in the city, of old and young, so many as there was wont to be old men from three∣score yeares upwards. This plague, though it spred it selfe over the whole world, yet especially it raged where the Edicts of the Emperour had beene against the Christians, whereby many places became utterly de∣solate. Valerian, albeit in the beginning of his Empire he shewed himself som∣what mild and gentle towards the professors of religion, yet afterwards he became their deadly enemy; but when he had terribly persecuted them in his dominions, it was not long ere he was taken prisoner in the Persian wars, being seventy yeares old, and made a slave to his conquerour all the rest of his life: And whose condition was so miserable, that Sapor King of In the Sermon of the congre∣gatiō of saints Euseb. Hist. Ec∣cles. l. 7. c 30. Persia used his backe as a blocke or stirrop to mount upon his horse. Yea he dealt so cruelly with the poore old man (as Eusobius testifieth) that to make up the full number of his miseries, he caused him to be fleine alive, and poudred with salt. The like severity of Gods terrible judgment is also to be noted in Glau∣dius Henric. de Er∣ford. his President, and minister of his persecution: For God gave him up to be possessed and vexed of the Devill, in such sort, that biting off his owne tongue in many small pieces, he so ended his dayes. Neither did Galienus the sonne of Valerian, after the captivity of his fa∣ther, utterly escape the righteous hand of God: for beside the miserable captivity of his father, whom he could not restore, such strange portents, and such earthquakes did happen, also such tumults, commotions, and re∣bellions did follow, that Trebellio doth reckon up to the number of thirty together, which at sundry places, all at one time, tooke upon them to be Emperours of the Romane Monarchy: by the means whereof hee was not able to succour his father, though he would: notwithstanding the said Gali∣enus, being, as is thought, terrified by the example of his father, did remove, Euseb. l. 7. c. 13 or at leastwise moderate the persecution stirred up against the Christians, as it may appeare by his Edict set forth in Eusebius. Aurelian being upon point to trouble the quiet of the church, which it a while enjoyed under the Emperour Galien; even whilst he was devising new practises against it, a thunderbolt fell from heaven at his feet, which so amazed him, that his malitious and bloud-thirsty mind was somewhat re∣bated and repressed from doing that which he pretended; untill that reour∣ning Vopis. Eutrop. Niceph. to his old bent, and persevering to pursue his purpose, when Gods thunder could not terrifie him, he stirred up his owne servants to cut his throat. Dioclesian went another way to worke, for he did not set abroach all his practises at one push, but first assayed by subtle means to make those that
were in his army to renounce their faith; then by open proclamation com∣manded, that their churches should be rased and beaten downe, their Bibles burned and torne in pieces: that they that were Magistrates, or bore Ruffin. any publique office in the commonwealth, if they were Christians, should be deposed: and that all bondmen that would forsake their profession, should be enfranchised. When hee had thus left no devise unpractised that might further to abolish and destroy the religion of Christ, and per∣ceiving that, notwithstanding all his malice and cruell rage, it every day (through the wonderfull constancy of Martyrs) increased and grew even against the haire; with very spight and anger he gave up the Empire. And lastly, when he had been tormented with diverse and strange diseases, and that his house had been set on fire with lightning, and burned with fire from heaven, and he himselfe so scarred with thunder, that he knew not where to hide him, he fell mad and killed himselfe. There was joyned to this man in the government of the Empire, one Maximilian, whose cruelty and ty∣ranny against the Christians was so outragious also, that upon a solemne festivall day, when infinite numbers of them were assembled together at Mandat. 7. lib. 2. cap. 12. Nicomedia, in a Temple, to serve God, he sent a band of Atheists to in∣close them, and burne the Temple and them together, as they indeed did: for there were consumed at that bone-fire (as Nicephorus writeth) twenty Euseb. Hist. Ec∣cles. 7, & 8. c. 16 Niceph. l. 7. c. 6. thousand persons. In like sort dealt he with a whole city in Phrygia, which after he had long besieged, hee caused to be burnt to cinders, with all the inhabitants therein. But the end of this wretch was like his life, even mi∣serable: for lying a while sicke of a grievous disease, the very vermine and such horrible stinke came forth of his body, that for shame and griefe hee hung himselfe. Maximinus that raigned Emperour in the East, was constrained to inter∣rupt Niceph. 7. 12. and make cease his persecution which he had begun, by means of a dangerfull and grievous sicknesse, and to confirme a generall peace to all Christians in his dominions, by publique Edicts. His sicknesse was thus: In the privy members of his body, there grew a sudden putrifaction, and after in the bottome of the same a botchy corrupt bile, with a fistula, consuming and eating up his intrails, out of the which came swarming an innumerable multitude of lice, with such a pestiferous stinke, that no man could abide him; and so much the more, for that all the grossenesse of his body, by abundance of meat before he fell sicke, was turned into fat; which fat now putrified and stinking, was so ugsome and horrible, that none that came to him could abide the sight thereof, by rea∣son whereof the Physitians which had him in cure, some of them not able to abide the intolerable stink, were commanded to be slaine; other some, because they could not heale him, being past hope, were also cruelly put to death. At length, being put in remembrance, that his disease was sent of God, hee began to repent of the cruelty which he had shewed the Christi∣ans, and forthwith commanded all persecution to cease. But (alas) this peace was so brittle, that it lasted but six moneths; for even then he sought by all means possible againe to trouble and disquiet their rest, and sent forth a new Edict quite contrary to the former, impor∣ting their utter destruction. And thus being nothing amended, but rather made worse by his sicknesse, it affailed him afresh, in such sort, that every day growing in extremity, as he grew in cruelty, it at last brought him to
his death, his carkasse being all rotten and full of corruption and wormes. Saint Chrysostome writeth of him, That the apple of his eye fell out before he died. Against the Gentiles. Maxentius and Licinius, the one Emperour of Italy, the other of the East, perceiving how the Emperour Constantine that raigned in the West, was had in great reputation, for maintaining the cause of the Christians, began also to doe the like: but by and by their malice and hypocrisie discovered it selfe, when they undertook to trouble and afflict those whom before they seemed to favour. For which cause Constantine taking arms against them, destroyed them both one after another; for Maxentius thinking to save himselfe upon a Bridge on Tyber, was deceived by the breaking of the Bridge, and so drenched and drowned in the water. Licinius was taken and put to death. And thus two Tyrants ended their dayes, for persecuting the Church of Christ. In the tenth yeare of the persecution of Dioclesian, Galerius his chiefe Lanquet. Chro. minister and instrument in that practise, fell into a grievous sicknesse, ha∣ving a sore risen in the neither part of his belly, which consumed his privy members, from whence swarmed great plenty of wormes engendred by the putrefaction. This disease could not be holpen by any Chirurgery or Phy∣sick: wherefore he confessed that it justly happened unto him for his mon∣strous cruelty towards the Christians, and called in his proclamations which he had published against them. Howbeit notwithstanding he died miserably, and as some write slew himselfe. CHAP. X. More examples of Persecutors. SAint Bartholomew one of the twelve Apostles, after hee had preached Christ Jesus unto the Indians, and deli∣vered them the Gospell written by Saint Mathew, and had converted many unto the Faith, albeit the mira∣cles which he wrought were strange and supernatural (for hee restored many diseased persons to their health, and clensed King Polemius his daughter from an unclean spirit wherewith she was possessed) yet in Hieron. in Ca. regard that he destroyed their Idoll Astaroth, and bewraied the subtilties of Satan, he was by Astyages, Polemius younger brother, at the instigation of the Idolatrous Priests, first cruell beaten with clubs, after fleyed, and last of all beheaded. But within thirty dayes after, both the wicked King, and the sacrilegious Priests, were poffessed with devills, and brought to a wret∣ched and miserable death. Aphraats that heavenly Philosopher, going out of his Cloyster to∣wards Theod. l. 4. c. 26. the Temple, to feed the flocke of Christ with some wholesome food of sound Doctrine; and being perceived by the Emperour Valeus, and de∣manded Tripartit. Hist. lib. 8. cap. 4. Nicl. 11. c. 25. whither he went; he answered, To pray for him and his kingdome. Yea, but said the Emperour, it were more convenient for thee that profes∣sest thy selfe a Monke, to remaine at home in contemplation, than to stray
abroad: True answered this holy man, if Christs sheep enjoyed peace; but as it becommeth an honest Matron to sit still within doors; nevertheles if her house were on fire, and the flame invioned her, should she not stirre to helpe to quench it? And should I lye still, and see my Countrey set on fire by the persecution? Whereat the Emperour being netled, threatned him with death; and one of his chamberlaines taunting him for his bold∣nesse, used him most currishly. But presently as he went to the Baths, to make them ready for the Emperour, the hand of God stroke him with an Apoplexy, that he fell downe dead into the waters. Under the Empire of Iulian the Apostate, all they that either conspired Teod. l. 3. c. 7. or practised the death of Cyrillus a Deacon of Heliopolis, scituate neer to Libanus, came to a miserable end: for after that Constantine was deceased, by whose authority the holy Martyr had broken downe many of their Ima∣ges and Idoils, the abhominable Idolaters did not onely murther him, but also devoured his liver with bread, as if it had been the sweetest morsell of meat in the world. But the all-seeing eye of God saw their villany, and his revengefull rod bruised them in peeces: for their teeth wherewith they chewed that unnaturall food, fell all out of their heads; and their tongues wherewith they tasted it, rotted and consumed to nothing; and lastly, their eyes which beheld it, failed them, and they became blinde. And thus were they all served, not one excepted, bearing justly the markes of Gods wrath for so inhumane and unnaturall a deed. At Tyre a City of Phoenicia, under the raigne of Dioclesian, many Chri∣stians Euseb. l. 8. c. 7. that stoutly professed and maintained the Faith and Religion of Christ Jesus, were after many tortures and destructions, exposed to wilde beasts to be devoured, as Beares, Libards, wilde Boares, and Buls: the sa∣vage basts, though made fierce and furious by fires and swords, yet (I know not by what secret instinct.) resused once to touch them, or to come neere them, but turned their teeth upon the Infidels that were without, and came to set them on upon the Saints, and tore many of them in pieces in their steads. Howbeit, although they escaped the jawes of wilde beasts, yet they escaped not the swords of them that were more savage than any beasts: and though the bowels of Beares refused to entombe them, yet were they intombed in the flouds, and crowned with the Crowne of sacred martyr∣dome. Processus and Martianus, Keeper of the Prison wherein the Apostles Pe∣ter and Paul were inclosed at Rome, seeing the miracles which were wrought by their hands, believed in Christ, and together with seven and forty other prisoners were baptized. Which when Paulinus the Judge per∣ceived, hee injoyned them to lay aside their conscience, and offer sacrifice to Idols. But they, readier to obey God than man, could neither by threats nor violence bee brought to it; but chose rather to bee beaten with clubs Vincentius, l. 10. c. 56. Petru de Na∣talibus. or consumed with fire, or scourged with Scorpions, as they were, than to yeeld to deny their Maker, by doing worship to devilish and mon∣strous Idols. But that Judge the procurer of their martyrdomes, shortly after became himselfe an object of Gods wrath; when his eye-sight fai∣led him, and an evill spirit so possessed and tormented him, that in the extremity of terrours and griefe, he breathed out ere long his last and mise∣rable breath. Nicephorus reporteth, How the Emperour Trajan having caused five Lib. 3. c. 21.
holy Virgins to be burned, for standing in the profession of the Truth, commanded certaine Vessells to be made of their ashes mingled with brasse, and dedicated them to the service of a publique Bath; but the Bath that before time instilled a wholesome and healthfull vapour into mens bodies, now became pernitious and fatall unto them: for all that wa∣shed themselves therein, felt presently such a giddinesse in their braines, and such a dimnesse of sight, that they fell downe dead forthwith: The cause of which mischiefe being perceived by Trajan, he melted againe the Virgin-moulded Vessells, and erected five statues to the honour of them; so choaking as it were one superstition with another, to his owne eternall infamy and disgrace. Agapitus, a youngman of fifteene yeares of age, being apprehended by Bergom. lib. . the inhabitants of Preneste, and grievously tormented, for refusing to offer sacrifice to their Idols; and when all would not serve to shake the foun∣dation of his Faith (which was builded upon a Rocke) hee was con∣demned and executed to death: For, being first scourged with whips, then hanged up by the feet; after having hot scalding water poured upon him, at last hee was cast unto wilde beasts. With all which torments being not terrified, nor yet dispatched, finally had his head cut off. But behold, the Judge called Antiochus, that pronounced the sentence, fell downe from his Throne before the face of the world, even whilst the young man was in the mid'st of his torments; and by his example made knowne to all men, how odious such cruell persecutors are in the sight of Him that judgeth the Earth, and controlleth the mightie Princes and Potentates of the same. In the Empire of Iulian the Apostate the Lord sene such horrible earth∣quakes upon the world, that what for the fall of houses, and raptures of fields, neither citie nor countrey was safe to abide in: besides, such an ex∣treame drouth dryed up the moisture of the earth, that victualls were very geason and deare. These plagues Theodoret avoucheth to have fallen upon Lib. 4. cap. 4. the world for the impietie of Iulian, and the miserable persecution of Christians. The Emperour Gallus had good successe in his affaires whil'st he abstai∣ned Euseb. lib. 7. cap. 21. & 2. from shedding the bloud of the Christians; but as soone as hee gave himselfe over unto that villany, his prosperitie, Kingdome, and life dimi∣nished and decreased at once: for within two yeares he and his sonne V∣lusianus, in the warre against Aemylian, were both slaine, through the defection of his souldiers, who in the point of necessitie forsooke him. Beside, the Lord in his time sent upon the Provinces of Rome a generall and contagious pestilence, which lasted whole ten yeares without intermis∣sion, to make satisfaction for the much innocens blood which was spilled amongst them. Arnolphus the fourescor▪th Emperour, raged like a Tyrant against all men, but especially against those that professed the Religion and name of Philip Melan. Chron. lib. 4. ebast. Franc. Chron. Pelon. Christ Jesus: for which cause the Lord stirred up a woman the wife of Guid, to minister unto him the dregs of his wrath in a poysoned cup, by means whereof such a rottennesse possessed all his members, that lice and wormes issuing out continually, he dyed most miserably in Ornge, a city of Bavary, the twelfth yeare of his raigne. Bajazet the Turke, to what a miserable and ludibrious end came he, for Philip Mela. Chron. lib. 5.
his outragious hatred against all Christendome, but especially against Constantinople, which he had brought to so low an ebbe, that they could scarce have resisted him any longer, had not Tamberlaine the Tartarian revo∣ked him from the siege, and bidden him leave to assayle others, and looke unto his owne? And indeed he welcommed him so kindly, that he soone tooke him prisoner, and binding him with chaines of gold, carried him up Composulus, lib. 9. cap. 5. and downe in a cage for a spectacle, using his backe for a foot-stoole to get upon his horse. And thus God plagueth one Tyrant by another, and all for the comfort of his chosen. Gensericus King of the Vandales exercised cruell tyranny against the Philip Mela. Chron. lib. 3. professors of the truth. So did Honoricus the second also: but both of them reaped their just deserts: for Gensericus dyed, being possessed with a Spirit; and Honoricus being so rotten and putrified, that one member dropped Greg. Taren. lib. 2. cap. 3. off after another. Some say, that he gnawned off his owne flesh with his teeth. Authar is the twelfth King of Lombardy forbad children to be baptised Paulus Diaco∣nus, l. 3. c. 18. de Gestis Long∣ard. or instructed in the Christian Faith: seeking by that means to abolish and pluck downe the Kingdome of Christ; but he raigned not long, for ere six yeares were compleat, he dyed with poyson at Pavia: And so he that thought to undermine Christ Jesus, was undermined himselfe most deser∣vedly, in the yeare of our Lord 593. When Arcadius the Emperonr, through the perswasion of certain envi∣ous fellowes, and his wife Eudoxia, had banished Iohn Chrysostome Bishop Evagrius, l. 5. c. 34. of Constantinople into Bosphorus; the next night there arose such a terri∣ble earth-quake, that the Empresse and the whole citie was sore affrighted therewith; so that the next morrow messengers after messengers were sent Mandat. 9. Calumniation lib. 2. c. 44. without ceasing, till they had brought him backe againe out of exile, and his accusers were all punished for their wrongfull accusation. Thus it plea∣sed God to testifie the innocency of his servant, by terrifying his enemies. Smaragdus an Exarch of Italy was transported by a Devill, for tyranni∣zing over Christians in the first yeare of the Empire of Mauritius. Mauha a Sarasen, being equall to Pharoah in persecuting the Church of God, God made him equall to him also in the manner of his destru∣ction: Paul. Diacon. lib. 3. c. 22. de Gostis Long. cent. 6. cap. 3. Anton. l. 15. c. 15. for as hee returned from the spoyle of the Monastery of Caime and Mossana, and the Daughter of many Christians, the Lord caused the sea to swallow up his whole army, even an hundred ships, so that few or none escaped. Another time, even the yeare 719, they were miraculously con∣sumed with famine, sword, pestilence, water, and captivitie, and all for Paul. Diac. l. 21. their infestuous rancour and tyranny towards Christians: for whom the famine spared, the sword devonred; whom both these touched not; the pestilence ate up; and they that escaped all three, yet perished in the wa∣ters; and ten ships that escaped the waters, were taken by the Romans and the Syrians: surely an egregious signe of Gods heavie wrath and displea∣sure. To conclude, there was never any that set themselves against the Church of God, but God set himselfe against them by some notable judgement: so that some were murthered by their subjects, as Bluso King of the Vandales; others by their enmies, as Vdo Prince of Sclavonia; others by their wives, as Cruco another Sclavonian Prince; others discomfited in warre,
as Abbas the King of Hungaria: some destroyed by their owne horses, as Lucius the Emperour, who first cast his owne daughter, because she was a Christian, amongst the same horses. And generally few persecutors esca∣ped Helm. c. 24. Sclavon. & cap. 34. Bonfius. without some evident and markable destruction. CHAP. XI. Of the Iewes that persecuted Christ. BY how much the offence of the Iews was more hainous, not onely in despising and rejecting the Lord of glory, whom God had sent amongst them for their salvation, but also in being so wicked as to put him to death; by so much the more hath God bestowed his fearfull indignation upon them: as at many other times, so especially by that great calamity and desolation which they abid at their last destruction, begun by Vespasian, and perfected by Titus; which was so great and lamentable, as the like was never heard of untill this day: for if the sacking and over∣throw of Ierusalem, then when Ieremy the Prophet made his booke of Lamentations over it, was reputed more grievous than the subversion of Sodome, which perished suddainly, how much more then is this last de∣struction without all comparison, by reason of those horrible and strange miseries, which were there both suddainly & in continuance of time com∣mitted? Neither truly is there any History which containeth a descrip∣tion of so many miseries as this doth: as it may appeare by Iosephus record of it. For after that they had been afflicted in divers countries, and tossed up and downe by the Deputies a long while, there were slaine at Caesarea in one day twenty thousand: At Alexandria another time fifty thousand: at Zabulon and Joppe eight thousand and foure hundred, besides the bur∣ning of the two Towns: at Damascus ten thousand that had their throats cut. As for Jerusalem, when it had a long time endured the brunt of the warre both within and without, it was pinched with so sore a famine, that Ioseph of the wars of the Iews, l. 2. c. 19. 21. 22, 23 Lib. 6. cap. 16. Lib. 7. c. 7, 8. Lib. 6. cap. 16. the dung of Oxen served some for meat: others fed upon the leather of old shooes and buckles; and divers women were driven to the extiemity to boyle and eat their owne children: Many thinking to save their lives by flying to the Enemy, were taken and slit in pieces, in hope to finde gold and silver in their guts; in one night two thousand were thus piteously dealt withall; and at the last the whole City was by force taken, and the holy Temple conslumed by fire. And this in generall was the miserable issue of that lamentable warre: during which, fourscore and seventeen thousand Iewes were taken Prisoners, and eleven hundred thousand slaine; for within the city were inclosed from the beginning to the ending, all those that were assembled together from all quarters of the earth, to keep the Passeover, as their custome was. As touching the prisouers, some were carried to Rome in triumph; others were here and there massacred at their conque∣rors wils; somes lot it was to be torn in pieces and devoured of wild-beasts; others were constrained to march in troops against their fellowes, and kill one another as if they had been enemies. All which evils came upon them
for the despight and fury which they used towards the Sonne of God and our Saviour; and that was the cause why he, foreseeing this desolation, wept over Jerusalem, and said, That it should be besieged on every side, and rased to the ground, and that not one stone should be left upon another, because it knew not the time of her visitation. Likewise said he to the woman that bewai∣led him as he was led to the Crosse, That they should not weep for him, but for themselves and their children, because of the dayes of sorrow which were to come, wherein the barren and those that had no children, and the dugs that never suckled should bee counted happy. So horrible and pitifull was the destruction of this people, that God would not suffer any of his owne children to bee wrapped in their miseries, nor to perish with this perverse and unbelieving Nation: for (as Eusebius reporteth) they were a little be∣fore the arrivall of these mischiefes, advertised from heaven by the speciall providence of God, to forsake the City, and retire into some far Coun∣try where none of these evils might come neer them. The reliques of this This example belongs also to the con∣tempt of the Word. lib. 1. cap. 34. wretched people that remained after this mighty tempest of Gods wrath, were dispersed and scattered throughout all nations under heaven, beeing subject to them with whom they sojourned, without King, Prince, Judge, or Magistrate to lead and guide them, or to redresse their wrongs, but were altogether at the discretion and commandement of the Lords of those Countries wherein they made their abode; so that their condition and kind of life is at this day so vile and contemptible (as experience sheweth) that no nation in the world is halfe so miserable, which is a manifest badge of Gods vengeance yet abiding upon them. And yet for all this, these dispersed reliques ceased not to vomit out the foame of their malice against Christ, it being so deep rooted an evill, and so inveterate, that time nor reason could revoke them from it. And no mar∣vell, seeing that God useth to punish the greatest sinnes with other sinnes, as with the greatest punishment: so they having shut their eyes to the light when it shined among them, are now given over to a reprobate and harde∣ned sence; otherwise it were not possible they should remain so obstinate. And albeit (God be thanked) we have many converts of them, yet I dare say for the most part, they remain in malitious blindnesse, barking against, and despighting both our Saviour himselfe, and all that professe his name, although their punishments have been still according to their deserts: as by these examples following shall appeare. The Jewes of Inmester, a Towne lying betwixt Calchis and Antioch, being upon a time celebrating their accustomed playes and feasts, in the midst of their jollity, as their use is, they contumeliously reviled not only Christians, but even Christ himselfe: for they got a Christian childe, and hung him upon a Crosse, and after many mocks and taunts, making them∣selves merry at him, they whipt him to death. What greater villany could there be than this? Or wherein could these Devils incarnate shew forth their malice more apparently than thus? not content once to have cruci∣fied Christ the Saviour of the World, but by imitation to performe it againe; and as it were to make knowne, that if it were undone, they would doe it: So also handled they a boy called Simeon, of two years and an halfe old, in the yeare of our Lord 1476. and an another in Fretulium five years after that. But above all, they massacred a poore Carpenters son in Hun∣gary Ioh. Fincel. l. 3 in hatred of Christ, whom they falsly supposed to bee a Carpenters
son: for they cut in two all his veines, and suckt out his blóud with quills. And being apprehended and tortured, they confessed that they had done the like at Thirna foure yeares before, and that they could not be without Christiàn bloud, for therewithall they anointed their Priests. But at all these times they suffered just punishment; for being still taken, they were either hanged, burned, murthered, or put to some other cruell death, at the discretion of he Magistrates. Moreover, they would at divers times buy the Host of some Popish Priest, and thrust it through with their knives, and use it most despightfully. This did one Bleazarus in the yeare of our Lord 1492, the 22 of October, but was burnt for his labour: and eight and thirty at another time for the same villanie, by the Marquesse Io∣achinus: for the caitifes would suffer themselves to be baptised for none o∣ther end, but more securely to exercise their villanies. Another Jew is recorded in the yeare of our Lord 147 to have stoln the picture of Christ out of a Church, & to have thrust it through many times Casp Hedi, lib. 3. cap. 6. with his sword, whereout, when bloud miraculously issued, hee amazed, would have burned it, but being taken in the manner, the Christians stoned him to death. The truth of which story, though I will not stand to avow, yet I doubt not but it might be true, considering that either the Devill might by his cunning so foster and confirme their superstition, or rather that seeing Christ is the subject of their religion as well as of ours, though after a corrupt and sacrilegious forme, and that the Jew did not so much aime at their religion, as at Christ the subject of it, the Lord might shew a miracle, not to establish their errour, but to confound the Jews impiety, especially in those young yeares of the Church. In our English Chronicles are recorded many histories of the malitious practises of the Jews against Christians, in hatred of Christ Jesus our Savi∣our, whom they in contempt call our crucified God; and especially this devillish practise was most frequent amongst them here in England, as in Germany, France, and other places where they were suffered to inhabite; namely every year to steale some Christian man childe from the parents, Nic. Trivis. and on good Friday to crucifie him in despight of Christ and Christian religion. Thus they served a childe at Lincolne named Hugo, of nine years of age, in the yeare 1255, in the reigne of Henry the third, and another at Norwich about the same time; having first circumcised him and detained Cestrens. Flores histor. him a whole yeare in custody. In which two facts they were apprehended; and at Lincolne thirty two of them put to death, and at Norwich twenty, But this was not all the punishment that they endured: as they proceeded and increased in their malice against Christ and his religion, so he procee∣ded in vengeance and indignation against them: First therefore at the co∣ronation of Richard the first, whereas some of them presumed to enter into the Court-gate contrary to the Kings expresse commandement, a great tu∣mult arising thereupon, a number of them were slaine, and their houses fired in the City of London, by the raging multitude and from thence the example spred into all other countries of the Land: for they following the example of the Londoners, havocked, spoyled, killed, and fired as many Jewes as they could come by; untill by the Kings Writs unto the Sheriffe of every County the tumult was appeased, and some few of the principall authors and stirrers of this outrage punished. And it is to bee noted, that this yeare the Iewes held for their Iubilie, but it turned to them a yeare
of confusion. Neither were they thus massacred onely by the Christians, but they became butchers of themselves also: For in the City of Yorke, when as they had obtained the occupying of a certaine Castle for their preservation, and afterward were not willing to restore it to the Christi∣ans againe, and being ready to bee vanquished, and offering much money for their lives, when as that would not be accepted, by the counsell of an old Jew among them, every one with a sharpe rasor cut anothers throat, whereby a thousand and five hundred of them were at that present destroy∣ed. At North-Hampton a number of them were burnt, for enterprizing to fire the City with wilde-fire, which they had prepared for that purposes besides many grievous impositions and taxes which were laid upon them. At last by King Edward the first they were utterly banished this Realme of England, in the yeare 1291: For which deed the Commons gave unto the King a Fifteen. And about the same time also they were banished out of France for the like practices; and still the wrath of God ceaseth not to punish them in all places wheresoever they inhabit. But that their Impiety may bee yet more discovered, I will here set downe the confession of one of their own Nation, a Jew of Ratisbone con∣verted 10. Fineel. l. 3. de Miracul. to the Faith, one very skilfull in the Hebrew tongue. This man being asked many questions about their superstition and ceremonies, an∣swered very fitly: and being demanded, why they thirsted so after Chri∣stian mens bloud? He said it was a mystery onely knowne to the Rabbines and highest persons; but that this was their custome he knew, when any of them was ready to dye, a Rabbine anointed him with this bloud, using these or such like words: If hee that was promised in the Law and Prophets hath truly appeared, and if this Iesus crucified bee the very Messias, then let the bloud of this innocent man that diedin his Faith, cleanse thee from thy sins, and help thee to eternall life. Nay Epiphanius affirmeth, That the Jews of Tybe∣rias did more confidently affirme it than thus: for they would whisper into a dying mans eare, Beleeve in Iesus of Nazareth whom our princes crucified, for he shall come to judge thee in the latter day: All which declareth how impious they are to goe against their owne conscience, and upon how fickle ground all their Religion standeth. CHAP. XII. Of those that in our age have persecuted the Gospell in the person of the Faithfull. AS the Religion of Christ hath beene hitherto cru∣elly crossed and besieged by the mightiest captaines of this world (as hath been partly declared) so it hath not been any better entertained by the Potentates of this age, that ceased not to disturbe the quiet, and pursue to death the lives of Gods children for their professions sake and to bring them utterly to ruine: to addresse all the engines and subtilties of their malicious and wicked counsels, without leaving any one device unthought of that their wit could imagine, or their
power afford; they joyned craft with force, and vile treason with horrible cruelty, thereby to suppresse the truth, and quench that faire and cleere light, which God after long time of blindnesse and ignorance, had caused of his infinite mercy to shine upon us. There fires were kindled every where with the bones of Martyrs; whilest for the space of forty yeares or thereabouts they never ceased to burne those that were followers of that way. Now when they saw that all their butcheries and burnings were not able to consume this holy seed, but that the more they went about to choake it, the more it grew up and increased, they tooke another course, and raised up troubles and seditions in all quarters, as if by that means they should attaine the end of their purpose. Hell vomited up all her Furies of warre, the whole earth was in a tumult, young and old with tooth and naile were imployed to root out the Church of Christ, but God stretching forth his arme against all their practises, shewed himselfe not only a Conqueror, but also a most sharpe revenger of all his adversaries. This is most apparent in that which happened to Thomas Arondel an English man, Archbishop of Canterbury, an enemy and persecutor of the Truth of Christ: who ha∣ving put to death divers holy and upright men, thinking that all he did was History of Martyrs, . 1. gain, was rooted out at last himselfe, by a most strange and horrible death; for he that sought to stop the mouth of God in his Ministers; and to hin∣der the passage of the Gospell, had his owne tongue so swolne, that it stop∣ped his owne mouth, that before his death hee could neither swallow nor speake, and so through famine died in great despaire. Foelix Farle of Wartemberg, one of the Captaines of the Emperour Charles the fifth, being at supper at Ausburg with many of his compani∣ons, Illirle. where threats were blowne out on every side against the Faithful, swore before them all, That before he died he would ide up to his spurs in the bloud of the Lutherans. But it hapned in the same night, that the hand of God so stroke him, that he was strangled and choaked with his own bloud: and so he rode not, but bathed himselfe, not up to the spurs, but up to the throat, not in the bloud of Lutherans, but in his owne bloud, before he died. In the raign of Francis de Valois of late memory, the first King of France of that name, those men that shewed themselves frowardest, sharpest, and History of France. most cruell in burning and murthering the holy Martyrs, were also forwar∣dest examples of the vengeance of God prepared for all such as they are. For proofe whereof, the miserable end of Iohn Roma a Monke of the Order of the White Friers, may serve; who although in regard of his hood and habit ought not to be placed in the number of men of note, yet by reason of the notable example of Gods vengeance upon him, wee may rightly place him in this ranke. This man therefore, at that time when the Chri∣stians of Cabrier and Merindol began to suffer persecution, having obtai∣ned a Commission from the Bishop of Provence and the Embassadour Avignion, to make inquisition after and seise upon the bodies of all them that were called Lutherans; ceased not to afflict them with the cruellest torments he could devise: Amongst many of his tortures this was one, To cause their boots to be filled with boiling grease, and then fastning them overthwartwise over a bench, their legs hanging over a gentle fire, to seeth them to death. The French King advertised of this cruelty, sent out his Letters Patents from the Parliament of Provence, charging, That the said
Iohn de Roma should be apprehended, imprisoned, and by processe of law condemned. Which news when the Caitife heard, he fled backe as fast as he could trot to Avignion, there purposing to recreate and delight him∣selfe with the excrements of his oppression and robbery which hee had wrung out of the purses of poor people: but see how contrary to his hope it fell out; for first he was robbed of his evill gotten goods by his owne servants; and presently upon the same hee fell sicke of so horrible and strange a disease, that no salve or medicine could be found to asswage his paine; and beside it was withall so loathsome, that a man could not en∣dure his company for the stinke and corruption which issued from him. For which cause the white Fryers (his Cloysterers) conveyed him out of their Covent into the hospitall; where increasing in ulcers and vermine, and being become now odious, not onely to others, but to himselfe also, hee would often cry, either to be delivered from his noysomnesse, or to bee slaine, being desirous, but not able to performe the deed upon himselfe. And thus in horrible torments and most fearfull despaire he most misera∣bly died. Now being dead, there was none found that would give Sepul∣ture to his rotten carkasse, had not a Monke of the same Order dragged the carrion into a ditch, which he provided for the purpose. The Lord of Revest, who a while supplied the place of the chiefe Presi∣dent in the Parliament of Provence, by whose meanes many of the Faith∣full Ibid. were put to death, after hee was put beside his office, and returned home unto his owne house, was attached with so grievous a sicknesse, and such furious and mad fits withall, that his wise and neerest allyance not da∣ring to come near him, he like a frantick bedlam, enraged and solitarily en∣ded his life. A Counsellor of the same Court called Bellemont, was so hot and zealous in proceeding against the poor prisoners for the Word of Gods sake, that to the end to pack them soon to the fire, he usually departed not from the Judgement Hall from morning to evening, but caused his meat and drinke to bee brought for his meales, returning not home but onely at night to take his rest. But whilest hee thus strongly and endeavourously imploy∣ed himselfe about these affaires, there began a little sore to rise upon his foot, which at the first being no bigger, than if a waspe had stung the place, grew quickly so red and full of paine, and so increased the first day by ranc∣kling over all his foot, and inflaming the same, that by the judgement of Physicians and Chirurgions, through the contagious fire that spread it selfe over his whole body, it seemed incurable, except by cutting off his foot, the other members of the body might be preserved: which hee in no case willing to yield unto, for all the medicines that were applied unto it, sound the second day his whole leg infected, and the third his whole thigh, and the fourth day his whole body, insomuch that he died the sameday, his deadbody being all partched as if it had been rosted by a fire. And thus he that was so hot in burning poore Christians, was himselfe by a secret flame of Gods wrath, as by slow and soft fire, burned and consumed to death. Lewes du Vaine, brother in law to Menir the President of the said Parlia∣ment History of Martyrs, lib. 2. of Provence, with the brother and son of Peter urand, chiefe but∣cher of the city Ajax, the evening before the horrible cruelty was execu∣ted at Merindoll, fell at debate amongst themselves, and the morrow, as instruments of Gods judgements, slew one another.
The Judge of the City Aix (one of that wretched crew) drowned him∣selfe in his returne, as he passed over the river Durance. As for the chiefe Judge that was principall in that murtherous action, Ibid. touching the condemnation of those poore soules of Merindoll and Ca∣brieres, he likewise suddainly died before he saw the execution of that de∣cree which himselfe had set downe. Iohn Mesnier Lord of Oppede, another chiefe Officer of the afore∣said Ibid. Parliament, that got the leading of the murthering Army against the poore Christians aforesaid, committing such excesse of cruelty, that the most barbarous heathen in the world would have yearned to doe. For which cause hee was also summoned to appeare personally at the Parliament of Paris, there to answer those extortions, robberies, and oppressions, which were layd to his charge; and being convin∣ced and found guilty theieof, was neverthelesse released and set at li∣berty; and that which is more, restored to his former estate. Howbeit, though hee escaped the hands of men, yet was hee overtaken by the hand of God, who knew well enough the way how to entrap and abate his proud intents: for even then when hee was in the height of world∣ly prosperity, and busier than ever, in persecuting Christians, even then was hee pulled downe by a flux of bloud, which provoking his privy parts, engendred such a carnositie and thicknesse of flesh therein, and with∣all a restraint of urine, that with horrible outeries and raving speeches hee died; feeling a burning fire broyling his entrailes from his navill up∣wards, and an extreme infection putrifying his lower parts, and beginning to feele in this life, both in body and soule, the rigour of eternall fire, pre∣pared for the devill and his angels. Iohn Martin Trombant of Briqueras in Piemont, vaunting himselfe 2. Booke of Martyrs. every foot in the hinderance of the Gospell, cut off a Ministers nose of Angrogne in his bravery; but immediately after was himselfe as∣sayled by a mad Woolse, that gnawed off his nose as hee had done the Mi∣nisters, and caused him like a mad man to end his life: Which strange judgement was notoriously knowne to all the countrey thereabout; and beside, it was never heard that this Woolfe had ever harmed any man be∣fore. Caspard of Renialme, one of the Magistrates of the City of Anvers, that adjudged to death certaine poore faithfull soules, received in the same place, ere hee removed, a terrible sentence of Gods judgement against him∣selfe; for he fell desperate immediately, and was faine to be led into his house halfe beside himselfe, where crying that he had condemned the inno∣cent bloud, he forthwith died.
CHAP. XIII. Other examples of the same subject. ABout the same time there happened a very strange judgement upon an ancient Lawyer of Bourges, one Iohn Cranequin, a man of ripe wit naturall, and a great practitioner in his profession, but very igno∣rant in the law of God, and all good literature, and so enviously bent against all those that knew more than himselfe, and that abstained from the filthy pol∣lutions of Popery, that he served instead of a Promo∣tor, to inform Ory the Inquisitor for them; but for his labour, the arme of God stroke him with a marvellous strange phrensie, that whatsoever his eyes beheld, seemed in his judgement to be crawling serpents: in such sort, that after he had in vaine experienced all kinde of medicines, yea and used the help of wicked sorcery & conjuration, yet at length his senses were quite benummed, and deprived him, and in that wretched and miserable e∣state he ended his life. Iohn Morin, a mighty enemy to the professors of Gods truth, one that laboured continually at Paris in the apprehending and accusing the faith∣full, insomuch that he sent daily multitudes that appealed from him to the high Court of the Palace; died himselfe in most grievous and horrible tor∣ment. The Chancellour of Prat, he that in the Parliaments of France put up the first bill against the faithfull, and gave out the first commissions to put them to death, dyed swearing and blaspheming the name of God, his stomacke being most strangely gnawne in pieces, and consumed with wormes. The Chancellour Oliver being restored to his former estate, having first Referre this a∣mong Apo∣states, l. . c. 18. (against his conscience) renounced his religion; so also now (the same con∣science of his, checking and reclaming) he spared not to shed much inno∣cent bloud, by condemning them to death. But such a fearefull judge∣ment was denounced against him (by the very mouths of the guiltlesse con∣demned soules) that stroke him into such a feare and terrour, that present∣ly he fell sick, surprised with so extreme a melancholy, that sobbing forth sighes without intermission, and murmurings against God, he so afflicted his halfe-dead body, like a man robbed and dispossest of reason, that with his vehement fits hee would so shake the bed, as if a young man in the prime of his yeares with all his strength had assayed to doe it. And when a certaine Cardinall came to visit him in this extremity, he could not abide his sight, his pains increasing thereby, but cried out as soone as he percei∣ved him departed, That it was the Cardinall that brought them all to dam∣nation. When he had been thus a long time tormented, at last in extreme angish and feare he died. Siden. l. 9. Sir Thomas more L. Chancellour of England, a sworne enemy to the Gospell, and a profest persecutor by fire and sword, of all the faithfull, as if thereby he would grow famous and get renowne, caused to be erected a sumptuous Sepulchre, and thereby (to eternize the memory of his pro∣phane
cruelty) to be engraven the commendation of his worthy deeds: amongst which the principall was, that hee had persecuted with all his might the Lutherans; that is, the faithfull: but it fell out contrary to his hope; for being accused, convicted, and condemned of high Treason; his head was taken from him, and his body found no other sepulchre to lie in but the gibbet. Cardinall Crsentius, the Popes Embassadour to the Councel of Trent, in the yeare of our Lord 1552, being very busie in writing to his Master the Pope, and having laboured all one night about his letters; behold as he raised himselfe in his chaire, to stir up his wit and memory, over-dulled with watching; a huge blacke dog with great flaming eyes, and long eares dangling to the ground, appeared unto him: which comming into his chamber, and making right towards him, even under the table where hee sate, vanished out of his sight: whereat he amazed, and a while sencelesse, re∣covering himselfe, called for a candle, and when he saw the dog could not be found, he fell presently sicke with a strong conceit, which never left him till his death; ever crying, that they would drive away the black dog which seemed to climbe up on his bed: and in that humour he died. Albertus Pightus, a great enemy of the Truth also (insomuch that Paulus Iovius calleth him the Lutherans scourge) being at Boloigne at the corona∣tion 27. Booke of his history. of the Emperor upon a scaffold, to behold the pompe and glory of the solemnization, the scaffold bursting with the weight of the multitude, he tumbled headlong amongst the guard that stood below, upon the points of their Halbards, piercing his body cleane through, the rest of his company escaping without any great hurt: for though the number of them which fell with the scaffold was great, yet very few found themselves hurt therby, save onely this honourable Pighius, that found his deaths wound, and lost his hearts bloud, as hath been shewed. Poncher, Archbishop of Tours, pursuing the execution of the burning chamber, was himselfe surprised with a fire from God, which beginning at 2. Booke of Martyrs. The burning chamber was a Court in France, which adjudged the Christians to be burned. his heele, could never be quenched, till member after member being cut off, he died miserably. An Augustine Frier named Lambert, Doctor and Prior in the City of Liege, one of the troop of cruell inquisitors for Religion, whilest he was preaching one day with an open mouth against the Faithfull, was cut short of a sudden in the midst of his sermon, being bereaved of sense and speech, insomuch that he was faine to be carried out of the pulpit to his cloister in a chaire, and a few dayes after was drowned in a ditch. In the yeare of our Lord 1527, there was one George Hala a Saxon, Mi∣nister of the Word and Sacraments, and a stout professor of the reformed Luther. Religion, who being for that cause sent for to appeare before the Archbi∣shop of Mentz at Aschaffenburge, was handled on this fashion: they took away his owne horse, and set him upon the Archbishops fooles horse, and so sent them back homewards, conducted by one appointed for the pur∣pose: who not suffering him to ride the common and beaten way, but lea∣ding him a new course through uncoth paths, brought him into an ambush of theeves placed there by the Bishops appointment, who set upon him and murthered him at once: but it is notoriously knowne, that not one of that wicked rabble came to a good end, but were consumed one after another.
In a City of Scotland called Fanum Ianius, the chiefe mart Towne of that countrey, soure of the chiefest citizens were accused by a Monke be∣fore the Cardinall, for interrupting him in a Sermon, and by him condem∣ned to be hanged like heretickes, when no other crime could bee laid to their charge, save that they desired the Monke to tie himselfe to his text, History of Martyrs, part. 7. and not to rove up and down as he did, without any certain scope or appli∣cation of matter. Now as they went to execution, their wives fell downe at the Cardinals feet, beseeching and intreating pardon for their husbands lives: which he was so farre from granting, that hee accused them also of heresie; and especially one of them (whose name was Helene) for hee caused her young infant to be pulled out of her armes, and her to be put to death with her husband, for speaking certaine words against the Virgin Mary, which by no testimonies could be proved against her. Which doome the godly woman taking cheerfully, and desiring to hang by her husbands side, they would not doe him the least favour, but drow∣ned her in a River running by, that it might be truly said, that no jot of mercy or compassion remained in them. But ere long the cruell Car∣dinall found as little favour at another Butchers hands, that slewe him in his Chamber, when hee dreamed of nothing lesse, and in his Cardinalls robes hanged him over the wall to the view of men. And thus God revenged the death of those innocents, whose blouds never cea∣sed crying for vengeance against their murtherer, untill he had justly pu∣nished him in the same kinde, and after the same fashion which hee had dealt with them. Of this Cardinall, called David Beton, Buchananus reporteth many strange acts of Cruelty, both in the Common-wealth of Scotland, in matters of State, as also in the Church, in questions of Religion▪ how he suborned a false testament in the dead Kings name, whereby hee would have created himselfe chiefe Governour of the whole kingdom, had not his knavery bin soon detected: and how he set many together by the eares of the chiefest sort, not caring which of them soonest perished, so that they perished; glutting himselfe thus with bloud: But amongst all his cruelties, the least was not extended towards the professors of the Gospell, whom hee endea∣voured by all means possible, not to suppresse only, but even utterly to ex∣tinguish: Many he put to death with fire, divers he forced to revolt with ex∣treame torments, and many he punished with banishment: among whom was George Buchanan, the reporter of this history; who being taken and im∣prisoned, escaped through a window, whilest his keepers slept, out of this Lions jaws. Amongst the rest there was one George Sephocard, a most lear∣ned and sincere Preacher of the word of God, in whom his savage cruelty was most eminent, This man abiding at one Iohn Cockburns house, a man of no small reckoning & account, about 7 miles from Edenborough, was first sent for by the Cardinall, & after being not delivered, he together with the Vicegerent, beset all the passages that he might not escape; so that Cockburn was constrained to deliver him into their hands, upon the assurance of Earl Bothuel, who promised to protect him from all injuries: How be it notwith∣standing the Earles promise, and the countermand of the Vicegerent, re∣fused to meddle with that innocent man, yea and gave command, That no proceedings should be made against him; yet the bloudy tyrant condem∣ned him tobe put to death, & also caused the condemnation to be executed:
and that which doth more aggravate his cruelty, he caused a place to be prepared for him and his company, hung with tapestry and silke, very sumptuously, that he might be a joyfull spectatour and eye-witnesse of his torments. But marke how the just vengeancee of God shewed it selfe even in that place: for, as it is in the former story, not long after, this vile but∣cher was murthered in his owne house, by the conspiracy of Normanus Le∣slius, son to the Earle of Rothusia, who early in a morning surprised his porters, and all his servants, in their sleepe, and murthered him in his bed that had murthered so many Christians: and to stop the rage and fury of his friends, hung out his body for a spectacle unto them in the same place where a little before he had with such triumph beheld the tortures of that guiltlesse Martyr: Insomuch that almost all did not only acknowledge the just view of Gods judgement herein, but also remembred the last words of that constant Saint, who being ready to give up the ghost, urtered this speech in effect: He that sitteth and beholdeth us so proudly in that high place, shall within few dayes as reproachfully lye, as now arrogantly he sitteth. A story not much unlike in manner of punishment, happened in the raign of King Henry the eighth, to one Sir Ralph Ellerker, Knight marshall in the towne of Calice, when as Adam Damlip, otherwise called George Bucker, a sincere Preacher of the word of God, was condemned to be execu∣ted as a traytour in pretence, though indeed for nothing but defending the truth against the dregs of Popery, would not suffer the innocent and godly man to declare either his faith, or the cause he dyed for: but said to Acts & Monu∣ments. p. 1223. the Executioner, Dispatch the knave, have done, not permitting him to speake a word in his owne defence to cleere himselfe from the treason that was objected, not proved against him; but this cruell Tyrant swore he would not away before he saw the trayterous heart out. Now this said Sir Ralph in a skirmish or road betweene the French and us at Bulloine, was amongst others slaine, whose only death sufficed not the enemies, but after that they had stripped him starke naked, they cut off his privy members, and pulled the heart out of his body, & so lefthim a terrible example to all bloudy and mercilesse men: for no cause was knowne why they should use him so rather than the rest; but that it is written, Faciens justitias Dominus & judicia omnibus injuria pressis. Thomas Baver, one of the Privy Councellors of the King of Scots, was a sore persecutor of the faithfull in that land: for which cause, lying on his Theatrum hi∣storicum. death bead, he fell into despaire, and said, he was damned, and a cast∣away; and when the Monkes came about him to comfort him, he cryed out upon them, saying, That their Masses and other trash would do him no good, for he never beleeved them; but all that he did was for love of lucre, and not of Religion, not respecting or beleeving there was either a God or a Devill, or a hell, or a Heaven, and therefore he was damned, there was no remedy. And in this miserable case, without any signe of repen∣tance, Refer this also to hypocrisie, lib. 1. cap. 22. he dyed. But let us come to our homebred English stories, and consider the judg∣ments of God upon the persecutors of Christs Gospell in our own coun∣trey. And first to begin with one Doctor Whittington, under the raigne of King Henry the seventh, who by vertue of his office, being Chancellour to the Bishop, had condemned most cruelly to death a certaine godly woman in a town called Chipping sadberry for the profession of the truth,
which the Papists then called Heresie. This woman being adjudged to death by the wretched Chancellor, and the time come when she should be brought to the place of her martyrdome, a great concourse of people both out of towne and country was gathered to behold her end: Amongst whom was also the foresaid Doctor there present, to see the execution perfor∣med. The godly woman and manly Martyr with great constancy gave over her life to the fire, and refused no paines or torments to keep her conscience cleere and unreproveable against the day of the Lord. Now the Sacrifice being ended: as the people began to returne homeward, they were encountred by a mighty furious Bull, which had escaped from a Butcher that was about to kill him (for at the same time as they were slaying this silly Lamb at the townes end, a Butcher was as busie within the towne in slaying of this Bull.) But belike not so skilfull in his art of killing of beasts, as the Papists be in murthering Christians, the Bull broke loose, as I said, and ranne violently through the throng of the people, with∣out hurting either man or childe, till he came to the place where the Chancellour was, against whom, as pricked forward with some super∣naturall instinct, hee ranne full butt, thrusting him at the first blow through the paunch, and after goaring him through and through, and so killed him immediately, trayling his guts with his hornes all the street over, to the great admiration and wonder of all that saw it. Behold here a plaine demonstration of Gods mighty power and judge∣ment against a wretched persecutor of one of his poore flocke: wherein (albeit the carnall sence of man doth often impute to blinde chance that which properly pertaineth to the only power and providence of God) yet none can be so dull and ignorant, but must needs con∣fesse a plaine miracle of Gods almighty power, and a worke of his own finger. Stephen Gardiner also, was one of the grand butchers in this land, what a miserable end came hee unto? Even the same day that Bishop Ridley and Master Latimer were burned at Oxford, he hearing newes thereof, rejoyced greatly, and being at dinner ate his meat merrily; but ere he had eaten many bits, the sudden stroke of Gods terrible hand fell upon him, Acts and Mo∣numents, pag. 1788. in such sort, that immediately he was taken from the board, and brought to his bed, where he continued 15 dayes in intolerable anguish, by reason he could not expell his urine; so that his body being miserably inflamed within (who had inflamed so many Godly Martyrs) was brought to a wretched end, with his tongue all blacke and swolne, hanging out of his mouth most horribly: a spectacle worthy to be beholden of all such blou∣dy burning persecutors. Bonner Bishop of London, another arch butcher, though he lived long af∣ter this man, and dyed also in his bed; yet was it so provided of God, that as Pag. 2114. he had been a persecutor of the light, and a child of darknesse, so his car∣kasse was tumbled into the earth in obscure darkenes at midnight, contra∣ry to the order of all other Christians: and as he had been a most cruell murtherer, so was he buried amongst theeves and murtherers; a place by Gods judgement rightly appointed for him. Morgan Bishop of S. Davids sitting upon the condemnation of the bles∣sed Martyr Bishop Farrar, whose roome he unjustly usurped, was not long 2099.
after stricken by Gods hand after such a strange sort, that his meat would not go downe, but rise and picke up againe, sometime at his mouth, some∣time blowne out of his nose, most horrible to behold, and so continued unto his death. Where note moreover, that when Master Leyson (being then Sheriffe at Bishop Farrars burning) had fetcht away the cattell of the said Bishop, from his servants house into his owne custody, divers of them would never eate meat, but lay bellowing and roaring, and so dyed. Adde unto this Bishop Morgan, Iustice Morgan a Judge that sate upon the death of the Lady Iane: this Iustice, not long after the execution of the said Lady, fell mad, and being thus bereft of his wits, dyed, having ever in his mouth, Lady Iane, Lady Iane. Bishop Thornton Suffragan of Dover, another grand persecutor, com∣ming upon a Saturday from the Chapter-house at Canterbury, and there upon the Sunday following looking upon his men playing at bowles, fell suddenly into a palsey, and dyed shortly after. And being exhorted to re∣member God in his extremity of sicknesse: So I do (saith he) and my Lord Cardinall too, &c. After him succeeded another Suffragan, ordained by the foresaid Car∣dinall, and equall to his Predecessor in cruell persecuting of the Church; who injoying his place but a short time, fell downe a paire of staires in the Cardinals chamber at Greenwich, and broke his necke, and that presently (let it be noted) after he received the Cardinals blessing. The like sudden death hapned to Doctor Dunning the bloudy and wret∣ched Chancellour of Norwich, who after he had most rigorously condem∣ned and murthered a number of simple and faithfull servants of God, was suddenly stricken with death even as he was sitting in his chaire. The like also fell upon Berry, Commissary of Norfolke, another bloudy persecutor; who foure dayes after Queene Maries death having made a great Feast, whereat was present one of his concubines; as he was comming home from the Church, where he had ministred the Sacrament of Baptisme, fell downe suddenly to the ground with a heavy groane, and never stirred after, thus ending his miserable life without any shew of re∣pentance. So Doctor Geffrey Chancellor of Salisbury, another of the same stampe, was suddenly stricken with the mighty hand of God in the midst of his buildings, where he was constrained to yeeld up his life, which had so little pitty of other mens lives before: and it is to be noted, that the day before he was thus stricken, he had appointed to call before him ninety poore Christians, to examine them by inquisition, but the goodnesse of God and his tender providence prevented him. Doctor Foxford, Chancellor to Bishop Stockesley, dyed also suddenly. So did Iustice Lelond the persecutor of one Ieffery Hurst. Alexander the Keeper of Newgate, a cruell enemy to those that lay in that prison for Religion, dyed very miserably, being so swollen, that he was more like a monster than a man, and so rotten within that no man could abide the smell of him. His sonne called Iames, after hee had spent all his fathers substance riotously, fell downe suddenly in Newgate market, and there wretchedly dyed. Iohn Peter sonne in law to the said Alexander, and no lesse cruell to the poore Christians, rotted away, and so dyed.
Cox an earnest Protestant in King Edwards dayes, and in Queene Maries time a Papist, and a Promoter, going well and in health to bed (as it seems was dead before the morning. All these almost, with many more which I could recite, dyed suddenly, being most cruell and horrible persecutors of the flocke of Christ. Many there were, which though they escaped sudden death, yet did not avoid a most miserable and wretched end. In the number whereof I may place first Alexander the Keeper of Newgate, together with his sonne in law Iohn Peter, of whom mention was made before: Also Master Woodroofe the Sheriffe of London, who used to rejoyce at the death of the poore Saints of Christ, and would not suffer Master Rogers, going to his Mar∣tyrdome, to speake with his children: this man lay seven or eight yeares bed-rid, having one halfe of his body all benummed, and so conti∣nued till his dying day. Also one Burton the Bayliffe of Crowland in Lincolneshire, who having been a Protestant in outward shew in King Edwards dayes, as soone as Queene Mary was quietly seated in the king∣dome, became very earnest in setting up the Masse againe, and constrai∣ned the Curate by threats to leave the English Service, and say Masse. This blinde Bailiffe not long after, as he was riding with one of his neigh∣bours, a Crow flying over his head, let her excrements fall upon his face, the poysoned stinke and savour whereof so annoyed his stomacke, that he never lest vomiting untill he came home, and there after certaine dayes, with extreame paine of vomiting, crying and cursing the Crow, desperate∣ly he dyed without any token of repentance. Also one Robert Baldwine, who being stricken with lightning, at the taking of William Seaman, pined away and dyed. Robert Blomfield also, Bailiffe to Sir Iohn Ierningham, after he had prosecuted one Master Browne, pined away both in his goods and body, by a consumption of both. William Swallow the cruell tormentor of George Egles, was shortly after plagued of God, that all the haire of his head, and nailes of his fingers and toes went off; his eyes were well neere closed up, that he could scant see; his wife was also stricken with the falling sicknesse, with the which malady she was never infected before. Lastly (to omit many others) one Twiford is not to be forgotten; who in King Henries dayes was a busie doer in setting up stakes for the burning of poore Martyrs: and seeing the stakes consume so fast, provided a big tree, cutting off the top, and set it up in Smithfield, saying, I will have a stake that shall hold. But behold Gods hand; before ever that tree was consumed, the state of Religion turned, and he fell into an horrible disease, rotting alive above the ground before he dyed. Besides these, many there were that hanged themselves. As for ex∣ample, one Clarke an open enemy to the Gospell in King Edwards dayes, hanged himselfe in the Tower. So did Pavier the Towne Clarke of Lon∣don, another bitter enemy to the Gospell. So did the sonne of one Levar a husbandman, that mocked and scorned at the holy Martyr Master Lati∣mer, being dead; and that at the same houre, as neere as could be gathered, whilst his father was railing upon the dead Martyr. So did Henry Smith a Lawyer, who having been a Protestant, became a Papist. Others drowned themselves; as namely Richard Long at Calice, in King Henry the eights dayes. Iohn Plankney a Fellow of New Colledge in Oxford, in the yeare of
our Lord 1566. And one Lanington a Fellow of the same Colledge, in a Well at Padua, or as some thinke, at Rome. Others were stricken with madnesse: in which ranke place first Justice Morgan, of whom wee made mention a little before: Then, a She∣riffes servant that railed upon Iames Abbes a godly Martyr, as he was go∣ing to be burned; saying, That hee was an Heretique and a mad man; but as soone as the fire was put to the Martyr (such was the fearefull stroke of Gods justice upon him) he was there presently in the sight of all the people stricken with a frenzy, crying out aloud, that Iames Abbes was saved, but he was damned; and so continued till his dying day. So likewise one William a Student in the inner Temple, in the midst of his railing against the Gospell of Christ and the Professors thereof, fell starke mad. Many other examples of the like kind I could here adde, but he that de∣sireth to know and read more thereof, let him have recourse unto the latter end of the Acts and Monuments of the English Church, where he shall find a whole Catalogue of such like examples. The overthrow of many mighty ones in our Age, serve for a looking glasse to represent the high exploits of the wonderfull judgements which the King of Kings hath sent upon those that have in any place or countrey whatsoever, resisted and strove against the Truth. whereof some after great victories, which by their singular dexterity and worldly wisedome in the mannaging of their affaires, have atchieved, by a perverse and overthwart end, contrary to their former prosperity, have darkned and obscured the re∣nowne and glory of all their brave deeds, their good report dying with their bodyes, and their credit impaired and buried with them in their graves. Others in like manner having addressed all their forces, and laid their bat∣tery, and placed all their Pieces and Canons against the wals of Sion, and thinking to blow it up and consume it to ashes, have made many breaches into the sides thereof, yea they have so bent all their strength against it, and afflicted it with such outragious cruelty, and unmercifull effusion of bloud, that it is pitifull and lamentable to remember: howbeit after all their po∣licies and practises, their courage hath been at length abated, and them∣selves raked one after another out of this world, with manifest markes of the just vengeance of God upon them. For though it may seem for a time that God slepeth and regardeth not the wrongs and oppressions of his servants, yet he never faileth to carry a watchfull eye upon them, and in his fittest time to revenge himselfe upon their enemies. CHAP. XIV. A Hymne of the persecution of Gods Church, and the deliverance of the same. ALong the verdant fields all richly dy'd. With Natures paintments, and with Flora's pride: Whose goodly bounds are lively Chryst all streames Begirt with bow'rs to keep backe Phoebus beames;
Even when the quenchlesse torch, the Worlds great eye, Advanc' his rayes orethwartly from the skie, And by his power of heavenly influence Reviv'd the seeds of Springs decay'd essence: Then many flockes unite in peace and love, Not seeking ought but naturall behove, Past quietly uncharg'a with other care, Save of their feed within that pasture faire. These Flocks a Sheepheard had (of power and skill) To fold and feed, and save them from all ill: By whose advice they liv'd; whose wholsome voice They heard and fear'd with love, and did rejoyce Therein with melody of song and praise, And dance, to magnifie his Name alwaies. He is their Guide, they are his Flocke and Fold, Nor will they be by any else controld. Well knowing, that whom he takes care to feed, He will preserve and save in time of need; Thus liv'd this holy Flocke at hearts content, Till cruell Beasts all set on ravishment, Broke off their peace, and ran upon with rage, Themselves, their Young, and all their heritage; Slitting their throats, devoured Lambs and all, And dissipating them that seap't their thrall. Then did the jolly feast to fast transforme, (So ask't the fury of that ragefull storme) Their joyfull song was turn'd to mournfull cries, And all their gladnesse chang'd to well adyes. Whereat Heav'n grieving, clad it selfe in blacke; But earth in uprore triumph't at their wracke. What profits then the sheephooke of their Guide? Or that he lies upon a Beacons side, With watchfull eye to circumscribe their traine, And hath no more regard unto their paine? To save them from such dangers imminent (Some say) as are so often incident. 'Tis not for that his arme wants strength to break All proud at tempts that men of might do make: Or that he will abandon unto death His Owne, deare bought with exchange of his breath. For must we thinke, that though they dye they perish; Death dyes in them, and they in death reflourish: And this lifes losse, a better life renues, Which after death eternally ensues. Though then their passions never seeme so great, Yet never comfort serves to swage their heat: Though strength of torments be extreame in durance, Yet are they guencht by Hopes and Faiths assurance. For thankefull Hope, if God be grounded in it. Assures the heart, and pacifies the spirit.
To them that love and reverence his Name, Prosperity betides, and want of shame. Thus can no Tyrant pull them from the hands Of mighty God, that for their safety stands: Who ever sees, and ever can defend; Them whom he loves, he loves unto the end: So that the more their fury overfloweth, The more each one his owne destruction soweth. And as they strive with God in policy, So are they sooner brought to misery. Like as the savage Boare dislodg'd from den, And hotly chased by pursuit of men, Run's furiously on them that come him neere, And goares himselfe upon the hunters speare: The gentle puissant Lambe, their Champion bold, So help's to conquer all that hart's his fold, That quickly they and all their Progeny Confounded is, and brought to misery. This is of Iudah the couragious Lion, The conquering Captaine, and the Rocke of Sion; Whose favour is as great to Iacobs Line, As is his fearefull frowne to Philistine. CHAP XV. Of Apostata's and Backsliders, that through infirmity and feare have fallen away. IT is a kinde of Apostasie and Backsliding condemned by the first commandement of the Law, when as hee that hath been once enlightened by the word of God in the knowledge of salvation, and nourished and in∣structed therein from the cradle, doth afterward cast behind his backe the grace of Gods spirit, or disallow thereof, and exempt himselfe from the service of God, to serve Idols, or make any outward shew to doe it: which kinde of sinne may be committed after two sorts; either through infirmity and feare, or willingly and with deliberation: when not being pressed or constrained thereto by any outward means, a man doth cleerely and of himselfe abandon and forsake the true Religion, to march under the baoner of Satan and Antichrist. And this is also of two sorts; either when a man doth simply forsake the profession of the Truth, to follow su∣perstition and Idolatry, without attempting any thing beside the meere deniall of his Faith; or when after his revolt he professeth not onely the contrary Religion, but also endeavoureth himselfe by all means possible to advance it, and to oppresse and lay siege to the doctrine of Gods Truth in those that maintaine the same. By this it appeareth that there are three kinds of Apostasie; one as it were inforced and compelled, the second vo∣luntary,
the last both voluntary and malitious: which though they be all very hainous and offensive in the sight of God, yet the second and third sort are most dangerous, and of them also one more hurtfull and pernitious than the other, as we shall perceive by that which followeth. Now as all these kinds are different one from another, so I will referre the examples of each sort to his severall place, that the efficacy thereof may be the better perceived. And first of those which have fallen away through feare and infirmity, and afterward in order of the rest. Athough that they who by the conceit and feare of tortures presented before their eyes, or of speedy and cruell death threatned against them, doe decline and slide backe from the profession of the Gospell, may pretend for excuse the weakenesse and feeblenesse of the flesh, yet doubtlesse they are found guilty before the throne of God, for preferring the love of this transitory and temporary life before the zeale of his glory, and the honour which is due to his onely be∣gotten Sonne, especially at that time when they are called out of purpose by their Martyrdome to witnesse his sacred truth before men, and he desi∣reth most to be glorified by their free and constant perseverance therein: to the which perseverance they are exhorted by many faire promises of eternall life and happinesse: and from the contrary terrified by threats of death and confusion, and upon paine to be discharged from the presence of Christ before God, because they have denied him before men: which is the misery of all miseries, and the greatest that can happen to any man; for what shall become of that man whom the Sonne of God doth not ac∣knowledge? Now to prove that God is indeed highly offended at this faint hearted cowardlinesse, he himself hath made knowne unto us, by the punishments which divers times he hath sent upon the heads of such of∣fendors. As in the time of the Emperour Valerian the eighth persecutor of the Church, under whose persecution albeit that many Champions bestir∣red themselves most valiantly in that combat of Faith; yet there wanted not some, whose hearts failing them, and who in stead of maintaining and standing for their cause to the death, as they ought to have done, retyred and gave up themselves to the enemy at the first assault. Amongst the num∣ber of which doubty souldiers, there was one that went up into the Capi∣toll at Rome, in that place where Iupiters Temple in old time stood, to ab∣jure Cyprian in his Sermons, de Lapsu mul∣terum. and recant Christ and his profession: which he had no sooner done, but he was presently strucke dumbe, and so was justly punished in that very member wherewith he had offended. A woman likewise having renounced her profession, and feeling in her∣selfe Cyprian. no remorse of conscience for her fall, went as she was wont to doe in the time of her rest and prosperity, to the Bathes and Hot-houses to re∣fresh herselfe, as if all had had gone well with her; but she was so seised upon and possessed by an evill Spirit, that in stead of pleasure, which she fought for, she fell to lamenting, and tormenting her owne flesh, and chopt in pieces with her dainty teeth her rebellious tongue, wherewith shee had spoken wicked words, and dishonoured God, and tasted meats offered to Idols: and so this poore wretch, whereas she should have wasted her selfe in teares of true repentance, and in the true bath of grace and mercy, be∣cause she had more care of cleansing her body from filth, than her soule from sinne, became corrupt and filthy both body and soule, by the meanes of that uncleane spirit which God had given power to afflict her: and
armed her owne mouth, which had tasted, chewed, and swallowed that cur∣sed food, furiously to rise against her selfe to destroy her: so that she be∣came her owne murtherer, for she survived not long, by reason that her bowels and intrails were choaked up to the throat with paine. Another woman well stricken in yeares, that in like manner had revol∣ted from the Truth, thrust her selfe notwithstanding into the assembly of Cyprian. the Faithfull, as they were receiving the holy Sacrament. But that holy Contempt of Word and Sa∣crament. lib. 1. c. 24. food which nourished the soules of them that believed, turned to her bane; for she found there in stead of peace, a sword; in stead of norishment, deadly and mortall poison, in such sort, that immediately after the receit of that holy Supper, she began to be marvellously troubled and vexed in soule, and felt the hand of God so heavy upon her for her offence commit∣ted in denying her Saviour, to shun her persecution, that trembling and stamping she fell downe dead. There was also in like manner a certain man, that having renounced his Cyprian. saith, did notwithstanding present himselfe at the celebration of the holy Supper, presuming to come and eat at his Table, whom he had a little be∣fore denied; but receiving into his hand part of the Sacrament as well as the rest, and thinking to put it into his mouth, it was turned into ashes: Contempt of Sacrament. lib. 1. c. 34. whereupon he stood amazed and confounded in himselfe, God manifesting in him, that hee that revoked his faith, and recoiled from Christ Jesus, Christ Jesus would recoile from him, & give him over to death, by depri∣ving him of his grace, and spoiling him of the power of his quickning and saving Spirit. These are the fearfull examples of Gods Judgements, which Saint Cyprian reporteth to have light upon back sliders in his time; adding more∣over, that besides these, many were possessed of devils, robbed of their wits, and inraged with fury and madnesse, and all for this offence of A∣postasie. Amongst all the examples of our age, of Gods severe justice upon Apo∣states, Sleiden. l. 21. . the example of Francis Spira an Italian Lawyer, a man of credit and authority in his countrey, is most pitifull and lamentable; who having embraced the true Religion with marvellous zeal, and made open professi∣on of the same, feared not freely to declare his opinion of every point of Doctrine that came in question, and grew in knowledge every day more and more. But it was not long ere he was complained of to the Popes Em∣bassadour: which when he understood, and saw the danger wherein he was like to fall, after he had long debated and disputed the matter in his owne conscience, the counsell of the flesh and worldly wisedome prevailing, he resolved at last to goe to the Embassadour, to the intent to appease his wrath, and do whatsoever he should command. Thus comming to Venice, and over-ruled with immoderate fear, he confessed that he had done amisse, & craved pardon for the same, promising ever after to be an obedient sub∣ject to the Popes Lawes: and that which is more, when it was enjoyned him, that at his return home he should in his owne countrey openly recant his former profession, he refused not, but performed his recantation in due sort. But it chanced very soone after, that this miserable man fell sicke of body and soule, and began to dispaire of Gods mercy towards him. His Physitian perceiving his disposition, judged, that the cause of his bodies disease was a vehement conceit and thought of minde; and therefore
gave advice to minister counsell to his troubled minde very carefully, that the cause being taken away, the effect also might surcease. To this end many learned men frequented him every day, recalling into his minde, and laying open before him many expresse places of Scripture, touching the greatnesse of Gods mercy. Which things he avouched to be true, but said that those promises pertained not to him, because he had renounced Christ Jesus, and forsworne the known truth, and that for this cause nothing was prepared for him but hell fire, which already in soule hee saw and felt: I would (said he) willingly, if it were possible, love God, but it is altogether impossible. I onely feare him without love. These and such speeches used he with a stedfast countenance; neither did his tongue at any time run at randome, nor his answers savour of indiscretion or want of memory; but advisedly warned all that stood by to take heed by his example, how to listen too much to worldly wisedome, especially when they should be cal∣led before men to professe the Religion of Christ. And lying in this ex∣tremity, he refused all manner of sustenance, rebuking and being angry with his sonnes that opened his mouth to make him swallow some food to sustaine him; saying, Since he had forsaken his Lord and Master, all his creatures ought to forsake him; I am afraid of every thing, there is not a creature that hath not conspired to worke my destruction: let me die, let me die, that I may goe and feele that unquenchable fire, which alrea∣dy consumeth me, and which I can by no meanes escape. And thus hee died indeed, pined to death in despaire and horrible torment of con∣science. Nichomachus a man that stoutly professed Christ Jesus in prosperity, be∣ing Cenur. 3. c. 12. brought to his triall at Troas, and put into torments he denied him; and being delivered by that meanes, consented to offer sacrifice unto Idols. But as soone as he had finished his sacrifice, he was hoisted up by the spirit of darknesse, whose darling now he was, & dashed against the earth: so that his teeth biting his prophane tongue (wherewith he had denied his Savi∣our) in two, he died continently. Tamerus a professor of the true Religion, was feduced by his brother to cleave unto Popery, and to forsake his first love: but for his defection from Theatrum hi∣storicum. the truth, the Lord gave him up into a ceprobate sense, so that falling into despaire he hung himselfe. Richard Denton a Blacksmith dwelling at Wels in Cambridge-shire, ha∣ving been a professor of the Gospell a foretime; when William Woolsey Mar∣tyr (whom the said Denton had first converted from the Truth) sent him certaine money out of prison at Ely, with his commendations, That hee marvelled he tarried so long behinde him, seeing he was the first that deli∣vered him the booke of Scripture into his hand, and told him that it was the truth: his answer was this, I confesse it is true, but alas I cannot burn. But he that could not burne in the cause of Christ, was afterward burned Acts and Mo∣numents, pag. 1717. against his will; for in the year 1564 his house was set on fire, and whilest he went to save his goods, he lost his life. There was also one Burton Bailiffe of Crowland in Lincoln-shire, who pretending an earnest friendship to the Gospell in King Edwards time; af∣ter the Kings death began lustily to set up the Popish Masse againe, and would have beaten the poore Curate, if he had not setled himselfe there∣to: but see how the Lords judgement overtook, him; as hee came riding Acts and Mo∣numents, pag. 2101. from Fennebanke one day, a Crow flying over his head, let fall her excre∣ments
upon his face, so that it ranne from the top of his nose downe to his beard, the poysoned sent and savour whereof so annoyed his stomack, that he never ceased vomiting untill he came home: and after falling deadly sicke, would never receive any meat, but vomited still, and complaining of that stinke, cursing the Crow that had poysoned him: to be short, within few daies he died desperately, without any token of repentance of his for∣mer life. Hither may we adde the examples of one Henry Smith a Lawyer of the Acts and Me∣numents. middle Temple, and Arnoldus Bomelius a Student of Lovaine; both which having professed the Truth a while, and after being seduced by evill com∣pany, the one of Gilford, the other of Master Tileman, Smith afterward han∣ged himselfe in his chamber in the Temple, in the yeare of our Lord 1569. Bomelius murthered himselfe with his owne dagger. And thus these two Apostata's felt the heavy scourge of Gods wrath, for revolting from the Truth which they once professed. CHAP. XVI. Of those that have willingly fallen away. THese kinde of Apostata's which we are now to speake of, are such as without any outward compulsion, threats, or likelyhood of danger, forsake freely Gods true Reli∣gion, and give themselves over to all Idolatry: Against whom there is a Decree ordained in the thirteenth of Deutronomy, by the Law-giver of Heaven: which is this; If the inhabitants of any city have turned from the Lord, to follow after strange gods, let them be destroyed with the edge of their sword, and their city consumed with fire, that they may be utterly rased out and brought to no∣thing. This was the sinne of Solomon King of Israel (a brave and mighty 1 King. 110 kingdome in his time) a man subject to none for power, nor fearing any for authority: yet for all this, so filthily recoyling from the Truth which hee knew and had professed, that in stead of serving the true God, he became a setter up of false Idols, and that of his owne freo will and pleasure: he that had been so well brought up and instructed from his childehood in true Religion by his School master the Prophet Nathan, into whose charge hee was committed; and so often and earnestly admonished by his father Da∣vid, to observe diligently the law of God, to direct his wayes thereby: and whom God vouchsafed this honour, to appeare twice unto, and to enrich and adorne with such excellent wisedome, that the Queene of Saba hea∣ring his report, came to Ierusalem to be his auditor: even this Solomon in his old age, when he should have been most stedfast and constant, suffered himselfe to be seduced by the enticements of his strange wives and concu∣bines, to offer service unto strange gods, and to forsake the God of Heaven, to worship the Idols of the Gentiles. And as his renowne was great and famous before for building that sumptuous and beautifull Temple at Ie∣rusalem; so was his obloquy and reproach the greater, for erecting Altars and Chappels for the Idols of his wives and concubines, even for every one
of their Idols, to the intent to flatter and please their humors: it was ther∣fore just and equall, that the Lord (his wrath being provoked against him) raised up two strong enemies that wrought him and his people much scath. Yea moreover Ieroboam, one of his owne servants (whilest hee yet lived) was by the ordinance of God designed King over ten Tribes: and so God punished him for his Idolatry and Backsliding, leaving him but a small portion of the kingdome to continue to his successors: which, had it not been for his father Davids sake, had been also taken away. It is true, That we read not that he ever hindred the service of the Temple, or com∣pelled or perswaded any man to worship an Idoll; yet he did enough to make him culpable before God of a grievous sinne, in that he being the head and Soveraigne Magistrate of the people, committed such wickednes and such Apostasie in Israel: beside, it is a marvellous strengthning, that in all his History there is not so much as any token mentioned, or to be ga∣thered of his true repentance alter this notable fall. And hee that well weigheth the nature and quality of this sinne, shall perceive that it some∣what resembleth that which is spoken of, Heb. 6. ver, 4, 5, 6: for Solomon was not so ignorant and destitute of the knowledge of God, but rather had the treasure of wisedome in fulnesse and abundance, and was endowed with the gifts and graces of Gods Spirit, that he was able to instruct others, and to discharge a Doctors place in the Church, as he also did both by word and writing. And although that the Sonne of God was nos as then yet manifested in the flesh; yet the power and efficacy of his death being ever∣lasting, and from the beginning, whereof the Law with the ceremonies and sacrifices thereof, was as it were a Schoolemaster, could not be hidden from him: Therefore so soone as he addicted himselfe to his Idolatry, he It is manifest that Solomon did repent: first because it is said, that God loved him. Se∣cōdlv, because he was a pen man of some part of the Scrptue and thdly, be∣caus he was a ype of Christ. 2 Chron. 12. forthwith abandoned the holy ordinances and sacrifices of Gods Law, and quitted himselfe of the promise of salvation therein contained; disanul∣ling and making of none effect, as concerning himselfe, the grace of the Mediator, ordained from the beginning: so that his downfall was terrible and perillous. Yet there be that thinke that after all this he wrote the booke of Ecclesiastes, as a declaration of his repentance; whose opinion I purpose not to contradict. Roboam his sonne succeeded him, as well in the likenesse of his sinne, as of his kingdome: for after that the Priests and Levites forsaking the part of Ieroboam because of his Idols, and leaving their houses and possessions to strangers, had made repaire to him, for feare of God, and love of his holy service, and that he had disposed and put in order his publique affaires, for the ratifying and confirming of his kingdome; presently he and all his people forsooke the law of God, and gave themselves over to Idolatry and other grievous sinnes: wherefore the Lord also forsooke and gave them over to the hands of Caesac King of Aegypt, that raised up a mighty power of men, even a thousand and two hundred chariots, threescore thousand horsemen, with an infinite multitude of footmen to make warre against him: so that all the strong cities and fortresses of Iudah, no nor Ierusalem it selfe, was strong enough to repulse him from sacking and taking them, and robbing the Temple of their treasures and despoyling the Kings pala∣ces of his riches, and carrying backe into Aegypt a rich prey of the best and beautifullest things that were therein. And this was the first shake that ever this kingdome received since it was a kingdome, whereby it began to
waine and decline. Notwithstanding all this, yet the Lord had compassion and pitty of him and all his people, and would not suffer his dignity to be troden under foot and quite suppressed, but restored him once againe into an honourable estate, because when he was reproved by Semeia the Prophet, he humbled himselfe before the Lord, and his Princes also: which is a ma∣fest signe, that his sinne was not an universall Apostasie, whereby hee was wholly turned aside from God and all hope of grace, but it was a particular revolt, such as was that of his forefathers, the children of Israel, when they imagined that God would be present with them in the idolatrous golden Calfe, and in that figure to worship him, so grosse and sencelesse were they: although yet Roboams sin seemeth to exceed theirs in greatnesse and guil∣tinesse. The Iewes that in the time of Ptolomey Philopater abode in Aegypt, and willingly renounced the law and service of God, in hope thereby better to provide for their worldly commodities, enjoyed not long their ease and prosperity: for the other Iewes which had couragiously stucke to their profession, and had been miraculously delivered from their enemies, being grieved and chased at their recoyle, made their supplications to the King (whose heart God inclined to favour their suit) that he would permit them to revenge Gods quarrell upon those Apostates as they had deserved: al∣ledging, that it was hard for them to be true subjects to the King, who for Machab. 7. their bellies sake had rebelled against the commandement of God. The King seeing their request reasonable, and their reasons which they alledged likely, not onely commended them, but gave authority to destroy all those that could be found in any place of his dominion, without any further en∣quiry of the cause, or intelligence of the Kings authority; insomuch that they put to death all those that they knew to have defiled themselves with filthy Idols, doing them before, all the shame they could devise. So that at that time there were dispatched above three hundred persons: which when they had accomplished they rejoyced greatly. CHAP XVII. Of the third and worst sort of Apostates, those that through malice forsake the Truth. IF so be that they of whom we have spoken in the two former Chapters, are in their revoltings inexcusable (as indeed they are) then much more worthy condem∣nation are they, who not only in a villanous contempt cast away the grace of Gods Spirit, and his holy wor∣ship; but also of a purposed malice set themselves against the same, yea and endeavour with all their power, utterly to race and root it out, and in stead there∣of to plant the lies, errors, and illusions of Satan by all means possible. Against this kinde of Monsters sentence is pronounced in the thirteenth of Deutronomy, to wit, That justice should be executed upon them with all extremity, and no mercy and compassion shewed upon him, be he Prophet
or what else, that goeth about to seduce others from the service of the Al∣mighty, to follow false gods. This is the pitfall wherein Ieroboam the first King of Israel slipped by the perversenesse of his owne conscience; who as he had by his rebellion against Rehoboam and the house of David, upreared a new kingdome; so by rebellion against God and his House (in hope by that means to retaine his usurped state and people in subjection) upreared also a new Religion: for distrusting the promises of God which were made him by the Prophet Ahias as touching the Realme of Israel, which he was already in possession of, and despising the good counsell of God, in respect of his owne inventions, he was so besotted and bleared with them, that just after the patterne of his idolatrous forefathers, who by their Aegyptian tricks had provoked the wrath of God against themselves, he set up golden calves, and caused the people to worship them, keeping them so from going to Ierusalem to worship God: nor yet content with this, hee also erected high places to set his Idols in; and having restrained the Priests and Le∣vites from the exercise of their charge, hee ordained a new order of Priests to sacrifice and minister unto his gods, and proclaimed a newer feast than that was in Iuda; even the seventh day of the eighth moneth: wherein he not onely exiled the pure service of God, but also perverted and turned upside downe the Ecclesiasticall discipline and policy of Gods Church, which by the Law had been instituted. And that which is yet more, as he was offering incense on the Altar at Bethel, when the Prophet cryed out 1 King. 13. against the Altar, and exclaimed against that filthy Idolatry, by denoun∣cing the vengeance of God against it, and the maintainers thereof, he was Contempt of Gods Word, lib. 1. cap. 34. so desperate and sencelesse, as to offer violence to him, and to command that he should be attached; but the power of Gods displeasure was upon him by and by: for that hand which he had stretched out against the Pro∣phet, dried up, so that he could not draw it backe againe; and at the very in∣stant, for a manifest declaration of the wrath of God, the Altar rent in pieces, and the ashes that were within were dispersed abroad. And although at the prayer of that holy man, his hand was restored to his former strength and soundnesse, yet returned not he from his unjust and disloyall dealing, but obstinately continued therein till his dying day. Wherefore also the 1 King. 14. fierce wrath of God hunted and pursued him continually: for first of all, he was robbed of his sonne Abia, dying through sicknesse: then he was set upon by Abia King of Iuda, with an army of foure hundred thousand 2 Chron. 3. men of warre: and though his power was double in strength and number, arising to eight hundred thousand persons, yet was he and his vaste army quite discomfited: for he lost at that field five hundred thousand of his men, beside certain cities which were yeelded to Abia in the pursuit of his victory: his courage was so abated and impoverished ever after this, that he could uever recover strength to resist the King of Iudah any more: And so God revenged at once the Apostasie both of the King and people of Israel, and last of all so strucke him after, that he died. Ioram King of Iuda, although his father Iosaphat had instructed him from 2 Chron. 21. his childehood with holy and wholsome precepts, and set before his face the example of his owne zeale, in purging the Church of God from all Idolatry and superstition, and maintaining the true and pure service of God; yet did he so foulely runne astray from his fathers steps, that allying himselfe by the marriage of Athalia, to the house of Achab, he became not
only himselfe like unto the Kings of Israel in their filthy idolatry, but also drew his people after him, causing the inhabitants of Ierusalem, and men of Iuda, to runne a whoring after his strange gods: for which cause Elias the Prophet most sharply reproved him by letters; the contents whereof in summe was this: That because he rebelled against the Lord God of his Fathers; therefore the people that were in his subjection should rebell against him. Presently the Arabians and Philistims rose up against him, wasted his countrey, robbed him of his treasures, tooke away his wives, and put all his children to the sword, except little Ochozias his youngest sonne that was preserved: And after all these miseries, the Lord smote him with so outragious and uncurable disease in his bowels, that after two yeares torment he died thereof, his guts being fallen out of his belly with anguish. Ioas also King of the same country, was one to whom God had bin many 2. Chron. 22. wayes beneficiall from his infancy: for he was even then miraculously pre∣served from the bloudy hand of Athalia, and after brought up in the house of God, under the tuition of that good Priest Iehoiada; yet he was no soo∣ner lifted up into his royall dignity, but by and by he and his people star∣ted aside, to the worship of stocks and stones, at that time when hee had taken upon him the repaire of the House of God. But all this came to passe after the decease of that good Priest his Tutor, whose good deeds to∣wards him in saving his life, and giving him the Crowne, he most unthank∣fully recompenced, by putting to death his sonne Zacharias; whom hee 2 Chlon. 24. caused (for reproving and threatning his Idolatry in a publique assembly, incited thereto by the Spirit of God) to be stoned to death in the porch of the Temple. But seeing he did so rebelliously set himselfe against the holy Spirit, as if he would have quite oppressed and extinguished the po∣wer thereof, by the death of this holy Prophet, by whom it spake; God hissed for an army of Syrians, that gave him battell, and conquered his souldiers, who in outward shew seemed much too strong for them. His Princes also that had seduced him, were destroyed, and himselfe vexed with grievous diseases; till at length his owne servants conspired against him for the death of Zacharias, and slew him on his bed; yea and his me∣mory was so odious, that they could not afford him a burying place among the sepulchres of their Kings. Amazias the sonne of this wicked father, carried himselfe also at the 2 Chron. 25. first uprightly towards God in his service; but it lasted not long: for a while after, he was corrupted and turned aside from that good way which he had begun, to tread in the by-paths of his father Ioas: for after he had conquered the Idumaeans, and slaine twenty thousand men of warre, and spoyled divers of their cities; in stead of rendring due thanks to God, who (without the ayde of the Israelites) had given him that victory, he set up the gods of the Edomites, which he had robbed them of, to be his gods, and worshipped and burned incense to them, so void of sence and reason was he. And being rebuked by the Prophet of his adverse dealing, he was so farre from humbling and repenting himself thereof, that quite contrary, he proudly withstood and rejected the Prophets threatnings, menacing him with death if he ceased not. Thus by this means having aggravated his sinne, and growing more and more obstinate, God made him an instru∣ment to hasten his owne destruction; for being proud, and puffed up with
the overthrow which he gave the Edomites, he defied the King of Israel, and provoked him to battell also; but full evill to his ease: for he lost the day, and was carried prisoner to Ierusalem, where before his face (for more reproach) foure hundred cubits of the wall was broken downe, the Temple and Palace ransackt of his Treasures, and his children carried for hostages to Samaria. And not long after, treason was devised against him in Ierusalem, so that he fled to Lachish, and being pursued thither also, was there taken and put to death. Likewise King Ahaz for making molten Images for Baalim, and walking 2. Chron. 28. in the idolatrous wayes of the Kings of Israel, and burning his sonnes with fire, after the abhomination of the heathen, in the valley of Ben-Hinnon, was forsaken of the Lord, and delivered into the hands of the King of Syria, who carried him prisoner to Damascus; and not onely so but was also sub∣dued by Pekah King of Israel, in that great battell, wherein his owne sonne, with fourescore thousand men at armes, were slaine; yea and two hundred thousand of all sorts, men, women, and children, were taken prisoners: for all these chastisements did he not once reforme his life, but rather grew worse and worse. To make up the number of his sinnes, he would needs sacrifice to the gods of Damascus also, thinking to finde succour at their hands: so that he utterly defaced the true service of God at Ierusalem, broke in pieces the holy Vessels, lockt up the Temple dores, and placed in their steads his abhominable Idols, for the people to worship, and erected Altars in every corner of the city to doe sacrifice on. But as he rebelled on every side against his God, so God raised up enemies on every side to di∣sturbe him: the Edomites and Philistims assaulted him on every side, beat his people, tooke and ransackt his cities: on the other side, the Assyrians whom he had hired with a great sum for his help, turned to his undoing and utter overthrow and confusion. Wat shall we thinke of Manasses? who re-edified the high places and 2 Chron. 22. Altars, which the zeale of Ezech as his father had defaced and throwne downe, and adored and worshipped the planets of Heaven, the Sunne, the Moone, and the Starres, prophaned the porch of Gods Temple with Al∣tars dedicated to strange gods, committing thereon all the abhominations of the Gentiles; yea, and caused his sonnes to passe through the valley of Lib. 1. cap. 26. Idolatry. Ben-Hinnon, and was an observer of times and seasons, and gave himselfe over to witchcraft, charming, and sorceries, and used the help of familiar spirits and Soothsayers; and that which is more, placed a carved Image in the house of God, flat against the second commandement of the Law: So that he did not only go astray and erre himselfe, in giving over his mind to most wicked and damnable heresies, but also seduced the people by his pernitious example and authority to doe the like mischiefe. And that which is yet more, and worst of all, he made no account nor reckoning of the admonitions of the Prophets; but the rather and the more hardened his heart, to runne out into all manner of cruelty and wickednesse, that his sinnes might have their full measure. For the very stones of the streets of Ierusalem were stained from one corner to another with the guiltlesse and innocent bloud of those that either for disswading him from, or not yeel∣ding unto his abhominable and detestable Idolatry, were cruelly murthe∣red: Amongst the number of which slaine innocents, many suppose that the Prophet Esayas (although he was of the bloud-royall) was with a 2 King. 12.
strange manner of torment put to death. Wherefore the flame of Gods ire was kindled against him and his people: so that he stirred up the Assyrians against them; whose power and force they being not able to resist, were subdued, and the King himselfe taken and put in fetters, and bound in chaines, carried captive to Babylon: but being there in tribulation, hee humbled his soule, and prayed unto the Lord his God; who for all his wicked, cruell, and abhominable Apostasie was intreated of him, and re∣ceived him to mercy; yea and brought him againe to Ierusalem into his unhoped for kingdome. Then was he no more unthankfull to the Lord for his wonderfull deliverance, but being touched with true repentance for his former life, abolished the strange gods, broke downe their Altars, and restored againe the true Religion of God, and gave strait commandement to his people to doe the like. Wherein it was the pleasure of the Highest, to leave a notable memoriall unto all posterity, of his great and infinite mercy towards poore and miserable sinners, to the end that no man (be his sinnes never so hainous) should at any time despaire: for, Where sin aboun∣deth, Rom. 5. there grace aboundeth much more Admit that this revolt of Manasses was farre greater and more outragious than was Solomons, yet his true repen∣tance found the grace to be raised up from that  ull downefall: for, God Rom. 9. 15. hath mercy on whom he will have mercy, and compassion on whom he will have com∣passion. O the profound riches of the wisedome and knowledge of God! How un∣speakable Rom. 11. 33. are his judgements? and his wayes pst finding out. Amon the wicked sonne of this repentant ather committed also the like 2 Chron. 33. offence in serving strange gods, but recanted not by like repentance; and therefore God gave his owne servants both will to conspire, and power Idolatry. Lib. 1. cap. 26. to execute his destruction, after hee had swayed the kingdome but two yeares. CHAP. XVIII. Of the third and worst sort of Apostata's. BY how much the more God hath in these latter daies poured forth more plentifully his graces upon the sonnes of men, by the manifestations of his Sonne Christ Iesus in the flesh, and sent forth a more cleere light by the preaching of his Gospell into the world than was before times; by so much the more culpable before God, and guilty of eter∣nall damnation are they, who being once enlightened and made partakers of those excellent graces, come afterwards either to despise or make light account of them, or goe about to suppresse the truth, and quench the spirit which instructed them therein. This is the Sinne against the Holy Ghost, which is mentioned in the sixth and tenth chapter to the Hebrewes and in the twelfth of Luke; and in another place, it is called a Sinne unto death, be∣cause it is impardonable, by reason that no excuse of ignorance can be pleaded, nor any plaister of true repentance applyed unto it. The Apo∣stata's of the old Testament under the Law were not guilty of this sinne: for although there were many that willingly and malitiously revolted and
set themselves against the Prophets of God, making warre as it were with the Holy Ghost; yet seeing they had no such cleere testimonies of Christ Iesus, and declaration of Gods Spirit as we have, their sinne cannot be properly said directly to be against the Holy Ghost, and so never to be re∣mitted: according to the description of this sinne in those passages of Scripture which were before recited, as it may manifestly appeare by the former example of King Manasses. The Apostle himselfe likewise doth averre the truth hereof, when he saith, If we sinne willingly after that we have Heb. 10. 26, 27, 28, 29. received the knowledge of the Truth, there remaineth no more sacrifice for sinnes, but a fearefull looking for of judgement, and violent fire, which shall devoure the adversaries. If any man despised Moses Law, he died without mercy, under two or three witnesses: of how much sorer punishment suppose ye shall he be worthy, which treadeth under foot the Sonne of God, and counteth the bloud of the new Testament as a prophane thing, whereby he was sanctified, and doth despight to the Spirit of Grace. Here we may see that this sinne is proper to those onely that lived under the Gospell, and have tasted of the comfort and knowledge of Christ. Iudas Iscariot (that wicked and accursed Varlet) committed the deed, and feeles the scourge of this great sinne: for he (being a Disciple, nay an Apo∣stle of Christ Iesus) moved with covetousnesse, after he had devised and concluded of the manner and complot of his treason with the enemie, sold his Lord and Master, the Savior of the World, for thirty pieces of silver, and betrayed him into the bands of theeves and murtherers, who sought no∣thing but his destruction. After this vile traitour had performed this ex∣ecrable purpose (by reason whereof he is called the sonne of perdition) he could finde no rest nor repose in his guilty conscience, but was horribly troubled and tormented with remorse of his wickednesse, judging himselfe worthy of a thousand deaths, for betraying that innocent and guiltlesse bloud. If hee looked up, he saw the vengeance of God ready to fall upon him and insnare him: if hee looked downe, he saw nothing but hell gaping to swallow him up: the light of this world was odious to him, and his own life displeased him, so that being plunged into the bottomlesse pit of de∣spaire, he at last strangled himselfe, and burst in twaine in the midst, and all Math. 27 Acts 1. his bowels gushed out. There is a notable example of Lucian, who having professed Christi∣anity Suid. for a season under the Emperour Trajan, fell away afterwards, and be∣came so prophane and impious, as to make a mocke at Religion and Divi∣nity; whereupon his sirname was called Atheist. This wretch, as he barked out (like a foule mouthed dog) bitter taunts against the religion of Christ, seeking to rend and abolish it, so he was himselfe, in Gods vengeance, torne in pieces and devoured of dogs. Porphyrie also (a whelp of the same litter) after he had received the know∣ledge of the truth, for despight and anger that he was reproved of his faults by the Christians, set himselfe against them, and published books full of horrible blasphemies, to discredit and overthrow the Christian Faith. But when he perceived how fully and sufficiently he was confuted, and that he was reputed an accursed and confounded wretch for his labour, in terrible despaire and anguish of soule he died. Iulian the Emperour, sirnamed the Apostate, cast himselfe headlong into the same gulfe: for having been brought up and instructed from his childe∣hood
in the Christian faith, and afterward a while a profest reader thereof to others in the Church, as soone as he had obtained the Empire, maliti∣ously revolted from his profession, and resisted with all his power, the Faith and Church of Christ, endeavouring by all means possible, either Socrat. Theod. Sozom. by force to ruinate and destroy it, or by fine sleights and subtilties to un∣dermine it. And because his purpose was to doe what hurt hee could to Christians, therefore he studied by all he could, to please, content, and up∣hold the contrary party, I meane the Painims: he caused their temples first to be opened, which Constantine his predecessor had caused to be shut up: he tooke from the Christian Churches and their Ministers those privi∣ledges, liberties, and commodities which the said Constantine had bestowed A theisme, lib. 1. cap. 25. upon them: and not content with this, he confiscated the Church revenues, and imposed great taxes and tributes upon all that professed the name of Christians, and forbad them to have any schooles of learning for their children. And yet more to vexe and grieve them, he translated many orders of the Church discipline and policy into Paganisme. After he had thus by all means striven to beat down the Scepter of Christs kingdome, it tur∣ned quite contrary to his expectation; for in stead thereof, the scepter of his owne kingdome was broken and brought to nought: at that time when making warre upon the Persians, he was wounded with an arrow, which Socrat. l. 3. hist. Eccles. c. . pierced his armour, and dived so deep into his side, that he died thereof. When he undertooke this voyage, he was furnished with such bravery both of apparell and all things else, as it might seeme it appertained to him and none else to overwhelme and oversway the world; still belching out threats against poore Christians, whom he hed determined at his returne from Persia utterly to destroy, and leave none alive, as was afterwards reported by one of his Councell. The number of his souldiers was so innumerable, and his strength so impregnable, that he made no other reckoning but to be lord of Persia in a very short space. But loe how the Lord overturneth the attempts of his enemies: This great army (as S. Chrysostome reporteth against the Heathen) in which he put so much confidence, seemed ere long to be rather a vaste and weak multitude of women and infants, than an host of Warriours: for by evill and foolish conduct and government, there rose so great a famine amongst them, that their horses which were provided for the battell, served for their bellies, yea and for want of that too, many hun∣dreds died for hunger and thirst. Even when he skirmished, his owne side came to the worse, doing more scath to themselves, than to their enemies; and lastly (leading them so undiscreetly) they could not by any means escape, out were constrained after he was slaine, to intreat the Persians to suffer them to retyre; and so as many as could, escaped and fled away to save their lives. And thus this brave army was thus miserably dismembred and discomfited, to the everlasting shame of that wicked Apostate. One of the Treasurers of this wicked Emperour (who to please his Ma∣ster, Theod. l. . c. 13. Sozom. l. 5. c. 8. Contempt of the Word, lib. 1. cap. 34. forsooke also the Religion of Christ) being on a time mocking and deriding the ministry of the holy Word, died miserably on a sudden, vo∣miting his owne bloud out of his mouth, and (as Chrysostome saith) his privy parts being rotten and purrified, and consumed with lice, for all that ever he could doe to remedy the same. It is recorded of Trebellius the first King of the Bulgarians, that being converted with his people to the faith of Christ, to the end to give himselfe
more quiet to the meditation and exercise of Religion, resigned over his kingdome to his eldest sonne: whom when hee perceived to renounce the Faith, and to follow strange gods, he not only deprived of all his Royall dignity, but also caused his eyes to be put out, for a punishment of his Apostacie, and bestowed the kingdome upon his other sonne; shewing thereby, that he that abandoneth the true light of salvation, is not worthy to enjoy the comfortable light of the world. During the heptarchy of the Saxons here in England, there raigned in eda Eccl. hist. lib. 3. cap. 1. Northumberland two Kings; one called Ostrich, who was King of the Dei∣rians, and the other Eaufride King of the Bernirians (for into those two Provinces was that countrey antiently divided.) These two Kings before they came to their Crownes, were by the preaching of Paulinus converted to the Faith of Christ, and baptised into the same Faith; but as soone as God advanced them to their Kingly dignities, presently they expelled the King of Glory out of their hearts, and renouncing Christ, betooke them∣selves againe to their filthy Idols. But they joyed not long in this their Apostacie; for within one yeare they were both slaine by Cedwalla King of the Britaines, the one in battell, the other comming to sue for peace: And so they forsaking Christ in their prosperity, were forsaken by him in their adversity, and given over to be a prey into the hands of their enemies. This yeare wherein these two Kings thus revolted and were slaine, hath upon it the marke of vengeance to this day: for by the common consent of all Chronicles, that the memory of these Apostates might be utterly defaced and blotted out, it was reckoned in the account of the next Kings raigne, to wit Oswold, a holy and religious man; and so both the name of the Kings, and the time of their raigne, is, in detestation of the Apostacie, utterly left out of our English stories, as if they were unworthy to have a place among men, much more among Kings, that forsooke Christ of their owne accord, without any constraint or compulsion thereunto. A Divine at Louvaine, one Iames Laonus, who was well instructed at the first in the knowledge of the Truth, afterwards renouncing the same, en∣deavoured with all his power to oppugne and oppresse it. This man being on a time mounted into a pulpit, to preach before the Emperour Charles the fifth, was at the very instant so amased and astonished, that no man could perceive what he said, and so made himselfe a laughing stocke to all that audience. Seeing himselfe thus disgraced, he returned from Brussels to Louvaine, where he fell into such griefe and sorrow of minde, for the dishonour which he had gotten, that it turned at length into despaire: and in his dayly Lectures, these or like words oftentimes escaped after that goodly Sermon, That he had impugned the truth of God: which when divers of his owne Coat heard, they caused him to be shut up fast in a house, where in desperation he died, telling every man he was damned, and that he could not hope for salvation or remission of his sins, because that of meer malice he had resisted and made war with God. Cardinall Poole an Englishman, had also somtimes professed himselfe to be well seen in the sincerity of the Gospell, yet contrary to his conscience he sent into his countrey the Trophies and Ensignes of Antichrist the Pope, which before had been rased out and abolished the realme; but he died two or three daies after Queene Mary, in horrible griefes, terrors, and fearfulnesse, without any shew of repentance.
Stephen Gaediner Bishop of Winchester, and after Chancellor of En∣gland, shewed in his young yeares some forwardnesse to withstand the Po∣pish abuses and superstitions; but as soone as he was exalted to honour, he turned over a new lease, and began freshly and furiously to afflict and to rend the poore & faithfull servants of Christ, putting them to the cruellest deaths he could devise. And yet more to discover his prophanenesse and rebellion, he wrote many books against the pure Religion of God: and being thus swolne with venomous spight against the Sonne of God, be∣side the extreame covetousnesse, whoredomes, and extortions which raig∣ned in him, behold the Lord layd his hand of wrath upon him, and stroke him with so strange a malady, that before his death such horrible stinke issued from him, that none of his friends and servants, no not himselfe, could endure the savour thereof: his belly was swolne like a taber, his eyes distracted and sunke into his head, his cheeks thin, and the appearance of his whole face very terrible: his breath savoured of a filthy and intolerable stinke, and all his members were rotten with continuall griefes and swou∣nings; yet this vile wretch in the midst of all these torments ceased not to yell out continuall blasphemies, and infamous speeches, and so despigh∣ting and maugring God, died. Peter Castellon Bishop of Maston, having attained to great riches and re∣nowne, by the means of the Gospell, turned notwithstanding his backe to Christ, and mightily inveyed in his sermons at Orleance against the pro∣fession of his Religion; seeking to make it knowne, that he had not onely abjured and denied it, but also that hee was a profest adversary unto it. This man sitting at a time in his chaite, fell into a strange disease, which no Physitian had ever seene, or could search out the cause of; for one halfe of his body was extreme hot, and burned like fire, the other extreame cold, and frozen like Ice; and in this torment with horrible cries and groanings he ended his life. A gray Frier called Picard, who once was not ashamed of the Gospell, afterwards set himselfe to preach against that which he had professed, and being in the pulpit at Orleance, after infinite blasphemies which he had dis∣gorged against the Truth, at last said, That he protested before God and the holy assembly, that he would never preach more after that day, because he was an Apostate: which saying he by and by impudently and constantly denied, to the perill and damnation of his owne soule; thinking by his hor∣rible cursings and forswearings, to abuse the poore ignorant and supersti∣tions people; but he no sooner came into the field, but the puissant hand of God over-reached him, and stroke him speechlesse, so that he was carried thence halfe dead, and within short space died, altogether without any ap∣pearance of repentance. Among other Iudges which shewed themselves hot and rigorous in per∣secuting and proceeding against the faithfull prisoners of Valence in Daulphine, and other Romanes, at that season when two Ministers of the same city suffered Martyrdome, one Lanbespin a Counsellor, and Ponsenas the Kings Atturney at the Parliament of Grenoble, both two having been professors in times past, were not the backwardest in that action; but God made them both strange examples of his wrath: for Lanbespin falling in love with a young maid, was so extremely passionate therein, that he forewent his owne estate, and all bounds of civill honesty, to follow her up and down
whithersoever she went: and seeing his love and labour despised and set at nought, he so pined away with very thought, that making no reckoning of himselfe, such a multitude of lice so fed upon him, and tooke so good liking of their pasture, that by no means he could be cleansed of them; for they increased and issued out of every part of his body in such number, as maggots are wont to engender in a dead and rotten carrion. At length a little before his death seeing his owne misery, and seeling Gods heavy ven∣geance upon him, he began to despaire of all mercy; and to the end to abridge his miserable dayes, he resolved to hungerstarve himselfe to death. Which purpose the lice furthered; for they stucke so thicke in his throat, as if they would have choaked him every moment: neither could he suffer any sustenance to passe downe by reason of them. They that were eye wit∣nesses of this pittifull spectacle, were wondrously moved with compassion, and constrained him to eat whither he would or not. And that they might make him take cullisss and other stewed broaths, because he refused and strove against them, they bound his armes, and put gagges into his mouth, to keep it open whilest others poured in the food. And in this wise being gagged, he died like a mad beast, with abundance of lice that went downe his throat; insomuch that the very Papists themselves stucke not to say, That as he caused the Ministers of Valence to have gagges thrust into their Persecution, lib. 1. cap. 15. mouths, and so put to death, so likewise he himself died with a gagge in his mouth. As touching Ponsenas, commonly called Bourrel (a very Butcher indeed of poore Christians) after he had sold his owne patrimony, and his wives and friends also, to the end to buy out his office, and had spent that which remained in house▪keeping, hoping in short space to take up twise as much as he had scattered, fell downe into a strange and unknowne disease, and shortly grew in despaire of Gods succour and favour towards him, by a strong remembrance of those of Valence, and the other Romanes which Persecution, lib. 1. cap. 15. he had put to death, which would never depart out of his minde, but still presented themselves before him: so that as one bestraught of reason and sence, he denied his Maker, and called upon his destroyer the Devill, with most horrible and bitter ensuings: which when his Clearke perceived, he layd out before him the mercies of God, out of all places of the Scripture, to comfort and restore his decayed sense. But in stead of returning to God by repentance and prayer, he continued obstinate, and answered his Clerke (whose name was Stephen) in this wise; Stephen, Stephen, thou art blacke: So I am and it please you (quoth he) but I am neither Turke nor Moore, nor Bohemian, but a Gascoigne of red haire. No no (answered he) not so, but thou art blacke; but it is with sinne. That is true (quoth he) but I hope in the bountifull mercy of God; that for the love of Christ who died for me, my blacke sinnes shall not be imputed to me. Then he redoubling his choler, cried mainly after his Clerke, calling him Lutheran, Huguenot, Villaine. At which noise his friends without rushed in to know what the matter was. But hee commanded, that Stephen his Clerke should pre∣sently have a paire of bolts clapt on his heeles, and to be burned for an He∣retique. In briefe, his choler and rage boyled so furiously in him, that in short space he died a fearefull death, with horrible howling and outcries. His creditors scarse gave him respite to draw his carkasse out of his bed, before they seised upon all his goods, not leaving his poore wife and chil∣dren
so much as a bed of straw to lye in: so grievous was the curse of God upon his house. Another great Prince having in former time used his authority and po∣wer to the advancing of Gods kingdome, afterwards being seduced by the allurements of the world, renounced God, and tooke part with the enemies of his Church, to make warre against it; in which war he was wounded to death, and is one notable example of Gods just vengeance, to all that shall in like manner fall away. CHAP. XIX. Of Heretiques. AS it is a matter necessarily appertaining to the first Commandement, That the purity and sinceritie of the doctrine of Gods Word be maintained, by the rule whereof he would have us both know him, and understand the holy mysteries which are revealed to us therein: so also by the contrary, whatsoever ten∣deth to the corrupting or falsifying of the same Word, rising from foolish and strange opinions of humane reason, the same transgresseth the limits of this Commandement: of which sort is Heresie, an evill of its owne nature very pernicious and contagious, and no lesse to be feared and shunned than the heat of persecu∣tion: and by means whereof the whole nation of Christendome hath been heretofore tossed with many troubles, and the Church of God grievously vexed. But as Truth got ever the upper hand, and prevailed against fal∣shood: so the broakers and upholders of falshood came ever to the worse, and were confounded as well by the strength of Truth, as by the speciall judgements of God sent downe upon the most part of them. Theudas & Iudas Galileus were two that seduced the Jews before Christ: Acts 5. 36. 39. Euseb. Eccles. Hist. l. 2. c. 10. Ios. Antiq. lib: 18. c. 1. & lib. 20. cap. 2. for the first of them said he was a Prophet sent from God, and that he could divide the waters of Jordan by his word, as Ioshuah the servant of the Lord did. The other promised to deliver them from the servitude and the yoake of the Romanes. And both of them by that means drew much people after them: so prone is the common multitude to follow novelties, and to be∣leeve every new sangle that is but yesterday set on broach. But they came both to a deserved destruction: for Fatus the Governour of Jury overtooke Theudas, and sending his trunke to the grave, carried his head as a monu∣ment to Jerusalem. As for Iudas, he perished also, and all his followers were dispersed, manifesting by their ends, that their works were not of God, but of men, and therefore must needs come to naught. After Christ, in the Apostles time there was one Elymas a Sorcerer, that mightily withstood the doctrine of Paul and Barnabas, before Sergius Paulus Act. 12. the deputy, and sowed a contrary heresie in his minde: but Paul full of the Holy Ghost, set his eyes on him, and said, O full of all subtilty and mischief, the childe of the Devill, and enemy of righteousnesse, wilt thou not cease to pervert the strait wayes of the Lord? Now therefore behold, the hand of the Lord is upon thee, and then shalt be blinde for season. And immediately there fell upon him
a mist and darknesse, and hee went about to seeke some to lead him by the hand. And this recompence gained hee for his erroneous and hereticall pra∣ctise. A while after him, under the Empire of Adrian, arose there another cal∣led Euseb. l. 4. c. 6. Phi. M. chron. Benchochab, that professed himselfe to be the Messias, and to have de∣scended from Heaven in the likenesse of a Star, for the safety and redemp∣tion of the people: by which fallacy he drew after him a world of seditious disciples; but at length he and many of his credulous rout were slaine, and was called by the Iewes Bencozba (that is) the son of a lye. And this was the goodly redemption which this Heretique brought upon his owne head and many of his fellowes. It is reported of Cerinthus an Heretique, that he denying and going Euseb. about to darken the doctrine of Christs everlasting kingdome, was over∣whelmed by the sudden fall of an hot house which fell upon him and his associates, as soone as S. Iohn was departed from it: for Ireneus saith, That he heard Polycarpus often report, how S. Iohn being about to enter into the bathes at Ephesus, when he perceived Cerinthus already within, departed very hastily; saying to those that bore him company, that he feared that the house would fall upon their heads, because of Cerinthus the heretique, that was therein at that instnat. Manes, of whom the Maniches tooke their name and first originall, for∣ged in his foolish braine a fiction of two gods, and two beginners, and re∣jecting Euseb. Socrat. the old Testament, and the true God which is revealed in the same, published a fifth Gospell of his owne forgery, yea and was so besotted with folly (as Suidas testifieth of him) that he reported himselfe to be the Holy Ghost: when he had thus with his devillish heresies and blasphemies infe∣cted the world, and was pursued by Gods just judgement, at last for other wicked practises he had his skin plucked over his eares alive, and so dyed in misery. Montanus that blasphemous Caitise, of whom came the Montanists, or Pepuzian heretiques, of a towne in Phrygia called Pepuza, denied Christ our Saviour to be God, and said he was but a man only like other men, with∣out any participation of divine Essence: he called himselfe the Comforter and holy Spirit which was forepromised to come into the world; and his two wives Priscilla and Maximilla, he named his prophetesses, and their wri∣tings prophecies: howbeit all their cunning could not foretell nor prevent a wretched and desperate end which befell him; for he hung himselfe, after he had deluded the world a long season, and proved by his end, his life to have been vile and damnable, according to the proverb, Qualis vita, finis it a, Nicep. l. 4. c. 23. Cent. 3. cap. 8. A cursed life, and a cursed death. Of all Heretiques that ever troubled and afflicted Gods Church, the Arrians were the chiefe: the author and ringleader of which crue, as by his vainglorious pride and ambition he sought to extoll himselfe above the clouds, boasting and vaunting in his damnable errour; so by the just ven∣geance of God he was abased lower than hell, and put in everlasting shame Socrat. Theod. Sozom. and opprobry: for he had long time as it were entred the list, and combated with Christ, and was condemned for an Heretique by the Nicene Councell, and his bookes burned: and then afterwards making shew before Constantine the Emperour, with a solemne oath to recant his old errours, and approve the profession of Faith, which the Councell of Nice had set forth concern∣ning
Christs divinity, whereunto also he subscribed his name: but all that he did was in hypocrisie, to the end to renew and republish the more boldly his false and pernitious doctrine. But when he thought himselfe neerest to the attainment of his purpose, and braved it most with his supporters and companions, even then the Lord stroke him with a sudden fear in the open street, and with such horrible pangs in his guts, and vehement desire of dis∣burthening nature, that he was faine to come unto the publick houses ap∣pointed for that purpose, taking them which were next at hand for a shift: but he never shifted from them again; for his breath went out of his mouth, and his guts ran out of his fundament, and there lay he dead upon his owne excrements. As the Emperour Constantius was a great favourer and supporter of this sect, and maintained it against, and in despight of true Christans, and by Socr. l. 2. c. 17. that meanes stirred up schismes and dissentions throughout all Christen∣dome: so the Lord to requite him, stirred up Iulian; whom he himselfe had promoted to honour, to rebell against him: whose practices as he went a∣bout to suppresse, and was even ready to encounter, a grievous Apoplexy sudenly surcharged him so sore, that he died of it; before he could bring his purpose to passe. The Emperour Valens was infected also with this poyson, wherewith Ruff. l. 2. c. 13. Iornand. likewise he infected the Gothes, who by his means were become the grea∣ter part Arrians, and not Christians: but neither went he unpunished▪ for when he marched forth to represse the rage of the furious Gothes, who were spread over all Thracia, and had given them battell, he lost the day, and being shamefully put to flight, was pursued so fiercely, that hee was faine to hide himselfe in a little house, which being set on fire by the Gothes, he was burnt therein. As for Nestorius, which would maintaine by his foolish and dangerous Niceph. l. 14. cap. 36. opinions, that the divinity of Christ was divided from his humanity, ma∣king as it were two Christs of one, and two persons of one, and so turned upside downe that whole ground-worke of our salvation, escaped no more the just vengeance of God than all other Hereticks did: for first he was ba∣nished into a far country, and their tormented with a strange disease; the very wormes did gnaw in pieces his blasphemous tongue, and at length the Earth opened her mouth, and swallowed him up. Concerning the Anabaptists, which rose up about five hundred yeares since, it is evidently known how divers wayes God scourged and plagued many of them: some of them were destroyed by troops and by thousands; others miserably executed and put to death in divers places, as well for their monstrous and damnable heresies, as for many mischiefes and outra∣ges which they committed. By all which things God doth exhibit and set before our eyes, how deere and precious in his sight the purenesse of his holy Word, and the unity of his Church is; and how carefull and zealous every one of us ought to be in maintaining and upholding the ame: when as he revengeth himselfe so sharply upon all those that go about to pervert and corrupt the sincerity thereof, or which be breeders of new sects and di∣visions Paul. Diac. in Anast. Hist. Sa∣bel. l. 5. c. 4. , lib. 1. c. 31.  lib. 1. c. 25. among his people. Olympus (by office Bishop of Carthage, but by profession a avourer and maintainer of the Arriah heresie) being upon a time in the Bath  himselfe, he uttered with an impious mouth, blasphemous words against
the holy Trinity, but a threefold thunderbolt came from above, and stroke him dead in the same place; teaching him by his paine, and all other by ex∣perience, what it is to blaspheme the Lord of Heaven, or with polluted lips to mention his sacred Majesty. This hapned in the yeare of our Lord God five hundred and ten. Cyril hath recorded unto us of his owne knowledge, a more wonderfull and admirable wonder of God upon an Heretique than all the rest, and such an one indeed, as the like (I dare say) was never heard of: The history is this; After the decease of Saint Hierome, there stood up one Sabinianus a perverse and blasphemous fellow, that denied the distinction of persons in the Trinity, and affirmed the Father, the Sonne, and the Holy-Ghost, to be but one distinct person: and to give credit to his heresie, he wrot a booke of such blasphemies, tending to the confirmation of the same, and fathered it upon Saint Hierome, as being the Author of it. But Silvanus the Bishop of Nazaren mightily withstood and reproved him, for depraving so worthy a man now dead; and offering his life for the truth, made this bargain with Sabinianus, That if Saint Hierome the next day did not by some miracle te∣stifie the falsenesse of his cause, he would offer his throat to the hangman, and abide death; but if he did, that then he should die. This was agreed upon by each party, and the day following, both of them accompanied with great expectation of the people, resorted unto the Temple of Jerusa∣lem to decide the controversie. Now the day was past, and no miracle ap∣peared, so that Silvanus was commanded to yeeld his neck to that punish∣ment which himselfe was Author of: which as he most willingly and con∣fidently did, behold, an Image like to Saint Hierome in shew, appeared and stayed the hangmans hand, which was now ready to strike: and vanishing forthwith, another miracle succeeded; Sabinianus head fell from his shoul∣ders, no man striking at it, and his carkasse remained upon the ground dead and sencelesse. Whereat the people amased, praising God, clave unto Silvanus, and abjured Sabinianus heresie. Whence wee may observe the wonderfull wisedome of God, both in punishing his enemies, and trying his children whither they will stand to his Truth or no; and learne thereby, neither rashly to measure and limit the purposes of God, nor yet timo∣rously to despaire of help in a good cause, though we see no meanes nor likelihood thereof. Grimoald King of Lombardy was infected with the Arrian heresie, for which cause the Lord punished him with untimely death; for having been let bloud, the eleventh day after as he strove to draw a bow, he opened the veine anew, and so bled to death. abades King of Persia, when he saw his sonne Phorsuasa addicted to the Gasp. ed. l. 3. cap. 10. & 11. Maniches, he assembled as many as he could of that sect into one place, and there setting his Souldiers on them, slew them till there was not one left. Photinu a Gallograecian, for renuing the heresie of Hebion, and affirming Christ to be but an excellent man borne naturally by Mary, after the man∣ner Platin sub. Sirii, 7. of other men, excelling in justice and morall vertues, was by the Empe∣rour Valentinianus justly banished. The Emperor Iustinian favouring the heresie of the Apthardocites, when as he gave out one Edict whereby Anastasius the Bishop, and all other that . . maintained the truth, should be banished; suddenly he was stroken with . .
an inward and invisible plague, which took away his life, and forestalled his wicked and cruell determination from comming to the desired effect. In all which examples we may see how God doth not onely punish here∣tiques themselves, but also their favorers and supporters, yea the very pla∣ces and cities wherein they lived and broached their blasphemies: as by the destruction of Antioch is seene, which being a very sinke of hereticks, was Paul. Diac. l. 5. partly consumed with fire from Heaven above, in the seventh yeare of Iu∣stinus the Emperour, and partly overthrowne with earth-quakes below, wherein Euphrasius the Bishop, and many other were destroyed. Moreover, besides those, there were under Pope Innocent the third, cer∣taine heretickes called Albigenses, or Albiani, which being possessed with the same spirit of fury that the Maniches were, affirmed that there were two Gods; the one good, and another evill: they denied the Resurrection, despised the Sacraments, and said that the soules of men after their separa∣tion, Contempt of the Word, l. 1. c. 34. passed either into hogs, oxen, serpents, or men, according to their me∣rits they would not spare to pollute the Temples appointed for the service of God, with their excrements, and other filthy actions, and to defile the holy Bibles with ruine, in despight and contumely. This heresie like an evill weed, so grew and increased, that the branches thereof spread over al∣most all Europe; a thousand cities were polluted therewith; so that it was high time to cut it short by violence and the sword, as it was; for they were oppressed with so huge a slaughter, that an hundred thousand of them were slaine, partly by war, partly by fire, at one time. Gregory of Tours hath recorded the life and death of an hereticall Monk of Bordeaux; that by the help of Magicke wrought miracles, and tooke upon him the name and title of Christ, saying hee could cure diseases, and restore those that were past help by physick, unto their healths: hee went attired with garments made of goats haire, and an hood, professing an au∣sterity of life abroad, whereas he plaid the glutton at home; but at length his cousenage was discovered, and he was banished the city, as a man unfit for civill society. In the yeare of our Lord God 1204, in the Empire of Otto the fourth, there was one Almaricus also that denied the presence of Christ in the Sa∣crament, and said, that God spake as well in prophane Ovid, as holy Augu∣stine: he scoffed at the doctrine of the Resurrection, and esteemed heaven Athoisme, l. 1. c. 25. and hell but as an old wives fable. Hee being dead, his disciples were brought forth into a large field neere Paris, and there in the presence of the French King, degraded and burnt: the dead carkasse of Almaricus being ta∣ken out of the Sepulchre and burnt amongst them, it fell out that whilest they were in burning, there arose so huge a tempest, that heaven and earth seemed to move out of their places; wherein doubtlesse the soules of these wicked men felt by experience, that hell was no fable; but a thing, and such a thing as waited for all such Rebels against God, as they were. Anastasius, Emperour of Constantinople, being corrupted with the he∣resie of Eutiches, published an Edict, wherein all men were commanded to worship God not under three persons as a Trinity, but as a Quaternity, containing it in foure persons: and could not by any counsell be brought from that devillish error, but repelled from him divers Bishops with great reproach, which came to perswade him to the contrary: for which cause not long after, a flash of lightning from Heaven suddenly seised
upon him, and so hee perished when he had raigned twenty eight yeares. Iustinus the second also, who after the death of Iustinian obtained the Imperiall Crowne, was a man of exceeding pride and cruelty, contemning poverty, and murthering the Nobility for the most part. In avarice his desire was so insatiate, that he caused iron chests to be prepared, wherein he might locke up that treasure which by unjust exactions he had extorted from the people. Notwithstanding all this, he prospered well enough un∣till he fell into the heresie of Pelagius, soone after which, the Lord bereft him of his wits, and shortly aster of his life also, when hee had raigned e∣leven yeares. Mahomet, by birth an Arabian, and by profession one of the most mon∣strous hereticks that ever lived, began his heresie in the yeare 625. His off-spring was out of a base stocke; for being fatherlesse, one Abdemonoples a man of the house of Ismael, bought him for his slave, and loved him great∣ly for his favour and wit: for which cause he made him ruler over his mer∣chandise and other businesse. Now in the meane while one Sergius a Monk (flying for heresie into Arabia) instructed him in the heresie of Nestorius: a while after, his Master died without children, and left behinde him much riches, and his wife a widow of fifty yeares of age, whom Mahomet married, and when she died, was made heire of all her riches. So that now (what for his wealth and cunning in Magick) he was had in high honour among the people. Wherefore (by the counsell of Sergius) hee called himselfe the great Prophet of God. And shortly after (when his fame was published) he devised a Law and kinde of Religion called Alcaron, wherein hee bor∣rowed something almost of all the heresies that were before his time, with the Sabellians he denied the Trinity: with the Maniches he said there was but two persons in the Deity: he denied the equality of the Father with the Sonne, with Eunomius: and said with Macedone that the Holy Ghost was a creature; and approved the community of women with the Nicho∣laits: he borrowed of the Jewes circumcision; and of the Gentiles much superstition; and somewhat he tooke of the Christian verity, besides many devillish fantasies invented of his owne braine: those that obeyed his Law, he called Sarazins. Now after he had lived in these monstrous abuses forty yeares, the Lord cut him off by the falling sicknesse, which he had dissem∣bled a long time, saying when he was taken therewith, that the Angell Ga∣briel appeared unto him, whose brightnesse hee could not behold: but the Lord made that his destruction, which be imagined would be for his ho∣nour, and setting forth his Sect. Infinite be the examples of the destruction and judgement of private Stow Chron. Heretiques in all ages, and therefore we will content our selves with them that be most famous. In the yeare of our Lord 1561, and the third yeare of the raigne of Queen Elizabeth, there was in London one William Geffery, that constantly avouched a companion of his called Iohn Moore to bee Christ our Saviour, and could not bee reclaimed from this mad perswa∣sion, untill hee was whipped from Southwarke to Bedlam, where the said Moore meeting him, was whipped also, untill they both confes∣sed Christ to bee in Heaven, and themselves to bee sinfull and wicked men. But most strange it is, how divers sensible and wise men were deluded and carried beside themselves by the subtilty of Satan, in the yeare 1591, Ibid.
and of the raigne of Queene Elizabeth 3 3, the memory whereof is yet fresh in every mans head and mouth, and therefore I will but briefly touch the same. Edmund Coppinger and Henry Arthington, two gentlemen, being asso∣ciated with one William Hacket, sometimes a prophane & very leud person, but now converted in outward shew, though not in inward affection, were so seduced by his hypocriticall behaviour, and the devils extraordinary de∣vices, that from one point to another they came at last to thinke, that this Hacket was anointed to be the Judge of the world; and therefore comming one day to Hackets lodging in London, he told them they had been anointed Hypocrisie in regard of Hac∣ket, l. 1. c. 22. of the Holy Ghost: then Coppinger asked him what his pleasure was to be done? Goe your way (saith he) and proclaim in the citie, that Christ Jesus is come with his fanne in his hand to judge the earth: and if they will not beleeve it, let them come and kill me, if they can. Then Coppinger answe∣red, it should be done forthwith; and thereupon (like mad-men) he and Arthington ran into the streets, and proclaimed their message aforesaid: and when by reason of the concourse of people they could not proceed any further, they got up into two emptie carts in Cheape, crying, Repent, repent, for Christ Iesus is come to judge the world: and then pulling a paper out of his bosome, he read out of it many things touching the office and calling of Hacket, how he represented Christ by taking part of his glorified body, &c. Besides, they called themselves his Prophets, one of Justice, another of Mercy. And thus these simple men were strangely deceived by a miracu∣lous illusion of Satan, who no doubt by strange apparitions had brought them into this vaine conceit. But let us observe the end of it; it was thus: the whole citie being in amaze, tooke Hacket, the breeder of this device, and arraigning him before the Maior and other Justices, found him guiltie as well of this seditious practise, as of speaking traiterous words against the Queene: wherefore he was shortly after hanged on a gibbet in Cheap-side, counterfeiting to his last his old devices, and at length uttering horrible blasphemies against the Majestie of God. As for his Prophets, Coppinger dyed the next day in Bride well, and Arthington was kept in prison, upon hope of repentance. CHAP. XX. Of Hypocrites. AS God is a Spirit and Truth, so he will be worshipped in truth of spirit and affection, and not in hypocrisie and dissimulation: for which cause he commandeth us by the mouth of Moses, in the sixth and tenth chap∣ters of Deuteronomy, To love and honour him with all our heart, with all our soule, and all our strength: which hypocrites are so farre from doing, that they have no∣thing in them but a vaine shew of coined religion, and so by that means break the first commandement; thinking to bleare Gods eyes with their outward shewes and ceremonies, as if he were like men, to see nothing but that which is without, and offereth it selfe to the view; but it is quite con∣trary:
for it is he that descryeth the heart, and searcheth out all the cornors thereof, to see what truth and sinceritie is therein, and therefore hateth and detesteth all hypocrisie, and abhorreth all such service as is performed one∣ly 1 Sam. 16: for fashion sake, or in regard of men: as appeareth by there proofes and checks which the Prophet Esay denounceth against the hypocrites of his time: who made shew of honouring God, but it was but with their lips and vaine and frivolous ceremonies, not in truth of heart and affection: so our Saviour Christ thundred out his curses against the Scribes and Pha∣risees Math. 23. with the judgements and vengeance of God for their hypocrisie. With this sinne was Balaam that wicked Prophet, upon whom God be∣stowed Numb. 22. a certaine gift of prophesie, infected: for when King Balac sent for him to curse the Israelites, he made as though he would not enterprise any thing contrary to the will of God as if he had him in great reverence and estimation: neverthelesse being allured and enticed by the golden presents which were sent him, he despised Gods commandement, and discovered his own secret impietie, and became an hired slave and enemy to the people of God: but as he was in journey towards him, there happened a strange and prodigious thing; an Angell met him by the way with a naked sword in his hand ready to hew him in pieces: whom when he himselfe being blinded with covetousnesse as with a vaile, could not perceive, is asse saw and was afraid; and that which was more strange, the poore bruit and dumbe beast speaking in a new language like a man, reproved his masters  Pet. 2. 16. madnesse. Whereat he being sore amazed, and notwithstanding all the asses humbling before the Angell, yet pursued his unhappy journey, to his eternall shame and confusion, as one of an obstinate and heardened heart; for he was forced by the Spirit of God to blesse those whom he had purpo∣sed to curse; and yet further discovering his hypocrisie and envious dispo∣sition, he was the cause why the Israelites provoked the wrath of God against themselves, through the pernicious and deceivable counsell which he gave to the Madianites; for which cause he himselfe was in the end slain. Numb. 25. Numb. 3. In this range may we place Geesie, Elizeus servant, who being as is it were the Disciple and profest follower both of his Masters life and doctrine, the true Prophet of God, by whom for the further assurance and confirmation 2 King. 5. of the grace and blessing of God, he had seene many notable and excellent miracles wrought; yet notwithstanding was not true of heart, but drawne aside by desire of lucre, that caused him secretly (unwitting to his master) to rune after Naaman the Syrian in his masters name, for the money and Avarice, l. 2. 6. 35. apparell which his master had before refused: and supposing his knavery to be so hidden that it could not come to light, God discovered and pulled off his visard, and punished as well the deed, as the manner of doing hereof, upon him and his posteritie, with a perpetuall leprosie. Saint Luke in the first chapter of the Acts, doth at large describe the hypocrisie of Ananias and Saphira, who that they might seeme zealous to Godward, and charitable toward the Saints, having sold a certaine posses∣sion, under pretence of giving the price thereof among the poore, retained covertly a certaine portion of it to their owne use, being so impudent as to lye unto the Holy Ghost the President of the Church, and founder of all secrets: but being attached by the mouth of Peter, a just and fearfull judge∣ment of God fell on them both, even their sudden death at the Apostles feet, one after another.
Nicephorus telleth of one Philip, the first Emperour that undertook the name and profession of Christ; but by the report of other writers, it pro∣ceeded not from any zeale of Religion, or feare of God, but onely to the in∣tent to counterfeit a kind of honestie, and cover his foule vices and cruel∣ties under the cloake of Religion. But God quickly espied and punished his deepe hypocrisie; for before he had raigned full five yeares, both he and his son were slain at Verona by his men of war. Let us learn then this lesson, by these examples to carry our selves in all purenesse, sinceritie, and good conscience before God; that our thoughts, words, and deeds, being estran∣ged from all hypocrisie, and dissimulation, may be agreeable and acceptable in his sight. Moreover, even as hypocrisie can winde and insinuate her selfe into the pure and sincere service of God, as hath been declared; so doth she play her part with no lesse bravery and ostentation in superstition and idolatry: for the truth whereof (before I proceed further) I will set downe a history not altogether unworthy the reading and remembring. Two hundred yeares Enguerran de Monstr. & Vol. 2. are not yet past, since there was in the raigne of Charles the seventh, King of France, a certaine preaching Frier of Britaine, called Frier Thomas, who by his dissembling customes and brags, under pretence of a certaine refor∣mation of manners, so mightily deceived the whole world, that every where he was reputed for an holy man. This Frier puffed up with a greedy desire of vaine-glory, used to goe from towne to towne, and from countrey to countrey, finding exceeding honourable entertainment in every place; which he tooke very willingly; and that he might ride at the more case, he got him a little young Mule, that would goe very softly; and in this sort appointed, he was accompanied with divers of his owne Order, and many other Disciples that went for the most part on foot by him: the people flocked from all quarters to see him; yea, and many were so besotted, as to forsake their fathers, mothers, wives, and children, to attend upon this holy man. Alwayes when he came neere to any citie, the Burgesses, and Gentle∣men, and Clergy, with one consent came forth to meet him, doing him as much reverence (saith mine Author) as they would have done to one of Christs Apostles if he were alive. Hee was very well content, that honou∣rable personages, as Knights and such others, being on foot, should hold his Mule by the bridle, to be in stead of pages and lacquies to lead him into the townes. His entrance into every citie was with great pompe and magnificence, and his lodging provided at the richest and stateliest Bur∣gesses house. Now that he might the better play his part, they prepared him in the best and convenientest places in the citie, a scaffold richly hung and garnished, upon the which his custome was first to say Masse, then to begin his Sermon; wherein he ripped up the vices of every estate, but reproved especially the Clergies enormities, because of their concubines and whores which they maintained: wherein he did say nothing but that which was good and lawfull; but in the same he used no discretion, but joyned madnesse and sacriledge with his Monkish nature, in stirring up little children to exclaime upon women for their attyre, promising certain dayes of pardon to them, as if he had been a god: so that Ladies and Gen∣tlewomen were inforced to lay aside for a season their accustomed trinkets. Moreover also, towards the end of his Sermons hee commanded to be brought unto him their Chesse-boords, Cards, Dice, Nine-pins, and such
other trash, which he openly threw into the fire, to be burned before them all. And that he might give more strength and credit to this his paltry rif∣raffe, he caused the men and women to be divided on each side, with a line drawne betwixt them, as in a Tennis-court; and by this means he drew toge∣ther sometimes twentie thousand persons: so ready and zealous is and ever hath been the world to follow after such hypocriticall deceivers, rather than the true preachers of Gods Word. But let us heare the issue of this holy hypocrite; it was thus: When he had in the fore-named sort traversed as well France as Flanders; it took him in the head to passe the mountaines, and visit Rome; imagining that it was no hard matter to obtaine the Popeship, seeing that in all places where he went, there was equall honour given unto him: or if he should faile of that hope, yet at least the Pope and his Cardinals would entertain him honourably; but it happened farre short of his expectation: for Popes are not so prodigall of their honours, to doe any such reverence to a poore silly Monke, but are very niggards and sparing thereof even towards Kings; so farre are they from leaving their Thrones of Majestie to any other: neither must we thinke that the Pope cared greatly for all those trickes and quid∣ditis of Frier Thomas, seeing he himselfe is the onely merchant of such trash. When he was arrived at Rome, Pope Eugenius seeing that he came not according to custome, to kisse his holinesse feet, sent for him twice, and understanding that he refused to come, and that he feigned himselfe to be evill at ease, sent his Treasurer, but not to impart to him any treasure, but to apprehend and attatch him. The Frier now perceiving that enquiry was made for him, and that they were at his chamber-dore, leapt out at a win∣dow, thinking by that means to escape; but he was quickly taken prisoner by the Treasurers servants, waiting before the dore, and brought before the Consistory of Cardinals: Law proceeded against him, by doome wher∣of, though no erroneous opinious could be proved against him, he was ad∣judged to the stake to be burned for an Hereticke: but it was sufficient to make him guiltie, because he defamed the Priests in his Sermons, and had spoken so broadly of their Gossips, and had been so bold to usurpe the au∣thoritie of giving pardons, which the Popes claime for a priviledge of their owne See; and besides, had made no more account of him that is a petty god on earth, but had done all these things without his leave and licence: it was a hard matter to be endured of the Bishops of Rome, that a silly Monke should so intermeddle with their affaires, and should derogate any whit from their supremacy, seeing that they quit themselves so well with Kings and Emperours, and can at every sleight occasion make them stoope: neither is it to be doubted, but that Pope Eugenius was very jealous of the honour which Frier Thomas attained unto in every place, and fearfull lest his presence might disturbe his present estate. By this meanes God, who useth all instruments for his owne purpose, and can direct every particular to the performing of his will, did punish and correct the hypocrisie of this Monke, that seemed to be holy and wise, being indeed nothing but foolish, stubborne, and ambitious. Moreover, most notable was the hypocrisie of two counterfeit holy Maids; one of Kent in England, called Elizabeth Barton; the other of France, Stow Chron. called Ioane la Pucelle: the former of which, by the procurement and infor∣mation of one Richard Master, Parson of Aldington, and Edward Bocking
Doctor of Divinity, a Monke of Canterbury, and divers others, counter∣feited such manner of trances and distortions in her body, with the utte∣ring of divers counterfeit vertues and holy words, tending to the rebuke of sinne, and reproving such new opinions as there began to spread, that shee woon great credit amongst the people, and drew after her a multitude of favourites; besides, she would prophecy of things to come, as that shee should be helped of her disease by none but the Image of our Lady in Al∣dington; whither being brought, she appeared to the people to be sudden∣ly relieved from her sicknesse; by meanes of which hypocriticall dissimula∣tion she was brought into marvellous estimation, not only with the com∣mon people, but with divers great men also, insomuch that a book was put in print, touching her fained miracles and revelations. Howbeit, not con∣tent to delude the people, she began also to meddle with the King himself, Henry the eight; saying, That if he proceeded to be divorced from his wife Queene Katherine, he should not remaine King one month after, and in the reputation of God not one day: for which and many other tricks practised by her, she with her complices was arraigned of high treason, and after con∣fession of all her knavery, drawn from the Tower to Tyburne, and there han∣ged; the holy maidens head being set upon London bridge, and the other on certaine gates of the City. The other named la Pucella de Dieu, marvellously deluded with her coun∣terfeit hypocrisie, Charles the seventh, King of France, and all the whole Stow Chron. French Nation; in such sort, that so much credit was attributed unto her, that she was honoured as a Saint, and thought to be sent of God to the aide of the French King. By her meanes Orleance was woon from the English, and many other exploits atchieved, which (to be short) I will referre the Reader unto the French Chronicles, where they shall finde her admirable knavery at large discovered. But touching her end, it was on this sort: as she marched on horsebake to the towne of Champaigne, to remove the siedge, wherewith it was guirt by the Duke of Burgoine and other of the English Captaines, Sir Iohn Leupembrough, a Burgonian Knight, tooke her alive, and conveyed her to the City of Roan, where she faigning her selfe with child, when the contrary was knowne, was condemned and burnt. And thus these two holy women, that in a diverse kind mocked the people of England and France by their hypocrisie, by the justice of God came to deserved destru∣ctions. CHAP. XXI. Of Conjurers, and Enchanters. IF God by his first Commandement hath enjoyned every one of us to love, serve, and to cleave unto him alone in the conjuction and unity of a true faith and hope unremo∣vable, there is no doubt but he forbiddeth on the other side that which is contrary to this foresaid duty, and here∣in especially that accursed familiarity which divers mise∣rable wretches have with that lying Spirit, the Father of errour, by whose delusions and subtilty they busie themselves in the study of sorceries and
enchantments, whereupon it is forbidden the Israelites in the nineteenth of Leviticus, to turne after familiar spirits, or to seeke to Soothsayers to be defiled by them: and the more to withdraw them from this damnable Lev. 19 31. crime, in the Chapter following there is a threat set downe against it in 0. 7. manner of a Commandement, That if either man or woman have a spirit of divination or soothsaying in them, they should dye the death, they should stone them to death, their bloud should be upon them: so in the two and twentieth of Exo∣dus, Exod. 22. 18. the Law of God saith, Thou shalt not suffer a Witch to live: and Moses following the same steps, giveth an expresse charge in the eighteenth of Deuteronomy, against this sinne, saying, Let nonebe found among thee that useth witchcraft, nor that regardeth the Clouds or times, nor a Sorcerer, or a Charmer, or Deut. 19. 10, 11. that counselleth with a Spirit, or a teller of Fortunes, or that asketh counsell of the dead, for all that doe such things are abhomination unto the Lord. And therefore this sinne, 1 Sam. ver. 15. is reputed amongst the most hainous and enor∣mous 1 Sam. 15. Isa. 8. 19, 20. sinnes that can be: When they shall say unto you (saith the Prophet) Enquire at them that have a Spirit of Divination, and at the Soothsayer, which whispers and murmures: answer, Should not a people enquire at their God? from the living to the dead? To the Law, and to the Testimony? Wherefore it was a commendable thing, and worthy imitation, when they that had received the Faith by Pauls preaching, having used curious Arts, as Magicke and such like, being touched with the feare of God, brought their bookes, and Acts 19. 19. burned them before all men, although the price thereof amounted to fifty thousand pieces of silver, which by Budeus his supputation ariseth to five thousand French Crownes. The Councels, as that of Carthage, and that other of Constantinople, kept the second time in the suburbs, utterly con∣demned the practices of all Conjurers and Enchanters. The twelve Tables in Rome adjudged to punishments those that bewitched the standing corne. And for the Civill Law, this kind is condemned both by the Law Iulia and Cornelia. In like manner the wisest Emperours (those I mean that attained to the honour of Christianity) ordained divers Edicts and Prohi∣bitions, under very sharp and grievous punishments, against all such villa∣ny: as Constantine in the ninth book of the Cod. tit. 18. enacted, That whoso∣ever should attempt any action by Art Magicke, against the safety of any person, or should bring in or stir up any man, to make him fall into any mischiefe or riotous demeanour, should suffer a grievous punishment: in the fifth Law he forbiddeth every man to aske counsell at Witches, or to use the helpe of Charmers and Sorcerers, under the paine of death. Let them (saith he in the sixth Law) be throwne to wild beasts to be devoured, that by conjuring or the helpe of familiar spirits go about to kill either their enemies, or any other. Moreover in the seventh Law he willeth, that not so much as his owne courtiers and servants, if they were found faulty in this crime, should be spared, but severely punished; yet neverthelesse, many of this age gave themselves over to this filthy sinne, without either feare of God, or respect of Law: some through a foolish and dangerous curiosity, others through the overruling of their owne vile and wicked affections, and a third sort, troubled with the terrours of an evill consci∣ence, desire to know what shall besall and happen unto them in the end. Thus Saul the first King of Israel being troubled in himselfe, and terri∣fied with the army of the Philistims that came against him, would needs
foreknow his owne fortune, and the issue of this doubtfull warre. Now whereas before whilest he performed the duty of a good King, and obeyed the commandement of God, hee had cleansed his Realme of Witches and Enchanters; yet is he now so mad as to make them serve his owne turn, and to use their counsels in his extremity; adding this wickednesse to the num∣ber of his other great sins, that the measure thereof might be full: he went therefore to a Witch to seeke counsell, who caused a Devill to appeare and speake unto him in the shape of Samuel, and foretell him of (Gods just judgement upon his wickednesse) his utter and finall ruine and de∣struction. An example not much unlike unto this in the event, but most like in Buchan. rerum. Scot. lib. 4. practise, wee finde recorded of Natholicus, the one and thirtieth King of the Scots: who, after he had unjustly usurped the Crowne and Seepter, and installed himselfe by much bloudshed into the Throne of the Kingdome, by open intrusion, and no apparent shew of right, sought by the same means to confirme and establish the Kingdome unto him: And therefore (as wickednesse is alwaies accompanied with suspition and feare) hee sent one of his trustiest fiends to a Witch, to enquire of things to come, both what successe he should have in his Kingdome, and also how long he should live: the Witch answered, That he should not live long, but should short∣ly be murthered, not by his enemy, but by his familiar friend: when the Messenger urged instantly of whom; she answered, of him: hee detesting her at first, and abhorring the thought of any such villany, yet at length considering that it was not safe to disclose the Witches answer, and on the other side, that it could not be concealed, resolved for his most security, rather to kill the Tyrant, with the favour of many, than to save him alive with the hazard of his owne head. Therefore as soone as he was returned home, being in secret alone with the King, to declare unto him the Wit∣ches answer, he slew him suddenly, and gave him his just desert, both for his horrible cruelty, and wicked sorcery. Let all them that make no con∣science of running to Witches, either for their lost goods, or for recovery of their owne or friends health, remember this example either for their instruction to amend, or for their terrour, if they continue that devillish practise. Plutarch in the life of Romulus reporteth of one Cleomedes, a man in pro∣portion Plut. Rom. of body, and cruell practises, huge and gyant-like: who for that he was the cause of the death of many little children, and was pursued by the parents of those dead infants, who sought to be revenged on him for that cruell part, he hid himselfe in a coffer, closing the lid fast to him: but when the Coffin was broken up, the Conjurer was not therein, neither alive nor dead, but was transported by the malitious spirit the Devill, to a place of greater torment. Antient Histories make mention of one Piso, a man of credit and au∣thority Tacit. among the Romanes, whom the Emperour Tiberius gave unto his sonne Germanicus for an help and counsellor in the mannaging of his af∣faires in Asia; so well was he perswaded both of his sufficiency, courage, and loyalty towards him. It chanced a while after, that he was suspected to have bewitched to death the said Germanicus: the signes and markes of which suspition were, certaine dead mens bones digged out of the earth with divers charmes and curses, and Germanicus name engraven in tables of
lead, and such like trash which Witches use to murther men withall, were found with him. Whereupon Tiberius himselfe accused him of that crime; but would not have the ordinary Iudges to sit upon it, but by speciall pri∣viledge committed the enquiry thereof unto the Senate. Piso, when every man thought he was preparing himself for his defence against the morrow (like a wise man to prevent all mischiefes) was found dead the day before, having his throat cut, and, as most likelihood was, finding himselfe guilty of the fact, and too weake to overweigh the other side, forestalled the infamy of a most shamefull death, by killing himselfe; although there be that say, that the Emperour sent one of purpose to dispatch him in this manner. Olaus Magnus telleth of one Methotin, a noble Magitian in old time, that Lib. 3. cap. 4. Of the Nor∣thene people. by his delusions did so deceive and blinde the poore ignorant people, that they accounted him not onely for some mighty man, but rather for some demy god; and in token of the honour and reverence they bare him, they Refer this also 10 l. 1. c. 24. offered up sacrifices unto him, which he refused not; but at last his knave∣ries and cousenages being laid open, they killed him whom before they so much esteemed: and because his dead carkasse with filthy stinke infected the approachers, they digged it up, and broached it upon the end of a stake, to be devoured of wild beasts. Another called Hollere (as the same Author witnesseth) plaid the like chap. 18. of the foresaid book. tricks in abusing the peoples minds as strongly as the other did, insomuch that he was reputed also for a god: for he joyned with his craft, strength and power to make himselfe of greater authority in the world. When he listed to passe over the sea, he used no other ship but a bone figured with certaine charmes, whereby he was transported, as if both sayles and wind had helped and driven him forwards; yet his inchanted bone was not of power to save him from being murthered of his enemies. The same Author writeth, That in Denmarke there was one Otto a great Rover and Pyrat by sea, who used likewise to passe the seas without the Olaus Magnus. help of ship or any other vessell, and sunke and drowned all his enemies with the waves, which by his cunning he stirred up: but at last his cunning practise was over-reached by one more expert in his art than himselfe, and as he had served others, so was he himselfe served, even swallowed up of the waves. There was a Conjurer at Saltzburg, that vaunted that he could gather to∣gether all the serpants within half a mile round about into a ditch, and feed them and bring them up there: and being about the experiment, behold, the old and grand serpent came in the while, which whilest he thought by the force of his charmes to make to enter into the ditch among the rest, he set upon and inclosed him round about like a girdle so strongly, that hee drew him perforce into the ditch with him, where he miserably died. Mark here the wages of such wicked miscreants, that as they make it their occu∣pation to abuse simple folke, they are themselves abused and cousened of the Devill, who is a finer jugler than them all. It was a very lamentable spectacle that chanced to the Governour of Mascon a Magitian, whom the Devill snatched up in dinner while, and hoisted aloft, carrying him three times about the towne of Mascon in the presence of many beholders, to whom he cried on this manner, Help, help, Hugo de Cluni. my friends; so that the whole towne stood amased thereat, yea and the re∣membrance
of this strange accident sticketh at this day fast in the minds of all the inhabitants of this country; and they say, that this wretch having given himselfe to the Devill, provided store of holy bread (as they call it) which he alwaies carried about with him, thinking thereby to keep himself from his clawes; but it served him to small stead, as his end declared. About the yeare 1437, Charles the seventh being King of France, Sir Glyes of Britaine, Lord of Rais, and high Constable of France, was accu∣sed (by the report of Enguerran de Monstrelet) for having murthered many infants and women with childe, to the number of eightscore or more, with Vol. 2. whose bloud he either writ or caused to be written books full of conjurati∣ons, hoping by that abhominable means to attaine to high matters: but it happened cleane crosse and contrary to his expectation and practise; for being convinced of those horrible crimes (it being Gods will, that such grosse and palpable sinnes should not go unpunished) he was adjudged to be hanged and burned to death, which was also accordingly executed at Nantes, by the authority of the Duke of Britaine. Iohn Francis Picus of Mirand saith, That he conferred divers times with many, who being inticed with a vaine hope of knowing things to come, were afterwards so grievously tormented by the Devill (with whom they had made some bargain) that they thought themselves thrise happy if they escaped with their lives. He saith moreover. That there was in his time a certaine Conjurer that promised a too curious and no great wise Prince, to present unto him upon a stage the siege of Troy, and Achilles, and Hector fighting together as they did when they were alive; but he could not per∣forme his promise for another sport and spectacle more hideous and ougly to his person; for he was taken away alive by a Devill, in such sort, that he was never afterward heard of. In our owne memory the Earle of Aspremont and his brother Lord of Orne, were made famous, and in every mans mouth, for their strange and prodigious seats, wherein they were so unreasonably dissolute and vaine∣glorious, that sometime they made it their sport and pastime to breake downe all the windowes about the castle Aspremont, where they kept (which lyeth in Lorraine two miles from Saint Michael) and threw them piecemeale into a deep Well to heare them cry plumpe: but this vaine ex∣cesse presaged a ruine and destruction to come, as well upon their house, which at this present lyeth desolate and ruinous in many respects, as upon themselves, that finished their daies in misery one after another; as we shall now understand of the one the Lord of Orne: as for the Earle, how hee died, shall more at large be declared elsewhere. Now it chanced, that as the Lord of Orne was of most wicked and cruell conditions, so hee had an evill favoured looke, answerable to his inclination and name, to be a Conjurer: the report that went of his cruelty was this, That upon a time he put the Baker (one of his servants, whose wie he used secretly to enter∣taine) into a un, which he caused to be rowled from the top of a hill, into the bottome, sometimes as high as a pike, as the place gave occasion; but by the great mercy of God, notwithstanding all this, this poore man saved his life. Furthermore, it was a common report, that when any Gentlemen or Lords came to see him, they were entertained (as they thought) very ho∣nourably, being served with all sort of most dainty faire and exquisite di∣shes, as if he had not spared to make them the best cheere that might be:
but at their departure, they that thought themselves well refreshed, found their stomacke empty and almost pined for want of food, having neither eaten nor drunk any thing save in imagination only; and it is to be thought, that their horses found no better fare than their masters. It happened one day that a certaine Lord being departed from his house, one of his men ha∣ving left something behind, returned to the Castle, and entring suddenly into the hall where they dined but a little before, he espied a Munky bea∣ting the master of the house that had feasted them of late, very sore. And there be others that say, that he hath been seen through the chink of a dore lying on a table upon his belly all at length, and a Munkey scourging him very strangely; to whom he should say, Let me alone, let me alone, wilt thou alwaies torment me thus? And thus he continued a long time: but at length after he had made away all his substance, he was brought to such extremity, that being destitute of maintenance, and forsaken of all men, he was fain (for want of a better refuge) to betake himselfe to the Hospitall of Paris, which was his last Mansion house, wherein he died. See here to how pittifull and miserable an end this man fell; that having been esteemed amongst the Mighties of this world, for making no more account of God, and for following the illusions of Satan (the common enemy of mannkdi) became so poore and wretched as to dye in an Hospitall among Cripples and Beggars. It is not long since there was in Lorraine a certaine man called Coulen, that was over much given to this cursed Art: amongst whose tricks this was one to be wondred at; that he would suffer harquebuses or pistols to be shot at him, and catch their bullets in his hand without receiving any hurt: but upon a certain time one of his servants being angry with him, hot him such a knock with a pistoll (notwithstanding all his great cunning) that he killed him therewith. Moreover, it is worthy to be observed, That within these two hundred yeares hitherto, more Monks and Priests have been found given over to these abhominations and devillishnesses, than of all other degrees of peo∣ple whatsoever, as it is declared in the second volume of Enguerran de Mon∣stralet more at large: where he maketh mention of a Monke that used to practise his sorceries in the top of a tower of an Abbey, lying neere to Longin upon Marne, where the Devils presented themselves to be at his commandement: and this was in the raigne of Charles the sixth. In the same booke it is recorded, That in the raigne of Charles the seventh, one Master William Ediline Doctor in Divinity, and Prior of Saint Germaine in Lay, having been an Augustine Frier, gave himselfe to the Devill for his pleasure, even to have his will of a certain woman: he was upon a time in a place where a Synagogue of people were gathered together; where to the end that he might quickly be (as he himselfe confessed) he took a broom and rode upon it. He confessed also that he had don homage to that enemy of God, the Devill▪ who appeared unto him in the shape of a sheep, and A sweet kisse doubtlesse. made him kisse his hinder parts, as he reported. For which causes hee was placed upon a scaffold, and openly made to weare a paper containing his owne faults, and afterwards plotted to live prisoner all the rest of his life laden with yrons, in the Bishop of Eureux his house, which was accordingly executed. This happened in the yeare 1453. In the raigne of the same King, 1457, there was a certaine Curate of a
village neere to Soissons, who to revenge himselfe of a Farmer that retai∣ned from him the tenths which were appointed to the Knights of the Rhodes, went to a Witch, of whom he received in gift a fat toad in an ear∣then pot, which she had a long while fed and brought up, which she com∣manded him to baptise; as he also did, and called it by the name of Iohn: albeit I tremble to recite so monstrous and vile a fact; yet that every man Contempt of Sacraments, lib. 1. cap. 34. might see how deadly besotted those sort of people are that give them∣selves over to Satan, and with what power of errour he overwhelmeth them, and beside, how full of malice this uncleane spirit is, that as it were in de∣spight of God, would prophane the holy Sacrament of Baptisme. This good holy Curate, after he had consecrated the holy host, gave it also to the toade to eat, and afterward restored it to the Witch again, who killing the toade, and cutting it in pieces, with other such like sorceries, caused a young wench to carry it secretly into the Farmers house, and to put it un∣der the table as they were at dinner; whereupon immediately the Farmer and his children that were at the table fell suddenly sicke, and three dayes after died: the Witch her selfe being detected, was burned, but the Cu∣rate suffered onely a little imprisonment in the Bishop of Paris house, and that not long for what with friendship and money he was soone delivered. Froissard, who was Treasurer and Canon of Chymay, reporteth of ano∣ther Curate in the countrey of Beare (under Charles the seventh) that had a familiar spirit which hee called Orthon: whose helpe hee used to the disturbance of the Lord of Corosse, by causing a terrible noise to bee heard every night by him and his servants in his castle, because the said Lord withheld his tythes from him, and converted them to his owne use. In the yiare 1530, at Nuremburg a certaine Priest studied Art Magick, Wierus. and being very covetous of gold and silver, the Devill (whom hee served) shed him through a Chrystall certaine treasures hidden in the city: he by and by (greedy of this rich prey) went to that part of the city where hee supposed it to have lien buried: and being arrived at the place, with a com∣panion whom he brought to this pretty pastime, fell a searching and dig∣ging up a hollow pit, untill he perceived a coffer that lay in the bottome of the hole, with a great blacke dog lying by it: whither he was no sooner en∣tred, but the earth fell downe and filled up the hole, and smothered and cru∣shed him to death. So this poore Priest was entrapped and rewarded by his master no otherwise than he deserved; but otherwise than he expected or looked for. Howbeit they are not onely simple Priests and Friers that deale with Naucler. vinc. &c. these cursed Arts, but even Popes themselves. Silvester the second (as Pla∣tina and others report) was first a conjuring Frier, and gave himselfe to the Devill upon condition he might be Pope, as he was indeed; and having obtained his purpose, as it seemed he began earnestly to desire to know the day wherein he should die: which also his Schoolmaster the Devill revea∣led unto him, but under such doubtfull tearmes, that he dreamed in his foolish conceit, of immortality, and that he should never die. It chanced on a time as he was singing Masse at Rome in a Temple called Ierusalem (which was the place assigned him to die in) and not Ierusalem in Palestina (as he made himselfe falsly to beleeve, he heard a great noise of Devils that came to fetch him away (note that this was done in Masse while) whereat A not woth the nothing.
he being terrified and tormented, and seeing himselfe not able any way to escape, hee desired his people to rend his body in pieces after his death, and lay it upon a charriot, and let horses draw it whither they would; which was accordingly performed: for as soone as he was dead, the pie∣ces of his carkasse were carried out of the Church of Laterane by the wic∣ked spirit, who as he ruled him in life, so he was the chiefe in his death and funerals. By like means came Benedict the ninth to the Popedome, for he was a de∣testable Bnno Balleus. Magitian; and in the ten yeares wherein he was Pope having com∣mitted infinite villanies and mischiefs, was at last by his familiar friend the Devill strangled to death in a forrest, whither he went to apply himselfe the more quieter to his conjurings. Gregory the sixth, scholler to Silvester, as great a conjurer as his master, Bal. wrought much misery in his time, but was at last banished Rome, and en∣ded his life in misery in Germany. Iohn the two and twentieth, being of no better disposition than these we have spoken of, but following judiciall astrology, sed himselfe with a vain hope of long life, whereof he vaunted himselfe among his familiars, one day above the rest at Viterbum, in a chamber which he had lately builded, saying, that he should live a great while, he was assured of it: presently the floore brake suddenly in pieces, and he was found seven daies after crushed to pieces under the ruines thereof. All this notwithstanding, yet other Popes ceased not to suffer themselves to be infected with this execrable poison: as Hildebrand, who was called Gregory the seventh, and Alexander the sixth, of which kinde we shall see a whole legend in the next booke. Doe but marke these holy Fathers how abhominable they were, to be in such sort given over to Satan. Cornelius Agrippa, a great Student in this cursed Art, and a man famous Iovius in ellgi∣is virorumil∣lustrium. both by his owne works and others report, for his Necromancy, went al∣waies accompanied with an evill spirit in the similitude of a blacke dogge: but when his time of death drew neer, and he was urged to repentance, hee tooke off the inchanted collar from the dogs neck, and sent him away with these termes; Get thee hence thou cursed beast, which hast utterly destroyed mee Neither was the dog ever after seen: some say he lept into Araris, and never came out againe. Agrippa himselfe died at Lyons in a base and beggarly Inne. Zeroastres King of Bactria is notified to have bin the inventer of Astro∣logy Theat, hist. and Magicke. But the Devill (whose ministry he used) when he was too importunate with him, burned him to death. Charles the seventh of France, put Egedius de Raxa Marshall of his King∣dome, to a cruell and filthy death, because he practised this Art, and in the Fulgos. l. 9. c. 1. same had murthered an hundred and twenty teeming women and yong in∣fants: he caused him to be hanged upon a forke by a hot fire, and roasted to death. Bladud the sonne of Lud King of Britaine, now called England, in the yeare of the World 3100, (hee that builded the city of Bath, as our late Histories witnesse, and also made therein the Bathes) addicted himselfe so much to the Devillish art of Necromancy, that hee wrought wonders thereby, insomuch that he made himselfe wings, and attemp∣ted to flee like Dedalus: but the Devill (as ever like a false knave) for∣sooke
him in his journey, so that hee fell downe and brake his necke. In the yeare of our Lord 1578, one mon Penbrooke dwelling in Saint Georges parish in London, being a figure setter, nd vehemently suspected to be a Conjurer, by the commandement of the Iudge appeared in the pa∣rish Church of Saint Saviour at Court holden there: where whilest he was busie in eutertaining a Proctor, and leaned his head upon a pew a good space, the Proctor began to lift up his head to see what he ayled, and found him departing out of this life, and straightwayes he fell downe ratling in the throat, without speaking any one word. This strange judgement hap∣pened before many witnesses, who searching him, found about him five de∣villish books of conjuration and most abhominable practises, with a pi∣cture in tin of a man having three dice in his hand, with this writing, Chance dice fortunately; and much other trash: so that every one consessed it to be a just judgement against Sorcery, and a great example to cause others to feare the just judgement of God. Now let every one learne by these examples to feare God, and to stand firme and stedfast to his holy Word, without turning from it on any side, so shall he be safe from such like miserable ends as these wicked varlets come unto. CHAP XXII. Of those that through pride and vaine-glory strove to usurpe the honour due unto God. AForgetfull and unthankfull minde for the benefits which God bestoweth upon us, is a branch of this first Commandement, as well as those which went be∣fore: And this is when we ascribe not unto God the glory of his benefits, to give him thanks for them, but through a foolish pride extoll our selves higher than we ought, presuming above measure and reason in our owne power, desire to place our selves in a higher degree than is meet. With this sond and foolish affection (I know not how) our first fathers Gen. 1. were tickled and tainted from the beginning, to think to impaire the glory of God: and they also were puffed up with the blast of ambition, that I know not with what fond, foolish, rash, and proud conceit, went about after the floud to build a city and tower of exceeding height, by that means to win same and reputation amongst men: In stead whereof they ought rather Gen. 11. to have praysed God by remembring his gracious goodnesse in their mira∣culous deliverance in their fathers persons, from that generall deluge and shipwracke of the world: but forasmuch as with a proud and high sto∣macke they lifted up themselves against God, to whom all glory onely ap∣pertaineth, therefore God also set himselfe against them and against their over bold practises, interrupting all their determined presumptuous pur∣poses, by such a confusion and alteration of tongues which he sent among them, that one could not understand another: so that with shame they were constrained to leave their begun worke. And besides, in stead of that strong and sure habitation which they dreamed on, to maintain and defend
themselves by, against all enemies, and  fortresse and castle wherby they went about to keep other in subjeon to them, they were forced to forsake the place by the just judgement of God, who scattered and dispersed them hither and thither that he might bring them to that estate and condition which they most of all feared, and strove to shun. And thus God resisteth the proud, and favoureth the humble: loe here the punishment wherewith God punished their sin, remaining still upon them this day, for a chastise∣ment of their proud spirits. With the staine of this sinne, most commonly, the mightiest Poten∣tates of this world are defiled, who although both by word and writing avouch and confesse their power to be by the grace of God, yet for the most part they are very unthankfull for the same, and so proud and high minded, that they shew themselves most obstinate and ungratefull of all men: for oftentimes they rob him of the honour and glory which is pecu∣liar unto himselfe, and attribute it to themselves, in setting forth their brave and sumptuous shewes and triumphs: this is the sinne whereof Na∣buchadnezzar King of Babell was reproved; for God having bestowed upon him a kingdome with such pompe and renowne, that he made whole nati∣ons to tremble before his face, and putting many people in subjection un∣der him, he (in stead of giving thanks for these great benefits) exalted himselfe, suffering his heart to swell, and his understanding to waxe hard with pride, not regarding the Lord who extolled him so high: and yet not∣withstanding he was constrained to confesse and acknowledge him for the true God, to have an everlasting Kingdome, and an infinite power, as well by the forewarning of dreames which Daniel interpreted, as by the miracu∣lous deliverance of three young men out of the burning furnace; there∣fore as he walked one day in his royall palace at Babylon, and vaunted of his greatnesse, and magnificence, saying to himselfe, Is not this great Babell, which I have built for the house of the Kingdome, by the might of my power, and Dan. 4. for the honour of my Majesty? Now whilest the word was yet in his mouth, a voyce was heard from heaven, saying, O King, to thee it is spoken, Thy King∣dome shall depart from thee: and according to the tenour of the voyce hee was immediately deposed from his royall seat, spoiled of all his glory, dri∣ven from the society of men, deprived of sense, and made a companion for the bruit beasts, and wilde asses, eating grasse like oxen, even so long, untill his haire was growne stiffe like Eagles feathers, and his nailes like the clawes of birds. In which estate he continued the space of seven yeares; even he that a little before was so proud and arrogant, and he that had con∣quered so many kingdomes and nations, that triumphed over Ierusalem, with the Kings thereof. This is a most excellent looking glasse for Kings to behold the ficklenesse and instability of all their power and pomp, when it pleaseth God to humble and bring them under: there is neither Scepter, Crowne, stay, or strength of man, that is able to hinder and turne aside the hand of the Almighty, the King of Kings, from abasing and weakning the most high and strong of this world, let them be never so brave and jolly, and bringing them into a low, contemptible, and brutish estate. Besides this which we have already touched, there is another kinde of pride and presumption most damnable and detestable of all; and it is when a man doth so much forget himselfe, as to seise and take upon him that ho∣nour which onely appertaineth to God, ascribing to himselfe a certaine
deity. One would hardly thinke that there were any such in the world, so proud as to commit this sinne, did not experience by certaine examples teach us the contrary: As first of all the King of Tyre, whose heart was so exalted with the multitude of riches, and the renowne and greatnesse of his house, that he doubted not to esteeme himselfe a god, and to desire ma∣jesty and power correspondent thereunto. For which presumption God by Chap. 28. 1, 2, 3, &c. the Prophet Ezechiel reproved him, and threatned his destruction, which afterward came upon him, when by the power of a strange and terrible nation, his goodly godhead was overcome and murthered, feeling indeed that he was no god, as hee supposed, but a man subject to death and mi∣sery. King Herod, sirnamed Agrippa, which put Iames the brother of Iohn to Acts 12. death, and imprisoned Peter, with purpose to make him taste of the same cup, was puffed up with no lesse sacrilegious pride; for being upon a time seated in his throne of judgement, and arrayed in his royall robes, shewing forth his greatnesse and magnificence in the presence of the Embassadors of Tyre and Sidon, that desired to continue in peace with him, as he spake unto them, the people shouted and cryed, That it was the voice of God, and not of man: which titles of honour he disclaimed not, and therefore the Angell of the Lord smote him suddenly, because he gave not the glory to God: so that he was eaten with wormes, and gave up the ghost. Iosephus reporteth the same story more at large on this manner: Vpon the second Iewish Anti∣quities, l. 19. c. 7. day of the solemnization of the playes which Herod caused to be celebra∣ted for the Emperours health, there being a great number of Gentlemen and Lords present, that came from all quarters to his feast, he came betime in the morning to the Theatre, clad in a garment all woven with silver of a marvellous workmanship; upon which, as the Sun rising cast his beames, there glittered out such an excellent brightnesse, that thereby his perni∣tious flatterers tooke occasion to call him with a loud voice by the name of God: for the which sacrilegious speech, he not reproving nor forbidding them, was presently taken with most grievous and horrible dolours and gripes in his bowels, so that looking upon the people he uttered these words: Behold here your goodly god, whom you but now so highly hono∣red, ready to die with extreame paine. And so he died indeed most mise∣rably, even when he was in the top of his honour and jollity, and as it were in the midst of his earthly Paradise, being beaten downe and swallowed up with confusion and ignominy, not stricken with the edge of sword or speare (for that had been far more honourable) but gnawne in pieces with lice and vermine. Simon Magus, otherwise called Simon the Samaritane, borne in a village Euseb. l. 2. c. 12. Phil. in Chron. Cen. 1. l. 3. c. 11. called Gitton, after he was cursed of Peter the Apostle, for offering to buy the gifts of the Spirit of God with money, went to Rome, and there put∣ting in practise his magicall arts, and working miracles by the Devill, was reputed a god, and had an image erected in his honour, with this inscrip∣tion, To Simon the holy god: Besides, all the Samaritanes, and divers also of other nations accounted him no lesse, as appeared by the reverence and ho∣nour which they did unto him: insomuch, as they called his companion, or rather his whore Helena (for that was her profession in Tyre a city of Phe∣nicia) the first mover that distilled out of Simons bosome. Now he, to foster this foolish and ridiculous opinion of theirs, and to eternize his name,
boasted that he would at a certaine time fly up into heaven, which, as he at∣tempted to doe by the help of the Devill, Peter the Apostle commanded the unclean spirit to cast him down again, so that he fell upon the earth and was bruised to death, and proved himselfe thereby to be no more than a mortall, wicked, and detestable wretch. Moreover elsewhere we read of Alexander the Great, whose courage Oros. lib. 3. and magnanimity was so exceeding great, that he enterprised to goe out of Greece and set upon all Asia, onely with an army of two and thirty thou∣sand footmen, five hundred horse, and an hundred and foure score ships: and in this appointment passing the seas, he conquered in short space the grea∣test part of the world: for which cause he was represented to the Prophet Daniel in a vision, by the figure of a Leopard with wings on his backe, to notifie the great diligence and speedy expedition which he used in com∣passing so many sudden and great victories; with pride he was so soone infected, that he would brooke no equall nor companion in his Empire; but as heaven had but one Sunne, so he thought the earth ought to have but one Monarch, which was himselfe: which mind of his he made known by his answer to King Darius demanding peace, and offering him the one Just. lib. 11. halfe of his Kingdome to be quiet; when he refused to accord thereunto; saying, He scorned to be a partner in the halfe, and hoped to be full posses∣sor of the whole. After his first victory had of Darius, and his entrance into Aegypt (which he tooke without blowes, as also he did Rhodes and Cilicia) he practised and suborned the Priests that ministred at the Oracle of Hammon, to make him be pronounced and entituled by the Oracle, The sonne of Iupiter (which kinde of jugling and deceit was common at that time.) Having obtained this honour, forthwith he caused himselfe to be worshipped as a god, according to the custome of the Kings of Persia: nei∣ther wanted he flatterers about him that egged him forward, and soothed Iust. lib. 12. Curt. lib. 8. him up in this proud humor: albeit that many of the better sort endeavou∣red tooth and nayle to turne him from it. It hapned as he warred in India, he received so sore a wound, that with paine thereof he was constrained to say, Though he was the renowned sonne of Iupiter, yet he ceased not to feele the infirmities of a weake and diseased body: finally, being returned to Babylon, where many Embassadors of divers farre countries, as of Car∣thage, and other cities in Africa, Spaine, France, Sicily, Sardinia, and cer∣taine cities of Italy, were arrived to congratulate his good successe, for the great renowne which by his worthy deeds he had gotten; as he lay there ta∣king his rest many dayes, and bathing himselfe in all kinde of pleasure, one day after a great feast, that lasted a whole day and a night, in a banquet after supper, being ready to returne home, he was poysoned; when before hee had drunke his whole draught, he gave a deep sigh suddenly, as if hee had been thrust through with a dart, and was carried away in a swoone, vexed with such horrible torment, that had he not been restrained, he would have killed himselfe. And on this manner he that could not content himselfe with the condition of a man, but would needs climbe above the clouds, to goe in equipage with God, drunke up his owne death, leaving as sud∣denly all his worldly pompe, as hee had suddenly gotten it: which va∣nished like smoake, none of his children being any whit the better for it. There was in Syracusa a city of Sicilia (which is now called Saragosse) a
Physitian called Menecrates, whose folly and presumption was so great, that he accounted himselfe a god, and desired to be so reputed by others; inso∣much that he required no other wages and recompence of the patients which he tooke in hand (as Aelianus witnesseth) but that they should onely acknowledge him to be Iupiter, and call him so, and avow themselves to his service. Vpon a time Denis the tyrant, desirous to make some pastime with him, made a feast, and invited him amongst others to be his guest; but be∣cause he was a god, to doe him honour answerable to his name, he placed him at a table all alone, and set before him no dishes, but only a censer with frankincense, which was a proper and convenient service for the gods. This honourable duty pleased the Physitian very well at the first, so that he shuf∣fed up the perfume most willingly: but when this poore god saw the other guests eating and drinking indeed, and himselfe not being able to be fed with smoake, ready to starve with hunger, arose up and went away all in∣raged in himselfe, and derided of others; having more need to purge his owne braines of their superfluous humor, than others from their sick∣nesses. Caligula the first, Emperor, being become an ordinary despiser and open mocker of all Religion, it came presently in his braine to beleeve (so drun∣ken was he with a draught of his owne foolish conceit) that there was no other God but himselfe; therefore he caused men to worship him, and to kisse his hands or his feet in token of reverence (which honour afterwards the Popes tooke upon them) yea and was so besotted, that he went about by certaine engines of art to counterfeit thunder and lightnings: albeit in all this pride and arrogancy, or rather folly, there was none so timerous and fearefull as he, or that could sooner upon lighter occasion be dismaied. One day as he was by mount Aetna in Sicily, hearing by chance the violent cracking of the flames which all that season ascended out of the top of the hill, it strucke so sudden and horrible a feare into him, that he never ceased flying all night till he came to Phar in Messina. Every little thunderclap put him in feare of death, for he would leap up and downe like a mad man when he heard it thunder; finding himselfe not able by his god head to de∣fend himselfe from the power thereof: but if there chanced greater cracks than ordinary, then would not his hot bed hold him, but needs must he run into the cold floore underneath the bed, to hide himselfe. Thus was hee compelled against his will to feare him whom willingly he would not deigne to acknowledge. And thus it falleth out with all wicked miserable Atheists, whose hearts imagine there is no God; and therefore have so little assurance in themselves, that there need no thunder and lightening to amase them; for the shaking of every leafe is sufficient to make them trem∣ble: To conclude, this Atheist, void of all Religion and feare of God, and full of all prophanenesse, was according to his due desert, murthered by one of his servants: of the which will follow more at large in the next booke. Domitian likewise was so blinded with pride, that hee would be cal∣led Gros. l. 7. c. 7. a god, and worshipped: of whom also wee will speake in the second booke. To these we may adde them also, that to the end to make themselves Dion. Mal. l. 1. Antiq. Roman. feared and reverenced as gods, have counterfeited the lightnings and thun∣ders of heaven, as we read of one Alladius a Latine King that raigned be∣fore Romulus: who being a most wicked Tyrant, and a contemner of God,
invented a tricke whereby to present to the eare and eye, the ratling and swift shine of both thunder and lightning; that by that means astonishing his subjects, he might be esteemed of them for a god: but it chanced that his house being set on fire by true lightning, and overthrowne with the vio∣lent strength of tempestuous rain, together with the overflowing of a pond that stood neer, he perished by fire and water, burnt and drowned, and all at once. Did not the King of Elide the like, and to the same end also, by the de∣vise of a chart drawne about with foure horses, wherein were certain yron∣works, Diod. lib. 4. which with wrinching about gave an horrible sound resembling thunder, and torches and squibs which hee caused to be throwne about like lightnings, in such sort, that hee oftentimes burnt the beholders: and in this manner he went up and downe braving it, especially over an yron bridge which he had of purpose built to passe and repasse over at his pleasure; untill Gods long suffering could not endure any longer such outragious and presumptuous madnesse, but sent a thunderbolt from hea∣ven upon his head, that all the world might see by his destruction, the ex∣ceeding folly and vaine pride which bewitched him in his life time: which history the Poet in the person of Sibylla, setteth downe to this ef∣fect: I saw Salmon in cruell torments lie, For counterfeiting thunder of the skie, Aenead. 6. And Ioves cleere lightning: whilst with torches bright, Drawne with foure steeds, and brandished his light, He rode triumphantly through Elis streats, And made all Grecia wonder at his feats. Thinking to win the honour of a god, (Mad as he was) by scattering fire abroad. With brazen engines, and with courses faigning, A noyse like that which in the clouds is raigning, And no where else: but God from thickest skie, No torch, but such a thunderbolt let flie At him, that headlong whirld him from his Cell, And tumbled downe into the deepest Hell. Thus this arrogant King was punished according to the quality of his offence, even in the same kinde wherein he offended: which thing though it be found written in a Poet, yet ought not be rejected for an old wives tale, seeing it is not incredible, that a King might make such pastimes and yron-crashing noises, nor that he might be justly punished for the same: and the rather, because Caligula did the like, as we have heard before. And wee read also, that one Arthemesius, in the time of the Emperour Iustinian, coun∣terfeited Agath. lib. 5. el. Gothu. by certain engines and devises, in his owne house in Constantino∣ple, such earthquakes, lightenings, and thunders, that would astonish a wise braine to heare or behold them on a sudden. But above all others that by darkning the glory of God, to increase their own power, have proudly exalted themselves against him, the Popes are the ring-leaders, whose unbridled boldnes hath bin so much the more impudent and pernitious; for that in terming themselves the servants of the servants
of God, in word, in deed, take unto them the authority and power of God himselfe: as of pardoning and absolving sinnes, creating lawes and ordi∣nances at their pleasure, in binding or unbinding mens consciences; which things appertaine to God onely. Nay they have been so brazen-faced, as to command angels and devils, as Clement the fifth did in one of his buls: so impudent as to be carried like Idols upon their vassals shoulders, and weare three crownes upon their heads; so proud and arrogant, as to constraine Kings and Emperours to kisse their feet, to make them their vassals, to usurp lordship and dominion over them, and all their lands and possessions, and to dispossesse whom they like not, of Kingdomes, and install in their roome whom they please; and all this by the thunder of excommunication, whereby they make themselves feared and stood in awe of. By which dea∣ling of theirs, they verifie in themselves that which the Scripture speaketh of Antichrist, which is the man of sinne, the sonne of perdition, an adver∣sary, 2 Thess. 2. 3. and one that exalteth himselfe against all which is called God, or which is worshipped, till he be set as a God in the Temple of God, shewing himselfe that he is God. Wherefore also the heavy vengeance of God is manifest upon them, by the great and horrible punishments they have been tormented with: for some of them have had their eyes pulled out; others have dyed in prisons; a third sort have bin smothered to death; a fourth hath bin killed with the sword; a fifth hath died with hunger; a sixth hath been stoned; a seventh poysoned; and yet there hath not wanted an eighth sort, whom the Devill himselfe hath stifled. This it is to over-reach the clouds, and not content with earthly power, Sabel. Aene∣ad. 9. lib. 7. John le Maire de Besges. Nich. Gyles, of the Chroni∣cles of France. to usurp a supremacy and preheminence over Kings: such was the pride of Pope Boniface the eighth, when he sent an embassage to Philip the Faire, King of France, to command him to take upon him an expedition against the Sarazens beyond the sea, upon paine of forfeiting of his Kingdome in∣to his hands; and when having his sword by his side he shamed not to say, that he alone, and none else, was Emperour and Lord of all the world: in demonstration whereof, he bestowed the Empire upon Duke Albert, toge∣ther with the Crowne of France; and not content herewith, his insolency was so importunate, that he charged Philip the Faire to acknowledge him∣selfe to be his subject in all causes, as well spirituall as temporall, and to levy a subfidy for his holinesse out of his clergy, disabling his authority in bestowing Church livings, which prerogative he challenged to his See: the conclusion of this bull was in these words: Aliud credentes fatuos reputa∣mus; as much to say, as, whosoever is of another mind than this, we esteeme him a foole. Whereunto the King answered in this wise, Philippus Dei, gratia Francorum Rex, Bonifacio se gerenti pro summo pontifice salutem modicam sive nullam. Sciat tua maxima fatuitas, in temporalibus nos alicui non subesse, Eccle∣siarum & Prebendarum vacantium collationem ad nos jure regio pertinere: secus autem credentes fatuos reputamus deviantes. In English thus: Philip by the grace of God King of France, to Boniface bearing himselfe for Pope, little or no health. Be it knowne to thy exceeding great foolishnesse, that we in temperall af∣faires are subject to none, that the bestowing of Benefices belongs to us by our royall right: and if there be any that thinke otherwise, we hold them for erroneous fools. A memorable answer, well beseeming a true royall and French heart. Im∣mediately he assembled together a nationall Councell of all the Barons and Prelates within his dominion, at Paris, wherein Boniface being pro∣nounced
an Hereticke, a Symonist, and a Manslayer, it was agreed upon by a joint consent, that the King should doe no more obeisance, but re∣ject as nothing worth, whatsoever he should impose. Wherefore the King to tame his proud and malitious nature, dispatched secretly two hundred men at armes under the conduct of one Captaine Noguard, towards Avian in Naples (whither his Holinesse was fled for feare of divers whose houses and castles he had caused to be rased downe) there to surprise him on a sud∣den: which stratagem they speedily performed, and carried him prisoner to Rome, where he died most miserably. Peter Mesie a Spanish Gentleman of Sevill, saith in many of his Lectures, that he died in prison inraged with famine. Nicholas Gilles in his first volume of French Chronicles reporteth, that he died in the castle Saint Angelo, through a fluxe of his belly, which cast him into a frenzy, that he gnew off his owne hands, and that at the houre of his death there were heard horrible thunders, and tempests, and lightenings round about: this is he in whose honour this fine Epitaph was made: Intravit ut Vulpes, regnavit ut Leo, mortuus est ut Canis, He entred like Sabel. Aene∣ad. 9. lib. 7. a Fox, raigned like a Lyon, and dyed like a Dog. And this was he that on the first day of Lent giving ashes to the Bishop of Genes, in stead of using the ordinary forme of speech, which is, Memento homo quòd cinis es, & in cinerem converter is, Remember man that thou art ashes, and into ashes thou shalt re∣turne said in despight and mockery, Memento homo quia Gibellinus es, & cum Gibellinis in cinerem converter is: Rember that thou art a Gibelline, and together with the Gibell nes thou shalt be turned into ashes: and in stead of laying the ashes upon his forehead, threw them into his eyes, and forthwith depri∣ved him of his Bishopricke, and would have done worse, if it had been in his power: marke what little account this holy father himselfe made of these ceremonies; and therefore it is no marvell if others mocke at them, seeing the Popes themselves make them but matters of pa∣stime. If it be so therefore, that no man ought to arrogate to himselfe any title of deity, then consequently it is no lesse unlawfull to give that divine ho∣nour to any other mortall creature; and therefore the people of Caesarea faulted greatly, when blasphemously they called King Herod a god, as hath been declared before. Likewise it was high and proud presumption in the Senat of Rome, not to receive any god to their Common-wealth, without their owne fore-approbation and consent. As if that God could not main∣taine his dignity, nor stand without the good liking and assent of men; or as if that man could defie whom he lited, which is a most ridiculous and absurd thing. And thus the Romanes in time of Tiberius consecrating Tertullian Apolog. to themselves a whole legion, even thousands of false gods, would not admit of the true God, and his Sonne Christ, but rejected him above all others. Among all the vanities of the Athenians, this was one worthy noting, how they ordained, that Demetrius, Alexanders successor (for re-establishing their popular and antient liberty) with his father Antigonus, should be called Kings, and honoured with the title of Saving gods, and to have a Priest that should offer sacrifice unto them: and moreover caused their pi∣ctures to be drawne in the same banner where the pictures of Iupiter and Minerva (the protectors of their city) were drawne in broidered worke: but this goodly banner as it was carried about in procession, was rent in
pieces by a tempestuous storme that arose suddenly. God thereby mani∣festing how odious and displeasant both this new and old superstition was in his sight: besides that, doe but consider the laudable vertues that so commended this new god Demetrius, to make them honour him in such sort; they were violence and cruelties, intemperance, with all inordinate lasciviousnesse, villanies, and whoredomes: so that it was no marvell if they had made him a god, being unworthy altogether of humane society. This new found god having gotten a great victory by sea, as he triumphed and braved it with ships after the same, was so shattered with a sudden tempest, that the greatest part of his navy went to wrecke, and afterwards was vanquished by Seleuchus in a battell, wherein his father Antigonus was slaine: and when he thought to returne to Athens, they shut their gates upon him, whom a little before they had canonized for a god: for which cause he raised war against them, and so wearied them with onsets on each side, and so inclosed them both by sea and land, that being brought to ex∣treame famine and necessity, they were compelled to entertain him again, and to behold the horrible outrages of their owne made god, to their griefe and confusion. But not long after, Seleuchus once againe damped his cou∣rage, insomuch that having lived three yeares in a countrey of Syria, like a banished outlaw; for feare to be delivered into his hands, and weary of his owne life, he stuffed himselfe so with food, that he burst in pieces. There∣fore let every man learne by these examples, not to translate the honour and majesty of God to any creature, but to leave it to him alone, who is jealous thereof, and will not (as the Prophet saith) give his glory unto ano∣ther. CHAP. XXIII. Of Epicures, and Atheists. AS touching voluptuous Epicures and cursed Atheists, that deny the providence of God, beleeve not the immortality of the soule, think there is no such thing as life to come, and consequently impugn all divini∣ty, living in this world like bruit beasts and like dogs and swine, wallowing in all sensuality; they doe also strike themselves against this commandement, by going about to wipe out and deface the knowledge of God; and if it were possible, to extinguish his very Essence; wherein they shew themselves more than mad and brutish, whereas notwithstan∣ding all the evident testimonies of the vertue, bounty, wisedome, and eter∣nall power of God, which they dayly see with their eyes, and feele in them∣selves, doe neverthelesse strive to quench his light of nature, which enligh∣teneth and perswadeth them and all Nations of this, There is a God, by whom we live, move, and have our being; who although in his Essence is invi∣sible, Acts 17. 22. yet maketh he himselfe knowne, and as it were seene by his works and creatures, and mighty government of the world, that he that would seeke after him, may (as one might say) handle and feele him. Therefore they
that would perswade themselves that this glorious heaven and massy earth wanted a guider and a governour, have their understanding blinded from fight of things manifest, and their hearts perverted from all shew of reason: for is there any substance in this world that bath no cause of his subsisting? Is there a day without a Sun? Are there fruit and no trees? Plants and no seeds? Can it raine without a cloud? Be a tempest without winde? Can a ship sayle without a Pylot? Or a house be built without a Carpenter or builder? If then every part of this world hath his particu∣lar cause of being and dependance, is it likely that the whole is without cause to be to it a furnishing and government? Say, you hogs and dogs, doe you not beleeve that which you see? or if your eyes be bored out that you cannot see, must you thinke there is no Sunne nor light, because your eyes are in darknesse and blindnesse? Can you behold all the secrets of na∣ture? Is there nothing but a voice, a singing of birds, or an harmonious consort of musicall instruments in the world? And yet who perceiveth these small things? Can you behold the winde? Can you see the sweet smell of fragrant flowers along the fields? Can you see the secrets of your owne bodies, your entrailes, your heart and your braine? And yet you cease not to beleeve that there are such things, except you be heartlesse and brainlesse indeed: Why then doe you measure God by your own sight, and doe not beleeve there is a God, because he is invisible, since that he ma∣nifesteth himselfe more apparently both to understanding and sence, than either voice, smell or winde? Doe not your owne oathes, blasphemies, and horrible cursings beare witnesse against you, when you sweare by, despight and maugre him whom you deny to be? Doth not every thunderclap con∣straine you to tremble at the blast of his voyce? If any calamity approach neere unto or light upon you, or if death be threatned or set before your eyes, doe not you then feele, in spight of all your reason, that the severe judgement of God doth waken up your dull and sleepy conscience to come to his tryall? There was never yet any nation or people so barbarous, which by the perswasion and instinct of nature hath not alwayes beleeved a cer∣taine deity, and to thinke otherwise is not only a derestable thing, but also most absurd, and so contrary to humane reason, that the very Paynims have very little tolerated such horrible blasphemy. The Athenians are witnes∣ses hereof, who banished Protagoras their city and countrey, because in the Cic. of the na∣ture of the gods, lib. 1. beginning of one of his books he called in question the deity, and caused his books to be burned openly. Neither shewed they any lesse severity to∣wards Diagoras, sirnamed the Atheist: when being (as some say) injuri∣ously Diodor. 13. and falsly accused of this crime, and for feare of punishment, fled away, they proclaimed, that whosoever did kill him should have a talent of silver in recompence, which in value is as much as six hundred crowns, after the rate of five and thirty shillings French to the crowne. How much more then is the state of Christendome at this day to be lamented, which we see in many places infected with such a contagious pestilence, that divers men invenomed with this deadly poison, are so mischievous and wretched, as to make roome for Atheisme, by forbidding and hindering by all means possible, the course of the Gospell: wherein they make known what they are, and what zeale they beare to the religion and service of God, and with what affection they are led towards the good and safety of the commonwealth, and what hereafter is to be hoped of him: for where there
is no knowledge nor feare of God, there also is no bridle nor bond to re∣straine and hold men backe from doing evill: whereupon they grow to that passe to be most insolent and prophane. This is the Divinity and goodly instruction that commeth beyond the mountaines, from that scientificall Vniversity and Colledge of the right reverend Masters, and from the ex∣cellent holinesse of some of their Popes: whose manner of life is so dis∣solute, lascivious, dishonest, and Sardanapal like, that thereby their Vide li. 1. c. 20. Lucian, Por∣pyry, ulian, &c. Bale. Atheisme is evidently and notoriously knowne and talked of by every one. Hereof Pope Leo the tenth, a Florentine by birth, may serve for an ex∣ample: who as he was a very effeminate person, given to all manner of de∣lights and pleasure, having no other care but of himselfe, and his owne filthy carkasses ease; so had he no more taste at all, nor feeling of God and his holy Word, than a dog: he made the promises and threats contai∣ned in holy Scripture, and all else that we beleeve, matter to laugh at, and things frivolous and of no weight; mocking at the simplicity, the faith, and beleefe of Christians: for one day when Cardinall Bembus (who also shewed himselfe to be none of the best Christians in the world, by his Ve∣netian history, where as ost as he speaketh of God be useth the plurall number, after the manner of heathen writers) alleadged a place out of the Gospell, his damnable impudency was so great as to reply, That this fable of Christ had brought to him and such as he, no little profit. Oh stinking and cursed throat to belch out such monstrous blasphemy! doe not these speeches bewray a villanous and abhominable Atheist, if ever any were? Is not this to declare himselfe openly to be Antichrist? For he is Anti∣christ which denieth Iesus to be Christ, and which denieth the Father and the Sonne, according as Saint Iohn saith. Albeit in the meane while this cur∣sed 1 Iohn 2▪ 22. caitife, that had as much religion as a dog, made shew to be the prote∣ctor and defender of the Catholicke Faith, making warre with all his po∣wer against Christ Iesus in the person of his servant Luther. Now after he had by his pardons and indulgences drawne out a world of money, and heaped up great treasures by the maintenance of courtizans and whores, and had enriched his bastards, one day being at meat, he received newes of the overthrow of the French in Lombardy, whereat hee rejoyced out of measure, and for that good tidings doubled his good cheare; suddenly he was constrained to turne his copy from joy into sadnesse, from pleasure into griefe and gnashing of teeth, by a most bitter and unlooked for death, which deprived him at once of all his pleasures, to make him drink the cup of Gods fierce wrath, and to throw him downe headlong into everlasting paines and torments which were provided for him. Pope Leo (saith Saint Martin of Belay in his second booke of memorable things) hearing of the great losse which the Frenchmen sustained at Milan, tooke so great joy thereat, that a catarrhe and an ague ensuing, killed him within three dayes after; a happy man indeed to die with joy. Pope Iulius the third was one of the same stampe, nothing inferiour to the former in all manner of dissolute and infamous living, and vile and cur∣sed talke, making knowne by his impiety, that he had none other god but Vide lib. 1. cap. 21. Heresie. his belly, and that he was none of Christs fold, but one of Epicures crew; he was such a glutton, and so passionate in his lusts, and so prophane a de∣spiser of God and his Word, that once at supper being inraged, and blas∣pheming
because they had not served in a cold Peacocke which he com∣manded to be kept whole at dinner, though there were other hot on the table; a Cardinall that was present, desired him not to be so moved for so small a trifle: What (quoth he) if it pleased God to be so angry for eating of an apple, as to thrust Adam and Eve out of paradise, should not I which am his Vicar be angry for a Peacocke, which is far more worth than any apple? See how this wicked wretch prophaned the holy Scripture, and like an Epicure and Atheist mocked God: but he died of the gout, after he had been long plagued with it, together with other diseases, leaving none other good name behind him, save the report of a most wicked and abhomi∣nable man. Philip Strozze, whom Paulus Iovius reporteth to have bin commonly brui∣ted Tm. 2. lib. 36. to be an Atheist, was an Exile of Florence, and afterwards prisoner there in the time of Cosimus Medius, the Prince of that Commonwealth, (against whom this Philip had enterprized to make warre) and being in pri∣son, he killed himselfe with the sword of a Spaniard his keeper, which by oversight he had left behinde, setting the point against his throat, and falling downe upon it: so may all Atheists perish and come to naught. Francis Rabelais having suckt up also this poison, used like a prophane villain, to make all Religion a matter to laugh and mocke at; but God de∣prived him of his sences, that as he had led a brutish life, so he might die a brutish death; for he died mocking all those that talked of God, or made mention of mercy in his eares. How miserable was the end of Periers the author of that detestable book intituled Symbolum mundi, wherein he openly mocked at God and his Reli∣gion, even finally he fell into despaire, and notwithstanding all that guar∣ded him, killed himselfe. Iodelle also a French tragicall Poet, being an Epicure and Atheist, made a very tragicall and most pittifull end; for he died in great misery and di∣stresse, even pined to death, after he had rioted out all his substance, and consumed his patrimony. Ligneroles the Courtier, to make himselfe seeme a man of service, made open profession of Atheisme; but his end and destruction came from thence whence he looked for credit and advance∣ment. To bring the matter to an end, I will here set downe a notable and strange thing that chanced in the raigne of Lewis the ninth (as Enguerran de Monstrelet in his second volume of Histories recordeth it) upon the fif∣teenth day of Iune in the yeare of our Lord God 1464, there happened a strange thing in the Palace at Paris: So it was, that there was a matter in law to be tried betwixt the Bishop of Angiers, and a rich citicen, whom the Bishop charged to have spoken before many witnesses, that he beleeved not that there was either God or Devill, Heaven or Hell. Now whilst the Bishops Lawyer laid to his charge these things, the place began to tremble very much wherein they were, and a stone fell downe from the roof amongst them all, without hurting any; yet every man was sore afraid, and departed out of the house untill the morrow; then the matter was begun againe to be pleaded, which was no sooner in hand, but the chamber began afresh to shake, and one of the summers came forth of his mortisehole, falling down∣wards two foot, and there stayed: so that all that were within the hall loo∣king
to have been slaine outright, ran out so violently, that some left be∣hinde them their caps, others their hoods, others their slippers: summarily, glad was he that could get out first; neither durst they plead any more causes in that place untill it were mended. Thus much reporteth Enguerran, without mention of any decision of that matter. Now forasmuch as no∣thing happeneth by chance, it is most likely that God by that accident would give us to understand, both how monstrous and detestable all such speeches are, as also how men ought to feare and abhorre them, seeing that the dumbe and sencelesse creatures, and wood, beams, planks, and stones, and the earth it self (by nature stedfast and fixed) are so far from enduring them, that they are moved withall. There was a certaine blasphemous wretch, that on a time being with his companions in a common lnne, carowsing and making merry, asked them, Discipulus de temp. srm. 132. if they thought a man was possessed with a soule or no? Whereunto when some replyed, That the soules of men were immortall, and that some of them after release from the body lived in heaven, others in Hell (for so the Writings of the Prophets and Apostles instructed them) hee answered and swore, that he thought it nothing so; but rather that there was no soule in man to survive the body, but that heaven and hell were meere fables, and inventions of Priests to get gaine by; and for himselfe, he was ready to sell his soule to any that would buy it: then one of his companions tooke up a cup of wine and said, Sell me thy soule for this cup of wine: Which he receiving, bad him take his soule; and dranke up the wine. Now Satan himselfe was there in a mans shape (as commonly he is never far from such meetings) and bought it againe of the other at the same price, and by and by bad him give him his soule; the whole company affirming it was meet he should have it, since he had bought it, not perceiving the Devill: but presently he laying hold of this souleseller, carried him into the aire before them all, toward his own habitation, to the great astonishment and amase∣ment of the beholders; and from that day to this he was never heard of, but tryed to his pain that men had soules, and that hell was no fable, according to his godlesse and prophane opinion. Pherecides (by birth a Syrian, a tragicall Poet and a Philosopher by pro∣fession) Aelianus de Var. bist. l. 4. boasted impudently against his schollers of his prosperity, learning and wisedome; saying, that although he offered no sacrifices unto the gods, yet he led a more quiet and prosperous life, than those that were ad∣dicted to Religion, and therefore he passed not for any such vanity. But ere long his impiety was justly revenged; for the Lord struck him with such a strange disease, that out of his body issued such a slimy and filthy sweat, and engendred such a number of lice and wormes, that his bowels being consumed by them, he died most miserably. At Hambourgh not long since there lived an impious wretch, that despi∣sed Theatr. histor. the preaching of the Gospell, and the Ministers thereof, accounting it as a vaine thing not worthy the beleeving of any man: neither did he thus himself only; but also seduced many others, bringing them all to Atheisme and ungodlinesse. Wherefore the Lord justly recompenced him for his impiety: for he that before had no sence nor feeling of God in his consci∣ence, being touched with the finger of the Almighty, grew to the con∣trary, even to too much feeling and knowledge of God, that he fell into extreme despaire, affirming now his sinnes to be past forgivenesse, because
he had withdrawne others from the truth, as well as himselfe, whereas be∣fore he thought himselfe guilty of no sinne; and that God was so just, that he would not forgive him, whereas before he thought there was no God (so mighty is the operation of the Lord when he pleaseth to touch the conscience of man) finally, continuing in this desperate case, he threw himselfe from the roofe of a house into a well, and not finding water enough to drowne him, he thrust his head into the bottome thereof, till he had made an end of his life. In the yeare of our Lord 1502 there lived one Hermannus Biswicke, a Theatr. histor. grand Atheist, and a notable instrument of Satan, who affirmed, that the world never had beginning, as foolish Moses dreamed: and that there was neither Angels, nor devils, nor hell, nor future life, but that the soules of men perished with their bodies: besides, that Christ Iesus was nothing else but a seducer of the people; and that the faith of Christians, and what∣soever else is contained in holy writs, was meere vanity. These articles full of impiety and blasphemy, he constantly avouched to the death; and for the same cause was together with his books burnt in Holland. A certaine rich man at Holberstadium abounding with all manner of earthly commodities, gave himselfe so much to his pleasure, that he be∣came Theatr. histor. besotted therewith; in such sort, that he made no reckoning of Reli∣gion, nor any good thing, but dared to say, that if he might lead such a life continually upon earth, he would not envy heaven, nor desire any ex∣change. Notwithstanding ere long (contrary to his expectation) the Lord cut him off by death, and so his desired pleasure came to an end: but after his death there appeared such diabolicall apparitions in his house, that no man daring to inhabite it, it became desolate: for every day there appeared the Image of this Epicure sitting at a board, with a number of his ghests, drinking, carousing, and making good cheare; and his table furnished with delicates, and attended on by many that ministred necessaries unto them, beside with minstrels, trumpetters, and such like. In summe, what∣soever he delighted in, in his life time, was there to be seene every day. The Lord permitting Satan to bleare mens eyes with such strange shewes, to the end that others might be terrified from such Epicurisme and impiety. Not inferior to any of the former in Atheisme and impiety, and equall to all in manner of punishment, was one of our owne nation, of fresh and late memory, called Marlin, by profession a scholler, brought up from his Marlw. youth in the Vniversity of Cambridge, but by practise a Play-maker, and a Poet of scurrility, who by giving too large a swing to his owne wit, and suffering his lust to have the full reines, fell (not without just desert) to that great outrage and extremity, that he denied God, and his sonne Christ, and not onely in word blasphemed the Trinity, but also (as it is credibly reported) wrote books against it, affirming our Saviour to be but a decei∣ver, and Moses to be but a seducer of the people, and the holy Bible to be but vaine and idle stories, and all Religion but a device of policy. But see what a hooke the Lord put in the nostrils of this barking dogge: so it fell out, that as he purposed to stab one whom he ought a grudge unto, with his dagger, the other party perceiving, so avoyded the stroke, that withall catching hold of his wrest, he stabbed his owne dagger into his own head; in such sort, that notwithstanding all the means of surgery that could be wrought, he shortly after died thereof: the manner of his death being so
terrible (for he even cursed and blasphemed to his last gaspe, and together with his breath an oath flew out of his mouth) that it was not onely a ma∣nifest signe of Gods judgement, but also an horrible and fearefull terrour to all that beheld him. But herein did the justice of God most notably ap∣peare, in that he compelled his own hand which had written those blasphe∣mies, to be the instrument to punish him, and that in his braine, which had devised the same. Another also of our owne nation is not to be overpassed, who for an Atheist and an Epicure might compare with any of the former, and for the judgement of God upon him doth give place to none. It was a gentleman of Barkshire, whose name I forbeare to expresse, a man of great possessions. This man was an open contemner of God and all Religion, a profest Atheist, and a scorner of the Word of God and Sacraments; insomuch, as I have heard reported of very credible persons, being a witnesse at the bap∣tising of a childe, he would needs have it called Beelzebub. Besides this, he was given over to all sensuality of the flesh, keeping in his house continu∣ally notorious strumpets, and that openly without shame: his mouth was so accustomed to swearing, that he could scarse speake without an oath. This miserable man, or rather beast, having continued long in this damna∣ble course of life, at last Gods heavy vengeance found him out: for upon a certain day riding abroad a hunting with another companion, as they were discoursing of many vaine matters, it pleased Almighty God of a sudden to strike him with sudden death: for falling suddenly to the crupper of his horse backward, he was taken downe starke dead, with his tongue hanging out of his mouth after a fearfull manner, and became a terrible example to all wicked Atheists, of Gods justice. Hither I might adde the examples of others, who having been in high places of favour in former times, are fallen like Lucifer from their heaven, that is, their worldly felicity, and live like him in chaines of imprison∣ments. These had wont (being in their bravery) to mocke at all Religion, and to make themselves merry with scoffing at the holy Scripture, but the Lord hath brought them downe, and plucked the feathers of their pride, to teach them to know there is a God, and that Religion is no matter of po∣licy, but Gods owne ordinance, to bring men to blessednesse; and let them be assured, if they repent not, the Lord will yet further execute his venge∣ance upon them, and make them more manifest spectacles of his justice. Many more moderne and home-bred examples I could adde; of some that were hanged, some that died desperate, some that were deprived of their senses, having been notorious Atheists and Epicures in their lives; but I hope these already named are sufficient to prove, that the Lord of heaven observeth the wayes of men, and rewardeth every man according to his works, especially such as strive to deny his Essence-or his sonne Christ. I would to God (and I pray it from my heart) that all Atheists in this Realme, and in the world beside, would by the remembrance and con∣sideration of these examples either forsake their horrible impiety, or that they might in like manner come to destruction; and so that abominable sin which so flourisheth amongst men of greatest name, might either be quite extinguished and rooted out, or at least smothered and kept under, that i durst not shew it head any more in the worlds eye.
CHAP XXII. Touching the transgressors of the second Comman∣dement, by Idolatry. WE have hitherto seene how and in what sort they, that ei∣ther by malice, or impiety, or Apostasie, or heresie, or otherwise have transgressed the first Commandement have been punished: Let us now consider the judge∣ments that have befallen Idolaters, the breakers of the second Commandement. But before we proceed, wee must know, that as it is required of us by the first Com∣mandement, to hold God for our true and onely God, to repose all our whole trust and confidence in him, and call upon him, serve and worship him alone; so in the second to this the contrary to this is forbidden; which is, to doe any manner of service, honour, and reverence by devotion to Idols, forasmuch he is a Spirit (that is to say, of a spirituall nature and Essence, which is infinite and incomprehensible) so loveth he a spirituall Iohn 4. worship and service, which is answerable to his nature, and not by Images and pictures, and such other outward and corruptible means, which he hath in no wise commanded: wherefore Isaiah the Prophet reproving the folly and vanity of Idolaters, saith, To whom will you liken God, or what similitude will you set up unto him: Therefore if it be not Gods will, that under pre∣tence and colour of his owne name, any Image or picture should be adored (being a thing not only inconvenient, but also absurd and unseemly) much lesse can hee abide to have them worshipped under the name and title of any creature whatsoever. And for this cause gave he the second Comman∣dement, Thou shalt not make to thy selfe any graven Image &c. which prohibi∣tion Chap. 40. 18. the Israelites brake in the desart, when they set up a golden calfe, and bowed themselves before it after the manner of the Paynims, giving it the honour which was onely due to God: whereby they incurred the indigna∣tion of Almighty God, who is strong and jealous of suffeing any such slander to be done unto his name: wherefore he caused the thousand of them to be stroken and wounded to death by the hand of the Levites, at the commandement of Moses, to make his anger against Idolatry more Exod. 32. manifest, by causing them to be executioners of his revenge, who were ordained for the ministry of his Church, and the service of the Altar and Tabernacle. Howbeit for all this, the same people not long after, fell back into the same sin, and bowed themselves befere strange gods, and through the allurements of the daughters of Moab, joyned themselves to Belphegor: Numb. 27. for which cause the Lord being insenced, stroke them with so grievous a plague, that there died of them in one day about twenty and foure thou∣sand persons. And albeit that after all this, being brought by him into the land of promise, he had forbidden and threatned them, for cleaving to the Idols of the nations, whose land they possessed, yet were they so prone to Idolatry, that notwithstanding all this, they fell to serve Baal and Astaroth: wherefore the fire of Gods wrath was inflamed against them, and he gave them over
to be a spoyle and prey unto their enemies on every side, so that for many yeares, sometimes the Moabites oppressed them, otherwhiles the Madia∣nites, and ever after the death of any of their Iudges and Rulers which God raised up for their deliverance, some grievous punishment befell them: for then (being without law or government) every man did that which seemed good in his owne eyes, and so turned aside from the right way. Now albeit these examples may seeme to have some affinity with Apo∣stasie, yet because the ignorance and rudenesse of the people was rather the cause of their falling away from God, than any wilfull affection that raig∣ned in them, therefore we place them in this ranke, as well as they have bin alwaies brought up and nuzled in Idolatry. One of this cw was Ochosias King of Iuda, sonne of Ioram, who having 2 Chron 22. before him an evill president of his wicked father, and a worse instruction and bringing up of his mother Athaliah, who together with the house of Achab pricked him forward to evill, joyned himselfe to them and to their Idols, and for that cause was wrapped in the same punishment and destru∣ction with Ioram the King of Israel, whom Iehu slew together with the Princes of Iuda, and many of his neere kinsmen. And to be short, Idolatry hath been the decay and ruine of the king∣dome of Iuda, as at all other times, so especially under Ioachas sonne of Io∣sias, 2 Kings 23. that raigned not above three moneths in Ierusalem, before he was ta∣ken and led captive into Aegypt by the King thereof, and there died: from which time the whole land became tributary to the King of Aegypt. And not long after, it was utterly destroyed by the forces of Nabuchad∣nezzar King of Babel, that came against Ierusalem and tooke it, and carried 2 Kings 24. 25 King Ioachim with his mother, his Princes, his servants, and the treasurers of the Temple, and his owne house, into Babylon; and finally tooke Ze∣dechias that fled away, and before his eyes caused his sonnes to be slaine: which as soone as he had beheld, commanded them also to be pulled out, and so binding him in chaines of yron, carried him prisoner to Babylon; putting all the Princes of Iudah to the sword, consuming with fire the Temple, with the Kings Palace, and all the goodly buildings of Ierusa∣lem. And thus the whole kingdome (though by an especiall prerogative, consecrated and ordained of God himselfe) ceased to be a kingdome, and came to such an end, that it was never re-established by God: it is no mar∣vell then if the like hapned to the kingdome of Israel, which was after a sort begun and confirmed by the filthy idolatry of Ieroboams calves, which as his successors maintained or favoured more or lesse, so were they expo∣sed U idel. 1. c. 19 to more or lesse plagues and incumbrances. Nadab, Ieroboams sonne, being nuzled and nurtured up in Idoll worship, 1 Kings 15. 27 after the example of his father, received a condigne punishment for his iniquity: for Baasa the sonne of Ahijah put both him and all the off spring of Ieroboams house to the sword, and raigned in his stead: who also being no whit better than those whom he had slaine, was punished in the person of Ela his sonne, whom Zambri also his servant slew. And this againe usur∣ping the crowne, enjoyed it but seven dayes, at the end whereof (seeing himselfe in danger in the city of Tirza, taken by Amri, whom the people had chosen for their King) went into the palace of the Kings house, and bur∣ned himselfe. As for Achab, he multiplied Idolatry in Israel, and committed more wic∣kednesse
than all his predecessors, wherefore the wrath of God was stret∣ched out against him and his; for he himselfe was wounded to death in battell by the Syrians, his son Ioram slain by Iehu, and threescore and ten of his children put to death in Samaria by their governors and chiefe of the city, sending their heads in baskets to Iehu. Above all, a most notable and manifest example of Gods judgement was seene in the death of Iezabel his wife, that had been his spurre and pro∣voker to all mischiefe, when by her Eunuchs and most trusty servants, at the commandement of Iehu, she was throwne downe out of a window, and trampled under the horse feet, and last of all devoured of dogs. Moreover, the greatest number of the kings of Israel that succeeded him, were mur∣thered one after another: so that the kingdome fell to such a low decline, that it became first tributary to the King of Assyria, and afterward invaded and subverted by him, and the inhabitants transported into his land, whence they never returned, but remained scattered here and there like vagabonds, and all for their abhominable Idolatry. Which ought to be a lesson to all people, Princes, and Kings, that seeing that God spared not these two Realmes of Iuda and Israel, but destroyed and rooted them out from the earth, much lesse will he spare any other kingdome and Monarchy which continue by their Images and Idol-worship, to stirre up his indignation against them. CHAP. XXV. Of many evils that have come upon Christendome for Idolatry. IF we consider and search out the cause of the ruine of the East Empire, and of so many famous and flouri∣shing Churches as were before time in the greatest part of Europe, and namely in Greece, we shall finde that Idolatry hath been the cause of all: for even as it got footing and increase in their dominions, so equal∣ly did the power of Saracens and Turkish tyranny take root and foundation among them, and prospered so well, that the rest of the world trembled at the report thereof; God ha∣ving raised and fortified them, as before time he had done the Assyrians and Babylonians, as whips and scourges to chasten the people and Nations of the world that wickedly had abused his holy Gospel, and bearing the name of Christians, had become Idolaters: for no other name than this can be given them, that in devotion doe any manner of homage to Images and pictures, whatsoever may superficially be alleadged to the contrary. For be it the Image either of Prophet, Apostle, or Christ Iesus himselfe, yet it is necessary that the law of God stand whole and sound, which saith, Thou shalt make thy selfe no graven Image, nor any likenesse of things either in heaven above, or in earth beneath, thou shalt not how downe to them, nor worship them, &c. Wherefore he performed the part of a good Bishop, that finding a vaile spread in the entrance of a Church dore, wherein the Image of Epiphan. John Bishop of Ierusalem. Christ or of some other Saint was pictured, rent it in pieces, with these
words, That it was against the authority of the sacred Scriptures, to have any Image of Christ set up in the Church. After the same manner, Serenus Bishop of Marscilla, beat downe and banished all Images out of his Churches, as occasions of Idolatry: and to shun them the more, it was ordained in the Elibertine Councell, that no Image nor picture should be set up in any Church: for which cause also the Emperour Leo the third, by an open Edict commanded his subjects to cast out of their Temples all pictures Paul. Diacon. lib. 6. cap. 14. and statues of Saints, Angels, and whatsoever else, to the intent that all oc∣casions of Idolatry might be taken away: yea and he burned some, and pu∣nished divers otherwise, that in this regard were not pliant, but disobedient to his commandement. After which time, when Images were recalled into Greece and into Constantinople (the chiefe city and seat of the East Em∣pire) it came to passe by a great and dreadfull (yet just) judgement of God, that this famous and renowned city, in the worlds eye impregnable, after long siege, and great and furious assaults) was at length taken by the Turks, who having won the breach, and entred with fury, drove the poore Empe∣rour Palaeologus (even till then fighting for the cities defence) to that extre∣mity, that in retyring among the prease of his own souldiers, he was thron∣ged and trampled to death; and his slain body being found, was beheaded, and his head contemptuously caried about the city upon a launce. Now af∣ter the massacre of many thousand men, to make up a compleat, & absolute cruelty, they drew the Empresse with her daughters and many other ladies and gentlewomen to a banquet, where after many vile and horrible wrongs and disgraces, they killed and tore them in pieces in most monstrous man∣ner. In all which, the execution of Gods most just wrath for Idolatry did most lively appeare: which sinne, accompanied with many other execrable and vile vices, must needs draw after it a grievous and terrible punishment, to serve for example to others that were to come: neither was it a thing by chance, or hap-hazzard, that the Christians were made a mocking stock to them in that wofull day, when in their bloudy triumphs they caused a Crucifix to be carried through the streets in contempt, and throwing durt upon it, cried in their Language, This is the gallant god of Christians. And thus did God license and permit these savage Turks to commit every day grievous outrages, and to make great wasts and desolations in all Chri∣stendome, till that they grew so mighty, that it is to be feared lest the say∣ing Lactant. lib. 1. Institut. ca. 15. of Lactantius touching the returne of the Empire into Asia, be not ve∣rified and accomplished very shortly, if there be no amendment practised: for we see by wofull experience, that almost all the forces which Christian Princes have mustered from all quarters, in pretence to resist their fury and rage, have not only been bootlesse and unprofitable, but also that which is worse, given them further occasion by their bloudy victories, and wonder∣full slaughter of so many millions of men, to make them more obstinate in their detestable Mahometisme & Turkish Religion than they were before: for they make their boasts thereof, and reare up trophies of their cruel∣ties, taking no more pitty of the vanquished, than the Butcher doth of a Sheep allotted to the slaughter. Whereof we have a pittifull example in the overthrow of the French army, which Iohn the sonne of Philip Duke of Burgondy led against the Turke Bajazet, and by the treachery and cowar∣dise of the Hungarians, who in the time of battell turned their backs and fled, was overcome: in that this wicked and cruell Tygre expresly charged,
That all the prisoners (in number many) should be murthered one after another, which was readily executed before his eyes; so that saving the chiefe Captaines and certaine few Lords of the company, that were spared in respect of great ransomes, there escaped not one alive. Besides these generall calamities, the Lord hath particularly shewne forth his indignation against private persons and places for Idolatry: as in Spoletium at one time there perished by an earthquake three hundred and Cent. 4. cap. 3. fifty, whilest they were offering sacrifice unto Idols. At Rome under the Empire of Alexander Severus, after that the left hand of the Image of Iu∣piter Cent. 3. cap. 14. was miraculously melted, the Priests going about to pacifie the an∣ger of their gods with Lectisterns and sacrifices, foure of them together with the Altar and Idoll were stricken in pieces with a thunderbolt, and suddenly such a terrible darknesse overspread all the city, that most of the inhabitants ran out into the fields all amased. Moreover, did not the Lord send lightning from heaven to inflame that notorious Temple of Idolatry, of Apollo, or rather the Devill of Delphos, in the time of Iulian the wic∣ked Theodor. lib: 3. cap. 9. & 10. Apostate, whilest he was exercising tortures upon one Theodorus a Christian, and did it not consume the Image of Apollo to ashes? The fa∣mous and rich Temple of Iupiter at Apamea, how strangely did it come to ruine and destruction? For when the President and Tribunes (who had in Nicephorus lib. 12. c. 27. charge to destroy it) thought it a thing almost unpossible, by reason of the strength of the wals, and matter of it; Marcellus the Bishop undertook the labour, and found out a man that promised to shake and root up the foun∣dation of it by fire; but when he had put it in practise, a blacke Devill ap∣peared and hindred the naturall operation of the fire: which when Marcel∣lus perceived, he by earnest and zealous prayer drove away the Devill, and so the fire rekindled and consumed it to nothing. In all which examples we may see the wonderfull indignation of God against Idoll-worshippers when by such strange and extraordinary means he bringeth them to destru∣ction. And this doubtlesse is no new course, for even since the beginning of the world (if we consult Histories) we shall finde, that well nigh all the kingdomes, places, persons, and countries that have been any wise infected with this sinne, have still come to some ruine or other, and to some great overthrow, and their Idolatry suppressed by some notable and strange ac∣cident. Whereof Saint Hierome may be a witnesse, who affirmeth, That when Iesus being a childe was carried into Aegypt for feare of Herod, all the Idols of Aegypt fell downe, and all their miracles became mute, which the Prophet Isaias foreseeing, saith, Behold, the Lord rideth upon a swift cloud. Isay 19. 1. and shall come into Aegypt, and the Idols of Aegypt shall melt in the midst of her. Besides, the generall silence of the Devill in his Oracles throughout the world presently upon Christs Incarnation, is a thing known and confessed of all men. Notwithstanding all which, the holy Pope will still maintain his Idolatry, albeit the Lord hath made manifest tokens of his indigna∣tion against it. As appeareth by that which happened in the yeare 1451, being the Popes Iubile, when such a concourse of people was made from all quarters of the world to honour that superstitious day: for the people being upon Adrians bridge, were so thrust together, that two hundred men and three horses lost their lives, being trampled upon and stifled to death: many fell into the water over the bridge, and so perished; of whom an hun∣dred and thirty were buried at Saint Celsus. And these are the fruits of
their Indulgences, which are too much bought and sought for, and of their Iubilies, proceeding from the Bishop of Rome his impious and sa∣crilegious zeale. Now to eschew these and such like misfortunes; the true and onely meanes is, an unfained diversion from all Idolatry and Su∣perstition, and whatsoever else contrarieth the pure service of God, and a conversation unto him, to serve him in spirit and truth, as the Scripture ex∣horteth. CHAP. XXVI. Of those that at any time corrupted and mingled Gods Religion with humane inventions, or went about to change or dis∣quiet the discipline of the Church. NOw seeing that God hath set downe a certaine forme of doctrine and instruction, according to which hee would have us to serve him, and established a kinde of discipline to be observed and maintained of every man inviolably, it behoveth therefore every Christian to conforme himselfe unto this order; and not to be guided by every fickle imagination of his own braine, or every rash presumption that ariseth in himselfe, but onely by the direct rule of Gods Word, which onely we ought to follow. By meanes of neg∣lecting which duty, many vaine and pernitious ceremonies and strange superstitions have beene brought in and swayed mightily: by reason whereof great Controversies and Disputations are taken up at this day. Albeit indeed it be a thing manifest, that being not grounded and prop∣ped upon the Anchor of the Scriptures, they ought to be abolished, what brave outward shew in appearance soever they beare. And that they set abroach things are not blamelesse and excusable be∣fore God, it appeareth by the punishment of Nadab and Abihu, who being Levit 20. Numb 34. ordained Priests of God, to sacrifice and offer onely those things which were commanded in the Law, yet were so evill advised as to offer strange incense and perfume upon the Altar, received at the very instant of the fact condigne punishment for their presumption: for suddenly this their strange fire invaded them so fiercely, and so piercingly, that they were soon burned and consumed therewith: and so they were not spared, albeit they were Aarons sonnes, even his first borne, and Moses Nephewes; that by them all other might feare and take warning how to enterprise any thing in Gods service contrary to his expresse Ordinance. This moderation also ought to be observed in the Church Discipline, to wit, that every man containe himselfe within the Precincts of his voca∣tion, and that none intrude themselves into any charge without being cal∣led of God thereunto: whereof Corah greatly faulted, when being not Numb. 16. content with the dignity of a Levites office which God had bestowed up∣on him, he ambitiously aspired to the Priests office, and besides this stirred up and drew to his faction Dathan and Abiram, and many others, to the
number of two hundred and fifty persons, against Moses and Aaron: but he drew withall the vengeance of God downe upon himselfe and all that tooke his part in most horrible and fearefull manner: for some of them, to wit, the two hundred and fifty, who, notwithstanding Moses reproose, were so hardy and presumptuous as to present themselves the next morrow after the tumult, openly before the Tabernacle, to offer Incense, as if they had beene true Priests, were for their flame of Ambition and Pride, set on fire and consumed with the flame of Gods wrath: others, to wit, Dathan and Abiram, for their audacious enterprise against God, in the person of his servants, Moses and Aaron, and their high mindednesse and rebellion, in not comming out of their Tents at the commandment of Moses, were throwne downe into the lowest pit, the earth opening her mouth, and swal∣lowing them up alive with their Tents and Families, and all that belonged unto them, to the fearefull amasement of the whole people, that were be∣holders of this Spectacle. Oziah King of Iuda, carried himselfe a long while uprightly and mo∣destly 2 Chron. 26. in the service of God: but after God had given him many great victories over his enemies the Philistims, the Arabians, the Amorites, and that his renowne and feare was spread not onely to his neighbours, but al∣so to strange nations, by and by his heart was puft up with pride and selfe∣conceit, that he dared to enter the Temple of God, and burne Incense up∣on the Altar, which belonged onely to the Priests office to doe: and not obeying the strong resistance and countermand of the good Priests that had charge of the Temple, he was strucken with a Leprosie, and hastily carried out and sequestred from the society of men all his life time. And so this proud King that foolishly tooke upon him more than was lawfull and convenient, was forced to recoile, and to be still, being humbled under so grievous a scourge as never for sooke him till his death. When the Arke of the Covenant was in bringing from Abinadabs house 1 Sam. 6: 1 Chron. 13. in Kyriathjarim, in a Cart guided by Vzza and Ahio, Abinadabs sonnes, it fell out on the way, that it being shaken by the Oxen, (unfit Servitors for such a worke) Vzza put forth his hand to hold it; but therein hee went beyond his charge, and therefore was punished forthwith with present death, for his inconsiderate rashnesse: for albeit he was both a Levite, and thought no evill in his heart, yet in no respect was be licenced to touch the Arke, being a thing lawfull for the Priests onely. Let therefore every one be advised by these Examples, to follow the rule in serving God, that is by him designed, in all simplicity, modestie, and obedience, without altering or declining, or undertaking any thing above or beside their calling.
CHAP. XXVII. Of Perjuries. THe third Commandement (which is, Thou shalt not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vaine) is first and especially broken by Perjury, when God is so lightly esteemed, nay, so despised, that without any regard had to his Name, that is to say, to his Greatnesse, Majesty, Power, Divine vertue, and fearefull Iustice, (for these bee his names) men by fraud and ma∣lice abuse their Oathes, either in denying that which is true, or affirming that which is untrue, or neglecting their promises made and vowed to others: for this is neither to have respect unto his presence, who is every where, nor reverence to his Majestie, who is God of Heaven and Earth, but rather to make him beare witnesse to our lye and falshood; as if he approved it, or had no power to revenge the injury and dishonour done to him. And therefore against such, in threatning words he denoun∣ceth judgement, that He will not hold him guiltlesse that taketh his Name in vaine. Howbeit very many over-boldly give themselves over to this sinne, making little or no conscience to cousen one another even by forswear∣ings: whereby they give most cleare evidence against themselves, that they have very little feare of God before their eyes, and are not guided by any other rule save of their owne affections by which they square out and build their oathes, and pull them done againe at their pleasures; for let it be a matter of vantage, and then they will keepe them, but straightway if a contrary perswasion come in their braine, they will cancell them by and by: wherein they deale farre worse and more injuriously with God, than with their knowne enemies; for he that contrary to his sworne faith de∣ceiveth his enemy, declareth that therein he feareth him, but feareth not God; and careth for him, but contemneth God. It was therefore not without good reason that all antiquity ever marked them with the coat of infamy that forswore themselves. And thereupon it is that Homer so of∣ten taunteth the Trojans by reason of their so usuall Perjuries. The Egyp∣tians Diod. l. 2. c. 2. had them in detestation as prophane persons, and reputed it so Ca∣pitall a crime, that whosoever was convinced thereof was punished by death. The ancient Romanes reverenced nothing more then faith in pub∣like affaires, for which cause they had in their Citie a Temple dedicated to it: wherein for a more strait bond they used solemnely to promise and sweare to all the conditions of Peace, Truces, and Bargaines, which they made, and to curse those which went about first to breake them: for grea∣ter solemnity and confirmation hereof, they were accustomed at those times to offer sacrifices to the image of faith for more reverence sake. Hence it was that Attilius Regulus, chiefe Captaine of the Romane Army against the Carthaginians, was so highly commended of all men, because when he was overcome and taken prisoner, and sent to Rome, he onely for his oathes sake which he had sworne, returned againe to the enemy, albeit hee knew what grievous torments were provided for him at his returne.
Others also that came with him, though they were intreated, and by their Parents, Wives, and Allies, instantly urged not to returne to Hannibals Campe, could in no wise be moved thereunto: but because they had sworne to the enemie, if the Romans did not accord to those conditions which were offered, to come againe, they preferred the bond and reve∣rence of their promised faith, though accompanied with perpetuall capti∣vity, before their private commodities, and neerest linke of affection. But two of these ten (for so many were they) falsified their oath, and whatso∣ever mist they might cast to darken and disguise their Perjury with, yet were they condemned of all men for cowards, and faint-hearted Traytors: insomuch that the Censors also nored them with infamy for the fact; whereat they tooke such griefe and inward sorrow, that being weary of their lives, they slew themselves. Now what can they pretend that pro∣fesse themselves Christians and Catholickes, to excuse their Perjuries, see∣ing that the very Heathen cry out so loud and cleere, That an oath and Cic. offic. lib. 1. faith is so sacredly to be kept towards our enemies? This is one of the greatest vertues and commendations which the Psalmist attributeth to the faithfull man, & him that feareth God, and whom God avoucheth for his owne, Not to falsifie his oath that he sweareth, though it be to his dammage. The Psal. 15. Iosh 9. Gibeonites although they were so execrable a people, that for their great and horrible wickednesses and ahominations they might be well esteemed for Hereticks, yet the Princes of Israel, after they had sworne and given their faith unto them, would in no wise retract or goe against their oath, albeit, therein they were deceived by them, for feare of incurring the wrath of God, that suffereth not a Perjurer to goe unpunished. Vpon what ground or example of holy Scripture then may that Doctrine of the Councell of Constance be founded, the purport whereof is, That a man ought not to keepe his faith with Hereticks? I omit to speake how these good Fathers (by Hereticks) meant those men who fearing God, relyed themselves upon his Word, and rejected the foolish and superstitious in∣ventions of men. And under what colour can the Popes usurpe this Au∣thority, to quit and discharge subjects of their oath wherewith they are bound to their Superiors? yet this was the impious audacity of Pope Zacharia, Pope Boniface the 8, and Pope Benedict de la Lune, who freed the Frenchmen from their duty and obedience which they ought unto their Platina. Kings. In like manner disgorged Gregory the 7 his choler and spight against the Emperour Henry, by forbidding his Subjects to be his Subjects, Enguerran de Monstrelet. and to yeeld that obedience unto him which Subjects were bound to doe. How be it if an oath be made either against God, or to the damage and hurt of our neighbour (it being for that cause unlawfull) it behoveth us to know that we ought to revoke it, lest wee fall into the sinne of Saul and 1 Sam. 14. Marc. 6. Herod. Now what punishments God hath laid upon Perjuries, these Ex∣amples that follow shall make known unto us. Osee the last King of Israel, being made (by Gods just judgement for his sinnes) subject and tributa∣ry to Salmanazar King of Ashur, without regard to the bond wherewith 2 Kings 17. he was bound, and to his faith which he had plighted, conspired and ente∣red league with the King of Aegypt, against him: but he discovering their seditious and privie conspiracies, assembled his forces, spoyled his coun∣trey, and bad them warre on all sides; laying fiege to the chiefe Citie of
his Kingdome, after three yeeres tooke it, together with the forsworne King, whom he put in close prison, and kept very straightly, leading him and his whole Nation captive into Syria, to end their dayes in misery: of which evill, as of all others that happened in that warre, the disloyalty and Treason of Osee was the next and chiefest cause. Among the bed-roll of sinnes which Zedechias the last King of Iuda is noted withall in holy Scripture, Perjury is one of the count: for notwith∣standing he received his Kingdome of Nabuchadnezzar, and had sworne 2 Chron. 36. fealty to him, as to his Soveraigne, yet brake he his oath in rebelling against him; which was the very cause of his destruction: for Nebuchadnez∣zar to be revenged on his disloyalty, sent a puissant Armie against Ierusa∣lem, which took, spoyled, and burnt it, and overtooke the Perjurer in his flight, and first made him a beholder of the slaughter of his owne children, and then had his owne eyes bored out, and was carried in chaines to Baby∣lon, serving for a spectacle to all posteritie, of Gods wondrous judgements upon Perjurers. And thus both the Kingdomes of Israel and Iuda were for breach and falsifying their Oath quite extinguished and ra∣sed out. The great deceiver and most treacherous person, one of them, that ever Plutarch. Greece saw, was Lisander the Lacedemonian, a busie-body, full of cunning, subtilty, and craft, and one that performed the most of his acts of Warre, more by fraud and stratagems, than by any other meanes: this was he that said, That when the Lions skinne (meaning Fortitude) would not serve, it was needfull then to sow unto it the Foxes case (meaning subtilty) he made so little reckoning of forswearing himselfe, that he would often say, That children were to be cousened with trifles, as Dice and Cockles, and old men with Oathes: but with deceitfull tricks he was occasion of much evill, and divers murders: but at last this Foxe making warre against the Thebans, for that they had taken part with the Athenians against him, and given them succour and meanes for recovering their liberty, was taken in the trap, and slaine at the foot of their walls. Metius Suffetius, Generall of the Albanes, procured the Fidenates to en∣ter Livie. warre against the Romanes, contrary to his oath which he had sworne unto them, and being called by the Romanes to their succour, and placed in an out Wing to helpe if need were, whilest the rest were fighting, hee drove away the time in ordering his men, and ranging them into squa∣drons, to see which part should have the best, that he might joyne himselfe unto that side. But Tullus the Roman King having obtained the victory, and seeing the cowardise, subtilty, and treason of this Albane, adjudged him to a most strange and vile death, answerable to his fact: for as he had in his body a double heart swimming between two streames, and now rea∣dy to goe this way, now that, so was his body dismembred and torne in pieces by foure horses, drawing foure contrary wayes: to serve for an ex∣ample to all others to be more fearefull and true observers of their oathes than he was. In old time the Africans and Carthagenians were generally noted for perfidy and falshood above other Nations; the cause of which bruit was principally that old subtile Souldier Annibal, an old deceiver, and a noto∣rious Perjurer, who by his crafts and cousenings which he wrought with∣out Liv. Decad. 3. lib. 1. Religion or feare of God, raised up the evill report. This subtile Foxe
having made warre in Italy sixteen yeeres, and all that while troubled and vexed the Romanes sore, after many victories, wastings of Countries, ruines, and sackings of Cities, and cruell bloodshed, was at length over∣come by Scipio in his owne Conntrey; and perceiving that his Country∣men imputed the cause of their fall unto him, and sought to make him odious to the Romanes, by laying to his charge the breach of that league which was betwixt them, he fled to Antiochus King of Syria, not so much for his owne safeties fake, as to continue his warre against the Romanes, which he knew Antiochus to be in hammering, because they came so neere unto his Frontiers: but he found his hope frustrate; for King Antiochus, for the small trust he affied in him, and the daily suspition of his treachery, would not commit any charge of his Armie into his hand, although for valiantnesse and prowesse he was second to none of that Age. It came to passe therefore, that as soone as Antiochus was overthrown of the Romanes, he was constrained to flie to Prusius King of Bythinia, that tooke him into his protection: but being as treacherous himselfe, hee soone devised a meanes to betray him to Quintius, the Generall of the Romane Armie: which when Annibal understood, and seeing that all passages for evasion were closed up, and that he could not any way escape, he poysoned him∣selfe, and so miserably ended his treacherous life. And thus the de∣ceit which he practised towards others, fell at length upon his owne Pate, to his utter destruction. Albeit that Perjurers and forswearers were to the Egyptians very odi∣ous Iustine. and abominable (as wee said before) yet among them there was one Ptolome, who to bereave his sister Arsinoe of her Kingdome, stained himselfe with this villanous spot, and thereby brought his purpose to passe; for pre∣tending and protesting great affection and love unto her in the way of marriage (for such incestuous marriages were there through a perverse and damnable custome not unlawfull) and avowing the same by solemne oath before her Embassadours, did notwitstanding soon make knowne the drift of his intent, which was to make himselfe King: for being arrived in shew to consummate Marriage, at his first approach hee caused his Nephewes (her sonnes which she had by her former husband Lysimachus, and were come forth from their mother to give him entertainment on the way) to be slaine; yea, and lest they should escape his hands, hee pursued them even to their mothers bosome, and there murthered them, and after (expelling her also from her Kingdome) caught the Crowne, and reigned Tyrant in her roome: all which mischiefe he committed by reason of the faithlesse oath which hee had taken: and although that in such a case no oath ought to bee of force to confirme so lawfull affiance (though it bee pronounced and taken by the name and in the Temple of their Idols) yet notwithanding it being done with an evill conscience, and to an evill pur∣pose, he that did it can be no lesse then a Perjurer. But for this and other vices it came to passe, that ere long he was conquered by the Gaules, who taking him in battell, slew him and cut off his head, and having fastened it upon a Lance, carried it in signe of victory and triumph up and downe the hoast. A most notable example of the punishment of Perjurie and falshood in Vladislaus King of Hungary and his Army destroyed by the Turkes, is set downe in Bonfinus his Hungarian History, after this manner. It fell out Bonfinus.
that the King of Hungary had so well bestirred himselfe against the Turks, that Amurathes was glad (upon unequall conditions, and even to his owne hurt, and their good) to conclude a peace with him: wherein it was agreed, that certaine Provinces should be restored to the Hungarian, which other∣wise could not have been recovered but by great losse of men. This league being made, and the Articles thereof engrossed in both Languages, with a solemne oath taken on both parties for the consirmation of the same; be∣hold the Cardinall of Florence, Admirall of the Navie which lay upon the Sea Hellespont (now called Saint Georges Arme, which divideth Turkie It is so called by the French men, but more commonly, the Straits of Castile. from Greece) sendeth Letters to the King of Hungary to perswade him to disannull and repeale this new concluded peace: This practise like∣wise did Cardinall Iulian, the Popes Legate in Hungarie, with might and maine helpe forward: which two good pillars of the Church, inspired with on and the same spirit, wrought together so effectually with the king, that at that instance he falsified his oath, broke the peace, and sent to Con∣stantinople to denounce Warre afresh; and forthwith whilst their Em∣bassadors were retyring their Garrisons out of Misia, to bring them into their hands againe, and had sent forty thousand crownes for the ransome of great men which were prisoners, and had restored the Realme of Rascia and all their Captives, according to the tenour of their late league, not know∣ing of this new breach: in the meane while (I say) he set forward his Ar∣mie towards the great Turkes in all expedition. Now the Turkes secure and misdoubting nothing, were set upon unawares by the King, yet putting themselves in defence, there grew a long and sharpe battell, till Amurathes perceiving his side to decline, and almost overcome, pulled out of his bo∣some the Articles of the aforesaid peace, & lifting up his eyes to heaven, ut∣tered these speeches: O Iesus Christ, these are the leagues that thy Christi∣ans have made and confirmed by swearing by thy name, and yet have bro∣ken them againe: if thou beest a God, as they say thou art, revenge this injurie which is offered both thee and mee, and punish those Truce-break∣ing Varlets. He had scarce ended these speeches, but the Christians bat∣tell and courage began to rebate, Vladislaus himselfe was slaine by the I∣nizaries, his horse being first hurt; his whole Army was discomfited, and all his people put to the sword, saving a few that fled: amongst whom was the right reverend Embassador of the Pope, who as soone as he had thrust in over the eares, withdrew himselfe (forsooth) farre enough from blowes or danger. Then followed a horrible butchery of people, and a lamentable noyse of poore soules ready to be slaughtered, for they spared none, but ha∣led them miserably in pieces, and executed a just and rigorous judgement of God for that vile treachery and perjury which was committed.
CHAP. XXVIII. More examples of the like subject. BVt let us adde a few more examples of fresher memory, as touching this ungodly Perjury: And first King Philip of Macedony, who never made reckoning of keeping his oathes, but swore and unswore them at his pleasure, and for his commodity: doubtlesse it was one of the chiefest cau∣ses why he and his whole Progeny came quickly to destru∣ction (as testifieth Pausanias) for hee himselfe being 46 yeeres old, was In Areadicis. slaine by one of his owne servants; after which Olympias his wife made away two of his sonnes, Anideus, and another which he had by Cleopatra, At∣talus his neece, whom she sod to death in a Cauldron: his daughter Thes∣salonicaes children likewise all perished: and lastly, Alexander after all his great victories, in the middest of his pompe, was poysoned at Babylon. Gregorie Tours maketh mention of a wicked Varlet in France among the people called Averni, that forswearing himselfe in an unjust cause, had his De confessori∣bus. tongue so presently tyed, that he could not speake but roare, and so conti∣nued, till by his earnest prayers and repentance the Lord restored to him∣selfe the use of that unruly member. There were in old time certaine people of Italy called Aequi, whereof the memory remaineth onely at this day, for they were utterly destroyed Liv. lib. 3: by Q. Cincinnatus. These having solemnely made a league with the Ro∣manes, and sworne unto it with one consent, afterward chose Gracchus Clui∣lius for their Captaine, and under his conduct spoyled the Fields and Ter∣ritories of the Romanes, contrary to the former league and oath. Wherupon the Romans sent Q. Fabius, P. Volumnius, and A. Posthumius Embassadors to them, to complaine of their wrongs and demand satis∣faction: but their Captaine so little esteemed them, that he bad them deliver their message to an Oake standing thereby, whilest hee atten∣ded other businesse. Then one of the three turning himselfe towards the Oake, spake on this manner: Thou hallowed oake, and whatsoever else belongeth to the gods in this place, heare and beare witnes of this disloyall part, and favor our iust complaints, that with the assistance of the gods wee may bee revenged on this injury. This done they returned home, and shortly after gathering a power of men, set upon and over came that truce-breaking Nation. In the yeer of Rome built, 317, the Fidenates revolted from the friend∣ship and league of the Romans, to Toluminus the king of the Veyans, and adding cruelty to treason, killed foure of their embassadours that came to know the cause of their defection: which disloyalty the Romans not brook∣ing, undertooke war against them, and notwithstanding all their private and forrein strength, overthrew and slew them. In this battell it is said, that a Tribune of the souldiers seeing Toluminus bravely galloping up and down, and incouraging his souldiers, and the Romans trembling at his ap∣proch, said, Is this the breaker of leagues, and violater of the law of nations? If there be any holinesse on earth, my sword shall sacrifice him to the
soules of our slaine embassadours; and therewithall setting spurres to his horse, he unhorst him, and fastening him to the earth with his speare, cut off his perfidious head: whereat his army dismaied, retired, and became a slaughter to the enemies. Albertus Duke of Franconia having slaine Conrade the Earle of Lotha∣ringia, Melanct. Chr. Lib. 4 brother to Lewis the fourth, then Emperor, and finding the Emper∣ors wrath incensed against him for the same, betooke himselfe to a strong castle at Bamberg; from whence the Emperour neither by force nor poli∣cie could remove him for seven yeares space, untill Atto the Bishop of Mentz by trecherie delivered him into his hands. This Atto under shew of friendship repaired to the castle, and gave his faith unto the earle, that if he would come downe to parle with the Emperor, he should safely return into his hold: the Earle mistrusting no fraud, went out of the castle gates with the Bishop towards the Emperour; but Atto (as it were suddenly re∣membring himselfe, when indeed it was his devised plot) desireth to re∣turne back and dine ere he went, because it was somewhat late: so they do, dine, and returne. Now the Earle was no sooner come to the Emperor, but he caused to be presently put to death, notwithstanding he urged the Bi∣shops promise and oath for his returne: for it was answered, that his oath was quit by returning backe to dine, as he had promised. And thus the Earle was wickedly betrayed, though justly punished. As for Atto the subtill traitor, indeed he possessod himselfe by this meanes of the Earles lands; but withall, the justice of God seised upon him, for within a while after he was stricken with a thunderbolt, and as some say, carried into mount Aetna, with this noyse, Sicpeccatalues, atque ruendorues. Cleomenes King of Lacedemonia making warre upon the Argives, sur∣prised Compfulgos. Lib. 7. c. 3. them by this subtilty, he tooke truce with them for seven dayes, and the third night whilest they lay secure, and unwarie in their truce, he op∣pressed them with a great slaughter, saying, (to excuse his trecherie, though no excuse could cleare him from the shame thereof) that the truce which he made was for seven dayes onely, without any mention of nights: howbeit for all this, it prospered not so well with him as he wished: for the Argie vwomen, their husbands slaine, tooke armes like Amasons, Tolesilla being their captainesse, and compassing the citie walls, repelled Cleomenes, halfe amased with the strangenesse of the sight. After which he was bani∣shed into Aegypt, and there miserably and desperatly slew himselfe. The Pope of Rome with all his heard of Bishops, opposed himselfe a∣gainst Chron. Carion. the Emperor Henry the fourth; for he banished him by excommu∣nication from the society of the Catholike Church, discharged his sub∣jects from the oath of fealty, and sent a crowne of gold to Rodolph king of Suevia, to canonize him Emperor: the crowne had this inscription, Petra dedit Petro, Petrus diadema Rodulpho; that is, The Rocke gave unto Peter, and Peter gave unto Rodolph the crown: Notwithstanding Rodolph remembring The Rocke is Christ. 1 Cor. 10. his oath to the Emperour, and how vile a part it was to betray him whom he had sworne to obey and defend, at first refused the Popes offer: howbe∣it by the persuasion of the Bishops sophistrie, he was induced to undertake the name and title of Caesar, and to oppugne the Emperor Henry by armes, even by foure unjust battels, in the last of which Rodolph being overcome, lost his right hand, and was sore wounded otherwise: wherefore being rea∣dy to die, when one brought unto him his hand that was cut off in the bat∣tell,
he in detestation of the Popes villanie, burst forth into these termes, (many Bishops standing by) Behold here the hand wherewith I swore fealtie to the Emperor, this will be an argument of my breach of faith before God, and of your traiterous impulsion thereunto. And thus he deceased, justly punished even by his owne confession for his perjurie. Howbeit for all this manifest ex∣ample, the Pope and Bishops continued to persecute the poore Emperor, yea and to stir up his owne sonnes, Conrade and Henry, to fight against him; so hardned are their hearts against all Gods judgments. Narcissus Bishop of Ierusalem, a man famous for his vertues, and sharpe Euseb. li. 6. c. 8. in reproving and correcting vice, was accused by three wicked wretches of unchastity, and that falsly and maliciously; for to prove their accusati∣on true, they bound it with oaths and curses on this wise; the first said, If I ly, I pray God I may perish by fire: The second, If I speake aught but truth, I pray God I may be consumed by some filthie and cruell disease. The third, If I ac∣cuse him falsely, I pray God I may be deprived of my sight, and become blinde. Thus Calumniation Lib. 2. Cap. 24. although the honesty and chastity of Narcissus was so well knowne to all the faithfull, that they beleeved none of their oaths, yet the good Bishop, partly mooved with griefe of this false accusation, and partly with desire of quietnesse from worldly affaires, forsooke his bishopricke, and lived in a desart for many yeares. But his forsworne accusers by their death wit∣nessed his innocencie, which by their words they impugned: for the first, his house being set on fire extraordinarily, perished in flame, with all his family and progenie. The second languished away with an irkesome dis∣ease that bespread his bodie all over. The third seeing the wofull ends of his companions, confessed all their villanie, and lamenting his case and crime, persisted so long weeping, till both his eyes were out. Thus God in his just judgement sent upon each of them their wishes, and there∣by cleered his servant from shame and opprobry. Burghard Archbishop of Magdeburg, though in regard of his place and Chron Eresti, Brotanff. profession, he ought to have given good example of honestie in himselfe, and punish perjurie in others; yet he thrice broke his promise and oath with his owne Citisens, the Senat and people of Magdeburg: for first hee besieged them with a power of men, and though they redeemed their li∣berty with a summe of money (he swearing not to besiege them any more) yet without respect of truth and credit he returned afresh to the siege: but his persidie was soone tamed; for they tooke him prisoner at that assault: howbeit he so asswaged their angrie mindes, with his humble and lowlie entreaties and counterfe it oathes, never to trouble them any more, but to continue their stedfast friend, that they not onely freed him from impri∣sonment, but restored him to all his dignities with solemnitie: never∣thelesse the traiterous Archbishop returning to his old vomit, got dispen∣sation for his oath from Pope Iohn the xxiij, and began afresh to vex, molest, and murther them whom he had sworne to maintaine: but it was the will of God that he should be once againe caught, and being enclosed in pri∣son, whilest his friends sought meanes to redeeme him, the gaoler beat him to death with a dore barre, or as some say, with an yron rod taken out of a window; and so at last, though long, his perjurie found its desert. The small successe that the Emperor Sigismund had in all his affaires, (after the violation of his faith given to Iohn Hus and Hierome of Prague Theatr. histor. at the Councell of Constance, whom though with direct protestations
and oathes he promised safe conduct and returne, yet he adjudged to be burned) doth testifie the odiousnesse of his sin in the sight of God. But above all, this one example is most worthie the marking, of a fellow that hearing perjury condemned in a pulpit by a learned preacher, and how it never escaped unpunished; said in a braverie, I have oft forsworne my selfe, and yet my right hand is not a whit shorter than my left. Which words he had scarce uttered, when such an inflamation arose in that hand, that he was constrained to go to the Chirurgion and cut it off, lest it should infect his whole bodie; and so his right hand became shorter than his left, in recom∣pence of his perjurie, which he lightly esteemed of. About the yeare of our Lord 925, when King Ethelstane, otherwise cal∣led Adelstane, raigned here in England, there was one Elfrede a Nobleman, who with a faction of seditious persons conspired against the King pre∣sently after the death of his Father, and at Winchester went about to put out his eyes: but the King by the good providence of God escaped that danger; and Elfrede being accused thereof, fled to Rome, to the end to purge himself of the crime by oath before the Pope: who beeing brought to the Church of Saint Peter, and there swearing, or rather forswearing, himself to be cleere, when indeed he was guilty, behold the Lords hand on him, suddenly as soon as his oath was pronounced, he fell down in a strange sicknesse; and from thence being brought to the English house in Rome, within three daies after departed this life. The Pope sent word hereof to King Ethelstane, with demand, Whither he would have him buried among Christians or no: Who through the perswasions of his friends and kins∣folke, granted, that though he neither lived nor died like a Christian, yet he should have Christian buriall. In the towne of Rutlinquen a certaine passenger came into an Inne, and Joh. le Gall. 1 vol. of his Table-talk. gave a budget to his hoast to be kept, in the which there was a great sum of money: but when he demanded it againe at his departure, the host de∣nied it, and gave him injurious words, with many mocks and taunts. Whereupon the passenger calleth him in question before the Iudge, and because he wanted witnesses, desireth to have him sworne: who without all scruple offered to sweare and protest, That he never received or concea∣led any such budget of money from him; giving himselfe to the Devill if he swore falsely. The passenger seeing his forwardnesse to damne himself, demanded respit to consider of the matter, and going out, hee meets with two men, who enquire the cause of his comming thither, and being in∣formed by him, offer their help unto him in his cause: thereupon they re∣turne before the Iudge, and these two unknowne persons justifie that the budget was delivered unto the host, and that hee had hidden it in such a place: whereat the host being astonished, by his countenance and gesture discovered his guiltinesse: the Iudge thereupon resolved to send him to prison, but the two unknowne witnesses (who were indeed two fiends of hell) began to say, you shall not need, for we are sent to punish his wicked∣nesse; and so saying, they hoisted him up into the ayre, where he vanished with them, and was never after found. In the yeare of our Lord 1055, Goodwine Earle of Kent sitting at the ta∣ble Stow. Chron. with King Edward of England, it happened that one of the cupbearers stumbled, and yet fell not: whereat Goodwine laughing, said, That if one brother had not holpen another (meaning his legs) all the wine had been
spilt: with which words the King calling to mind his brothers death, which was slaine by Goodwine; answered, So should my brother Alphred have hol∣pen me had not Goodwine been: then Goodwine fearing the Kings new kind∣led displeasure, excused himselfe with many words, and at last eating a morsell of bread, wished it might choke him if he were not guiltlesse of Alphreds bloud. But he swore falsly, as the judgement of God declared, for he was forthwith choaked in the presence of the King, ere he removed one foot from that place; though there be some say he recovered life againe. Long time after this, in the raigne of Queene Elizabeth, there was in the city of London, one Anne Averies widow, who forswore her selfe for Stow Chron. a little money that she should have paid for six pounds of tow at a shop in Woodstreet: for which cause being suddenly surprised with the justice of God, shee fell downe speechlesse forthwith, and cast up at her mouth in great abundance, and with horrible stinke, that matter which by natures course should have been voided downewards, and so died, to the terrour of all perjured and forsworne wretches. There are in histories many more ex∣amples to be found of this hurtfull and pernitious sin, exercised by one na∣tion towards another, and one man towards another, in most prophane and villanous sort, neither shaming to be accounted forsworne, nor conse∣quently fearing to displease God and his majesty. But forasmuch as when we come to speak of murtherers in the next book, we shall have occasion to speake of them more, or of such like, I will referre the handling thereof unto that place: onely this, let every man learne by that which hath been spoken, to be sound and fraudlesse, and to keep his faith and promise to∣wards all men, if for no other cause, yet for feare of God, who leaveth not this sin unpunished, nor holdeth them guiltlesse that thus taketh his name in vaine. CHAP. XXIX. Of Blasphemers. AS touching Blasphemy, it was a most grievous and enormous sin, and contrary to this third Comman∣mandement, when a man is so wretched and mise∣ble, as to pronounce presumptuous speeches a∣gainst God, whereby his name is slandered and evill spoken of: which sinne cannot chuse but be sharply and severely punished; for if so be that God holdeth not him guiltles, that doth but take his name in vain must he not needs abhor him that blasphemeth his Name? See how me∣ritoriously that wicked and perverse wretch that blasphemed and murde∣red (as it were) the name of God, among the people of Israel in the de∣sart, was punished: he was taken, put in prison, and condemned, and spee∣dily stoned to death by the whole multitude: and upon that occasion (as evill manners evermore begat good lawes) the Lord instituted a perpetuall Levit. 24. law and decree, that every one that should blaspheme and curse God, of what estate or degree soever, should be stoned to death, in token of dete∣station:
which sentence, if it might now adaies stand in force, there would not raign so many miserable blasphemers and deniers of God as the world is now filled and infected with. It was also ordained by a new law of Iusti∣nian, Cod. lib. 3. tit. 43. That blasphemies should be severely punished by the judges and ma∣gistrates of Commonweales: but such is the corruption and misery of this age, that those men that ought to correct others for such speeches, are of∣tentimes worst themselves: and there are that thinke, that they cannot be sufficiently feared and awed of men, except by horrible bannings and swearings they despight and maugre God: nay it is further come to that passe, that in some places, to swearc and ban be the markes and ensignes of a Catholike, and they are best welcome that can blaspheme most. How much then is that good King Saint Lewis of France to be commended, who Nich. Gil. vol. Of French Chronicles. especially discharged all his subjects from swearing and blaspheming within his realm, insomuch that when he heard a Lord of Ienville. nobleman blaspheme God most cruelly, he caused him to be laid hold on, and his lips to bee slit with an hot yron, saying, hee must be content to endure that punishment, seeing he purposed to banish oathes out of his kingdome. Now wee call blasphemy (according to the Scripture phrase) every word that derogateth either from the bounty, mercy, justice, eternity, and soveraigne power of God. Of this sort was that blasphemous speech of one of King Iorams Princes, who at the time of the great famine in Samaria, when it was be∣sieged by the Syrians, hearing Elizeus the Prophet say, that the next mor∣row there should be plenty of victuals and good cheap, rejected this pro∣mise of God made by his Prophet, saying that it was impossible; as if God were either a lyar, or not able to performe what he would: for this cause this unbeleeving blasphemer received the same day a deserved punishment for 2 King. 7. his blasphemy, for he was troden to death in the gate of the city under the feet of the multitude that went out into the Syrians campe, forsaken and left desolate by them, through a feare which the Lord sent among them. Senaccherib King of Assyria, after he had obtained many victories, and odued much people under him, and also layd siege to Ierusalem, became 2 King 19. proud and arrogant, as by his servants mouth to revile and blaspheme the living God, speaking no otherwise of him than of some strange idoll, and one that had no power to help and deliver those that trusted in him; for which blasphemies he soone after felt a just vengeance of God upon himselfe and his people: for although in mans eyes he seemed to be with∣out the reach of danger (seeing he was not assayled, but did assayle, and was guarded with so mighty an army, that assured him to make him lord of Ierusalem in short space) yet the Lord overthrew his power, and de∣stroyed of his men in one night by the hand of his Angell 185 thousand men, so that he was faine to raise his siege, and returne into his owne king∣dome, where finally he was slaine by his owne sons, as he was worshipping on his knees in the temple of his god. In the time of the Machabees, those men that were in the strong hold called Gazara, fighting against the Iewes, trusting to the strength of the 2 Mach. 10. place wherein they were, uttered forth most infamous speeches against God: but ere long, their blasphemous mouths were encountred by a con∣digne punishment: for the first day of the siege, Machabeus put fire to the towne, and consumed the place (with the blasphemers in it) to ashes.
Holofernes, when Achior advanced the glory of the God of Israel, replyed on this fashion: Since thou hast prophesied unto us, that Israel shall be defended by their God, thou shalt prove that there is no God but Nabuchadnezzar, when the Iudeth 6. 7. sword of mine army shall passe through thy sides, and thou shalt fall among their slaine: but for this blasphemy the Lord cut him short, and prevented his cruell purpose by sudden death, und that by the hand of a woman, to his further shame. Nay, this sinne is so odious in the sight of God, that he punisheth even them that give occasion thereof unto others, yea though they be his dea∣rest children, as it appeareth by the words of the Prophet Nathan unto King David: Because of this deed (saith he) of murthering Vriah, and defiling 2 Kings 12. Bathshabe, thou hast made the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme, the childe that is borne unto thee shall surely die. In the Empire of Iulian the Apostata, there were divers great men that for the Emperours sake sake forsooke Christ and his religion: amongst Theod. lib. 3. cap. 11, & 12. Contempt of holy things. Lib. 1. cap. 3, 4. whom, was one Iulian, uncle to the Emperour, and Governour of the East; another, Foelix the Emperours Treasurer: the first of which two, after hee had spoyled all Christian Churches and Temples, pissed against the table whereon the holy Sacraments were used to be administred, in contempt, and strucke Euzoius on the care for reproving him for it: the other behol∣ding the holy vessels that belonged to the Church said, See what pretious vessels Maries sonne is served withall. After which blasphemy, the Lord plagued them most strangely: for Iulian fell into so strange a disease, that his intrailes being rotten, he voided his excrements at his mouth, because when they passed naturally, he abused them to the dishonour of God. Foe∣lix vomited bloud so excessively night and day at his blasphemous mouth, that he died forthwith. About the same time there lived a famous sophister and Epicure called Theatr. hist. Libanius; who being at Antioch, demanded blasphemously of a learned and godly schoolemaster, What the Carpenters sonne did, and how he occupied himselfe? Marry (quoth the schoolemaster, full of the spirit of God) the Creator of this world (whom thou disdainfully callest the car∣penters sonne) is making a coffin for thee, to carry thee to thy grave: where∣at the sophister jeasting, departed, and within few daies dying, was buried in a coffin, according to the prophesie of that holy man. The Emperour Heraclius sending Embassadors to Cosroë the King of Persia to intreat of peace, returned with this answer, That he would never Vide l. 1. c. 21. ares. Phil. Chron. Ab. Vrusperg. cease to trouble them with warre, till he had constrained them to forsake their crucified Christ, and to worship the Sunne. But ere long he bore the punishment of his blasphemy: for what with a domesticall calamity, and a forrein overthrow by the hand of Heraclius, he came to a most wofull de∣struction. Michael that blasphemous Rabbine, that was accounted of the Iewes, as their Prince and Messias, as he was on a time banquetting with his com∣panions, Fincelius de Miraculis. li. 2. amongst other things this was chiefest sauce for their meat, to blasphme Christ and his mother Mary, insomuch as he boasted of a victo∣ry already gotten over the Christians God. But marke the issue: as he des∣cended down the stayres, his foot slipping, he tumbled headlong and broke his neck; wherein his late victory proved a discomfiture and overthrow, to his eternall shame and confusion.
Three souldiers (amongst the Tyrigetes, a people of Sarmatia) passing through a Wood, there arose a tempest of thunder and lightening, which though commonly it maketh the greatest Atheists to tremble, yet one of them to shew his contempt of God and his judgements, burst forth into blasphemy and despightings of God. But the Lord soone tamed his re∣bellious tongue: for he caused the winde to blow up by the root a huge tree, that fell upon him and crushed him to pieces, the other escaping to testifie to the World of his destruction. At a village called Benavides in Spain, two young men being together Anthonio de Torquemeda. in a field, there arose of a sudden a terrible tempest, with such violence of weather and winde, and withall so impetuous a whirlwinde, that it amased those that beheld it. The two young men seeing the fury thereof com∣ming amaine towards them, to avoid the danger ran away as fast as they possibly might: but make what haste they could it overtooke them: who fearing lest the same should swing them up into the ayre, fell flatlong down upon the earth, where the whirlwinde whisking about them a pretty while, and then passing forth, the one of them arose so altered and in such an agony, that he was scarcely able to stand on his feet: the other lying still and not stirring, some others afarre off, that stood under a hedge, went to see how hee did, and found him, to be starke dead, not without markes upon him of wonderfull admiration: for all his bones were so cru∣shed, that the pipes and joynts of his legges and armes were as easie to be turned the one way as the other, as though his whole body had been made of mosse; and besides, his tongue was pulled out by the roots, which could not by any meanes be found, though they sought for it most diligently. And this was the miserable end of this wretched man, who was noted to be a great outragious swearer & blasphemer of Gods holy name; the Lord therfore chose him out, to make him an example to the world of his justice. No lesse notable is the example of a young girle, named Denis Benesield, Acts and Mo∣numents of the Church. of twelve yeares of age: who going to schoole amongst other girles, when they fell to reason among themselves after their childish discretion about God, one among the rest said that he was a good old father: What, hee? (said the foresaid Denis) he is an old doting foole: which being told to her mistresse, she purposed to correct her the next day for it: but it chanced that the next day her mother sent her to London to the market, the wench greatly intreating her mother that she might not goe, so that she escaped her mistresses correction. But the Lord in vengeance met with her: for as she returned homeward, suddenly she was stricken dead, all the one side of her being black; and buried at Hackney the same night. A terrible ex∣ample (no doubt) both to old and young, what it is for children to blas∣pheme the Lord and God, and what it is for parents to suffer their young ones to grow up in blindnesse, without nurtering them in the feare of God, and reverence of his Majesty, and therefore worthy to be remembred of Paul Diacon. in the history of Anastatius. Sabel. Aenead. 8. lib. 2. Anton. Panor. of the acts of Alphonsus. Aeneas Silvius of the acts of Alphonsus. all. In the yeare 510 an Arrian Bishop called Olympius, being at Carthage in the bathes, reproached and blasphemed the holy and sacred Trinity, and that openly: but lighting fell downe from heaven upon him three times, and he was burnt and consumed therewith. There was also in the time of Alphonsus King of Arragon and Sicily, in an Isle towards Africa, a cer∣tain hermit called Antonius, a monstrous and prophane hypocrite, that had
so wicked a heart to devise, and so filthy a throat to belch out vile and in∣jurious speeches against Christ Iesus and the Virgin Mary his mother; but hee was strieken with a most grievous disease, even to be eaten and gnawne in pieces of wormes untill he died. CHAP. XXX. Of those that by cursing and denying God give themselves to the Devill. AS concerning those that are addicted to much cursing, and as if their throats were Hell it selfe, to despigh∣tings and reviling against God (that is blessed for ever) and are so mad as to renounce him, and give them∣selves to the Devill: truely they worthily deserve to be forsaken of God, and given over to the Devill in∣deed, to go with him into everlasting perdition: which hath been visibly experienced in our time upon certaine wretched persons, which have been carried away by that wicked spirit to whom they gave themselves. There was upon a time in Germany, a certain naughty packe of a most Luther upon the' 15. chap. of the 1 Ep. to the Corinth. wicked life, and so evill brought up, that at every word he spake almost, the Devill was at one end; if walking he chanced to tread awry, or to stumble, presently the Devill was in his mouth: whereof albeit he was many times reproved by his neighbors, and exhorted to correct and amend so vile and detestable a vice, yet all was in vaine: continuing therefore this evill and damnable custome, it happened, that as he was upon a time passing over a bridge, he fell downe, and in his fall gave these speeches, Hoist up with an hundred Devils: which he had no sooner spoken, bat the Devill whom he called for so oft, was at his elbow to strangle him, and carry him away with him. A certain souldier travelling through Marchia, a country of Almaigne, Wirius 3 Book chap. 17. of the delusion of spirits. and finding himselfe evill at ease in his journey, abode in an Inne till hee might recover his health, and committed to the hostesses custody certaine money which he had about him. Now a while after being recovered of his sicknesse, required his money againe; but she having consulted with her husband, denied the receit, and therefore the returne thereof; and accused him of wrong, in demanding that which she never received: The souldier on the other side fretted amaine, and accused her of cousenage: Which stir when the goodman of the house understood (though privy to all before) yet dissembling, tooke his wives part, and thrust the souldier out of doors: who being throughly chaed with that indignity, drew his sword, and ran at the doore with the point hereof: whereat the host began to cry, Theeves, theeves, saying that he would have entred his house by force: so that the poore souldier was taken and cast into prison, and by processe of law ready to be condemned to death: but the very day wherein this hard sentence was to be pronounced and executed, the Devill entred into the prison, and told the souldier that he was condemned to die; howbeit neverthelesse if
hee would giue himselfe bodie and soule unto him, he would promise to deliuer him out of their hands: the prisoner answering, said, That he had rather die being innocent, and without cause, than to be delivered by that meanes: againe the divell replied, and propounded unto him the great danger wherein he was, yea and used all cunning meanes possible to per∣swade him: but seeing that he lost his labour, he at length left his suit, and promised him both helpe, and revenge upon his enemies, and that for nothing: advising him moreover when he came to judgement, to plead not guiltie, and to declare his innocencie and their wrong, and to intreat the Iudge to grant him one in a blew cap that stood by to be his advocate: (now this one in a blew cap was the Divell himselfe) the souldier accep∣ting his offer, being called to the barre, and indicted there of Felonie, pre∣sently desired to have his Atturney, who was there present to plead his cause: then began the fine and craftie Doctor of the lawes to plead, and defend his client verie cunningly, affirming him to be falsly accused, and consequently unjustly condemned, and that his host did withhold his mo∣ny and had offered him violence, and to prove his assertion he reckoned up every circumstance in the action, yea the verie place were they had hidden the mony. The host on the other side stood in deniall very impudently, wi∣shing the divell might take him if he had it: then the subtill lawyer in the blew cap, looking for no other vantage, left pleading, and fell to lay hold of the host, and carrying him out of the Sessions house, hoisted him into the ayre so high, that he was never after seen nor heard of. And thus was the souldier delivered from the execution of the law most strangely, to the astonishment of all the beholders, that were eye witnesses of that which happened to the for sworne and cursing host. In the yere of our Lord 1551, at Megalopole neer Voildstat, it happened Iohn Wierus. in the time of the celebration of the feast of Pentecost▪ the people being set on drikingng and carousing, that a woman in the company commonly named the Devill in her oathes; till that he being so often called on, came of a sudden, and carried her through the gate aloft into the ayre before them all, who ran out astonished to see whither he would transport her, and found her a while hanging in the ayre without the towne, and then fal∣ling downe upon the ground dead. About the same time there lived in a City of Savoy one that was both a monstrous swearer, & also otherwise very vicious, who put many good men to much fruitlesse paines, that in regard of their charge employed them∣selves often to admonish and reprove his wicked behaviour, to the end he might amend it: but all in vaine, they might as well cast stones against the wind; for he would not so much as listen to their words, much lesse re∣forme his manners. Now it fell out that the Pestilence being in the City, he was infected with it, and therefore withdrew himselfe a part with his wife & another kinswoman into a garden which he had: neither yet in this extremity did the Ministers forsake him, but ceased not continually to ex∣hort him to repentance, and to lay before his eyes his faults and offences to the end to bring him into the right way. But he was so farre from being touched or moved with these godly admonitions, that he strove rather to harden himselfe more and more in his sinnes. Therefore one day hasting forward his owne mishap, as hee was swearing and denying God, and giving himselfe to the Devill, and calling for him with vehe∣hemency,
behold even the Devill indeed snatched him up suddenly, and heaved him into the aire, his wife and kinswoman looking on, and seeing him fly over their heads. Being thus swiftly transported, his cap tumbled from his head, and was found at Rosne; but himselfe no man could ever after set eye on. The magistrate advertised hereof, came to the place where he was taken, to be better informed of the truth, taking the witnesse of the two women touching that which they had seene. Here may wee see the strange and terrible events of Gods just vengeance upon such vile caitifes; which doubtlesse are made manifest to strike a feare and terrour into the heart of every swearer and denier of God (the world being but too full at this day of such wretches) that are so inspired with Satan, that they can∣not speake but they must name him, even him that is both an enemy to God and man, and like a roaring lion runneth and roveth too and fro to devoure them: not seeking any thing but mans destruction. And yet when any paine assaileth them, or any trouble disquieteth their minds, or any danger threateneth to oppresse their bodies, desperately they call upon him for aid, when indeed it were more needfull to commend themselves to God, and to pray for his grace and assistance, having both a comman∣dement so to doe, and a promise adjoyned, that he will help us in our ne∣cessities, if we come unto him by true and hearty prayer. It is not there∣fore without just cause, that God hath propounded and laid open in this corrupt age, a Theatre of his Iudgements, that every man might be warned thereby. CHAP. XXXI. More examples of Gods Iudgements upon Cursers. BVt before we goe to the next commandement, wee will ad∣joyne a few more examples of this devillish cursing. Mar∣tin Luther hath left registred unto us a notable example In Coll. Luth. showne upon a popish priest that was once a professor of the sincere religion, and fell away voluntarily unto Pa∣pisme; whereof Adam Budissina was the reporter: This man thundred out most bitter curses against Luther in the pulpit, at a town cal∣led Ruthnerwald, and amongst the rest, wished, that if Luthers doctrine were true, a thunderbolt might strike him to death. Now three dayes af∣ter there arose a mighty tempest, with thunder and lightening: whereat the cursed Priest, bearing in himselfe a guilty conscience, for that hee had untruly and malitiously spoken, ranne hastily into the Church, and there fell to his prayers before the Altar most devoutly; but the vengeance of God found him out and his hypocrisie, so that he was stroken dead with the lightening, and albeit they recovered life in him againe, yet as they led him homewards through the Church-yard, another flsh so set upon him, that he was burnt from the crowne of the head to the sole of the foot, as blacke as a shoo, so that he died with a manifest marke of Gods vengeance upon him. Theodorus Beza reporteth unto us two notable histories of his owne Homil. 26. in hist. passionis. knowledge, of the severity of Gods judgment upon a curser and a perjurer;
the tenor whereof is this, I knew (said he) in France a man of good parts, well instructed in Religion, and a master of a Familie, who in his anger cursing, and bidding the Divell take one of his children, had presently his wish; for the childe was possessed immediatly with a Spirit: from which though by the servent and continuall prayers of the Church he was at length released, yet ere he had fully recovered his health he died. The like we read to have happened to a woman, whom her husband in anger devo∣ted with bitter curses to the Divell; for Sathan assaulted her persently, and robbed her of her wits, so that she could never be recovered. Another example (saith he) happened not far hence, even in this coun∣try, Discipulus de Tempore Ser∣mon. 116. Perjury. Lib. 1. cap. 29. upon a perjurer that forswore him selfe to the end to deceive and pre∣judice another thereby: but he had no sooner made an end of his false oath, but a grievous Apoplexy assailed him, so that without speaking of any one word he dyed within few dayes. In the yere of our Lord 1557, the day before good fryday, at Forche∣num Job. Fincelius, lib. 3. de Mirac. a city in the Bishopricke of Bamburg, there was a certaine crooked Priest both in body and minde, through age and evill conditions, that could not go but upon crutches, yet would needs be lifted into the pulpit to make a Sermon: his text was out of the 11 chap. of the first Epi∣stle to the Corinthians, touching the Lords Supper; whereout taking oc∣casion to defend the Papisticall errours and the Masse, hee used these or such like blasphemous speeches, O Paul, Paul, if thy doctrine touching the receiving of the Sacrament in both kinds be true, and if it be a wicked thing to receive it otherwise, then would the divell might take me: and (turning to the people) if the Popes doctrine concerning this point be not true, then am I the divels bondslaue, neither do I feare to pawne my soule upon it. These and many other blasphemous words he used, till the Divell came indeed, transformed into the shape of a tall man, blacke and terrible, sending before him such a fearefull noyse, and such a wind, that the people supposed that the Church would have fallen on their heads: but he not able to hurt the rest, tooke away the old Priest, being his devo∣ted bondslave, and carried him so far that he was never heard of. The bi∣shop of Rugenstines brother hardly escaped his hands: for he came back to fetch him; but he defending himself with his sword, wounded his owne body, and very narrowly escaped with his life. Beside, after this there were many visions seene about the citie, as armies of men ready to enter and sur∣prise them, so that well was he that could hide himselfe in a corner. At another time after, the like noyse was heard in the Church whilst they were baptising an infant; and all this for the abhominable cursing and blasphemy of the prophane Priest. In the yeare of our Lorld 1556, at S. Gallus in Helvetia, a certaine man that earned his living by making cleane rough and soule linnen against the Sun, entering a taverne, tasted so much the grape, that he vomited out terrible curses against himselfe and others: amongst the rest he wished, if ever he went into the fields to his old occupation, that the divell might come and breake his necke: but when sleepe had conquered drinke, and sobriety restored his sences, he went again to his trade, remembring in∣deed his late words, but regarding them not: howbeit the Divell to shew his double diligence, attended on him at his appointed houre in the like∣nesse of a big swarthy man, and asked him if he remembred his promise
and vow which he had made the day before, and if it were not lawfull for him to breake his necke; and withall stroke the poore man, trembling with feare, over the shoulders, that his feet and his hands presently dried up, so that he lay there not able to stir, till by help of men he was carried home; the Lord not giving the Devill so much power over him as he wished him∣selfe; but yet permitting him to plague him on this sort, for his amend∣ment, and our example. Henry Earle of Schwartburg through a corrupt custome used common∣ly to wish he might be drowned in a privy: and as he wished, so it hapned Albert. Kirant. Chron. Sax. l. 6. unto him, for he was so served, and murthered at S. Peters Monastery in Er∣ford, in the yeare of our Lord, 1148. The like befell a young Courtier at Mansfield, whose custome was in any earnest asseveration, to say, The Devill take me if it be not so: the De∣vill Cyriac. Span∣genb. in le∣ganijs veter is Adami. indeed tooke him whilest hee slept, and threw him out of a high win∣dow, where albeit by the good providence of God he ought no great hurt, yet he learnt by experience to bridle his tongue from all such cursed spee∣ches, this being but a tast of Gods wrath that is to fall upon such wretches as he. At Oster a village in the duchy of Megalopole, there chanced a most Theatr. hist. strange and fearefull example upon a woman that gave her selfe to the De∣vill both body and soule, and used most horrible cursings and oathes, both against her selfe and others: which detestible manner of behaviour, as at many other times, so especially shee shewed at a marriage in the foresaid village upon S. Iohn Baptists day, the whole people exhorting her to leave off that monstrous villany: but she nothing bettered, continued her course, till all the company were set at dinner, and very merry. Then loe, the De∣vill having got full possession of her, came in person, and transported her into the aire before them all, with most horrible outcries and roarings, and in that sort carried her round about the towne, that the Inhabitants were ready to die with feare, and by ct by tore her in foure pieces, leaving in four severall high wayes a quarter, that all that came by might be witnesses of her punishment. And then returning to the marriage, threw her bowels upon the table before the Major of the towne, with these words, Behold, these dishes of meat belong to thee, whom the like destruction awaiteth, if thou doest not amend thy wicked life. The reporters of this history were, Iohn Herman the Minister of the said towne, with the Major himselfe and the whole Inha∣bitants, being desirous to have it knowne to the world for example sake. In Luthers conferences there is mention made of this story following: Luther: Divers noblemen were striving together at a horse race, and in their course cried, The Devill take the last. Now the last was a horse that broke loose, whom the Devill hoisted up into the aire and tooke cleane away. Which teacheth us, not to call for the Devill, for he is ready alwayes about us un∣called and unlooked for, yea many legions of them compasse us about even in our best actions to disturbe and pervert us. A certaine man not far from Gorlitz provided a sumptuous supper, and Iob. Fincelius. invited many guests unto it, who at the time appointed refused to come: he in anger cried, Then let all the Devils in hell come. Neither was his wish frivolous; for a number of those hellish fiends came forthwith, whom he not discerning from men, came to welcome and entertaine: but as he
tooke them by the hands, and perceiued in stead of fingers, clawes, all dis∣maied he ran out of the doores with his wife, and left none in the house but a young infant, with a foole sitting by the fire, whom the Divels had no power to hurt, neither any man else, save the goodly supper, which they made away withall, and so departed. It is notoriously knowne in Oundle a towne in Northamptonshire, a∣mongst all that were acquainted with the partie, namely one Hacket, of whom more hath spoken before, how he used in his earnest talke to curse himselfe on this manner; If it be not true, then let a visible confusion come up∣on me. Now he wanted not his wish, for he came to a visible confusion in∣deed, as hath been declared more at large in the twentieth chapter of this booke. At Witeberg, before Martin Luther and divers other learned men, a woman whose daughter was possessed with a spirit, confessed, That by her curse that plague was fallen upon her: for being angry at a time, she bad the Divell take her, and she had no sooner spoken the word, but he tooke her indeed, and possessed her in most strange sort. No whit lesse strange and horrible is that which happened at Neoburg Theatr. histor in Germanie, to a sonne that was cursed of his mother in her anger, with this curse, she prayed God she might never see him returne aliue; for the same day the yong man bathing himselfe in the water, was drowned, and never returned to his mother alive, according to her ungodly wish. The like judgement of God we read of to have beene executed upon Antonio de Torquemeda. another sonne that was banned and cursed by his mother, in the citie of Astorga. The mother in her rage cursed one of her sons with detestable maledictions, betaking him to the Diuels of hell, and wishing that they would fetch him out of her presence, with many other horrible execrati∣ons: This was about ten a clocke at night, the same being very darke and obscure; the boy at last through feare went out into a little court behind the house, from the which hee was suddenly hoised up into the ayte, by men in shew of grim countenance, great stature, and loathsome and hor∣rible gesture, but indeed cruell fiends of hell, and that with such swiftnesse (as he himselfe after confessed) that it was not possible, to his seeming, for any bird in the world to fly so fast: and lighting downe amongst cer∣taine mountaines of bushes and briers, was trailed through the thickest of them, and so all torne and rent, not only in his cloaths, but also in his hands and face and almost his whole body. At last the boy remembring God, and beseeching him of helpe and assistance, the cruell fiends brought him backe againe through the aire, and put him in at a little window into a chamber in his fathers house, where after much search and griefe for him, hee was found in this pittifull plight, and almost besides himselfe. And thus though they had not power to deprive him of his life, as they had done the former, yet the Lord suffered them to afflict the parents in the sonne, for the good of both parents and sonne if they belonged unto the Lord. But above all, this is most strange which hapned in a town of Misina, Theatr. hist. Let not the strangenes of this example discredit the truth thereof, seeing we read how Lots wife was turned in∣to a pillar of salt, Gen. 19. and Corah with his Company swallowed of the earth, Nu∣mer. 16. which are stranger than this. Acts and Mo∣numents. pag. 2101. in the yeare of our Lord God 1552, the eleventh of September; where a cholericke father seeing his sonne flacke about his businesse, wished hee might never stirre from that place: for it was no sooner said, but done, his sonne stucke fast in the place, neither by any meanes possible could be removed, no not so much as to fit or bend his body, till by the praiers of
the Faithfull his paines were somewhat mitigated, though not remitted: three yeares he continued standing, with a post at his backe for his ease, and foure yeares sitting, at the end whereof he died; nothing weakened in his understanding, but professing the faith, and not doubting of his salva∣tion in Christ Iesus. When he was demanded at any time how he did: he answered most usually, That he was fastened of God, and that it was not in man but in Gods mercy for him to be released. Iohn Peter sonne in law to Alexander that cruel Keeper of Newgate be∣ing a most horrible swearer and blasphemer, used commonly to say, If it be not true, I pray God I may rot ere I die: and not in vaine, for he rotted away indeed, and so dyed in misery. Hither we may adde a notable example of a certaine yong gallant that was a monstrous swearer, who riding in the company of divers gentlemen, Acts and Mo∣numents. pag. 2105. began to sweare and most horribly blaspheme the name of God: unto whom one in the company with gentle words said, he should one day an∣swer for that: the Yonker taking snuffe thereat, Why (said he) takest thou thought for me? Take thought for thy winding sheet. Well (quoth the other) amend, for death giveth no warning, as soone commeth a lambes skin to the market, as an old sheeps. Gods wounds (said he) care not thou for me: raging still on this manner worse and worse, till at length passing on their journey, they came riding over a great bridge, upon which this gentleman swearer spurred his horse in such sort, that he sprang cleane o∣ver with the man on his backe, who as hee was going, cried, Horse and man and all to the Divell. This terrible story Bishop Ridley preached and uttered at Pauls crosse: and one Haines a Minister of Cornwall (the repre∣hender of this man) was the reporter of it to Master Fox, out of whom I have drawne it. Let us refraine then (wretches that we are) our divelish tongues, and leave off to provoke the wrath of God any longer against us: let us forbeare all wicked and cursed speeches, and acquaint our selves as well in word as in deed to praise and glorisie God. CHAP. XXXII. Punishments for the contempt of the Word and Sacraments; and abuse of holy things. NOw it is another kind of taking the Name of God in vaine, to despise his Word and Sacraments: for like as among earthly princes, it is accounted a crime no lesse than treason, either to abuse their pictures, to counterfeit or deprave their seales, to rent, pollute, or corrupt their letters patents, or to use unreverently their messengers, or any thing that commeth from them: So with the Prince of heaven it is a fin of high degree, either to a∣buse his Word prophanely, which is the letters patents of our salvation; or handle the Sacraments unreverently, which are the seales of his mercy; or to despise his Ministers, which are his messengers untous. And this he maketh knowne unto us not only by Edicts and Commandments, but
also by examples of his vengeance on the heads of the offendors in this case. For the former, look what Paul saith, That for the unworthy recei∣ving of the Sacraments, many were weake and sicke among the Corinthi∣ans, 1 Cor. 11. 29, 30. and many slept. How much more then for the abusing and contem∣ning the Sacraments? And the Prophet David, That for casting the Word Psal. 50. 16, 17. of God behinde them, they should have nothing to do with his Cove∣nant. How much more then for prophaning and deriding his Word? And Moses, when the people murmured against him and Aaron, saith, That Exod. 16. 8. their murmurings were not against them, which were but Ministers, but against the Lord. How much more then is the Lord enraged, when they are scoffed at, derided, and set at naught? Hence it is that the Lord de∣nounceth Deut. 4. 2. & 12. 13. Apoc. 22. 18. Proverb 30. 6; a Wo to him that addeth or taketh away from the Word; and calleth them dogs that abuse such precious pearles. But let us come to the examples wherein the grievousnesse of this sinne willly more open than by any words can be expressed. First, to begin with the house of Israel, which were the sole select peo∣ple of the Lord, whom he had chosen out of all other nations of the world, to be his owne peculiar flocke, and his chiefe treasure, above all other people of the earth, and a kingdome of Priests, and a holy Nation; when Exod. 19 6. as they contemned and despised his Word spoken unto them by his pro∣phets, and cast his law behinde their backe, he gave them over into the hands of their enemies, and of Ammi made them Loammi; that is, of his people, made them not his people: and of Ruhama, Loruhama; that is, of such as had found mercy and favour at Gods hand, a nation that should ob∣tain no mercy nor favour, as the Prophet Hosea speaketh. Hosea 1. 6, 7. This we see plainly verified first in the ten tribes, which under Ieroboam fell away from the Scepter of Iuda: for after that the Lord had sundry times scourged them by many particular punishments, as the famin, sword, and pestilence, for their idolatry and rebellion to his law; at the last in the ninth yere of the raign of Hoshea King of Israel, he brought up∣on them a finall and generall destruction, and delivered them into the hands of the King of Ashur, who carried them away captive into Assyria; and placed them in Hala and in Habor, by the river of Gosan, and in the cities of the Medes; and in stead of them seated the men of Babel, of Cu∣thah, Ava, Hamath, and Sepharvaim, in the cities of Samaria. Thus were they utterly rooted up, and spued out of the land of their inheritance, and their portion given unto strangers, as was threatned to them by the mouth of Moses the servant of the Lord: and the cause of all this is set down by the Deu. 28. a King. 17. 13. holy Ghost, 2 Kin. 17. 13. to be, for that though the Lord had testified to them by al his prophets & seers, saying, Turn from your evill wayes, and keepe my commandements and my statutes, according to all the Law which I commanded your fathers: neverthelesse they would not obey, but hardned their necks: & then it followeth in the 18 ver, Therfore the Lord was exceeding wroth with Israel, and put them out of his sight, and none was left but the Tribe of Iuda onely. Now though the kingdome of Iuda continued in good estate long af∣ter the desolation of the ten tribes, (for this hapned in the raigne of Ahaz. King of Iuda;) yet afterward in the raigne of Zedekiah, the great and fa∣mous citie Ierusalem was taken by Nabuchadnezzar the King of Babel, and utterly ruined and defaced: the glorious and stately temple of the Lord, built by Salomon, the wonder of the world, was burnt down to ashes, toge∣ther
with all the houses of Ierusalem, and all other great houses in the land: all the rich vessels and furniture of the temple, of gold, silver, and brasse, were carried to Babel by Nabuzaradan the chiefe steward. The king himselfe was bound in chaines, and after he had seen his owne sons slaine before his eyes, had his owne eyes put out, that he might never more take comfort of the light. The priests and all the greatest and richest of the people were carried away in captivity, and only the poore were left behind to dresse the vines and til the land. Now what was the cause of this la∣mentable destruction of this holy City, of the Temple and Sanctuary of the Lord, and of his owne people? it is set downe by the holy-Ghost in expresse word, 2 Chro. 36. 15, 16. That, When the Lord sent unto them by his 2 Chron, 36. 15, 16. Messengers, rising early, and sending, because he had compassion on them, and on his habitation, they mocked the Messengers of God, despised his words, and misused his Prophets: and therefore the wrath of the Lord arose against his people, and there was no remedy. Behold here the grievous judgement of the Lord upon such as contemned his Word, and despised his Prophets. Thus was the first city and temple destroyed: and did the second fare any better? no verily, but far worse: for as their sinne was greater, in that the former Iews contemned only the Word spoken by the Prophets which were but servants, these despised the Word spoken by the Sonne himself, which is the Lord of life; so their punishment was also the greater: for as the Apostle saith, If they which despised Moses Law died without mercy, how Heb. 10. 28. 29. much sorer punishment are they worthy of which tread under foot the Sonne of God, and count the bloud of the Testament as an unholy thing, and neglect so great sal∣vation, which first began to be preached by the Lord himselfe, and afterward was Heb. 2. 3. confirmed by them which heard him. Therefore the destruction of the second city and temple by Titus and Vespasian Emperours of Rome, was far more lamentable than that of the former: yea, so terrible and fearefull was the judgement of God upon that nation at this time, that never the like cala∣mitie and misery was heard or read of: there at the siege of Ierusalem the famin was so great within the walls, and the sword so terrible without, that within they were constrained to eat not only leather and old shoo's, but horse-dung, yea their owne excrements, and some to devour their owne children: and as many as issued out were crucified by the Romans, as they had crucified the Saviour of the world, till they had no more wood to naile them on. So that it was most true which our Saviour foreprophesied, That such should be the tribulation of that time, as was not from the beginning of Matth. 24. 21. the world, nor should be againe to the end. At this destruction perished eleven hundred thousand Iewes, as Historians report; besides them which Vespa∣sian slew in subduing the country of Galilee: over and besides them also which were sould and sent into Aegypt and other provinces, to vile slavery, to the number of seventeene thousand: two thousand were brought with Titus in triumph; of which, part he gave to be devoured of wilde beasts, and part otherwise most cruelly were slaine. By whose case all nations may take example, what it is to reject the visitation of Gods verity being sent unto them, and much more to persecute them which be sent of God for their salvation. And here is diligently to be observed the great equi∣ty of this judgment: they refused Christ to be their King, and chose rather to be subject unto Caesar; now they are by the said (their owne) Caesar de∣stroyed, when as Christs subjects the same time escaped the danger.
The like example of Gods wrathfull punishment is to be noted no lesse in the Romans also themselves, for despising Christ and his Gospel: for when Tiberius Nero the Emperor having received by letters from Ponti∣us Tertul. Apol. cap. 5. Pilat, a true report of the doings of Christ Iesus, of his miracles, resur∣rection, and ascention into heaven, and how he was received as God of many good men, was himselfe mooved with beleefe of the same, and did confer thereof with the whole Senat of Rome, to have Christ adored as God. But they not agreeing thereunto, refused him, because that contra∣ry to the law of the Romans, he was consecrated (said they) for a God before the Senat of Rome had decreed and approved him. Thus the vaine Senat which were contented with the Emperor to raign over them, were not contented with the meeke King of glory, the Sonne of God, to be their King; yea they contemned also the preaching of the two blessed Apostles Peter and Paul, who were also most cruelly put to death in the later end of Domitius Nero his raigne, and the yeare of Christ 69, for the testimony and saith of Christ. And therefore after much like sort to the Iews were they scourged and entrapped by the same way which they did prefer: for as they preferred the Emperour, and rejected Christ, so did Sueton. Tacitus. God stirre up their owne Emperours against them, in such sort, that both the Senators themselves were all devoured, and the whole city most hor∣ribly afflicted the space almost of three hundred yeares together. Neither were they only thus scourged by their Emperors, but also by civill wars, whereof three were sought in two yeares at Rome after Nero's death: as likewise by other casualties: for in Suetonius is testified, five thousand were hurt and slaine by fall of a Theatre. How heavy and searefull the judgement of God hath beene towards those seven famous Churches of Asia, to the which the holy Ghost wri∣teth his seven Epistles, Revel. 2 and 3. histories sufficiently testifie, and ex∣perience sheweth: for whereas in the Apostles time, and long after in the dayes of persecution, no Churches in the world more flourished; after, when they began to make light account of the word of God, and to fall away from the truth to errors, from godlinesse to impieties, the Lord also made light account of them, and removed his Candlesticke, that is, the ministery of his Gospell, from amongst them, and made them a prey unto Revel. 2. 5. their enemies: and so they which before were subjects to Christ, are now slaves to Mahomet; and there where the true God was worshipped is now a filthy Idol adored; and instead of the Gospel of Christ, is the Turks Al∣coran; in stead of the seven stars and seven candlesticks are seven thousand priests of Mahomet, and worshippers of him: and thus for the contempt of the Gospel of Christ, is the Chrurch of Christians made a cage of Divels. Venerable Bede in his Ecclesticall history of England reporteth, That Beda li. 1. ca. 15. about the yeare of our Lord 420, after that the Brittons had been long afflicted by the Irish, Picts, and Scots, and that the Lord had given them rest from all their enemies, and had blessed them with such great plenty of corn, and fruits of the earth, as had not been before heard of, they fell into all manner of sins and vices, and in stead of shewing themselves thank∣full to the Lord for his great mercies, provoked his indignation more fiercely against them: for, as he saith, together with plenty grew ryot, and this was accompanied with a train of many other foule enormities, especi∣ally the hatred of the truth, & contempt of the Word, and that not only in
the Laity and ignorant people, but even also in the Clergy and Sheep∣heards of the people: for which cause the Lord first sent among them such a contagious plague, that the living were scarce sufficient to bury the dead: and when by this punishment they were not reclaimed, then by their owne counsels and procurement the Lord brought upon them a fierce and mighty nation, even the Saxons of Germany; who albeit they came at first as helpers and succorers of them against their enemies, yet ere long proved their sorest foes themselves, and after much bloudshed drave them almost quite out of their Kingdome, confining them into a haven, nooke, and corner of the same, where they remaine till this day: and all this came upon them (saith that reverend Authour) for their in∣gratitude for Gods mercies, and contempt of the Word of God. Againe, we reade a little before this, how that God stirred up Gildas Acts and Mo∣numents, pag. 32. a godly learned man, to preach to the old Brittons, and to exhort them to repentance and amendment of life, and to forewarne them of plagues to come, if they repented not: but what availed it? Gildas was laughed to scorne and taken for a false Prophet; the Brittons, with whorish faces and unrepentant hearts, went forward in their sins; and what followed? God to punish their contempt of his Word and Ministers, sent in their ene∣mies on every side, and destroying them, gave their land to other nations. Againe, not many yeares past, Almighty God seeing idolatry, super∣stition, Acts and Mo∣numents. pag. 32. hypocrisie, and wicked living used in this land, raised up that godly learned man Iohn Wickliffe to preach unto our fathers repentance, and to exhort them to forsake their idolatry and superstition: but his ex∣hortations were not regarded, he with his sermons was despised, his bookes and himselfe after his death, were burnt: What ensued? A most grievous and heavy vengeance: they slew their lawfull King, and set up three other on a row, under whom all the noble bloud was slaine up, and halfe the Commons destroyed; what by warre in France, and civile dis∣cord among themselves, the cities and towns were decayed, and the land brought half to a wildernesse. O, extrem plagues of Gods just vengeance! But these examples be generall over whole nations: now let us des∣cend to particular judgments upon private persons, for contemning, scorning, or despising the Word of God, the holy Sacraments, and the Ministers of the same. Hemingius a learned Divine, in his exposition upon the first chapter of S. Iohns Gospell reporteth, That about the yere 1550 there was a certain Nich. Heming. lewd companion in Denmark, who had long made profession to mocke at all Religion, and at devout persons: This fellow entering into a Church where there was a sermon made by the Minister of the place, began con∣trary to all those that were present, to behave himselfe most prophanely, and to shew by lewd countenances and gestures, his dislike and contempt of that holy exercise: to whom the preacher (being instant upon his busi∣nesse in hand) spake not a word, but only sighing, praied unto God, that this mocker might be suppressed: who seeing that the Preacher would no contest against him, but contemned his unworthy behaviour, goeth out of the Church, but yet not out of the reach of Gods vengeance: for presently as he passed out, a tyle fell from the house upon his head, and slew him upon the place: a just judgement upon so prophane a wretch. From whence all scorners and deriders of godly sermons, and the preachers
of the same, may take example for their amendment, if they have any grace in them. Christopher Turke a Counsellor of Estate to a great Nobleman in Ger∣many, Mart. ydius, Celebrat. deut. excels. going one day to horse, and mocking at a certaine godly Noble∣man who was then prisoner in his enemies hands, uttered these or such like speeches; See what is become of these gallants, that sung so much one with anothe, When any one doth wrong us, God is our succor and defence: but he had scarce ended his words, when as a sudden griefe tooke him, so that he was forced to alight from his horse, and to be carried to bed; where in stead of singing, he dyed in dispaire, drawing forth his tongue as blacke as a cole, and hanging out of his mouth. This happened the ninth of Iune, 1547. The contempt of the Sacrament of baptisme was most notably puni∣shed Georst. le feure, lib. 3. Annal. Misniae. in a certaine Curate of Misnia in Thuring: whose custome was when∣soever hee had baptised any women children, in contempt of the foemi∣nine sex, and without any regard to the holy Sacrament, to say, That they should not carry them backe to the house, but cast them into the River. This prophane Curate looking one day over the bridge of Elbe (which is a large and a deepe River) how the boats did passe; no man touching him, nor his braine any way altered, but by a secret judgement of God, fell over the bridge into the water, and was presently drowned: that he which so impiously wished drowning to other, and that at the Sacrament of Baptisme, was drowned himselfe. This happened in the yeare 1505. The contemptuous and irreverent handling of the Word of God in the Acts and Mo∣numents. pag. 1730. pulpit, together with open hatred of the Gospel, was most famously re∣venged in one Nightingale the Parson of Gondal besides Canterbury, in the raigne of Queen Mary, Anno 1555. This wretched Parson upon Shrove Sunday (which was the third day of the moneth of March) making a Ser∣mon to his parishioners, entred beside his text, into an impertinent dis∣course of the Articles lately set forth by the Popes authority, in commen∣dation thereof, and to the disgrace of the Gospell: saying more over thus unto the people, My masters and neighbours, rejoice and be merry, for the prodigall sonne is come home: for I know that the most part of you are as I am, I know your hearts well enough, and I shall tell you what happened to me this weeke past: I was before my Lord Cardinall, and he hath made me as cleane from sinne as I was at the Font-stone; and he hath also ap∣pointed me to notifie unto you the Bull of the Popes pardon; and so rea∣ding the same unto them, he thanked God that ever he lived to see that day: adding moreover, that he beleeved, that by the vertue of that Bull he was as cleane from sinne as that night that he was borne: which words he had no sooner uttered, but the Lord to shew that he lyed, stroke him with sudden death, and so he fel down out of the pulpit, never stirring hand nor foot, not speaking word, but there lay, an amazement and astonish∣ment to all the people. Denterius an Arrian Bishop being at Bizantium, as he was about to bap∣tise one Barbas after his blasphemous manner, saying, I baptise thee in the name of the Father, through the Sonne, in the holy Ghost, (which forme of words is contrary to the prescript rule of Christ, that bad his disciples to baptise all nations, In the Name of the Father, the Sonne, and the
holy Ghost) the water suddenly vanished, so that he could not then be baptised: wherefore Barbas all amased, fled to a Church of purer Religion, and there was entertained into the Church by baptisme. Socrates in his Ecclesiasticall History reporteth the like accident to have happened to a Socrat. lib. 7. cap. 17. Iew, who had beene oftentimes baptised, and came to Paulus a Novatian Bishop, to receive the Sacrament againe; but the water as before vanished; and his villany being detected, he was banished the Church. Vrbanus Formensis and Foelix Iducensis, two Donatists by profession, ru∣shing into Thipasa a city of Mauritania, commanded the Eucharist to be Opat. Meltuit. Lib 2 contra Parenanum. Cent. 4. cap. 6. throwne among the dogs; but the dogs growing mad thereby, set upon their owne Masters, and rent them with their teeth, as being guilty of de∣spising the body of Christ. Certainly a notable judgement to condemne the wicked behaviour of those miscreants, who were so prophane, as not only to refuse the Sacrament themselves, but also to cast it to their dogs, as if it were the vilest and contemptiblest thing in the world. Vide lib. 1. cap. 17. Theopompus a Phylosopher being about to insert certaine things out of the writings of Moses, into his prophane works, and so to abuse the sacred Word of God, was stricken with a frenzy; and being warned of the cause thereof in a dreame, by prayers made unto God, recovered his sences againe. This story is recorded by Iosephus. As also another of Theodectes Jeseph. Antiq: Liba 2. cap. 2. a Poet, that mingled his Tragedies with the holy Scripture, and was ther∣fore stricken with blindnesse, untill he had recanted his impiety. In a towne of Germany called Itzsith, there dwelt a certaine husband∣man Luther in Coloqijs. that was a monstrous despiser and prophaner of the Word of God and his Sacraments: he upon a time amidst his cups, railed with most bit∣ter termes upon a Minister of Gods Word; after which, going presently into the fields to overlooke his sheepe, he never returned alive, but was found there dead, with his body all scortched and burnt as blacke as a cole: the Lord having given him over into the hands of the Divell, to be thus used for his vile prophanenesse and abusing his holy things. This D. Iustus Ionus in Luthers Conferences reporteth to be most true. In the yeare of our Lord 1553, a certain Coblers servant being brought up among the professors of the reformed Religion, and having received Philip. Melan. the Sacrament in both kinds, after living under Popery, received it after their fashion in one kinde; but when he returned to his old Master, and was admonished by him to go againe to the Communion as he was wont, then his sleepy conscience awaked and he fell into most horrible dispaire, cry∣ing that he was the Divels bondslave, and therewithall threw himselfe headlong out of the window, so that with the fall his bowels gushed out of his mouth, and he died most miserably. When the great persecution of the Christians was in Persia under king Sozomen lib. 2. cap. 1. Sapor, in the yeare of our Lord 347, there was one Miles an holy Bishop, and constant Martyr; who preaching, exhorting, and suffering all manner Vide lib. 1. cap. 16. of torments for the truth of the Gospel, could not convert one soule of the whole city whereof he was Bishop, to the faith: wherefore in hatred and detestation of it he forewent it cleane: but after his departure the Lord made them worthily ue their contempt of his Word; for he sent the spirit of division betwixt King Sapor and them, so that he came with an ar∣my of men and three hundred Elephants against it, and quickly subverted it, that the very apparance and memoriall of a city was quile defaced and
rooted out. For certainly this is a sure position, where Gods word is ge∣nerally despised, and not regarded nor profited by, there some notable de∣struction approcheth. In a certaine place there was acted a tragedy of the death and passion of Christ in shew, but in deed of themselves: for he that played Christs part, Plip. Me∣lanct. in Colle∣ctane Manlij. hanging upon the Crosse, was wounded to death by him that should have thrust his sword into a bladder full of bloud tyed to his side; who with his fall slew another that played one of the womens part that lamented under the Crosse: his brother that was first slaine seeing this, slew the murther∣er, and was himselfe by order of justice hanged therefore: so that this tra∣gedy was concluded with foure true, not counterfeit deaths, and that by the divine providence of God, who can endure nothing lesse than such prophane and rediculous handling of so serious and heavenly matters. In the Vniversity of Oxford the history of Christ was also played, and cruelly punished, and that not many yeares since: for he that bore the person of Christ, the Lord struck him with such a giddinesse of spirit and brain, that he became mad forthwith, crying when he was in his best humour, That God had laid this judgment upon him for playing Christ. Three other Actors in the same play were hanged for robbing, as by credible re∣port is affirmed. Most lamentable was the judgement of God upon Iohn Apowel (some∣times a Serving-man) for mocking and jeasting at the Word of God: This Iohn Apowel hearing one William Malden reading certaine English prayers, mocked him after every word, with contrary gaudes and flouting termes; insomuch that at last hee was terribly afraid, so that his haire stood upright on his head, and the next day was found besides his wits, crying night and day without ceasing, The Divell, the Divell, O the Di∣vell of Hell, now the Devill of hell there he goeth: for it seemed to him as the Acts and Mo∣numents, pag. 2103. other read, Lord have mercy upon us, at the end of the prayer, that the Devill appeared unto him, and by the permission of God depilved him of his un∣derstanding. This is a terrible example for all those that be mockers, at the Word of God, to warne them (if they doe not repent) lest the ven∣geance of God fall upon them in like manner. Thus we see how severely the Lord punisheth all despisers and prophars of his holy things, and thereby ought to learne to carry a most dutifull regard and reverence to them, as also to note them for none of Gods flocke, whosoever they be that deride or contemne any part of Religion, or the Ministers of the same. CHAP. XXXV. Of those that prophane the Sabbath day. IN the fourth and last Commandement of the first Table, it is said, Remember to keepe holy the Sabbath day: By which words it is ordained and enjoyned us to separate one day of seven from all bodily and servile labour, not to idle∣nesse and loosenesse, but to the worship of God, which is spirituall and wholesome. Which holy ordinance when
one of the children of Israel in contempt broke, as they were in the wil∣dernes, by gathering sticks upon the Sabbath, he was brought before Mo∣ses and Aaron, and the whole congregation, & by them put in prison untill such time as they knew the Lords determination concerning him: knowing Num. 15. well, That he was guilty of a most grievous crime. And at length by the Lords owne sentence to his servant Moses, condemned to be stoned to death without the host, as was speedily executed. Wherein the Lord made knowne unto them, both how unpleasant and odious the prophanation of his Sabbath was in his sight, and how seriously and carefully every one ought to observe and keepe the same. Now albeit that this strict obser∣vation of the Sabbath was partly ceremoniall under the Law, and that in Christ Iesus we have an accomplishment, as of all other, so also of this ceremony, (He being the true Sabbath, and assured repose of our soules) yet seeing we still stand in need of some time for the instruction and exer∣cise of our Faith, it is necessary that we should have at least one day in a weeke to occupy our selves in and about those holy and godly exercises, which are required at our hands; and what day fitter for that purpose than Sunday? which was also ordained in the Apostles time for the same end, and called by them Dies Dominicus, that is, the day of our Lord: because upon that day he rose from the dead, to wi, the morrow after the Iewes Sabbath, being the first day of the weeke: to which Sabbath it by com∣mon consent of the Church succeeded, to the end that a difference might be put betwixt Christians and Iewes. Therefore it ought now religiously Cod li. 3. i. 12 . 10. to be observed, as it is also commanded in the civill law, with expresse pro∣hibition not to abuse this day of holy rest, in unholy sports and pastimes of evill example. Neverthelesse in stead hereof we use the evill imploy∣ance, abuse, and disorder of it for the most part, for beside the false worship and plentifull superstitions which reigne in so many places, all manner of disorder and dissolutenesse is in request, and beareth sway in these dayes: this is the day for tipling houses and tavernes to be fullest fraught with ruffians and ribalds, and for villanous and dishonest speech, with lecherous and baudy songs to be most rie: this is the day when dicing, dauncing, whoring, and such noysome and dishonest demeanors, muster their bands and keep ranke together; from whence foame out envies, hatreds, displea∣sures, quarrels, debates, bloud sheddings, and murthers, as daily experience testifieth. All which things are evident signes of Gods heavy displeasure upon the people where these abuses are permitted, and no difference made of that day wherein God would be served, but is contrarily mostdishono∣red by the overflow of wicked examples. And that it is a thing odious and condemned of God, these examples following will declare. Gregory Turonensis reporteth, That a husbandman, who upon the Lords day went to plough his field, as he cleansed his plow∣share with an yron, the yron stucke so fast into his hand, that for two yeares hee could not be delivered from it, but carried it about continually to his exceeding great paine and shame. Another prophane fellow, without any Discipulus de tempore. er. 103. regard of God or his service, made no conscience to convey his corne out of the field on the Lords day in Sermon time; but hee was well rewar∣ded for his godlesse covetousnesse: for the same corne which with so much care he gathered together, was consumed with fire from heaven, with the barne and all the graine that was in it.
A certaine Nobleman used every Lords day to goe a hunting in the Sermon while; which impiety the Lord punished with this judgement: he caused his wife to bring forth a childe with a head like a dog, that seeing Theatr. hist. he preferred his dogs before the service of God, hee might have one of his owne getting to make much of. At Kimsta a towne in France, there lived in the yere of our Lord 1559, Iob Fincel. l. 3. de Miac. a certain covetous woman, who was so eager upon the world, and greedy of gaine, that she would neither frequent the Church to heare the word of God her selfe, nor suffer any of her family to doe it, but continually abode labouring and toyling about drying and pilling flax, and doing other do∣mesticall businesses: neither would she be reclaimed by her neighbours, who admonished and dehorted her from such untimely works. One Sab∣bath day as they were thus busily occupied, fire seemed to issue among the flax, without doing any hurt: the next Sabbath day it tooke fire indeed, but was quickly extinct: for all this she continued obstinate in her pro∣phanenesse even the third Sabbath, when the flax againe taking fire, could not be quenched till it had burnt her and two of her children to death; for though they were recovered out of the fire alive, yet the next day they all three died. And that which was most to be wondred at, a young infant in the cradle was taken out of the midst of the flame, without any hurt. Thus God useth to exercise his judgements upon the contemners of his com∣mandements. The Centuriators of Magdeburge, intreating of the manners of Chri∣stians, Cent. 12. cap. 6. made report out of another history, that a certaine husbandman (in Parochia Gemilacensi) grinding corne upon the Lords day, the meale be∣gan to burne, Anno Dom. 1126, which though it might seeme to be a thing meere casuall, yet they set it downe as a judgement of God upon him for breaking the Sabbath. As also of that which they speake in the same place Eccles. hist. Cent. 12. ib. of one of the Kings of Denmarke, who when as hee (contrary to the ad∣monition of the Priests, who desired him to deferre it) would needs upon the day of Pentecost make warre with his enemy, died in the battell. But that may be better knowne to us all, which is written in the second booke of Macchabees, of Nicanor the Iewes enemy, who would needs set upon them on the Sabbath; from which when other the Iewes that were com∣pelled to be with him, could no way disswade him, he was slaine in the bat∣tell, and most miserably but deservedly handled, even the parts of his bo∣dy shamefully dismembred, as in that History you may read more at large. Therefore in the Councell at Paris every one labouring to perswade un∣to a more religious keeping of the Sabbath day, when they had justly Concil. Paris. lib. 1. cap. 50. complained, that (as many other things) so also the observation of the Sabbath was greatly decayed through the abuse of Christian liberty; in that men too much followed the delights of the world, and their owne worldly pleasures, both wicked and dangerous: They further adde, Multi nánque nostrum visu, multi etiam quorundam relatu dedicimus, &c. For many of us have been eye-witnesses, many have intelligence of it by the relation of others that some men upon this day being about their husbandry, have been strucken with thunder, some have been maimed and made lame, some have had their bodies (even bones and all) burnt in a moment with visible fire, and have consumed to ashes, and many other judgements of God have been, and are daily; Whereby it is declared, that God is offended with
the dishonour of so high a day. And our time hath not wanted examples in this kind, whosoever hath observed them, when sometimes in the faires upon this day the Wares have swumme in the streetes; sometimes the scaffolds at Playes have falne downe, to the hurting and endangering of many; sometime one thing, sometime another hath fallen out, to the great damage and hurt of many that have no conscience of this day; yea, often to the endangering of their lives: and that which is most strange, within these late yeares, a whole town hath been twice burnt for the breach of the Sabbath, by the inhabitants, as all men judged: The just report thereof I passe over here to set downe, untill such time as I shall be better instructed. Famous and memorable also is that example which happened at Lon∣don in the yeare 1583 at Paris garden, where, upon the Sabbath day were gathered together (as accustomably they used) great multitudes of prophane people, to behold the sport of Beare baiting, without respect of the Lords day, or any exercise of religion required therein: which prophane impiety, the Lord that he might chasten in some sort, and shew his dislike thereof, he caused the scaffolds suddenly to breake, and the beholders to tumble headlong downe; so that to the number of eight persons, men and women, were slaine therewith, besides many others which were sore hurt and bruised, to the shortening of their dayes. The like example happened at a towne in Bedford shire called Risley, in the yeare 1607: Where the floore of a chamber, wherein a number were gathered together to see a play on the Sabbath day, fell downe, by meanes whereof many were sore hurt, and some killed. Surely, a friendly warning to such as more delight themselves with the cruelty of beasts, and vain sports, than with the works of mercy and Religion, the fruits of a true faith, which ought to be the Sabbath dayes exercise. And thus much for the examples of the first Ta∣ble, whereof if some seeme to exceed credit, by reason of the strangenesse of them, yet let us know, that nothing is impossible to God; and that hee doth often worke miracles to controll the obstinate impiety and rebellion of mortall men against his commandement. Besides, there is not one ex∣ample here mentioned, but it hath a credible or probable Author for the avoucher of it. Let us now, out of all this that hath been spoken, gather up this wholsome lesson, to love God with all our heart and affection, to the end we may worship him, invocate his holy name, and repose all the confidence of our salvation upon him alone through Christ Iesus, seeking by pleasing and obeying his will, to set forth his glory, and render him due thanks for all his benefits. FINIS.
THE SECOND BOOKE. CHAP. I. Of rebellious and stubborne children to∣wards their Parents. WEe have seene in the former Booke, what punishments they have incurred, that either malitiously or otherwise have transgressed and broken the commandements of the first Table: Now it followeth to discover the cha∣stisements which God hath sent upon the transgressors of the second Table. And first concerning the first commandement therof, which is, Honour thy father and mother, that thy dayes may be prolonged in the land which the Lord thy God hath given thee. Cham one of old Noah's sonnes, was guilty of the breach of this Gen 9. Commandement; who in stead of performing that reverence to his fa∣ther which he ought (and that presently after the deluge, which being yet fresh in memory, might have taught him to walke in the feare of God) came so short of his duty, that when he saw his nakednesse, hee did not hide it, but mocked and jeasted at it: for which cause hee was cursed both of his father, and of God, in the person of his youngest sonne Chanaan, and made a servant to the servants of his brethren: which curse was fulfilled in Num. 33. Deut. 7. his posterity the Canaanites, who being forsaken of God, were rooted up and spued out of their land, because of their sinnes and abhomina∣tions. Marvellous strange was the malice of Absolon, to rebell so furiously 2 Sam. 15. against his father David, as to wage warre against him: which he did with all his strongest endeavours, without sparing any thing that might further his proceedings; insomuch that he grew to that outrage and madnesse, through the wicked and pernitious counsell of Achitophel, that hee sha∣med not villanously to commit incest with his fathers concubines, and 2 Sam. 16. pollute his bloud even before the eyes of the multitude: by which means being become altogether odious and abhominable, hee shortly after lost 2 Sam. 18. the battell: wherein though himselfe received no hurt nor wound, yet was he not therefore quit; but being pursued by Gods just judgement, fell un∣wittingly into the snare which he had deserved: for as he rode along the forrest, to save himselfe from his fathers army; his moyle carrying him un∣der a thicke oake, left him hanging by the haire upon a bough betwixt
heaven and earth, untill being found by Ioab, he was wounded to death with many blowes. Whereby every man may plainly see that God wan∣teth no means to punish sinners when it pleaseth him; but maketh the dumbe and sencelesse creatures the instruments of his vengeance: for hee that had escaped the brunt and danger of the battell, (and yet not having therefore escaped the hand of God) was by a bruit beast brought under a sencelesse tree, which God had appointed to catch hold of him as an exe∣cutioner of his just judgement: which if wee consider, is as strange and wonderfull an accident as may possible happen; and such an one as God himselfe provided, to punish this wicked, proud, and rebellious wretch withall: for seeing his outrage and villany was so great as to rebell against his father, and so good and kinde a father towards him as he was, it was most just, that he should endure so vile a punishment. Beside, herein doubt∣lesse God would lay open to the eyes of all the world, a fearefull spectacle of his judgements against wicked and disobedient children, thereby to terrifie the most impudent and malitious wretches that live, from this horrible sinne. And for the same cause it was his pleasure, that that wic∣ked and false Achitophel should fall into extreme ignominy and confusion for forsaking David, and setting forward with counsell and presence yong Absolon against his father; for which cause with despaire he hung him∣selfe. Now by this example it is easie to perceive how unpleasant this sin is in Gods sight, and how much he would have every man to hate and de∣test it, seeing that Nature her selfe teacheth and instructeth us so farre, as to yeeld duty and obedience unto those that begat, nourished, and brought us up. Notwithstanding all this, yet is the world full of ill advised and ill nur∣tured youth, that are little lesse disobedient unto their parents than Abso∣lon was, as Adramalech and Saraser, that slew their father Sennacherib as he was worshipping in the Temple of Nisroth his god: but whereas they loo∣ked 2 King. 19. 37. for the soveraignty, they lost the benefit of subjection, and were banished into Armenia, their brother Esarhaddon raigning in their stead. Gregory of Tours maketh mention of one Crannius the son of Clotarius Greg. of Tours fourth booke. King of France, who having conspired treacherously, and raised warre against his father, together with the Earle of Brittaine his supporter, were both vanquished and put to flight; but the Earle was slaine in the pursuit: The Prince himselfe also (thinking to escape by sea, where lay provided certaine ships ready to receive him) was in the mid way overtaken, toge∣ther with his wife and children, whom he purposed to make partakers of his fortune, and were altogether (by the expresse commandement of his father) shut up in a little house, and there burned together. In this wise did Clotarius revenge the treachery and rebellion of his sonne, after a more severe, cruell, and fierce manner than King David did, who would have sa∣ved his sonne Absolons life, notwithstanding all his wickednesse, and ma∣litious and furious rebellion: but this man contrariwise being bereft of all fatherly affection, would use no compassion towards his sonne, but com∣manded so cruell an execution to bee performed, not onely upon him, but upon his daughter in law also, and their children, perchance altogether innocent and guiltlesse of that crime. A very rare and strange example, seeing it is commonly seene, that grandfathers use more to cherish and
cocker their childrens children than their own. Therefore we must think, that it was the providence of God to leave behind a notable example of his most just and righteous severity against disobedient and rebellious chil∣dren, to the end to amase and feare all others from enterprising the like. Philip Comineus hath recorded the treacherous tragedy of a most wicked Philip Comine∣us in the reigne of Lewis the twelfth. cap. 63 and cruell sonne called Adolphus (for the world waxeth every day worse than other) that came in an evening suddenly to take his father the Duke of Gilderland prisoner, even as he was going to bed, and would not give him so much liberty as to pull on his hose (for he was bare legged) but car∣ried him away in all haste, making him march on foot without breeches five long Almaine miles, in a most cold weather: and then clapt him up in the bottome of a deep tower, where there was no light save by a little window, and there kept him close prisoner six moneths together. After which cruell fact, he himselfe was taken prisoner in like manner, and car∣ried bound to Namur, where he lay a long time, untill the Gaunts reprived him forthwith, and led him with them against Tournay, where he was slain: in the while of his imprisonment, his father yeelding to nature, disinhe∣rited him of all his goods, for his vile ingratitude and unnaturall cruelty, and left the succession of his dukedome to the Duke of Bourgondy. In the yeare of our Lord 1461, in a village called Iuchi, neere to Cam∣bray, Enguerr. de Monstr. vol. 2. there dwelt a certaine man (or rather a beast) that in a great rage threw his owne mother out of his doores thrice in one day, and the third time told her in fury, That hee had rather see his house on fire, and burnt to coles, than that she should abide there but one day longer. It happe∣ned that the very same day, according to his cursed speech, his house was indeed fired, but how or whence no man could judge: and the fire was so fierce, that it consumed to ashes not only that house, but also twelve other houses adjoyning: which was an evident figure of Gods just judgement in punishing so vile and unnaturall a deed by fire, seeing he deserved at the least to lose his house for banishing her out of it, that had borne him in her belly, and nourished him with the milke of her paps. In this place I may fitly insert two memorable examples of the same Alex. ab Alex. general. dier. Lib. 4. cap. 14. subject, gathered by an author of credit and fame sufficient, to this effect. It is not long (saith he) since a friend of mine, a man of a great spirit, and worthy to be beleeved, recounted to me a very strange accident which, he said, hapned to himselfe, and proved his saying by the testimony of many witnesses: which was this: That being upon a time at Naples at a kins∣mans and familiars house of his, he heard by night the voice of a man cry∣ing in the street for aid, which caused him to rise and light a candle, and run out to see what the matter was: being come out of the doores, he per∣ceived a cruell and ougly shaped divell, striving with all his force to catch and get into his clouches a yong man, that strove on the other side to de∣fend himselfe, and for feare raised that outcry which he had before heard: the yong man seeing him, ran to him forthwith, and catching fast hold by his cloathes, and pitifully crying to God, would in no case let go his hold untill his cruell enemy forsooke him: and being brought into the house all dismaied and beside himselfe, would not let go his hold untill he came to his sences againe out of that exceeding feare. The cause of which assault was, he had led all his time a most wicked life, and had been a con∣temner
of God, and a Rebell against his parents, using vile railing and bit∣ter speeches against them, in such sort, that in stead of blessing, they had layd a curse upon him. And this is the first example. Concerning the second, I will also set downe the Authors owne words, as followeth. Of all the strange things (saith he) that ever I heard report of, that which happened not long since at Rome is most worthy to be re∣membred, of a certaine yong man of Gabia, borne of a base and poore fa∣mily, but endued with terrible and furious nature, and addicted to a loose and disordinate life. This gallant picking a quarrell with his owne father, in his anger reviled him with most grosse and reprochfull tearmes: In which mad fits, as one wholly given over to the Divell, he purposely de∣parted to Rome to practise some naughty device against his father: but his ghostly father the Divell met him in the way, under the shape of a cruell and ougly fellow with a thicke bushie beard, and haire hanging disorderly, and cloathes all rent and tattered; who as they walked toge∣ther, enquired of him why he was so sad: He answered, that there had passed some bitter speeches betwixt his father and him, and now he devi∣sed to work him some mischiefe. The Divell by and by like a crafty knave soothed him up & said, that he also upon the like occasion went about the same practise, and desired that they might pursue both their voyage and enterprise together: it was soone agreed upon betwixt them, being like to like, as the proverbe goeth. Therefore being arrived at Rome, and lod∣ged at the same Inne, one bed did serve them both; where whilest the yong man securely and soundly slept, the old malicious knave watching his opprtunity, caught him by the throat to strangle him: whereat the poore wretch awoke, and cried for help to God so that the wicked spirit was constrained to forsake him without performing his purpose, and to flee out at the chamber with such force and violence, that the house roofe crackt, and the tyles clattered downe aboundantly. The host of the house being awaked with the noyse, cryed out to know what the matter was, and running into the chamber where this noyse was, with a candle in his hand, found the poore young man all alone betwixt dead and alive, of whom (recovered) he learnt out the whole truth, as hath been told: but he af∣ter this terrible accident repented him of his wicked life, and was touch∣ed with the sence of his grievous sinne so nearly, that ever after he led a more circumspect and honest life. Thus much we finde written in that Author. Henry the fifth inspired with the furies of the Pope of Rome, made warre upon his father Henry the fourth, vexing him with cruell and often Philip. Melanc lib 4. Chron. battels, and not ceasing till he had spoiled him of his Empire, and till the Bishop of Mentz had proudly and insolently taken from him his Im∣periall ornaments even in his presence: but the Lord in recompence of his unnaturall dealing, made him and his army a prey unto his enemies the Saxons, and to flie before them, stirring up also the Pope of Rome to be as grievous a scourge unto him, as he had beene before time to his father. Now as the ambition of a Kingdome was the cause of this mans ingratitude, so in the example following, pride and disdaine ruled, and therefore he is so much the more to be condemned, by how much a Kingdome is a stronger cord to draw men to vice, than a mans owne affection.
There was (saith Manlius) an old man crooked with age, distressed with poverty, and almost pined with hunger, that had a sonne rich, strong, and fat, of whom he intreated no gold or silver, or possession, but food and In Collectan. sustenance for his belly, and clothes for his backe, but could not obtaine it at his hands: for his proud heart, exalted with prosperity, thought it a shame and discredit to his house, to be borne of so poore and base paren∣tage, and therefore not onely denied him reliefe, but also disclaimed him from being his father, and chased him away with bitter and crabbed reproaches. The poore old man thus cruelly handled, let teares fall as witnesse of his griefe, and departed comfortlesse from his Tygre minded sonne. But the Lord that gathereth up the tears of the innocent, looked down from heaven in justice, and sent a fury into the sences and under∣standing of this monstrous son, that as he was void of nature and compas∣sion, so he might bevoid of reason and discretion for ever after. Another not so cruell and disdainfull as the former, yet cruell and dis∣dainfull Manlius in collectan. enough to plucke downe vengeace upon his head, would not see his father beg indeed, nor yet abjure him as the other did; but yet under∣taking to keepe him, used him more like a slave than a father: for what should be too deare for him that gives us life? yet every good thing was too deare for this poore father, Vpon a time a dainty morsell of meat was upon the boord to be eaten, which as soone as he came in he conveied away, and foisted in courser victuals in the roome. But marke what his Fides sit apud authorem. dainties turned to: when the servant went to fetch it againe, he found in stead of meat snakes, and of sauce serpents, to the great terrour of his con∣science: but that which is more, one of the serpents leaped in his face, and catching hold by his lip, hung there till his dying day, so that hee could never feed himselfe, but he must feed the serpent withall. And this badge carried he about as a cognisance of an unkinde and ungrate∣full sonne. Moreover this is another judgment of God, that commonly as children deale with their parents, so doe their children deale with them: and this in the law of proportion is most just, and in the order of punishing most usuall: for the proofe whereof, as experience daily teacheth, so one exam∣ple or two I will subjoyne It is reported how a certaine unkind and per∣verse Thearr. hist, sonne beat his aged father upon a time, and drew him by the haire of his head to the threshold: who when hee was old was likewise beaten of his sonne, and drawne also by the haire of the head not to the thre∣shold, but out of doores into the durt; and how hee should say he was rightly served, if he had left him at the threshold, as he left his father, and not dragged him into the streets, which hee did not to his. Thus did his owne mouth beare record of his impiety, and his owne conscience con∣demne him before God and men. Another old man being persuaded by his son (that had maried a yong Guiliel. Lugdi. Discipulus de emp. wise) with faire and sugred promises of kindnesses and contentments, to surrender his goods and lands unto him, yeelded to his request, and found for a space all things to his desire: but when his often coughing annoyd his yong and dainty wise, he first removed his lodging from a faire high chamber to a base under roome, and after shewed him many other unkinde and unchildly parts: and lastly when the old man as ked for cloathes, he bought foure elnes of cloath, two wherof he bestowed upon him, and reser∣ved
the other two for himselfe. Now his young sonne marking this nig∣gardise of his father towards his grandfather, hid the two elles of cloath, and being asked why hee hid them (whether by ingeniousnesse or instinct of God) he answered, To the end to reserve them for his father, against he was old, to be a covering for him. Which answer touched his father so neere, that ever after hee shewed himselfe more loving and obsequious to his father than he did before. Two great faults, but soone and happily amended. Would it might be an example to all children, if not to miti∣gate them, yet at least to learne them to feare how to deale roughly and crookedly with their parents, seeing that God punisheth sinne with sinne, and sinners in their owne kinde, and measureth the same measure to every man which they have measured unto others. The like we read of another George Lanter∣de disciplina liberorum. that provided a trough for his old decrepit unmannerly father to eat his meat in: who being demanded of his sonne also to what use that trough should serve, answered for his grandfather: What (quoth the childe) and must we have the like for you when you are old? Which words so abashed him, that he threw it away forthwith. At Millan there was an abstinate and ungodly sonne, that when he was Theat. hist. admonished by his mother of some fault which he had committed, made a wry mouth, and pointed his fingers at her in scorne and derision. Where∣at his mother being angry, wished that he might make such a mouth upon the gallowes. Neither was it a vaine wish, for within few daies he was ta∣ken Mandat. 3. Cursing. li. 1. cap. 33. with a theft, and condemned by law to be hanged; and being upon the ladder, was perceived to wryth his mouth in griefe, after the same fashion which he had done before to his mother in derision. Henry the second of that name, King of England, sonne of Geffrey Plan∣tagenet, and Maud the Empresse, after he had raigned twenty yeares, was content to admit his young sonne Henry (married to Margaret the French Kings daughter) into participation of his Crowne: but he like an unnatu∣rall son to requite his fathers love, sought to dispossesse him of the whole; for by inciting the King of France and certaine other Nobles, hee tooke armes, and raised warre against his owne naturall father: betwixt whom di∣vers strong battels being fought, as well in England by the Deputies and friends of both parties, as also in Normandy, Poytou, Guian, and Britain; the victory alwayes inclined to the father, so that the rebellious son with his allies were constrained to bend to his fathers will, and to desire peace, which he gently granted, and forgave his offence. Howbeit the Lord for his disobedience did not so lightly pardon him, but because his hasty mind could not tarry for the Crowne till his fathers death, therefore the Lord cut him short of it altogether, causing him to die six yeares before his father, being yet but young, and like to live long. Lothair King of Soissons in France, committed the rule of the province of Guian to his eldest son Cramiris, who when (contrary to the mind of his father) he oppressed the people with exactions, and was reclaimed home, he like an ungratious and impious son, fled to his uncle Childebert, and pro∣voked him towarre upon his owne father, wherein he himselfe was by the just vengeance of God taken, and burned with his wife and children to death. Furthermore it is not (doubtlesse) but to a very good end enacted in the law of God, That he which curseth his father or mother should die the
death, and that rebellious children and such as be incorrigible, should at the instance and pursuit of their owne parents, by order of law be stoned to death. As children by all these examples ought not onely to learne to feare to displease and revile their parents, but also to feare and reverence them, lest that by disobedience they kindle the fire of Gods wrath against them: so likewise on the other side parents are here advertised to have great care in bringing up and instructing their children in the feare of God, and obedi∣ence to his will; lest for want of instruction and correction on their part, they themselves incurre a punishment of their carelesse negligence in the person of their children. And this is proved by experience of the men of 2 Kin. 2. Bethel, of whose children two and forty were torne in pieces by Beares, for that they had been so evill taught as to mocke the holy Prophet Elizeus, in calling him bald-pate. Heli likewise the high priest was culpable of this fault, for having two 1 Sam. 1. 2. wicked and perverse sonnes, whom no feare of God could restraine, being discontent with that honourable portion of the sacrifices allotted them by God, like famished and unsatiable wretches fell to share out more than was their due, and by force to raven all that which by faire meanes they could not get: and that which is worse, to pollute the holy Tabernacle of God with their filthy whoredomes, in such sort, that the Religion of God Contempt of holy things. Lib. 1. cap. 34. grew in disgrace through their prophane dealings. And albeit it may seem that their father did his duty in some sort, when he admonished and repro∣ved them, yet it is manifest by the reprehension of the man of God, that he did no part of that at all, or if he did, yet it was in so carelesse, loose, and cold manner, using more lenity than hee ought, or lesse severity than was necessary, that God turned their destructions (when they were slaine at the overthrow of Israel by the Philistins) to be his punishment: for under∣standing the dolefull newes of his sonnes death, and the Arkes taking, at once, he fell backewards from his stoole, and burst his necke, being old and heavy, even fourescore and eighteene yeares of age, not able either to help or stay himselfe. David also was not free from this offence; for hee so much cockered a Kin. 1. 16. some of his children, that they proved the greatest plagues and scourges unto him, especially Absolon and Adonijah: for the one openly rebelled against him, and almost drove him out of his kingdome; the other usurped the title and honour of the kingdome before his fathers death: of this it is recorded. That David so cockered and pampered him, that he would ne∣ver displease him from his youth. But see how he was punished in them for this too great lenity; both of them came to an untimely death, and pro∣ved not onely the workers of their owne destruction, but also great crosses to their father. Ludovicus Vives saith, That in his time a certain woman in Flanders did Lib. 2. cap. 10. de institut: Christ. ami. so much pamper and cocker up two of her sonnes, even against her hus∣bands will, that she would not suffer them to want money, or any thing which might furnish their roiotous life, both in drinking, banquetting, and dicing; yea she would stoale from her husband to minister unto them: but as soone as her husband was dead, she was justly plagued in them both, for they fell from royoting to robbing, (which two vices are commonly linked together) and for the same one of them was executed by the sword,
and the other by the halter, she her selfe looking on as a witnesse of their destructions, whereof her conscience told her that her indulgence was the chiefest cause. Hither may we referre that common and vulgar story, and I suppose very true, which is almost in every childes mouth, of him that going to the gallowes, desired to speake with his mother in her care ere he dyed; and when she came unto him, in stead of speaking, bit off her care Cyriac. Spang. with his teeth, exclaiming upon her as the causer of his death, because she did not chastise him in his youth for his faults, but by her flatteries esta∣blished him in vice, which brought him to this wofull end: and herein she was doubly punished, both in her sonnes destruction, and her owne infamy, whereof she carried about her a continuall make. This ought to be a war∣ning to all parents, to looke better to the education of their children, and to root out of them in time all evill and corrupt manners; lest of small sprigs they grow to branches, and of qualities to habits, and so either be hardly done off, or at least deprave the whole body, and bring it to destru∣ction: but above all to keep them from idlenesse and vaine pleasures, the discommodity and mischiefe whereof this present example will declare. At a towne called Hannuel in Saxony, the Devill transforming himselfe Iob. Fincelius, lib. de Myrac. into the shape of a man, exercised many jugling trickes and pretty pa∣stime to delight young men and maids withall, and indeed to draw after him daily great companies: one day they followed him out of the city gates, unto a hill adjoyning, where he played a jugling tricke indeed with them, for he carried them all away with him, so that they were never after heard of. This history is recorded in the Annales of the aforenamed city, and avouched to be most true; being a notable and fearefull admonition to all parents, to set their children to learning and instruction, and to with∣draw them from all such vaine and foolish pastimes. CHAP. II. Of those that rebell against their Superiors. NOw as it is a thing required by law and reason, that chil∣dren beare that honour and reverence to their naturall parents which is commanded; so it is necessary by the same respect, that all subjects performe that duty of honour and obedience to their Lords, Princes, and Kings, which is not derogatory to the glory of God; & the rather, because they are as it were their fathers, in supplying that duty towards their subjects which fathers owe their children: as namely in maintaining their peace and tranquility in earthly things, and keeping them under the discipline of Gods Church; to which two ends they were ordained. For this cause the Scripture biddeth every man to be subject to the higher powers; not so much to avoid the punish∣ment which might befall the contrary, as because it is agreeable to the will Rom. 13. of God. And in another place, To honour the King; and, To give unto Caesar that which is Caesars, as unto God that which is Gods. So also in Moses law wee 1 Pet. 2. Mat. 22. Exod. 22. are forbidden to detract from, or speake evill of the Magistrate, or to curse the Ruler of the people.
Yet for all this the children of Israel were not afraid many times to commit this sin, but then especially when they charged Moses with con∣spiring the murther of those Rebels that (under Corah, Dathan, and Abi∣ram, Num. 16. Captaines of that enterprise) set themselves against him and Aaron; whom not he, but God for their pride and stubburnnesse, had rooted out and destroyed: and thus they backbited and slandered Moses, and muti∣ned against him, being their soveraigne Magistrate and Conductor, that so meekly and justly had brought them out of Egypt, even by the speciall commission of Almighty God. But the fury of Gods displeasure was so stirred up against them for this their fact, that they were scourged with a grievous plague, whereof dyed about foure thousand and seven hundred persons. In the time of King Davids flight from Absalom, who pursued him to 2 Sam. 16. bereave him of his kingdome, there was one Semei a Ieminite, that in his wicked and perverse humour, in stead of service done unto his Soveraigne, especially in that extremity, not only presented not himselfe unto him as a subject, but as a railer cursed him with most reproachfull tearmes, as of Mandat. 3. Cursers, lib. 1. cap. 33. murtherer, and wicked man, and also threw stones at him and his follow∣ers, in most despightfull manner: for which his malitious and rebellious act, though whilest David lived he was not once called in question: yet was he not exempted from punishment therefore; for in the end his wic∣kednesse fell upon his owne head, and destruction overtooke him by desert of another fault, at the commandement of Solomon. 1 King. 2. The punishment of Shiba the sonne of Bichri tarried not all so long, 2 Sam. 20. who having also with a proud and audacious heart stirred up the greatest part of Israel to rebell against David, then when he thought to have been most at quiet, enjoyed not long his disloyall enterprise; for being speedily pursued by Davids servants, and besieged in the city Abel, his head was cut off by the citizens, and throwne over the wall, as a just reward for his re∣bellious act. But let us passe over these sacred histories, and come to prophane, yet probable, and more neere examples. When Camillus besieged the Phalis∣chi, Liv. lib. 5. a people in Hetruria, neere to mount Floscon, a Schoolemaster of the city, who had the rule over the chiefe mens sons, both touching instruction and governance, led them out of the city gates one day in shew to walke, but indeed to betray them into Camillus hands: which unfaithfull dealing Camillus did not onely mislike, but detest and refuse, thinking it an unho∣nest part by such finister meanes to bring even his enemies in subjection; and therefore reproving the trustlesse Schoolmaster, and binding his hands behind his back, he gave every one of his schollers a rod, with commande∣ment to whip him backe unto the parents, whom hee had pretended so to deceive. A most noble act in Camillus (would wee could finde the like among Christians) and a most deserved punishment of the Schoolmaster, (would no traitor might be served better.) Neither might that worthy Romane repent his deed, for the Phalischi in admiration and love of this notable justice, freely yeelded themselves and their city to him, which otherwise in long time, and without great effusion of bloud he could not have atchieved. Did Tarpeia the daughter of Sp. Tarpeius speed any better, when sht be∣trayed Liv. lib. 1. the tower whereof her father was the overseer; to Tatius King of the
Sabines, who at that season besieged Rome, upon condition of a summe of gold, or as other writers say, of all that the souldiers wore on their left hands? No verily, for the Sabines (as soon as they had obtained their pur∣pose) overwhelmed her with her left hand gifts; to wit, their shields, and not their rings and bracelets, which she hoped: to the end to leave an ex∣ample to the posterity, how no promise nor oath ought to be of force to traitors, to keep them from punishment. Neither did these noble young men of Rome, amongst whom were the Tit. Liv. Consull Brutus sonnes, come to any better issue, when they conspired to receive King Tarquinius into the city by night, who by the vertue and va∣lour of their father was worthily expulsed: for their secret and wicked counsell being bewrayed to the Consuls Iunius and Pub. Valerius, by Vin∣dicio a bondslave, they were apprehended, having letters about them writ∣ten to Tarquinius to the same effect: and being condemned, were first shamefully scourged with rods, and after executed to death. Pausanias King of Sparta having conspired with the Persians against his Thucyd, lib. 1 own countrey, and as it were offered violence to his owne bowels, fled into the Sanctuary of Pallas for reliefe, when he saw the Ephori to go about to Aelian. lib. 9. call him in question for his treason. Now whereas it was irrelegious to take him from thence by violence, they agreed to shut him up there con∣tinually, and so to pine him to death. Which when his mother understood, she was the first person that brought a stone to stop up the doores, to hin∣der him from getting forth: and therein shewed a notable example of god∣ly cruelty to her childe, and cruell pitty to her countrey: approving that saying of Aristippus, who being demanded why hee neglected his sonne being borne of his body? answered, Doe wee not cast from us lice and flegme which are also bred of our bodies? Insinuating, That they which have nothing to commend them to their parents but genera∣tion, are not to be esteemed as children; much lesse they that degenerate. When Brennus, Captaine of the Gaules, brother to Belinus, and sonne to Moluntius King of Brittaine, besieged Ephesus, a devillish woman enti∣ced with the jewels which Brennus wore about him, betraied the city into his hands. But Brennus detesting this abhominable covetousnesse, when he entred the city so loaded her with gold, that he covered and oppressed her therewith. In like manner Herodamon delivered up to the Emperour Aurelian his own native city Tian, in hope to save his owne life by betraying his coun∣trey. But it fell out quite contrary to his expectation; for though Caesar had sworne not to leave a dog alive within the wals, because they shut their gates against him, and also his souldiers were instant and urgent upon his Eras. in Apoph. lib. 6. promise, yet he spared the city, and destroyed the traitor, and quit himselfe of his promise, by hanging up every dog in the city, contrary to his owne intent, and his armies expectation; yet agreeable to his words, and most correspondent to equity and true fortitude. In the yeare of our Lord 1270, the Bishop of Colonea practising to spoile the city of her priviledges, and reduce it under his own jurisdiction: Hermanus Grinu, Consul, and chiefe Magistrate, withstood his power and authority with all his force, so that he could not bring his purpose about. Wherefore two Cannons belonging to the Bishop, sought to undermine this their enemy by policy, and to take him out of the way: for which
end they invited him in very kind manner to dinner, but when he was come they brought him into a young lyons denne (which they kept in honour of the Bishop) and unawares shut the doores upon him, bidding him shift for himselfe, thinking that it was impossible for him to escape out alive. But the Consull perceiving in what great danger he was, wrapped his cloake about his left arme, and thrusting it into the mouth of the hungry Lion, killed him with his right hand, and so by the wonderfull providence of God, escaped without hurt. But the two traiterous Canons he caught right soone, and hung them at their Cathedrall Church, to their owne con∣fusion, and tertor of all traitors. It was noble saying, and worthy the marking, of Augustus Caesar, to Rami∣talches King of Thracia, who having forsaken Anthony, to take part with Augustus, boasted very insolently of his deserts towards him: then Caesar dissembling his folly, dranke to another King, and said, I love treason, but I cannot commend nor trust a traitour. The same also in effect Philip of Macedony and Iulius Caesar were wont to say, That they loved a traitour at the first, but when hee had finished his treason, they hated him more than any other: signifying, that traitours deserved no retribution of thankes, seeing their office was accepted for a time, yet they themselves could never be counted lesse than naughty and disloyall persons: for no honest man ever betrayed his countrey or his friend: and what greater pu∣nishment can there be than this? But for manifest proofe hereof let this one example serve in stead of many, namely, of Theodoricke King of Fran∣cia, Albert. Crantz and Irminfride King of Thuringia, who being profest foes, and having sought many cruell battels, at length the latter was conquered of the for∣mer, by the lucky assistance of the Saxons. This Irminfride thus subdued, sued for pardon and release at the conquerours hand, but hee was so farre from pittying his estate, that he corrupted one Iringus a Nobleman, and Irminfride's subject, to murther his master, which he performed kneeling before Theodoricke, running him through with his sword at his backe: which traiterous deed, as soone as it was finished, Theodoricke, though the setter of it, yet he could not abide the actour, but bad him be packing, for who could put trust in him that had betrayed his owne master? At which words Iringus (mad with anger and rage) ranne at Theodericke also with purpose to have slaine him too; but his hand missing the marke, returned his sword into his owne bowels, so that he fell down dead upon his masters carkasse. What more notable and wonderfull judgement could happen? surely it is an example worthy to be written in golden letters, and to bee read and remembred of every one, to teach men allegiance and obedience to their Princes and Superiors, lest more sudden destruction than this fall upon them. After the death of Ieronimus King of Siracuse, Andronodorus and Themi∣stius, Tit. Livius. provoked by their wives descending of the bloud royall, affected an usurpation of the crowne, and wrought much hurt to the commonwealth: but their practises being discovered, the Pretors (by the consent of the Senatours) slew them both in the market place, as rotten members of their common body, and therefore fit to be cut off. And when they un∣derstood, how their wives Damarata and Harmonia were breeders and incen∣sers of this mischiefe, they sent to kill them also; yea and Heraclia, Har∣monia her sister, guiltlesse and witlesse of the crime (for no other cause,
but because shee was sister unto her) was pluckt from the Altar, and slain in the tumult, with two of her daughters that were virgins. And thus is treason plagued not only in traitors themselves, but also in those that are linked unto them in friendship and affinity. The glory and reputation of Fabritius the Roman is eternised by that noble act of his, in sending bound to Pyrrhus a traitor that offered to poy∣son Cic. offic. lib. 3. him. For albeit that Pyrrhus was a sworne enemy to the Roman Em∣pire, and also made war upon it, yet would not Fabritius trecherously seeke his destruction, but sent back that traitor unto him, to be punished at his discretion. What notable treasons did Hadrian the fourth, Pope of Rome, practise against the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa, yet all was still frustrate; for the Lord protected the Emperour, and punished the traitour with a sudden and strange death; for he was choaked with a flie which went downe his throat and stopped his breath, and could by no meanes be pulled out till it made an end of him. Besides, many others that went about the same pra∣ctise, were brought to notable destructions: as that counterfeit foole whom the Italians set on to murder Fredericke in his chamber, which had been performed, had he not leaped out of a window into a river, and so saved his life: for the foole being taken, was throwne headlong out of the same window and broke his neeke. As also an Arabian Doctor, a grand poysoner, who going about to infect with poyson his bridle, his saddle, his spurres, and stirrops, that as soone as he should but touch them, hee might be poysoned, was discovered and hanged for his labour. In the yeare of our Lord 1364, when as the Emperour Charles the Albert. Crantz fourth, and Philip Duke of Austria, were ready to joyne battell in the field, Charles distrusting his owne power, undermined his foe by subtil∣ty on this fashion: he sent for three of Duke Philips captaines privily, and persuaded them with promises of rewards to worke some meanes to terri∣fie the Duke, and dissuade him from that battell: which they performed with all diligence; for they told the Duke, that they had stolne into the Emperours tents by night, and viewed his power, which they found to ex∣ceed his by three parts, and therefore counselled him not to try the ha∣zard of the battell, but to save his souldiers lives by flight, which if they tarried, they were sure to loose. Wherewithall the Duke mistrusting no fraud, sore affrighted, tooke the next occasion of flight, and returned home with dishonour. Now when these three traitors came to the Em∣perour for their compacted rewards, he caused them to bee payed in coun∣terfeit money, not equivaling the summe of their bargaine by the twen∣tieth part: which although at first they discerned not, yet afterwards finding how they were cousened, they returned to require their due, and complaine of their wrong. But the Emperor looking sternely upon them, answered▪ That counterfeit money was good enough for their counter∣feit service, and that if they tarried long, they should have a due reward of their treason. Ladislaus Lerezin, Governour of Alba Iulia in Hungary, under Maximi∣lian Leunclanias Annales of Turky. the Emperour, in the yeare 1566: the City being besieged, and in some danger of losing, albeit hee was advertised, That within two dayes he should receive some reliefe, yet yeelded the City traiterously into the hands of the Turkes upon composition. The cruell Turks forgetting their
faith and all humanity, massacred all the souldiers within the City, and sent Ladislaus the traitour bound hand and foot to Selym the great Turke: where he was accused for his cruell slaying of some Turkish prisoners, and delivered to his accusers to be used at their pleasure; who (a just reward of his former treason) put him into a great Pipe stickt full of long nailes, and then rolled him downe from a high mountaine, so as the nailes ran through him, and ended his life in horrible torment. Besides, his sonne that was also partaker of this treason, died miserably without meanes, and abandoned of all men, in great poverty and extremity. When as the City of Rhodes was besieged by the Turke, there was in it a certaine traiterous Nobleman, who upon promise to have one of Soly∣mans daughters given him in marriage, did many services to the Turke in secret, to the prejudice of the City. The Island and towne being woon, he presented himselfe to Solyman, expecting the performance of his promise: but hee in recompence of his treason caused him to be flayed alive; say∣ing, Camerarius Historicall me∣ditat. cap. 7. That it was not lawfull for a Christian to marry a Turkish wife, ex∣cept he put off his old skinne: being thus flayed, they layed him upon a bed all covered with salt, and so poudered him, that in short space he di∣ed in unspeakable tormenes. CHAP. III. More examples of the same subject. WHen Manuel the Emperour of Constantinople lay about Otto Frisin∣gensis de rebus Freder. pri. lib. 1. cap. 47. Antioch with an army prepared against the Turke, one of his chiefest officers, namely, his Chancellour, put in practise this notable piece of treason against him: he waged three desperate young men with an infinite summe of money to kill him on a day appointed, and then with a band of souldiers determined to possesse himselfe of the Crowne, and of the City, and to slay all that any way crossed his purpose. But the treason being discoured secretly to the Em∣presse, she acquainted her Lord with it, who tooke the three traitours, and put them all to cruell deaths: and as for the Chancellour, he first bo∣red out his eyes, and plucking his tongue through his throat, tormented him to death with a rigorous and most miserable punishment. When the Turke besieged Alba Graeca, certaine souldiers conspired to betray the City into his hands, for he had promised them large rewards Bonfinus, lib. 3. Decad. 5. so to doe; howbe it it succeeded not with them, for they were detected and apprehended by Paulus Kynifius Governour of Hungary, who constrai∣ned them to eat one anothers flesh, seething every dayone to feed the other withall, but he that was last was faine to devour his owne body. Scribonianus a captaine of the Romans in Dalmatia, rebelled against the Lanquet. Chro. Emperor Claudius, and named himselfe emperor in the army; but his re∣bellion was miraculously punished, for though the whole army favored him very much, yet they could not by any meanes spread their banners, or remove their standers out of their places as long as he was called by the
name of Emperor, with which miracle being moved, they turned their loves into hatred, and their liking into loathing, so that whom lately they saluted as Emperor, him now they murthered as a traitor. To rehearse all the English traitors that have conspired against their Lanquet. Kings from the Conquest unto this day, it is a thing unnecessary, and al∣most impossible. Howbeit, that their destructions may appeare more evi∣dently, and the curse of God upon traitors be made more manifest, I will briefely reckon up a catalogue of the chiefest of them. In the yere 1295 Lewline Prince of Wales rebelled against King Edward the first, and after much adoe, was taken by Sir Roger Mortimer, and his head set upon the Tower of London. In like sort was David, Lewline's brother served. Rs and Madok escaped no better measure in stirring the Welchmen up to re∣bellion. No more did the Scots, who having of their owne accord com∣mitted the government of their kingdome to king Edward, after the death of Alexander (who broke his neck by a fall from an horse, and lest no issue male) and sworne fealty unto him; yet dispensed with their oath by the Popes commission, and Frenchmens incitement, and rebelled divers times against King Edward: for he overcame them sundry times, and made slaughter of their men, slaying at one time 32000, and taking divers of their Nobles prisoners. In like manner they rebelled against King Ed∣ward Lanquet. Stow. the third, who made three voyages into that land in the space of foure yeares, and at every time overcame and discomfited them, insomuch that well neere all the nobility of Scotland, with infinite number of the com∣mon people were slaine. Thus they rebelled in Henry the sixths time, and also Henry the eights, and divers other kings reignes, ever when our Eng∣lish forces were busied about forraine wars, invading the land on the other side most traiterously. In the reigne of King Henry the fourth there rebelled at one time against him Sir Iohn Holland, D. of Excester, with the Dukes of Aumarle, Surrey, Lanquet. Salisbury, and Gloucester: and at another time Sir Thomas Percy Earle of Worcester, and Henry Percy son to the Earle of Northumberland: at ano∣ther, Sir Richard Scroope Archbishop of Yorke, and divers others of the house of the Lord Moubray: at another time Sir Henry Percy the father, Earle of Northumberland, and the Lord Bardolph: and lastly, Ryce ap Dee and Owen Glendour, two Welchmen: all which were either slaine, as Sir Henry Percy the younger; or beheaded, as the rest of these noble Rebels; or starved to death, as Owen Glendour was in the mountaines of Wales, af∣ter he had devoured his owne flesh. In the reigne of Henry the fifth, Sir Richard Earle of Cambridge, Sir Richard Scroope Treasurer of England, and Sir Thomas Gray were beheaded for treason. No lesse was the perfidious and ungratefull treachery of Humphry Ba∣nister an Englishman towards the Duke of Buckingham his Lord and ma∣ster, whom the said Duke had tenderly brought up, and exalted to great promotion, For when as the Duke being driven into extremity, by reason of the separation of his army which he had mustered together against King Richard the usurper, fled to the same Banister as his trustiest friend, to be kept in secret untill he could find opportunity to escape; this false traitor, upon hope of a thousand pounds which was promised to him that could bring forth the Duke, betraied him into the hands of Iohn Mitton
Shirife of Shropshire, who conveied him to the city of Salisbury, where King Richard kept his houshold; where he was soone after put to death. But as for ungratefull Banister, the vengeance of God pursued him to his utter ignominy: for presently after, his eldest sonne became mad and died in a bores sti: his eldest daughter was suddenly stricken with a foule lepry: his second sonne marvellously deformed of his lims, and lame: his youngest sonne drowned in a puddle: and he himselfe in his old age ar∣raigned and found guilty of a murther, and by his Clergy saved: And as for his thousand pounds, King Richard gave him not a farthing; saying, That he which would be nutrue to so good a master, must needs be false to all other. To passe over the time of the residue of the Kings, where in many exam∣ples of treasons and punishments upon them are extant, and to come nee∣rer unto our owne age, let us consider the wonderfull providence of God in discovering the notorious treasons which have been so oftenpretended, and so many, against our late Soveraigne Queene Elizabeth, and prote∣cting her so fatherly from the dint of them all. First therefore, to begin with the chiefest, the Earles of Northumberland and Westmerland, in the eleventh yeare of her raigne began a rebellion in the North, preten∣ding their purpose to be sometimes to defend the Queenes person and go∣vernment from the invasion of strangers, and sometimes for conscience sake to seeke reformation of Religion: under colour whereof they got to∣gether an army of men, to the number of six thousand souldiers; against whom marched the Earle of Suffex, Lieutenant of the North, and the Earle of Warwicke, sent by the Queene to his ayde: Whose approch strucke such a terrour into their hearts, that the two Earles, with divers of the arch Rebels, fled by night into Scotland, leaving the rest of their company a prey unto their enemies, whereof threescore and six, or there∣about, were hanged at Durham. As for the Earles, one of them (to wit) of Northumberland, was after taken in Scotland, and beheaded at York. Westmerland fled into another Countrey, and left his house and family destroyed and undone by his folly. A while after this, what befell to Iohn Throgmorton, Thomas Brooke, George Redman, and divers other Gentlemen at Norwich, who pretended a rebellion under the color of suppressing strangers, were they not disco∣vered by one of their owne conspiracy Thomas Ket, and executed at Nor∣wich for their paines? The same end came Francis Throgmorton to, whose trecheries as they were abhominable, and touching the Queens owne per∣son, so they were disclosed not without the especiall providence of God. But above all, that vile and ungratefull traitor William Parry, upon whom the Queene had powred plentifully her liberality, deserveth to be had in everlasting remembrance to his shame; whose treasons being dis∣covered, he payed the tribute of his life in recompence thereof. What shall I say of the Earle of Arundell, and a second Earle of Northumber∣land? Did not the justice of God appeare in both their ends, when being attainted for treason, the one slew himselfe in prison, and the other died by course of nature in prison also? Notorious was the conspiracy of those arch traitours, Ballard, Babington, Savadge, and Tylney, &c. yet the Lord brought them downe, and made them spectacles to the World of his ju∣stice. Even so that notorious villaine Doctor Lopez (the Queenes Physi∣tian)
who a long time had not onely beene an intelligencer to the Pope and King of Spaine of our English Counsells, but also had poisoned ma∣ny Noblemen, and went about also to poyson the Queene her selfe, was he not surprised in his treachery, and brought to sudden destruction? In summe, the Lord preserved her Majesty not only from these, but many other secret and privy foes, and that most miraculously, and contrary to all reason, and spread his wings over her, evermore to defend her from all her enemies, and in despight of them all brought her, being full of yeares, in peace to her grave: All these treasons had their breeding and begin∣ning from that filthy sinke of Romish superstition, from whence the poi∣son was conveied into the hearts of these traiterous wretches, by the means of those common firebrands of the Christian World, the wicked Iesuites, whose chiefest art is Treason, and whose profession is equivocation, and practise, to stir up rebellion; and therefore as long as they breath in the world let us looke for no better fruits from such trees. And hath the reigne of our now Soveraigne King Iames beene free from these Sinons? He hath as yet swayed the Scepter of this Kingdome not fully nine yeres, and how many treasons have beene complotted and pra∣ctised against his Majesty and the State, and how miraculously hath the Lord preserved him evermore, even as the apple of his eye, and the signet on his right hand. To omit the treason of Raleigh and Cobham, and that al∣so of Watson and Clerke, that late and last divellish and damnable practise of blowing up the Parliament house with gunpowder, together with the King, Prince, and all the Nobles and chiefe Pillars of the Land, is never to be omitted nor forgotten, but to be remembred as long as the Sunne and Moone endureth, to the shame of their religion, and the professours thereof: never Nation so barbarous, that ever practised the like: never any religion so odious, that maintained the like: but such are the fruits of their so much advanced religion, such the clusters of their grapes: How be it the Lord prevented their malice, and turned it upon their owne pates, not on∣ly by a Divine and miraculous discovery of their treason (the very night before it should have beene effected) but also by bringing the chiefe plot∣ters thereof unto confusion; some by the ordinary proceeding of justice, and some by slaughter in resistance: and that which is not to bee overpast, some of the principall of them being together in a chamber, were so scorched by their owne powder, which was in drying, that they were dri∣ven to confesse the heavy judgement of God to be upon them. I pray God such may ever bee the end of all traitours, and that the religion which bringeth forth such horrible fruits may not onely be suspected but abhorred of all. Moreover, there is yet another kind of treason, and another ranke of traitors as pernitious as any of the former, and as odious before God and man. Such are they which either upon private quarrels, or received inju∣ries, or hope of gaine, or any other silly respect, forsake their countries, and take part with the enemies to fight against it: or they that in time of ne∣cessity refuse to fight, or dare not fight in defence of it: the former sort are called fugitives, & the latter cowards. As touching the first, they havebeen alwayes in detestation in well governed Policies, and also evermore se∣verely punished. The Aeginates punished them with the losse of their right hand thumbs, to the end they might no more handle a speare or a sword,
but an oare: the Mitylenians with losse of their lives: the inhabitants of Samos marked them in the face with the picture of an Owle: and the Ro∣mans punished them after divers fashions. Fabius Maximus caused all those that had fled from the Roman succours to the enemy to lose their hands. Africanus the former, though gentle and mild by nature, yet in Valerius Max∣imus. this respect he borrowed from forreine cruelty: for having conquered Carthage, and got into his power all those Romane Rebels that tooke part against his countrey, he hung the Romans as traitors to their coun∣trey, and mitigated the punishment of the Latines, as but perfidious con∣federates. Africanus the later, when hee had subdued the Punicke Nati∣on, he threw all fugitives amongst wilde beasts to be devoured. Lucius Paulus aftor the conquest of the King of Persia, committed these fellowes to the mercy of Elephants. Generally there is no Nation under the Sunne which holdeth them not in execration: and therefore our Eng∣lish fugitives, who under cloke of Religion not onely abandon their coun∣trey, their kindred, and their Prince, but also conspire the undoing, and sweare the destruction of them, are they not worthy to be handled like traitours, and to have their quarters spectacles of perfidy? The bridge and gates of London beare witnesse of the wofull ends that these runna∣gates come unto. As touching cowards (I meane such as preferring their lives or liberty, or any other by-respects, before their countries welfare, and either dare not or will not stand stoutly in defence of it in time of warre and danger) they deserve no lesse punishment than the former, seeing that as they are open oppugners, so these are close underminers of the good thereof. And therefore the Romanes did sharpely chasten them in their government, as may appeare by diverse examples of the same: as first they were noted with this ignominy, never to eat their meat but standing; and hereunto they were sworne: Nay, they were in such hatefull account amongst them, that when Annibal offered the Senate 8000 captives to be redee∣med, they refused his offer; saying, That they were not worthy to be re∣deemed, Alex. ab Alex. that had rather be taken basely than die honestly and valiantly: The same Senate dealt more favourably with the captives which King Pyrrhus tooke, for they redeemed them, but with this disgrace, degrading them from their honours and places, untill by a double spoile they had woon their reputation againe. L. Calpurnius Piso handled Titius the cap∣taine of his horsemen in Sicilia (one who being overcharged with ene∣mies, delivered his weapons unto them) on this manner, he caused him to goe bare footed before the army, wearing a garment without seames, he forbad him society with any save such as were noted with the same Valerius Max. lib. 2. cap. 2. fault, and from a Generall over horsemen he debased him to a common souldier. How did the same Senate correct the cowardise of Caius Vatie∣nus (who to the end to priviledge himselfe from the Italicke warre, cut off all the fingers of his left hand:) even they proscribed his goods, and cast him into perpetuall prison, that that life which hee re∣fused to hazard in defence of his countrey, he might consume in bondage and fetters. Fulgosius saith, That among the Germanes it was so unhonourable Lib. 2. cap. 2. a part to lose but a shield in the warre, that whosover had happened to doe so, was suspended both from the place of common councell, and from
the temples of Religion; insomuch, that many (as he reporteth) killed themselves to avoid the shame. The people called Daci punished cowards on this sort: they suffered them not to sleepe but with their heads to the beds feet-ward; and besides, by the law they made them slaves and sub∣jects to their owne wives. What viler disgrace could there be than this? And yet the Lacedemonians plagued them more shamefully: for with Phi. Agesilaus. them it was a discredit to marry in the stocke of a coward; any man might strike them lawfully; and in their attire they went with their clothes rent, and their beards halfe shaven. Thus are all kind of traitors continually pu∣nished of the Lord by one meanes or other; and therefore let us learne to shun treason as one of the vilest and detestablest things in the world. CHAP. IIII. Of such as have murthered their Rulers or Princes. ZImri, Captaine of halfe the chariots of Elah, King of All this whole chapter, in re∣gard of mur∣ther, belon∣geth to the 6 commande∣ment. 1. King. 16. Israel, conspired against his Lord, as he was in Tirza drinking till he was drunke in the house of Arze his Steward, and came upon him suddenly, and smote him till hee died, and possessed the Kingdome in his roome. Howbeit, herein he was the Lords rod to punish the house of Baasha, yet when the punishment was past, the Lord threw the rod into the fire; for he enjoyed the Crowne but seven dayes: for all Israel, detesting his fact, made Omri King over them, who besieged him in Tirza, and drove him in∣to that extremity, that hee went into the palace of the Kings house, and burnt himselfe and the house with fire. Iozachar the sonne of Shimeah, and Ieozabed the sonne of Shomer, came King. 12. 22. to no better end for murthering Iehoash King of Iuda: for Amaziah his sonne after the kingdome was confirmed unto him, caused them both to be put to death: but their children he slew not, according to that which is written in the Booke of the law; The fathers shall not be put to death for the 2 King. 14. 5. children, nor the children for the fathers, but every man shall beare this owne sin. Neither did Shallum, that slew Zacharia King of Israel, prosper any bet∣ter; 2 King. 15. for he reigned but one month in Samaria, when Menahim the sonne of Gadi rebelled against him, and slew him as he had done his master. Amon, the sonne of Manasseh, was slaine by his owne servants, but the Lord stirred up the people of the Land to revenge his death, and to kill all them that had conspired against their King. But to let passe the holy histories of the sacred Scripture, wherein, ever after any treason, the Holy Ghost presently setteth downe the punishment of traitours, as it were of purpose to signifie how the Lord hateth all such Rebels that rose up against his owne ordinance: let us consider a little the consequents of these in prophane, yet credible authors, and apply them unto our purpose. Archelaus King of Macedonia had a minion called Cratenas, whom hee loved most entirely; but he againe requited him not with love but Aelian. lib. 1.
with hatred, and stretched all his wits to install himselfe in his king∣dome, by deposing and murthering him: which though he accompli∣shed, yet his deserts were cut short by the vengeance of God: for he con∣tinued not many dayes in his royalty, but he was served with the same sauce that he had made. Archelaus before him to taste of, even betraied and murthered, as he well deserved. Lodovicus Sfortia to the end to invest himselfe with the Dukedome of Millain, spared not to shed the innocent bloud of his two Nephewes, the sonnes of Galenchus, together with their tutors, and one Francis Cala∣ber, a worthy and excellent man; but the Lord so disposed of his purposes, that he (in stead of obtaining the kingdome) was taken prisoner by the King of France, so that neither he nor any of his off spring injoyed that which he so much affected. When Numerianus was to succeed arus his father in the Empire, Arri∣us Axer his father in law, to the end to translate the Empire unto him∣selfe, Philip Melanst Cbro 1. lib. 3. entered a conspiracy, and slew his sonne in law, that nothing mis∣trusted his disloyalty: but the Pretorian army understanding the mat∣ter, discharged Arrius, and elected Dioclesian in his roome, who laying hold upon his competitour, laied an action of treason to his charge, and put him to death in the sight of the multitude. Theodoricke and Fredericke conspired against their owne brother Thuris∣mund Chro. Sigebert. King of the Visigothes, to the intent to succeed him in his King∣dome: And albeit that nature reclaymed them from the act, yet they slew him without all compassion. But after thirteene yeres reigne the same Theodericke was requited by his other brethren with the same measure that he before meted to his brother Thurismund. And so though vengeance slept a while, yet at length it wakened. Aelias Antonius Gordianus, Emperour of Rome, though so excellent Philip Melanct Chron. a young Prince, that he deserved to be called the Love and Iewell of the World, yet was he slaine by one promoted by himselfe to high honour, Aventin. lib. 2. called Philip Arabs, when he was but two and twenty yeres old: after whose decease this Philip got himselfe elected Emperour by the Band, and con∣firmed by the Senate. All which notwithstanding, after five yeres Decius rebelled, and his owne souldiers conspired against him, so that both he at Ingratitude punished. Verona, and his sonne at Rome, were slaine by them about one time. After the death of Constantine the Great, his three sonnes dividing the Aventin. lib. 3. Empire betwixt them, succeeded their father. Constantine the eldest had for his share Spaine, France, the Alpes and England; Constance the second held Italy, Africa, Graecia, and Illyricum; Constantine the younger was King and Emperour of the East. But ambition suffered them not to enjoy quietly these their possessions: for when the eldest being more proud and seditious than the other, not content with his alotted portion, made warre upon his brother Constance his Provinces, and strove to enter Italy, he was slaine in a battell by Aquileia, when he was but five and twenty yeares old; by which meanes, all the provinces which were his, fell to Con∣stance, and therewithall such a drowsinesse and Epicurisme for want of a stirrer up after his brothers death, that he fell into the gout, and neglected the governement of the Empire: Wherefore in Asourge and in Rhetia they created a new Emperour; one Magnentius, whose life before time Constance had saved from the souldiers, and therefore
his treachery was the greater. This Magnentius deprived and slew Con∣stance, but was overcome by Constantine the third brother in Illyricum, yet in such sort, that the conqueror could not greatly brag, for he lost Notable in∣gratitude punished. an infinit company of his men, and yet missed of his chiefe purpose, the taking of Magnentius, for he escaped to Lyons, and there massacring all that he mistrusted, at last growing (I suppose) in suspition with his owne heart, slew himselfe also: and so his traiterous, ingratefull, and ambitious murther was revenged with his owne hands. Victericus betrayed Lnyba king of Spaine, and succeeded in his place; seven yeares after, another traitour slew him, and succeeded also in his Ritius lib. 1. de regib. Hispan. place. Mauritius the Emperor was murthered by Phocas, together with his wife and five of his children, he seating himselfe Emperour in his roome: Howbeit, traitors and murtherers can never come to happy ends: for as he had slaine Mauritius; so Priscus, Heraclianus, and Phorius three of his chiefest captaines, conspiring against him, with three severall ar∣mies gave him such an alarme at once at his owne doores, that they soone quailed his courage, and after much mangling of his body, cut him shor∣ter by the head and the kingdome at one blow. In the time of Edward the second and Edward the third in England, one Sir Roger Mortimer committed many villanous outrages in shedding Lanquet. much bloud, and at last King Edward himselfe, lying at Barkley castle, to the end that he might (as it was supposed) enjoy Isabel his wife, with whom he had very suspitious familiarity. After this, he unjustly accu∣sed Edmund Earle of Kent of treason, and caused him to bee put to death therefore: and lastly, he conspired against King Edward the third, as it was suspected, for which cause he was worthily and deservedly beheaded. Among this ranke of murtherers of Kings we may fitly place also Ri∣chard the third, usurper of the Crowne of England, and divers others Stow. which he used as instruments to bring his detestable purpose to effect: as namely Sir Iames Tirrèl Knight, a man for natures gifts worthy to have served a much better Prince than this Richard, if he had well served God, and beene endued with as much truth and honesty as he had strength and wit: also Miles Forest, and Iohn Dighton two villaines fleshed in murthers. But to come to the fact, it was on this sort: When Richard the usurper had enjoyned Robert Brackenbury to this piece of service of murthering the young King Edward the fifth, his Nephew, in the Tower, with his brother the Duke of Yorke, and saw it refused by him: he committed the charge of the murther to Sir Iames Tirrel; who hasting to the Tower, by the Kings Commission received the keyes into his owne hands, and by the helpe of those two butchers, Dighton and Forest, smothered the two Princes in their bed, and buried them at the staires feet: which being done, Sir Iames rode back to king Richard, who gave him great thankes, and as some say, made him knight for his labour. All which things on every part well pondered, it appeareth, that God never gave the world a notabler example, both of the unconstancy of worldly wale, and also of the wretched end which ensueth such despightfull cruelty: for first, to begin with the ministers, Miles Forest rotted away peecemeale at Saint Martins, Sir Iames Tirrel died at the Tower hill beheaded for treason, King Kichard himselfe (as it is declared elsewhere) was slaine in the field, hacked and hewed of his enemies, carried on horse∣backe
dead, his haire in despight torne and tugged like a dog: besides, the inward torments of his guilty conscience were more than all the rest: for it is most certainly reported, That after this abhominable deed hee never had quiet in his minde; when he went abroad, his eye whirled about, his body was privily fenced, his hand ever upon his dagger, his countenance and manner like one alwaies ready to strike, his sleep short and unquiet, full of fearefull dreames, insomuch that he would often suddenly start up and leap out of his bed, and runne about his chamber, his restlesse consci∣ence was so continually tossed and tumbled with the tedious impression of that abhominable murther. CHAP. V. Of such as rebelled against their Superiors, because of Sub∣sidies and Taxes imposed upon them. AS it is not lawfull for children to rebell against their parents, though they be cruell and unnaturall, so also it is as unlawfull for subjects to withstand their Princes and Governors, though they be somewhat grievous and burthensome unto them: which we af∣firme, not to the end that it should be licensed to them to exercise all manner of rigour and unmeasu∣rable oppression upon their subjects (as shall be de∣clared hereafter more at large) but we entreat onely here of their duties which are in subjection to the power of other men, whose authority they ought in no wise to resist, unlesse they oppose themselves against the ordi∣nance of God. Therefore this position is true by the word of God, That no subject ought by force to shake off the yoke of subjection and obedi∣ence due unto his Prince, or exempt himselfe from any taxe or contribu∣tion, which by publicke authority is imposed: Give (saith the Apostle) tribute to whom tribute belongeth, custome to whom custome pertaineth, feare to whom feare is due, and honour to whom honour is owing. And generally in all actions wherein the commodities of this life (though with some oppressi∣on and grievance) and not the Religion and service of God, nor the consci∣ence about the same is called into question, we ought with all patience to endure whatsoever burthen or charge is laid upon us, without moving any troubles, or shewing any discontentments for the same: for they that have otherwise behaved themselves, these examples following will shew how well they have been appaied for their misdemeanors. In the yeare of our Lord 1304, after that Guy Earle of Flanders having Nich. Gil. vol. 1 rebelled against Philip the Faire his Soveraigne, was by strength of armes reduced into subjection, and constrained to deliver himselfe and his two sons prisoners into his hands, the Flemings made an insurrection against the Kings part, because of a certain taxe which he had set upon their ships that arrived at certaine havens: and upon this occasion great warre, divers battels, and sundry overthrowes on each side grew, but so, that at last the King remained conqueror, and the Flemings (for a reward of their rebel∣lion)
lost in the battell six and thirty thousand men that were slaine, beside a great number that were taken prisoners. Two yeares after this Flemmish stirre, there arose a great commotion The same au∣thor. and hurly burly of the rascall and basest sort of people at Paris, because of the alteration of their coines: who being not satisfied with the pillage and spoilage of their houses, whom they supposed to be either causes of the said alteration, or by counsell or other meanes any furtherers there∣unto, came in great troupes before the Kings Palace, at his lodging in the Temple, with such an hideous noise and outrage, that all the day after, neither the King nor any of his officers durst once stir over the threshold: nay they grew to that overflow of pride and insolency, that the victuals which were provided for the Kings diet, and carried to him, were by them shamefully throwne under feet in the dirt, and trampled upon in despight and disdaine. But three or foure daies after this tumult was appeased, ma∣ny of them for their pains were hanged before their own doores, and in the city gates, to the number of eight and twenty persons. In the raigne of Charles the sixth, the Parisians (by reason of a certaine taxe which he minded to lay upon them) banded themselves and conspi∣red together against him: they determined once (saith Froissard) to have beaten downe Loure, and S. Vincents castle, and all the houses of defence Vol 2. cap. 120. about Paris, that they might not be offensive to them. But the King (though young in yeares) handled them so ripe and handsomely, that ha∣ving taken away from them their armor, the city gates and chaines of the streets, and locked up their weapons in S. Vincents castle, hee dealt with Cap. 129. them as pleased him. And thus their pride being quashed, many of them were executed and put to death: As also for the like rebellion were at Cap. 130. Nic. Gil. Vol. 2. Troyes, Orlean, Chalon, Sens, and Rhemes. About the same time the Flandrians, and especially the inhabitants of Gaunt wrought much trouble against Lewis the Earle of Flanders, for di∣vers Froiss. v. 2. c. 97. taxes and tributes which he had layd upon them, which they in no re∣spect would yeeld unto. The matter came to be decided by blowes, and much bloud was shed, and many losses endured on both sides, as a meanes appointed of God to chastise as well the one as the other. The Gaunts being no more in number than five or six thousand men, overthrew the Cap. 92. Earles army consisting of forty thousand, and in pursuit of their victory tooke Bruges, whither the Earle was gone for safety, and lying in a poore womans house, was constrained (in the habit of a beggar) to fly the City. And thus he fared till King Charles the sixth sent an army of men to his succor (for he was his subject) by whose support he overcame those Rebels Cap. 180. in a battell fought at Rose Bec, to the number of forty thousand: and the body of their chiefetaine Philip Artevil, slaine in the throng, he caused to be hanged on a tree. And this was the end of that cruell Tragedy, the Nic. Gil. vol. 2. countrey being brought againe into the obedience of their old Lord. A while before this, whilest King Iohn was held prisoner in England, there arose a great commotion of the common people in France, against Froiss vol. 1. cap. 182. the nobility and gentry of the realme, that oppressed them: this tumult began but with an hundred men that were gathered together in the coun∣trey of Beauvoisin, but that small handfull grew right quickly to an arm∣full, on to nine thousand, that ranged and robbed throughout all Brie, along by the river Marne to Laonoise, and all about Soissons, armed with
great bats shod with yron: an headlesse crue without Governour, fully purposing to bring to ruine the whole nobility. In this disorder they wrought much mischiefe, broke up many houses and castles, murthered many Lords; so that divers Ladies and Knights, as the Duchesses of Nor∣mandy & Orleance, were fain to fly for safegard to Meaux: whither when these Rebels would needs pursue them, they were there overthrown, killed, and hanged by troups. In the yeare of our Lord 1525, there were certain husbandmen of Sou∣abe Sleid. lib. 4. that began to stand in resistance against the Earle of Lupsfen, by rea∣son of certaine burthens which they complained themselves to be over∣laid with by him: their neighbors seeing this, enterprised the like against their Lords: And so upon this small beginning (by a certaine contagion) there grew up a most dangerous and fearefull commotion, that spread it selfe almost over all Almaine: the sedition thus increasing in all quarters, and the swaines being now full forty thousand strong, making their owne liberty and the Gospels a cloake to cover their treason and rebellion, and a pretence of their undertaking armes (to the wonderfull griefe of all that feared God) did not onely fight with the Romane Catholickes, but with all other without respect, as well in Souabe as in Franconia: they destroy∣ed the greater part of the Nobility, sacked and burnt many castles and for∣tresses, to the number of two hundred, and put to death the Earle of Hel∣fest, in making him passe through their pikes. But at length their strength was broken, they discomfited and torn in pieces with a most horrible mas∣sacre of more than eighteen thousand of them. During this sedition there were slaine on each side fifty thousand men. The captaine of the Souabian swaines called Geismer, having betaken himselfe to flight, got over the mountaines of Padua, where by treason he was made away. In the yeare of our Lord 1517, in the Marquesdome of the Vandales, the like insurrection and rebellion was of the commonalty, especially the baser sort, against the Nobility, Spirituall, and Temporall, by whom they were oppressed with intolerable exactions: their army was numbred of ninety thousand men all clowns and husbandmen, that conspired together to redresse and reforme their owne grievances, without any respect of civill Magistrate, or feare of Almighty God. This rascality of swaines raged and tyranized every where, burning and beating down the castles and hou∣ses of Noblemen, and making their ruines even with the ground: Nay, they handled the Noblemen themselves, as many as they could attaine unto, not contumeliously only, but rigorously and cruelly, for they tormented them to death, and carried their heads upon speares, in token of victory. Thus they swayed a while uncontrolled, for the Emperour Maximilian winked at their riots, as being acquainted with what in juries they had been over∣charged: but when he perceived that the rude multitude did not limit their fury within reason, but let it runne too lavish to the damnifying as well the innocent as the guilty, he made out a small troup of mercinary souldiers, together with a band of horsemen, to suppresse them, who com∣ming to a city were presently so environed with such a multitude of these swaines, that like locusts overspread the earth, that they thought it impos∣sible to escape with their lives; wherefore feare and extremity made them to rush out to battell with them. But see how the Lord prospereth a good cause, for all their weak number in comparison of their enemies, yet such a
feare possessed their enemies hearts, that they fled like troups of sheep, and were slaine like dogges before them: insomuch, that they that escaped the sword, were either hanged by flocks on trees, or rosted on spits by fires, or otherwise tormented to death. And this end befell that wicked rebellious rout, which wrought such mischiefe in that country, with their monstrous villanies, that the traces and steppes thereof remaine at this day to bee seene. In the yeare of our Lord 1381, Richard the second being King, the Commons of England (and especially of Kent and Essex) by meanes of a Stow Chron. taxe that was set upon them, suddenly rebelled, and assembled together on Blackheath, to the number of 60000 or more: which rebellious rout had none but base and ignoble fellowes for their captaines; as Wat Tiler, Iacke Straw, Tom Miller, but yet they caused much trouble and disquietnesse in the Realme, and chiefly about the city of London, where they committed much villany, in destroying many goodly places, as the Savoy, and others; and being in Smithfield, used themselves very proudly and unreverently towards the King: but by the manhood and wisedome of William Walworth, Major of London (who arrested their chiefe captain in the midst of them) that rude company was discomfited, and the ringleaders of them worthily punished. In like manner in the raigne of Henry the seventh, a great commotion was stirred up in England by the Commons of the North, by reason of a Stow Chron. certaine taxe which was levied of the tenth peny of all mens lands and goods within the land; in the which the Earle of Northumberland was slain; but their rash attempt was soon broken, and Chamberlain their captain with divers other hanged at Yorke, for the same. Howbeit their example feared not the Cornishmen from rebelling upon the like occasion of a tax, under the conduct of the Lord Audley, untill by woefull experience they felt the same scourge: for the King met them upon Blackheath, and dis∣comfiting their troups, took their captaines and ring leaders, and put them to most worthy and sharp death. Thus we may see the unhappy issue of all such seditious revoltings, and thereby gather how unpleasant they are in the sight of God. Let all the people therefore learne by these experiences to submit themselves in the feare of God to the higher powers, whether they be Lords, Kings, Princes, or any other that are set over them. CHAP. VI. Of Murtherers. AS touching Murther, which is (by the second comman∣dement of the second Table) forbidden in these words, Thou shalt not kill: the Lord denounceth this judgment upon it, That he which striketh a man that hee dieth, shall Exod. 21. die the death. And this is correspondent to that Edict which he gave to Noah presently after the uni∣versall floud, to suppresse that generall cruelty which had taken root from the beginning in Cain and his posterity, being carefull
for mans life; saying, That he will require the bloud of man, at the hands of ei∣ther man or beast that killeth him: adding moreover, That whosoever sheddeth mans bloud, by man also his bloud shall be shed, seeing that God created him after Gen. 9. his owne Image: which he would not have to be basely accounted of, but deare and precious unto us. If then the bruit and unreasonable creatures Exod. 21. are not exempted from the sentence of death pronounced in the law, if they chance to kill a man: how much more punishable then is man, endued with will and reason, when malitiously and advisedly he taketh away the life of his neighbour? But the hainousnesse and greatnesse of this sinne is most lively expressed by that ordinance of God set downe in the 21 of Deutronomy, where it is enjoyned, That if a man be found slain in the field, Deut. 21. and it be not knowne who it was that slew him, then the Elders and Iudges of the next towne assembling together, should offer up an expiatory sacri∣fice by the hands of the Priests, to demand pardon for that cruell murther, that the guilt of innocent bloud might not be imputed unto them. And if by oversight or negligence without any malice, hatred, or pretence, one killed another, yet was he not exempted from all punishment, but suffered to fly to the city of refuge, to be kept, and as it were inclosed untill his in∣nocency Num. 35. were made manifest, or at the least untill the death of the high Priest. From this (it may seeme) arose the custome of Painims in the like case; which was, that if a man had unwillingly committed murther, he did presently avoid the countrey, and goe unto some man of power and autho∣rity of a strange nation, and present himselfe at his gate, sitting with his face covered, humbly intreating pardon and reconciliation for his mur∣ther: and for one whole yeare he might not returne into his countrey. On this manner was the sonne of a certaine King of Phrygia entertained in King Craesus court, who unadvisedly had slaine his owne brother. Whereby Herod. lib. 1. it is manifest, how odious and execrable in all ages, and all places, and all people, this murther hath been: insomuch that men did shun their very meeting and company, and abandon them out of their temples and pub∣licke assemblies, as people excommunicate and prophane. And yet for all this, mankinde (for the most part) like savage beasts hath by the instiga∣tion of that wicked spirit (who was a murtherer from the beginning) been too too addicted to this kind of cruelty, not being afraid to offer violence to nature, and shed innocent bloud. Such was the franticke and perverse cruelty of the second man Cain, when without any occasion, but onely Gen. 4. through envy, he slew his brother Abel, and that traiterously: which deed, albeit it was done in secret and without the view of men, yet it could not shun the piercing eye of God, who reproved him for it, saying, That the bloud of Abel cried for vengeance from the earth. And although this cursed and wicked murtherer received not immediately a condigne punishment an∣swerable to his crime (God to the end to spare mans bloud, using undeser∣ved favour towards him) yet escaped hee not scot free, for he was pursued with a continuall torment and sting of confcience, together with such an incessant feare, that he became a vagabond and a runnagate upon the earth: and seeing himselfe brought into so miserable an estate, he fell to complai∣ning, that the punishment was greater than he was able to beare. Thus God permitted this wretch to draw out his life in such anguish, that for a greater punishment he might pine away the rest of his daies without com∣fort. A man may find in this world many such brother murthering Cains,
who for no occasion sticke not to cut their throats, whom (for the bond of common nature wherein all men are linked together as branches to one root) they ought to acknowledge for their brethren and friends: upon whom the heavy hand of God hath not beene more slacke to punish either by one meanes or other, than it was upon their eldest brother Cain. But seeing the number of them is so great, and it is not so convenient to heape up here so huge a multitude together, it shall suffice onely to recount the most famous and notablest of them, as of those that have beene men of note and reputation of the world, or that through an ambitious desire of raigning, have by armes sought to atchieve their purposes: for these for the most part are the greatest murtherers and butchers of all, that through their wicked affections, worldly pompe, or desire of revenge, have no re∣morse of making the bloud of men run like rivers upon the earth, making no more account of the life of a man, than of a flie or a worme. Such an one was Abimelech one of the sonnes of Gedeon, who to the end Iudg. 9. to usurpe the regiment of the people, (which his father before him refu∣sed) got together a rout of rascal and vile fellowes, by whose aid comming to his fathers house, he slew seventy of his brethren, even all except Ioa∣than the yongest, that stole away and hid himselfe. After which massacre, he raigned in jolity three yeares, and at the end thereof was cut short by God, together with the Sichemites his provokers and maintainers, who were also guilty of all the innocent bloud which he had shed: for God sent the spirit of division betwixt them, so that the Sichemites began to despise him, and rebell against him; but they had the worst end of the staffe, and were overcome by him: who pursuing the victory, tooke their city by force, and put them all to the edge of the sword. And after he had thus destroied their city, put fire also to the castle, wherein he consumed neere about a thousand persons of men and women, that were retired thi∣ther to save their lives. And thus God brought upon them the mischiefe which they had consented and put their hands unto: for as they had lent him aid and furtherance to the shedding of his brethrens bloud, so was their owne bloud with their wives and childrens shed by him: yet this ty∣ran not content therewith, made war also with the inhabitants of Tebez, and tooke their city, and would have forced the tower also, wherein the citisens had inclosed themselves; but as he approched to the wall, a wo∣man threw downe a piece of a milstone upon his head, wherewith finding himselfe hurt to death, he commanded one of his soldiers to kill him outright. And thus this wicked murtherer that had shed the bloud of many men, yea of his owne brethren, had his braines knockt out by a wo∣man, and died a most desperate death. The bloudy treachery of Baana and Rechab, chiefe captaines of Ishbo∣sheth, Sauls son, in conspiring against and murthering their master whilest 2 Sam. 4. he slept, abode not long unpunished; for having cut off his head, they presented it for a present to king David, hoping to gratifie the king, and to receive some recompence for their paines. But David being of an up∣right Treason, lib. 2. cap. 3. & 4. and true kingly heart, could not endure such vile treachery, though against the person of his enemy; but entertained them as most vile trai∣tors and master-murtherers, commanding first their hands and feet to be cut off, which they had especially imployed as instruments about that villany, and afterwards caused them to bee slaine, and then
hanged for an example to all others that should attempt the like. For the like cause was Ioab (Generall of king Davids host) for killing Abner traiterously (who forsaking Ishbosheth, had yeelded himselfe to the King) cursed of David, with all his house, with a most grievous and terri∣ble Treason; lib. 2. cap. 3. curse. And yet notwithstanding a while after he came againe to that passe, as to murder Amasa one of Davids chiefe captains, making shew to salute and embrace him. For which cruell deed, albeit that in Davids time he received no punishment, yet it overtooke him at last, and the same kinde 2. Sam. 20. of cruelty which he had so traiterously and villanously committed towards others, fell upon his owne head, being himselfe also killed as he had killed others: which happened in king Solomons raigne, who executing the charge and commandement of his father, put to death this murderer in the taber∣nacle 1. King. 2. of God, and by the Altar, whither hee was fled as to a place priviledged for safetie. CHA. VII. A sute of examples like unto the former. LEaving the Scripture, we finde in other writers notable ex∣amples Herod. lib. 1. of this subject▪ As first of Astyages king of the Medes, who so much swarved from humanity, that he gave in strait charge that young Cyrus his own daughters sonne, now ready to be borne, should be made away by some sini∣ster practise, to avoid by that meanes the danger which by a dreame was signified unto him. Notwithstanding the young infant find∣ing friends to preserve him alive, and growing up by meanes of the Peers favor (to whom his grandfather by his cruell dealings, was become odious) obtained the Crowne out of his hands, and dispossessing him, seated him∣selfe in his roome. This Cyrus was that mighty and awfull king of Persia, whom God used as an instrument for the delivery of his people out of the captivity of Babylon, as he foretold by the Prophet Isaiah: who yet (following kinde) made cru∣ell war in many places for the space of thirty yeares: and therefore it was necessary that he should taste some fruits of his insatiable and bloud-thirsty desire, as hee indeed did: for after many great victories and conquests o∣ver Oros. lib. 2. divers countries atchieved, going about to assaile Scythia also, hee and his armie together were surprised, overcome, and slaine, to the number of two hundred thousand persons: and for his shame received this disgrace at a womans hand, who triumphing in her victory, threw his head into a sacke full of bloud, with these tearmes, Now glut thy selfe with bloud which thou hast thirsted after so long time. Cambyses, Cyrus son, was also so bloudy and cruell a man, that one day hee Herod. lib. 3. shot a noblemans sonne to the heart, with an arrow, for being admonished by his father of his drunkennesse, to which he was very much given, which he did in indignation, and to shew that he was not yet so drunken but he knew how to draw his bow. He caused his own brother to be murdered privi∣ly, for feare he should raigne after him; and slew his sister for repro∣ving him for that deed. In his voyage to Aethiopia, when his armie
was brought into so great penurie of victuals, that they were glad to feed upon horse flesh, hee was so cruell and barbarous, that after their horses were spent he caused them to eat one another: but at his returne from Ae∣gypt, the Susians his chiefe citizens welcommed him home with rebellion: and at last, as he was riding, it so chanced, that his sword fell out of the scabberd, and himselfe upon the point of it, so that it pierced him through, and so he dyed. After that Xerxes by his overbold enterprise had disturbed the greatest part of the world, passed the sea, and traversed many countries, to the Diodor. lib. 11. end to assaile Greece with innumerable forces, he was overcome both by sea and by land, and compelled privily to retire into his countrey with shame and discredit: where he had not long beene, but Artabanus the cap∣taine of his guard killed him in his palace by night: who also after that and many other mischiefes committed by him, was himselfe cruelly murthered. The thirty Governours which the Lacedemonians set over the Atheni∣ans by compulsion, were such cruell tyrants, oppressors, and bloudsuckers Iustine. of the people, that they made away a great part of them, untill they were chased away themselves violently: and then being secretly dogged and pur∣sued, were all killed one after another. Pyrrhus king of Epire that raigned not long after Alexander the great, was naturally disposed to such a quicknes and heat of courage, that he could never be quiet but when he was either doing some mischiefe to another, or when another was doing some unto him: ever devising some new practise of molestation for pastimes sake. This his wilde and dangerous disposition began first to shew it selfe in the death of Neoptolemus, who was conjoyned king with him, whom having bidden to supper in his lodging under pre∣tence of sacrifice to his gods, he deceitfully slew: preventing by that meanes Neoptolemus pretended purpose of poysoning him when occasion should serve. After this he conquered Macedonia by armes, and came into Italie to make war with the Romans, in the behalfe of the Tarentines, and gave them battel in the field, and slew fifteen thousand of them in one day: he took their camp, revoked many cities from their alliance, and spoyled much of their countrey even to the walls of Rome: and all this in a trice without breath∣ing. Againe by Ascolie he encountred them the second time, where there was a great overthrow of each side of fifteene thousand men: but the Romanes had the worst, and tooke their heeles. When hee was intreated by the Sicilian embassadors to lend them aid to expulse the Carthaginians out of their Isle, hee yeelded presently and chased them out. Being recalled by the Tarentines into Italy for their succour, he was conquered by the Ro∣manes after he had made war upon them six yeres. At his returne to Epire he re-entred by violence Macedonia, tooke many places, overcame the army of king Antigonus that resisted him, & had all the whole realm rendred into his hand. Being intreated by Cleominus to make war upon Sparta, to the end tore∣install him in his kingdome which he was deprived of: forthwith he mustered his forces, besieged the citie, and spoyled and wasted all the whole country. Afterwards there being a sedition raised in the city of Argos betweene two of the chiefest citizens, one of the which sent unto him for aid, he (what issue soever was like to ensue, whether victory or vanquishment) could not abide in peace from disquieting others and himselfe, but must needs go to take part in that sedition: but to his cost, even to his destruction. For first in his way
he found an evill-favoured welcome by an ambush placed of purpose to in∣terrupt his journey, amongst whom he lost his son: which mishap nothing dismaied him, nor abated any whit of his purpose or courage from pursu∣ing this journey to Argos, though the citizens themselves intreated him to retire, and though he had no businesse there save only to looke over the town being arrived by night, and finding a gate left open for him to enter by, by the meanes of him that had sent for him to his aid, hee put his souldiers in, and possessed himselfe of the towne incontinently. But the city being aided by Antigonus and the King of Sparta, charged and pressed him so sore, that he sought meanes to retire out of the same, but could not. At which time being about to strike a young man of the city that had done him some hurt, his mother being aloft upon the roofe of an house, perceiving his intent, threw downe a tile with both her hands upon his head, and hit him such a knocke upon the necke through default of his armour, that it so bruised his joynts, that he fell into a sudden swound, and lost his sight, his raines falling out of his hand, and he himselfe tumbling from his saddle upon the ground, which when some of the soldiers perceived, they drew him out of the gate, and there, to make an end of the tragedy, cut off his head. The cruelty of the Ephori was marvellous strange, when being unwilling once to heare the equality of lands and possessions to be named, which Agis Plutarch. their King, for the good of the commonwealth (according to the antient cu∣stome and ordinance of Licurgus) sought to restore: they rose up against him and cast him in prison, and there without any processe or forme of law sttan∣gled him to death, with his mother and grandfather. But it cost them very deare: for Cleamenes who was joynt King with Agis, albe it he had consented to the weaving of that web himself, to the end he might raigne alone; yet cea∣sed he not to prosecute revenge upon them, which hee did not onely by his daily and usuall practises openly, but also privily; for taking them once at advantage, being at supper all together, hee caused his men to kill them sud∣denly as they fat. And thus was the good King Agis revenged. But this last murtherer which was fullied and polluted with so much bloud, he went not long unpunished for his misdeeds: for soone after, Antigonus King of Mace∣donia gave him a great overthrow in a battell, wherein hee lost Sparta his chiefe city, and fled into Aegypt for succour: where after small abode, upon an accusation laid against him, he was cast into prison, and though he esca∣ped out with his company by cunning and craft, yet as he walked up and down Alexandria in armor, in hope that through his seditious practises the citizens would take his part, and help to restore him to his liberty; when he perceived it was nothing so, but that every man forsooke him, and that there was no hope left of recovery, he commanded his men to kill one another, as they did. In which desperate rage and fury he himselfe was slain, & his body being found, was commanded by King Ptolomey to be hangd on a gibbet, and his mother, wives, and children that came with him into Aegypt, to bee put to death. And this was the tragicall end of Cleomenes King of Sparta. Alexander the tyrant of Pheres never ceased to make and spy out all occa∣sions of warre against the people of Thessaly, to the end to bring them ge∣nerally in subjection under his dominion: he was a most bloudy and cruell minded man, having neither regard of person or justice in any action. In his cruelty he buried some alive, others he clothed in beares and boares skins, and then set dogs at their tailes to rend them in pieces; others hee used
in way of pastime to strike through with darts and arrowes. And one day as the inhabitants of a certaine city were assembled together in counsell, he caused his guard to inclose them up suddenly, and to kill them all even to the very infants. He slew also his owne uncle, and crowned the speare wher∣with he did that deed with garlands of flowers, and sacrificed unto him be∣ing dead, as to a god. Now albeit this cruell Tygre was garded continually with troupes of souldiers that kept night and day watch about his body wheresoever hee lay, and with a most ougly and terrible dog, unacquainted with any saving himselfe, his wife, and one servant that gave him his meat, tied to his chamber dore, yet could hee not escape the evill chance which by his wives meanes fell upon him: for she taking away the staires of his chamber, let in three of her owne brethren provided to murther him, as they did: for finding him asleep, one tooke him fast by the heeles, the other by the haire, wringing his head behind him, and the third thrust him through with his sword, shee all this while giving them light to dispatch their businesse. The citizens of Pheres when they had drawne his car∣kasse about their streets, and trampled upon it their bellies full, threw it to the dogges to be devoured; so odious was his very remembrance among them. Igurth, sonne to Manastabal, brother to Micipsa King of Numidia, by Salusti birth a bastard, for hee was borne of a concubine, yet by nature and disposition so valiant and full of courage, that hee was not onely belo∣ved of all men, but also so deerely esteemed of by Micipsa, that he adop∣ted him joynt heire with his sonnes Adherbal and Hiempsal, to his crowne, kindly admonishing him in way of intreaty to continue the union of love and concord without breach between them, which hee promised to performe.. But Micipsa was no sooner deceased, but hee by and by not content with a portion of the Kingdome, ambitiously sought for the whole. For which cause hee first found meanes to dispatch Hiempsal out of his way by the hands of the guard, who in his lodging by night cut his throat, and then by battell having vanquished Adherbal his brother, obtained the sole regiment without controlment. Besides, hee corrup∣ted so by bribes the Senators of Rome that had soveraigne authority in and over his Kingdome, that in stead of punishment which his murther cried for, he was by the decree of the Senate allotted to the one halfe of the Kingdome. Whereupon being growne yet more presumptuous, hee made excursions and ryots upon Adherbals territories, and did him thereby much injury: and from thence falling to open warre, put him to flight, and pursued him to a city, where hee besieged him so long, till he was constrained to yeeld himselfe. And then having gotten him within his power, put him to the cruellest death he could devise: which villanous deed gave just cause to the Romanes, of that warre which they undertooke against him, wherein hee was discomfited: and seeing him∣selfe utterly lost, fled to his sonne in law Bochus, King of Mauritania, to seeke supply of succour, who receiving him into safegard, proved a false gard to him, and delivered him into the hands of his enemies, and so was he carried in triumph to Rome by Marius fast bound; and being come to Rome, cast into perpetuall prison, where first his gowne was torne off his backe by violence, next a ring of gold pluckt off his eare, lap and all; and lastly, himselfe starke naked throwne into a deepe ditch, where com∣bating
with famine six dayes, the seventh miserably ended his wretched life, according to the merits of his misdeeds. Orsius, saith he, was strang∣led in prison. Methridates king of Parthia put to death the king of Cappadocia, to Oras. Sabel. Treason, lib. 2. cap. 3. get his kingdome, and after under pretence of parlying with one of his sonnes, slew him also: for which cause the Romanes tooke up the quar∣rell, and made warre upon him, by meanes whereof much losse and in∣convenience grew unto him as well by sea as by land. After the first over∣throw, where one of his sisters was taken prisoner, when he saw himselfe in so desperate a case, that no hope of helpe was left, he slew two other of his sisters, with two of his wives, having before this warre given his foruth sister (who also was his wife) a dram of poyson to make up the tragedy. Afterward being vanquished in the night by Pompey the Roman, and put to flight with onely three of his company, as he went about to gather a new supply of forces, behold tydings was brought him of the revolt of many of his Provinces and countries, and of the delivering up of the rest of his daughters into Pompeyes hand, and of the treason of his yong sonne Pharnax, the gallantest of his sonnes, and whom he purposed to make his successor, who had joyned himselfe to his enemy, which troubled and asto∣nished him more than all the rest▪ so that his courage being quite dashed, and all hope of bettering his estate extinguished, his other two daughters he poysoned with his owne hands, and sought to practise the same experi∣ment upon himselfe, but that his body was too strong for the poison, and killed the operation thereof by strength of nature: but that which poyson could not effect, his owne sword performed. Though Pompey the great was never any of the most notorious offenders in Rome, yet did this staine of cruelty, ambition and desire of rule, cleave Plutarch. unto him: for first he joyning himselfe to Silla, dealt most cruelly and un∣naturally with Carbo, whom after familiar conference, in shew of friend∣ship, he caused suddenly to be slain, without shew of mercy. And with Quintius Valerius, a wise and well lettered man, with whom walking but two or three turnes, he committed to a cruell and unexpected slaughter. He executed severe punishment upon the enemies of Sylla, especially those that were most of note and reputation, and unmercifully put Brutus to death, that had rendered himselfe unto his mercy. It was he that devised that new combat of prisoners and wilde beasts, to make the people sport withall; a most inhumane and bloudy pastime, to see humane and manly bodies torne and dismembred by brute and senselesse creatures: which, if we will beleeve Plutarch, was the onely cause of his destruction. Now af∣ter so many brave and gallant victories, so many magnificent triumphs; as the taking of King Hiarbas, the overthrow of Domitius, the conquest of Africa, the pacifying of Spaine, and the overwelding of the commotions that were therein, the clearing of the sea coasts from Pirates, the victo∣ry over Methridates, the subduing of the Arabians, the reducing of Syria into a Province, the conquest of Iudea, Pontus, Armenia, Cappadocia, and Paphlagonia: I say, after all these worthy deeds of armes and mighty vi∣ctories, he was shamefully overcome by Iulius Caesar in that civill warre, wherein it was generally thought that he had undertaken the better cause in maintaining the authority of the Senat, and defending the liberty of the people, as he pretended to doe: being thus put to flight, and making to∣wards
Aegypt, in hope the King (for that before time he had beene his tu∣tor) would protect and furnish him, that he might recover himselfe againe, he found himselfe so farre deceived of his expectation, that in stead thereof the Kings people cut him short of his purpose, and of his head both at once, sending it for a token to Caesar, to gratifie him withall. Never∣thelesse, for all this, his murtherers and betrayers, as the yong King, and all others that were causers of his death were justly punished for their cru∣elty, by the hands of him whom they thought to gratifie: for as Cleopatra the Kings sister thrw her selfe downe at Caesars feet to entreat her portion of the kingdome, and he being willing also to shew her that favour, was by that means gotten into the kings palace; forthwith the murtherers of Pompey beset the palace, and went about to bring him into the same snare that they had caught Pompey in. But Caesar after that he had sustained their greatest brunt, frustrated their purposes, and recovered his forces into his hands, assayled them with such valour and prowesse on all sides, that in short space he overcame this wicked and traiterous nation. Amongst the slaine, the dead body of this young and evill advised King was found, over∣borne with dirt. Theodotus the kings schoolemaster (by whose instigation lor. lib. 4. and advice both Pompey was slaine, and this warre undertaken) being esca∣ped and fled towards Asia for his safety, found even there sufficient instru∣ments both to abridge his journey and shorten his life. As for the rest of that murthering fellowship, they ended their lives some here, some there, in (that mercilesse element) the sea, and by (that boisterous element) the wind, which though senselesse, yet could not suffer them to escape unpunished. Although that Iulius Caesar (concerning whom more occasion of speech Plutarch. will be given hereafter) did tyrannously usurp the key of the Roman Com∣mon-wealth, and intruded himselfe into the Empire against the lawes, customes, and authority of the people and Senate, yet was it accounted a most traiterous and cruell part to massacre and kill him in the Senate, as he sat in his seat misdoubting no mishap, as the sequell of their severall ends which were actors in this tragedy did declare: for the vengeance of God was so manifestly displayed upon them, that not one of the conspi∣rators escaped, but was pursued by sea and land so eagerly, till there was Treason, lib. 2. cap. 3. & 4. Plutarch. nor one left of that wicked crue whom revenge had not overtaken. Cassius being discomfited in the battell of Philippos, supposing that Brutus had beene also in the same case, used the same sword against himselfe (a mar∣vellous thing) wherewith before he had smitten Caesar. Brutus also a few dayes after, when a fearefull vision had appeared twice unto him by night, Eutrop. understanding thereby that his time of life was but short, though he had the better of his enemies the day before, yet threw himselfe desperately into the greatest danger of the battell, for his speedier dispatch; but he was reserved to a more shamefull end., for seeing his men slaine before him, he retired hastily apart from view of men, and setting his sword to his breast, threw himselfe upon it, piercing him through the body, and so ended his life. And thus was Caesars death revenged by Octavius and Anthony who remained conquerors, after all that bloudy crew was brought to nought: betwixt whom also ere long burst out a most cruell division, which grew unto a furious and cruell battell by sea, wherein Anthony was overcome, and sent flying into Aegypt, and there taught his owne hands
to be his murtherers. And such was the end of his life, who had beene an actor in that pernicious office of the Triumvirship, and a causer of the deaths of many men. And forasmuch as Cleopatra was the first motive and fetter on of Anthony to this warre, it was good reason that she should par∣take some of that punishment which they both deserved; as she did: for be∣ing surprised by her enemies, to the intent she might not be carried in tri∣umph to Rome, she caused an aspe to bite her to death. Marke here the pit∣tifull Tragedies that following one another in the necke, were so linkt to∣gether, that drawing and holding each other, they drew with them a world of miseries to a most wofull end: a most transparent and cleere glasse, wherein the visages of Gods heavy judgements upon all murtherers are ap∣parently deciphered. CHAP. VI. Other examples like unto the former. AFter that the Empire of Rome, declining after the death of Theodosius, was almost at the last cast, ready to yeeld Procopius. up the ghost, and that Theodorick king of the Goths, had usurped the dominion of Italy under the Emperor Zeno, he put to death two great personages, Senators and chiefe citizens of Rome, to wit, Simmachus and oe∣ti, only for secret surmise which he had, without pro∣bability, that they two should weave some she web for his destruction. After which cruell deed, as he was one day at supper, a fishes head of great bignesse beeing served into the table, purposing to be very merry, sudden∣ly the vengeance of God assailed, amased, oppressed, and pursued him so freshly, that without intermission or breathing it sent his body a senselesse trunk into the grave in a most strange and marvellous manner: for he was conceited (as himselfe reported) that the fishes head was the head of Simma∣chus, whom he had but lately slaine, which grinned upon him, and seemed to face him with an overthwart threatning and angry eye: wherewith hee was so scarred, that he forthwith rose from the table, and was possessed with such an exceeding trembling and icle ehilnesse that ran through all his joynts, that he was constrained to take his chamber and goe to bed, where soone after with griefe and fretting and displeasure hee died. He com∣mitted also another most cruell and traiterous part upon Odoacer; whom inviting to a banquet, he deceitfully welcommed with a messe of swords in stead of other victuals, to kill him withall, that he might sway the Em∣pire alone both of the Gothes and Romanes without checke. It was not without cause that Attila was called the scourge of God: for with an army of five hundred thousand men he wasted and spoiled all fields, Iornand. Greg. de Tours. cities and villages that he passed by, putting all to fire and sword, without shewing mercy to any: on this manner he went spoiling through France, and there at one time gave battell to the united forces of the Romans, Vice∣gothes, Frenchmen, Sarmatians, Burgundians, Saxons, and Almaignes: after that he entered Italy, tooke by way of force Aquilea, sacked and de∣stroyed
Millan, with many other cities, and in a word spoiled all the coun∣trey: in fine, being returned beyond Almaigne, having married a wife of excellent beauty, though he was well wived before, he died on his marri∣age night suddenly in his bed: for having well carowsed the day before, he fell into so dead a sleepe, that lying upon his backe without respect, the bloud which was often woont to issue at his nostrils, finding those conduits stopped by his upright lying, descended into his throat, and stopped his winde. And so that bloudy tyrant that had shed the bloud of so many peo∣ple, was himselfe by the effusion of his owne bloud murthered and stifled to death. Ithilbald king of Gothia at the instigation of his wife put to death very unadvisedly one of the chiefe peeres of his realme: after which murther, as he sate banquetting one day with his princes, environed with his gard and other attendants, having his hand in the dish, and the meat between his fin∣gers, one suddenly reached him such a blow with a sword, that it cut off his head, so that it almost tumbled upon the table, to the great astonishment of all that were present. Sigismund king of Burgundy suffered himselfe to be carried away with Greg. of Tours, lib. 3. hist. such an extreame passion of choler, provoked by a false and malicious ac∣cusation of his second wife, that he caused one of his sonnes which he had by his former wife, to be strangled in his bed, because he was induced to think that he went about to make himselfe king: which deed being blowne abroad, Clodomire sonne to Clodovee and Clotild king France, and cousin german to Sigismund, came with an army for to revenge this cruell and unnaturall Referre this properly to lib. 2. cap. 11. part; his mother setting forward and inciting him thereunto, in regard of the injury which Sigismunds father had done to her father and mother, one of whom he slew, and drowned the other. As they were ready to joyne battell, Sigismunds souldiers forsooke him, so that hee was taken and pre∣sently put to death, and his sonnes which he had by his second wife were taken also, and carried captive to Orleance, and there drowned in a Well. Thus was the execrable murther of Sigismund and his wife punished in their owne children. As for Clodomire, though he went conqueror from this battell, yet was he encountered with another disastrous misfortune: for as hee marched forward with his forces to fight with Sigismunds bro∣ther, he was by him overcome and slaine; and for a further disgrace, his dismembred head fastened on the top of a pike was carried about to the en∣terview of all men. Hee left behinde him three young sonnes, whom his owne brethren and their uncles Clotaire and Childebert, notwithstanding their young and tender yeres, tooke from their grandmother Clotildes cu∣stody, that brought them up, as if they would install them into some part of their fathers kingdome; but most wickedly and cruelly, to the end to possesse their goods, lands, and seigniories, bereft them all of their lives, save one that saved himselfe in a Monastery. In this strange and monstrous act Clotaire shewed himselfe more than barbarous, when he would not take pity upon the youngest of the two, being but seven yeares old, who hearing his brother (of the age of tenne yeres) crying pittifully at his slaughter, threw himselfe at his uncle Childeberts feet with teares, desiring him to save his life: wherewith Childebert being greatly affected, entreated his brother with weeping eies to have pity upon him, and spare the life of this poore infant: but all his warnings and entreaties could not hinder the savage beast
from performing this cruell murther upon this poore childe, as he had don upon the other. The Emperour Phocas attained by this bloudy means the imperiall dig∣nity, Niceph. l. 18. 58. even by the slaughter of his lord and master Mauricius, whom as he fled in disguised attire for feare of a treason pretended against him, he being be∣foretime the Lievtenant Generall of his army, pursued so maliciously and hotly, that he overtooke him in his flight, and for his further griefe, first put all his children severally to death before his face, that every one of them might be a severall death unto him before he died, and then slew him also. This murtherer was he that first exalted to so high a point the popish horn, when at the request of Boniface he ordained, That the Bishop of Rome should have preheminence and authority over all other Bishops: which he did to the end that the staine and blame of his most execrable murther might be either quite blotted out, or at least winked at. Vnder his regency the forces of the Empire grew wondrously into decay▪ France, Spaine, Almaigne, and Lombardy, revolted from the Empire: and at last himselfe being pursued by his son in law Priscus with the Senatours, was taken, and having his hands and feet cut off, was together with the whole race of his off-spring put to a most cruell death, because of his cruell and tyrannous life. Among all the strange examples of Gods judgements that ever were de∣clared in this world, that one that befell a King of Poland, called Popiel, for his murthers, is for the strangenesse thereof most worthy to be had in me∣mory: he reigned in the yeare of our Lord 1346. This man amongst other of his particular kinds of cursings and swearings, whereof he was no niggard, used ordinarily this oath, If it be not true, would rats might devoure me; pro∣phesying Munst. Cosmog. Mandat. 3. Cursing. l. 1. cyp. 30. thereby his owne destruction; for hee was devoured by the same meanes which he so often wished for, as the sequell of his history will de∣clare. The father of this Popiel seeling himselfe neere death, resigned the go∣vernment of his kingdome to two of his brethren, men exceedingly reveren∣ced of all men for the valour and vertue which appeared in them. He being deceased, and Popiel being growne up to ripe and lawfull yeares, when he saw himselfe in full liberty, without all bridle of government to doe what hee listed, he began to give the full swinge to his lawlesse and unruly desires, in such sort, that within few daies he became so shamelesse, that there was no vice which appeared not in his behavior, even to the working of the death of his owne uncles, for all their faithfull dealing towards him, which he by poi∣son brought to passe. Which being done, he caused himselfe forthwith to be crowned with garlands of flowers, and to be perfumed with precious oynt∣ments: and to the end the better to solemnie his entry to the crowne, com∣manded a sumptuous and pompous banquet to be prepared, whereunto all the Princes and Lords of his kingdome were invited. Now as they were about to give the onset upon the delicate cheere, behold an army of rats sal∣lying out of the dead and putrified bodies of his uncles, set upon him, his wife and children, amid their dainties, to gnaw them with their sharp teeth, insomuch that his gard with all their weapons and strength were not able to chase them away, but being weary with resisting their daily and mighty as∣saults, gave over the battell: wherefore counsell was given to make great cole ires about them, that the rats by that means might be kept off, not knowing that no policy or power of man was able to withstand the unchangeable de∣cree of God; for, for all their huge forces they ceased not to run through the
midst of them, and to assault with their teeth this cruell murtherer, Then they gave him counsell to put himselfe, his wife, and children into a boat, and thrust it into the middest of a lake, thinking that by reason of the wa∣ters the rats would not approach unto them: but alas in vaine; for they swum through the waters amaine, and gnawing the boat, made such chinkes into the sides thereof, that the water began to run in: which being perceived of the boatman, amased them sore, and made them make poste haste unto the shore, where hee was no sooner arrived, but a fresh muster of rats uniting their forces with the former, encountred him so sore, that they did him more scath than all the rest. Whereupon all his guard, and others that were there present for his defence, perceiving it to be a judgement of Gods vengeance upon him, abandoned and for sooke him at once: who seeing himselfe desti∣tute of succour, and forsaken on all sides, flew into a high tower in Chouz∣itze, whither also they pursued him, and climbing even up to the highest roome where hee was, first eat up his wife and children (she being guilty of his uncles death) and lastly gnew and devoured him to the very bones. After the same sort was an Archbishop of Mentz, called Hatto, punished Munster cos∣mographle. in the yeare 940, under the reigne of the Emperour Otho the great, for the extreme cruelty which he used towards certain poor beggers, whom in time of famine he assembled together into a great barn, not to relieve their wants, as he might and ought, but to rid their lives, as he ought not, but did: for he set on fire the barne wherein they were, and consumed them all alive; and Mandat. 8. Avarice and unmercifulnes comparing them to rats and mice that devoured good corne, but served to no other good use. But God that had regard and respect unto those poore wretches, tooke their cause into his hand, to quit this proud Prelate with just revenge for his outrage committed against them; sending towards him an army of rats and mice to lay siege against him with the engines of their teeth on all sides, which when this cursed wretch perceived, he removed into a tower that standeth in the midst of Rhine, not far from Bing, whither hee presumed this host of rats could not pursue him; but he was deceived: for they swum over Rhine thick and threefold, and got into his tower with such strange fury, that in very short space they had consumed him to nothing; in memoriall whereof, this tower was ever after called the tower of rats. And this was the tragedy of that bloudy arch-butcher that compared poore Christian soules to brutish and base creatures, and therefore became him∣selfe a prey unto them, as Popiel King of Poland did before him; in whose strange examples the beames of Gods justice shine forth after an extraor∣dinary and wonderfull manner, to the terrour and feare of all men; when by the means of small creatures they made roome for his vengeance, to make entrance upon these execrable creature-murtherers, notwithstanding all mans devises and impediments of nature: for the native operation of the elements was restrained from hindering the passage of them, armed and in∣spired with an invincible and supernaturall courage, to feare neither fire, water, nor weapon, till they had finished his command that sent them. And thus in old time did frogs, flyes, grashoppers, and lice, make war with Pha∣raoh, at the command of him that hath all the world at his becke. After this Archbishop, in the same ranke of murtherers we finde regi∣stred many Popes, of all whom the most notorious and remarkable are these two, Innocent the fourth, and Boniface the eighth, who deserved rather to be called Nocents and Malefaces than Innocents and Boniface, for their wic∣ked
and perverse lives: for as touching the first of them, from the time that he was first installed in the Papacie, he alwayes bent his hornes against the Emperor Fredericke, and fought with him with an armie not of men, but of excommunications and cursings; as their manner is: and seeing that all his thundering Buls and Canons could not prevaile so farre as he desired, he pre∣sently sought to bring to passe that by treason which by force he could not: for he so enchanted certain of his household servants with foule bribes and faire words, that when by reason of his short draught, the poyson which Hieron. Marius. he ministred could not hurt him, he got them to strangle him to death. Moreover, he was chiefe sower of that warre betwixt Henry, Lantgrave of Thuring, whom hee created King of the Romanes, and Conrade, Frederickes sonne, wherein he reaped a crop of discomfitures and overthrowes: after which, he was found slaine in his bed, his body being full of blacke markes, as if he had beene beaten to death with cudgels. Concerning Boniface, after he had by subtile and crafty meanes made his predecessor dismisse himselfe of his Papacie, and enthronised himselfe there∣in, Baleus. he put him to death in prison, and afterward made war upon the Gibi∣lines, and committed much cruelty; wherefore also he dyed mad, as we heard Murdering Popes. before. But touching Popes and their punishments, we shall see more in the 44 chapter following, whither the examples of them are referred, that exceeding in all kinde of wickednesse, cannot be rightly placed in the trea∣tise of any particular commandement. CHAP. IX. Other memorable examples of the same subject. IF wee descend from antiquities to histories of later and fresher memory, wee shall finde many things worthy report and credit: as that which happened in the yeere Euguerran de Monstr. Vol. 1. 1405 betwixt two Gentlemen of Henault; the one of which accused the other for killing a neere kinsman of his, which the other utterly & stedfastly denied: whereon DWilliam, County of Henault, offered them the combat in the city of Quesney to decide the controversie, when as by law it could not be ended: whereunto they being come, and having broken their speares in two, and encountered valiantly with their swords, at length he that was charged with and indeed guilty of the murder, was over∣come of the other, and made to confesse with his mouth in open audience the truth of the fact: Wherefore the Country adjudged him in the same place to be beheaded; which was speedily executed, and the conquerour ho∣nourably conducted to his lodging. Now albeit this manner of deciding controversies be not approved of God, yet we must not think it happened at all adventures, but rather that the issue thereof came of the Lord of Hosts, that by this meanes gave place to the execution of his most high and sove∣raigne justice, by manifesting the murderer, and bringing him to that pu∣nishment which he deserved.
About this very time there was a most cruell and out ragious riot practi∣sed and performed upon Lewis Duke of Orleance, brother to Charles the Enguerran de Monstr. Vol. 1. sixth, by the complot and devise of Iohn Duke of Burgundie, who (as hee was naturally haughtie and ambitious) went about to usurpe the govern∣ment of the realme of France, for that the king by reason of weakenesse of his braine was not able to mannage the affaires thereof, so that great trouble and uncivill warres were growne up by that occasion in every corner of the realme. As therefore he affected and gaped after the rule, so hee thought no meanes dishonest to attaine unto it, and therefore his first enterprise was to take out of the way the Kings brother, who stood betwixt him and home. Having therefore provided fit champions for his purpose, he found oppor∣tunity one night to cause him to come out of his lodging late by counterfeit tokens from the king, as if he had sent for him about some matters of im∣portance: and being in the way to S. Pauls hostle, where the kings lodging was in Paris, the poore Prince suspecting nothing, was suddenly set upon with eighteen roisters at once, with such fury and violence, that in very short space they left him dead upon the pavement, by the gate Barbet, his braines lying scattered about the street. After this detestable and odious act committed and detected, the cruell Burgundian was so farre from sha∣ming, that he vanted and boasted at it, as if he had atchieved the most valo∣rous and honourable exploit in the World (so farre did his impudencie outstretch the bond of reason.) Neverthelesse, to cast some counterfeit co∣lour upon this rough practise, he used the conscience and fidelitie of three famous Divines of Paris, who openly in publike assemblies approved of this murder; saying, That he had greatly offended, if he had left it undone. About this device he imployed especially M. Iohn Petit, a Sorbonist Do∣ctor, whose rashnesse and brasen-facednesse was so great, as in the councel∣house of the King, stoutly to averre, That that which was done in the death of the Duke of Orleance was a vertuous and commendable action, and the author of it to be void of fault, and therefore ought to be void of punish∣ment. The preface which this brave Orator used, was, That he was bounden in duetie to the Duke of Burgundie, in regard of a goodly pension which he had received at his hands, and for that cause he had prepared his poor tongue in token of gratitude to defend his cause. He might better have said thus, That seeing his tongue was poore and miserable, and he himselfe a sencelesse creature, therefore he ought not to allow or defend so obstinately such a de∣testable & traiterous murder committed upon a Duke of Orleance, and the same the Kings brother, in such vile sort; and that if he should doe other∣wise, he should approve of that which God and man apparently condemned, yea the very Turkes and greatest Paynims under heaven; and that he should justifie the wicked, and condemne the innocent, which is an abomination before God; and should put darkenesse in stead of light, and call that which is evill, good: (for which the Prophet Esay in his fifth chapter denounceth the jugdements of God against false prophets) and should follow the steps of Balaam, which let out his tongue to hire for the wages of iniquity: but none of these supposes came once into his minde. But to returne to our Hi∣story: The Duke of Burgundy having the tongues of these brave Doctors at his commandement, and the Parisians who bore themselves partially in this quarrell (generally favourers of his side) came to Paris in armes, to justifie himselfe, as he pretended, and strucke such a dreadfull awe of him∣selfe
into all mens mindes, that notwithstanding all the earnest pursuit of the Dutchesse, the widow of Orleance, for justice, he escaped unpunished, untill God (by other meanes) tooke vengeance upon him: which happe∣ned after a while, after that those his complices of Paris (being become lords and rulers of the citie) had committed many horrible and cruell mur∣ders, as of the Constable and Chancellor, two head officers of the realme, whose bodies fast bound together, they drew naked through the streets from place to place in most despightfull manner: for the Daulphin escaping their hands by night, and safegard in his castle, after that he heard of the seisure of the citie; found meanes to assemble certuine forces, and marched to Montereaufautyon with 20000 men, of purpose to be reven∣ged on the Duke for all his brave and riotous demeanors: hither, under colour of parling and devising new means to pacifie these old civill troubles, he enticed the Duke, and being come, at his very first arrivall, as he was bowing his knee in reverence to him, he caused him to be slaine. And on this manner was the Duke of Orleance death quitted, and the evill and cru∣elty shewed towards him, returned upon the murderers owne necke; for as he slew him trecherously and cowardly, so was he also trecherously and cowardly slaine, and justly requited with the same measure that he before Treason, lib. 2. cap. 3. had measured to another: notwithstanding herein the Daulphin was not free from a grievous crime of disloyaltie and truth-breach, in working his death without shame of either faith-breach or perjury, and that in his owne pre∣sence, whom hee had so often with protestation of assurance and safetie, re∣quested to come to him. Neither did he escape unpunished for it; for af∣ter his fathers decease he was in danger of losing the Crowne, and all for this cause: for Philip Duke of Burgundie taking his fathers revenge into his hands, by his cunning devices wrought meanes to displace him from the succession of the kingdome, by according a marriage betwixt the King of England and his sister, to whom he in favor agreed to give his kingdome in reversion after his owne decease. Now assoone as the King of England was seised upon the governement of France, the Daulphin was presently summoned to the marble Table, to give answere for the death of the old Duke: whither, when he made none appearance, they presently banished him the realme, and pronounced him to be unworthy to be succeeder to the noble Crowne: which truely was a very grievous chastisement, and such an one as brought with it a heape of many mischiefes and discomfitures, which happened in the warre betwixt England and him, for the recovery of his kingdome. Peter, sonne to Alphonsus King of Castile, was a most bloudy and cruell Fois. lib. 1. hist. Tyran: for first he put to death his owne wife, the daughter of Peter Duke of Burbon, and sister to the Queene of France: next hee slew the mother of his bastard brother Henrie, together with many Lords and Barons of the realme, for which he was hated not onely of all his subjects, but also of his neighbor and adjoyning countries: which hatred moved the foresaid Henrie to aspire unto the Crowne; which, what with the Popes avouch, who le∣gitimated him, and the helpe of certaine French forces, and the support of the Nobility of Castile, he soone atchieved. Peter thus abandoned, put his safest gard in his heeles, and fled to Bordeaux, towards the Prince of Wales, of whom he received such good entertainment, that with his aid he sonne re-entred his lost dominions, and by maine battell chased his ba∣stard
brother out of the confines thereof: but being re-installed, whilest his cruelties ceased not to multiply on every side, behold Henrie (with a new supply out of France) began to assayle him afresh, and put him once again to his shifts: but all that he could doe, could not shift him out of Henries hands, who pursued him so hotly, that with his owne hands hee soone rid him out of all troubles, and afterwards peaceably enjoyed the kingdome of Castille. But above all the horrible murders and massacres that ever were heard or read of in this last age of the World, that bloudy massacre in France, un∣der the reigne of Charles the ninth, is most famous, or rather infamous; wherein the noble Admirall, with many of the nobility and gentrie, which were Protestants, were most traiterously and cruelly murdered in their chambers and beds in Paris, the foure and twentieth of August, in the night: in this massacre were butchered in Paris that very night ten thousand Protestants, and in all France, (for other cities followed the example of Paris) thirty, or as some say, forty thousand. I will not stand to relate the particular circumstances and manner thereof, it being at large descri∣bed by divers writers both in French and English: only to our purpose, let us consider the judgements and vengeance of Almightie God upon the chiefe practisers and plotters thereof, which were these: Charles the ninth then King, by whose commission and commandement this massacre was undertaken; his brother and successour the Duke of Aniou; the Queene mother, his bastard brother, and the Duke of Guise, yea the whole towne of Paris; and generally all France was guilty thereof. Now observe Gods just revenge: Charles himselfe had the thred of his life cut off by the imme∣diat hand of God, by a long and lingring sickenesse, and that before he was come to the full age of 24 yeres: in his sicknesse bloud issued in great abun∣dance out of many places of his body, insomuch that sometimes he fell and wallowed in his owne bloud: that as he had delight to shed the bloud of so many innocents, so he might now at the latter end of his dayes be glut∣ted with bloud. And surely by this meanes the Lord did put him in minde of his former bloudy murders, to draw him to repentance, if it were pos∣sible. The Duke of Anjou, who succeeded this Charles in the Crowne of France, and was called Henrie the third, was murdered by a young Iacobine Monke, called Frier Iaques Clement, at the instigation of the duke de Maine and others of the league, and that (wherein appeareth manifestly the hand of God) in the selfe same chamber at S. Cloves wherein the Councell for the great massacre had beene taken and plotted, as it is constantly affirmed. The Duke of Guise, in the yeare 1588, the 23 of December, was murde∣red by the kings owne appointment, being sent for into the kings chamber out of the councell chamber, where attended him 45 with rapiers and po∣niards ready prepared to receive him. The Queene mother soone after the slaughter of the Duke of Guise, tooke the matter so to heart, that shee went to bed, and dyed the first of Ianuarie after. Touching all the rest that were chiefe actors in the tragidie, few or none escaped the apparant venge∣ance of God: and as for Paris and the whole realme of France, they also felt the severe scourge of Gods justice, partly by civile wars and bloudshed, and partly by famine and other plagues; so that the Lord hath plainly made knowne to the world, how precious in the sight of his most Holy Majestie, is the death of innocents, and how impossible it is for cruell murderers to escape unpunished.
CHAP. X. Of divers other Murderers, and their severall punishments. MAximinus from a shepheard in Thracia, grew to be an Emperor in Rome by these degrees: his exceeding stength and swiftnesse in running commended him so to Severus then Emperour, that he made him of his gard, from that he arose to be a Tribune, and at last to bee Emperor: which place he was no sooner in possession of, but immoderate cruelty (all this while buried) began to shew it selfe: for he made havocke of all the Nobilitie, and put to death those that he suspected to be acquainted with his estate: insomuch as some called him Cyclops, some Bsiris, others A∣teus, for his cruelty. Wherefore the Senate of Rome seeing his indignity, proclaimed him an enemy to their commonwealth. and made it lawfull for any man to procure his death: Which being knowne, his souldiers lying at the siege of Aquileia, moved with hatred, entred his tent at noone day, and flew him and his sonne together. Iustinian the yonger (no lesse hatefull to his subjects for his cruelty than Maximinus) was deposed from the empire by conspiracy, and having his nosthrils slit, exiled to Chersona, Leontius succeeding in his place. How∣beit ere long he recovered his Crowne and Scepter, and returned to Con∣stantinople, exercising more cruelty at his returne, than ever he had done before: for he had not only put to death Leontius and Tiberius, but also all that any way favored their parts. It is said of him, that he never blew his mangled nose, but he caused one of them to be executed to death. At last he was slaine by Philippicus, to verifie the word of the Lord, That he which striketh with the sword shall perish with the sword. Albonius king of Lunbardy, drinking upon a time to his wife Rosimund in a cup made of her fathers skull (whom he in battell had slaine) so dis∣pleased her therewith, that (attributing more to naturall affection than unity of marriage) decreed with her selfe to hazard life and kingdome, to be revenged upon this grievous injurie; wherefore she thus practised: A knight called Hemichild was enamoured with one of her maids; him shee brought into a secret darke place by policie, in shew to injoy his love, but indeed to be at her command; for she supplyed his loves place: and then discovering her selfe, put it to his choise, either to kill her husband, or to be accused by her of this villanie. Hemichild chose the former, and indeed murdered his Lord in his bed; and after the deed done, fled with her to Ra∣venna. But marke how the Lord required this murder, even most strangely; for they both which were linkt together in the fact, were linkt together also in the punishment; and as they had beene joynt instruments of anothers destruction, so he made them mutuall instruments of their owne for Rosi∣mund thinking to poyson him too, made him drinke halfe her medicine: but hee feeling the poyson in his veines, staied in the mid way, and made her sup up the other halfe for her part: so they died both together. The Electors of the Empire disagreeing in suffrages, Adolphus Duke Munst. Cosm. Phi. Melan. lib.
of Nassavia, and Albertus Duke of Austria, tooke upon them the regi∣ment and managing of the State: whereupon grew grievous wars in all Germanie, and dissention between the two State-men, so that Adolphus was slaine by the Duke of Austria in battell by the citie of Spire: whose death was thus notably revenged. All that tooke part against him, or that were accessary to the murder, perished most strangely; Albert Earle of Hagerloch was slaine, Otto of Ochsensteme was hanged, the Bishop of Mentz died suddenly of an apoplexie, in his cellar, the Bishop of Strasbrough was butchered by a Butcher: the Earle of Leimingen died of a frensie, the Duke of Austria himselfe was slaine by his nephew Iohn, from whom hee had taken the government of Suevia, because of his unthriftinesse: generally they all came to destruction, so grievous is the crie of innocent bloud, against those that are guilty thereof. After the death of Woldimirus King of Rhythenia, his sonne Berisus succeeded in the kingdome, who though hee was a vertuous and reli∣gious Treason, lib. 2. cap. 3. Prince, yet could not his vertue or religion priviledge him from the malice of his brother Suadopolcus, who gaping and itching for the Crowne, slew his brother this good Prince as hee was sleeping in his Chamber, together with his Esquire that attended upon him: and Chron. Pol. lib. 2. cap. 10. not content herewith, but adding murder to murder, hee assaulted ano∣ther of his brethren by the same impietie, and brought him to the same end. Whereupon the last brother Iorislaus (to bee revenged on this villanie) set upon him with an armie of men, and killing his complices, drove him to fly to Crachus king of Polonia for succour: who furnishing him with a new armie, sent him backe against his brother, in which battell (his successe being equall to the former) hee lost his men, and himselfe escaping the sword, dyed in his flight to Polonia, and was buried in a base and ignoble sepulchre, fit enough for so base and ignoble a wretch. And that we may see how hatefull and ungodly a thing it is to be either a protector or a saver of any murderer, marke the judgement of God that fell upon this king of Polonia, though not in his own person, yet in his posterity; for hee being dead, his eldest sonne and heire Crachus Treason, lib. 2. cap. 3. was murdered by his younger brother Lechus, as they were hunting, so dis∣guised and torn, that every man imputed his death not to Lechus (whose eyes dropt crocodiles teares) but to some savage and cruell beast: howbeit ere long (his trechery being discovered, and disseised of his kingdome) hee died with extreame griefe and horrour of conscience. And thus we see that Cra∣chus his kingdome came to desolation for maintaining a murderer. Iohn the high Priest of Jerusalem, sonne and successor to Iudas, had a brother termed Iesus, to whom Bagoses the lieutenant of Artaxerxes army promised the Priesthood, meaning indeed to depose Iohn, and install him in his roome: upon which occasion this Iesus growing insolent, spared not Ioseph. antiq. Iudaic. li. 11. c. 7 to revile his brother, and that in the temple, with immodest and opprobri∣ous speeches, so that his anger being provoked he slew him in his rage; a most impious part for the high Priest to pollute the holy temple with bloud, and that of his owne brother, and so impious, that the Lord in Prophanation of holy things, Lib. 1. cap. 34. justice could not chuse but punish the whole nation for it most severely. For this cause Bagoses imposed a tribute upon them, even a most grie∣vous tribute, that for every lambe they offered upon the altar, they should pay fiftie groats to the king of Persia, besides the prophanation of
their temple with the uncircumcised Persians, who entred into it at their pleasures, and so polluted the Sanctuary and holy things of God: this pu∣nishment continued upon them seven yeares and all for this one murder. Gerhardus Earle of Holsatia, after he had conquered the Danes in many and sundry battells, was traiterously slaine in the citie Kanderhusen, by one Treason, lib. 2. cap. 3. Nicolaus Iacobus, a rich Baron: so that whom the open enemy feared in the field, him the privie subtile foe murdered in his chamber. But the traitor and murderer, albeit hee fled to the castle Schaldenburg, and got a band of souldiers to defend himselfe, yet hee was surprised by the Earles sonnes, who tormenting him as became a traitor to bee tor∣mented, at last rent his body into foure quarters, and so his murder and treason was condignely punished. Above all, the execution of Gods vengeance is most notably manifested in the punishment and detection of one Parthenius an homicide, treasurer Greg. of Tours, lib. 1. cap. 36. to Theodobert king of France; who having traiterously slaine an especi∣all friend of his called Ausanius, with his wife apianilla, when no man suspected or accused him thereof, he detected and accused himselfe after this strange manner: As hee slept in his bed, suddenly hee roared out This example belongeth also to the 11. chap most pittifully, crying for helpe, or else hee perished: and being deman∣ded what he ailed, he halfe asleepe answered, That his friend Ausanius and his wife, whome hee had slaine long agoe, summoned him to judge∣ment before God: upon which confession hee was apprehended, and after due examination stoned to death. Thus though all witnesses faile, yet a mur∣derers own conscience will betray him. Pepin and Martellus his sonne, kings of France, enjoying prosperity and ease, fell into divers monstrous sinnes: as to forsake their wives Casp. Hed. li. 6. cap. 17. and follow whores: which filthynesse when the Bishop of Tungia re∣proved, Dodo the harlors brother murdered him for his labor: but hee was presently taken with the vengeance of God, even a lousie and most filthie disease, with the griefe and stinke whereof being moved, hee threw himselfe into the river of Mosa, and there was drowned. How manifest and evident was the vengeance of God upon the murde∣rers Martian. Sou. of Theodorick Bishop of Treverse  Conrade the author of it dyed sud∣denly: the souldier that helped to throw him downe from the rocke, was Hermanus con∣tract us. choaked as he was at supper two other servants that layd to their hands to this murder, slew themselves most desperatly. About the yeare of our Lord 700. Gelian the wife of Gosbere prince of Wurtiburg, being reproved by Kilianus for incest (for shee married her Casp. Hed. li. . cap. 10. husbands brother) wrought such meanes, that both hee and his brethren were deprived of their lives: but the Lord gave her up to Satan in venge∣ance, so that shee was presently possessed with him, and so continued till her dying day. A certaine woman of Millaine in Italie hung a young boy, and after de∣voured him instead of meat, when as she wanted none other victuals▪ and when she was examined about the crime, she confessed that a spirit per∣swaded her to doe it, telling her, that after it she should attaine unto what∣soever she desired: for which murder shee was to rnted to death by a lin∣gring and grievous punishment. This Arlunus reporteth to have happened in his time. And surely how soever openly the Divell sheweth not himselfe, yet he is the mover and perswader of all murders, and commonly the doctor.
For hee delighteth in mens blouds and their destruction, as in nothing more. A gentleman of Chaleur in Fossignie, being in the Duke of Savoyes army, in September the yeare of our Lord 1589, and grieving to behold the cruelties which were exercised upon the poore inhabitants of that countrey, resolved to depart from the said army: now because there was no safer nor neerer waie for him, than to crosse the lake to Bonne, he entrea∣ted one of his acquaintance, named Iohn Villaine, to procure him meanes of safe passage over the lake: who for that purpose procured two watermen to transport him, with his horse, apparell, and other things: being up∣on the lake, the watermen, whereof the chiefest was called Martin Bourrie, fell upon him and cut his throat: Iohn Villaine understanding hereof com∣plained to the magistrates; but they being forestalled with a present from the murderer, of the gentlemans horse, which was of great value, made no inquisition into the matter, but said, that hee was an enemy which was dispatched: and so the murderers were justified; but God would not leave it so unpunished: for about the fifteenth of Iuly 1591, this Bourrie go∣ing with divers others to shoot for a wager, as hee was charging the har∣quebuse which hee had robbed the gentleman of when hee murdered him, it suddenly discharged of it selfe, and shot the murderer through the heart, so that hee fell downe starke dead, and never stirred nor spake word. In the first troubles of France, a gentleman of the troups which besie∣ged Moulins in Bourbonnois, was taken with sickenesse, in such sort that Historie of France, Charles the ninth. hee could not follow his company when they dislodged; and lying at a Bakers house which professed much friendship and kindnesse to him, hee put such confidence in him, that hee shewed him all the money that he had: but so farre was this wretch from either conscience or common ho∣nestie, that assoone as it was night hee most wickedly murdered him. Now marke how God revenged it: it happened not long after, that the murderer being in sentinell, one of his owne fellowes unawares shot him through the arme with a harquebuse, whereof he languished the space of three moneths, and then died starke mad. The town of Bourges being yeelded by Monsieur D'yvoy, during the first troubles in France, the inhabitants were inhibited from talking together, The same hi∣storie. either within or without the towne, or from being above two together at a time: under colour of which decree many were most cruelly murdered: And a principall actor herein was one Garget captaine of the Bourbonne quar∣ter, who made a common practise of killing innocent men, under that pretence. But shortly after, the Lord that heareth the crie of innocent bloud met with him for hee was stricken with a burning fever, and ranne up and downe blaspheming the Name of God, calling upon the Divell, and crying out if any would goe along with him to hell, hee would pay his charges; and so died in desperate and franticke manner. Peter Martin, one of the Queries of the King of France his stable, and Post-master at a place called Lynge, in the way towards Poyctou, up∣on The same hi∣storie. a sleight accusation, without all just forme of lawfull processe, was condemned by a Lord to bee drowned: The Lord commanded one of his Faulkners to execute this sentence upon him, upon paine to bee drowned himselfe: whereupon he performed his masters command: But God defer∣red not the revenge thereof long; for within three daies after, this Faulkner and a Lackey falling out about the dead mans apparell, went into the field
and slew one another. Thus he that was but the instrument of that murder was justly punished: how much more is it likely that the author escaped not scot free, except the Lord gave him a heart truely to repent? It hath beene observed in the history of France, since the yeare of our Lord 1560, that of a thousand murders which remained unpunished in regard of men, not tenne of them escaped the hands of God, but came to most wretched ends. In the yeare of our Lord 1546 Iohn Diazius, a Spaniard by birth, living a student and Professor in Paris, came first to Geneva, and then to Stras∣brough, and there by the grace of Gods spirit saw his Sorbonicall errors, and renounced them, betaking himselfe to the profession of the purer reli∣gion, and the company and acquaintance of godly men: amongst whom was Bucer that excellent man, who sent him also to Nurnburge, to oversee the printing of a booke which he was to publish. Whilest Diazius lived at this Nurnburge (a city scituat upon the river Dimow) his brother, a lawyer, and judge laterall to the Inquisition, by name Alphonsus, came thither, and Sleid. lib. 17. by all meanes possible endevoured to dissuade him from his religion, and to reduce him againe to Popery. But the good man persisted in the truth not∣withstanding all his perswasions and threats: wherefore the subtill fox took another course, and faining himselfe to be converted also to his religion, ex∣horted him to goe with him into Italy, where he might do much good; or at the least to Angust: but by the counsell of Bucer and his friends he was kept back, otherwise willing to follow his brother. Wherefore Alphonsus depar∣ted, and exhorted him to constancy and perseverance, giving him also four∣teene crowns to defray his charges. Now the wolfe had not been three dayes absent, when he hired a rakehell and common butcher, and with him flew a∣gain to Nurnburge in post hast: and comming to his brothers lodging, de∣livered him a letter, which whilest he read, the villain his confederat cleft his head in pieces with an axe, leaving him dead upon the floore, and so fled with all expedition. Howbeit they were apprehended, yet quit by the Popes justice (so holy and sacred are the fruits of his Holinesse) though not by the justice of God, for within a while after hee hung himselfe upon his mules necke at Trent. Duke Abrogastes slew Valentinian the Emperour of the West, and ad∣vanced Eugenius to the crowne of the Empire: but a while after, the same sword which had slain his lord and master was by his owne hands turned in∣to his owne bowels. Mempricius the sonne of Madan, the fourth King of England, then called Lanquet. Chro. Britaine after Brute, had a brother called Manlius, betwixt whom was great strife for the soveraigne dominion: but to rid himselfe of all his trouble at once, he slew his brother Manlius by treason, and after continued his raigne in tyranny and all unlawfull lusts, the space of twenty yeeres: but although vengeance all this while winked, yet it slept not, for at the end of this space, as he was hunting, he was devoured of wilde beasts. In the yeare of our Lord God 745 one Sigebert was authorised king of the Saxons in Britaine, a cruell and tyrannous Prince towards his subjects. and one that changed the ancient Lawes and customes of his Realme after his owne pleasure: and because a certaine Nobleman somewhat sharpely advertised him of his evill conditions, hee maliciously caused him to bee put to death. But see how the Lord revenged this murder, hee caused his
Nobles to deprive him of his kingly authority, and at last as a desolate and forlorne person, wandring alone in a wood, to be slaine of a swine∣heard, whose master he (being king) had wrongfully put to death. About the yeare of our Lord 793 Ethelbert king of the East Angles, a learned and right godly Prince, came to the court of Offa the king of Acts and Mo∣numents. Mercia, perswaded by the counsell of his nobles, to sue for the marri∣age of his daughter, well accompanied like a prince with a great traine of men about him: whereupon Offa's Queene conceiving a false suspition of that which was never minded, That Ethelbert under the pretence of this marriage, was come to worke some violence against her husband, and the kingdome of Mercia, so perswaded with king Offa and certaine of his Councell that night, that the next day following Offa caused him to be trained into his palace alone from his company, by one called Guymber∣tus, who tooke him and bound him, and after strooke off his head, which forthwith he presented to the king and Queene. Thus was the in∣nocent King wrongfully murdered, but not without a just revenge on Gods hand: for the aforesaid Queene, worker of this villany, lived not three moneths after, and in her death was so tormented, that she bit and rent her tongue in pieces with her teeth, which was the instrument to set abroach that murtherous practise. Offa himselfe understanding at length the innocency of the king, and the hainous cruelty of his fact, gave the tenth part of his goods to the Church, bestowed upon the Church of Here∣ford, in remembrance of this Ethelbert, great lands, builded the Abbey of S. Albons, with certaine other Monasteries beside, and afterward went to Rome for his penance, where hee gave to the Church of S. Peter, a peny through every house in his dominion, which was commonly called Rome∣shot, or Peterpence, and there at length was transformed from a king to a monke. Thus God punished not only him and his wife, but the whole land, for this vile murder. One principall cause of the conquest of this land by the Normans, was Ranulphus. a vile and horrible murder committed by one Goodwin, an Earle in Eng∣land, upon certaine Mormans that came overwith Alfred and Edward, to visit their mother Emma, that had beene married to King Canutus. This matter thus fell out: When these two came from Normandy to England, to visit their mother, as I have said, Earle Goodwin having a daughter called Godith, whom hee thought to marry to Edward, and ad∣vance him to the kingdome, to bring his purpose to passe used this pra∣ctise, that is, to perswade King Hardeknout and the Lords, not to suf∣fer those Normans to bee within the Realme, for jeopardy, but rather to punish them for example: by which meanes hee got authority to or∣der the matter himselfe: Wherefore hee met them on Guild downe, and there wretchedly murdered, or rather martyred the most part of the Nor∣mans, killing nine, and leaving the tenth alive throughout the whole company; and then tything againe the said tyth, he slew every tenth knight, and that by cruell torment, as winding their guts out of their body, after a most savage manner: among the rest he put out the eyes of the elder of the two brethren, Alfred, and sent him to an Abbey at Elie; where being fed with bread and water, hee ere long ended his life. Now albeit hee obtained his purpose hereby; and married his daugh∣ter to Edward, who was after King, called Edward the Confessor,
yet did not Gods justice sleepe to punish this horrible murder: for he him∣selfe died not long after suddenly, having forsworne himselfe, and the Normanes with William their Duke ere long came into this Iland, to revenge this murder, as also to claime a right of inheritance bequeathed unto him by Edward his Nephew: and how hee succeeded, and what mise∣ry he brought this whole Nation unto, who knoweth not. But heere is the justice of God: As the Normans comming with a naturall English Prince, were most cruelly and barbarously murdered of Englishmen; so afterwards the Englishmen were slaine and conquered, by the Normans comming with a forreine King, being none of their naturall countrey. In the yeare of our Lord sixe hundred threescore and eighteene, Childe∣rich King of France caused a Nobleman of his Realme, called Bolyde, to bee bound to a stake, and there beaten to death, without the pretence of any just crime or accusation against him: For which cruelty his Lords and Commons, being grievously offended, conspired together, and slew him and his wife as they were hunting. In the raigne of Edward the second and Edward the third, Sir Roger Mor∣timer committed many villanous outrages, in shedding much humane bloud: but he was also justly recompenced in the end; first he murdered King Edward the second, lying in Barkeley Castle, to the end he might, as it was supposed, enjoy Isabel his wife, with whom he had very suspi∣tious familiarity. Secondly, he caused Edward the third to conclude a di∣shonorable peace with the Scots, by restoring them all their ancient wri∣tings, charters, and patents, whereby the Kings of Scotland had bound themselves to be feudaries to the Kings of England. Thirdly, he accused Edmund Earle of Kent, uncle to King Edward, of treason, and caused him unjustly to bee put to death. And lastly he conspi redagainst the King to worke his destruction; for which and divers other things that were laid to his charge he was worthily and justly beheaded. In the reigne of Henry the sixt, Humfrey the good duke of Gloucester, and faithfull protectour of the King, by the meanes of certaine malicious persons, to wit, the Queene, the Cardinall of Winchester, and especi∣ally the Marquesse of Suffolke, (as it was supposed) was arrested, cast into hold, and strangled to death in the Abbey of Bure: For which cause the Lords hand of judgement was upon them all: for the Marquesse was not onely banished the land for the space of five yeares, but also banished out of his life for ever; for as hee sailed towards France, hee was met withall by a Ship of Warre, and there presently beheaded, and the dead corps cast up at Dover; that England wherein he had committed the crime, might be a witnesse of his punishment. The Queene, that thought by this meanes to preserve her husband in honour, and her selfe in estate, thereby both lost her husband and her state: her husband lost his realme; and the Realme lost Anjou, Normandy, with all other places beyond the sea, Calice onely excepted. As for the Cardinall, who was the principall artificer of all this mischiefe, he lived not long after; and being on his death bed, murmured and grudged against God, asking wherefore hee should die, having so much wealth and riches? and saying, That if the whole Realme would save his life, he was able either by policy to get it, or by riches to buy it: but death would not be bri∣bed; for all his aboundant treasure he died miserably, more like a Heathen
than a Christian, without any shew of repentence. And thus was the good Dukes death revenged upon the princiall procurers thereof. As the murder of a gentleman in Kent, called master Arden of Fever∣sham, was most execrable, so the wonderfull discovery thereof was exceed∣ing rare. This Arden being somewhat aged, had to wife a young woman, no lesse faire than dishonest, who being in love with one Mosbie more than her husband, did not onely abuse his bed, but also conspired his death with this her companion: for together they hired a notorious Ruffin, one Blacke Will, to strangle him to death with a towell as he was playing a game at ta∣bles: which though secretly done, yet by her owne guilty conscience, and some tokens of bloud which appeared in his house, was soone discovered and confessed. Wherefore she her selfe was burnt at Canterbury: Michael, master Ardens man, was hanged in chaines at Feversham: Mosbie and his sister were hanged in Smithfield: Greene another partner in this bloudy action was hanged in chaines in the high way against Feversham: And Blacke Will the Ruffian, after his first escape, was apprehended and burnt on a seaffold at Flushing in Zeeland. And thus all the murderers had their de∣served dues in this life, and what they endured in the life to come (except they obtained mercy by true repentance) is easie to judge. CHA. XI. Of the admirable discovery of Murders. AS the Lord hath shewed himselfe a most just Judge, in punishing most severely this horrible sinne of shed∣ding mans bloud, so hath he alwaies declared his dete∣station thereof, and his will to have it punished by those who are in his stead upon the earth, and have the sword of vengeance committed unto them: by his mi∣raculous and superhaturall detecting of such murder∣ers from time to time, who have carried their villa∣nies so closely, as the eye of man could not espy them: plainely shewing thereby, that the bloud of the slaine crieth to the Lord for vengeance from the earth, as Abels did upon Cain▪ and that God will have that law stand Gen. 4. true and firme, which he made almost before all other lawes: He that shed∣deth mans bloud, by man shall his bloud be shed. If I should commit to writing Gen. all the examples of this kinde, which either are recorded in Authors, or which dayly experience doth offer unto us, it would require rather a full Booke than a short Chapter for that subject: And therefore I will be con∣tent with some few, and those for truth most credible, and yet for strange∣nesse most incredible. And to begin with our owne countrey: About the yeare of our Lord Ex historia Iornlens. 867, a certaine Nobleman of the Danes, of the kings stock, called Lothebro∣cus, father to Inguar and Hubba, entring upon a certaine time with his hawke into a cockboat alone, by chance through tempest was driven with his hawke to the coast of Northfolke in England, named Rodham: where be∣ing found, and detained, he was presented to king Edmund, that raigned over the East-Angles in Northfolke and Suffolke at that time. The King (as hee
was a just and good man) understanding his parentage, and seeing his cause, entertained him in his Court accordingly; and every day more and more perceiving his activity, and great dexterity in hunting and hawking, bare speciall favour unto him: insomuch that the Kings Faulconer bearing pri∣vy malice against him, for this cause, secretly as they were hunting together in a wood, did murther him, and threw him in a bush. Lothebroke being thus murthered, and shortly missed in the Kings house, no tydings could be heard of him, untill it pleased God to reveale the murther by his dog: which continuing in the wood with the corps of his Master, at sundry times came to the Court, and fauned on the King: so that the King suspecting some such matter, at length followed the trace of the hound, and was brought to the place where Lothebroke lay. Whereupon inquisition being made, at length by some circumstances of words, and other suspitions, it was knowne that he was murdered by Berik the Kings Faulconer: who for his punishment he was set into the same boat of Lothebroke alone, and so com∣mitted to the mercy of the sea: but the sea more mercifull to him than he was to Lothebroke, carried him directly to the coast of Denmarke, from whence Lothebroke came; as it were there to be punished for his murder. Here the boat of Lothebroke being well knowne, hands were lay upon him, and by torments he was enquired into: but hee to save himselfe, uttered an untruth of King Edmund; saying, That the King had put him to death in Northfolke. Whereupon revenge was devised, and to that end an army of men prepared and sent over: which was the first occasion of the Danes ar∣rivall in this land. Thus was this murther wonderfully discovered by meanes of a dog. Plutarch in his book Desolertia aimalium, reporteth the like story of a Plutarch. So∣leria anim. souldier of King Pyrrhus, who being slain, his dog discovered the murder∣ers: for when as the dog could by no meanes be brought from the dead bo∣dy, but fauning upon the King, as it were desiring helpe at his hand; the King commanded all his Army to passe by in good order by two and two, till at length the murtherers came; and then the dog flew upon them so fiercely, as if he would have torne them in pieces; and turning to the king, ranne againe upon the murderers. Whereupon being apprehended and examined, they soone confessed the fact, and received condigne punishment for their desert. Plutarch ascribeth this to the secret of Natures instinct: but we must rather attribute both this and all such like, to the mighty fin∣ger of God. who to terrifie men from shedding humane bloud, doth stirre up the dumbe creatures to be revealers of their bloudy sinne. The like story the same Author reporteth of the murder of the Poet Hesiod, who being slaine by the sonnes of Ganyctor, the murder, though se∣cret, The same. and the Murderers, though unknowne to all the world save to God and their owne conscience, were discovered and brought to punishment by the means of a dog which belonged to him that was murdered. The like also we reade of two French Merchants, which travailing toge∣ther through a certaine Wood, one of them rose against the other for the Blondus. desire of his mony, and so slew him, and buried him▪ but the Dog of the murdered Merchant would not depart from the place, but filled the Woods with howlings and cryes. The murderer went forward on his journey, and the Inhabitants neere the said Wood, found out the murdered corps, and also the Dog, whom they tooke up and nourished till the Faire was done,
and the Merchants returned; at which time they watched the Highwayes, having the Dog with them: who seeing the murtherer, instantly made force at him without all provocation, as a man would doe at his mortall enemy: which thing caused the people to apprehend him; who being exa∣mined, confessed the fact, and received condigne punishment for so foule a deed. The same Author reporteth yet a more memorable and strange story of Blondus. another murder discovered also by the meanes of a dogge, which I may not omit. There was (saith hee) a certaine maid neere Paris, who was be∣loved of two young men; the one of whom as he was going to visite his love, happened to be murdered by the way, and buried: now his dog which he had with him would not depart from the grave of his master: at the last the young man being missed by his father and brethren, was diligently sought for; but not finding him, at last they found his dog lying upon his grave, that howled pittifully as soone as he saw his masters brother: the grave was opened, and the wounded corps found, which was brought away, and committed to other buriall, untill the murderer should be descryed: Afterward, in processe of time, the dogge in the presence of the dead mans brethren espied the murderer, and presently assaulted him with great fierce∣nesse: Whereupon he was appreliended, and examined, and when by no meanes nor policy he would confesse, the magistrate adjudged, That the young man and the dogge should combate together: The dogge was cover∣ed with a dry sod skinne in stead of armour, and the murderer with a speare, and on his body a thinne linnen cloth; and so they both came forth to fight: but behold the hand of vengeance: the man offering at the dogge with his speare, the dogge leaped presently at his face, and caught him fast by the throat, and overthrew him: whereat the wretch amased, cryed out to the beholders, Take pity on me, and pull off the dogge from my throat, and I will confesse all▪ the which being done, he declared the cause and manner of the whole murder, and for the same was deservedly put to death. All these murders were discovered by dogges, the Lord using them as instruments to reveale his justice and vengeance upon this bloudy sinne, but these following by other meanes: The murder of the Poet Ibycus was detected by Cranes; as you may see in the 36 chapter of this booke more at large set forth. Luther recites such another story as that of Ibycus, of a certain Almaigne, Luther. who in travelling fell among theeves, which being about to cut his throat, the poore man espied a flight of Crows, and said, O Crows I take you for wit∣nesses and revengers of my death. About two or three daies after, these mur∣dering theeves drinking in an Inne, a company of Crows came and lighted on the top of the house: whereupon the theeves began to laugh and say one to another, Looke yonder are they which must revenge his death, whom we dispatched the other day. The Tapster over-hearing them, told it to the ma∣gistrat; who presently caused them to be apprehended, and upon their dis∣agreeing in speeches and contrary answers, urged them so far, that they con∣fessed the truth, and received their deserved punishment. There was one Bessus (as Plutarch reporteth) who having killed his fa∣ther, was brought both to knowledge and punishment by the meanes of Plutarch. Swallowes: for his guilty conscience persuaded him, that the Swallowes in their chattering language did say to one another, That Bessus had killed his
father: whereupon not able to conceale his owne guiltinesse, hee be∣wrayed his horrible fact: and was worthily and deservedly for the same put to death. But of all the examples that either reading or experience can afford, none in my opinion is either more admirable, or a more clearer testimony of Gods providence & justice, than that which hapned about a Lucquois Merchant, Pasquier, Recerche▪ lib. 5. c. 20. who comming out of England to Roan in France, and from thence making towards Paris, was in the way, on a mountain neer to Argentueil, murdered by a Frenchman his servant, and his body throwne amongst the Vines. Now as this fact was a doing, a blind man ran by, being led by his dog; who hea∣ring one groane, asked who it was? Whereunto the murderer answered, that it was a sicke man going to ease himselfe. The blind man thus deluded, went his way, and the servant with his masters money, and with Papers of his takes up at Paris a good summe of money, and sets up a shop at Roane. Now this Merchant being expected at Luca a whole yeare together, whi∣ther he had sent word he would shortly repaire; when he came not, a mes∣senger was dispatched to seeke him out; and after much enquiry at London and Roan, and elsewhere, he learnt at last in an Inne, that a Lucquois Mer∣chant about sixe moneths before had lodged there, and was gone to Paris: where also not hearing any tydings of him, he suspected that he was mur∣thered, & made his complaint to the Court of Parliament at Roan: Which imbracing this businesse (being directed by Gods providence) made en∣quiry up and downe the Towne, Whether there were any that within seven or eight moneths had set up a new shop; and finding one, caused him to be arrested for a supposed and a pretended debt: but in the end examined him upon this murther, and laid it to his charge: herewith the prisoner, so∣licited partly bythe remorse of his conscience, & partly by hope of freeing himselfe by a bribe, confessed the fact in private to the Justice but as soone as he perceived that he went about to call in witnesses to his confession, hee denyed it againe: in briefe, the new Merchant is committed to prison, and he sueth the Justice for forgerie and false imprisonment: the Justice can by no meanes cleare himselfe, but onely by the assurance that all men had of his honesty. The matter hangs thus in suspence, till at length the dead carkasse of the Lucquois was eard of, and the blind man also came to light who heard the noyse of the murther: to make short, this blind man was brought to confront the prisoner; and twenty men were caused to speake one after another, and still the blinde man was demaunded, whether hee knew their voices, and said, That that was the man that answered him on the mountaine. This course being ofttimes re-iterated, the blind man hit al∣wayes on the right, and never missed. Whereupon the Court condemned him to death, and before he dyed he confessed the fact, to the great glory of Gods Justice, and the great amazement and strange astonishment of all men. At Paris, in the yeare of our Lord 1551, a certaine young woman was brained by a man with a hammer, neere unto Saint Opportunes Church, Pasquier, Recerches, lib. 5. c. 20. as she was going to midnight Masse, and all her rings and jewels taken from her: This hammer was stolne from a poore Smith there by the same eve∣ning; who therefore being suspected of the murder, was cruelly handled, and put to extraordinary torture, by reason of the vehement presumptions made against him; in such sort, that hee was quite lamed and deprived
of the meanes to get his living; whereby being reduced into extreame po∣verty, he ended his life in great misery. All this while the murderer re∣mained unknowne almost for the space of twenty yeares, and the memory of the murder seemed to be buried with the poore woman in her grave: now marke the justice of God, who hath promised, that nothing shall be so hid but shall be brought to light. It hapned, that one Iohn Flaming, Serge∣ant of the Subsidies at Paris, being upon occasion of businesse at S. Leups, a Village by Montmorency, chanced among other talke at Supper to say, how he had left his wife at home sicke, and no body with her but a little boy: there was an old man then present, named Monstier, and a sonne in law of his, who immediatly upon this speech went away that night, with each of them a basket of cherries and a greene goose, and came about ten of the clock the next morning to Flamings house, where they intended to murder both the woman and the boy, and to possesse themselves of all the goods that they could conveniently carrie away: but the Lord prevented them of their pur∣pose: for being let in at the dores by the boy, pretending that they came from the husband with thse remembrances to his wife, they presently slew the boy, thinking also to surprise the woman; but she hearing the cry of the boy, lockt fast her chamber dore, and cried for helpe out at her window, whereupon the neighbors running to the house tooke these two villaines, one hidden in the funnell of the Chimney; and the other in a Well in the Cellar, with nothing but his nose above water. Now these two wretches be∣ing thus apprehended, arraigned, and condemned, being on the seaffold at the place of execution, the old man desired to speake with the Smithes wi∣dow, whose husband was suspected for the first murder: of whom when she came, hee asked forgivenesse; saying, that it was he which had killed the young woman by S. Opportunes Church. Thus the Lord discovered both the innocency of the Smith, and the guiltinesse of this vile murderer, and that twenty yeeres after the fact was committed. Not long since the like discovery of a murderer was made here in Eng∣land in Leicestershire, not farre from Lutterworth, almost twenty yeeres after the fact committed, The murder was committed by a Miller upon one in his Mill, whom he buried in the ground hard by: This Miller removed unto another countrey, and there dwelt a long space, untill at last guided by Gods Almighty providence, to the manifestation of his justice, he returned unto that place to visit some of his friends. Now in the meane time whilest he was there, the Miller that now possessed the former Mill, had occasion to dig deepe into the ground, where he found the carkasse of a dead man, pre∣sently it was suspected that some had beene murdered, and was there buried: whereupon the Lord put it into their hearts to remember, how about twenty yeares before a certaine neighbour of theirs was suddenly missed, and could never be heard of, insomuch that all supposed him to have beene dead in some strange countrey: this carkasse they suspected to be his, and bethinking themselves who was then Miller of that Mill, behold he was there ready in the towne, not having been there for many yeares before. This man was suspected, nd thereupon examined, and without much adoe confes∣sed the fact, and received deserved punishment. Who seeth not here manifest traces and footsteps of Gods providence? First in reducing the murderer to that place at that time: Secondly, in stirring up the Miller to digge at the same time also: thirdly, in
putting into the hearts of the people the missing of such a man, whose me∣mory was almost forgotten: and lastly, in causing the murderer to confesse his deed, when as no proofe nor witnesse could be brought against him: but here is the justice of God against all such, Vengeance will not suffer the mur∣derer Acts 28. 4. to live. Henry Ranzovius, Lieutenant for the King of Denmarke in the Duchie of Ranzovius. Holsace, makes relation in a letter of his, of an ordinary meanes of finding out Murderers, practised in the kingdome of Denmark by King Christiernus the second, and permitted over all his Kingdome; the occasion whereof (he saith) was this: Certaine Gentlemen being on an evening together in a stove, fell out among themselves, and from words grew to blowes (the Candles being put out) insomuch that one of them was stabbed with a pu∣nyard. Now the deed doer was unknowne by reason of the number; al∣though the Gentleman accused a Pursevant of the Kings for it, who was one of them in the stove. The King to finde out the homicide, caused them all to come together in the stove, and standing round about the dead Corps, becommanded that they should one after another lay their right hand on the slain Gentlemans naked breasts, swearing they had not killed him: the Gentlemen did so, and no signe appeared to witnesse against them; the Pur∣sevant onely remained, who condemned before in his owne conscience, went first of all and kissed the dead mans feet, but as soone as he layed his hand on his breast, the blood gushed forth in abundance, both out of his wound and nosthrils, so that urged by this evident accusation, he confessed the murder, and by the Kings owne sentence was incontinently beheaded: whereupon (as I said before) arose that practise which is now ordinary in many places of finding out unknowne Murders; which by the admirable power of God are for the most part revealed, either by the bleeding of the corpes, or the opening of the eye, or some other extraordinary signe, as daily experience doth teach. The same Authour reporteth another example farre more strange, in the same letter written to David Chytreus, which happened at Itzehow in Den∣marke. A Traveller was murdered by the high-way side, and because the murderer could not be found out, the Magistrates of Itzehow caused the bo∣dy to be taken up, and one of the hands to be cut off, which was carried into the prison of the Towne, and hung up by a string in one of the Cham∣bers: about ten yeares after, the murderer comming upon some occasion in to the prison, the hand which had been a long time dry began to drop blood on the Table that stood underneath it: which the Gaoler beholding, stayed the fellow, and advertised the Magistrates of it; who examining him, the Phi. Lonicer. Theat. hist. Fides sit apud authorem. Though strange, yet not incredi∣ble, since God can as well turne Calves heads into mens, as a rod into a ser∣pent, or wa∣ter into blood. murderer giving glory to God, confessed his fact, and submitted himselfe to the rigour of the Law, which was inflicted on him, as he very well de∣served. At Winsheime in Germany, a certaine Theefe after many Robberies and Murders committed by him upon Travellers and Women with childe, went to the Shambles before Easter, and bought three Calves heads, which when hee put into a Wallet, they seemed to the standers by to be mens heads: whereupon being attached and searched by the Officers, and he ex∣amined how hee came by them, answered and proved by witnesses, that hee bought Calves heads, and how they were transformed hee knew not: whereupon the Senate amazed, not supposing this miracle to
arise of naught, cast the party into prison, and tortured him to make him confesse what villany he had committed; who confessed indeed at last his horrible murders, and was worthily punished for the same, and then the heads recovered their old shapes. When I read this story, I was halfe afraid to set it downe, least I should seeme to insert fables into this serious Treatise of Gods Judgements: but seeing the Lord doth often worke miraculously for the disclosing of this foule sinne, I thought that it would not seeme alto∣gether incredible. Another murderer at Tubing betrayed his murder by his owne sighes, which were so deepe and incessant, in griefe not of his fact, but of his small Lonicer. booty, that being but asked the question, he confessed the crime, and under∣went worthy punishment. Another murtherer in Spain was discovered by the trembling of his heart; for when many were suspected of the murder, and all renounced it, the Judge caused all their breasts to be opened, and him in whom he saw most trembling of brest, he condemned, who also could not deny the fact, but pre∣sently confessed the same. At Isenacum a certaine yong man being in love with a maid, and not ha∣ving wherewith to maintain her, used this unlawfull meanes to accomplish his desire; upon a night he slew his host, and throwing his body into a Cel∣lar, tooke away all his money, and then hasted away; but the terrour of his owne conscience and the judgement of God so besotted him, that hee could not stirre a foot untill he was apprchended. At the same time Mar∣tin Luther, and Philip Melancthon abode at Isenacum, and were eye-witnesses of this miraculous judgement, who also so dealt with this murderer, that in most humble and penitent confession of his sinnes, and comfort of soule, he ended his life. By all these examples wee see, how hard it is for a murderer to escape without his reward: when the justice of man is either too blinde, that it cannot search out the truth, or too blunt, that it doth not strike with seve∣rity the man appointed unto death, then the justice of God riseth up, and with his owne arme he discovereth and punisheth the murderer; yea, rather than he shall goe unpunished, sencelesse creatures and his owne heart and tongue rise to give sentence against him. I doubt not but daily experi∣ence in all places affordeth many more examples to this purpose, and espe∣cially the experience of our Judges in criminall causes, who have continuall occasion of understanding such matters in their Circuits: but these shall suffice for our present purpose. CHAP. XII. Of such as have murdered themselves. WHen the Law saith, Thou shalt not kill, it not onely condemneth the killing of others, but much more of our selves: for charity sprin∣geth from a mans selfe; & therfore if they be guilty of murder
that spill the bloud of others, much more guilty are they before God that shed their owne bloud: and if nature bindeth us to preserve the life of all men as much as lyeth in our power, then much more are we bound to pre∣serve our owne lives, so long as God shall give us leave. We are here set in this life as souldiers in a station, without the licence of our Captaine we must not depart: our soule is maried to the body by the appointment of God, none must presume to put a sunder those whom God hath coupled: and our life is committed to us as a thing in trust, we must not redeliver it, nor part with it, untill he require it againe at our hands that gave it into, our hands. Saint Augustine in his first Booke De Civitate Dei, doth most Aug. de civit. lib. 1. cap. 26. strongly evince and prove, That for no cause voluntary death is to be un∣dertaken: neither to avoid temporall troubles, least we fall into eternall; nor for feare to be polluted with the sinnes of others, lest by avoiding other mens sinnes, we encrease our owne; nor yet for our owne sinnes that are past, for the which we have more need of life that we might repent of them: nor lastly: for the hope of a better life, because they which are guilty of their owne death, a better life is not prepared for them. These be the words of Augustine: wherein he alledgeth foure causes, by which men are mooved to this unnaturall act; and concludeth, that for none of them, nor for any other cause what soever, a man ought to lay vio∣lent and bloudy hands upon himselfe; yea, concludeth peremptorily, that a better life after death doth not receive such, to wit, that wilfully and desperately murder themselves, and die without repentance, as com∣monly they doe. But here it is to be observed, that many which seeme to make away themselves, are murdered and made away by the Divell, and not by themselves: for otherwise it were not possible that then should pe∣rish so strangely as they doe: as when some have beene hanged with their knees almost touching the ground; others upon a weake twigge, not strong enough to beare the weight of the tenth part of their body: others beene drowned in a puddle of water: which plainely sheweth, that the Divell, either as the principall actor, or at least as a helper, was the procurer of their murders, and not alwayes themselves: And therefore I must needs say with Luther, That both charity and conscience inhibites resolutely to judge all such to be damned that seeme to have made havocke of their owne lives; for the mercy of God is incomprehensible, and why may he not save the soules of them, whose bodies he gave leave to the Di∣vell to torment, yea to destroy? Besides, we read of many holy wo∣men, who in the time of persecution cast themselves into the deep stream to preserve their chastity from the violence of the wicked persecutours; and yet were reputed in the Church for holy Martyrs. Saint Augu∣stines judgement is worthy to be learned and imitated of all concerning this matter, who thus defineth the case: Of these (saith he) I dare avouch nothing rashly: it may be the Church of God was perswaded by divine authority to receive them into the number of Martyrs; or it may be they did this act, not be∣ing deceived, after the manner of men, but being commanded of God, not er∣ring, but obeying; as also we are to judge of Sampson: now when God biddeth, and without all doubt makes knowne his will, who can call this obedience a crime? who can accuse a duety of piety? But a little after he giveth a ca∣veat, Ne divina iussio ullo nutet incerto; that is, that we be sure God bids; for often times the divell translates himself into an Angell of light, and wil feine
a message from God, which proceedeth from his owne malice. All this is to be conceived only touching that extraordinary case of those holy women that drowned themselves, and yet were held for Martyrs in the Church of God: as for others that shall wilfully and wofully shed their owne blouds, and rob themselves of that precious jewell of life which God hath given them to keep, no doubt but as they commit a horrible and hainous crime, so they incurre a horrible and fearefull judgement: yea, the very act it selfe is both a crime and a judgment; a crime deserving a further judgment, even eternall damnation in hell fire; and a judgement and punishment of some notable sinnes commed by them before, and of an ungodly and wicked life unrepented of. The drift therfore & purpose of these examples follow∣ing is this, to shew how the Lord punisheth oftentimes in men an ungodly life with voluntary and wilfull murder of themselves, and this wilfull mur∣der of themseles with eternall damnation after this life ended, as a just re∣compence of their deserts; and all to teach us repentance, the onely means to prevent both these. The first we reade of in holy Scripture that cruelly murdered himselfe 1 Sam. 31. 4. with his owne hands, was King Saul; who, as it is recorded of him, was a most wicked man and a Tyran: for being chosen from among all the people of Israel to be King by the Lords owne appointment, and advanced as it were from the Plough to the Scepter, he like a most ungratefull wretch kicked against his advancer, and rebelled against his God that had done so great things for him: yea, hee not onely contemned his lawes, and cast his commandements behind his backe but also proved a most cruell Tyran, and shed much innocent blood: amongst the rest of his cruelties, this was the chiefe; upon the false accusation of Doeg the Edomite, he caused foure∣score 1 Sam. 22. 18, 19. and five persons, that were Priests, and wore a linnen Ephod, to bee staine at one time, and Nob the Citie of the Priests to be smote with the edge of the sword, both man and woman, childe and suckling, Oxe and Asse: yea, so wicked was he, that when the Lord would not answer him neither by Prophets, nor by dreames, nor by any other meanes, he went to take coun∣sell of the Divell, at the mouth of the Witch of Endor: for all which his 1 Sam. 28. 15. abominable wickednesse, the Lord gave him over at last to so desperate a minde, that rather than he would fall into the hands of his enemies, he fell upon his owne sword, and murdered himselfe. Zimri also, the King of Israel, is set forth by the holy Ghost to be a wic∣ked man, and a traitor: for he conspited against his master Ela, the sonne 1 King. 16. 10, 18, 19. of Baasha King of Israel, and flew him as he was drinking in Tirza, and pro∣claimed himselfe King in his roome: but the army hearing thereof, made Omri, the Captaine of the hoste, King: who comming to besiege Tirza, wherein Zimri was, Zimri seeing that the Citie was taken, went into the pa∣lace of the Kings house, and there, together with the house burnt himselfe, rather than he would fall into the hands of his enemy: Now the holy Ghost setteth it downe in plaine words, that the Lord sent this judgement upon him for his sinnes which he had sinned, in doing that which was evill in the of the Lord, and walking in the way of Ieroboam, who made Israel to sinne. Achitophel, that great Counsellor of State to King David, of whom it is 2 Sam. 17, 20. said, that the counsell which he counselled was like the Oracle of God, when hee saw that the counsell which hee gave was not followed, but de∣spised,
hee sadled his Asse, and arose and went home into his owne citie, and put his houshold in order, and hanged himselfe: And that this was Gods just vengeance upon him for his former wickednesse, it may appeare both by his conspiracie with Absalom against his liege lord king David, 2 Sam. 16. 21, 22. and also that wicked counsel which hee gave unto him, of going in unto his fathers concubines in the sight of the people. In the second booke of the Machabees is recorded a notable story of one 2 Mac. 14. 37, 38. Raz is an Elder of Jerusalem, who is there set forth to bee a man of very good report, constant in religion, a father of the Jewes, and a lover of the citie: yet notwithstanding, this man rather than hee would fall into the hands of Nicanor his enemy, murdered himselfe after a most fearefull and savage manner, for first hee fell upon his sword, and when as for haste that stroke dispatched him not, hee ran boldly or rather furiously to the wall, and cast himselfe downe headlong; after which yet breathing, hee got up on a steepe rocke, and rending out his bowels with his owne hands, threw them amongst the people, calling upon the Lord of life, that hee would restore them againe unto him. The author of that booke commendeth this fact for a valiant and noble deed; but surely wee are taught out of the booke of God by Gods spirit, that it was a most bloudy, barbarous, and irreli∣gious act: for rather should a man endure all the reproaches and torments of an enemy, than embrue his owne hands in his owne bloud; and there∣fore if he were not extraordinarily stirred up hereunto by the spirit of God, this must needs bee a just punishment of some former sinne wherein hee lay without repentance, and a forerunner of an eternall punishment after this life. Let us joyne Iudas and Pilate together, the one being the betrayer of his Lord and Master Jesus Christ our Saviour, the other the condemner of him, and that against his conscience: as they both agreed in one malicious pra∣ctise against the life of Christ, so they disagreed not in offering violence to their owne lives: for Iudas hanged himselfe, and his bowels gushed out, and Pilat being banished to Vienna, and oppressed with the torment of con∣science Acts 1. Euseb. and feare of punishment for his misdeeds, to prevent all killed him∣selfe, and so became a notable spectacle of Gods justice, and Christs in∣nocencie. The Jewes, as they are recorded in Scripture to bee a stiffe-necked and stubborne Nation, above all the Nations under the Sunne, so none were ever more hardy and daring in this bloudy practise of selfe-murther than they were; which may bee thought a portion of Gods just judgement upon them for their sinnes: three examples of greatest note I will propound, which I thinke can hardly bee matched. When the City of Jerusalem was taken by Herod and Sosius, there was a certaine Jew that had hidden himselfe in a denne with his wife and seven Iosephus de bell. Iud. lib. 1. c. 12. 13. children; to whom Herod offered both life and liberty, if hee would come forth: but the stiffe-hearted wretch had rather die than bee captive to the Romanes: therefore refusing Herods offer, hee first threw downe his chil∣dren headlong from a high rocke, and burst their neckes, next hee sent his wife after them, and lastly tumbled himselfe upon their carkasses to make up the tragedie: a horrible and lamentable spectacle of a proud and despe∣rate minde. The second example is nothing inferior to the former. After the siege
and sacking of Jotapata by the Romanes, forty Jewes (among whom was Iosephus the writer of this story) having hid themselves in a cave, by mutu∣all consent killed one another, rather than they would fall into the hands of Iosephus Fulgol. lib. 3. c. 2. the Romanes▪ Iosephus onely, with one other, by his persuasion, by great art and industry, after the other were slain, proceeded not in that bloudy enterprise, but yeelded themselves to the mercy of the enemies, and so es∣caped with their lives. This fearefull obstinacy may well be imputed to the justice of God upon them, as for their other sinnes, so especially for cruci∣fying the Lord of life, whose bloud they imprecated might fall on them and on their children. The third example surpasseth both the former both in cruelty and obsti∣nacy: Eleazer the Jew after the taking of Jerusalem fled into the tower of Messada with nine hundred followers; being besieged there by Sabinus Fla∣vius, a Roman Captaine, when he saw that the walls were almost beaten Fulgos. lib. 3. cap. 2. downe, and that there was no hope of escaping, he persuaded his compani∣ons by a pithy and vehement Oration, and drew them to this resolution, that tenne should be chosen by lot, which should kill all the rest, together with their wives and children, and that afterward they themselves should kill each other. The former part of this Tragedy being performed, the surviving tenne first set on fire the Tower, that no prey might come unto the enemy (the victuals only preserved, to the end it might be knowne, that not hunger, but desperate valour drew them to this bloudy massacre▪) then according to their appoyntment, by mutuall wounds they dispatched one another: and of so great a number not one remained, besides one wo∣man with her five children, who hearing the horriblenesse of their determi∣nation, hid her selfe in a cave in the ground, and so escaped with the life of her selfe and her children, and became a reporter of this whole story. The like story is recorded by Livie touching the Campagnians; who being besieged by the Romanes, and constrained to yeeld up their City unto them upon composition, Vibius, a chiefe nobleman of the City, with seven Liv. lib. 26. and twenty other Senatours, that they might not fall into their enemies hands, after they had glutted themselves with wine and good cheere, dranke all of them poyson, and so bewayling the state of their countrey and embra∣cing each other, and taking their last farewell, died ere the enemies were re∣ceived into the city. Buthes, otherwise called Boges by Herodotus, Governor of Thracia, being besieged in the city Eion, by Cymon the Athenian captaine, to the end that Fulgos. l. 3. c. 2. the enemy might receive no benefit nor great glory by his victory, first caused the city to be fired, and then by one consent they all killed them∣selves. So likewise did Ariarathes king of Capadocia, when he was besieged by Perdicca. Cato Vticensis, rather than he would fall into the hands of Iuli∣us Caesar, his enemy, after his victory over Pompey, fell upon his owne sword, and slew himselfe; having first read Plato's booke of the immortality of the soule. So likewise did Marcus Antonius, after that he was over come by Au∣gustus. And Cleopatra the Aegyptian Queene, when as by her allurements she could not intice Augustus to her lust, as she had done Anthony, but perceived that she was reserved for triumph, escaping out of prison, and placing her selfe in her sumptuous sepulchre, neere to the body of her dead paramour, set an Aspe to her left arme, by the venome whereof she died as it were in a sleepe. Thus the Lord doth infatuate the mindes of wicked and
ungodly persons, and such as have no true knowledge nor feare of the true God in their hearts, making them instruments of his vengeance, and execu∣tioners of his wrath upon themselves. Hannibal the sonne of Amilchar, after many victories and much blood∣shed Fulgos. of the Romans, at last being overcome, and doubting of the faith of Pru∣sia the King of Bythinia, to whom he was fled for succour, poysoned himselfe with poyson which he alwayes carried in a Ring to that purpose. At the destruction of Carthage, when as Asdrubal the chiefe Captaine Fulgos. submitted himselfe to the mercy of Scipio, his wife cursing and railing on him for his base mind, threw her children into the midst of a fire, and there ended her dayes: and Asdrubal himselfe not long after followed her by a vo∣luntary and violent death. When Cinna besieged the city of Rome, two brothers chanced to encoun∣ter Philip. Melan. Chron. 2. together in single fight, one of Cinna's army, the other of the contrary: and the one having slaine the other, after that the Conquerour perceived that it was his brother whom hee had slaine, hee slew himselfe also, to make satisfaction for his brothers blood: and so they were both buried in one grave. Norbanus a Consull of Rome flying from Scylla, slew himselfe at Rhodes, rather than he would fall into his enemies hands: and so did likewise Marius the sonne, at Praeneste. Of the murderers of Iulius Caesar, almost all became also the murderer of themselves: Cassius stabb'd himselfe with the same dagger wherewith he had stabb'd Caesar: Brutus the night before his overthrow at Philippi, saw in his chamber a vision of a great fearefull man; and he demanding who he was, and what he would, he answered, I am (O Brutus) thy evill spirit, and to morrow thou shalt see me at Philippi: To whom Brutus with a bold cou∣rage answered, I will therefore see thee there. The next day Brutus being conquered by Augustus and Anthony, at Philippi, fell upon his own sword and slew himselfe. Methridates that bloody and mighty King of Pontus being overcome of Lucullus and Pompey, and set upon by his owne sonne, went about to make away himselfe by poyson: which when it tooke not effect, by reason of his daily taking of Antidotes, he forced a French souldier of his to lay violent hands upon him; and so hee became a wilfull spiller of his owne blood, that had caused the blood of so many thousands to be spilt. His two wives Monica and Veronica, hearing of the miserable end of the king, made likewise themselves away; for the one hanged her selfe, but when the weight of her body broke the cord, shee committed her selfe to Bochis the Eunuch to bee slaine: the other received poyson, which when it wrought not so speedily as shee desired, Bochis also was made an instrument to dispatch her. Most famous and notorious is the story of Lucretia, who being ravished Livit. by Tarquinius the yonger, and impatient of that injury and disgrace, slew her selfe openly, and gave cause by her death of the change of the Roman State, from the government of Kings to Consuls. Sophronia another Roman woman, but a Christian, when as she could by Euseb. no meanes escape the lust of Decius the Emperour, daily assaulting her cha∣stity, tooke a sword, and by her husbands consent slew her selfe; and so to prevent one sin, she committed another farre worse than that she feared. Portia the daughter of Cato, and wife of Brutus, hearing of the death of
her husband at Philippi, sought for a knife to kill her selfe; which being denyed her, she eat burning coales, and so ended her life by a strange kinde of death. Wee read of many wanton and lewd Poets that have thus made an end of themselves: who as for the most they are Epicures and Atheists, so sel∣dome come to a good end: Labienus the railing Poet (who for that cause was called Rabienus) understanding that his bookes were adjudged to bee burned by a publike Decree, would not survive his own writings, and there∣fore killed himselfe. Lucretius the Atheist taking a love potion to incite his lust, was by the force therof deprived of his sences, and so deprived him∣selfe also of life in his rage. Empedocles the vainglorious Poet, affecting the name of a god, and of immortality, threw himselfe headlong into mount Aetna, and so perished. Silvius Italicus being taken with an incurable dis∣ease, chose rather to be his owne murderer, than to endure the torment of his sicknesse. Cornelius Gallus an amatorius Poet, having robbed the City Thebes, over which he was set to be governour by Augustus Caesar, and fea∣ring Ammianus Marcellinus. to be called to account, prevented the punishment of humane justice, by executing the justice of God upon himselfe with his owne hands. Of those that persecuted the Church of Christ, very many were given o∣ver by God to be persecutors of themselves, and spoylers of their owne lives: as Nero for example, the first Emperour that tooke in hand to per∣secute Suet. Christians, he seeing himselfe in danger to be murdered by one ap∣pointed for that purpose, to prevent the malice of the murderer, murdered himselfe. Magnentius another tyrant, and enemy to Christs Church, being overcome by Constantius, brother to Constans, whom he had slaine, fled to Lions, and there became his owne Butcher: whose death as soone as his brother Decentius understood, he also hanged himselfe. Galerius the Emperour, after he had tormented the Christians by all cru∣ell means, and left no way unattempted whereby he might root them out of his Kingdome, fell into a grievous disease, through the torment whereof, not being able to endure any longer, he thrust a sword into his own bowels, and so miserably ended his dayes. And to come neerer to our owne age, in King Edward the sixths dayes one Clerke an open enemy to the Gospel, hanged himselfe in the Tower: so did Pavier Towne-clerke of London: so did the sonne of one Levar a hus∣bandman, that mocked and scorned at the holy Martyr master Latymer: so likewise did Henry Smith a Lawyer, another open adversary to Gods truth. Richard Long, another enemy to Gods truth, drowned himselfe at Calice, in King Henry the eights dayes. Iohn Plankney, a Fellow of New Colledge in Oxford, did the like Anno 1566. and likewise one Hanington, a Fellow of the same Colledge, in a well at Padua; or, as some thinke, at Rome. Of these you may reade more in the first booke. Hither I might adde many examples of moderne experience, as name∣ly of a covetous wretch in the Isle of Elie, who being cast in a suit of Law, through impatience of griefe, came home and hanged himselfe: of another that had beene a great dealer in worldly matters, and an undoer of a Family or two of good credit and revenue, by usury, and taking for∣feiture of bonds, and that by his owne flattering perswasion: being himselfe arrested at Huntington for debt, rather then he would satisfie it, though he
was able enough, cut his owne throat, after a most fearefull and horrible manner: another being a man of note and good possessions, threw himselfe downe headlong from the top of a Church. Many such like examples I could adjoyne, with their names and places of abode, but I forbeare, least by reporting Gods judgements upon the dead, I should offend some that are alive. These therefore already proposed may be a sufficient taste of this kinde of judgement, inflicted by God upon wicked persons: and also may serve for a caveat and warning to all men to take heed how they offer violence to their owne lives, seeing it is not onely a punishment of sinne past, but a fear∣full sinne it selfe, and a forerunner and causer of punishment to come, even of eternall punishment, except the Lord extraordinarily and mi∣raculously shew mercy, which none ought to presume of. CHAP. XIII. Of Paricides, or Parent Murderers. IF all effusion of humane blood be both horrible to be∣hold, and repugnant to nature, then is the murdering of Parents especially detestable, when a man is so possessed with the Devill, or transported with a hellish fury, that he lifteth up his hand against his own father or mother, to put them to death: this is so monstrous and inor∣mous an impiety, that the greatest Barbarians ever have had it in detestation: wherefore it is also expresly com∣manded in the Law of God. That whosoever smiteth his father or mo∣ther Exod. 21. in what sort so ever, though not to death, yet he shall die the death. If the disobedience, unreverence, and contempt of children towards their Pa∣rents, are by the just judgements of God most rigorously punished (as hath beene declared before in the first commandement of the second Table) how much more then when violence is offered, and above all, when murder is committed? Thus the Aegyptians punished this sinne: they put the com∣mittants upon a stacke of thornes, and burnt them alive, having beaten their Diodor. Sic. bodies beforehand with sharpe reeds made of purpose. Solon being deman∣ded why he appointed no punishment in his Lawes for Paricides; answered, that there was no necessity, thinking that the wide world could not afford so wicked a wretch. It is said, that Romulus for the same cause ordained no pu∣nishment in his Common wealth for that crime, but called every murde∣rer a Paricide; the one being in his opinion a thing execrable, and the other impossible. And in truth there was not for 600 yeeres space (according to Plutarchs report) found in Rome any one that had committed this execra∣ble fact. The first Paricide that Rome saw, was Lucius Ostius, after the first Punicke warre; although other Writers affirme, that M. Malliolus was the first, and Lucius the second: how soever it was, they both underwent the punishment of the Law Pompeia, which enacted, That such offenders should be thrust into a sacke of Leather, and an Ape, a Cocke, a Viper, and a Dog, put in to accompany them, and then to be throwne into the water, to the
end that these beasts being enraged and animated one against another, might wreke their teene upon them, and so deprive them of life after a strange fashion, being debarred of the use of the aire, water, and earth, as unworthy to participate the very Elements with their deaths, much lesse with their lives: which kinde of punishment was after practised and confirmed by the constitution of Constantine the Great. And albeit the regard of the punishment seemed terrible, and the offence it selfe much more monstrous, yet since that time there have beene many so perverse and exceeding wic∣ked, as to throw themselves headlong into that desperate gulfe. As Cleodoricke sonne of Sigebert King of Austria, who being tickled with an unsatiable lust of raigne through the deceivable perswasions of Cleo∣dovius Greg. of Tours, lib 2. King of France, slew his father Sigebert as he lay asleepe in his Tent in a forrest at noone time of the day; who being weary with walking, laid himselfe downe there to take his rest: but for all that, the wicked wretch was so farre from attaining his purpose, that it fell out cleane contrary to his expectation: for after his fathers death, as he was viewing his treasures, and ransacking his coffers, one of Cleodovius factors strooke him suddenly, and murdered him, and so Cleodovius seised both upon the Crowne and Treasures. After the death of Hircanus, Aristobulus succeeded in the government of Ioseph. antiq. Judea, which whilest he strove to reduce into a kingdome, and to weare a crown, contrary to the custome of his predecessors, his mother & other bre∣thren contending with him about the same, he cast in prison, & took Antigo∣nus his next brother to be his associate: but ere long (a good gratefull son) he famished her to death with hunger that had fed him to life with her teares, even his naturall mother: And after perswaded with false accusations, cau∣sed his late best beloved Antigonus to be slaine by an ambush that lay by Strato's tower, because in the time of his sicknesse he entred the Temple with pompe. But the Lord called for quittance for the two bloodsheds immediately after the execution of them: for his brothers blood was scarce washed off the ground, ere in the extreamity of his sicknesse he was carried into the same place, and there vomiting up blood at his mouth and nost∣hrils, to be mingled with his brothers, he fell downe starke dead, not with∣out horrible tokens of trembling and despaire. Nero that unnaturall Tyran surpassed all that lived, as in all other vices, Corn. Tacit lib. 14. so in this; for he attempted thrice by poyson to make away his mother Agrippina: and when that could not prevaile, by reason of her usuall Anti∣dotes and preservatives, hee assayed divers other meanes: as first a devise, whereby she should be crushed to death as she slept, a loosened beame that should fall upon her; and secondly by shipwracke: both which when she Sueton. cap 33. escaped, the one by discovery, and the other by swimming, he sent Anictus the Centurion to slaughter her with the sword: who with his companions breaking up the gate of the City where she lay, rushed into her Chamber, and there murdered her. It is written of her, that when she saw there was no remedy but death, she presented her belly unto the murderer, and desired him to kill her in that part which had most deserved it, by bringing into the world so vile a monster: and of him, that he came to view the dead carkasse of his mother, and handled the members thereof, commending this, and dis∣commending that, as his fancy led him, and in the meane time being thirsty, to call for drinke: so farre was he from all humanity and touch of Nature:
but he that spared not to embrue his hands in her blood that bred him, was constrained ere long to offer violence to his own life, which was most deere unto him. Henry the son of Nicolotus Duke of Herulia, had two wicked, cruell, and Munst. Cos∣mog. lib. 3. unkind sonnes, by the yonger of whom, with the consent of the elder, he was traiterously murdered, because he had married a third wife: for which cause Nicolotus, their cousin-german, pursued them both with a just revenge; for he deprived them of their kingdome, and drove them into exile, where they soon after perished. Selymus the tenth Emperour of Turkes was so unnaturall a childe, that he Philip. Melan. Chron. lib. 5.  Munst. Cos∣mog. lib. 4. feared not to dispossesse his father Bajazet of the crown by treason; and next to bereave him of his life by poyson. And not satisfied therewith, even to murder his two brethren, and to destroy the whole stock of his own blood. But when hee had raigned eight yeares, vengeance found him out, and be∣ing at his backe▪ so corrupted and putrified his reins, that the contagion spread it selfe over all his body: so that he dyed a beast-like and irksome death, and that in the same place where he had before oppressed his father Bajazet with an army, to wit, at Chiurle a city of Thracia, in the year of our Lord 1520. in the moneth of September. Charles the younger, by surname called Crassus son to Lodouick the third, Casp. Hedian. lib. . cap. 29. was possessed & tormented with a divell in the presence of his father, & the Peeres of the Realme; which he openly confessed to have justly happened unto him, because he had pretended in his mind to have conspired his fa∣thers death and deposition: what then are they to expect, that doe not pre∣tend, but performe this monstrous enterprise? A certaine degenerate and cruell son longing and gaping after the inhe∣ritance of his father, which nothing but his life kept him from, wrought this means to accomplish his desire: he accused his father of a most filthy un∣nameable crime, even of committing filtinesse with a Cow; knowing that if he were convicted therof, the law would cut off his life: & herein he wroght a Theat. hist. double villany, in going about not only to take away his life (wch by the law of nature he ought to have preserved) but also his good name, without respe∣cting that the stain of a father redoundeth to his posterity, and that children Mandat. 8. Calumniation lib. 2. cap. commōly do not only inherit the possessions, but also imitate the conditions of their parents: but all these supposes laid aside, together with▪ all feare of God, he indicted him before the Magistrate, of incest, and that upon his own knowledge: insomuch that they brought the poore innocent man to the rack, to the end to make him confesse the crime; which albeit amidst his tortures he did, as soon as he was out, he denyed again: howbeit his extorted confessi∣on stood for evidence, and he was condemned to be burned with fire, as was speedily executed, and constantly endured by him, exclaiming still upon the false accusation of his son, and his own unspotted innocency; as, by the issue that followed, most cleerely appeared; for his son not long after fell into a reprobate mind, and hanged himselfe: and the Judge that condemned him, with the witnesses that bare record of his forced confession, within one moneth died all, after a most wretched▪ and miserable sort. And thus it plea∣sed God both to revenge his death, and also to quit his reputation and in∣nocency, from ignominy and discredit in this world. Manfred Prince of Tarentum, bastard son to Frederick the second, smo∣thered Philip. Melan. Chron. lib. 4. No better fruit to be ex∣pected of any bastard imp. his father to death with a pillow, because (as some say) he would not bestow the kingdome of Naples upon him: and not content herewith, he poi∣soned also the heirs of Frederick, to the end he might attain unto the crown,
as Conrade his elder brother, and his nephew the son of Henry the heir, which Henry died in prison; and now onely Conradinus remained betwixt him and the kingdome, whom though he assayed to send after his father, yet was his intention frustrate, for the Pope thundered out his curses against him, and instigated Charles Duke of Angiers to make war against him: wherein ba∣stard and unnaturall Manfred was discomfited and slaine, and cut short of his purpose, for which he had committed so many tragedies. Martin Luther was wont to report of his own experience this wonderfull history of a Locksmith, a yong man, riotous and vicious, who to find fuel for Luther. his luxury, was so bewitched that he feared not to slay his own father & mo∣ther with a hammer, to the end to gain their mony and possessions: after wch cruell deed, he presently went to a shoomaker and bought him new shooes, leaving his old behind him, by the providence of God to be his accusers: for after an houre or two the slain bodies being found by the Magistrate, and in∣quisition made for the murderer, no manner of suspition being had of him, he seeming to take such griefe therat. But the Lord that knoweth the secrets of the heart discovered his hypocrisie, and made his owne shooes which hee had left with the Shoomaker rise up to beare witnesse against him: for the blood which ran from his fathers wounds besprinckled them so, that thereof grew the suspition, and from thence the examination, and very soon the con∣fession, and last of all his worthy and lawfull execution. From hence we may learne for a generall trueth, that murder, never so secret, will ever by one means or other be discovered; the Lord will not suffer it to goe unpunished, so abominable it is in his sight. Another son at Basil, in the yeare of our Lord God, 1560, bought a quan∣tity of poyson of an Apothecary, and ministred it to none but to his own fa∣ther, Casp. Hed. 4. part. Chron. accounting him worthiest of so great a benefit: which when it had ef∣fected his wish upon him, the crime being detected, in stead of possessing his goods which he aimed at, he possessed a vile and shamefull death; for he was drawne through the streets, burnt with hot Irons, and tormented nine houres in a wheele, till his life forsooke him. As it is repugnant to nature for children to deale thus cruelly with their parents, so it is more against nature for parents to murder their children: insomuch as naturall affection is of greater force in the descent than in the ascent, & the love that parents bear their children, is greater than that which children redound to their Parents; because the childe proceedeth from the father, and not the father from the childe, as part of his fathers essence, and not the father of his: Can a man then hate his own flesh, or be a rooter out of that which himselfe planted? It is rare, yet sometimes it commeth to passe. Howbeit as the offence is in an high degree, so it is alwayes punished by some high judgement: as by these examples that follow shall appeare. The ancient Ammonites had an Idoll called Moloch to the which they offered their children in sacrifice: this Idoll, (as the Jewes write) was of a great stature, and hollow within, having seven chambers in his hollownesse, whereof one was to receive meat, another turtle Doves, the third a sheep, the fourth a ram, the fifth a calfe, the sixth an oxe, and the seventh a childe: his hands were alwayes extended to receive gifts; and when a childe was offered, they were made fire hot to burne it to death: none must offer the childe but the father: and to drowne the cries of it, the Chemarims (for so were the Priests of that Idoll called) made a noise with bels, cymbals and horns: thus is it written, that king Ahab offered his son, yea, and many of the children of Israel beside, as the Prophet David affirmeth: They offered (saith he) their Psal. 106. 37, 38.
sons and daughters to Divels, and shed innocent blood, &c. this is the horrible crime. Now marke the judgement concerning the Canaanites: the land∣spued them out for their abominations, Achab with his posterity was accur sed, himselfe being slaine by his enemies, and the crowne taken from his po∣sterity, not one being left of his off-spring to pis against the wall, according to the saying of Elias: as for the Jewes, the Prophet David in the same place declareth their punishment, when he saith, That the wrath of the Lord was Verse 40. kindled, and he abhorred his inheritance, and gave them into the hands of the hea∣then, that they that hated them were lords over them. In the yeare of our Lord 1551, in a town of Hassia called Weidenhasten, Iob Fincelius, lib. 1. de Mi∣rac. The twentieth day of November, a cruell mother inspired with Satan, shut up all her doores, and began to murder her four children on this manner: shee snatcht up ā sharpe axe, and first set upon her eldest son, being but eight yeares old, searching him out with a candle behinde a hogs-head, where he hid himselfe, and presently (notwithstanding his pitifull praiers and com∣plaints) clave his head in two pieces, and chopped off both his armes: Next shee killed her daughter of five yeares old, after the same manner: another little boy of three yeares of age (seeing his mothers madnesse) hid himselfe (poore infant) behinde the gate, whom as soone as the Tygre espied, shee drew out by the haire of the head into the floore, and there cut off his head: the yongest lay crying in the cradle but halfe a yeare old, him she (without all compassion) pluckt out and murdered in like sort. These murders being finished, the Diuell incarnate (for certaine no womanly nature was left in her) to take punishment of her selfe for the same, cut her owne throat; and albeit she survived nine dayes, and confessing her fault, dyed with teares and repentance, yet we see how it pleased God to arme her own hands against her selfe, as the fittest executioners of vengeance. The like tragicall accident we reade to have happened at Cutzenborff, a Theat. hist. City in Silesia, in the yeare 1536, to a woman and her three children; who having slain them all in her husbands absence, killed her selfe in like manner also to make up the tragedy. Concerning stepmothers, it is a world to reade how many horrible mur∣ders they have usually practised upon their children in law, to the end to bring the inheritance to their own brood, or at least to revenge some injury supposed to be done unto them: of which, one or two examples I will subnect as a taste out of many hundred, leaving the residue to the judgment and reading of the Learned. Constantius, the son of Heraclius, having raigned Emperour but one yeere, Zonor as com. 5. was poysoned by his stepmother Martina, to the end to install her own son Heraclon in the Crown: but for this cruell part becomming odious, to the Senat, they so much hated to have her or her son raigne over them, that in stead thereof they cut off her tongue and his nose, and so banished them the City. Fausta the wife of Constantine the great fell in love with Constantine her sonne in Law, begotten upon a Concubine: whom when shee could not Zonor as 3. Annl. Sex. Aur. perswade unto her lust, she accused unto the Emperour, as a solicitor of her chastity; for which cause he was condemned to die: but after the truth knowne, Constantine put her into a hot bath, and suffered her not to come forth, untill the heat had choaked her, revenging upon her head her sonnes death, and her owne unchastity.
CHAP. XIIII. Of Subject Murtherers. SEeing then they that take away their neighbours lives doe not escape unpunished, (as by the former examples it appeareth) it must needs follow, that if they to whom the sword of Justice is committed of God, to represse wrongs, and chastise vices, do give over themselves to cruelties, and to kill and slay those whom they ought in duty to protect and defend, must receive a greater measure of punishment, according to the measure and quality of their offence. Such an one was Saul the first king of Israel; who albeit he ought to have beene sufficiently instructed out of the law of God in his duty in this behalfe: yet was hee so cruell and bloody-minded, as contrary to all Justice, to put to death Abi∣melech the high Priest, with fourescore and five other Priests, of the family of his father, onely for receiving David into his house: a small, or rather no offence. And yet not satisfied therewith, he vomited out his rage also against 1 Sam. 22. the whole city of the Priests, and put to the mercilesse sword both man, wo∣man, and child, without sparing any. He slew many of the Gibeonites, who though they were reliques of the Amorites that first inhabited that land, yet because they were received into league of amity by a solemne oath, and permitted of long continuance to dwell amongst them, should not have beene awarded as enemies, nor handled after so cruell a fashion. Thus therefore hee tyrannizing and playing the Butcher amongst his own subjects (for which cause his house was called the house of slaughter) and practi∣sing many other foule enormities, he was at the last overcome of the Phili∣stims, and sore wounded: which when he saw, fearing to fall alive into his enemies hands, and not finding any of his owne men that would lay their hands upon him, desperately slew himselfe. The same day three of his sons, and they that followed him of his owne houshould, were all slaine. The Philistims the next day finding his dead body dispoyled among the carkas∣ses, beheaded it, and carried the head in triumph to the temple of their god, and hung up the trunke in disgrace in one of their Cities, to be seene, lookt upon, and pointed at. And yet for all this was not the fire of Gods wrath quenched: for in King Davids time there arose a famine that lasted three yeeres, the cause thereof was declared by God to be the murder which Saul committed upon the Gibeonites: wherefore David delivered Sauls seven 2 Sam. 21. sons into the Gibeonites hands that were left, who put them to the most shamefull death, that is, even to hanging. Amongst all the sins of King A∣chab 1 Kings 21. and Iezabel, which were many and great, the murder of Naboth standeth in the fore front; for though hee had committed no such crime as might any way deserve death, yet by the subtill and wicked devise of Iezabel, foolish and credulous consent of Achab, and false accusation of the two sub∣orned witnesses, he was cruelly stoned to death: but his innocent blood was punished first in Achab, who not long after the Warre which he made with the King of Syria, received so deadly a wound, that he dyed there∣of, the dogs licking up his blood in the same place where Naboths blood was licked, according to the foretelling of Elias the Prophet. And secondly of Iezabel, whom her own servants at the commandement of Iehu (whom 2 Kings 9. God had made executor of his wrath) threw headlong out of an highwindow unto the ground, so that the wals were dyed with her blood, and the horses trampled her under their feet, and dogs devoured her flesh, till of all her
dainty body there remained nothing saving onely her skull, feet, and palme of her hands. Ioram sonne of Iehosaphat King of Judah, being after his fathers death 2 Chron. 21. possessed of the Crowne and Scepter of Judah, by and by exalted himselfe in tyranny, and put to death sixe of his owne brethren, all younger than him∣selfe, with many Princes of the Realme: for which cause God stirred up the Edomites to rebell, the Philistines and Arabians to make warre a∣gainst him, who forraged his countrey, sacked and spoiled his cities, and tooke prisoners his wives and children, the youngest onely excepted, who afterwards also was murdered, when he had raigned King but a small space. And lastly, as in doing to death his own brethren, he committed cruelty a∣gainst his owne bowels, so the Lord stroke him with such an incurable dis∣ease in his bowels, and so perpetuall (for it continued two yeares) that his very entrails issued out with torment, and so he dyed in horrible misery. Albeit that in the former booke we have already touched the pride and arrogancy of King Alexander the Great; yet we cannot pretermit to speake of him in this place, his example serving to fit for the present subject; for although as touching the rest of his life he was very well governed in his private actions, as a Monarch of his reputation might be, yet in his de∣clining age (I meane not in yeares, but to deathward) he grew exceeding cruell, not onely towards strangers, as the Cosseis, whom he destroyed to the sucking babe, but also to his houshold and familiar friends: Insomuch that being become odious to most, fewest loved him, and divers wrought all meanes possible to make him away, but one especially, whose sonne in law and other neere friends he had put to death, never ceased untill he both mi∣nistred a deadly draught unto himselfe, whereby he deprived him of his Iustin. wicked life, and a fatall stroke to his wives and children after his death, to the accomplishment of his full revenge. Phalaris, the Tyran of Agrigentum, made himselfe famous to posterity by no other meanes than horrible cruelties, exercised upon his subjects, in∣venting Orose. every day new kinds of tortures to scourge and afflict the poore soules withall. In his dominion there was one Perillus artificer of his craft, one expert in his occupation, who to flatter and curry favour with him, de∣vised a new torment, a brasen bull of such a strange workmanship, that the voyce of those that were roasted therein, resembled rather the roaring of a Bull, then the cry of men. The Tyran was well pleased with the Invention, but he would needs have the Inventor make first triall of his owne worke, as he well deserved, before any other should take taste thereof. But what was the end of this Tyran? The people not able any longer to endure his Cic, Off. 2. monstrous and unnaturall cruelties, ran upon him with one consent, with such violence, that they soone brought him to destruction: and as some say, put him into the brasen Bull (which hee provided to roast others) to bee roasted therein himselfe: deserving it as well for approoving the devise, as Perillus did for devising it. Edward the second of that name, King of England, at the request and de∣sire Enguerran de Monstr. Vol. 1. of Hugh Spencer his darling, made warre upon his subjects, and put to death divers of the Peeres and Lords of the Realme, without either right or form of the law, insomuch that queen Isabel his wife fled to France with her yong son, for fear of his unbrideled fury, & after a while finding opportunity and means to return again, garded with certain small forces which she had
in those countreyes gathered together, she found the whole people discon∣tented with the Kings demeanours, and ready to assist her against him: so she besieged him with their succour, and tooke him prisoner, and put him into the Tower of London to be kept, till order might be taken for his de∣position; so that shortly after by the Estates (being assembled together) he was generally and joyntly reputed and pronounced unworthy to be King, for his exceeding cruelties sake which he had committed upon many of his worthy Subjects; and so deposing him, they crowned his young sonne Ed∣ward (the third of his name) King in his roome, he yet living and beholding the same. Iohn Maria Duke of Millan may be put into this ranke of Murtherers: Paul. Iovius. for his custome was divers times when any Citizen offended thim, yea, and somtimes without offence too, to throw them amongst cruell Mastives to be torne in pieces and devoured. But as he continued and delighted in this un∣naturall kinde of murther, the people one day incensed and stirred up against him, ranne upon him with such rage and violence, that they quickly depri∣ved him of life. And he was so well beloved, that no man ever would or durst bestow a Sepulchre upon his dead bones, but suffered his body to lie in the open streets uncovered, save that a certaine harlot threw a few Roses upon his wounds, and so covered him. Alphonsus the second, King of Naples, Ferdinands sonne, was in tyranny towards his subjects nothing inferiour to his father: for whether of them Sabell. Guicciar. li. 1. Philip. de Com. Bemb. Histor. Vent. lib. 2. imprisoned and put to death more of the Nobility and Barons of the Realme it is hard to say; but sure it is, that both were too outragious in all manner of cruelty: for which, so soone as Charles the eight, King of France departing from Rome, made towards Naples, the hatred which the people bore him secretly, with the odious remembrance of his fathers cruelty, be∣gan openly to shew it selfe by the fruits; for they did not nor could not dissemble the great desire that every one had of the approach of the French∣men: which when Alphonsus perceived, and seeing his affaires and estate brought unto so narrow a pinch, he also cowardly cast away all courage to resist, and hope to recover so huge a tempest: and he that for a long time had made warre his trade and profession, and had yet all his forces and armies complete and in readinesse, making himselfe banquerupt of all that honour and reputation, which by long experience and deeds of armes he had gotten, resolved to abandon his kingdome, and to resigne the title and authority thereof to his sonne Ferdinand, thinking by that meanes to asswage the heat of their hatred, and that so young and innocent a King, who in his owne per∣son had never offended them, might be accepted and beloved of them, and so their affection toward the French rebated and cooled. But this devise see∣med to no more purpose than a salve applyed to a sore out of season, when it was growne incureable, or a prop set to a house that is already falne. Therefore he tormented with the sting of his owne conscience, and finding in his minde no repose by day, nor rest by night, but a continuall summons and advertisement by fearefull dreames, that the Noblemen which hee had put to death, cryed to the people for revenge against him, was surprised with so terrible terrour, that forthwith, without making acquainted with his departure either his brother or his owne sonne, he fled to Sicilie, suppo∣sing in his journey, that the Frenchmen were still at his backe, and starting at every little noyse, as if he feared all the Elements had conspired his de∣struction.
Philip Comineus, that was an eye-witnesse of this journey, repor∣teth, That every night he would cry, that he heard the Frenchmen, and that the very trees and stones echoed France into his eares: And on this manner was his flight to Sicilie. King Charles in the meane while having by force and bloodshed to terrifie the rest, taken two passages that were before him, the whole Realme without any great resistance yeelded it selfe unto his mer∣cy, albeit that the young King had done what he could to withstand him. But at length seeing the Neapolitanes ready to rebell, and himselfe in dan∣ger to be taken prisoner, he fled from the Castle of Naples, and with a small company got certaine Brigandines, wherein he sayled to the Island Ischia, thirty miles from Naples: saying at his departure this verse out of the Psalmes, How vaine are the watchmen and gards of that City which is not gar∣ded and watched by the Lord? which he often repeated, and so long as Naples was in his view. And thus was cruelty punished both in Ferdinand the fa∣ther, and Alphonso the sonne. Artaxerxes Ochus the eight King of the Persians began his raigne with thus many murders: he slew two of his owne brethren first: secondly, Herodot. Euagoras King of Cyprus, his partner and associate in the kingdome; third∣ly, he tooke Gidon traiterously, and was the cause of forty thousand mens deaths that were slaine and burned therein; beside many other private mur∣ders and outrages which he committed: for which cause the Lord in his justice rained downe vengeance upon his head: for Bagoas one of his Prin∣ces ministred such a fatall cup to his stomacke, that it mortified his senses, and deprived him of his unmercifull soule and life, and not onely upon his head, but upon his Kingdome and his sonne Arsame also, for he was also poysoned by the same Bagoas, and his Kingdome was translated to Darius Prince of Armenia; whom when the same Bagoas went about to make taste of the same cup, which his predecessors did, he was taken in his owne snare; for Darius understanding his pretence, made him drinke up his owne poy∣son which he provided for him: and thus murder was revenged with mur∣der, and poyson with poyson, according to the Decree of the Almighty, who saith, Eye for eye, tooth for tooth, &c. Exod. 22. 24. In the yeare of the World 3659. Morindus a most cruell and bloody Stow. minded Prince raigned here in England, who for his cruelties sake came to an unhappy and bloody end: for out of the Irish seas came forth a Mon∣ster which destroyed much people: whereof he hearing, would of his vali∣ant courage needs fight with it, and was devoured of it: so that it may tru∣ly here be said, that one Monster devoured another. There was (as Aelianus reporteth) a cruell and pernicious Tyran, who Aelianus. to the end to prevent all practises of conspiracy and treason (as Tyrans are ever naturally and upon desert timerous) that might be devised against him, enacted this Law among his subjects, That no man should conferre with another, either privately or publikely, upon paine of death: and so indeed he abrogated all civill society: (For speech, as it was the beginning and birth of fellowship, so it is the very joynt and glue thereof) but what cared he for society, that respected nothing but his owne safety? hee was so farre from regarding the common good, that when his subjects, not daring to speake, signified their mindes by signes, he prohibited that also: and that which is yet more, when not daring to speake, or yet make signes, they fell to weeping and lamenting their misery, he came with a band of men even
to restraine their teares too: but the multitudes rage being justly incensed, they gave him such a desperat welcome, that neither he nor his followers re∣turned one of them alive. And thus his abominable cruelty came to an end, together with his life; and that by those meanes (which is to be observed) by which he thought to preserve and maintaine them both. Childericus, who in the yeare 697, succeeded in the Kingdome of France Michael. Ric. lib. 1. de regi∣bus Franc. l. 2. c. 46. Theodoricke (that for his negligence and sluggish government was deposed, and made of a King, a Frier) exercised barbarous and inhumane cruelty up∣on his subjects: for he spared neither noble or ignoble, but mixtly sent them to their graves, without respect of cause or justice. One of the noble sort he caused to be fastened to a stake, and beaten with clubbes, not to death, but to chastisement: which monstrous cruelty so incensed the peoples mind against him, that there wanted no hands to take part with this club-beaten man against the Tyran his enemie. Wherefore they layed wait for him as he came one day from hunting, and murdered him, together with his wife great with childe, no man either willing or daring to defend him. Tymocrates the King, or rather Tyran of the Cyrenians, will give place to none in this commendation of cruelty: For he afflicted his subjects with many and monstrous calamities, insomuch that he spared not the priests of his gods, which commonly were in reverent regard among the Heathen; As the bloody death of Menalippus (Apollo's priest) did witnesse, whom to the end to marry his faire and beautifull wife Aretaphila, he cruelly put to death: how beit, it prospered not with him as he desired: for the good woman not contented with this sacrilegious contract, sought rather meanes to revenge her first husbands death, than to please this new letchers hu∣mour: Wherefore she assayed by poyson to effect her wish; and when that prevailed not, she gave a yong daughter she had to Leander, the Tyrans brother, to wife, who loved her exceedingly; but with this condition, that he should by some practise or other worke the death and destruction of his brother: which indeed he performed; for he so bribed one of the groomes of the Tyrans chamber, that by his helpe he soone rid wicked Tymocrates out of the way by a speedy and deserved death. But to abridge these long discourses, let us looke into all times and ages, and to the histories of all Countries and Nations, and we shall finde, that Tyrans have ever come to one destruction or other. Diomedes the Thracian King fed his horses with mans flesh as with pro∣vender, but was made at last provender for his owne horses himselfe by Plut. in Dion. Hercules. Calippus the Athenian, that slew Dion his familiar friend, and deposed Dionisius the Tyran, and committed many other murders amongst the peo∣ple, was first banished Rheginum, and then living in extreame necessity, slaine by Leptines and Polysperchon. Phil. Melanct. lib. 2. Valemar. Clephes the second King of the Lumbards, for his savage cruelty towards his subjects was slaughtered by one of his friends. Damasippus that massacred so many Citizens of Rome, was cut off by Scylla. Ecelinus that played the Tyran at Taurisium, guelding Boyes, deflowring Maydes, mayming Matrons of their Dugs, cutting children out of their mo∣thers bellies, and killing 1200 Patavians at once that were his friends, was cut short in a battell. In a Word, if we read and consult Histories of all Sabel. l. 8. c. 3.
Countries and times, we shall find seldome or never any notorious Tyran and oppressor of his subjects that came to any good end, but ever some no∣table judgement or other fell upon them. CHAP. XV. Of those that are both cruell and disloyall. NOw if it be a thing so unworthy and evill beseeming a Prince, as nothing more, to be stayned with the note of cruelty, how much more dishonourable is it, when with cruelty, disloyalty and falshood is coupled? and when he is not ashamed not onely to play the Tyran, but also the traitour, dissembler, and hypocrite; to the end hee may more freely poure out the ome of his rage against those that put confidence in him. This is one of the foulest and vilest blots that can be, wherewith the honour and reputation of a man is not one∣ly stayned, but blasted and blotted out, not ever to be recovered: for what perswasion can one have of such? Or who is so fond as to put affiance in them? This was one of the notorious vices of King Saul, when maligning the prosperity of David, he cunningly promoted him to be Generall of his Ar∣my, and married him to one of his daughters, to this end, that by exposing 2 Sam. 18. him to the hazards & perils of warre, he might bring him to speedy destru∣ction; seeking besides other unlawfull means to put him to death by▪ but what was the end of this unjust murderer, we have declared in the former Chapter. But above all that by treason and deceit made way unto their cruelty, the Emperour Antonius, surnamed Caracalla, was the chiefe▪ who to revenge Herodian. himselfe more at full upon the Citizens of Alexandria in Aegypt, feyned as if he would come see their City, built by Alexander, and receive an Oracle from their god: Which when he approached neere unto, the Alexandrians prepared to entertain him most honourably: and being entred, he went first to visite their Temples where to cast more colours upon his treachery, hee offered many sacrifices, & in the mean while perceiving the people gathered together from all quarters to bid him welcome, finding opportunity fitting his wicked and traiterous enterprise, he gave commandement, that all the young men of the Citie should assemble together at one place; saying, That hee would acquaint them to range themselves in battell after the manner of the Macedonians, in honour of King Alexander. But whilest they thus assembled together in mirth and bravery, hee making as though he would bring them in array by going up and down amongst them, and holding them in talke, his army enclosed them on all sides: then with drawing himselfe with Kis guard, he gave the watch-word, that they should rush upon them; which was performed with such outrage, that the poor cre∣dulous people being surprised at unawares, were all most cruelly massacred. There might you see the most horrible, barbarous, and incredible butche∣ry of men that ever was heard of: for besides those that were actors in this bloody tragedy, there were others that drew the slaine bodies into great
ditches, and very often haled in them that were scarce dead, yea and some∣times that were altogether alive; which was the cause that divers soul∣diers perished at the same time, when those that having some strength of life left, being haled to the ditch, held so fast by the halers, that divers times both fell in together. The bloud that was shed at this massacre was so much, that the mouth of the River Nilus, and the sea shore were died with the streams thereof, that ran downe by smaller Rivers into those plain places. Furthermore, being desirous to obtain a victory over the Parthians, that he might get himselfe fame and reputation thereby, he passed not at what rate he bought it: he sent therefore Embassadours with Letters and Presents to the King of Parthia, to demand his daugh∣ter in marriage, though he never intended any such thing, and being non∣suted at the first with a deniall, yet pursued he his counterfeit purpose with much earnestnes, and with solemne Oath protested his singular good affection and love that he bore unto her; so that in the end the match was condescended unto by all parties, whereof the Parthian people were not a little glad, in hope of so durable a peace, which by this marriage was like to be established betwixt them. The King therefore with all his subjects being ready to entertain this new Bridegroom, went out with one consent to meet him in the mid-way: their encounter was in a fair plain, where the Parthians having sent backe their horses, being unarmed, and prepared, not for a day of battle, but of marriage and disport, gave him the most honourable welcome they could: but the wicked varlet finding opportunity so fit, set his armed souldiers upon the naked multitude, and hewed in pieces the most part of them; and had not the King with a few followers bestirred him well, he had been served with the like sauce. After which worthy exploit and bloudy stratagem he took his voyage Treason, lib 2. cap 3 backeward, burning and spoiling the townes and villages as he went, till he arrived at Charam, a City in Mesopotamia; where making his abode a while, he had a fancy to walke one day into the fields, and going apart from his company to unburden nature, attended upon by one onely ser∣vant, as he was putting downe his breeches, another of his company ran in and strucke him through with his dagger. Thus God blessed the World, by taking out of it this wicked Tyran, who by treason and trea∣chery had spilt so much innocent bloud. Seturus Galba, another bird of the same feather, exercised no lesse perfidious cruelty upon the people of three Cities in Lusitania: for hee assembled them together, in colour of providing for their common af∣faires: but when hee had gotten them into his hands unarmed and wea∣ponlesse, he took nine thousand of the flower of their youth, and partly committed them to the sword, and partly sold them for bondslaves. The disloyall and treacherous dealing of Stilico towards the Gothes, Iornand. Paul. demil. how dear it cost him and all Italie beside, Histories do sufficiently testi∣fie: for it fell out, that the Gothes (under the conduct of Allaricus) entered Italie with a puissant and fearfull Army, to know the cause why the Em∣peror Honorius with-held the pension which (by vertue of a league, and in recompence of their aid to the Empire in time of war) was due unto them: which by riper judgement and deliberation of the Councell was quiet∣ed; and to preserve their Countrey from so imminent a tempest, offer was made unto them of the Spaniards and French-men, if they could recover Treason, lib. 2 cap. 3.
them out of the hands of the Vandales; which usurped over them; so that incontinently they should take their journey over the Alpes to∣wards them, and depart their Coasts. Which offer and gift the Gothes accepting, did accordingly fulfill the condition, and passed away, without commiting any riot or any damages in their passages. But as they were upon mount Cinis, making toward France, behold Stilico, Honorius his father in law (a man of a stirring, stubborne, and rash spirit) pursueth and chargeth them with battell unawares, and dreaming of nothing lesse: whereat they, being at the instant amazed, quickly gathered their spirits together, and putting themselves in defence, fought it out with such cou∣rage and eagernesse, that the traitors Army was wholly discomfited, and he himselfe with one of his sonnes, slain. The Gothes having gotten this victory, broke off their voyage to France, and turned their course backe again to Italie, with purpose to destroy and spoil; and so they did; for they laid waste all the Countrey of Piemont and Lumbardy, and else∣where, and besieged Rome it selfe: so that from that time Italie never ceased to be scourged and tormented with the Gothes for the space of eighteen yeers. Moreover, whosoever else have been found to follow the steps of these truce, peace, and promise-breakers (void of truth and re∣gard of reputation) alwayes underwent worthy punishment for their un∣worthy acts, and fell headlong into confusion and ignominy, making themselves subjects worthy to be curst and detested of all men. CHAP. XVI. Of Queenes that were Murtherers. IF these and such like cruelties as we have spoken be∣fore, be strange and monstrous for men, what shall we then say of wicked and bloudy women, who (con∣trary to the nature of their sex) addict themselves to all violence and bloudshedding, as cursed Iezabel Queen of Israel did; of whom sufficient hath been spoken before. Athaliah, Ahabs daughter, and wife to Ioram King 2 Kings 11. of Judah, was a bird of the same feather: for she was possessed with such a spirit of fury and rage, that after the death of her son Ochosias (that died without issue) she put to death all the bloud royall, to wit, the posterity of Nathan, Solomons brother, to whom by right of succession the inheritance of the Crown appertained, to the end that she might in∣stall her selfe into the kingly diadem: after this cruell butchery of all the royall male children, except Ioas, who (by Gods providence) was pre∣served alive, she usurped the Crowne and Scepter of Juda full seven yeeres; at the end of which date, Ioas was exalted to the Crowne, and she not onely deposed, but slain by the hands of her Guard that attended upon her. Semiramis the Queen of Assyria was a woman of an ambitious spirit, who through her thirst of reigning counterfeited her sex, and attired her Sabellic.
selfe like a man to get more authority and reverence to her selfe. She was the destruction of many thousand people, by the unjust war which she stirred up; besides that, she was a notorious strumpet, and withall a murderer of those that satisfied her lust; for still as they came from her bed, some lay privily in watch to kill them, lest they should bewray her villany: it is reported, that she was so shamelesse, that she solicited her owne son to commit incest with her; who in detestation of her fil∣thinesse and cruelty raised a power against her, and conquering her in one great battell, caused her most deservedly to be put to death. Brunchild (whom Histories call Brunhault) a Queen of France by mar∣riage, Aimon. Nic. Gil. vol. 1. but a Spaniard by birth, was a woman that bred much mischiefe in her age, and that wrought many horrible and death-deserving crimes: for partly with her subtle devices, and partly with her owne hands, she murdered ten Kings of France one after another: she caused her hus∣band to slay his owne brother: she procured the death of her nephew Meroveus, whom against all equity and honesty she had secondly espoused for her husband; for he being hated of his father for that vile incest, and perceiving himselfe in danger of taking, made one of servants thrust him through. After she had committed these and many other foul facts, she went aboutalso to defraud Clotairius the son of Chilpericke, of the right of the Crowne, which pertained unto him, and to thrust in another in his room: whereupon arose great war, in the which as she dealt more boldly and manfully than the condition of her sexe would bear, so she received the due wages of her brave and vertuous deeds for she was taken prisoner, with three of her nephewes, whose throats she saw cut before her face, and after her selfe was set upon a Camell, and led through the hoste three dayes together, every man reviling, mocking, reproaching, and despighting her; and at last by the award and judgement of the Princes and Captaines of the Army she was adjudged to be tied by the hair of her head, one arme and one foot to the tail of a wilde and un∣med horse, and so to be left to his mercy to be drawne miserably to her destruction: which was no sooner executed, but her miserable carkase (the instrument of so many mischiefes) was with mens feet spurned, bruised, trampled, and wounded after a most strange fashion: and this was the wofull end of miserable Brunchild. Edilburga, the daughter of Offa King of Mercia, in England, who was married to Brigthricus King of the West Saxons, was a woman so passing Malmesbur. all the bounds of humanity, and so given to cruelty and other beastly conditions, that she first poysoned divers of the Nobles of the King∣dom: and then having practised this wickednesse upon them, she at length poysoned also the King her husband: for which cause flying over into France unto Charles the Great for fear of punishment among her owne people, when by reason of her beautie it was offered unto her, that she should marry either with the King himselfe or with his son; because she chose the son before the father, married neither the one nor yet the other, but was thrust into a Monastery, where she not forgetting her old trade, playing the harlot with a Monke, was expulsed from thence, and ended her life in great penury and misery. About the same time that this Edilburga was thus working her feats in Acts and Mo∣numents. England, Irene, another most idolatrous and cruell minded woman, be∣ing
Emperesse of the Greekes, was as busie for her part at Constanti∣nople. This wicked woman, through the meanes of Pope Adrian, took up the body of Constantine Emperour of Constantinople, her owne husbands father; and when she had burned the same, she caused the ashes to be cast into the sea, because he disannulled images. Afterward reigning with her son Constantine the sixth, son to Leo the fourth, and being at dissention with him for disallowing the worshipping of images, caused him to be taken and laid in prison: who afterward, through power of friends, being re∣stored to his Empire again, at last she caused the same her owne son to be cast in prison, and his eyes to be put out so cruelly, that within short space he died. After this, the said Emperesse as it were triumphing in her cruel∣ty and idolatry, caused a Councell to be held at Nice, where it was decreed, That images should again be restored to the Church▪ but this Councell was after repealed by another Councell holden at Frankford by Charles the Great: and at length this wicked woman was deposed by Nicephorus (who reigned after) and was expulsed the Empire, and after the example of Edil∣burga above mentioned (being condignely punished for her wickednesse) ended her life in much penury and misery. Alexius Emperour of the Greekes dying, left behinde him a wicked Sabel. lib. 7. Decad. 1. and cruell woman, his late wife now widow. this widow being exhorted by the Peeres of the Empire to a second marriage, and to that end choice being offered unto her of all the Nobility, to chuse whom she should best affect, notwithstanding refused all: for she was so linked in familiarity with one of her owne houshold called Grifo (who afterward when he came to be Emperour called himselfe Emanuel) that for his love she refused all other matches: with this Grifo this wicked woman entereth a secret and bloudy practise: she consulted with him, that he should bring into the Court a number of his servants secretly armed; which comming in at di∣vers times, and by divers wayes, to avoid suspition, she disposed in the house in secret places, to be ready at her call to execute her bloudy designe∣ment. This being thus plotted, she called together the Peeres of the Em∣pire, and demanded of them, if they were content that she should chuse to her husband whom she pleased, and that they would acknowledge him for their Emperour whom she should chuse; when as the Noblemen hereunto consented, supposing that she would have chosen one fitting for her estate, she presently saluted this Grifo, her old adulterous companion, for her hus∣band and Emperour, and commanded them all to swear fealty unto him; which when as they all utterly refused and disdained, the wicked woman forthwith called the bloudy troop prepared for that purpose, and caused them all to be murdered, not one escaping alive. Thus to satisfie her wic∣ked lust, she spared not to spill the bloud of the most part of her Nobility after a most savage and cruell manner: and indeed she injoyed her desire, but behold the issue of it: from this time forward the race of Constantine ceased to sit in the Imperiall throne, and no doubt but Gods vengeance also fell upon her and her wicked husband. In the yeer of our Lord 700. Gracus the famous King of Poland being Herbutus. Hist. Polon. lib. 1. cap. 6. deceased, the Crowne and Government descended upon his onely daughter Venda, by full consent of the whole Realme. This Venda being of a proud and stately nature, refused to be joyned in marriage with any; saying, That she had rather be a Prince her selfe, and governed by her owne power,
than the wife of the greatest Prince in the World. Among many that were suiters unto her, there was one Ritigerus, a noble and mighty Prince of the Theutons; whose suit being not onely denied, but scornefully re∣jected, and he notwithstanding greatly inflamed with her love, went about to enforce her by strength to his will: but she as valiant as he, raised a great power to withstand his violence: when the matter was ready to come to deciding by blowes, Ritigerus his army perceiving the resolution of Queen Venda, and the danger and losse which was like to arise to them, and that upon so slight an occasion, refused to fight: so that Ritigerus be∣ing thus forsaken, for griefe and shame slew himselfe: and Queen Venda returning to Cracovia, and there sacrificing to her gods for her good suc∣cesse; at last, least her succesfull government should be stained with some disastrous misfortune, and so her pride abated, to prevent this fear, despe∣rately threw her selfe from an high bridge into the River Vistula, and there ended her glorious and proud dayes with a shamefull and ignominious death. Let every one both great and small learne by these examples to contain themselves within the limits of humanity, and not be so ready and prompt to the shedding of humane bloud, knowing nothing to be more true than this, That he that smiteth with the sword, shall perish with the sword. CHAP. XVII. Of such, as without necessity, upon every light cause, move war. AS in Surgery, so in a Common-wealth we must account war as a last refuge, and as it were a desperate medi∣cine, which without very urgent necessity, when all other meanes of maintaining our estate against the as∣saults of the enemy fail, ought not to be taken in hand: and indeed the chief scope and marke that all those that Cic. Off. lib. 1. lawfully undertake war, ought to propound to them∣selves, should be nothing else, but the good and quiet of the Common∣wealth, with the peace and repose of every member thereof. And there∣fore so ost as any reasonable offers and conditions of peace are propounded, they ought to be accepted, to the end to avoid the masse of evils (as ruines, bloudsheds, robberies) which alwayes accompany war as necessary atten∣dants: for whosoever doth not so, but upon every light occasion runneth to Armes, and to trie the hazard of battell, they manifest their owne foolish and pernicious rashnesse, and their small conscience in shedding humane bloud. Amongst the good Kings of Judah, Iosias for piety and zeal in the ser∣vice of God, was most renowned: for he purged the Realme from all drosse of idolatry, repaired the decayed Temple, and restored it to the first glory; and yet for all this for committing this one crime, he lost his life: for as Necho King of Aegypt was passing with an Army toward the King of Babylon in Charcamis, beside Euphrates, to bid him battell, he would 2 Chron. 35.
needs encounter him by the way, and interrupt his journey by unprovoked war; yea, though Necho had by embassage assured him not to meddle with him, but intreated onely free passage at his hand: yet would not Iosias in any wise listen (so opinionative and selfe-willed was he) but gave him battell in the field, without any just cause, save his owne pleasure, which turned to his pain: for he caught so many wounds at that skirmish, that shortly after hee died of them, to the great griefe of the whole people, and the Prophet Ieremy also, that lamented his death. King Iohn of France (for refusing reasonable conditions of peace at the English mens hands) was overthrowne by them two miles from Poytiers, Froiss. vol. 1. Nic. Gl. 2. with a great overthrow: for the Englishmen in regard of their owne small number, and the huge multitude of the French to encounter with them, ti∣morously offered up a surrender of all that they had either conquered, taken, or spoiled, since their comming from Bourdeaux, and so to be sworne not to bear Armes against him for seven yeares, so that they might quietly de∣part. But the King, that crowed before the Conquest, affying too much in the multitude of his Forces, stopt his eares to all conditions, not willing to hear of any thing but war, war, even thinking to hew them in pieces, without one escaping: but it fell out otherwise, for the English men in∣trenching themselves in a place of advantage, and hard of accesse, inclosed with thicke hedges and brambles, disturbed and overthrew with their Ar∣chers, at the first onset, the French Horsemen, and wounded most of their men and horses with multitude of arrowes: it tarried not long ere the foot∣men also were put to flight on the other side, and the whole Army of three∣score thousand men, by bare eight thousand English, discomfited: divers great Lords were found slain in the field, and divers others with the King himselfe carried Prisoners into England: which was a great shake to the whole Realme, and the occasion of many tumults and disorders that ensued afterwards. Moreover, as it is a rash part to hazard the doubtfull event of battell indiscreetly, and without cause, so it is a point of no lesse folly to thrust ones selfe voluntarily into any action of war without charge, not being particularly called and bound thereunto, or having a body unsufficient and unfit for the same. And this was also one of the warlike points of Disci∣pline which the antient Romans used; That none should presume to fight for his Countrey, before he had been admitted by some Captain by a so∣lemne Oath. Of all the Histories that I ever read, I know none more strange in mat∣ter of war, than this which I now go about to recite, of Henry of Luxen∣bourg, Froiss. vol. 1. cap▪ 130. Emperour of Germany, who when he heard that his son Charles King of Bohemia was in the French Army, and that Philip of Valois, King of France, was ready to give battell to the English, albeit he was blinde, and consequently unfit for war, yet would needs take part with the French: and therefore commanded his men at Armes to guide him into the place where the Field was to be fought, that he might strike one blow. They as foolish as himselfe, not willing to crosse his minde, and fearing to lose him in the prease, tied him faste to the raines of their bridles, being by this meanes so coupled together, as if they meant all to perish together if need were, as indeed they did, for they were overcome in battell, and the next day found all dead, horse and men faste bound together. This accident be∣fell
at Crecy neer Abrevile, in which journey the French King sustained an inestimable damage, for he lost fifteen of his chiefest Princes, fourscore Ensignes, twelve hundred Knights, and about thirty thousand men. In the yeer 1455. the Hungarians without any just cause or pretence, Theatr. Histor. made war upon the Emperour Otto, onely moved with a desire of bringing under their subjection the Germane powers; and the rather at this time, because they supposed the Emperours strength of war to be weakened, and his power of men lessened, by those continuall troubles and wars which he had been daily occupied in: notwithstanding Otto, as by his former deeds of Armes, he deserved the sirname of Great, so in this exploit especially, for he conscribed eight Legions of men out of Franconia, Bavaria, and Bohemia, and with that small valiant handfull, overturned and destroyed the huge unchristened multitude of his enemies: for albeit the Bohemians being placed in the Rereward, were as suddenly and unexpectedly assaulted by the enemy, that craftily passed over the River Lycus to set upon them behinde, as unhappily put to flight with the losse of the carriages and vi∣ctuals, which they were set to protect; yet Otto with his other Legions renuing the battell, and encouraging his souldiers, gave the enemy such an encounter and repulse, that he put them to flight and slew them with a mi∣serable slaughter: three of their Kings he took Prisoners, and few of that vaste Army escaped with their lives. On the Emperours side died many worthy men, among whom Conrade the Emperours son in law, and Burg∣hard Duke of Suevia were two, beside many other. In this successive bat∣tell, it is to be noted above the rest, how religiously the Emperour both began and finished it: the day before the Fight he enjoyned a Faste in his Army, and directed his prayers to the Almighty, relying more upon the presence of Gods helpe, than his owne power: after the Conquest gotten, he caused solemne thankes to be given in all Churches to God, for the great deliverance. I would our moderne Generals and Captaines would learne by this example to follow his footsteps, and not to make their pray∣ers quaffings, and their thanksgiving carousings, as they use to do, even as it were purposely to tempt the Lord, and to stir up his wrath against them. Penda King of middle England, making war upon Anna King of East Angles, slew him in open field: with which victory being puffed up by Lanq. Chron. pride, he sent defiance to Osway King of Northumberland also: who hear∣ing of his approach proffered him great gifts, and fair conditions of peace, which when Penda obstinately refused, he was slain in battell with thirty of his most noble Captaines, although he had thrice the number of people which Osway had. And thus the heathen and bloudy Pagan ended his cruel∣ty, and paid dear for his too much forwardnesse in war.
CHAP. XVIII. Of such as please themselves overmuch in seeing Cruelties. THe Romanes were so accustomed by long use of war to behold fightings and bloudshed, that in time of peace also they would make themselves sports and pastimes therewith: for they would compell poor captives and bondslaves either to kill one another by mutuall blowes, or to enter combate with savage and cruell beasts, to be torne in pieces by them. The first (ac∣cording to Seneca) that devised and put in practice this unkindely Com∣bate of Beasts and Malefactours, was Pompey, who provided an Army of Seneca. eighteen Elephants to fight with men, and thought it a notable and com∣mendable spectacle to put men to death after this new and strange fashion. Oh how mens mindes are blinded with over much prosperity! He esteem∣ed himselfe at that time to be higher in dignity than all other, when he thus threw to wilde beasts people of farre Countries, and in the presence of the people caused so much bloud to be shed: but not long after himselfe was betrayed by the treachery of the Alexandrians, and slain by a bond∣slave (a just quittance for murdering so many of that condition:) thus much of Seneca. Now it is manifest that this was an ordinary pastime among the Romans, albelt it is strange, that any pastime or pleasure could arise by seeing poor Creatures interchangeably strike one another to death, and humane bloud to run like water along the streets. It was not then without cause, but by a speciall will of God to revenge cru∣elty, Flor. that the bondslaves (conducted by Spartacus the Fencer) rebelled against their masters in Rome, after they had broken through the guards of Len∣tulus his house, and issuing out of Capua, gathered together above ten thousand fighting men, and encamped themselves in mount Vesuvius; where being besieged by Clodus Glaber, they sallied so rudely and boiste∣rously upon him, that the victory and spoil of their enemies tents remain∣ed on their sides: after this they ran over all the Land, forraged the Coun∣trey, and destroyed many Villages and Townes, but especially these four, Nola, Nocera, Terrenevae, and Metaponte, were by them sacked and spoil∣ed with a strange and bloudy overthrow: after all which, having encoun∣tred two Consuls, they overcame Lentulus on mount Appennine, and dis∣comfited Gaiu Cassius near Modene▪ all which victories and lucky pro∣ceedings did so embolden and puffe up the courage of Captain Fencer, that he determined to give an alarme to Rome, and to lay siege unto it: but the Romanes preparing and directing all their Forces to withstand their pra∣ctices, gave him and his crue so sore a repulse, that from Rome they were fain to flie to the uttermost parts of Italie, and there seeing themselves pent in on all sides, and driven to deep extremity, they gave so desperate an onset on their enemies, that both their Captain and they were all slain. And thus the Romans made jolly pastime with their Fencers and bondslaves, and more (I thinke at this time) than they either looked or wished for: for
four hundred of them being taken by the bondmen, were enforced to shew them pastime at the same game whereat they had oftentimes made them∣selves merry at their costs; and to kill one another, as they had before Oros. l. 5. c. 24. time caused them to do. How curious and desirous the people of Rome was wont to be of be∣holding Corn. Tacit. Annal. l. 4. these bloudy and mischievous games, Cornelius Tacitus in the fourth book of his Annales declareth at large: where he reporteth, That in the City of the Fidenates (in the twelfth year of the Raigne of Tiberius) the people being gathered together to behold the Fencers prizes were fifty thousand of them hurt and maimed at one time, by the Amphitheatre that fell upon them; a cruell pastime indeed, and a strange accident, not com∣ming by adventure (as some suppose) but by the just vengeance of God, to suppresse such pernitious and uncivill sports. The same story is registred by Paulus Orosius in his seventh book, with this adjection, That at that time were slain more than twenty thousand persons. I cannot passe over in silence two notable and memorable Histories of Senec. l. 1. de benefic. two Lions, recorded by two famous Authours, Seneca the one, and Aulu Gellius the other. The first of whom reporteth, That he saw on the Theatre a Lion, who seeing a slave that sometimes had been his keeper, throwne among the beasts to be devoured, acknowledged him, and defended him from their teeth, and would not suffer any of them to do him hurt. The second bringeth the testimony of one Appianus, that affirmeth himselfe to Aul. Gel. Nct. A. tic. l. 5. c. 14. have seen at Rome a Lion, who for old acquaintance sake which he had with a condemned servant, fawned upon him, and cleared him in like man∣ner from the fury of the other beasts. The History was this: A certain bondslave too roughly handled by his master, forsook him, and fled away, and in his flight retiring into a desart, and not knowing how to bestow himselfe, took up a cave for his lodging, where he had not long abode, but a mighty Lion came halting to his den, with a sore and bloudy leg: the poor slave all forgone at this strange and ugly sight, looked every minute to be devoured, but the Lion in another mood came fawningly and softly towards him, as if he would complain unto him of his grief: where∣at (somewhat heartened) he bethought himselfe to apply some medicine to his would, and to binde up the sore as well as he could; which he had no sooner done, but the Lion made out for his prey, and ere▪long returning, brought home to his Host and Chirurgion certain gobbets of raw flesh, which he halfe roasting upon a rocke by the Sun-beames, made his daily sustenance, for the time of his abode there: notwithstanding at length wearied with this old and savage life, and hating to abide long in that estate, he for sook the desart, and put himselfe again to adventure: now it chanced that he was taken by his old master, and carried from Aegypt to Rome, to the end to be an actor in those beastly Tragoedies; but by chance his old patient the Lion (taken also since his departure, being ready amongst other beasts to play his part) knew him by and by, and ran unto him, fawning and making much of him: the people wondring at this strange accident, after enquiry made of the cause thereof, gave him the Lion, and caused him to lead him in a string through the City for a miracle: for indeed both this and the former deserve no other name. Thus God reproveth the savage inhumanity of men, by the example of the wilde and furious beasts at whose teeth poor servants found more favour than at their masters hands.
The Emperour Constamine weighing the indignity of these and such like pastimes, and knowing how far they ought to be banished from the society of men, by a publike Edict abolished all such bloudy and monstrous spe∣ctacles, In like manner these monomachies and single combates performed in places inclosed for the purpose, wherein one at the least, if not both, must of necessary die, ought to be abrogated in a Christian policy, as by the Laterane Councell it was well enacted, with this penalty, That whoso∣ever should in that manner be slain, his body should be deprived of Eccle∣siasticall buriall: and truely most commonly it commeth to passe, that they that presume most upon their owne prowesse and strength, and are most forward in offering combat, either lose their lives, or gain discredit, which is more grievous than death. CHAP. XIX. Of such as exercise too much rigour and severity. FUrthermore we must understand, that God doth not only forbid murder and bloudshed, but also all tyranny and oppression; therein providing for the weak against the strong, the poor against the rich, and bondslaves against their masters: to the end that none might be trode under foot, and oppressed of others, under pain of his indignation. Insomuch therefore as the Romans used such rigour towards their servants, it came to passe by a just judge∣ment of God, that they being Lords over all the World, were three sundry times driven by their servants into great extremities. As first in Rome within the wals, at the sametime when they also were troubled with the se∣ditious factions of their Tribunes. Secondly in Sicily, where they horribly laid waste the whole Countrey: the cause of which commotion was, be∣cause the Romans had chained a multitude of slaves together, and in that order sent them to maur and till the ground: for a certain Syrian first assembled two thousand men of them that came next hand, then breaking up the Prisons, multiplied his Army to fourty thousand, and with them pul∣led downe Castles, rased up Townes, and destroyed every where. The third undertaken by a Shepherd, who having killed his master, set at liberty all the ondmen, and prepared an Army of them, wherewith he spoiled Ci∣ties, Townes, Castles, and discomfited the Armies of Servilius and Lucul∣lus who were pretors at that time: but at last they were destroyed and rooted out by little and little: and this good service got the Romans at their servants hands. As every Nation hath his proper vertue and vice ascribed to it, so the Spaniards for their part are noted famous for cruelty towards their sub∣jects and vassals, insomuch that (as experience in many witnesseth) they are intolerable in that kinde: for which cause they have bor the markes of Gods Justice, for their rigorous and barbarous handling of the poor West Indians, whom they have brought to that extremity by putting
them to such excessive travels in digging their mines of Gold (as namely in the island Hispagnola) that the most part by sighes and teares wish by death to end their miseries: many (first killing their children) have desperately Benzon. Milan. of the new world. hung themselves on high trees; some have throwne themselves headlong from steep mountaines, and others cast themselves into the sea to be rid of their troubles; but the Tyrans have never escaped scot-free, but came al∣wayes to some miserable end or other: for some of them were destroyed by the inhabitants, others slew one another with their owne hands, pro∣voked by insatiable avarice: some have been drowned in the sea, and others starved in the Desart; in fine, few escaped unpunished. Bombadilla, one of the Governours of Hispagnola, after he had swayed there a while, and enriched himselfe by the sweat and charge of the inhabi∣tants, was called home again into Spain: whitherward (according to the commandment received) as he imbarqued himselfe, shipping with him so much treasure as in value mounted to more than an hundred and fifty thousand duckats, beside many pieces and graines of Gold, which he car∣ried to the Spanish Queen for a Present, whereof one weighed three thou∣sand duckats, there arose such a horrible and outragious tempest in the broad sea, and beat so violently against his ships, that four and twenty vessels were shivered in pieces, and drowned at that blow: there perished Bombadilla himselfe with most of his Captaines, and more than five hun∣dred Spaniards, that thought to returne full rich into the Country, and be∣came with all their treasures a prey unto the fishes. In the year of our Lord 1541. The eight day of September, there chan∣ced in the City Guatimala (which lyeth in the way from Nicaragna West∣ward) The same Authour. a strange and admirable judgement. After the death of Alvarado, who subdued this province, and founded the City; and was but a little before slain in fight, it rained so strangely and vehemently all this whole day and night, that of a sudden so huge a deluge and floud of waters overflowed the earth, streaming from the bottom of the mountains into the lower grounds, with such violence, that stones of incredible bignesse were carried with it; which tumbling strongly downewards, bruised and burst in pieces whatso∣ever was in their way. In the mean while there was heard in the air fearfull cries and voices, and a blacke Cow was seen running up and downe in the midst of the water, that did much hurt. The first house that was Over∣throwne by this tempest, was dead Alvarado's, wherein his widow (a very proud woman, that held the Government of the whole Province in her hand, and had before despited God for her husbands death) was slain with all her houshold, and in a moment the Citie was either drowned or subvert∣ed: there perished in this tempest of men and women sixscore persons: but they that at the beginning of the floud ted, saved their lives. The mor∣row after the waters were surceased, one might see the poor Spaniards lie along the fields, some maimed in their bodies, other with broken armes or legs, or otherwise miserably wounded. And thus did God revenge the mon∣strous Spanish cruelties exercised upon those poor people, whom instead of inicing by fair and gentle meanes to the knowledge of the true God and his Son Christ, they terrified by extraordinary tyranny (for such is the Spanish nature) making them thinke that Christians were the cruellest and most wicked men of the earth. In the year of our Lord 1514. happened the horrible sedition and
butchery of the Croysadoes in Hungary: the story is this, There was a ge∣nerall discontent amongst the people, against the King and chiefest of the Realme, because they went not about to conquer those places again from Ioach. Curcu in his Annales of Silesia. the Turke which he held in Hungary. Thereupon the Popes Legate published Pardons for all those that would crosse themselves to go to war against the Turke. Whereupon suddenly there gathered together a won∣derfull company of thieves and robbers, from every corner of Hungary, who together with great multitudes of the common people that were op∣pressed by the insolency of the Nobility (creating themselves a Generall) committed a most horrible spoil almost over all Hungary; murdering all the Gentlemen and Bishops they could meet withall: the richest and those which were noblest descended, they empailed alive. This cruell rage con∣tinuing, at last the King raised Forces against them, and ere long they were defeated in a set battle, by Iohn the son of Vayvod Stephen, who having cut the most of them in pieces, took their Leaders, and put them to death by such strange torments as I have horrour to remember: for the Generall of this seditious troop, called George, he caused to be stript naked, and a Crowne of hot burning iron to be set upon his head; then some of his veines to be opened, and made Lucatius his brother to drinke the bloud which issued out of them. After that, the chiefest of the Peasants, who had been kept three dayes without meat, were brought forth, and forced to fall up on the body of George (yet breathing) with their teeth, and every one to tear away and eat a piece of it. Thus he being torne in pieces, his bowels were pulled out, and cut into morsels, whereof some being boyled, and the rest roasted, the Prisoners were constrained to feed on them: which done, all that remained were put to most horrible and languishing deaths. An ex∣ample of greater cruelty can hardly be found since the world was a world, and therefore no marvell if the Lord hath punished the King and Realme of Hungary, for such strange cruelties, by suffering the cruell Turkes to make spoil of them. Cruell chastisements are prepared for them that be cruell and inhumane. During the Peasants war in Germany, in the year 1525. a certain Gen∣tleman not content to have massacred a great number even of those which had humbly craved pardon of him, used in all company to glory of his ex∣ploits, and to tell what murders and thefts he had committed. But some moneths after he fell sicke, and languished many dayes of an extreme pain in the reines of his back; through the torment whereof he fell into de∣spair, and ceased not to curse and deny his Creatour, who is blessed for ever, untill that both speech and life failed him. Neither did the severity of Gods justice here stay, but shewed it selfe on his posterity also; for his eldest son seeking to exalt the prowesse and valour of his father, vaunted much of his fathers exploits in an open assembly at a banquet; where∣withall a countriman being moved, stabbed him to the heart with his dag∣ger: and some few dayes after the Plague fals among the residue of his Family, and consumeth all that remaineth.
CHAP. XX. Of Adulteries. IT followeth by the order of our subject now to touch the transgression of the third Commandement of the second Table; which is, Thou shalt not commit Adul∣tery: in which words, as also in many other Texts of Scripture, Adultery is forbidden, and grievous threat∣nings denounced against all those that defile their bo∣dies with filthy and impure actions, estrange them∣selves from God, and conjoyne themselves to whores and ribauds. This sin did the Israelites commit with the woman of Madian, by means whereof they were to follow strange gods, and to fall into Gods heavie dis∣pleasure, who by a cruell Plague destroyed 24000. of them for the same sin. And forasmuch as the Madianites (through the wicked and pernicious counsell of Balaam) did lay this snare for them, and were so villanous and shamelesse, as to prostitute and be Bauds to their owne wives; therefore they were by the expresse Commandement of God discomfited, their Kings and false prophets, with all their men and women, except onely their unpolluted virgins that had knowne no man, slain: and all their Cities and dwellings burned and consumed to ashes. As every one ought to have re∣gard and care to their honesty, so maides especially, whose whole credit and reputation hangeth thereupon; for they that make no account thereof, but suffer themselves to be polluted with any filthinesse, draw upon them not onely most vile infamy, but also many great miseries: as is proved by the daughter of Hippomenes Prince of Athens, who being a whore, her father shut up in a stable with a wilde horse, giving him no provender, nor other meat to eat, that the horse (naturally furious enough, but more enraged by famine) might tear her in pieces, and with her carkase refresh his hunger, as he did. Pontus Aufidian understanding that his daughter had been betray∣ed and sold into a lechers hands by a slave of his that was her schoolmaster; put them both to death. In like manner served Pub. Atilius, Falisque his daughter, that fell into the same infamy. Vives reporteth, that in our fa∣thers Lud, Vives. dayes, two brothers of Arragon perceiving their sister (whom they ever esteemed for honest) to be with childe, (hiding their displeasure untill her delivery was past) came in suddenly, and stabbed her into the belly with their daggers, till they killed her, in the presence of a sage matron that was witnesse to their deed. The same Authour saith, That when he was a young man, there were three in the same Countrey, that conspired the death of a companion of theirs, that went about to commit this villany, and as they conspired, so they performed it, strangling him to death with a napkin, as he was going to his filthinesse. As for Adulterers, examples are infinite both of their wicked lives and miserable ends. In which number many of them may be scored, that making profession of a single life; and undertaking the vow of chastity, shew themselves monstrous knaves and ribauds, as many of the Popes themselves have done. As we reade of Iohn the Ele∣venth, Petr. pramonst.
bastard son to Lando his predecessour, who by meanes of his Adul∣teries with Theodora, then Governesse of Rome, came by degrees to the Pa∣pacy; so he passed the blessed time of his holy Popeship with this vertu∣ous Dame, to whom he served instead of a common Horse to satisfie her in∣satiable and disordinate lust: but the good and holy father was at last taken and castin prison, and there smothered to death with a pillow. Benedict the Eleventh, diing on a time with an Abbesse, his familiar, was poysoned with Bal. certain figs that he eat. Clement the Fifth was reported to be a common Bawd and a protectour of whores: he went apart into Avignion, and there stayed of purpose to do nothing but whore-hunt: he died in great torment of the bloudy flux, plurisie, and grief of the stomacke. In our English Chronicles we reade of Sir Roger Mortimer Earl of March, in the time of Edward the Third, who having secret familiarity with Isabel, Edward the Seconds wife, was not onely the cause to stir her up to make war against her husband, but also when he was vanquished by her, and deposed from his Crowne, his young son being installed in his Throne, caused him most cruelly to be put to death, by thrusting a hot spit into his body, at his fundament. He also procured the Earle of Kent, the Kings uncle, to be arraigned and beheaded at Winchester, for that he withstood the Queenes and his dealings, and would not suffer them to do what they listed. All these mischiefes sprung out from the filthy root of Adultery. But the just judgement of God not permitting such odious crimes to be unpunished nor undetected, it so fell forth at the length, that Isabel the old Queen was discovered to be with childe by the said Mortimer: whereof complaint being made to the King, as also of the killing of King Edward his father, and conspiring and procuring the death of the Earle of Kent the Kings uncle, he was arreigned and indicted, and by verdict found guilty, and suffered death accordingly like a Traitor, his head being exalted upon Lon∣don-bridge, for a spectacle for all murderers and adulterers to behold, that they might see and fear the heavy vengeance of God. CHAP. XXI. Of Rapes. NOw if Adultery, which with liking and consent of par∣ties is committed, be condemned, how much more grievous and hainous is the offence and more guilty the offendour, when with violence the chastity of any i, assailed, and enforced? This was the sin wherewith Si∣chem the son of Hemor the Levite is marked in holy Scripture; for he ravished Dina, Iacobs daughter, for Go. which cause Simeon and Levi revenged the injury done unto their sister up∣on the head of not onely him and his father, but all the Males that were in the City, by putting them to the sword. It was a custome amongst the Spartans and Messenians during the time, of peace betwixt them, to send yearly to one another certain of their daugh∣ters, to celebrate certain feasts and sacrifices that were amongst them: now
in continuance of time it chanced that fifty of the Lacedemonian virgins being come to those solemne feasts, were pursued by the Messenian gallants, to have their pleasures of them: but they joyntly making resistance, and fighting for their honesties, strove so long, not one yeelding themselves a prey into their hands, till they all died: whereupon arose so long and mise∣rable a war, that all the Countrey of Messena was destroyed thereby. Aristoclides a Tyran of Orchomenus a City of Arcadia, fell enamored with a maid of Stymphalis: who seeing her father by him slain, because he seemed to stand in his purposes light, fled to the Temple of Diana, to take Sanctuary, neither could once be plucked from the image of the goddesse, untill her life was taken from her but her death so incensed the Arcadi∣ans, that they fell to Armes and sharpely revenged her cruell injury. Appius a Roman, a man of power and authority in the City, inflamed Titus 1. vius. with the love of a virgine, whose father hight Virginius, would needs make her his servant, to the end to abuse her the more freely, and whilest he en∣deavoured with all his power and policy to accomplish his immoderate lust, her father slew her with his owne hands, more willing to prostitute her to death, than to so soul an opprobry and disgrace: but every man stirred up with the wofulnesse of the event, with one consent pursued, apprehen∣ded, and imprisoned the foul lecher; who fearing the award of a most shamefull death, killed himselfe to prevent a further mischief. In the year of our Lord 1271. under the Raigne of the Emperour Ro∣dolph, the Sicilians netled and enraged with the horrible whoredomes, adul∣teries Nic. Gil. vol. 1. and Rapes, which the Garrisons that had the government over them committed, not able any longer to endure their insolent and outragious de∣meanour, entered a secret and common conspiracy upon a time appointed for the purpose, which was on Easter Sunday, at the shutting in of the evening, to set upon them with one accord, and to murder so many as they could: as they did, for at that instant they massacred so many throughout the whole Island, that of all the great multitude there survived not one to bear tidings, or bewail the dead. At Naples it chanced in the Kings Palace, as young King Fredericke, Ferdinands son, entered the Privy Chamber of the Queen his mother, to emb. lib. 3. bist. Venet. salute her and the other Ladies of the Court, that the Prince of Bissenio waiting in the outward chamber for his returne, was slain by one of his owne servants, that suddenly gave him with his sword three deadly strokes in the presence of many beholders; which deed he confessed he had watch∣ed three yeares to performe, in regard of an injury done unto his sister, and in her to him, whom he ravished against her will. The Spaniards that first took the Isle Hispaniola, were for their whore∣domes and Rapes, which they committed upon the wives and virgines, all Benzon. Milan. of the new-found Land. murdered by the inhabitants. The inhabitants of the Province Cumana, when they saw the beastly outrage of the Spanish Nation, that lay along their Coasts to fish for The same Au∣thour. Pearle, in forcing and ravishing (without difference) their women young and old, set upon them upon a Sunday morning with all their force, and slew all that ever they found by the Sea-coasts Westward, till there remain∣ed not one alive: and the fury of the rude uncivill people was so great, that they spared not the Monkes in their Cloysters, but cut their throats as they were mumbling their Masses; burnt up the Spanish houses, both religious
and private, burst in pieces their bels, drew about their Images, hurld downe their Crucifixes, and cast them in disgrace and contempt overthwart their streets to be troden upon: nay, they destroyed whatsoever belonged unto them, to their very dogs and hennes, and their owne countrymen that served them in any service, whether religious or other, they spared not, they beat the earth, and cursed it with bitter curses, because it had upholden such wicked and wretched Caitises. Now the report of this massacre was so fearfull and terrible, that the Spaniards which were in Cubagna doubted much of their lives also; and truly not without great cause: for if the In∣dians of the Continent had been furnished and provided with sufficient store of barkes, they had passed even into that Island, and had served them with the same sauce which their fellowes were served with; for they want∣ed not will, but ability to do it. And these are the goodly fruits of their Adulteries and Rapes, which the Spanish Nation hath reaped in their new∣found land. The great calamity and overthrow which the Lacedemonians indured at Lectria, wherein their chiefest strength and powers were weakened and con∣sumed, was a manifest punishment of their inordinate lust committed up∣on Phil. Melanct. lib. 2. two virgins, whom after they had ravished, in that very place they cut in pieces and threw them into a pit: and when their father came to complain him of the villany, they made so light account of his words, that in stead of redresse he found nothing but reproach and derision, so that with grief he slew himselfe upon his daughters sepulchre: but how grievously the Lord revenged this injury, Histories do sufficiently testifie, and that Leu∣ctrian calamity doth bear witnesse. Brias a Grecian Captain being received into a Citizens house as a guest, Pausan. lib. 2. forced his wife by violence to his lust: but when he was asleep, to revenge her wrong, she put out both his eyes; and afterward complained to the Citizens also, who deprived him of his Office, and cast him out of their City. Macrinus the Emperour punished two Souldiers that ravished their Hostesse on this manner: he shut them up in an Oxes bowels with their heads out, and so partly with famishment, and partly with wormes and rot∣tennesse, they consumed to death. Rodericus King of the Gothes in Spain forced an Earles daughter to his lust; for which cause her father brought against him an Army of Sarasens Iohan. Magnus. and Moores, and not onely slew him with his son, but also quite extinguish∣ed the Gothicke kingdom in Spain: in this war, and upon this occasion, seven hundred thousand men perished, as Histories record, and so a king∣dom came to ruine by the perverse lust of one lecher, Anno 714. At the sacking and destruction of Thebes by King Alexander, a Thracian Captain which was in the Macedonian Army took a noble Matron prison∣er, Plut. in vita Alexand. Sabel. lib. 5 c. 6. called Timoclea, whom when by no perswasion of promises he could intice to his lust, he constrained by force to yeeld unto it: but this noble minded woman invented a most witty and subtle shift both to rid her selfe out of his hands, and to revenge his injury: she told him, that she knew where a rich treasure lay hid in a deep pit; whither when with greedinesse of the gold he hastened, and standing upon the brinke, pried and peered into the bot∣tome of it, she thrust him with both her hands into the hole, and tumbled stones after him, that he might never finde meanes to come forth: for
which fact she was brought before Alexander, to have justice; who de∣manding her what she was, she answered, that Theagenes, who led the The∣bane Army against the Macedonians, was her brother. Alexander percei∣ving the marvellous constancy of the woman, and knowing the cause of her accusation to be unjust, manumitted and set her free with her whole Family. When C. Manlius having conquered the Gallo-Grecians, pitched his Liv. l. b. 33 Army against the Tectosages (people of Narbonia towards the Pyrene monntaines) amongst other prisoners, a very fair woman, wife to Orgiagous Regulus, was in the custody of a Centurion, that was both lustfull and cove∣tous: this lecher tempted her first with fair perswasions, and seeing her unwilling, compelled her with violence to yeeld her body, as slave to for∣tune, so to infamy and dishonour: after which act, somewhat to mitigate the wrong, he gave her promise of release and freedom, upon condition of a certain sum of money; and to that purpose, sent her servant that was captive with her to her friends to purvey the same: which he bringing, the Centurion alone, with the wronged Lady met him at a place appointed, and whilest he weighed the money, by her counsell was murdered of her servants: so she escaping, carried to her husband both his money, and threw at his feet the villaines head that had spoiled her of her chastity. Andreas King of Hungary having undertaken the voyage into Syria for the recovery of the Holy Land, together with many other Kings and Prin∣ces, Chronica Hun∣ariae. committed the charge of his Kingdom and Family to one Bannebanius, a wise and faithfull man, who discharged his Office as faithfully as he took it willingly upon him. Now the Queen had a brother called Gertrude, that came to visit and comfort his sister in her husbands absence, and by that meanes sojourned with her a long time, even so long, till he fell deadly in love with Bannebanius Lady, a fair and vertuous woman, and one that was thought worthy to keep company with the Queen continually: to whom when he had unfolded his suit, and received such stedfast repulse, that he was without all hope of obtaining his desire, he began to droup and pine, untill the Queen his sister perceiving his disease, found this perverse reme∣dy for the cure thereof; she would often give him opportunity of dis∣course, by withdrawing her selfe from them being alone, and many times leave them in secret and dangerous places, of purpose that he might have his will of her, but she would never consent unto his lust; and therefore at last, when he saw no remedy, he constrained her by force, and made her sub∣ject to his will against her will: which vile disgracefull indignity when she had suffered, she returned home sad and melancholy, and when her husband would have embraced her, she fled from him, asking him, if he would em∣brace a whore, and related unto him her whole abuse, desiring him either to rid her from shame by death, or to revenge her wrong, and make knowne unto the world the injury done unto her. There needed no more spurres to pricke him forward for revenge: he posteth to the Court, and upbraiding the Queen with her ungratefull and abominable treachery, runneth her through with his sword, and taking her heart in his hand, proclaimeth openly, that it was not a deed of inconsideration, but of judgement, in re∣compence of the losse of his wives chastity: forthwith he flieth towards the King his Lord, that now was at Constantinople, and declaring to him his fact, and shewing to him his sword besmeared with his wives bloud,
submitteth himselfe to his sentence, either of death in rigour, or pardon in compassion: but the good King enquiring the truth of the cause, though grieved with the death of his wife, yet acquit him of the crime, and held him in as much honour and esteem as ever he did; condemning also his wife as worthy of that which she had endured, for her unwomanlike and traiterous part. A notable example of justice in him, and of punishment in her, that forgetting the law of womanhood and modesty, made her selfe a Bawd unto her brothers lust: whose memory as it shall be odious and execrable, so his justice deserveth to be engraven in marble with characters of gold. Equal to this King in punishing a Rape, was Otho the first: for as he passed through Italy with an Army, a certain woman cast her selfe downe Albert, Crantz. lib. 3. at his feet for justice against a villain that had spoiled her of her chastity; who deferring the execution of the law till his returne, because his haste was great, the woman asked, who should then put him in minde thereof? he answered, This Church which thou seest shall be a witnesse betwixt me and thee, that I will then revenge thy wrong. Now when he had made an end of this warfare, in his returne, as he beheld the Church, he called to minde the woman, and caused her be fetched; who falling downe before him, desired now pardon for him whom before she had accused, seeing he had now made her his wife, and redeemed his injury with sufficient satis∣faction: not so I swear (quoth Otho) your compacting shall not infringe, or colludo the sacred Law, but he shall die for his former fault, and so he caused him to be put to death. A notable example for them, that after they have committed filthinesse with a maid, thinke it no sin, but competent amends, if they take her in marriage whom they abused before in forni∣cation. Nothing inferiour to these in punishing this sin, was Gonzaga Duke of Ferrara, as by this History following may appear. In the year 1547. a Ci∣tizen Theat. hist. of Comun was cast into Prison upon an accusation of murder, whom to deliver from the judgement of death, his wife wrought all meanes possi∣ble: therefore comming to the Captain that held him Prisoner, she sued to him for her husbands life; who upon condition of her yeelding to his lust and payment of two hundred Ducats, promised safe deliverance for him; the poor woman seeing that nothing could redeem her husbands life, but losse and shipwracke of her owne honesty, told her husband: who wil∣led her to yeeld to the Captaines desire, and not to pretermit so good an oc∣casion; wherefore she consented: but after the pleasure past, the traiterous and wicked Captain put her husband to death notwithstanding: which in∣jury when she complained to Gonzaga Duke of Ferrara, he caused the Cap∣tain first to restore backe her two hundred Ducats, with an addition of seven hundred Crownes, and secondly to marry her to his wife; and lastly, when he hoped to enjoy her body, to be hanged for his treachery. O noble justice, and comparable to the worthiest deeds of Antiquity, and deserving to be held in perpetuall remembrance! As these before mentioned excelled in punishing this sin, so this fellow following excelled in committing it, and in being punished for it; his Theat. hist. name is Novellus Cararius, Lord of Pavie, a man of note and credit in the World for his greatnesse, but of infamy and discredit for his wickednesse. This man after many cruell murders and bloudy practises, which he exer∣cised
in every place where he came, fell at last into this notorious and ab∣hominable crime; for lying at Vincentia, he fell in love with a young maid of excellent beauty, but more excellent honesty, an honest Citizens daugh∣ter, whom he commanded her parents to send unto him, that he might have his pleasure of her: but when they regarding their credit, and she her cha∣stity, more than the Tyrans command, refused to come, he took her vio∣lently out of their house, and constrained her body to his lust; and after, to adde cruelty to villany, chopped her into small pieces, and sent them to her parents in a basket for a present: wherewith her poor father astonished; carried it to the Senate, who sent it to Venice, desiring them to consider the fact, and to revenge the cruelty. The Venetians undertaking their defence, made war upon the Tyran, and besieging him in his owne City, took him at last prisoner, and hanged him with his two sons, Francis and William. Diocles, son of Pisistratus, Tyran of Athens, for ravishing a maid was slain by her brother; whose death when Hippias his brother undertook to Lanquet. revenge, and caused the maidens brother to be racked, that he might disco∣ver the other conspiratours, he named all the Tyrans friends (which by commandment being put to death) the Tyran asked, whether there were any more? None but onely thy selfe (quoth he) whom I would wish next to be hanged; whereby it was perceived how abundantly he had revenged his sisters chastity: by whose notable stomacke all the Athenians being put in remembrance of their liberty, expelled their Tyran Hippias out of their City. Mundus, a young Gentleman of Rome, ravished the chaste Matron Pau∣lina in this fashion: when he perceived her resolution not to yeeld unto his Lanq. ron. lust, he perswaded the Priests of Isis to say, that they were warned by an Oracle, how that Anubius the god of Egypt, desired the company of the said Paulina: to whom the chaste Matron gave light credence, both because she thought the Priests would not lie, and also because it was accounted a great renowne to have to do with a god: and thus by this meanes was Pau∣lina abused by Mundus in the Temple of Isis, under the name of Anubius. Which thing being after disclosed by Mundus himselfe, he was thus justly revenged; the Priests were put to death, the Temple beaten downe to the ground, the Image of Isis throwne into Tiber, and the young man banished. A principall occasion of the Danes first arrivall here in England (which after conquered the whole Land, and exercised among the Inhabitants most  historia Iornaloi. horrible cruelties and outrages) was a Rape committed by one Osbright a deputy King, under the King of the West-Saxons in the North part. This Osbright upon a time journeying by the way, turned into the house of one of his Nobles called Bruer, who having a wife of great beauty (he being from home) the King after dinner (allured with her excellent beauty) took her to a secret Chamber, where he forcibly, contrary to her will, ravished her: whereupon she being greatly dismayed and vexed, made her mone to her husband at his returne, of this violence and injury received. The No∣bleman forthwith studying revenge, first went to the King, and resigned to his hands all such services and possessions which he held of him, and then took shipping and sailed into Denmarke, where he had great friends, and had his bringing up: there making his mone to Codrinus the King, desired his aid in revenging of the great villany of Osbright against him and his wife. Codrinus glad to entertain any occasion of quarrell against this Land,
presently levied an Army, and preparing all things for the same, sendeth forth Inguar and Hubba, two brethren, with a mighty Army of Danes into England; who first arriving at Holdernesse, burnt up the Countrey, and killed without mercy both men, women, and children: then marching to∣wards Yorke, encountered with wicked Osbright himselfe, where he, with the most part of his Army was slain and discomfited: a just reward for his villanous act; as also one chief cause of the Conquest of the whole Land by the Danes. In the year of our Lord 955. Edwine succeeding his uncle Eldred, was Lanquet. King of England: this man was so impudent, that in the very day of his Coronation he suddenly withdrew himselfe from his Lords, and in sight of certain persons ravished his owne kinswoman, the wife of a Nobleman of his Realme, and afterward slew her husband, that he might have unlawfull use of her beauty: for which act he became so odious to his Subjects and Nobles, that they joyntly rose against him, and deprived him of his Crowne, when he had reigned four yeares. CHAP. XXII. Other examples of Gods Judgements upon Adulterers. AMongst all other things, this is especially to be noted, how God (for a greater punishment of the disordinate lust of men) strucke them with a new (yet filthy and stinking) kinde of Disease called the French Pox; though indeed the Spaniards were the first that were infected therewith, by the heat which they caught Paul. Iovius. Bembus. among the women of the new-found lands, and sowed the seeds thereof first in Spain, and from thence sprinkled Italy therewith, wherethe French men caught it, when Charles the Eighth their King went Guicciardine. against Naples. From whence the contagion spread it selfe throughout di∣vers places of Europe. Barbary was so over-growne with it, that in all their Cities the tenth part escaped not untouched, nay almost not a Family but was infected. From thence it ran to Aegypt, Syria, and the graund Cair; and it may near hand truly be said, that there was not a corner of the habitable world, where this not onely new and strange (for it was never heard of in antient ages) but terrible and hideous scourge of Gods wrath stretched not it selfe. They that were spotted with it, and had it rooted in their bodies, led a languishing life, full of aches and torments, and carried in their visages filthy markes of unclean behaviour, as ulcers, boyles, and such like, that greatly disfigured them. And herein we see the words of Saint Paul verified, That an Adulterer sinneth against his owne body. Now for so much as the world is so brutishly carried into this sin, as to none more, 1 Cor. 6. 18. the Lord therefore hath declared his anger against it in divers sorts, so that divers times he hath punished it in the very act, or not long after, by a strange death. Of which, Alcibiades, one of the great Captaines of Athens, Sabell. may stand for an example; who being polluted with many great and
odious vices, and much given to his pleasures, and subject to all unclean∣nesse, ended his life in the midst thereof: for as he was in company of a Phrygian strumpet (having flowne thither to the King of Phrygia for shel∣ter) was notwithstanding set upon by certain Guards, which the King (in∣duced by his enemies) sent to stay him; but they though in number many, through the conceived opinion of his notable valour, durst not apprehend him at hand, but set fire to the house, standing themselves in armes round about it, to receive him if need were: he seeing the fire, leaped through the midst of it, and so long defended himselfe amongst them all, till strength failed in himselfe, and blowes encreasing upon him, constrained him to give up his life amongst them. Pliny telleth of Cornelius Gallus and Q. Elerius, two Roman Knights, Plin. lib. 7. that died in the very action of filthinesse. In the Irish History we finde recorded a notable judgement of God upon Holinshed. a notorious and cruell lecher, one Turgesnis, a Norwegian, who having twice invaded Ireland, reigned there as King for the space of thirty yeares. This Tyran not onely cried havocke and spoil upon the whole Countrey, abusing his victory very insolently, but also spared not to abuse virgins and women at his pleasure, to the satisfying of his filthy lust. Omalaghlilen King of Meth was in some trust with the Tyran: his onely daughter Tur∣gesnis craved for his Concubine; but he having a ready wit, and watching his opportunity, seemed not onely not to deny his daughter, but to offer him the choice of many other his neeces and cousins, endowed (as he s them forth) with such singular beauty, as they seemed rather Angels than mortall Creatures. The Tyran as it were ravished, and doting in love with those pecrlesse pieces, could endure no delay, but must needs possesse him∣selfe of their bodies, and that very speedily: to which Omalagblilen con∣descending, attired his daughter in princelike apparell, and with her sixteen proper young men, beautifull and amiable to behold, in like array, and so being sent unto the King, were presented unto him in his Privy Chamber, having none about him but a few dissolute youthfull persons: whereupon those disguised young striplings drew forth from under their long wo∣manish garments their skenes, and valiantly bestirring themselves, first stabbed their weapons points through the body of the Tyran, and then ser∣ved all those youthes about him with the like sauce, they making small or no resistance. And thus the abhominable lecher, together with his rabble of filthy Pandars, received the due reward of their ugly filthinesse; and by this means the Irish Nation was freed from the slavery of a cruell Tyran. Theodebert, the eldest son of Glotharius, died amidst his whores, to whom Mich. Rit. Neap. he was (though married) too too much addicted. The like befell one Ber∣trane Ferrier at Barcelone in Spain, according to the report of Pontanus. Lib. de obedi. In like manner there was one Giachet Geneve of Saluces, a man that had Fulgos. lib. 6. cap. 12. both wife and children of his owne, of good yeares, well learned, and of good esteem amongst his neighbour Citisens, that secretly haunted the company of a young woman; with whom being coupled one evening in his study, he suddenly died: his wife and children seeing his longtariance, when time required to go to bed, called him, and knocked at his door very hard, but when no answer was made, they broke open the doores that were locked on the inner side, and found him (to their great grief and dismay) lying upon the woman starke dead, and her dead also.
Claudius of Asses, Counsellour of the Parliament of Paris, (a man very evill-affected toward the Professours of the Gospel) committed villany with one of his waiting-maids, in the very midst whereof he was taken with an Apoplexy, which immediately after made an end of him. Not long since, here in our owne Countrey, a Noblemans servant of good credit and place with his master, having familiarity with another mans wife, as he was about to commit villany with her in a chamber, he fell downe starke dead with his hoe about his heeles: which being heard (by reason of the noise his fall made) of those which were in the lower room, they all ran up hastily, and easily perceived both the villany he went about, and the horrible judgement of God upon him for the same. This happened in Northamptonshire, as it was testified by very godly, honest, and sufficient witnesses. Another in Hertfordshire about Barkway, having the company of a harlot in a Wood, was also surprised by the judgement of God, and strucke dead as it seemed in the very committall of that filthy act: his name I conceal, as also of the former, that none might thinke themselves disgraced thereby, but all learne to fear the wrath of God, and tremble at his judge∣ments. We reade also of a Chirurgeon, who disdaining his honest wife, had abandoned himselfe to a strumpet; and going on a time to horsebacke, and asked by his wife whither he went, he answered scornefully, To the Stewes, going indeed presently to his Adulteresse. After a while he returneth to horse, and offering to manage his round, the horse leapes and bounds extra∣ordinarily, and casts this wretched man out of the saddle, in such sort, as one of his feet hung in the bridle. The horse being hot, ran so furiously upon the stones, as he beat out his braines, and never stayed untill he came before the Stues, where this miserable man remained dead upon the place. The Spaniards in the West-Indies going to seek gold near unto the gulfe Benzo. Gomar. Hist. Iud. lib. 2. cap. 57. of Uruba, their Captain, called Horeda, carried away the daughter of the Cacique or Lord of the place prisoner, and abused her as his Concubine: the Cacique soon after came to the Captain, making shew that he came to redeem his daughter, but being come into his presence, he reproached him with injurious words, and shot a poysoned arrow at him, with an intent to kill him; but he wounded him onely in the thigh: whereupon the Spani∣ards rushing in suddenly with their swords drawne, slew the Cacique, his wife, and all his company. But this villanous Captain escaped not the ar∣row of Gods wrath: for he was driven to retire out of that Countrey into Hispaniola, where he died of his wound within few dayes after in extreme paines: all his company being imbarqued to Spain-ward, were driven backe by the winde, and after infinite toiles, some of them were slain by the Indians, and the rest died miserably of divers Diseases: and this was the fruit of that Adultery. In the year 1533. a certain religious man in the Towne of Clavenne in Stumpsius. lib. 10. bist. of Swisse. the Grisons Countrey, being enamoured with a certain beautifull maid, as∣sayed by all meanes to corrupt her chastity, and to allure her to his will: but when by no meanes he could obtaine his desire, he counterfeited certain ap∣paritions and revelations, abusing the sacred Name of God, and of the Vir∣gin Mary, and so seduced this poor maid to his lust: but his imposture be∣ing discovered, he was committed to prison, and notwithstanding his Order, was publikely beheaded, and his body burnt.
CHAP. XXIII. Shewing that Stues ought not to be suffered among Christians. BY this which hath been spoken it appeareth manifestly, how infamous a thing is it among Christians to privilege and allow publique places for Adulteries, albeit it is a com∣mon thing in the greatest Cities of Europe; yea, and in the very bowels of Christendom, where no such villany should be tolerated. There is nothing that can cast any colour of excuse upon it, seeing it is expresly contrary to Gods ediet in many places: as first, Thou shalt not commit Adultery: and in Lev. 19. 29. Thou shalt not pollute thy daughter in prostituting her to be a where, lest the land be defiled with wheredom, and filled with wickednesse: and in Deut. 23. 17. Let there be no where of the daughters of Israel, neither a where-keeper of the sonnes of Israel. This is the decree of God, and the rule which he had given us to square our affections by, and it admitteth no dispensation. But some do object, that those things are tolerated to avoid greater mischiefes: as though the Lord were not well advised when he gave forth those Com∣mandments, or that mortall men had more discretion than the immortall God. This truely is nothing else but to reject and disannull that which Saint Paul requireth as a duty of all Christians; namely, That fornicati∣on Ephes. 5. and all uncleannesse should not once be named amongst us, neither filthinesse, foolish talking, or jesting, which are things not comely; forsomuch as no whoremonger nor unclean person can have any inheri∣tance in the Kingdom of God. Plate the Philosopher, though a Panim, and Dial. 3. ignorant of the knowledge of the true God, for bad expresly in his common wealth Poets and Painters to represent or set to the view any unclean and lascivious counterfeit, whereby good manners might be any wayes depra∣ved. Aristotle following his masters steps, ordained in his Politiques, That all filthy communication should be banished out of his City. How Lib. 7. cap. 17. far then were they from giving leave and liberty for filthy and stinking bro∣thel-houses to be erected and maintained? In this therefore the very Hea∣then are a shame and reproach to those that call themselves Christians and Catholiques. Besides, the goodly reason which they alleage for their up∣holding of their Stues is so far from the truth, that the contrary is ever truer; namely, that by their odious and dishonest liberty more evill ariseth to the world than otherwise would, insomuch as it setteth open a wide door to all dissolutenesse and whoredomes, and an occasion of lechery and uncleannesse even to those that otherwise would abstain from all such filthy actions. How many young folke are there, as well men as women, that by this meanes give themselves over to loosenesse, and undo themselves utter∣ly? How many murders are, have been, and still will be committed there∣by? What a disorder, confusion, and ignominy of nature is it, for a father to lie with her with whom his son had been but a little before? Or the son to come after the father? and such like: but by the just judgement of God it commeth to passe, that that which is thought to be enclosed within the pre∣cincts
of certain appointed places, spreadeth it selfe at large so far, that oftentimes whole streets and Cities are poysoned; yea, even their houses, who in regard of their place either in the Law or policy, ought to stop the stream of such vices: nay, which is more marvell, they that with open mouth vaunt themselves to be Gods Lieutenants on earth, Christs Vicars, and Successours to his Apostles, are so filthy and abhominable, as to suffer publike bauds and whores to be under their noses uncontroled; and which is more, to enrich their treasures by their traffique. Cornelius Agrippa saith, That of all the e-bauds of his time, Pope Sextus was most infamous: for he builded a most glorious and stately Stues (if any state or glory can abide in so bad a place) as well for common Adultery, as unnaturall Sodomy, to be exercised in. He used (as Heliogabalus was wont to do) to maintain whole heards of whores, with whom he participated his friends and servants as they stood in need, and by Adulteries reared yearly great revenues into his purse. Baleus saith, That at this day every whore in Rome payes tribute to the Pope, a Iulle; which amounted then to twenty thousand Ducats by the year at least; but now the number is so encreased, that it ariseth to fourty thousand. I thinke there is none ignorant, how Pope Paul the third had by computation five and fourty thousand whores and curtezans, that paid him a monethly tribute for their whoredomes: and thus also this holy Father was a protectour and upholder of the Stues, and deserved by his villanous behaviour (for he was one of the lewdest Adulterers of that time) to bear the name of the master and erectour of these filthy places: and herein both he and the rest of that crue have shewed themselves enemies to God, and true Antichrists indeed, and have not onely imitated, but far surpassed shamelesse and wicked Caligula in all filthy and monstrous dealings. Thou shalt not (saith Moses) bring the hire of a whore into the house of the Lord Deut. 23. thy God for any vow: by what title then can these honest men exact so great rent from their whorish Tenants, seeing it is by the Law of God a thing so abhominable? Truly it can no otherwise be but a kinde of art of baudery, as may be gathered out of the Law which is in F. deritu nupt. L. palem. Qui habet mancipia, &c. The meaning whereof is, That he which for gain prostituteth his slaves to the lust of men, and draweth thereby com∣modity to himselfe, is a Baud: He is also stained with infamy by the Law Athletas, that partaketh the gain or wages of a whore. How much more then is that Law of Iustinian to be commended, which commandeth all whores to be banished out of the confines of Cities and Commonwealths? It was also a worthy and memorable act of Theodosius, when he rooted the Scr. l 5. c. 18. Ecclesiast. hist. Stues out of Rome; and of Saint Lewis King of France, that pulled downe the Stues at Paris, and chased away, as neer as he could, all loose and who∣rish women from his Dominions. The antient Romans permitted no wo∣man to become an open whore, before she had made a formall declaration Lib. de pud. of her intent before the Aediles; thinking by this meanes to quench their hot lust, because they would be ashamed to make such an open confession. And by a decree of the Senate it was enacted, That no woman comming of gentile stocke should be suffered to give her selfe over to this Trade, it being a stain and blot to true Nobility.
CHAP. XXIIII. Of Whoredomes committed under colour of Marriage. SEeing that oftentimes it falleth out, that those which in shew seem most honest, thinke it a thing lawfull to con∣verse together as man and wife by some secret and pri∣vate contract, without making account of the publike celebration of Marriage as necessary, but for some worldly respects, according as their foolish and disor∣dinate affections misperswadeth them, to dispence therewith: It shall not be impertinent as we go, to give warning how un∣lawfull all such conversation is, and how contrary to good manners, and to the laudable customes of all civill and well governed people. For it is so far from deserving the name of Marriage, that on the other side it can be nothing but plain whoredom and fornication: the which name and title Tertullian giveth to all secret and privy meeting which have not been allow∣ed Corn. Tacit. of, received, and blessed by the Church of God. Again, besides the evill examples which is exhibited, there is this mischief moreover, that the children of such a bed cannot be esteemed legitimate, yea God himselfe ac∣curseth such law lesse familiarity, as the mischiefes that arise therefrom do declare, whereof this one example which we alledge shall serve for suffici∣ent proof. In the reigne of Lewis the Ninth, King of France, and Iulius the Second, Pope of Rome, there was a Gentleman of Naples called Antonio Bologne, that had been Governour of Fredericke of Arragons house, when he was King of Naples, and had the same Office under the Duchesse of Malfi after she was widow; with whom in protract of time he grew to have such secret and privie acquaintance (albeit she was a princesse and he her servant) that he enjoyeed her as his owne wife. And thus they conversed secretly together under the colour of Marriage accorded betwixt them, the space of certain yeares, untill she had bore unto him three children: by which meanes their private dealings which they so much desired to smother and keep close, burst out and bewrayed it selfe. The matter being come to her brothers eares, they took it so to the heart, that they could not rest untill they had revenged the vile injury and dishonour which they pretended to have been done to them and their whole house, equally by them both. Therefore when they had chased them first from Ancona, whither in hope of quiet∣nesse they had fled out of Naples, they drave them also out of Tuscane: who seeing themselves so hotly pursued on every side, resolved to make to∣wards Venice, thinking there to finde some safety: But in the midway she was overtaken, and brought backe to Naples, where in short space she mi∣serably ended her life: for her brothers Guard strangled her to death, to∣gether with her chambermaid, who had served in stead of a Baud to them; and her poor infants which she had by the said Bologne. But he by the good∣nesse of his horse escaping, took his flight to Milan, where he sojourned quietly a long while, untill at the instant pursuit of one of her brothers,
the Cardinall of Arragon, he was slain in the open streets, when he least mistrusted any present danger. And this was a true Cardinall like exploit indeed, representing that mildenesse, mercifulnesse, and good nature which is so required of every Christian, in traiterously murdering a man so many yeares after the first rancour was conceived, that might well in halfe that space have been digested, in fostering hatred so long in his cruell heart, and waging ruffians and murderers to commit so monstrous an act: wherein al∣beir the Cardinals cruelty was most famous, as also in putting to death the poor infants, yet Gods justice bare the sway, that used him as an instru∣ment to punish those who under the vail of secret Marriage thought it law∣full for them to commit any villany. And thus God busieth sometime the most wicked about his will, and maketh the rage and fury of the Devill himselfe serve for meanes to bring to passe his fearfull judgements. CHAP. XXV. Of unlawfull Marriages, and their issues. NOw to redres all such evils as have before been mention∣ed, and to avoid all inconveniences in this case, God of his bountifull mercy hath ordained Marriage as a reme∣dy to be applied to all such as have not the gift of con∣tinency, least they should fall into fornication: which notwithstanding many shamelesse creatures that blush not at their owne filthinesse, but rather rejoyce therein, make no account of. Such are they that making Marriage one of the Sacra∣ments of the Church, do neverthelesse despise as a vile and prophane thing; albeit that the Apostle saith, That Marriage is honourable among all men, and the bed undefiled; but whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge. But they have it not in that estimation, seeing by authority they are deprived of the use thereof, and not of Adultery. That which is honest and laudable is for∣bidden, and that which is sinfull and unlawfull, allowed of. This (saith Sleiden) is the custom of the Germane Bishops, for money to suffer their Lib. 4. Priests to keep harlots, not exacting any other punishment, saving their purses, to privilege their knaveries. But these reines of liberty were let more loose in certain Villages of the Cantons of Switzers, where it was Lib. 3. not onely winked at, but also commanded, That every new Priest should have his private whore for his owne tooth; that he might not intermeddle with other mens. Neither was it without reason that Iohn le Maire said, how under the shew and colour of chastity, Priests whoredomes did over∣flow, being men abandoned to all dissolute and riotous living. Now then it were far better to marry than to burne; yet in such sort to marry, that all giddinesse and inconsideration set aside, every one should matcht himselfe according to his degree and age, with great respect and good advisement had unto them both, to the end to avoid those mischiefes and enormities which oftentimes happen, when either by an over-hardy, foolish, and rash presumption, a man would nestle himselfe in an higher nest than his estate and calling requireth, or by a sensuall and fleshly lust passing the bounds of
reason, goeth about to constrain and interrupt the law of nature. The chiefest thing that is required in Marriage, is the consent of parties, as well of themselves that are to be joyned together, as of each of their parents; the contrary whereof is constraint, where either party is forced: as it hapned to those two hundred maids which the Benjamites took by force and vio∣lence to be their wives. Judg. 21. This was a reproach to Romulus the first King of Rome, when he ravish∣ed the Sabine virgins that came to see their sports, which was cause of great war betwixt them. Moreover besides the mutuall joint of love which ought to be betwixt man and wife, it is necessary that they that marry do marry in the Lord, to serve him in greater purity, and with lesse distur∣bance; which cannot be if a Christian marry an Infidell, for the great dif∣ficulties and hinderances that usually spring from such a root. Therefore it was straitly forbidden the people of God to contract Marriages with Idolaters; yea, and the holy Patriarchs before any such law was given, had Exod. 34. 16. Deut. 7. 3. carefully great regard (in the Marriages of their children) to this thing, as the example of Abraham doth sufficiently declare. Therefore they that have any manner of government and authority over unmarried folkes, whe∣ther they be fathers, morthers, kinsmen, or Tutors, ought to have especiall care and regard thereof. Yea, Christian Princes and Lords, or Rulers of Common-wealths, should not in this respect be so supine and negligent in the performance of their Offices, as once to permit and suffer this amongst them, which is so directly contrary to the Word of God; but rather by especiall charge forbid it, to the end that both their Lawes might be con∣formable, and in every respect agreeable to the holy Ordinance of God; and that the way might be stopped to those mischiefes which were likely to arise from such evil concluded Marriages. For what reason is it that a young maid baptised and brought up in the Church of Christ, should be given in marri∣age to a worshipper of Images and Idols; and sent to such a Countrey where the worship of God is not so much as once thought upon? Is not this to plucke a soul out of the House of God, and thrust it into the house of the de∣vill? out of Heaven, into Hell? than which, what greater apostasie or falling from God can there be? whereof all they are guilty, that either make up such Marriages; or give their good will or consent to them, or do not hin∣der the cause and proceedings of them, if any manner of way they can. Now that this confusion and mixture of Religion in Marriages is unplea∣sant and noysom to God, it manifestly appeareth Gen. 6. where it is said, that because the sonnes of God (to wit, those whom God had separated for himselfe from the beginning of the world to be his peculiar ones,) were so evill advised, as to be allured with the beauties of the daughters of men, (to wit, of those which were not chosen of God to be his people; and to marry with them, corrupting themselves by this contagious acquaintance of prophane people, with whom they should have had nothing to do) that therefore God was incensed against them, and resolved simply to revenge the wickednesse of each party without respect. Beside, the monstrous fruits of those prophane Marriages, do sufficiently declare their odiousnesse in Gods sight: for from them arose gyants of strength and stature, exceeding the proportion of men, who by their hugenesse did much wrong and vio∣lence in the world, and gained fearfull and terrible names to themselves: but God (provoked by their oppressions) drowned their tyrannies in the Floud, and made an end of the world for their sakes.
In the time of the Judges in Israel, the Israelites were chastised by the hand of God for this same fault; for they tooke to wives the daughters of the uncircumcised, and gave them their daughters also. In like sort framed Judges 3. they themselves by this meanes to their corrupt manners and superstitions, and to the service of their Idolatrous gods: but the Lord of heaven raigned downe anger upon their heads, and made them subject to a stranger, the King of Mesopotamia, whom they served the space of eight yeares. Looke what hapned to King Solomon for giving his heart to strange wo∣men 1 Kings 11. that were not of the houshold of Gods people: he that before was re∣plenished with such admirable wisdome, that he was the wonder of the world, was in his olde age deprived thereof, and besotted with a kinde of dulnesse of understanding, and led aside from the true knowledge of God to serve Idols, and to build them Altars and Chappels for their worship; and all this to please forsooth his wives humours, whose acquaintance was the chiefe cause of his misery and Apostasie. CHAP. XXIV. Touching incestuous Marriages. NOw as it is unlawfull to contract marriages with parties of contrary religion, so it is as unlawfull to marry those that are neare unto us by any degree of kindred or affini∣ty, as it is inhibited not only by the law of God, but also by civill and politique constitutions: whereunto all na∣tions have ever by the sole instinct of nature agreed and accorded, except the Aegyptians and Persians, whose ab∣hominations were so great, as to take their owne sisters and mothers to be their wives. Cambyses King of Media and Persia, married his owne sister, but it was not long ere he put her to death: a just proofe of an unjust and accursed marriage. Many others there were in protract of time, that in their insatiable lusts shewed themselves no lesse unstaied and unbriedled in their lawlesse affections then he: One of which was Antigonus King of Judea, Joseph. antiq. lib. 17. cap. 15. son of Herodes, sirnamed Great, who blushed not to marry his sister, the late wife of his deceased brother Alexander, by whom she had borne two children: but for this and divers other his good deeds, he lost not only his goods (which were confiscated) but was himselfe also banished out of his countrey into a forraine place, from Judea to Vienna, in France. Herod also the Tetrarch was so impudent and shamelesse, that he tooke The same, lb. 18. cap. 3. from his brother Philip his wife Herodias, and espoused her unto himselfe: which shamelesse and incestuous deed Iohn Baptist reproving in him, told him plainly how unlawfull it was for him to possesse his brothers wise: but the punishment which befell him for this, and many other his sins, we have heard in the former booke, and need not here to be repeated. Anton. Caracalla tooke to wife his mother in law, allured thereunto by her faire enticements: whose wretched and miserable end hath already been touched in the former booke. The Emperour Heraclius, after the decease of his first wife, married his
owne neece the daughter of his brother: which turned mightily to his un∣doing; for besides that, that under his raigne, and as it were by his occasi∣on, the Saracens entred the borders of Christendome, and spoiled and de∣stroyed his dominions under his nose, to his foule and utter disgrace, he was over and above smitten corporally with so grievous and irksome a disease of dropsie, that he dyed thereof. Thus many men run ryot, by assuming to themselves too much liberty, and breake the bounds of civill honesty required in all Contracts, and too audaciously set themselves against the commandement of God, which ought to be of such authority with all men, that none (be they never so great) should dare to derogate one jot from them, unlesse they meant wholly to op∣pose themselves as profest enemies to God himselfe, and to turne all the good order of things into confusion. All which notwithstanding, some of the Romish Popes have presumed to encroach upon Gods right, and to dis∣anull by their foolish decrees the lawes of the Almighty: As Alexander the sixth did, who by his Bull approved the incestuous marriage of Ferdinand Sleid. lib. 9. King of Naples with his owne Aunt his father Alphonsus sister by the fathers side: which otherwise (saith Cardinall Bembus) had been against all law and equity, and in no case to be tollerated and borne withall. Henry the seventh, King of England, after the death of his eldest son Ar∣thur, caused (by the speciall dispensation of Pope Iulius) his next son named Henry, to take to wife his brothers widdow called Katherine, daughter to Ferdinando King of Spaine, for the desire he had to have this Spanish affini∣ty continued: who succeeding his father in the Crowne, after continuance of time, began to advise himselfe, and to consult whether this marriage with his brothers wife were lawfull or no; and found it by conference both of holy and prophane lawes utterly unlawfull: whereupon he sent certaine Bi∣shops to the Queene to give her to know, That the Popes dispensation was altogether unjust, and of none effect to priviledge such an act: to whom she answered, That it was too late to call in question the Popes Bull which so long time they had allowed of. The two Cardinals that were in Commissi∣on from the Pope to decide the controversie, and to award judgement upon the matter, were once upon point to conclude the decree which the King de∣sired, had not the Pope impeached their determination in regard of the Emperour Charles, nephew to the said Queene, whom he was loath to dis∣please: wherefore the King seeing himselfe frustrate of his purpose in this behalfe, sent into divers Countries to know the judgement of all the learned Divines concerning the matter in controversie, who (especially those that dwelt not far off) seemed to allow and approve the divorce: Thereupon he resolved (rejecting his olde wife) to take him to a new, and to marrie (as he did) Anne of Bulloine one of the Queenes maides of honour, a woman of most rare and excellent beauty. Now as touching his first marriage with his brothers wife, how unfortunate it was in it owne nature, and how unjust∣ly dispensed withall by the Pope, we shall anon see by those heavy, sorrow∣full, and troublesome events and issues which immediatly followed in the neck thereof. And first and formest of the evill fare of the Cardinall of Yorke, with whom the King being highly displeased for that at his instance and request, the Pope had opposed himselfe to this marriage, requited him (and not un∣deservedly) on this manner: first he deposed him from the office of the
Chancellorship: secondly, deprived him of two of his three bishoprickes which he held: and lastly, sent him packing to his owne bouse, as one whom he never purposed more to see: yet afterward being advertised of certaine insolent and threatning speeches which he used against him, he sent againe for him: but he not daring to refuse to come at his call, dyed in the way with meere griefe and despight. The Pope gave his definitive sentence against this act, and favoured the cause of the divorced Ladie: but what gained he by it, save only that the King, offended with him, rejected him and all his trumpery, retained his yearely tribute levied out of this Realm, and converted it to another use: and this was the recompence of his good∣ly dispensation with an incestuous marriage: wherein although, to speake truly and properly, he lost nothing of his owne, yet it was a deep check and no shallow losse to him and his successors, to be deprived of so goodly a re∣venue, and so great authority in this Realme, as he then was. CHAP. XXVII. Of Adulterie. SEeing that marriage is so holy an institution and ordinance of God, as it hath been shewed to be; it followeth by good right that the corruption thereof, namely Adultery, where∣by the bond of marriage is dissolved, should be forbidden: for the woman that is polluted therewith, despiseth her owne husband, yea and for the most part hateth him, and foisteth in strange seed (even his enemies brats) in stead of his owne, not on∣ly to be fathered, but also to be brought up and maintained by him, and in time to be made inheritors of his possessions: which thing being once knowne, must needes stir up coales to set anger on fire, and set abroach much mischiefe: and albeit that the poore infants are innocent and guiltlesse of the crime, yet doth the punishment and ignominie thereof redound to them, because they cannot be reputed as legitimate, but are even marked with the black coale of bastardy whilest they live: so grievous is the guilt of this sin, and uneasie to be removed. For this cause the very Heathen not on∣ly reproved adultery evermore, but also by authority of law prohibited it, and allotted to death the offenders therein. Abimelech King of the Philistims, a man without circumcision, and Gen. 26. therefore without the covenant, knowing by the light of nature (for hee knew not the law of God) how sacred and inviolable the knot of marriage ought to be, expresly forbad all his people from doing any injury to Isaac in regard of his wife, and from touching her dishonestly upon paine of death. Out of the same fountaine sprang the words of queene Hecuba in Eu∣ripides, speaking to Menelaus touching Helen, when she admonished him to enact this law, That every woman which should betray her husbands cre∣dit, and her owne chastity to another man, should die the death. In olde time the Aegyptians used to punish adultery on this sort; the Diedor. man with a thousand jerkes with a reed, and the woman with cutting off her nose; but he that forced a free woman to his lust, had his privy mem∣bers
cut off. By the law of Iulia, adulterers were without difference adjug∣ed to death, insomuch that Iulius Antonius, a man of great parentage and reputation among the Romanes, whose son was nephew to Augustus sister (as Cornelius Tacitus reporteth) was for this crime executed to death. Au∣relianus Lib. 4. Annal. the Emperour did so hate and detest this vice, that to the end to scare and terrifie his souldiers from the like offence, he punished a souldier which had committed adultery with his hostesse in most severe manner, even by causing him to be tyed by both his feet to two trees bent downe to the earth with force, which being let goe, returning to their course, rent him cruelly in pieces, the one halfe of his body hanging on the one tree, and the other on the other. Yea and at this day amongst the very Turkes and Tarta∣rians, this sin is sharply punished. So that we ought not wonder that the Lord should ordaine death for the Adulterer. If a man (saith the law) lie with another mans wife, if (I say) he commit adultery with his neighbours Levit. 20. 10. wife, the Adulterer and the Adulteresse shall die the death. And in ano∣ther place, If a man be found lying with a woman married to a man, they Deut. 22. 22. shall die both twaine; to wit, the man that lay with the wife, and the wife, that thou maiest put away evill from Israel. Yea, and before Moses time al∣so, it was a custome to burne the Adulterers with fire, as it appeareth by Gen. 38. the sentence of Iuda (one of the twelve Patriarchs) upon Thamar his daugh∣ter in law, because he supposed her to have played the whore. Beside all this, to the end this sin might not be shuffled up and kept close, there was a meanes given, whereby if a man did but suspect his wife for this sin, though she could by no witnesse or proofe be convinced, her wickednesse notwith∣standing most strangely and extraordinarily might be discovered. And it was this: The woman publikely at her husbands suit called in question be∣fore Num. 5. the Priest, who was to give judgement of her after divers ceremonies and circumstances performed, and bitter curses pronounced by him, her belly would burst, and her thigh would rot, if she were guilty, and she should be a curse amongst the people for her sin; but if she was free, no evill would come unto her. Thus it pleased God to make knowne, that the fil∣thinesse of those that are polluted with this sin, should not be hid. This may more clearely appeare by the example of the Levites wife, of whom it is spoken in the 19, 20, and 21. Chapters of Iudges, who having forsaken her husband to play the whore, certaine moneths after he had againe recei∣ved her to be his wife, she was given over against her will to the villanous Rape, l. 2. c. 19. and monstrous lusts of the most wicked and perverse Gibeonites, that so abused her for the space of a whole night together, that in the morning she was found dead upon the threshold: which thing turned to a great destru∣ction and overthrow in Israel; for the Levite, when he arose, and found his wife newly dead at the dore of his lodging, he cut and dismembred her body into twelve pieces, and sent them into all the countries of Israel, to every tribe one, to give them to understand, how vile and monstrous an injurie was done unto him: whereupon the whole nation assembling and consulting together, when they saw how the Benjamites (in whose tribe this monstrous villany was committed) make no reckoning of seeing punishment executed upon those execrable wretches, they tooke armes against them, and made war upon them; wherein though at the first conflict they lost to the num∣ber of forty thousand men, yet afterward they discomfited and overthrew the Benjamites, and slew of them 25000. rasing and burning downe the
City Gibea (where the sinne was committed) with all the rest of the Ci∣ties of that Tribe, in such sort that there remained alive but six hundred persons, that saved their lives by flying into the desart, and there hid themselves foure moneths, untill such time as the Israelites taking pitty of them, lest they should utterly be brought to nought, gave them to wife (to the end to repeople them againe) foure hundred virgins of the inha∣bitants of Jabes Gilead, reserved out of that flaughter of those people, wherein man, woman, and childe, were put to the sword, for not com∣ming forth to take part with their brethren in that late warre. And foras∣much as yet there remained two hundred of them unprovided for, the An∣tients of Israel gave them liberty to take by force two hundred of the daugh∣ters of their people: which could not be but great injury and vexation unto their parents, to be thus robbed of their daughters, and to see them married at all adventures, without their consent or liking. These were the mischiefes which issued and sprang from that vile and abominable a∣dultery of the wicked Gibeonites with the Levites wife, whose first vo∣luntary sinne was in like manner also most justly punished by this second rape: and this is no new practise of our most just God, to punish one One sin puni∣shed with ano∣ther. sinne by another, and sinners in the same kinde wherein they have offended. When King David, after he had overcome the most part of his enemies, 2 Sam. 11. and made them tributaries unto him, and injoyed some rest in his king∣dome, whilest his men of war pursuing their victory, destroyed the Am∣monites, and were in besieging Rabba their chiefe City, he was so en∣flamed with the beauty of Bathshabe, Vriahs wife, that he caused her to bee conveyed to him to lye with her: to which sinne he combined another more grievous; to wit, when he saw her with childe by him (to the end to cover his adultery) he caused her husband to be slaine at the siege, by putting him in the Vantgard of the battell at the assault; and then think∣ing himselfe cocksure, married Bathshabe. But all this while, as it was but vaine allurements, no solid joy that fed his minde, and his sleepe was but of sinne, not of safety, wherein he slumbred: so the Lord awakened him right soone by afflictions and crosses, to make him feele the burden of the sinne which he had committed: first therefore the childe (the fruit of this adultery) was striken with sicknesse and dyed: next his daughter Tha∣mar, Absaloms sister, was ravished by Ammon one of his owne sonnes: 2 Sam. 12. 2 Sam. 13. thirdly Ammon for his incest was slaine by Absalom: and fourthly Absa∣lom (ambitiously aspiring after the kingdome, and conspiring against him) 2 Sam. 15. raised war upon him, and defiled his Concubines, and came to a wofull de∣struction. All which things (being grievous crosses to K. David) were infli∣cted by the just hand of God, to chastise and correct him for his good, not to destroy him in his wickednesse: neither did it want the effect in him, for he was so far from swelling and hardening himselfe in his sin, that con∣trariwise he cast downe and humbled himselfe, and craved pardon and for∣givenesse at the hand of God with all his heart, and true repentance: not like to such as grow obstinate in their sinnes and wickednesse, and make themselves beleeve all things are lawfull for them, although they be never so vile and dishonest. This therefore that we have spoken concerning Da∣vid, is not to place him among the number of lewd and wicked livers, but to shew by his chastisements (being a man after Gods owne heart) how
odious and displeasant this sin of Adultery is to the Lord, and what punish∣ment all others are to expect that wallow therein, since he spared not him whom he so much loved and favoured. CHAP. XXVIII. Other examples like unto the former. THE history of the ravishment of Helene, registred by so many worthy and excellent Authors, and the great evils that pursued the same, is not to be counted altogether an idle fable, or an invention of pleasure, seeing that it Herod. l. 2. is sure, that upon that occasion great and huge war arose betweene the Graecians and the Trojanes; during the Thucyd. which the whole Countrey was havocked, many Cities and Townes destroyed, much blood shed, and thousands of men discomfit∣ed; among whom the ravisher and adulterer himselfe (to wit Paris, the chiefe mover of all those miserable tragedies) escaped not the edge of the sword; no nor that famous city Troy (which entertained and maintained the adulterers within her walls) went unpunished, but at last was taken and destroyed by fire and sword. In which sacking, olde and gray headed King Prim, with all the remnant of his halfe slaine sonnes, were together mur∣dered, his wife and daughters were taken prisoners, and exposed to the mer∣cy of their enemies: his whole kingdome was entirely spoiled, and his house quite defaced, and well nigh all the Trojane Nobility extinguished: and as touching the whore, Helene her selfe (whose disloyalty gave consent to the wicked enterprise of forsaking her husbands house, and following a stranger) she was not exempt from punishment: for as some writers affirm, Ant. Vols. up∣on Ovidi epist. of Hermione to Orestes. she was slaine at the sacke: but according to others, she was at that time spared, and entertained againe by Menelaus her husband; but after his death, she was banished in her olde age, and constrained for her last refuge (being both destitute of reliefe and succour, and forsaken of kinsfolkes and friends) to flie to Rhodes, where at length (contrary to her hope) she was put to a shamefull death, even hanging on a tree, which she long time be∣fore deserved. The injury and dishonour done to Lucrece, the wife of Collatinus, by Sex∣tus Tit. Livius. Tarquinius, son to Superbus the last King of Rome, was cause of much trouble and disquietnesse in the City and elsewhere: for first she (not able Rape, l. 2. c. 19. to endure the great injurie and indignity which was done unto her, pushed forward with anger and despite) slew her selfe in the presence of her hus∣band and kinsfolke, notwithstanding all their desires and willingnesse to cleare her from all blame: with whose death the Romanes were so stirred and provoked against Sextus the sonne, and Tarquinius the father, that they rebelled forthwith, and when he should enter the City, shut the gates a∣gainst him, neither would receive or acknowledge him ever after for their King. Whereupon ensued war abroad, and alteration of the state at home
for after that time Rome endured no more King to beare rule over them, but in their roome created two Consuls to be their governours; which kinde of government continued to Iulius Caesars time. Thus was Tarquinius the father shamefully deposed from his crowne, for the adultery, or rather, rape of his son; and Tarquinius the son slaine by the Sabians, for the rob∣beries and murders which by his fathers advice he committed against them; and he himselfe not long after in the war which by the Tuscane succours he renued against Rome to recover his lost estate, was discomfited with them, Plutarch. and slaine in the middest of the rout. In the Emperour Valentinianus time, the first of that name, many wo∣men of great account and parentage, were for committing adultery put to death, as testifieth Ammianus Marcellinus. When Europe, after the horrible wasting and great ruines which it suf∣fered by the furious invasion of Attila, began to take a little breath and Li. 28. finde some ease, behold a new trouble, more hurtfull and pernitious than the former, came upon it, by meanes of the filthy lechery and lust of the Emperour Valentinianus, the third of that name, who by reason of his evill bringing up, and government under his mother Placidia, being too much Procop. subject to his owne voluptuousnesse, and tyed to his owne desires, disho∣noured the wife of Petronius Maximus, a Senatour of Rome, by forcing her to his pleasure; an act indeed that cost him his life, and many more be∣side, and that drew after it the finall destruction of the Romane Empire, and the horrible besacking and desolation of the City of Rome: For the Emperour being thus taken and set on fire with the love of this woman, through the excellent beauty wherewith she was endued, endeavoured first to entice her to his lust by faire allurements; and seeing that the bulwarke of her vertuous chastity would not by this meanes be shaken, but that all his pursute was still in vaine, he tryed a new course, and attempted to get her by deceit and policie; which to bring about, one day setting himselfe to play with her husband Maximus, he won of him his Ring, which he no sooner had, but secretly he sent it to his wife in her husbands name, with this commandement, That by that token she should come presently to the Court, to doe her duty to the Empresse Eudoxia: she, seeing her husbands Ring, doubted nothing, but came forthwith, as she was commanded; where, whilest she was entertained by certaine suborned women, whom the Em∣perour had set on, he himselfe commeth in place, and discloseth unto her his whole love, which he said he could no longer represse, but must needes satisfie, if not by faire meanes, at least by force and compulsion, and so he constrained her to his lust. Her husband advertised hereof, intended to Rape, li. 2. cap. 19. revenge this injury upon the Emperour with his owne hand: but seeing he could not execute his purpose, whilest Actius, the Captaine Generall of Valentinianus army lived (a man greatly reverenced and feared for his mighty and famous exploits, atchieved in the wars against the Burgundians, Gothes, and Attila) he found meanes by suggesting a false accusation of treason against him (which made him to be hated and suspected of the Em∣perour) to worke his death. After that Actius was thus traiterously and un∣worthily slaine, the griefe of infinite numbers of people for him, in re∣gard of his great vertues and good service which he had done to the Com∣monwealth, gave Maximus it occasion to practise the Emperours de∣struction, and that by this meanes: He set on two of Actius most faithfull
followers, partly by laying before them the unworthy death of their ma∣ster, and partly by presents and rewards, to kill the Emperour; which they performed as hee was sitting on his seat of judgement in the sight of the whole multitude; among whom there was not one found that would op∣pose himselfe to Maximus in his defence, save one of his Eunuchs, who stepping betwixt to save his life, lost his owne: and the amazement of the whole City with this sudden accident was so great, that Maximus ha∣ving revenged himselfe thus upon the Emperour, without much adoe not only seised upon the Empire, but also upon the Empresse Eudoxia, and that against her will, to be his wife (for his owne dyed but a little before:) Now the Empresse, not able to endure so vile an indignity (being above measure passionate with griefe and desire of revenge) conspired his destru∣ction on this manner: She sent secretly into Africa to solicite and request most instantly Gensericus King of the Vandales, by prayers mingled with presents, to come to deliver her and the City of Rome from the cruell ty∣ranny of Maximus, and to revenge the thrice unjust murder of her hus∣band Valentinian; adding moreover, that he was bound to doe no lesse, in consideration of the league of friendship which by oath was confirmed betwixt them. Gensericus well pleased with these newes, laid hold upon the offered occasion, which long time hee had more wished than hoped for, and forthwith (being already tickled with hope of a great and inesti∣mable booty) rigged his ships and made ready his armie by Sea, lanching forth with three hundred thousand men, Vandales and Moores, and with this huge fleete made straight for Rome. Ma∣ximus meane while mistrusting no such matter, especially from those parts, was sore affrighted at the sudden brute of their comming; and not yet understanding the full effect of the matter, perceiving the whole Citty to bee in dismay, and that not only the common people, but also the Nobilitie had for feare forsaken their houses, and fled to the Mountaines or Forrests for safety: hee I say de∣stitute of succour, tooke himselfe also to his heeles, as his surest refuge; but all could not serve to rid him from the just vengeance of God prepared for him, for the murders which hee had beene cause of: for certaine Senatours of Rome, his private and secret foes, Mandat. 6. lib. 2. cap. 8. finding him alone in the way of his flight, and remembring their olde quarrels, fell upon him suddenly and felled him downe with stones, and af∣ter mangled him in pieces, and threw his body into Tiber. Three dayes after arrived Gensericus with all his forces, and entering Rome, found it naked of all defence, and left to his owne will and discretion: where (al∣beit he professed himselfe to be a Christian) yet he shewed more pride and cruelty, and lesse pitty than either Attila or Allaricus, two heathen Kings: For having given his souldiers the pillage of the City, they not only spoiled all private houses, but also the Temples and Monasteries in most cruell and riotous manner. All the best and beautifullest things of the City they took away, and carried a huge multitude of people prisoners to Affrica, amongst the which was Eudoxia the Empresse (with her two daughters Eudocia and Placidia) who was the cause of all this calamity; but her trechery saved not her self nor them from thraldome. And thus was Rome sacked and destroyed more than ever it was before; insomuch, that the Romane Empire could ne∣ver Treason, lib. 2. cap. 3. after recover it selfe, but decayed every day, and grew worse and worse.
These were the calamities which the adultery of Valeutinian brought upon himselfe and many others, to his owne destruction, and the utter ruine of the whole Empire. Childericke King of France, son to Merouce, for laying siege to the chasti∣ty Paulus Aemil. Nic. Gil. of many great Ladies of his Realme, the Princes and Barons conspired against him, and drove him to flie for his life. Eleonor the wife to King Lewis of France (he that first cut through the Paulus Aemil. sea surrowes towards Jerusalem, against the Turkes and Saracens) would needs couragiously follow her husband in that long and dangerous voyage; but how? Marrie, whilest he travailed night and day in perill of his life, she lay at Antioch bathing her selfe in all delights, and that more licenti∣ously than the reputation or duty of a married woman required: wherefore being had in suspition, and evill reported of for her lewd behaviour, it was thought meet that she should be divorced from the King under pretence of consanguinity, to the end she should not altogether be defamed. The faire daughters of Philip the faire King of France escaped not at so Fulgos. li. 6. c. 1. good a rate: for the King as soone as he smelt out the haunt of their uncha∣stity, caused them to be apprehended and imprisoned presently: howbeit one of them (namely, the Countesse of Poictiers) her innocency being knowne, was set at liberty, and the other two (to wit, the Queen of Na∣varre, and the wife of Iohn de le March) being found guilty by proofe, were adjudged to perpetuall imprisonment: and the Adulterers (two brethren of the countrey of Anjou) with whom these Ladies had often lyen, were first cruelly flaine, and after hanged. Charles, son of the aforesaid Philip the faire, had to wife the daughter of Froiss. vol. 1. cap. 22. the Earle of Artois, that also offended in the like case, and in recompence received this dishonour and ignominie to be divorced, and put in prison, and to see him married to another before her face. In the reigne of Charles the sixth there befell a notable and memorable Frois. Vol. 3. cap. 45. accident, which was this: one Iaques le Gris, of the Countrey of Alanson being enamoured with a Lady no lesse faire than honourable, the wife of the Lord of Carouge, came upon a day when he knew her husband to bee from home, to her house; and faining as if he had some secret message to unfold unto her on her husbands behalfe (for their familiarity was so great) Rape, lib. 2. cap. 19. entred with her all alone into a most secret chamber, where as soone as he had gotten her, he locked the doore, and throwing himselfe upon her, forced her unto his lust, and afterward saved himselfe by speedy flight. Her hus∣band at his returne understanding the injury and wrong which was done him by this vile miscreant, sought first to revenge himselfe by justice, and therefore put his cause to be heard by the Parliament of Paris; where be∣ing debated, it could not well be decided, because he wanted witnesses to convince the crime, except his owne wives words, which could not be ac∣cepted: so that the Court, to the end that there might some end be made of their quarrell, ordained a combate betwixt them; which was forthwith performed: for the two duellists entering the lists, fell presently to strokes, and that so eagerly, that in short space the quarrell was decided: the Lord of Carouge, husband of the wronged Lady, remained conquerour, after he had slaine his enemy that had wronged him so wickedly and disloyally: the vanquished was forthwith delivered to the hangman of Paris, who dragged him to mount Falcon, and there hanged him. Now albeit this forme and
custome of deciding controversies hath no ground nor warrant either from humane or divine Law (God having ordained only an Oath to end doubts, where proofes and witnesses faile) yet doubtlesse the Lord used this as an in∣strument to bring the treacherous and cruell Adulterer to the deserved pu∣nishment and shame, which by deniall he thought to escape. A certaine Seneschall of Normandy perceiving the vicious and suspiti∣ous behaviour of his wife with the Steward of his house, watched them so Fulgos li. 6. c. 1. narrowly, that he tooke them in bed together; he slew the Adulterer first, and after his wife for not all her pittifull cryings for mercy, with innume∣rable teares for this one fault, and holding up in her armes the children which she had borne unto him, no nor her house and parentage, being sister to Lewis the eleventh then King, could not withhold him from killing her with her companion: Howbeit, King Lewis never made shew of anger, or offence for her death. Msselna, the wife of Claudius the Emperour, was a woman of so notable incontinency, that the would contend with the common harlots in filthy Lanq. Chron. pleasure: at last she fell in love with a faire young Gentleman called Silius, and to obtaine more commodiously her desire, she caused his wife Sillana to be divorced; and notwithstanding she was wife to the Emperour then li∣ving, yet she openly married him; for which cause, after great complaint made to the Emperour by the Nobles, she was worthily put to death. Abusahed King of Fez was with six of his children murdered at once by his Secretary for his wives sake whom he had abused. And it is not long sithence Paul. Iovius, Tom. 2. lib. 38. Sleid. lib. 10. the two Cities Dalmendine and Delmedine were taken from the King of Fez, and brought uder the Portugals dominion, only for the ravishment of a woman, whom the Governour violently took from her husband to abuse, and was slain for his labour. CHAP. XXIX. Other examples like unto the former. MArie of Arragon, wife to Otho the third, was so unchast and lascious a woman, and withall barren (for they com∣monly Munst. Cosmog lib. 3. Casp. Hed. Mist. Ecclesiast. goe together) that she could never satisfie her unsatiable lust · she carried about with her continual∣ly a young lecher in womans clothes to attend upon her person, with whom she daily committed filthinesse: who being suspected, was in the presence of many, un∣tyred, and found to be a man; for which villany hee was burnt to death. Howbeit the Empresse, though pardoned for her fault, returned to her old vomit, and continued her wanton traffique with more than either desired or loved her company: at last she fell in love with the County of Mutina, a gallant man in personage, and too honest to be allu∣red with her stale, though he was often solicited by her: wherefore like a Tvgre she accused him to the Emperour (for extreame love converts to ex∣treame hatred if it be crossed of offering to ravish her against her will; for which cause the Emperour Otho caused him to lose his head: but his wife
being privy to the innocency of her husband, traversed his cause, and re∣quired justice, that though his life was lost, yet his reputation might bee preserved: and to prove his innocency, she miraculously handled Iron red with heat without any hurt; which when the Emperour saw, searching out the cause very narrowly he found out his wives villany, and for her paines caused her to be burned at a stake, but on the Earles wife he bestowed great rewards, even foure Castles in recompence of her husband, though no re∣ward could countervaile that so great a losse. Rodoaldus the eighth King of Lumbardy being taken in Adultery even in the fact, by the husband of the Adulteresse, was slaine without delay. Anno Chron. Philip. Melanct lib. 3. 659. In like sort, Iohn Malatesta slew his wife and the Adulterer together, when he tooke them amidst their embracements. So did one Lodowicke, steward of Normandy, kill his wife Carlotta and her lover Iohn Lavernus, as they were in bed together. Hedion in his Chronicle telleth of a Doctor of the Law that loved his Proctors wife, with whom as he acquainted himselfe over familiarly and un∣honestly, Casp. Hed. part. 4. both at her owne house, when her husband was absent, and at a bath in an olde womans house hard by, the Proctor watched their haunt so neere, that he caught them naked together in the bath, and so curried the lecherous Doctor with a curry-combe, that he scraped out his eyes, and cut off his privy members; so that within three dayes after he dyed: his wife he spared, because she was with childe, otherwise she should have tasted the same sauce. Another storie like unto this he telleth of a Popish Priest, that never left to lay siege to the chastity of an honest Matron, till she condescending to his desire, brought him into the snare, and caused her husband to geld him. I would to God that all that dishonour their profession by filthy acti∣ons might be served after the same manner, that there might be fewer ba∣stards and bauds and common strumpets than there are now adaies, and that since the feare of God is extinguished in their soules, the feare and certain∣ty of sudden judgements might restraine them. Wolfius Schrenk reported to Martin Luther, how in Vaitland foure mur∣ders were committed upon the occasion of one Adultery; for whilest the Adulteresse strumpet was banqueting with her lovers, her husband came in with a hunting speare in his hand, and struck him through that sat next un∣to her, and then her also; other two in the mean while leapt downe staires with feare and haste, broke their armes and shortly after dyed. A certaine Cardinall committed daily Adultery with a mans wife, that Theatr. histor. winked and as it were subscribed unto it: wherefore her brother taking this dishonour to his house in evill part, watched when the lecher had promised to come, but upon occasion came not, and in the darke slew his sister and her husband, supposing it to have been the Cardinall: but when he per∣ceived his errour, he fled the countrey for feare of the Law: Howbeit, be∣fore his departure he wrought such meanes, that whom he missed in his pur∣pose of the sword, him he murdered by poyson. This judgement is not on∣ly for Adulterers, but for Wittals also, that yeeld their consents to the dishonouring of their owne wives; a monstrous kinde of creatures, and de∣generate not only from the law of humanity, but of nature also. Martin Luther hath left recorded in his writings many examples of judge∣ments on this sin, but especially upon Clergy men, whose profession as it
requireth a more strict kinde of conversation, so their sins and judgements were more notorious, both in their owne natures, and in the eye and opini∣on of the world, some of which, as it is not amisse to insert in this place, so it is not unnecessary to beleeve them, proceeding from the mouth of so wor∣thy a witnesse. There was (saith he) a man of great authority and learning, that forsa∣king his secular life, betooke himselfe into the Colledge of Priests (whe∣ther Luther in E∣pist. consolat ad Lucum Cra∣nach. of devotion, or of hope of liberty to sin, let them judge that reade this history) this new adopted Priest fell in love with a Masons wife, whom hee so wooed, that he got his pleasure of her; and what fitter time but when Masse was singing did he daily chuse for the performing of his villany? In this haunt he persisted a long season, till the Mason finding him in bed with his wife, did not summon him to law nor penance, but tooke a shorter course and cut his throat. Another Nobleman in Thuringa being taken in adultery, was murther∣ed after this strange fashion by the Adulteresses husband; he bound him Luther. hand and foot and cast him into prison; and to quench his lust, seeing that Ceres, that is, gluttony, is the fewell of Venus, that is, lust, denied him all manner of sustenance, and the more to augment his paine, set hot dishes of meate before him, that the smell and sight thereof might more provoke his appetite, and the want thereof torment him more. In this torture the wretched lecher abode so long, untill he gnew off the flesh from his owne shoulders, and the eleventh day of his imprisonment ended his life. His punishment was most horrible, and too too severe in respect of the infli∣cter, yet most just in respect of God, whose custome is to proportion his judgements to the quality of the sin that is committed. Luther affirmeth this to have hapned in his childhood, and that both the parties were known unto him by name, which for honor and charity sake he would not discose. There was another nobleman that so delighted in lust, and was so inor∣dinate in his desires, that he shamed not to say, that if his life of pleasure, Luther. Mandat. 1. Atheisme, Lib. 1. cap. 25. and passing from harlot to harlot might endure ever, he would not care for heaven or life eternall. What cursed madnesse and impiety is this? a man to be so forgetfull of his Maker and himselfe, that he preferred his whores before his Saviour, and his filthy pleasure before the grace of God? Doth it not deserve to be punished with Scorpions? Yes verily, as it was indeed; for the polluted wretch dyed amongst his strumpets, being strucken with a sudden stroke of Gods vengeance. In the yeare 1505. a certaine Bishop well seen in all learning and elo∣quence, and especially skilfull in languages, was notwithstanding so filthy in his conversation, that he shamed not to defile his body and name with many adulteries: but at length he was slaine by a Cobler, whose wife hee had often corrupted, being taken in bed with her, and so received a due re∣ward of his filthinesse. In the yeare of our Lord 778. Kenulphus King of the West Saxons in Britaine, as he usually haunted the company of a certaine harlot which hee Lanquet. Chr. kept at Merton, was slaine by one Clito the kinsmun of Sigebert that was late King. Sergus a King of Scotland was so foule a drunkard and glutton, and so outragiously given to harlots, that he neglected his owne wife, and drove The same. her to such penury, that she was faine to serve other noble-women for her
living; wherefore she murthered him in his bed, and after slew her selfe also. Arichbertus eldest son unto Lotharius King of France, dyed even as hee was embracing his whores. In summe to conclude this matter, our English Chronicles report, that in the yeare of our Lord 349, there was so great a plenty of corne and fruit in Britaine, that the like had not been seene many yeares before: but this was the cause of much idlenesse, gluttony, lechery, and other vices in the land: (For usually case and prosperity are the nurses of all enormity:) but the Lord requited this their riotous and incontinent life with so great a pe∣stilence and mortality, that the living scantly sufficed to bury the dead. Petrarch maketh mention of a certaine Cardinall, that though hee was Petrarch. seventy yeares old, yet every night, would have a fresh whore, and to this end had certaine bauds purveyours and providers of his trash: but he dyed a miserable and wretched death. And Martin Luther reported, that a bishop being a common frequenter of the stewes in Hidelberg, came to this mist∣rable end; the boards of the chamber whither he used to enter went loosen∣ed, that as soone as he came in he slipped through and broke his neck. But above all, that which we finde written in the second booke of Fince∣lius Iob Fincel. Lib. 2. is most strange and wonderfull, of a priest in Albenthewer, a towne neare adjoyning to Gaunt in Flanders, that perswaded a young maid to re∣ject and disobey all her parents godly admonitions, and to become his con∣cubine: when she objected how vile a sin it was, and how contrary to the Law of God, he told her, that by the authority of the Pope, he could dis∣pence with any wickednesse, were it never so great, and further alledged the discommodities of marriage, and the pleasure that would arise from that kinde of life: in fine, he conquered her vertuous purpose, and made her yeeld unto his filthy lust. But when they had thus pampered their desires together a while, in came the devill, and would needs conclude the play: for as they were banquetting with many such like companions, he tooke her away from the Priests side, and notwithstanding her pittifull crying and all their exorcising and conjuring, carried her quite away, telling the Priest that very shortly he would, fetch him also, for he was his owne darling. I may not here passe over in silence an Irish history, famous both for Holinshed. notorious villany, and excellent in justice; wherein we may see by the adultery of one filthy Fryer occasion given not only of much bloodshed, but of the ruine of a famous City, called Rosse, scituate in Leinster. This City being first an unwalled towne, was (to prevent the sudden invasion of the Irish) compassed about with a large and strong wall, by the advice and charges of one Rose, a chaste widdow and bountifull Gentlewoman: This Rose had issue three sons, who being bolstered out by their mothers wealth and their owne traffique, made divers prosperous voyages into far coun∣tries: but as one of the three chapmen was employed in his traffique abroad, so the pretty poppet his wise began to play the harlot at home, and that with none but a fat religious cloysterer of the towne: they wallowed so long in this stinking puddle, that suspition began to creepe into mens braines, and from suspition the matter was so apparent, that it grew to plaine proofe: her unfortunate husband was no sooner come home, but notice hereof was blowne in his eares, so that with griefe and anger he grew (for such is the nature of jealouse) almost starke mad; and not only he, but
the whole towne took themselves as extreamely wronged by this shamefull fact: whereupon divers of them conspiring together, agreed (as being a deed of charity) to grub away such wilde shrubs from the towne, and so flocking together in the dead of the night to the Abbey, wherein this Fryet was cloystered (the monument of which Abbey is yet to be seen at Rosse on the South side) they undersparred the gates, and breaking open the doores, stabbed the Adulterer, with the rest of the Covent, through with their weapons; where they left them goaring in their blood, and gasping up their ghosts in their couches: a cruell act, I must needs confesse, in the ex∣ecutioners; who being carried away with private revenge, had no measure in their cruelty; but yet a just vengeance upon the executed, that harboured and maintained so wretched a person: but secret and deep are the judge∣ments of God, who punisheth one sin with another, and maketh one wicked man a rod to plague another, and after casteth the rod also into the fire: for so did he here; stirring up the rest of the Clergy to be a meanes to punish this cruelty: for when as these three brethren not long after sped them∣selves into some far countrey to continue their trade, the religious men be∣ing informed of their returne homeward, every night did not misse to set a lantorne on the top of a high rock (which was used to be set upon the Hulk tower, a notable marke for Pilots, in directing them which way to sterne their Ships, and to eschew the danger of the rockes, which are there very plentifull) and so by this practise these three passengers bearing saile with a good winde, made right upon the lantorne, supposing it had been the Hulk tower, and so ere they were aware their Ship was dasht upon the rockes, and all the passengers over-whirled in the Sea. And thus was Adultery pu∣nished with cruelty, and cruelty with treason: but see the end; upon this there grew so great quarrels and discontentments between the townesmen and the religious, the one cursing the other, that the estate of that flourish∣ing towne was turned upside downe, and from abundance of prosperity, quite exchanged to extreame penury. CHAP. XXX. More examples of the same argument. I Cannot passe over in silence a history truly tragicall, touching the death of many men, who by reason of an Adultery slew one another in most strange and cruell manner, and indeed so strangely, that (as far as I ever read or knew) there was never the like particular deed heard of, wherein God more evidently poured forth the streame of his displeasure, turning the courage and valour of each part into rage and fury, to the end that by their owne meanes he might be revenged on them. In the Dukedome of Spaleto, which is the way from Ancona to Rome (of the antient Latines called Umbria) there were three brethren, who kept in their possession three Cities of the said Dukedome, namely Faligno, Nocera, and Trevio: the eldest of whom, whose sirname was Nicholas, as he passed from one town
to the other, being at Nocera, lodged divers times in the Castle in the keep∣ers and Captaines house, whom he had there substituted to defend the place with an ordinary band of souldiers. Now as he made his abode there a few dayes, he grew to cast a more lascivious eye upon the Captaines wife than was meet, and from looking fell to lusting after her; in such sort, that in short space he got very privy and familiar acquaintance with her, and often∣times secret and suspitious meetings: which being perceived by her hus∣band, he after watched so narrowly their haunts, that once he spyed them together without being seen of them: neverthelesse, digesting and swallow∣ing up this sorrow with silence, and without giving forth any tokens there∣of, he consulted in himselfe to revenge the injury by the death and rasing out, not only of the Adulterer, but also of the whole race and fraternity. Now when he had hampered this enterprise, and layed forth the plot there∣of in his head, he dispatched presently a messenger to the three Gentlemen brethren, to invite them against the next day to the hunting of the fairest wilde Bore that was this many a day seen in the forrests of Nocera. Seigni∣or Nicholas failed not to come at the time appointed, accompanied with Duke Camerino, who desired to be one of this jolly crue: they supped in the towne, but lodged in the castle, where being at rest, about midnight the Captaine rushed into his chamber with the greatest part of his guard, and there handled Seignior Nicholas on this manner; he first cut off his privy members, as being principall in the offence, then thrust him through on both sides with a speare, next pluckt out his heart, and lastly, tore the rest of his body into a thousand pieces. As for the Duke Camerino, he shut him up in a deep and dark dungeon with all the strangers of his retinue. At day breake another of the brethren called Caesar, that lay that night in the town, was sent for to come and speake with his brother, and as soone as he was en∣tered into the Court of the Castle, seven or eight of the guard bound him and his followers, and carried him into the chamber where his dead brother lay chopt as small as flesh to the pot, and there murdered him also. Conrade the third brother, being by reason of a Marriage absent from this feast, when he received the report of these pittifull news, gathered together a band of men from all quarters, and with them (assisted with the friends and allies of the Duke Camerino then prisoner) layed siege to the Castle, they battered the walls, made a breach, and gave the assault of enterance, and were man∣fully resisted five houres long, till the defendants being but thirty or forty men at the most, not able to stand any longer in defence, were forced to re∣tire and lay open way of enterance to the enemy: then began a most horri∣ble butchery of men; for Conrade, having woon the fort, first hewed them in pieces that stood in resistance, then finding the Captaines father, slew him, and cast him piece-meale to the dogs; some he tyed to the tailes of wilde horses, to be drawne over hedges, ditches, thornes, and bryers; others he pinched with hot Irons, and so burnt them to death: which when the Captaine from the top of the dungeon where he had saved himselfe, beheld, he tooke his wife whom he held there prisoner, and binding her hand and foot, threw her headlong from the top of the tower upon the pavement: which the souldiers perceiving, put fire to the tower, so that he was con∣strained through heat and smoke (himselfe, his brother, and his little child) to sally downe the same way which he had taught his wife a little before to goe, and so all three broke their necks: their carkasses were cast out to bee
meat for Wolves, as unworthy of humane sepulture. And this was the ca∣tastrophe of that wofull tragedy, where by the occasion of one Adultery (so heavy is the curse of God upon that sin) a number of men came to their ends. In the histories of our time we finde recorded a fearefull story of many murders springing from one Adultery, together with the hand of God up∣on the Adulterers themselves; the story is this: an Advocate of Grasse in Provence, called Tolonio, that having the managing of the affaires of the Seignior of Chabrye, and by that meanes familiar accesse to him and his Lady, by this familiarity allured the Lady, who was then forty yeares old, and had foure children, to his filthy lust: and being plunged into this gulfe, Satan did thrust them headlong into others: for first they practised and performed the massacre of her husband, walking in his Warren, by two murderers suborned to that end: and secondly, when her eldest sonne seemed to dislike her wicked behaviour with the Advocate, they also wrought his death, by loosing certaine boords in a gallery, where he used ordinarily to walk, so that as soone as he set his foot on these disjoynted boords, he fell downe headlong, and had his braines beaten out. And third∣ly, when her younger son shewed his discontent to their brutish conversa∣tion, yet nothing misdoubted them to be guilty of the former parricides, these wicked wretches resolved to prevent him also, lest he should interrupt their resolved filthinesse. Wherefore they hired a murderer to make him away; who watching his opportunity, thrust him headlong downe a steep rock, so that he was at the bottome sooner slaine then he felt the murderer. After all this, these two miserable wretches, finding that they were obser∣ved by all men, and noted, did practise to marry together: but there was one betwixt them, namely the Advocates wife; wherefore they conspired her death to make up the messe, and indeed the villanous lecher, her hus∣band, lying one night by her, strangled her with a napkin; and then cryed out with a loud voice for help, pretending that a catarre had suffocated her in her sleep. But for all his cunning, the father of his wife mistrusted her death to be violent, and caused him to be strictly examined upon the same; who presently by silence bewrayed his guilty conscience, and after without torture confessed both his fact, and all the murders before mentioned: for which he was condemned to be quartered alive in the market place of Grasse, where he dwelled, and where his murders were committed. As for that cruell Lady his associate, because she could not be found, being fled the countrey, she was condemned by contempt, and executed in picture. But though she escaped the hand of justice among men, yet the hand of God pursued her: for flying to Genoa, she was first robbed by a servant of all she had, and after being constrained to serve an olde widdow, and to teach her daughters, being tormented with the sting of her owne conscience, with∣in short space dyed in great misery. In the time of Pope Stephen the eighth, there was a varlet Priest that was Chaplaine in the house of a Marquesse of Italie, who although he was very Luth. prand. lib. 5. cap. 15. mishapen and evill favoured, yet was entertained of the Lady Marquesse his mistresse to her bed, and made her paramour: upon a night as he was going to lie with her according to his wont (his Lord being from home) behold a dog barked so fiercely, leaping and biting at him, that all the ser∣vants of the house being awaked ran thitherward, and finding this gallant in
the snare, took him, and for all his bauld crowne stripped him naked, and cut off cleane his privy and adulterous parts: and thus was this lecherous Priest served. Pope Iohn the thirteenth, a man as of wicked conversation in all things▪ Luth. prand. lib. 6. cap. 6. so especially abominable in whoredomes and adultery, which good condi∣tions whilest he pursued, he was one day taken tardy in the plain fields, whi∣ther he went to disport himselfe; for he was found in the act of adultery, and slaine forthwith: and these are the godly fruits of those single life-lo∣vers, to whom the use of marriage is counted unlawfull, and therefore for∣bidden, but Adultery not once prohibited nor disallowed. CHAP. XXXI. Of such as are divorced without cause: BY these and such like judgements, it pleaseth God to make knowne unto men how much he desireth to have the estate of marriage maintained and preserved in the integrity, and how much every one ought to take heed how to deprave or corrupt the same: now then to proceed. If it be a sin to take away, ravish, or intice to folly another mans wife, shall we not thinke it an equall sin for a husband to forsake his wife, and cast her off to take another, she having not disanulled and cancelled the bond of marriage by adultery? Yes verily; for as concerning the permis∣sion of divorce to the Israelites under the law, our Saviour himselfe ex∣poundeth the meaning and intent thereof in the Gospell, to be nothing else Matt. 19. but a toleration for the hardnesse and stubbornnesse of their hearts, and not a constitution from the beginning; upon which occasion speaking of mar∣riage, and declaring the right and strength of the same; he saith, That who∣soever putteth away his wife, except it be for adultery, and marrieth ano∣ther, committeth adultery; and he that marrieth her that is put away, committeth adultery also. All which notwithstanding the great men of this world let loose themselves to this sin too licentiously, as it appeareth by many examples: as of Antiochus Theos, son of Antiochus Soter, King of Syria, who to the end to goe with Ptolomie Philadelphus, King of Aegypt, and marrie his daughter Bernice, cast off his wife Laodicea, that had borne him children, and tooke Bernice to be his wife: but ere long he rejected her also, and betrayed her to her enemies (namely his son Callinicus) who slew her with one of her sons, and all that belonged unto her: and then he tooke a∣gaine his old wife, for which cause Ptolemie Euergetes (son to Philadelphus) renewed war upon him. Herod the Tetrarch was so bewitched with the love of Herodias his bro∣ther Joseph. of the Jewish anti∣quity, lib. 18. cap. 7. 9. Philips wife, that, to the end he might enjoy her, he disclaimed his law∣full wife, and sent her home to her father King Aretas; who being touch∣ed and netled with this indignity and disgrace, sought to revenge himselfe by armes: and indeed made so hot war upon him, and charged his army so furiously, that it was discomfited by him: after which shamefull losse, he was by the Emperour Caligula's commandement banished to Lions, there to end the residue of his daies.
Among the Romanes Marcus Antonius was noted for the most dissolute and impudent in this case of divorce, for albeit that in the beginning of his Plutarch. triumvirship he forsooke his first wife to marry Octavius his sister, yet hee proceeded further, not content herewith, but must needs forsake her also, to be with Cleopatra the Queen of Aegypt, from whence sprung out many great evils, which at length fell upon his owne head, to his finall ruine and de∣struction: for when he saw himselfe in such straits, that no meanes could be found to resist Octavius, be sheathed with his owne hands his sword into his bowels, when all his servants being requested, refused to performe the same; and being thus wounded, he fell upon a little bed, intreating those that were present, to make an end of his daies; but they all fled and left him in the chamber crying and tormenting himselfe, untill such time that he was con∣veighed to the monument wherein Cleopatra was inclosed, that he might die there. Cleopatra seeing this pittifull spectacle, all amased let downe chaines and cords from the high window, and with the help of her two maids drew him up into the monument, uniting their forces, and doing what they could to get his poore carkasse, though by a shamefull and undecent manner, for the gate was locked and might not be opened; and it was a lamentable sight to see his poore body all besmeared with blood, and breathing now his last blast (for he dyed as soone as he came to the top) to be drawne up on that cruell fashion. As for Cleopatra, who by her flattering allurements ravish∣ed the heart of this miserable man, and was cause of his second divorce, shee played her true part also in this wofull tragedy, and as she partaked of the sin, so she did of the punishment: For after she saw her selfe past hope of help, and her sweet-heart dead, she beat her owne breasts, and tormented her selfe so much with sorrow, that her bosome was bruised, and halfe murder∣ed with her blowes, and her body in many places exulcerate with inflamati∣ons: she pulled off her haire, rent her face with her nailes, and altogether infrensied with griefe, melancholie, and distresse, was found fresh dead, with her two maids lying at her ft: and this was the miserable end of those two, who for enjoying of a few foolish and cursed pleasures together, recei∣ved in exchange infinite torments and vexations; and at length, unhappy deaths together in one and the same place: verifying the olde proverbe, For one pleasure a thousand dolours. Charles the eighth, King of France, after he had been long time married to the daughter of the King of the Romanes, sister to the Archduke of Au∣stria, Philip. de com. was so evill advised as to returne her home againe upon no other occa∣sion but to marrie the Dutchesse of Britaine, the sole heire to her fathers Dukedome: wherein he doubly injured his father in law the Romane King; for he did not only reject his daughter, but also deprived him of his wife the Dutchesse of Britaine, whom by his substitute (according to the man∣ner of great Princes) he had first espoused. Bembus in his Venetian history Bembus. handling this story, somewhat mollifieth the fault, when he saith that the Romane Kings daughter was never touched by King Charles in the way of marriage all the while she was there, by reason of her unripe and over∣young yeares. After a while, after this new married King had given a hot alarme to all Italy, and conquered the Realme of Naples; as the Venetians were deliberating to take the matter in hand of themselves, and to resist him, Maximilian the Romane King solicited them in the same, and thrust them forward, as well that he might confederate himselfe with the Duke of
Milan, as that he might revenge the injury touching his repelled daughter: so that by this meanes the French K. was fore troubled at his returne, having to withstand him all the Venetian forces, with the most part of the Poten∣tates of Italie: notwithstanding he broke through them all, after he had put the Venetians to the worst: but being returned after this victorious and Phil. de Com. triumphant voyage, it happened that one day as he led the Queen to the Castle of Amboise, to see some some sport at Tenise, he stroke his fore∣head against the upper door-poste of the gallery, as he went in, that he fell presently to the ground speechlesse, and died incontinently in the place, Sursvil. from whence (though the filthiest and sluttishest place about the Castle) they removed not his body, but laid it on a bed of straw to the view of the world from two of the clocke in the afternoon till eleven at midnight, and this good successe followed at last his so much desired divorce. CHAP. XXVII. Of those that either cause or authorise unlawfull Divorcements. ALthough the Commandment of our Saviour Christ be very plain and manifest, That man should not sepa∣rate Matth. 19. those whom God hath joyned together, yet there are some so void of understanding and judgement, that they make no conscience to dissolve those that by the bond of marriage are united: Of which number was Sampsons father in Law, who took his daughter, first Judges 15. given in marriage to Sampson, and gave her to another; without any other reason, save that he suspected that Sampson loved her not. But what got he by it? Marry this; the Philistims provoked against him, consumed him and his daughter with fire, because that by the meanes of his injury Samp∣son had burned their corne, their vineyards and their olive-trees. After the same sort dealt Saul with David, when he gave him his daugh∣ter 1 Sam. 25. Michol to Wife, and afterward in despight and hatred of him took her away again, and bestowed her upon another: wherein, as in many other things, he shewed himselfe a wicked and prophane man, and was worthily punished therefore, as hath been before declared. Hugh Spencer, one of King Edward of Englands chiefest favourites, in∣somuch Frois. Vol. 1. that his ear and heart was at his pleasure, was he that first persua∣ded the King to forsake and repudiate the Queen his Wife (daughter to Philip the Faire, King of France) upon no other occasion, but onely to satis∣fie his owne appetite, and the better to follow his delights: And thus by this meanes she was chased out of England, and driven to retire to King Charles her brother; where hoping to finde rest and refuge, she was de∣ceived: for what by the crafts and practises of the English, and what by the Popes authority (who thrust himselfe into this action, as his custom is) she was constrained to dislodge her selfe, and to change her countrey very speedily: wherefore from thence she went to crave succour of the Coun∣ty of Henault, who furnished her with certain forces, and sent her towards
England: where being arrived, and finding the people generally at her command, and ready to do her service, she set upon her enemy Hugh Spen∣cer, took him prisoner, and put him to a shamefull death, as he well de∣served: for he was also the causer of the deaths of many of the Nobles of the Realme: therefore he was drawne through the streets of Hereford up∣on an hurdle, and after his privie members, his heart, and head, were cut off, his four quarters were exalted in four severall places, to the view of the world. Now if these be found guilty, that either directly make, or indirectly Guicciar. l. 4. procure divorcements, shall we accuse them that allow and authorize the same, without lawfull and just occasion? No verily, no though they be Popes that take it upon them: as we reade Pope Alexander the sixth did, who for the advancement of his haughty desires, to gratifie and flatter, Lewis the twelfth, King of France, sent him by his son a dispensation to put away his Wife, daughter to King Lewis the eleventh, because she was barren and counterfeit, and to recontract Anne of Bretaigne, the widow of Charles the eighth lately deceased. But herein, though barrennesse of the former was pretended, yet the Duchie of the later was aimed at, which before this time he could never attain unto. But of what force and vertue this dispensation by right was, or at least ought to be, it is easie to perceive, seeing it is not onely contrary to the words of the Gospel, Matth. 19. but also to their owne decrees, secund. part. quest. 7. Hi qui matrimonium: where in is im∣ported, that marriage ought not to be infringed for any default or imper∣fection, no not of nature. But Popes may maim and clip both the Word of God and all other writings, and do what soever themselves liketh, be it good or bad. CHAP. XXXIII. Of Incestuous persons. ALthough Incest be a wicked and abominable sin, and forbidden both by the Law of God and man, in so much that the very heathen held it in detestation, yet are there some so inordinately vicious and dissolute, that they blush not once to pollute themselves with this filthinesse, Reuben the Patriarch was one of this Gen. 35. vile crue, that shamed not to defile himselfe with Bil∣ha his fathers concubine; but he was cursed for his la∣bour: for whereas by right of eldership and birth he ought to have had a certain prerogative and authority over his brethren, his excellency shed it selfe Gen. 49. like water, and he was surpassed by his brethren both in encrease of progeny and renowne. Ammon one of King Davids sonnes was so strongly 2 Sam. 13. enchanted with the love of his sister Thamar, that to the end to fulfill his lust, he traiterously forced her to his will: but Absalom her naturall brother (hunting for opportunity of revenge for this indignity towards his sister) Rape. Lib. 2. cap. 21. invited him two yeares after to a banquet with his other brethren, and after the same, caused his men to murder him for a farewell.
The same Absalom that slew Amnon for Incest with his sister, commit∣ted himselfe incest with his fathers concubines, moved thereto by the wic∣ked 2 Sam. 16. counsell of Achitophel, that advised him to that infamous deed of defi∣ling his fathers bed: but it was the forerunner of his overthrow, as we have already heard. Divers of the Roman Empetours were so villanous and wretched, as to Suct. Lamprid. make no bones of this sin with their owne sisters, as Caligula, Antonius, and Commodus: and some with their mothers, as Nero, so much was he given over and transported to all licentiousnesse. Plutarch telleth us of one Cyanippus, that being overcome with wine, de∣floured Oros. l. 7. c. 4. his owne daughter Cyane, but he was slain of her for his labour. Neither do I thinke it so unnaturall a part for her to kill her father, as in him to commit incest with his owne daughter: for the Oracle lessened, or rather approved her fault, when it abhorred and chastened his crime: for when Syracusa was grievously infected with the pestilence, it was pro∣nounced by the Oracle, That the plague should continue till the wicked person was sacrificed: which dark speech when no man knew, Cyane haled her father by the head to the Altar; telling them, that he was that wicked per∣son pointed at by the Oracle, and there sacrificed him with her owne hands, killing her selfe also with the same knife, that her innocency might be wit∣nessed even by her bloud. Thus it pleased God even among the idola∣trous heathen, to execute justice and judgement upon the earth, though by the meanes of the devill himselfe, who is the authour of all such villany. Valeria Thusculana was in love with her owne father, and under colour of another maid got to lie with him: which as soon as he understood, he slew Plutarch. himselfe in detestation of his owne ignorant abhomination and wicked∣nesse: nay, so monstrous and horrible is this sin, even in the sight of man, that Nausimenes (a woman of Athens) taking her owne son and daughter toge∣ther, Valerius. was so amazed and grieved therewith, that she never spake word after that time, but remained dumbe all the rest of her life time: as for the in∣cestors themselves, they lived not, but became murderers of their owne lives. Papyrius a Roman, got with childe his owne sister Canusia: which when their father understood, he sent each of them a sword, wherewith they slew themselves. But above all, the vengeance of God is most apparent in the punishment Zodar. lib. 3. of Heraclius the Emperour, who to his notorious wickednesses, heresies, persecutions, and paganisme, he added this villany, to defile carnally his Paul. Diac. l. 18 owne sister; so to his notorious punishments (the Sarasins sword, dropsie, and the ruine of the Empire) the Lord added this infamous and cruell judgement, that he could not give passage to his urine, but it would flie into his face, had not a pentise been applied to his belly to beat it downeward. And this last plague was proper to his last sin; wherein the very member which he had abused, sought revenge of him that had abused it; for that he had confounded nature, and most wickedly sinned against his owne flesh. Agathias writing of the manners of the Persians, reporteth, That cer∣tain Agathias. Philosophers comming out of Aegypt into Greece, where they had seen all manner of unnaturall mixtures, found the carkase of a man with∣out sepulchre; which when in charity they buried, the next day it was found unburied again: and as they went about to bury it the second time, a spirit appeared unto them, and forbad them to do it; saying, that it was unwor∣thy
that honour, seeing that when it lived he had committed incest with his owne mother. A notable story, shewing that the very earth abhorreth this monstrous confusion of nature: the truth whereof let it lie upon the Au∣thors credit. Most abominable was the incest of Artaxerxes King of Persia; for first he tooke to himselfe Aspasia his brother Cyrus concubine, having overcome Herodot. lib. 9. him in war; and afterward gave the same Aspasia to his owne son Darius to wife; from whom, after carnall knowledge, he tooke her againe, commit∣ting incest upon incest, and that most unnaturally: but mark how the Lord punished all this; first, Darius his eldest son was put to death for treason; then Othus (succeeding in the inheritance) slew Arsame another of his bre∣thren; and albeit Artaxerxes himselfe dyed without note of judgement, yet his seed after him was punished for his offence; for so miserable a calamity pursued them all, that in the second generation not one was left to sit upon his throne. Now to teach us how execrable and monstrous this kinde of sin is, and how much to be abhorred of all men, the example of a bruit beast may stand in stead of a lesson for us; it being so worthy of remembrance, that I thought meet to make rehearsall of it in this place. It is reported by Varro Varro. a learned and grave Writer (whom S. Augustine often commendeth in his Lib. 2. de Re∣rustica, cop. 7. booke de Civitate Dei) of a certaine horse which by no meanes could bee brought to cover a mare that was his damme, untill by hiding her head they beguiled his sences: but after when he perceived their guile, and knew his damme being uncovered, he ran so furiously upon the keeper with his teeth, that incontinently he tore him in pieces. Truly a miraculous thing, and no doubt divinely caused, to reprove the enormous and too unruly lusts of men. CHAP. XXXIV. Of effeminate persons, Sodomites, and other such like Monsters. SArdanapalus King of Assyria was so lascivious and effemi∣nate, that to the end to set forth his beauty, he shamed not to Frog. lib. 1. paint his face with ointments, and to attire his body with the habits and Ornaments of women, and on that manner Cic. lib. 5. Tusc. quest. to sit and lie continually among whores, and with them to commit all manner of filthinesse and villany: wherefore be∣ing thought unworthy to beare rule over men, first Arbaces his lieutenant rebelled; then the Medes and Baby lonians revolted, and joyntly made war upon him, till they vanquished and put him to flight: and in his flight hee returned to a tower in his palace, which (moved with griefe and despaire) he set on fire, and was consumed therein. Such like was the impudent lasciviousnesse of two unworthy Emperors, Commodus and Heliogabolus, who laying aside all Imperiall gravity, shewed Lamprid. themselves oftentimes publikely in womans attire; an act as in nature monstrous, so very dishonest and ignominious: but like as these cursed monsters ran too much out of frame in their unbridled lusts and affections,
so there wanted not many that hastened and emboldened themselves to con∣spire their destruction, as unworthy in their judgements to enjoy the bene∣fit of this light: wherefore to one of them poison was ministred, and when that would take no effect, strangling came in the roome thereof, and brought him to his end▪ the other was slaine in a jakes where he hid himselfe, and his body (drawne like carrion through the streetes) found no better sepul∣chre then the dunghill. Touching those abominable wretches of Sodome and Gomorrah which Gen. 19. gave themselves over with all violence, and without all shame and measure, to their infamous lusts, polluting their bodies with unnaturall sins, God sent upon them an unnaturall raine, not of water, but of fire and brimstone, to burne and consume them, that were so hot and fervent in their cursed vices: so that they were quite rooted and raked out of the earth, and their Cities and habitations destroyed, yea and the very soile that bore them, made desolate and fruitlesse; and all this by fire, whose smoke ascended like the smoke of a furnace: yea and in signe of a further curse for to be a wit∣nesse and a marke of this terrible judgement, the earth and face of that coun∣trey continueth still parched and withered: and (as Iosephus saith) whereas before it was a most plentifull and fertile soile, and as it were an earthly pa∣radise, bedecked with five gallant Cities; now it lyeth desart, unhabitable, and barren, yeelding fruit in shew, but such as being touched, turneth to cinders. In a word, the wrath of God is so notoriously and fearefully ma∣nifested therein, that when the holy Ghost would strike a terrour into the most wicked, he threateneth them with this like punishment, saying: The Lord will raine upon each wicked one, Psal. 11. 6. Fire, snares, and brimstone, for their portion. Howbeit this maketh not but that still there are too many such monsters in the World, so mightily is it corrupted and depraved: neither is it any marvell, seeing that divers Bishops of Rome, that take upon them to be Christs Vicars, and Peters successours, are infected with this filthy conta∣gion: As namely, Pope Iulius the third, whose custome was to promote none to Ecclesiasticall livings save only his buggerers: Amongst whom was one Innocent, whom this holy father (contrary to the Suffrages of the whole Colledge) would needs make Cardinall: nay, the unsatiable and monstrous lust of this beastly and stinking goat was so extraordinary, that he could not abstaine from many Cardinals themselves. Iohn de la Casae, a Florentine by birth, and by office Archbishop of Benevento, and Deane of his Apostati∣call chamber, was his Legat and Intelligencer in all the Venetian Seignio∣ries▪ a man equall, or rather worse then himselfe; and such a one, as whose memory ought to be accursed of all posterity, for that detestable booke which he composed in commendation and praise of Sodomie; and was so shamelesse, nay rather possessed with some devillish and uncleane spirit, as to divulgate it to the view of the world. Here you may see (poore soules) the holinesse of those whom you so much reverence, and upon whom you build your beliefe and religion: you see their brave and excellent vertues, and of what esteeme their lawes and ordinances ought to be amongst you. Now touching the end that this holy father made, it is declared in the for∣mer booke among the ranke of Atheists, where we placed him. And albeit
that he and such like villaines please their owne humours with their abo∣minations, and approve and cleare themselves therein, yet are they reward∣ed by death, not only by the law of God, but also by the law of Iulia. Levit. 20. When Charlemaigne reigned in France, there happened a most notable judgement of God upon the Monkes of S. Martin in Tours, for their disor∣dinate lusts: they were men whose food was too much and dainty, whose case was too easie, and whose pleasures were too immoderate, being altoge∣ther addicted to pastimes and merriments: in their apparell they went clad in silke like great Lords; and (as Nichol. Gill. in his first Volume of Nic. Gil. Vol. 1. French Chronicles saith) their shooes were gilt over with Gold, so great was the super fluity of their riches and pride: in summe, their whole life was luxurious and infamous: for which cause there came forth a destroy∣ing Angel from the Lord (by the report of Budes the Abbot of Clugnie) and slew them all in one night, as the first born of Aegypt were slaine, save one only person that was preserved, as Lot in Sodome was preserved. This strange accident moved Charlemaigne to appoint a brotherhood of Canons to be in their roome, though little better, and as little profitable to their Commonwealth as the former. It is not for nothing that the law of God forbiddeth to lie with a beast, and denounceth death against them that commit this foule sin: for there have been such monsters in the world at some times, as we reade in Calius Levit. 18. and Volaterranus, of one Crathes a shepheard, that accompanied carnally Exod. 22. Levit. 20. Deut. 27. with a shee Goat; but the Buck finding him sleeping, offended and provo∣ked with this strange action, ran at him so furiously with his hornes, that he left him dead upon the ground. God that opened an Asses mouth to re∣prove the madnesse of the false Prophet Balaam, and sent Lions to kill the strange inhabitants of Samaria, employed also this Buck about his service in executing just vengeance upon a wicked varlet. CHAP. XXXV. Of the wonderfull evill that ariseth from this greedinesse of lust. IT is to good reason, that Scripture forbids us to abstain 1 John 2. from the lust of the flesh and the eyes, which is of the world and the corruption of mans own nature; forsomuch as by it we are drawn to evill, it being as it were a corrupt root which sendeth forth most bitter, sowre, and rotten fruit and this hapneth not only when the goods & riches of Iames 1. the world are in quest, but also when a man hunteth after dishonest and un∣chaste delights: this concupiscence is it that bringeth forth whoredomes, adulteries, and many other such sinnes, whereout spring forth oftentimes flouds of mischiefes, and that divers times by the selfe-will and inordinate desire of private and particular persons: what did the lawlesse lust of Poti∣phars Wife bring upon Ioseph? Was not his life indangered, and his bo∣dy Gen. 29. kept in close prison, where he cooled his feet two yeares or more? We have a most notable example of the miserable end of a certain wo∣man,
with the sacking and destruction of a whole City, and all caused by her intemperance and unbridled lust. About the time that the Emperour Phocas was slain by Priscus, one Gysul∣phus Sabel. (Governour and Chieftain of a Countrey in Lumbardy) going out in defence of his Countrey against the Bavarians (which were certaine re∣liques of the Hunnes) gave them battell, and lost the field and his life with∣all: Now the Conquerours (pursuing their victory) laid siege to the chief City of his Province, where Romilda his Wife made her abode; who view∣ing one day from the wals the young and fair King, with yellow curled lockes galloping about the City, fell presently so extreamly in love with him, that her minde ran of nothing but satisfying her greedy and new conceived lust: wherefore (burying in oblivion the love of her late husband, with her young infants yet living, and her Countrey, and preferring her owne lust before them all) she sent secretly unto him this message, That if he would promise to marry her, she would deliver up the City into his hands: he, well pleased with this gentle offer (through a desire of obtaining the City, which without great bloudshed and losse of men he could not otherwise compasse) accepted of it, and was received upon this condition, within the wals: and lest he should seeme too perfidious, he performed his promise of marriage, and made her his wife for that one night; but soone after (in scorne and disdaine) he gave her up to twelve of his strongest lechers, to glut her unquenchable fire: and finally nailed her on a gibbet, for a finall re∣ward of her trecherous and boundlesse lust. Marke well the misery where∣into this wretched woman threw her selfe, and not only her selfe, but a whole City also, by her boiling concupiscence, which so dazled her understand∣ing, that she could not consider how undecent it was, dishonest, and incon∣venient, for a woman to offer her selfe, nay to solicite a man that was an ene∣mie, a stranger, and one that she had never seen before, to her bed, and that to the utter undoing of her selfe and all hers. But even thus, many more (whose hearts are passionate with love) are blindfolded after the same sort (like as poeticall Cupid is fained to be) that not knowing what they take in hand, they fall headlong into destruction ere they be aware. Let us then be here advertised to pray unto God that he would purifie our drossie hearts, and divert our wandring eyes from beholding vanity, to be seduced thereby. CHAP. XXXVI. Of unlawfull gestures, Idlenesse, Gluttony, Drunkennesse, Dancing, and other such like dissolutenesse. LIke as if we would carry our selves chastly and uprightly be∣fore God, it behoveth us to avoid all filthinesse and adulte∣ry, so we must abstain from uncivill and dishonest gestures, which are (as it were) badges of concupiscence, and coales to set lust on fire, and instruments to injure others withall. From hence it was, that Pompey caused one of his souldiers Sabel. eyes to be put out in Spaine, for thrusting his hand under a womans gar∣ment that was a Spaniard: and for the same or like offence did Sertorius
command a footman of his band to be cut in pieces. O that we had in these daies such minded captaines, that would sharply represse the wrongs and ravishments which are so common and usuall amongst men of war at this day, and so uncontrolled! they would not then doubtlesse be so rise and common as in these daies they are. Kissing is no lesse to be eschewed than the former, if it be not betwixt those that are tyed together by some bond of kindred or affinity, as it was by antient custome of the Medes and Persians, and Romanes also; according to the report of Plutarch and Seneca: and that which is more, Tiberius Cae∣sar forbad the often and daily practise thereof in that kinde, as a thing not Suet. to be freqented, but rather utterly abhorred, though it be amongst kins∣folkes themselves. It was esteemed an indignity among the Graecians, to kisse any maid that was not in blood or assinity allyed unto them; as it ma∣nifestly appeareth by the earnest suit and request of the wife of Pisistratus the Tyran of Athens, to put to death a young man for kissing her daughter in Valer. li. 1. c. 5. the streets, as he met her, although it was nothing but love that moved him thereto. Saint Augustine also affirmeth, That he which wantonly kisseth a De civitat. Dei lib. 21. cap. 11. woman that is not his wife, deserveth the whip. It is true, that the holy Scripture often mentioneth kissing, but either betwixt father and childe, or brethren or kinsfolkes, or at least in a manner of salutation betwixt one an∣other Gen. 27. 45. of acquaintance, according to the custome of the people of God▪ and 2 Sam. 20. 9. sometimes also it is mentioned as a token of honour and reverence, which the subject performeth to his superiour in this action. In the former ages 1 Sam. 10. Christians used to kisse also; but so, that it was ever betwixt parties of ac∣quaintance; and in such sort, that by this manner of greeting they testifi∣ed to each other their true and sincere charity, peace, and union of heart and soule in the Lord. Such chearings and loving embracings were pure and Iust. Apolog. 2. Tertull. holy, not lascivious and wanton, like the kisses of prophane and leacherous wretches and strumpets, whereof Solomon maketh mention. Furthermore, every man ought to shun all meanes and occasions which Prov. 7. 13. may induce or entice them to uncleanenesse; and amongst the rest especi∣ally Idlenesse, which cannot chuse but be as it were a wide doore and passage for many vices to enter by, as by experience we see in those that occupy themselves about no good nor profitable exercises, but mispend their time in trifling and doing nothing, and their wits either upon vaine and foolish conceit to the hurt of others; or upon lascivious and unchaste thoughts, to their owne overthrow; whereas on the contrary, to them that are well em∣ployed either in body or minde, no such thing betideth; wherefore wee ought to be here advertised every one of us to apply our selves to some ho∣nest and seemly trade, answerable to our divers and severall estates and con∣ditions, and not to suffer our selves to be overgrowne with Idlenesse, lest thereby we fall into mischiefe; for whom the adversary (that malicious and wicked one) findeth in that case, he knowes well how to fit them to his purpose, and to set them about filthy and pernitious services. Next to idlenesse, the too much pampering the body with dainty and much food is to be eschewed: for like as a fat and well fed horse winceth and kicketh against his rider, so the pampered flesh rebelleth against God and a mans owne selfe. This fulnesse of bread, and abundance of shly delights, was the cause of the destruction of Sodome and Gomorrah: and therefore our Saviour to good purpose warneth us, to take heed to our selves, that we Eych. 16. .
be not oppressed with surfetting and drunkennesse: and the Apostle, to take no thought for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof, but to walke honestly, not Luke 21. 34. Rom. 13. 13. Ephes. 5. being given to gluttony and drunkennesse, chambering, and wantonnesse: and in another place, not to be drunke with wine, wherein is excesse: for besides the losse of time and mispence of goods, the grievous diseases and pangs of the body, and dulling and besotting of the wit, which spring from intempe∣rance, many other great evils depend and wait thereon; as whoredomes, adulteries, uncleannesses, quarrels, debates, murders, with many other such like disorders and mischiefes. Noah, that holy Patriarch, by drinking too much wine, not only disco∣vered Gen. 9. his owne shame, but also was the occasion of that cruell curse which the Lord sent upon the posterity of Cham, which even to this day lyeth hea∣vy upon them. Lot, though he hated the sin of Sodome, and escaped the punishment of Gen. 19. Sodome, yet being overcome with the wine of the mountaines, he commit∣ted incest with his owne daughters, and made a new Sodome of his owne family. Balthasar, rioting and revelling amongst his pots, had the end both of life and kingdome denounced against him, by a bodilesse hand-writing upon the Dan. 5. wall, the Lords decree. Whilest Holofernes besotted his sences with excesse Judith. 13. of wine and good cheare, Iudith found meanes to cut off his head. The Emperours Septimius Severus, and Iovinianus, dyed with eating and drinking too much. Likewise a certaine African called Donitius, overcharged his stomacke Euseb. with so much food at supper, that he dyed therewith. Gregory of Tours reporteth of Childericke a Saxon, that glutted himselfe so full of meat and drink over night, that in the morning he was found cho∣ked in his bed. In our memory there was a Priest in Rovergne, neare Milan, that (dining with a rich farmer for his yeares dinner) cheared himselfe so well, and filled his belly so full, that it burst in two, and he dyed suddenly. Alexander the great having invited many of his favourites and captaines to supper, propounded a crowne in reward to him that should drinke most: Plutarch. now the greatest drinker swallowed up foure steanes of wine, and woon the prize, being in value worth six hundred crownes; but lost his life (a jewell of greater worth) for he survived not three daies after the vile excesse: be∣sides, the rest that strove with him in this goodly conflict of carousing, one and forty of them dyed to beare him company. The same Alexander was himselfe subject to wine, and so distempered divers times therewith, that he often slew his friends at the table in his drunkennesse, whom in sobriety he loved dearest. Plutarch telleth us of Armitus and Ciranippus, two Syracusians, that be∣ing Incest, lib. 2. cap. 31. drunk with wine, committed incest with their owne daughters. Cleomenes, King of Lacedemonia, being disposed to carouse after the man∣ner of the Scythians, dranke so much, that he became, and continued ever after, sencelesse. Anacreon the Poet, a grand consumer of wine, and a notable drunkard, was choaked with the huske of a grape. The monstrous and riotous excesses of divers Romane Emperours (as Tiberius by name, who was a companion of all drunkards) is strange to be
heard, and almost incredible to be beleeved: he loved wine so well, that in stead of Tiberius they called him Biberius, and in stead of Claudius, Caldus, and in stead of Nero, Mero; noting by those nicknames, how great a drunk∣ard he was. The Earle of Aspremont (after he had by infinite excesse exhausted all his substance) being upon a day at S. Michael, dranke so excessively, that he dyed therewith. Cyrillus a Citizen of Hippon, had an ungracious son, who leading a rio∣tous and luxurious life, in the middest of his drunkennesse killed his owne Aug. tom. 10. Ver. 33. mother great with childe, and his father, that sought to restraine his sury, and would have ravished his sister, had she not escaped from him with ma∣ny Parricid. li. 2. cap. 11. wounds. Bonosus the Emperour is reported to have been such a notorious drunk∣ard, that he was said to be borne not to live, but to drinke: if any Embassa∣dours Flavius Vopis. came unto him, he would make them drunke, to the end to reveale their secrets: he ended his life with misery, even by hanging, with this Epi∣taph, That a tun, not a man, was hanged in that place. Philostrates, being in the bathes at Sinuessa, devoured so much wine, that he fell downe the staires, and almost broke his neck with the fall. Martid. li. 11. Zeno, the Emperour of the East, was so notoriously given to excesse of meates and drinkes, that his sences being benummed, he would often lie as Platina. one that was dead: wherefore being become odious to all men by his beast∣ly qualities, his wife Ariadne fell also in detestation of him, and one day as he lay sencelesse, she transported him into a tombe, and throwing a great stone upon it, pined him to death, not suffering any to remove the stone, or to yeeld him any succour; and this was a just reward of his drunkennesse. Pope Paulus the second, beside the exceeding pompe of apparell which he used, he was also very carefull for his throat: for (as Platina writeth of him) he delighted in all kinde of exquisite dishes, and delicate wine, and that in superfluity: by which immoderate and continuall surfeiting he fell into a grievous Apoplexy, which quickly made an end of his life. It is re∣ported of him, that he eat the day before he dyed two great Melons, and that in a very good appetite; when as the next night the Lord struck him with his heavy judgement. Alexander the son of Basilius, and brother of Leo the Emperour, did so wallow and drowne himselfe in the gulfe of pleasure and intemperance, that Philip. Me∣lanct. lib. 4. one day, after he had stuffed himselfe too full of meat, as he got upon his horse, he burst a veine within his body, whereat upwards and downewards issued such abundance of blood, that his life and soule issued forth withall. The moderne examples of Gods fearefull judgements upon drunkards, not only in other countries, but even in this Nation of ours, are many and terrible: all which if I should stand to report, it would be matter for a whole booke. Our reverend Judges in their severall circuits doe finde by experience, that few murthers and manslaughters are committed, which are not from this root of drunkennesse: for when mens braines are heat with wine and strong drinke, then their tongues are let loose to opprobrious speeches, and thence proceed both sudden quarrels, and deliberate chal∣lenges, wherewith thousands are brought to their untimely ends: Besides, the Lord punisheth the Drunkard many waies; first, in his soule, with im∣penitency and hardnesse of heart: which commonly followeth this vice: for
as Saint Augustine saith, As by too much raine the earth is resolved into durt, and made unfit for tillage; so by excessive drinking, our bodies are altogether un∣fitted Aug. de Vi∣tand. Ebriet. Ser. 231. for he spirituall tillage, and so can bring forth no good fruits of holinesse and righteousnesse; but rather like biggest and marishes; are fit to bed nothing but serpents, frog, and vershine, that is, all manner of abominable sins and leathsome wickednesse. Secondly in his body, with deformednesse of feature; filthy diseases, and unseasonable death: for excessive drinking breedeth crudities, Rheumes, Imposthumes, Gouts, Consumptions, Apoplexies, and such like; whereof men perish before they are come to the halfe of their natu∣rall yeares: and this is one principall cause why men are now so short lived in respect of that they have en heretofore. Thirdly, in his estate, for com∣monly poverty, yea penury followeth this vice at the heeles; as Solomon teacheth. Pov. 21. 27. And lastly, with sudden death and destruction, even in the middest of their drunken fits, as wofull experience doth make mani∣fest every day, and almost in every corner of this land. Within these few yeares, of mine owne knowledge, three not far from Huntington being over∣come with drinke, perished by drowning; when being not able to rule their horses, they were carried by them into the maine streame, from whence they never came out alive againe, but left behinde them visible markes of Gods justice, for the terrour and example of others; and yet what sin is more commonly used and lesse feared than this. Concerning Dancing (the usuall dependants of feasts and good cheare) there is none of sound judgement that know not, that they are baits and al∣lurements to uncleanenesse, and as it were instruments of bawdrie: by rea∣son whereof they were alwaies condemned among men of honour and repu∣tation, whether Romanes or Greekes, and left for vile and base minded men to use. And this may appeare by the reproach that Demosthenes the Orator gave to Philip of Macedony and his Courtiers, in an Oration to the Atheni∣ans, wherein he termed them common dancers, and such as shamed not as soone as they had glutted their bellies with meate, and their heads with wine, to fall scurrilously a dancing. As for the honourable Dames of Rome, truly we shall never reade that any of them accustomed themselves to dance, according to the report of Salust touching Sempronia, whom he judged to be too fine a dancer and singer to be honourable withall: as if these two could no more agree then fire and water. Cicero in his apologie of Muraena rehearseth an objection of Cato against Muraena. his client, wherein he challenged him for dancing in Asia; which he maketh a matter of so great reproach, that not daring to maintain or excuse the fact, he flatly denyeth it; saying, That no sober and discreet man ever would com∣mit that fault, unlesse his sence and reason was bereft him. Plutarch also setting forth the vertues of women, putteth in this among the rest, that she ought to be no dancer: and speaking in another place to all others as well as wo∣men, biddeth them to repulse even their friends, if they should lead and en∣tice them to that exercise. Besides, all the ancient Doctors of the Church have utterly condemned them as unlawfull: Thou learnest to sing prophane and idle songs (saith Basil) and forgettest the godly Psalmes and Hymnes which were enact ught thee▪ thou caperest and leapest with thy feet in dances (unwise, as thou art) when a thou shouldest rather bend thy knees in prayer to the almighty but what gaine  got thereby  Marry this, that virgins returne robbed of their virginities and
married wives of their trth to their husbands: both, and all, lesse chaste than they went; and more dishonest than they should, if not in act, which peradventure may be, yet stainedin thought, which cannot be eschewed. Heare (saith Chrysost.) you maids and wives, which are not ashamed to dance and trip it at others marri∣ages, and to pollute your sees; wheresoever a lascivious dance is danced, there the devill beareth the other part, and is the author of it. It is better (saith Ambrose) to dig and delve upon holy daies than to dance. And in another place writing to his sister, he saith, That he eed not care for dissolute behaviours and songs which are used as marriages to make him merry withall; for when banquets are concluded with dances, then is chastity in an evill case and in great danger to suffer shipwracke by those suspitious allurements. Besides this, dancing hath been ab∣solutely forbidden by consent of the whole Church of Christ before time, Orig. lib. i. contr. Ces. Can. 5. & 52. under paine of excommunication; as it may appeare by the Constantino∣politan Councell under Iustinian the Emperour: what answer can they make then to this, that are Christians, and allow of these forbidden sports? Is it the denying of a mans selfe? The spirituall regeneration? The putting off the old man touching our conversation in this life? And if all adultery Ephes. 5. 4. and uncleanenesse, all filthinesse and foolish talking, jesting and such like, ought not once to be named amongst us, because they are things not come∣ly: If I say it be not lawfull to jeast or speake the least lascivious word that is, how shall it be lawfull to doe an action with the motion and consent of the whole body, which representeth nothing else but folly, vanity, and lasciviousnesse? And this is for them that demand where dancing is for∣bidden in the Scripture; which I touch as it were by the way, and doe but point at, not minding to frame any long discourse thereof, seeing there is a particular treatise touching the same matter, which he may reade that desi∣reth to know any more touching it. Now let us see what goodly fruits and commodities have risen therefrom. The daughters of the children of Isra∣el being dancing in Silo upon a festivall day, after the manner of the uncir∣cumcised Idolaters, were ravished by the Benjamites for to be their wives, and that mixtly without regard of one or other, were they of never so high or base condition. Judg. 1. At the feast which Herod the Tetrarch made to the Princes and Cap∣taines and Nobles of Galilee, the daughter of Herodias pleased him and his company so well with her dancing, that to gratifie this filthy strumpet the incestuous Tyran caused Iohn Baptist to be beheaded. Mark. 6. Lodowicke, Archbishop of Magdeburge, celebrating a solemne feast at a towne called Calven, invited many of the worthy Citizens to make merry with him: the place for their joyalty was the great hall wherein judiciall causes were appointed to be discussed. Here after the banquet ended they fell a dancing, men and women mixtly together, such a ridiculous roundelay, and such a multitude, that what with the weight of their bodies, or rather the indignation of God against them for this scurrilous and immodest beha∣viour, the beames of the house began to crack and threaten a certain ruine; whereat the Archbishop affrighted, caught hold by a faire dame, and began first to goe downe the staires; but the steps afore loosened, as soone as he trode upon them, tumbled downe, and he and his consort headlong withall, and were crushed in pieces. And thus he that was principall of the feast and sport, was made an example to all the rest, of the Lords vengeance▪ be∣cause he dishonoured his calling and profession by such lewd and light be∣haviour:
and this was one goodly effect of dauncing. Another we reade of in the Chronicles of the same City to this effect, Chron. Magde∣burg. in a village called Ossemer, adjoyning to Stendell: As the Popish Priest played the minstrell to his parishioners that danced the morris before him, and rejoyced in their merry May-games, a tempest arose, and a thunderbolt struck off his night hand, together with the harpe which he played on, and consumed about twenty foure men and women of the company: a just pu∣nishment of so prophane a Priest, who in stead of dehorting them (as his duty bound him) from that lascivious custome, played the chiefe part in their madnesse, and was an inticer of them unto it. Moreover, in many places, by dances grievous and spitefull quarrels have been stirred up, and many murders executed, the examples whereof are so evident and notorious, that it is not needfull now to stand upon them: to conclude therefore this point with the saying of Lodovicus Vives, There Lodovicus Vives. is not a greater vanity in the world than dancing; for (saith he) I heard of certain men of Asia, that comming into Spaine, when they first saw the Spaniards dance, were so sore affrighted, that they ran away for feare, sup∣posing them to have been either possessed with some spirit, or out of their wits at least: and truly I thinke if a man had never seen a woman dance be∣fore, he could hardly be of another judgement, there being nothing that re∣sembleth frenzie and lunacy more than the strange shakings and motions of the body at the noise of a beaten sheep-skin: verily it is a pastime to mark the grave behaviour, the measurable march, the pomp and ostentation of women dancers, and the great care they have to performe wisely so foolish an action▪ it is very likely that all their wit at that time is distilled from their head into their feet, for there it is more requisite and needfull than in their braine. Thus much saith Lodovicus Vives. Now touching Mummeries and Maskes, I place them in the same ranke with the other; for somuch as they are derived from the same fountaine, and communicate the same nature, and produce the same effects, and oftentimes are so pernicious, that divers honourable women have been ravished and conveyed away by their meanes: nay, and some Masquers have been well chastised in their owne vices: as it happened in the raigne of Charles the sixth, to six that masqued it to a marriage at the hostle of S. Pauls in Paris, being attired like wilde horses, covered with loose flax, dangling down like haire, all bedabed with grease for the fitter hanging thereof, and fast bound one to another, and in this guise entered the hall, dancing with torches be∣fore them: but behold suddenly their play turned to a tragedy; for a spar of one of their torches fell into the greasie flax of his neighbour, and set it immediatly on fire, so that in the turning of an hand they were all on lame then gave they out a most horrible oury: one of them threw himself head∣long into a tub of water provided to ince their drinking cups and goblets, and upon that occasion standing not far off: two were burnt to death, with∣out stirring once from the place: The bastard Foix and the Earle of Jouy escaped indeed present death; but being conveyed to their lodgings, they survived not two daies: the King himselfe being one of the s, was saved by the Dutchesse of Berry, that covering him with her loose and tide gar∣ments  the fire before it could seise upon his flesh. Froyssard the Vol. 4 cap. 5. reporter of this tragedy, aith▪ That the next morrow every man could say, tha this  wonderfull signe and advertisement sent by God to the King
to warne him to renounce all such fond and foolish devices which he de∣lighted too much in, and more then it became a King of France to doe: and this was the event of that gallant Masque. It resteth now that we speak somewhat of Playes and Comedies, and such like toyes and May-games, which have no other use in the world but to de∣prave and corrupt good manners, and to open a doore to all uncleanenesse: the eares of yong folke are there polluted with many filthy and dishonest speeches, their eyes are there infected with lascivious and unchaste gestures and countenances, and their wits are there stained and embrued with so per∣nitious liquor, that (except Gods good grace) they will ever savour of it: the holy and sacred Scripture ordained to a holy and sacred use, is often∣times by these filthy swine prophaned, to please and to delight their audi∣ence: in few words, there is nothing else to be found among them, but nou∣rishment to our sences of foolish and vaine delights. For this cause many of the sager Romanes, as Nasica and divers other Censors, hindred the buil∣ding of the Theatres in Rome, for an opinion they had, that their sports and Tertul. Oros. pastimes which were exercised therein, served to no other purpose but to make the people idle, effeminate, and voluptuous: and besides, the masters, guiders, and actors of Playes were alwayes debarred as men infamous, from bearing any publike Office or dignity in the Common-wealth. Tiberius Caesar himselfe, though of most corrupt and rotten manners and Tacit. lib. 4. conversation, yet in open Senate complained and found fault with the im∣modesty of Stage-players, and banished them at that same time out of Ita∣lie. When Domitian was Censor, he put out of the Senate a Citizen of Rome, because he was too much addicted to the imitation of the fashions of Fulgos. Driositate. Players and Dancers. And Plutarch saith, that we ought to shun all such spectacles. If then such pastimes were by the judgements of the Romanes noted with infamy, shall we have their equals in follies in better account? Basil calleth such sports and pastimes, the work-house, forge, and common shop of all Homil. 4. wickednesse: and therefore Chrysostome prayeth and admonisheth the faith∣full of his time to abstaine from frequenting such places. S. Augustine also for biddeth to bestow our money upon tumblers, juglers, and players, and Homil. 6. in 1. cap. Gen. Can. 51. such like. Beside, by the Constantinopolitan Councell under Iustinian, it was inhibited to be once present at such sports, under the paine of excom∣munication: and that the ancient Christians did by common consent not only condemne, but also utterly abstaine from such pastimes, it may ap∣peare by the testimony of Tertullian writing to the Gentiles to this effect: We renounce and send back (faith he) sports and playes unto you, as to the head and fountaine from whence they were first derived: we make no reckoning of thse Apolog. things which we know were drawne from superstition: we love not  be hld the folly of turning with Chariots, nor the unchastity of the Theatre, nor the cruelty of sword playing, nor the vanity of leaping, rstling and dancing: but take plea∣sure in exercises of better report, and lesse hr. Moreover, how odious and irksome in the sight of the Lord such specta∣cles are, and what power and sway the devill beareth therein, they  of God upon a Christian woman (reported by, Tertullian) may sufficiently instruct us. There was a woman (saith he) that went to the  to see Tertull. de spect. a play, and returned home possessed with an uncleane spirit: who being re∣buked in a conjuration for daring to assault one of the aith, that professed
Christ; answered, that he had done well, because he found her upon his owne ground. The same author reporteth another example as strange, of a woman also that went to see a Tragedie acted, to whom the night following appeared in a dreame the picture of a sheete (a presage of death) casting in her teeth that which she had done; and five daies after, death himselfe seised upon her. As touching wanton songs, and unchaste and ribald bookes (that I may be (briefe) I will content my selfe only with that which is alleadged by Lo∣dovicus Vives Lib. of instru∣ction of a Christian wo∣man. concerning that matter. The Magistrate (saith he) ought to ba∣nish out of his dominion all unhonest Songs and Poems, and not to suffer novelties to be published day by day in rimes and ballads, as they are: as if a man should heare in a City nothing but foolish and scurrilous Ditties, such as would make even the onger sort that are well brought up to blash, and stir up the indignation of men of honour and gravity: this ought Magistrates to prevent, and to discharge the peo∣ple from reading Amadis, Tristram, Launcelot due Lake, Melusine, Poggius scurrillities, and Boccace novelties; with a thousand more such like toyes: and thus much out of Vives. CHAP. XXXVII. Of Theeves and Robbers. IT followes that we speake in the next place of such as by their greedy covetousnesse and unquenchable desire of lucre, transgresse the fourth commandement of the second Table; to wit, Thou shalt not steale: wherein not only simply theft, but also Sacriledge is condemn∣ed: and first of Sacriledge. Into this sin fell wretched Aehan in the time of Io∣shua, Joshua 7. when in the sack of Jericho he seeing a Babylo∣nish garment, with certaine gold and silver, covered it and stole it away, and hid it in his Tent, contrary to the commandement of the Lord: for which cause the Lord was offended with his whole people, as if they all had been accessary to the crime, and eneebled them so before their enemies, that they were beaten downe at Hay, and shamefully put to flight: neither was his anger appeased, untill that the offendant being divinely and miraculously descryed, was stoned to death and burnt with his children and all his sub∣stance. But to come unto prophane stories, let us begin with Heliodorus, Treasu∣rer Iosephus. of Seleuchus King of Asia; who by the Kings commandement and sug∣gestion of one Simon Governour of the Temple, came to take away the gold and silver which was kept in the Treasury of the Temple, and to transport it unto the Kings Treasury; whereat the whole City of Jerusalem put on sackeloth, and poured out prayers unto the Lord: so that when Heliodorus was present in the Temple with his soldiers ready to seise upon the treasure, the Lord of all spirits and power shewed so great a vision, that he fell sud∣denly into extreame feare and trembling: for there appeared unto him an horse with a terrible man sitting upon him, most richly barbed, which came
fiercely and smote at him with his forefeet: moreover, there appeared two yong men, notable in strength, excellent in beauty, and comely in apparell, which stood by him on either side, and scourged him with many stripes: so that Heliodorus that came in with so great a company of souldiers and at∣tendants, was strucken dumbe, and carried out in a litter upon mens shoul∣ders; for his strength was so abated, that he could not help himselfe, but lay destitute of all hope of recovery, so heavy was the hand of God upon him, untill by the prayers of Onias the high Priest he was restored; then loe he confessed, that he which dwelt in heaven had his eye on that place, and defended it from all those that came to hurt and spoile it. Another of this crue was in Crassus the Romane; who entering Jerusa∣lem, Iosephus. Zonar. robbed the Temple of two thousand talents of silver and gold, beside the rich ornaments, which amounted in worth to eight thousand Talents, and a beame of beaten gold containing three hundred pound in weight: for which sacriledge, the vengeance of God so pursued him, that within a while Camposul. lib. 1. after he was overcome by the Parthians, and together with his son slain, his evill gotten goods being dispersed, and the skull of his head being made a ladle to melt gold in, that it might be glutted with that being dead, which alive it could be never satisfied with. Herod following the steps of Hircanus his predecessor, that tooke out of Iosephus l. 17. Zonar. Annal. 1 the sepulchre of King David three thousand talents of money, thinking to finde the like treasure, broke up the sepulchre in the night, and found no money, but rich ornaments of gold, which he tooke away with him; how∣beit to his cost: for two of his servants perished in the vault, by a divine fire, as it is reported, and he himselfe had small successe in his worldly af∣faires ever after. Iulian the Apostata robbed the Church of the revenues thereof, and took away all benevolences and contributions to schooles of learning, to the end the children might not be instructed in the liberall Arts, nor in any other good literature. He exaggerated also his sacriledge with scornfull jeasts; saying, That he did further their salvation by making them poore; seeing it was written in their owne Bibles, Blessed are the poore, for theirs is the king∣dome of heaven: but how this sacrilegious theefe was punished, is already declared in the former booke. Leo Groponymus took out of the Temple of Constantinople an excellent Lib. a. cap. 20. Zonar as. crowne of gold beset with precious stones; which Mauritius had dedicated to the Lord; but as soon as he had set it on his head, a cruell fever seised upon him, that he dyed very shortly. The punishment of the sacriledge of Queen Vrraca in Spaine was most wonderfull and speedy▪ for when in her war against her son Alphonsus shee Fulgos. l. 1. c. a. wanted money, she robbed the Church dedicated to S. Isidore, and tooke with her owne hands the treasures up, which her souldiers refused to do: but ere she departed out of the Church vengeance overtooke her, and strooke her dead in the place. Moreover, the Lord so hateth this irreligious sin, that he permitteth the devill to exercise his cruelty upon the spoilers of prophane and Idolatrous temples, as he did upon Dyonisius the Tyran of Syracusa; who after many robberies of holy things, and spoiling the Churches, dyed suddenly with extreame joy, as authors report. He spoiled the Temple of Proserpina at Locris, and shaved off the golden beard of Aesculapius at Epidamnum; say∣ing,
It was an unseemly thing for Apollo to be beardlesse and his son bearded: he deprived Iupiter Olympus of his golden rament, and gave him a woollen coat instead thereof; saying it was too heavy for him in the Summer, and too cold in winter, and this was more convenient for both seasons. The pre∣text of all his sacriledge was this, That seeing the gods were good, why should not he be partaker of their goodnesse. Such another was Cambyses King of Persia, who sent fifty thousand men Sabel. l. 1. c. 3. Herod. lib. 4. to rob and destroy the temple of Iupiter Ammon; but in their journey so mighty a tempest arose, that they were overwhelmed with the sand, not one of them remaining to carry newes of their successe. Brennus was constrained to slay himselfe, for enterprising to rob the Tem∣ple Fulg. lib. 1. c. 2. of Apollo at Delphos: Philomelus, Onomarchus, and Phayllus, went about the same practise, and indeed robbed the Temple of all the treasures there∣in; but one of them was burned, another drowned, and the third broke his neck: to conclude, the Athenians put to death a yong childe, for taking but a golden plate out of Diana's Temple; but first they offered him other jewels and trinkets, which when he despised in respect of the plate, they ri∣gorously punished him as guilty of sacriledge. Cardinall Wolsey being determined to erect two new Colledges, one at Stow. Chron. Oxford, and the other at Ipswich, obtained licence and authority of Pope Clement the seventh, to suppresse about the number of forty monasteries, to furnish and set forward the building of his said Colledge: which irreligi∣ous sacriledge (I call it sacriledge both because he was perswaded in con∣science that those goods belonged to the Church, and so to him it was sa∣criledge: as also for that he did it in pride of his heart) was furthered by five persons, who were the chiefe instruments of the dissolution of Daintry Monastery, because the Prior and Covent would not grant them certaine lands in farme at their owne price. But what punishment ensued upon them at Gods hand the world was witnesse of: for of these five persons, two fell at discord amongst themselves, and the one slew the other, for the which the survivor was hanged; the third drowned himselfe in a well; the fourth, being then worth two hundred pounds, within three yeares became so poore that he begged untill his dying day; and the fifth (called Doctor Allen) was cruelly maimed in Ireland▪ The Cardinall himselfe falling into the Kings displeasure, was deposed from his bishoprick, and dyed miserably: the Colledges which he meant to have made so glorious a building, came never to any good effect, the one at Ipswich being cleane defaced, the other at Oxford unfinished. And thus much of sacriledge: Now let us come and see the punishment of simple theft, the principall cause whereof is covetousnesse; which is so unruly an evill, and so deep rooted in the heart of man, that ever yet it hath used to encroach upon the goods of others, and to keep possession of that which was none of its owne; breaking all the bonds of humanity, equity, and right, without being contained in any measure or meane; whereof wee have a most notable example in the old world before the flood, which (by Moses report) overflowed with iniquity and extortion, the mighty ones op∣pressed the weak, the greater trode under foot the lesse, and the rich devour∣ed the poore. When the Lord saw the generall deluge of sin and disorder thus universally spread (which indeed was a signe of great defection and contempt of him) he like a just judge that could not endure these monstrous
iniquities, sent a deluge of waters amongst them, by opening the windowes of heaven, and breaking up the fountaines of the great deepes, and giving passage to the waters both by heaven and earth, so that it raigned forty daies, and forty nights without ceasing, and the waters prevailed upon the earth, and overcovered the high mountaines by fifteen cubites, the earth being re∣duced into the same estate which it had in the beginning before the waters were tooke away from the face thereof: verily it was a most hideous and sad spectacle, to see first the vallies, then the hils, and last the highest moun∣taines so overflowne with water, that no shew or appearance of them might be perceived; it was a dreadfull sight to behold whole houses, tossed to and fro up and downe in the waves, and at last to be shivered in pieces: there was not a City nor village that perished not in the deep, not a tree nor tow∣er so high that could overpeere the waters: as they increased more and more in abundance, so feare, horrour, and despaire of safety encreased in the heart of every living soule. And on this fashion did God punish those wicked re∣bels, not at one blow, but by little and little increasing their paine, that as they had a long time abused his patience, and made no reckoning of amend∣ment, so the punishment of their sin might be long and tedious. Now in this extremity one could not help another, nor one envy another, but all were concluded under the same destruction, all surprised, assieged, and envi∣roned alike, as well he that roved in the fields, as he that stayed in the houses, he that climbed up into the mountaines, as he that abode in the vallies, the mercilesse waters spared none: it was to no purpose that some ascended their high houses, some climbed upon trees, and some scaled the rockes, nei∣ther one nor other found any refuge or safety in any place, the rich were not saved by their riches, nor the strong by the pith of their strength, but all pe∣rished and were drowned together, except Noah and his family: which pu∣nishment was correspondent unto the worlds iniquity, for as the earth was corrupted and polluted with abundance of sin, so God sent abundance of wa∣ter to purge and cleanse away the filthinesse thereof, as at the latter day hee will send fire to purifie and refine heaven and earth from their dregs, and re∣store them to their first and purest estate. And thus God revenged the ex∣tortion and cruelty of that age. But yet for all this, those sins were not then so defaced and rooted up, but that they be burnished againe and growne in time to as big a bulke: for even at this day the greatest part of the world is given to practise fraud and deceit, and by unlawfull meanes to incroach upon others goods: which subtilties though they desire never so to disguise and cloke, yet will they ever be condemned and reputed kindes of theft before God: now as some are of greater power & authority than others in the world, so answerable to themselves is the quality of their sins, and by consequence the punishment: the greater of power, the greater theeves, and the greater judgment; for if a poore man that through poverty and necessity cutteth a purse or stealeth any other trifle, be culpable, how much more culpable shall he that is rich be, that usurpeth the goods of his neighbour? Draco the lawgiver of Athens, appointed death to be the punishment of sheft: Solon mitigated that rigour, and punished it with double restitution: The Locrians put out his eyes that had stolne ought from his neighbour: The Hetrurians stoned them to death: The Scythians abhorred them more than all creatures, because they had a community of all things except their
cups the Vatoeiane used such severity towards this kinde of men, that as  taken a handfull of  he was sure to die for it. being Censor,  demeed his owne son Buteo to death, being apprehended for theft. Tiberius the Emperour punished a souldier after the time  for stealing i eacoke in summe, there was no Commonwealth  was not highly detested, and sharply  the  where it ws permitted and tollerated,  of . yet as  a just dead of Tamberlaine that Tbeatr. histor. mighty  and Conquerour of Asia, when a poore woman complained  of his souldiers, that had taken from her a little milke and a  the caused the souldiers belly to be ripped to see that her  had falsely accused him on no, and finding the milke in his stomacke; adjudged him worthy of that punishment, for stealing from poore  woman. When Theophilus raigned Emperour in the East there was a certaine Zonar. Annal. 3 souldier possessed of a very gallant and brave horse which his Captaine by all meaes possible sought to get from him▪ but he would not in any case  he put him forth of pay, and tooke his horse, from him by force, and sent him for a present to the Emperour Theophilus: now it chanced that this poore souldier was slaine in the battell for want of his horse, and his wife and children lest destitute of succour, insomuch that through necessity she was constrained to flie to Constant inople, and to com∣plaine to the Emperour of the injury done unto her husband; with this re∣solution entring the City, she met the Emperour riding upon her hus∣bands horse, and catching the horse bridle, challenged him not ony for stea∣ling the horse, but also being the cause of her husbands death. The Empe∣rour wondring at the woman boldnesse, examined her more narrowly▪ and found out the whole practise of that wicked Captaine whom he banished presently, his Empire, and bestowed his possession in recommence upon the distressed widdow. Ibicus the Poet being set upon by Theeves, when he saw that they would not only spoile him of his money but of  he also cryed for help and revenge to the cranes that flew over his head a while after  these murder∣ing  together in the market Place, the same cranes appearing unto  they whispered one another in the care, and said, onder  which though secretly spoken, yet was over∣herd  they being examined and found guilty, were put to death for their . The like story Martin Luther reporteth touching a traveller; Luther. only  in this that as Cranes detected the former: so Crowes laid open the latter. In the yeare 138▪ when as all Saxony was so infested with Theeyes that Albert. Crantz. lib. 10. cap. 7. no man could travell safely in the countrey the Princes calling a Councell, for downe this order. That not only the Theeves themselves should be se∣verely punished▪ but all that did protect, or harbour any of them; which  as Theodoricke Country of Weingrde impugned, the body of  Councell sent for him, and adjudged him to a most cruell and shamefull . In the yeare 1410▪ Henry Duke of Luneburg a most just and severe Crantz. lib. 10. cap. 30. Prince, went about to purge his Countrey from all thefts and robberies▪
insomuch that the least offence committed in that kinde he suffered not to go unpunished: now it hapned as the Duke went towards Lunburge, he sene before him one of his chiefest officers to provide necessaries against his comming: who riding without a cloak, the weather being cold,  a ploughman to lend him his cloak till his returne: which when the clowne refused to do, he took it without leave, but it cost him his life for , for the ploughman awaited the Dukes comming and directed his complaint un∣to him on this manner: What availeth i (O most noble Prince to seek to suppres the courage of thieves and spoilers, when as thy chiefest officers dare commit such things uncontrolled, a the Lieutenant of  but now taken from me my cloak? The Duke hearing this complaint, and conside∣ring the cause, dissembled his counsell  his returne  from Lune∣burge unto the same place, where calling for his Lieutenant, and rating him for his injury, he commanded him to be hunged upon a tree. A won∣derfull severity in justice, and worthy to be commended: for what hope is it to root out small and pity thieves, if we suffer grand thieves to go un∣corrected? There is another kinde of these practised of them that be in authority, who under the title of confiscation assume unto themselves stollen goods, and so much the redilier, by now much the value of the things amounteth to more worth: an action altogether unjust, and contrary to both divine and humane lawes, which ordain to restore unto every man his owne: and truly he that in stead of restitution withholdeth the goods of his neigh∣bour in this manner, differeth no more from a  than that the one stealeth boldly without fear, the other norously and with great danger: and what greater corruption of justice can there be than this? For who would follow the Law upon a thiefe, when he knoweth he shall rather run into further charge, than recover any of his old losse? Beside this, it hap∣neth that poor small theeves are often drawne to the whip, or driven to banishment, of sent to the gallowes, when rich grand theeves lie at their case, and escape uncontrolled, albeit the quality of their  be far un∣equall: according to the Poet: The simple dove by law is censured, Dat veniam cervis, vexat censura colum∣bas. When ravenou  escape unpunished. The world was ever yet full of such ravenou Raens; so nimble in pilling others goods, and so greedy of their owne gain, that the poor people in stead of being maintained and preserved in the peaceable enjoy∣ing of their portions, are gnawne to the very bone amongst them: for which cause Homer in the person of Agamemnon calleth them devourers of men. Likewise also the Prophet David in the  Psalme calleth them Eaters of his people: and yet want they not flatterers and  friends (canker wormes of a Common-wealth) that urge them forwards, and devise daily new kinde of exactions, like horse-leades to suckt out the very bloud of mens purses: shewing so much the more wit and deceit therein, by how much the more they hope to gain a great part  of unto their selves: being like hunger-starved Harpeis, that will never be forti∣fied, but still match and catch all that commeth near their : and these are they that do good to no man, but hurt to all; of whom the Mer∣chant findeth himselfe agrieved, the Artificer trodden under foot, the poor labourer oppressed, and generally all men endammaged.
CHAP. XXXVIII. Of the excessive burdenings of the Comminalty. AS it is a just and approved thing before God, to do ho∣nour and reverence to Kings and Princes, and to be subject under them in all obedience; so it is a reason∣able and allowable duty to pay such tributes and sub∣sidies (whereby their great charges and honourable estate may be maintained) as by right or equity are due unto them: and this is also commanded by our Saviour Christ in expresse words, when he saith, Give unto Caesar that which is Caesars. And by the Apostle Paul more expresly, Pay tributes, render unto Mat. 22. 21. Rom. 1. 7. all men their due: tribute to whom tribute belongeth, and custom to whom custom: Marke how he saith, Give unto all men their due: and therein observe, that Kings and Princes ought of their good and just disposition to be content with their due, and not seek to load and overcharge their subjects with un∣necessary exactions, but to desire to see them rather rich and wealthy, than poor and needy; for thereby commeth no profit unto themselves. Fur∣ther it is most unlawfull for them to exact that above measure upon their Commons, which being in mediocrity is not condemned: I say it is un∣lawfull both by the law of God and man (the Law of God and man is tearmed all that which both God and man allow and agree upon, and which a man with a safe conscience may put in practise:) for the former we can have no other schoolmaster nor instruction, save the holy Scripture, where∣in God hath manifested his will unto us concerning this very matter; as in Deuteronomy the eighteenth, speaking of the office and duty of a King, he forbiddeth them to be hoorders up of gold and siluer, and espousers of many wives, and lovers of pride: signifying thereby, that they ought to contain themselves within the bounds of modesty and temperance, and not give the raines to their owne affections, nor heape up great treasures to their peoples detriment, nor to delight in war, nor to be too much subject to their owne pleasures: all which things are meanes of unmeasurable ex∣pence: so that if it be not allowable to muster together multitudes of goods, for the danger and mischief that ensueth thereof, as it appeareth out of this place; then surely it is much lesse lawfull to levy excessive taxes of the people; for the one of these cannot be without the other: and thus for the Law of God it is clear, that by it authority is not committed unto them, to surcharge, and as it were trample downe their poor subjects, by unmeasurable and unsupportable impositions. As for that which the Prophet Samuel in the Name of God giveth no∣tice to the Israelites of, touching the right of a King; wherein he seemeth to allow him the disposition of the goods and persons of his subjects: I an∣swer first, That God being an immoveable Truth, cannot contradict him∣selfe by commanding and forbidding the same thing; and secondly, that the word of the Text in the Originall signifieth nothing else but a custome or fashion, as it appeareth by the 1 Sam. 11. 13. besides, the speech that the Prophet useth, importeth not a commandment, but an advertisement
of the subjection, whereunto the people were about to thrust themselves, by desiring a King after the manner of other Nations, whose customes amongst them was to exercise authority and dominion as well over their goods as their persons: for which cause God would have them forewarned, that they might know how vile a yoak they put their owneneckes under, and what grievous and troublesome servitude they undertook, from the which they could no wayes be delivered, no though they deed it with teares. Furthermore, that a King in Israel had no power (in right and eqity) to take away the possessions of any of his subjects, and appropriate it to him∣selfe, it appeareth by Naboaths refusall no King Achab, to give him his 1 Kings 12. vineyard, though he requested it (as it may seem) upon very reasonable conditions, either for his money, or for exchange, so that a man would thinke he ought not to have denied him: howbeit his desire being thus crossed, he could not mend himselfe by his authority, but fell to vexe and grieve himselfe, and to champe upon his owne bit, untill by the wicked and detestable complot of Iezable, poor Naboath was falsely accused, un∣justly condemned, and cruelly murdered; and then he put in possession of his vineyard: which murder (doubtlesse) she would never have attempted, nor yet Naboath ever have refused to yeeld his vineyard, if by any pretence of Law they could have laid claim unto it: but Naboath knowing that it Numb. 36. 9. was contrary to Gods Ordinance, for him to part with his patrimony (which he ought most carefully to preserve) would not consent to sell over his vineyard, neither for love nor money, nor other recompence: and herein he did but his duty, approved by the holy Scripture. Now how odious a thing before God the oppression of poor people is, it is mani∣fest by his owne words in the Prophesie of Ezechiel, where he saith, Let it suffice, O Princes of Israel, learn off cruelty and oppression, and execute judge∣ment Chap. 45. 9. and justice: take away your exactions from my people, and cease to thrust them from their goods and heritages. Now concerning the law of man, which all men agree unto, because it is grounded upon reason and equity, we finde no permission given to Kings to use the goods of other men at their plea∣sures; for that was far from equity: neither was there any such liberty bestowed upon them, by those that first in the beginning exalted them to that degree of dignity: but rather (as divers worthy Authours avouch) their owne vertues and good behaviour which woon them credit amongst the better sort, installed them first unto that honour. And truely there is Cic. lib. 3. de legibus. Aug. de Civit. Dei, lib. 4. ca. 6. nothing more rightfull and justin mans society, than that every one should possesse and enjoy that which is his owne in peace and quietnesse, without disturbance or violence; in which respect also, rules of justice are esta∣blished, called lawes, which no good Kings will ever seek to stand against. They are indeed Lords of the earth, a some say, and truly; but so, that their Lordships stretch no further than right, and passe not the rule of equity: and notwithstanding, the propriety of goods and possessions re∣maineth untouched. To Kings (saith Soca) pertaineth the soveraignty over all things, but to private men the propriety. Lib. 7. c. 4. & 5. de beneficiis. Tiberius Caesar being solicited by the Governours of the Provinces, to lay heavier tributes, and levy larger subsidies from his people, made (though a Painim) this notable answer, That a good shepherd ought to shear his sheep, not to flea them. Saint Lewis, that good King, amongst all
his other wife and vertuous exhortations which he gave to his son before his death, this was none of the least nor last; That he should never crave any taxe or subsidie of his subjects, but upon urgent necessity, and very just Nic. Gil. cause; and that if he did otherwise, he should not be reputed for a King, but for a tyran. CHAP. XXXIX. Of those that have used too much cruelty to wards their subjects in Taxes and Exactions. IT is clear then by these foresaid assumptions, that a King may not impose upon his Subjects unmeasurable taxes and subsidies, least he make himselfe guilty of extortion, the root and fountain many times of many great mischiefes and inconveniences, and in very deed from whence oftner changes, seditions, and ruines of Common-wealths have proceeded, than from any other cause beside. What hapned to Roboam King of Israel, for shewing himselfe too rigo∣rous on this behalfe to his subjects, but the defection of the greater part of his Kingdom from him; for being come to the Crowne after the death of his father Solomon, when the people came and made a supplication to him, to be eased from his fathers burdens, he (despising the counsell of his sage 1 Kings 12. and antient. Counsellours, and following the giddy advice of his young companions) gave them a most sharpe and sowre reply; saying, That if his father had laid an heavy yoak upon them, he would encrease it; and if he had chastised them with rods, he would correct them with scourges; which when they of Israel heard, they revolted from him (all save the two Tribes of Iuda and Benjamin) and stoned to death his Collectours, and chose them another King to rule over them. Thus Roboam was deprived of∣ten parts of his Kingdom thorow his owne unadvised tyranny, and fled all amazed unto Jerusalem, where he lived all his dayes without recovery of the same. Achaeus King of Lydia was hanged up against a hill, and his head throwne into a River running by, because of the great subsidies which he exacted of his people. Dionysius, the first of that name, a notorious and renowned Tyran, not Plutarch. de Reg. onely in regard of his exceeding cruelty, but also of his unjust rackings and exactions, was so violent in that practise of doing wrong, that alboit he well knew the griefes and vexations of the people, that ceased not to complain and lament their case continually, yet he diminished not their burdens, but multiplied them more and more, and sucked and gnew out all that ever he could, untill he left them naked, empty, and despoiled: To Frog. lib. 21. conclude, this grand theefe, that durst not trust his wife nor owne daugh∣ters, after he had been discomfited by the Carthaginians, was slain by his servants. Of the Roman Emperours that most vexed the Commonalty with tri∣bures
and taxes, these three were chief, Caligula, Nero, and Caracalla; of whom this latter did most pill and pull the people, and would often say, That the gold and silver of the Kingdom pertained in right to none but Dion. & Xiph. him. Being reproved of his mother at a time, for his immoderate and ex∣cessive expences; saying, That there was almost not so much more trea∣sure left as he had already spent; he made her this answer, That she should take no care for that; for as long as his hand was able to wield his sword (which he held naked before her) he would not want money. This is the sword which many now adayes (after the example of Caracalla) have taken up, to cut out (by force and violence) a way to their owne wils, and to cut the throat of equity and justice, and to compell the poor people to forgo their goods, and surrender them into their hands: Now how odious and hatefull these three were made unto the people by their owne wicked de∣meanours, their miserable ends do sufficiently testify; which wee have al∣ready before ment ioned, and mean afterward more at large to speak of. The Emperour Constance, son to Constantine, whose father was Heraclius, comming at a time out of Greece into Rome, abode there but five dayes; but ulg. lib. 9. c. 4. in that short space committed so much outrage in ransacking the Temples and other publike places, and carrying away so many rich ornaments and pictures (whereof those places then abounded) that in mans remembrance no forreigne barbarous enemy, having taken the City by force of war, ever went away with the like spoil: besides, he did so oppresse the Allies and Tributaries of the Empire (and chiefly the Sicilians) with taxes and im∣posts, that many of them were constrained to sell their children for mo∣ney to satisfie his extortion: and by this meanes he scraped together an in∣finite masse of rapines and evill gotten goods; but enjoyed the sweet of them not very long; for very soon after he was murdered by his owne men of wat, in his returne out of Sicily and all that spoil which he had un∣justly surprised, was suddenly taken and transported into Africa by the Sarasens, that then inhabited the City Panorme. Lewis the eleventh, King of France, after he had overcharged his sub∣jects with too grievous burdens of payments and taxes, fell into such a ti∣morous conceit and fear of death, as never any man did the like; he at∣tempted all meanes of avoiding or delaying the same; as first, during his sicknesse, he gave his Physitian monethly ten thousand crownes, by that meanes to creep into his favour: wherein he, being in all other things a very niggard and pinch-penny, shewed himself on the other side more than prodigall: next he sent into Calabria for an Hermit, reported to be an holy and devout man, to whom at his arrivall, he performed so much duty and reverence, as was wonderfull and unseemly: for he threw himselfe on his knees, and besought him to prolong his decaying life, as if he had been a God, and not a man: but all that he could do was to no purpose; no nor the reliques which Pope Sextus sent him to busie himselfe withall, nor the holy viall of the Rheimes which was brought him, could prorogue this life of his, nor priviledge him from dying a discontent and unwilling death: he suspected the most part of his nearest attendants, and would not suffer them to approach unto him in his sicknesse: after he had thus prolonged the time in hope, and yet still languished in extream distresse of his dis∣ease, it was at length told him in all speed, that he should not set his minde any longer upon those vain hopes, nor upon that holy man, for his time
was come, and he must needs die. And thus he that during his Raigne shewed himselfe rough and cruell to his subjects, by too many and heavy impositions, was himselfe in his latter end thus roughly and hardly dealt withall. Christierne the eleventh, King of Denmarke, Norway; and Suecia, after the death of King Iohn his father, reigned, the year of our Lord 1514. and was too intolerable in imposing burdens and taxes upon his subjects; for which cause the Suecians revolted from his government: whom though after many battels and sieges he conquered, and placed amongst them his garisons to keep them in awe, yet ceased they not to rebell against him, and that by the instigation of a mean Gentleman, who very quickly got foting into the Kingdom, and possessed himselfe of the Crowne and government. Now Christierne having lost this Province, and being also in disdain and hatred of his owne Countrey, and fearing least this inward heat of spight should grow to some flame of danger to his life, seeing that the inhabi∣tants of Lubecke conspiring with his uncle Fredericke, began to take armes against him, he fled away, with his wife (sister to the Emperour Charles the fifth) and his young children, to Zealand, a Province of the Empe∣rours, after he had reigned nine yeares: after which the Estates of the Realme (aided by them of Lubecke) assembling together, exalted his uncle Fredericke, Prince of Holsatia (though old and antient) to the Crowne; and publishing certain writings, addressed them to the Emperour and the Princes of his Empire, to render a reason of their proceeding, and to make knowne unto them upon how good considerations they had deposed and banished Christierne, for the tyranny which hee exercised among them. Ten yeares after this he got together a new Army by sea, in hope to recover his losses, but contrary to his hope he was taken prisoner, and in captivity miserably ended his dayes. Henry King of Suecia was chased from his Scepter for enterprising to Nic. Gil. vol. 1 burden his Commons with new contributions: those that were devisers of new Taxes and Tributes, for the most part ever lost their lives in their la∣bours: for proof whereof, let the example of Parchenus or Porchetes serve; who for giving counsell to King Theodebert touching the raising of new sub∣sidies, was stoned to death by the multitude, in the City Trieves. Likewise was George Presquon cruelly put to death by the people, for perswading and setting forward Henry of Suecia, to the vexation and ex∣action of his subjects.
CHAP. XL. More examples of the same subject. AIstulphus the nineteenth King of Lumbardy, was not onely a most cruell Tyran, but also a grievous op∣pressour Platina invita Zacharia. of his subjects with taxes and exactions; for he imposed this upon every one of them, to pay year∣ly Phil. Melanct. lib. 1. a Noble for their heads: against this man Pope Stephen provoked King Pepin of France, who com∣ming with an Army drove the Tyran into Tycinum, and constrained him to yeeld to partiall conditions of peace. Howbeit Pepin was no sooner gone, but he returned to his old byas; wherefore the second time he came and drove him to as great extreamity; insomuch as another peace was concluded: after the accomplishment whereof, perverse Aistulph still vexing his subjects, was plagued by God with an Apoplexy, and so died. Iustinian the Emperour, as he was profuse and excessive in spending, so was he immoderate and insatiable in gathering together riches, for he exer∣cised Zonar. lib. 3. his wit in devising new tributes and payments, and rejoyced his heart in nothing more; for which causes there arose a grievous sedition at Con∣stantinople against him; wherein not onely the excellent and famous mo∣numents of the Empire were burned, but also forty thousand men slain; and this was no small punishment for his oppression. At Paris there is to be seene in the corne market, a certaine monument hard at the mouth of the common sinke, which conveyeth away all the filth Eras. in lingua out of the City; the occasion whereof is reported to be this: A certaine courtier seeing the king sad and melancholly for want of treasure, counsel∣led him to exact of every countriman that brought ware into the city but one penny, and that but for two yeares together: which when the King put in practise, and found the exceeding commodity thereof, he not onely continued that tax, but also invented divers others, to the great dammage of the common-wealth, and enriching of his owne treasurie. Wherefore he that put it first into his head, when hee saw that he had not so much au∣thority in dissuading, as he had in persuading it, to take punishment of himselfe for that inconsiderate deed; and to warne others from attempting the like, he commanded by his testament, that his body should be buried in that common sinke, to be an example of exaction and the filthinesse thereof. Barnabe, Vicount of Milan, by the report of Paulus Iovius, was an uncon∣scionable oppressor of his subjects and tenants: for he did not onely extort Tom. 2. Vire∣rum illustrium. of them continuall imposts and payments, but enjoyned them to keepe eve∣ry one a dogge: which if they came to any mishap, or were either too fat or too leane, the keeper was sure to be beaten, or at least some fine to be set on his head. This Tyran was taken by Iohn Galeacius, and after seven moneths imprisonment poysoned to death. Archigallo, brother to Gorbonianus in nature, though unlike in conditi∣ons Lanquet. (for he was a good Prince, whereas this was a tyran) was crowned King of Britaine in the yeare of the world 3671: we may well place him in the
ranke, of oppressours; for he deposed the Noblemen, and exalted the ignoble, he extorted from men their goods, to enrich his treasure; for which cause the Estates of the Realme deprived him of his royall Dignity, and placed his younger brother Elydurus in his room, after he had raigned five yeares. Hardiknitus King of Denmarke, after the death of Harold was ordained The same. King of England, in the year of our Lord 1041. This King as he was somewhat cruell (for he caused the body of Harold to be taken up out of the Sepulclire, and smiting off his head, to be cast out into the River Thames, because he had injured his mother Emma when he was alive;) so he was burdensom to his Subjects in tributes and exaction: for which cause grow∣ing into hatred with God and his Subjects, he was strucken with sudden death, not without suspition of poysoning, after he had raigned three yeares. William Rufus, second son of William the Conquerour, succeeded his fa∣ther, as in the Kingdom of England, so in disposition of nature: for they The same. were both cruell, inconstant, and covetous, aud burdened their people with unreasonable taxes; insomuch, that what by the murraine of men by postilence, and oppressions of them by exactions, the tillage of the earth was put off for one year, being the year 1099, whereby ensued great scar∣city the year following throughout all the Land: but for the oppression William was justly punished by sudden death, when being at his disport of hunting he was wounded with an arrow glauncing from the bow of Tyrill a French Knight, and so his tyranny and life ended together. And here is further to be noted, that the place where this King was slain, was called New Forest; in which same place Richard, the Cousin ger∣mane of King William, son to Duke Robert his brother, was likewise slain. This New Forest was made by William the Conquerour their father, who plucked downe and depopulated divers Townes and Churches the compasse of 30. miles about, to make this a Forest for wilde Beasts: a most beastly sin, yea a bloudy crying sin, too too much practised in these dayes, and that by great persons, that make no conscience to turne Townes into pastures, and men into sheep: but let all them behold the just vengeance of God upon this Kings posterity: for when then either cannot or will not revenge, then God revengeth either in them or their posterity. In the year 1548. the Commons of Guyenne, Santonge, and Augoule∣mois fell into a great Rebellion, by reason of the extortions of the Custo∣mers Annales of France, Henry 2. and Farmours of Salt: the Rebels in a few weekes grew to the num∣ber of fourty thousand men, armed with clubs and staves; who joyning with the Islanders, by a generall consent ran upon the Officers of the Cu∣stome, and with extreme sury put to sword all that they could take, not∣withstanding the King of Navarre sought by all meanes to appease them. About the same time the Commons of Gascoigne rose in divers places, upon the same causes, and notwithstanding all that the Lord of Monneins, the Kings Lieutenant, and all other Officers could do, they made a great spoil of many honourable Houses, and massacre of much people: inso∣much, that the Lord of Moneins himselfe was slain by them, whilest he was making an Oration to them to pacifie their rage: but at length these Rebels were suppressed by Francis of Lorraine, Earle of Aumale, and Anne of Mommorancye, high Constable of France, and the chief King∣leaders
and Captaines of them executed according to their deserts. La Vergne was drawne in pieces by four horses: L'Estonnac, and the two bro∣thers of Saulx, had their heads cut off: Tallemoigne and Galefer, the two Colonels of the Commons, were broken upon the Wheele, being first crowned with a crowne of burning iron, as a punishment of the Sove∣raignty which they had usurped. Thus the Lord punished both the one and the other, and the one by the other; the exactors for their oppression, and the tumultuous Commons for their Rebellion. Neither doth the Lord thus punish oppressours themselves, but also they that either countenance, or having authority, do not punish the same; as Lanquet. it appeareth by this example following. In the year of our Lord 475. there lived one Corrannus a King of Scots; who though he governed the people in peace and quietnesse a long space, and was indeed a good Prince, yet because his Chancellour Tomset used extortion and exaction amongst his Subjects, and he being advertised thereof, did not punish him, he was slain traiterously by his owne Subjects. It is not unworthy to be noted, how Edward the Third, King of Eng∣land, prospered a long while in the warres against France, and got many worthy and wonderfull victories: but when Prince Edward, son unto the aforesaid Edward, after conditions of peace concluded, began to set taxes and impositions upon the Country of Aquitain, then did King Edwards part begin to incline, and the successe of war, which the space of fourty yeares never forsook him, now frowned upon him; so that he quickly lost all those lands which by composition of peace were granted unto him. CHAP. XLI. Of such as by force of armes have either taken away, or would have taken away, the goods and lands of other men. NOw if they that oppresse their Subjects, and devour them in this manner be found guilty, then must they In this whole chapter note the nature of Ambition, and the frui thereof. needs be much more, that are carried with the wings of their owne hungry ambitious desire to invade their lands and Seigniories, attended on with an infinite re∣tinue of pillages, sackings, ruines of Cities and peo∣ple; which are alwayes necessary companions of furi∣ous unmercifull war. There are no flouds so broad, nor mountaines so steep, nor rokces so rough and dangerous, nor sea so long and furious, that can restrain the rash and headstrong desire of such greedy minded Sacres: so that if their body might be proportioned to the square and greatnesse of their mindes, with the one hand they would reach the East, and with the other hand the West (as it is said of Alexander:) howbeit hereof they boast and glory no lesse than they that took delight to be sirnamed City-spoilers: others burners of Cities; some conquerours, and many Eagles and Faulcons, seeking as it were fame by infamy; and by vice, eternity. But to these men it often commeth to passe, that even then when they thinke to advance their Dominion, and to stretch their bounds and frontiers fur∣thest,
they are driven to recoil, for fear of being dispossessed themselves of their owne lands and inheritances: and even as they dealt, with others ri∣gorously and by strength of weapons, so shall they be themselves rehandled and dealt withall after the same measure; according to the Word of the Prophet denounced against such as they: Cursed be th that spoilest and dealest unfaithfully; when thou hast made an end of spoiling others, th th selfe shalt be spoiled; and when thou hast done dealing traiterously, then treason shall begin to be practised against thee. And this curse most commonly never faileth to seise upon these great Theeves and Robbers, or at least upon their children and successours; as by particular examples we shall see, after we have first spoken of Adonias, who not content with his owne estate of being a Kings son, which God had allotted him, went about to  the 1 Kings 12. Crowne and Kingdome from his brother Solomon, to whom by right it ap∣pertained Treason, lib. 2. cap. 3. (for God had manifested the same by the mouth of his father David) but both he and his assistants, for their overbold and rash enter∣prise, were iustly by Solomon punished with death. Crassus King of Lydia was the first that made war against Ephesus, and Herod. that subdued the Greekes of Asia: to wit, the Phrygians, Mysians. Cha∣lybeans, Paphlagonians, Thracians, Bythinians, Ionians, Dorians, Aeoli∣ans, and Pamphilians, and made them all tributeries unto him: by meanes whereof he being growne exceeding rich and puissant, by the detriment and undoing of so many people, vanted and gloried in his greatnesse and power, and even then thought himselfe the happiest man in the world, when most misery and adversity, grief and distresse of his estate and wholehouse, approuched nearest: for first and formost one of his sonnes that was dear unto him, was by oversight slain at the chase of a wilde Bore: next him∣selfe having commenced war with Cyrus, was overcome in battell, and be∣sieged in Sardis the chief City of his Kingdom, and at last taken and car∣ried captive to Cyrus, despoiled of all his late glory and dominion. And thus Crassus (as saith Plutarch after Herodotus) bore the punishment of the offence of his great Grandfather Gigas: who being but one of King Ca∣daules attendants, slew his master, and usurped the Crowne at the pro∣vokement of the Queen his mistresse, whom he also took to be his wife: And thus this Kingdom decayed by the same meanes by which it first en∣creased. Polycrats the Tyran was one that by violence and tyrannous meanes grew from a base condition to an high estate: for being but one of the Herod. vulgar sort in the City Samos, he with the assistance of fifteen armed men seised upon the whole City, and made himselfe Lord of it: which dividing into three parts, he bestowed two of them upon his two brethren, but not for perpetuity; for ere long the third part of his usurpation cost the elder of them the best part of his life, and the younger his liberty, for he chased him away, that he might be sole possessour of the whole Island. After this, he invaded many other Islands, besides many Cities in the same Land: he raised the Lacedemonians from the fiege of Samos, which they had begirt: and when he saw that all things fell out so well to his owne wish, that no∣thing could be more, fearing so great prosperity could not but carry in the ail some terrible sting of adversity and mischance, attempted by volun∣tary losse of something of value to prevent the mischief which he feared to ensue: and this by the advice of his dear friend and allie (the
King of Aegypt) therefore he threw a ring which he had of great price in∣to the sea, to the end to delude Fortune (as he thought) thereby: ut the ring was after found in a fishes belly, and offered as a present unto him: and this was an evident presage of some inevitable this for tune that waited for him: neither did it prove vain and frivolous; for he was hanged upon a gibbet of Sardis, by the commandment of Orates the Governour of the City; who under pretence of friendship, and colour of rendring his trea∣sure into his hands, and bestowing upon him a great part thereof, promi∣sing also to passe the rest of his dayes under his wing, for fear of the rage of Cambyses, drew him to come privately to speak with him, and so easily wrought his will upon him. Aristodemus got into his hands the government of Cma, after he had made away the principall of the City: and to keep it the better being ob∣tined, Dlonis. Halic. lib. 7. he first worme the vulgars hearts by presents, then banished out of the City their children whom he had put to death, and entertained the rest of the youth with such variety of pleasures and delights, that by those de∣vices he kept himselfe in his tyrannous estate many yeares: but as soon as the children of those slain Citizens were growne to ripe yeares of strength and discretion, being desirous to revenge their fathers deaths, they set upon him in the night, so at unawares, that they put him and all his family to the slaughter. Timophanes usurped a principality, power, and rule in Corinth a free City, and became so odious thereby to the whole people, yea and to his Plutarch. owne brother Tymoleon also, that laying aside all respect of nature, he slew him with his owne hands, preferring the liberty of his Countrey before any unity or bond of bloud. When the Cities of Greece (saith Orosius) would needs through too greedy a desire and ambition of reigne▪ get every Lib. 3. cap. 12. one the mastery and soveraignty of the rest, they all together made ship∣wracke of their owne liberties by encroaching upon others: as for in∣stance, the Lacedemonians, how hurtfull and incommodious the desire of bringing their neighbour adjoyning Cities under their dominion was unto them, the sundry discomfitures and distresses within the time of that war, undertaken upon that onely cause, befell them, bear sufficient record. Oros. l. 3. c. 2. Servius Tullus, the son to a bondman, addicted himselfe so much to the Titus Livius. exploits of war, that by prowesse he got so great credit and reputation among the Romans, that he was thought it to be son in law of King Tar∣quinius, by marrying one of his daughters; after whose death he usurped the Crowne, under colour of the Protectorship of the Kings oo young sonnes; who when they came to age and bignesse, married the daughters of their brother in law Tullus; by whose exhortation and continuall pro∣vokement the elder of them, which was called Tarquinius, conspired against his father in law, and practised to make himselfe King, and to recover his rightfull inheritance, and that by this meanes: he watched his opportu∣nity when the greatest part of the people were out of the City about ga∣thering their fruit in the fields, and then placing his companions in readi∣nesse, to serve his turne if need should be, he marched to the palace in the royall robes, garded with a company of his comederates; and having called a Senate, as he began to complain him of the treachery and impudency of Tullus, behold, Tullus himselfe came in and would have run violently upon him; but Tarquinius catching him about the middle, threw him headlong
downe the staires, and presently sent certaine of his guard to make an end of the murder which he had begun. But herein the cruelty of Tullia was most monstrous; that not onely first moved her husband to this bloudy practice, but also made her coach to be driven over the body of her father, which lay bleeding in the midst of the street, scarce dead. Manlius, after hee had maintained the fortresse of Rome against the Parricide, lib. 2. cap. 11. Gaules, glorying in that action, and envying the good hap and prosperity of Camillus, went about to make himselfe King, under pretence of restoring the people to their antient entire libertie: but his practise being discove∣red, hee was accused, found guilty, and by the consent of the multitude adjudged to be throwne headlong downe from the top of the same fortresse, to the end that the same place which gave him great glorie, might be a wit∣nesse and a memoriall of his shame and last confusion: for all his valiant deeds before done were not of so much force with the people, to excuse his fault or save his life, as this one crime was of weight to bring him to his death. In former times there lived in Carthage one Hanno, who because he had Oros. lib. 4. cap. 6. more riches than all the Common-wealth beside, began to aspire to the do∣mination of the Citie: which the better to accomplish, hee devised to make shew of marrying his onely daughter, to the end that at the marriage feast hee might poison the chiefest men of credit and power of the City whom he knew could or would not any wayes withstand or countermand his purpose: but when this devise tooke no effect, by reason of the discove∣ry thereof by certaine of his servants, hee sought another meanes to effect his will: Hee got together a huge number of bondslaves and servants, which should at a sudden put him in possession of the city but being prevented herein also by the Citizens, he seised upon a castle with a thousand men of base regard, even servants for the most part; whither thinking to draw the Africans and King of the Moores to his succour, he was taken and first whipped, next had his eyes thrust out, and then his armes and legs broken in pieces, and so was executed to death before all the people: his carkasse be∣ing thus mangled with blowes, was hanged upon a gallowes, and all his kin∣dred and children put to death, that there might not one remaine of his straine, either to enterprise the like deed, or to revenge his death. That great and fearefull warrior Iulius Caesar, one of the most hardie and valiant pieces of flesh that ever was, after hee had performed so many nota∣ble exploits, overcome all his enemies, and brought all high and haughtie purposes to their desired effect, being prickt forward with the spurre of ambition and a high minde, through the meanes and assistance of the migh∣ty forces of the common-wealth, which (contrary to the constitution of the Senat) were left in his hands, hee set footing into the State, and ma∣king himselfe master and Lord of the whole Romane Empire, usurped a Plutarch. Suet. Eutrop. soveraigntie over them: but as he attained to his dignitie by force and vio∣lence, so he enjoyed it not long, neither gained any great benefit by it, ex∣cept the losse of his life may be counted a benefit, which shortly after in the open Senat was bereft him: for the conspirers thereof, as soone as hee was set downe in his seat, compassing him about, so vehemently overchar∣ged him on all sides, that notwithstanding all the resistance hee could make for his defence, tossing amongst them, and shifting himselfe up and downe, he was overthrowne on the earth, and abode for dead, through the number
of blowes that were given him, even three and twenty wounds. The Monarchie of Assyria was at one instant extinguished in Sardana pa∣lus; and of Babylon in Balthasar, Arbaces being the worker of the first, and Darius King of Persia, of the later; both of them receiving the wa∣ges, not of their wickednesse, but also of their predecessors, and great grandfathers cruelty and oppressions, by whom many people and nations had been destroyed. Moreover, as the Babylonian Empire was overthrowne by Darius of Persia, so was his Persian Kingdome (in Darius the last King of that countrey his time, this mans successor) overturned by Alexander. Again, the great dominion of Alexander (who survived not long after) was not continued to any of his by inheritance, but divided like a prey amongst his greatest captaines, and from them the most part of it in short time de∣scended to the Romanes; who spreading their wings, and stretching their greedie tallons farre and neere, for a while ravened and preyed over all the world, and enriched and bedecked themselves with the spoyles of many nations; and therefore it was necessary that they also should be made a prey, and that the farre fetcht Goths and Vandales should come upon them, as upon the bodie of a great Whale that suffers shipwreck upon the sea shore: since which time the Romane Empire went to decay, and grew eve∣ry day weaker than other; yea, and many Princes setting themselves against and above it, have robbed it of the realmes and provinces which it robbed others of before. And thus wee may see how all things run as it were in a circle, and how great the uncertainetie of this world is, seeing that the mightiest are subject to so many and great changes: for if there be any thing under the Sun that may carry any shew of stability or continuance, surely it is a Monarchie or Common-wealth, grounded upon the unitie and consent of all people, maintained by the authoritie of the greatest and most mightie, and underpropped with the shores of much strength and wealth, as the Romane Empire was; and yet for all that, there was never any, though never so well reared and furnished, and deepe rooted, which at the length hath not bin demolished, ransacked, and pulled up by some no∣table and strange calamitie. And this is that which the spirit of God would give us to knowe, by the vision of that great image, represented to Nabuchadnezzar in a dreame, according to Daniels interpretation thereof; to wit, that the foure great and puissant Monarchies of the world should at last be ruined and dispersed, like the chaffe before the winde, till they were consumed and brought to nothing, albeit they were glorious and excellent as gold and silver, or strong and mightie as brasse and iron. How much more foolish and evill advised are they then, that for a cer∣taine apparant splendour and shew of worldly honour (which is as fraile as any rose, as variable as the winde, as light and vaine as a shadow or smoke, as unassured as a rotten planke) have the eyes of their minde so dazeled, and their wits so bewitched, and all their affections so transported, as to mingle heaven and earth together, to dash the East against the West, to stirre up discord and dissention betwixt man and man, and to shed so many thousand mens bloud, and all for a paltrie desire of reigne, though to their owne finall ruine and destruction. And thus it came to passe in the time of the emperor Otho to a Duke of Sabell. Venice, called Peter Caudian, who (not content with his Dukedome)
went about to usurpe a tyrannicall rule over the whole Seigniorie, and that by pride and threats, desiring rather to make himselfe terrible to the people by those bad meanes, than amiable and beloved by any meanes whatsoever; and thus daily hee grew as in age so in insolencie: he placed a garrison of men about his palace, and so fortifying himselfe, presently he shewed him∣selfe in his colours, namely a cruell Tyran: which when the multitude perceived, and remembred withall their libertie, which they were like to lose, they tooke up armes forthwith, in purpose to beat downe his haugh∣tie minde: therefore they first set on fire his house, and caused him to forsake his fortresse, and to betake himselfe to his shifts: but when by reason of the stopping of the passages he could not escape, they tooke him and his young sonne also which was with him, and put them to a most cruell and sudden death, and cast their carkasses to be devoured of dogs. In the Empire of Maximilian, Lewis Sforce, a Prince of an inconstant Bembus, lib. 2. Of the Veneti∣an historie. and turbulent spirit, ambitious, and one that made no account of his promises nor faith, tooke upon him the governement of Milan, after the death of his brother Galeaz, Duke of Milan, who was traiterously slaine: in which action the first wrong which hee did was to his brothers widow, whom hee deposed; the second to his young nephew, his brother Galeaz son, whom he so brought up as if he never meant he should come to honour or goodnesse; for he suffered him not to be trained up either in learning or armes, but let him runne into all possible occasions that might corrupt and spoyle his tender age. Thus hee enjoyed the principalitie thirteene yeares, all the while under his nephewes reigne; to whom when Alphonsus King of Naples had given in mariage one of his daughters, and perceived what small reckoning his uncle made of restoring him his Dukedome; after he had often and instantly intreated him without prevailing, at length he fell to threaten him with warre: he fearing to have the worse, and to lose so great a dignitie, wrought so by his owne shifts and devices, together with the helping hand of Pope Alexander, that hee put in the head of Charles the eighth of France to go and conquer Naples, for the hatred which his heart possessed against Alphonsus; supposing by this meanes the better to accomplish his affaires to his owne desire. The King of France Guicciard. li. 1 was no sooner entred Italie, but Lewis Sforce ministred an Italian posset to his young nephew Iohn Galeaz, that hee immediatly died upon it, and then he proclamed himselfe Prince of the Duchie, by the aid of the principall of the Councell, whom he had woon to referre that honour unto him, by deposing the young sonne of Iohn Galeaz, beeing then but five yeares old: but he declared presently his inconstant and perfidious nature, in breaking promise with the King of France, whome he had induced with so many faire speeches to undertake that voyage, and entering a new league with the Venetians both against him and the Pope, although ere long he served them with the same measure: but Lewis the twelfth, succeeding in the Crowne of France, could not brooke this injurie done to his predecessor, but preten∣ding a title to the Duchie of Milan, he dispatched an armie thitherward, that bestirred it selfe so well, that in short space they brought under their subjection all the Cities and Townes neere adjoyning: which the citizens perceiving, began to rebell against their Duke, and killed his Treasurer: whereupon he (being not able to make his part good with the French a∣broad, nor daring to put any confidence in his owne at home) left his castle
to the charge and custodie of a captaine, and fled himselfe with his children to Almaine, towards the Emperour Maximilians court, hoping to finde succour at his hand, as indeed he did: for he returned to Milan with five hundred Burgundians, and eight thousand Switzers, and was received a∣gaine into the Citie. Being thus refortified with these and other more troupes that came unto him, he encamped before Navarre, and by compo∣sition got the City into his hands from the Frenchmen. The French King in the meane while sent a new supplie of men into the Duchie, amongst whom were many Switzers, who so dealt with their countrimen that were on the Dukes side, that they brought them also to favour the King of France, and to forsake the Duke: which when he understood, hee presently departed the citie, and posting to the campe, hardened his souldiers, desi∣ring them to play the men, and not to shrinke, for he meant to give battell without delay: but the captains made answer, that they might not fight a∣gainst their owne nation, without especiall leave from their Lords. Now in the meane while, whilest these things were in doing, they tooke order, that the Frenchmen should approach to Navarre, and intercept all the pas∣sages, that the Duke might not escape: He therefore laid aside his horse, and marched on foot in the squadron of Switzers, now joyned to the French, in attire and armour like a Switzer, thinking by this tricke to save his life: but all his counterfeiting could not save him from being taken, and from lying ten yeares prisoner in the Tower of Loches, where he also died: and so all his high and ambitious thoughts (which scarcely Italie could con∣taine) were pend up in a strait and narrow roome. Guicciard. lib. 4. With the like turbulent and furious spirit of ambition have many Ro∣man Bishops been inspired, who what by their jugling trickes, cousenages, and subtill devises, and what by force, have prospered so well, that of sim∣ple Bishops (which they were wont to be) they are growne temporall Lords, and as it were Monarchs; having in their possessions lands, cities, castles, fortresses, havens, garrisons, and guards, after the manner of Kings; nay they have exalted themselves above Kings (so intollerable is Marke 10. Luke 22. their impudence) and made them subject to their wils; and yet they call themselves the Apostles pedigree, whom Christ forbad all such dominati∣on. But what of that? It pertaineth not to them to succeed in vertue, but in authoritie the Apostles: for if that charge had concerned them, then Pope Lucius the second would never have beene so shamelesse, as to request Bal. in right of his Popeship the soveraigntie over Rome as hee did: neither when it was denyed him, to have gone about to usurpe it by force, and to bring his minde about to have layed siege to the Senat house with armed men, to the end that either by banishing or murdering the Senatours then assembled together, he might invest himselfe with the Kingly dignitie: but what got he by it? Marry this, the people being in an uprore in the Citie, upon the sight of this holy fathers proud attempt, tooke themselves to armes, and ran with such violence upon master Pope, that they forthwith stoned his Holinesse to death; but not like Stephen the Martyr for the pro∣fession of Christ Iesus, but like a vile and seditious theefe for seeking the Common-wealths overthrow. Pope Adrian the fourteenth, a monkes sonne, succeeding Lucius both in the Papacie, and also in ambition, tooke in hand his omitted enterprises; Sabel. Bal. for he excommunicated the Romanes, untill they had banished Arnold a
Bishop, that gave them counsell to retaine the power of electing their ma∣gistrate, and governing their citie in their hands (a thing repugnant to his intent) and after hee had degraded the Consuls, to make his part the stron∣ger, he caused the Emperour Fredericke to come with an armie to the citie; whom notwithstanding hee handled but basely for his paines: for hee did not onely checke him openly for standing on his feet, and holding the stir∣rop of his horse with his left hand, but also denied him the crowne of the Empire, except hee would restore to him Poville, which (he said) pertai∣ned unto him: how beit he got the Crowne notwithstanding, and before his returne from Rome into Germanie, more than a thousand citizens that would not yeeld nor subscribe unto the Popes will, were slaine. After Fre∣derickes departure, the Pope seeing himselfe destitute of his further aid, first excommunicated the King of Sicilie, that in right of inheritance possessed the foresaid Poville: but when this served him to small purpose, he practi∣sed with Emanuel the Emperour of Greece to set upon him; which thing turned to his finall confusion. After this (through his intollerable pride) hee fell out with Fredericke the Emperour, and to revenge himselfe upon him, discharged his subjects from their fealtie to him, and him from his authoritie over them. Now marke his end: As he walked one day to∣wards Aviane, a flie got in at his mouth and downe his throat so farre, that it stopped the conduit of his breath, so that for all that his physitions could do, hee was choked therewith. And thus he that sought by all the meanes he could to make himselfe greater than he ought to be, and to get the masterie of every thing at his owne will and pleasure, and to take away other mens rights by force, was cut short and rebated by a small and base creature, and constrained to leave this life, which he was most unworthy of. Hither may be referred that which befell the Emperour Albert, Duke of Austria, and one of his lievtenants in Switzerland, for going about to u∣surpe and appropriat certaine lands and dominions to him, which belonged not unto him. This Emperour had many children whom he desired to leave rich and mighty, and therefore by all meanes possible he endeavoured to augment his living, even by getting from other men whatsoever he could; and amongst all the rest, this was one especiall practise, wherein he laboured tooth and nayle to alienate from the Empire the land of the Switzers, and to leave it for an everlasting inheritance to his heires: which although the Switzers would in no case condiscend nor agree unto, but contrariwise sued earnestly unto his Majesty for the maintenance of their antient liberties and priviledges which were confirmed unto them by the former Emperors, and that they might not be distracted from the Empire; yet notwithstan∣ding were constrained to undergo for a season the yoke of most grievous ty∣ranny and servitude imposed by force upon them: and thus the poore com∣munaltie indured many mischiefes, and many grievous and cruell extorti∣ons and indignities at the hands of the Emperours officers, whilest they lived in this wretched and miserable estate. Amongst the rest there was one called Grislier that began to erect a strong fort of defence upon a little hill neere unto Altorfe, to keepe the countrey in greater awe and subjection; and desiring to descrie his friends from his foes, he invented this devise: He put a hat upon the end of a long pole, and placed it in the field before Altorfe, where were great multitudes of people, with this commandement, That everie one that came by should do
but dieth ere he awaketh; so mony taken in usurie, delighteth and conten∣teth at the first, but it infecteth all his possessions, and sucketh out the mar∣row of them ere it be long: Seeing then it is abhominable both by the law of God and nature, let us shun it as a toad, and flie from it as a cockatrice: But when these persuasions will not serve, let them turne their eyes to these examples following, wherein they shall see the manifest indignation of God upon it. In the Bishopricke of Collen a notable famous Usurer lying upon his death-bed ready to die, moved up and downe his chaps and his lips, as if he Discipul. de tempore. had bin eating something in his mouth; and beeing demanded what hee eat, hee answered, his money, and that the divell thrust it in his mouth perforce, so that hee could neither will nor chuse but devour it: in which miserable temptation he died without any shew of repentance. The same author telleth of another Usurer, that a little before his death called for his bags of gold and silver, and offered them all to his soule, upon condition it would not forsake him: But if he would have given all the world, it could not ransome him from death: wherefore when he saw there was no remedie but hee must needs die, hee commended his soule to the Divell, to be carried into everlasting torments: which words when hee had uttered hee gave up the ghost. Another Usurer being ready to die, made this his last Will and Testa∣ment: My soule (quoth he) I bequeath to the divell who is owner of it, my wife likewise to the divell who induced me to this ungodly trade of life, and Iohanaes An∣glut. my deacon to the divell for soothing me up, and not reproving me for my faults; and in this desperate persuasion he died incontinently. Usury consisteth not only in lending and borowing, but buying and selling also, and all unjust and crafty bargaining, yea and it is a kinde of usurie to detain through too much covetousnesse those commodities from the people which concerne the publike good, and to hoord them up for their private gain, til some scarcitie orwant arise; and this also hath evermore beene most sharpely punished, as by these examples may appeare. About the yeare 1543. at what time a great famine and dearth of bread afflicted the world, there was in Saxonie a countrey peasant, that having carried his corne to the market, and sold it cheaper than he looked for, as he returned homewards he fell into most heavy dumpes and dolours of minde with griefe that the price of graine was abated: and when his servants sang merrily for joy of that blessed cheapnesse, he rebuked them most sharpely and cruelly, yea and was so much the more tormented and troubled in minde, by how much he more he saw any poore soule thankfull unto God for it: but marke how God gave him over to a reprobate and desperate sence: Whilest his servants rode before, hee hung himselfe at the cart taile, being past recoverie of life ere any man looked backe or perceived him. A notable example for our En∣glish cormorants, who joyne barne to barne, and heape to heape, and will not sell nor give a handful of their superfluitie to the poore, when it beareth a low price, but preserve it till scarcity and want come, and then they sell it at their owne rate; let them feare by this, lest the Lord deale so or worse with them. Another covetous wretch, when he could not sel his cornesodear as hee de∣sired, said the mise should eat it rather than he would lessen one jot of the price thereof: Which words were no sooner spoken, but vengeance tooke
them: for all the mise in the countrey flocked to his barnes and fieldes, so that they left him neither standing nor lying corne, but devoured all. This story was written to Martin Luther: upon occasion whereof he inveying mightily against this cruell usurie of husbandmen, told of three misers Luther. that in one yeare hung themselves, because graine bore a lower price than they looked for: adding moreover, that all such cruell and muddy extorti∣oners deserved no better a doome, for their unimercifull oppressi∣on. Another rich farmer, whose barnes were full of graine, and his stacks D. Pomeranus. untouched, was so covetous withall, that in hope of some dearth and deere∣nesse of corne, he would not diminish one heape, but hoorded up dayly more and more, and wished for a scarcity upon the earth, to the end hee might enrich his coffers by other mens necessities. This cruell churle re∣joyced so much in his aboundance, that everie day he would go into his barnes, and feed his eyes with his superfluitie: Now it fell out as the Lord would, that having supped and drunke very largely, upon a night as hee went, according to his custome, to view his riches, with a candle in his hand, behold the wine, or rather the justice of God, overcame his sences, so that he fell downe suddenly into the mow, and by his fall set on fire the corne, being dry and easie to be incensed, in such sort that in a moment all that which he had scraped together and preserved so charily, and delighted in so unreasonably, was consumed and brought to ashes, and scarce he him∣selfe escaped with his life. Another in Misnia, in the yeare 1559, having great store of corne hoor∣dedup, Ioh. Fincel li. 2. refused to succor the necessitie of his poore & halfe famished neigh∣bours: for which cause the Lord punished him with a strange and unusuall judgement, for the corne which he so much cherished, assumed life, and be∣came feathered fowles, flying out of his barnes in such abundance, that the world was astonished thereat, and his barnes left emptie of all provision, in most wonderfull and miraculous manner. No lesse strange was that which happened in a towne of France called The same Au∣thor. Stenchansen, to the Governour of the towne, who being requested by one of his poore subjects to sell him some corne for his money, when there was Fides fit apud authorem. none to be gotten elsewhere; answered, hee could spare none, by reason he had scarce enough for his owne hogs: which hoggish disposition the Lord requited in it owne kinde; for his wife at the next litter brought forth seven pigs at one birth to increase the number of his hogs: that as he had prefer∣red filthie and ougly creatures before his poore brethren, in whom the i∣mage of God in some sort shined forth, so he might have of his owne get∣ting more of that kinde to make much of, since hee loved them so well. Equall to all the former both in cruelty touching the person, and mira∣cle The same. touching the judgement, was that which is reported by the same au∣thour, to have happened to a rich couetous woman in Marchia, who in an extreame dearth of victuals, denyed not onely to relieve a poore man whose children were ready to starve with famine, but also to sell him but one bu∣shell of corne, when he wanted but a penny of her price: for the poore wretch making great shift to borrow that penny, returned to her againe, and desired her he might have the corn: but as he payed her the mony, the penny fell upon the ground by the providence of God, which as she stretched out
obeisance, and vaile bonnet to the hat, and in every respect shew themselves as dutifull unto it, as to his owne person, imagining that his greatest ene∣mies could not endure nor finde in their hearts to do it, and therefore upon this occasion he might apprehend them, and discover all their close practi∣ses, and conspiracies, which they might brew against him: now there was one, a stout hearted man, that passing everie day up and downe that wayes, could in no wise be brought to reverence the dignitie of the worthy hat, (so unreasonable a thing it seemed in his eyes) whereupon being taken, the tyran commanded him (for punishment of his open contempt) to shoot at an apple laid upon the crowne of the head of his dearest childe, and if he mist the apple, to be put to death: the poore man after many ex∣cuses, and allegations, and entreaties that he might not hazard his childes life in that sort, was notwithstanding enforced to shoot, and shooting, God so directed his shaft, that the apple was hit, and the childe untoucht; and yet for all this, he adjudged him to perpetuall prison: out of which he mi∣raculously escaping, watched the tyrans approach in so fit a place, that with the shaft that should have beene the death of his sonne, he strooke him to the heart; whose unluckie end, was a luckie beginning of the Switzers de∣liverance from the bondage of tyrans, and of the recovery of their antient freedome, which ever after they wisely and constantly maintained. Nic. Gil. vol. 1. The Emperour Albert, purposing to be revenged upon them for his in∣jury, as also for slaying many more of his men, and breaking downe his castles of defence which he had caused to be builded in their countrey, de∣termined to mak war upon them; but he was slaine ere he could bring it hat determination to effect by one of his owne nephews, from whom (being his overseer and gardant for bringing up) he withheld his patrimonie a∣gainst all equity; neither by prayers or entreatie could be perswaded to re∣store it. These things (according to Nic. Gils report in his first volume of the Chronicles of France) happened about the reigne of Saint Lewis. Hither may be referred the history of Richard the first, King of En∣gland, called Richard Coeur de Lyon: though not so much a fruite of ambi∣tion Ex Bibliotbeca Cariensi, &c. in him, as of filthie covetousnesse. This King, when as Widomarus Lord of Linionice in little Britaine having found a great substance of trea∣sure in the ground, sent him a great part thereof, as chiefe Lord and Prince of the countrey, refused it; saying, That he would either have all or none; but the finder would not condiscend to that: whereupon the King layed siege to a castle of his called Galuz, thinking the treasure to lye there: but as he with the Duke of Brabant went about viewing the Castle, a souldier within stroke him with an arrow in the arme, the yron whereof festering in the wound, caused that the King within nine daies after died: And so because he was not content with the halfe of the treasure that another man found, lost all his owne treasure that he had, together with his life the chiefest trea∣sure of all.
CHAP. XLII. Of Vsurers, and their theft. IF open larcenies and violent robberies and extortions are forbidden by the law of God, as we have seene they are, then it is no doubt but that all deceit and un∣just dealings and bargains used to the dammage of o∣thers are also condemned by the same law; and namely Usurie, when a man exacteth such unmeasurable gaine for either his mony or other thing which hee lendeth, that the poore borrower is so greatly indam∣maged, that in stead of benefitting and providing for his affaires, which he aimed at, he hitteth his further losse and finall overthrow. This sinne is ex∣pressely prohibited in Leviticus, 25, Deuteronomy 23, and Psalme, 15; where the committants thereof are held guilty before Gods judgement Seat, of iniquitie and injustice: and against them it is that the prophet Levit. 25. 36 Deut. 23. 19. Psal. 15. 5. Ezechiel denounceth this threatening: That he which oppresseth or vexeth the poore and afflicted, he which robbeth or giveth to usurie, and receiveth the en∣crease into their bags, shall die the death, and his bloud shall bee upon his Eze. 18. 12. 13 pate. Neither truely doth the justice of God sleepe in this respect, but taketh vengeance upon all such, and punisheth them after one sort or other, either in body or goods, as it pleaseth him: I my selfe knew a grand usurer in the countrey of Vallay that having scraped together great masses of gold and silver by these unlawfull meanes, was in one night robbed of fifteene hun∣dred crownes by theeves that broke into his house. I remember also ano∣ther usurer dwelling in a town called Argental, nigh unto Anovay under the jurisdiction of Tholosse in high Vivaria, who being in hay time in a mea∣dowe, was stung in the foot by a serpent, or some other venomous beast, that he died thereof: an answerable punishment for his often stinging and biting many poore people with his cruell and unmercifull usurie. Nay it is so contrarie to equitie and reason, that all nations led by the instinct of nature, have alwayes abhorred and condemned it; insomuch that the conditions of theeves hath bin more easie and tollerable than usu∣rers; for theft was wont to be punished but with double restitution, but usurie with quadruple: and to speake truely, these rich and gallant usurers do more rob the common people and purloine from them, than all the publike theeves that are made publike examples of justice in the world. It is to be wished that some would examine usurers bookes, and make a De officio prin∣cip. lib. 4. ca. 14 bond-fire of their obligations, as that Lacedemonian did when Agesilaus re∣ported that hee never saw a leerer fire: or that some Lucullus would deli∣ver Europe from that contagion, as the Romane did Asia in his time. Li∣curgus Alex. ab Alex. lib. 1 cap. 7. banished this canker worme out of his Sparta: Amasis punished it severely in his Aegypt: Cato exiled it out of Sicilie; and Solo condemned it in Athens; how much more should it he held in detestation among Christians? S. Chrysostome compareth it fitly to the biting of an aspe; Chrysost. in Mat. cap. 5. as he that is stung with an aspe, falleth asleepe as it were with delectation,
her hand to reach, it miraculously turned into a serpent, and bit her so fast, that by no meanes it could be loosened from her arme, untill it had brought her to a woefull and miserable end. Sergius Galba, before hee came to be Emperor (being President of Africa under Claudius, when as through penurie of victuals, corne, and other food Fulgos. lib. 2. cap. 2. was very sparingly shared out and divided amongst the armie) punished a certaine souldier that sould a bushell of wheat to one of his fellows for an hundred pence, in ope to obtaine a new share himselfe, in this manner, he cōmanded the Quaestor or Treasurer to give him no more sustenance, since hee preferred lucre before the necessity of his owne body and his friends welfare; neither suffered he any man else to sell him any; so that hee peri∣shed with famine, and became a miserable example to all the army, of the fruits of that foule droupsie covetousnesse. And thus wee see how the Lord rained downe vengeance upon all cove∣tous Usurers and oppressors, plaguing some on this fashion, and some on that; and never passing any, but either in this life some notable judgement overtakes them, either in themselves or their off-springs (for it is notori∣ously knowne that usurers children, though left rich, yet the first or second generation became alwayes beggers) or in the life to come they are thrown into the pit of perdition, from whence there is no redemption nor deli∣verance. CHAP. XLIII. Of Dicers and Card-players, and their theft. IF any recreation be allowed us, as no doubt there is, yet sure∣ly it is not such as whereby we should worke the damage and hurt of one another, as when by gaming we draw away ano∣ther mans mony with his great losse, and this is one kinde of theft, to usurpe any mans goods by unlawfull meanes: wherefore no such sports ought to finde any place amongst Christians, especially those wherein any kinde of lot or hazard is used, by the which the good blessings of God are, contrary to their true and naturall use, expo∣sed to chance and fortune, as they tearme it: for which cause Saint Augus∣tine is of this opinion concerning them: That the gaine which ariseth to any party in play, should be bestowedupon the poor, to the end that both the Epist. 54. ad Maced. gamesters, as well the winner as the loser might be equally punished, the one by not carrying the stake being won, the other by being frustrated of all his hope of winning. Players at dice, both by the Elibertine & Constantino∣politan Councell under Iustinian, were punished with excommunication: and by a new constitution of the said Emperour it was enacted, That no man should use Dice-play either in private or publique, no nor approve Can. 77. Can. 50. the same by their presence, under paine of punishment: and Bishops were there appointed to be overseers in this behalfe, to espie if any default was Cod. li. 3. tit. 43 made. Od. 14. l. 2. Ludere doctior seu Graeco ju∣beas trocho, seu malis veti∣talgibus alea. Horace an heathen Poet avouched the unlawfulnesse of this thing even in his time, when he saith that Dice-playing was forbidden by their law. Lewis the eighth, King of France, renouned for his good conditions and rare ver∣tues;
amongst all the excellent laws which he made, this was one, That all sports should be banished the Common-wealth, except shooting (whether with long bow or Crosse bow) and that no Cards nor Dice should be either made or sold by any; to the end that all occasion of gaming might bee taken away. Surely it would be very profitable and expedient for the Weale-pub∣lique, that this Ordinance might stand in use at this day, and that all Mer∣chants and Mercers whatsoever, especially those that follow the reformati∣on of Religion, might forbeare the sale of all such paltry Wares: for the fault in selling such trash is no lesse than the abuse of them in playing at them, for so much as they upon greedinesse of so small a gaine, put as it were a sword into a mad mans hand, by ministring to them the instruments not onely of their sports, but also of those mischiefes that ensue the same. There a man may heare curses as rife as words, bannings, swearings, and blasphemies, banded up and downe; there men fret themselves to death, and consume whole nights in darke and divelish pastimes; some lose their horses, others their cloakes, a third sort all that ever they are worth, to the undoing of their houses, wives, and children; and some again from brau∣lings fall to buffetings, from buffets to bloudshedding, from bloudshedding to hanging: and these are the fruits of those gallant sports. But this you shall see more plainely by a few particular examples. In a Discip. de tem∣por. ser. 12. towne of Campania a certaine Iew playing at dice with a Christian, lost a great summe of money unto him; with which great losse being enraged, and almost beside himselfe, as commonly men in that case are affected, hee belched out most bitter curses against Christ Iesus, and his mother the blessed Virgin, in the midst whereof the Lord deprived him of his life and sense; and strooke him dead in the place: as for his companion the Christi∣an, indeed he escaped sudden death, howbeit he was robbed of his wit and understanding, and survived not verie long after: to teach us not onely Blasphemie, Lib. 1. cap. 31. what a grievous sinne it is to blaspheme God, and to accompanie such wret∣ches, and not to shun, or at least reprove their outrage; but also what mon∣strous effects proceed from such kinde of ungodly sports, and how grie∣vously the Lord punisheth them, first by giving them over to blasphemy, secondly to death, and thirdly and lastly to eternall and irrevocable damna∣tion: Let our English gamesters consider this example, and if it will not terrifie them from their sports, then let them looke to this that followeth, which if their hearts be not as hard as adamant, will mollifie and perswade them. In the yeare 1533. neere to Belissana a citie in Helvetia, there were three Iob. Fincell. Andreas Mus∣cabus in diabol. blasphemiae. prophane wretches that played at dice upon the Lords day without the wals of the citie, one of which called Vlrich Schraelerus having lost much mony, and offended God with many cursed speeches, at last presaging to himselfe good lucke, he burst forth into these tearmes, If fortune deceive me now, I will thrust my dagger into the verie body of God as farre as I can: now Mandat. 4. Breach of Sa∣both, li. 1. 6. 35. Mandat. 3. Blasphemie, lib. 1. cap. 31. fortune failed him as before, wherefore forthwith he drew his dagger, and taking it by the point, threw it against heaven with all his strength: behold, the dagger vanished away, and five drops of bloud distilled upon the table before them, and without all delay the divell came in place, and carried a∣way the blasphemous wretch with such force and noyse, that the whole ci∣ty was amased and astonished thereat: the other two (halfe beside them∣selves with feare) strove to wipe away the drops of bloud out of the table,
but the more they wiped it, the more clearly it appeared; The rumor of this accident flew into the citie, and caused the people to flocke thicke and threefold unto the place, where they found the other two gamesters wash∣ing the boord; whom (by the decree of the Senate) they bound with chaines, and carried towards the prison; but as they passed with them through a gate of the citie, one of them was stroken suddenly dead in the midst of them, with such a number of lice and wormes creeping out of him, that it was both wonderfull and lothsome to behold: the third they themselves (without any further inquisition or triall) to avert the indig∣nation which seemed to hang over their heads, put incontinently to death; the table they tooke and preserved it for a monument, to witnesse unto po∣sterity, both how an accursed pastime dicing is, and also what great incon∣veniencies and mischiefes grow thereby. But that we may see yet more the vanitie and mischievous working of this sport, I will report one storie more out of the same authour, though not equall to the former in strangenesse and height of sinne, yet as tragicall, and no lesse pitifull. In the yeare 1550, there lived in Alsatia one Adam Steckman, one that Iob Fincel. l. 2 got his living by tximming, pruning, and dressing vines; this man having received his wages, fell to dice, and lost all that he had gotten; insomuch that he had not wherewith to nourish his family, so that he fell into such a griefe of minde, and withall into such paines of the head, that he grew al∣most desperate withall: one day his wife being busie abroad, left the care of her children unto him; but he tooke such great care of them that he cut all their throats, even three of them, whereof one lay in the cradle, and lastly would have hanged himselfe, had not his wife come in the meane while, who beholding this pitifull tragedie, gave a great outcrie, and fell downe dead; whereupon the neighbours running in, were eye witnesses of this wofull spectacle: as for him, by law he was judged to a most severe and cruell pu∣nishment: and all these pitifull events arose from that cursed root of Dice∣play. We ought therefore to learne by all these things that have beene already spoken, to abstaine not onely from this cursed pastime, but also from extor∣tion, robberies, deceit, guile, and other such naughty practices that tend to the hurt and detriment of one another; and in place thereof to procure the good and welfare of each one in all kindenesse and equity, following the A∣postles counsell, where he sayeth, Let them that stole steale no more, but ra∣ther Ephes. 4. 28. travell by labouring with his hands in that which is good, that he may have wherewith to succor the necessitie of others. For it is not enough not to do evill to our neighbor, but we are tyed to do him good, or at least to endea∣vour to do it.
CHAP. XLIV. Of such as have beene notorious in all kinde of sinne. BY these fore placed examples we have seene how heavie the judgements of God have beene upon those that through the These exam∣ples of this Chapter may be referred to all the com∣mandements for the most part. untamednesse of their owne lusts and affections, would not submit themselves under the holy and mighty will of God, but have countermanded his commandements, and with∣stood his precepts, some after one sort, and some after ano∣ther: now because there have bin some so wicked and wretched, that being wholy corrupted and depraved, they have over flowed with all manner of sinne and iniquity, and as it were maugred God with the multitude and hai∣nousnesse of their offences; we must therefore spend sometime also in set∣ting forth their lives and ends, as of the most vile and monstrous kinde of people that ever were. In this ranke we may place the antient Inhabitants of the land of Canaan; an irreligious people, void of all feare and dread of God, and consequently given over to all abhominabl wickednesse, as to con∣jurings, witchcrafts, and unnameable adulteries: for which causes the Lord abhorring and hating them, did also bring them to a most strange destructi∣on; for first and formost Jericho (the frontier citie of their countrey) be∣ing assaulted by the Israelites, for hindering their progresse into the country; were all discomfited, not so much by Iosuah his sword, as by the huge stones which dropped from heaven upon their heads: and lest the night overtaking them should breake off the finall and full destruction of this cursed people, the day was miraculously prolonged, and the Sunne made to rest himselfe in the middest of heaven for the space of a whole day: and so these five Kings hiding themselves in a cave, were brought out, and their neckes made a foot∣stoole to the captains of Israell, and were hanged on five trees. The tyran Pertander usurped the government over Corinth after hee had Sabell. slaine the principall of the city: he put to death his owne wife, to the end to content and please his concubine; nay and was so execrable, as to lye with his owne mother: he banished his naturall sonne, and caused many children of his subjects to be gelded: finally fearing some miserable and monstrous end, and want of sepulchre, in conscience of his misdeeds, he gave in charge to two strong and hardy souldiers, that they should gad a certain appointed place, and not faile to kill the first that came in their way, and to bury his body being slaine: now the first that met them was himselfe, who offered himselfe unto them without speaking any word, and was soone dispatched and buried according to his commandement▪ but these two were encountered with foure other, whom he also had appointed to do the same to them which they had done to them. In this ranke deservably we may place the second Dionysius his sonne, that Sabell. for his cruelties and extortions was slaine by his owne subjects: who though at the first made shew of a better and milder nature than his father was of, yet after he was installed in his Kingdom, and growne strong, his wicked na∣ture shewd forth it selfe; for first he rid out of the way his owne brethren, then his neerest kindred, and lastly, all other that but any way displeased
him; using his sword not to the cutting downe of vice, as it ought, but to the cutting the throats of his innocent and guiltlesse subjects: with which tyrannie the people being incensed, began to mutinie, and from mutinies fell to open rebellion, persecuting him so, that he was compelled to flie and take harbour in Greece: where notwithstanding hee ceased not his ac∣customed manners, but continued still freshly, committing robberies, and doing all manner of injuries and outrages, in wronging men; and forcing both women and maids to his filthie lusts: untill hee was brought to so low and so base an ebbe of estate, that of a King being become a beggar and a vagabond, hee was glad to teach children at Corinth to get his poore li∣ving, and so died in miserie. Clearchus, another tyran, after hee had put to death the most part of the Sabell. Nobles, and chiefe men of account in the citie of Heraclea, usurped a ty∣rannous authoritie over the rest: amongst many of whose monstrous enor∣mities this was one, that hee constrained the widowes of those whom hee had slaine, against their wils to marry those of his followers whom hee al∣lotted them to; insomuch that many of them with griefe and anger slew themselves: now there were two men of stouter courage than the rest, who pittying the miserable condition of the whole citie, undertooke to deliver the same out of his cruell hands: comming therefore accompanied with fiftie other of the same minde and resolution, as though they would debate a privat quarrell before his presence, as soone as convenience served, they diverted their swords from themselves into the tyrans bosome, and hewed him in pieces in the very midst of his guard. Agathocles, King, or rather tyran of Sicilie, from a porters sonne, grow∣ing Sabell. to be a man of warre, tooke upon him the government of the countrey, and usurped the crowne, contrary to the consent of his people: hee was one given to all manner of filthie and uncleane pollutions, in whom trea∣cherie, crueltie, and generally all kinde of vice reigned, and therefore was worthily plagued by God; first by a murder of his youngest sonne, com∣mitted by his eldest sonnes son, that aspired unto the crowne, and thought that he might be an obstacle in his way for obtaining his purpose: and last∣ly, having sent his wife and children into Aegypt for safety, by his owne miserable and languishing death which shortly after ensued. Romulus the first King of Rome was (as Florus testifieth) transported by Florus. a devill out of this earth into some habitation of his owne, for the mon∣strous superstitions, conjurings, thefts, ravishments, and murders, which during his pompe hee committed; and moreover (he saith) that Plutarch, Plutarch. the most credible and learned Writer amongst Historiographers, both Greek and Latin, that ever writ, avoucheth the same for true; That hee was carried away one day by a spirit in a mighty tempest of thunder and lightening, before the view of the whole multitude, to their great astonish∣ment, insomuch that they fled at the sight thereof. What shall wee say of Silla, that monster in cruelty, that most odious and execrable Tyran that ever was, by whom all civile order and humane policie was utterly defaced, and all vice and confusion in stead thereof set up? did hee not procure the death of six thousand men at one clap, at the Plutarch. discomfiture of Marius? And having promised to save the lives of three thousand that appealed unto his mercy, did he not cause them to be assem∣bled within a Parke, and there to have their throats cut, whilest hee made
an oration to the Senate? It was hee that filled the channels of the streets of Rome, and other cities in Italie, with bloud and slaughters innumerable: and that neither spared Altar, Temple, or other priviledged place or house whatsoever, from the pollution and distainment of innocent bloud: hus∣bands were staine in their wives armes, infants in their mothers bosomes, and infinite multitudes of men murdered for their riches: for if any were either rich, or owners of faire houses, or pleasant gardens, they were sure to die: besides, if there were any private quarrell or grudge betwixt any citizen, and some of his crew, he suffered his side to revenge themselves af∣ter their owne lusts, so that for private mislike and enmity many hundreds lost their lives; he that saved an outlaw or proscribed person in his house, (of which there were too many of the best sort in his time) or gave him entertainment under his roofe, whether he were his brother, sonne, or pa∣rent whatsoever, was himselfe for recompence of his curtesie and humani∣tie, proscribed and sould, and condemned to death: and he that killed one of them that was proscribed, had for reward two talents (the wages of his murder) amounting in value to twelve hundred crownes, whether it was a bondslave that slew his master, or a sonne that murdered his father: com∣ming to Preneste, hee began to proceed in a kinde of justiciall forme a∣mongst the citizens, and as it were by law and equitie to practise wrong and injurie: but ere long, either being weary of such slow proceedings, or not at leisure to prosecure the same any further, he caused to meet together in one assemblie two thousand of them, whom hee committed all to the mas∣sacre without any manner of compassion: As hee was sitting one day in the middest of his pallace in Rome, a souldier to whom he had granted the proscription of his dead brother, as if he had beene alive (whom he him∣selfe before the civile warre had slaine) presented him in lieu of thanks for the great good turne the head of one Marcus Marius of the adverse faction, before the whole citie, with his hands all imbrued in bloud, which hee also washed in the holy water stake  Apolloes temple, being near unto that place; and all this being commended and countenanced by Silla: hee de∣creed a generall disanulment and abrogation of all titles and rights that were passed before his time, to the end to have the more liberty both to put to death whom he pleased, and to confiscate mens goods, and also to unpeo∣ple and repeople cities, sack, pulldowne, and build, and to depose & make Kings at his pleasure: the goods which he had thus seised, he shamed not to sell with his owne hands; sitting in his tribunall sear, giving oftentimes a faire woman a whole countrey, or the revenues of a citie for her beauty, and to Players, Jesters, Juglers, Minstrs, and other wicked effranchised slaves, great and unnecessary rewards: yea, and to divers married women also, whom (pleasing his eye) he deprived their husbands of perforce, and espoused them to himselfe, maugre their wils: being desirous to ally him∣selfe with Pompey, hee commanded him to cast off his lawfull wife, and ta∣king from Magnus Gabri his wife Aemilia, made him marry her, though already great with childe by her former husband; but she died in travell in his house. In seasts and banketings he was too immoderate, for it was his continuall and daily practise: the wine that hee dranke usually was fortie yeares old, and the company that hee delighted to keepe was compact of ministriss, tumblers, players, singers, and such like rascals, and with these he would spend whole dayes in drinking, carousing, dauncing, and all dis∣solutenesse.
Now this disinordinate life of his did so augment a disease which was growne in his body, to wit an imposthume; that in time it cor∣rupted his flesh, and turned it into lice; in such sort, that though hee had those that continually followed him to sweepe them off, and to louze him night and day, yet the encrease was still so plentifull, that all would not serve to cleare him for a moment: insomuch, that not his apparell, though never so new and changeable; nor his linnen, though never so fresh, nor his bath, nor his laver, no nor his meat and drinke could be kept unpolluted from the fluxe of this filthy vermine, it issued in such abundance: often∣times in a day hee would wash himselfe in a bath, but to no great purpose; for his shame increased the more. The day before he dyed he sent for one Granius, who attending his death, delayed to pay that which hee ought to the Common-wealth; and being come in his presence, hee commanded him to be strangled to death before his face: but with straining himselfe in crying after his execution, his imposthume burst, and vomited out such streames of bloud, that his strength failed him withall; and passing that night in great distresse, the next day made up his wicked and miserable end. After that Caligula began to addict himselfe to impiety and contempt of Dion. God, presently being not curbed with any feare nor shame, he became most dissolute in all kinde of wickednesse; for at one time he caused to be slaine a great number of people for calling him young Augustus, as if it had beene an injury to his person to be so intituled: and to say briefly of all his mur∣ders, there were so many of his kindred, friends, senators, and citizens, made away by his meanes, that it would be too long and tedious here to recite: wherefore seeing that hee was generally hated of the people for his mis∣deeds, hee wished that they all had but one head, to the end (as it might seeme) that at one blow hee might dispatch them all. In sumptuousnesse and costlinesse of dishes and banquets, he neither found nor left his equall, Sueton. for he would sup up most pretious stones melted by art, and swallow down treasures into his belly: his banquets were often served with golden loaves and golden meats: in giving rewards hee was sometime too too prodigall, for he would cast great summes of money amongst the people certain dayes together, untill his bags were drawne drie, and then new strange shifts must be practised to fill them up againe: his subjects he over charged with many new-found and unjust taxes, exacting of them a tribute even for their meat: if there were any money controversies to be decided, the fourth part of the same was his share, which way soever the matter enclined: the eight penny of every Porters gaine throughout the citie (which with travell they ear∣ned) hee tooke into his purse: yea, and that which is more filthy and dis∣honest, the very whores and common strumpets payed him a yearely re∣venue for their bauderies; which act, though most villanous and slandrous, yet is made a samplar to some of our holy Popes to imitate, and indeed hath of many beene put in practise: but to our purpose; whereas before his prodigality was so great as to scatter money like seed amidst the peo∣ple; now his niggardlinesse grew on the other side so miserable, that hee would have the people upon the first day of the yeare, every one to give him a new-yeares-gift, he himselfe standing at the doore of his house like a beggar, receiving the peoples almes. Moreover, of all that ever gave their lusts the bridle to abuse other mens wives, hee was most impudent and no∣torious;
for divers times he used to feast many faire Ladies and their hus∣bands, and after his good cheare ended, to overview them severally a part, as Merchants doe their wares; and to take her that pleased his fancie best into some secret place, to abuse at his pleasure: neither after the deed done to be ashamed to glory and vaunt himselfe in his wicked and filthy act. He committed incest with his owne sisters, forcing them to his lust, and by one of them had a daughter borne, whom (saith Eutropius) his abhominable concupiscence abused also in most filthy and preposterous manner: At length many conspired his destruction, but especially one of the Tribunes, which office we may after the custome of our French nation rightly terme the Marshalship, and the officer one of our foure Marshals, as Budeus saith) who shewed himselfe more eagerly affected in the cause than the rest, pur∣sued this enterprise in more speedy and desperate manner: for as the Ty∣rant returned from the Theater by a by-way to his Pallace (the third day of the feast, which he celebrated in honour of Iulius Caesar) the Tribune pre∣sented himselfe, as if in regard of his office, to import some matter of im∣portance unto him: and having received a currish word or two at his hands (as his custome was) he gave him such a stroke betweene the head and the shoulders, that what with it and the blowes of his complices, that go∣ing for the same intent, rushed upon him, he was laine amongst them, no man stirring a foot to deliver him out of their hands, though many looked on, and might have aided him if they would: he was no sooner slaine, but his wife incontinently was sent after, and his daughter also that was crushed to death against a wall; and thus came his wretched selfe, with his filthie progenie, to a wretched and miserable end. Nero shewed himselfe not onely an enemy to God in persecuting his Church, but also a perverter and disturber of humane nature, in embruing Sueton. his hands in the bloud of his owne mother and grandmother, whom he cau∣sed to be put to death, and in killing his owne wife and sister, and infinite numbers of all kinde of people: beside, in adulteries he was so monstrous, that it is better to conceale them from modest eares, than to stirre up the puddle of so stinking and noysome a dunghill: for which his villanies the Senate condemned him to a shamefull and most ignominious death, and his armies and forces forsooke him: which when hee understood, he betooke him to flight, and hid himselfe in an out way amongst thornes and bushes, which with great paine having past through, being weary of his life, hee threw himselfe downe into a pit foure foot deepe; and when he could get none of his men to lay their hands upon him, he desperately and miserably slew himselfe. Vitellius, for the murders and other outragious misdeeds which he com∣mitted, Sueton. was taken in his shirt, and drawne through the streets with a halter about his necke, and his hands bound behinde him, and the point of a dag∣ger under his chin; the people casting durt and dung upon him in detesta∣tion, and calling him make-bate and seditious villain, with other opprobri∣ous reproches: and at last being massacred with many blowes, was drawne with a hooke into Tyber, like a carrion. Domitian was a cruell enemy of the Christians▪ hee rejected his owne Sueton. wife to take a new, and being covertly reproved by Helvidius for the same, in a Play of the divorce of Paris and Enon, which he presented unto him, he put him to death for his labour. Many worthy Senatours and chiefe men,
and such as had borne the office of the Consull, without just cause given of reprehension, were murdered by him: hee spared not his owne bloud and nearest allies, no nor his owne brother Titus, but what with poyson and sword, destroyed them all to confusion. But in the end, when hee saw that the world hated him for his outragious cruelties, he consulted with the A∣strologians and Conjurers, what death did waite for him; one of the which amongst the rest told him that hee should be slaine, and that very shortly: wherewithall being sore troubled, hee first caused him that had prognosti∣cated this evill unto him, to be slaine: then he compassed himselfe with a strong guard, and to the end to see them that should come neare, hee made his gallery walls where hee walked, of such a kinde of glistring and shining stone, that he might see in them all about him, both behinde and before. When the day and houre which was fore-calculated for his death was come, one of the Conspirators came in with his left arme in a scarfe, as if he had beene sore hurt; feigning that he would bewray the whole treason which hee so much feared; and being entred his Chamber, he presented him with a long discourse in writing, touching the matter and manner of the Conspiracie: and when in reading the same, he saw him most astoni∣shed; then he tooke occasion to strike him suddenly into the belly with his dagger, his owne servants making up the murther, when they saw him goe about to resist. And thus by all his wisedome and providence he could not rid himselfe from being surprised, nor hinder the execution of Gods just fore-appointed judgement. And these were the ends of those wicked Em∣perours, who in regard of their vile lives, were rather monsters than men; and not onely they whom we have named, but many moe also, as Antonius, Caracalla, Heliogabalus, and other like may bee worthily placed in this ranke. But of all, Heliogabalus is most famous: of whom is recorded in histo∣ries, that hee was so prodigious in all gluttonie, filthinesse, and ribauldrie, that the like I thinke was never heard of, except those monsters that went before; and yet I suppose he surpassed them too. Such was the exceeding and luxurious pompe of this beast-like Emperour, that in his lampes hee used baulme, and filled his fish-ponds with rose-water: the garments which he wore were all of the finest gold and most costly silkes: his shooes gliste∣red with precious stones, curiously engraven: he was never two dayes ser∣ved with one kinde of meat, nor wore one garment twice; and so likewise for his fleshly wickednesse, he varyed it every time: Some dayes hee was served at meales with the braines of Ostriches, and a strange fowle called a Phylocapterie, another day with the tongues of Popingayes, and other sweet singing birds, being nigh to the sea; hee never used fish in places farre distant from the sea: all his house was served with most delicate fish: at one supper his table was furnished with seven thousand fishes, and five thousand fowles: At his remoovals in his progresse, there followed him commonly six hundred chariots: he used to sacrifice with young children, and preferred to the best advancements in the Common-wealth most light persons; as Bawdes, Minstrels, Players, and such like: in one word, hee was an enemy to all honesty and good order. And when he was fore-told by his Sorcerers and Astronomers, that he should die a violent death, he pro∣vided ropes of silke to hang himselfe, swords of gold to kill himselfe, and strong poysons in Jacinths and Emerauds to poyson himselfe, if needs hee
should thereto be forced: Moreover, hee made an high tower, having the boorded floore covered with gold plate, and broidered with pretious stones, from the which tower he might throw himselfe downe, if hee were pursued of his enemies. But notwithstanding all this provision, (Gods vengeance not permitting him to die as hee would) hee was slaine of the souldiers, drawne through the citie, and cast into Tiber, after hee had raigned two yeares and eight moneths. Tigellinus, one of the Captaines of Neroes guard, and a chiefe procurer and setter forward of his tyranny, was the cause of the death of many great personages in Rome: and being enriched by their spoyle and other such like robberies, after the death of Nero (whom in his extremity hee for∣sooke) plunged himselfe, and wallowed in all manner of licentious and dis∣ordinate delights. Now though hee was worthy of a thousand deaths for his cruelties towards many good citizens, yet by the meanes of one Iunius, the Emperour Galba his chiefe minion, whose favour hee had by great summes of money bought and obtained (for hee gave unto his daughter at one time five and twenty thousand crownes, and to himselfe at another time a carknet worth fifteen thousand crownes for a present) he was spared and kept in safety: but as soon as Otho was installed in the Empire, his downfall and destruction began presently to follow: for Otho, to the end to gratifie the Romans, sent to apprehend him, who was then in his houses of pleasure in the field, banquetting and sporting with his harlots, and using all manner of riot, albeit by reason of a deadly disease which was upon him, hee was even at deaths doore. When hee saw himselfe thus taken, and that no meanes of escape was left, (no not by the vessels which he had prepared at the sea shore for purpose, if need were, to convey him away) and that hee which had commission to take him, would give him no advantage of esca∣ping, though he offered him great rewards for the same, he entreated onely leisure to shave his beard before he went; which being granted, he tooke a rasor, and in stead of shaving, cut his owne throat. CHAP. XLV. More examples of the same argument. HIeronymus, a true Tyran of Sicily, enured and fashioned Tit. Liv. to all pride, and of most corrupt and rotten manners, began right after the death of his father Hiero, (that left him a peaceable and quiet Kingdom) to shew orth his arrogance; for he quickly made himselfe fearfull to his Subjects, both by his stately and proud manner of speech, as also by the hardnesse of accesse unto him, together with a kinde of disdainfull contempt of all men: but most of all did the inward pride of his heart appeare when hee had gotten a guard about his body; for then he ceased not to bait, bite, and devoure, and to exercise all kinde of cruelty against every man, and all kind of ryot and excesse of filthinesse against himselfe: so that he became so odi∣ous and contemptible to his subjects, that they conspired against him, to
deprive him both of his life and kingdome: which conspiracy though it came to light, yet for all that wanted not his due effect: for after hee had (through listning to false reports) put to death unjustly his truest and dea∣rest friends, and those that would indeed have helped him in his necessity, both with good advice and other succour, he was surprised as he walked in a narrow and strait way, and there cruelly murthered. Now there was one Andronodorus his brother in law, that aspired to the crowne, had cor∣rupted his manners, and thrust him forward to all these misdemeanours, to the end by those practises he might make him odious to his people, that by that meanes he might obtaine his owne purpose, as indeed he did: for after his death he seised upon the Scepter, though with no long enjoyance; for through the troubles and commotions which were raised in the countrey by his meanes, both hee, his wife, and whole race, together with the whole progenie of Hieronymus, whether innocent or guilty, were all utterly roo∣ted out and defaced. Andronicus was one of the most wickedest men that lived on the earth in his time; for he excelled in all kinde of evill: in ambition, boldnesse in doing mischiefe, cruelty, whoredome, adulterie, and incest also to make up the whole number: besides, he was so treacherous and disloyall, that hee traiterously slew the sonne and heire of the Emperour Emanuel, shutting him in a sacke, and so throwing him into the sea; after which, by violence he tooke possession of the Empire of Constantinople, and like a strong theefe seised upon that which was none of his owne; but as soone as he had gotten his desire, then began his lusts to rage and rave, then he fell to whore∣ing and forcing women and maids to his lust, whom after he had once rob∣bed of their chastities, he gave over to his bands and ruffians to abuse; and that which is more than all this, he ravished one of his owne sisters, and committed incest with her: moreover, to maintaine and uphold his tyran∣nous estate, he slew most of the nobility, and all else that bore any shew of honesty or credit with them, and lived altogether by wrongs and extorti∣ons: wherefore his subjects (provoked with these multitudes of evils which reigned in him, and not able to endure any longer his vile outrages and indignities) rebelled against him and besieged him, got him into their mercilesse hands, and handled him on this fashion following: first they de∣graded him and spoyled him of his imperiall ornaments, then they pulled out one of his eyes, and set him upon an asse backward, with the tayle in his hand in stead of a Scepter, and a rope about his necke in stead of a crowne; and in this order and attyre they led him through all Constanti∣nople, the people shouting and reviling him on all sides, some throwing durt, others spittle, divers dung, and the women their pispots at his head: after all which banquetting dishes, he was transported to the gallowes, and there hanged, to make an end of all. Charles King of Navarre, whose mother Iean was daughter to Lewis Lut∣ton Frois. vol. 3. cap. 100. King of France, was another that oppressed his subjects with cruelty and rough dealing: for he imposed upon them grievous taxes and tributes, and when many of the chiefest of his Common-Wealth came to make knowne unto him the poverty of his people, and that they were not able to endure any more such burthens, he caused them all to be put to death for their boldnesse: he was the kindler of many great mischiefes in France, and of the fire wherewith divers places of strength, and castles of defence were
burned to ashes: he counselled the Count of Foix his sonne to poyson his father, and not onely so, but gave him also the poyson with his owne hands, wherewith to do the deed: Moreover, above all this, lechery and Adultery Nich. Gilles. swayed his powers, even in his old age; for at threescore yeares of age, he had a whore in a corner, whose company he dayly hanted; and so much, that she at length gave him his deaths wound; for returning from her company one day (as his use was) and entring into his chamber, he went to bed all quaking and halfe frozen with cold, neither could he by any meanes recover his heat, untill by art they sought to supply nature, and blew upon him with brasen bellowes Aquavitae and hot blasts of ayre; but withall, the fire unregarded flew betwixt the sheets, and inflamed the drie linnen together with the Aquavitae, so suddenly, that ere any help could be made, his late quivering bones were now halfe burned to death. It is true that he lived fifteene daies after this, but in so great griefe and torment, without sence of any helpe or assuagement by Physicke or Surgery, that at the end there∣of he died miserably: and so, as during his life his affection over burnt in lust, and his minde was alwayes hot, upon mischiefe and covetousnesse, so his dayes were finished with heat and cruell burning. Lugtake, King of Scots, succeeding his father Galdus in the Kingdome, Lanquet. was so odious and mischievous a Tyran, that every man hated him no lesse for his vices, than they loved his father for his vertues: he slew many rich and noble-men for no other cause, but to enrich his treasury with their goods: he committed the government of the Realme to most unjust and covetous persons, and with their company was most delighted: he shamed not to defloure his owne aunts, sisters, and daughters, and to scorne his wise and grave counsellors, calling them old doting fooles: all which mon∣strous villanies (with a thousand more) so incensed his Nobles against him, that they slew him after he had raigned three yeares: but as the Proverbe goeth, Seldome commeth a better; another or worse Tyran succeeded in his kingdome; namely Mogallus, cousin germane to Lugtake, a man notori∣ously infected with all manner of vices: for albeit in the beginning of his reigne hee gave himselfe to follow the wisedome and manners of his unkle Galdus; yet in his age his corrupt nature burst forth abundantly, but chiefly in avarice, lechery, and cruelty: this was he that licensed theeves and rob∣bers to take the goods of their neighbours without punishment, and that first ordained the goods of condemned persons to be confiscate to the kings use, without respect either of wives, children, or creditors; for which crimes he was also slaine by his nobles. Besides these, there was another king of the Scots, called Atherto, in the The fame. yeare of our Lord 240. who shewed himselfe also in like manner a most abhominable wretch: for he so wallowed in all manner of uncleane and effeminate lusts, that he was not ashamed to goe in the sight of the people playing upon a flute, rejoycing more to be accounted a good Fidler, than a good Prince; from which vices he fell at last to the deflouring and ravish∣ing of maids and women, insomuch as the daughters of his nobles could not be safe from his insatiable and intollerable lust: wherefore being pur∣sued by them, when hee saw no meanes to escape, hee desperately slew himselfe. The great outrages which the Spaniards have committed in the West Indies, are apparant testimonies of their impiety, injustice, cruelty, insa∣tiable
covetousnesse, and luxury; and the judgement wherewith God hath hunted them up and downe both by sea and land, (as late and fresh histories doe testifie) are manifest witnesses of his heavy anger and displeasure against them: amongst all which, I will here insert none but that which is most notorious and worthy memory, as the wretched accident of Pamphilius No∣vares, and his company: This man with six hundred Spaniards making for the coast of Florida, to seeke the gold of the river of Palme-trees, were so Benzon. Mil. turmoyled with vehement windes and tempests, that they could not keepe their vessels from dashing against the shore, so that their ships did all split in sunder, and they for the most part were drowned, save a few that escaped to land, yet escaped not danger; for they ranne roving up and downe this savage countrey so long, till they fell into such extreame poverty and fa∣mine, that for want of victuals twelve of them devoured one another; and of the whole six hundred that went forth, there never yet returned above ten, all the rest being either drowned or pined to death. Francis Pizarre, a man of base parentage, for in his youth he was but a Benzon. hogheard, and of worse qualities and education, for he knew not so much as the first elements of learning, giving himselfe to the West Indian wars, grew to some credit in bearing office, but withall shewed himselfe very disloyall, treacherous, and bloudy-minded, in committing many odious and monstrous cruelties: entring Peru with an army of souldiers, to the end, to conquer new lands and dominions, and to glut his unsatiable covetous∣nesse with a new surfet of riches (after the true Spanish custome) he com∣mitted many bloudy and trayterous acts, and exercised more than barba∣rous cruelty: for first under pretence of friendship feyning to parle with Artabaliba, King of Cusco; the poore King comming with five and twen∣ty thousand of unarmed men, in ostentation of his greatnesse, not in pur∣pose to resist, he welcommed him and his men so nimbly with swords and curtleaxes, that they had all soon their throats cut by a most horrible slaugh∣ter, and the King himselfe was taken and put in chaines: yea, and the Citie after this massacre of men abroad, felt soone the insolencies of these brave warriours within: in fine, though Pizarre promised Artabaliba to save his life, in regard of a ransome, amounting to more than two millions of gold; yet after the receit thereof he traiterously caused him to be hanged, contra∣ry to both his oath, and all equity and reason: but this cruell perfidie of his went not long without punishment; for both hee and all the rest that were any wayes accessarie, or consenting to the death of this King, came to a wretched end: but especially his foure brethren, Ferdinand, Gonsal, Iohn Martin of Alcantara, and Diego of Almagro; who as they were principall in the action, so were they in the punishment: the first that was punished was Iohn Pizarre, who with many other Spaniards was surprised in the Ci∣ty of Cusco, and slaine by the men of warre of Mangefrem and Artabaliba: next after that there arose such a division and heart-burning betwixt the Pizarres and Almagro, and their partakers, that after they had robbed and wasted and shared out the great and rich Countrey of Peru, they slew one another by mutuall strokes: and albeit that there was by common consent an agreement accorded betwixt them, for the preserving of their unity and friendship; yet Francis Pizarre, envying that Almagro should bee Gover∣nour of Cusco, and he not, interrupted all their agreements, by starting from his promises; and re-kindled the halfe-quenched fire of warre by his
owne ambition: for hee presently defied Amagro, and sent his brother Ferdinand before to bid him battaile; who so well behaved himselfe, that hee tooke Almagro prisoner, and delivered him bound to his brother Francis, who caused him to bee strangled in prison secretly, and after to be beheaded in publique. Now Ferdinand being sent by his brother to∣wards Spaine, with a great masse of gold to cleare himselfe of the death of Almagro, could not so well justifie the fact, as that all his treasure could save him from the prison; and what became of him afterwards, knowne it is to God, but not to the world. A while after, the fellowes and friends of Almagro, whose goods the Pizarrists hath seised upon, tooke counsell with Don Diego Almagro his sonne, to revenge the death of his father; therefore being in number but twelve, with unsheathed swords, they de∣sperately burst into Francis Pizarres house, (then Marquesse and Gover∣nour of Peru) and at the first brunt slew a Captaine that guarded the ente∣rance of the Hall, and next him Martin of Alcahtara, and other more, that kept the entrance of the Chamber, so that hee fell dead even at his bro∣ther the Marquesses feet: who albeit his men were all slaine before his eyes, and himselfe left alone amiddest his enemies, yet gave not over to de∣fend himselfe stoutly and manfully, untill all of them setting upon him at once, hee was stabbed into the throat, and so fell dead upon the ground; and thus finished hee and his complices their wretched dayes, answerable to their cruell deserts: but their murderers (though they deserved to bee thus dealt withall) yet for dealing in this sort without authority, were not faultlesse, but received the due wages of their furious madnesse: for Don Diego himselfe, after he had beene a while Governour of Peru, had his ar∣my overcome and discomfited by the Emperours forces, and was betrayed into their hands by his owne Lieutenant of Cusco, where he thought to have saved himself, and right soone lost his head, with the greatest Captains and favourites that hee had, who were also quartered. Now of the five brethren wee have heard foure of their destructions, onely one remaineth (namely Gonzalle Pizarre) to bee spoken of; who being sent for by the Conquerours to be their Chieftaine and Protector against the Viceroy, that went about to make them observe the Emperours lawes and decrees, touching the liberty of the Indian Nation, was betrayed and forsaken by the same men that sent for him, and so fell into his enemies hands, that cut off his head: The Generall of his army, a covetous and cruell man, that in short space made away above three hundred Spaniards, and all as it were with his own hand; was drawn up and downe at a horse tayle the space of halfe a quarter of an houre, and then hanged upon the gallowes, & quartered in foure parts. The Monke of Vauvard, called Vincent, who with his crosse and porteise had encouraged Pizarre and his army against Artabaliba, and was for that cause created Bishop of Peru, when Diego came to the go∣vernement, fled into the Island Puna to escape his wrath; but in seeking to avoyde him, he fell into as great a snare; for the Islanders assaulted him one night, and knockt him to death with staves and clubs, together with forty Spaniards of his fellowship, that accompanied him in his flight, and started not from him in his death. And thus the good and holy Monke, for medling with, and setting forward the murder of so many poore peo∣ple, was for his paines and good deeds justly rewarded by the Indians of that Island.
Moreover, after and beside all these troubles, seditions, and civil warres of Peru, all they that returned from Spaine, suffered shipwracke for the most part: for their fleet had scarce attained the midst of their course, when there arose so terrible a tempest, that of eighteen ships, thirteen so perished, that they were never heard of after; and of the five which re∣mained, two were tumbled backe to the coast of Saint Dominick, all be∣rent and shivered in pieces; other three were driven to Spaine, whereof one hitting against the bay of Portugall, lost many of her men: The Ad∣mirall her selfe of this fleet perished near unto Saint Lucar de Baramede, with two hundred persons that were within her, and but one onely of them all got safe into the haven of Calix, without dammage. Here we may see how mightily the hand of God was stretched forth to the revenge of those wicked deeds and villanies which were committed by the Spaniards in those quarters. Peter Loys, bastard son to Pope Paul the third, was one that practised many horrible villanies, robberies, murthers, adulteries, incest, and Sodomitries; Sleid. lib. 19. Ball. thinking that because his father was Pope, therefore no wickednesse was unlawfull for him to commit. He was by the report of all men, one of the most notorious, vilest, and filthiest villaines that ever the world saw: he forced the Bishop of Faence to his unnaturall lust, so that the poor Bi∣shop, with meer anger and grief that he should be so abused, died immedi∣ately. Being made Duke of Plaisence and Parma, he exercised most cruell tyranny towards many of his subjects; insomuch, that divers Gentlemen that could not brook nor endure his injuries, conceived an inward hate against him, and conspired his death: and for to put in practise the same, they hired certain Ruffians and Roysters to watch the opportunity of slay∣ing him; yea, and they themselves oftentimes went apart with these Roy∣sters, keeping themselves upon their guards, as if some private and parti∣cular quarrels had been in hand. One day as the Duke went in his horse∣litter out of his Castle, with a great retinue, to see certain Fortifications which he had prepared, being advertised by his father the Pope (by the helpe of Magicke which he practised) to look diligently to himselfe the tenth day of September: in which notwithstanding he was slain; for as he returned into his Castle, the Conspiratours, to the number of thirty six, marched before him, as it were to do him honour, but indeed to do him villany: for as soon as he was entred the Castle, they drew up the draw∣bridge for fear of his retinue that were without, and comming to him with their naked swords, cast in his teeth his tyranny, and so slew him in his lit∣ter, together with a Priest, the master of his horse, and five Almaignes that were of his Guard: his dead body they hung by a chain over the wals, and shaking it to and fro to the view of the people, threw it downe headlong at last into the ditch; where the multitude to shew their hates, wounded it with daggers, and trampled it under their feet: and so whom they durst not touch in his life, being dead they thus abused: and this befell upon the tenth day of September, in the year of our Lord 1547. Some of the Bishops of Rome for their rare and notable vertues, and the glory of their brave deeds, may be honoured with this dignity, to be placed in this worthy ranke; for their good conditions and behaviours were such, that no tyran, butcher, thief, robber, ruffian, nor any other, ever ex∣celled them in cruelty, robbery, adultery, and such like wickednesse, or
deserved more the credit and reputation of this place than they. And here∣of we have a manifest example in Iohn the thirteenth, who pulling out the eyes of some of his Cardinals, cutting out the tongues of others, hewing off the hands, noses, and privy members of others, shewed himselfe a paterne of such cruelty, as the world never saw the like: he was accused before the Emperour Otho, in a Synod, first for incest with two of his own sisters: secondly, for calling the devill to helpe him at dice: thirdly, for promoting young infants to Bishoprickes, bribed thereto by certain pieces of Gold; fourthly, for the ravishing of maids and wives, and lying with his fathers concubine: yea, and lastly, for lyingwth his own mother, and many other such monstrous villanies: for which cause he was deposed from the Papacy, though re-installed again by the suit and cunning practise of his Whores; by whom as he recovered his triple Crown, so he lost shortly after his vicious life, by the meanes of a married whore that betrayed him. Pope Hildebrand, sirnamed Gregory the seventh, was adorned with all Benno. Ball. these good qualities, namely to be bloudy minded, a poysoner, a murthe∣rer, a conjurer, also a consulter with spirits, and in a word, nothing but a lumpe and masse of wickednesse: he was the stirrer up of many battels against the Emperour Henry the fourth, and a provoken of his own son to depose and poyson his father, as he did: but this wicked (I would say holy) Pope, was at last banished his Cathedral City, to Salernum, where he end∣ed his dayes in misery. Pope Clement the sixth, of name contrary to his nature, for his incle∣mency, cruelty and pride towards the Emperour Lewis of Bavaria, was in∣tolerable; he procured many horrible warres against the Empire, and caused the destruction of twenty thousand Frenchmen by the King of Eng∣land, yea and poysoned the good Emperour also, so well he wished to him: Howbeit ere long himselfe was stifled to death, and that suddenly▪ not by any practise of man, as it was thought, but by the especiall hand of God, in recompence of all his notable acts. Iohn the four and twentieth was deposed by the Councell of Constance, for these crimes following; heresie, Simony, manslaughter, poysonings, Benno. Ball. cousenings, adultery, and sodomitry, and was cast into prison; where re∣maining three yeares, he falsely made shew of amendment of his wicked life, and therefore was graced with a Cardinals hat, but it was not that which he expected; for which cause with despight and grief he died. It would be too long to run over the discourse of every particular Pope of like conditions, and therefore we will content our selves in brief with the legend of Pope Alexander the sixth, reported by by two authours of credit and renown, and unsuspected; to wit, Guicciardine a Florentine Guicciard. l. 2. Bembus. Gentleman, and Bembus a Venetian Cardinal: This man (saith Guicciar∣dine) attained to the Papacy not by worthinesse of vertues, but by heavi∣nesse of bribes, and multitude of fair promises made to the Cardinals for his election, promising large recompence to them that stood on his side; whereupon many that knew his course of life were filled with astonish∣ment, amongst whom was the King of Naples, who hearing of this electi∣on, complained to his Queen with teares, that there was such a Pope crea∣ted that would be a plague to Italy and all Christendom: beside, the great vices which swayed in him, of which the same Authour speaking, maketh this Catalogue and pedegree in his own Language, which followeth: Co∣stum
(dit il) escensimi non sincerita, non verita, non fede, non religione; avari∣tia insatiabile, ambitione immoderata, crudelta pinque barbara, o ardentissima cupidi di escalt are in qualunque mode, i figli voli, i qualierano molti: (that is Guicciard. lib. 2. to say) He was endued with most filthy conditions, and that neither since∣rity, truth, faith, nor religion, was in him, but in stead of them, covetous∣nesse unquenchable, ambition unmeasurable, more than barbarous cruelty, and a burning desire of promoting his own children (for he had many) by what meanes soever. He perswaded King Charles the eighth of France to undertake war against Naples, and after he had brought him to it, present∣ly he forsook him, and entred a new league with the Venetians, and the other Princes of Italy, to drive him home again. This was he (saith Car∣dinal Venetian. hist. lib. 6. Bembus) that set Benefices and Promotions to sale, that he which would give most might have most; and that poysoned Iohn Michel the Cardinal of Venice at Rome, for his gold and treasure which he abounded with: whose insatiable covetousnesse provoked him to the committall of all mischief, to the end he might maintain the forces of his son, who went about to bring the whole lands & dominions of all Italy, into his possession in adulteries he was most filthy and abominable, in tyranny most cruell, and in Magick most cunning, and therefore most execrable: supping one night with Cardinal Adrian, his very familiar friend, in his garden, having fore∣appointed his destruction that night by poyson; through the negligence and oversight of his butler, to whom he had given the exploit in charge, that was deceived by mistaking the bottles, he dranke himselfe the medi∣cine which he had prepared for his good friend the Cardinal: and so he died (saith Bembus) not without an evident marke of Gods heavy wrath, in that he which had slain so many Princes and rich men to enjoy their trea∣sures, and went now about to murder his host which entertained him with friendship & good chear into his house, was caught in the same snare which he had laid, and destroyed by the same meanes himselfe, which he had de∣stinated for another: being thus dead, the whole City of Rome (saith Guic∣ciardine) ran out with greedinesse and joy to behold his carkasse, not being able to satisfie their eyes with beholding the dead Serpent, whose venome of ambition, treachery, cruelty, adultery, and avarice, had impoysoned the whole world. Some say, that as he purposed to poyson certain Cardi∣nals, he poysoned his own father, that being in their company, chanced to get a share of his drugs: and that he was so abominable to abuse his own sister Lucrece in the way of filthinesse. When Zemes the brother of Bajazet the Emperour of the Turkes came and surrendred himselfe into his hands, and was admitted into his protection, he being hired with two hundred duckets by Bajazet, gave poyson to his new Client, even to him to whom hee had before sworne and vowed his friendship: besides, that hee might maintain his tyranny, he demanded and obtained aid of the Turke against the King of France, which was a most unchristian and antichri∣stian part: hee caused the tongue and two hands of Anthony Manci∣vellus (a very learned and wise man) to be cut off, for an excellent Oration which he made in reproof of his wicked demeanours and dishonest life. It is written moreover by some, that he was so affectionated to the service of his good lord and master the devil, that he never attempted any thing without his counsell and advice; who also presented himselfe unto him at his death in the habit of a post, according to the agreement which was be∣twixt
them: and although this wretched Antichrist strove against him for life, alledging that his terme was not yet finished; yet he was enforced to dislodge, and depart into his proper place, where with horrible cries and hideous fearfull groanes he died. Thus we see how miserably such wretched and infamous miscreants, and such pernitious and cruell tyrants have ended their wicked lives, their force and power being execrable and odious, and therefore (as saith Seneca) not In his book of the clemencie of a Prince. able to continue any long time, for that government cannot be firme and stable, where there is no shame nor fear to do evill, nor where equity, ju∣stice, faith, and piety, with other vertues, are contemned and trodden un∣der foot: for when cruelty once beginneth to be predominate, it is so in∣satiable, that it never ceaseth, but groweth every day from worse to worse, by striving to maintain and defend old faults by new, untill the fear and terrour of the poor afflicted and oppressed people, with a continuall source and enterchange of evils which surcharge them, converteth it selfe from sorced patience, to willing fury, and breaketh forth to do vengeance upon the tyrants heads with all violence; whence ariseth that saying of the Sa∣tyricall Poet to the same sence; where he saith, Few Tyrans dye the death that nature sends, Ad generum Cereris sine cae∣de & sanguine pauc, Descendunt re∣ges & scca morte tyranni. But most are brought by slaughter to their ends. CHAP. XLVI. Of Calumniation and false witnesse bearing. WE have seen heretofore what punishments the Lord hath laid upon those that either vex their neigbours in their persons, as in the breakers of the fifth, sixth, and se∣venth Commandments; or dammage them in their goods, as in the eighth: now let us look unto those that seek to spoil them of their good names, and rob them of their credit by slanderous reproaches, and false and forged calumniatious, and by that meanes go against the ninth Command∣ment, which saith, Thou shalt not bear false witnesse against thy neighbour: In which words is condemned generally all slanders, all false reports, all defa∣mations, and all evill speeches else whatsoever, whereby the good name and credit of a man is blemished, stained, or impoverished; and this sin was not onely inhibited by the divine Law of the Almighty, but also by the lawes of Nature and Nations: for there is no Countrey and People so barbarous, with whom these pernitious kinde of Creatures are not held in detestation: of tame beasts (saith Diogenes) a flatterer is worst, and of wilde beasts a backbiter or a slanderer: and not without great reason, for as there is no disease so dangerous as that which is secret, so there is no enemy so pernitious as he which under the colour of friendship biteth and slandereth us behinde our backs: but let us see what judgement the Lord hath shewn upon them, to the end the odiousnesse of this vice may more clearly appear.
And first to begin with Doeg the Edomite, who falsly accused Achimelech the High-Priest unto Saul, for giving succour unto David in his necessity and flight: for though he told nothing but that which was true, yet of that 1 Sam. 22. 9. truth some he maliciously perverted, and some he kept backe: and false∣hood consisteth not onely in plain lying, but also in concealing and mis∣using the truth: for Achimelech indeed asked counsell of the Lord for Da∣vid, and ministred unto him the Shew-bread and the sword of Goliah, but not with any intent of malice against King Saul for he supposed, and David also made him beleeve, that he went about the Kings businesse, and that he was in great favour with the King: which last clause the wicked accuser left out, and by that meanes not onely provoked the wrath of Saul, against the High-Priest, but also when all other refused, became himselfe executi∣oner of his wrath, and murdered Achimelech, with all the nation of the Priests, and smote Nob the City of the Priests with the edge of the sword, both man, and woman, childe, and suckling, oxe and asse, not leaving any alive (so beastly was his cruelty) save Abiathar onely, one of the sons of Achimelech, that fled to David, and brought him tidings of this bloudy massacre. But did this  Spirit of God in the 52. Psalme proclaimeth his judgement: Why boastest thou in Psal. . 1. 2. . thy wickednesse thou Tyran? Thy , and is like a sharpe rasor that cutteth deceitfully, &c. but God shall destroy thee for ever, he shall take thee and plucke thee out of thy tabernacle, and root thee out of the Land of the living. Next to this man we may justly place Achab the King of Israel, and Iesa∣bel 1 King. 21. his wife, who to the end to get possession of Naboths vineyard (which being his inheritance he would not part from) suborned by his wives per∣nitious counsell false accusers, wicked men, to witnesse against Naboth, that he had blasphemed God and the King, and by that meanes caused him to be stoned to death: but marke the judgement of God denounced against them both by the mouth of Elias, for this wicked fact: Hast thou killed (saith he) and taken possession? Thus saith the Lord, In the place where the dogs licked the bloud of Naboth, shall dogs even licke thy bloud also: and as for Jesabel, dogs shall eat her by the wall of Iesrael: thy house shall be like the house of Jeroboam the son of Nabat: I will cut off from Ahab him that pisseth against the wall, &c. Neither was this onely denounced, but executed also; as we may reade, 1 Kin. 22. 38. & 2 Kin. 9. 36, 37, &c. & 2 Kin. 10. 7, &c. Amaziah the Priest of Bethel under Ieroboam the wicked King of Isra∣el, Amo 7. 17. perceiving how the Prophet Amos prophesied against the Idolatry of that place, and of the King, he falsly accused him to Ieroboam, to have con∣spired against him; also he exhorted him to flie from Bethel, because it was the Kings Chappell, and flie into Judah, and prophesie there; but what said the Lord unto him by the Prophet? Thy wife shall be an harlot in the city, thy sons and thy daughters shall fall by the sword, and thy land shall be divided by line, and thou shalt die in a polluted land: Loe there was the pu∣nishment of his false accusation. How notable was the judgement that the Lord manifested upon Hamon Ester 7. 10. the Syrian for his false accusing of the Jewes, to be disturbers of the Com∣mon-wealth, and breakers of the lawes of King Ahasuerosh? Did not the Lord turne his mischief upon his own head? The same day that was ap∣pointed for their destruction, the Lord turned it to the destruction of their
enemies, and the same gallowes which he prepared for Mordecai was he himselfe hanged upon. The men that falsly accused Daniel to King Darius, for breaking the Dan. 6. Kings edict, which was, that none should make any request unto any for thirty dayes space, save onely to the King himselfe, fared no better: for when as they found Daniel praying unto God, they presently accused him unto the King; urging him with the stability which ought to be in the De∣crees of the Kings of Media and Persia, that ought not to be altered; in such sort, that King Darius (though against his will) commanded Daniel to be throwne amongst the Lions, to be devoured of them; but when he saw how miraculously the Lord preserved him from the teeth of the Lions, and thereby perceived his innocency, he caused his envious accusers to be thrown into the Lions den, with their wives and children, who were de∣voured by the Lions ere they could fall to the ground. Notorious is the example of the two Judges that accused Susanna, both how she was delivered, and they punished. But let us come to prophane istories: Apelles that famous Painter of Ephesus, felt the sting and tternesse o this venomous vier, for he was falsly accused by Antiphilus another Painter, an envier of his art and ex∣cellent workemanship, to have conspired with Theodota against King Ptolo∣mie, and to have been the cause of the defection of Pelusium from him: which accusation he laid against him, to the end that seeing he could not Theat. Hist. attain to that excellency of art which he had, he might by this false pre∣tence worke his disgrace and overthrow; as indeed he had effected, had not great persuasions been used, and manifest proofes alledged of Apelles inno∣cency and integrity: wherefore Ptolomie having made triall of the cause, and found out the false and wrongfull practise, he most justly rewarded Apelles with an hundred talents, and Antiphilus the accuser with perpetu∣all servitude: upon which occasion Apelles in remembrance of that dan∣ger painted out Calumniation on this manner; a Woman gayly attired, and dressed with an angry and furious countenance, holding in her left hand a torch, and with her right a young man by the hair of the head, before whom marched an evill favoured sluttish usher, quicke-sighted, and pale∣faced, called Envy, at her right hand sat a fellow with long eares like King Midas to receive tales, and behinde her two waiting maids, Ignorance and Suspition. And thus the witty Painter, to delude his own evill hap, ex∣pressed Vide l. 1. c. 12. Example of Nero. the lively Image and nature of that detracting sin. This tricke used Maximinus the Tyran to deface the Doctrine and Reli∣gion of Christ in his time; for when he saw that violence and torments Euseb. l. 9. c. 6. prevailed not, but that like the Palme, the more it was trodden and op∣pressed, Nicep. l. 7. c. 27. the more it grew, he used this subtilty and craft to undermine it: he published divers bookes full of Blasphemy, of a conference betwixt Christ and Pilate, and caused them to be taught to children in stead of their first elements, that they might no sooner speak than hate and blaspheme Christ: Moreover, he constrained certain wicked lewd women to avouch that they were Christians, and that vile filthinesse was dayly committed by them in their assemblies; which also he published far and near in wri∣ting: howbeit, for all this the Lords truth quailed not, but swum as it were against the stream, and encreased in despight of Envy: and for these false accusers, they were punished one after another with notable judge∣ments;
for one that was a chiefe doer therein became his owne murderer, and Maximinus himselfe was consumed with wormes and rottennesse, as hath beene shewed in the former Booke. It was a law among the Romans, that if any man had enforced an accu∣sation Eus. l. 5. cap. 21. against another, either wrongfully, unlawfully, or without probabi∣lity, both his legs should be broken, in recompence of his malice: which custome, as it was laudable and necessary, so was it put in execution at di∣vers times, as namely under the Emperour Commodus, when a prophane Nicep. l. 4. c. 26. wretch accused Apollonius (a godly and profest Christian, and afterward a constant martyr of Christ Jesus) before the Judges, of certaine grievous crimes, which when he could by no colour or likelyhood of truth convince and prove, they adjudged him to that ignominious punishment to have his legs broken, because he had accused and defamed a man without cause. Eustathius Bishop of Antioch, a man famous for eloquence in speech, Nicep. l. 8. c. 46. and uprightnesse of life, when as hee impugned the heresie of the Arrians, was circumvented by them, and deposed from his Bishopricke by this meanes: they suborned a naughty strumpet to come in with a childe in her armes, and in an open Synod of two hundred and fifty Bishops to accuse him of adultery, and to sweare that hee had got that childe of her body: which though he denied constantly, and no just proofe could be brought a∣gainst him, yet the impudent strumpets oath tooke such place, that by the Emperours censure hee was banished from his Bishopricke; howbeit ere long his innocency was knowne, for the said strumpet being deservedly touched with the finger of Gods justice in extreame sicknesse, confessed the whole practise, how she was suborned by certaine Bishops to slander this holy man, and that yet she was not altogether a lyar, for one Eustathius a handy-crafts man got the childe, as shee had sworne, and not Eustathius the Bishop. The like slander the same hereticks devised against Athanasius in a Sy∣nod Philip Melanct. Chron. lib. 3. Nicep. l. 9. c. 23. convocated by Constantine the Emperour, at Tyrus; for they suborned a certaine lewd woman to exclaime upon the holy man in the open assem∣bly, for ravishing of her that last night against her will: which slander he shifted off by this devise, he sent Timotheus the Presbyter of Alexandria in∣to the Synod in his place, who comming to the woman, asked her before them all, whether she durst say that he had ravished her; to whom she re∣plyed, yea, I sweare and vow that thou hast done it (for shee supposed it to have beene Athanasius, whom shee never saw) whereat the whole Synod perceived the cavill of the lying Arrians, and quitted the innocency of that good man. Howbeit these malicious hereticks seeing this practise not to succeed, invented another worse then the former; for they accused him to have slaine one Arsenius, whom they themselves kept secret; and that hee carried one of his hands about him, wherewith he wrought miracles by en∣chantment: but Arsenius, touched by the spirit of God, stole away from them, and came to Athanasius, to the end he should receive no damage by his absence, whom he brought in to the Judges, and shewed them both his hands, confounded his accusers with shame of their malice, insomuch as they ranne away for feare, and satisfied the Judges both of his integrity, and their envious calumniation: the chiefe Broker of all this mischiefe was Stephanus Bishop of Antioch, but he was degraded from his Bishop∣ricke, and Leontius elected in his roome.
In our English Chronicles we have recorded a notable history to the like effect of King Canutus the Dane, who after much trouble, being established in the Kingdome of England, caused a Parliament to bee held at London; where (amongst other things there debated) it was propounded to the Bi∣shops, Barons, and Lords of that Assembly, Whether in the composition made betwixt Edmond and Canutus any speciall remembrance was made for the children or brethren of Edmond, touching any partition of any part of the land? which the English Lords, flattering the king, though falsly and against the truth, yea and against their owne consciences, denied to be; and not onely so, but for the Kings pleasure confirmed their false words with a more false oath, that to the uttermost of their powers they would put off the bloud of Edmond from all right and interest: by reason of which oath and promise they thought to have purchased with the King great favour; but by the just retribution of God it chanced farre otherwise: for many of them, or the most part, especially such as Canutus perceived to have sworne fealtie before time to Edmond and his heires, he mistrusted and disdained ever after: insomuch, that some he exiled, many he beheaded, and divers by Gods just judgement died suddenly. In the Scottish Chronicles we read how Hamilton the Scot was brought unto his death by the false accusation of a false Frier called Campbel: who being in the fire ready to be executed, cited and summoned the said Frier to appeare before the high God, as generall Judge of all men, to answer to the innocency of his death, and whether his accusation were just or not, betwixt that and a certaine day of the next moneth, which he there named. Now see the heart and hand of God against a false witnesse, ere that day came the Fri∣er died without any remorse of conscience; and no doubt he gave a sharpe account to Almighty God of his malicious and unjust accusation. In the yeare of our Lord 1105, Henry Archbishop of Mentz, being complained of to the Pope, sent a learned man, a speciall friend of his, to excuse him, named Arnold; one for whom he had much done, and promo∣ted to great livings and promotions: but this honest man in stead of an ex∣cuser became an accuser; for hee bribed the two chiefest Cardinals with gold, and obtained of the Pope those two to be sent Inquisitors about the Archbishops case: The which comming into Germany, summoned the said Henry, and without either law or justice, deposed him from his Arch∣bishoprick, and substituted in his place Arnold, upon hope of his Ecclesi∣asticall gold: Whereupon that vertuous and honourable Henry is repor∣ted to have spoken thus unto those perverse Judges: If I should appeale to Acts and Mo∣numents. the Apostolike Sea, for this your unjust processe had against me, perhaps I should but lose my labour, and gaine nothing but toyle of body, losse of goods, affliction of minde, and care of heart: Wherefore I doe appeale to the Lord Jesus Christ, as to the most highest and just Judge, and cite you before his judgement seat, there to answer for this wrong done unto me; for neither justly, nor godly, but corruptly, and unjustly, have you judged my cause. Whereunto they scoffingly said, Goe you first, and we will fol∣low. Not long after, the said Henry dyed: whereof the two Cardinals ha∣ving intelligence, said one to the other jestingly, Behold he is gone before, and wee must follow according to our promise. And verily they spoke truer than they were aware; for within a while after they both dyed in one day: the one sitting upon a jakes to ease himselfe, voyded out all his en∣trailes
into the draught, and miserably ended his life: the other gnawing off the fingers of his hands, and spitting them out of his mouth, (all deformed in devouring of himselfe) died. And in like wise not long after the said Ar∣nold was slaine in a sedition, and his body for certaine dayes lying stinking above the ground unburied, was open to the spoyle of every raskall and har∣lot. And this was the horrible end of this false accuser, and those corrup∣ted Judges. Thus were two Cardinals punished for this sinne: and that we may see that the holy father the Pope is no better than his Cardinals, and that God spareth not him no more than he did them; let us heare how the Lord pu∣nished one of that ranke for this crime. It is not unknowne, that Pope Innocent the fourth condemned the Em∣perour Fredericke at the Councell at Lyons, his cause being unheard, and before hee could come to answer for himselfe: For when the Emperour, being summoned to appeare at the Councell, made all haste hee could thi∣therward, and desired to have the day of hearing his cause prorogued, till that he might conveniently travell thither; the Pope refused, and contra∣ry to Gods law, to Christian Doctrine, to the prescript of the law of na∣ture and reason, and to all humanity, without probation of any crime, or pleading any cause, or hearing what might be answered, taking upon him to be both Adversary and Judge, condemned the Emperour being absent. What more wicked sentence was ever pronounced? What more cruell fact (considering the person) might be committed? But marke what vengeance God tooke upon this wicked Judge. The writers of the Annals record, that when Fredericke the Emperour, and Con∣rade his sonne were both dead, the Pope gaping for the inheritance of Na∣ples and Sicilie, and thinking by force to have subdued the same, came to Naples with a great hoast of men: where was heard in his court manifest∣ly pronounced this voyce; Veni miser ad judicium Dei, Thou wretch come to receive thy judgement of God. And the next day the Pope was found in his bed dead, all black and blew, as though he had beene beaten with bats. And this was the judgement of God which he came unto. To this Pope and these Cardinals let us adde an Archbishop, and that Acts and Mo∣numents, pag. 700. of Canterbury; to wit, Thomas Arundel, upon whom the justice of God ap∣peared no lesse manifestly than on the former: For after hee had unjustly given sentence against the Lord Cobham, he died himselfe before him; be∣ing so striken in his tongue, that he could neither swallow nor speake for a certaine space before the time of his death. Hither might be adjoyned the vengeance of God upon Justice Morgan, who condemned to death the innocent Lady Iane; but presently after fell madde, and so dyed, having nothing in his mouth but Lady Iane, Lady Iane. In the reigne of King Henry the eighth, one Richard Long, a man of armes in Calice, bore false witnesse against master Smith, the Curate of our La∣dy Parish in Calice, for eating flesh in Lent, which hee never did: but hee escaped not vengeance; for shortly after he desperately drowned him∣selfe. A terrible example unto all such as are ready to forsweare them∣selves on a Booke upon malice, or some other cause: a thing in these dayes over rise every where, and almost of most men little or nothing regarded. About the same time one Gregory Bradway committed the same crime
of false accusation against one Broke, whom being driven thereunto by feare and constraint, he accused to have robbed the Custome-house, wherein hee was a Clerke, of foure groats every day; and to this accusation he subscri∣bed his hand: but for the same presently felt upon him the heavy hand of God; for being grieved in his consciene for his deed, hee first with a knife enterprised to cut his owne throt; but being not altogether dis∣patched therewith, the Gaoler comming up and preventing his purpose, hee fell forthwith into a furious frenzie; and in that case lived long time after. Hitherto we may adde the example of one William Feming, who accused an Acts and Mo∣numents. honest man called Iohn Cooper, of speaking trayterous words against Queene Mary, and all because he would not sell him two goodly bullockes which he much desired: for which cause the poore man being arraigned at Berry in Suffolke, was condemned to death by reason of two false witnesses which the said Feming had suborned for that purpose, whose names were White and Greenwood; so this poore man was hanged, drawne, and quartered, and his goods taken from his poore wife and nine children, which are left de∣stitute of all helpe: but as for his false accusers, one of them died most miserably; for in harvest time being well and lusty, of a sudden his bowels fell out of his body, and so he perished: the other two what ends they came unto, it is not reported; but sure the Lord hath reserved a sufficient pu∣nishment for all such as they are. Many more be the examples of this sinne, and judgements upon it; as Acts and Mo∣numents, pag. 2100. the Pillories at Westminster, and daily experience beareth witnesse; but these that we have alledged shall suffice for this purpose: because this sinne is cousin Germane unto perjury, of which you may read more at large in the former booke. It should now follow by course of order, if wee would not pretermit any thing of the law of God, to speak of such as have offended against the tenth Commandement, and what punishment hath ensued the same: but forsomuch as all such offences for the most part are included under the former, of which wee have already spoken; and that there is no adultery, nor fornication, nor theft, nor unjust warre, but it is annexed to, and proceedeth from the affection and the resolution of an evill and disor∣dinate concupiscence, as the effect from the cause: therefore it is not ne∣cessary to make any particular recitall of them, more than may well bee collected out of the former examples added hereunto; that in evill concu∣piscence and affection of doing evill, which commeth not to act, (though it be in the sight of God condemned to everlasting torments) yet it doth not so much incurre and provoke his indignation, that a man should for that one∣ly cause be brought to apparent destruction, and be made an example to others, to whom the sinne is altogether darke and unknowne: therefore we will proceed in our purpose without intermeddling in speciall with this last Commandement.
CHAP. XLVII. That Kings and Princes ought to looke to the execution of Iustice, for the punishment of naughty and corrupt manners. NO man ought to be ignorant of this, that it is the duty of a Prince, not onely to hinder the course of sin from bursting into action, but also to punish the doers of the Jame; making both civill justice to be administred up∣rightly, and the law of God to be regarded and observed inviolably: for to this end are they ordained of God, that by their meanes every one might live a quiet and peaceable life, in all godlinesse and honesty: to the which end the mainte∣nance and administration of justice being most necessary, they ought not so to discharge themselves of it, as to translate it upon their Officers and Judges, but also to looke to the execution thereof themselves, as it is most needfull: for if law (which is the foundation of justice) be (as Plato saith) a speechlesse and dumbe Magistrate; who shall give voyce and vigor unto it, if not hee that is in supreame and soveraigne authority? For which cause the King is commanded in Deuteronomy, To have before him alwayes the Deut. 17. 18. 19. Booke of the Law, to the end to doe justice and judgement to every one in the feare of God. And before the creation of the Kings in Israel, the chiefe Captaines and Soveraignes amongst them were renowned with no other title nor quality, than of Judges. In the time of Deborah the Prophetesse, though she was a woman, the weaker vessell; yet because she had the con∣ducting and governing of the people, they came unto her to seeke judge∣ment. It is said of Samuel, that he judged Israel so long, till being tyred with age, and not able to beare that burden any longer, hee appointed his sonnes for Judges in his stead: who when through covetousnesse they per∣verted Judg. 4. 1 Sam. 7. 8. justice, and did not execute judgement like their father Samuel, they gave occasion to the people to demaund a King, that they might be judged and governed after the manner of other Nations: which things sufficient∣ly declared, that in old time the principall charge of Kings was personally to administer justice and judgement, and not as now to transferre the care thereof to others. The same we read of King David, of whom it is said, That during his reigne he executed justice and judgement, among his people: and in ano∣ther 1 Chron. 18. place, That men came unto him for judgement, and therefore he dis∣dained 2 Sam. 15. not to heare the complaint of the woman of Tekoah; shewing him∣selfe herein a good Prince, and as the Angel of God, to heare good and evill: for this cause Solomon desired not riches, nor long life of the Lord, but a wise 2 Sam. 14. and discreet heart to judge his people, and to discerne betwixt good and e∣vill: which request was so agreeable and acceptable to God, that hee gran∣ted 1 King 3. it unto him; so that he obtained such an excellent measure of incompara∣ble wisedome, that he was commended and reputed more for it, than for all his great riches and precious treasure beside. There is mention made in the Book of the Kings of his judiciall throne wherein he used to sit and heare the causes of the people, and execute justice among them; and albeit he was the
most puissant and glorious King of the earth, yet notwithstanding hee scorned not to hear two harlots plead before him about the controversie of a dead infant. Ioram King of Israel, son of Achab, though a man that walked not up∣rightly 2 King. 6. before God, but gave himselfe to worke abomination in his sight; yet he despised not the complaint of the poor affamished woman of Sa∣maria, when she demanded justice at his hands, although it was in the time of war when Lawes use to be silent, and in the besieging and famishment of the City; neither did he reject the Sunamites request, for the recovery of 2 King. 8. her house and lands, but caused them to be restored unto her. So that then it is manifest, that those Kings which in old time reigned over the People of God, albeit they had in every City Judges, yea and in Jerusalem also, as it appeareth in the nineteenth Chapter of the second Book of Chro∣nicles; yet they ceased not for all that to give ear to suits and complaints that were made unto them, and to decide controversies that came to their knowledge: and for this cause it is that Wisdom saith, That by her Kings Prov. 8. 15. reigne, and Princes decree justice: whereunto also belongeth that which is said in another place, That a King sitting in the Throne of judgement Proc. 20. 8. chaseth away all evill with his eyes. Moreover, that this was the greatest part of the Office and duty of Kings in antient times to see the administration of justice, Homer the Poet may be a sufficient witnesse, when he saith of Agamemnon, That the Scepter and Law was committed to him by God, to do right to every man: an∣swerable to the which, Virgil (describing the Queen of Carthage) saith, She sat in judgement in the midst of her People: as if there was nothing more beseeming such a person than such an action. And therefore the Poets not without cause feigne Iupiter alwayes to have Themis (that is to say, Justice) at his elbow; signifying thereby, not that whatsoever Kings and Princes did was just and lawfull, be it never so vile in it own nature (as that wanton flatterer Anaxarchus said to Alexander) but that equity and justice should alwayes accompany them, and never depart from their sides. And hereupon it was that Eacus, Minos, and Radamanthus the first King of Graecia, were so renowned of old antiquity, because of their true and up∣right execution of Justice, and therefore were not honoured with any grea∣ter title than the name of Judges. It is said of King Alexander, that although he was continually busied in Plutarch. affaires of war, and of giving battels, yet he would sit personally in judge∣ment to hear criminall causes and matters of importance pleaded; and that whilest the accuser laid open his accusation, he would stop one ear with his hand, to the end that the other might be kept pure and without prejudice, for the defence and answer of the accused. The Roman Empe∣rours Sueton. also were very carefull and diligent in this behalfe: as first Iulius Cae∣sar, who is recorded to have taken great paines in giving audience to par∣ties, and in dealing justice betwixt them. In like manner Augustus Caesar is commended for his care and travell in this behalfe: for he would ordi∣narily sit in judgement upon causes and controversies of his subjects, and that with such great delight and pleasure, that oftentimes night was fain to interrupt his course, before his will was to relinquish it: yea, though he found himselfe evill at case, yet would he not omit to apply himselfe to the division of judgement, or else calling the parties before him to his bed.
The Emperour Claudius, though a man otherwise of a dull and grosse spirit, yet in this respect he discharged the duty of a good Prince, for that he would intermeddle with hearing his subjects causes, and do right unto them: he chanced once to make a very pretty and witty end of a suit be∣twixt a son and his mother, who denying and disclaiming him to be her son, was by the Emperour commanded to marry him; and so lest he should agree to that mischief, was constrained to acknowledge and avow him for her son: and to be short, it was very ordinary and usuall among the Em∣perours, to take knowledge of matters controverted, but especially of cri∣minall and capitall causes; by meanes whereof the Apostle Paul, desirous to shun the judgement and lyings in wait of his enemies the Jewes, ap∣pealed from them to Caesar; which he would never have done, if Caesar had not in some sort used to meddle with such affaires; and for further proof hereof, hither may be added the saying which is reported of Nero, in the beginning of his reigne, That when he should signe with his hand a sen∣tence of death against a condemned person, he wished that he could nei∣ther write nor reade, to the end to avoid that necessary action. The bold answer of an old woman to the Emperour Adrian is very wor∣thy Fulgos. lib 6. cap. 2. to be remembred; who appealing and complaining to the Emperour of some wrong, when he answered that he was not at leasure then to hear her suit, she told him boldly and plainly, That then he ought not to be at lea∣sure to be her Emperour: which speech went so near the quicke unto him, that ever after he shewed more facility and courtesie towards all men that had any thing to do with him. The Kings of France used also this custome of hearing and deciding their subjects matters, as we reade of Charlemaigne the King and Emperour, who commanded that he should be made ac∣quainted with all matters of importance, and their issues, throughout his Realme. King Lewis the first treading the steps of his father Charlemaigne, accustomed himselfe three dayes in a week to hear publiquely in his pal∣lace the complaints and grievances of his people, and to right their wrongs and injuries. King Lewis, sirnamed the Holy, a little before his death gave Alm. in charge to his son that should succeed him in the Crown, amongst other, this precept, To be carefull to bear a stroke in seeing the distribution of justice, and that it should not be perverted nor depraved. CHAP. XLVIII. Of such Princes as have made no reckoning of punishing vice, nor regarded the estate of their People. IT cannot chuse but be a great confusion in a Common∣wealth, when justice sleepeth, and when the shamelesse boldnesse of evill doers is not curbed in with any bridle, but runneth it own swinge; and therefore a Consull of Rome could say, That it was an evil thing to have a Prince, under whom licence and liberty is given to every man to do what him listeth: forsomuch then as this evill proceedeth from the carelesnesse and slothfulnesse of those that hold the sterne of government
in their hands, it cannot be but some evill must needs fall upon them for the same: the truth of this may appear in the person of Philip of Macedony (whom Demosthenes the Orator noteth for a treacherous and false dealing Prince:) after that he had subdued almost all Greece, not so much by open war, as by subtilty, craft, and surprise, and that being in the top of his glory, he celebrated at one time the marriage of his son Alexander, whom he had lately made King of Epire, and of one of his daughters, with great pompe and magnificence; as he was marching with all his train betwixt the two bridegroomes (his own son and his son in law) to see the sports and pastimes which were prepared for the solemnity of the marriage, be∣hold suddenly a young Macedonian Gentleman called Pausanias, ran at him, and slew him in the midst of the prease, for not regarding to do him justice, when he complained of an injury done unto him by one of the Peeres of the Realme. Tatius, the fellow King of Rome with Romulus, for not doing justice in Plutarch. punishing certain of his friends and kinsfolkes that had robbed and mur∣dered certain Embassadours which came to Rome, and for making their impunity an example for other malefactors by deferring and protracting, and disappointing their punishment, was so watched by the kindred of the slain, that they slew him even as he was sacrificing to his gods, because they could not obtain justice at his hands. What happened to the Romans for refusing to deliver an Embassadour, Titus Livius. Plutarch. who (contrary to the law of Nations comming unto them) played the part of an enemy to his own Countrey, even well nigh the totall overthrow of them and their City: for having by this meanes brought upon themselves the calamity of war, they were at the first discomfited by the Gaules; who pursuing their victory, entred Rome, and slew all that came in their way, whether men or women, infants or aged persons, and after many dayes spent in the pillage and spoiling of the houses, at last set fire on all, and ut∣terly destroyed the whole City. Childericke King of France is notified for an extreme dullard and block∣head, Paulus Aemil. and such a one as had no care or regard unto his Realme, but that li∣ved idlely and slothfully, without intermedling with the affaires of the Common-wealth: for he laid all the charge and burden of them upon Pe∣pin his Lieutenant Generall, and therefore was by him justly deposed from his royall Dignity, and mewed up in a Cloyster of Religion to become a Monke, because he was unfit for any good purpose: and albeit that this sudden change and mutation was very strange, yet there ensued no trouble nor commotion in the Realme thereupon; so odious was he become to the whole land for his drousie and idle disposition. For the same cause did the Princes Electors depose Venceslaus the Emperour from the Empire, and established another in his room. Paulus Aemil. King Richard of England, among other foul faults which he was guilty of, incurred greatest blame for this, because he suffered many theeves and robbers to rove up and down the Land unpunished: for which cause the Citizens of London commenced a high suit against him, and compelled him having reigned two and twenty yeares, to lay aside the Crown, and re∣signe it to another, in the presence of all the States, and died prisoner in the Tower. Moreover, this is no small defect of justice, when men of authority do
not onely pardon capitall and detestable crimes, but also grace and favour the doers of them: and this neither ought nor can be done by a soveraigne Prince, without overpassing the bounds of his limited power, which can in no wayes dispence with the law of God, whereunto even Kings themselves Exod. 21. are subject: for as touching the willing and considerate murderer, Thou shalt plucke him from my Altar (saith the Lord) that he may die, thy eye shall Deut. 19. not spare him, to the end it may goe well with thee: which was put in practise in the death of Ioab, who was slaine in the Tabernacle of God, holding his 1 King. 2. hands upon the hornes of the Altar: for he is no lesse abhominable before God that justifieth the wicked, than he that condemneth the just: and here∣upon Prov. 17. that holy King S. Lewis, when he had granted pardon to a malefactor, Nich. Gilles. revoked it againe, after better consideration of the matter; saying, That he would give no pardon, except the case deserved pardon by the law, for it was a worke of charity and pitty to punish an offendor; and not to punish crimes was as much as to commit them. In the yeare of our Lord 978, Egelrede the sonne of Edgare and Alphred, King of England, was a man of goodly outward shape and visage, but whol∣ly given to idlenesse, and abhorring all Princely exercises: besides, he was a lover of ryot and drunkennesse, and used extreame cruelty towards his sub∣jects, having his eares open to all unjust complaints; in feats of armes of all men most ignorant: so that his cruelty made him odious to his subjects, and his cowardise encouraged strange enemies to invade his kingdome; by meanes whereof England was sore afflicted with warre, famine and pesti∣lence. In his time (as a just plague for his negligence in Governement) decayed the noble Kingdome of England, and became tributary to the Danes: for ever when the Danes oppressed him with warre, he would hire them away with summes of money, without making any resistance against them: insomuch, that from ten thousand pounds by the yeare, the tribute arose in short space to fifty thousand: wherefore he devised a new tricke, and sought by treacherie to destroy them, sending secret Commissioners to the Magistrates throughout the Land, that upon a certaine day and houre assigned, the Danes should suddenly and joyntly bee murdered: Which massacre being performed, turned to be the cause of greater misery: for Swaine King of Denmarke hearing of the murder of his countrey-men, lan∣ded with a strange army in divers parts of this Realme, and so cruelly with∣out mercy and pitty spoyled the Countrey, and slew the people, that the Englishmen were brought to most extreame and unspeakable misery, and Egelrede the King driven to flie with his wife and children to Richard Duke of Normandie, leaving the whole Kingdome to bee possessed of Swaine. Edward the second of that name may well be placed in this ranke: for Stow Chron. Phil. Com. though he was faire and well proportioned of body, yet he was crooked and evill favoured in conditions: for hee was so disposed to lightnesse and va∣nity, that he refused the company of his Lords and men of honour, and haunted amongst villaines and vile persons; he delighted in drinking and riot, and loved nothing lesse than to keep secret his owne counsailes, though never so important; so that he let the affaires of his Kingdome runne at six and at sevens: To these vices he added the familiarity of certaine evill dis∣posed fellowes, as Pierce de Gaueston, and Hugh the Spencers; whose wanton counfell he following, neglected to order his Common-wealth by sadnesse,
discretion, and justice: which thing caused first great variance betwixt him and his nobles, so that shortly he became to them most odious, and in the end was deprived of his kingdome: for the Scots that were so curbed in his fathers dayes, now playd rex through his negligence, and made many irruptions into his land, killing and discomfiting his men at three sundry battailes: besides, Charles of France did him much scath upon his lands in Gasconie and Guyan; and at last Isabell his owne wife, with the helpe of Sir Iohn of Henault and his Henowaies (to whom the nobles and commons gave their assistance) tooke him and deprived him of his crowne, installed his young sonne Edward in his place, keeping him in prison at Bartcley, where not long after he was murdered by Sir Roger Mortimer. CHAP. XLIX. How rare and geason good Princes have beene at all times. IT appeareth by all these former histories, what a multi∣tude there hath beene of dissolute, proud, cruell, and vi∣cious Princes, and of tyrans and oppressors, so that the number of good & vertuous ones seemeth to have been but small in comparison of them: which is also intima∣ted by the tenor of the histories of the Kings of Juda & Israel, of whom (being in number forty) but ten onely were found that pleased God in their reignes, and they of Juda; and yet of them ten, one was corrupted in his old age, and fell away to vile iniquities: but of Israel there was not one that demeaned not himself evill in his estate, and dealt not unjustly and wickedly before the Lord. As for the first Emperors, what manner of men they were for the most part, we have already sufficiently declared: Wherefore it was not unfitly spoken of him, that jeasting-wise told the Emperor Claudius, That all the good Caesars might be engraven in one little ring, they were so few: so that then a King or Prince endued with vertue, bounty, and clemency, and that loveth his subjects, endeth strifes, and kindleth concord, is a speciall note of Gods fa∣vour, and a gift inestimable; and that people that hath such a Prince for their support and stay, are infinitely blessed; they lie as it were upon a sunnie banke, and ride in a most safe and quiet haven, whilest others are ex∣posed and laid open to the cruelty of time, and are tossed and turmoyled with the waves of calamitie and oppression; therefore this may be their song of mirth and rejoycing, whilest other nations sing nothing but wella∣daies: A sad afflicted soule, all pale with griefe and wrong, Being eas'd from sence of dole, doth straitway change his song From moane to mirth, for why his thick and cloudy night, Is turn'd to purity of Titans glorious light. The raging storme is past, and feare of shipwracke gone, Their weary ships at last a calmie shore have won. The Pilot safely lies reposed under lee, Not fearing frowne of skies, or other miserie.
The strong and mighty blasts of furious winds are still, They doe no more cast downe huge Firre trees at their will: A pleasant gale succeeds of fruitfull Zephyrus, Which recreates the seeds of spring voluptuous. Pack hence you wicked ones, with all your equipage Of murdering champions, envenomed with rage: Your horse are tir'd with toyle, and all your strength's pluckt downe, Your swords have caught a foyle by lovely peaces crowne. O blessed glorious peace (that beautifiest each land, And mak'st all dangers cease, whereof in feare we stand) Distill thy favours pure (which are immortall things) On us that lie secure in shadow of thy wings. Even those thy holy traine, which still attendance yeeld, Let them wax young againe, and flourish in our field: Iustice and verity, which ballance right from wrong, Let them attend on thee with equity among. Then shall the Swaines rejoyce under a Fig-tree lien, And sing with cheerfull voice untill the Suns decline: And all the world shall ring with ecchoes of our praise, Which to the Lord our King we warble out alwayes. The simple harmlesse Lambe no greedy Wolfe shall feare, Nor Kid new wain'd from dam shall stand in awe of Beare: But Sheepe and Wolfe shall make like friends one flocke and fold, A fearelesse childe shall take the rule of Tigres old. You flockes of Sion hill which through so many feares Of warre and crosses, still have sowne your field with teares, Take comfort to your hope, strait comes the joyfull houre To reap a fruitfull crop for all your torments soure. But alas it commeth to passe through the sinnes and wickednesse of men, that Realmes are oftentimes scarred with the alarmes and assaults of foes, and strangely afflicted with many evils, when as the State of governement Esay 3. is troubled and changed by the iniquities of the people. CHAP. L. That the greatest and mightiest Cities are not exempt from punish∣ment of their iniquities. WHereas great and populous Cities are as it were the eyes of the earth (as Athens and Sparta were said to be of Greece) there is no question but that they are so much the more blameable for glutting and overcharging themselves with sinnes, by how much the more they abound with all manner of temporall goods and commodities, and that at length they tumble into utter ruine and desolation; for instead of being a patterne and direction unto others, of wisedome and good governement, as they ought; they are for the
most part examples of folly and vanity: for where is more evils and disso∣lutenesse reigning, than in them? the principall cause whereof is that gree∣dy worme Avarice, which begetteth in all estates much fraud, cousening, and other naughty practises, with many such like children: for through it every man looketh to provide for his owne affaires, and to get any com∣moditie or ease whatsoever to himselfe, even with all his power; not caring who be damnified, so he be enriched: The plenty of riches which there a∣boundeth, instilleth pride and haughtinesse of minde into some, maketh o∣thers dissolute and effeminate, and besotteth others with carnall & unhonest pleasures; from which head spring rivers of evils, as envies, quarrels, dis∣sentions, debates, and murders; all which things happen to them, that be∣ing transported and distracted with the furious contrariety of their disordi∣nate affection, can finde no contentment nor agreement with themselves, but must needs burst out into some outward mischiefes; Hence is that wonderfull pompe and bravery, as well of apparell as other things: hence all gourmandise and drunkennesse are so common, yea and adulteries so much frequented; wherefore the anger of the Almighty must needs bee kindled, to consume them in their sinnes. One of the notablest Cities of the world for greatnesse and antiquity was Ninive, the capitall and chiefe Citie of the Assyrian Empire: howbeit her greatnesse and power could not so protect her, but that after she had once beene spared by the meanes of the Prophet Ionas, who fore-told her of her destruction, being returned to her former vomit againe; to wit, of rob∣beries, extortions, wrongfull dealings, and adulteries, she was wholly and utterly subverted, God having delivered her for a prey into the hands of many of her enemies, that spoiled and pilled her to the quicke; and lastly, into the hands of the Medes, who brought her to a finall and unrecoverable desolation, as it was prophesied by the Prophet Nahum. Babylon was wont to be the seat of that puissant Monarchie under Nabu∣chadnezzar, where flourished the famous Astrologers, and notable wise men of the world, where the spoyles and riches of many nations and coun∣tries were set up as Trophies, and kept as the remembrance of their victo∣ries; where also vices reigned, and all manner of excesse and villanie over∣flowed: for by the report of Q. Curtius, the Citie did so exceed in whoredome Lib. 5. of the acts of Alex∣ander. and adulteries, that fathers and mothers were not ashamed to be bawdes un∣to their daughters, no nor husbands to their wives; a thing most strange and odious: wherefore it could not chuse but in the end bee sacked, and Oros. lib. 2. quite destroyed with an extreame ruine and destruction, the signes and ap∣parance whereof yet are seen in the ruine of old wals and ancient buildings Paul. Jovius, Com. 2. lib. 33. that there remaine. Amongst sea-bordering Cities, and for renowne of merchandise, Tyre in former ages was most famous: for thither resorted the merchants of all Countries for traffique of Palestina, Syria, Aegypt, Persia, and Assyria; they of Tarshis brought thither Iron, Lead, Brasse, and Silver: the Syrians sold their Carbuncles, Purple, broidered worke, fine linnen, corall, and pearle: the Jewes, Hony, Oyle, Treacle, Cassia, and Calamus: the Ara∣bians traffiqued with Lambs, Muttons, and Goats: the Sabeans brought merchandise of all exquisite spices and Apothecary stuffe, with gold and precious stones; by meanes whereof it being growne exceeding wealthy, inriched by fraud and deceit, and being lifted up to the height of pride, and
plunged in the depth of pleasures, it was at length by the just judgement of God, so sacked and ruinated, that the very memory thereof at this day scarce remaineth. The like judgement fell upon Sidon, and upon that rich and renowned Sabell. Citie of Corinth, which through the commodiousnesse of the haven, was the most frequented place of the world, for the entercourse of Merchants out of Asia and Europe; for by reason of her pride and corruption of man∣ners, Thucyd. (but especially for her despising and abuse of the heavenly graces of Gods spirit) which were sowed and planted in her, she underwent this pu∣nishment, Contempt of the word. Lib. 1. cap. 34. Eutrop. Oros. lib. 9. to be first finally destroyed, and brought into cinders by the Ro∣mans; and then after her re-edification, to be debased into so low and vle an estate, that that which remaineth is no wise comparable to her former glory. Againe, Athens the most flourishing and famous Citie of Greece for her faire buildings, large precincts, and multitude of inhabitants, but espe∣cially for her Philosophie, by meanes whereof recourse was made from all parts to her, as the fountaine and well-spring of Arts, and the Schoole and University of the whole world; whose policie and manner of governement was so much esteemed by the Romanes, that they drew from thence their lawes; but now she lies dead and buried in forgetfulnesse, not carrying any of her former proportion or apparance. Carthage that noble Citie, mistresse of Africa, and paragon to Rome, may not brag of any better issue than her fellowes: for though she resisted and made her part good with Rome for many yeares, yet at length by means of her owne inward and civile jarres, she was utterly destroyed by them: for the inhabitants, not able to stand any longer in defence, were constrained to Oros. Eutrop. yeeld themselves to the mercy of their enemies: the women, to the number of five and twenty thousand marching first forth, and after them the men in number thirty thousand following; all which poore captives were sold for bond-slaves, a few onely of the principall excepted; and then fire was put to the Citie, which burnt seventeene dayes without ceasing, even till it was Eutrop. cleane consumed. It is true that it was re-edified after this, but which last∣ed not long, for it was againe brought to destruction; that at this day there remaineth nothing but old and rotten ruines. And thus fared many other Cities, of which may be verified that which was spoken of Troy, that fields and corne are where Cities were. Nunc seges est ubi Tria fuit. Numantium in Spaine being besieged by the Romans, after it had borne the brunt of warre and sacking, a long while made many desperate sallies upon their enemies: and lastly, seeing themselves consumed with famine, rather than they would bow their necks to the yoke of servitude, barring their gates, set fire on all: and so burning themselves with their whole Ci∣ty, left the enemy nothing but ashes for his prey and triumph: as the Sa∣guntines not long before served Anniball. Titue Livius. It is a marvellous and strange thing to consider, how that proud Citie hath lifted up her head above all others, and usurped a tyrannie over Nati∣ons, and which Lactantius, Ierome, and Augustine, three learned fathers, en∣tituled Babylon: how I say she hath beene humbled for all her pride, and Rome hee meaneth. impoverished for all her riches, and made a prey unto many Nations. It was sacked and ransacked twice by the Visigothes, taken once by the Heru∣lians, surprised by the Ostrogothes, destroyed and rooted up by the Van∣dales,
annoyed by the Lumbards, pilled and spoiled by the Graecians, and whipped and chastised by many others; and now  Sodome and Gomor∣rah it is to expect no more punishment, but the last blow of the most migh∣tiest his indignation, to throw it headlong into everlasting and horrible de∣solation. CHAP. LI. Of such punishments which are common to all men in regard of their iniquities. THese and such like effects of Gods wrath ought to ad∣monish and instruct every man to looke unto himselfe for doing evill, and to abhorre and detest sinne, since it bringeth forth such soure and bitter fruits: for albeit the wayes of the wicked seeme in their owne eyes faire and good, yet it is certaine, that they are full of snares Prov. 22. and thornes to entrap and pricke them to the quicke: for after that, being fed with the licorous and deceitfull sweetnesse of their owne lusts, they have sported themselves their fils in their pleasures and wicked affections, then in stead of delights and pastimes, they shall finde nothing but punishment and sadnesse; their laughter, joy, pompe, magni∣ficence, and glory, shall be turned into torments and dolors, weepings, op∣probries, ignominies, confusion, and miserie everlasting: for if God spa∣red not great Cities, Empires, Monarchies, and Kings, in their obstinate misdeeds, shall we thinke he will spare little Cities, Hamlets, and Villa∣ges, and men of base estate, when by their sinnes they provoke him to an∣ger? no, it cannot be; for God is alwayes of one and the same nature, al∣wayes like unto himselfe: A God executing justice and judgement upon the earth; a God that loveth not iniquity;  with whom the wicked cannot dwell, nor Jerem. 19. the fooles stand before his presence. It is hee that huteth the workers of un∣righteousnesse, Psal. 5. and that destroyeth the lyers, and abhorreth all deceitfull, disloyall, perjurous, and murdering persons: as with him there is no ex∣ception of persons, so none, of what estate or condition soever, bee they rich or poore, noble or ignoble, gentle, or carter-like, can exempt them∣selves from his wrath and indignation when it is kindled but a little, if they delight and continue in their sinnes: for as S. Paul saith, Tribulation and Rom. 2. 9. anguish upon the soule of every man that doth evill. Now according to the variety and diversity of mens offences, the Lord in his most just and admirable judgement, useth diversity of punishments: sometimes correcting them one by one, particular; otherwhiles altogether in a heap: sometimes by stormes and tempests, both by sea and land; other times by lightning, haile, and deluge of waters▪ often by overflowing and breaking out of rivers, and of the sea also: and not seldome by remedilesse and sudden fires, heaven and earth, and all the elements being armed with an invincible force, to take vengeance upon such as are traytors and rebels against God  sundry times hee scourgeth the world (as it well deserveth) with his usuall and accustomed plagues, namely of warre, and famine, and
pestilence, which are evident signes of his anger, according to the threats denounced in the law thing the same: and therefore if at any time hee deferre the punishment of the wicked, it is for no other end, but to expect the fulnesse of their sinne, and to make them more inexcusable, when con∣trary to his bountifulnesse and long suffering (which inviteth and calleth them to repentance) they harden themselves and grow more obstinate in their vices and rebellion, drawing upon their heads the whole heape of wrath, the more grievously to assaile them. And thus the vengeance of God marcheth but a soft pace (as saith Valerius Maximus) to the end to double and aggravate the punishment for the slacknesse thereof. CHAP. LII. That the greatest punishments are reserved and layed up for the wicked in the world to come. NOtwithstanding all which hath beene spoken, and how∣soever sinners are punished in this life, it is certaine, that the greatest and terriblest punishments are kept in store for them in another world: And albeit that during this transitory pilgrimage, they seeme to them∣selves oftentimes to live at their ease, and enjoy their pleasures and pastimes to their hearts contentment; yet doubtlesse it is so, that they are indeed in a continuall prison, and in a dungeon of darkenesse, bound and chained with fetters of their owne sinne, and very often turmoyled and but chered with their owne guilty conscience, overcharged with the multitude of offences, and fore-feeling the approach of hell: And in this case many languish away with feare, care, and terror, being toyled and tyred with uncessant and unsupportable disquietnesse, and tossed and distracted with despaire, untill by death they be brought unto their last irrevokable punishment; which punishment is not to endure for a time, and then to end, but is eternall and everlastingly inherent both in body and soule: I say in the body, after the resurrection of the dead; and in soule, after the departure out of this life till all eternity: for it is just and equall, that they which have offended and dishonoured God in their bodies in this life, should be punished also in their bodies in the world to come with endlesse torments: of which torments when mention is made in the holy Scripture, they are for our weake capacity sake called Gehenna, or a place of torment, utter darkenesse and hell fire, where there is weeping and gnashing of teeth, &c. againe, eternall fire, a poole and pit of fire and brim∣stone, which is prepared for the devill and his darlings: and how miserable their estate is that fall therein, our Saviour Christ giveth us to know in the person of the rich glutton, who having bathed himselfe in the pleasures and Luke 16. delights of this world, without once regarding or pittying the poore, was after cast into the torments of hell, and there burneth in quenchlesse flames, without any ceasing or allaying of his griefes: therefore whatsoever pu∣nishments the wicked suffer before they die, they are not quitted by them from this other, but must descend into the appointed place to receive the
surplus of their payments which is due unto them: For what were it for a notorious and cruell Tyran that had committed many foule and wicked deeds, or had most villanously murdered many good men, to have no other punishment but to be slaine, and to endure in the houre of death some ex∣traordinary paine; could such a punishment ballance with his so many and great offences? Whereas therefore many such wretches suffer punish∣ment in this world, we must thinke that this is but a taste and scantling of those torments and punishments which are prepared and made ready for them in the world to come. And therefore it often commeth to passe, that they passe out of this life most quietly, without the disturbance of any crosse or punishment; but it is that they might be more strangely tormen∣ted in another world. Some not considering this point, nor stretching the view of their understanding beyond the aspect of their carnall eyes, have fallen into this foolish opinion, to thinke that there is neither justice nor judgement in heaven, nor respect of equity with the Highest: when they see the wicked to flourish in prosperity, and the good and innocent to bee overwhelmed with adversity, yea and many holy men have fallen into this temptation, as Iob and David did, who when they considered the condition Job. 12. & Psal. 73. of the wicked and unjust, how they lived in this world at their hearts ease, compassed about with pleasures and delights, and waxing old in the same, were carried to their sepulchres in peace; they were somewhat troubled and perplexed within themselves, untill being instructed and resolved by the Word of God, they marked their finall end and issue, and the everlast∣ing perdition which was prepared for them, and by no means could be esca∣ped. And thus it commeth to passe (saith S. Augustine) that many sinnes Epist. 54. are punished in this world, that the providence of God might be more ap∣parant; and many, yea most reserved to be punished in the world to come, that we might know that there is yet judgement behinde. CHAP. LIII. How the afflictions of the godly, and the punishment of the wicked differ. WHich seeing it is so, it is necessary that the wicked and per∣verse ones should feele the rigor of Gods wrath for the pre∣sumption and rebellion wherewith they daily provoke him against them; and although with those that feare God, and strive to keepe themselves from evill, and take paines to live peaceably and quietly, it oftentimes goeth worse here below than with others, being laid open to millions of injuries, reproches, and cruelties, and as it were sheepe appointed to the slaughter; whereof some are massacred, some hanged, some headed, some drowned, some bur∣ned, or put to some other cruell death; yet notwithstanding their estate and condition is farre happier than that of the wicked, for somuch as all their sufferings and adversities are blessed and sanctified unto them of God, who turneth them to their advantage, according to the saying of S. Paul, Rom. 8. 28.
That all things worke for the good to them that feare God: for whatsoever tribulation befalleth them, they cannot be separated from the love of God, which he beareth unto them in his welbeloved son Christ Jesus: be it then that God visiteth them for their faults, (for there is none that is clear of sin) it is a fatherly chastisement to bring them to amendment: be it that hee exerciseth them by many afflictions, as hee did Iob, it is to prove their faith and patience, to the end they may be better purified like gold in the furnace, and serve for example to others. If it bee for the truth of the Gospell that they suffer, then they are blessed, because they are conformed to the image of the sonne of God, that they might also be partakers of his glory, for they that suffer with him, are assured to reign with him: hence it is, that in the midst of their torments and oppressions, in the midst of fires and fagots flaming about them, being comforted with the consolati∣ons of Gods spirit, through a sure hope of their happy repose and incor∣ruptible crowne which is prepared for them in the heavens, they rejoyce and are so chearefull: contrariwise the wicked, seeing themselves ensnared in the evils which their owne sinnes brought upon them, gnash their teeth, fret themselves, murmur against God, and blaspheme him, like wretches, to their endlesse perdition. There is therefore great difference betwixt the punishments of each of these, for the one tendeth to honour and life, the other to shame and confusion: and even as it is not the greatnesse of tor∣ments that maketh the martyr, but the goodnesse of the cause; so the in∣fliction of punishment unjustly, neither maketh the party afflicted guilty, nor any whit diminisheth his reputation: whereas the wicked that are justly tormented for their sinnes, are so marked with infamie and dishonour, that the staine thereof can never be wiped out. Let every one therefore learne to keepe, himselfe from evill, and to containe himselfe in a kinde of modesty and integrity of life, seeing that by the plagues and scourges wherewith the world is ordinarily afflicted; Gods fierce wrath is clearely revealed from heaven upon all impiety and injustice of men, to consume all those that rebell against him. Thinke upon this you inhabitants of the earth, small and great, of what qualitie or condition soever you be. If you be mighty, puissant, and fearefull, know that the Lord is greater than you, for he is almighty, all-terrible, and all-fearefull: in what place soever you are, he is alwayes above you, ready to hurle you down and over∣turne you, to breake, quash, and crush you in peeces as pots of earth: hee is armed with thunder, fire, and a bloudy sword, to destroy, consume, and cut you in pieces: heaven threatneth from above, and the earth which you trample on from below; shaking under your feet, and being ready to spue you out from her face, or swallow you up in her bowels: in briefe, all the elements and creatures of God looke askew at you in disdaine, and set themselves against you in hatred, if you feare not your Creator, your Lord and Master, of whom you have received your Scepters and Crownes, Esay 40. and who is able (when he please) to bring Princes to nothing, and make the Rulers of the earth a thing of nought. Forsake therefore, if you ten∣der the good, honour, and repose of your selves and yours, the evill and corrupt fashions of the world, and submit your selves in obedience under the Scepter of Gods Law and Gospell, fearing the just retribution of ven∣geance
upon all them that doe the contrary: for it is a horrible thing to fall into the hands of the Lord. And you which honour and reverence Heb. 10. 31. God already, be now more quickned and stirred up to his love and obedi∣ence, and to a more diligent practising of his will, and following his com∣mandements, to the end to glorifie him by your lives looking for the happie end of your hope reserved in the heavens for you by Christ Jsus our Lord, to whom  everlasting, Amen.
A briefe Summarie of more Examples, annexed to the former by the same Author. CHAP. I. Of such as have persecuted the Church of Christ. ZAcharias the sonne of Barachias, of whom S. Mathew speaketh in the three and twentieth chapter; and Saint Augustine in the 242 Sermon, de Tempore, in these words; Zacharie the high-Priest, reproving the rebel∣lious people for the neglect of the worship of God, and the sacred lawes, was slaine of the people; and the de∣testable band of the Jewes dyed the pavement with his bloud, in the ninth yeare of the reigne of Ioas King of Judah: which cruelty against this good man the whole nation of the Jewes payed deare for; for when a yeare was past, an armie of the Syrians came up against Ioas, and slew all the Princes of the people in Judah and Hieru∣salem: and there being but a small number of the Syrians, God delivered into their hands the whole multitude of the Jewes. Rabbi Iohosua report∣eth, that two hundred and eleven thousand were slaine in the field, and nine∣tie foure thousand in the Citie, for the expiation of the bloud of Zacharias, which bloud boyled out of the earth till that day, as it were out of a seething Caldron. Egas Patrensis, a Prefect of the Emperor in Achaia, when he had cruci∣fied Phil. Lonicer. Saint Andrew, was possessed of Sathan, and slaine. Incommodous Emperour Commodus, which was judged by the Senate more cruell than Domitian, and more impure than Nero, had a tragicall end, both for his other vices, and principally for persecuting the Church of Christ. In the time of Constantine, one Teredates a great man in Armenia, grie∣vously persecuted the Church: at which time Gregorie the Great, famous for miracles, suffered many indignities from him, and at the last was shut up into a darke and muddie pit for the space of fourteene years. But Tere∣dates
the Prince of that nation, felt the horrible vengeance of God upon himselfe, his houshold, and his Nobles, for they were all transformed into swine, and lived like swine together, and devoured one another. Whether this storie be true or fabulous, let the Reader judge: But it is reported by Nicephorus, lib. 8. cap. 35. In the reigne of Constantius, after the Antiochian Synod, in the which Zozom. lib. 3. cap. 6. great Athanasius was condemned, the Easterne Cities, and especially An∣tioch, were shaken and quashed with wonderfull Earthquakes, in revenge of the injuries done to that good man. Neither did Constantius the Emperour, an assertor and maintainer of the Cent. 4. cap. 3. Arrian heresie, escape unpunished for his perfidie and impietie. For first his warre-like affaires in the East prospered not: then a little before the end of his life he grievously complained, that he had innovated the faith in his kingdome. At last in those sighings and complaints he parted this life, with a grievous and violent disease. The Unkle of Iulian the Apostata, called also Iulianus, at Antioch, in the Phil. Lonicer. temple prophaned the holy table with pissing upon it. And when Eusoius the Bishop rebuked him for it, he stroke him with his fist. Not long after he was taken with a grievous disease of his bowels putrifying, and misera∣bly died, his excrements comming from him not by their ordinary passa∣ges, but by his wicked mouth. Under the Emperour Valence, a wonderfull haile, the stones being as big as a man could hold in his hand, was sent upon Constantinople, and slew Fascic. Temp. many, both men and beasts, for that the Emperour had banished many fa∣mous men that would not communicate with Eudoxius the Arrian: and for the same reason a great part of Germa, a Citie of Hellespont, was throwne downe by an earthquake; and in Phrygia such a famine succeeded, that the Inhabitants were faine to change their habitation, and to lee to o∣ther places. After the martyrdome of Gregory the Bishop of Spoleta, Flacchus the Phil. Lonicer. Governour, who was author thereof, was strucke with an Angel, and vomi∣ted out his entrailes at his mouth, and died. Under the Empire of Alexander, Mammea Agrippitus fifteene yeares old, Cent. 3. cap. 12. because he would not sacrifice to their Idols, was apprehended at Praeneste, whipt with scourges, and hanged up by the heeles, and at last slaine with the sword; in the middest of whose torments the Governour of the Citie fell from the Tribunall seat dead. Bajazet, a most cruell enemy of the Christians, was taken by Tamerlane Chr. Phil. lib. 5. the Tartarian King, and bound in golden chaines, and carried about by him in an iron cage, latised and shewne unto all, being used for a stirrop unto Tamerlane, when he got upon his horse. Gensericus the King of the Vandales, exercising grievous cruelty against the Orthodox Christians, he himselfe being an Arrian, was possessed of the Sigeb. in Chro. Devill, and died a miserable death, in the yeare 477. Honoricus the second, King of the Vandales, having used inexplicable Chro. Phil. l. 3. cruelty against the Orthodox Christians, hanging up honest matrons and virgins naked, burning their bodies with torches, cutting off their dugges and armes, because they would not subscribe to the Arrian heresie, was sur∣prised himselfe with the vengeance of God: for his land was turned into barrennesse through an exceeding drought, so that numbers of men, women,
and beasts, died with famine; the pestilence also seised upon them, and he himselfe was stricken with such a disease of his body, that his members rot∣ted off one after another. Anastatius Dicorus, a grievous persecutor of the Church of Christ, be∣ing Zonar. lib. 3. admonished in a dreame, that he should perish with thunder, built him an house, wherein he might defend himselfe from that judgement; but in vaine, for in a great thunder he fled from chamber to chamber, and at last was found dead, blasted with lightning, to the great horror of the behol∣ders. Chasroes the King of Persia, a grievous enemy to Christ and Christians, Paul▪ Diaconus lib. 18. de reb. Romanis. committed horrible outrages against them; for first he slew at Jerusalem ninety thousand men, with Zachari the Patriarch of Jerusalem, and also raged in like manner in Aegypt, Lybia, Aethiopia, and would grant them no condition of peace, unlesse they would forsake Christ, and worship the Sunne; he also put to death with most cruell torments Anastatius a godly Monke, because he constantly confessed the faith of Christ. But God met with him to the full; for his eldest sonne Syroes tooke him prisoner, and handled him in most vile manner; he hanged an iron weight upon his neck, and imprisoned him in an high tower, which he had built to keepe his trea∣sure; denying him food, and bidding him eat the gold which he had gathe∣red together; then he slew all his children before his face, and exposed him to the scoffes and railings of the people, and lastly caused him to be shot to death: and so that great terror of the world, and shedder of Christian bloud, breathed out his soule after a miserable manner. Regnerus the King of Denmarke, abrogating Christian Religion, and set∣ting Crantz. lib. 3. cap. 2. up Idolatrie in his Kingdome anew, the divine vengeance overtooke him: for Helles, whom he had cast out of the Kingdome, returned upon him with an army of the Gaules, and overcomming him in battell, tooke him prisoner, and shut him up in a filthie prison full of serpents, which setting upon him, with their venomous bitings and stings, brought him to a most horrible end. Lysius the Emperour gave Heria his daughter, a virgin, because she was Offic. Ravisi. a Christian, to be trampled under foot of horses; but he himselfe was sain by the byting of one of the same horses. A Popish Magistrate having condemned a poore Protestant to death, before his execution caused his tongue to be cut out, because he should not confesse the truth: in requitall whereof, the next childe that was borne un∣to him, was borne without a tongue.
CHAP. II. Of Perjurie. Pilip King of Macedon, who was a great contemner of all oathes, and held the Religion thereof as a vain thing; for this cause (as all Writers affirme) the vengeance of God followed him and his posteritie; for when he had lived scarce forty and sixe yeares, he himselfe was slain, and all his whole house in short time in short time af∣ter utterly extinguished;  one of his sonnes was slaine by Olympias his wife. Also another sonne, which he had by Cleopatra the  of Aalus, he tormented to death in a brazen vessell, compassed about with fire. The est of his sonnes periffied in like manner, and at last Pausan. in Arc. the famous Alexander his sonne, after great conquest atchieved by him, in the middle course of his victories periffied miserably, some thinke by poyson. In the Countrey of Arbernum, there was a certaine wicked man that used ordinarily to for sweare himselfe: but at one time after he had thus sin∣ned, Greg. Turon. his tongue was tyed up that he could not speake, but began to low like an oe: yet repenting and grieving for his sinne, he found the bond of his tongue loosed, and a readinesse of speech given unto him againe: whereby we see both the Iustice of God in punishing them that sinne in this kinde, and his mercy, in pardoning when they truly repent. At this day we have an example fresh and famous, of a certaine maid that had stolne and pilfered many things away out of her mistresses house; of which being examined, she forswore them, and wisht that she might rot if she ever touched them, or knew of them: but notwithstanding she was carried to prison, and there presently began so to rot & stink, that they were forced to thrust her out of prison, and to convey her to the Hospitall, where she lies in lamentable miserie; repenting as they say of her foule sinne: The Lord be mercifull unto her. CHAP. III. Of Epicures and Atheists. BArges, otherwise called Elima, a sore of implety, and a horrible Magitian and Atheist, oftenly resisting the Apo∣stles, Paul and Barnabas, before Sergius Paulus the Deputy; was presently stroke with blindnesse by the hand of God: This man Saint Luke speaketh of, Acts 13. Iustin Martyr that lived not long after the Apostles Chron. Philip. times, a famous Christian, writeth thus to  the Emperour: viz. after the ascention of Christ into Heaven, certaine men stirred up by the Devill, called themselves gods; of which number was Simon the Samari∣tane,
borne in a Village called Gitton. This man in the time of Claudius Caesar, by the power of the Devill, exercising Magicall Arts, and working great wonders, was esteemed for a god, and a Statue erected unto him with this inscription; Simon deo sancto, To Simon the holy god: The Samaritans also, with many of other Nations worshipped him as a god; but this Atheist meeting with Saint Peter at Rome, had great contentions with him; and boasting that he would ascend into Heaven in the sight of all was  up into the aire by Devils; but Peter commanded the Devils in the name of Christ to let him goe, and so he fell downe upon the  a pieces. Caius Caligula Emperour of Rome, raging against both  Jewes, caused himselfe to be worshipped and his Images  places: He also dedicated the Temple of Jerusalem to ; Euseb. l. 2. c. 7. commanding it to be called the Temple of famous Iupiter,  o hee styled himselfe; but to shew that he was but a wretched simple man, he reigned Sueton. but three years and three moneths, and was stain by Pherius a Tribut. Herod Agrippa when he suffered himselfe to be saluted and honoured as a Euseb. l. 2. c. 9. god, was presently smitten with horrible plagues in his bowels, when dete∣sting the voice of his flatterers; said, I that was called but lately a god,  in the bonds of death. Daphida, a biting and contentious Sophister, and hating all Religion   lib. 1. cap. 8. both Heathenish and Christian, came to Delphos, and in a scoffe asked the Oracle of Apollo, Whether he might finde his horse or no; when hee had none to finde: the Oracle answered, That he should finde a orse, but it should be his destruction. At his returne from the Oracle, King Atalus his enemy ceased upon him, and set him upon a rocke, the name whereof was a horse; causing him to be throwne downe headlong, to learne what it is to mocke the gods. CHAP. IV. Of Idolatrie. THe wonderfull Idolatrie of the Heathens was so abho∣minable, that their madnesse would astonish any rea∣sonable man; not to speake of their Iupiter, Mars, Mer∣curie, Apollo, and the rest; Hesiod doth report that they had thirty thousand gods upon the earth, and some most strange ones. Troglodites worshipped Snayles; the Syrians Pigions; the Romans Geese; because by their squaking the Capitoll was saved from the Gaules; the Abacians a Liò∣nesse; because a Lionesse had killed a Tyrant of theirs: The Delphians a Wolfe, the Samians a Sheepe; the Tenedians a Cow with Calfe; the Al∣banians a Dragon; the Aegyptians Rats and Mise, and Cats, and a Calfe; wherein the Jewes are said to imitate them in the Wildernesse. But the I∣dolatrie of the Romans was beyond all, for they worshipped not onely the higher gods, as they called, but the basest things that could be named in the World: as the Ague, and the Gout, the Privie; yea and Priapus that filthie
Idoll of the Gardens. Now who seeth not but the vengeance of God hath beene poured downe upon all these Nations, for their impious Idolatrie, having beene delivered up into the hands of the Gothes and Vandals, Turks and Tartarians, and make a prey unto them. Neither doe the Papists come short of these Heathens in their Idolatrie; for they turne the blessed Saints into Idols, and worship them in stead of God: Every countrey, and every citie, and every house, hath his protecting Saint, which they daily invocate; yea, they ascribe a certaine god to every member, and for their severall Cattell, beside their abhominable Idolatrie in worshipping their breaden god: but as God hath taken already in part vengeance upon that Idolatrous Whore of Babylon; so I doubt not but he will fulfill the full measure of his wrath upon them, in his due time, except they repent. CHAP. V. Of Blasphemie. A Certaine holy man passing by a Wine-Taverne, went to prayer; wherein certaine young men having passed the whole night in drinking and playing, and blasphe∣ming the name of God, he met with a poore man hor∣ribly wounded in his body, and asked him of whom he had received those wounds; the poore man answered, that hee had received them of those young men that were in that Taverne: whereupon the good man returned backe, and en∣quired of them, why they had so wounded the poore man? The young men astonished answered, that there were none in the Taverne with them all that night but themselves; and presently went out to see the poore man thus wounded, but he was not to be found: whereupon being more amazed, they Discip. de Tem. judged that it was Christ whom they had thus wounded with their blas∣phemies. Anno 1551. in the coasts of Magnapolis, certaine men abusing the feast Iob. Fincel. of Pentecost with much drinking, a certaine woman in their company blas∣phemed God strangely, and called upon the Devils, who presently snatched her away, and carried her aloft into the aire, from whence the ell downe dead, the whole company beholding of her. At the coasts of Bohemia; Anno 1551. five drnken men quaffing toge∣ther, with horrible blasphemies prophaned the name of God; and the pi∣cture of the Devill being painted upon the wall, they caroused healths unto Iob. Fincel. lib. him: to which the Devill answered immediately, for the next-morning all five were found dead, their necks being broken, and quashed to places, a though a wheele had gone over them, bloud running out of their mohes, nostrils, and eares, to the great astonishment of the beholders. Not many years since, two men contended together which of them should Lonicer. poure forth most blasphemies against God, but whilest they were exerci∣sing this devilish contention, one of them was stricken with madnesse, and so continued till his lives end.
In like manner at Rome certaine young men agreed together, that hee should have the victory that could sweare most: which wicked strife as soone as they entred into, one of them was deprived of the use of his tongue, Lonicer. another of his reason and understanding, and the rest remained as dead men; God reserving them alive for repentance. At Eslinga in Germany, upon Saint Katharines day, a certaine Noble∣man Lonicer. having lost much money at play, with horrible execrations and bla∣phemies, commanded his man to bring him his horse that hee might ride home, in a very darke night; but his servant dissuaded him from his jour∣ney, affirming how dangerous the way was, by reason of the waters and the fennes that lay in the middest: whereat hee began to rage and sweare the more, and goe he would. But he was encountred by the way with an army of infernall souldiers, which beset the nobleman on all sides, and threw him from his horse: Now there was in his company a vertuous and valiant gentleman, who set him againe upon his horse, and held him on one side; whom when the spirits durst not attempt by reason of his innocency, they vanished out of sight; and they conveyed the nobleman into a monasterie that was hard by, where he lay three dayes and died: such is the end of hor∣rible and fearefull blasphemers. A Vintner that accustomed himselfe to blaspheming, swearing, and drun∣kennesse, and delighting to entertaine such that were like himselfe, to swal∣low downe his wine; upon the Lords day standing at the dore with a pot in his hand to call in more guests, there came suddenly a violent whirlew inde, and carried him up into the aire in the sight of all men, and he was never seene more. CHAP. VI. Of Conjucers, Magitians, and Witches. IOhn Faustus, a filthie beast, and a sinke of many devils, led about with him an evill spirit in the likenesse of a dog; being at Wittenberg, when as by the Edict of the Prince he should have beene taken, he escaped by his magicall delusions; and after at Noremberg being by an extraordinary sweat that came upon him as he was at dinner, certified that hee was beset, payed his host suddenly his shot, and went away: and being scarce escaped out of the walls of the Citie, the Sergeants and other officers came to apprehend him. But Gods vengeance following him, as he came into a Village of the Dukedome of Wittenberg, he sat there in his Inne very sad: the host required of him what was the cause of his sadnesse; he answered, that he would not have him terrified, if he heard a great noise and shaking of the house that night; which happened according to his presage: for in the morning hee was found dead, with his necke wrung behinde him; the Devill whom he served having carried his soule into hell. This story is set downe by many in other termes; but Philip Lonicerus expresseth it in this manner, in his Theatre of Histories.
Anno 1553. two Witches were taken which went about by tempest, haile, and frost, to destroy all the corne in the countrey; these women stole away a little infant of one of their neighbours, and cutting it in pieces, put it into a Cauldron to be boyled: but by Gods providence the mother of the childe came in the meane while, and found the members of her childe thus cut in pieces and boyled. Whereupon the two Witches were taken, and being examined, answered, That if the boyling had beene finished, such a tempest of aine and haile would have followed, that all the fruits of the earth in that countrey should have been destroyed; but God prevented them by his just judgement, in causing them to be put to death. Anno 1558. in a Village neare to Ihaena in Germany, a certaine Magiti∣an being instructed by the Devill in the composition of divers hearbs, re∣stored many unto their healths. He had daily commerce with that evill spi∣rit, and used his counsell in the curing of diseases: but it happened that there fell a quarrell betwixt him and a neighbour of his a carpenter: who so exasperated him with his taunting words, that in few dayes after he cau∣sed the Carpenter, by his magicall art, to fall into a grievous disease. The poore Carpenter sent for this Magitian, and entreated him to helpe him in his need. The Magitian feigning an appeased minde, but desiring to revenge the injuries done unto him, gave unto him a potion confected of such veno∣mous hearbs and roots, that being taken, the poore man presently died. Whereupon the Carpenters wife accused the Magitian of murther: the cause is brought to the Senate of Ihaena, who examining the matter, caused him by torments to confesse the murther, and many other wickednesses, for which he was fastened to a stake and burnt to death. CHAP. VII. Of the prophanation of the Sabbath. A Certaine nobleman (prophaning the Sabbath usually in hunting) had a childe by his wife with a head like a dog, and with eares and chaps crying like a hound. Stratford upon Sluon was, twice on the same day twelve-month (being the Lords day) almost consumed with fire; chiefly for prophaning the Lords day, and contemning his Word in the mouth of his faith∣full Minister. Feverton in Devonshire (whose remembrance makes my heart bleed) was oftentimes admonished by her godly Preachers, that God would bring some heavie judgement on the Towne for their horrible prophanation of the Lords day, occasioned chiefly by their Market on the day following. Not long after his death, on the third of Aprill, Anno Dom. 1598. God in lesse than halfe an houre consumed with a sudden and fearfull fire the whole Towne, except onely the Church, the Court-house, and the Almes-houses, or a few poore peoples dwellings; where a man might have seene foure hundred dwelling houses all at once on fire: and above fiftie persons con∣sumed with the flame. And now againe since the former Edition of this
booke, on the fifth of August last 1612, (fourteene yeares since the former fire) the whole Towne was againe fired and consumed, except some thirty houses of poore people, with the School-house, and Almes-houses; they are blinde which see not in this the finger of God: God grant them grace when it is next built, to change their Market-day, and to remove all occasions of prophaning the Lords day. Let other Townes remember the Tower of Siloe, Luke 13. 4. and take warning by their neighbours chastisements: Feare Gods threatnings, Ieremie 17. 27. and beleeve Gods Prophets if they will prospet, 1 Chron. 20. 20. CHAP. VIII. Of Drunkennesse. AN Ale-wise in Kesgrave neare to Ipswich, who would needs force three Serving-men (that had been drinking in her house, and were taking their leaves) to stay and drinke the three outs first: that is, Wit out of the head, Money out of the purse, Ale out of the barrell: as shee was comming towards them with the pot in her hand, was suddenly taken speechlesse and sickher tongue swolne in her head; she never recovered speech, but the third day after died. This Sir Anthony Felton the next Gentleman and Justice, with divers o∣thers, eye-witnesses of her in sicknesse, related to me; whereupon I went to the house with two or three witnesses, and enquired the truth of it. Two servants of a Brewer in Ipswich, drinking for a rumpe of a Turkey, strugling in their drinke for it, fell into a scalding Caldron backwards; whereof the one died presently, the other lingringly, and painfully, since my comming to Ipswich. A man comming home drunk, would needs goe and swimme in the mill pond; his wife and servants knowing he could not swimme, dissuaded him, once by intreaty got him out of the water, but in he would needs goe again, and there was drowned. I was at the house to enquire of this, and found it to be true. In Barnewell neare to Cambridge, one at the signe of the Plough, a lusty young man, with two of his neighbours, and one woman in their company, agreed to drinke a barrell of strong beere; they drunke up the vessell, three of them died within foure and twenty houres, the fourth hardly escaped af∣ter great sicknesse. This I have under a Justice of Peace his hand neare dwelling, besides the common fame. A Butcher in Haslingfield hearing the Minister inveigh against drun∣kennesse, being at his cups in an Ale-house, fell a scoffing at the Minister and his Sermons. As he was drinking, the drinke, or something in the cup quackned him, and stuck so in his throat, that he could neither get it up not downe, but strangled him presently. At Tillingham in Dengy hundred in Essex, three young men meeting to drinke strong waters, fell by degrees to halfe pintes: one fell downe dead in the roome, and the other, prevented by company comming in, esca∣ped not without much sicknesse.
At Bungey in Norfolke, three comming out of an Ale-house in a very darke evening, swore they thought it was not darker in hell it selfe: one of them fell off the bridge into the water, and was drowned; the second fell off his horse; the third sleeping on the ground by the river side was frozen to death. This have I often heard, but have no certaine ground for the truth of it. A Bay life of Hedly upon the Lords day being drunke at Melford, would needs get upon his mare to ride through the street, affirming (as the report goes) that his mare would carry him to the Devill: his mare casts him off, and broke his necke. Instantly reported by sundry sufficient witnesses. Company drinking in an Ale-house at Harwich in the night over against one Master Russels, and by him once or twice willed to depart; at length he came downe and tooke one of them, and made as he would carry him to prison, who drawing his knife, fled from him, and was three dayes after ta∣ken out of the sea with the knife in his hand. Related to me by Master Russel himselfe, Maior of the town. At Tenby in Pembroke-shire, a drunkard being exceeding drunke, broke himselfe all to pieces from an high and steep rock, in a most fearefull man∣ner; and yet the occasion and circumstances of his fall so ridiculous, as I thinke not fit to relate, least in so serious a judgement I should move laugh∣ter to the Reader. A Glasier in Chancery lane in London, noted formerly for profession, fell to a common course of drinking; whereof being oft by his wife and many Christian friends admonished, yet presuming much of Gods mercy to himselfe, continued therein, till upon a time having surcharged his sto∣macke with drinke, he fell a vomiting, broke a veine, lay two dayes in ex∣treame paine of body, and distresse of minde, till in the end, recovering a little comfort, died. Both these examples were related to me by a Gentle∣man of worth upon his owne knowledge. Foure sundry instances of drunkennesse, wallowing, and tumbling in their drinke, slaine by carts; I forbeare to mention, because such examples are so common and ordinary. A Yeomans sonne in Northampton-shire being drunke at Welling∣brough on a market day, would needs ride his horse in a brayery over the ploughed lands, fell from his horse, and brake his necke. Reported to me by a kinsman of his owne. A Knight notoriously given to drinke, carrying sometime payles of drinke into the open field to make people drunke withall: being upon a time drinking with company, a woman comes in, delivering him a ring with this poesie, Drinke and die; saying to him, This is for you; which he tooke and wore: and within a week after came to his end by drinking. Re∣ported by sundry, and justified by a Minister dwelling within a mile of the place. One of Aylesham in Norfolke, a notorious drunkard, was drowned in a shallow brooke of water, with his horse by him. Two examples have I knowne of children that murdered their owne mo∣thers in drinke; and one notorious drunkard that attempted to kill his fa∣ther; of which being hindered, he fired his barne, and was afterward execu∣ted one of these formerly in print. At a Taverne in Bread-street in London, certaine Gentlemen drinking
healths to their Lords, on whom they had dependance; one desperate wretch steps to the tables end, layes hold on a pottle pot full of Canarie Sacke, sweares a deepe oath, What, will none here drinke a health to my noble Lord and Master? and so setting the pottle pot to his mouth, drinks it off to the bottome; but was not able to rise up, or to speake when he had done, but fell into a deepe snoaring sleepe, and being removed, laid aside, and covered by one of the servants in the house, attending the time of his waking, was within the space of two houres irrecoverably dead. Witnessed at the time of the printing hereof, by the same servant that stood by him in the act, and helpe to remove him. In Dengy hundred neare Mauldon, about the beginning of his Majesties reigne, there fell out an extraordinary judgement upon five or six that plot∣ted a solemne drinking at one of their houses; laid in Beere for the purpose, drunke healths in a strange manner, and died thereof within a few weekes, some sooner, and some later. Witnessed to me by some that was with one of them on his death-bed to demand a debt, and oftentimes spoken of by Master Heydn, late Preacher of Mauldon, in the hearing of many? the par∣ticular circumstances were exceeding remarkable, but having not sufficient proofe for the particulars, I will not report them. A man in Suffolke overtaken with wine, (though never in all his life be∣fore, as he himselfe said, a little before his fall, seeming to bewaile his pre∣sent condition, and others that knew him so say of him) yet going downe a paire of staires against the perswasion of a woman (sitting by him in his chamber) fell, and was so dangerously hurt, as he died soone after, not being able to speake from the time of his fall to his death. The names of the parties thus punished, I for beare for the kindreds sake yet living. These examples before going, are taken out of the report of that worthy Prea∣cher of Gods word in Ipswich, Master Samuel Ward, in his Sermon called A woe to Drunkards: to the which I will adde one more of mine owne knowledge lately executed. A young Gentleman of good fame, credit, and behaviour, being in July last overtaken by drinke, and riding homeward void of wit and feare, was throwne by his horse, and his braines knocked out with the pummell of his sword. An example more remarkable for two causes: first, because he was not formerly given to that vice; and secondly, in that a friend of his meet∣ing him by the way, intreated him that he would ride softly, and he would conduct him home; but he desperately spurring his horse over rough wayes, was thus overthrowne and perished: but I hope God had mercy on his soule. Saint Augustine in his three and thirtieth Sermon Ad fratres in eremo, relateth this strange example of one Cyril, a Cittizen of Hippo, a man well esteemed and beloved in the Citie: He having one onely sonne, did so coc∣ker him, forbearing either to checke him or correct him; but loving him (as that holy Father saith) not onely above all things, but even above God himselfe; that by his too much liberty and indulgence, his sonne grew won∣derfull debaushed, and gave himselfe to filthy drunkennesse. Upon a time, being vilely overtaken with drinke, he came home, and tumbled over his
mother being great with childe, would have ravished his sister, slew his fa∣ther, and wounded to death two of his other sisters. O fearefull effect of drun∣kennesse! thus God punished the father for his too much love and indul∣gence of his sonne, and the sonne for his vile impiety. Not unlike to this I finde in Philip Lonicerus, Page 486. A certain man, saith he, that gave himselfe to the studie of Godlinesse, was daily assaulted with the temptation of the Divell, who perswaded him if hee would bee quiet, to choose one of these three sinnes, either to make himselfe drunke, or to commit adulterie with his neighbours wife, or to kill his neighbour him∣selfe. The poore man thinking drunkennesse the least sinne, chose that; but being enraged with wine, he was easily drawn to the committall of the other sinnes; for being with wine enflamed, with lust he feared not to vitiate his neighbours wife, nor yet to kill her husband, comming in the meane while seeking to be revenged of him: so giving himselfe to drunkennesse, hee wraps himselfe in all other wickednesse. On the eighteenth of August 1629, one Thomas Wilson labourer, a knowne and common blasphemer of Gods name by oathes and curses, and given much to drinking to excesse, upon a slight occasion moved to displea∣sure against his wife, and not daring to doe much violence unto her, turned it upon himselfe, and with his knife stabbed himselfe, many of his friends and neighbours being present; and so he died. On the 10 day of May 1629, one Iohn Bone of Ely, (coachman unto one Master alu of Beenham) a fellow very vitious, and exceeding in those two evils of prophane swearing and drunkennesse, on the Sabbath day in the Sermon-time, dranke himselfe drunke; so that when he was to sit in the coach-box to drive the coach, he fell out thereof under the horses feet, where he was trodden to death, or so hurt at least, that he died shortly. On the six and twentieth of November 1621, one Richard Borne, servant to Iaspr Brch Gardiner of Ely, accustomed to travell upon the Lords day, and making no reckoning of the Sabbath, seldome or never comming to Church on that day, but went onwards to Saint Ies market, and so spent the day; and being drunke, was at length overtaken by the just judgement of God: and going up the streame in his boate, which he had loaden with marketable wares, he fell into the river, and was so drowned. On the third day of August 1618, one Thomas Alred of Godmanchester, in the Countie of Huntington Butcher, an accustomed Drunkard, being entreated by a neighbour to unpitch a load of hay, and being at that very time in drinke, letting his pitch-forke slip out of his hand, and stooping to take it up againe, slipped from the cart with his head down-wards, his fork standing  with the tines, he fell directly upon them, which it once ran into his breast, and stroke his heart so, that he died suddenly. On the sixteenth day of July 1628, one Iohn Vintner of  Gardiner, a knowne drunkard, and one that would prophanely (especially in his ) scoffe at religion, and abuse good men▪ fell from the top of a  the ground and brake his necke, and so died. These ive lust examples were reported unto me, and written with his owne hand, by a worthy Minister Master Goorge Nelson, Preacher of the Word of God in Godmanchester.
CHAP. IX. Of rebellious and disobedient Children to their Parents. AGathias in his Booke of the Persian manners, reporteth this storie, That certaine Philosophers, going into Ae∣gypt, and finding there a promiscuous commixture of fathers and mothers with their daughters and sonnes, and a miserable neglect of children towards their pa∣rents; returned speedily into Greece, and in a certaine Citie there, finding the dead body of a man wanting buriall, they in compassion committed the same into the earth; the next day comming the same way againe, they found the same body digged out of the earth: which whilest they went about to bury the second time, a feare∣full spectrum appeared unto them, and forbad them to doe it, saying, That he was a man unworthy to be buried, because he had committed incest with his mother, and despised and contemned his father. This narration shew∣eth, that the very earth doth execrate and abhorre such unnaturall lust and disobedience. Laterbius in his Booke of the discipline of children, reports a storie of a certaine young man, who had a father very old, that had bestowed upon him all his substance. This old man, being by the fault of age unmannerly at the table of his sonne, his sonne caused a woodden trough to be made for his father, to eate his meate in like a hogge: which when his sonnes young childe perceived, he asked his father for what use it should serve; his father answered, That it was for his Grandfather to eate his meate in; and (what saith the childe) must I provide the like for you when you are old: Where∣at his father being astonished threw away the trough, and ever after enter∣tained his old father with greater reverence and obedient respect. CHAP. X. Of Murtherers. ROmulus having marked out with a plough the compasse of the walls of the Citie of Rome which he was a build∣ing, and had forbidden that no man should leape over the same, his brother, Rhmus in scorne leaped over the wall; which Romulus taking in evill part, slew his bro∣ther, and reigned alone but at length being hated of the people for his insolencie, he himselfe was slaine by the fathers of the Senate at Caprea. Constantine the Great, after he had overcome Licinius his partner in the Empire, and obtained the sole Monarchie, grew both insolent and cruell; for he first put to death his owne sisters; next his owne sonne Crisp which he had by Minervea; then he slew his owne wife Fausta in the bathes; and
lastly a number more of his friends. For which cruelty, though hee was a man endued with excellent vertues, yet God strucke him with a filthy Le∣prosie, which continued upon him untill such time that he was converted to the faith of Christ, and baptised by Pope Silvester: after which he pro∣ved a most famous protector of the Church of Christ. Perillus that devised the brasen Bull for the Tyrant Phalaris, wherein men being inclosed and scorched with the heat that was under the Bull, did imtate the lowing of an Oxe, to the end that there should be no compassi∣on shewed unto them by the King, if they had uttered a humane voyce: but the author thereof was the first that endured the torment thereof; and after the Tyrant Phalaris himselfe was constrained to endure the same miserable end. In a famous Citie of Germany, at a nuptiall festivitie, a certaine virgin Theat. Hist. was brought by a young man a Shoomaker, that made love unto her, to the solemne and usuall dancing: when the maide should returne home, the young man by chance was absent, so that she was conducted home by ano∣ther; which when the Shoomaker knew, supposing himselfe to be wronged, hee went presently to her fathers house; and calling out the young student which guided her home, he slew him assoone as he came out of the doores. His father hearing the death of his onely sonne, died within three dayes with griefe, and was buried in the same grave with his sonne: the Shoomakers mother died also with griefe; and the murtherer himselfe falling into de∣speration, threw himselfe headlong into a running river, and was drow∣ned. Anno 156, a certaine Nobleman abounding with wealth, not farre from Augusta of the Vindiletians, brought up in his house a young Blacka∣more: which villaine when his Master was from home, rose up in the night, and slew not onely his Lady, but the whole family: excepting one little daughter of the Noblemans. The Nobleman returning home after two dayes, and finding his gate shut, rode nearer to the walls of the house, wondring. Where the Blackamore upon the top of the house, with a fear∣full countenance, spake unto him these words: O thou cruell man, thou re∣memberest how unworthily thou beatest me (not long since) for no fault, the me∣mory whereof I still retained in my minde, and have revenged this wrong upon thine; behold here part of the carkasse of thy wife, whom I have slaine, with thy whole family, except this little child which I have reserved; and will restore it, if thou wilt promise me my life. The father being wonderfully disturbed, pro∣mised that which he desired: but the devillish Moore answered, I know thou wilt not keepe promise with me, therefore take thy childe unto thee; and threw her out of the window, where she was quashed in pieces; and then threw himselfe downe headlong from the top of the house, that hee might avoid the vengeance of his Master. This story was related unto Phi∣lip Count Nassau, by the Secretarie of the Count of Hanault.
CHAP. XI. Of Adulterie. ANobleman in Burgundie, having taken in war a cap∣tive, a Gentleman that was his prisoner; the Gentle∣mans wife came to this Nobleman to redeeme her husband; he promised that hee should be set free, if that he might have the use of her bodie: the woman returned to her husband, and told him upon what tearmes he stood. The Gentleman said, that she could not shew her love better unto him, than in yeelding to his desire: which Author Phil. Lonicer. being accomplished, the trayterous adulterous Nobleman next day cut off the prisoners head, and gave his body to his wife: which horrible fact be∣ing complained of by her to the Duke of Burgundie, he presently sent for the Nobleman, and first constrained him to marry her; but before night he cut off his head, and gave her all his possessions. A like example is reported by the same Author of a Spanish Captaine, who kept in prison a certaine man that had violated the lawes. This man having a beautifull wife, sent her to the Captaine to desire his favour and freedome; which he promised, upon condition that she should yeeld to his lust; wherewith her husband being acquainted, advised her to yeeld for the saving of his life: the Spaniard after he had satisfied his lust upon her, com∣mandeth over and above two hundred Duckets to be paid unto him; which being received, she conceiving a certaine hope of her husbands liberty, the perfidious Spaniard brought him forth out of prison unto her, and present∣ly remanded him back againe into prison, and there commanded his head to be cut off. Which horrible fact, when the poore lamentable woman com∣plained of to the Duke of Ferara, called Gonsaga, he presently sent for this Captaine; and finding the accusation true, first commanded him to pay back againe the two hundred Duckats, with an addition of seaven hundred crownes more; next hee sent for a Priest, and married the woman to the Captaine: which being done, when as he hoped to enjoy his new married wife, Gonsaga sent him presently to the gallows, and there he ended his mi∣serable dayes. The wife of a certaine Duke, being a lascivious woman, wrote two let∣ters; one to the Duke her husband, and another to her Lover: but it hap∣pened by chance, that her letter written to her Lover, was delivered to her Husband the Duke; who thereby knowing her wickednesse, came no sooner home, but slew her with his owne hand. Anno 1056, a certaine Doctor of the Law, an advocate in Constance, extreamely lusted after the wise of the Kings Procurator; which Procura∣tor finding the Doctor and his wife together in a bath, playing and sporting, and afterward in an old womans house hard by; he got unto him a sharpe curry-combe, and leaving three at the doore, to watch that no man should come in, he so curryed the Doctor, that he pulled out his eyes out of his head, and rent his whole body and members, that he died within three dayes: the like he had done to his wife, but that she was with childe.
In the yeare 1488, a certaine Priest did so long assault the chastitie of a Citizens wife, that she was constrained to declare the same unto her hus∣band; who forbad him his house, threatning that if ever he came there, he would geld him: but this bold Priest came againe when hee imagined an opportunity; the husband fell upon him, and bound him hand and foot, and performed what he had threatened, so that he went home in a misera∣ble case. In Voitland, foure murthers were committed upon the cause of one A∣dulterie: For when the adulterous woman was banquetting with her lo∣vers, her husband came of a sudden into the Chamber, and slew first him that sate next his wife; the other two amazed, ran downe the staires and brake both their shoulders, and died within a short space: Then hee slew his adulterous wife. This storie Wolsis Schrencke reported to Martin Lu∣ther, as he himselfe confesseth. In a certaine Citie of Germany, a Gentleman of good note did solicite and seduce to his lust a Citizens wife, which her husband comming to the knowledge of, watcht them so narrowly, that he found them in bed toge∣ther; and rushing into the chamber, first slew the adulterer himselfe, and then his wife, being crept under a bed, and imploring his mercy till she could confesse her selfe to a Priest; her husband asked her, Whether shee were sorry for what she had done? Who answered, that she was grieved for it; which words were no sooner pronounced, but he thrust her through the heart with his sword, and was for the same adjudged by the Citie to have done justly. This story is reported in Colloq. of Luther. Luther doth report, that a man of great name and fame, did so burne with continuall lust, that he blasphemously said, That if that pleasure was per∣petuall, he would never desire to have any part in the Kingdome of Heaven; so that he might be carried from one Stewes to another, and from one Har∣lot unto another. I could adde more examples of this kinde; but these shall suffice, to shew that God doth not onely punish this horrible sinne in the life to come, but also in this life with fearefull judgements. CHAP. XII. Of Theeves and Robbers. SPiredon, a Bishop of a certaine Citie in Cyprus, was also delighted with keeping of irrationall sheepe; upon a night certaine theeves entered into his sheepe-fold, with an intent to steale away some of his sheepe: but God protecting the sheepheard and his sheepe, infatua∣ted the theeves, that they could not stirre out of that place till the morning: at what time the Bishop com∣ming to view his flock, found them thus bound; who presently prayed to God for their delivery, and wished them to get their living hereafter by ho∣nest labour, and not by stealth; yet withall gave them a Ramme with this pleasant tant: I give you this Ramme that you may not seeme to watch it in vaine; and so set them free.
A certaine young man being bitten with a mad dogge, fell presently af∣ter into madnesse himselfe; and was faine to be bound with chaines. The parents of this young man brought their sonne to an Abbot called Ammon; entreating him, that by his prayers hee would restore him to his former health; the holy Abbot answered, that they demanded that of him that pas∣sed his power: But this I can signifie unto you, that the Devill holdeth you all bound in his chaines, by reason of a Bull which you stole from a poore widdow; and untill you restore that Bull backe againe to the widdow, your sonne shall never be healed. The parents presently confessed their fault, re∣stored the Bull, and presently their sonne was delivered from this grievous disease. A certaine Baker merrily talking with his neighbour, bragged, that in that great time of dearth which was then, he gained out of every bushell of Wheat above a crowne: which words being related unto the Governour of the Citie, hee sent for the Baker to supper, and examined him about those speeches; which the Baker could not deny: whereupon the Governour commanded him presently to put off his upper garments, and to knead so much dowe before him, that hee might finde out the manner of his deceit; which being done, hee and all his fellow Bakers in the towne was cast into prison, to their great disgrace. The same Authour reporteth, That at Prague in Bohemia a Jew being dead, his friends desired that he might be buried at Ratisbone, forty miles off; which becase it could not bee done without paying of great tribute, they put his carkasse into a hog shed full of sweet wine, and committed it to a carter to convey to Ratisbone. The theevish carters in the way being greedy of the wine, pierced the hogshead, and drinking themselves drunke with the wine, mixed with the stinke of the dead carkasse, most of them died. The same Luther reporteth, that at Wittenberge three theeves having stolne a silver dish, brought it to a Goldsmiths wife to sell; who desired them to come againe within an houre, and then shee would bargaine with them. In the meane while she related this businesse unto the Magistrates; who sending presently the Sergeants to apprehend the theeves, they seeing themselves to be betrayed, resisted with their swords: but notwithstanding one of them was taken and executed, another escaped by flight, and the third being pursued over a bridge, leaped into the river Albis, and there was drowned. This example is more remarkable (saith Luther) because this fel∣low was a most notorious wicked wretch, and had cut off two fingers of his owne fathers; at which very instant his father not knowing of it, being as∣ked what was become of his sonne, answered, that he wished hee was drow∣ned in the river Albis; which wish was really performed at that very in∣stant; for it was the voyce of Gods anger out of the mouth of a father. About Ailton in Huntington-shire, a lewd fellow stole one of his neigh∣bours fat weathers; and bringing him home bound about his neck,  upon a great stone in the field to ase himselfe, where the weather stgling, fell over the stone, and pulled the thiefe after him; and so both striving, one for life, another for liberty, the theefe was found dead in the morning, and the weather alive.
CHAP. XIII. Of Trecherie. WHen the two Earles of Northumberland and Westmore∣land had rebelled against Q. Elizabeth, and being defea∣ted in the field, fled into Scotland; the Earle of Nor∣thumberland hid himself in the house of Hector of Har∣lawe an Armestrange, having confidence in him that he would be true to him: he notwithstanding for money betrayed him to the Regent of Scotland, from whence the Earle was sent into England, condemned of high treason, and beheaded. But it was observed, that this Hector, being before a rich man, fell poor of a sudden, and was so hated generally, that he never durst go abroad; insomuch that the Proverbe (to take Hectors cloake) is continued to this day among them, when they would expresse a man that betrayeth his friend who tru∣sted him. The like example we have of Banister who betrayed the Duke of Buckingham, in the raigne of Richard the third. CHAP. XIV. Of the molestation of evill Spirits, and their execution of Gods Iudgements upon men. ALmighty God sometimes doth execute his judgements himselfe, as he did upon Pharaoh in the Red Sea, and upon Sodome and Gomorrah; sometimes hee useth the creatures as instruments, as frogs and lice, &c. to plague Pharaoh and the Aegyptians: Sometimes hee imployeth the good Angels to that purpose, as an An∣gell to destroy the Armie of Zenacherib before Jerusa∣lem: but most ordinarily, he useth the ministery of evill Angels, who being forward enough of their owne malice, he giveth more strength unto by his command, to execute vengeance upon wicked men. Thus Sathan under the shape of a Serpent, beguiled our first parents Adam and Eve, and promi∣sed them great good, in the stead of punishments, which God had threat∣ned unto them, Gen. 3. The same Sathan vexed King Saul, 1 Reg. 16. This Sathan rose against Israell, and stirred up David to number the people; whereat God being offended, strooke Israell with a grievous peltilence, 1 Chronic. 21. It was Sathan that got leave of God, that hee might torture Iob with loathsome botches and boyles, Iob 2. It was Sathan that slew seaven husbands, to whom Sarah the daughter of Raguel had married: Tobit. It was Sathan that entred into Iudas Iscariots heart, and moved him to betray Christ, and hang himselfe, Iohn 13. Acts 7. It was Sathan that instiga∣ted Ananias and Saphira to lye to the Holy Ghost, whereupon they both died suddenly, Acts 5. Lastly, it was Sathan that sited Peter, and buffered Paul.
But to leave the Holy Scripture; Philip Melancthon reporteth, That he heard of two men credible and faith-worthy, that a certain Bottonian young woman, two yeares after her death, returned againe to humane shape, and went up and downe in the house, and sate at meate with them, but eate little. This young seeming woman, being at a time amongst other vir∣gines, a certaine Magitian came in, skilfull in diabolicall Arts; who said to the beholders, This woman is but a dead carkasse, carried about by the Devill; and presently he tooke from under her right arme-hole, the charme; which hee had no sooner done, but she fell downe a dead filthie carkasse. Martin Luther reporteth the like of a woman at Erford in Germany, who being animated by the Devill, accompanied a young student that was in love with her, and went up and downe divers yeares: but at last, the Devill being cast out by the prayers of the Church, she returned to a dead and fil∣thie carkasse. The same Luther in his Colloquies telleth us, how Sathan oftentimes stealeth away young children of women lying in child-bed, and supposteth others of their owne begetting in their stead in the shapes of Incubus and Sucobus; one such childe Luther reporteth of his owne knowledge at Hal∣bersted; which being carried by the parents to the Temple of the Virgine Mary to be cured, the Devill asked the childe (being in a basket upon the river) whither it was going? the young infant answered, That hee was going to the Virgin Mary: whereupon the father threw the basket and the childe into the river: The like hee reporteth of another at Pessovia, which representing in all lineaments a humane shape, it was nothing else but a meere elusion of the Devill: this childe, saith he, delighted in no∣thing but in stuffing it selfe with food, and egesting the same in a filthy man∣ner, but was discovered, and disrobed, and cast out by the Prayers of the Church. At Babylon in the Temple of Apollo, a souldier breaking open a golden Chest, there flew out such a pestilent spirit, that infected the whole world with the plague: thus Aventine, lib. 2. cap. 17. Bruno the Bishop of Herbipolis, accompanying the Emperour through an arme of the Sea, heard this voyce sounding in his eares; Ho, Ho, thou Bi∣shop, I am thy Malus Genius, and whithersoever thou goest thou art mine; at this time I have no power to hurt thee, but thou shalt see me shortly againe; and so it came to passe: For not long after, being in a roome with divers o∣thers, part of the roofe fell downe, and flew this wicked Bishop alone, all the rest remaining safe and sound. Vrbanus Regius in a Sermon at Wittenberge, Anno 1538, concerning good and bad Angels, relateth a storie of a certaine young maide possessed by the Devill; for whom when prayers were made in the Church, he see∣med to be quiet for the time, as if he were departed out of her, watching an opportunity to do her further mischiefe, as he did indeed; for, when as lesse care was taken of her, supposing her to be found, shee going to wash her hands at the brinke of a river running by, the Devill tumbled her headlong in, and drowned her in a fearefull manner. Platina, Nauclerus, and other Historiographers write of Pope Bennet the ninth, who died in the yeare 1405, that hee appeared (or the Devill for him) in a prodigious and bestiall forme, like a Beare in his body, and in
his head and tayle, like an Asse: and when he was asked by some, Why he shewed himselfe in so ougly a shape, answered, That this shape was impo∣sed upon him for his wicked and bestiall behaviour when he was alive. In the hill countries of Bohemia, there used to appeare an evill Spirit in the habit and shape of a Monk, whom the countrie people called Rubezall: This devillish Monke used to joyne himselfe unto travellers over those hils, and to bid them be of good courage, for hee would lead them the right way thorow the woods: but when as he had purposely led them out of the way, so that they could not tell which way to turne themselves, he would leap into a tree and laugh at them, with such a loud noyse, that the whole wood would ring of him: This was a morrie Devill, such as our Robin-Good∣fellow is said to be; but yet in his mirth hee alwayes affected mischiefe. Theat. Hist. pag. 120. Chunibert King of Lumbardie, consulted with one of his trusty counsel∣lours, about putting to death his two brothers, Aldo and Grauso. Whilest they were thus consulting in a by-window, there sate a great flie by them; one of the feet whereof, the King with his knife which he had in his hand cut off; in the meane while Aldo, and Grauso, entering into the Pallace, met with a man with one of his feet cut off; who told them the King was purposed to slay them if they passed on: whereupon they returned and hid themselves in the Temple of Romanus the Martyr. The King hearing thereof, was much troubled how his Counsell might be revealed, and charged his Privie Counsellours with infidelity: But the Counsellour answered, That hee had not departed from his presence since the matter was contrived, but there sate a flie whose foot they cut off, which no que∣stion was the Devill (as it was) had revealed this secret in the shape of a man. Hereupon the King was reconciled to his brethren, and embraced them with love ever after. Thus the Devill sometimes doth good, but it is with an intent of greater mischiefe: Et sinon aliquâ nocuisset mortuus esset▪ Cronica Hedion. While certaine Mariners were sayling in the Sea, a Monster was taken by them, in every thing like unto a woman; which being detained in the ship a good while, one of the Mariners fell in love with her, tooke her to his wife, and begot one childe of her: after three yeares they returning to the same place againe where the same Monster was taken, this woman-De∣vill leaped into the Sea with her childe in her armes; the childe was drow∣ned, but shee vanished away. Thus it is easie for the Devill to take upon him the shape of a man or a woman. Ex Colloquiis Lutheri. A certaine Nobleman invited Martin Luther, and other learned men to his house: the Nobleman after dinner went out a hunting, where a Hare of great bignesse, and a Fox of great swiftnesse, offered themselves unto his hounds. The Nobleman riding upon a good horse, followed them amaine, but his horse falling downe under him, dyed, and the Hare vanished into the aire: This was certainly a diabolicall delusion. Luther. The same Luther writeth, That certaine Noblemen riding a race, they cryed out, let the last bee the Devils; one of the Noblemen having a spare horse, hasted forward with the rest of his company; but his horse that was let free, came softly behinde, and was carried up by the Devill into the aire. The Devill is not to be invited, for he is ready to come un∣called.
Philip Lonicerus in his Historicall Theatre, reporteth, that in a great plague, one carkasse was seene to devoure it selfe in a grave: which, the people being superstitious, thought it was a presage of the continuance of the pestilence; whereupon they sent unto Wittenberge to Luther and o∣ther godly Ministers, for their advise and counsell: he answered, that it was a delusion of the Devill, and if they gave credit thereunto, the sick∣nesse would increase; and therefore advised them that despising this delusi∣on of the Devill; they should joyne together in prayer in Gods holy Tem∣ple, to represse the furie and malice of the old Serpent; which by that meanes they obtained. At Rotingburge an honest and worthy Citizen having a beautifull daughter, to whom many Sutors frequented, there came also one in gallant apparrell, and two men attending upon him, to be a Sutor unto that beau∣tifull maide: but her father being displeased at his importunitie, invited the godly Minister of the Town, and some other good men to supper; where entring into conference of divine matters, this gallant abhorring the same, desired them to talke of some other merry matters; which they refusing to doe, he shewed himselfe what he was, and with his companions disparished into the aire, leaving a filthy stinke behinde him: thus the Devill doth go about to delude both men and women. Manlius in Col. A certaine man abounding with wealth, invited to supper a company of his neighbours and friends; who, when they refused to come upon occa∣sions, hee wished that all the Devils in Hell would come: which wishes were not in vaine, for presently great troopes of Devils came unto his house, which hee entertained at the first; and afterward (as my Authour saith) perceiving by their fingers and feet to be infernall Spirits, he with his wife, trembling, ranne out of the house, leaving a young infant in a cra∣dle, and a foole rocking of it; both which were preserved alive after the de∣parture of the Devils: Iob. Fincel. The Devill also appeared unto a Souldier that was given to play, swea∣ring, and drinking; and having played with him all night, and woon his money, hee told him it was time to depart, and carryed him a∣way with him into the aire, whither God knowes; for hee never was seene after. In the yeare of our Lord 1536, there was at Franckford a maide grie∣vously tormented with a paine in her head, and a kinde of frenzie, at the last she came to that passe, that it was manifest that she was possessed with the Devill; for if she touched any thing of any mans, either head, garment, or anything else, she drew money out of it of the usuall coyne of that coun∣trey, and presently put it into her mouth and swallowed it; but sometimes they caught her hand, and wrung their money from her, and shewed it up and downe as a great wonder: Shee also in her fits spake the high Dutch tongue perfectly, which she never learned not heard of; with many other things of great admiration. Luther being demanded, What course was to be taken to dispossesse her of this evill Spirit; advised, that shee should duely be brought unto the Church to heare Sermons, and to bee prayed for publiquely in the Congregation; by which meanes, shortly after shee was delivered from Sathan, and restored to her former health: this rela∣tion the wise Senatours of Frankeford caused to bee published in Print, Anno 1538.
Certaine learned men in the Counsell of Basil, went into a wood for re∣creation sake, friendly to conferre about the controversies of that time: Whilest they were there walking, they heard a bird like unto a nightingall singing most sweetly, above any Nightingall in the World, and also sw a bird upon an arme of a tree, not like unto any bird: one of the companie more hearty than the other, said thus unto her; I abjure thee in the name of the Lord Iesus Christ; to tell us what thou art; to whom the bird answered, That she was one of the damned soules, and appointed to stay in that place untill the last day, and then to endure everlasting punishments; whereupon she flue from the tree, and cried, O perpetuall and infinite  M∣lncthon judged this to bee an evill spirit, and so the event prooved: for all that were present at this abjuration fell presently very sicke, and shortly af∣ter died. Manl. Collecta. A certaine panish Clerke (as Csariu reporteth) exelled all men in sweetnesse of singing, whom when at a time a godly and holy man heard, he said, This is the voice not of a man, but of the Divell;  he had abjured in the name of Christ, the Divell departed out of the bodie of the Clerke, and the bodie fell downe into a dead carkasse. Discip. de tem∣pore. Paulus Diaconius in his sixteenth Booke witnesseth, That in the reigne of Anastasius the Emperour, there were in Alexandria many women and chil∣dren, possessed of the Divell, which being taken with furie, uttered no other voice but like the barking of a dog. In the yeare of our Lord 1545, an evill spirit haunted the Citie Rotuill, sometimes in the shape of an hare, sometimes of a Weesell, sometimes of a Gose, and with a cleere voice threatened that he would fire the Citie, which malice of his, though God prevented, yet it strooke great terror into the minds of the people. Iob. Finc. lib. 1. In the Dukedome of Luneberge, a certaine woman possessed of the Divel, used to speake in her fits most pure Latine and Greeke to the great admira∣tion of all that heard her. Man. in Collect. At Fribuge in Misnia, a certaine man of great pietie and holinesse, lying sicke and neere unto death, the Divell came unto him in the habite of a Bi∣shop (hee being alone) and exhorted the man to confesse all his sinnes which hee had committed in his life time, and that having pene and Inke∣horne he would write them downe in order; but the old man being impor∣tuned by him, answered, Seeing thou urgest this, write downe first this sen∣tence: The seed of the woman shall bruise the Serpents head: which the Divell-Bishop no sooner heard but he vanished away, leaving a filthie savour be∣hinde him, and the man died in peace. Manl. in Collect. Iob Fincelius in his third booke of miracles, writeth a strange storie of a godly young maide, infested long, and possessed at length by the Divell, who in her acted strange things to the admiration of all men: but at length shee was freed from his malicious molestation, by the earnest prayers of godly Ministers in the Church, the Divell flying out of her in the forme of a swarme of flies out of a window. This storie is at large related with many strange circumstances, by Philippus Lonicerus in his Historicall Theatre. Page a hundred twenty and six. The same Author relateth a storie of a maide of excellent beauty, whom the Priest of the towne so induced and inveigled by his perswasions (saying
that the Pope had pardoned him for all such offences) that shee became his Concubine: Now when hee had invited many of his companions to a feast, together with his Concubine, the Divell entered in amongst the guests, snatching away the young woman, and saying, Thou art mine: neither could the Priest or any of the companie deliver her out of his hands. And thou also (sayeth the Divell to the Priest) and I meane to fetch thee short∣ly. Martin Luther reporteth this storie out of the mouth of Doctor Gregori∣us Pontanus, how two Noblemen falling out in the Court of the Emperour Maximilian, vowed each others death. Now the Divell taking occasion out of this malicious vow, slew the one of the Noblemen in the night with a sword taken out of the others sheath, into the which hee put the same againe all bloudie; whereupon this Nobleman was arraigned of this murther, and had bin condemned, but that it was prooved that he stirred not out of his chamber all that night: and therefore they concluded that it was the mali∣cious fact of Sathan. And yet the Nobleman because hee intended this murther, though hee acted it not, was condemned by the Emperour to per∣petuall banishment. And thus much concerning persons infested by the Divell. Now a word or two for places. Saint Augustine in his two and twentieth Booke De Civitate Dei, chapter the eighth, reporteth of a certaine Gentleman that lived not far from him in Affrica, who had his house so infested with evill Spirits, that both his servants and his Cattell died frequently. This man getting unto him the company of the Priests, & offering up the sacrifice of the body and bloud of Christ in his house, with servent prayers unto God against these evill Spi∣rits, was thereby freed from any further molestation by them, as this holy Father writeth. Saint Gregorie telleth us of the Spirit of one Paschasius, that haunted the Bathes, and was seene by Sermanus the Bishop of Capua, by whose meanes and prayers the place was freed from that Ghost, or rather the Ghost was freed from that place. Greg. lib. 4. Dialog. Cap, 39. Gregorie Nissen writes also of a certaine Bath which was grievously infe∣sted by evill Spirits, wherein they tooke away the lives of many men. The like whereof is reported by Georgius Presbyter, of another house thus molested, where the evill Spirits would throw stones upon the table while they were at dinner, and filled the house with myce and Serpents, so that no man durst dwell therein. The like storie reporteth mataphrastes in the life of Saint Pautheneus; and Lycas, in the life of the Emperor Anastasius. Pliny in his seventh Booke, the twentie seventh Epistle, telleth us, that in an house in Athens there appeared continually a tall and leane shape of a man drawing chaines after him; which when it was seene to sinke downe and vanish into a certaine place of the ground, they digged and found the dead body of a man: which being removed, the house was freed from the molestation. What should I speake of the house of Eubatis in Corinth, written by Lucian? or of Pausanias the King of the Spartans, whose house was haunted
by an evil spirit presently after he had slain his wife Cleonice, as Plutarch wri∣teth? Or of the evil spirits that haunted the grave of that cruel Tyrant Caesar Caligula? Suet. Or of Nero that slew his mother Agrippina, who was continu∣ally after pursued with a spirit in his mothers shape? or of Otto that slew his predecessor Galba; after which he never ceased to be molestred with fearful and terrible visions? Or a number more which I might insert; but these shal suf∣fice as a taste of a number more that Tyraeus the Iesuite hath set down in his Book De infestis Locis. I adde onely two or three, and so an end. Alexander of Alexandro dwelling in Rome, in an house so infamous for strange sights, that no man durst dwell therein, reporteth, that beside the night tumults and horrible and fearefull noyses, there appeared unto him the shape of a map, of a filthie looke, threatening countenance, and blacke and fearfull in bodie, from which the house could by no meanes be set free. Cardanus, Lib. 26. c. 93. De rerum varietate, reporteth the like to haye hap∣pened to an house of a certaine Nobleman in Parma. In which house al∣waies before the death of some of the family, an old woman of an hundred yeares old appeared sitting in the chimney corner▪ In an Island neere unto the Articke Pole, there is an hill out of the which, like mount Aetna, there bursteth out continually fire and smoake. There everie night appeareth a companie of evill Spirits, representing perfectly the shape of some friends which they know: whom when they go to speake unto, they presently vanish out of their sight. Olaus magnus. But enough, enough, of this unsaverie subject: onely let us learne hereby to beware of this ambitious enemie of mankinde, who as Saint Peter sayeth, Goeth about somtime like a Lion to devour us: Other times like a subtill Serpent to molest us, but all with a desire of our destruction. I may be thought too prolix in this Argument of Gods Iudgements; but considering the fiercenesse of Gods wrath against notorious sinners, and the hardnesse of mens hearts to be drawne to repentance, nothing I thinke can be judged too much. But yet to sweeten these soure pills, let me cover them a little with the sugar of Gods mercifull protection of his children by his holy Angels. CHAP. XV. The conclusion, concerning the protection of holy angels, over such as feare God. NOtwithstanding all these Judgements upon the wicked, yet God is good unto Israel, even to those that are of an upright heart. Psalme seventie three, Verse the first: for as he executeth his Judgements upon the one, so hee defendeth the other, by his mightie providence; espe∣cially by the protection of Angels. Of which I pur∣pose to give you many examples in this place: and first out of the holy Scriptures.
Two Angels came to Lt in Sodome, strooke the inhabitants with blind∣nesse and led Lot by the hand out of Sodom, readie to be destroyed by fire and brimstone, Genesis the nineteenth. When Abraham was about to sacri∣fice his son Isaac, an Angell held his hand, and forbad him to kill his sonne, promising him from God a blessing for his obedience, Genesis 22. Iacob in his returne homeward, was comforted and strengthened against his brother Esau by the blessed Angels, Genesis the two and thirtieth. An Angell of the Lord when the children of Israel came out of Aegypt, stood betwixt the campe of the Aegyptians and the Israelites in a pillar of clouds by day, to protect the Israelites against the Aegyptians, Exodus 14. Balaam when being sent for by Balaac King of Moab to curse the Israelites, an Angell with a sword drawne in his hand withstood him in the way, and commanded him to speake nothing but what the Lord should put into his mouth. Numbers 22. An Angel of the Lord apeared unto Gedeon, comforted him, and appointed him captain over the people, to deliver Israel out of the hand of the Madi∣anites, Iudges, Chapter 6. An Angel of the Lord appeared unto Manoa and his wife who was barren, promising them a sonne, to be called Sampson, that should deliver the Israe∣lites out of the hands of the Philistims, Iudg. 13. It was an Angell in Davids time which strooke the Israelites with the pestilence, whereof died threescore and ten thousand; and when David prayed, put his sword up into his sheath, and saved the rest: the second booke of Samuel, and twentie fourth Chapter. Elias the Prophet was refreshed with meat and drink, and in the strength thereof hee travelled fourtie dayes and fourtie nights; even to Mount Ho∣reb, by the Ministerie of an Angell, 1. Kings, 19. Many legions of Angels environed the Prophet Elisha, which his ser∣vant, at his prayer, (his eyes being opened) saw and beheld, and all to de∣fend him from the Assyrians that besieged Samaria; 2. Kings, 6. An Angell of the Lord slew in the campe of the Assyrians in one night an hundred fourscoure and five thousand men; 2. Kings, 19. Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, being cast into the fierie Furnace by Nabuchadnezzar, for not worshipping his golden Image, were preserved a∣live and kept from hurt by an Angell of the Lord, Daniel 3. It was an Angell that stopt the mouthes of the Lyons, that they could not hurt Daniel that was cast into their Denne, Daniel, 10. The Angel Gabriel declared unto Zacharias, that his wife should conceive with child, and bring forth Iohn the Baptist in her old age, Luk 1. It was the same Angell that announced to the Virgine Mary, that she should bring forth Iesus Christ our Saviour, Luke 1. The same told the shepheards in the field, of Christ his Nativitie and witnessed his resurrection and ascention into the heavens, Mathew 28 Marke 16. Acts the first. An Angell delivered the Apostles out of Prison, Acts 5. An Angell freed Peter from his chaines, Acts 12. and Paul and Silas, Acts 16. An Angell comforted Paul upon the Sea, and all those that were with him, and delivered them from the Tempest, Acts twentie seven. All these Examples are out of the holy Scriptures, which is of infalli∣ble
truth, and sheweth that to be which is spoken by the Prophet Da∣vid in the foure and thirtieth Psalme, That the Angell of the Lord pitcheth his tents round about them that feare him. Now follow examples out of humane Writes; and first to begin with a storie in Socrates, lib. 6. cap. 6. and Sozomen. lib. 8. cap. 4. When Arcadius was Emperour of Rome, and Saint Chrysostome Bi∣shop of Constantinople, there was Gainas, an Arrian, and a Barbarian by profession, who being powerfull and great, went about to thrust Arcadius out of his Seat; but the Emperour compounding with him, sent him unto Constantinople with a troupe of horse and foot, under the pay of the Emperour. This man desired to have a peculiar Church for them of his owne Sect, for the free exercising of their Religion: which being denyed by the Emperour, at the perswasion of Saint Chry∣sostome, the Tyrant raised his forces in the night to spoyle and havocke the Citie. But they were resisted the first and second night, by the shew of a great Armie of tall and lustie men, and so terrified, that they durst doe nothing. The third night the Tyrant himselfe, thinking this to be but a fable, came in his owne person with his whole Armie, and found the same resistance: wherewith being terrified, hee fled into Tracia; where hee was slaine most miserably. Thus this great Citie was protected by the ministery of Angels, as Hierusalem once was from the Tyran Zenacherib. In the reigne of Pompilius King of Poland, as the Polonian Chroni∣cles doe report, in the first booke, and twelfth Chapter, there came two men o a venerable countenance and habit to the Court gate, desi∣ring entrance and entertainment; but they were repulsed by the Por∣ter. Then they went to one Pyastus, a man of excellent holinesse and charity, who entertained them into his house very lovingly, broached a Vessell of sweet Wine for their drinke, and killed a fat Hogge for their meate, which hee had prepared against the first tonsure of his sonne, according to the custome of that Countrey. These men, or ra∣ther Angels, finding this kinde entertainment, caused the Vessell of sweet Wine to multiply, so that the more they dranke, the more still remained behinde; and the Hogge also in like manner. At last they wrought means, that Pompilius the King being dead, this good man was chosen King in his stead; and then disparished and were never more seen. Nicephorus in his seventeenth booke, Chapter thirty five, reporteth a strange storie of a Jewish childe. This boy playing among other Christian children, was brought into the Temple by the Priest to care the reliques of the Sacrament, as the custome was: who tooke it a∣mongst his followes. Which as soone as the Jew his father understood, he put him into a fierie oven to be tormented to death: his mother sought him up and downe the Citie, not knowing what was done; and at last, after three dayes, found him alive in the Oven: from whence be∣ing taken, there was no smell of fire about him. Thus God protected by his Angell this poore childe. Instinian the Emperour, after hee knew thereof, caused the boy and his mother to be baptized; and the father, who refused, he caused to be crucified to death. Under the Emperour Mauritius the Citie of Antioch was shaken with a terrible Earthquake, after this manner: There was a certaine
Citizen so given to bountifulnesse to the Poore, that hee would never suppe nor dine, unlesse hee had one poore man to be with him at his Table. Upon a certaine evening seeking for such a guest, and finding none, a grave old man met him in the Market-place, cloathed in white, with two companions with him, whom hee entreated to suppe with him: But the old man answered him, That he had more need to pray against the destruction of the Citie; and presently shooke his hand∣kerchiefe against one part of the Citie, and then against another; and being hardly entreated, forbore the rest. Which hee had no sooner done, but those two parts of the Citie, terribly shaken with an Earth∣quake, were throwne to the ground, and thousands of men slain. Which this good Citizen seeing, trembled exceedingly. To whom the old man in white answered and sayed, By reason of charity to the poore his house and Familie were preserved. And presently these three men (which no question were Angels) vanished out of sight. This storie Si∣gubert in his Chron. reporteth, Anne 585. Philip Melancthon reporteth, That in a certaine Village neare unto the Citie Sygnea, a woman sent her sonne into the wood to fetch home her Kine: in the meane while, such a snow fell, that the boy could not returne home againe: his parents the next day (taking more care for the boy then for the kine) went out to seeke him; and within three dayes, found him in the middest of the wood, sitting in a faire place where no snow had fallen: They demanded of him, Why he made not haste home: He answered, That he tarryed till it was evening; being insensible both of the time and of the cold: They asked him againe, Whether he had received any food or no? The boy answered, That a certaine man brought unto him bread and cheese, which hee did eate. Thus without doubt the childe was preserved by an Angell, and the man that brought him the bread and cheese was an Angel of God. Tiburtius the Governour of Areciam, a Heathen man, forbad two Christian brothers, Pergentinus and Laurentinus, to preach Christ: First, he allured them by flattering speeches; which when it succeeded not, he caused them to be beaten with clubbes. But the armes of them that beat them were so withered, that they could not strike a stroke: Then he went about to starve them in prison, but they were nourished by an Angell of God: After, hee commanded them to walke bare-footed upon burning coales, which they did without any sense of hurt: Last∣ly, the Image of Iupiter being brought unto them to worship, they cal∣ling upon the name of Jesus, the brazen Image resolved into dust: whereupon many of the Heathen people forsooke their Idols, and tur∣ned unto the faith of Christ. This story is written by Marullus Spala∣tensis, lib. 1. cap. 8. In that battell wherein Iudas Machabeus overcame Timotheus, five men appeared in golden Armour; whereof two defended Machabeus, and the other three assaulted the enemies; the second of Machabees, Chapter the tenth. Likewise in the eleventh Chapter of the same Book, it is declared how two men in goodly Armour, and upon white horses, fought for the Jewes against their enemies; as Castor and Pollux were seene to fight for the Romans against the Tusculans, at the Lake Regillum.
When the Locrians made warre with the Crotolians, there was seen two goodly young men upon white horses, fighting for the Locrians; who as soone as the victory was gotten, were never seene more: which victory, at the same instant that it was gotten, was declared at Athens. Lacedemon, and Corinth; places farre distant from Locris and Cro∣thon. When Attila the King of the Hunnes, calling himselfe the scourge of God, had with furious rage destroyed and wasted many Cities in Ita∣ly; he came at last to Rome, purposing also to destroy it: But Pope Leo the Great, by the commandment of Valentinian the Emperour, came out unto him, and by his prayers and intreaties made him so milde, that presently without doing any hurt he returned into his owne Countrey. Hereupon, being demanded by his Nobles, Why he shew∣ed himselfe so obedient to the Romane Bishop; he answered, That it was not in honour of the Pope, but that he saw another man standing by in Priestly garments, threatning him with a naked sword in his hand, unlesse hee would yeeld unto Pope Leo. This doubtlesse was an Angell protecting of the Citie of Rome from that cruell and mercilesse Enemie. We reade in the lives of the Fathers, how a certaine religious Chri∣stian was cast into prison by the souldiers of Iulian the Apostata, whom when Apolonius another godly Christian came to visit, the Centurion cast him also into prison, to accompany the other, and set souldiers to watch the prison lest they should escape; but late in the night an Angel of God was seene in a most cleare light, and broke open the prison dore: which being seene, the Watch fell downe before those holy men, and the Centurion that night having his house sore shaken with an Earth∣quake, and some of his servants slaine; the next morning came and deli∣vered the two holy men out of prison with great trembling and feare. We reade in the lives of the Fathers, of one Copres a holy man, that disputed with Manichee, and when hee could not put him downe in words, it was agreed betweene them, that the tryall of the truth of their religion should be made by fire: whereupon a fire being made in the Market-place, Copres went into it, and stood a time in it unhurt, being protected by the Angell of God; then the Manichee refusing to doe the like, was thrust into the middest of the fire by the people, and was so scortched, that he scarce escaped with his life; so that the people ab∣horring his wicked doctrine, thrust him out of the Citie; saying, This seducer burneth alive. Baratanes the King of Persia made warre upon the Romanes; against whom Narsaeus the Emperours Generall prepared an Armie: and when the Constantinopolitanes were in great feare, two Angels in Bythinia charged certaine men that went to Constantinople, to tell the Citizens that they should give themselves to prayer and fasting, and feare no∣thing, for they were sent of God to defend the Army of the Romanes against the Persians; which they did accordingly for the Persian Army was defeated by Narsaeus, and the Saracens that came to helpe them in great multitudes, were drowned in the river Euphrates. This Socrates reporteth, Lib. 7. Capitul 18.
But to come to examples of later memory. Melancthon in his ex∣plication of the tenth Chapter of the prophesie of Daniel, relateth a storie of Gryneus a famous learned and godly man, who having offended the Bishop of Vienna, called Faba, in a disputation about Religion, re∣turned unto his sociates assembled together, whereof Melancthon was one: where discoursing of the disputation betweene him and the Bi∣shop, I (saith Melancthon) was called out of the chamber, to speak with a certaine grave man, of a venerable countenance and habit, who told me that we should remove Gryneus out of that place presently, for the Sergeants were come to apprehend him, and to cast him into prison: whereupon we presently conducted him through the Citie, and brought him unto the rivers side, where we had him conveyed over into ano∣ther Jurisdiction: and at our returne to the Inne, found that the Ser∣geants had beene there. Thus, saith Melancthon, we see that this grave old man was an Angell of God, that came to protect the good man from his enemies. In the yeare 1539, not farre from Sitta in Germany, in the time of a great dearth, and famine, a certaine godly matron having two sonnes, and destitute of all manner of sustenance, went with her children to a certaine fountaine hard by, praying unto Almighty God, that he would there relieve their hunger by his infinite goodnesse: as she was going, a certaine man met her by the way, and saluteth her kindly, and asked her whither shee was going; who confessed that she was going to that fountaine there, hoping to be relieved by God, to whom all things are possible; for if he nourished the children of Israell in the desart forty yeares, how is it hard for him to nourish me and my children with a draught of water: and when shee had spoken these words, the man, (which was doubtlesse an Angel of God) told her, that seeing her faith was so constant, she should returne home, and there should finde six bushels of meale for her and her children. The woman returning, found that true which was promised. In the yeare 1558, a cruell tempest raged in Thuringea, beating downe houses, pulling up trees by the roots, and drowned by the vio∣lence of the water above forty persons, men and women. In this feare∣full inundation of waters, a notable and miraculous example of Gods protection by Angels shewed it selfe: for there was a woman newly brought to bed of a childe, drowned, but the infant lying in a cradle, was carried with the violence of the water a great way off, and at last the cradle stopping at the bough of an apple-tree, was fastened till the waters decreased, and after divers dayes was found alive. The like example of a childe miraculously preserved in the waters, is described by Husan in most elegant verses; the copie whereof you may reade in the Historicall Theatre of Lonicerus, pag. 196. Another childe at Friburge in Misnia falling into the river, was car∣ried violently a great space, untill it came unto a Mill, where it stop∣ped, and was miraculously taken up alive by Gods protection, and his holy Angels. The like we reade of concerning another childe, miraculously preser∣ved at Rotinberge, in the yeare 1565, as Lonicerus reporteth.
I will adde one more of my owne knowledge, concerning an In∣ft. Towne in Cambridge-shire, there was a craie Steeple ready to , under which a poore man with one childe, had built a little cottage, and lived therein: it chanced that the Steeple fell upon that little cot∣tage, the woman being in the towne, and the childe in the house: all men supposed the childe had beene crushed to pies; but it pleased God, by the protection of his holy Angels, that certaine pieces of the Bell-free fell crosse over the little cottage, and kept off the stoes from hurting of the childe; which crying was heard, and they removing the stones and rubbidge, found the childe alive. The like happened at Huntington; where Saint Mars Church, having a decayed Steeple, the Parishioners for  to repaire it; who about noone comming downe to hir , left certaine children which were taught by the Minister, playing in the body of the Church, who had no sooner runne into the Chancell to their victuals, but the Steeple tumbled downe into the Church, beating downe a great part of the Church: withall, behold the wonderfull protection of God, if the Steeple had fallen upon the Lords day, many hundreds had beene slaine; and if at any other time of the day, the Masons and the children had all perished: but blessed be the name of the Lord for this safe de∣liverance. Another example was related unto me by men of good credit, upon their owne knowledge; how a certaine man riding between two woods in a great tempest of thundering and lightening, rode under an Oake to shelter himselfe; but his horse would by no meanes stay under that Oake, winching, and kicking, and running away, whether his Master would or no: which his master perceiving, went unto another Oake hard by, where the horse stayed very quietly: but they had not long staid there, but the first Oake with a grievous clap of thunder and ligh∣tening was torne all to fitters, and the man and horse in the other place escaped safely: Oh the wonderfull protection of God, and that by the ministery of his holy Angels! In the yeare 1565, so great a tempest of raine and waters arose at Islebia, that it bare downe houses before it; it fell most violently upon the house of one Barthold Bogt, so that it broke downe the fore-part of his house, where lay a childe in a cradle; which the father, with hazard of his life, brought forth and carried into his adjoyning neighbours house: two other of his children endeavouring also to save, hee tooke in his armes to carry forth of the house, but the rage of the water hin∣dered him, so that they rested upon a beame; from whence the one of his children was violently taken out of his armes, and he and the other being shaken from the post, were carried into the Orchard; where fin∣ding footing, stood up to the neck in water, with the childe in his armes; and looking about for his other childe, he found it sitting upon a piece of timber, and comming towards him, which hee also tooke into his armes, and got up into a high pile of wood, where he rested all night, none being able to afford him any helpe. The next morning, when the waters were decreased, he came downe to looke for two other of his chil∣dren
which he had left in an upper part of the house, whom hee found fast asleepe; now he had no sooner taken them from thence, but that part of the house fell downe also: where we may see a visible signe of Gods protection by his holy Angels, who not onely preserved all the fa∣mily, but also kept that part of the house from falling, wherein the chil∣dren lay sleeping, untill they were brought forth. Many more examples of this kinde might be added, but these shall suffice to shew Gods great providence towards his children; who as he punisheth the wicked with most severe Judgements, so he protecteth those that feare him with extraordinary providence by his holy Angels: to shew the truth of that, which the Apostle speaketh; that They are ministring Spirits, sent forth to waite upon them who shall be heires of salva∣tion, Hebrewes 1. Verse 14.
