B1787 R16794 12546300 63059
THE BELIEF OF PRAYING FOR THE DEAD. A holy and Godly Thought. Maccab. l. 2. c. 12. Permissu Superiorum. London Printed, and Sold by Matthew Turner at the Lamb in High-Holbourn. 1688.
THE Introduction. I Lately met, in the Country, with a Discourse concerning Purga∣tory and Prayer for the Dead; wherein the Author endeavours by many waies to wean me from my Faith, in these Points: First, He be∣gins to discountenance the Be∣lief of the Roman-Catholick Church, which teaches me to Pray for the Deceased; by telling me, She was beholden for This to Her Worthy Forerun∣ners, the Poets and Heathen Philosophers. Then he labours to intangle it with the ancient Custom of the Primitive Church, Praying to GOD for all the Saints. After, he proceeds to contradict it by the
opposite Profession of the Greeks, who never re∣ceiv'd any such Doctrine from their Ancestors. And he finally resolves to lose it, amidst the divers Opinions of the Fathers, concerning the State of Men after Death. But all this in vain: For we know who is the Master of Confusion and Contra∣diction. And the Gates of Hell shall never prevail against that Faith, which is built on the Rock, CHRIST. 'Tis here Roman Catholicks fix their Article of Praying for Souls departed. Read without Prejudice; judge without Partiality; confess your Conviction without Obstinacy.
THE BELIEF OF Praying for the Dead. CHAP. I. Of Pagans Praying for the Dead. THE Discourser troubled at the early Pra∣ctice of Praying for the Dead in the Church of GOD, allows this Custom, with a smile,Page 3. to have been of very venerable Antiquity, and to have exceeded even Christianity it self, for some Hundreds of Years. The Ghost of Elpenor in Homer,Hom. Odyss. 12. Virg. Aeneid. 6. and of Palinurus in Virgil, abundantly shew this. Jests are not seasonable in serious debates of Re∣ligion. Nor do Roman Catholicks believe Prayers to be profitable for the Dead, because the Poets have described many Ceremonies used for their deliverance, which nearly resemble the present Practice of the
Roman Church. Which of our Authors have given this loose Account? Where has our Church thus ex∣plicated the Reason of Her Belief? When Pagans speak like Christians, we do not condemn them. And if the Poets seem to hint in their Fancies at something of our Faith, we still continue to profess it. Praep. Evang. l. 11. c. 16.Eusebius recounts of Plato, that he divided Mankind into three States. Some who excell'd in Holiness of Life, enjoy eternal Felicity, which it is neither possi∣ble for any Words to express, nor Thoughts to conceive. Others, who abandon'd themselves to Vices and Wickedness, he supposed were at their deaths convey'd to Hell, there to be tormented for ever. But now, be∣sides these, he speaks of a middle sort, who, though they had sinn'd, yet had repented of it; and these he thought went down for some time into Hell, to be purg'd and absolv'd by grievous Torments; but after this, they should be remov'd, and share in Honours prepared for them. The Discourser catches hold of this third State, and will have the Church of Rome beholden to Paganism for it, which introduc'd it be∣fore Christianity was heard of, some Hundreds of Years. This is very remarkable. But, Is not Hell and Hea∣ven too, as Christians believe them, describ'd by this Pagan Philosopher? Will he call Hell a piece of Pa∣ganism, and renounce Heaven upon the same score, as he does Purgatory, or a middle State, where the Dead are reliev'd by the Prayers of the Faithful, because these Doctrines are of very venerable Antiquity, and exceeded Christianity for some Hundreds of Years? I warrant ye, the Discourser will in his next Pam∣phlet condemn, for the same reason, the Old Testament, which was writ long before Christianity; and call in question the New Testament too, which exceeded even
the Religion by Law establish'd, many Hundreds of Years. CHAP. II. Of the Primitive Church Praying that GOD would be mindful of the Saints. 'TIS one thing to Pray to God with reference to the Saints, and another to Pray to God for Souls departed. The Primitive Church meant by praying to God for all the Saints, to honour the Blessed Citizens of Heaven; and beg'd that God, being mindful of them, would, at their intercession, grant the Faithful upon earth their Petitions. These Prayers were Thanksgivings. She pray'd to God for Souls de∣parted, that he would be pleased to remit to them those lesser faults, which they had through humane frailty contracted, and for which they suffer'd in a middle State. These Prayers were Expiations. The present Church performs her Devotions after the same manner. Prayers for the Deceased, are offer'd as an Expiation to God for their Sins;Con. Trid. Sess. 22. cap. 2. Docet Sancta Synodus Sacrificium verè pro∣pitiatorium esse — pro Defunctis in Christo nondùm ad plenum Purgatis. The holy Sacrifice is an Expiation (says the Council of Trent) for the Departed in Christ not yet throughly purg'd. Prayers for the Saints are directed as a Thanksgiving to God, for their Happiness, whose Favour we covet;Et. cap. 3. De Sanctorum vic∣toriis gratias agens, eorum patrocinia im∣plorat. Giving Thanks to God, con∣tinues the same OEcumenical Synod, for their Victories, whose protection we implore. Had the Discourser taken this distinction, he would not have told us, that he needed no other Evidence,
than the Liturgies of the Primitive Church, in which we find them to have pray'd for the best of persons,Pag. 49. for our B. Lady, for the holy Apostles, &c. to shew that they did not pray for the Dead, with any intent to re∣lieve them from Purgatory, or place of punishment, by their Suffrages. And, I answer, we need no other Evidence than these publick Records, and the very pla∣ces of those Liturgies he cites, to prove, that the Pri∣mitive Church meant, by praying that God would be mindful of His Saints, to beg their Intercession; and by praying for Souls departed, to relieve them. Lit. Aegyp. ex Arab. Con. Ush.In the Liturgy of the Church of Aegypt, ascrib'd, saies the Discourser to S. Basil, S. Gregory Nazianzene, and S. Cyril of Alexandria, thus they pray; Be mindful, O Lord, of thy servants, which have pleased thee from the beginning, our holy Fathers the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Evangelists, and all the Souls of the Just, which have died in the Faith, especially the holy glorious, and ever more Virgin Mary, Mother of God, S. John the Fore∣runner, the Baptist, and Martyr, S. Stephen the first Deacon, and Martyr, S. Mark the Apostle, Evangelist and Martyr. See how fervent the Primitive Church was in this Devotion, which alledges the Memories of Her Saints, thereby to move God's mercy towards Sinners. This is confirm'd in the Book of Exodus,Chap. 32.13. where we read the like prescription of Prayer. Remember Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, thy servants, to whom thou swarest, by thy own self, and saidst unto them, I will multiply your Seed as the starrs of Heaven — and our Lord repented (was pacified) of the evil which he thought to do unto his People. Thus Moses pray'd to God by the Mediation of the holy Patriarchs. A Form of Prayer so pleasing to Heaven, that God having declar'd a little before how
He would consume the Israelites for their Sin of Idolatry, the Memories of His holy Servants, though not yet in Heaven, being but laid before Him, He presently pardon'd them. And how much more easi∣ly will he yield himself to be overcome by the Inter∣cession of those, who sing His perpetual Praises in e∣ternal Felicity? This is just theCon. Trid. Sess. 22 Cap. 3. Roman Catholicks praying to Saints. How agreeable to the practice of the Primitive Church! How conformable to Scri∣pture! In the Liturgy of Constantinople,S. Chrys. Lit. edit. Goar. in Euchol. p. 78. Par. 1647. continues the Dis∣courser, said to be Saint Chrysostom's, we find the very same. We offer unto Thee, this reasonable service, for those who are at Rest in the Faith, our Fore-Fathers, Fathers, Patriarks, Prophets and Apostles, Preachers, Evangelists, Martyrs, Confessors, Religious Persons, and for every Spirit perfected in the Faith, especially, for our most Holy, Immaculate, and most Blessed Lady, the Mother of God, the ever Virgin Mary. Here the Discourser wisely ended the Prayer, before he came to Amen: Or rather, found his Mistake, and so made a Pause. The Liturgy goes on, raising the Praises of Our B. Lady beyond those of Seraphims. Then adds the Saint, whose Memo∣ry we celebrate, and all the Saints,Ibidem. . by whose Intercession we beseech Thee, O GOD to protect us. This is the Reason, which the Liturgy gives of the Primitive Church praying GOD to be mindful of his Saints. If you now ask, but why did She pray for Souls departed; the following Words of the same Liturgy will satisfy you. He (the Priest) says for the Dead. For the Rest and Remission of the soul of thy servant
[N] O GOD instate it in a lightsome place,. where there is no more any Grief, or Weeping; seat it, where it may see the splendour of Thy Face. The Priest prays for Rest; the Departed therefore is in Pain: the Priest prays for his Remission; which shews him to be in Sin. This is so plain of its self, That Nicholaus Cabasila, admir'd, how any one of ordinary Capacity, could so grosly mistake the sence of the Liturgy, as the Discourser has done. Some here are deceiv'd (says this Author) taking the Commemoration of Saints, as a Prayer made to GOD for them,In Exposit. Li∣turg. c. 33. . and not as a Thanks∣giving. What gave occasion to this Thought, I cannot imagin: For neither the things themselves, nor the Words of the Sacrifice, afford any the like Conception. But what do we pray for in reference to them, who sleep? For Remission of their sins, for their Inheritance of the Kingdome of GOD; for their Rest in the Bosome of Abraham, with the consummated Saints. Thus, the Greek Church pray'd. S. Aug. Serm. de Verb. Aplic. 1. Ideo{que} habet Ecclesiastica disciplina, quod fideles noverunt, cum Martyres eo loco recitantur ad Altare Dei, ubi non pro ipsis oratur, pro caeteris autem Defunctis oratur; injuria est enim pro Martyre orare, cujus nos debemus orationibus commendare.And, this is what St. Austin affirms of the Latin Church's pious Custome, though not well understood by Strangers: The Faithful, says this Father, know what means this Ecclesiastical Duty, when the Martyrs are repeated in their place at the Altar of GOD, where
Prayers are not offer'd for them, but for other Comme∣morated Souls they are offer'd: For it is an Injury to pray for a Martyr, to whose Intercession we ought to re∣commend our selves. And elsewhere he tells us, how Prayers benefit other Commemorated Souls.Enchir. cap. 110 Pro non valdè bonis Propitiatio∣nes sunt. They are Expiations, says He, for those who are not very bad. CHAP. III. Of the Greek Church Praying for the Dead. THE Discourser offers Three Reasons to prove, That the Greek Church never pray'd for the Dead, with intent to free them from Purga∣tory, or a Middle State, where they suffer Pain and Anguish for the Remainder of their Offences. I.Discourse p. 7. Their Apology penn'd by Marcus Eugenicus Arch∣bishop of Ephesus, and presented to Cardinal Cusan, declares as much. II. The Deputies of the Council of Basil, the Year before, positively declare, That they neither had received any such Doctrine from their Ancestors, and therefore, they would never accept it. III. The Proceedings of the same Marcus, and of the Greek Church after, neither of which, would be drawn to consent to this Ʋnion. If what is related by the Discourser, may be sup∣posed to have been transacted (which is much to be suspected) the Three Reasons alledged, must of ne∣cessity be understood of some other Controversy, than what is under Debate: for this was never contra∣dicted by the Greek Church. Indeed, some single Persons may unfortunately have
fallen into Errour, and so share in the forgoing Rea∣sons. And in this sence, the First Reason evidences of what mind Marcus was, before the Council of Florence; but the Greek Church alwaies profess'd the contrary Doctrine. The Second Reason foretells, how Marcus with his Deputy, would not own in the Coun∣cil, to have received any such Tradition from his An∣cestors, and therefore would never accept it; but the Subscription of the Greek Church is there extant, and Recorded against him. The Last Reason concludes Marcus continued firm in his former erroneous Reso∣lution; but the Greek Church carried home what She had publickly consented to, and sign'd in the Synod. But Marcus never consented to the Council's De∣termination; nor did Arius to the Nicean. And Ma∣cedonius was averse to that of Constantinople; and Ne∣storius never approv'd of the Third oecumenical Coun∣cil. O strange Proceeding! The Discourser's Cause is so desperate, that he's forc'd to rely on an Apo∣state from Faith, to support it. The Greek Church before the Council of Florence,Against the First Reason. Perform'd this Christian Duty to Souls departed in the sence already set down. This is not an Opi∣nion, pick'd out of some single Writer, or war∣ranted without any Tradition. It is the general Pra∣ctice of their Church, Authorized in their Liturgies, and acknowledg'd in their publick Offices and De∣votions. The Liturgy, which is Ascrib'd to St. Chrysostom, prays, That the Souls departed, may change their
Sins, into Pardon; their Pain, into Rest; their Griefs and Weepings, into Joys and Jubilees of never end∣ing Satisfaction. The Words are already mention'd in the foregoing Chapter. S. Basil's Liturgy on Whit-sunday Feast,S. Bas. Precat. tertia in Pen∣tacosten. . uses the same Language. O GOD, Who vouchsafest on this per∣fect, and all-saving Feast, to receive the Suffrages and Supplications made for the Detained in Hell (or place of Purgation,) We earnestly hope You will import to these Imprison'd, Freedom from Griefs, which encompass them, and Consolation. Hear us abject and miserable Creatures praying to Thee: Give Rest to the Souls of thy Ser∣vants, before our dayes departed, in a bright place, a flourishing place, a place of Cheerfulness; where there is no more any pain, sorrow and sighing; and seat their Souls in the Tabernacles of the Just, and of Peace, and Forgiveness. In the Paracletica, the Greek Church thus sings.In Paraclet. . From Tears, and Bewailings, which are heard in Hell, deliver thy Servants O SAVIOUR. Hell is an usual Word, which signifies the Place of the Damned, and expresses likewise the Middle State of Souls. Thus the Word Prison expresses the Place, where Hainous Malefactors are detained; and signifies also the Goal, into which, those, who commit only Petty Faults and Misdemeanors, are conducted. We cannot here by the Word Hell, understand the everlasting Con∣finement: The Greek Church holds the Wicked and
Impious without Redemption. Nor can the Damned be called the Servants of Christ, Deliver thy Servants, O Saviour. They are his greatest Enemies. In Offic. Exeq. in Euchol. Goar. p. 526. .In the Office, they pray; O let the Soul, Lord, of thy deceased Servant [N] enjoy rest in a place of brightness, a place of pleasantness and delight, whence all pain, grief, and anguish, are banish'd: Forgive, as a clement and merciful God, whatever offence may be by him committed in word, deed, and thought. In Officio Fun. the Priest prays, that our B. Lady would intercede to God,In Offic. Fun. ibidem, pag. 572. . pag. 577. . to free the Deceased from bit∣ter Torments.— Afterwards he says, With a doleful Voice we beg the Creator of all things to release the De∣ceased, and take pitty on him. Nich. Athena∣rum Metro∣polis, in Offic. Ol. S. in Ora∣tionibus. .In Officio Olei Sancti, they pray, O God, Give rest to the soul of thy Deceased Servant: Ease him of Evils; deliver him from darkness; take him out of Prison, and lodge him where the Just inhabit: Loose his Chains; save him from stripes; lead him out of Prison and Darkness, and associate him with your Elect. Against the Second Rea∣son.The Greek Church in the Council of Florence, Ratifies what we have deliver'd concerning Prayers for the Dead. The Council call'd, and assembled;
the Latines forthwith proposed the Question of Purga∣tory, or place where the Dead are tormented, and help'd by the Prayers of the Faithful; The Greeks gave this Answer: The Greeks truly hold,Conc. Gen. Labbei Paris. pag. 27. . That in the World to come there is pain, sorrow, and a place of pain, but no Fire. The Greeks then never disputed the being of Purgatory, where Souls departed undergo pain, and sorrow. And the Latins believe no more. For, In the Last Session, the Procession of the Holy Ghost agreed too, on both sides, all embroils untangled, and disturbances quieted, the Debate of Purgatory was moved again, and resolved by both Churches, the Latin and Greek joyning jointly together, that there were Three States of the Dead; of Saints in Heaven; of the Wicked in Hell; and of a middle State of Souls in a place of Torments, viz. of those Christians who had sinn'd, repented of it, and confess'd, yet had not performed Works of satisfaction;. & pag. 515. in Def. Conc. . for which Prayers and Alms are offer'd and given. In this Sence Joseph Patriarch of Constantinople confess'd a Purgatory of Souls. And all the Greeks, except one or two, sub∣scrib'd to the Definition of the Council, worded after this manner. If truly penitent, they died in the Love of God, before they satisfied by worthy fruits of re∣pentance, for what they committed and omitted, their souls, after death, are to be purg'd in Purgatory pains, and that they may be reliev'd in these pains, the suffra∣ges of the Faithful living, holy Sacrifices, Alms-deeds, perform'd according to the Church's Institution, are bene∣ficial to them.
Against the Third Reason.The Greek Church after the Council of Florence, No doubt carried home, what She had alwaies profess'd and subscrib'd to in the Council. Paludanus asks, How does the Synod prove Souls to be purg'd after Death?Palud in Discep. pro Conc. Fl. . And An∣swers, first, From our own Practise; and after, From the Testimonies of the Holy Fathers. And the very Liturgies that they formerly had in Esteem, the Greeks now reverence. The publick Prayers they Antiently offer'd, are the same which they now-a-daies pour forth. Missa S. P. Joan. Chry∣sost. Pag. 28. .The Priest prays thus in the Mass, which the pre∣sent Greeks now say in Rome, for the Dead; O GOD, that the soul of thy departed servant [N] may enjoy Rest, and obtain Pardon; seat it in the place of Light, where no sorrow, nor bemoanings are heard; place it where it may wait on the splendor of thy Countenance. Gabriel Severus assures us, that as the well-meaning Greeks alwaies did, so do they at present pray with in∣tent to free the Detained in a middle State of pain and sorrow.Gab. Sever. Philadelphien. de Purg. . The Apostles, says this Greek, and who suc∣ceeded them, the Prelates, and Priests, and the whole Order of Orthodox Persons, pray'd like servants with de∣jected minds; and now pray GOD for the faithful Ortho∣dox
deceased Christians, that they may be freed from their Torments, and obtain Pardon of their Sins. I end this Chapter with the misfortune of Marcus Eugenicus. For, what is worse,Georg. Sch. ult. sess. conc. Florentini. . said Georgius Scholarius in the Council of Florence, What is worse, than that one man, of what Dignity soever he be, should oppose an OEcumenical Synod, which represents the Ʋniversal Church of GOD. The Greek Church then alwaies held Prayers for the Dead, as part of a Christians duty; and this too, with intent to free those Christians who had sinned, but repented, yet had not perform'd Works of satis∣faction, from a Middle State of souls, a Prison of confinement, tears, sorrows, sighings, pains, darkness, evils, stripes, chains, and bitter torments. If this be not to pray with design to deliver souls departed out of Purgatory, I know not what it means. CHAP. IV. Of the diverse Opinions of the Fathers concerning the State of Men after Death. A Midst the Variety of Opinions, the Discourser singles out Three, which he guessed to be most fit to his present purpose, and which seem to have been among the ancient Fathers, concerning the State of Men after Death, more generally received.Bellar. de SS. Beat. 1. c. 5. I. That the Souls departed do not straightway go to Heaven, but remain in a place of sequester, a plea∣sant
State, free of trouble and pain, yet earnestly ex∣pecting their final Consummation in Glory. Euseb. Hist. l. 3. c. 39.An other Opinion there was of the Millenary King∣dom, That those of the Faithful, whose Piety had been most eminent, should reign a thousand years in all delights with Christ upon earth. A Third Opinion, and that too, not without Pa∣trons, was, That all men being rais'd up at the Last Day, should pass through a certain probatory Fire, in which every man should be scorched and purified, some more, others less, according as they had lived, better or worser Lives here upon earth. Pag. 47.The First, says the Discourser, Pray'd that GOD would comfort them in the bosome of Abraham, with the blessed Company of Holy Angels, and the Vision of our Saviour Christ, till the wished for day of Judgment should come. The Second flattered themselves, That by their Prayers, they might hasten the Felicity of their Friends; and accordingly pray'd for their speedy rising in Christ's Kingdom. The Third sort pray'd that God would have Mercy on their Dead at the last day, and not suffer them to be so much sing'd and burnt in the General Conflagration, at the end of the World. How true these things are, I shall not enquire. The Dis∣courser advances them without proof, and holds them no more than Opinions. This is sufficient for me at present. Pag. 5.But the Discourser avers, that it is from these Opi∣nions, That those of the Roman Communion impose upon the unwary, their pretence of Antiquity for this Doc∣trine. Confidence will assert any thing. And I expec∣ted a great Warranty for this bold Assertion. And may expect long enough, before I get one; for the Discourser is so far from thinking of this, that he has not as yet
made Choice of which of these Opinions he shall pitch upon to do our business; and therefore barely asserts, from these Opinions it is, but he knows not from which of them it is; or rather he knows 'tis from none of them, nor upon any other pretence whatso∣ever, do the Roman Catholicks endeavour, to impose up∣on the Ʋnwary. This indeed he waranted sufficiently, wiping off in some manner, the foregoing Aspersion,Disc. p. 10. by taking care to tell the Reader, That he allow'd of what Natalis Alexander said, to be the Belief in this point of the Roman Church.Nat. Alexand. Sec. 4. par. 3. pag. 352. Id unum ita{que} Catholicos inter & Pro∣testantes in Controversi∣am venit u∣trum Fides doceat ali∣quem esse defunctorum statum in quo poenis temporaneis expientur, à quibus, Ecclesiae precibus liberari, vel in ijs sublevari possint. These are Natalis's Words; The only thing therefore, that is in Controversy between Catholicks and Protestants, is this, whether Faith teaches there is a State of the Dead, in which they shall be expiated by temporary Punishments, and from which they may be freed, or otherwise helped by the Prayers of the Church. How far distant this Belief and Sense of Roman-Catholicks is from the Three mentioned Opinions, a short perusal, and slight comparison, will abundantly evidence. For the First, that place of Sequester, was free, as the Discourser will have it, of all pain and trou∣ble: And the Second, that of the Millenary King∣dom, overflow'd with satisfactions; there is no Sin in either of them, to be pardon'd; no penalty to be endur'd, which are the Motives, Why Roman Catho∣licks pray, that God will be pleas'd to help the de∣tained in a Middle State, or Purgatory. Nor can the last State, viz. that of the general Conflagration, enter into this present Controversy, because it has not as yet a Being, it only will be,Disc. pag. 5. says the Discourser in
the end of the World. And what is convincing, the Discourser acknowledges all this to be true, where he says, It is evident to any one that shall please to com∣pare these with the Account I shall hereafter give of the present Roman Purgatory, how vastly different they were from what is now proposed to us as an Article of Faith. 'Tis very true, That Roman Catholicks distinguish between Faith and Opinion, what they now believe in this present Controversy, was alwaies lookt upon, as part of a Christians duty. But I cannot see how Reformers can allow of any such distinction. Opinion increas'd their pretended Reformation of Religion, in∣to Thirty Nine Articles. But Roman Catholicks are the Old Church, with which Christ has promis'd, and his Promises are certain, to be present, till the end of the World.Nihil inno∣vetur, nisi quod tradi∣tum est. She daily repeats what blessed Pope Stephen said in the Third Age, in the Voice of Her surviving and chief Pastors upon Earth; Let nothing of Novelty be introduc'd, keep what you have from Tra∣dition. CHAP. V. What it is the Church of Rome means by Pray∣ing for the Dead. I Have already given a short, and as I think, satis∣factory Account of this,Chap. 3. in the Decree of the Council of Florence, where it is determin'd, That we pray for the Faithful deceased, who have not suffici∣ently satisfy'd, here upon earth, for their Offences for which they now suffer, that God would be pleas'd to free them from these Sufferings.
The Council of Trent teaches the very same,Concil. Trid. Sess. 22. cap. 2. Docet sancta synodus sacrificium i∣stud vere pro∣pitiatorium esse—quod non solùm pro fidelium vivorum peccatis, poenis, satisfactionibus, & alijs necessitatibus, sed & pro defunctis in Christo nondum ad plenum purgatis, rité juxta Apostolorum Tra∣ditionem, offertur. That the Sacrifice is an Expiation offer'd, not only for the sins, pains, satisfactions, and other necessities of the Living; but also for the deceased in Christ, not yet fully purg'd, according to the Tradition of the Apostles. In the Third Canon of the same Session,Sess. 22. Can. 3. Si quis dixerit Missa Sacrificium non esse pro∣pitiatorium, ne{que} pro Vi∣vis & Defun∣ctis, pro peccatis, poenis, satisfactionibus, & alijs necessitatibus, offerri debere; Ana∣thema sit. the same Council thus resolves; If any shall say, that the Mass is not a propitiatory Sacrifice, nor ought to be offered for the Living and the Dead, for their sins, pains, satisfac∣tions, and other necessities, let him be Anathema. And in the Decree of Purgatory, we find these Words; Since the Catholick Church,Sess. 25. De∣cretum de Pur. Cum Catho∣lica Ecclesia, Spiritu sancto educta, ex sa∣cris Literis, & antiqua Pa∣trum-Traditi∣one, in sacris Conciliis, & novissime in hâc OEcumenica Synodo docuerit, Purgatorium esse, Animasque ibi deten∣tas, fidelium Suffragiis, potissimum verò acceptabili Altaris Sacrificio juvari, praecipit sancta Synodus, &c. inspir'd by the Ho∣ly Ghost, has from Holy Scriptures, and Ancient Tradi∣tion of Fathers, taught in Holy Councils, and last of all, in this OEcumenical Synod, that there is a Purgatory, and that the Souls there detained, are help'd by the Suffrages of the Faithful; especially, by the acceptable Sacrifice of the Altar, the holy Synod commands, &c. Our Article of Belief is thus worded in our pro∣fession of Faith,Apud Conc. Trid. Sess. 25. in fine. Con∣stanter teneo Purgatorium esse, Animasque ibi detentas Fidelium Suffragijs juvari. couch'd in the Bulla of Pius the Fourth; I firmly hold, that there is a Purgatory, (or
middle State) and that the Souls there retained, are help'd by the Suffrages of the Faithful. In the Canon of the Mass, the Priest makes this Commemoration of the Dead;In Can. Miss. Memento eti∣am famulo∣rum, famula∣rumque tua∣rum N. & N. qui nos praecesserunt, cum signo Fidei, & dormiunt in somno Pacis. Be mindful O Lord, of thy servants N. and N. who are gone before us, with the sign of Faith, and rest in the sleep of Peace. Here are mention'd such Dead as are pray'd for in particular. Ipsis Domine, & omnibus in Christo qui∣escentibus lo∣cum refrige∣rij, lucis, & pacis, ut indulgeas deprecamur. Per eundem Christum Dominum no∣strum. Amen.To whom O Lord, and to all that rest in Christ, grant we beseech Thee, a place of refreshment, of light, and of peace: through the same Christ our Lord, Amen. In Miss. De∣funct. Fide∣lium Deus omnium Con∣ditor & Re∣demptor, ani∣mabus samu∣lorum, famu∣larum{que} tua∣rum remissionem cunctorum tribue peccatorum, ut indulgentiam, quam semper opta∣verunt, Piis supplicationibus consequantur.And in the Mass for the Dead, he prays thus; O God, the Creator and Redeemer of the Faithful,; grant to the souls of thy servants, both men and women, remission of all their sins, that by the pious supplications of the faithful for them, they may obtain the Pardon, they have alwaies wished for. Tho' the Custom, Intention, and Belief of the Ro∣man Catholick Church, be fully laid down and mani∣fested from these publick Records, as to what She means by praying for souls departed, yet perhaps, the repeating of them in some few Reflections, may not be ungrateful to meaners Capacities.
I. Reflection. WE pray for all Sinners, though never so great; of whose Salvation we have some Signs and Hopes at their departing hour: For these may be call'd the Faithful deceased.Conc. Flor. Sess. ult. in Definit. Fidei. This is what the Council of Florence includes in these Words: If they dyed truly penitent in the Love of God. They may be called the de∣ceased in Christ, as the Council of Trent expresses it;Con. Trid. Sess. 22. c. 2. and the Souls of thy Servants, as the Priest prays for them in the Mass for the Dead. Nor ought we to be blamed, for complying with this pious Exercise; though some of the deceased, for whom Prayers are offer'd, should be really in Heaven, or in Hell; for in doubtful things, the securest is best to be chosen. And Prayers, some wayes or other, still prove beneficial. S. Austin illustrates this, after his usual manner, with great sense and approbation: When Offerings, either of the Altar, says this Father, or of Alms, are ordered for all the Dead who were Baptised in Christ,S. Aug. Enchir. 110. Cum ergo Sacrifica, sive Altaris, sive quarumcun{que} Eleemosynarum pro Ba∣ptizatis defunctis omnibus offeruntur, pro valdè bonis, gratiarum actiones sunt, pro non valde malis, propitia∣tiones sunt; pro valdè malis, & si nulla sunt Adjumenta Mortuorum, qualescun{que} Vivorum Consolationes sunt. if they be made for the very Good; or Saints, they are thanksgivings; if for them, who are not very Bad, or in a middle State, they are Expia∣tions; if for the very Wicked, or the Damned, although they prove not advantagious to these unfortunate De∣ceased; yet they become Consolations to the Living. They are Witnesses of the performance of their Christian Charity.
II. Reflection. VVE pray that God would be pleas'd to lessen the pain, which the Faithful deceased endure in a middle State.Conc. Flor. in Decret. The Council of Florence declares, we pray with intent to free them from their Sufferings; that of Trent affirms,Con. Trid. Sess. 22. Can. 3. The sacrifice is offer'd as an Expiation for their pains; the Priest at Mass in the Memento, begs, That God would grant them a place of Refreshment. What this Pain substantially consists in, the Church allowing of a Middle State, concludes to be the sus∣pension of seeing God; which musts needs be grievous, in regard the Object expected, is so earnestly desired. For Hope prolong'd,Proverb. Spes quae dif∣fertur affligit Animam. as the wise Man teaches, torments the Soul. How far this suspension of seeing God is extended; whether accompanied with grief, or darkness, or an∣guish, or real fire, &c; when these pains are to end; where undergon, in the dusky aire, where the Devils dwell, or under ground, or elsewhere; are School-Questions, variously agitated by Divines, and apper∣tain not to Faith. But we are sure there is some pains to be endur'd, because there is somthing of sins re∣main, to be purg'd and pardon'd. III. Reflection. THe cause of Pain, is Sin: Sin consists of Two Parts: The Fault which stains the Soul: and the Guilt, which Renders it Liable to punishment.
If the Sin be mortal, eternal; if venial, it must be temporal: For all Sin deserves some punishment. Now besides eternal pain, which the Fault of all mortal Sin carries along with it, there remains some∣times at least the Guilt of some temporal penalty due to the Justice of God, to be paid in this world, or in the next. The Church has pronounced this Truth, in these Words of the Coun∣cil of Trent;Conc. Trid. Can. 30. Sess. 6. Si quis post acceptam Justificationis gratiam, cuilibet peccatori poenitenti ita Culpam remitti, & reatum aeter∣nae poenae deleri dixerit, ut nullus remaneat reatus poenae temporalis ex∣solvendae, vel in hoc saeculo, vel in futuro, in Purgatorio, antequam ad regna Coelorum aditus patere possit, Anathema sit. If any one shall say, That the Fault after the Grace of Justification, is so remitted to eve∣ry penitent Sinner, and the Guilt of eternal Punishment is so blotted out, that there remains no Guilt of tem∣poral pain to be paid for, now, or hereafter in Purgatory, before there be an Entrance granted into the Kingdom of Heaven, let him be Anathema. And GOD has revealed the same in Holy Scriptures. Is it not true, That the Fault, and Guilt of eternal Punishment of the first Sin, which we call Original, are both expiated, and and quite wash'd away in the waters of Baptism? And yet there remains a Guilt of temporal Afflicti∣on to be undergone, that of Death.Rom. 5.12. We must all die. Again, the Israelites grievously offended God by murmuring. Moses interceded for them.Numb. 14. And our Lord said I have forgiven it. And yet God with the same breath declares, That he has not remitted the temporal Punishment, which remains due to His Divine Justice. This they are to pay. Their Fathers are excluded the Land of Canaan, and die in the Wil∣derness. And their Children wander forty Years in the Desert. This Guilt of temporal Penalty, which is oftentimes
the remainder of mortal Sin remitted, retains the name of Sin. Thus the Evening, or Remainder of the day, is not improperly still call'd day. And it is up∣on this Account, and for lesser, or venial Sins; whose Fault, whilst the Sinner liv'd upon earth, is not for∣given, or Guilt not pardon'd; that we generally pray God to remit to Souls departed,Con. Flor. in Decret. their Sins; who have not sufficiently satisfied for their Offences, says the Coun∣cil of Florence; for their Sins and Satisfactions, de∣crees the Council of Trent;Conc. Trid. Can. 3. Sess. 22. for the Remission of all their Sins, prays the Priest in the Mass for the Dead. IV. Reflection. I Close the Controversy between Catholicks and Pro∣testants in this narrow Compass, whether, We ought to believe that the Dead in Purgatory are help'd by the Prayers of the Living, as our Article of Faith words it: or (which is the same thing, and con∣tains all) whether, It be part of a Christians Duty to pray, (as the Priest does at Mass) that God will re∣mit to Souls departed, their Sins. The Discourser can∣not blame me for omitting the word Pain, in my Proposition. For if there be any detained in a mid∣dle State, whose Sins are not yet fully purg'd, or if they be small ones, and entirely remain; there is without dispute, some Penalty to be undergone for them. This is undeniably true, because all Sin, as the Discourser acknowledges, infers an Obligation to Punishment.Page 31.
CHAP. VI. Why Roman Catholicks believe the Dead are help'd by Prayers. IF you ask me the Formal Reason, Why Roman Ca∣tholicks believe it to be a part of a Christians du∣ty to pray for the Faithful deceased; I answer, Because God has taught us so. Apostolical Tradition assures us of it; the Practise of the Ʋniversal Church confirms it; Holy Scriptures authorise it. We do not pretend that Sciptures have any where commanded this Doctrine.Tertull. l. de Coron. Mil. c, 4. Si Le∣gem expostu∣les Scriptura∣rum, nullam invenies. If you seek a Precept in the Scriptures, says Tertullian, you cannot find any. Nor is this absolutely necessary, to make it a part of Chri∣stian duty. It is abundantly sufficient for this Obli∣gation; if first, it be recommended to us by Reve∣lation from Heaven; and secondly, propos'd to the Faithful, or practis'd by the Universal Church of CHRIST. The Will of GOD, or Revelation, is recommended to us in Holy Scriptures, or convey'd to us by the Apostles and their Successors. The Ʋni∣versal Church is either taken diffusively, as it is spread over the World; or collectively, as it is assembled in an OEcumenical Synod, which represents the whole Church. All Four conspire together to confirm Ro∣man Catholicks in their Belief of Praying for the Dead; and to confound their Opposers. The Holy Scriptures recommend it in many places to the Faithful. The A∣postles taught it. The Universal Church practis'd it. And General Councils have defin'd it.
As for General Councils, I have alledg'd already, Two very plain Ones; that of Florence, and that of Trent. The Council of Trent pretended no Command in Scripture for this Doctrine. We read it decreed by the Tridentine Fathers, because the Apostles taught it; according to the Tradition of the Apostles, declares this OEcumenical Synod, in the 2d. Chap. & 22d. Session; and because it is recommended in the Scri∣ptures, the same Council, in the Decree of Purga∣tory, determines Prayers for the Dead, from the Scri∣ptures. CHAP. VII. Of the Universal Church Praying for the Dead. TO ackowledge Prayers offer'd by the Ʋniversal Church of CHRIST, with intent to expiate the Sins of Souls departed, in a middle State, is to believe this Pious Custome came from the Di∣vine Apostles.S. Aug. Ep. 118. Quod universa tenet Eccle∣sia, nec à Conciliis institu∣tum, sed semper retentum est, nonnisi authoritate A∣postolica traditum rectissimè creditur. For, as S. Austin observes, What the whole Church holds, and was not Instituted by Councils, but was alwaies re∣tain'd, is most truly believed to come from Apostolical Tradition. In finding out then one of these, we learn both of them. Our Masters shall be the holy Pen-men of Primitive Times. Petrus Venerabilis Writing against the Petrobrusian Hereticks; thus exhorts all Christians out of the Book of Maccabees
to pray for the Dead. The Faithful Jews pray'd for the heinous Offences of their Dead; that, what they had Committed,Ep. 2. cont. Petrob. Cap. 5. Rogant fideles Judaei pro delictis tam gravi∣bus defunctorum, ut quod fecerant, oblivioni traderetur, & non rogabunt fideles Christiani pro defunctis in spe bona fidelibus eundem Deum, ut eis nondum plenè laxata Peccata remit∣tantur? Rogaverunt hoc illi adhuc in tempore irae, & non rogabunt hoc isti in tempore gratiae? might totally he forgiven; and the faithful Christians will not pray for their faithful piously departed, that their sins not fully remitted, may by the same GOD be Pardon'd? The Jews pray'd in the time of An∣ger; and Christians are negligent in the day of Grace? Is not this to pray with intent, as Roman Catholicks do, that God will remit to souls departed, their sins? And what follows will not give you leave to doubt that this pious Devotion was be∣liev'd the duty of Christians in those dayes.Ibidem. Qui bona vivorum Mortuis, qui digni sunt prodesse dene∣gat, ad com∣munis fidei laesionem per∣tinere cognos∣cat. Let him, continues this Venerable Writer, that denies the good Works of the Living to be advantagious to the Dead, who deserve them, know that he makes a Breach in Faith. S. Bernard Calls them, who deny this pious Doctrine, Here∣ticks, and Hypocrites. Is it not, says this Saint,Super Cantica Ser. 66. pag. 762. Non sufficit haereticos esse, nisi & hy∣pocritae sint. Mortuos viventium frau∣dantes auxilijs, non credunt ignem Purgatorium restare post mortem. sufficient for them to be Hereticks, unless they be Hypocrites too. They are Here∣ticks, because they Defraud the Dead of help from the Living, nor do they believe that there remaines after Death Pur∣gatory Fire. As Hypocrites, they make a fair shew, and pretending to follow the pure Word of God.
S. Isidore of Spain Says, Because sacrifice and prayers are offer'd thorow the whole world for the rest of the Faithful Deceased,S. Isid. Hisp. l. 1. de Offic. Eccles. c. 18. Sacrificium pro Defunctorum fidelium requie offerri, vel pro eis orari, quia per totum hoc Orbem custoditur, cre∣dimus quod ab ipsis Apostolis tradi∣tum sit. Hoc enim ubi{que} Catholica tenet Ecclesia; quae nisi crederet fide∣libus defunctis dimitti peccata, non pro eorum spiritibus vel Eleemosy∣nam faceret, vel Deo sacrificium of∣ferret. we believe this Custom comes from the Apostles themselves. For the Ca∣tholick Church every where observes this; Nor would She give Alms, or of∣fer Sacrifice for Souls Departed, unless she believ'd the Faithful De∣ceased, receiv'd pardon of their Sins. Nothing can be more fully exprest for Roman Catho∣licks. First, Prayers are offer'd for the Faithful de∣ceased. Secondly, For their Rest, and Remission of their Sins. Thirdly, The Catholick Church thorow the whole world practis'd the same. Fourthly, 'Twas believ'd Apostolical Tradition. And shall a pretended Reformer start up, without any warrant of a new Revelation from Heaven, and banish this Pious Devo∣tion, and contradict the whole Church of God, and teach contrary to what the Blessed Apostles deli∣ver'd. S. Gregorie the Great, Eminent for Learning and Piety, and with whom the whole Church of Christ communicated in Reli∣gion,page 6. the Discourser of his own accord gives up as one of ours, so would he if he were just, give us all the Fathers.
The Council of Calcedon, Or the Fourth General, which the Religion by Law Establish'd reverences, approves of the same Doctrine, Recording to Posterity what was laid to Dioscorus's Charge, who was condemn'd by the Synod. Amongst others of the Accusations, which were brought against him, we find that he was impeach'd, and said to have dispos'd of a great summ of Money, contrary to the Deceased's desires, who gave it with intent to be pray'd for.Conc. Calc. an. 451. Tom. 4. Conc. Lab. Pag. 401. Act. 3. . But no body, says the Acts of this OEcu∣menical Synod, is ignorant of the business of the Renowned Peristeria of Happy Memory. For She Com∣manded in her last Will and Testa∣ment, a considerable summ of Mo∣ney to be given for her Soul to Mo∣nasteries, Hospitals, Alms-Houses, and to the Poor of the Aegyptian Province. And yet by the disposal of Dioscorus, things were so Or∣der'd, That as much as lay in him, even Incense was not offer'd from the Sacrifice to GOD, in Remembrance of the most Illustrious deceased Peristeria. The Acts take Notice, First, That this Lady gave Money, with intent, that after her Death, the Prayers of the Faith∣ful should benefit her Soul.In Bulla pii Pont. This is our Article of Faith, which obliges us firmly to hold, that the Dead are help'd by the Prayers of the Living. Secondly, This was the Practice of the whole Church, because
spoken of with approbation in an OEcumenical Council, and no body, say the Acts, was ignorant of it. Thirdly, The hinderance of this Devotion was look'd upon as a great Crime. 'Twas laid to Dioscorus's Charge, In as much as lay in him, Sacrifice was not offered for the Deceased. Theodoretus, Who liv'd at the same time that this general Coun∣cil was assembled, gives us another confirmation, not of a private Person, praying in his Oratory for the Soul of his deceased Friend, but of the Emperor Theo∣dosius, prostrating himself before the Reliques of St. John Chrysostom,Theod. l. 5. Histor. c. 36. . and praying for the Souls of his de∣ceased Parents, Arcadius and Eudoxia. His looks, sayes this Historian, and eyes fix'd on the Tombe of this Holy Man (St. Chrysostom) he let tears fall for his Parents, and he beg'd that he (the Saint) would obtain pardon for them, of their faults contracted through ignorance. For long before this, his Parents were dead, and he was left very young, and an Orphan. St. Austin Is so clear in this Controversy for Roman Catholicks, that Calvin had not confidence enough to deny it. These are the Saints words:St. Aug. Serm. 34. de verbis Apostoli. O∣rationibus St. Ecclesiae, & Sacrificio salutari, & eleemosynis quae pro illorum spiritibus erogantur, non est dubitandum mortuos adjuvari ut cum eis miseri cordiùs agatur à Do∣mino, quam eorum peccata meruerunt. Hoc enim à Patribus traditum universa obser∣vat Ecclesia; ut pro eis, qui in corporis & sanguinis Christi communione defuncti sunt. cum ad ipsum sacrificium loco suo commemorantur, Oretur. Funeral Pomps, atten∣dance of Obsequies, rich constructure of Monuments are
some Comfort to the Living, and no Relief to the Dead. But it is not at all to be doubted, that the Prayers of the holy Church, the wholesome Sacrifice, and Alms-deeds given for the deceased, are beneficial to the Dead, that God might deal more mildly with them, than their sins have deserv'd. For this which was delivered by our fore-Fathers, the Ʋniversal Church observes, to pray for those who are departed in the Communion of the Body and Blood of Christ, when they are commemorated in their place at the Sacrifice. Thus S. Austin. And thus Ro∣man Catholicks. We pray for the Faithful deceased; S. Austin prays for the same; for those who are departed in the Communion of the Body and Blood of Christ: We pray with intent, that God may ease their Suffe∣rings, so did S. Austin, That God might deal more meekly with them than their Sins have deserv'd. We look upon this as part of our Christian Duty; so did S. Austin; For this which has been deliver'd by our fore-Fathers, the Ʋniversal Church observes. Nor is this Learned Father contented here. He reckons the opposite Errour, He∣retical. The Aerian Hereticks,De Haeres. num 53. de Aerio. Aëriani ab Aerio quodam sunt nomi∣nati, qui cum esset Presbyter doluisse fertur quod Episcopus non potuit or∣dinari, & in Arianorum haeresim lap∣sus, propria quoque dogmata addi∣disse nonnulla, dicens, orare vel offer∣re pro Mortuis oblationem non opor∣tere — contra ista sentit Ecclesia Ca∣tholica. sayes he, take their Name from Aerius, who being a Priest, was griev'd that he could not get a Bishoprick, and being fallen into the Arian Heresy; he added some of his own peculiar Doctrines, saying, We ought not to pray, nor offer sacrifice for the Dead.— The Catholick Church teaches the contrary. This Aerius is the first Man we read of, who deny'd Prayers for the Dead. In what sense he deny'd them, S. Austin declares, viz. in the sense opposite, to what the Ʋni∣versal Church observ'd. Now the Universal Church
pray'd, as this Holy Father observes, with intent to ease the Deceased in their Sufferings, That GOD might deal more meekly with them, than their Sins deserv'd. S. Hierome Vindicates himself from Origen's Error, in which some would involve him,In Proverb. cap. 2. Mor∣tuo homine in∣iquo nulla erit ultra Spes. Heu misere hanc senten∣tiam pertran∣sijt Origenes qui post uni∣versale extre∣mum{que} judi∣cium vitam credit omni∣bus impiis & peccatoribus dandum. No∣tandum au∣tem, quod et∣si impiis post Mortem spes veniae non est sunt tamen qui de levioribus peccatis, cum quibus obligati defuncti sunt, post Mortem absolvi possunt; vel poenis videlicet castigati, vel suorum precibus, & eleemosynis, Missarumque celebrationibus; sed haec quibuscunque fiunt, & ante judicium, & de le∣vioribus fiunt erratis. writing thus upon this passage of the Proverbs; The Wicked Man dead, all Hope is ended; ah Misery! Origen over-look'd this sentence, who believ'd, that Life would be given, after the last and universal Judgment, to all the Wicked and Sinners. What follows is the Belief of the Church, which S. Hierome stamps with a Notandum. But take Notice, sayes he, although there be no Hope of Pardon after Death for the Wicked; yet there are some, who may be absolv'd after Death, from lesser Faults, with which they dyed ingag'd, viz. expiated either by Pains, or Prayers of their Friends, or Alms-deeds, or saying of Masses; but these things, for whomsoever they are perform'd, are done before (the Last) Judgment, and that too, for lesser Offences. If you ask what anciently were the Devotions for the Dead; you have here Prayers, and Alms-deeds, and saying of Masses prescrib'd; a word, which is so disagreeable to the fondlings of New Religions. If you would know why the Dead are detain'd in a middle State, S. Jerome tells you, because, when they
dyed, they were involved in lesser Faults. If you urge on, and say, they do not suffer there; this Fa∣ther replyes, their Faults are expiated by suffering Pains. Had the Discourser seen this evident Testimony, sure he would not have triumph'd, that in S. Jerome there was no mention of those,Pag. 23. & 24. who depart this Life in a state of Charity, to be punish'd in Purgatory, or a middle state of Souls; sure he would not have vaunted, that if he did not with Rufinus, accuse him of being involv'd in the Error of Origen; yet Bellar∣min himself cannot deny him to have been charg'd with an Opinion not very much differing from it, viz. that All Catholick Christians, shall in the end be saved, af∣ter they have been tryed and purifyed in the Fire of the last Judgment. Rather than he will have a Fa∣ther without Error, he will be twice injurious to him. When I find any passage of a Father dubious, or hard to be understood, I straightway compare it with clearer and easier, about the same matter, and so gather its meaning. Thus if I should read in S. Jerome, that all Catholicks shall in the end be sa∣ved after they are purifyed, or, that Christians, if they be overtaken in their sins, shall be saved after Punishment: I straightway suppose, if these sins be mortal, they have repented of them; and that all Catholicks, whom God has order'd to be tryed and purifyed, shall after be saved. Now, these cannot be all Catholick Christians, generally speaking, but only those who depart this Life in Charity, which is compatible with lesser, or venial Faults. And these are to be purg'd, not at the day of Judgment, but before this dreadful day. This is not my Opi∣nion, 'tis S. Jerom's own interpretation; in the end
of the foregoing Testimony; but, by whomsoever Pains are undergone, or Prayers offer'd, they are done before Judgment; and that too for lesser Offences. S. Epiphanius Charges Aerius with the same Error, which we have read S. Austin imputed to him; that he opposed, men∣tioning the Names of the Dead; asking to what purpose they did it? He that is alive, prayeth, or offereth the Sacrifice; What shall this advantage the Dead? But if the Dead are indeed profited thereby, then let no man from henceforth trouble himself to live well, only let him oblige his Friends, or give Money to per∣sons to pray for him, that none of the inexpiable sins he hath commited may be required of him. This is the Case of Aerius in the Discourser.Disc. p. 53. Can any Re∣former Argue better against the Church of Rome, than this Heretick does against S. Epiphanius. Aerius asks to what purpose they pray for the Dead, S. Epi∣phanius answers to benefit them. Aerius presses forwards, if Prayers profit the Dead, let no man endeavour to live well, only let him give Money to be Pray'd for, That none of those inexpi∣able Sins he hath Committed, may be required of him. S. Epiphanius replyes, that these Prayers do not extinguish all sort of Faults. They only purify the stains of smaller Offences; which this Father calls Slips, of the Perfect. But for the most part, says he, they therefore profit us, because when we enjoy'd this
World, we wilfully,S. Epiph. haec 75. pag. 911. , &c. yet with relu∣ctancy fail'd, an evident sign of a more perfect Condition. We do therefore make Commemoration of the Just, and of sinners (of whose Salvation we have some hope.) For sinners we implore Gods Mer∣cy. For the Just, we honour our Saviour Christ. Here are Pray∣ers manifestly offer'd for Expiation of Sin, not for notorious Crimes; for these, no expiation can be made in the World to come. They were offer'd for smaller Faults, with which the Sinner laden, depar∣ted, and for which he suffers in a middle State, and therefore Gods Mercy was implor'd for him. Lastly, S. Epiphanius assures us, the Answer he gave, was that of the Church, unalterable; and therefore not to be call'd in question by a private Reformer. And I say, pursues this Father,Ibidem Num. ult. . the Church necessarily performs this (Christian Duty) who receiv'd it, deliver'd to Her from Her Ancestors. But can any one break the Order of his Mother, or Law of his Fa∣ther? In Salomon 'tis written, Hear O Son, the Words of thy Father, and do not despise the Law of thy Mo∣ther; declaring, That the Father, who is God, His only begotten Son, and the Holy Ghost, have taught us by the written and unwritten Word; and that our Mo∣ther
the Church, has some Laws in her own Hand, which neither can be dissolv'd nor broken. From these Laws establish'd in the Church, which are laudable ones, and full of administration, this Impostor is convinc'd. Language, which I heartily wish the Pretended Re∣formers would learn to speak! S. Chrysostom Is very copious in his exhorting Christians to pray for the Dead. I'lle content my self with one single passage,Hom. 3. in Ep. Phillip. Edit. Etonae P. 20. . but so plain a one, that none but a Roman Catholick could have spoken it. Not in vain, sayes he, is it Enacted by the Apostles, that in the dreadful Mysteries Commemoration be made of the Dead. They (the Apostles) knew very well, how much profit, from hence, and benefit accrews to their Souls. For when all people stand (at their Devotions before the Altar) with lifted up Hands, and the Quire of Priests, and the dreadful Sacrifice, exciting Veneration, how shall we fail to appease GOD, in praying for them? And this truly is to be understood of those who departed in the Faith. S. Chrysostom says the Dead are help'd by the Pray∣ers of the Living, much profit from hence accrews to them: And the Reformers deny it. St. Chrysostom says the Pain hereby, which the Dead suffer, is allevi∣ated,
how shall we fail to appease God in praying for them? And is not his Anger attended with Punishment? And the Reformers hold it a fond Invention. S. Chry∣sostom says, this pious Custom receiv'd its authority from Apostolical Tradition, not in vain Enacted by the Apostles: and the Reformers contradict it. S. Chrysostom admonishes us, that these Prayers only belong to them who die with hopes of Salvation, They are said for those who departed in the Faith:Disc. pag. 65. And the Refor∣mers explicate him corruptedly of the Damned. O wonderful Piety of Reformers! Rather than they should not be cruel to their Dead, they labour to pervert the Writings of the Fathers: Yet I cease to be surpriz'd, why they exclude the Dead from their Prayers, when I consider how they banish Christ from their Altar, and abolish the dreadful Sacrifice. Eusebius Caesariensis Speaks of the earnest desire, which Constantine the Great had, to be pray'd for after Death, who took care, that his Corps should be intomb'd near the shrines of the Blessed Apostles, whether all pious Peo∣ple resorted to perform the Devotions for the Dead, to GOD and his Saints. He chose, says Eusebius,Lib 4. de vita Const. c. 60. .— this place of Reposal with an incredible Cheerful∣ness of Faith, foreseeing that he should share after Death in their Prayers, which were said in honour of the Apo∣stles,
—believing that their Remembrance would exceed∣ingly profit his Soul; nor was he frustrated of his ex∣pectation. An innumerable Multi∣tude of People with the Priests of God,Ibidem Cap. 71. . not without Lamentation, and with many tears, offer'd Prayers to God for the Soul of the Empe∣ror. These Prayers were offer'd with intent to relieve the Emperor's Soul; Constan∣tine believ'd, that the Intercession of the Apostles to God for him, would profit his departed Soul exceedingly. And this must be to free him from the confinement of a middle state. It could not be that of the Damned in Hell, Eusebius had never such an impious thought of Constantine. It could not be that of Heaven; the blessed Apostles there, were to interceed for him. It must then be that of Purgatory, wherein, if detain'd, the Emperor believ'd that the prayers of the Faithful would relieve him. There is no reason in the world to understand this Third State after death, of the Discoursers place of Sequester which was fill'd with quietness, nor of the Millenary Kingdom, which abounded with delights. Eusebius was never accus'd of these errors, nor ought he to be taxed with these Opinions. And what re∣moves all doubt, is that he speaks of the Third State above mentioned, not as an Opinion, but delivers it as the custom of the universal Church. This is veri∣fied by the devotions of the people of the whole Em∣pire, who pray'd to God for the Soul of the departed Emperor. Nor could it be less than the Sentiment of the first Ʋniversal Council, because it was that of Con∣stantine, and Eusebius, who both sate in this Synod among the Nicean Fathers, of whom Constantine re∣ceiv'd most of his instructions.
Arnobius Tells us, how Christians labouring under Persecu∣tion, were not permitted the reasonable Exercise of their Religion; which made them thus to complain; Why should our Chappels be so outragiously thrown down,Lib. 4. Adu. Gent. Pag. ult. Cur im∣maniter Conventicula dirui (merue∣runt) in quibus summus oratur De∣us, pax cunctis & venia postulatur, Magistratibus, Exercitibus, Regibus, Familiaribus, Inimicis, adhuc vitam degentibus, & resolutis Corporum vinctione. in which Prayers were offer'd to our sove∣raign God, peace and pardon was implor'd for all, for Magistrates, Armies, Kings, Friends and Foes, whether alive or dead? This is exactly what the Council of Trent has defin'd;Sess. 22. Can. 3. Prayers offer'd for the living and the dead, for their sins, pains and satisfactions. Did not Christians anciently pray for one another, that they might be absolv'd from their sins and satisfa∣ctions? And why must not the Dead share in these Prayers? Arnobius affirms, they pray'd for all, whe∣ther alive or dead? Why do you divide them? And these dead were in pain or inquietude, because they pray'd for peace. They were in sin, because par∣don was implor'd for them. If this be not to pray for Souls in Purgatory, the Discourser has forg'd a new one of his one.
Tertullian Exhorts Widows to be mindful in their Devotions of the souls of their deceased Husbands, after this manner,De Monoga∣mia. Pro a∣nima ejus o∣ret, & refri∣gerium inte∣rim adpostu∣let ei, & in primà Resurectione consortium, & offerat annuis diebus dormitionis ejus. Let her pray for his soul, and beg now for him, ease or refreshment, and his company in the first Resurrection, and let her see sacrifice be offer'd yearly for him, on the day of his departure. Here are Prayers offer'd with intent to free the dead from pain and anguish. We pray, for what is wanting. Now Tertullian exhorts Widows to pray for ease for their Husbands; therefore they wanted ease, and so were in pain. He exhorted them to pray for refreshment; they wanted then refreshment, and so were in anguish. This ease or refreshment was not beg'd for them in the Millenary Kingdom,Disc. pag. 47. Tertull. Refri∣gerium inte∣rim adpostu∣let ei. Disc. pag. 4. of which the Discourser would understand the first Resurrection. For Tertullian exhorts them to beg this refreshment now for the Dead, before the first Resurrection. Nor can this be expoun∣ded of the Discoursers place of sequester. Here, nei∣ther Ease nor Refreshment was wanting: And of this, Tertullian speaks no where. And this Exhortation of praying for the Dead, was grounded on the then Universal Practise of the Church. Had it been otherwise, the Writers of those times, would have reply'd, 'twas a Novelty which Tertullian brought into the Church, and so have silenc'd
him. Thus they opposed with all their might, the Error of Montanus, towards which, I know Tertullian was at this time much inclin'd. But what has the rigid Er∣ror of the Montanists, which allow'd of no Repen∣tance in this life for the relapsed into grievous and notorious sins, to do with this pious custom which ex∣tends devotion even after death, to Souls departed? And what is considerable, those Books which Tertul∣lian wrote, when he could not be censur'd of the suspition of being a Montanist, deliver the same do∣ctrine. Thus he says, in his Book,Oblationes pro defunctis, pro natalitijs annuà die fa-, cimus. de Corona Mili∣tis, and third Chapter, that we offer sacrifices for the dead, and keep the anniversary of their Birth. Obla∣tions and Anniversaries ought not to be confounded; Oblations are for the Faithful not yet fully purg'd, Anniversaries in honor of the Saints. 'Tis S. Gregory Nazianzen's Explication: Some, says he, we perform,S. Greg. Nazian. Orat. in laud. Caesarij. Alia quidem persolvimus, alia vero dabimus, anniversarios Honores, & Commemorationes offerentes. and some we give. We perform Anniversary Ho∣nors, we give Commemorations, (or Oblations, when Commemoration of the dead is made). With what intent these Ob∣blations were made, Tertullian teaches us elsewhere, for lesser Faults, for which the dead are imprison'd, he (GOD) will cast thee into the infernal Goal,Tertull. de Anima c. 35. Ille te in Carcerem mandet infernum, unde non dimitteris, nisi modico quo∣que delicto, mora Resurrectionis, ex∣penso. whence thou shalt not go forth, until the smallest Fault be expiated in the delay of Resurre∣ction. And finally, Tertullian af∣firms this middle state, or prison, where smaller Faults are to be expiated, before the detained go to Heaven, into the delay of Resurrection, to be part of what the Church believ'd, in these Words, If you ask a Command for this in Scripture,
there is none to be found.Lib. de Coron. Mil. c. 4. Traditio tibi pretendetur auctrix, con∣suetudo confirmatrix, fides observator. Tradition (from the Apo∣stles) has increas'd this into a Precept; Custom confirms it, Faith observes it. Dionysius Areopagita Makes mention of Three States of Men after death. De Hierar. Eccles. tom. 1. c. 7. Edit. Pa∣ris, 1644. Pag 352. & 357. .The First are the Wicked, who die miserably, and go straightway to Hell, and for whom the Priest ne∣ver prays at the Altar: For the Wicked deceased, he never prays. The Second State is of the Just, who go straight∣way to Heaven, and of these he recounts two de∣grees. Some liv'd a divine Life upon earth, others not so fervent in Charity, a holy Life: both after death enjoy the sight of God. The Prelate prays for neither. They want not his Prayers. For both of them he gives Thanks to God,Ib. pag. 352. .— who leads here a divine, says S. Denis, and most holy Life, as much as 'tis possi∣ble for man to imitate God, shall in the next World enjoy divine and happy Rest. And whose Life is infe∣riour
to this divine one, yet likewise holy, he will re∣ceive equal recompence for his Merits. The blessed Pre∣late giving Thanks for this divine Justice, goes on with the holy Sacrifice. Thus the Roman Catholick Church holds prayers offer'd with reference to the Saints, a Thanks-giving to GOD. Besides these Two States, we find mention of a Third. This cannot be Hell; the place admits of Mercy. It cannot be Heaven, the detained are not yet fully purg'd from sin, or lesser Faults. And it is for the remission of these, that the Prelate prays. The Prayer of the Holy Prelate implores the Divine Goodness to pardon the deceased of all his sins commit∣ted by humane frailty,Ib. Parag. 3. . and to transfer him into the light and region of the Living; and to seat him in the Bosom of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in a place, where there is no more any pain, sorrow, or sighing. S. Maximus in his exposition of this passage,S. Max. in Di∣onys. . calls these Faults of human frailty, little Sins; and these are those venial Offences, which accompanyed the dead to Purgatory, there to be expiated, before the detained change sorrow, grief, or weeping, into joy, and eternal felicity; and of which the Church of ROME begs pardon in her Prayers for Souls de∣parted. And lest succeeding Ages should be forgetful of the dead, or oppose this pious Devotion of the Faithful for them, S. Denis guided with a Prophetick Spirit, left in few words, Three strong Motives, which are of themselves proper to remind the Forgetful of this
duty, and able to convince any unbyas'd Under∣standing of it. First, he says, That this Doctrine is divinely re∣veal'd. Secondly, That it is grateful to Heaven. Thirdly, That these Prayers will prove effectual to relieve the Dead. Ib. Pag. 357, .The holy Bishop, concludes this ancient FATHER, asks, what is divinely promis'd, what is accep∣table to God, and what will certain∣ly be granted? And after this, can any one pretend to be exempted from praying with intent to help Souls departed in a middle state of pain, sorrow, and sighing; or of Purgatory, where lesser Faults are ex∣piated. This is the sense the Greeks gave of Dionysius Areo∣pagite, and they understood his Language.Mich. in Ep. ad Nilum Mona. . You have, says Michael Glyca, chiefly Dionysius the Great, banishing the Opinion (of no mid∣dle State); and openly teaching, what sins may, and what may not be pardon'd. For discoursing of those who died in Sin, he adds this, if they be small, they receive help from Good Works, which are done for them, if they be notorious Faults, GOD has concluded against them. And Gabriel Seve∣rus a Greek Schismatick, writing against the Latins, about the being of real Fire in Purgatory, which is no matter of Faith, declares the Greeks agree with the Latins: In as much as we (the Greeks) likewise affirm, That the Souls of those who piously departed,
are help'd in those places, in which they are kept,Gab. Tract. de Purgat. adu. Lat. . and set free by Alms-deeds, and Prayers, which are offer'd for them, as Dionysius Areopagite says. The Discourser apprehended very much the pressing of this ancient Father's Authority, and therefore would have us doubt of his Works, and calls him, the pre∣tended Dionysius. But the two Greeks above-menti∣ned call him the true Areopagite; so does S. Gregory the Great;S. Greg. hom. 34. Evang. Conc. 6. Gen. Act. 5. Relatio est aliud Testimo∣nium è Codicillo S. Dionysij Episco∣pi, Atheniensis & Martyris. Apud Niceph. l. 15. c, 14. S. Greg. Naz. orat. 42. in Pascha. so does the sixth OEcumenical Coun∣cil. Juvenalis Bishop of Jerusalem, who Liv'd at the Time of the fourth OEcumenical Synod, af∣firms the same. S. Gregory Nazi∣anzen makes use of this Authority. Dionysius Alex∣andrinus Commented upon him in the Third Age, as S. Maximus assures us. And the Monotholite He∣reticks citing his Authority, 'twas explicated by the Fathers of the Church, as that of Dionysius. And I think these grave and weighty Authorities will easily sink down the light Pretension of a Discourser.
CHAP. VIII. Of Scriptures recommending Prayers for the DEAD. HOly Scriptures have in many places recommen∣ded this pious Office to the Faithful. I'le content my self with three or four Instan∣ces. The First shall be, what we read in the Se∣cond Book, and Twelth Chapter of The Maccabees: And the day following, Judas came with his Com∣pany, to take away the bodies of them that were over∣thrown, and with their Kins-men to lay them in the Se∣pulchres of their Fathers. And they found under the Coats of the slain, some of the Donaries of the Idols that were in Jamnia, from which the Law forbideth the Jews: therefore it was made plain to all, that for that cause they were slain. All therefore Blessed the just Judgment of our Lord; who had made manifest the hidden things. And turn'd to Prayers, they beg'd of him, that the Sin committed, might be perfectly blot∣ted out. Then Judas exhorted the People to keep them∣selves from the like Sin, made a Collection among them of a considerable summ of Money, and sent it to Jerusalem, to offer Sacrifice for the Sin, well,
and religiously thinking of the Resurrection.Edit. Sixti. . For unless he hop'd that they, that were fallen, should rise again, it would seem superfluous and vain to pray for the Dead. After considering, that there is an excellent Reward laid up for those, that die piously, which was a Holy, and Godly Thought; he therefore made an Expiation for the Dead, that they might be Absolv'd from their Sin. This is so plain and easy, that I cannot ima∣gin, how any one, except he wilfully will mistake, should understand it otherwise, than in the Roman Ca∣tholick Affirmation. The Sin, questionless, that they committed, (whom GOD permitted to be cut off by the Enemy) was mortal. The Law forbad to covet,Deut. 7. Josh. 7. or take any thing appertaining to Idols. They were commanded to destroy it; and therefore because this People had taken the Donaries of Idols, they were slain, says the Text. Judas and his Company, hop'd that their fellow-Souldiers repented, before they died, of their grie∣vous Sin. There was sufficient Ground for this: They fought in defence of their Country, and their Religion: For these, they bravely Ventur'd their Lives. As therefore the Justice of GOD punished their Crime, by permitting them to be kill'd; might not their surviving Associates hope the Divine Good∣ness would recompence the venturing of their Lives for GOD's Honour and Glory, by Repentance, before
Death surpriz'd them? His Mercy exceeds all other of the Divine Attributes. At least, this makes the case dubious: And in ambiguous things, a favou∣rable Interpretation is approv'd of: For who knows the sense of the Lord, or who was His Counsellor? If this be not satisfactory, what follows will convince you; for it is certain, That Judas order'd Prayers to be offer'd for the slain, because he hop'd they repented of their Sin: Considering, says the Text, That there is an excellent Reward, laid up for those that die godlily, he therefore made an expiation for the Dead, Is not a godly Death, a mark of Repentance? These Prayers, order'd by Judas, were offer'd as an Atonement for the Sin of the deceased: That this was his design, is apparent. No body can dis∣pute the being of a Sacrifice among the Jews, which was offer'd for Sin. The Law of Moses in Numbers and Deuteronomy, frequently makes mention of such a one: And all the Tribes forthwith after the Battle, agree∣ing in a general Collection of a summ of Money, to be sent upon this Account to Jerusalem, demon∣strate, that this Sin-Offering was extended to, and allow'd of for the Dead. Two Motives excited Ju∣das hereunto. First, the Resurrection to Life; For unless he hop'd that they that were fallen, should rise again, it would seem superfluous and vain to pray for the Dead. And Secondly, the Pardon of Sin; after considering, continues the Text, That there is an ex∣cellent Reward laid up for those that die godlily; he therefore made an Expiation for the Dead, that they might be absolv'd from their Sin. By Sin, for which Prayers were offered, is meant the remainder of mortal Sin, the Guilt which infers an Obligation to some temporal Penalty, this is evi∣dent:
Judas hop'd that the Slain died godlily, or re∣pented: but he could not be of this perswasion, un∣less he likewise believ'd, that the Fault of their no∣torious Crime, was pardon'd; For Repentance, car∣ries along with it Forgiveness. Whensoever you shall invoke my Name, saith the LORD, I will hear you. Now besides the Guilt of eternal Damnation which follows the Fault of grievous Offences, as the sha∣dow does the body, both standing, or perishing together, there can nothing remain, to which the Title of Sin may be given, but the Guilt which infers an Obligation to temporal Punishment. 'Tis then this Guilt which is here call'd Sin, for which Judas, (after the hope of Pardon and Repentance of the Fault, as the Text affirms; Considering, That there is an ex∣cellent Reward laid up for those that die godlily, who re∣pent of their Sins, and are pardon'd) therefore made an Expiation for the Dead, that they might be absolv'd from their Sin. This is further confirm'd, in these other Words of the Text; And turning to Prayers, they beg'd of God, That the Sin Committed, might be perfectly blotted out: The Sin then, was before blot∣ted out, the Fault pardon'd, but not perfectly blot∣ted out; the Guilt, which deserv'd some temporal Penalty, remain'd to be expiated: For had they deem'd it had been before perfectly blotted out, they would not have beg'd of God, a perfect Forgiveness: This had been already Granted. There was then, some Penalty that remain'd, of which they beg'd for∣giveness. But the Pain of Sin, is, ordinarily speaking, only compleatly satisfied with pain. Nor can any one hope to be perfectly pardon'd of Sin, according to the rate of God's ordinary Providence, without entire satisfaction; which if not paid now, must here∣after be compensated.
This is exactly what Mr. de Meaux Writes of the Roman Catholick Belief in this point, in his ex∣cellent Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church,Exposit. pag: 17. Sect. 8. which all Christendom approves of: Those who depart this Life, says this Venerable Prelate, in Grace and Cha∣rity, but nevertheless, indebted to the Divine Justice some Pains which it reserv'd, are to suffer them in the other Life. This is what Oblig'd all the Primitive Christians to offer up Prayers, Alms-deeds, and Sacri∣fices, for the Faithful, who departed in Peace, and Communion of the Church, with a certain Faith, that they might be assisted by these means. This is what the Council of Trent proposes to us to believe, touching Souls departed in Purgatory,Sess. 25. de Purg. without determining in what their Pains consist, or many other such like things, concerning which, this Holy Council de∣mands great Moderation, blaming those who divulge what is uncertain, or suspected. And to finish; This passage of Holy Scripture, out of the Second Book of Maccabees, is so strong and convictive in behalf of praying for the Dead, that our Adversaries can have nothing at all to say for themselves, but with a strange Boldness, to deny these Books to be part of the Bible: Yet the old Editions of Scripture in English, which were prin∣ted near the Beginning of the Pretended Reformation, give them, without distinction, their proper place in the Bible. What private Revelation the Reformers have had since, to displace them, and cast them out, they never told us. The Discourser indeed, gives us this Reason for it, that they were never receiv'd by the Jews as Canonical, That we may well understand the Meaning of this Objection, it will not be amiss to speak here, of Two
Canons of a Bible, which the Jews used. The First Canon of the Bible was composed by Esdras: This is generally allow'd of. The Second Collection was more ample, and encreas'd by the superaddition of many Books to the former. This was more rarely spoken of in ancient Times, because less common. 'Twas compil'd sometime before our Saviours com∣ming, with the addition of those Books which were Written after the Collection of the First Canon.Lib. 2. Cont. Appion. Jo∣seph the Jew, assures us of such an addition made, where he cites the Text of Ecclesiastick, as part of their Scripture, which Book is not found in the Col∣lection of the First Canon of the Jews, and was writ∣ten near Two Hundred Years after it. This suppos'd, I am of the Discoursers mind, that the Books of Maccabees, were not by the Jews acknowledg'd as part of the First Collection of Canonical Scripture: they were written near Three Hundred Years after the First Collection made by Esdras. But can the Discour∣ser prove to me, that these Books were not by the Jews receiv'd as part of the Second Collection of Ca∣nonical Scripture? If the Discourser (notwithstanding this reasonable Distinction) remains unsatisfied, and still scruples their Authenticness, and continues to say, that the Jews did not receive them as Canonical; Ile humour him in this, and grant him what he asks. But are we Jews? If the Jews did not, the Church of Christ, receiv'd them as Canonical Scripture. S. Jerome 'tis true, says,In Praef. Sa∣lom. that the Church did not look upon them, as part of that Canonical Scripture, which was contain'd in the First Canon of the Jews, and which was universally receiv'd from the begin∣ning by all Christians: So did S. Gregory the Great.Lib. Moral. 19. c. 13.
Neither of them deny the Maccabees to be part of that entire Canon of Scripture, which the Church of Christ appprov'd of, and read in their dayes. In this entire Canon of Scripture,Canon 47. Sunt autem Canonicae Scripturae Maccabaeorum Libri duo. the Third Council of Carthage, which all well-meaning Christians alwayes look'd upon as Orthodox, number'd the Maccabees: So did Innocent the First, Head of the Universal Church of Christ upon Earth, in his Letter to Exuperius, Bishop of Tholouse. S. Austin in express Words says, That the Jews do not receive the Books of Maccabees as Canonical,S. Aug. l. 18. de Civit. Dei. c. 37. Maccabaeo∣rum Libros, non Judaei, sed Ecclesia pro Canoni∣cis habet. but the Church does. And in the Second Age, the Valentinian Hereticks asserted, That the Bible no where patroniz'd it to be lawful to venture their Lives for GOD ALMIGHTY's sake: And Origen instanc'd that Famous Example of the Mo∣ther and seven Sons, who died upon this Account, out of the Second of Maccabees, as part of Holy Scri∣pture, and confuted them. Reasons, without excep∣tion, that if the Jews did not, Christians number'd these Books with the rest of Canonical Scripture. In S. Matthew We read an other Confirmation of this Truth, where Christ himself says,Chap. 12. v. 32. That the Sin against the Holy Ghost shall not be forgiven, neither in this World, nor in that to come. I cannot chuse here but take Notice, how wittily the Discourser Reasons upon the World to come. He will have the World to come, to be in this present World, and not to be, till this
World end. Thus he delivers himself; They (Ca∣tholicks) suppose, That the World to come,Page 19. must sig∣nify the time between every mans Death, and the Gene∣ral Resurrection. The World to come, cannot be, till this World end (i. e.) till the time be, That Purga∣tory shall be no more, which now is in this Present World. I expected the acuteness of so sharp a Wit, could have distinguished between Life, and Death; this World, and the next; especially, when Scripture had done it before him. We therefore, following the distinction which Scripture gives, understand by this World, this present Life, which all Mankind, more or less enjoys; and by that to come, the State of Man after Death, a middle State, where some Sin is to be expiated. 'Tis certain that by this passage, neither in this World, nor in that to come, is meant, that the Sin against the Holy Ghost, in which Man dies, is ne∣ver to be forgiven: For if it were ever to be for∣given, certainly it would be pardon'd in this World or that to come; for no other place can be assign'd, where Pardon is to be expected:S. M. c. 3. v. 29. And thus S. Mark interprets the Phrase, He hath not Forgiveness for ever, and shall be guilty of an eternal Sin. From hence Roman Catholicks infer, That there are some Sins not eternal, to be pardon'd in the next World; and if to be pardon'd, without dispute in a middle state of Souls, for whose delivery, Pray∣ers are offer'd by the Faithful living. Our Reason is, because Scripture assigns this World, and that to come, as the only two places, where Sin may be pardon'd, saying, That the Sin against the Holy Ghost shall in neither of them, or never be pardon'd. Let those, sayes S. Bernard, who deny Purgatory, ask
of him,S. Bern. super Cantica Serm. 66. Quaerant ergò ab eo, qui dixit quoddam pec∣catum esse, quod neque in hoc saeculo, neque in futuro remitteretur; Cur hoc dixerit, si nulla manet in fu∣turo remissio purgatione peccatis? who said there is some Sin, which shall neither be forgiven in this World, nor in that to come; Why did he say this, if there remain in the World to come, no forgiveness, or purgation of Sin? S. Isidore of Spain is more ex∣press;Lib. 1. de off. Eccles. c. 18. Nam & cum Dominus dicit, qui peccaverit in Spiritum sanctum non remitteretur ei, ne{que} in hoc saeculo, ne{que} in futuro, demonstrat quibusdam illic dimitten∣da peccata, & quodam purgatorio ig∣ne purganda. For when our Lord says, whosoever shall sin against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him, neither in this World, nor in that to come; he demonstrates, that Sin is forgiven to some there, and expia∣ted in a certain Purgatory Fire. And to the same Words of CHRIST, S. Austin gives the like Interpreta∣tion;S. Aug. Civit. Dei, l. 2. c. 24. De De∣functis quibus∣dam vel ipsius Ecclesiae, vel quorundam piorum exau∣ditur Ora∣tio; — ne{que} enim de qui∣busdam veraciter diceretur, quod non eis remittatur, neque in hoc saeculo, neque in futuro, nisi essent, quibus, etsi non in isto, tamen remittetur in futuro. For some Souls departed, the Prayers of the Church, or pious Persons are heard; —for otherwise it would not be truly said of some, that it should not be forgiven them, neither in this World, nor in that to come, unless there were some, to whom, if not in this, it shall be forgiven in the World to come. And I am of opinion, if the Discourser will but seriously consider our Saviours own Words, that he will acknowledge some Sins to be pardon'd, in this Life, and some after Death. I shall instance only one Example, somewhat of the like nature to
convince him. If some of the Discoursers Compa∣nions should tell him, that he had a Law-suit in hand, and that he was certain never to win it, nei∣ther at the Kings-Bench, nor Court of Chancery; I am perswaded the Discourser, or any man of sense, would infer from this Person's talk, that Law-suits were pleaded both at the Kings-Bench, and in Chancery: And why will he not infer from these Words of our Saviours, Some sins shall never be pardon'd, neither in this World, nor in that to come; that there are some sins, both pardonable in this World, and in that to come? And if there be some sins there to be forgiven, I suppose he will allow of some Pain there to be suf∣fered; for all sin deserves some Punishment: And 'tis upon this account the Roman Church prays for the Dead, that their pain may be eased, and sins for∣given. S. Paul1 Cor. c. 15. v. 29. Makes use of two Arguments to verify the Resur∣rection of Man, Devotion perform'd for the Dead, and the exposing of his own Life, which was in danger, preaching this ineffable Mystery, which is the Foundation of Christian Religion: Otherwise, says the Text, what shall they do that are baptised for the Dead, if the Dead rise not at all? Why also are they baptised for them? Why also are we in danger every hour? I expect here the Discourser will exclaim a∣gainst the hardness of this passage. I am somewhat of his opinion; 'tis so difficult, that if I were a Re∣former, I could make no sence of it.
Mark 10. Orat. in S. Lumina.This Word Baptism, as hard as 'tis, S. Mark inter∣prets to be pain or austerity: And S. Gregory Nazi∣anzen calls Purgatory Fire, the last Baptism: But let the word Baptism signify whatever affliction the Dis∣courser shall please to assign, Penance, or Prayer, it will still Literally be true, that it is performed to be∣nefit the Dead: For if the Dead are not hereby hel∣ped, why does S. Paul urge again so earnestly? Why also, to what end, are they baptised, or afflicted for them? If this Devotion profit not the Dead, might not we answer the Apostle, and say, to no end at all: And so void and silence his pressing Forwardness. Far be it from me, Divine APOSTLE, to con∣tend against thy Testimony! S. John, The beloved Disciple of Christ, speaks of Two states of Sinners after Death: He speaks of those, who we know depart in mortal, or deadly sin: For these he forbids us to pray. They are without Re∣demption, abandon'd by God. S. John speaks of an other sort of Sinners, whom we know by outward signs of Repentance, die not in deadly sin: For these he does encourage us, if he do not command us, with confidence to pray. And this is, says the Scripture,Ep. Catho. 1. Chap. 5. v. 14. the Confidence which we have towards him, that whatsoever we shall ask according to His Will, He heareth us. He that knoweth his Brother to sin, a Sin not to Death; let him him ask, and Life shall
be given him, sinning not to Death. Here is Encou∣ragement for us to pray for those, who die with Re∣pentance: And Two strong Motives excite us here∣unto. First, We are encourag'd thus to pray; because we ask, What is according to GOD's Will: And Secondly, God will hear us, pardon the Delinquent, and give him Life everlasting. The Text continues, There is a sin to Death, for that I say not, that any man ask. Here is an Inhibition to pray for any, of whom we have no signs, no Hopes of Repentance at their Death. I do not expect here that the Discourser will deny S. John speaks of Praying for the Dead. The Text is too plain against him. And what is convincing, neither the Church, nor any Man is disswaded here from praying for any Sinner yet living, nor for the Remission of any Sin in this Life. I know the Montanist Hereticks held some sins not pardonable. But the Church of Christ before the Death of any Sinner, prays, and is often heard, for the sins of Hereticks, Jews, Turks, Apostates, or what other In∣fidels, or ill-Livers soever in the World: so long as Life is, all have hopes of Pardon. But S. John speaks here of a Sinner, now placed in such a state, that Prayer for him will not be available; therefore he speaks of praying for the sins of the Departed. Of these, some die without repentance. These we are not to pray for: Others duly repent; for these, we are encouraged to pray, and God will hear us, and give them Life everlasting.
CHAP. IX. Of Purgatory. IF the Word Purgatory be not found in Scripture, no pious Reader ought upon this sole account to scruple at it: the sense of it is delivered in Ho∣ly Writ. Do we read any where in the Bible of the Word Trinity? We all of us believe in the blessed Trinity, one GOD, and three divine Persons, Fa∣ther, Son, and Holy Ghost. The Word, Catholick, is not written in Scriptures: We all of us profess in the Creed, I believe one Catholick Church. By the Word Purgatory, we not improperly sig∣nify a middle state after Death, where Souls depar∣ted, endure some Pain for smaller Offences, not for∣given in this World. That there is such a state of Souls, I have already from Fathers, and Scripture demonstrated; for if both these teach us to pray, as I have shewn, that God will be pleased to deal with some Souls departed more mildly than their sins deserve, to forgive them, and to seat them in the Kingdom of Heaven, who can justly refuse the being of Purgatory? This is all we mean by it: This is our Belief; and of this I will add one more Proof, very plain and easy. There are two sorts of sin, Mortal, and Venial: I call a Mortal sin, that Crime, which breaks Cha∣rity
between God and the Delinquent, and for which hee's to suffer eternal pain. I mean by Venial sin, that Fault, which lessens Friendship between God, and the Just; for which, he must undergoe some Penalty, because he has transgres'd, yet not that of eternal Damnation. I know that God might have punished all sins, and this too with Justice, eternally. But the Divine Goodness considering the weakness of human frailty, which failes almost at every step it makes, will'd all Offences should not be Mortal, or lyable to everlasting Torments. This he has re∣vealed to us in S. Matthew, where we read,Math. 5.23. Whoso∣ever is angry with his Brother, shall be in danger of Judgment; whosoever shall say to his Brother, Raca, shall be in danger of Council; whosoever shall say to his Brother, thou Fool, shall be guilty of Hell Fire. Is not here an uncontroul'd difference of two sorts of sin? Some are guilty of Hell Fire; these, I call Mor∣tal; Others are not guilty of Hell Fire, but in dan∣ger of Judgment; these, I name Venial faults. And they are these quotidian slips, which the Prophet at∣tributes to the Just, who fails seven times a day. If he be just, hee's GOD's Favourite, and not guilty of Hell Fire. If he fail, as all of us do, witness this Sentence of S. James, We all offend in many things,S. Jam. 3.2. before he may recover these Lapses, Death may sur∣prize him, when he neither thinks of them, nor of the World to come, where then must these smaller Offences be Expiated? Must the Delinquent go straight to Heaven? This is not a place of Punish∣ment. Must he be thrown head-long down into Hell? This is not a state of expiation. The Justice of God will not punish this Delinquent eternally with the Damned, because his divine Mercy has declar'd
in this passage of S. Matthew, that these lesser ble∣mishes, with which he died engag'd, carry not along with them the Guilt of Hell Fire. The Mercy of God will not as yet deck him with the beauties of Heaven,Apocalyp. because His Justice has pronounc'd, That no unclean thing enters into Heaven; and elsewhere he sayes,Psal. 14. In∣greditur sine Macula. Who enters, enters without stain. There is then some middle place of Souls, assign'd by the Di∣vine Providence, to punish these lighter Offences, that Justice and Mercy may meet together. This, Roman Catholicks believe and call Purgatory.
Conclusion. I Hope the Pretended Reformers will hereaf∣ter be so just, as to grant, That the Ho∣ly Fathers anciently pray'd with the same intent, which the Church of Rome does at pre∣sent, to free Souls departed, of their Lesser Offences and Pains, in a middle State or Purga∣tory. Petrus Venerabilis prays, That their Sins not yet forgiven, may be pardon'd: S. Bernard, That they may be Freed from Purgatory; S. Isidore, That their remaining Sins may be ex∣piated in a certain Purgatory Fire; S. Austin, That GOD may deal more meekly with them, than their sins deserv'd; S. Jerome, For lesser Faults; Theodoretus, For what thorough Imprudence they had committed; S. Chrysostom, To profit the Deceased, and to appease GOD; S. Epiphanius, To extinguish not inexpiable, but lesser sins; Ar∣nobius, For their sins and satisfactions; Tertul∣lian,
For their ease and refreshment; and Dio∣nysius Areopagite, For all their sins through hu∣man frailty committed. These Authorities are so plain and convi∣ctive, That to speak sincerely, I cannot see how any Word of Reply may be given them. Had these Holy Writers delivered their private Opinions, one might have given them a put-off, and said, they were Men, and so might erre. But what they speak of, either intimates the Practice of the whole Church in their Times, or reckons it APOSTO∣LICAL TRADITION, or hold it part of their Faith; in which they cannot be said, without Injury to mistake. Would it not be injurious to say, That the Learnedest Prelates of the Reformers, might now mistake all of them in their Books, delivering to Posteri∣ty, that in England, Service according to the Religion by Law Established, is generally said in the Language of the People? The Peasant knows as much, and the very Ideot is not ignorant of it. Sure the same may be granted to the FATHERS of the Church. Then they cannot all be said with Injury to mistake in delivering what was the Belief of the Church in their dayes. Petrus
Venerabilis assures us, that the Denyal of this pious Devotion for the Dead, is a Breach of Faith; S. Bernard believes this Article delivered in Scripture; S. Isidore, What is practised thorow the whole World, and taught by the Apostles; S. Austin, What the Universal Church observes; S. Chrysostom, What is Instituted by the Apo∣stles; S. Epiphanius, Which is ordained by the Church; Eusebius, What Christians did in the flourishing Encrease of the Church; Arnobius, How they pray'd for the Dead in time of Persecution; Tertullian, What Faith observes; and Dionysius Disciple of S. Paul, alledging the same Pra∣ctice, who can deny it to be Apostolical Tradition? Or if it were nothing, when the Pretended Reformers left the Roman Church, to have ut∣terly lost the whole Assembly of Fathers, and renounc'd Apostolical Tradition; yet it is considerable to overlook, rather than be∣lieve, this pious Devotion for the DEAD, Recommended to us in the Maccabees, in S. Matthew, in S. Paul, and in S. John, the Be∣loved of CHRIST. Good GOD! What a state is that Chri∣stian in, who rejects the Belief of the Univer∣sal Church of Christ, contradicts Apostolical
Order, and struggles with Holy Scriptures. The Apostles instituted what was right; they were inspir'd by the Holy Ghost. The whole Church erres not in her Belief; the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against Her. Holy Scri∣ptures agree in the Recommendation of the same Doctrine; they are the infallible Word of GOD. Here I leave the Pretended Refor∣mers to a serious Consideration of a speedy Conformity with the Church of Rome in this pious Practice and Belief of Praying for the DEAD. THE END. Ecclesiae Judicio subjiciantur.
