B1910 12015078 52509
THE Compleat History OF THE WARRS OF FLANDERS: WRITTEN in ITALIAN BY THE LEARNED and FAMOUS Cardinall BENTIVOGLIO: ENGLISHED By the Right Honorable HENRY Earl of MONMOUTH: THE VVHOLE VVORK. ILLUSTRATED With many Figures of the chief Personages mentioned in this HISTORY. LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Moseley at the Sign of the Prince's-Arms in St Pauls Churchyard, 1654.
The Translators Epistle To his Countrey-men THE READERS. WHILST I was pursuing my Custome of avoyding Idle∣ness, the Mother of all Mis∣chief, (and yet I justly may, and thankfully doe say, Deus mihi haec Otia fecit) Provi∣dence threw me upon This Piece: for I began it Before there was any appearance (at least as I conceiv'd) of our falling out with the United Provinces; which seeing we have Since done, those that are concerned in the Carrying on of That business, if they will peruse This Book, may thereby be acquainted with the Scitua∣tion, Strength, Government, Customes, Incomes, Expen∣ces, Havens, and Strong holds of That countrey; as also with their Manner of Warfaring and Treating: Out of which they may Pick something which peradventure may prove Serviceable to them, by applying Practice to Theory. But this, if it shall So fall out, is upon the By; I challenge no Thanks for it; for it was no part of My intention, who was never an Abettor of Warr, but born and brought up in Peacefull times, and wish I may live to see a well setled and Lasting Peace in England, between good and honest Men, proceeding from the motions of well-weighed Reason illumi∣nated from Above, which makes us Well-wishers to one ano∣thers Good; and which being nourished by so perfect a Radi∣call humor may keep still Fresh and Alive, as a Tree planted by the Rivers side, that bringeth forth Fruit in Due season; and it is my Prayer that we English-men may have the desire of this Peace lodg'd in our Hearts, so to help towards the re∣turning
of our Countrey to her former Beauty: Wherein methinks all Goodmen should joyn with Me, and say, AMEN. For such a Peace is the effect of Concord; which when she begins to withdraw her self, in a Kingdom or Commonwealth, Vertue and Justice, (though they may keep Here and There amongst their Particular friends, where they are sure to be well received) yet they appear but little in Publique: whereas Warr proceeds from Discord, which occasioneth Irreverence towards God, Disobedience of Magistrates, Corruption of Manners, Alteration of Laws, Contempt of Justice, Neglect of Learning, no Respect of Con∣sanguinity, Forgetfulness of Friendship, Change of civil Government, and all the Mischiefs that can be done by Fire or Sword: Many of which, we in the Dominions of Eng∣land, Scotland, and Ireland have of Late too Sadly experi∣enced. And yet Domestick greatness wonn by Vertue, and according to the Laws, is Assured and Happy; whereas that which is hoped for by Warr, is Uncertain and Unfor∣tunate. But I will forbear launching farther out into so Dangerous and so High-going a Sea; and return to tell Thee my Rea∣der) that a Desire to Serve my Countrey and Country-men according to my Ability, and that I may not be said to have Totally buryed my Talent, was the Cause why first I Penn'd then Publish'd this my Translation of BENTIVOGLIO. For which All that I crave of my Readers, is, that They will turn Translators with Me, be it but of my Authors Name; and therein say unto Me, I WISH THEE WELL Monmouth.
THE STATIONER TO THE READER. IF I say this Book hath been often call'd for, you may believe me. For, none who are not un-read or un-tra vail'd, but know what value is paid to BENTIVOGLIO; not only in Italy, whose Language it weare's, and in Flanders which gave it Subject; but in France and Spain, who by worthy Translations have made it their own. 'Tis therefore no wonder it hath been so oft Re-printed in French, but that it came no sooner into English. And the rather be∣cause (to speak the Author's words) Whosoever shall consi∣der the successes of this Warr, shall find so many and so illu∣strious Scenes of various accidents, as he shall be compell'd to confess, that never any afforded more matter of humane in∣struction. For marvelous it is, that a few Fisher-men should fight so long with a Monarch, so vast and puissant, that the Sun both rises and sets in his Dominions, when the opening of a Sluice, or cutting of a Damm would
drown them and their Countrey. How this was done, the Rise and Growth; the Designe, as well as the Action are skilfully and clearly told you in this Book. If you ask why 'tis call'd The WARRS OF FLAN∣DERS, which strictly taken is but One Province of Seventeen, (and this Book speaks equally the Warrs of all the rest) our Author himself Answer's it, Page 2. And if you read but the very first Leaf, 'twill furnish you sufficiently (without farther Preface) to the whole WORK. It likely may displease you to see him stile, the Enemy Heretick and Schismatick; but consider 'tis the usuall Language of that Church whereof he was a Member; and Writers who are of the contrary Perswa∣sion, do bestow as sharp Epithets on Him and his Friends But, which more becomes my Duty to ac∣quaint you, take notice how the Printer (according to his Custome) hath mistaken a few Figures on the head of some Pages; viz. In the first Part, pag. 50, for 55. and pag. 129, for 139. In the second Part, pag. 193. Book II for Book I. And in the third Part, pag. 413. Book VI. for VII. Now I hope none will mistake this History for that other Book of his which I lately publish'd; call'd (HISTORICALL RELATIONS OF THE UNITED PROVINCES) which possibly some may do, because both have the same Author, and the same Honourable Translator, and FLANDERS is the subject Matter of both: But the former treats pro∣perly of the Scituation of the Countrey, the Nature of the Inhabitants, Form of their Government in particular Provinces, and in their generall Union, their Interest and Religion, the Title and Right of Dominion over them; with the Religion and Interest of all their Friends and Enemies: Which Book was so wisely and usefully Written, that it hath been Translated and often Prin∣ted in most Languages of Europe. This I now offer, is an accurate History of the WARRS OF FLAN∣DERS, and is a distinct entire Work of it self. The Author wrote this after the former; and how he hath perform'd it, there needs no Evidence but the word of Learned GROTIUS, who (in a Letter to Mon∣sieur Du Maurier the French Ambassador at the Haghe)
say's; I confess my Expectation was much deceiv'd in Cardinall BENTIVOGLIO; I could not hope from the hand of an Enemy to receive so impartiall a History of our Warrs: I doubted not his Ability, for I had formerly seen some Discourses of his; but this shews he knew what to write, and wrote what he knew: His Education abroad, and long Residence in Flanders ena∣bled him for both; My Countrey will by this be a Gai∣ner and a Loser: Our Courage and Diligence was equall to theirs, our Swords as sharp; but now BENTI∣VOGLIO hath Conquer'd us with his Pen, and will wound us to Posterity.
Ad Comitem Monumethen sem de BENTIVOGLIO suo. FLoribus Angligenis non hanc tibi necto Corollam, Cum sais indigenis te probet ipse Liber; Per me Roma sciet tibi se debere, quòd Anglo Romanus didicit cultiùs ore loqui; Ultima quae tellus Aquilas duce Caesare vidit, Candida Romulio ûm te duce scripta videt: Conso ut quondam Patriam nil jnveris, esto, Sed studio cives ingenioque juvas; Namque dolis Liber hic instructus & arte Batavâ, A Belg â nobis ut caveamus, ait; Horremus per te civilis dira furoris Vulnera, discordes Flandria quassa monet; Hic discat Miles pugnare, orare Senator, Qui regnant, leni sceptra tenere manu: Macte (Comes) virtute novâ vestri ordinis ingens Ornamentum, aevi daeliciaeque tui; Dum stertunt alii somno, vinóque sepulti, Nobilis antiquo stemmate digna facis. ED. WALLER.
To the Earl of MONMOVTH: On his Translation of BENTIVOGLIO. THose who could rule the ancient World with ease, Could strictly govern all, yet none displease, Were those who cherish'd Learning; not because It wrapt in rev'renc'd Mysterie the Lawes, Nor that it did the Nobles civilize, But rather that it made the People wise; Who found by reading Story (where we see What the most knowing were, or we should bee) That only Peace breeds bliss, and only they Breed Peace, who (wisely foolish) Pow'r obey. Of such importance for the Publick good Is Learning, when by th' People understood; But those who dress it in a forreign Tongue, Serve Meat in cover'd Plate to make them long; Whilst those who forreign Learning well translate, Feed weak Minds full, and at the cheapest rate. This you have done, my Lord! which only showes How free your Mind in publick Chanels flowes: But if that good to which some Men are born, Doe less then good-acquir'd our Names adorn, The ceasless nature of your Kindness then, Still ready to inform un-languag'd Men, Deserves less Praise, if rightly understood, Than does your Judgment how to doe Men good; Which none can value at too high a rate, Judging the choice of Authors you translate. WILL. D'AVENANT.
To the Reader of Cardinal Bentivoglio's Guerra di Fiandra, Translated by the Right honorable the Earl of Monmouth. THere are who Languages a Mysterie Would make, that yet does undiscover'd lie; Boasting the Spaniard lofty, Toscan sweet, And aery-French to dance with gracefull fcet; Whose well-tun'd-Layes, in Times, then Ours, less rude, By such, whose hasty Vanity t'intrude Into the Press, having been rendred hoarse, Sense, and Words massacred without remorse; Those, by Fantastick prejudice, condemn, Young Travellers infection, root and stem Of all Translations; as implicitly, As some damn all who on a Scaffold dy. But 'tis not now as when Squire-Jeffrey liv'd, The tongue's not cramp'd ere it can be repriev'd: Words, here, are facil, apt, significant; Such, as not make the Sense too wide, nor scant. His Pen not racks the Reader, as some do, But gives us ease, pleasure, and profit too. He is our Understanding's Optick; Wee, By such a Perspective, much clearer see. The Mapp of Italy's choice Language, here, To Brittish-eyes, in Landskip does appeare: Though, that the Garden of the World we do Esteem; This is that Garden's Garden too; Where flowers, transplanted thus, become more fair, Fragrant, and rarifi'd, by such pure air. Nor is't an easie Task; since two, we see, Were fain to joyni'th' Gallick-Historie. His single pains carry's the evener thread, And Monarch of Interpreters Hee's read: One, answering one, in just proportion fits, Nor breeds a tumult of dissenting Wits. As Bentivoglio, then, the Peace, not breaks, When Spaniard, French, or Dutch, his language speaks; So the same calm, of this smooth-Pen, unites, And levels to our Dialect their heights. The Cardinal's Soul, (her superstition fled) Is so transfus'd in Him; should, from the dead, Pythagoras now rise agen, by this Alone, Hee'd prove his Metempsychosis. But I presume no praise; that fits Him best, Who can contain Himself, and such a Guest: Only in honour to Nobilitie, That with some treine it still attended be; Though made, by Most, our Countrey's sin and shame; To help support His state, not raise His fame; In this Corteggio, I, a Servant loe, Crowd, when His vertues in Procession goe. R. BAKER.
To the Right Honourable the Earle of MONMOUTH. Upon his Translation of BENTIVOGLIO. MY LORD, AS their great Letter of Exchange, by you The learn'd of Foraign Nations, make a true Payment to us, of what they wisely thought Fit to Instruct, or for example Taught. You are the Bank, where they address their Store; You give it all to us, yet make it more: For, see how much in knowledge we do thrive By reading them in You; they doe derive From You so much of Honor and Renown, Which makes this Nation love them as their own. Now what shall we return, my Lord, who are Improv'd by You, without our Cost or Care; We can but wish Your Fact'ry to Increase, Your Credit and Employment ne'r to cease; Learn'd Correspondents, to advance Your gains In honor, the Reward of Learned pains. That oblig'd Rome may to your Name present But as much Fame, as to her Son y'have lent; And Belgia when shee on her Reckoning looks, Confess her self a Debtor in your Books. Your Lordships most humble Servant, PH. FROWDE.
A NEW MAPE XVII PROVINCE LOW GERMAN mended a new in mani Anno 1654
THE HISTORY OF THE WARS OF FLANDERS. Written by CARDINAL BENTIVOGLIO. BOOK I. The Contents. An Introduction to the History. The scituation and Government of the Provinces of Flanders. The first occasions of the War described. In what condition Flan∣ders was, when the Catholick King, Philip the second, resolved to leave those Countrys, and to return for Spain. The general States, upon his departure, are assembled together at Gaunt. His Speech to the Dutchess of Parma, (whom he leaves Regent of those Provinces.) Concerning the manner of Governing them. He departs, and goes his journey by Sea. Divers difficulties which the Dutchess meets withall at the beginning of her Government, and especially in matters of Religion. The Nobility begin to stirr, and cannot tollerate the too great autho∣rity of Cardinal Granville; but chiefly the Prince of Orange, the Counts of E∣gamont and Horne. Their grievances or complaints, they write all three joyntly to the King, declaring openly against Granville, and desire that he may be removed from Flanders. The King will not give way thereunto. They are scandalized at the refusal, and together with the rest of the Nobles, are so much the more in∣cens'd against Granville, they come to open contempt of him. And finally, force the King to remove him from thence. THe Provinces of Flanders in former ages, were divided one from another almost every one of them had its parti∣cular Prince; but rather Titular, then essential. After∣ward, at several times they by degrees joyned one with another. The male Line failed in many of them, and Women came to succeed; by whose Marriages the States in those Parts began chiefly to increase; and together with the strength of the States, the prerogative of Princes. By this means the house of Burgundy did at last unite those Provinces into one body, and govern'd them with such greatness. And afterwards the Houseof Austria came to possess and govern them in greater glo∣ry.
The first of this Family on whom the Inheritance fell, was Philip the first, Son and Successor to Mary, the last Princess, and Heir of the Burgundian bloud. From Philip who dyed in the flowre of his age came Charls, and from Charls, Philip the second. Charls possest Flanders in great quiet; but in the first year of Philips succession, those Provinces grew into such alteration, through divers home-bred, and foreign occasions, as the mischief creeping in from the very be∣ginning by degrees, now in one sort, now in another, it at last broke forth into open tumults; and from tumults into one of the longest, and most bitter Wars that hath at any time happened. The events of this war is that which I under∣take to describe; which doubtlesly are the greatest and most famous which can be expos'd to the Worlds Theatre. Forty years of continual troubles have past over since the first tumults, to the beginning of the Truce for twelve years. In which time, as also in the times following, wherein the Truce being ended, Arms were reassumed: he who shall consider the successes of this war, shall find so ma∣ny, and so illustrious Scenes of various accidents, as he shall be compell'd to confess, that never any afforded more copious matter of Humane Instructions; or that any war more memorable then this, was ever written of, either in Antient or Modern Histories. You shall see Countries of a small circuit, contesting with a mighty Monarchy; but you shall see them so favour'd by the Arms of Na∣ture, by the Sea, and Rivers, and by Forces from abroad with all possible assi∣stance, as it is not to be wondred if they have made so long opposition, and if they continue still to make it more vigorously then ever. You, in their unvan∣quish'd Rebellion, shall see the rage of Heresie against the Church, joyned to the like of Subjects against their Prince: And Flanders divided within her self, miserably to consume by wars, caused no less by Religion, then by State-Inte∣rest; and set on fire no less by internal, then by external Forces. You shall see bloudy battels, unheard of sieges, dreadfull sackings, firings, and ruins: Succes∣ses at Sea, which will not yield for cruelty, to those by Land; and wars carryed with no less Atrocety from the neighbouring Seas of Europe, into the most re∣moted Seas of the Indies. Business will sometimes appear amidst Arms: and amidst the raging noyse of war, the natural desire of peace. Yet ruine, death, and destruction, shall be seen to prevail on all sides. And it shall appear, that on the fatal fields of Flanders, as on the Lists of a publick Combat, almost all the Nations of Europe have strove, and as it were vied to vent forth their anger and malice, and with their sword in hand, to buckle themselves still more obstinately one against the other. But before I enter upon my intended Narration of the mentioned Affairs, it will be requisite that I take their beginnings from a little further off; shewing first what the condition of the Provinces of Flanders was, and how the Neighboring Countreys were disposed, when the mentioned Commotions began; to the end that their more inward causes being known, the future successes may be the better understood. 'Tis then known to all men that the Provinces of Flanders past from the Line of Burgundy, into the house of Austria, in manner as hath been already said. The abovesaid Provinces are scituated upon the utmost confines of that Northern Continent of Europe, which neighbours most upon Germany and France. Some of them therefore go under the name of Galla Belgica; but all of them in common under the name of the Low-Countries of Germany; and more commonly by the name of Flanders. In time past, when they were all joyned together in one body, they made up the number of 17 Provinces, and were divi∣ded into the Dukedomes of Brabant, Limburg, Lucemburg, and Ghelderland: in∣to the Counties of Flanders, Artois, Holland, Hennault, Zealand, Namures and Zutfen: into the Marquesate of the Holy Empire; and into the Lordships of Friesland, Malines, Utricht, Overisell and Groninghen. To which Countries was added, (but not as of the same body) the City of Cambray, together with the Territory of Cambresis; and likewise the County of Burgundy, which is divided from all the rest by the Interposition of Lorain. These Provinces were very con∣formable one to another, in the institution of Laws and Government. The Ca∣tholick Religion flourisht equally in all of them, and the States representing each of them, were generally formed of three sorts of Persons: Ecclesiasticks, the
Nobility, and the more common sort of people. The Ecclesiasticks were for the most part Monasticall Abbots, who lived in their Monasteries, which were  seated in the Country. The Nobles, were of the best qualified families, who likewise resided commonly in the Country, in their Lordships and Castles: and the meaner sort of people were Tradesmen, and Artificers living in Cities; Civill and criminall causes were within the Cognisance of the Counsels of each Province, or of the Magistracy of every City; according to the quality of the affaire, and the Institutions of the Place: and Appeals were generally made to a supream Tribunall, which was placed in Malines, as the place most commodious for the whole Country. Three most remarkable Councels handled the affaires of Government at Court; The Councell of State, the privy Councell, and the Councell of the Exchequer, or Treasurie. The first was composed of some of the chiefest Lords of the Provinces, and of some Churchmen likewise and Gown∣men, and things of greatest consequence were therein treated of: in the second, which consisted wholly of Lawyers, such matters of Justice were resolved on, for which it was necessary to have recourse to the Supream Authority of the Prince. And in the third, the Prince his Patrimoniall revenues were managed, as also all contribution monies, according to the need of the Provinces, which past through the hands of two or three of better account, and of other inferior Of∣ficers: and sometimes the States Generall of the whole Country were assembled: but this was onely in the most weighty affairs; and wherein necessity more then good will brought the Prince to see his people united together in one body: lest they upon such occasions might be so bold as rather to impose laws then receive them. This was the former form of the Government of the Provinces of Flanders in Generall. The People there have alwayes injoyed many Prerogatives and priviledges in the form of their government: and therefore have yielded unto their Princes an obedience mixt with libertie. No place can more abound in all things requisit for humane life, then Flanders doth, set wine and some other things aside. The winters there are not too excessive cold, the colds being rather long, then sharp, and transgressing much more in moisture then in hard weather. The Coun∣try is full of navigable rivers; and which for the most part, by the flowing of the sea, bring the sea it self, and the commerce thereof very far into the continent: but it is no lesser full of great towns, Cities, and inhabitants, who for the most part are tall of stature, of a candid aspect, and almost of as candid nature, much given to Traffick and of a pleasant, and tractable nature, when they are not angred; but altogether as contumcious, implacable, and revengefull, when offended. The possession of these parts, falling (as hath been said) upon Philip of Austria, he begot his eldest son Charles in Gaunt, which is the chiefest City of the peculiar Province of Flanders: who likewise inherited the Kingdom of Spaine; and not long after was made Emperour of Germany. This Charles be∣ing born in Flanders, past his first childhood there, and was afterwards oftner seen there, then in any other part of his so many Kingdoms and Provinces, in the so frequent voyages which he continually made for the administration of their severall governments: together with the inclination which nature had given him towards the Dutch by his being born and bred up amongst them, he alwayes shewed a particular affection to them, by making use of them in his weightiest, and most important affairs, Signeur De Ceures had the charge and government of him in very Ample manner in his youth; Cardinall Adrian, who was afterwards Pope Adrian the sixth, together with Ceures, govern'd Spain in his absence; Charles De Lanoia governed the Kingdom of Naples as also all the affairs of Italy, for a long time, with almost an absolute Authoritie. And in the wars of Germany, especially in those which burst forth often in his time towards the Frontiers of France. Of all other his Dominions, he made most use of the Flanders forces; upon all which occasions, the Flemish Nobility was alwayes greatly honoured, and favoured by him, and very great was the demonstration of love which he shewed towards those Countryes: the people whereof forgat not Charles his great affability to them in his tender years, and how graciously he alwayes heard and received them: and that of a Prince becomming a private man, he would oft times lay aside his publike Majestie, to make his particular affection
towards them appear the more; which caused them alwayes to shew all requisit obedience, and constant devotion toward him, unless it were in that little Commo∣tion in Gaunt, which was quieted as soon as begun. Flanders after this injoyed full and perfect felicity as long as he lived; for except it were in the Frontiers to∣ward France, which sometimes suffered by taking up of Arms, all the rest of the Provinces injoyed a flourishing Peace, and perpetuall tranquilitie, in such sort, as it cannot be exprest how much the inhabitants plenty, the frequencie of traffick, the beautie of Cities, and abundancy of all things requisit therein, were augmented. Particularly you would have thought that Europe had chosen Antwerp for the Universal staple town of her traffick; in so great numbers, and with such varieties of Merchandize, did all forrein Nations, even from the remotest regions flock thither: which was much occasioned through the moderate and wise government of two Princesses, whose names will for ever be celebrated in Flanders: which were; the Lady Margaret, Aunt to the Emperour, and her sister, the Lady Mary Queen of Hungary: the one or the other whereof governed all those Provinces almost all the while that the Emperour lay in the field. Charls (as hath been said) had no son but Philip, who was born and bred up in Spaine; and because his Father foresaw how much the keeping of Flanders well united to the rest of the Monarchie of Spaine did conduce to his sons greatness, he made Philip come thither when he was yet very young, that he might be sworn his successor, after his death by the Flemish, as he was: Philip staid not long in Flanders the first time: he returned thither a second time, when he was of more mature years, having been in England with his wife Queen Mary, and then he staid some years in Flanders, after that his Father the Emperour had resigned over unto him, all his Hereditary States and Dominions; till upon very urgent occasions it behoved him to return again to Spaine: whilst Philip aboad amongst the Flemings, they saw the difference of Natures, and inclinations between the Father, and the son; great was both their Pieties and Religion; great their Justice, and constancy of Minde. But Philip was as much given to Peace, as Charles was to War: the one was affable and gracious; the other extraordinarily grave, and composed: the latter acquainted with all languages, and accommodating himself to all Na∣tions; whereas the other as well in his language as in all things else, seemed as if he knew not how to adapt himself to any thing, but the Spanish Garbe. It was therefore generally conceived in Flanders, that Philip, by reason of his Nature and customes, would shew himself to be wholly a Spanyard, would retire into Spaine, and put the government of Flanders wholly into the hands of Spanyards, which opinion was confinrmed in them by the particular favour which he was al∣wayes seen to bear to Prince Ruygomes Di Silva, to the duke of Alva, and to the Conde De Feria; and that he communicated all his most weighty affairs, and even those which did more properly concern the interest of Flanders, with them, and with Monsieur De Granville, a Burgonian, Bishop of Arras. They threfore ap∣prehended an alteration in their government; and so much the rather for that they knew that Charles had towards his end, begun to be somewhat jealous of them, and Philip much more afterwards: one of the chief reasons whereof was the infection of Heresie which from the neighboring parts began to break forth in Flanders whilst Charles did yet live. The chief Heresies which then raigned in Germany, France, and England, all of them neighboring upon Flanders, were three. In Germany Lutherisme, in France Calvinisme, and in England a com∣pound of both these, together with a reservation of some outward shew of the Catholike Religion: nor was the number of Anabaptists few, which were mingled with the Lutherans in that part of Flanders which lies towards Germany. This so powerfull evill required no lesse powerfull remedies; and therefore Charles in his time had publish'd many severe edicts against the infected, which were afterwards confirmed by Philip: which had occasioned imprisonments, exiles, confiscation of goods, and even death it self to many of the inhabitants: and because a particuler office was erected to purge the Country of Heresie, which was in the hands of Church men, and which did much resemble the inquisition; the Flemish began even from the beginning to grumble at, and to shew open re∣pugnancy to such an office, to the which they gave hatefull names, fearing to finde
the effects thereof daily more hatefull. Neither did the common people appre∣hend this more then did the great ones. Who seemed more moved thereat, for that either Authority which govern'd the Provinces was increased by protecting the Inhabitants. There were then, many in Flanders of much eminency for birth, valour and and adherency: especially two who did much exceed the rest: which were, William Prince of Orange, Lamoral Count Egmont. Orange was born an Heretick in Germany; and coming whilst yet a youth into Flanders to inherit large possessions, both by the Father and Mothers side, became a Catholick, and was always very much favoured by the Emperour. And Egmont being come wholly of Flemish parentage, had always enjoyed the prime places of Honour and esteem in Flanders, especially in Military affairs; great part of the victory which the King got at the memorable battel of St. Quintain was attributed to his valour; and to him alone that of Graveling, where he commanded the Kings Army. These two personages, though of almost clean contrary genius and nature, were in equal authority and favour with the Flemish. Orange was more for Civil, then Military affairs; wary, wise, a great Master of speech, and no less good at Councel; in his fashion and behaviour popular; and of whom it was questionable whether his ability was greater in comprehending businesses, or his wariness in managing them. Rare qualities all of them when they are level'd at right ends; but do strangely degenerate when they are made use of (as they were afterwards by Orange) to ambitious and corrupt designes. Egmont on the contrary was more given to studie war then peace: of a free nature, can did in his thoughts and words; popular likewise, but rather amongst soldiers in the fields, then with the vulgar within walls: and in all things else. Much apter to win preferment a∣mongst Arms then at Court. The Government of the Provinces, and Military commands, were put into these two mens hands, and some others of the chiefest of the Country. And though till after the Kings departure thence, none of them had any ways opposed the aforesaid Edicts, yet it was well enough known, that many of them were not well pleased with them; and 'twas feared that those would make use thereof, who under palliated pretences, had a mind to disquiet the present Government, and introduce some novelties. Orange had till then gi∣ven greatest suspitions thereof; for whilst, he was in France with Henry the second for one of King Philips hostages, in performance of the peace which was conclud∣ed in Cambrey between those two Kings, the year 1559. he honesting the occasion thereby, slipt into Flanders, and revealed to his adherents a strong plot, which those two Kings had in secret, to exterp Heresie. And the Nobility of Flanders having spent very much in Charls his time, and many of the best of them being but in bad condition, therefore the King being to leave Flanders, they did in that behalf begin to murmure aloud, and very much to complain; as if by the Kings perpetual future absence, the Dutch were to be deprived of those advantages, which they had so largely enjoyed in the time of his Father the Emperour. Which might occasion fear that they would endeavour the preservation thereof by exciting of troubles, as having but little hopes to effect it by the way of peace. Nor were many of the Church-men much better satisfied then were the people, and the Nobility, by reason of the new erection of Bishopricks, which were in∣stituted in the chiefest Cities of the Country: which being at first procured by Charls, for the better Church-government in Flanders, and especially to bridle Heresie, were after compleated, and constantly continued by Philip. Upon the reason of these new erections, it was necessary to suppress many Abbies and Prio∣ries. And the Bishops being to enjoy the first place in Ecclestastical Orders, the Abbots held themselves thereby offended, who formerly made the greatest num∣ber of Ecclesiasticks, and held the chief place at publick meetings. To these several distastes in all the three Provincial Orders, another was added; with the introducing of forainers; as Germans, and Spaniards into the chief Forts, which were formerly Garison'd by people of their own Provinces: These, and many other passions, wherewith the minds of the Flemish were agitated, were not unknown to the neighbouring Princes, who watched all occasions which might cause commotions in Flanders, and were desirous to propagate them. And though
they were not all of a mind in point of Religion, and divers other things, yet they all joyned in one end, which was to see the greatness of the house of Austria somewhat lesned, and especially the King of Spains power. And none of them were well pleased to see the Provinces of Flanders joyned to his Crown: which by reason of their situation, circuit, and opulency, were of such consideration, as when they were only in the hands of the house of Burgundy, had oft-times redu∣ced France to great straits, and troubled England, and the near adjacent parts of Germany, more then once. In France, after the unfortunate mischance of Hen∣ry the second, who was wounded as he was running a Tilt, and died at the cele∣bration of his daughters marriage with the King of Spain, and his sisters with the Duke of Savoy; Francis the second succeeded in the Crown whilst he was yet a child. The Government of the Kingdom was therefore wholly in the hands of his mother Catherine of Medicis: but so distracted, and so full of factions, as it could not be in greater disorder, nor more confused. Heresie which was first in secret, and fraudulently crept into France, shew'd it self now bare-faced. And her Fautorers, hiding their own ambitious ends under the deceitfull visard of con∣science, proceeded from their first Court-contentions, to the taking up of arms, to the great detriment of the whole Kingdom. Those hereticks were called Hu∣gonots: (nor is it well known from whence that word proceeded) and Lodovick of Burbone, Prince of Conde, made himself the chief head thereof: he was brother to Anthony, King of Navar, first Prince of the bloud-royal; and his chief ra∣ther guider then follower, was Jasper di Coligni, Admiral of France, who proved afterwards the plague of that Kingdom; and at last his own ruine. But the chief heads who maintained the Catholick cause, were not less suspected, and especial∣ly those of the house of Guise; out of a received opinion, that under the speci∣ous zeal to religion, they hatched divers designes of bringing themselves to grea∣ter power. France, whilst thus afflicted within her self, could not contribute much to the afflictions of others. Yet it was evidently discerned, that what fo∣mentation from thence could be expected to the troubles of Flanders, would never be wanting, especially by the instigation of the Hugonots. In England, the succession of that Kingdom, and of Ireland, was fallen to E∣lizabeth, daughter to Henry the eight; Queen Mary, who was wife to Philip King of Spain, dying without issue. Mary was not more resolute in restoring the Catho∣lick faith in England, then Elizabeth was in resuppressing it, incited thereunto by the example of her mother Anne of Bullen; and for fear lest by the Laws of the Church, her succession might prove illegitemate; from which fear she thought her self secure under the Dogmata of heresie. Elizabeth making Religion thus sub∣servient to State Interest, would have heresie to be received throughout all England and Ireland. And detesting the Pope, and King of Spain, by which two she might be the most indamaged, she likewise endeavoured to prejudice them as much as she could. She therefore persecuted the Church infinitely in Eng∣land, and was very intent upon all those sinister successes, which might befall the King of Spain, especially in Flanders, where his power was nearest unto her, and from whence she did most suspect it. From those parts of Germany which lie nearest to Flanders, all those heretick Princes who were there Masters of any States or Dominions, shewed the same dis∣position against the Church and the King of Spain. But the most considerable amongst them, and of whom the greatest fear was had, for that he was more a∣midst the Austrian Forces of Germany and Flanders, was the Prince Elector Pa∣latine of Rhine. 'Twas therefore much to be feared that from these external parts, all the inward commotions of Flanders, were upon all occasions to be fo∣mented. This was the condition of Affairs, and the disposition of minds in Flanders, when the King was there, and upon his departure for Spain. I will take my rise in the History which I undertake to write from hence; af∣ter having with as much brevity as I could, acquainted you with what hath alrea∣dy been said. The King was resolved to go for Spain; to the which he was mo∣ved not only out of his particular natural addiction to those Kingdoms, as out of mature wisdome and advised choice. He saw his vast Empire hardly well setled and consolidated, after the so many voyages and great pains of his Father; and
finding it composed of so many members, and so far divided one from another, he thought it expedient, that he should share out and disperce the vigor and spirit of government from out the principall part thereof, as doth the heart in humane bodies, and certainly Spain was to be reputed not onely the most important but the fittest place for this purpose; there wanted not moreover many other urgent necessities, which required the Kings presence, and particularly those which were occasioned partly by the danger of Heresie which was already begun there, and partly by jealousies of the Moors wherewith Spaine was greatly infected, and with whom it was greatly feared that upon any intestine commotion, the neigh∣bouring Moors of Africa would joyn themselves. The chiefest business which before the Kings departure was taken into consul∣tation, was to whom he should leave the government of Flanders in his absence. Two Ladyes neerly allyde unto the King by blood were taken into consideration; the one was Christierna Dutches of Loraine; who was daughter to a sister of the Emperour Charls the fifth, and the other Margaret Dutches of Parma, naturall daughter to the same Emperour, great was the contestation, before it was re∣solved which of the two was to be preferred. Christierna was the elder: very well known in Flanders by reason of the neighbor-hood of Loraine: praised for her great wisdom, in having worthily discharged the Government of that State, remaining still a Widdow: and the afore mentioned Peace of Cambray, which by her means, (she being there present in person) was managed and concluded, had very much increased her reputation. By which successe, Flanders being freed from the molestation of Arms, she won more upon the affection of the Flemings, Orange was chiefly for her, out of the hopes he had of marrying one of her Daughters, and therefore labored her Election as much as he could; hoping also by that marriage that the government of Flanders might be more sway'd by him then by Christierna. But the Kings inclination bore him at last to like best of Margaret; as she who had been born and bred up in Flanders; and who having her Husbands Estates of Parma and Piacensa in midst the forces of the Duke∣dom of Millan in Italy, and resolving to send her onely son Alexander to the Court of Spain, promised a more absolute dependency upon the King: where on the contrary the house of Loraine, by reason of the condition of the Country, and more in respect of interest was inforced to depend almost wholly upon the Crown of France, besides the great desire which the Flemish themselves shewed to have Christierna for their Regent made the King & Spanish officers more averse there∣unto: with whom the Bishop of Arras joyned in opinion who was one of the most imployed Ministers of the Court. Out of these reasons they also hindred Orange his afore mentioned Marriage; it appearing to them that it was not good to con∣sent to such an Alliance, so neer to the King himself; and that it would make Orange yet greater in Flanders, by the neer leaning stock of Loraine, and would cause yet more ambitious desires in him, then those which had more then once been already discovered in him: when the King had chosen the Dutchesse of Parma to be Governess of Flanders, and caused her therefore to come from Italy, he thought it fitting before his departure to call a generall Assembly of all the Provinces, the which he held in Gaunt. Where the Deputies being as∣sembled together, the King spoke first severally with every of them apart, con∣cerning the affairs of chiefest importance; and at the first opening of the Assembly, he was present himself in person, together with the new Governess, where after a great silence, The Bishop of Arras began to speak by the Kings command to the Deputies; and inlarged himself into a long discourse, wherein he shewed the reasons which forced the King to go for Spaine, and afterwards apply'd himself to the particular affairs of Flanders. He said, That his Father the Emperour had not for the space of many years seen Spaine, and that at last he went thither out of no other end but to lay his bones there: that the present King had also absented himself from thence for many years, not to abandon Flanders, which was then exposed to the greatest dangers of War, which was very hot between him and the King of France. That at last the peace of Cambray was insued; his Marriage with the Daughter of Henry the second, and all good intel∣ligence and concord between both the parties: that the affairs of Flanders being thus
setled, reason did require that he should now turn himself to the affairs of Spaine, to provide in those parts likewise for many things, which did necessarily require his pre∣sence: that the King hoped either to return quickly himself to Flanders, or else to send his son thither: that he did acknowledge those Provinces to be his principall Patrimony; and that from thence he had his rise to the succession of so many Kingdoms: and that therefore he would vie with his Father in his love to them, and endeavour to exceed him in his favouring of them: that certainly of all goods that could befall them, peace was to be preferred, which occasioned commerce; commerce traffick; and traffick the plenty which the people of Flanders did now injoy: that in peace likewise the Church did most flourish in her Ministery, and the Nobility injoy their greatest priviledges: that then this quiet was equally advantageous for all the three orders of the Country, and that the King was therein interested more then any others, by reason of the dangers whereinto the Princes Authority doth usually fall through the peoples turbulencies: that the King knew nothing could more crosse this his so wise and pious object, then Heresie: the monster of impiety and Sedition: and that when people did once arm themselves against their God, they did at the same time arm themselves against their Princes; of which the neighbouring Countries did afford too horrid and dreadfull examples: that therefore the King, as a Father no lesse then as a Prince, did exhort the Provinces to preserve the purity of the ancient Faith; to wit, that faith which their Forefathers had for so many Ages professed with such lively zeal, and caused to flourish with such constant Pietie. That therefore they should cause the Edicts to be observed, which were first published by his Father, and afterwards confirmed by him, in this point: that they should not suffer themselves to be abused by false words, taking licentiousness for liberty: that they should take ex∣ample from the evils of others not to fall into the like themselves: that they should give all due obedience and respect to their new Governess: and that they should assure themselves, that as the King went from them full of Gratitude for the good service which they had done him and his Father, so he would alwayes continue his Fathers and his wn affection towards those Provinces: to witness which he would presently cause all forrein Garrisons to be drawn from forth their fortresses, and take away all unusuall contributions from the Country. These were the chief things which the Bishop of Arras uttered in the Kings name. The answer which the Provinces did at the present give was full of Humi∣lity and obsequiousness, and seemed to breath forth fidelity: but those States end∣ed afterward with very little of satisfaction to the King: For touching the things spoken of before, wherein the Country seemed to be distasted, he saw the ill disposed minds of the Provinces, in the faces of their Deputies, and might judge that affairs would not continue long in the condition he left them. The Fle∣mings were then chiefly vexed through fear of having the inquisition introduced amongst them; and there wanted not some who spoke their mindes therein pub∣likely in the States. That Flanders was not accustomed to such Rigors: that it was terrified at the very name of the inquisition: which would be the cause of deserting traffick, and Merchandizing, throughout the whole Country. How much better would those evils be remedied by fairmeans, then by fire and sword? That every Humane body had its particular Habit: and so every Nation its proper and natural constitution of tem∣per. That what did become Spain and Italy, might not be fit for Flanders; nor for the other more Northern people of Europe. Who were more naturally inclined to liberty then those of the Southern parts. By these and such like words wherewith they pierced the ears of the King, they would either have had him, have annul'd the published Edicts before his depar∣ture, or at least have moderated them. But he would never assent thereunto. But gave this remarkable answer to one of his Officers, who represented unto him the danger which he thereby might run into of losing either all, or many of those Provinces; and that therefore he might do better somewhat to connive, al∣ledging the neighbouring Countreyes for his example. That he would rather be without Kingdoms then injoy them with Heresie. Moreover the King with no lesse maturity of judgement, then zeal of Religion, foresaw the pernitious consequences which might from thence arise in his other
Dominions; for such an example would have encouraged the rest to have made the like desires: and would be very dangerous to be admitted of; and no lesse dangerous to be refused. He therefore remained resolute to have the said Edicts put in execution; as also fully to establish the new Erection of Bishopricks. The King in the yeare 1555 had renewed the Edict which his Father the Emperour had made in the year 1550, wherein by Authority of the Apostolick See the form was ordained which the inquisitors were to observe in the expunging of Heresie. The substance whereof was; That they should proceed with all rigor in seeking out those who were infected with Heresie, and in punishing them according to the penalties appointed, the execution whereof was committed to the Magistrates of Cities, and to the Provincial Councels, with provision to be had that no par∣ticular Tribunals should be introduced for the inquisition as it was formed: and as for the new Erection of Bishopricks, it was carried as hath been said in the relation. The King having ordered matters of Religion thus, declared that for all things else the former ancient Government should be continued: wherein next unto the Regent the Councel of State should have the first place; of which were many of the chief Lords of Flanders; and because it was impossible to con∣fide in them all, therefore the King gave private instructions, that the Regent in matters of greatest jealousies and weight, should abridge the number to a few, and intrust the chief managing thereof in the hands of the Bishop of Arras; whom to this purpose he left with her. Before the King went from Gaunt, he would make a new creation of Knights of the golden Fleece in the places of many that were dead. And amongst others, he honoured some Lords of that Country with that Order, whose Ancestors had formerly been thereof. Finally the King preparing for his journey, and being desirous first to give such instructions to the Dutchesse of Parma as were most convenient for the administration of Government; he took her one day aside, and as it is reported, said thus unto her. I could not give you a greater testimony (my beloved Sister) of my confidence in you, then that which I have now deposited into your hands, in assigning over unto you the Government of these Provinces of Flanders. You see their situation; by how much they are the more remote from my other Kingdoms, so much the neerer are they to be endangered by the States which do inviron them. Tis true, France is now at peace with me, but 'tis not so within it self; being full of Factions, and in the hands of a childe, who instead of giving Lawes will be enforc'd to receive them; to boote, that the emulation which hath alwayes been, and ever will be between France and Spain is too much known. The Queen of England who Oppugnes the Religion which I defend, will alwayes be plotting to the prejudice of my forces, particularly those of Flanders; the same suspitions almost out of the same reasons, may be had of the Heretick Princes of the neighbouring parts of Germany. As also for the spite they bear to see the Empire continue so long in my blood. These neighbours will still be practising some innovations here. And the most dangerous business which can be appre∣hended from them, will be their infecting the People with Heresie, and the making the Nobility, upon such occasions, aspire to Novelties. They will then endeavour to incite the vulgar people to madness by the poison of false opinions, and to withdraw them by degrees from liberty to licenciousness; from licenci∣ousness to tumults; and from tumults to Rebellion. And without doubt the introducing of Heresie being permitted, these other evils will consequently fol∣low. True piety, and falie cannot cohabit together. And when people begin once to differ in their beliefe, the great ones break forth presently into Novelties, and by a thousand false pretentions turn Religion into Faction. Miserable effects are seen hereof in Germany, and no lesse miserable are already begun in France. Therefore to preserve Flanders from so dangerous evils, care must be had above all things to keep her free from Heresie, and that only the Catholike Religion be practised there; Which is the true and ancient Religion; and which alone is profest in my other Kingdoms: From hence doth my Family acknowledge her chiefest greatness; and by the means thereof, as Subjects are more united within
themselves in the worship of the Altars and Temples, so are they by her means also the closer tyed together in obedience to their Princes and Magistrates. So as I by defending and sustaining of her, am by her defended and sustained. And rendring hereby the greatest service that I can to God, I do consequently the grea∣test advantage I can to my Crown. I go from hence therefore resolved that the Edicts published against the Hereticks in these Provinces, be inviolably execu∣ted; wherein I shall desire you to use your greatest vigilancy, and to be sure that your sence be the same that mine is: which is not notwithstanding that a setled Inquisition be introduced here. I see the differences between these Pro∣vinces, and those which have received it. But on the other side, the greatest e∣vils require the strongest remedies. To boot that this doth not oppose the pri∣viledges of the Provinces, nor the form of that Government which I have pro∣mised and sworn unto: Nay to tollerate the introducing of heresie, would be the greatest violation thereof I could commit. Since hitherto it hath wholly been grounded upon the Catholick Religion; and all things would be distur∣bed, and quite overthrown, if I should give any allowance to the bringing in of heresie. When this danger shall be provided for, it will make the remedy the easier for the other which may arise from some peccant humour of ambition in some of the great ones. Ambition usually seeks out pretences, so as course must be taken that no such be found. Of all other pretensions, that of consci∣ence is the most specious; and they who plot most against the common good, seem by this way to be most zealous in procuring it. Let this so plausible occa∣sion be taken away, the other which may move the people to commotions will the more easily cease. You (my sister) very well know the humours of the peo∣ple of Flanders, and how they ought to be govern'd: They are born almost as much to liberty, as to subjection. He that commands must entreat; and oft-times must yield instead of obtaining. To such natures 'tis fit to adjust a proportionate Government. You must therefore use all possible diligence in maintaining the accustomed Priviledges and Immunities of the Country, and endeavour to satisfie the people in them, they being almost wholly constituted in their power. The common people live peaceably when at ease and quiet; and 'tis little to be feared, that the ambitious can either discompose them by hidden fraud, or grow more bold by open conspiracy to move them to commotion: and yet you must by all means endeavour to keep the Nobility devout to my ser∣vice by particularly giving them their due imployments, their due respects, and by assuring them that they shall always see my father supervive in me, in fa∣vouring and protecting them. Thus it may be hoped that affairs may here suc∣ceed happily, and that none of the great ones instead of expecting honours and favours from me, will provoke me to rigour and severity. But howsoever, it is in you that I place my chiefest hopes of being well served in these Countrys: n you who are so near unto me; and who in all respects, as well your own, as of the Family of Fernese, ought to assist to all my greatness, and esteem my for∣tune as yours: For what remains, if the present calamities of Europe shall prove such, as it shall be impossible for humane wisdom to preserve Flanders from sharing therein, we must leave the event to God. But I trust he will never abandon his Religion, which is mine, nor those interests which out of just ends, shall be alwayes by me constantly imbraced, and with equall constancy defended. The Dutchess her Answer unto the King was, That she received those his councels as so many oracles of piety and wisdom; and that she would imploy all her study in seeing them executed; and that for all things else his Majesty might be confident, that both her self, her husband, her son, and the whole family of the Ferneses, would always place all their fortune in absolute depen∣dency upon that of the Royal House of Spain The King going afterwards from Gaunt to Flushing, which is the nearest haven of Zealand; he took ship, and made for Spain; where he prosperously arrived about the latter end of September, the year 1559. though he was not well land∣ded when a horrible tempest arose, which rent and sunk many of his ships, almost in his own sight. The King being gone, the Dutchess came to Brussels; and pre∣sently
applyd her self wholly to the affairs of Religion, to prevent the ensuing of such novelties, as by reason thereof was to be feared in Flanders. A business which was notwithstanding very difficult; for as nothing could more move the minds of men to novelties, then the introducing of heresie into the Country; so was there no more odious remedy to be found, then that of the Inquisition, in what manner soever it should be handled. The Dutchess began quickly to find divers difficulties, in those erections of Bishopricks which were not yet wholly established. The Abbots never gave over their former complaints; but endea∣vouring to add publick murmurings to their own particular grievances, they exa∣gerated, That these Erections were made contrary to the priviledges of the Provinces, whose consents should have been given thereunto. That formerly the Abbots were chosen in the Country, who did above all things lay to heart the interests thereof: whereas henceforward Bishops will be chosen by the Pope, at the King of Spains nomination, and will have their chief dependency upon the Court of Rome, and that of Spain. These reasons prevailed with some of the Provinces; and especially with Brabant, which is the chief for dignity, and hath most priviledges, in so much, as divers of her Deputies came to Brussels, desiring the Regent that she would consider better upon this business. They prest in particular that no new Bishoprick might be erected in Antwerp; which is a City united to Brabant, and which as it was feared, might by this occasion suffer much prejudice in the freedom of her Traffick. In this behalf the Re∣gent though that for the present, satisfaction might be given to that Province: in the rest she would have all things done as was decreed, not without the great indignation of many; who being either too much wedded to their own opinions, or too much inclin'd to novelty, called Bishops, Spanish Inquisitors, and much vilified the new erection of Bishopricks. The Regent treated but little of this af∣fair in the Counsel of State; for as a business already resolved on by the King, she rather thought to see it executed, then to hear new opinions concerning it. And if she did at any time treat thereof, it was with the Bishop of Arras, or some other confident, and not in full Counsel; as she did likewise in other mat∣ters of greatest jealousie. And this was in nature of a secret or Cabinet Coun∣sel; and so did the rest of the Counsellers term it with a great deal of bitterness, who were not admitted thereinto. Next to the Regent, the Bishop of Arras had the chief stroke in Government, as hath been said: and to him two of the gravest Counsellers of State did openly adhere; Vighlio, a Lawyer of great e∣steem, and President of the Privy Counsel; and Monsieur de Barlemonte, one of the chief of the Treasury; who being both of them absolutely resolv'd to follow the Kings sense, would acknowledg no other interpreter thereof then Granville, in whose brest they knew that the King had chiefly deposited them. Jealousies began therefore suddenly to arise amongst the Counsel, and from jealousies they soon past to factions, to the great prejudice of Government, and of the Kings af∣fairs. In the new erection of Bishopricks, the King had made Granville Arch∣bishop of Malines; as well that he might be heightned in preferment, as also that he might not be forced to absent himself from the Regent, whose residency was usually to be at Brussels, a Town within the Diocess of Malines. He like∣wise the next year 1560. did by the Kings favour obtain the dignity of Cardi∣nalship; so as with this his increase of honour, his Authority in the Government was much increased. Antonio Cardinal di Granvilla (for so he stiled himself) was son to Nicholas Perenot, a Burgundian, Lord of Granville, who had a long time, and with great credit, been Secretary to the Emperour Charls the fift; whom his son succeeded, as well in his Office, as in his fathers favour, being made Bishop of Arras. In this his fathers School, and among the Arcana of this Prince, Antonio had much better learnt the art of absolute, then of limited command. And pas∣sing from Charls his service to the like of Philip, in equal imployment and power; and being afterwards left in Flanders with the Dutchess of Parma, as Arbitrer and Moderator of her Government, he could hardly be brought to temper that Au∣thority which the Kings passionate affection gave him in Flanders in so high a de∣gree; but being haughty and cholerick by nature, and of a mind which tasted more of the Laick, then of the Ecclesiastick; he loved to boast how great his
power was with the King, rather then to keep it conceal'd. He loved in con∣testation and envy to be above all others, in rather an imperious then moderate manner: in all things else he was an able Minister of State without all question; through his knowledge of many tongues, and many sorts of learning, and by he experience of so many things, seen and managed by him, in the service of so memorable Princes. On the other side it was hard for the chief and prime Lords of Flanders to tollerate the Cardinals imperious power. Orange and Egmont were principally moved hereat, as also Count Horne, who was Admiral at sea a man of a fierce and rash nature: he enjoyed the place of Admiralty in Flanders; Orange the government of Holland, Zealand, and Utricht, together with that of Burgundy: and Egmont was Governor of the particular Province of Flanders, and of Artois. These were all three of the Councel of State; and being scan∣dalized to see the continuance of the Cabinet Councel, wherein many things of weighty consequences were resolved on without their acquaintance: they mur∣mured publickly against it in all places. Was this the reward of their past services and merits? That the King, under the name of the Dutchess of Parma, should make their Country be governed, and domi∣neered over by the Cardinal Granville? that the King did only confide in him, and made him only acquainted with his true intentions. That they were allow'd votes in the Councel, and places in the Provinces, only as insignificant cyphers, that the weigh∣tiest affairs were treated of in secret, unknown to the Councel; and that such Laws were given to Flanders as best liked ā stranger, an imperious Burgundian; and one of so mean a beginning, as those of his Family would not disdain to serve them. That the Inquisition was chiefly the of spring of his advice: That he would thus bring in the Go∣vernment of Spain and Italy into Flanders, and rule over their consciences as well as their persons. That the estates, the honours, nay even the lives of the most innocent amongst them, was expos'd to the rigour of the Inquisition, upon any appearance, any report, how false, how slight soever it was. Let Spain and Italy groan under such a burthen; the one so infected with the Moors, and the other so often overrun by Barbarians. That Flanders enjoyed the purity of its antient bloud, and the modera∣tion of its peculiar Laws. That it had been Catholick thus long of its own will, and would of its own will be so still Orange and the other two spread abroad these complaints, not only amongst the Nobility, but amongst the common people; and 'tis not to be believed what a commotion they begot: For nothing more plausible could be touched upon, then what had respect to the preservation of their publick priviledges, nor more odious then the Inquisition, by which they expected to be every day more and more prejudiced. They forbare not to shew their sences herein to the Regent her self; who set upon on the one side by the absolute decrees of Spain, and on the other by the apprehension of so bitter complaints, could do no otherwise but give good answers, and hopes of timely remedy. That which she was most trou∣bled at, was to hear that Orange in particular had propounded a Convocation of the States General, as the most efficatious remedy which could be apply'd to the evils in matter of Religion, which at that time threatned Flanders. He see∣med to propound this out of his zeal to the love of Religion, and of the King: saying, that thus, by the opinion of all the Provinces, the Inquisition might either be moderated, or wholly supprest, by the applying of some more moderate re∣medy in the lieu thereof, and which used with the satisfaction of the Country, might be altogether as efficatious. This advice could not be well received from Orange, who was esteemed mighty ambitious, and very crafty. It was rather thought he endeavoured thus anteci∣pately to work upon the peoples inclination, to the end that he might afterwards rule this publick Assembly when it should be called, according to his own will, and his own ends. The Cardinal did not let slip these occasions to raise the grea∣ter jealousies in the King, of Orange and the rest, who seemed to contrary him, and detracted from his actions. He shew'd, How much such a Convocation would redound to the Kings prejudice; and how that the meeting of this Assembly was to be shun'd at all times as much as might be: which coming the better to the knowledge of its power by its union,
endeavoured alwayes to lessen the Princes Authority and Prerogative, and to advance their own. But of how much greater danger would this be at such a conjuncture of time, wherein such a preparation of peccant humors were seen to be in all the degrees of the Country. So as it was to be held for certain that the Abbots would appear discontented; the meaner sort of Gentry would be wrought upon by the greater; and the common People, of themselves alwayes greedy of Noveltie, would much more willingly obey their Deputies, and the rest of esteem amongst them of their own degree, then the King, the Regent, or any other of the Kings Officers. That therefore the King was not by any means to admit of such an Assembly; but that it was better to temporize a while be∣tween rigor and mildness, till this inclination to Innovation should passe over; it being to be hoped for that Ornage and the rest would never endeavor it, when they should see no hopes of bringing it to passe. The King would have been averse enough of himself from the calling together of the States General, for these very reasons which he himself very well knew: but the Letters which Granville writ to him to this purpose, and which were fully confirmed by the Regent, made him be much more so: insomuch as the King per∣sisting still more and more in the execution of the Edicts against the Hereticks, renued his orders therein often to the Regent; and by her the Commissions were reitterated in the Provinces: where the Magistrates meeting every day with greater difficulties in making them be executed, saw their Authority often times scorned and derided. Heresie had by this time got too deep rooting; and still cor∣rupting the peoples minds more and more by the alluring liberty of her Tenets, had begun to beget in them an open alienation from their due obedience to the Lawes and Magistrates: contrary to publike orders, papers were every day given abroad by the Hereticks, first in writing, and then in Print; first in matters one∣ly which concern'd conscience; and then in such things as might make the people the more fear to see the form of Government altered to their prejudice. On the part of France, these pernitious practises were managed in the Walloon Provinces; under which name are comprehended those Provinces of Flanders, which are situated towards France; and wherein there is great commerce of wine, and other Merchandize, with that Kingdom; and especially in the two Cities of Tourney, and Valenciennes. On the side of Germany, the Hereticks sought in like manner to infect Friesland, and all that neighbouring part of the low Coun∣tryes within land. But the infection was greater, which was brought both by Sea and Land, into Holland and Zealand by meanes of the commerce which the Cities in the Baltick Sea had in Amsterdam, and in Midleburg; both of them places of great Traffick; as also in many other towns of great Traffick both in Holland and Zealand. Great was the commerce of Traffickers likewise into both those Provinces from England. And Hereticall Ministers entring on all sides, under the profession of Merchants, they accompanied their seditious writings, with words of mouth yet more seditious; reproving the Flemish in particular of their too much remisness, and patience, in bearing the yoke, which as they said, was laid upon their consciences. That Germany had thrown it off long ago, as they might see; even against the forces of Charls the fifth: that England had now happily done the like: and that the reformed Religion made daily great advancements in France: that they might then know their own power, and how to make use of it; that the Regent was a woman, wholly in their power: Granville a forreiner, and hated by the Country: that the King was far off, and but little hopes of his ever returning thither in person: and to what end did the disarmed Authority of the Princes serve, but to make them be the more scorned and lesse feared. The Heretical Ministers, and other Sectaries fill'd the ears, and mindes of the Flemish in all parts with these conceits, which infused impiety and sedition. And in concourse of time it was discovered that Orange held intelligence particularly with the Admirall of France: which was contracted upon the occasion he had of entertaining himself in France with Henry the second, as one of the hostages of Philip the second, in performance of the Peace of Cambray, as hath been said: and time produced at last, that Orange took for his fourth and last wife a daugh∣ter
of the same Admirals (though the Admirall was then dead) as shall be said in its due place. This correspondency in endeavours between them was easily contracted by the similitude of their natures. For both of them were very Am∣bitious and Fraudulent: and did equally endeavour to advance their own private Fortunes by the publike ruine. In fine, in the opinion of all men the one was born to be the cause of France's misfortunes, the other of the calamities of Flan∣ders. And both of them by their Tragical ends, shewed what punishment is re∣served for those, who losing all respects either of Lawes or God, do erect their Altars here below to Ambition, and impiety; and to the Idols of other immode∣rate and blinde Humane passions. The Kingdom of France was at this time in∣volved in great troubles. Francis the second was dead: whom Charls the ninth, succeeded at the age of ten years. Catherine of Medicis, mother to them both, retained the chief place in Government in Charls his time as well as she had done in his Brothers, who not able to sustain it but by intreaty, or prayer, was forced to devide it sometimes with the Catholikes, sometime with the Hugonots. But still in danger of the Ambitious designes, which was discovered in both the parties. France was never agitated with greater Tempests then these. And the Hugonot faction prevailing then continually more in the Kingdom, 'tis no wonder if the Hereticks took the boldness to foment the evils from that part, which were a hatching in Flanders; expecting that by the conjuncture of times and actions, they might come from secret fomenting, to open conspiracy. A midst so many forreine Plots, and home difficulties, the Regent was every day more straitened in matter of Religion. On the one side Granville encouraged her to have the Edicts executed; one the others side, the Governours of the Provinces desired to be ex∣cused; shewing that the number of the Hereticks was already too great; and that in many places the Magistrates themselves were infected with Heresie. It was known notwithstanding that they did not what they might have done; were it ei∣ther that they desired some dishonour and shame might redound to Granville from such disorders, who had the chief stroke in Government; or that the King should be the more inforced to seek for remedy therein by their means. They con∣tinued their former complaints against Granville; and discovered an apparent hatred and scorn of him: as was particularly seen upon a certain occasion, which was thus. At a certain Feast there hapned to be, Count Egmont, the Marquess of Berghen, (who was likewise one of the chief Lords of the Country, and Governour of Henault) and Min Here Montigni, Brother to Count Horne, and divers other of their Friends: where a discourse hapned (were it casuall, or premeditated) upon the Liveries which the Pages and foot-men of the Lords and other chiefest of the Court wore: here one of them rising up, said, Why doe we not all make one and the same Livery, which by the similitude of our colours, may denote the conformity of our mindes? the proposition was instantly enter∣tained, and lots being drawn, who should chuse the Livery, it fell to Egmont; and he chose one with a certain Odde Coule, or Hood, which in Flanders are Buffonelike, and are wont to be put on the heads of Fools or Jesters. Many others of the Court presently took up this livery: and for divers dayes there was no other work done in Brussels. The Dutchesse was hereat offended; for none doubted but that this habit had relation to the Cardinals habit; and that this was done in derision of him. Besides, it might be feared, that this might be the be∣ginning of a league, and union within the Court, which might soon spread abroad throughout the whole Country to the great prejudice of the King. The Dutchess laid this particularly to Egmonts charge; who excused it, as a thing which had hapned casually, and without any intention of offending the Cardinal, and much lesse, of proving prejudicial to the Kings service. They then left off their Coule and took for their common impressa, a bundoll of Arrowes tide up together; which was an impressa often used in the Kings coyn. They would have it beleeved that this signified their joynt union in the Kings service; but it was generally thought, that this union had for its end, the defence of publike Pri∣viledges, and their conformable sense to conspire unanimously against Granville: nor was it long ere this conspiracie broke forth: for people growing still more haughty, not being able to discend to dissimulation, as neither was the Cardinal on
his behalf, nor yet to any sort of going lesse, especially when he saw himself so bitterly provoked; Orange, Egmont, and Horn, together with divers others, combined joyntly together against him; and these three in particular, resolved to write a letter to the King; which was to this purpose. How great our devotions have alwayes been to your Majesties service in these parts, we beleeve may be sufficiently known, both by our so faithfull service to your Majestie, and by those favours which in leiu thereof you have upon all occasions so graciously confer'd upon each of us. The same zeal makes us now perhaps transgresse the rules of reverence, that we may not prove faulty in those of Loyalty. Your Majesty, at your departure left the Government of these Provinces in the Dutchess of Parma; so vertuous a Princess as she hath fully answered the applause of so worthy a choice. It was beleeved that the Bishop of Arras, now Cardinal, was left with her to Councell and advise her, and not to be Arbitrer in the Government: but he arrogating unto himself the absolute disposall of all things, and leaving nothing of Regent to the Dutchess but the bare name, disposes of these Provinces, as he would do of his own private house. He orders all things as he pleases; he handles and resolves the weightiest affairs without the knowledge of the Councell of State: and doth this so imperiously, and with such contempt of all the Nobility, as the manner is more odious then the thing it self. If the evils which insue from hence did terminate in our own private offences, we might at last resolve to bear with them; but experience doth shew daily more and more, that this maladie is already become Publike; and that not stopping in the Court, it passes, and breakes out into the Provinces, with great danger that the effects will still prove worse. As long as Cardinal Granville shall tarry in Flanders, so long will these inconviencies and disorders increase; and be∣cause they may perchance in time arrive at such a height, that it will be too late to remove him from hence; we therefore have thought it suited with the obligation which the Candor of our fidelitie, and the condition of our severall imployments imposeth upon us to acquaint your Maiesty with what hath been said, to the end that you may apply such remedy as is necessary: which certainly consists in taking the Cardinal from Flanders, as soon as may be. Those who are here of the best sort, and generally all the rest of the Provinces are of our opinion; in which let not the Cardinal boast him∣self that he desires the integrity of the Catholike Religion more then we; for we may rather justly glory, that had it not been for us the worship thereof would have been much more damnified, and diminished in them. This was written in March 1563 those who writ it, knew very well, that the Cardinal did nothing but by express command from the King; and therefore to blame him, was thorough him to blame the King; the King forbore from an∣swering them some months; and at last, with such brevity and state as became a King, he answered thus. I am glad that I can attribute all that which you all three have written touch∣ing Cardinal Granville, to the particular respect of my service. I commend your zeal, and am well pleased with your carriage. But on the other side, I do not use for any complaint made by others, to bereave any Officer of mine of his imployment, without hearing him speak for himself. Moreover, it is fitting in business of this nature, to come from generalities to particular offences; to the end that if the accused cannot justifie himself, his punishment may be the greater. But because these are things which peradventure may better be discust by word of mouth then by Letters, I think it best that some one of you to that purpose, come over to me in person; with assurance of being here by me, both willingly heard, and honourably received. Orange and the rest were much confused at this Letter: they were not there∣withall satisfied; but being the more incensed, they writ again unto the King, a longer Letter, complaining that after so long a delay, the King seemed so much to slight their endeavours. They said in that Letter, That they had not subscribed themselves in their former Letter, as the Cardinals accusers, but as his Majesties Councellers; and therefore bound to acquaint him with that which they conceiv'd made most for his service; that they did not desire the Cardi∣nal should be any wars damnified by their means; but did rather wish him all encrease of honour and employment, so as it were out of Flanders; that his being in Flanders
did too much harm, for the reasons they had formerly alleadged, which were so known, as they needed no further proof. For what remained, they did not put so great a va∣lue upon the Cardinal, as that any of them should come into Spain upon his score. And since the King did so little believe them, they desired he would be pleased that from hence-forward they might forbear coming to the Councel; where they could no longer either serve the King, or do themselves any honour. This in short was the contents of the second Letter. To which the King after a while did also answer, to this effect. That he would consider of what was best to be done concerning the Cardinals person; that in the mean time they should continue to do him that service which he expected at their hands, as well in the Councel, as in their other employ∣ments, for which they were to expect from him by way of recompence, all grate∣full acknowledgement. There past little less then a whole year in the intercourse of these Letters; but Orange, Egmont, and the rest, continuing still their boldness, and knowing that there was little good to be hoped for from Spain, touching Granvilles removal from Flanders, they resolved to put such scorn upon him, and so to despise him, as he himself should desire to be gone from thence. They treated little with him: they seldom appeared in Councel; they termed such as adhered therein to him, Cardinalists: in their meetings, at their feasts, and almost at all times and in all places, they mockt and laught at him: and there wanted not some of them who affirmed that the speediest way of ridding Flanders of him, was to rid him of his life. So as the Cardinal being reduced to those terms, as that he could not serve the King to any purpose in those parts, nor stay there with safety to his own life; he himself at last craved leave of the King to be gone. Who agitated awhile between the necessity of granting his request, and his own dignity in denying it, resolved at last to give way thereunto, since he could now put on no more vigo∣rous resolutions. But this injury remained notwithstanding, deeply imprinted in his mind: which he resented upon other occasions, as we shall hereafter see. The Cardinal Granville went then from Flanders in March 1564. and going first into Burgundy about his Domestical affairs, he was afterwards sent for by the King with much honour into Spain; and was there made one of the Councel of State, and employed in the most weighty affairs of that Crown. Many were of opinion that the Dutchess was not much troubled to see Granville gone; as one who was upheld by the King in too great Authority with her. Yet the truer opinion was, that she was very much grieved to be deprived of such a man, and one so well experienced in the affairs of Flanders. To boot that upon any sinister events, (whereof many, and of very great moment did ensue after his de∣parture) he might have justified her behaviour therein unto the King, and have easily freed her from those accusations, which were afterwards, often laid unto her charge in the Councel in Spain.
THE HISTORY OF THE WARS OF FLANDERS. Written by CARDINAL BENTIVOGLIO. BOOK II. The Contents. The Nobility are glad at Granvilles departure. Factions in the Councel of State. The Regent makes the Councel of Trent be received; Orange opposeth it, and shews an unquiet disposition. Heresie begins to appear bare-faced in Flanders. The In∣quisition still more detested. Egmont goes into Spain. The King persists in his former resolutions. Egmont returns, and the Country is distasted. The Nobility do in particular conspire, and form an Instrument in writing, by the name of Com∣promise or Covenant. Some of the chiefest meet together at Breda, a Town belong∣ing to the Prince of Orange. The Dutchess grows very apprehensive of these pro∣ceedings. She understands that a great many of the Nobility meet together, to present her with a Petition; she endeavours, but in vain to hinder the delivery of it. Brederodes Oration to his other Companions. They present the Petition. They take upon them the name of Beggers. And why they do so. The Marquis of Berghen and Monsieur Montigni are sent into Spain; and are not admitted of by the King. The practise and profession of heresie is publickly introduced in Flanders. The Nobilities audaciousness in defending it. Their assembling to∣gether at Getrinberg. The Regent endeavours to satisfie them. And is at last inforced to take away all manner of Inquisition. The hereticks and unquiet people are hereby encouraged. From whence they come to open violencies against the Churches. WHen Cardinal Granville was gone from Flanders, occasion of complaining did rather cease in Orange and the rest, then a will to complain. And therefore seeming very well satisfied with this the Kings resolution, they made pub∣lick demonstrations of joy in all places. That now the Country was freed of him who sought to op∣press it; The Councel left in its former dignity; and the Regent her self in the reputation which was due to her in the Government: That Flanders had not a sorer enemy then the Cardinal; nor the Nobility a more malitious interpreter of their actions to the King. Let him in Gods name, carry that pride and arrogancy which he so much joy'd in, somewhere else; and
let him exalt himself, where either the obscurity of his birth was not known, or where the splendor of others was less esteemed of. They accompanied the Cardinals deperture with these words, full of bitterness; not yet satisfied with the hatred, which whilst present, they had in so many sorts shewed towards him. On the other side they shewed all due observancy to the Regent; they never intermitted commg to Councel; neither did they let slip any other occasion by which they might reconcile her unto them, and make her their protect or unto the King. We told you before, that the President Vighlio, and Barlemont did side with the Cardinal in all things in Councel; he had made the King have a great good opinion of their fidelity and wisdom, as also the Coun∣cel of Spain; so as when the Cardinal was gone, 'twas soon seen that the Re∣gent confided more in these two in many resolutions, then in all the rest: and 'twas easily to be judged that she had Orders from the King so to do; and that though the Cardinal was gone, yet his Councels remained still in Flanders. Vighlio was an upright man, and no less pious in matters of Religion, then faithfull in what concern'd the King. And where it was needfull, he opposed the ambition and arrogancy of great ones, more then became his condition. Succeeding then in Granvilles sence, and encouraged thereunto by the esteem which was put up∣on his Councels in Spain, he forbore not to put the Regent in mind, How little cause she had to confide in those great ones; who having no other end then to make themselves every day greater, could not receive any addition to their Authority, which tended not to the diminution of the Regal power. That their eyes were now upon France; and by the example of those Contrivers of Innovations, they would introduce the same troubles and Faction into Flan∣ders, that they might afterwards fall out within themselves, who should have the greatest share of their Country, when they had made a prey of her. Was there any doubt but that all those pretences were false which they had made use of to remove Granville from Flanders? How had he offended them? unless they would esteem themselves injured by the service which he had done the King, and which with such loyalty and constancie of mind he had alwayes endea∣voured to sustain, not regarding their complaint nor threats? That she would be soon enough aware of this: For one pretence failing, they would raise up others; and after having warred against the Kings Ministers of State, they would bare-faced make war against the King himself. This speech of Vighlio's proved a prophesie; so fully was it confirmed by the event. Nor was it long ere (just as he had foretold) Orange and the rest took up new occasion of Com∣plaints, in a business which fell out in Religion; and 'twas this. The Coun∣cel of Trent was already published; and the controversies which arose between the Catholicks and Hereticks in matter of religion, were truly determined by that divine Oracle of the Church: neither had her sacred Decree brought forth less fruit, in the reformation of Ecclesiastical discipline. Of all the Princes of Chri∣stendom, the King of Spain had made it his particular care to see that Councel take good effect. He was alwayes fixed and unalterable, not to admit of any Religion in his Kingdoms and States but the Catholike profession: For his Ter∣ritories being so far divided one from another, he thought that they might be the easilier united in their obedience under him by the bond of an uniform zeal which might equally fasten them in their devotion to the Church. The Councel then being ended, the King was resolved for what concerned his Temporal authority, that the Decrees made thereby should be observed in all his Dominions; and therefore had given such orders as were needfull, to the Dutchess of Parma, to make them be received and observed in Flanders. She propounded this to the Councel of State; and there wanted not some who presently opposed the pro∣position. They said, That the Conncel was in many things contrary to the priviledges of the Provinces; that the Ecclesiastical government would be too much advantaged thereby; that the strictness thereof did too much oppose the liberty of the Country; and , that the Catholike Princes of Germany had refused to receive it, and that the same contra∣rieties appeared to be in France. Orange in particular moved these oppositions: Though it was not true that any
evil could redound to the Country by the Councel, as experience did afterwards shew. But he did this, that he might not let slip any occasion in shewing himself zealous in whatsoever might appeare serviceable for the common good of the Flemish: To boot, that it was already begun to be feared that these might proceed from some corruption in him in point of religion. He had already two years ago married for his second wife, Anne, daughter to Maurice Elector of Saxony, a wo∣man who was an Heretick: whereat the King was displeased, neither was the Regent nor Cardinal Granville well pleased thereat. Bringing her afterwards to Brussels, he gave way that not only she, but many others under colour of belonging to her family, had the exercise of the Lutheran religion used amongst them: So as the ceremonies thereof were observed in his house; and his wife had with her some of her sisters of the same sect. Orange excused himself herein, by reason of the Li∣berty of Conscience which was enjoyed in Germany, and by his being obliged so to doe in his conditions of marriage. But whatsoever his opinion was then in point of Religion, it was thought that he had willingly allied himself to a Prince so considerable in Germany, to the end that he might get new adherences in those parts, and thereby advantage or aggrandise himself upon any occasion that might arise. He therefore under the abovesaid pretences did oppose the introducing of the Councel more then any other: And being egg'd on by Ambition, and by those ends which till then he had secretly hatched in his mind; not stopping at those difficulties which arose of Religion, he propounded many other things by way of Reformation of Government: under pretence of doing the King service, and of the good which would thereby redound unto the Country. He proposed how that it would be much better, to have all things discust in the Councell of State, which were now severally agitated in the Cabinet Councell, and Councel of the Treasurie. He said that many times the results of one Councel did thwart those of another; and that by reason of the affairs being thus divided, they were usually spun out into much length, and great difficulties were occasioned. That the Councel of State being esteemed the chiefest, it was as the eye of the Prince, which watched over the common good of his people: that therefore the Government thereof should be answerable to its dignitie. That notwithstanding, not to ingrosse the whole body of business into the Counsel of State, a deputa∣tion might be made to some inferior officers who might discuss the more com∣mon affairs of the two other Councels; and that these of greatest importance being thus united, and choice being made of the ablest Councellors to manage them, the expedition would doubtlesly be much greater, and the profit much more. But all the rest of the Councel did not agree in this; Egmont, though he was oft times drawn to be of Orange his opinion, through the advantage which the subtile craft of the one had over the others more open nature, seemed not to approve of these innovations touching the Councels; and in the business of the Councel of Trent, he said; that it was a business to be maturelty con∣sidered upon; to the end that the Kings orders therein might be effected, so as might give best satisfaction to the Provinces. But Veghlio was for the present put∣ting of the Councel in Execution. He said; That the Church in all ages had endeavoured by the way of Councels to preserve the Purity of her decrees, and the order of her Discipline. And how salutiferous would such a remedy be in particular to those evils wherewith Flanders did at the present labour, and which did still threaten her more and more? that if the Councel could any wise prejudice the priviledges of the Provinces, some accomodation might be thought upon therein. For what remain'd, that the King ought to boast and glory himself that he had not either the same necessity or the same sence as other Princes had; and that his was so conformable to that of the Church, and grounded upon such rea∣sons which did so well unite Wisdom and Piety together. Neither did he lesse op∣pose Orange his proposition touching the reducing the three above said Councels into one. Shewing, That, that would be, not to order, but to confound businesses; which be∣ing so many and of such weight and labor, might be sufficiently digested in each of them apart, that the introducing of those Councels did not then begin; but that the use of them was so Ancient, as shewed the good
use which was made of them, and that therefore they ought not by any means to be altered. And afterward inciting the Regent in secret against Orange his Ambition; he shewed how dangerous such propositions were to the Kingly Authority, and that of her her self. For that the Councel of State would by this means not only be supe∣riour to her Regencie, but to the power of the very King. Barlemont agreed in opinion with the President Vighlto; and these two, together with some others which they had drawn over to side with them, were by Orange and the rest who had shewed themselves enemies to Granville, called by the name of Cardinalists. Complaining still that his sence remained in Flanders, though not his person: the complaints, and contrarieties of opinions in the Councel did therefore daily increase more and more; and from these disorders the like in the Provinces, where the Edicts met with such difficulties as some of the meaner sort of Hereticks had lately had the boldnes in Antwerp to hinder the publike execution of justice which was to have been done upon one of them by burning him in the place appointed thereunto. The like had not long before happened in Valenciennes, and the like was feared in Tourney: to this was added, that in these and others Cities the Here∣ticks were heard to sing their vulgar Psalms by night publikely in the streets. And did by day exercise their sects in more then one place; and did almost threaten that they would have the free use thereof by force, since they could not have it by Toleration. The Dutchess wavered between the inconveniencies and dangers which might insue as well by putting the Edicts rigorously into execution, as by giving any the least connivencie to the exercise of Heresie; she therefore thought good that Count Egmont should go to Spain, to inform the King fully by word of mouth, of all the occurrences of Flanders, and in particular of those which had respect to Religion: and to solicit such remedies as should be thought most fit. The Councel approved of his going, and because in the infor∣mations which were given unto the Count of those things which he was to say in Spain, Orange thought that the disorders which were already risen, and which yet were to be feared in matter of Heresie, were not represented in such manner as they ought to be: he spake, as much concern'd, or very feelingly therein; reflecting particularly upon Vighlio who was to draw up the instructions. This (said he) is either to deceive our selves, or the King, in going about to les∣sen those evils, which are so much greater then the Relation which is now to be sent, makes them appear to be. Let the King know the bottom of our evils, to the end that he may the better know them, and know how the more easily to cure them. Let us not conceal how great the number of hereticks are here almost in all our Provinces; how little they do already value his Edicts: how small respect they bear to the Magi∣strates: and let it be concluded that Flanders is not capable of the Inquisition. And that to continue it, would be a greater evil then the mallady it self. I am (said he) a good Catholick, and a faithfull servant of the Kings; but the deplorable examples of Germany and France, do sufficiently prove, that conscience will be perswaded, not enforced; and that heresie ought not to be suddenly allay'd by violence, since it may sooner be quenched by fair means. He put them in mind again of the difficulties of the Councel of Trent, and what he had propounded touching the reforming of the Councels; upon which things he did much expatiate himself with great fervency. But the Dutchess ta∣king Count Egmont aside, and giving him such instructions as she thought fittest; dispatched him away for Spain, loading him with all those hopes which might more encourage him to the journey, and wishing him for his own sake to carry the business so as might stand best with the Kings liking. The King was well pleased that Egmont should come to Spain, for he was thought to be of a good and easie nature, when left to himself; and therefore the King hoped to draw him the easilier over to his sense, by favours which he would conferr upon him. And that having won him, who was so much beloved in Flanders, the others would either forbear novelties, or being divided amongst themselves, they should not at least so easily put them in execution. Egmont began his journey in the beginning of the year 1565. and when he came to Madrid, he was honourably received by the King and the whole Court. But as for the business, he prevailed
no more then the former endeavours, and complaints about the Inquisition and Edicts against the hereticks had done. The King was firmly setled in his first re∣solution, of not giving any the least toleration at all therein: and he, as also the whole Councel of Spain, was as firmly perswaded, that the mischiefs of Flanders in matter of Religion, were chiefly occasioned by the weakness and connivency of those who were trusted with seeing the Edicts executed. The King was displea∣sed with the Proposition touching the alteration of the Councels; as arguments of ambitious and unquiet thoughts, which still appeared more in Orange: Nor would have any thing spoken thereof, nor listen to any opposition that was made to the Councel of Trent. He notwithstanding dispatcht Egmont away in a very benigne manner, and full of hopes that he himself would follow speedily after him, to Flanders in person, to see the better to the affairs of those Provinces. He did him many favours, and in particular presented him 50000 Dutch Guelders, and promised he would help to see his daughters (of which Egmont had good store) well married, and would take him, and all the interests of his Family, in∣to his particular protection. He therefore returned very well satisfied from the Court of Spain, magnifying the Kings goodness: his inclination to the Fle∣mish, the favours which he would in particular conferr upon the Nobility; and his firm resolution of coming quickly into Flanders. But Orange seeming little to believe what Egmont said, and not trusting to the hope which he so amplified, told him upon a time in the presence of many, by way of sharp derision, That he little understood the Spaniards cunning: and that suffering himself to be deluded by his own privat advantages, he had not well minded the Countrys publick welfare, whilst he was in Spain. At the same time that Egmont returned from Spain, Alexander Fernese, Prince of Parma, and son to the Regent, came likewise from thence to Flanders, by rea∣son of the marriage which was concluded between him and the Princess Mary, of the bloud Royal of Portugal. This Alexander is he who afterward go∣verned the Low-Countreys so gallantly for the space of 15 years, and who by his so many illustrious actions will enrich this our History, if God permit me life to finish it, and a sutable vigour to my pen. His marriage was to be celebrated in Flanders; and not long after Peter Ernestus, Count Mansfield, Governor of Lu∣cemberg, went by sea, together with his wife, and a noble and numerous atten∣dance, to conduct his Bride from those parts. And after a dangerous voyage, having at last brought her safely to Brussels, the marriage was there solemnized; to the which Octavius Fernese, Duke of Parma, came from Italy to honour his son, and see the Regent his wife. But to return to the affairs treated of by Eg∣mont in Spain. The Regent thought it fit, that he himself should make relation thereof in the Councel of State. The Councels opinion was, that a conference should be had in Brussels of some Bishops, some Divines, and some Lawyers, who might consider how the Kings Orders in the aforesaid matters of Religion, and wherein was so much difficulty, might best be effected. To this end the Regent sent for the Bishops of Arras, of Ipri, and Namures, who had intervened at the Councel of Trent: For Ravenstai, and Jansene, two of the most esteemed Divines which were then in those parts; for two Presidents of the Provincial Councels of Flanders and Utricht, together with two Councellers, the one of Malines, the other of Brabant. The result of this conference was, That all possible care should be taken to preserve the true Catholick Doctrine throughout the whole Country: That to this purpose Seminaries should be instituted in Cities, and Schools in other places: That it should be endeavoured to reduce all Ec∣clesiastical persons to convenient reformation. And lastly, it was judged, that touch∣ing the punishment of Hereticks, the necessity of the times were such, as for the pre∣sent, moderation was rather to be therein used then rigor since it was seen that the severity of punishment made them still more mad and pertenacious. The Dutchess acquainted the King at large with all that was treated of in this Conference, by her Letters of July the same year 1565. to the which the King answered, by a new and express Declaration, That he would not forgoe what he had already so maturely resolved on con∣cerning his Edicts, the Inquisition, the Councel of Trent, and other things
which concerned Religion. He seemed much incenst that dispute should be still had about such businesses: and complain'd that the disorder of the Heretick was occasioned and increased through the too great connivencie of his Officers: that if any of them were wanting either in courage, or in zeal, the Regent should change them and should consider that the dangers were not so great which might be feared from observing the Edicts, and from so moderate a use of the inquisiti∣on, but that those were much greater, which would insue by leaving Heresie, and the wilde boldness of her Sectaries, without such a curb. He concluded, that the Regent could do him no such acceptable service, as to endeavour by all possible means the maintaining of Flanders united in the Catholike Religion to his other Kingdoms: since by rendering this obedience to the Church, the obe∣dience which was due to his Crown was the better established; and that when these two obediences should be given, he would in all things else, not onely make Flanders enjoy her Priviledges, but confer greater immunities upon her. These so strict commands being come to the Regent from Spain, she suddenly published a new Edict against the Hereticks in confirmarion of the former; she writ herein apart to the Councels, and Governours of the Provinces. And de∣puted certain persons in each of them, who were to give her an account every three moneths of the State of Religion, and particularly what observance was given to the Councel of Trent. It was generally hoped for in Flanders, upon Egmonts going into Spain, that the King would have moderated the Edicts, and wholly have suppressed the in∣quisition. So as when the contrary appear'd, and that the rigor of the Edicts was rather augmented, & that the inquisition, so much abhor'd by them, was establisht, it cannot be said how much the People were hereat inraged: and what preparations were suddenly made for the ensuing troubles. The fear of the inquisition being by this new Edict every where diffused, and the terror thereof being by many artificiously encreased, some grew so bold as to give a beginning to a confederacy, whereby they straitly bound themselves to keep united together, and to oppose the inquisition as much as they might. Philip Marnissius, Lord of Saint Aldigonde, was reputed the Author hereof; who was a bold man, and who already began to think ill of the Catholike Religion, and was alwayes afterwards one of the most obstinate of the Heretick Faction. A particular writing was then drawn up in testimony of the aforesaid confederacy, and was suddenly subscribed by many. And in respect of the reciprocal promises therein contained, it was called a Com∣premise, or Covenant; the Tenor whereof was, That the King being abused by some few under the pretence of Religion, who were more sway'd by Ambition, Avarice, and infidelity, then by honesty, Justice, or the love of their Country, would by all means establish the Spanish inquisition in Spain; the use whereof, and the calamities which would thereupon insue, were set down in the most fearfull terms that could be devised: 'twas added, that the care of remedying such evils belonged chiefly to the Nobilitie; and that the best remedy was, to joyn all in one sense, not to admit of the inquisition in any manner whatsoever: 'twas shew'd how that the same intention would be had throughout the whole Country, such a novelty being too pernitious to all men, and did too much repugne the publike Priviledges: and in fine, the confederates engaged themselves each to other by oath, never to seperate, or ever to admit of the use of the inquisition, under what soever name either of visitation, commission, or Edict. They cal'd God to be a witness of their good intentions, and invoked the Holy Ghost to bring their endeavours to a happy end. This is the Compremise, Arbitrement, or Covenant which is so much written of by all those who relate the affairs of Flanders. And this proved the first sparkle of that fire, which did afterwards involve, and doth to this day keep all the Pro∣vinces in so long, and so bitter a War. The above said writing was suddenly disperst abroad throughout the whole Country: for the first confederates di∣viding themselves into the chiefest Cities, and all possible diligence and cunning to make it be subscribed by as many as they could. They gave out, that all this was done by the Agreement of the persons of best quality in all the Provinces; and that Orange, Egmont, the Marquess of Berghen, and divers others of the prime nobilitie, were the Authors thereof, though they would not yet discover
themselves; to the end they might do it hereafter to better purpose. Thus Ca∣tholicks and Hereticks, the Nobles and Citizens, Merchants and Plebeians; and many others of all conditions and professions, strive who shall run fastest to sub∣scribe. The confederacy is praised, and received with great applause: In their cups, and at their meat, great is the ardor which is seen in every one to embrace it. Down goes the Inquisition; the mischief suddenly grows greater; the ve∣nome whereof doth not now creep in, but like a Torrent, overflowes and enlar∣geth it self every where. Of such force is inraged fear with mortals; and so much more doth apprehended evill sometimes prevail, then the evil would do were it effected. At the same time many seditious papers were scattered about in the Cities of greatest commerce, whereby the apprehension of the Inquisition was en∣deavoured to be augmented in the people. In particular it was given out, that Henry Duke of Brunswick, was shortly to come with some Alman Forces to assist the Inquisitors. That to this purpose requisite moneys were sent from Spain; that the King sent some Inquisitors of the very Spanish Nation; and that already one Alonzo del Canto was in Flanders to this purpose. The Dutchess of Pa ma was exceedingly troubled to see this: and the more she thought, the less she knew what to do: she saw how needfull rigor would be; but on the other side, she could not exercise it without Forces. What good was there to be expected from new Order, or new Edicts, unless in were to make her authority the less esteemed, and the peoples boldness the greater in de∣spising her. The Regent being thus perplext, and not knowing yet for certain whether the chiefest Lords had joyned in subscribing to this Compremise, or no; she was ad∣vertised that many of them were at the present with Orange in Breda, a Town of his, together with divers other personages of quality. The appearing occasion of their meeting was to visit the Count of Zwarsenburg, who had married a sister of the Prince of Orange, and who was then upon his departure for Germany. With Orange, was Count Lodovick (a brother of his) a man of a turbulent and fierce Nature. And the rest of that Assembly were the Counts of Horn, of Hostrat, and of Mega, together with some others of those Noblemen who had subscribed the compremise; and because Egmont and the Marquis of Berghen could not be then at Breda, they were invited together with all the above-named, the next day to supper in Hostrat, by the Count thereof. The aforesaid confederacy was much discust, first in Breda, and then in Hostrat. At these meetings, Orange, after many complaints made against the Cardina∣lists, shewed how that it appertained to them, who were of the Councel of State, and of the Order of the Golden Fleece, to endeavour the remedy of those evils which so important a commotion did threaten the Country withall. He said that the number of the confederates was great in all parts; and especially those of the better sort: and he spake as if he approv'd of the confederacie, and as if he en∣deavoured to draw the rest of his Colleagues joyntly to embrace it. Lodovick, the Brother of Orange, agreed with him in all things; who was commonly thought to be an heretick, and was not displeased to be thought so; either for that he really was so, and valued not those punishments which he did not fear; or for that Orange himself, for some hidden ends of his own, was well enough content to see his brother in favour and Authority with the Hereticks. Egmont and Berghen, did not seem to adhere to Orange his sence and the Count of Me∣ga much less, who spake boldly against the rashness of the confederates: Horn and Hostrat, suspended their opinions, and thus the meetings ended, no particu∣lar resolution being taken. The Regent was soon acquainted with all these pro∣ceedings, by Egmont and Mega; who together with Barlemonte, and Vighlio, encouraged her, and advised her to raise some soldiers; to which, necessity seem∣ed likewise to perswade her, for that it was every day heard how the number of confederates did every where encrease, as also the suspition that they would at∣tempt some novelty: nor did they any longer delay it. When a great number of them were gathered together, they drew near to Brussels, and desired the Re∣gent that she would permit them to propound a business of importance unto her, and which, (as they said) concerned the Kings service, as well as their own good.
The Councel differed in their opinions, what they ought to advise the Regent to do in this point; the manner of the request being considered, some thought that it was absolutely to be rejected; others, that only two or three might be per∣mitted to present it; but that opinion which was judged most necessary, pleavailed at last, since without forces there was nothing else to be done: and it was, That all of them should be suffered to enter Brussels, which was coloured over by such of the Councel, as were not displeased at the action, by alleadging that it was not fitting to exasperate so many of the Nobility, by rejecting their Petition before it was heard: and that they came but to make supplication, the most desirable tribute of submission which Princes could receive from their people. Of all the confederates who had as yet subscribed, Henry of Brederode, Lord of Viana, a Town in Holland, in which Province he was highly esteemed for the nobility of his bloud, and for which he was likewise much respected throughout the whole Country, was acknowledged as the Head, or Chieftain: he was an heretick with∣out dissimulation, of a troublesome spirit, and more troublesome tongue, desirous of novelties, and the more incited thereunto at this time, by his being chosen to be the head of so many Nobles. He therefore came into Brussels, accompanied with a numerous multitude in the beginning of April 1566; and was soon fol∣lowed by Count Lodovick, brother to the Prince of Orange, who was likewise wel accompanied: as also by the Counts of Collemburg and Tresemberg. These four were then the chief men: their rendezvous at Brussels was in the Count Colemburgs house; and therefore that house was afterwards razed to the ground in Duke Alva's time, in memory of so execrable an excesse: their numbers are diversly spoken of. Some will have them to be 200, others 300, others 500. The Dutchess had this mean while endeavoured by many expedients, and did still endeavour to bring the confederates to some more wholesome Councels. They therefore fearing lest some of their associates might be thereby wrought upon, Brederode, desirous to appear in the first place, and to enjoy it rather by the bold∣ness of his advice, then by the prerogative of persons, spoke thus at one of their meetings. We have already overcome the worst (generous Associats) in being met toge∣ther in so great a union from parts so far distant, and now in so great numbers here. The Regent cannot any ways deny our just desires. But say she should do so, and still persist in the rigor of the Edicts, and the bitterness of the In∣quisition, according to the Orders received from Spain; which of us is it that in such a case will not expose his estate, and life, to free himself, his wife, his chil∣dren, and his Countrey, from such sore yokes? Let us first consider the conditi∣on of our evils, and then we shall see the great justice of our desires. And to say truth, what more unhappy condition can be imagined, then to have so ma∣ny miserable creatures under pretence of Heresie, be continually hurried away into the Inquisition, and there either to die by torments, or be starved in pri∣sons; or being out of prison, to be deprived of their Countrey, and Estates, and oft-times of life it selfe, by the horrible punishment of Fire? What greater unhappiness can there be, then to see innocency it self so often suf∣fer shipwrack in that sea of Calumnies, for every Argument, for every accusa∣tion? Then to see secrecy banisht from out houses, friendship from out Ci∣ties, and to have all Human rights, and rights of Nature violated amongst such as are neerest ally'd in blood, and in belief? These are the Fruits, these the pub∣lick and privat advantages which the Inquisition brings with it: And yet we must esteem the present punishments but slight, and tolerable, in respect of those which threaten us in the future. Which of you is unacquainted with the coming of Don Alonzo del Canto, that new Spanish Inquisitor, into these parts? and who knows not what cruell and fearfull Orders he brings with him? New prisons are already begun to be built, new Irons to be made, and other new ingenious inventions of torments, by this Architects designing. Gastly looks, sad com∣plaints, and in fine, the height of calamity will reign in all places: And this sort of slavery will then appear to us the harder, by how much we have been accu∣stomed by the Laws of our former government, to the sweets of Liberty. Kings themselves (I know not whether you know so much or no) are liable to
the laws of the Inquisition & oft-times to the great scorn of their Scepters, they must undergo the severity of punishment & the superiority of Empire & cōmand: and what more unworthy case can be heard of then what befell our Emperour of ever happy memory? it affrights me to relate it. That vanquisher of Eu∣rope, that Monark of new worlds: and he who was more glorious in renouncing them, then in possessing them; He, even he was compeld by Orders from the Inquisitors, to do publick penance at his return to Spain, for having onely trea∣ted with the Lutheran Hereticks in the wars which he made in Germany. Now if the dangers of the Inquisition be so many, and if they be so hard to be evaded, by the very Spaniards, and Italians, who are by nature so wary and cautious, how shall we Flemings ever hope to escape the least part thereof? We, I say, whose hearts are with such candor seen in our words? who lead so free, and so conversable a life? and who hold it for a particular law of faithfull friendship, not to keep any thing concealed one from another, in our baals, feastings, cups, and invitations? shall it be imputed as a fault of misbeliefe, if some vain or idle word escape our mouths, amidst those our innocent delights? The Inqusition will quickly take from us these our contentments: we shall be turn'd Savages in our demeanours; and our Cities will at last be turned into Desarts, and our Pro∣vinces into solitary habitations: Commerce will be every where destroyed, which consists almost wholly in contracting with such foraigners as profess li∣berty of conscience, and who cannot tolerate so much as the very name of the Inquisition▪ Thus Flanders will in a short time fall into ruine and desolation: And thus our formerly so fortunate Provinces, will for the future be an example of infinite misery to all Europe: whereas formerly their felicity hath been en∣vied by all other Countries. By the condition of the evils which I have laid be∣fore you, the justice of the desires which we shall make to escape them, will con∣sequently and clearly appear. The King hath sworn to maintain our Countrey in her liberties: and what doth more destroy them then doth the Inquisition? The King himself hath for a long time been vers'd here in our customes: and what is more averse unto them then these his Edicts? The Spaniards will intro∣duce the government of Spain into Flanders; and what greater repugnancy can there be, then what is seen between their Laws and ours? between Subjection' which is there adored, and by all men here so much detested? Kings cannot ex∣tend their Laws beyond those of Nature; nay, they are as liable to her Laws, as are their subjects. Let Spain and Italy then retain and enjoy their Inquisition as they shall like best, which Flanders never received but by force, and from which force she is now resolved to free her self. But since 'tis understood that those a∣mongst our selves who partake of the Regents most secret resolutions, and which are now more Spanish then Flemish, endevour to divide us, who is he amongst us, that will be found faulty in his faith? Faulty in things so solemnly promis'd and sworn unto? And finally, faulty to himselfe, to his blood, to his honor, and to the so great danger of his Countrey? God forbid that any such thing should be dream'd of, much less seen. Let each of us consider the ancient glory of our Belgicks, and esteem it a good fortune to be able upon this occasion to imitate them. The worth of progenitors ought to passe together with their blood, into those that descend from them. And the later ought not onely to approve them∣selves heirs, but even competitors of the former in all glorious actions. I then (most noble companions) will with all humility lay before the Regent the bit∣terness of the evils which we undergo, and the necessity of our being relieved therein. But if all due respect, obsequy, and reason, shall prevail no more in these our present instances, then they have formerly done, what is to be done in such a case, but to have recourse to such remedies as desperation useth to suggest against violence. I shall for my part be as ready to hazard my life then, as I am willing now to use my tongue upō this present occasion. We shal find the greatest in the Councel wil agree with our sense, and we shall find their assent to what we shall say by their silence. And doubtlesly all the rest of the Countrey wil cheer∣fully take up such resolutions, as we shall do in such a case which cannot be more just, since they cannot be more necessary. Thus did Brederode inflame himself and the rest against the inquisition. But it was not true (as hath been often said) that the King intended to introduce a
setled form of the use thereof in Flanders. Nor was it true that Alanson Del Canto, was come to Brussels for any thing concerning the inquisition: and what he affirmed touching the Emperour Charls the fifth, was a meer fable rashly invented and beleeved: who accompanying so many of his other excellent vertues with his innate piety, did never treat with the Hereticks in Germany, but when necessitated so to do, that he might rid them of their Frenzy, either by the usuall way of their Diets, or by force of Arms in Battel: and for what concerns the inquisition, though the Country were generally averse thereunto, yet there were many of try'd wisdom and zeal, who found in themselves & desired to inform others by the benefit which Spain and Italy had received thereby, how advantagious it would be to Flanders to have a moderate form thereof introduced in her Provinces. They said, That some little seeming of severity being taken away from the inquisition, there were not in effect any Tribunals lesse severe then hers. Nor whereby more just and Candid wayes the preservation of the Honour and Purity of Faith was endeavoured. That the name and use thereof was to be esteemed most sacred. That if so many tem∣poral Lawes were made in favour of Princes, to keep humane Majesty unharmed; spirituall Lawes were much more to be approved of in favour of the Church; by pu∣nishing those who were guilty of high treason against the Majesty of God. That by defending this right which doth so straitly binde the faithfull to God, and to Religion; the other which was due from the people to Princes and their States, was the better su∣stained. That if Calumny were to give way to truth, as of right it should, it must neces∣sarily be confest that nothing maintained States in the sincerity of Faith more then the inquisition; where as when Heresie once enters, Factions suddenly arise; from Factions, civil Wars: and from civil Wars, Forrein ones inevitably. So as Princes together with their People were suddenly seen to fall into deplorable miseries and calamitie: what unhappy proof may Flanders fear herein through her own evils? and to how many fat all seenes may Germany and France serve for a Theatre by reason hereof? nor were the same revolutions and misfortunes lesse in other Countries, where Heresie hath been able to open the Schools of error, and display the Ensignes of Rebellion. That Spain and Italy this mean while did enjoy a perfect and happy peace; which was the supream good of mortals, and that which distinguisheth men from beasts, and Cities from wildernesses: nor was it to be doubted but that the one and the other of them did acknowledge so happy a condition much more from the Catholike unitie, and from the strong holds of the inquisition which defend that unitie, then from the immence wals of Mountains, and vast dieches of Seass, where with they are by nature invironed and united. Thus spoke they in favour of the inquisition who knew more then did the nest; and endeavoured thus to make it be better thought of. The Regent had made use of the same reasons, to the same end, and at the same time, as she had often done formerly, to moderate the violence and the heat of the Nobles who were gathered together in Brussels: but their hearts were too much hardned, and their ears deaf, to admit of any reason in this affair. Brederodes discourse was received with a favourable Hum. And in signe that they would persist more then ever in the resolutions which they had taken, they all cry'd aloud. He is a Traytor that proves faultie; hereupon they were admitted to Audience before the Regent; who would have the Councel of State, and those Knighes of the golden Fleece who were then in Brussels, to be present. The consederates marcht two by two, from Colembergs house, as it were in Procession, to the Regents Palace; and the two last were Count Lodovick and Brederode. Brederode spoke in the name of them all; he first complained of the bad relations which he said were made of them to the King and the Regent: and then added; that the Publike necessity of the Coun∣try, and their own private urgencies, had inforced them to this kind of Action. He then presented a petition to the Regent in the name of them all; and desired it might be read. The contents were these. That infinitly praise worthy was the zeal which first moved the Emperor, and then the King to provide for the dangers which might befall the Catholike Re∣ligion in Flanders. That time, which is an un orrupt Councellor, had made it clearly seen, that the remedies which were applied did agravate the evil; that the King continuing not withstanding in the same minde, and greater disorders daily accruing, The Nobility could no longer contain from representing the danger. That they were chiefly concern'd therein both by their prerogative of place,
and by their strict bond of Allegiance: but that their interest did likewise particularly oblige them thereunto: since the Nobles living for the most part in the Country, and enjoying there their Estates, they should be the first who should be sencible of the inconveniencies, and experience the injuries, when the alterations which were to be feared, should happen: that therefore it was ne∣cessary to take away the occasions, which would inevitable produce so bad ef∣fects. That the inquisition, and Edicts had put the whole Country into com∣motion, and in all places had turn'd patience into desperation. That therefore they did humbly beseech her Highness, that she would as soon as might be, advertise the King of the premises by expresse Messengers, and that in the mean time she would suspend the use of the former, and moderate the rigor of the others: that the necessity wherein Religion was concerned might better be seen into by the States General, and a remedy found out, by their uniform consent. That if in fine it should appear that these their humble and devout in∣treaties should no wayes avail, they cal'd God to witness, the King, her High∣ness self, and all the Gentlemen that were there present, that they had done what upon such an occasion belonged to good and faithfull subjects: and that the fault was not to be put upon their account, if peradventure any evil should ensue. The Regents answer was, That she would consider better upon what they had propounded. And she afterwards answered them in writing thus, That she would send some personages of purpose into Spain, according to their de∣sire. That States were grounded upon Laws: And that such Laws were most necessa∣ry as did most favour Religion. That notwithstanding, for their better satisfaction, proceedings should be had therein, with all possible moderation: That in the mean time, the Kings mind was to be known; to whom, as she would do them all the good offices she could, so she promised unto her self, that they would shun all manner of no∣velty in this behalf. The Confederates would gladly have received a more direct answer to their re∣quest of having the Inquisition suspended, and the rigor of the Edicts moderated. And some there were who interpreted the words of the Regents answer to the worst sense. So as they seemed not only not to be satisfied therewith; but did in bitter terms complain thereof. They this mean while shewed their mad pranks in divers manners. One of which was, the aparelling of many of them in one and the same colour, near upon the russet, of an ordinary cheap stuff, and the shewing of themselves so together in company. Upon a certain occasion, the Regent her self saw them; and 'tis reported that Barlemont, who was then with her, should say unto her, 'Madam, what fear can you have of these Gueux'. (A French word, which in English signifies Vagrants, or Beggers.) There are some Writers who say that Barlemont gave them this name when they went to present their Petition to the Regent in way of procession; and that this being by them known, they took oc∣casion thereupon to aparel themselves, and to appear in manner aforesaid: and not contented with the bare colour and habit of beggers, they hung some upon their hats, some about their girdles certain vile and sordid implements, such as are used to be worn by beggers: they had nothing in their mouths but the word Gueux; they used it in all places, and upon all occasions, but especially in their cups, and in the freedom they take at meals. This fell out particularly one day when they a great many of them were at a solemn invitation, in Count Colembergs house: where beyond all other vanities, they strove who should most celebrate the name of Gueux, or beggers. The wine is ply'd, and great goblets goe round: the de∣fie encreases, and they lay hands on vessels of a very large sise: they break their order of sitting; one gets upon chairs, another upon tables, and their drink; the fury of drunkeness fits them with a thousand mad vagaries, they crie as every glass goes down, Long live the King Long live the Gueux. And the whole house rung of nothing but this. They had an oath amongst them likewise very suta∣ble to that place, and that action, in French dog-rime, to this purpose
By this bread, by this salt, and by this Budget, The Guex will from their Tenets nere budg yet. nor yet contented herewithall, they wore almost all of them as they walked the streets of Brussels, a certain medal hanging at their girdle, wherein these words were written in French, True to the King, even to the Budget. Thus did they rejoyce, and as it were, triumph in this name of Guex; an unfor∣tunate name to Flanders, which from that time began to lose its quiet, and which hath since, so long, and by so many means beg'd it, and could never obtain it. The Petitioners desires to the Regent consisted chiefly in two things: the one, That some express personages might be sent into Spain to the purpose spoken of: The other, That in the mean while the Inquisition, and the rigor of the Edicts, might be forborn in Flanders. The Dutchess then designed to send the Marquis of Berghen, and the Lord Montigni, brother to Count Horn, to the Court of Spain: both which were propounded by the Petitioners. And for what con∣cernd the second point, she sent to the Governours of the Provinces, to cause a new form of Edict to be propounded in each Province, by which the Inquisition was somewhat moderated, but not suspended; and the like was done in the E∣dicts; seditious papers were this mean while dispersed about from divers parts, both within and without Flanders, by which the Petitioners were still more inci∣ted to persist in their demands. They were incouraged in these seditious papers, by the example of the liberty of the neighbouring Countries, and especially by that of upper Germany, with which 'twas affirmed, that divers of the lower Pro∣vinces were incorporated; and it was particularly suggested, that as the former did enjoy the confession of Ausperg, so ought Flanders without all question, to enjoy it. The fire was no longer in bursting out: Whilst the Edict of modera∣tion was proposed by the Regent througout the Provinces; whilst it was doubt∣full how they would interpret this, and much more how the King would be plea∣sed with it, some of the more turbulent spirits amongst the Petitioners, instigated by the sutler sort, gave out, that the Regent had granted all that was desired, and in confirmation thereof, a counterfeit writing was given about: This report ran presently over the whole Country like a Torrent, and did so provoke the common people, as that in divers places of the Provinces, the dores were thrown open to the heritick Preachers. They cunningly thought, that thus the King would be by necessity induced to grant all their demands. The first Sermons were made in the very Province of Flanders, and 'twas first begun to be done in some great Villages, for they feared, lest if they should do it in Cities, they might be hindred by the Magistrates. They forthwith did the like in other Villages in Brabant, near Antwerp, and suddenly the mallady encreased every where; so as it began to disperse it self through the greatest part of the Provinces. In the Countrys of Lucemberg, Hennault, Artois, and Namures, no novelty at all was made. The Hereticks appeared more licentious about Torney, and Valentiennes, then in other parts. And those two Cities seemed most disposed to receive and favour them. Lutherans, Calvinists, and Anabaptists, began in troops to divulge their Herisie: each of them exalted their own sect: the common peo∣ple flockt unto, and applauded novelty. Not the most learned, but the most hair∣braind amongst them, took upon them to preach; and through the blind and most monstruous perswasion that every one was able to teach the word of God: the baser sort of women had the affrontedness to have their several meetings, if not at preachings, yet at conferences: they went armed where they preached, lest the Magistrates might hinder their meetings. And disobedience was already manifested almost every where: So as the Regent thought it not now fit to pro∣ceed in the intended Edict, touching the moderation of the others that were al∣ready gone out, and touching the Inquisition; but published another upon very severe penalties, against the Preachers, and against such as should follow them,
inhibiting all meetings which should be made to this purpose. The Regents or∣ders did as then some good, in containing the vulgar within Cities, in their duties; yet the same licentiousness continued in the Country Villages. The Regent com∣plained of the Governors of the Provinces; and they again of her, shewing that to side too much with the sense of Spain, she had suffered the Edicts, and Inquisition to be so far proceeded in. Had not they foreseen the evil which was now burst forth? how oft had they men∣tioned the remedy? but that more belief was adhibited to Granville, and after him, to those who in his absence sustained his faction, and who being looked upon as the most faithfull, had proved most perfidious to the service of their King and Countrey. Such contestations as these fell out often in the Councel of State, even in the presence of the Dutchess her self: where Orange, Egmont, & the other Lords who interven'd therein, would with much freedom upbraid Barlemont, Vighlio, and Assonville, who was one much imployed by the Regent, and went hand in hand with the other two, with the above said disorders. the Hereticks did not as yet preach publikely in Cities; and because this was feared dayly more and more, and especially in Antwerp, where the danger was thought to be the greatest, by reason of the frequency of people, and the liberty of Commerce which drew a great number of forreign Hereticks thither, the Regent therfore sent the Count of Mega thither to endeavour with the Magistrate that he would permit a garri∣son to be put in there. But it was impossible to effect it, it being alledged to the contrary that it was not expedient to mix souldiers with Merchants: this mean while the Marquiss of Berghen, and Monsieur De Montigni were arrived in Spain, and after having staid there a considerable while, could not get audience of the King. It was well known in the Court that they brought with them the sense of the Petitioners, and that they were rather sent by them, then dispacht away by the Regent. Yet thinking it was his best course to dissemble at the pre∣sent, he writ to the Governours of the Province. Shewing how much he relied upon them, and exhorting them to provide by all possible means, remedies for the evils already begun. That his intention was to come himself in person into Flanders, and that Divers necessities of his other Kingdoms had made him de∣lay, but not change his former thought therein. That he would by his own pre∣presence, give full satisfaction to all the desires which were made unto him: that the tumults in the mean while might be appeased; and that particular care might be taken that no innovation might be made in matter of Religion. The Regent writ likewise to the chiefest of the Petitioners, who were already gone from Brussels, complaining of too long delay in the demands which they had made. She gave a touch upon the suspition she had of their introducing an Heretical Army; and acquainted them with what she thought necessary for the remedying the Novelties which ensued. Yet they, nevertheless, little regarding the Regents endeavours, or little trusting what she said did not onely not satisfie her just desires, but with greater contumacy then before, resolved to assemble to∣gether again at Getrinberg, a town in the Bishoprick of Liege. To this end having had many preceding practices both by people and by letters in divers places; a great many of them met there in the moneth of August, where the most sediti∣ous were most listned unto. They appeared to be of divers opinions; some would have them to break forth into publick tumults, and get that by force, which they had not as yet got by intreaties. Others, that the States General should meet to∣gether of their own Authority, and that by that means the Edicts, and the Inqui∣sition might be thrown down. Others, that to the end they might lead on their designes the more advantagiously, they might first advise with their neighbours, & be assisted by them; yet some were more moderate in their opinions, who pro∣pounded that they should better consider ere they resolved on any thing; and that they should first see what effect the Marquis of Berghens and Montigni's jour∣ney to Spain would produce, and what the mean time the Regent would do in Flanders. But the most seditious prevailing, it was resolved, that by all means, as well within Flanders, as elsewhere, that liberty which they pretended to in Religion;
might be endeavoured. The Dutchess was very much troubled at the news of this meeting at Getrinberg, and presently used all her industry to break it off. To this purpose she sent Orange, (some Writers say it was the Duke of Arescot) and Egmont to Duffle, a town in Brabant neer Antwerp, and not very far from Getrinberg, willing them by all possible means to appease the Confederates, and to assure them again, that they should receive full satisfaction both from her, and from the King. The effect of this was, That they clean contrary, sent some of their Deputies thither: Orange and Egmont propounded divers things in satisfaction of the con∣federates; they said that the Dutchess would undoubtedly procure leave from the King for the convocating of the States General; that in the mean time all lenity should be observed in matter of Religion; and that the Dutchess would quite forget the former disorder which had insued thereupon: and they gave hopes likewise that a liberty of preaching might be allowed, provided it might not be with any armed concourse. In answer whereunto the Deputies used ra∣ther complaints then reasons; and it was clearly seen, that though they desired sa∣tisfaction, they would not accept of it: so as full of contumacy they returned to Getrinberg more resolute then ever to have liberty in matter of Religion, with∣out attending any answer from Spain, or relying any longer upon the sense of the Provinces. To which they were incited by those who gave out that nothing was to be expected from Spain but artificiall delayes, nor from the Regent, but ambi∣guous resolves: yet divers negotiations were kept on foot; and some mutuall ex∣pedients were endeavoured to be found out, by which the confederates should not be proceeded against for any novelties that had happened, and whereby they might receive some satisfaction touching the liberty of Preaching: and whereby the Regent on the other side might be sure that they should for the future desist from somenting the begun disorders. But in fine all proved but lost labour; the wound which was first exulcerated, threw forth immediatly great store of putri∣fied matter. From preaching, which the Hereticks at first introduced in the open Fields, they proceeded to use violence upon the Churches in the neighbou∣ring villages, breaking thereinto by force, spoyling their sacred utensils, and using all manner of greater impieties. This was first done in some parts of the province of Flanders, wherein Egmont the Governour thereof was; and where either his di∣ligence was not such as was requisite, or else the violences surpassed his authority. He excused himselfe in divers wayes, as did others in other parts where the like plague presently burst forth, which at last dilated it selfe into Cities, and of them, with a horrible scene of impietie and sacriledge, into Antwerp. Upon the holy day celebrated every year for the Assumption of the Virgin Mary, a solemn procession is used to be made in the City wherein a carved image with much devotion is born about: that procession proceeds from the Cathedral Church, and after a large perambulation returns thither again: the Hereticks were heard to belch forth that day much blasphemy against the image as it was carried about, and many injurious speeches against the Church men who were imployed in that procession; and 'twas feared that the rabble rout of the Hereticks would that day break forth into yet more greater madnesses; but through much diligence that was used they were kept from doing so at that time: on the twentieth day of the same moneth, set on by new furies of them∣selves, or instigated by others, they went to the Cathedral Church; one of the most famous structures, and most sumptuously adorn'd that is in all Europe; be∣ing got in, they shut all the doors; they then began wickedly to mock at the image, and at the like of many other Saints; which were there venerated; their meriment being at last turn'd into rage, and their insolencies into Frenzies, they flew upon all the images, and broke them all to pieces. Neither did they contain themselves here; but turning their fury principally against a Crucifix which was gallantly cut, and placed on high, they by the force of ropes, pul'd it to the ground, and in a most execrable manner tore it to pieces and trode upon it. At the same time they overthrew the Altars; dealt worse with the painted images, then with those that were carved, and did profane that so famous Church throughout, in a thousand other manners. Nothing more of villanie remaining
to be committed there, they ran to do the like in the other Churches of that Citie. From Churches they fly to force Monasteries; and from Monasteries of men, run more greedily to those of women. The sacred virgins are sorely affrighted and run to their parents houses. The heretick rabble grow more perverse, and every where leave signes of avarice, impiety, and barbarism: At last, rather weary, then satisfied with so much wickedness, which endured from noon till the next night was almost over, they dispersed themselves here and there, and retur∣ned to their own houses. The tumult was of great consideration in it self, but much more in the exam∣ple thereof: it was undertaken by a few, desired by many, and at last consented unto by all. The meaner sort of people in that City, which was then very numerous because the Trading of Europe was greater there then in any other place, were ge¦nerally infected with heresie. And the people of better quality, even those who were the most zealous Catholicks, did so abhor the Inquisition, and the rigor of the Edicts, and thought the effect thereof so pernitious to the liberty of Mer∣chandizing, as that they were not sorry to see the King necessitated to grant that, which could not till then be obtained, and wherein his consent was still despaired of: By the tumlut of Antwerp, as by displaid Ensignes, all the other chief Cities of almost all the other Provinces, were forthwith invited to do the like: only the Walloon Provinces, upon the Frontiers of France, kept free from these novel∣ties. The Dutchess perceiving so great and so universal a commotion, and suspe∣cting lest the Governours of the Provinces might seem to tollerate it, and in secret to authorize it, she began to fear she might not be safe in Brussels, where here∣sie had likewise got good footing. She enclined to leave that Town, and to go to Mons, the chief City in Hennault; but divers of the chief Lords that were about her, did joyntly oppose themselves thereunto, and in particular, Orange and Eg∣mont; they said that the troubles which were risen in other places would be ap∣peased, and they assured her there should no disorder happen in Brussels: which though her own presence alone was sufficient to prevent, yet if need should re∣quire, they would hazard their lives in hindring it. But the greatest considera∣tion herein was concerning themselves, since they should be too much blamed, if the Dutches, they being present, should retire, or rather run away in such a manner. How would this relish in Spain? how would the King be thereat scandalized? and how much should they suffer in their honours? for no justification would be able to free them from being thought to be the true Authors of such violences done by the common people. The Regent therefore resolved to stay at Brussels; but for her greater safety, that Peter Ernestus, Count of Mansfield, should get together some soldiers, who might serve to remedy any tumult which might happen in the City, and her own person might be the more secure. It was debated in Councel how so many and so great disorders might be provided against. It was thought fit to treat again with the Petitioners, wherein were so many of the Nobility of the Country, to see whether any satisfaction might be given them, so as that their union might be broken, and so the people might want that fomentation, and the King the mean while might put on more vigorous resolutions, which the Regent might with more ease execute. To this purpose some of the Councel were deputed by her, and some others by the Petitioners; and after many contradictions, they pitched upon that which the necessity of the time, upon that occasion, did require. Thus by a new Edict, which seemed to be in answer to the Petition delivered, the prece∣ding April, the Regent declared, That no use of the Inquisition should be had or made in Flanders, and that there should be no use thereof for the future: That the Edicts should be so moderated as should give full satisfaction to all the Provinces: That the confe∣derates should not be proceeded against for any of the late novelties: and that the liberty of Preaching should be permitted where it was already introduced; provided that no tumults were occasioned thereby, and that the Catholick wor∣ship should not be in any wise hindred. Another Edict came forth presently after in the Kings express name, denouncing heavy punishments to all those who had committed so many and so horrible enor∣mitys
against the Churches and Monasteries. But by how much the Regent went e∣very day less in her authority, so much more did the audacity of the Confederates, and the rest who held Intelligence with them, increase. So as the hereticks not laying aside their former insolencies in Antwerp, did still insult in divers manners over the Catholicks. They by violence made their Churches be shut up: they stormed to see that they could not get any one of them for themselves to preach in; and not being able to do it elsewhere, they preached publickly in the Piaz∣zas of the new Town of Antwerp, the Lutherans in one place, in another the Calvinists: and the stinch of many other sectaries gave occasion of divers other sorts of meetings, both in privat and in publick. These sects did greatly differ one from another, but they joyned all in their rage against the Catholick religion. At last they prevailed so far, as it behoved to come to express capitulation with them: by vertue whereof they got so much liberty, as did amount almost to a full exercise of heresie: and at last they were permitted to build a particular Fa∣brick, which they called by the name of Temple, where their Ministers were heard to preach, and all other exercises of their sects were officiated. Assoon as this permission was obtained, men and women flock thither from all parts, Mer∣chants and Plebeians, Gentry and Citizens, to put their hands to the building of this Temple. The Prince of Orange, to boot with his being Governor of Hol∣land and Zealand, and of a part of Burgundy, was likewise Governor of Antwerp. In the tumult which had hapned in that City, he had endeavoured that it might appear he had used all dilligence to impede them, he himself came often thither in person: and when he could not be there himself, he sent the Count of Hostrat thither. 'Twas known that Orange his authority in that City was very great; so as few thought that he would make use thereof according as occasion did require: And when they saw Hostrat adhere unto him, they thought they were both of the same mind. Orange had likewise gone into Holland and Zealand, to appease the tumults which had ensued there in matter of Religion, presently after that of Antwerp: But his endeavours there availed but little likewise, by reason of the maligne constellation of times, or they were but little sincere, by his own, per∣adventure, more maligne contrariety. Great was the commotion which had ensued in Gaunt, the chief City of Flanders; where the hereticks had likewise insolently introduced the use of their heresie, as also in almost all the other con∣siderable places of that Province. Egmont, who was Governor thereof, had been there too in person; and because his presence had done but little good, he began to be suspected as well as Orange. Though it was considered by some, in their justification, that in the Province of Groninghen, where Count Aremberg was Governour, and in Ghelderland and Zutfen, which were Governed by the Count Mega, both of them being esteemed great Catholicks, and faithfull to the King. The like revolts were seen in matter of Religion, and like difficulties in re∣moving them: but howsoever, those two were chieflyest suspected; since they exceeding the rest so far in Authorities, 'twas thought that the tumults fomen∣ted by them, had made all the rest prove likewise remediless.
THE HISTORY OF THE WARS OF FLANDERS. Written by CARDINAL BENTIVOGLIO. BOOK III. The Contents. The King is highly offended for the novelties happened in Flanders. A letter from Montigni to Count Horne; the Regent resolves to take up Arms. A meeting of Orange, Egmont, and others in Terramond; Valentiennes is befieged: is reduced. So is Antwerp. The Regent enters Antwerp well provided of Arms. A great disposition throughout the whole Low Countries to quiet. Consultations in Spain upon the affairs of Flanders; two opposite Orations made unto the King by the Duke of Feria, and the Duke of Alva, the King resolves at last to send an Army into Flanders. And gives the command thereof to the Duke of Alva: upon newes hereof, Orange retures into Germany. Alva enters the low Countries: he forth∣with imprisons Egmont and Horne. The Dutchesse of Parma departs for Italy. The Duke of Alva is Governour of the Low Countries. THus went the Affairs in Flanders at this time: in the interim Anno. 1566. newes was brought to Spain, of the so many and so strange innovasions happened of late in those Provinces: nor can it be said how much the King and his Councel were troubled thereat. Wherfore the Marquess of Berghen, and the Lord Montigni could not be admitted to Audi∣ence before the King, & the King did not only seem not to approve of what had bin done in Flanders to the so great prejudice of the Catholike Religion, and his regal Autho∣rity, but he discovered a great indignation against the Flemish, and a firm in∣tention to chastise them and because such a designe required time, and time dis∣simulation; therefore the King yielding in this conjuncture to the force of neces∣sitie, writ unto the Regent, That she should endeavour by all means possible to compose the tumults the best she might, incouraging her notwithstanding to use force, when she should think it were a fitting time to do so. To this end some monies were sent from Spain, and thereupon it was taken into consideration that for the present some Alman and Walloone forces might be raised, till time should
better advise what was to be resolved on, touching the sending of Spanish forces, and the like of other nations subject to the Crown of Spain, into Flanders: by reason then of these orders which were come in secret, and much more by reason of the manifest appearing necessity of providing by Arms against the tumults which had already happened, and to those of greater danger which might insue; the Regent resolved to raise a good number of souldiers, and to place them under such Commanders as she might confide in: the speediest and neerest Levies which could be made abroad, were the High Dutch, and in Flan∣ders the Walloones: The Regent had not as then any other souldiers then those who a little before she had assembled to secure Brussels from tumults, and for the more safety of her own person: which might be about 500 Walloone foot, and 100 Harquebusiers on horse back, under the Command of Ernestus Count Mansfeild. She did then without any delay give order for the raising of the aforesaid forces; to wit, the Lower Almans in two Regiments under the Counts of Aremberg, and of Mega; and two Regiments of the Upper Almans, under Count Erbestin, and Baron Shamburg. The Walloones were divided into three Regiments; one of which was given to Charls Count Mansfield, son to Ernestus; another to the Count De Reules: and the third to Monsieur De Hierghes, son to the Lord Barlemont: to boote with these foot, order was given for the raising of some horse. The opinions of those of the Councel of State touching the raising of Arms were different. Those of greatest Authority amongst them did not seem to incline thereunto: alledging that instead of taking away jealousies, which was of most importment, this would be the way to increase them. Others thought this remedy requisit, since faire means had hitherto prevail'd so little; but the Regent would adhere unto the latter opinion; and shewed how that it was the more necessary, for that it was known a little before, that the confederats had divers projects on foot to raise men also, and that to this effect divers correspon∣dencies had already been had between them and the neighbouring parts of Ger∣many, and France. This preparation for Arms did much trouble such, who thought they might be used against them. The Hereticks who had so many wayes offend∣ed, had reason to fear: and the better sort of the Petitioners, and the rest of their order, who had licentiously run upon so many novelties, had almost as much cause to fear: but Egmont, Orange, and Horne were in private no lesse troubled hereat; they being suspected to have continually fomented the disorders, more then the other Lords. Their names were publikely torn to pieces in Spain; and they were already called Traytors oftner then Subjects. This opinion which the King and the whole Court had of them all three, and in general of all the Flemish, had often been signified by letters written by the Marquess of Berghen, and the Lord Montigni: and one in particular was sent (as it was commonly reported) from Montigni to his brother Count Horne, the contents whereof were these. How much our arrivall here is detested by every one, hath been often times signified by the Marquess of Berghen and by my self: but in this letter wherein I may be more free, because it will be convey'd with more secrefie, I will adde many things, which it was wisdom to conceal in the rest: In brief, our affairs cannot be worse received, nor worse relished then they are here. After so many moneths, we are still denyed Audi∣ence: we are permitted but little to Treat with the State Ministers; and their answers are every day more ambiguous, as much as to say, every day more visibly opposite to our negotiations. They terme our Covenant, conspiracie, our Petition, a plot; and our popular tumults, manifest insurrection: it is not then to be doubted but that they will shew their resentment by Arms: the Flemish themselves do now make preparations against Flanders. But the true designe is to make use of Foreiners, and especially of Spaniards. They are chiefly incenst against the greatest amongst us; beleeving that the mischief is in secret chiefly fomented by them. Granville rejoyceth at the commotions which have ensued; and boasts that if he had still continued in Flanders, these things had not happened: if his Councels were formerly Turbulent, he now sug∣gests them with much more violence: that the King either come himself in the head of an Army, or else send an army: that he quell the Flemish, and upon so fair an occasion violate their Priviledges: and that having bridled them by his Forces, he keep them still in the same posture: and these his proposals cannot be better received then they are.
The haughtiness of that Nation is too well known. The Spaniards see how far they come short of the Flemish in their prerogatives. They envie our liberty, and would reduce it if they could, to their subjection: and because that cannot be done but by force, they will have recourse unto force. This is the cloud which now threatens our Provinces, and the tempest will break forth sooner perhaps then it is imagined. They who foresee it, give notice of it; and let them to whom notice is given, either undaun∣tedly encounter it, or warily shun it. As for us two who are here, may it please God, that as our coming hither was unluckie, our return may not prove more un∣fortunate. This letter caused much fear; and the end thereof shewed (as shall be said in its proper place) that the two that writ it, foresaw the tragical success they should have in Spain. Orange had often intreated the Regent to give him leave to quit his imployments, and to retire; protesting that in times of such trouble it was impossible to satisfie his service to the King on the one part, and on the other, the Countreys necessity: But his true end herein was thought to be, his desire to forgoe Flanders with the Kings leave, to the end that he might not be held guilty of the plotted Machinations if he should leave it in a less becoming manner. The Regent would never be perswaded to move any such thing to the King; but on the contrary she exhorted Orange to embrace the Kings affairs so much the more, by how much the times did now require his service, which might be so advanta∣gious. And still by publick praise, or privat dissimulation, she made use of him in the most important affairs. He afterwards did by Letters make the same desires unto the King, but still received the like answer. He did not rely at all notwith∣standing upon any shew made by the Regent, nor upon any demonstrations that he received from Spain. He reflected upon what had been advertised by Berghen and Montigni; the which he likewise understood by other wayes. For it was said that the Admirall Colligny by reason of the correspondency which was between them, did advertise him from France of many particular important passages, to make him still the more jealous of what resolutions would be put on in Spain, up∣on the disorders which had happened in Flanders. Orange being thus at odds with himself, and set upon by various passions, he sometimes seemed to serve the King out of meer zeal: but most commonly notwithstanding he appeared inclined to second, as formerly, the unquiet humors. His brother Lodovick shewed himselfe more seditiously arrogant then any other. He had still the chiefest part in all the most turbulent actions; and because great confiding appeared to be between the two brothers, it was thought that Lodovick did but act Orange his true intentions. They held divers correspondencies in Germany, as well for that their family derived from thence, as out of the relation which Orange had to the Elector of Saxony, his Father-inlaw. Great was their adherence almost throughout all Flanders; but especially that which Orange had in Holland and Zealand. He was not therefore any ways pleased with the Regents resolution of levying men. Nothing was heard of any where, but that either the King would come himselfe in person into Flanders with a great Army, or that he would send an Army thither under some gallant Commander. It was known that good store of shipping was already building in the havens of Biscay, and that the rumor was, that the King would make use of them for such a voyage. And though for what concerned the Kings coming himself in person, the difficulties were so great, as they were almost insuperable; yet that a foraign Army should ap∣pear in Holland, could not but cause great fear in the Flemish, and chiefly in the greatest men amongst them. Orange his fear, and the like of the other abovesaid Lords, was much increased by the interception of a letter (though it was thought by many to be but an invention of Orange himselfe) which Francisco Alano, a Spanish Ambassador in the Court of France, writ to the Dutchess of Parma, it contained almost the same things wch were specified in Montigni's letter, touching what sense the Spaniards had of the tumults which had happened in Flanders. The Ambassador did therein exhort the Regent above all things to use dissimulation; and that in the mean time the King would prepare either to come himself in per∣son with a great Army, or else would send one. That in fine, he was fully resolved to hazard, if need should be, all his other Kingdoms, rather then not to punish
so many, and so inormous offences as were committed in Flanders against the ho∣nour of God, and of himself. This letter being seen, and the imminent danger being considered of the Forces which began already to move in Flanders, and of those which were shortly to be expected from Spain; Orange, together with his brother Lodov. ck, Egmont, Horn, and Hostrat resolved to meet together, and treat of the common interest. They therefore met at Terramonde, a town in Bra∣bant, not sarre from Antwerp; where they differ'd in opinion. Horn and Lodo∣vick were of one and the same mind out of the similitude of their fierce and rash natures. Both of them were of opinion, that even from that instant they should endeavour to incite the people to arms within Flanders, and to make foreigners advance; so as those forces raised by the Regent, might forthwith be withstood, and that they might prepare to do it much more against those which were to come from Spain. Orange was not for the taking up of arms presently, but ex∣horted that affairs might be put in order by way of anticipation. That we should be the first who should begin the war (said he) is that which neither can, nor ought to be done. It cannot, for that we are not at this time sufficiently prepared of forces. It ought not, for that as yet we have not pre∣tences fair enough to do it. The Inquisition is already taken away; the Edicts are already almost abolished; and we enjoy such liberty of religion as may suf∣fice And for what concerns the Regents having raised some Soldiers, to say truth, the popular Tumults have either been too great, or too immature, which have forced her to such a resolution, and put us into a necessity of tollerating it; but this is a Militia consisting almost wholly of our own Country-men, and therefore not to be by us feared. We must then wait for more just occasions of taking up arms; and these in my opinion we shall unavoidably soon have. Can we ever believe that the Spaniards will use moderation? Their pride and Surquedry is not capable thereof: They will have an absolute Empire in Flan∣ders, as they have in Spain: Granville, the Duke of Alva, and almost all the rest of that Councel do continually infuse such sence as this into the Kings ears; so as we shall soon see foreign forces brought into these our Provinces: 'twill then be fitting time for us to move; then will our people at home, and foreigners from abroad, readily flock unto us. Let us then prepare for this resolution by all necessary endeavours against that time. Here, by shewing that the Spaniards design is, not only to set the Inquisition again on foot by the way of force, and the Edicts, but punctually to introduce the Government of Spain in Flanders and abroad, by making it known, that when they shall have enthraled our Provin∣ces, our neighbours may the more justly fear to be dealt withall accordingly. Let us the mean while be fure not to trust them; the malice of Princes is then chiefly preparing when they do most conceal it. And that they do now deeply dissemble with us in Spain, who can know it better then a native Spaniard, who is an Ambassador, and to whom the Kings most intimate thoughts touching Flanders are known? doth not his whole Letter denounce fire and sword against the Flemish? and chiefly us who are here, and enjoy the greatest Prerogatives? but let us primarily remember what hath been often formerly treated of by us, and which in this our present meeting is again in agitation. They would have all late actions to befelony, and to have had it but in thought, will suffice to make men guilty thereof. Hostrat did adhere to Orange almost in all things; and it was certainly thought that Egmont would be of the same mind: but he, contrary to the expectation of all men, shewed how much better it would be to endeavour peace and quiet in the Countrey, and to abstain by all means from force. What a folly would it be (said he) for us to move? where are our men? where is our money? where can we hope to have any? from the Nobility, who are already to∣tally exhausted? or from those meaner sort of people, who have so unworthily violated the Churches, and rob'd the Altars? These misdeeds must be attributed to the very scum of people; and not to the true popularity. The better sort of Citizens, and who fit most at ease, will not be induced to take up arms, but upon necessary occasions. Moreover, do not we know how great the inconstancie of the multitude is? the multi∣tude is apt on the sudden to waver between contrary passions, and is always advised
either by rashness, or abjection. And for what concerns our hopes in our neighbours, we must believe, that considering their own Interests more then ours, they will be apt rather to fear, then to provoke the enmity of Spain. How much better will it be then, for us to endeavour to allay the Kings anger, and cancelling all memory of late dis∣orders, do what in us lies, to bring him to his former inclination to these Provinces, and to our selves in particular? To say the truth, the King may with too much rea∣son esteem himself offended by these late novelties: For though the fault ought rather to be imputed to the times then to us; yet who can deny that the Nobility hath past by many actions of great licentiousness? And these last of the common people against the Churches, have been such, as 'tis no wonder if it be generally held in Spain, that a will hath rather been wanting in us the Governours of the Provinces, then a pow∣er to impede them. The King may be therefore thought to have just cause to resent them: But that he will do it by the means of foreign forces, and that he will by violence introduce the Spanish Government into Flanders, his own concernment, more then ours, makes me not believe it. Princes ought not to commit that to the uncertain suc∣cess of violence, the fruit whereof they may certainly enjoy by moderation. I know how I found the King minded towards the affairs of Flanders when I was in Spain: and I cannot perswade my self that he will be disswaded from thence by the particular passions of our enemies. Such a one I know Granville to be; the Duke of Alva is such a one: and it may be that Alva, as such a one, writes passionately from Paris. Neither do I much value Montigni's Letter: For in my opinion, it is grounded ra∣ther upon appearing, then upon real threats. My vote goes therefore, that we ought by all means possible, endeavour the Countries tranquility: That this doth not only befit the Kings service, but the like of the Country, and of our selves. And that if we do thus, he will neither send foreign forces hither, nor use any violence to our Go∣vernment. In fine, the Spaniards know where Flanders is: and those of the Councel who are even most hoodwink'd in their towards us, know, that in this form of Principality, prayers prevail, and that here we obey, because we will do so. All the rest were much amazed, and troubled to hear Egmont speak thus. They had thought that he would have gone along with them in their designes; which were, to involve the Country continually in more evils, and to increase their own private fortunes by the publick ruines. But Egmont, were it either that he was won over by the Regents perswasions, or that he was thereunto moved out of his own natural goodness; or (which was of more force with him then all thing else) that he was the Father of a numerous family, and that he would not seek to advan∣tage himself by the downfall of others; was resolved to second the Kings sence, by executing the like of the Regents. To boot that weighing his services done to the King, together with his defaults, he could not think the latter such, as should make him lose the reward of the former. Orange and the rest did notwithstan∣ding endeavour to make him adhere to them in their resolutions, by many effica∣cious replyes; but all in vain: whereupon, much to their grief, and whereat Orange did not a little storm; the meeting at Terramond was dissolved. This division falling out between them, Egmont apply'd himself sincerely, and the o∣ther feignedly, to endeavour the peace of the Provinces, and to effect it where need should require, by the forces which the Regent had already gathered toge∣ther. That they might afterwards expect what time and chance might produce. The Regents resolution was, that the forces-should move thither first, where was greatest cause of punishment. They were therefore suddenly prepared to goe a∣gainst the Town of Valentiennes, the Inhabitants whereof were most infected with heresie, and occasioned most fear in the Dutchess; as well by reason of the apparent signes of disobedience which were already seen, as for their being openly fomented from without by the Hugonots of France. She therefore gave order to Monsieur Norchermes, who in the Marquis of Berghens absence, govern'd the Province of Hennault, that he should cause so many soldiers to be received into Valentiennes, as might serve to bridle the peoples boldness, and re-order the af∣fairs of that Town. Norchermes marched thitherward, and endeavoured to exe∣cute the Regents Orders; but because the Townsmen were equally doubtfull of being inforced to take in the Garison, and Norchermes, that he should not be able to constrain them so to do; therefore it was agreed before he approached the
Town, that no Garison should be put in thither, provided that no heretical ex∣ercise might be permitted there. The rabble rout now will, and anon will not; Norchermes coming near to the walls without any soldiers, to the end that he might be admitted to come in, and by his being there in person, see the agree∣ment better established, a handfull of base people were so bold as not only to shut the gates upon him, but to make him keep aloof by musquet shot. The Dutchess, much moved at this excess, commanded Norchermes howsoever, to bring the intended Garison into the Town. But the Townsmen increasing in their contumacy, refused to receive them; whereupon the Dutchess declared them presently rebels, and made all things be prepared to besiege the Town. Their confederate hereticks, both within and without Flanders, had presently notice of what past Some few Hugonots came immediately thither from the Frontiers of France; but from the neighbouring parts of Flanders, above 3000 foot, and some horse were forthwith gathered together, and some pieces of Artillery, and all these went to put in such numbers of men into Valentiennes, as might suffice to secure the Town in its present condition. These people were led on by John So∣reas, a man of base abstract, who had assembled them together between Lilla and Torney. Norchermes being hereof advertised, he suddenly drew up some Compa∣nies of foot, together with some horse, and with him, Rosseghen the Governour of Lilla did joyn: Then falling at unawares upon these suddenly assembled tag∣rags, rather then soldiers, they easily routed them, Soreas was wounded, and many others slain, though they had seated themselves strongly in a wood between ditch∣es and marish grounds, which made the getting thereinto very difficult. The Ar∣tillery was likewise taken; the rest of the rout sought to get into Torney; but Norchermes, and especially the Country people reduced them to such straits, as they could never make head again; and making use of this occasion, he went himself in person to Torney, entred by the Citadel, and reduced things to obedi∣ence there, where they were not much less likely to have been wavering then in Valentiennes; he punisht divers in that City, and put some heretick preachers to death, who had been the chief incitors of the people to this contumacy. And ma∣king amends by present rigour for past impunitie; he went from thence and turn'd to Valentiennes to lay formal siege unto it, and to reduce them by force, which he could not do by Treaty: yet before the siege was made, the Dutchess was content that Count Egmont and Duke Arescot should go to Valentiennes, to see whether by their Authority and Offices they could bring the people therein to their wits: But all was to no purpose, Norchermes delayed then no longer. Such preparations as were needfull being made, and particularly of great pieces of Artillery, he began the siege in the beginning of March, a great Battery was made ready, and yet they within seemed resolute to defend themselves, fed with several hopes of succour; but their rashness turn'd suddenly to weakness: being in an instant cast down, seeing no succour from without, and wanting wherewith∣all to defend themselves, they hardly expected the first battery; they yielded up∣on discretion to Norchermes. He entred the Town, and gave Laws thereunto, such as satisfied the Regent, as well in what concern'd religion, as their obedience to the King. He left a sufficient Garison there, and put the Government into the hands of a Catholick Magistrate; having first cleansed the Town of the most sediti∣ous hereticks, and of al their preachers. He, for the example of others, punisht some of the prime offenders with death, and particularly many of the French Hugonots, who bore arms against the King in that siege In the beginning of war, fame hath always a great share; and the bare reputation of one victory, suffices to the getting of many others. The news of Valentiennes was suddenly divulged abroad, and the Regents forces began to be dreaded every where. Fresh Tumults about this time began to be made in divers places, and especially in the Castle of Cambresis upon the Frontiers of France; in Balduke, a chief Ci∣ty in Brabant; and in the Town of Mastrick, a place of important situation, having a stone-bridg over the Mause, which makes the passage surer and safer on that side which confines upon Germany. Such remedies as were requisite either by way of Treaty, or by force were apply'd in all these places, and in a few days they were reduced to quiet obedience. And as the Kings canse did improve, so did the
cause of religion by reason of this success of the Regents forces, the Nobles of the Confederacy began to stagger; the chief head whereof was Henry de Bre∣derode, as hath been said. Some grew cooler, others fell off, and many laid aside all unquiet thoughts; thus they endeavoured by several ways to be restored to the Regents favour: nor did she forbear to use the fittest means for this purpose. Yet Brederode growing every day more vain, and being drawn by the spirit of he∣resie to the like of rebellion, he used all means not only to re-unite the best sort of Petitioners, but also to excite new disorders in those of meaner condition. He gave out that nothing was performed which was promised in matter of religion; but that the liberty thereof was daily more and more lost, and they severely pu∣nished who would enjoy it. What was there then wanting but to see the Inquisi∣tion and the Edicts on foot again? and that they were shortly to see their necks not only under the yoke of the Flemish forces, but under the intollerable yoke of those which were preparing in Spain. He formed some new Petitions, full of such complaints as these, and made them be presented to the Dutchess. The first was presented in name of the People, with new pressures for liberty in matters be∣longing to religion: and to facilitate the work, they offered three millions of guilders: The Regent suddenly refused it, as altogether rash, vain, and disloy∣al; and 'twas known that this proceeded only from Brederode and some few of his followers. He made another be afterwards presented under the name of ma∣ny of the Nobility, and renewed the former desire, of being permitted to come to Brussels, and being heard by the Regent; but this second prevailed no more then did the first. Brederode, failing of all hopes this way, precipitated himself into a more rash councel, which was to try some novelty by force of arms. He went to Holland, and there endeavoured to incite the people to new tumults, e∣specially in Amsterdam, which next to Antwerp, was at that time the Town of greatest Traffick in all Flanders. The Dutchess doubted some sedition of concern∣ment; especially since it was generally known that Brederode seconded Orange in all things; and therefore though by his presence he caused some alteration there, yet the Dutchess took such good order, as that all disorders were there soon quieted. Brederode being rather driven then gon out of Amsterdam, he staid at Vianen, a little Town of his own not far from Amsterdam: he began to forti∣fie it, and to bring soldiers thither. The Counts of Aremberg, and of Mega went suddenly by order from the Regent towards that Town, who had the Govern∣ment of the Provinces neerest thereunto: Norchermes was also sent thither, so as they quickly drove Brederode from thence; who of a chief Commander being become a single man, and of a mutiner an exile, was forced to flie to the nearest parts of Germany; and tarrying at Embden, a Sea-Town, he not long after dyed there. The Regent encouraged by this good success, betook her self suddenly to re-order the affairs of Antwerp. To this purpose she shewed at one and the same time both lenity and force. Orange and Hostrat laboured to compose the affairs of that City the best they could though, to place a Garison there (which was the Regents chiefe drift) stood not with their particular Interests. Divers tumults had happened there since that first great one, wherein the hereticks had violated the Churches, trampled the sacred things, and insulted in all unworthy manner over the Catholicks. One sedition being allayd, another was presently ready to be set on foot, which made still more for the advantage of the hereticks. They grumbled that they had not so many Churches as they desired: There were almost as many sects as sectarists: with the Inhabitants, Foreigners did combine; and plots from abroad accompanied those within: They strove to provide them∣selves of arms, to better their cause thereby: One Tolose appeared more sediti∣ous then all the rest, a bold man, and of good retinue: This man betaking him∣self to raise men, had gathered a considerable number together, not above a league from Antwerp, in a certain Village called Ostervel, on the other side the Scheld. The Dutches had notice of this, and making those men be set upon on the sudden by a good many of hers, they were soon scattered: Tolose endeavored to save himself in a house, but was therein burat; the rest either fled or were slain, or drowned in the river. This success caused a great revolt in Antwerp, and they were ready to fall together by the ears in the City; the hereticks growing mad hereat on the
one side, and the Catholicks taking advantage and courage on the other side. But Orange, Hostrat and others of Authority with the people, did so handle the busi∣ness, as the apparent danger was provided for by a new agreement which was there made in matter of Religion: This agreement had much reference to the others which had preceded; but in this, some things were added touching the Government of the City, the better to prevent future tumults: To which pur∣pose the City itself raised certain foot Companies, and armed some boats to guard the Scheld where it was most needfull; yet let them do what they could to keep peace in that City, none took effect, or at least they lasted not. In fine, where Religion is not united, there can be no union in obedience. This new a∣greement was soon observed to be kept as ill as were the former. The Regent, whose forces still increased, taking occasion from hence, resolved to put a good Garison into Antwerp; which she could not very well do before. All necessary preparations being had to this end, and the Catholick party in Antwerp being much advantaged, the Cities deliberations were sutable to her desires. She first sent for some to Brussels, who were chosen by the City to this purpose, and trea∣ted with them touching the form of re-ordering the Government, wherein the Catholick religion, and obedience to the King were above all things to be con∣sidered. The agreement being made, wherein she now no longer received, but gave conditions, the City seemed willing to execute them. All heretical ex∣ercises were thereby forbidden, and all new erection of Temples for sectarists: their preachers were driven out, and order taken for the repairing of the Chur∣ches by them violated. A Magistrate was chosen who was zealous for the af∣fairs of religion, and of the King. And the soldiers which the City had taken in∣to Garison, took an oath to be faithfull to the King, and to execute, if need should require, all things which were agreed upon. The Regent immediately sent Charls Count Mansfield into Antwerp with his Regiment of Walloons, to establish all things better by arms, and that it might be seen she would no longer use only intreaties. The Garison was received by the City, whereinto Mans∣field entred in good order, so as the hereticks could neither endeavour any no∣velty, nor the soldiers on the other side use any licentiousness. The Garison be∣ing placed in Antwerp, the Regent thought she her self might now safely and with honour go thither: so as leaving Brussels she went thither, waited on by ma∣ny of the Nobility and chief Lords. She entred as it were in triumph; so great a concourse of people met her, and with such acclamations was she received: though the heretick party forbore not to murmure, seeing themselves reduced to so mean terms. The Regent staid awhile in Antwerp, till she thought she had re∣duced the affairs of the Church and King into convenient order: she used seve∣rity, tempered with clemency. She returned from thence to Brussels. It cannot be said what good consequences this example of Antwerp wrought in amend∣ment of the preceding evils: The tottering condition of the Provinces was on a sudden reduced to tranquility almost in all parts; the Churches were repaired, Altars restored, Images worshiped, and wonted obedience given to Magistrates. The chief Lords strove who should be forwardest in their service to the Church, and to the King, in their obsequiousness to the Regent, and in waiting personal∣ly upon her: in so much as it was generally hoped that the peace of those Pro∣vinces should for ever be perpetuated; and that heresie being either totally ex∣tinguisht in them, or at least mightily quel'd, the antient worship of God, and their former devotion and loyalty to their Prince was to flourish again. Whilst affairs went thus in Flanders, great consultations were had in Spain, to resolve how the disorders which had hapned in those Provinces might best be re∣medi'd. One of the chiefest debates was, whether the King should go thither himself in person or no, or whether he should send a Commander of known valour and authority. It was not doubted but that his going in person would be the most efficacious remedy which could be apply'd to the necessities of those Countries. Many examples were hereupon alleadged, to shew of what power the very pre∣sence of the Prince was with the people. And amongst the rest, that which the King might take from his Father the Emperour; who with the very sole majesty of his aspect, had assoon queld as seen those of Gaunt. The Dutchess urged this
as the only remedy; and shewed how that assoon as the King should be arrived, Flanders would suddenly be quieted; and that his presence would in all other respects be very acceptable to those people. The Marquis of Berghen and Mon∣tigni gave out the same opinions in Madrid; were it either that they did really desire the King should go into the Low-Countries, or that thinking it very hard to be effected, they believed it would be yet much more difficult to send a Com∣mander in chief thither with a foreign army. They said that the King would find greatest obedience; they sought to honest as much as they could the Covenant, and the Petition: and though they detested the popular insolencies against the Church, yet they would make it be believed, that it was done out of ignorance, or levity, but not out of infidelity: That therefore the King should come him∣self in person; and that imitating his father, and his fore-fathers in his benignity, he might expect answerable effects in their obsequiousness from the Flemish. The King himself had long nourisht this opinion of his going into Flanders, and such a speech was spread abroad in Spain; and such was the preparation of ships which were built in Biscay, to make that voyage, as it was given out, as all Europe did firmly believe it: and to say truth, the aforesaid reasons being well consider∣ed, it could not be judged but that the King had some such thought; but oft∣times those councels which are advisedly taken, are out of necessity past by. The consequences which made against it being therefore put into the contrary scale, it appear'd almost impossible for the King to resolve upon such an action And first to keep a long time aloof off from the heart of his Monarchy, bore with it those im∣portant considerations which were toucht upon in the beginning, when it was shewed for what reasons the King resolved to make his residency in Spain. And a double fear did still continue, as well of the Moors, who were spread thorough∣out all those Kingdoms, as also of some dangerous infectious heresie which might be brought amongst those people. But suppose the King had been free of those suspitions; how should he have gone into Flanders by sea or by land? with or without forces? by sea he must depend upon storms and wind, and upon the meer will of fortune, which useth to make her greatest sports of the most emi∣nent amongst mortals. And the King himself, not many years before, had expe∣rienced the danger of sea-voyages, in his return from Flanders: and had not his own example been sufficient, that of his Grandfather Philip was yet very fresh, who by the violence of the winds was thrown upon England, and detained by force many days in that Kingdom: Upon which occasion he notwithstanding re∣ceived all fair entertainment, and Courtly hospitality from Henry the seventh, which the King could not exspect from Queen Elizabeth, who did rather con∣spire with his enemies to his prejudice. On the other side, the journey by land seemed very difficult; for the King was of necessity to pass through the Coun∣tries of several Princes, and would depend with too much danger upon their wills. The King of France would peradventure consent that he should pass through his Kingdom, and would perhaps have received him with no less friend∣ly demonstrations then King Francis had done the Emperour Charls the fifth: but the hereticks wherewith all the parts of that Kingdom were then almost in∣fected would have opposed his journey, and would doubtlesly have made the e∣vent prove dangerous. It remained then that he must land in Italy, and after∣wards take his way either through Savoy, or by the Switzers, so to enter into the Country of Burgundy and Lorain, and from thence into Flanders. On both which parts he was likewise to pass through the Countries of strangers, and to coast so near upon France and Germany, as he must needs be subject to many sini∣ster accidents, which easily might have befaln him. These were the difficulties which were taken into consideration, if the King were to pass into Flanders either by sea or by land, with only his Court attendance: But how much greater were to be feared if he should pass with an Army? since carrying with him so great a ne as the occasion would doubtlesly require, all States would be jealous of so great Forces and peradventure would have raised Forces likewise, and instead of friends have become enemies; lest that which was termed a passage, might turn to an oppression. Then the Councel of Spain not thinking it fit that the King should go himself
in person into Flanders for the aforesaid reasons, it remained to see whether it were better to send some warlick Commander thither with an Army; or laying aside all asperity, endeavour to compose the affairs by fair means. The King was much at variance within himself upon this point: He was naturally given to love quiet; he loved the Flemish, and would rather have been beloved then feared by them; knowing very well how much securer the Garison is which Princes have in their subjects hearts, then those of Citadels or Cities: moreover that he might be very uncertain of what the event of his forces would be, against a people by nature so fierce, so far remote from all the rest of his Dominions, and who were invironed on all sides by the Crown of Spains greatest enemies and enviers: But on the contrary he saw how little good fair means had done as yet, since the authors of the begun disorders had rather been incouraged thereunto then otherwise, by too much tolleration, and might likely, if unpunished, grow worse and worse. Nor were the Kings Councelless at a stand then the King. The Councel of Spain was then full of many eminent personages. Amongst the rest Ferdinand de Tol∣ledo, Duke of Alva, and Gomes de Figheroa Duke of Feria, were in great esteem both with the King and Councel. Feria chiefly for Civil affairs, and Alva for Military actions; who was so excellent therein, as the first place in the professi∣on of Militia, was unquestionably given to him by all Spain. These two were of differing opinions. Feria thought it better to reduce the Flemish to their du∣ties by fair means, and Alva by force. Upon a certain day then, when the King himself was in Councel to resolve what was to be done in this so important bu∣siness. The Duke of Feria spake thus. The cure of an evil (most glorious Prince) lies chiefly without all question in knowing what it is. Cities and Monarchies are born and die, grow sick and are cured, as humane bodies are; so as if diligence be used in the private indispo∣sitions of one onely man, how much more necessary is it to be used in the pub∣lick maladies of whole Kingdoms? To provide then for the evils wherewith Flanders is afflicted, 'tis very necessary first to know their causes. And this without all doubt ought chiefly to be attributed to the terror which the Inqui∣sition and the Edicts have infused into that Country. The Flemish have appre∣hended, and do apprehend now more then ever to have their consciences vio∣lated by such ways, and to undergoe all other greater affliction and misery: and this it is which hath made them fall at last into so many and so hainous outra∣ges. That under which Flanders doth at the present labour, is (if I may so call it) a Frenzie of fear, which is fomented by such as are ambitious and turbulent, that they may have matter for innovations to their advantage. What reason is there then that more fuel should be added to the fire of those tumults, when they ought rather to be quenched and deaded? If the bare name of Inquisition (as it may be termed) not almost any ways put in use, or at least but as a sha∣dow, and which it was thought necessary wholly to suppress, hath put Flanders into such commotions; what will that Nation do when they shall see them∣selves threatned with the forces of a foreign Army? what fear, what horrour will they thereat conceive? the least they can apprehend, will doubtlesly be the Inquisition. They will believe that the Government of Spain will be by force brought into Flanders: that their Priviledges will be violated, their Instituti∣ons overthrown, their faults severely punished, their Liberties opprest by Gari∣sons; and finally be buried in Citadels. But suppose an Army be to be sent in∣to Flanders; who will secure their passage? who will secure their entrance? Peoples fear doth oft-times degenerate into desparation. So the Flemings growing desperate, and the Nobility cloaking themselves no longer under Cove∣nants and Petitions, nor the common people falling into slight tumults, but the whole Country going into a general rebellion, all may with one accord oppose our forces, and not suffer them to enter. And say the Flemish were not apt e∣nough of themselves to make this opposition, will they peradventure want nigh∣bours who will use all means to incite them thereunto? do not we know what apprehensions the being of the Spanish forces in Flanders will cause in Germany, in England, and in France? But let it be granted that they be suffered to enter, and that as then they cannot from thence receive any impediment for so doing:
are we any whit the more secure that the Country may not alter afterwards, and be troubled? Great punishments must certainly be undergone, and force must divers ways be secured by greater force. The people there will then begin to de∣spair more then ever: they will call punishment oppression, and severity tyran∣ny; Citadels yokes; and Garisons chains and fetters: and thus at last they will break out into rebellion and arms: thus will the war be kindled. Nor doe I know whether it will be afterwards as easily ended, as it would have been easie at first not to have begun it. Nature, by the strong situation of sea and rivers, will fight for them; they themselves will fight desperately, in defence (as they will say) of themselves, wives, children and liberty. The opulency of their own Country will furnish them with gallant forces, and much more the oportunity of their neighbours. On the contrary, how heavie a burthen of war will your Majesty be to sustain? Succours at so great a distance will prove very slow, and very costly both by sea and land. Passage must either be beg'd or bought: and we shall see our men fail before they come into Flanders. The event of war is always uncertain: And Fortune, which in other humane accidents is content with a part, will here have the whole Dominion. If the success prove favoura∣ble to your Majesty, the victory will be bought with bloud, and against the bloud of your subjects. But if the contrary should fall out (which God for∣bid) not only men, but States would be lost; nor they alone, but Religion: and so at last by too deplorable event we shall be taught, how much fair means would have been better then bitter proceedings, for the accommodation of the affairs of those Provinces. It is to those fair means that I exhort you, and that by all means you give over any thought of the other. Every Province, every Kingdom hath its particular nature, like unto humane bodies. And who knows this better then you, Sir? to whose Scepter worlds are born, and whose Mo∣narchie embraceth so much, as the circuit thereof is only to be measured by the Sun. One Government is proper for Spain, another for the Indies, another for your States in Italy; and so likewise others in Flanders, and in the rest of so many members, of which the bulk of your Empire is composed. Only the same religion ought to be in them all; but in this also the zeal ought to be well regulated, so as the too violent remedies which may be used to that purpose, do not produce division instead of unity; and that together with the loss of obe∣dience to the Church, that fail not likewise which is due by the people to their Prince. What did not Don Piedro di Tolledo Viceroy of Naples do? what did he not trie to bring the Inquisition into that Kingdom, in the Emperour your fathers time? Naples rose, and so would the whole Kingdom have done; so as it was necessary to remove the occasion of the tumults of that City. Let the Flemish then be permitted to enjoy the Government of Flanders: Free them from all suspition either of Inquisition, Foreign Forces, or any other more dreaded vio∣lence. Let one contrary cure another: So the peoples fear ceasing, the Coun∣trey commotions will cease. Nor is it to be doubted but that heresie is rather supprest by peace then by war. It is too well seen how much it hath increased heresie in Germany and in France: and since so many have done amiss in Flan∣ders, and that the faults ought not to be left altogether unpunisht, let the pu∣nishment of a few serve for the example of all; and let it be laid there where the Country may be least exasperated thereby. In fine, clemency becomes a Prince; other people are capable of other vertues. But the Duke of Alva spake thus to the contrary. To begin (most puisant Prince) where the Duke of Feria ended; I shall both true∣ly and freely deny, that it is now in your Majesties power to use clemency. Which virtue ill used, degenerates into abject servititie. And as in some cases it preserves Kingdoms, in other some it ruines them. How long will you indure to receive Laws in Flanders, instead of giving them? What remains now but that the Flemish who upon all occasions boast themselves to be as well free as subjects, having denyed all obe∣dience to the Church, may also altogether deny it to you? so as a second Switzer Commonwealth shall be seen to arise against you in Flanders, as the former did against the other Austrians in Germany; or rather instead of a popular tyranny, Orange and Egmont, and the other Authors of so many base novelties, oppressing the liberty of
those people, instead of defending it, shall boldly divide those Provinces amongst themselves. The affairs of Flanders do at the present lean this way; and shall we talk of pardon? and shall it be in your power to make the Church lose the Patri∣mony of so many of the faithfull, and your Crown the like of so many opulent Coun∣tries? Heresie triumphs there now with a thousand horrid impieties: and is not your Authority oppugned on all sides by Covenants, Petitions, and a thousand other perfideous practises? you have erred then sufficiently already, in using only fair means. And to say truth, to what end hath so long patience and dissimulation served? unless to make the disorders still the greater, and the Authors thereof more audacious. O that it were Gods will that you might go your self in person into Flanders! That would certainly be a prevalent remedy. We have the example thereof in your father against those of Gaunt: But that great Prince, born in Flanders, yea even in the City of Gaunt, and who punisht that City only, having all the rest of the Country in full obedience, would not go from thence till he had placed a strong and well Gari∣soned Castle in Gaunt,. They then likewise broke forth into complaints; they cal∣led upon their Priviledges as upon so many Tutelary Angels, and termed the Castle a chain and yoke. But all was in vain; they must at last submit their rehellious necks to so just force. If the Emperour thought that his sole presence was not suffici∣ent upon that occasion, how much less should you think yours should suffice? who in∣stead of one City, have the whole Country in rebellion; to boot with beresie, which infects it at home, and threatens it from all parts abroad. If then it stood with your Majesties conveniency to go now into the Low-Countries, you ought appear in a po∣sture to command, not to intreat: which is as much as to say, powerfully armed, that you might leave your Authority when you should depart, armed with Castles and Ga∣risons. So did the Emperour your Father; and so doubtlesly would you do. And how much more applyable is the cause whereof we now treat to this example of Gaunt then to that other of Naples? where the so many strong holds which are every where in that City, and throughout the whole Kingdom, and which are so well Garisoned, may suffice no less for the safety of Religion, then of your self. I wish (I say again) it were Gods pleasure that you your self in person might provide by such remedies as your great wisdom would apply, to remedy those disorders which now afflict Flanders But since for other more urgent occasions your Majesties presence cannot at this time be dispenst withall from out this Center of your Empire, my opinion is, That without more delay you send an Army into those Provinces, appointing such a Commander o∣ver it as you shall think fit. Which if it be resolved on; for what remains, either in its passage to Flanders, or its being admitted entrance when it shall be there, I do not at all scruple it. Who knows not how much you may rely upon the Duke of Savoy, so near allyd in bloud to your Crown, and more unto your Interest? your Army shall then at its going out of Italy, pass through Savoy as through your own Country. If it were better to march through Swisserland, the Catholick Cantons which are your Confederates will easily accommodate you: hence it enters into your Burgundy, and Lorain neither can nor will resist you. When the Army shall be come to the confines of Lucemberg, which is the Gate of Flanders towards Italy, on what side shall any one so much as dare to oppose the passage of your forces? will the Flemish peradventure do it? as if it were as easie to raise an Army, as to frame a Conspiracy; and that the rabble-rout will be as ready to fight against armed squadrons, as they have been to wage war so wickedly against the sacred Images and Altars. Will the Confining Princes perhaps deny their passage? France is wholly on fire with Civil War: A Woman sits at the Helm of Government in England; and what can be feared from Germany, divided amongst so many Princes, and so at variance with∣in themselves? moreover your case will be theirs. All Princes are equally concer∣ned in the peoples disobedience. The damage insues peradventure but to one at once; but the example reaches always to all. On the contrary; when was ever your Em∣pire in greater power and tranquility? your Empire, which imbraceth several worlds; and wherein God hath placed you, more for the amplifying of his glory, then of your own. Your forces will then without any manner of difficulty be received in Flanders: and the strife will be, who shall first give them entrance, and most fear them when they are entred. When they shall once be setled there, 'twill doubtlesly be consonant
to reason that that be rendred to God which is his, and what is yours to you. Pu∣nishment must be inflicted in proportion to the faults demerit. And if that frenzy (as it is termed) of fear, but which is indeed of perfideousness, made the Flemish fall blindfold into open rebellion, why ought not your forces hope for all good success against them? Yours, which will be so just, and so potent, against theirs which are tu∣multuary, managed by adject men, rebels to God, and to their Prince. Nor if need should require, will yours want succour by the same ways, either of Savoy or of Swis∣serland; and succour may also easilier be conveyed by sea than by land. But there will be no occasion, in my judgement, that your forces should either move or be suc∣cour'd. We shall see the Rebellion supprest almost assoon as born by those which shall now enter Flanders. And what fairer occasion then this can you desire to bring an Army into Flanders, and make those Provinces the Piazza d'Armi of your Empire? to make by that situation, which may be said to be in the very bowels of Europe, the Churches Authority be so much the more reverenced, and your Name the more re∣spected. Doubtlesly there are variety of Governments; but there can be no variance in the bond of obedience which is due by the people unto their Prince. Subjects are born with this Law, and when they go about to break it, 'tis they that use violence, they receive it not. Just thus it falls out now in Flanders, where all Laws both hu∣mane and divine are traden under foot. Your Majesty shall not then use force, save on∣ly to suppress force; nor sharp remedies, till after having so long in vain used mo∣derate ones. The wound is degenerated into a Gangreen; it requires fire and sword. By so many and so efficacious, reasons, on the one, and on the other side the King was rather confused then confirmed; Cardinal Granville adhered to the Duke of Alva; and though he appeared to be a bitter enemy to the Flemish; yet his long experience in the affairs of that Country, gave authority to his very passions. On the other side Prince Ruygomez who was greatly in the Kings fa∣vour, joyned with the Duke of Feria. And almost the whole Councel was di∣vided between these two opinions. The King did then again waver a little before he put on any resolution: But the news of the novelties in Flanders still increa∣sing, and particularly those of the violence used to the Churches, and of the ex∣cess of liberty which the hereticks took in all things else, the King thought it was now no longer an act of will, but of necessity to send an Army into the Low-Countries, and to use force against the Flemish. Princes usually when they can, commit the execution of affairs to those who have had the greatest share thereof in Councel. Therefore the King chose the Duke of Alva to go chief Comman∣der over his Forces which went for Flanders. To boot that if there should be a∣ny occasion to use them, none in Spain was thought to be more able (as hath been said) in that profession: A man rigid both in nature and aspect: haughty in peace, and much more haughty in war; long bred up in arms; and who thought it always advantagious for him and the King, to have them, and to make use of them. The delay was not long: requisite orders were suddenly given for the raising of good store of new soldiers in Spain; that they might be placed in the wonted Garisons in Italy, and that those who were ancient Companies might be sent into Flanders. The chief strength of foot were to be Spaniards; the horse were to be composed of Italians, Burgundians and High-Dutch: and some Regiments of foot were to come to Flanders from Germany, which by their vicinity might the speedilier be raised. Whilst these preparations were a making in Spain, Italy and other parts, the Regents affairs prospered in Flanders, as hath been said. Obedience was restored to the King, and the Church had almost wholly recovered hers; and the Country was on all sides reduced to quiet: so as it was expected that the King would change his mind, and that no Army should be sent into Flanders. But were it that he did think that the tumalts ri∣sen in those Provinces were rather husht then quite extinct; or that desires to e∣stablish his Authority the better there for ever after, he would not lose the pre∣sent occasion of doing it; or that he thought he could not without a great body of forces, perfectly enjoy the secure possession thereof, they being placed amidst neighbours, which made him daily more jealous of them; he continued his first resolution. The Duke of Alva being departed from Spain, and come by sea
to Genoa: he mustered the men spoken of before, in the State of Millan, which came to near 8000 Spanish foot, under four Camp-Masters. Allonso Ulloa commanded the Neapolitan Brigado; Guellielmo Romero that of Cicily; Sancio di Londonio that of Lombardy, and the Sardinian Brigado was commanded by Gonsalo di Bracamonte. All experienced soldiers, and under valliant Commanders. He gave the command of the horse which were raised in Italy, which might be a∣bout 1500. the greatest part whereof were Itallians, the rest Spaniards, to his natural son Fernando di Tolledo. 300 were afterwards added to these in Burgun∣dy; and of the Dutch there was but only one Regiment of 4000 foot raised at the present under Count Alberico di Lodrone. The Duke would have also di∣vers other Spaniards to be near him, who were fit for command; and amongst others, Sancio d'Avola who was Governor of the Castle of Pavia, and who by his valour came afterwards to the chief Commands in Flanders. Of the Italian Commanders, the chief were Marquis Chiapino Vitelli, and Gabrio Serbelloni, Prior of the Order of St. Johns of Jerusalem, in Hungary: Both of them long experienced in the wars of Italy, and who had therein won much renown. He made Vitelli Camp-Master-General, and gave the charge of the Artillery to Ser∣belloni. The Muster being made, and the Army marching in very good discipline, not meeting with any difficulty either from France or Germany, he led it finally into the Province of Lucemberg. He made some Brigades of foot advance from thence, and quartered them where he thought most convenient, the better to se∣cure his entry into the Country, and then he himself went to the Regent. The Flemish who were much astonisht to hear of these forces, were much more a∣stonisht when they saw them Many of them resolved to quit the Country be∣fore the Duke should bring them in: and the Prince of Orange had already led them an example. He being assertained of so great a preparation of forces, and that the Duke of Alva was Commander in chief, resolved to withdraw into Germany. He knew how suspected his actions were in Spain. That the Duke of Alva formerly a rival, was now become a Superiour: and insteed of thundring out contrary opinions in the Councel at Madrid, he was to lead a powerfull Army into Flanders. That the sore orders were to be put into sorer execution; if Count Egmont and the rest would perish through con∣fiding, he would secure himself by doing the contrary; 'twas therefore no lon∣ger time to stand lingring; 'twas better to get into Germany, and to be a specta∣tor of the Tragedies in Flanders afar off. And how could he with honour be under the Duke of Alva, who was but a bare Grandee of Spain? whereas he himself enjoy'd the Prerogative of Free States, and many other greater in his Family in Germany. Let others endure to see the Provinces of Flanders, always accustomed to be governed by some of the bloud royal, or at least nearly allyd thereunto, fall with scorn into such hands. Together with him went his brother Lodovick; and at the same time the Count of Hostrat went from Flanders, Before Orange departed, he oft-times incited Count Egmont to do the like; and not able to prevail with him, he told him, You will repent, but too late. And in other speeches did prognosticate unto him those misfortunes whereinto afterwards he fell. The Duke taking a house in Brussels, not with the Regent, but in a house near the Palace-Royal; the first thing he did, was to make the Counts of Egmont and Horn prisoners, which he did thus: They were both of them of the Coun∣cel of State, and therefore the Duke seeming as if he would know their opinions touching some intended Citadels, and especially concerning one which he meant to erect presently in Antwerp, he made them come to his lodgings, with divers o∣thers of the Councel. Some discourse being here had upon the business, the Coun∣cel being ended, as they past through divers lodgings, they were by feigned pre∣tences parted one from another, and after made prisoners. At the same time, but not in Brussels, was Antonio Strales taken, who had been oft-times Burgamaster of Antwerp, a man of great imployment in that City, and esteemed one of the chiefest Authors of the Tumults which had happened there; and John Casembrot Lord of Bacharsel, who was Egmonts Secretary, and who managed all his af∣fairs. By means of these two, more then by any others, the Duke hoped to come
by the knowledg of many inportant businesses, not only touching the persona∣ges of Egmont and Horn, but concerning the passages and events of all the late revolts. Upon the news hereof in Spain, Montigni was likewise suddenly impri∣soned, the Marquiss of Berghen being dead some months before in Spain, not without suspition of being poysoned as the Flemish did believe. The Regent knew nothing of what had befaln Egmont and Horn, till it was done. From the Kings first sending of the Duke of Alva with an Army into Flanders, he had declared that the Duke should have the sole Government of the Militia, and that for all things else the Regent should continue in her former administration. The Duke at his first arrival had shewed his Commission to be such; but the Regent had already discerned, that he had private Orders for further Authority then he would as yet make known. Yet she did not think the Duke would have proceeded so far as he had done in the Imprisonment of Egmont and Horn, without making her first acquainted with his resolution therein; so as she esteemed this either a diffidence, or an undervaluation of her by the King; and almost an approbati∣on of those accusations which were laid to her charge in Spain: as if she had used too much tolleration in the disorders which had happened, and had rather occasioned then supprest the novelties. Judging then that she could not with her honour continue longer in such a form of Government, and desirous also to be rid of it, as one who had always been contrary to the Duke of Alva's sence touching the affairs of those Countries; she intreated the King that he would suffer her to return to Italy: and after some reiterated requests therein, she at last got leave so to do. The King notwithstanding seemed very well satisfied with her Government, and gave large demonstrations thereof. He honoured her se∣veral ways, and in particular testimony of his gratitude, he gave her a good in∣crease of revenue for her and her heirs; to boot with that which formerly she en∣joyed as her Dowry, in the Kingdom of Naples. She went from Brussels about the beginning of the year 1568. nor can it be said how much love she left behind her amongst the Flemish. She was born amongst them, and her demeanors were conformable to her birth. She was gracious, affable and moderate: but there∣withall a Princess of a manly spirit, and constancy; since involved so long in so many storms and tempests wherewith her Government was a gitated, she knew how to come out of them with so much honour, and at last, did turn the tempests into a calm.
THE HISTORY OF THE WARS OF FLANDERS Written by CARDINAL BENTIVOGLIO. BOOK IV. The Contents. Divers of the Duke of Alva's cruel proceedings. A great many of the Flemish fly to the neighbouring parts. The disposition of the confining Princes to foment the revolts of the Low-Countries. Orange his particular indeavours in Germany to this purpose. He cals a Diet of some Princes, and Hans Towns. His Speech to the Diet. The Germans resolve to assist the Flemish. Their first motion, and their defeat. Lodovick brother to Orange, enters Friesland with an Army. Count Aremberg is sent against him by the Duke of Alva. They fight: Arem∣berg is routed and slain. The Duke resolves to go himself in person against Lodo∣vick. To this purpose he gives order for the increasing of his Army. Before his departure he causeth Egmont and Horn to be beheaded in Brussels. Other severi∣ties of his. He comes to the Army in Friesland; makes an Oration to the soldi∣ers. Lodovick retreats; but the Duke overtakes him, fights him, and utterly de∣seats him. THe Reyns of Government being wholly left in the Duke Anno. 15. 8. of Alva's hand, he apply'd himself with all attention to execute his begun rigour upon the Flemish. Soon after that Egmont and Horn were made prisoners in Brussels, he sent them both well guarded to the Castle at Gaunt; and put in an High-Dutch Garison into it, instead of the Flemish Garison which was there before. He formed a new Tribunal of Justice by the name of a Councel to sit upon Tumults, for the better cognisance of businesses of that weight, and all others of that nature, and composed it of such as he thought he might most confide in: Amongst other he placed a Spanish Lawyer in it, and a Burgundian of the same profession; and he himself would be the President thereof. Then publishing his Authority in Print to make it the more formidable by being divulged: and proclaimed all those to be guilty of High-Treason, both against God and the King, who had had any thing to do in the late actions of the
Covenant, Petition, and of the violences used against the Churches, and the Ca∣tholick religion. He forthwith accompanied the terror of his Threats with the severity of Punishment. He caused the Prince of Orange, his brother Lodovick, Count Hostrate, Brederode and Colemburgh, and the rest of the prime men who were gone out of Flanders, to be publikely cited to appear before him within a certain prefixt time, upon pain of rebellion, and the loss of their goods in case they did not appear. He caused a great many others of all sorts to be imprisoned in sundry parts of the Provinces, who were fallen into the aforesaid faults and they were in so great numbers, that all the prisons throughout the whole Country were on a sudden full of them. To imprisonment he added Death, and made the market∣places the places of execution, to the end that the publikeness thereof might in∣fuse the greater terror. At the same time he designed divers Citadels and began to lay their foundations where he thought either the situation of the Towns, or the condition of the Inhabitants did most require it. The first was placed in Ant∣werp, with five royal Bulwarks upon the Scheld, upon which River the City is seated; to hasten the which he went in person to Antwerp, and made the City contribute towards the expence thereof, giving them assured hopes that as soon as the Citadel should be put into a posture of defence, Lodroneas Regiment of High-Dutch which were there in garrison should be removed. He began to build a Fort in Flushing, the chief Haven of Zealand, and which opens and shuts the en∣trance into the Scheld. He designed another in Groninghen, upon the confines of Germany; and another in Valentiennes, which lies towards France: But unless it were that of Antwerp, the rest were not built; for so many troubles arose from so many parts, as the Duke had not fitting opportunity to doe it. He notwith∣standing secured the Frontiers on all sides by good garrisons, against all innovati∣ons which might be endeavoured from abroad; and within, he disarmed many of the most suspected Cities, and distributed forces in divers parts, where he thought it most needfull to curb the Flemish more straightly. This so rigorous a beginning of Government put the Country every where into such fear, as it was on a sudden abandoned by a great number of people of all sorts; they were reported to be above thirty thousand. Those who were no wayes concerned, were affrighted to see the faults of others so severely punished; and they groaned to see that Flanders, which was wont to enjoy one of the ea∣liest governments of all Europe, should now have no other object to behold but the Terror of Arms, Flight, Exiles, Imprisonments, blood, death, and confiscati∣ons. The people fled to the neighbouring parts of Germany, to France, and Eng∣land: But those of best quality retired to Germany, drawn thither by Orange, who encouraged them more then all the rest to follow his example, and run his for∣tune. And who from thence did answer the Dukes citation in writing, refusing to submit himself to his Tribunal, as to that of a Judge too much suspected, and of too inferior a condition to take cognisance of such a cause; saying that he was a free Prince of Germany, and therefore in the first place a Subject to the Emperour; and that being a Knight of the Golden Fleece, he was only to be judged by the King himself, who was the supreme Head of that Order. Hostrat answered al∣most in the same sort, save only that he left out the reason of being Feudatory to the Emperour, for he had no estate in Germany. Horn had some estate of that nature; and therefore his Mother, when he was imprisoned, had suddenly recourse to Caesars Authority, and had from thence procured favourable offices in her sons behalf to the King and Duke of Alva. The like is done by divers Princes of Ger∣many in Orange his behalf, and those that were joyned with him in the same cause; for indeed the Catholike Princes were no less displeased then were the Hereticks of those parts with the Dukes severity; and that such an alteration should be made in the Government of Flanders, with which Country they had such con∣formity both in language, customs, and laws. The King promised all fair in∣treatment, so as the Citation might be obeyed. But none of those that were cited daring to trust, and the time of citation being already elapsed, the Duke proceeded to punishment; and amongst other things, he made Colemburghs house in Brussels be pull'd down to the ground, in memory of the detestation of the seditious practises which were there chiefly woven and concluded. Orange
was Master of divers fair Towns in sundry Provinces of Flanders, (The Princi∣pality of Orange is in France, though not subject to that Crown) and of a great many likewise in the County of Burgundy; in Brabant amongst others he had Breda, a noble pace, having a stately Castle in it, and of such consequence as the Duke of Alva would suddenly secure himself the better thereof by putting a gar∣rison into it. To the confiscation of his goods, the Duke added the retension of the Count di Buren, a Youth of twelve years of age, who was the Prince of Orange his eldest son, and who was then at the University of Lovain following his studies; and under pretence that the King would have him follow the same studies and exercises in the University of Alcala d'Enares, he sent him well guarded into Spain. Orange and his companions together with other Nobles who were fled from Flanders, exasperated at these proceedings, did what they could to shew their re∣sentment. Their chief end was to raise Forces, and lead them into Flanders; hoping assuredly that when any Forces should appear from without, they that were within the Country would suddenly rise. This was therefore hotly endea∣voured, and it was managed by their Adherents in almost all the Provinces of Flanders. The Duke of Alva's government infused horror into them, and by all dreadful exagerations they endeavoured to make the people abhor it. From with∣out they themselves endeavoured by all possible means to draw other Princes to favour their cause. From England, 'twas known the Queen had a great inclina∣tion to foment whatsoever novelties which might happen in the Low-Countries. She considered, that if the King of Spain should possess them peacefully, his Forces would be too formidable both by sea and land throughout all Europe: That she in particular was greatly to apprehend his Forces by Sea, since England and Ireland would be as it were invironed by the Fleets which might be maintain∣ed on the one side in Spain, and on the other in Flanders: That the King would not be backward in molesting her, having opportunity to doe it; as he who knew she sought to indamage him as much as she might, as he had already had several experiences. These outward dangers appeared unto the Queen to be the greater, when she considered also those within. She saw the Heretick government which she had introduced within her Kingdom began to totter; that a great many Ca∣tholicks were still in England, that Ireland was almost wholly Catholick; and that to cause innovations in those parts, particularly in matters of Religion, no Prince would be more forward therein then the King of Spain: She therefore desired to see her neighbour Countries involved in Heresie, hoping that people withdraw∣ing themselves from the obedience of the Church, would the easelier be perswaded to doe the like from that of their Prince; and that one rebellion added to another, affairs should be so imbroiled in those parts, as there should be no design of trou∣bling her. To this purpose the Hugonot Faction in France was at first favoured by her, and now more then ever; who joyed to see the progress thereof so great in that Kingdom. But her design in this point, was chiefly upon Flanders; for from thence, by reason of the vicinity of those Countries unto hers, both before, and much more after the Duke of Alva was entred there with his Forces, grew the greatest suspitions which she had of the King of Spains power. Wherefore she graciously received all those who fled from Flanders to England, and nourisht the complaints which they made against the Spaniard, and much more the hatred and ill will which they bore them. Nor content to favour them in her own Domini∣ons, she did the like with the Hereticks of France and Germany, with whom she held continual correspondencie, and bore great sway. But though these offices did help, yet were they more then needed either for the one or the other faction. That of the Hugonots was already so increased in France, as they designed to ground a popular Commonwealth upon the ruines of the Monarchy. The go∣vernment in Religion which they had imbraced was of this form: And desirous that their Politick interests should be guided by the like, they pretended that the King should permit them to meet in the general, and in the particular Assemblies, and to treat of what concerned their body apart, which was to make a total sepa∣ration from the State, within the State. King Charles was then got out of his minority, and shewed himself to be both generously and piously given: But by reason of his youth, the government was still managed by the Queen his mother;
who set upon by the ambition of the Hereticks, and almost no less by the like of the Catholicks, did temporise amongst so many and so fierce storms, and sought to shun danger, since she knew not how to oppose it. Arms had already been seve∣ral times both taken up, and laid down; and the King had endeavoured to allay the fire of Civil wars by divers Edicts of Pacification, (as they termed them) since the times would not suffer him totally to extinguish it. But the Edicts served but to little purpose to restore quiet to that Kingdom, since the factions were more inflamed then ever: Nor were Arms laid down, but that they might be taken up again with more advantage. To this end the Hugonots held close intelligence with the Queen of England, and with the Hereticks of Germany. And because the King of Spain assisted King Charles, and did integrally favour the Catholick cause, and especially by the Flanders Forces, therefore did not the Hugonots omit to foment the Flemish in their bad inclinations. Secret intelligence had ever past (as we have already said) between the Prince of Orange and Coligni the Ad∣miral of France: But after Orange his retreat to Germany, their practises grew hotter: The one of them plotted the ruine of France, which was already begun; the other the ruine of Flanders, which was shortly to begin. Nor is it to be said how much the Hugonots desired to see the like troubles ensue in Flanders, as France did already suffer under, that they might have companions abroad, and to make but one cause of two, to the end that it might be so much the better de∣fended by common forces, and honested by reciprocal examples. So that Coligni, and the other Chieftains of the Heretick faction used all possible diligence to make the Flemish who were fled into France, suddenly endeavour the like no∣velty, which they greatly desired to raise up of themselves in their Country. From Germany likewise, the Heretick Princes, and the Hans-Towns of the same Faction, seemed for the same reasons to have the same ends in the affairs of Flan∣ders. Yea before the rise of Luthers Heresie, all the Princes and the Hans-Towns of Germany, which together with the Emperor their head doe compose the body of the Empire, were not well pleased to see that the House of Austria, first by the addition of Flanders, and then by that of Spain, should be so much exalted. Till then they had looked upon the fortune of that House with an envious eye. When Charles the Fifth was come to the Imperial Crown, they turned their envy into open fear, lest from being Head of the German government he might become absolute Prince of that Empire. They saw that how great soever his design might be, his Forces were equivalent in greatness thereunto. And their fear in this point was rather increased then diminished by the entry of Heresie into Germany: For they apprehended, lest under the colour of reordering the affairs concerning Re∣ligion, he might intend to advantage his own Authority the more easily in those which regarded the State. Hence in a great part were occasioned the troubles of those Countries; hence their so many Dyets, and particularly the Accords which insued in point of Religion. And though when Charles dyed, the House of Au∣stria was divided, and that the greatest power thereof remained in that Branch which was transplanted into Spain; and that on the other side the Hereticks had great Forces in Germany, yet feared they much the neighbourhood of Flanders: They suspected that the Forces of that House might upon all occasions be on that side united against them; to boot that by the opportunity of that situation they saw too great advantages arose to the Austrians in Germany to continue the en∣joyment of the Empire; and that in stead of being elective, it might become he∣reditary in that Family; and that the possession might remain in the Catholick part, with the exclusion of the Heretical. They therefore fauthor'd by all the means they might, the Novelties which had insued in Flanders in the Govern∣ment of the Dutchess of Parma: They favoured Heresie, fomented Sedition, counsell'd their chief Leaders, and endeavoured by all other means to cause such Troubles in those Provinces, as that the King of Spain might either wholly lose them, or not quietly enjoy them. They termed Flanders the Lower-Germany, and reputed it as joyned to the body of their own Upper-Germany, by reason of the connexion of Countries, the conformity of speech and manner of living, and by the community of Traffick and Rivers; of which 'tis arguable whether the Rhine be more commodious to higher Germany by the longer course thereof,
or to the lower by her breadth. In these respects their friendships, adherents, and allyances were very great in those parts. Moreover divers of the best Fami∣lies of Flanders derived from Germany; and amongst others, that of the Prince of Orange, who afterwards married with the house of Saxony, as hath been said. The heretick Princes held therefore their streightest corespondencies with him, and to him did discover their most intimate sence of the affairs of Flanders, because it was most conformable with his own. Orange, being afterwards gon to them by reason of the Duke of Alva's being come into Flanders, he still indeavoured to increase in them a resolution, not to tollerate that oppression which he in the most horrid manner he could invent, affirmed to be already introduced by the Spani∣ards amongst the Flemish. Affirming that this cause was common to both the Germanies; he mingled the Interest of Religion together with that of State; and by the strength and vivacity of wit, made dangers a far off seem very near at hand He chiefly propounded a meeting between those Princes who were most to dread the Spanish forces in Flanders; the Queen of England assisted him here∣in by her authority, and the Hugonots of France by their practices. So as the resolution was soon put on; and divers Hans Towns joyned therein likewise, by sending their Deputies thither; particularly those which are situated upon the Rhine, in which by reason of their neighbourhood with Flanders, the aforesaid power of the Spanish forces was most dreaded: Of the Princes, the Count Pa∣latine of Rhine was most remarkable, his State lay nearest to Flanders; he had the best forces: and being past on from Luthers heresie to that of Calvin, he held greater corespondency with the hereticks of France, and with the Queen of Eng∣land. The rest were the Duke of Wittenberg, the Landgrave of Hesse, the Mar∣quis of Bada, the Marquis of Durlack, and some neighbouring Counts, besides those of Nassaw. The King of Denmark, and the house of Saxony sent likewise their particular Deputies to the Diet. Business doth still proceed slowly, which is to be agitated by many: either they differ in their ends, or agree not in the means, or for the most part are lost through confusion. But their progress is more slow then ordinarily in Germany, where negotiations are not had without much prolixity, more by writing then by word of mouth, and where more time is spent in banqueting then in business. The Diet proceeded on then but slowly, and by reason of the variety of opinions, many difficulties were met with in the things proposed. Whereupon the Prince of Orange, being all on fire himself, and that he might set others on fire likewise, spake one day thus, It is not assuredly any waies to be doubted (most Noble Princes and worthy Deputies) but that we now treat upon a common cause. The one and the other Germany are sufficiently united in situation, tongue, name, traffick, life, and in all things else. And who knows not that in former times they both made but one body? their people do chiefly affect liberty. And though in Flanders the Prince be heriditory, whereas in Germany he is elective, yet almost the same pre∣eminence is due by them to their States as is here attributed to your Dyets. But how oft, and with how much labour and danger hath it behoved the one and the other Nation, to oppose themselves to the avaritiousness of their Prin∣ces? I will leave the pursuit of ancient affairs, that I may come to the more mo∣dern; and those of Germany, that I may descend to the present affairs of Flan∣ders. When the Emperour Charls the fifth was dead, every one knows the King his son's chiefest desire was, to leave those parts, and settle himself in Spain. Being there wholly transformed into the sence and Customs of that people, he grew desirous to govern Flanders after the same manner and Empire as Spain was governed. And what more imperious Minister of State could he leave be∣hind him with the Dutchess of Parma, then the Cardinal Granville? Did I say Minister of State? nay rather supream Governor; since whilst he was there the Dutchess bore only the name of Regent: the whole power lay in him, base Burgundian! The first Author of Flanders's mischiefs; and who deserves chiefly to be punished, since the fault was chiefly his. The Government of the Ecclesiastical and Temporal affairs was suddenly altered in divers sorts by abso∣lute Authority; but chiefly by new Edicts, still more grievous to the conscience, and by introducing the Inquisition. The secretest Oracles are come from the
Councel of Spain, and are executed by secret consultations in Flanders. If the Nobility have complained, their complaints have proved vain; to Petition is counted treachery: to seem troubled, rebellion; and the casual headdy giddi∣ness of the common people, a premeditated insurrection of the whole Country In fine, nothing but to have a pretence to use force against Flanders, was expe∣cted in Spain. And what more light pretence could be taken, then to go about to suppress those tumults, which were seen to cease almost assoon as begun? When so suddenly hereupon the Flemish are insolently declared in Spain to be rebels to God, and to the King: and a foreign Army marches to cause Flanders to be treated hereafter, not as a successive Nation, but as a Conquered Countrey. And who could be better chosen to execute such violences then the Duke of Alva? the most haughty minded man of all Spain; Flanders greatest enemy: and who knows better then any other how to extinguish all remainders of re∣ligion, and in lieu thereof to use all sorts of Tyranny. And just so it fell out. He hath begun to raise Citadels in the chiefest Cities: he hath placed Garisons every where; the places of execution run down with bloud in all Towns no more home-Laws are heard of, but forein ones. The Country is almost unpeo∣pled by exilement, imprisonment and running away. And nothing but gastly looks, complaints, misery, desparation, and calamity is seen every where. In this deplorable estate is Flanders at the present. How much more happie then is Germany, which enjoys her former libertie, and which abhorring all forein force, knows no other Empire then her own? I partake of this felicity, for from hence I derive my bloud, and my first stem remains still here. Nay I am more hated in Spain then any other of the Flemish, by reason of my German spirit. I am held to be the contriver of Conspiracies, the head of sedition, the pesti∣lence of those Countries. Their greatest anger thunders against me, and the severest punishments are already fallen upon me. Thus they seek to turn my glory to infamy: And what greater glory can there be, then to maintain the liberty of a mans Country, and to die rather then be inslaved? I then (most high Princes and Noble Deputies) who am both a German and a Fleming, after having laid before you the miseries of the Lower Germany, whose tears and sup∣plications I bring hither with me, do in her name implore the help and protecti∣on of the Upper Germany. But such recourse for refuge will not avail, unless you your selves repute the cause which is now in hand, to be common as well to Germany as to Flanders, as I at first took for granted. And who can doubt it? who is not aware of the Spaniards vast designes? doubtlesly a desire of Domi∣nation doth naturally reigne in all men. One will draws on another; nor doth what is possest give satisfaction. But how immence, how immoderate doth this thirst appear particularly in the Spaniards? they think not their unknown worlds sufficient to quench it; and will therefore extend their Empire still fur∣ther in those which are known. They fix their eyes, and their machinations much more, upon Europe in particular. When they shall have opprest Flanders, and have gotten so opportune a seat for their Arms, what Province will they next fall upon? that certainly which they shall have most reason to fear. He who will lay the foundations of servitude well, first seeks to beat down the Bulwarks of Liberty. Wherefore knowing that they shall be most withstood by the pow∣er and undaunted spirits of this Nation, which in all things is so united to Flan∣ders, they will forthwith bend all their forces hitherward. It may then be con∣cluded, that the Spanish forces being in Flanders, will be always ready to enter Germany: and then what will your miseries be? when their Colonies shall likewise be seen here; new faces, new Customs, severe Laws, more severely ex∣ecuted heavy yoaks upon mens persons and more heavy upon their consciences? This point being then granted, that the danger will be common amongst us, the other will be clear, that the cause should likewise be reputed common: the rest follows on in consequence: One neighbour runs to quench the fire that is kindled in another neighbours house. When a river threatens to break in, who runs not from all sides to mend the banks? the same course ought now to be held all you must haste to help the Flemish; since you are the first that are like∣ly to seel the flames of their fire, and they who shall first partake of the inun∣dation
of so many miseries which they suffer. But do not believe that they will linger in expectation of your aids. They will move assoon as they shall see you move: and their worth and vertue, which by so unexpected and cruel a violence, is rather stupified then opprest, will return with greater vigour then before, What cannot armed desparation do? what dares it not? the entrance will be always easie from these parts into Friesland, and into the Provinces of Flanders which are on this side the Rhine, that river will with like easiness be at all times past over: all the chief Cities will throw open their gates. The Nobility, and all the whole Country will joyn in the same opinion. But I came short when I said that only Germany and Flanders would joyn in this cause: France and England, and the other Northern Countries, will undoubt∣edly joyn with us, since they stand in like fear of the Spanish forces. He that commits violence doth not always boast thereof. And how oft do we see op∣pression prove the ruine of the oppressor? It may so fall out, as whilst the Spaniards do so greedily gape after other mens states, they may chance to lose their own. The Flemish expect only your assistance, to escape so hard a sla∣very. And I in their names do once again earnestly implore it. The cause can∣not be more just, nor more easily helped: and it is yours no less then ours. All neighbours will take it for their own concernment; and the whole North will favour it. But as the defence will in the first place fall to your share, so the first place of victory will be given to your forces. And so by the title of our being oppressed, you shall for ever be accounted our deliverers. The Crown of Spain never had, nor never shall have a fiercer enemy then the Prince of Orange. To this his discourse made in publick, he added many others in privat. He exagerated all the evils which are wont to be said in detestation of great Empires and their Governors; and sought by all means possible to imprint those passions in the minds of others, which burnt so fiercely in his own. He pre|'vailed so far with the Diet, as even the backwardest amongst them, wisht they had helped the Flemish. Whereupon it was concluded that such men as were ne∣cessary for that purpose should speedily be raised. This resolution was suddenly communicated by Orange to his confederates of Flanders, and to those also with whom he held intelligence in France and in England. They designed to enter Flanders at one and the same time in divers parts. The easiest way seemed to be by Friesland, as being the most open Country, and the most commodious to re∣ceive German aids. The other side whereon they would endeavour to get en∣trance was Brabant and Ghelderland, confining upon the States of Cleves and Ju∣liers, and Liege. On the behalf of France, the Hugonor intimated hopes that they would cause some novelties in the Walloon Frontiers; and the like was pro∣mised from England, in Holland and Zealand by sea. They made no delay: much soldiery did just then return to Germany, which John Casimere, one of the Count Palatines of Rhine, had not long before led into France in favour of the Hugo∣nots. Arms were for that time laid down in that Kingdom by some agreement between the parties interessed; and therefore the aforesaid Germans returning to their own homes, Orange and the rest of his adherents, thought it very opor∣tune upon this occasion to make use of them for the accomplishment of their designes. Such as were needfull being then tane into pay by the Princes, and Ci∣ties that did intervene in the Diet, as many of them as were requisit, to boot with the men which they raised in their own Countries, began to march under Count Lodovick brother to the Prince of Orange, with intention to enter the Low-Countries on the side of Friesland: but before he began to move, another was heard of towards Ghelderland. Lumay and Villiers, were two of those Nobles who had shared most in the Covenant Petitions and revolts which had happened in the Dutchess of Parma's time, they feared to be punished by the Duke of Alva, proportionably to their demerits Havingtherefore through this appre∣hension quitted their Countrie, they would now return again with forces. They resolved to put it to a tryal, by indeavouring to surprise some important place in Ghelderland. They thought Ruremond a fitting place, a City standing on the Mause, and which might serve them for a passage into Brabant. Orange insti∣gated them hereunto; for he designed to enter with very powerfull forces on
that side, and then to settle in the midst of the Countrie. Having gathered tu∣multuously together about 2000 fot, and some few horse, a rabble of people, all of them almost of the neighbouring Countries, they moved to execute the aid designe: and they hoped for better success, for that they had some intelligence in the City. This was soon foreseen, and speedily prevented by the Duke of Alva. He dispacht away the Camp-Master Londonio forthwith thitherward with some Spanish, some German, and some Walloon Colours, and sent Sancio d'Avila likewise thither with 30 horse; and in the first place secured Mastrick, that being the chief pass towards Germany. That City is cut through, not in the midst, but on one side by the Mause, the lesser part thereof makes as it were an angle, which is called by the name of Vich. This part belongs to the Principali∣ty of Liege; but the chief body of the Town is under the Low-Countries. The City is united by a stone-bridg: and the Ligeois contented with the Civil Go∣vernment of what belongs to them, leave both the lesser and greater division un∣der the Military custody of the King of Spain. The revolters drew near Rure∣mond, and endeavoured to possess themselves of one gate; but they failed in their designe: for they reaped no good by the Intelligence they had within; but found things in a better posture of defence then they expected. They therefore presently withdrew into the State of Liege, fearing to have the Spaniards on their back, if they should tarry in the Kings Territories. This mean while Londonio and Avila were on their march; and understanding that they were retreated, Londonio was not minded to pursue them into Liege, saying, Will not this be to offend and irritate our neighbours? our own Countrie is too full of jealousie. Let us make a bridg to them that fly; to see the enemy run away, is to have sufficiently overcome. But Avila was for pursuing them: replying, Our neighbours will be so far from being hereat offended, as they ought rather to thank us for it. Do not we know that these wicked ones have entred the Country of Liege by force? the Ligeois will then repute our forces for their own, and must con∣fess that we have done this to free them, not to invade their Countrie. This opinion prevailed; and the Spaniards advancing, heard that Lumay and Villiers were retired with their men towards Dalem, a little Town, bordering up∣on the Country of Liege, environed with a wall and a ditch, but otherwise not strong. They did not think that the Spaniard would have touched upon that State: but when they knew they marched towards them, they got underneath the walls of Dalem, and assisted by a ravelin on one side, and by the carriage carts on the other, they prepared to defend themselves. When the Spaniards were come up they sent some of their men forthwith to the other side of the Town, and with the rest gave so strong an assault to the enemy on the front, as they wholly routed them. They slew many of them, took many of them, and amongst the rest, Villiers was taken prisoner. So the designe of the Flemish who had quit their Countrie, proved vain on that side. Not long after they indeavoured to possess themselves of the Town of Graves, which was first possest by the Prince of O∣range; and which being seated upon the Mause, on the utmost confines of Bra∣bant, would have been very fit for their purpose. But they were not well got in, by means of some intelligence which they had, when they resolved to be gon a∣gain, hearing that the Dukes men marched towards them. Nor had they better success in a conspiracy of theirs, which (as was commonly divulged was not long before discovered against the Dukes person. He oft-times used to pass by the Forrest Soigny; near Brussels, upon occasion of frequenting a Monastery which was thereabouts, called Groendal. Some of the Nobility had resolved to set upon him with some men in that wood and to kill him, and so suddenly to run to Brussels, and to raise the people there But were it either that the report was false, (for the conspiracy was not much believed) or that the designe could not be executed, the business soon vanisht, no certainty of it being ever known. Count Lodovick was this mean while fallen into Friesland with an intire Army, consisting as 'twas said, of 10000 foot, and 3000 horse; and Orange did pre∣pare at the same time to pass into the Low Countries on another side with a much greater strength. Lodovick being entred Friesland, he began to fortifie the
Town of Delfeziel, situated towards the mouth of the river Embs. This river divides East-Friesland, which belongs to the Upper-Germany, from West-Fries∣land, which appertains to the Lower. As it grows nearer the sea, it so inlargeth it self, as by the mouth thereof it makes a gulf. Here is the City of Embden seated, one of the most considerable Towns of all the Maretine part, by reason of the frequency of people, and oportunity of Commerce, which is much helped by the Haven thereof, being held one of the most commodious of all the North. The Flemish Friesland (if I may so call it) makes two Provinces; that which joyns upon Germany is called Groninghen, from the City of the same name: a City very well populated, and suspitiously seated, being the chiefest Key of those Con∣fines. 'Tis seated very low, as is its sister Province, which retains the name of Friesland. In Winter the fields stand full of water; and there is no coming to their habitations but upon the banks: in Summer the land lies dry, and yields great store of pasturage You would say that in those parts the sea is interchangably turned into land, and the land to sea. By reason of the low situation, and great humidity, there is no Woods in the Country, nor almost any sort of Trees which may serve for firing. But where nature is therein wanting, the Inhabi∣tants make it good by their industry; they make use of Turfs cut out of the Earth, and dryed in the Sun, in stead of Wood. These are the Woods of Fries∣land, and the Inhabitants usual fire. In divers other parts of Flanders they suffer likewise the same wants, and with the same industry provide against it. Lodovick intended to make himself Master of the City of Groninghen, and there were some within the Town who fed him with hopes of so doing. He therefore encamped thereabouts, and fortified himself where he thought best; especially where he might receive new supplies from Germany. But the Duke of Alva had not been wanting this mean while in taking such order as was needfull to withstand this Army. Count Aremberg was Governour of that Friesland which belong'd to the King of Spain; he was one of the chiefest Lords of Flanders; of great e∣steem in the Militia: and who a little before was sent by the Duke into France with a good strength of horse to the aid of King Charls against the here∣ticks of that Kingdom. The affairs of France being afterwards setled, and A∣remberg being returned to Flandets, the Duke sent him suddenly into Friesland. He had under him a Regiment of High-Dutch: and Count Mega, Governour of the Provinces of Ghelderland and Zutfen, had another. The Duke then or∣dered, that as many of the High-Dutch as could be had, should fall down into those parts. He dispatched away thither also the Camp-Master Bracamonte, with almost his whole Spanish Brigado, and some horse, and six Field-Pieces. Lodo∣vick had begun to fortifie the Town of Dam, from whence there runs a Channel to Delfeziel; but hindred by the coming of the Spaniards, he resolved to quit those Quarters, and to go to a certain Priory not far from thence, which was more commodious and safe: the ground was higher here then in other parts, and there were some trees which served for the use of the Priory. Here the Count took up his Quarters, not knowing whether the Spaniards would assault him or indeavour by reducing him to straits, to make him return to Germany. If they should assault him, it would make for his advantage, by reason of his situa∣tion, and because the Spaniards were of necessity to pass through the hollow pla∣ces where they had cut out Turfs, which stood ful of water and mire, as did likewise all the fields thereabouts. He feared rather to be straitned in victuals, and conse∣quently inforced to retreat: but he was not left long in this doubt. The Spa∣niards assoon as they descri'd the enemy, began to murmure for that Aremberg would not suffer them to fall on and assault them; which he was against, consi∣dering wisely that Mega was not yet come, and that he expected some further re∣inforcement of horse and foot, his present forces being fewer in number then were the enemy. But his councel was but little listned unto, nor his Authority re∣spected. For the Spaniards, impatient of all delay, despising his Command, would forbear no longer. Nay some of them using injurious and offensive words towards him, tearmed him a coward for matter of War, and disloyal in the Cause of the Church and King. Whence much incenst, he said,
Let us then goe, not to overcome, but to be overcome; and not by the Arms of our Enemies, but those which Nature adoperates for them. Shall not we be buried in wa∣ter, dirt, and ditches, before we can come to assault them? How strong in all other respects is their situation? and how much greater are their numbers then ours? I notwithstanding will be one of the first that will fight, and dye: Thus will I shew whether I degenerate from my blood or no whether I be a Coward, and whether I be faulty in my loyalty to my Religion and to my King. This being said, he with the rest felt headlong into the battel. The Spaniards were on the front, the High-Dutch followed; and the Horse were placed more where the quality of the ground would permit them to be, then in any good order; the Artillery guarded one flank of the Enemy, where they lay most open. Lodovick on the contrary, seeing himself at such advantage, full of joy, put his Army in order, and encouraged them thus unto the battel. What Victory (my fellow souldiers) was ever more certain, then that which we shall this day win upon the Spaniards? Doe you see how rashly, and with how much arrogancie they come to assault us? as if this Quarter of so valiant Souldiers were the proud Alva's Palace, and that they were by their base treacheries to imprison here some other Egmont and Horn; to make them afterwards laughing-stocks, and to destroy them in their new Forts, wherewith they have inthralled Flanders every where. But this day undoubtedly will make them repent their so many tyrannical proceedings: and make the Country conceive a certain hope, that all bondage being shaken off, it shall soon recover its former liberty. If we consider Forces, ours are twice as many as theirs: If the Cause, Violence displayes the Colours on their side and Justice on ours: If the condition of Souldiers, many of theirs are to be accounted ours; and how can their Germans differ in opinion from you? But say they were all Spaniards, that they were more in number then we, and that they had the better cause; were not our so many other advantages sufficient to win us the victory? The water, dirt, and holes will rob us of the honour of overcoming them. This will not be like the encounter at Dalem, where those few of our men thinking to be safe in the Country of Liege, were set on at unawares, and routed without almost any fighting. Deceits will not avail here: We will here soon repay our selves for that loss, with good use to boot. In wars, the beginning useth to presage the end: And therefore we by this present Victory, will ascertain the future. But lo the Enemy already comes on; receive him couragi∣ously: For as Justice leads them on to punishment, so doth it you to prey, revenge, and glory. He had ordered his men thus: The Horse on the right wing, under his brother Adolphus who had the command of them, on which side the ground was more tractable; the Foot on the left, where they were sheltred by a little hill, whereon he placed some Files of Musquetiers; he left the ground on which were trees on his back, and on his front that which was most myery. At the first the Spanish Artillery did somewhat prejudice his men; and some of them did so couragiously charge Lodovicks Musquetiers who were placed to defend the little hill, as they hoped to win it: whereupon the Spaniards gave on upon the Enemy with more obstinate resolution then before. But they soon were aware of their errors: For bemyred in the water and mud, the more they endeavoured to get out the faster they stuck; and the rest who came to help them, had need of help themselves. They were then wounded and slain by the Enemies Foot, who ran no danger thereby: And Lodovick making his Horse wheel about, invironed Arembergs men, and without any trouble routed and defeated them. In the Battel about 600 Spaniards were slain, and almost none of the Germans; for they suddenly yielded upon discretion to the Enemy, who easily gave them their lives, upon ob∣ligation that they should never bear arms more for the Spaniard. Aremberg, playing the part rather of a common Souldier then of a Commander, whilst he fought couragiously was slain at the first encounter. There were but few lost on Lodovicks side: their greatest loss was in his brother Adolphus; Some will have it that he was slain by Arembergs own hand and that Adolphus slew Aremberg. The Spaniards lost their Artlllery and their Baggage, and some monies which was brought to their Camp to pay the Souldiers. The Battel was not well ended, when a Troop of horse appeared, led on by Count Curtio Martinengo, and by
Andrea Salatsar, which Count Mega had sent before to reinforce the Horse of the Kings army. Their arrival helped at least to hinder the Enemy from slaughter∣ing any more of the disbanded men, who ran away from the Spanish Camp. Nor was Mega himself long after in coming up; who considering the danger of Gro∣ninghen, entred thereinto suddenly, and did there assemble all the men he could get together, lest they might fall into Lodovicks hands. The success of this Battel was sundry times related to me in the time of my be∣ing Nuntio in the Low-Countries, by Count Aremberg, son to him that was slain: who was Knight of the Golden Fleece; a Gentleman of very much merit like∣wise, and no whit inferior to his Father in the managing as well of Military as Civil affairs in Flanders. Upon the news of this Rout, the Duke of Alva was much troubled: He saw how that Lodovick, when he was hardly entred Friesland, had won so important a victory; that Orange prepared likewise to enter the Country with very potent Forces; and that now the Neighbours would be much encouraged to assist them, and the Flemish ready to receive them. Moved by these considerations, he would have gone himself in person presently into Friesland, the better to secure that Frontier, to drive Lodovick from thence, and to hinder Orange from entring into Flanders by any other part. But he considered on the contrary, that he had not at that present men enough to confront the Enemy, and to secure the Country. But he chiefly questioned whether he were to go so far or no from the imprisoned Egmont and Horn, since a slight guard would not be sufficient to keep them, and his Army would be too much lessened by leaving a great garrison. Amidst these difficulties, he judged it was not fit to afford the Enemy time: whereupon he resolved to hasten as fast as might be divers Levies, which he forth∣with gave order for, of German, Burgonian, and Walloon foot and horse, and to go with all speed to drive Lodovick out of Friesland. This resolution being put on, he determined to have the cause of the aforesaid Counts, and of other Prisoners of quality speedily heard and determined; touching which he had re∣ceived divers express Commissions from Spain: The Kings Councel thinking it fit that the hainousness of so many faults committed by such Chieftains against the Church and King should be severely punished. The two Counts being forth∣with brought with a good guard from Gaunt to Brussels, after seven moneths imprisonment, they received their sentence, whereby they were adjudged to be publikely beheaded, and their goods confiscated as guilty of the aforesaid faults against divine and humane Majesty. Before they came to their execution, eighteen of a meaner condition were publikely put to death in the same City, for being Rebels. Soon after, for the same faults, Monsieur de Villiers and Monsieur de Duy had their heads cut off in fight of all the people. And lastly, two dayes after the sentence was executed upon Egmont and Horn; the place of execution being first well guarded by a great many Spaniards, to hinder any tumult which might arise amongst the people by seeing two Personages of such condition led to death, one of them being especially so generally beloved by the Flemish. The sorrow which they shewed for his death, was answerable to the love they bore Egmont. He was bewailed by all; many vowed his revenge; and they were not a few who gathered up the blood which ran from his body. So great was the sense which was then had of his suffering, and so fatal accidents did afterwards insue, as if the neck of whole Flanders had depended upon his. Egmont dyed with demonstra∣tion of great piety and courage. Horn did likewise undauntedly wait the blow; and being to lose his life, he stood not much upon his conscience. Strales for∣merly Burgamaster of Antwerp, who had so much fomented the seditions of that City, as hath been said in its proper place, was executed in Viluorde, within two leagues of Brussels, where he was imprisoned. And Cassenbrot, formerly Secretary to Egmont, was whilst alive torn to peeces by four horses in Brussels. Other four obstinate hereticks, who had had the greatest hand in the violation & depredation of the Churches, were publikely burnt; and divers others were at the same time executed in several places, to the so great fear and horror of the people, as nothing was any where seen or heard but sighs, groans, and lamentations. To all this was added a horrible Proclamation against all those that were fled, who were sum∣moned
to return upon pain of losing their goods, if they did not, and a strict search was ordered to find out all their wealth. At the same time Montigni, bro∣ther to Count Horn, was put to death in Spain; the Marquis of Berghen being dead there likewise some moneths before, as hath been said. The Duke being thus free from the fear of his Prisoners he gave himself wholly to the thought of Arms. He diipatcht away the Marquis Chiapino Vitelli immediately with many men, to secure Groninghen: And this mean while 1500 German Horse were raised by Henry, one of the Dukes of Brunswick; 400 German Dragoons by Hans Ber∣nia, and 1000 in Burgundy by Signior Norchernes; and the German Regiments which were under Mega, Ladrone, and Schamburg were recruited. To these Foot were added three new Walloon Brigades under the command of Count de Rules, of Egidius Barlemonte Lord of Hierges, and Gaspero de Robles Lord of Bigly; and all these people were ordered to meet at Deventer, a City standing upon the River Isel in the Province of Overisel, joyning upon Friesland; in which City the Duke was to be with all the Spanish Brigades, except it were some few Com∣panies which were left in the most important Garrisons. These expeditions being made, Vitelly soon arrived at Groninghen; and there were with him Brunswicks Horse, Mega's Foot, and part of Shamburg's Foot. Lodovick durst not all this time lay a formal siege to Groninghen, partly because he had not men enough for that purpose, partly because he hoped to be brought in by Intelligence, and finally because he would not ingage himself in a business, of which he could not disingage himself but either by danger or dishonour. Vitelli being afterwards come to Groninghen, Lodovick staid still neer thereabouts in a place strengthened by a River on one side, and by the buildings of a Priory called Salveret on the other, where he had fortified himself very well. Vitelli, to encourage his men, and to try the Enemies valour, made many skirmishes, and resolved at last to possess him∣self of a place somewhat higher neer to Lodovicks quarters, and where the Enemy had fortified themselves: The place was somewhat disputed, but at last he won it with the slaughter of about an hundred of their men. This mean while the Duke himself was on his march; and having thrown Bridges over the Mause, Rhine, and Isel, and readily past over all those Rivers, he about the midst of July arrived at Deventer: Then raising his whole Camp from thence, he in three dayes march came to Rolde, a large Village neerest to Groninghen, and not far distant from the Enemy. He was not well got thither, when a great Alarm was given, occasioned by a speech that the Enemy did assault that place which Vitelli had taken from them. The Duke went himself in person to see what was doing, and he found the rumour false: whereupon, calling to mind the bad success of Friesland occa∣sioned through the self-default of the Kings souldiers, and incensed at this new in∣convenience which had hapned in his own sight at Rolde; as soon as he was re∣turn'd unto the Camp, he call'd his Souldiers unto him, and spake thus: What my Military Government hath been in the so many occasion; wherein I have had the honour to command the Spanish Forces, may be sufficiently known to all men. And what old Souldier is there in this Army, especially of my Nation, who either hath not fought under the same Ensigns with me, or hath not been disciplined under me? The form of my Command being not then unknown to you, nor your wonted obedience unknown to me, I may justly wonder to see your actions so altered, as it may almost be questioned whether you be the accustomed Souldiers, or whether you think me your accustomed Commander? I am now again strangely moved in thinking upon the disorders lately happened in Friesland: One or two dayes patience might have made the Victory assuredly ours: Count Mega was already on his march with great Forces: the Flemish Rebels were but few in number; Lodovick their Commander had neither meat nor money to maintain the Germans; his people were for the most part tumultuary and full of confusion within themselves. In this case what was to be done, but to have fought the Enemy by discommodiating them, and thus to have de∣feated them? That was my opinion then, and so was Count Aremberg ordered by me to doe. And notwithstanding, not his command, but mine being contemned; and not courage, but rashness being used, that Victory was brought home, as it may be said to the Enemies doors, which they could not otherwise ever have hoped for. Who could have expected such errors as these? especially from Spaniards, who are wont to be a
president of discipline and obedience; and who knew better then all others when to fight, and when not to fight. The injurie was done to me in particular, which was of∣fered by some of them to that so worthy Commander: as if I had been indiscreet in making choice of him upon so great an occurrencie; and yet it was my opinion, that I could not oppose any one more faithfull to the Church and King and more valiant in arms, then was Count Aremberg, against so perfidious and rebellious a Leader as is Lodovick, From which success, what advantage have the rebels made unto them∣selves, who are now entred Friesland? How much are others thereby incouraged who prepare likewise to enter these Provinces by other parts? What doth not the Prince of Orange do? what doth he not now endeavour amongst the hereticks of Germany af∣ter so joyfull news? Orange I say! the plotter of all the past revolts; the occasio∣ner of all these present troubles? We are here then to drive Lodovick out of Fries∣land, and to hinder Orange from entring into these Provinces by any other way. Now whilst I expect that those errors be amended under my command, which were com∣mitted under Arembergs, what disorders, what new tumults do both my ears and eyes meet withall? What doth this Alarm, and this running to take up arms with∣out any occasion, mean? Doth not this Army believe that they have the Duke of Alva still for their Commander? or doth it no longer fear the severity of his orders, and the rigour of his discipline? Peradventure you will say the fault lies in the new men, perhaps so, but their Governours are not new men. And therefore as a great part of the fault hath been theirs, theirs should likewise be a great part of the punish∣ment. But let indulgency at this time prevail over rigour; and let it never be said that my men were punished before the enemies were so. But if I shall be hereafter provo∣ked to resentment, I do from this time declare it shall be such, as every one shall at last know how inseparable an union there is between my Command and Discipline, and between Discipline and my Command. Rashness is alwaies blind, and almost alwaies unfortunate in all humane actions; but how much more in Military, then in Civil Government? For in these, time is allowed to amend evil councels by good ones; whereas in the other, at the very instant that the error is committed, the loss is irre∣mediably received. And this may suffice to have been said for what is past, together with caution for what is to come. For what remains, I am resolved now to use these very means to break and defeat Lodovick, which Aremberg ought to have observed by my Command. I hope to see him soon return to Germany with shame and scorn enough, only by the advantages of Incamping, and by the sole force of sufferings, or else to drive him out by lively force Buckle your selves my soldiers then to this busi∣ness either I shall have forgot the mysterie of War, or I will make good my words. That age had not a more compleat Commander then was the Duke of Alva; nor who did less hazard the event of Arms to the uncertainty of Fortune. To encamp always with great advantage; to keep his men in great discipline; to weary the enemy, to reduce him into straits, to overcome oftest without fight∣ing; or to fight with little loss of his own mens bloud and great effusion of the enemies: these were the arts he used in his Military Government. It would be truely said, that he was the Spanish Fabius of his time: so did he imitate him in his form of waging War. The Duke parted from Rolde, and marched in very good order, lest Lodovick might meet with him between Rolde and Groninghen, and force him to fight before those of the City could joyn with him. But Lodo∣vick forbare so doing, fearing likewise lest if he should assault the Spanish Camp, he might at the same time be taken in the midst between the Dukes men and those of the City. He therefore kept in his former quarters, and had sortified himself very well there: he had the River, which winding about, fenced him almost on two sides, the rest was strengthened by good Trenches, and by the seat of the a∣foresaid Priory, a great Trench was likewise thrust out on this side the River, which lay upon the front of the Spanish Camp; and which Lodovick had made the better to defend two wooden bridges which lay over the same River. He thought to keep himself still in so commodious a quarter, intending to keep the Kings Army imployed in Friesland, and the mean while afford the Prince his bro∣ther the better commodity to enter into those Provinces also; or that if the Duke should turn upon Orange, Groninghen and all that Frontier might remain in the former danger. But these designes which Lodovick propounded unto himself,
were very well foreseen by the Duke, who was therefore resolved not to suffer him to tarry long in Friesland. When he had certain information that the enemy did not stir, he entred into Groninghen, and having refresht his men, he led them out of the City, and drew near the enemies Camp. The Duke gessed just as it fell out. To wit, that Lodo∣vick when he should be faced with o powerfull an Army, when he should see himself in danger to want victuals, and that he should not be able to retreat when he would, better weighing his designes, he would prevent these difficulties, and without more adoe resolve upon retreat. Lodovick at last resolved to do so: and that he might do it without loss of men or reputation: he effected it thus, that very day towards the evening he sent away his baggage before, after it his foot and left the horse for the last: having taken order for breaking down the bridges which were over the river, to the end that the Spaniards might not follow him. The Duke had foreseen this; and to be the more sure, he gave order that Robles the camp-master, with 400 Walloons, should possess himself of a certain house conve∣niently seated to discover the enemies goings the retreat was then apparently seen: the Duke made no delay: he forthwith sent forth 400 Spaniards of the Neopolitan Brigado to assault the great trench which was formerly spoken of; which was so wel perform'd, as they drove away those that defended it, who suddenly firing the bridges, repast over the river. The night now drew on, and the enemy was already so far advanced, and in so good order, as the Dukes men could do them no great harm. Yet some Spaniards and Walloons waded over the river where it was shallowest; but they met with such hindrances by the squadrons of the enemies horse, and by the narrowness and badness of the ways, as they could make no further progress. But few of the enemies were slain in this action; yet were they much discouraged and confused therwith, seeing themselvs so boldly set upon. After this rather flight then retreat, Lodovick continued his march backward towards East-Friesland: in∣tending for as much as was conceiv'd, to stay notwithstanding on this side the ri∣ver of Embs, in some good situation, and as near Embden as possibly he could, that by the nearness of the river and the City, he might come the better by victuals, and come what would come, secure his last retreat. By which means he stil thought he might compass his intention, either of keeping the Duke of Alva busied, or to keep with his former hopes in Friesland, if the Duke should in some other parts oppose his brother. He thought he might likewise believe that the Duke would not touch upon Germany, nor hazard the want of victuals, or suffering of other incommodi∣ties in a Countrey which appeared openly averse unto him. And howsoever, he thought he should be able so wel to fortifie himself, as the Duke should not so ea∣sily dislodg him the second time, as he had done the first. To boot with the river which fenced him on the one side, the Country was almost altogether impassable, since it hardly allowed conveniency to be marcht upon, and that upon the banks, and muchless to fight. And moreover the river swelling much more then ordina∣rily at a high tide, the Country might easily be overflown by means of certain sluces, which cutting the banks of the same river in divers places, are usually open∣ed or shut by the Inhabitants, according as the sea swels or lessens. This was Lodo∣vicks designe. So he pursued to march after his first retreat and did advance so far that very night, and some days after, as at last he quarter'd in a great village on this side the Embs, call'd Geminghen. He might first have staid in another call'd Rheeden, and have had the passage over the Embs, more cōmodiously there also, by reason of a bridg which was nigh at hand: but it was known that he would stay on this side the river, and yet as near as he could to the City of Embden, for the reasons which have been already spoken of. On the other side the Duke continued his purposes, which were to follow Lo∣dovick to the Embs, and to endeavour by all means possible to send him back routed and defeated into Germany, that so he might be the freer afterwards to turn back upon Orange. He therefore made his Army march, leaving almost all the new raised horse in Groninghen, because they could not be serviceable in those parts. He lodged the first night in a Village called Sclotenem: and not hearing any news of the enemy, nor of good conveniency for victuals for all that Coun∣try was against him) he was inforced to stay two days in that place. He doubt∣ed
that Lodovick might be tarryed in Rheeden, that he might enjoy the oportu∣nity of that near bridg which secured unto the passage over the River. Knowing afterwards that he was past further on, the Duke liked the business much better, and staid his Camp in Rheeden, securing that pass for himself. Here he at last had certain advertisement, that the Enemy were lodged in Geminghen. From Rheeden to Geminghen at some 8 miles distance, there runs a continued bank which serves as a curb to the River, whereby the better to tame the swelling thereof occasioned by the sea. The Duke was to make his men march upon this Bank, if he would defeat the Enemy. Divers Channels ran into the River, which had houses and bridges upon them for the use and service of the Country people, who in the sum∣mer time (which now it was) had some abidings not so low, nor not so muddy as in the Country. Lodovicks Quarters were thus fortified: He had the Town of Geminghen upon his back, on his left side the River, and on his right the open fields fortified with Trenches where the situation would allow it: On the Front, the Bank it self, somewhat distant from the River, gave the entrance, which with∣out was cut in two by two Ravelins, and better guarded within by two peeces of Artillery. In this so strong place, he either did not expect, or did not fear the Duke: Who desirous to try all wayes to fight, and defeat him, resolved to goe to him. He sent some Horse before under his natural son Fernando, who had the charge of the Horse, and made the houses and bridges still as he marched be taken, to secure his retreat upon all occasions. From hence he advanced Sancio d' Avila with 50 Horse and 500 Harquebusiers, all of them Spaniards; and sent the two Camp-masters Romero and Londonio after him, with each of them 600 Spanish Foot, part Harquebusiers, part Musquetiers, and with two Companies of Lances, commanded by Cesar d' Avalos, and Curtio Martinengo. The rest of the Army marcht in this order: The Spaniards were the Van; the High-Dutch followed next; and the Walloons brought up the Reer, inclosed by some Troops of Horse: the Files were very strait, for they could not march well but upon the bank. At Avala his first advancement, he found some of the Enemy, who had opened the Sluces to overflow the Country, and saw that the water entred already in abun∣dance: But putting them to flight suddenly, he made the Sluces be shut, and kept as they ought to be. The Duke himself advanced this mean while, together with Vitelli, Norchernes, and some few others, who came in fight of the Enemies quar∣ters. He understood by the Spies that they were in some disorder, as well for that they saw his Army so neer, as that Lodovicks men were almost all of them tumul∣tuous, and so ill paid, as some uprore was already feared in the Camp. The first Spaniards had this mean while drawn the Enemy forth to skirmish; who not thinking that the body of the Army was so neer, thought they might easily break the forerunners. There was no long delay made: Two great Squadrons of Foot for as much as the narrowness of the place could permit) vigorously assaulted the Spaniards, by whom they were no less vigorously withstood. The Dukes Van this mean while advanced: and look how much courage this added to the Catholicks, so much did it lessen in the Hereticks. They then would have re∣treated; but being hotly pursued by the Spaniards, they began basely to run a∣way; and the Spaniards followed them so close at the heels, as they fell in with them at the same instant into their quarters: where the Dukes men shewed no less valour, nor the Enemy any more resistance; who being still more imbased, and thinking only how to save themselves, fell every where into disorder and confusion. The rest was not to be termed fighting, but execution: The Spani∣ards, more greedy of blood then booty, by reason of the slaughter which the others had committed the preceding battel, put as many of the Enemy as they could unto the sword; but there were almost as many drowned as slain: for seeing they could not escape the fury of the sword, they blindly threw them∣selves into the River, which was very large and deep in that place. It was said that Lodovick swom it over with much adoe, and that 7000 of his men perisht; the rest ran away some here, some there, in so great terror, as there hardly was left any remainder of that Army. Few of the Dukes men were flam: And the Battel was such, as certainly few will be the like, wherein the vanquished were more indamaged, and the vanquishers less.
THE HISTORY OF THE WARS OF FLANDERS. Written by CARDINAL BENTIVOGLIO. BOOK V. The Contents. Orange enters Flanders with great Forces raised in Germany. The Duke of Alva goes to meet him. They lie many dayes in the face of one another. Orange at last gives way, and must quit the Country. The Duke returns triumphant to Brussels. His necessity in matter of monies, occasioned by a great reprisal made thereof in England. He therefore resolves to impose unusual grievances. Commotions which insue thereupon. A general Pardon proclaimed by him. The Arch-Dutchess Anne of Austria passeth through Flanders, to marry with the Catholique King. The Flemish are scandalized at a Statue of the Dukes which was set up in the Citadel at Antwerp. The Castle of Lovestein is surprised by Orange his follow∣ers, but is suddenly recovered by the Spaniard. Lumay more luckily takes the Bril. A particular Description of Holland and Zealand. The troubles of Zealand. Sancio d'Avila goes to the succour of Middleburgh. Valentiennes fals into the Hugonots hands, who not long after are made to quit it. By their assistance Lo∣dovick steals into the City of Mons, and prepares to maintain the siege. THe Duke of Alva, after having obtained so notable a victory, return'd to Groninghen, and staid there some Anno 1568. dayes, the better to secure it from any new danger. He therefore munited it according as was requisite: And because he feared danger more from within, then from without, he left a Citadel begun to be built there, accord∣ing as he intended at first, the better to bridle the Inhabi∣tants. From thence he past to Utrecht, whose Province is as it were incorporated in Holland. He thought to have stayed there some time, the better to secure the affairs of Holland: But the news which he heard from divers parts of Orange his approach, or preparation so to do, made him go from thence much sooner then he had intended. From thence he went to Balduke, giving at the same time such order as was requisite for the ga∣thering together of the Army, and the reinforcing it with Foot and Horse. To this end he fill'd up the German and Walloon Regiments, and added another Regi∣ment
of Walloons under Christophero Mandragone, a Spaniard; and commanded that the Train-Bands of Flanders, which came to about 2000 Horse, should be in a readiness. This sort of Militia, distinguished into Companies of Curasiers and Harquebusiers, under the chief Lords of the Country, was of great  in time past; but afterward it lessened much in reputation. When there is need to make use thereof, the charge is given apart to some one chief Lord of the Country, who knows no other Superior then the Generalissimo of the Army. Whilst the Duke was preparing in this manner, the Prince of Orange used no less diligence in gathering together great Forces to enter Flanders with them, where it might be more for his advantage. He had received very considerable helps, but more in men then mony, from the aforesaid Princes and Free-Towns of Germany: To boot with the German souldiers, he and his adherents had assembled together a good number of those Flemish and Walloons who had left the Country, and some French. He was upon the banks of the Rhine with all these people, part whereof were taken into pay, and part were a taking in, intending to pass the River and then to thrust into Ghelderland or Brabant, as it hath been said, and fix himself in the best parts of the Country. He was not to expect any obstacle in his passing over the Rhine, not wanting means to doe so in many of his friends territories in Germany. His greatest difficulty lay in passing over the Mause, which did wholly appertain unto the King of Spain; except the State of Liege, which was also wholly a Catholick Country, and almost incorporated into the Kings Dominions. But he hoped to possess himself of some important place upon that shore, which might secure his passage, both for his entrance, if he should ad∣vance, and for a safe retreat, if he were necessitated to turn back. Orange having thus mustered his whole Army together, he past freely over the Rhine above Colen about the end of August; and then over the Mosel at Trovers: And winding to the right hand, he advanced towards the Country of Juliers confining upon the Kings Provinces of Ghelderland and Limburg, and upon the State of Liege. The common report was, that his Camp consisted of 20000 Foot and 9000 Horse, all of them Germans, except the aforesaid Flemish, Walloons, and French. With Orange was his Brother Lodovick, Count Hostrat, and Monsieur de Lumay; and some other Flemish of good quality, together with many German Commanders of great consideration. The Army was well enough furnisht with Artillery and ammunition for war, but had not so much mony nor victuals as was needfull. This being understood, the Duke of Alva resolved to make his Ren∣dezvous at Mastrick, the most commodious place upon the Mause, that he might oppose Orange where it should be most convenient. There were come unto the Duke from Spain at this time 400000 Crowns, and 2000 Spanish Foot, which (being all of them new Souldiers) he placed in the Garrisons, and drew out from thence the old ones. His eldest son Frederick came likewise then to Flanders, to whom he gave the command of all the Foot. The Rendezvous being appointed, the Kings Army was found to consist of 16000 choise Foot, to wit, 6000 Spani∣ards, the rest all Germans and Walloons; and of 6000 Horse, some whereof were Spanish, some Italian, some Germans, some Burgonians, and some Walloons, and those Train-Bands of Flanders, which were commanded by Carlo Philippo¦de Croy Marquis of Haure. The Duke removed the Camp afterwards from Ma∣strick to Haren, a great Village not far from thence, and seated likewise upon the Mause. And here he made a Bridg of Boats that he might have free passage overfit at all hours, and receive victuals the better from all those parts. This place was almost in the midst between Liege and Ruremonde, upon which two Cities Orange his designe was likeliest to be. Ruremonde is in Ghelderland, as hath been said: It stands upon a little River called Ruer, just where it fals into the Mause. 'Tis rather a place of great circuit, then much people; but the situation thereof is of importance, by reason of both those Rivers. Liege lies upon the same River a little higher. The Mause hath not a City upon it of larger circuit, nor better peopled: 'Tis divided by the River, but joyned together again by di∣vers Bridges. The Bishop governs the Inhabitants there as well in temporal as in spiritual affairs, being also Prince thereof; though the City enjoy such ample priviledges, as the form of Government therein partakes more of a Common∣wealth,
then of a Principality. 'Tis one of the most Catholick Cities of all the North, fullest of Ecclesiastical goods; and most devoted to the Apostolical See. Orange desired to try Liege first: he wrote to the Magistracy, omitting to write to Gerardo Grosbech, who was then Bishop of the City, and a personage of great worth; thinking that he adhered too much to the Kings and the Catholick cause. But the same mind and zeal appeared to be in the Magistracy: for they determi∣nately answered, That the City would not receive in any foreign soldiers, and that they had men enough of their own to defend themselves against any violence that should be offered them. This practising of Orange with the Ligeois, and his marching with his Army towards that City, made the Duke resolve likewise to draw near it with his. But Orange his designe upon Liege proving vain, he without trying Ruremond, turned suddenly elsewhere, with intention to pass the Mause where he might best foard over it. The river happened to be very low that year, for the climat of Flanders, which even in Summer is very rainy and moyst, was of some late months more drie then usual. Having found the most commodious foard, and making use of the night season, Orange in great silence past his Army over the river, just against Stocchem, in the State of Liege. Which when the Duke heard, he forthwith went thither also, and drew near Orange with his Army. Their designes were not∣withstanding very different. Orange would have fought at the very first; for finding himself much streigthned in mony and victuals, and with men who he was rather to obey then command, he thought he could not long maintain his Army. And nothing being done as yet in Flanders in favour to him, he knew that if he should not have some favourable success by way of battel, the Coun∣trie would hardly rise, having so powerfull an Army as was that of the Duke of Alva's within its bowels. The Duke out of the very same reasons shun'd giving or battel. He saw that Orange in losing a battel, could lose nothing but his Ar∣my; whereas he together with the loss of his Army, should hazard the loss of all Flanders. Resolving therefore rather to coast along by his enemy then to fight him, and to vex him so with sufferings, as at last he should disband of himself, he only kept near him. And because it was already evidently seen that Orange his intention was to en∣ter into Brabant, the Duke provided the places of greatest danger with all things needfull; which were Tilemon, Lovayne, and Brussels; and had an eye also to all other parts where there was any cause of suspition. The two Camps being thus quartered, Orange moved towards Tongueren, a great Town in the State of Liege, intending to possess himself of it, and there to get victuals for his men. But the Duke did so secure it, as Orange durst never assault it. Getringberg, a ve∣ry good Town in the same Countrie, was more easily perswaded to let him have victuals, and to receive his soldiers into the Town. Which it soon repented, by reason of the insolencies which they committed, particularly against the Church∣es and sacred things. Departing suddenly from thence, for that it was not tena∣ble. He quartered upon the confines of Brabant: hoping that when his Colours should be seen so nigh at hand, the malecontents within the Countrie would likewise display theirs. But the Duke flanking still upon him, and streightning him now on one side, now on another, did not afford him one minutes rest. Chia∣pino Vitelli had the particular care of the quarters; which he was very diligent in taking and muniting. To which purpose he had a great many pyoneers in the Army, and upon occasion he would make the very soldiers work within the Tren∣ches. In these the Camps approachings one unto the other in their quartering and disquartering, and particularly upon occasion of forrage, there happened almost continually some skirmishes between the soldiers of the two Armies. Nor was there any considerable advantage got on either side for many days. But at last one action proved very bloudie. Brabant is watered by many small rivolets which fall almost all of them into the Demer, which inlarged by their accessions, doth at last disgorge it self into the Scheld: Amongst other, the Geet runs into it. Orange being advanced into Brabant, he could not pass this river so speedily and with such caution, before that a good part of his Reer ere it could re-joyn with the rest was in danger to be assailed upon great advantage by the Dukes soldiers,
who did not lose that oportunity: The Camp-Masters, Romero, Bracamonte and Bigli advancing with their Spaniards and Walloons, gave violently upon the e∣nemy who seeing the danger, had tumultuously fortified themselves in a Village upon the river side) and without much gainsaying, quickly put them to the rout. Many of them were drowned in the river, many slain, and many taken prisoners: Amongst others Hostrat was wounded, and soon after died of his wounds. This action put a period to all Orange his hopes of seeing the Countrie rise, and to the like of the Flemish malecontents of ever exciting any. He was the more troubled at this success, because his hopes were much increased at this time by advertise∣ments that he had received of great succours sent from the French Hugonots, which were at hand. They were led on by Monsieur Genlis, and sent by the Prince of Conde, out of the abovesaid ends which the Hugonots had to foment the neighbourghring revolutions of Flanders, that they might the better establish their own in France Orange thinking now on nothing else but how to put him∣self into some safe condition, left Brabant, and went into the Contiguous Pro∣vinces of Namures and Hennault to meet the French succour (which he did) and so make his retreat the surer. Genlis had about some 4000 foot with him, and 1500 horse. Orange was somewhat inheartned by the coming of these men, for many of his own men were missing, and many ran away every day: and the rest being ill disciplined, and worse paid, and threatning continually to mutiny, he thought to return back the same way to Germany: But finding the Mause at that time very high, and greater opposition then before in the Legeiois, he turned again into the Province of Hennault. From thence he continued his retreat to∣wards France; and having in vain tryed the Castle of Cambray before he quitted Flanders, being still close pursued by the Duke of Alva, he at last went out of Flanders, and staid near St. Quintains, at the entrance into Picardy. Here, ac∣cording to the diversity of designes, he divided his men, and those of France into several parts. The High-Dutch, quite spent by hunger and hardships, returned to Germany. Orange staid a while in France, to renew the former practises with the chief Hugonots; and his brother Lodovick tarryed there afterwards for the same end, till their second coming from Germany and France against the Duke of Alva: as shall be said in its due place. The Duke having gotten so important a Victury without the loss of almost any one of his Army, or rising of any place: he distributed his soldiers into their several quarters, and about the end of the year returned as in triumph into Brussels. And for that it appeared he had merited no less for his service done to Religion then to the King, Pope Pius Quintus sent him soon after the Helmet and Trunchion which are presented only to great Princes, and particularly to such who by some famous action have deserved well of the Church. This mean while these prosperous proceedings of the Spanish forces in Flanders, were looked up∣on with a clean contrary eye by the Queen of England. She had hitherto assi∣sted the troubles in those parts rather in secret then barefaced; but when she saw that those of Nassaw were driven out, and that the King of Spains forces were now more potent there then ever, she returning to her former fear of having them so near at hand, resolved to let slip no occasion whereby she might more o∣penly prejudice the Kings affairs in those parts. There were two of her privy Councel who then bore great sway with her. The one was Robert Dudly Earl of Lester, a Gentleman of Noble descent and great imployment. And the other, William Cecil her Secretary of State, who being but of mean bloud, though of great wisdom, passing through divers Court-Offices, to the managing of State-affairs, had drawn almost the whole Government of the Kingdom upon him. Both these had chiefly perswaded the Queen still to establish the heresie of England, and consequently to indamage the Catholick Church, and the King of Spain as much as she could, for those respects which have been formerly spoken or. She persecuted the Church cruelly in her Kingdom. And watching for an opportunity whereby she might still more incommodate the Kings affairs in Flan∣ders, it was not longere she met with one of very great consequence: which was this, The King by means of means of Givers Genua. Merchants had raised a great sum of money for the affairs of Flanders; whereof 400 thousand crowns were sent by
sea to Antwerp; the ships which brought this money met with some Pyrats: so as to save themselves they were forced to fall in upon England. The Spanish Am∣bassador who was then with the Queen, hearing of this, apply'd himself present∣ly to the Queen, that the money might be freely carried to Antwerp; and re∣ceived answer from her sutable to his desire. But she being resolved within her self, and councelled thereunto by Lester and Cecil, to detain the money, so as at one and the same time she might accommodate her self, and disaccommodate the King of Spain, let the Ambassador know, that being informed that those monies were not really the King of Spains, but that they belonged to some Italian Mer∣chants, she had resolved to make use thereof her self, allowing them just con∣sideration. The Ambassador laboured to make it appear that the money belong∣ed unto the King, and sent by his direction to Flanders: and to strengthen this the more, he made the Duke of Alva write to her about it. But she feigning one difficulty after another, gave such delatory answers, as it was plainly seen she had no mind the money should goe into Flanders. The Duke stormed mightily hereat, and presently dispatched away Assonville to London about it, who with much earnestness renewed what the Ambassador had formerly prest for. But look how much the Duke made his need of the monies appear the greater by his so earnest desiring them, so much the more did the Queen by the interposal of new and subtill Impediments on her behalf, deny them. He being thus deluded in his Negotiation, and being by nature inclined rather to overcome then to sweeten difficulties, resolved at last to see if he could bring the English over to his will, or no, by reprisals. He therefore first made the goods and the persons of such Merchants of that Nation be detained, who did in great numbers traffick in the Low-Countries; and made it be known unto the Queen, that the like should be done in all the King of Spain's other Dominions, unless the monies of Spain were set at liberty which were so unjustly detained in England. The Queen was not inwardly displeased hereat: but growing the bolder by such a pretence to make good the mony-business, she began to pretend satisfaction, in stead of giving it; and complained bitterly of the Duke of Alva to the King himself. To her complaints she added resentment on her behalf; she commanded that the same reprisals should be made in England against the King of Spains subjects: And appearing much incenst against the Duke of Alva's person, she publikely threatned to indammage him as much as she could in his affairs of Flanders. Both sides being thus incensed, divers means of mitigation were used. But this made nothing at all for the Duke of Alva's present necessity: who finding himself much in arrears to the Army, and at great charges with the Citadels which he had begun to build, particularly with that of Antwerp, which he would suddenly see finished; could not bear with the malitious delayes made by the English. Moved therefore by so urgent necessity, and considering what new troubles might befall him by Orange his plots and machinations which he was framing both within Flanders and without it, he resolved to have recourse for aid to the Flemish themselves by laying new Impositions upon the Country: his design was to raise so much mony as might suffice for the present necessity, and to establish a setled Treasury for the future, so as the grievances should not be every day to be renewed, and therewithall the danger of incensing the Provin∣ces with odious demands, as doubtlesly those would be which should be made in so abhorr'd a business. The Duke thought therefore to lay on so great impositions at once, as might suffice to carry through his whole business. And the way was this: That a true value being made of all moveable and immoveable goods, for once only but one of a hundred should be paid; but that upon every contract, the twentieth part of the immoveables should be paid and the tenth of the moveables; and that these two last payments should last as long as the pub∣like necessities should require This being resolved upon, the Duke call'd together the States General of all the Provinces to meet at Brussels, to acquaint them with the Kings mind in this business, and to get their consent. He first represented unto the Deputies what great necessity the King had of monies at that time. He said, That to boot with the great expences of the Armies late march, the Queen of
Engiand out of malicious pretences, and which argued more malicious machinations in her, had detained 40000 Crowns which were sent from Spain to Flanders. That howsoever, the Souldier must be satisfied, which had long wanted their due pay. That from the vigilancy of the Kings enemies, in procuring by all means how to beat down his authority, and to raise tumults amongst his people, the necessity of those re∣medies might appear, which were to be opposed to so many perverse intelligences and conspiracies. That without doubt the best lay in building of Citadels, and in main∣taining of Garrisons in fitting places, upon which the peace and safety of the Country did depend; and that all whatsoever monies ought to be held well laid out to that purpose. He wisht them to remember what the obligation of every good Subject was towards their Prince, how great the Kings affection was towards those Provinces; and how behovefull it was, that in such and so urgent need, the Kings desires should be by them willingly received, and readily executed. He afterwards propounded the demand in manner abovesaid. It would be hard to say how much troubled, and how full of confusion the Deputies of the Pro∣vinces were at the hearing of it: Flanders had never formerly been wont to suffer the grievances of taxes and impositions, as is used in Spain, Italy, and other places. The antient custom was, for the Prince to desire such assistance from the people in his necessities as was thought needfull; and the often denying thereof shewed that the granting it lay in the people free will: When they were resolved to grant any, every Province imposed upon it self such a proportion as was fit for that pur∣pose: These contributions were demanded by the Prince, and granted by the people, but for a certain prefixt time and as oft as the one was necessitated to make new desires, as oft was the other to renew again their consents. So as this unaccustomed fashion propounded by the Duke, of taxing the Country so inte∣grally, for an unlimited time, and in a manner not prescribed by the Provinces, but by himself, did strangely move mans minds; especially at this time, when humours were stirred every where. The Deputies took time to give their answer, and in the mean while acquainted their several Provinees with the whole affair. Who when they heard thereof, the people strove who should most storm: Nothing but complaints, lamenting, and execrations were heard against those who had counselled it, and against the Governour who had made it. That the misories of Flanders did infinitely increase. Was it not sufficient to introduce forein Armies by violence; to violate her liberties by Garisons, and strong Holds; and to unpeople Cities by banishments, imprisonment and death; but that the people whose contributions were formerly voluntary and moderate, must now be com∣pel'd to submit themselves to immense and everlasting tributes? That the Flemish did not only not desire, but did wholly detest the bringing in of these forces, and these unaccustomed yokes. And yet how faithfull had the Countrie apreared when the House of Nassaw was in arms? and how ready was it by its ownproper forces to streng then the Kings Army? That the enemies forces being driven out, the Kings were now be∣come the greater enemies. And as if the war had been begun by the Flemish, 'tis they that must now bear the burthen thereof. That Flanders was astonished at the very name of Tribute. How much more would she be so to feel the effects thereof? Hence it was that the concourse of foreiners grew less, and therewithall the Traffick of the Provinces. That Merchandizing ceasing, by which the people did chiefly sustain themselves, what was to be expected but to see them fall into the greatest misery and calamity that might be? Where was the former moderate Government of their pre∣ceding rather Fathers then Princes? where the Emperours rescent goodness? that in lieu thereof, the King deriving his bloud from Spain, and his opinions yet more, and imitating the Spaniards yet more particularly in his afflicting Flanders, seemed as if his only end were to take from her all shews of Liberty, and reduce her to the misera∣blest condition of slavery. That to this purpose he had made choice of the most Impe∣rious and cruel Duke Alva, for his Agent: who was come to ruine, not to govern the Low-Countries. But the Flemish had already tollerated too much: 'twas now time to turn their patience into generosity; and retaining as well the worth of the antient Bel∣giques, as their descent from them, they ought for the future to be as forward in withstanding vyolence, as they had been formerly in tolerating it. The Dukes ears were fill'd with these complaints from all parts, much agitated
therefore between his desire of promoting what he had propounded, and the dif∣ficulties he found of so doing, he treated very fervently thereof with the Coun∣cel of State, to find out some means whereby he might overcome the difficulties which therein were met withall. The Councel differed likewise in their opinions: there were not wanting some who incouraged the Duke to proceed, and who fed him with hopes of good success. They proposed to begin with that which was likelyest to succeed, to wit, with that of the hundreth penny. That this more easie entrance being made, the Provinces would be the easilyer induced afterwards to give way to the harder Impositions of the tenth and twentieth penny. That some of the Provinces should be first dealt withall herein, as were thought were most inclinable to the Proposition. That the example of one, would conduce much to the rest. And where example would not serve, let Authority at last sup∣ply the place. But the greater part of the Councel were of a contrary opinion; and the President Vighlio appeared more openly against it then al the rest: a State Mini∣nister who was esteemed of incorrupted Loyalty to the King and of experienced wisdom in the affairs of Flanders. He shewed how that too great difficulties would be met with even in the exaction of the hundreth penny, alleadging the example of what had insued some years before upon the desire of the like subsi∣die. He shewed how much the times were since then impaired: how averse the Countrie did now appear to ordinary Contributions: and how the minds of all men were agitated for what had happened. That howsoever he did not think this kind of Imposition altogether infeisable, since it would not be very grievous, and but for once. But as for the other upon goods moveable and unmoveable, he thought that Imposition altogether uneffectable; those oppositions not being to be overcome which would assuredly be made by whole Flanders; as well for being grievances never before experienced, and laid on for an unlimited time, as that also without all peradventure, the overthrow of all Traffick and Commerce would thereupon insue. For, (said he) will not all the concourse of foreign Merchants cease, when they see they cannot freely buy and sell Merchandise according as they had wont? What is it that doth not often turn from one to another species, when it hath left its former homely and simple nature? who will not abhor so oft a repeated grievance? the price of other Merchandise increasing, the like will certainly in∣sue in what concerns victuals. How will the poorer sort of people be there∣withall grieved? and how much will the very ablest be displeased? there will be no remedy found for so great an evill, but for no foreigners to Traffick in these Provinces, and immediately to take away those of our own, who are of the same profession. Thus the Countrie will be impoverisht both in men and mo∣nies. By which, how much will the King himself suffer? so as instead of recei∣ving unwonted Impositions, such as are usual will peradventure not be had here∣after. Nor can it be doubted but that the contradictory example which will be seen in almost all the whole Countrie, will be of greater prevalence then the ascent, and that uncertain, which may perchance be found in some one Province. Our neighbour-Nations will likewise much complain of this noveltie, with which ours hath express Covenants of free Trade. But the mischief will at last fall wholly upon us; and in the first place upon the King. For in fine, Princes are rich according as their Subjects are so. And look what of commodity is got from them in time of peace, much more is reaped in time of war. In my opini∣on, then that advantage ought to be past by, which brings with it a greater evil. And all means ought rather to be indeavoured, whereby to appease mens minds, then to afford them new occasions of exasperation. Otherwise I foresee (and I wish I may prove a false Prophet) that the losses which we shall receive at home, will prove much greater then the victories which we have lately obtained a∣broad advantagious. These reasons alleadged by Vighlio, were undoubtedly of great wheight. But they did not though divert the Duke of Alva from his indeavours: who be∣ing accustomed to overcome Military difficulties, thought he might much more easily do the like in Civil affairs. So as continuing in his former fervency, he cea∣sed not to interpose sometimes prayers, sometime power, and very oft threats to
arrive at the end which he had proposed unto himself. He particularly indeavou∣red to compass those means in every Province, which might the easilyer dispose them to allow of the aforesaid Impositions. The Walloon Provinces were the most Catholick, and of least Traffick. It was so handled, as these assented pre∣sently to the hundred penny; and by their example, though not without much difficulty, the rest were induced to do the like. The Duke, to make himself ap∣pear the more gracious at the same time to the people, caused severe justice to be executed upon one John Speell, a Fleming who had had a great share in all the most odious criminal affairs. This man was therefore very much abhor'd by all the Country, not only for what he had done, but for the manner of doing it, with all sort of cruelty and corruption. When he was condemned to die, the Duke would have him hung up in the publick market-place at Brussels. And two others whom he had used most in his negotiations were banished. To this Actof Justice, the Duke added a much greater of Clemency. He had lying by him a ge∣neral pardon from the Pope, and another from the King which bore with them abolition for the misdeeds committed in Flanders against the Ecclesiastical and Regal Authority; of both which he had liberty to make use accordingly as he (being upon the place) should think fit. The Popes dispensation was to this pur∣pose obtained in Spain, and the King had likewise sent his: but in each of them such high defaults were excepted, wherein Divine and Humane Majesty were most offended: and the King reserved unto himself the free power to make good or abrogate those priviledges which had served for a pretence to the late risings. The Duke going to Antwerp, which by reason of Traffick was a City then very much frequented by forreigners, he made a stately Throne be erected in the chief Piazza, upon the top of which was placed a Chair of State, whereon he him∣self being sate, and invironed round about with great pomp, he made both these pardons be proclaimed. All the people ran to hear this, and the news thereof was suddenly divulged throughout all the Provinces. And the Duke at the same time indeavoured to reconcile himself unto them, by reducing the soldiers to a lesser number, by ordering their quarters better, and by putting divers things in better order, for the better satisfaction of the people: But in fine, it proved too true, that let a man do well or ill, all actions are abhor'd which proceed from a hatefull Government. And just so it fell out then: The Flemish seemed little satisfied with all that the Duke had done; nay many of them gave a sinister in∣terpretation to both the Indulgencies: as if there were too much scope left by the so many exceptions, both to punish past faults, and cause new ones to be com∣mitted. And that clause did in particular displease very much, wherein the Kings intention of assuming unto himself a power of anulling all priviledges for the late risings was so clearly seen. There wanted not those in Flanders, and elsewhere who fomented these evil suggestions. And because the gathering of the hundreth penny was already begun, and that great difficulties were met withall therein, many of the ill-affected Flemish, and Kings back-friends in the neighbouring parts, indeavoured still to alienate the people more and more. This alienation, by reason of the abovesaid grievance, appeared particularly in Holland and Zea∣land to be greatest, as also in all that Maritine Coast. And as for the other of the tenth and twentieth penny, 'twas plainly seen that none of the other Provin∣ces would ever be brought unto it: But because Traffick was much greatest in the Maritine parts by reason of the commodity of Navigation, which made them be more frequented by forreiners, and chiefly by English Merchants, and by those of the neighbouring Hans-Towns, Cities of Germany, all of them infected with heresie: Therefore a greater backwardness was seen for the present in the afore∣said Provinces, and a greater preparation for the like in the future. This mean while the Dukes necessity of monies increased. Much pay was due to the soldi∣er. The new Citadels proved to be a very great expence; and nothing near so much mony could be come by from Spain as was requisite. Lodrone's Regiment of High-Dutch did just at this time mutiny for want of pay. And though the ring-leaders of the mutiny were severely punished, and that the contagion brake no farther forth in the Army, yet the danger was great, as was also the Dukes fear. Whilst things past thus in Flanders, the Archdutchess Anne, daughter to
the Emperour Maximilian, was gone from Germany towards Spain to marry with the Catholick King. She came by Flanders, that so she might imbarque in Zea∣land, and goe the sooner to Spain. The Duke of Alva went therefore to receive her upon the confines, and waited upon her till he saw her under fail: who soon after arrived happily in Spain. With her were the two Archdukes her brothers, Albertus, and Vincelaus. The latter whereof dyed afterwards in Spain, and the other tarried long there. This is that Albertus who devoting himself first to Ecclesiastical life, was made Cardinal, and was afterwards sent to govern the Kingdom of Portugal; and lastly the Low-Countries: wherein returning to a se∣cular profession, and having married the Infanta Isabella, eldest daughter to the King, and had those Countries in portion with her; of Governour, became af∣terwards Prince of them, and joyntly with his wife governed them many years. Princes both of them, of such religion and piety, and indow'd with all other such eminent virtues, as this our History will have fil'd room enough to illustrate it self in their times, if it shall please God that it shall arive thereat, and that their memory may thereby be rendred as famous to posterity, as the knowledg of them hath been in this our age. The Duke of Alva made use of the new Brides going into Spain, to obtain leave of the King that he might quit the Government of Flanders. To the which the King giving way, the Duke of Medina-Celi, was destin'd to succeed him, who at that time was Viceroy of Cicily. But whatever the occasion was, it was not for the present so done; the King thought, it may be, that the danger of new troubles in Flanders was not so far ceased, as that it was fit to remove the Duke of Alva from thence: who peradventure foreseeing them, desired that the tem∣pest might fall upon a new successor. Being then returned to Brussels, after he had attended the new Queen to the sea-side, he betook himself wholly to the bu∣siness of the new Impositions And because greater difficulties and obstacles were every day found in that of the tenth and twentieth penny, he indeavoured that in lieu thereof the Provinces should pay at one intire payment, 6 million of Crowns, which he afterwards reduced to four. But this appearing still to be too excessive a sum, no favourable resolution could be had therein. The Provinces were rather inclined to build the intended Citadels at their own cost▪ and this was propounded; but the Duke would in no ways listen thereunto; holding that it neither stood with dignity nor safety, to suffer that the Flemish in so im∣portant a business should chuse rather then obey. 'Twas said, that to sweeten the Duke, both in his intercessions to the King, and in his own rigour towards the Countrie, the Provinces offered to give him a donative of a hundred thou∣sand crowns in Gold: and that he with no less wisdom then generosity, refused it: as well not to render his Authority undervalued in Flanders, as not to afford colour for such calumnies, as his enemies might plot against him in Spain. He at this time did one thing which did exceedingly exasperate the Flemish, and increa∣sed their batred more against him. The Citadel of Antwerp was already made defensable, and the Duke caused all possible haste that could be, made to per∣fect it. He gloried to leave such a memory of him behind him in the Low-Coun∣tries; thinking that by such a curb he had mainly secured their obedience to the King. But desirous that together with this image of his mind, another of his bo¦dy might likewise remain there, he made his Effigies be set up in the Citadel in a Statue of Brass. The Statue was all in Armour, save the head, and 'twas made by Jongeling, a German one of the famousest workmen that was then in all Europe. At the feet thereof was a monstrous Figure of brass also, which had two heads, and six arms, and other misterious signes in other parts which did clearly denote the past successes of the Covenant, Petitions and Revolts. This great piece of workmanship was sustained by a great Pillar of Marble with four faces. In that which looked towards the City, were ingraven some single Letters with a full point to each of them, without any other expression of words therein contain∣ed: but the sence thereof, as it was commonly interpreted, was in praise of the Duke of Alva, for having preserved obedience to the Church and King in the Low-Countries, and restored Justice and quiet unto the Provinces. In the two side faces, some misterious significations were exprest in Sculpture, in praise lik∣wise
of his Government: and in that behind was the Sculptures name. The Fle∣mish seemed deeply concern'd in this action: and great complaints were made thereof every where, as if the Duke would be publickly seen in this his Statue, up∣on their necks; and as if not content to have reduced them already to this slave∣ry, he would boast of his Trophies, in this to them so ignominious a fashion. In∣novations were not long in insuing. In the late indeavours which those of Nas∣saw had made to enter with their forces into Flanders, they had experienced how hard a matter it was to get any footing there, having no place upon the Con∣fines which would receive them, and more particularly upon the River, and be∣cause the greatest hopes of new commotions lay yet in Germany, therefore Orange his adherents, spying out the conjuncture of time, resolved to indeavour the ta∣king of some opportune place upon the Mause on that side. In this river, after it hath changed its name to Wahell, in one of its branches is contained the Island of Bomele, of large circuit. The situation of this Island could not be of more im∣portance, in respect also of its nearness to the Rhine. And not far from thence was Balduke, upon the utmost confines of Brabant, which is one of the most po∣pulous Cities of that Province, and one the best fortified both by Nature and Art, of all Flanders. One Captain Hermanno Reiter was a native of this City, who depended upon the Prince of Orange, and desired to signalize himself by do∣ing him some service. Upon the lower point of the abovesaid Island stands a little Castle called Lovesteyn, more considerable for its situation then strength. Reiter with some of his companions got in hither by fraud, and brought in some fifty with him. Roderigo de Tolledo lay in Balduke with some Spanish Companies; who by reason of his being so near, was advertised hereof. He therefore present∣ly dispatcht away 200 foot, under Captain Lorenso Perea, of the same Nation, that he might indeavour by all means to recover the Castle. The Invaders did not think to be so soon set upon: so as not being able to defend themselves by their own forces, nor having time to expect any from elsewhere, they presently surrendred it to Perea, not without some little dispute, wherein Reiter was slain. Thus was Lovesteyn recovered almost before it was lost. But the Duke was not∣withstanding much moved hereat, weighing more the occasion, then the effect of such a designe: for he might fear that other more dangerous and more conside∣rable designes were hatching, as the event soon after shewed He being still more necessitated in expences, and in monies to defray them; and much incenst to see how hardly the hundreth penny was payed, and more particularly upon the Ma∣ritine coast, where no exaction thereof could ever be made; and being yet more angred at the attempt of Lovesteyn: he resolved by all means to recover not only the hundreth penny, but the tenth and twentieth too, he made the Kings mind in that affair be publisht, having notwithstanding moderated the Imposition so, as those of the Country were taxed less, and foreigners more, and thus he would have it executed. But the people were no less resolved to the contrary, notwith∣standing any moderation which was added. And this repugnancy grew so great, as in some places no more meat was brought to the Markets, nor did the Mer∣chants expose to sale their wonted Merchandise. Thus did affairs stand in the end of the year 1570. The other of 71 follows; which will bring with it deplorable memorials for ever to Flanders. For then the Anno 1571. war broke forth almost every where in her; and so great a fire was afterwards kindled, as could never be extinguisht, but by the truce of twelve years, where with it was not quencht, but smothered up, Arms being suddenly afterwards re∣assumed, and the War continued with more obstinacy on both sides. We told you before how the Prince of Orange and his brother Lodovick were got into Picardy in France, after the Duke of Alva had driven them out of Flanders; and that Orange retiring from thence into Germany, had left his bro∣ther in France. Their Forces were almost quite disbanded, for they wanted ne∣cessarie conveniences to maintain them. But the whole strength which Genlis brought with him in assistance of those of Nassaw, as hath been said, was still intire: Nor were the chief of the Hugonots in France wanting, in nourishing in themselvs, and in reviving in the Flemish runagates, hopes of new revolutions which were to arise in those Provinces: The Hugonots promised therefore all assistance
on their sides, and shewed how it would be easie to make themselves Masters of some good Town in the Walloon Provinces, which (as hath been said) lie nearest France. They therefore stood expecting all fit opportunities for this purpose. Orange used all the means he could with the Princes his friends, and other his ad∣herents in Germany, to prepare new Forces, and facilitate his designe of entring Flanders again on that side. He excused his first undertaking, and promised bet∣ter success in the next; representing how ill-affected the Flemish were to the Spa∣niards, and how much their hatred was increased by reason of the grievances which the Duke of Alva would lay upon the Countrie. Nor was his indea∣vours and those of his associates in France ere a whit less fervent with the Queen of England, so as by the opportunity of the Sea, and for other aforesaid conside∣rations, 'twas hoped that easier footing might be got in Holland and Zealand, and easilyer maintained. To this end, some of the fled-Flemish, the better to raise some insurrection, were got to sea in men of War: to which they were driven e∣ven by despair. For their goods being confiscated, and not knowing how to live but by rapine, they thought they might better do so by sea, then by land. The Lord Lumay, Count of Marcia, descended of Noble bloud, and who neither wanted courage in undertaking, nor industry in executing hard enterprises, was one of the best qualified amongst them. From this Maritine part, where the danger appeared to be greatest, the mischief first broke forth, which Lumay was in this manner the Author of. Having got together about 25 Vessels, some of them fled-Flemish, and some of them English Pyrates, and fomented in private by the Queen of England her self, he steered about the end of March, towards Holland; and unexpectedly, by underhand dealing, got into the Town of Brill. In the Western part of Holland there lies a little Island, made by the Mause, and by the Sea, on the utmost part whereof towards the sea, stands this Town; which by the commodiousness of its Haven, is held one of the chiefest Keys of those Maritine parts. Lumay had with him about a thousand souldiers, pickt up from several parts, which were all hereticks, of mean condition, most of them fugi∣tives, or such as were driven from Flanders, and such in fine, as desired to raise tumults there. Now because from this first commotion in Holland many others suddenly insued both in that Province and in Zealand, so as the war was more kindled there then in other places, and many of the most memorable accidents happened there: I think it fit, first to set down here briefly their situation, and nature, to the end that deliniating (as I may so say) the portraiture thereof, the Reader may have the events, as it were before his eyes. Both these Provinces lie on the North and West side of Flanders. In Holland, the Rhine and the Mause, and in Zealand the Scheld, fall into the Sea, in so large Channels, as losing the condition of Rivers, they seem to carry new Seas into the Sea; on the contrary, the Ocean first washing the said two Provinces for a long trackt of ground, and turning then as it were from the sea into a River, penetrates into each of them by divers Channels, and hides it self there in sundry Gulfs. From hence joyning with the Rivers, and together with them, cutting Zealand thorough in many places, it makes many Islands thereof, and reduceth Holland into a Peninsula. To boot with these three forenamed Rivers, which are the chiefest of all Flanders, there are in Holland divers other lesser ones; and as if Art would contend with Nature; there are thereunto added an infinite number of Channels cut by hand, which are made for the more commodiousness of the Countrie. There are within it likewise a great number of Lakes and standing waters: so as the situation of both these Provinces being well considered, 'tis to be questioned whether the space of ground be greater which is won from the earth by water, or from water by the earth; nor is it less to be disputed whether their Country do more abound with, or be more failing in those Commodities which men enjoy in other parts. Through the condition of their situation they want both Corn, Wine, Oyle, Wool, Wood, Hemp, Flax, and almost all other Com¦modities and delights which are used in more temperate and drie Climates; and yet again there is no Country not only in that Northern nook, but not even in a∣ny part of Europe which abounds so much as Holland and Zealand doth in al∣most all the aforenamed things, and even of those which are less necessary for the
maintenance of humane life. So great is the advantage which these two Provin∣ces receive by the Sea and Rivers, whereby their Commerce with all other parts is so easie. Which since they have introduced and made so familiar in the Indies, it cannot be said how much both Merchandise and Merchants are increased in both of them. Hence it is that they abound so much in Inhabitants, and that their Cities, Towns and Villages are so well peopled. But the Sea likewise is as full of Ships and other bottoms; and all their watry places with other sorts of boats, which serve all for habitations, especially to Mariners and Fishers. Great is the number of people which apply themselves to these two vocations in Holland and in Zealand. They make houses of their ships, and of their houses schools: Here they are born, here they are bred up, and here they learn their profession. And the Mariners especially practising their Calling, in running so oft and so boldly from the one Pole to the other, and whethersoever the Sun communicates it self to mortals, they grow so expert therein, as though they may be equalled, yet can∣not they be out-done in this Seafering mysterie, by any whatsoever Nation. For what remains, these people are generally given to Traffick; and are extraordina∣ry industrious in Manual and Mechanical Arts. Their greatest delight lies in their feasts and at their meat: by which they temper the melancholy of their tedious Winters; which are rather long then sharp, the Country abounding much more in rain then in frost. They are generally well shaped in body: as can∣did in nature as in countenance: pleasant in their leasure times, but fierce in their revolts; and much better at fighting by sea then by land. They feed most upon fish and white-meats, wherein their Country doth infinitely abound They have alwaies been inclin'd to a Free Government; and have ever tenaciously held their antient Customes. And since Heresie began to creep in amongst them, tur∣ning their Liberty by degrees into licentiousness, it hath since been easier for the Authors of the late Novelties, to make them rise, and forgoe their former obe∣dience to the Church and King. Holland is full of great Cities, good Towns, and infinite in Villages: But by reason of the frequency of Foreigners, and multi∣tude of self-Inhabitants, Amsterdam hath always been the chief City of that Province. Even whilst Commerce flourisht in Antwerp, great was the concourse of Foreigners to Amsterdam; but Commerce failing in that City, by reason of the War, it is so mightily increased in this other, as Amsterdam is at this hour the place of greatest Merchandising, not only in Holland, but in all the North. In Zealand, Midleburg is the Town best peopled, and of greatest Traffick: That Province cannot notwithstanding come any thing near Holland, neither in cir∣cuit, people, nor plenty. 'Tis almost impossible to enter either of these Provinces by force: because not only the chief places but even the commonest Towns are Invironed either by the Sea, Rivers or Lakes, or by Earth, then which there can be none more low, nor more myery. So as it is no wonder if these People, being thus favoured by Nature, were both so fierce in taking up Arms at first, and have with like animosity maintained them ever since. But to return to where I left: As soon as Lumay was received into the Brill, he presently began to fortifie himself; judging that without delay the Duke of Alva would send to drive him from thence. He openly profest Heresie, where∣with that Town was likewise much infected, so as great violence and impiety was at first committed against Church-men and sacred things. The news of this flew suddenly round about; and the Duke of Alva was soon advertised thereof by Maximilian, Count de Bossu, Governour of Holland. The Duke was mightily troubled hereat. He knew what practises there were in Germany, France and Eng∣land, to cause new troubles in Flanders; and that the nearest and greatest danger lay on the Maritine side of the Country: He therefore ordered Bossu, to draw out so many men out of the neighbouring Garisons with all possible speed, as would suffice not only to recover the Brill, but to drive Lumay out of that Island. To this purpose Fernando de Tolledo marched thitherward, with part of his men which lay nearest, and went to Roterdam, one of the greatest and most Merchan∣dizing Towns in all Holland: 'tis seated upon the Roter, a little River (from whence it takes its name) and almost where it falls into the Mause, which inlar∣geth itself there very much. The Kings Forces passing from thence, met with
Bossu in Waldargin, a Town situated likewise upon the same stream of the Mause, not far from the Bril; and hence they were conveyed in Barks into the Island. But Lumay, being first advertised of their advancing, Bossu met with such impedi∣ments in effecting this enterprise, as he was inforced, and that not without great difficulty, to turn back; and all those people were already manifestly inclined to rise, through an opinion which was every where received, and by the Hereticks cunningly spread abroad, that the Kings souldiers went to gather the imposed taxes by force. When the Spaniards were come out of the Bril Island, they return'd again to Roterdam, where they found difficulty in being received: But being got into the town, and greater mislikes arising amongst the Citizens, they came from words to blows; nor did the quarrel end, till the Town by military licentious∣ness was sackt. This success drew after it very bad consequences: For every Town in Holland seemed to share in this sacking of Roterdam; and the example shewn therein by one Town to another, extended it self suddenly from one Pro∣vince to another. The affairs were notwithstanding for that time appeased there by Count Bossu. Lumay growing bold by this prosperity, and growing stronger by new men who came in unto him, went to get further footing thereabouts, especi∣ally in some other place upon the Mause: But divers of the Kings souldiers be∣ing assembled together, hindred all his further attempts at that time. Orange prepared this mean while to march with his Forces from Germany. He was to this purpose in a Town of his called Dilimburgh, near the Rhine; and endeavoured again to make all that side of the Country joyn with him. And seeing that for∣tune began already to smile on him in Flanders by this success of the Bril, he thought it good to allure men yet more by writing. He and his brother Lodo∣vick did therefore publish a Manifesto, the tenor of which was to this purpose: They shewed how much they were obliged by Nature and Honour not to suffer their Country to be opprest.. They said that the King, being abused, could not remedy those things which were concealed from him. They added to the past miseries, by great∣ly exagerating the present: calling the Duke of Alva's introduced grievances Ty∣rannies, and things till then unheard of in Flanders. They endeavoured by specious titles, even of doing service to the King, to make the Country incline to them, and particularly to secure the Catholicks in matter of Religion. And in fine they strove to be so zealous of the publike good, as others should not fear that any of their own private ambition were hidden underneath it. The Duke of Alva seeing these beginnings, delayed not to take new men into pay: He gave order for the speedy raising of 6000 Walloon Foot under 3 Camp∣masters, to wit, the Messieurs of Capres, Bevoir, and Liques; and he gave out other Commissions to the same effect. He was chiefly jealous of Zealand, by rea∣son of the particular correspondencies which Orange held there, who was formerly Master of many places there, of importance. The Ilands of that Province are full of Havens, but Flushing is the chiefest. This Town stands further into the Sea then any other on that side which looks towards Spain, and commands the mouth of the Channel where it is seated. The Duke sought to secure himself of this Haven which opens and shuts the chief ingress into that Country, by a Citadel which he caused to be built there, but which was not yet made defensible. Neer Flushing stands the Ramechins, a little Castle, but well fortified. And more inward, Ramua, an open Town, but which hath one of the best Havens of all the North. Between Flushing and Ramua, a little within land, stands Middleburgh, the greatest and chiefest City for traffick in all Zealand, as hath been said; and which therefore makes its own Iland (called Walcheren) the noblest of all those Ilands. The City holds communication with the Sea by a large Channel cut out by hand, and re∣ceives all commodities from thence. The Duke of Alva having these jealousies of Zealand, he in the first place endeavoured to secure Flushing, and suddenly dispatched thitherward Captain Osorio d' Angulo with three companies of Spanish Foot. Nor did the Duke conceive amiss. The marching of these people being heard of at Flushing, the Townsmen resolved not to receive them into the Town; and boldly did as they resolved. The Souldiers being come neer the Town, the people within took up Arms, ran to the gates, and shut them up: Exclaiming
that they came to raise by force the new Impositions; and moreover, to sack Flushing, as they had done Rotterdam Nor were they content to keep out the Kings Souldiers but imprisoning Captain Pacieco a Spaniard, who had the care of ordering the new Citadel; and after having treated him abusively in divers sorts, they cut off his head, and hung it up for a publike spectacle in the market∣place. This opposition, accompanied with such sad circumstances, forced Osorio to quit the Island, and to retreat, as he did, to some place of safety, expecting new Orders from the Duke, who was extremely troubled at this success. But it cannot be said how glad Orange was of this, and how much his Fautors rejoyced every where. They all of them applied themselves with all diligence to send men into Flushing, and in a few dayes many High-Dutch and French came and were there received, and the Queen sent some Souldiers privatly thither from England. Jero∣lomo Lor of Seras, born at Breda, came thither afterwards, who was made Go∣vernour of the Town by Orange; and he gathering together 3000 Souldiers, did better establish the Insurrection of that Town. The Tumultuaries expecting from hence better progress, they without any gainsaying took Ramua, and Vere, a con∣siderable place not far from thence, and all other places of lesser importance. So as of the whole Iland of Walcherin, only Middleburg and the small Castle of Ra∣mechins, remained to the King. Wherefore the Tumultuaries, desiring to be ma∣sters of the whole Iland, and hoping to be so, they resolved to besiege Middle∣burgh, and sate down before it with those men which they had, whose numbers increased daily. The Duke hearing of this so great revolt, feared very much that Middleburgh would also be lost: He knew that there were but few of the Kings Souldiers within it, and that many of the Citizens were but ill enough inclin'd. Wherefore he suddenly sent the Signeur de Beavoir thither with 400 old Walloon Foot, for the new Souldiers of his Regiment were not as yet raised. Beavoir was received into the City: And because to boot with the small number of Souldiers, the City was but ill munited and victuall'd, the Duke gave order to send speedily a powerful succour thither; he commanded that many ships should be made rea∣dy in Antwerp, and that the greatest strength of Spaniards and Walloons that could be had should be mustered, and that the Rendezvous should be at Berghen ap Zoom. Berghen is but a few leagues distant from Antwerp; the River of Zoom runs by it, which not far off fals into the Scheld. So as it is a place of importance in it self, and was then the fittest from whence to send that succour. To encou∣rage the enterprise, the Duke sent his son Frederick to Berghen, and with him Signior Norchermes, and here all things were preparing which were needfull for the above-mentioned enterprise. But news coming every day of greater danger, if Middleburgh were not suddenly secured, therefore it was requisite to send away an indifferent aid, since there was not time allowed for a plenary succour. Sancio d' Avila was chosen by the Duke to conduct it, who was Governour of the Castle of Antwerp, and greatly esteemed of by him. The Tumultuaries hearing of these preparations, they likewise endeavoured by all the power they could to impede the effect thereof: They fortified those places where they thought the Spaniards were likeliest to land; and with all diligence increased their Forces at Sea, in∣tending to incounter and break the Fleet which was to bring the succour. Avila began to move about the end of April, and had with him 500 choise Spanish foot under the Captains Osorio d' Angulo, Gonsalvo d' Ovalla, Fernando d' Aguasco, Inico de Mediniglia, and Joavinni d' Avola. To these Spaniards were added as many Walloons, all of them also old Souldiers, under the Signiors de Liques and de Glimus, and Captain Torres. And to these were afterward added a good many of Reformado-Officers and other people of quality, especially of the Spanish Nation, who desired rather to serve as Voluntiers, then to take pay upon so hard service Avila went down the Scheld at a low ebb, that he might make use of the next flowing water, and drew his men towards the lower part of the channel which washes the Island of Walcherin. He would have landed his men there, because the fuccour would have been neerer from thence, Middleburgh lying on that side. But he found the Enemy so well fortified in that place, as he resolved to go to the opposite place which looks upon the sea: A plain situation, and of all others fur∣thest remote from the City, and where the Enemy by reason of these difficulties
did not expect that they should endeavour to land. In evils which may happen, nothing is worse then not to fear: Nothing is more usually seen in war, then the insuing of damage, where danger was least looked for. Avila being arrived on that shore, found no impediment in landing his men, save only that they must wade a little way through the water, before they could come to the land. Watch∣ing the Enemies proceedings from thence, he was informed that they were in no very good order, especially toward that place where he and his men had landed, as least apprehended. The Kings men were greatly hereby encouraged: And Avila, to make them be so the more, spake thus unto them. My fellow-souldiers! The worst is over, now that we are landed and off the sea; where the Enemy might have beaten us by power, and also by fortune. On land, all the advantages will make for us. We shall not fight here one ship-board flying from an∣other; nor will the wind, be it propitious or contrary, have any share here: but the victory or loss will lie in our arms and military valour. Which of us can then doubt, but that at our first appearance the Enemies are likelier to betake themselves to their heels, then to put themselves in order? We are for certain fewer then they: but 'tis not only numbers that fight, nor are victories had by unexperienced men. And what more contemptible people can be found, then those whom we are now to assail? Mari∣ners, and fisher-men for the most part, who are not acquainted so much as with the name of Arms; who have tumultuously taken them up, and will in like manner lay them down. Perfidious to the King, and more to God: and who by very divine justice are now delivered up into our hands, to the end that without any delay they may receive punishment according to their demerit. They have with them some He∣retick foreign Souldiers, but almost all of them vagabonds, abject people, who in war look after nothing but pillage, and understand nothing but rapiue. On the contrary, who is he in this our so antient Militia, who hath not either seen or done some egregious action? which of us have not seen our late victories abroad against those very Chief∣tains who now foment these present rebellions here within us? Let us resolve then to overcome, before we fight: For I presage as much. The Rebels doe not look for us on this side, so as we shall be upon them at unawares. The besieged will at the same time sally out upon them: we shall fill their Camp with blood, slaughter, and runawayes: And so by succouring one onely City, we shall soon see the whole Iland set at liberty. This speech being ended, Avila began to march: And advancing himself and Liques with some Spaniards and Walloons, the better to discern what the Enemy was doing, they found that there was no appearance of any opposition on that side. Then calling up the rest, they went resolutely to assault the Enemy. Nor did Avila's presage prove false: For they forsaking their Trenches, which were either ill made, or ill guarded on that side, thought rather how to ran away, then how to fight. At the same time the Kings souldiers sallied out of the City; so as the Enemy being inclosed on both sides, many of them were slain, and the rest in great confusion scattered here and there abroad. Thus was Middleburg freed, and Ramua was suddenly regained; and some of the Enemies ships were there taken, which Avila made use of the better to secure the Haven; and moreover he fortified the Town where it was most needfull. Whilst he was thus victorious he would have endeavoured the recovery of Flushing: But the Town being mu∣nited, and at all times succorable, and he having but a few men with him, he could not doe it. The Duke of Alva sent for him back, to know the better from him by word of mouth, what was best to be done to establish the affairs of Holland and Zealand, so as might make most for the Kings service. But he was no sooner come, then the Duke heard of another novelty of great consequence, which had hapned neer the Frontiers of France. Upon that Confine stands the Town of Valentiennes, which was the first Town that did rebell in the Dutchess of Parma's time, as was then shewn. It is one of the best peopled, and most Merchant-like Town of all those parts: and holds great correspondencie in traffick with the neighbouring Provinces of France. Notwithstanding the punishment which was inflicted upon the first Tumultuaries, there were yet many Hereticks in it, who still held continual practises with the French Hugonots. The Duke had already begun to build a Citadel in this Town, as hath been said, it being subject to suspi∣tion
both by its situation, and condition of Inhabitants: And the Citadel was by this time in a good forwardness, but it was not as yet made wholly tenable, nor yet provided of a sufficient Garrison. This conjuncture of time being by the Hugonots observed, Monsieur de Fama entred the Town on the 15. of May with 400 men: He presently ran to the Town-house; and possessing himself of the most commodious places to annoy the Citadel, he prepared with some Artillery, and some other provisions to besiege it. The Duke was beyond measure moved at this disorder; both in regard of it self, and for fear lest others the like, and peradventure greater might insue upon the same Frontier; where he greatly apprehended not only the open practises of the Hugonots, but even the secret ones which by order or connivance of the King of France the very Catholicks might nourish in those parts. He therefore with all speed sent such men as were needfull to chase the French forthwith from out that Town, and to prevent the danger of the coming in of others to assist the former. Alonzo de Lumbrales marched thitherward immediately with 150 Spanish horse, and was followed the next day by Garzia de Gualdes with above one hundred more of the same Nation. These Horse were brought without any difficulty into the Citadel and time was afforded this mean while for John de Mendosa General of the Light-horse, to come with both more Horse and Foot: he brought with him also some Companies of Walloons, taken newly into pay. So as being entred with all these men into the Citadel, and charging vigorously upon the French, who could not in so short a time be succoured from without, nor sufficiently fortified within, they were first soon disordered, and afterwards put to flight. Many of them were slain, and but few of them would have escaped, if the Kings men would in that heat have pursued them. But they were no less angry with the Townsmen, suspecting that they had favoured the French: So as leaving these, and falling on the others, they began to sack many houses, and shed much blood, not much distinguishing between such as were guilty, and such as were in no fault at all. The Duke had not well recovered Valentiennes, when he heard that upon the same Frontier, by means of some other Hugonots, who had taken Lodovick of Nassaw for their Leader, Mons was lost. And the mischiefs were already grown so general on all sides in Flanders, as it was impossible to withstand their course any longer: just as the waters of an overswoln Torrent, bearing down first the lesser obstacles, and afterwards the greater, doe at last in sundry places overflow the neighbouring fields, and in sundry sorts make strange havock. The Walloon Provinces (as hath been often said) lie towards France: Henault is one of the chiefest of them, and Mons is the chiefest Town therein a noble City for situa∣tion, Inhabitants, and buildings. And because it stood not upon the very edge of the Confines, but lay somewhat more inward, therefore was it neither very well fortified, nor yet carefully guarded; though it were of it self strongly situated, and well provided with ditches, and strong antient walls. Lodovick drawing se∣cretly neer to that Frontier, with a few French Hugonots, he was let in on the 25. of May, and thus surprised the Town. Some other French were first entred Mons under pretence of merchandise, with certain Fats full of Arms; and had private in∣telligence with divers of the Townsmen. So as the agreement being had, they made themselves masters of one of the Gates; and killing him who kept the keyes of it, and driving away the rest of the Corps de Gard, they let in Lodovick, who to that end had marched hard all that night with an hundred Horse When he was entred the City, he began to run into every place, and endeavoured by seditious speeches to make the people adhere to him, hoping for more succour. But no French appearing from without, nor the Townsmen rising any way within, he forewent almost assoon the hopes of making himself master of the City, as he had assumed them, and resolved to quit it: Nay he began already to fear, lest the people, being almost all of them Catholicks, should rather turn against him, and either drive him out, or, to his greater danger, take him prisoner. But Fortune which had favoured him the first time, did so the second: He was not well gone out of the Town, when he met with 200 other French horse with foot en croupe, which came to succour him, being led on by Monsieur Genlis himself, who was the chiefest plotter of all the Hugonots upon that Frontier: So
as reassuming courage, and assuring himself that the gate by which he was new∣ly come out, was yet open, he again entred the City. And having in the first place possest himself of all the Market places, and chiefest streets, he summoned all the best of the Town into the Town-house, and endeavoured to justifie his action, honesting it with words full of zeal towards the Country, and of devo∣tion towards the King: but of detestation against the Dake of Alvas Govern∣ment, and the Spaniards actions. He afterwards gave all assurance that the City should receive no outrage, nor be in any sort damnified: and the better to secure himself and his men, he seised upon all the Arms, and Warlike Ammunition he could any where find. Then he began with all diligence to take order for such things as were requisit for the defence of the City, considering that the Duke of Alva would without any delay, bend all the Kings Forces against him. Genlis went himself in person to sollicite the Hugonots in France, and to be himself their Conductor. And Lodovick was not wanting in hastning his brother the Prince of Orange to come in unto his succour from the side of Germany, and by so great an acquisition, the better to confirm those hopes which he conceived they had reason to build upon of making yet greater in a short time.
THE HISTORY OF THE WARS OF FLANDERS. Written by CARDINAL BENTIVOGLIO. BOOK VI. The Contents. The Duke of Alva was mightily incenst at the loss of Mons. Other Insurrections in Holland follow. Orange prepares to enter Flanders the second time. The Duke of Alva makes a great levy of men to hinder him. Consultations touching the marching of the Kings Forces. Resolution is taken to besiege Mons. Genlis, and other Hugonots of France, endeavour to bring in relief: They are met with by the Kings Forces, fought, and routed. Orange enters Flanders with a great Ar∣my by Ghelderland. He takes and sacks Ruremonde: He secures himself of Malines; and staies his Camp in the Province of Hennault. He is so opposed by the Duke of Alva as he cannot relieve Mons. He often endeavours therefore, but in vain, to draw the Duke to battel. Great confusion in the Prince of Orange his Army; whereupon the Duke takes occasion to make a Camisado by night, wherein he succeeds well, and makes great slaughter. Orange retreats and passeth into Holland Sundry troubles in that Province, and in the others beyond the Rhine The Duke of Alva enters Mons. The Town of Goes is besieged by the Tumultua∣ries, and with memorable courage succoured by the Kings men. The Catholick Army in Brabant. Sacks Malines. Recovers divers places in Ghelderland. Takes and sacks Zutfen; and doth almost wholly destroy Naerden. THe Duke of Alva was the more troubled for the loss of Mons, in that he did no ways suspect the losing of it. Anno 1572. He considered it was not only the prime City in all the Province of Hennault, but even one of the chiefest of all Flanders. That from that Line of the Confines which was towards France, it lay far enough inward in the Kings Territories, but yet not so far but that it might be easily succour'd from without: That it might easily be made very strong, being on one side in a very low and spongy situation, and well provided of Walls and Ditches on all other parts. That being near the very Province of Flanders, and that of Brabant, it might easily further the Tumults both in the one and the other of them, and consequently
make the fire more lasting, which was to be kindled in so many parts He there∣fore with much fervency apply'd himself to the sudden regaining of it; and ho∣ped well therein, by his having so easily recovered Valentiennes. He saw that Lo∣dovick of Nassaw might be succoured on two sides; to wit, by the way of Ger∣many, by the Forces which Orange prepared, and by the way of France by the Forces raised by the Hugonots; these were doubtlesly the nearest, and therefore likely to be the speediest. The Duke therefore resolved to make his quickest op∣position on this side of France, hoping that when he should have interrupted that succour, he might more easily impede the other: but such, and so grievous com∣motious happened suddenly in Holland, as they put upon him new, and greater necessities, and rendred him much perplext touching what he was to resolve up∣on. The Town of Eachusen had there led the way first to open disobedience; which Town lies very opportunely for situation, as lying upon the point of a great Gulf which the Sea makes in Holland, towards the North; and no less for the quality thereof, and number of shipping which are continually built there, and which makes it one of the best, and most esteemed Arsenals of all that Pro∣vince. Nor was it long ere other greater revolts followed: For Dort, Harlem, Leyden, Gouda, and almost all the other Cities and chief Towns did at once the like, except Amsterdam, which continued then, and long after in Allegiance to the King. Great raising of Arms was likewise heard of in Germany; and that Orange having past the Rhine, grew still stronger in men, intending to enter Flan∣ders again by the same way he did before. To obviate so many evils which threatned him in so many several parts, the Duke of Alva betook himself sud∣denly to raise great levies, both of horse and foot; and gave order for the taking of 5 or 6 thousand horse into pay in High-Germany, the chief care whereof was had by Henry Duke of Brunswick, formerly imployed by the King upon like oc∣casions; by Salentine, Count of Isemburg, Archbishop of Cullen, who shewed himself very faithfull to the Catholick Cause and the Crown of Spain; and by Peter Ernestus Count of Mansfield, who came originally from Germany, and who had yet many friends and kindred of great esteem there; he gave order for the raising of 18 thousand foot in six Regiments: to wit, 3000 in the Upper, and 3000 in the Lower Germany. The first were taken into pay by Ottone Count of Erbestein: by George Baron of Fronsberg, and by Nicholas Purvighliere, all of them natives of the same Country. And the latter by Giles Count of Barlemonte; by Maximilian Count of Bossu, and by Lancelot Count of Mega; all of them the Kings Vassals in the Provinces of Flanders. These levies required great store of money, whereof the Duke was very much exhausted. But he had represented unto the King the affairs of Flanders to be in so dangerous a condition, as he was in some sort presently furnisht therewithall for his necessities: and the King pro∣mised him to see him continually furnisht with what should be requisit for main∣taining the Churches Cause and his own (which was now become one and the same) in those Provinces. The new Insurrections which had happened in Hol∣land bore with them very bad consequences, to boot with the former in Zealand. And the Novelties which had succeeded, and which still grew greater in the Fron∣tiers towards Germany and France, required powerfull and speedy remedy. The Duke of Alva consulted therefore with the chief Commanders of the Army, to what part it was best to bend the Kings Forces; or if by dividing them, they might suffice for both occasions. 'Twas generally thought that there were not e∣nough to be divided. And as for the turning to the one or the other place, Mar∣shal Vitelli, Camp-Master-General, who was greatly esteemed in the Army, as well for the prerogative of his Place, as for his Valour, was of opinion that they were to bend all their Forces immediately towards Holland and Zealand. saying, That by good reason of War, Forces were to be turned thither where their imploy∣ment was of greatest consequence. And how much did it most import first to secure the Maritine Country? That in those parts which lay more inward in the Country, the people were neither so infected with Heresie, nor so inclin'd to Rebellion. And though some loss might be suffered by the Forces from Germany and France, it was to be hoped that they might be easily regain'd. That the Hugonots Forces were of no
substance of themselves; nor was it to be thought that the King of France would favour them, if for what might concern the good of Spain, at least for what might respect the service of his own Kingdom, so grievously infested by them. That the he∣retick Forces of Germany which were to enter Flanders, were to be esteemed of the same nature: being tumultuously raised, ill provided of men, and worse of money; more ready to pillage then to fight; and that prey and pay failing, they would soon forgoe their obedience, and insteed of carrying their Colours against their enemies, they would turn them against their Commanders. That for these reasons it was to be believed, that the noise was greater then the blow would be from either of both those parts: and that those foreign Forces being soon scattered by the opposition made by the Kings Towns (which to that purpose were with all diligence suddenly to be munited) Mons would easily be recovered, as also whatsoever other damage might insue in any other part upon those Frontiers. But on the contrary, how firmly was heresie radi∣cated, both in Holland and Zealand? how much were the people alienated from their former devotion to the Church, and to the King? That by reason of the Sea and Ri∣vers, Merchandise did very much abound there; as also monies and victuals: and that every Town there was so strong by Nature, that allow but a little time to Indu∣stry, every Pass would require an Army to overcome it, and every Siege almost an Age to finish it. That by the opportunity of the Sea, new Forces might continual∣ly be sent unto the Rebels on those sides, from Germany and France, But especially from England. And they being Masters of the Maritine parts, what advanta∣ges might they by other designes work unto themselves in the more inward Countries? What difficulties would the succours then meet withall which should be sent by Sea from Spain to Flanders? Which succours were to be esteemed the speediest and most profitable; the others-which were to be expected by land being so far off, and so charge∣able to convoy, that Orange had long governd both those Provinces, having great store of wealth and adherents in them, that therefore it was to be believed, that out of so many considerations of his own advantage, he would indeavour to lay the chief seat of the Rebellion there. That therefore the Frontiers towards Germany and France being secured the best that might be, they were presently to turn with all their forces toward Holland and Zealand. That from thence the chiefest head of this new Hydra arose. And that it was not to be doubted, but that the hardest difficulty being once o∣vercome, the rest would afterwards prove much more easie. This opinion of Vitelli was grounded upon very solid reasons. But amongst others, Norchermes was rather of a different then of a repugnant mind. He was held to be the ablest souldier of all those Provinces. He was Governor of Hen∣nault, and therefore adding his own privat ends to the publick considerations, he propounded the recovery of Mons in the first place. He said, That that City might be recovered by a short siege, and also all the designes which Orange and the Hugonots could have upon those Frontiers of Germany and France be easily broken. That turning the Kings Forces suddenly from thence, upon Holland and Zealand, they might be there time enough to allay the Rebellion which was there begun. Nor was this resolution to be taken so much out of conveniency, as out of necessity. That the loss of Mons was of too great importance: That by the opportunity of its situation, the Enemy might make it very strong, and make it as it were a Piazzad Armi, from whence they might infest the whole Countrie of Walloon, and also the two neighbouring Provinces of Brabant and Flanders, which were the two largest, and most opulent Provinces of all the Low-Countries. And how could they be sure, but that so many Forces of the Enemy might make further progress in those Frontiers? That it was not possible to furnish all the Kings Towns in those parts with all things ne∣cessary. And though the chiefest should make resistance, doubtlesly the wea∣ker would not be able to do it; which notwithstanding being quickly fortified by the Enemy, would make way for their further entrance on other sides into the Kings Provinces. How much would they then molest the Countrie every where? and what other commodities would they there receive whereby to main∣tain themselves? the Towns would then be burnt on all sides, the fields fill'd with amazement, the Inhabitants with horror, and to boot with the prejudice the Kings affairs should suffer, how much should he thereby suffer in his ho∣nour?
In my opinion then, we must in the first place recover what is lost, and seek to prevent other greater losses, which our Enemies may occasion unto us in our Frontiers upon Germany and France. This being done, all the Kings For∣ces may the easilier march to the reducing of Holland and Zealand to their for∣mer obedience. One success will bring on another, and we ought to expect as good successe in the second, as we have reason to hope for in the first. The Duke was of this opinion. He thought he should be able to settle the Kings affairs so soon in one place, as he might have time enough to secure them on the other. To the which he was the more incited out of a desire not to permit the French to nestle so much as any one minute in Flanders. And no less out of the bitter hatred which he and the Prince of Orange bore each to other, as well for privat as publick respects, as hath been said. He therefore desired to op∣pose him as soon as might be; and to drive him now again out of the Countrie more shamefully then he had done before. The business of Mons being then re∣solved on, he forthwith dispatcht away some Troops of horse thitherward, to hinder the coming of any others thither from France; and sent afterwards his son Frederick de Tolledo thither with 4000 foot, and 800 horse, accompanied by Vitelli and Norchermes. Towards the end of June these people appeared within sight of the City: and possessing themselves of the fittest places round about it, did as it were besiege it at a large distance. The City of Mons receives its name from its situation, which in that Language signifies a Mountain, or Hill; but the rise of the earth is there so gentle, as it cannot well be said to be mountainous. 'Tis a very Noble City, as well for the concourse of people, as for Commerce: it hath many good houses in it, and there sits the Kings Councel, which admini∣sters Justice to the Countrie; all which Prerogatives gives it the precedency over all other Towns of that Province. It commands large and spacious fields round about it, which may be questioned whether they abound more in Pasture or Til∣lage. Nor is the Territory thereof less rich in Woods; nor generally indeed all the rest of the Province. The City is stronger by natural situation, then by manual industry. It is cut thorough on the lower side by a little rivolet called Trulla, which as soon as it goes out of it, fals into another somewhat bigger, cal∣led Hayne; which crossing through the Province, before it be gotten quite out, fals likewise into the Scheld. The besieged this mean while sought only how to furnish themselves with victuals, which they were not well provided of. The Har∣vest was then ripe; wherefore they determined to make a stout sally, thereby to afford leasure for the cutting down of the nearest Corn, and for the bringing of it into the City. The Kings men were not backwards in opposing them, so as a very fierce skirmish insued. But fresh succours coming still into the latter, the defendants were forc'd at last to retreat, and Vitelli as he was pursuing them, was shot with a musquet in the leg. Genlis was not this mean while idle on the French behalf: he had with very great diligence gathered together a considerable strength of horse and foot, wherewith he marched speedily to relieve the besieged. The Province of Hennault, looks towards the South on Champania and Picardy in France, so as the speediest and easiest succour was hoped for from thence. Gen∣lis his designe was to draw so near Mons, as that he might put thereinto a good number of soldiers, and then to go himself with the rest of his Forces, and joyn with the Prince of Orange. The Admiral Coligni, who was the principal Archi∣tecture of all the plots hatched by the Hugonots as well within France, as out of it, had exhorted him, to goe immediately to find out Orange. Count Lodovick had signified the like unto him from Mons; both of them being of opinion that the body of the Army conducted by Orange being rendred so much the greater, that City might be the easilyer succoured. But Genlis persisting in his own opi∣nion, would needs pursue it; so took his way through Picardy to the Confines of Hennault. Frederick being advertised hereof, resolved by Vitelli's advice, to incounter him, and fight him before he should get into the Kings Countrie. When the Kings men were come to the River Heyne, and heard that the Enemy began to appear out of a Wood, near the Town Hoterage, they marched towards them, and by a skirmish kept them at first somewhat farther from the Wood, and from the Town. Here the skirmish was turn'd into parties, and the parties into a bat∣tel.
The French seeing the necessity of fighting, made two squadrons of their foot, and but one of their horse, placing them all according as best fitted the situ∣ation of the Wood and of field-room. The Kings foot were likewise divided into two bodies, which were seconded to the best advantage by the horse. Vitel∣li, who by reason of his wound, was brought into the field in a chair, not without great pain and danger, ordered the battel. Fulian Romero, a Spanish Camp-Ma∣ster, and one of known valour and experience, had the charge of the Van. Here they fell to it; but the fight continued not long; the circumstances whereof be∣ing well considered, it might rather be called an Incounter then a Battel. The French did not look to be so soon faced by the Kings men, and therefore came not so well prepared to fight as 'twas needfull they should have been, that they might have disputed the victory better then they did. Being vigorously set upon by the Kings men, they made at first some resistance: but their first force sud∣denly failing, they fell soon into disorder: and for the rest, 'twas nothing but slaughter and flight. They suffered more by the Country people afterwards, then they did at first by the souldiers. For many Country people of those fron∣tiers having followed the Spanish Camp, fell bitterly upon the French after their defeat, suffering few of them to escape, and fully revenging themselves for the losses their Country had suffered by this their march. The common opinion was that Genlis had with him about 7000 foot, and 1000 horse; whereof a third part together with the loss of almost all their Colours, were either slain or taken prisoners. Genlis himself was taken prisoner, and Monsieur de Genisack, who Commanded the horse, and another Chieftain of the Hugonots of good quality, called the Ringrave. The Baron of Ranti, and one Giumella, both of them foot Colonels, were slain in the battel. These were the chief of the Hugonots Camp: all the rest of their men, what by being slaughtered by the Country people, and what through terror of the discomfeiture, were reduced to so weak a remain∣der, as they could not be any more serviceable to the Hugonots neither within, nor without the Kingdom. Genlis was carried to the Castel of Antwerp, where he soon after fell sick and died. Very few were found missing of the Kings Camp, and of those, not any one of quality. Thus ended the succour brought by the French Hugonots: whose unfortunate success, was a presage of that no less un∣happy event which was soon after seen, both in the Army Commanded by Orange, and in the siege sustained by his brother. The fight was not many miles distant from the City: so as the Kings party returned suddenly to the siege. And Pu∣luighlier being come not long after unto the Army with 4000 foot, and some horse, Frederick incouraged by so great an addition of Forces, and by the coming like∣wise of Fronsbergs horse, and Bracamonts foot, began very hotly to begirt the be∣sieged. He took up his quarters particularly in the Village of Nimy, St. Sinforia∣no, Bertamonte, and Jumampel, which inviron Mons; and he indeavoured to se∣cure his quarters every where the best he could by the Rivers Heyne and Trulla. There was a Priory under the Walls of Mons, well furnisht with Edifices. And because the Kings men might be much prejudiced from thence, they within the Town had put a good Garison into it, and seemed as if they would strive to de∣fend it. At which Frederick being moved, he resolved howsoever to take it: but he failed in his first attempt, through the valiant resistance made by the de∣fendants, and by the help they received by the Cannon which were at that time drawn out of the City. But returning the second time with greater Forces, and playing upon the place with two pieces of Cannon, the Spaniards prepared for the assault, when the French knowing they could no longer hold it, forsook it, and withdrew themselvs within the Walls of the Town. The Priory being lost, the Town was more narrowly besieged. The Duke of Alva came at the same time to the Army, as well to encourage the enterprise by being present thereat himself, as to hasten whatsoever was needfull to oppose Orange his designe of re∣lieving Mons, and freeing his brother. With him came the Duke of Medina-Celi who was then come by sea to Flanders from Spain with fresh men; being sent by the King to succeed the Duke of Alva in that Government. The Country had in these dayes contributed a great sum of money more then usual, so as the Army was much increased by their arrival, and by the new Levies
of Flanders, and much more by those that were raised in Germany; to boot that, set the chief Garrisons aside, all the old Souldiery were ordered to come to the Camp. The Duke therefore presently prepared divers Batteries and Trenches, where it was easiest to fall down into the Ditches; and the City-walls began al∣ready to be furiously plaid upon from sundry sides. The greatest part of the Canon were placed against the gate Bartimonte, and against a Ravelin which fenc'd it: the Battery was one day so fierce, as some of the Peeces broke, and the Ravelin was almost quite level'd. But the resistance and valour of those within was no less. Monsieur de la Nue was with Lodovick, a man of great valour, and the best esteemed of any that was then in France of the Hugonot Faction: the defence of Mons past chiefly through his hands, and by his directions and therefore the besieged failed not to do what in them lay for their best advantage. Fearing therefore to lose that place, they made a Work more inward, and placed two Culverins upon it; and prejudicing the Kings men greatly thereby, they forced them to proceed more cautiously in their assault which they design'd against that side. But though they were not wanting in defending themselves the best and most resolutely that they could, yet their chiefest hopes lay in their succor from Orange: who being already upon his march with a powerful Army raised almost wholly in Germany, was got into the Low-Countries by Ghelderland, and made towards Ruremond. He intended to use only fair means, and not force, to be ac∣commodated with victuals by that City, thinking he should not so easily win it; nor was he willing to waste his time and forces before it, to the prejudice of his chief design, which was to relieve Mons as soon as might be, and afterwards to make there a great Magazine of Arms. He therefore friendly intreated those Ci∣tizens to accommodate him with victuals and other things which his Army want∣ed. But they answering more boldly then they ought to have done, and not mea∣suring their Forces by their words, gave him a flat denial. He did not expect such an answer, so as he grew much incensed; and to his anger necessity was joyned, for his people suffered already in many things. There were not Hereticks want∣ing in the City, and they desired to see it in Orange his possession, who had for∣merly held some intelligence with them to that purpose. Practises being then renewed within, and the men prepared without, he made a fierce assault upon one of the Gates, which with equal valour was defended by those within: who shewed the like stoutness twice after, when Orange renewed twice his assaults. In the heat of this resistance which the Catholick defendants made, the He∣retick Townsmen making use of opportunity, possest themselves of another gate, and thereby let them in that were without. Orange either could not, or would not hinder the sacking of the City: withheld perhaps on one side, by judging it was not fit to use examples of cruelty, when the Flemish did most expect clemency; and inforst on the other side to provide for the necessities of his people, which since he was not able to satisfie with pay, he must supply the want thereof by plunder. But sacking was the least misery which Ruremond suffered: For the Hereticks with unheard of barbarism, mingling slaughter with pillage, grew cruel to all sexes and all ages, especially against Church-men and Church-adornments. By the taking of Ruremond, Orange got another City in those parts, which gave him a secure pass over the Mause. He turn'd from hence to Malines, which was already wrought to be at his devotion, by Monsieur de Dorp: so as he put a good Garrison thereinto of High-Dutch. In his march he likewise made him∣self master of many other places of lesser consideration: And being come to Lo∣vain, desired to be there received. But meeting with more stiffness in the Citizens then he expected, and fearing that he should lose too much time in staying to force it, he resolved to accept of a certain sum of money, which the City was contented to give him. Thus leaving Brabant, he came in the beginning of September into Henault; and here he mustered his Army. His Forces consisted, as it was said, of 16000 Foot, and 9000 Horse; all of them Germans, except some French and Walloons. He was aided by the success of a business which had happened a little before in favour of his adherents in Zealand, to move sooner then he himself had thought. A great many Flemish ships were at this time returned from Lisbone richly laden;
and out of choice rather then necessity, they put in according to their custom at Flushing not knowing till then any thing of the new revolutions which had hap∣ned there. The Inhabitants of that Town being masters of so great a booty, made suddenly monies thereof, and sent the greatest part to the Prince of Orange, just when he stood in most need, to assemble his men together, and make them march. But the greater his Army was, the greater was his difficulty in maintaining them: For neither had he sufficient monies to that end, nor any authority grounded upon command, but only upon intreaties. He came with the like resolutions as before, to wit, to doe all he could to draw the Duke to battel; hoping at least thereby to find some means to succour Mons the more easily. On the other side, as the Dukes ends were clean otherwise, so did his resolutions appear to be. He as before, desired to beat Orange by the Arms of his own Necessity: so as de∣spairing of Battel, and no less of succour, and forced by disaccommodations and sufferings, he should at last confess himself overcome, by returning discomfited. The Duke doubted towards which part Orange would betake himself. The spee∣diest and shortest way was towards Nimi and St. Sinforiano. Between these two Villages stands a Wood; and therefore the Duke used all needful diligence to fortifie all those places, so to hinder his passage on that side. Which Orange hearing of, he changed his way, and turning Eastward, past by Perone a Village some two leagues distant from Mons; and fording without any difficulty over the Heyn and Trulla, he marched towards the other part of the City, drawing straight upon Jumampel. The ground was here a little more hilly then in other parts thereabouts, and was therefore thought less easie to fortifie; and therefore Orange judged he might soonest succour the besieged on that side. But as soon as the Duke had discovered this design, he turn'd most of his men suddenly thitherward, and resolved to raise a Fort there: which was done with all speed, and the Duke Medina celi took particular care of it. To boot with the Fort, which was provided of Artillery the better to entertain the Enemy on that side, the Duke surrounded his Camp on that side too with a Trench. Having thus secured himself, and having a watchfull eye over all things, he commanded upon severest punishment that no man should stir from the Squadrons without his order, nor should in any manner whatsoever offer to fight. Orange was this mean while drawn neer this place: And having sent his brother Henry a little before, who was a gallant Youth, with fifty Horse, to learn some news of the Spanish Camp, he met with almost as many which the Duke of Alva had sent out towards the Enemy to the same purpose. A bloody skirmish was had between these two Parties of Horse, wherein the Dukes men coming off with somewhat the worse, Orange came up soon after with his whole Army, and offered the Duke battel. But he, still more stedfast in his first resolution, kept all his men in great order within their Trenches, suffering only the Artillery to play upon the Enemy, who did the like upon the Spanish camp. Orange took up his Quarters afterwards at Querenon a Village not far from Jumampel, and endeavoured divers times to provoke the Duke to fight. To this end he greatly annoyed the Kings Camp with continual thunder of Cannon; he endeavoured to keep them from forrage or victuals, and sallied out in skirmishes as oft as he could, so to provoke them to battel the sooner; wherein, having much the greater number of Horse, he hoped to be Victor. There were some with the Duke, who advised to fight the Enemy, shewing how much his men did exceed the others in valour; saying, That victories were not won by numbers, but by worth. How oft had their first Squadrons born it away? nay, how oft their first Files? What comparison was there to be made between new tumultuary base people, such as were the Enemy; and old Souldiers, so well disciplin'd, and so nobly born as were his? Let him then go out of the Trenches: and fighting in so just a cause, and with such valiant men, he might be sure to overcome. The Archbishop of Cullen was particularly of this opinion; who being of a warlike mind, was come in person into the Camp. But the Duke, still firm to his old Maxim, not to fight with Fortune, which in all humane af∣fairs is ever fickle, but especially in affairs of war and battel, answered in words befitting such a Commander:
That the end of those who govern an Army, was alwaies to overcome, but not alwaies to fight. And that he should have fought sufficiently, when he should have overcome. Orange being thus deluded of all hopes of bringing it to a day of battel, ap∣ply I himself wholly to the relief; and the Duke wholly to keep him from it: and this was the chiefest indeavor of them both. Orange propounded unto himself the consequences of preserving such a place as Mons was: and the Duke the im∣portancy of re-possessing himself of it. Orange had assur'd his friends that he would succor and relieve it; and the other had signified no less assurance in Spain that he would hinder him from so doing. Each of them argue the future from the pre∣sent success. And warring one against the other, rather out of privat hatred, then the publick respect, each of them fervently desired to compass their ends with reputation and glory, the more to thwart the adversaries designe with loss and dishonour. Orange was much afflicted to find himself amidst the aforesaid necessities, which did foretoken that if he did not very speedily relieve Mons, his Army would immediately moulder away: he had no money to maintain it, nor was it any longer nourishable by rapine; and fearing every day lest the souldier might mutiny, he knew that in such a case his own forces would be more prejudi∣ciall to him then those of his enemies. And doubtlesly he ran hazard either of being brought into great agony by his own men, by actual imprisonment, or through greater perfidiousness and avarice, of being delivered up into the Duke of Alva's hands, which was the most hideous thing his thoughts could sug∣gest unto him. Without any further delay then, chusing out 2000 of his best horse and 1000 of his best foot, he sent them with great resolution towards that part where he thought they might easilyest enter Mons, on the side of Ju∣mampel. He divided the horse into two squadrons, and by them sheltered the foot, which he intended to put into the City; and disposed of all the rest of his Army so as might serve upon any occasion which fortune might present of battel. But the Kings men who had very well furnisht that pass before, and especially with some Spanish Colours under Sancio d' Avila, and Julian Romero, did so gal∣lantly oppose the Assailants, and were so advantagiously seconded by the Artil∣lery which from the Fort commanded the Champian, as Orange could in no ways compass his intent. The conflict was notwithstanding very fierce, and was ac∣companied by a double tempest of Canon-shot, wherewith the Kings men play∣ed continually upon the Enemy both within and without: they being no less playd upon by the others likewise, both from within and without: but few of the Spaniards were slain. Of the Enemy about 300. Orange despairing of bring∣ing in any relief on that side, removed his Camp that very night, and lodged in the Village Hermenes upon the bank of Trulla, not far from St Sinforiano. The Duke of Alva turned such forces likewise as were requisite on his side thither∣ward, to hinder the enemy from all relief on that side. Nor was it long ere he made them lose all hopes thereof. Orange his souldiers were quartered in great disorder, especially the Germans; all other things also in his Camp were in much confusion nor was it any wonder: For the souldiers being for the most part pickt up here and there, without pay, or the curb of discipline, they obeyed no longer then they listed. The Duke of Alva was very well informed of all these disor∣ders and wants amongst the enemy; which he suddenly made advantage of. Ha∣ving himself viewed the Germans nearest quarters he resolved to assault them that very night, hoping that fortune would befriend him in their change of quar∣ters. He gave the charge thereof to Norchermes, who was then very much im∣ployed by him in Vitelli's absence, he being gone out of the Camp to be cured of his wound. The business insued thus: A thousand Spanish foot were pickt out and the Camp-Master Romero was chosen to conduct them, who though he was very good at Councel, yet was much better at execution. To these thousand Spa∣niards as many Walloons were added, to secure the retreat where need should re∣quire. In the deepest silence of night the Kings men began to move: and that they might be known from the enemy in the dark, they went with snirts upper∣most. The Germans were then in a great deal of carelesness all of them fast a∣sleep, so as they were slain before they knew they were assaulted: they thought som
tumult had casually hapned amongst them; but being disdeceived by their wounds and bloud, and suddenly seised upon by confusion and fear they betook themselves rather to flight than to fight. The Kings men at the same time they assaulted the Germans, the more to increase their terror and loss, had fired their quarters: the fire burst forth on a sudden in sundry parts, and burnt many of the enemies. So as it was questionable whether more of them perisht by the Sword, Fire, or Water, whereinto many of them did blindly precipitate themselves. So to shun one death met with another: and the Kings men having continu'd slaughter a good while, they were forced at last to retreat, for the Enemies Camp was by this time in Arms. In this action about 500 Germans were lost; and some few of the Spaniards, who not observing well their orders, were either borne away with too much heat of fighting, or were not well acquainted with the places of retreat. But the Enemy was hereat so affrighted, as forgoing all obedience and discipline, and leaving behind them great part of their baggage, they of their own inclination betook themselves presently to be gone. They stormed against O∣range for having abused and betrayed them, and that instead of returning home loaded with spoyl and booty, they were now to carry away nothing but suffe∣rings and disaccommodations. Amidst these outcries which tasted more of threats then complaints; Orange, being strangely confused, and being reduced to a condition rather of obeying then commanding, raised his Camp and marched towards Malines. The Duke was councelled by divers not to let slip so fitting an occasion of falling on the enemy whilst they retreated in disorder. But he an∣swered with the vulgar Proverb; Let us make a Bridg to them that fly. and shew'd how that without doubt Orange would within a few days be forced to quit the Country. That it was sufficient for him that he had compast his end in the same manner as he desired. Orange left a strong Garison in Malines, inten∣ding to keep that City, which lying in the heart of Flanders, might serve him for many purposes. His Army afterwards wholly disbanding, and he luckely esca∣ping out of their hands, whom he now suspected more then the enemy, he at last by way of a fugitive, rather hiding himself then retiring, got to Delfe, a City in Holland, there to put on such new resolutions as time and necessity should admi∣nister. When Orange was gone from about Mons, the Duke of Alva began narrowlyer to begirt the besieged. He re-inforced the begun batteries, and used all other necessary diligence, to the end that being rid of this siege, he might the sooner also recover thole other places which Orange had made himself Master of. The besieged did notwithstanding valiantly and constantly defend themselves for some days; but at last all hopes of succour failing them, they resolved to yield, having received such honourable conditions as upon such occasions are usually ar∣ticled and agreed upon between the vanquishers and vanquished▪ Count Lodo∣vick went sick out of Mons; and passing into Holland to see his brother, he de∣parted suddenly for Germany, to move every stone there which might serve to di∣sturbe Flanders. Whilst affairs went thus about Mons, many important novel∣ties had happened in Holland, Zealand and in other places. Monsieur de Seras was Governor of Flushing, being sent thither, as hath been said, by the Prince of Orange: and many hereticks were come from the neighbouring Countries to joyn with him. He therefore borne away with greater designes, and desirous in particular to lend his helping hand to the besieged in Mons, by entring into Flan∣ders, and afterwards into Hennault, betook himself thereunto. He gathered to∣gether 3000 foot, and easily imbarked them in the maritine coasts of Flanders he had not notwithstanding sufficient Artillery to force any place; wherefore he pla∣ced his hopes more in the peoples rising, then in his own forces. But the Duke having used all needfull care to secure that Province, and Seras meeting with good resistance in all parts, he came from thence almost as soon as he was entred, and laid aside all thoughts of doing any good on that side. The chief end of the tumultuaries in Zealand, was to possess themselves of Midleburg. They thought that the Town of Targoes, placed on the Northern parts of one of those Islands,
called Southbeverlant, would be a hindrance herein unto them. This Town was guarded by some Spaniards, and Walloons: and Midleburg might better be relie∣ved by the Kings men from thence, then from any other part. Seras applying himself to get this place, brought a good number of men with him, and endea∣voured to enter it by force; but he found such opposition, as he soon forsook the enterprise. And being despised by his own men, for these two unfortunate successes, as also for some other things; those of Flushing would no more re∣ceive him, nor the rest any longer follow him; so as he was fain to forgoe the Province with as much shame as he was at first received thereinto with honour At the same time that Count Lodovick had possest himself of Mons, the above∣said insurrections had happened in Holland; and except it were Amsterdam, the whole Province was almost revolted. To the Brill, where Lumay had raised the first tumults of those parts, many heretick souldiers were come from the neigh∣bouring Countries, especially from England. People were likewise raised by the Rebels in other parts of the Province, who fortified divers other Passes which lay more inward in the Countrie, to the end that they might be Masters of the best Avenues on both sides. The Duke of Alva had taken with him, to the re∣lief of Mons, and to oppose Orange, almost all the whole Army, as hath been said, especially the Spaniards, in whom he did most confide. So as Holland being as it were abandoned to the will of the tumultuaries, it was no wonder, if having so large a field to break forth in into novelties, they were both so easily contrived by them, and so easily executed. Divers notable alterations to the Kings preju∣dice arose likewise in the contiguous Provinces of Utricht, Friesland, Overisel, Groninghen and Zutfen. At Orange his entrance into Flanders, many of the chief∣est places in each of them, followed him and his fortune, not meeting with al∣most any opposition by the Kings men. And the people baited by the spetious ti∣tles of common good, run almost from all places to assist his cause as if it had been their own. The Count de Berg, one of the chiefest Lords of all the Low-Countries, had married a sister of the Prince of Orange; who had great adhe∣rencies particularly in Friesland and the parts thereabouts. He was likewise ap∣parently inclin'd to favour heresie, and joyned with Orange no less in Councel then in Bloud. He therefore came into the aforesaid Province beyond the Rhine at the same time that Orange past from them to the other more inward Provinces, and made divers places of importance rise, and placed Garrisons in some of them which were most considerable either for their Situation or Inhabitants: amongst others the City of Zutfen was fallen into his hands, which gives the name to that Province. and which being seated on the River Isel, is held for one of the chief∣est of all those parts. He had taken and sackt the Town of Amersfort, upon the Frontiers of Holland; and indeavoured thus to draw the people by force, where they would not of themselves be wrought unto it, to joyn with him, O∣range, and the other Flemish exiles. It is not to be believed how ill they observed their promise which Orange in the aforementioned Manifesto made to the Catho∣licks in point of Religion: For the first thing the hereticks did when they were entred into any Town, was to violate this promise: nay growing more outragi∣ous then ordinarily against Ecclesiasticks, and especially against Votaries; not content to use scorn, they proceeded to rapine, to imprisonment, to torments, and with unheard of cruelties, even to death. The end, which to the praise of Mar∣tyrdom, some Franciscan Votaries made in the Towns of Alckmar and Gorcham, was very memorable. The affairs of the abovesaid Provinces were at this pass when Mons was delivered into the Duke of Alva's hands. A little before this siege was ended, the Tumultuaries in the heat of the advantages they had gotten, and whilst the Duke was busied about Mons with all the Kings forces, had re∣solved to attempt the taking of Tergoes in Zealand: They despaired of getting Middleburgh, if they had not Tergoes first. Putting therefore 8000 Foot to∣gether, many whereof were French, Germans, and English; and being provided of Artillery to batter, they shipt the one and the other at Flushing, with all other things necessary for the enterprise: and from thence went to the Island of Southbevolant, and incamped themselves underneath Tergoes. Isidore Pacceco commanded such of the Kings men as were there, consisting of little less then 400
Foot, part Spaniards, part Walloons. And because one of the gallantest resistance was there made that hath been seen in all this war, and the Town still preserv'd by one of the most memorable succours that ever was read of either in antient or modern History, methinks I may be permitted to be a little more diligent in the narration of the whole, then the brevity which we would willingly follow doth allow of. Where the Scheld falls from the more inward parts of the Land, gliding for a good space along the Confines of Brabant and Flanders, it comes at once out of both those Provinces, and at the coming out divides it self into two large branches: The one bends towards the North, and retains the name of Scheld, the other turns towards the West, and is called Honte. Here both of them growing greater as they draw nearer the Ocean, before they fall thereinto, they joyn to∣gether in divers spacious Gulfs; amongst which the Islands of Zealand are rather buried then raised up, so low are they seated, and so oft doth the Sea do mischief there. This low situation is notwithstanding endeavoured to be remedied by the Inhabitants with exceeding high and firm banks. But this remedy doth not al∣ways avail: of which the Island of Zuitbevolant, which now we speak of, hath had sad experience it having in former times been one of the greatest and best popu∣lated of all the Zealands Islands. 'Tis said that in the year: 532 the Sea rose with one of the terriblest tempests that was ever seen in those parts; and that rending the banks asunder, and bearing down whatsoever withstood it, it overflowed from the one side to the other, and did actually drown a great part of the Island, to the utter and horrible destruction both of men and beasts, and a great num∣ber of intire Villages, which were miserably swallowed up by that deluge. This chance hapned on that side which lies neerest Brabant and Flanders; this being the first Island which the Scheld in forming its abovesaid branches, cuts off and divides from the Continent. Yet that Angle which lieth neerest the firm land, remained still unprejudiced, and is yet inhabited: So as by an easie passage which the Scheld gives there way unto, as many Souldiers as you please may be conveyed from each of the forenamed Provinces. On the West the Island looks towards Flanders, on the North towards Brabant and on this side stands Tergoes, and might therefore easiliest be relieved from thence. Tergoes is a small Town, better munited by nature then by art, being fenced on the one side by the Scheld, upon whose banks it is situated; it is invironed on another part with certain ma∣rish grounds; and the defendants had fortified it on the weakest side which lies towards the firm land. When the Enemies were incamped about it, they were very diligent in their strait besieging it. Nor did the Kings men forbear making divers sallies to hinder the out-works, so as at the first many were slain on both sides, wherein those within shewed notable valour and courage. But the Enemy advancing with Trenches and Batteries on divers sides, they began to annoy the besieged very much; and had already made so great a breach in one of the walls with their batteries, as they thought they might come to an assault. Wherefore selecting out their choise men, they set upon the Kings men: but they met with so stout resistance, as they were forced to retreat with the loss and wounding of many of them: amongst which more then one of their chiefest Captains. They afterwards made the like trial in another of their batteries, and had the same suc∣cess. In fine, those without could not labour more to offend, then those within did to defend. Behind one Work they raised another; they wrought both night and day; women ran to the Works as well as men: And although the Souldiers were but few in number to what was requisite, yet they supplied that want by their worth. Famine works oft-times more in Sieges then doth the Sword. The Enemy proceeding no longer by way of Assault, betook themselves to a more slow opposition, hoping to reduce the besieged to such a scarcity of victuals, as that they should be forced to yield the Town. This mean while the Duke of Alva having taken Mons, did not delay his resolution of succouring Tergoes: He considered the Souldiers worth, the honour of the enterprise, and the impor∣tancie of the place; since upon the loss or preservation thereof, the like of Mid∣dleburgh did consist. But it was chiefly weighed, that by keeping possession of both these places, the King should keep good footing still in Zealand, the chief
Maritine Port of all those Countries: to the full obtaining whereof, all courage and industry was to be imployed. He therefore charged Sancio d' Avila and Christopher Mandragone to endeavour the relief of the besieged with all speed. Avila was Governour of the Castle of Antwerp: and from that City, which lies upon the Scheld, and not far from the Island Zuitbevolant, necessary provisi∣ons for relief might be better had then from any other part. Berghen ap Zoom is yet neerer Tergoes; so as all things necessary for the business were appointed to be brought thither, as the place fittest to receive them from Antwerp. The reso∣lution was, to enter the North branch of the Scheld, which keeps the name there∣of, and upon which Tergoes stands, with armed Boats, and to endeavour to effect their enterprise by that way. Mandragone, though a Spaniard, was then the Wal∣loons Camp-master; but past afterwards to the like, and other greater imploy∣ments in his own Nation, with such praise for his valour, as he after became one of the chief Commanders thereof. A good number of men being then mustered to this end, part Spaniards, part Germans, part Walloons, they divers times endea∣voured at the flowing of the Sea to advance by the said branch of the River, and to convey in the relief: but they still found the passage so possest by the enemy, and with so much stronger forces by Sea then theirs, as they could not effect it. Avila resolved afterwards to bring some Peeces of Artillery to the banks of the Scheld, and to try whether he could thereby make the Enemy give way unto the passage, so as Mandragone might at the same time convey the succour into Goes by water. But this answered not their expectation: For the Artillery being al∣most sunk in the mire of those low places, they could not advance much; where∣fore Mandragone despaired likewise of doing any thing on his part. Thus did all hope of succour fail: When Captain Plumart, a Native of that Country, and very well practis'd therein, a man of courage, and who had served the King faithfully, presented himself before D' Avila and Mandragone, and spake thus: Desperate advice is requisite in desperate enterprises. Yet I hope that which I shall now propound will prove rather so in shew then in substance. Why shall not we en∣deavour the relief, hazarding to wade through the drown'd part of the Island? A passage of terrible length doubtlesly; but yet it may be happily effected, if we observe well to endeavour it at the Seas lowest ebb. I who so boldly give the advice, doe with the like boldness offer to be my self the first that will execute it. The quality of the man, who was held experienced, and known to be faithfull, added some force to his proposition, though both Avila and Mandragone thought it bore with it important difficulties. They knew already by experience, that the Country which was drowned, and through which they were to wade, was neer upon seven miles over; that the bottom of those drowned grounds was very muddy; that before the inundation happened, there were other running waters which past through the Country: That in propositions of this nature, the diffi∣culties proved alwayes greatest in the practise; and how troublesome would so long a passage be? what breast, or what breath would be able to go through with it? and how could the ebbing and the flowing of the Sea be so justly mea∣sured, as that the Souldiers might not run danger of being lost? Nor would their dangers have here an end: for if the Enemy should either know of, or but suspect such a design, they might assault the Kings Souldiers upon great advan∣tage as they should draw neer the dry land, and slaughtering them at their plea∣sure, hinder them from fixing their foot there: In which case what would it avail them to be well gotten out of the water, if they must at last be a prey unto the sword of the enemy? Plumart did not at all go less, for all these difficulties mentioned by d' Avila and Mandragone. But still making good his opinion, said, his minde gave him that the passage would be safe, and that he would be the first that would venture upon it. That the chiefest importance lay herein; and that the business was to be carryed on with all secresie, and done before it was known. A∣vila and Mandragone made then no longer delay. Plumart, together with two Spaniards and another Country fellow well verst in those parts, went and found the passage for their purpose. It was about the end of October, and the season was yet very fair, seeming as if it did also applaud the designe. The tryal pro∣ving
so well, they resolved forthwith to venture to succour the Town by that way To this purpose a great many sacks were prepared to carry match and powder, and bisket, and the souldiers were carryed into a Village called Aggier, in that Angle of the Island which lies nearest the firm land, most commodious for that passage. The people that were to make it were 3000 chosen out of the three a∣bovesaid Nations. Avila stayed in another neighbouring Village with Minhere Seroscherche, Governour of Berghen, and the care of the succour was left to Mandragone. They took their time to enter into the water at the first ebb; for the time of its being at the very lowest would not serve the turn. He commanded the sacks to be distributed according to the number of the souldiers, who were to carry them upon their backs, to the end that not being hurt by the water, the soul∣diers might at their coming out take some refreshment after their so grert labour, and use their musquets against the enemy in case they should meet with any un∣expected opposition. In War, nothing is more requisite then secrecy, as well to advantage the fight, as to overcome without fighting. The enterprise was there∣fore till then kept very secret, to the end that the enemy being taken at unawares, might not disturb it. The time determined being come, and Mandragone being now to make the business known, he by way of incouragment spake thus unto the soul∣diers: Fortune could not shew her self unto us (my fellow souldiers) with a more favou∣rable aspect, then when she seemed most to frown. You know we have oft-times in vain endeavoured to relieve Tergoes; and now when we were in despair of doing it, Fortune hath pointed out a way unto us how to do it: Do you see this spatios water Whereinto we are now to enter? This in former times was all drie land, which hath since been miserably drowned by the sea; yet ever since then the waters have been so shallow in some parts, as when the Sea ebs it may be waded thorough. And that there may be no doubt of this, the tryal hath been lately made. Which of you doth not know Captain Plumart, and his fidelity in the Kings service? which of you knows not that he is better practised in these parts, then in his own house? he, accompanied with some others, hath past forwards and backwards over these waters, through which we are to bring in the relief. He will be my guide, I will be the like to the first file, and so one to another till we shall all come upon drie land: which being done, the business is effected. The enemy will dream of nothing less then of being assulted by us on this side: so as astonished at our boldnesse, and overcome more by their own feare, then by our Forces, they will betake themselves rather to flie then to fight: and say they should fight, how can we doubt the victory? These are the same Rebels as at first: Rebels no less to God then to the King. And altogether as cowardly at their Arms, as perfidious in their Cause. These are the very same whom we but lately saw besiege Midleburg; and in despight of them we relieved the Town by unexpected ways; and they running away before we were well got up unto them, yielded us the victory without any gainsaying. Then 'tis only the water that we are now to fight with, and to overcome; and some of you peradventure will fear this more then you would do the enemy. So many miles of drown'd land, blind ways, through so blind an Element; and chiefly the terror which the Tide brings with it. These doubtless are all of them dreadfull objects, and I confess the enterprise is diffi∣cult; but glory is not won where there is no danger. Yet these are not such as may not assuredly be overcome. The Ford (as I told you) is already found: the tryal thereof hath already been faithfully made: and the ebb will allow us time enough for our march before the flood come. For what remains, our patience will be more re∣quisite then our courage: and yet our courage will herein so clearly appear, as such an action cannot be more apprehended by the enemy, nor more celebrated in the mouths of all others. We shall be famous throughout all the world, as contem∣ners of dangers; as vanquishers even of Natures self, and of her proudest Element. And what shall our deserts be hereby from God? what from the King? moreover we may hope for great booty from their precipitate running away, as assuredly the e∣nemy will do from the siege of Tergoes. But the work allows no longer time. I will be the first that shall enter the water: but every one afterwards undantedly follow me; and let each of us perform our parts so, as that by this glorious action the world may think me a gallant Commander, and you no less gallant Souldiers. These words were followed with a great appiause, each Nation seeming ambi∣tious
of the enterprise: and Mandragone ordered his people thus: The Spani∣ards went first, the Germans next them, and the Walloons last; all in very close files, to the end that the soldiers might wade the better, and if need should be, be the readier to help one another. Nor was there any delay made. Mandragone stept first into the water bare footed and bare leg'd, taking Plumart for his guide. Then all the rest did the like in the abovesaid order, and thus they continued to march, one file still incouraging the other. And the voyage was so well fitted to the floud, as also their courage in enduring it, to the labour of doing it, as unless it were nine who perisht either through misfortune or weariness, all of them got safely to the banks of Yersichen, a Village on the contrary shore, after a long march by water. Yersichen is two leagues distant from Tergoes; when they were got thither, Mandragone gave notice thereof presently to Avila by fires: and resting himself and his souldiers that night, he resolved to proceed on to the suc∣cour the next morning. But it was not needfull to make use of their Arms; for when the enemy heard how that they had passed the water, and in what manner; they were so astonished, and so sorely frighted, as they immediately raised their Camp, and began to imbarque themselves. Mandragone being hereof advertised from Tergoes, and being desired to send some souldiers to the Town, to assault the other in their retreat, he forthwith sent them 400 Harquebusiers, who made such haste, as they met with those of the Town time enough to anoy the enemy on their reer, and slew many of them before they could imbarque themselves. Mandragone entred afterwards into Tergoes, and by mutual demonstration of mi∣litary joy, the soldiers received each other on both sides, contending whether the one had shewed more valour in maintaining the siege, or the others in raising it. When Mandragone had furnished the Town with things necessary, he returned to Avila, and both of them with their men went to the Army where the Duke of Alva was. Some of the antientest Spaniards who were in Flanders during my being Nuntio in those Provinces were present at this memorable action; and amongst others, John Rivas, who was come into those parts with the Duke of Alva; and who from a private souidier, was by his worth arrived by degrees to the highest places of Military profession. In my time he was Governour of the City and Citadel of Cambray, which is one of the chiefest charges which is given to those of his Nation. A man of a venerable aspect, and in whom it might be disputed, whether his wisdom in Civil, or in Military affairs was the more emi∣nent. He hath sundry times related this success to me, and I have in this place wil∣lingly commemorated so worthy and so grave an Author. But to return to what the Duke of Alva did after the recovery of Mons: when he had provided for the safety of that City, and the rest of that Frontier, he tur∣ned his Army into Brabant, and marched towards the City of Malines. He went thither intending to use more severity then clemency: He thought that the Malineses had favoured Orange upon too easie terms, both in receiving a Gari∣son from him, and in furnishing him with whatsoever he desired. He there∣fore made his son Frederick advance, to prepare all things requisite for storming the City. The rest of the Camp followed him, breathing forth threats and re∣venge. But not having received any pay for a long time, they were rather desi∣rous of booty then of bloud, and therefore inclin'd to allay their anger more by pillage then by slaughter. The Citizens were not ignorant of their danger so as after a short skirmish which happened between Orange his Germans, and the Kings men at their first arrival, they presently put that Garison out of the Town; and indeavoured by all means possible to appease the enemies anger. They used the greatest submission that might be to the Duke; and finally sent forth the Clergy in solemn procession, to induce them the more to clemency and commiseration. The Duke began to listen to conditions; when the Spaniards, laying aside all delay, forced the Walls, and being followed by the rest, they entred the City, and overrunning it on a sudden, put it wholly to the sack. Their fury ex∣tended to all sexes, and to all ages. The Churches did not escape their avarice nor did the Monasteries escape their Just. There was but little bloud shed; and the Duke not being much troubled to see the City punisht, as also being in great arrears unto the Army, he was contented rather to excuse the plunder, then to
resent it. When he had reordered his affairs, he went from Malines to Mastrick, and from thence to Niminghen the chiefest City in Ghelderland. Here he staid some dayes, thinking how he might recover the Towns of that Province which were lost. Ruremond fell without any difficulty into his hands, together with whatsoever Orange had possest himself of thereabouts. He then resolved to be∣girt Zutfen, where the Enemy had fortified themselves, and seemed as if they would make it good. To this end he sent his son Frederick thitherward with a good proportion of men, and Artillery. Zutfen is fituated upon the River Isel, and on one side of the Town a lesser River called Berchel fals into the said Isel: The other situations without the Town are very low and myerie. Zutfen was at this time walled about after the ancient form, and was every where provided with good and deep ditches. But being many years after fallen into the absolute power of the Hereticks, they have made it one of the strongest places of all those Countries. Frederick pitched his Camp about it about the latter end of November, at which time the weather grew very sharp and cold; and there was great store of Ice, which as it made for the advantage of the Kings men, so did it to the contrary for the enemy, who had placed their chiefest hopes of defence in their low and watery places, where∣with the Town was environed on all sides. Frederick drew neer it without much difficulty; and having raised two Batteries where he thought it fittest in those low situations, he began by them to make great breaches. Signior Hierges, a vali∣ant Souldier, had the charge of the Artillery; and the Kings men were not like∣ly long to forbear the assault: when the Garrison which was within the Town growing apprehensive, resolved to steal privately away; wherefore the Towns∣mens fear growing greater, they fell presently to treat of agreement. But the Kings men, scorning all accord forced the walls: and being more greedy here likewise of booty then of blood, fell forthwith to plunder the Town in hostile manner, and treated it altogether as ill as they had formerly done Malines. By the terror of these two sackings, all those Cities and Towns on the other side of Rhein in the aforesaid Provinces of Groninghen, Overisel, Friesland and Utricht, which had cast off their obedience to the King, returned suddenly thereunto: And the Count de Berg, together with divers other personages of quality, with∣drew themselves presently into the neerest parts of Germany. It was now the beginning of winter: Wherefore the Duke cashier'd all the Germans which he had lately raised, and which were much lessened in their num∣bers, and returned to his usual abode at Brussels. But his son Frederick, when he had secured the most important places beyond the Rhine, turn'd his Army forthwith into Holland. To boot with his former victories, he was encouraged by the season of the year; which being extaordinarily cold and icy, made him hope he might the more easily enter those low and watry situations. He marched thitherward with great Forces, particularly with the flower of the Spaniards. But before he could get thereinto, he must entertain himself some dayes before Naerden, a little Town neer the Sea. Naerden is seated very low, and hath many standing waters about it, occasioned by the River Wetcht, which running through the midst of the Town fals soon after into the Zuiderzee. Here had many Here∣ticks nestled themselves, by reason of the opportunity of the seat; and not only those of the Country, but also of the neighbouring parts And this was one of the most corrupted Sanctuaries which they had in all those parts. Frederick did not think they would make any resistance: yet because there were many French Hugonots there, and because they were encouraged by the other Rebels in Holland who had promised them aid, they would not return to the Kings obedience, as Frederick had fairly invited them to doe. Wherefore he was the more incensed. He made the Artillery advance: and adding threats to the terror of Arms, he betook himself to storm the Town. But those within, failing in their courage, condescended to a parley, and agreed to surrender the Town to Frederick: where∣with the Souldiers being displeased, they observed no Articles, but fell presently to fire the Town: Plunder was the least of their evils: All the French, and other Hereticks who were in the Town, were put to the sword: And to compleat their miseries, to Plunder and blood Fire was added; so as except it were one Church
and Monaster, there was not any sign of a Town left. With these dreadfull president did Frederick enter Holland. But the event will shew, that though it be always g  to joyn hear to clemencie, it is always hurtful to couple it with desperation. When the Spanish forces were brought into that Province, the peo∣ple thereof grew into such horror of them, as despairing either to obtain forgive∣ness if they should demand it, or to have it made good unto them though they should have it promised, they resolved to maintain by all possible means their begun Revolt.
THE HISTORY OF THE WARS OF FLANDERS. Written by CARDINAL BENTIVOGLIO. BOOK VII. The Contents. The Cities of Holland which are up in Arms, endeavour to get Amsterdam to joyn with them: which not being able to doe, they imploy force against it. Frederick of Toledo goes thither himself in person, and secures it from all danger. He seeks to be received into Harlem, and to put a garrison into it. Those of the Town seem at first to incline thereunto, and afterwards refuse to doe it. Frederick layes siege unto the City. The situation of Harlem. A Fort is planted by those of Harlem without the Town: 'tis taken by the Spaniards, who also cut off a succour. They assault the Town in an impetuous, but disorderly manner, and are repulsed with great loss. Fresh aid is brought into the City. Extraordinary Cold and Frost. The Hollanders extraordinary dexterousness and agility upon the Ice. Great suf∣ferings amongst the Kings men: They fear to be necessitated to retreat, but the Duke of Alva will not consent thereunto. The Besiegers make therefore the greater opposition, and the Besieged the greater resistance. Valiant actions both by sea and land by both parties. A Naval battel, wherein the Kings men have the better. A sore famine in Harlem. Succour sent by Orange, but routed by the Spaniards. The City is surrendred: Severe punishments inflicted. New things happen this mean while in Zealand. The Spaniards mutiny in Holland. Their unfortuate siege of Alkmar: And no less unfortunate success by Sea. The Duke of Alva and Duke Medina-Celi depart from Flanders. Rechesens the Com∣mendador General of Castile, is made Governour of Flanders. IN the almost general Insurrection of Holland, it is not to be believed how constant the City of Amsterdam kept in their obedience to the Church, and King. And her con∣stancie is so much the more to be praised, for that all the rest of the Cities that were up in Arms endeavoured by all means possible to draw her over to side with them. They first used fair means; and then betook themselves to force. They infested her territories with armed men; and indammaging her more by sea then by land, they had burnt many of her ships in the Port, and did as it were besiege her with theirs on that side. Frederick
removed suddenly therefore from Nacrden to Amsterdam, and secured the City on the Land-side. He endeavoured to doe the like on that side which lay towards the Sea: he sent some men against the Enemies ships, hoping by means of the Ice to be able to assault them neer at hand, and to indammage them. But the Ene∣my breaking the Ice, and making as it were a Ditch about them for their defence, kept the Kings men aloof off, and preserved their ships free from any harm. So as Frederick highly commending those of Amsterdam for their loyalty, and satisfying the City by not putting any foreign Garrison into it, resolved to proceed in that Province as he had begun, by his Forces. He would notwithstanding first use fair means, accompanied with threats: And to this purpose perswaded the City of Amsterdam to mediate with the rest. The nearest and chiefest of them was Har∣lem: And so far did this City exceed all the other Cities of Holland in Prerogatives as in the new erection of Bishopricks the Episcopal See of that Province should have been placed there. Those of Harlem seemed to take in good part the Am¦sterdammist intercession; and sent some of their Inhabitants who were best af∣fected to the Church and to the King, to treat with Frederick in Amsterdam: And the Treaty was already believed to be as good as agreed on, wherein was contain∣ed, That they should receive a Spanish garrison. When the Harlem men suddenly changing their minds, would needs fall off and break the Treaty. The Sea is not so agitated with winds, as are the common people with passions: They are blind in their consultations, and more blind in their resolutions; and with incre∣dible fickleness, on a sudden turn their love into hatred, and their hatred into love. We told you before, that the Prince of Orange was come to settle himself in Hollana, not only as in a Province whereof he had formerly been Governour, and wherein he was still acknowledged to be so, but as in the chief seat of his de∣signs: And therefore he ceased not by all possible art to foment the troubles which were already begun there. Under him, Captain Wibald Ripert was Governor of Harlem, born in Friesland; and who depended upon Orange more by the sub∣ordination of his sense, then of his office. This man assembling the multitúde to∣gether whilst they were hottest in concluding with the Spaniards, with a loud voice spake thus unto them. Shall private Fraud be now thus falsly cloaked by publike Zeal? Shall the Ty∣ranny exercised by the Duke of Alva be thus adhered unto under pretence of Obedi∣ence due unto the King? And to shun the peril of a Siege, as is speciously pretended, shall we with greater danger receive Spaniards into this City? which if we doe, who shall secure us of their truth? or rather why should not we by their usual customes assure our selves of their persidiousness? The streets of Malines, Zutfen, and Naer∣den run yet with blood, their houses smoke yet with fire, and the groans occasioned by a thousand other hostile acts of theirs in those places, without regard either to arti∣cles agreed upon, or promises sworn unto, are yet every where heard? Why should not we of Harlem rather doe as they of Amsterdam have done? the Inhabitants whereof would not admit of a Spanish Garrison, but will maintain their Loyalty to the King by their own proper Militia. It is best for us to doe so likewise; and so thinks the Prince of Orange, who is Governour of this Province, and so well affected to this City. The Prince of Orange, who after having run such grievous dangers, and suffered so much hardness for the common service of his Country, is at last come to fix himself here amongst us, to make our cause more his then his own; and by which he desires the King may be obtyed rather then by any other; but by the mildness of our own Laws, and not by the violence of Strangers. For if then the Spaniards will try their power by a Siege and we shall endeavour to withstand them, and doe it more by the wals of our breasts then of our City, our cause will doubtlesly be so just as we shall not doubt of the success. But come what will come, how much better will it be to die once in defence of our Liberty, then a thousand times every day in undergoing the mi∣series of an intolerable slavery? When Ripert had thus spoken, Lancelot Brederode stept forward, one of the most honorable men of the Province, and best esteemed of in that City; and se∣conded Ripert with equal efficacie. In kindling fedition, the forwardness of a few is sufficient against the lukewarmness of many: And thus it then fell out.
Some others who were openly of Orange his faction, followed these two Chief∣tains, and changing the resolution which was already almost agreed on, it was concluded that instead of a Spanish Garison, some Companies of a German Re∣giment, who by order from the Rebels in Holland were raised by Colonel Mul∣ler, should be received into the City. Hereticks were not wanting within the walls, who growing bold upon such an occasion, flew suddenly to some Churches, and turn'd them to their own use. Nor did the rage of the seditious stop here: They would have those to be imprisoned who were gone to treat with the Spani∣ards, and not long after they cruelly put them to death: whereat Orange was not displeased, for that the Harlemists being thereby the deeper dipt in Guilt, they de∣spair the more of pardon from the King. At the hearing of so unexpected an al∣teration, Frederick of Tolledo was highly incenst, and his father more highly, who had heard news thereof at Brussels. They made no long delay. Frederick moved at the same instant with the Kings Army towards Harlem, and with great resolution prepared to besiege it. Harlem lies in a large plain, devided every where into lovely medows; the ground in Holland being usually fitter for pasture then for seed. On the one side it hath a wood nigh at hand, which is but very little, and serves rather for pleasure then for firing. On another side the River Sparen runs within the Walls; which washing the walls on the outside with ano∣ther branch, that presently joyns with the former, makes that part of the City an Island. Towards the South, this River communicates with a great Lake cal∣led Harlem Meer, and towards the West with a large Gulf called Tie, which en∣tring into other greater Gulfs, fals not into, but is rather inclosed by the Ocean. The City is provided of a good Ditch, and good Walls, not flanked according to the modern fashion, but with great Towers after the antient wont. The circuit thereof is great; it is very well peopled: and to the number of the Inhabitants, as well in private as in publick, doth the condition of the Edifices answer. Near this City, almost at equal distance within half a days journey lie two of the chief∣est Towns of Holland, Amsterdam on the East, and on the South Leyden. The later conspired with the others in the insurrection; and Orange was himself then in it, to the end that he might be nearer to assist the Harlemists, both with advice and forces. Amsterdam on the contrary, was wholly, as hath been said, for the King; as was likewise the contiguous Province of Utricht: and from that side therefore was the Spanish Camp to be furnished with all things necessary for the siege. Frederick endeavoured therefore first to secure the Passes on that side. One of which was of greater importance then the rest, and lay nearer Harlem, between two little Villages, betwixt which runs the river Sparen, and which by rea∣son of the neighbourhood thereof, are called, the one Sparendam, the other Spa∣renwoude. In this place there was a Fort, built by the Rebels of Holland, which being lost, and again re-taken, was better munited by them then before. Frede∣rick purposed to possess himself of this Fort; but as much as he desired to gain it, as much did the Harlemists strive to keep it from being lost. It was now about the beginning of December; and the cold falling out more early, and more bitter that year then usually; the waters were in all parts very hard frozen. This made much for the Spaniards in assaulting the Fort; for the water in the ditch being frozen over, and the earth hardened by the cold, which before was soft and spon∣gy, they might therefore the easilyer draw near it. Frederick sought first not∣withstanding to inform himself better of the Forts condition, and of the ene∣mies intentions To this end he sent forth Roderigo Zappata with a party of Har∣quebusiers. Which when the Harlemists saw, they forth with sallied out couragi∣ously, and made the Spaniards retreat: and in this action Zappata lost an arm. This did not flacken, but did more inflame the Spaniards. They therefore soon after assaulted the Forton two sides at once, and the Harlemists came forth the second time to defend it: But the number of the latter was neither equal to the others, nor yet their valour: so as they did rather yield then fight. And the Spaniards ceased not, till passing over the ditch upon the ice, and still pressing har∣der upon the Harlemists, they entred the Fort joyntly with them; where they slew many, and easily drove out the rest. The Spaniards incouraged hereby,
drew near the City, and begirt it on sundry parts▪ The Kings Army consisted not of above 12000 foot, but all of them choice souldiers, and mightily puft up by their so many prosperous successes. There were about 6000 Spaniards, 3500 Germans, and the rest Walloons. They brought but 400 horse to the siege, part Lances, part Dragoons, which were as many as they needed, respect being had to the Country, and to the season. As Frederick advanced, and as he divided his quarters, he understood that Lumay came from Leydens side to bring a good succour to the City. He brought with him the remainder of the German Regi∣ment which was raised by Muller, and some other Companies of French and English, which might make 3000 foot, with some pieces of Artillery, and some victuals. Frederick hearing this, hasted to meet the enemy: a thick cloud fa∣voured both the parties, each of them thinking the better to conceal themselves by the obscurity thereof; and to fall upon the contrary party at unawares: But the event proved better for the Kings men. The encounter was near the Town of Berchenrode, where the business lasted not long; for the Kings men were so much the better both in numbers, valour and diligence, as the enemy were quickly rou∣ted. Many of them were slain, and the rest disperst: they lost their Artillery, many Colours, all their Baggage, and all the provision which they brought. Frederick returning to order the siege, chose for his quarters a certain Hospital, with some few houses of a Burrough, which answered upon one of the Gates of the City called de la Croce, and kept with him all the Spaniards. On this side a great battery was soon prepared. But this situation which was the most commo∣dious for quarter, was not so for battery; for the Gate was fenced by a good Ravelin, and the Wall was there also more defensable. On the side opposite to them, which looked towards Leyden, the rest were quartered, with little or no commodity of covert. But the Wall being weaker on that side, and worse flankt, therefore the oppugning on that side might be the easier. This error was rather despised then not known. The Spaniards could not perswade themselves but that the Harlemists would throw open their Gates at the very first thunder of their Ca∣non, as they had done in other places which they had lately taken. And they were the more confirmed herein by their double good success of taking the Fort, and keeping back the relief. So as not observing the Military proceedings in sie∣ges, and too scornfully neglecting to make their Trenches, so to draw near by de∣grees (as is usual) under their Rampires; they resolved to fall immediately to the battery of the said gate de la Croce, and of its Ravelin. They placed sixteen piece of great Canon against that side, and on the 18 of December began a very fierce Battery. So great was the first days rain, as they of Harlem could hardly work upon the Ravelin and the Gate. But the night following they did so well provide for all things necessary, as they manfully made good the defence; to the great praise in particular of Captain Steinback, Mullers Lieutenant, who had the custody of the Ravelin. They continued therefore to play more fiercely with their Canon from without. Il Segnor della Cressoniera commanded the Artille∣ry, and Captain Bartolomy Campi, an Italian, was chief Ingenier of the Army; a man greatly esteemed in that profession. The souldiers seemed very desirous to proceed to the assault. They were eg'd on by anger, hatred, and desire of booty; but especially by finding so obstinate a resistance in the Harlemists. The Ingenier Campi made a portable bridg, and the ruines being still made greater by the Bat∣teries, the Tolledan not contented with the commodity which the ice afforded him commanded that the bridg should be thrown over the Ditch. Yet for the bet∣ter discovery, he made Captain Francisco Vargas advance with 150 Harquebusiers, all Spaniards. The rest of the foot staid not to expect orders, but ere it was time to fall on, they advanced. Three could hardly march abrest upon the bridg, yet the souldiers striving who should enter first thereupon, and eagerness prevailing more with them then discipline, they came in such disorder, as one hindred ano∣ther; and they could not advance, because the breach was not so great as that the bridg could reach unto it. This mean while a furious tempest of musquet∣shot, of fire, and of Canon powred down upon them from the City, they lying open with their squadrons upon the side of the ditch, and making themselves too near a mark for the wounds which they received. Yet were they so transported
with the fury of assaulting, as forgetting their obedience to their Commanders, they would not retreat. Insomuch as the Camp-master Romero, who was both greatly beloved and feared by them, was forc'd to go to them, and bitterly chiding them, to say, What rashness, or rather what Frensie is it that causeth you doe thus? Are these errors learnt in the Duke of Alva's Military school? Doe men go to assaults by the air? Will you suffer your selves thus to be slain, when you are not able to fight? being made a But, or rather a laughing-stock to these Rebels, who secure within their Rampiers, mock you whilst they wound you? Shall you not have occasions enough to punish their perfidiousness? Lay aside now then that violence wherewith you are blinded. I, who have so often shar'd with you in victory, will at this time share wil∣lingly with you in loss. Thus at last they retreated; but they left little less then 200 dead behind them, whereof one Captain and some Ensigns. The Spaniards by this success found their error of their opinion touching the taking of Harlem: So as finding it now to be as hard, as they thought it easie before, they resolved to forgo all manner of action, till they were largely provided of all things necessary to lead on the siege at leisure. To this end such orders as was requisite were given in the neighbouring Cities of Amsterdam and Utricht: But it was not so easie to bring provisions to the Camp, because the Rebel Hollanders infesting all the wayes, did all they could to hinder them. A moneths space past over therefore, before the Kings men did any thing of consideration concerning the siege. In which interim the Harlemites received a succour of 800 French and Walloon Foot, who had been at the de∣fence of Mons, led on by Signior di Serras, together with good store of ammu∣nition and victuals. The enemy grew so proud upon this success, as become∣ing rather insolent then audacious, they appeared openly upon the walls, jeering and scoffing at the Spaniards. And joyning impiety to their insolence, they caused themselves to be seen in usual places, as it were in Procession, with Priests and Friars habits upon them, with Mitres and other Church-accoutrments, contending who could best express their hatred to the Spanish Nation, or their derision to the Church and Catholick religion. And this their heretical frensie grew to that height, as exposing in that wicked Scene the sacred Images, and chiefly such as were most frequented in the Churches, they made them a mark to be shot at, and finally cut them all to peeces with their swords. This mean while the Kings men, when they had made necessary provisions, desirous to redeem the time they had lost, they betook themselves with all fervencie to the siege; intending notwithstanding to pursue it, not with immature assaults, but with well ordered patience. Whereupon opening their Trenches, they diligently pursued them: The Battery followed; which they made not in the former place, but placed it against the Curtain which ran between the Gate de la Croce, and that of Sil, which lay nearest the Camp on the right hand. They made a great breach therein; and yet those within did so well repair it, as they without thought it not yet fit to fall to an assault. And because the Curtain was too well fenced by the aforesaid Ra∣velin, therefore 'twas thought absolutely necessary to bereave the Defendants of so great an advantage. Leaving then the Battery for a while, they came in a short time to the entrance of the Ditch: here their whole endeavour was against the Ravelin: For going the longest way about, but yet the most secure, they would advance by degrees with the pick-axe, spade, and mines, and thus drive the enemy from thence. At last they made themselves masters of it, but with no less expence of blood then of time such valour did they within shew, and plaid so often their parts rather of Assaulters then Assaulted. The Harlemists lost not their courage, though they had lost their Ravelin: But their diligence increasing answerable to their danger, they ran suddenly from every place, women as well as men, to for∣tifie the gate de la Croce, which, the Ravelin being lost, lay altogether open. They did the like to the Curtain which was already battered, and which ran as hath been said toward the gate Sill. And fearing lest the Kings men should play like∣wise upon the other Curtain on the left hand, which joyned with the next gate called S. Johns gate, they fell industrionsly to repair that side also; not omitting any labour either in making of Ditches, Traverses, Countermines, and other In∣ventions,
which are usually found out by the most industrious Defendant, against the most cunning Opposers. But they without lay at too much disadvantage in comparison of those that were within. The Kings men, by reason of the Ene∣mies continual excursions, came hardly by their victuals: Great store of men were required to conduct them; the remainder were not able to maintain the siege well: And together with other hardships, being mightily tormented by the cold, their numbers lessened every day, by sickness, death, and running away. The Harlemists, on the contrary, did abound in warlike men; they were easily succoured with men and victuals; their houses saved them from the injuries of the weather; and the ice was not of greater use to the Kings Camp for ordering the Country, then it was to them by affording them means to bring all necessaries into the City. It is not to be said how dexterous the Hollanders are upon the ice. Their Country (as we have often said) is full of standing waters; which are usu∣ally frozen over every year, though they be not so excessive there as in other less humid and watry Countries. The waters doe therefore then loss their nature; and the use of Boats being changed into the like of Chariots, those Fields of ice, as if they were so much firm land, are travel'd on by men and horses. Their Cha∣riots are usually little, and drawn but by one horse; they are not born upon wheels, but upon little joysts or rafters, according to those sledges which are used in Lombardy. Their men are likewise very ingenious in going a great pace, and yet very safe upon the ice: They harness the whole length of their feet with sleek and narrow irons, bowing a little outward in the part before; they govern them∣selves upon these, and upon these wings (if I may so call them) they rather flie then walk, their course being then so fast as it can hardly be followed by the eye. Nor is the use hereof less practised by women then by men; nay, in contentions which have somtimes hapned herein between both sexes, the women have often had the better: The women there find no trouble at all in running upon the ice; but at the same time when they go fastest, do some one or other of their womanly works. By means then of these Chariots or Sledges, the Harlemists received whatsoever they needed: they came in troops upon that great neighbouring Lake call'd Harlem-meer. All that side is call'd by that name, which looks most upon the City, whereinto the River Sparen enters on that side. And because the same Lake comes almost as neer Leyden on another part, it is there called Leyden-meer. This communication between Leyden and Harlem by means of this Lake, furnish∣ed the besieged with all things necessary; who with frequent excursions received in their succours, and oft times made the Kings men repent the going about to hinder them Nor did Orange forbear to bring in such aids into the City as he could by the usual land-way. But to secure the succours the better from those parts, he made a Fort be erected almost half way between Leyden and Harlem, whither bringing the provisions, he conveyed them the easilier from thence to the besieged. But the Kings men, though upon such disadvantagious terms, ceased not to pursue what they had begun: They pursued to batter the broken walls and to endeavour the undermining them; hoping thereby to make the breach more commodious, and consequently the assault more easie. On the contrary the Defendants were not less vigilant in using all possible means to obviate all the Enemies endeavours, and make them invalid. To Mines without they opposed Mines within, meeting thus with them, spoiling them and springing them: They repaired the walls where they were amiss. So as they no wayes feared the threats of being assaulted from without. This mean while December ended, and the new year of 1573. began, which was remarkable in Flanders particularly for this Siege which we now describe. It An. 1573 lasted above seven moneths; the accidents were as various, as the time was long; and they doubted oft-times most of the victory, who at last got it. We notwith∣standing will only set down the chief accidents which hapned there; the dignity of the story it self so requiring it, and the worthiness of future things calling us with too much reason from observing every smaller accident. But to return to the Siege. As vigilant as the Kings men were in providing that victuals might be safely brought to the Camp, the Enemy were altogether as industrious in en∣deavouring to hinder them. To this purpose they sent a good number of souldiers
to possess themselves of one of the most important Passes towards Naerden and Amsterdam. And they were led on by one Antonio Pittore, who had the chief hand in the surprisal of Mons, when Count Lodovick of Nassaw entred it, as we then observed. But notice hereof being brought to Amsterdam, the Towns∣men sent forth souldiers enough to hinder the success, who meeting with the ene∣my, routed them and slew many of them, in particular Antonio Pittore was there slain; and the Spaniards in scorn of his misdeed, threw his head into the City, together with the head of another who was called the King, and who was much esteemed of by the Harlemists. Who incenst by this action, were not long in re∣senting it. They chose out twelve of those prisoners which they had of the Kings Army, and cutting off their heads, they put them into a barrel, and rouling it down the walls, made it fall into the Spaniards Trenches, with this Inscription upon it. This Tribute of the tenth penny is sent by the Harlemists to the Duke of Alva; and foruse-mony, they have sent the twelfth. This cruel act was answered by another no less cruel from without; for some of their men were in their sight hung up by the head and the heels, and they soon after served some of the Kings men with the same sauce. So much doth the fury of war inrage mens minds, especially of such war, where rebellion is punished on one side, and maintained on the other. This mean while the number of souldi∣ers within the City was mightily increased. Besides the Townsmen, there were there 4000 foot, many of which were Germans, French and English. And O∣range ceased not to labour hard in all the neighbouring Countries, the raising of so potent a succour as by open force might make the Spaniards raise their siege. The besieged growing therefore daily more jolly, made frequent excursions: and made one so fierce against the German quarter of the Kings Camp, as they drove them from one house, wounded and slew many of them, and put all the rest into great confusion. They sallied forth yet more furiously a few days after against the Spanish quarters, and indeavoured mainly to recover the Ravelin which they had lost; and so far forward did their courage carry them, as they had almost nailed up the Canons mouths as they stood upon the battery. But being vali∣antly withstood, they re-entred the City without reaping any advantage. The action was notwithstanding very gallant, and cost much bloud on both sides. Frederick on the contrary still incouraging his men the more, resolved to raise the Ravelin which they had taken, so high as it might command, and hinder the Works within: and having caused much earth to be brought to that purpose, he planted two pieces of Artillery upon it. but the good did not answer expectati∣on, so well did the besieged behave themselves on that behalf. The Kings men grew this mean while every day fewer by reason of their sufferings. Signor della (ressoniera, who had the charge of the Artillery was dead of sickness. Signor Norchermes being wounded, could not have such diligence used in his cure as was requisite, many other Spanish Officers of quality were found missing, as also many of other Nations. And in fine, the affairs of the Army were reduced to such terms, as the success of the business began greatly to be feared. Yet the Duke of Alva's instructions to his son were still more peremptory: Though in case the siege should draw out in length, he had written effectually to Spain to have two old Brigades of that Nation sent him, who were then in Italy; and raised new men in the neighbouring County of Burgundy. Frederick delayed not then to make one tryal more before his men were consumed. Resolving therefore to give a fierce assault in divers places at once, against that side which ran from St Johns gate to that of la Croce, and to the other of Sill, on which side, as we have already said, the Kings men had opened their Trenches made Batte∣ries, and wrought in the Ditches, the determination was thus put in execution. The three Spanish Camp-Masters, Roderigo de Tolledo, Julian Romero, and Con∣salvo de Bracamonte took upon them to assault with the souldiers of their Bri∣gades, one of them the gate de la Croce, and the other two the two next sides on the right hand, and on the left. Signor de Bigli with some Walloons of his Re∣giment, was appointed against a Work which fenced St Johns gate, and such or∣ders were given as were requisite so to annoy those within at once, both from
the Ravelin, and the fittest places of the Ditch, as they should not be able to hin∣der those without, who were to get upon the Breach. All these directions were valiantly performed by the Kings men; but the besieged shewed no less valour on their side, running with vigilancy and courage whether soever danger called them. So as it behoved the Kings men at last to fall off, with a considerable loss, for above 300 of them were slain, and in particular many of Bigli's men, who met with the geatest difficulties, and most resistance. In this assault Roderigo de Tolledo was sorely wounded, and Captain Lorenso Perea was slain, with some o∣ther inferiour Officers. It cannot be said how afflicted the Kings Camp was at this unfortunate success. And the affair growing every day more doubtfull, Fre∣derick thought good to hear the opinion of the chief Commanders herein. Ma¦ny of them shewed very little hopes of any good success. That the difficulties of the siege were now greater without then within. That the cold was very extream; and the season a greater enemy then the enemie's self. That they suffered all other greater straits in their lodgings and in their victuals: That their men were but few, being more consumed by sufferings then by action. That on the contrary, there was great plenty of all things in the City; that they were every day strengthened with new aids, and appeared still more obstinate in their defence; whence it was to be concluded, that either the siege was never to have an end, or if it were to have any, the conqueror would at last be greater losers then the conquered. That it was then better to withdraw the Army as soon as they could, and wisely to prevent greater necessities, lest they might unfortunately be prevented to their shame. But it was again alleadged on the contrary. That upon the success of this siege, the consequences of future sieges did depend. That it was not to be believed that the obstinacy of the Rebels in Holland was to be allay'd by this a∣lone. How much would other Cities be encouraged, if they should see the siege base∣ly raised from before this? That the injuries of the season were not eternal: that the worst weather was succeeded by better. And that from the natural humidity of that Climat, it might be hoped that some one night the ice would be quite dispersed. That new men would quickly come from Spain, and new Levies might be sooner made in Flanders: That then the siege might be laid closer, and care to be had for the advance∣ment of provisions for the Camp. That succours being cut off, the town would soon fall into their hands; neither could the Kings losses be so great upon this occasion, but that they might be largely recompenced in future atchievements. Frederick represented these different opinions to the Duke his father, desirous to know his opinion, which he would fully observe. The Duke quickly answered in terms which might make it doubtfull whether his paternal, or Military Autho∣rity swa'd him most. That he should be sure to pursue and finish the siege, unless he would shew himself unworthy of Spanish bloud, unworthy of his bloud; and of having the Command of these Forces which when they should have reduced Holland, would without any diffi∣culty do the like to all the rest of Flanders. That the hardest enterprises were always the most glorious. And that in great sieges the number of days was not to be consider∣ed, but the advantagious consequences. That he should now endeavour that by Fa∣mine, which hitherto he could not effect by the sword: and to this end he should use all diligence to keep the town from being relieved from any part. That this might be done by new men who should be suddenly sent him. That all places must yield at last, if not succoured; and that in such a case the most obstinate defendants become usually the most abject. That the event of this siege would serve for an example to all the rest of Holland. And that finally he should set before him a victory, wherein it would be questionable, whether he ould have done more service to God and to his King, or won more glory to himself and to his Family. Frederick finding himself as well shent, as admonished by his Father, grew more hot then ever in the enterprise: And when the Dukes answer was made known to the Army, it cannot be said how all their minds were inlivened. Fre∣derick, together with all the other Commanders, resolved with redoubled dili∣gence chiefly to study how to keep victuals from the City. And in the interim Bernardino di Mendosa was dispatched away into Spain, to procure Orders from
the King to the Governour of Milan, to the end that the two old before menti∣oned Spanish Brigadoes which were in that State should be sent from thence, to∣gether with some Number of Horse into Flanders, as soon as possibly might be This is that Mendosa who did so nobly write the War of the Low-Countries in his own language, during all the time that he staid there; and who passing from the managing of Arms to the like of Civil affairs, was imployed by the King in Ambassies to England and France. The affairs of the Siege went on thus; when on a sudden about the midst of February the season grew more temperate, and the cold turning into moisture, the waters returned to their former being: and with the change of the weather, the whole order of the war began to change. At first the ice would not suffer the water to be distinguisht from the dry land; and therefore it might be said that all that was done then, was done by land: But the ice being thaw'd, the chiefest future actions were to be done by water; by reason of the commodiousness which the Enemy would receive of being relieved by the means of that great Lake before spoken of, and of the necessity the Kings men would be put to of hindring them by the same way. It was not long ere the events were seen on both sides. Hardly was the ice gone, when many Vessels might be seen to appear upon the Leyden meer which fell into the Harlem meer; and entring from thence into the river of Sparen, brought good relief to the City. The River where it fals into the Lake, forms a little Island, wherein the Harlemists had wise∣ly built a Fort, which was called the Fort of Fico; foreseeing how much it would avail them to be masters of that place. Here then as in a safe Haven they received those succours which came usually from Leyden, and from another Town not far from thence called Sassene. But the Kings men did not defer opposing them. Count Bossu prepared suddenly many Boats in Amsteraans, and quickly entred the Lake also with a good Naval strength. His ships, as likewise those of the Enemy were not very deep in the bottom, by reason the Lake was shallow: Each of them had likewise built some in the form of Gallies, which being the easelier guided by Oars, were more serviceable to the rest which used only sails. Thus the whole balk of the Siege was brought to conflicts by water, and to endeavour that way interchangeably to bringin, or to keep out succour. At first they were but Parties; but at last when the Vessels on both sides were increased, they turn'd to Battels: fortune and valour making the successes alternate; sometimes the one side, sometimes the other getting the better. The Kings party did notwithstand∣ing prevail for the most part; which being furnisht from Amsterdam with what∣soever Bossu could desire, and he performing his part gallantly, the Harlemists began to be in scarcity of victuals Bossu had placed some Forts on the East side of the Lake, under the shelter whereof his ships might lie; they were not far from the little Island where the aforesaid Fort of Fico stood. Here did the skir∣mishes oftnest happen. But the Kings men could not so much binder the Ene∣my, but that some of their ships stealing from the conflicts might get in safety under that Fort, and from thence might fall into the River, and come afterwards very safely to the City; to which purpose the Harlemists had fortified that side of the River which was nearest the Town, with other Works. The Kings men made then no longer delay; they likewise raised some works on the contrary side, the better to disturb the passage of the Enemies. Soon after a new Battel fell out upon the Lake; and it was the last, and greater then any other that had preceded. The Harlemists Fleet consisted of 150 Sail; the Kings were not ful out one hundred. but the quality of these out-did the others quantity The conflict was bloody, and the victory for a while doubtfull; which at last lean'd towards the Catholicks, to the great praise of Bossu in particular. The Rebels Naval forces were hereby so much weakned, as the Kings men met not afterwards with any resistance in the Lake. The Fort de Fico fell presently after∣wards into the Spaniards hands; and thus the City was streightly besieged. But this mean while the other military actions by land ceased not. The Harlemists abounded in Souldiers, as hath been said: And therefore often annoying the Kings Camp with bold Sallies, they fiercely assaulted now one, now another Quarter; and made one so furious assault upon the German quarter, as entring by violence into their Fortifications, they flew many, and wounded more; and
bearing away with them some Colours, and some Peeces of Artillery, they re∣turned in triumph to the City. Nor shewed they less valour in resisting the Spa∣niards on the other side; who continued their former labour with secure slow∣ness, lest they might fall again into fruitless impetuosity. They endeavoured to annoy them within, and to hinder the Works which the Harlemists continually there made, from the Platform which (as hath been said they had made upon the Ravelin. But on the contrary, the Harlemists having planted some of their Ar∣tillery against the Platform, they much indammaged it and slew the Enginier Campi, which was a very considerable loss to the Kings Army. In fine it appear'd that the Spaniards had but small hopes to doe any good by oppugning, though Frederick ordered all things as if he meant to end the Siege by a general assault. His principal care therefore was, to keep out all relief; in which he was still more encouraged. He had already received a good recruit of men; for the Baron of Cleveraw had brought 1000 Foot unto the Camp, who were raised in Burgony; and some other Walloons were come thither out of Bigly's and Mandragoues Regiments, and the two Spanish Brigadoes which were sent for from Italy were already on their march for Flanders But if the Kings men made more use of Famine then of the sword to overcome, the Haerlemists fought no less to famish them, and to overcome them with their own weapons. To this end they often tryed by reiterated endeavours to possess themselves of one of the chief Passes by which victuals were brought to the Catholick Camp from Utricht; and one of their endeavours was likely to have succeeded, had not John Baptista de Tassis made manly resistance; who being casually in Utricht, came forth against the Enemy, and forc'd them to retire. So as the Passes to the Catholick Camp conti∣nuing free as formerly, the Famine grew still greater amongst the Harlemists: who when they had well weighed their necessity, began to seek for remedy by desperate resolutions. They resolved to cut the bank of the River which was to∣wards the City in divers parts, and overflow all the ground even to the Lake, so as some relief of victuals might be brought into the Town, at least by little Boats; and particularly some Gun-powder, which they very much wanted. At the first they received some aid by that way; but they were soon cut off from that. After∣wards they made two Camisado's in the stillest hours of the night towards the Germans quarters, such countersigns being past as was requisite between them and those who were to conduct the victuals without. The bickerings were bloody, and the Germans recovered in these the honour which they had lost in the former; for they behaved themselves so valiantly to disturb the succour, fighting at once with the enemies without who came to introduce it, and with those within who were come to receive it, as the enemy could get no good by these trials. The Harie∣mists being thus surrounded with unsupportable necessities on all sides, their only hope lay in a succour which the Prince of Orange was preparing to send with a great strength of men. But they met herein with greater difficulties then the Rebels in Holland did imagine: For the Queen of England not willing to declare her self an open Enemy to the King of Spain, did not what she might have done in their behalf; and the Hereticks of Germany and of France finding themselves busied about their domestick necessities, they could not assist the troubles in Flanders as need required. This mean while the Famine was grown so great in Harlem, as they could brook no longer delay of remedy: Wanting all other sort of nourishment, the Townsmen were reduced to feed on the basest and un∣cleannest sort of Animals, and at last upon Grass, Leather, and on whatsoever despair in such like cases useth to suggest unto humane necessity. Orange was in∣form'd of this from the City; and the Town being now so straightly besieged, as no advertisement could be given by the ministry of man, they used the way of Pidgeons. Orange made no delay. He had with him 2000 foreign Foot, consisting of French, Dutch, Walloons and English, and 3000 Hollanders, Zealanders and Flemings, and little less then 300 Horse, mixt of all these several Nations. The Baron of Battenburgh marcht away with these men, who carried along with them great store of Carts loaded with victuals; and the resolution was, that as these should appear without, those within should move at the same time, and so by a double fierce assault they should either free the City from the Siege, or furnish it
aboundantly with all things requisite to maintain it. But this last endeavour pro∣ved as unfortunate as the former: for those within, and those without, not ha∣ving well adjusted their time of giving assault; and the Kings men-having notice that the succour drew near, they fought them, and first routing their horse, which marched most of them in the front, and afterwards with the same force scattering the foot, they wholly discomfeited the enemy. The Spaniards who were alrea∣dy come from Italy, and were got but a little before to the siege, behaved them∣selves gallantly in this action: wherein 'twas said that about 2000 of the enemy were slain; amongst which Batteburg who commanded them, and divers other personages of quality. The Kings men got moreover many Colours, some Artil∣lery, and almost all their victuals. This success put a period to the pride of the Harlemists; in so much as they sent to Frederick to treat of surrendring the Town upon Articles: But Frederick declared that he would not receive them but upon mercy. When this answer was brought back, the City were strangely astonished. Men, women, and children, ran up and down every where, with tears and outcries, deploring their miserable condition; whereupon Captain Ry∣part, who foresaw himself lost in the common ruine, taking a fit occasion spoke thus unto the multitude. With how much cruelty of mind (most worthy Citizens) the Spaniards have begun, continued, and now ended this siege, their actions. Have too clearly demonstrated in their undertaking it, they made use of false pretences, desiring only that obedience from us to the King, which was grounded upon the arbitrary will of their own Forces. In the continuace thereof, you all know what their losses have been, what their sufferings, and how oft they have been at the point of being rather besieged then besieging: to such great straits have they been brought, by snow, frost, rain, want of victuals, want of men, and chiefly by our so many and so valiant excurtions, wherewith we have somtime more indamaged them in their quarters, then they us within our walls. But at last their rage hath prevailed more over us in overcoming all difficulties so to finish their siege, then the rage of earth and heaven (as it may be said) hath prevailed over them. Behold them therefore thirsting after our bloud, and already panting at our gates, and ready to enter our City thirsting after our goods. And shall we expect any mercy at their hands? any favourable dealing? from them I say, whose rape (as it is every day seen) is not to be satisfied by women, their firings by houses, their plunder by goods, nor their bloud-thirstiness by all the people: We must then believe, that as soon as they shall be entred they will put us all to the sword, or to some more ignominious death, without respect of age, sex, or condition. The welfare of the miserable consist in the despairing of welfare. Why shall not we therefore endeavour (placing the weakest sex and weakest age amidst us) to make our way through our enemies with our swords in our hands? whether we yield, or whether we be overcome we must die. But if we must perish (as there is little hopes of doing otherwise) death will come the more welcome, when sought by our selves with undauntless valour, then when with scorn and disdain received from the pride our enemies of. These words were of such force, and found their minds so ready to entertain any whatsoever desperate resolution, as they already spake of following Ripar∣do's councel, which came to Fredericks car. Who better considering the danger, what despair might make so many valiant men do, and that by overcoming them, he should find the whole City consumed, he forthwith sent a Trumpet to the Town, to let the Harlemists know, that they might hope for better then they de∣served. In particular, he promised to secure them from Plunder, and from all o∣ther licentious Military violence. That there were so many amongst them who knew there was no saveguard for them, as between their despair, and the others hope, it was often doubted whether the more fiercer or more mild resolution should prevail amongst them: at last the last prevailed; and thus the City a∣bout the beginning of July was surrendred to the mercy of the enemy A Brigade of the Spanish foot forthwith entred the Town, and unarmed every one therein. They then fell to inflicting punishment. Captain Rypart, as chief head of the sedition, had his head immediately struck off; and Lancelot Brederode not long after received the like punishment. All the rest of the Harlemists who were thought most guilty either of Heresie or Rebellion, ended their lives either by
the rope or sword. And the like was without remission done to all those foreign souldiers who had been in Mons, or in any other place which the Spaniards had taken, and who had promised never to bear arms any more against the Kings par∣ty. Above 2000 were put to death; and the very executioners were either so weary, or so glutted, or so affrighted with the work, as for speedier dispatch, they drowned a great many of them in the River which ran through the City. The Inhabitants freed themselves from plunder by the payment of 24000 pound sterling, the Kings men raging and storming to see their hopes so far deluded. This was the end of the siege of Harlem; Noble, for being so valiantly and so long both sustained and prosecuted: Remarkable, for the variety of successes both by land and sea: but at last so horrid by the severe punishments inflicted by the vanquishers upon the vanquished, as it was doubted, whether the faults com∣mitted by the one, or the punishments inflicted by the other, were the greater. Whilst affairs went thus in Holland, they were not quiet in Zealand; the chief Island whereof (as hath oft. been said) is Walcherin, wherein stands Midleburg, a little within land. This Town which is the chief not only of that Island, but of the whole Province, was the Kings, together with the little Castle of Rami∣chins, and the Town of Ramua, both of them situated on the sea-side. Ramichins was of great concernment for the keeping of Midleburg. The rebels seeing the Kings forces so imployed about the taking of Harlem, did not let the occasion slip, but applyed themselves apace to the making themselves Masters of the whole Island of Walcherin. It made much for the succouring of those places that Ter∣goes was in the Kings hands, and chiefly for the gaining the speedier passage in that branch which the River Scheld thrusts forth there. But howsoever, it was re∣quisite to have maritine forces to overcome the enemy, who freely sailing over all those Gulfs were much to their advantage, Masters of them. Thus they kept Midleburg besieged at a distance, though they did not seem to besiege it. But little victuals were brought to the City, and it was known that if care were not had in that point speedily, the City would soon fall into the rebels hands. Seigneur de Beavoir, a man who had witnessed his valour and loyalty in the Kings service, was Governour of the Province, and Colonel of a Regiment of Walloons. He acqnainted the Duke of Alva with the danger that these three places were in, and especially Midleburg. Whereupon the Duke resolved to relieve it. He gave the care hereof to Sancio d' Avila, Governour of Antwerp Castle; who having made ready some shipping, betook himself to the business. But he was not well advanced when he returned back, hearing for certain that the enemy were so strong, as he should have run manifest danger of being lost. Having then with very great diligence made better provision then before, he went again to attempt the succour. The enemy, who did no ways fear him, expected him with much resolution. So they came to a sea-fight in the Channel of Flushing which was rather sharp then long. For many ships fighting at once, the battel was for one hours space very fierce on both sides. But Avila's ships being more rent, and his people ill treated, he was forced at last to yield the Victory to the enemy, not without great loss both of souldiers and ships. He notwithstanding landed, and brought some small store of victuals into Midleburgh, made it safer then it was before, and so returned to Antwerp. With him Beavoir came along, who was sent for by the Duke of Alva, meaning to make use of his service, in providing a great Fleet for those parts, whereof he made him Commander, and to that pur∣pose, made him Admiral of Zealand. But the rebels this mean while, incoura∣ged by one success to undertake another, betook themselves to the taking of Tolen, a Town between the confines of Brabant and Zealand, intending if they should succeed therein, to fall upon Berghen ap Zoom. These two places lie not far from one another, but Berghen is a Town of great concernment out of those reasons that have formerly been spoken of. All the Country thereabouts lies very low, and is made habitable only by the banks; one of which of greater moment then the rest, runs between the two abovesaid Towns. The enemies came presently upon this bank, led on by Colonel Rollet, Governour of Canfer, and endeavoured to make themselves Masters of it, to keep succour from being sent from Berghen
to Tolen. Christopher Mandragone was in these parts, being detained there by the Duke together with Sancio Avila, out of the need the Kings affairs in those parts had of them. Mandragone made no delay, but ran presently with suceh of the Kings men as were in the neighbouring Garisons, to disturb their designe. And after divers skirmishes, in one of which he was wounded, he drove the ene∣my from the bank; overthrew a Fort which they had begun to build there; and secured both the aforesaid Towns. But the enemy was not discouraged for all this, nor did they cool in their undertakings. But using stratagems where they could not use force, they soon after perfected a practise of great importance. As the Mosel approaches near the Ocean, she enlargeth her Chanel, and extends it in∣to several large branches. Upon the left side of the first, lies the Town of St Ge∣tringburg, belonging unto Holland; but so close upon the Confines of Brabant, as it may be questioned whether her situation makes her more commodins for expeditions by land, or for such as may be designed from thence by water. The rebels held hidden correspondency either with the hereticks, or with the Male∣contents every where, and chiefly in these parts. The designe being then secret∣ly laid; they were received into St Getringburg by way of Scalado in the secret hours of night. The chief Author of this Plot, and of the putting it in executi∣on was Captain Poyeto, a man of good esteem amongst them. Neither did the mischief on the Kings behalf cease here. This loss was soon followed by another very great likewise, and not without suspition of fraud; which was that of the Ramechins, by the obtaining whereof the rebels placed all their confidence of ma∣king themselves shortly Masters of Midleburg. Bevoir notwithstanding being better provided of Naval Forces, try'd to bring succour into the City, and with him was Mandragone. But the enemies Fleet lying at watch in all the chief A∣venues, the Kings men could not come where to relieve the City, and that but in a very small measure neither, unless it were by great circumferences, and ways far about. Bevoir returned to Antwerp, and Mandragone staid to guard Midleburg. This was the condition of the affairs in Zealand and the adjacent parts when Harlem was taken. The siege whereof was not well at an end, when one of the greatest evils happened which could befall the Catholick Camp. The Spanish souldiers of the old Brigades were much in arrears for pay; who storming eve∣ry day more and more to see themselves deprived of the sacking of Harlem, and that they had so bad reward for so long labour, more transported with self-Inte∣rest, then withheld by obedience, they resolved to mutiny. Frederick, and the rest of the Commanders endeavoured to appease them in some sort, so as they might not lose the opportunity of the season, which was then very fair, to make further proceeding in Holland. But the greater the Kings need appeared to be, the more did the Spaniards contumacy increase. They threatned that they would have their whole pay: and quartering themselves in Harlem, as it were by force, they began to draw Contributions from the City, and under the fair pretence of need and assistance, to use many of the most hatefull actions which plunder and sacking are wont to produce. So as after the preceding miseries, the City became more deplorable by this new affliction. The Duke of Alva was hereat mightily displeased; for he saw on one side the fruits of the Victory so basely abused; and on the other side, the strength of Discipline to be weakened in the Army by this example. But not being able to constrain these by greater forces, nor make such use of sharp means, but that they might at last prove prejudicial, he resolved to remedy this disorder as soon as he might by fair means. The Marquis of Vitelli's love in the Army was equal with his Authority, particularly amongst the Spani∣ards. So as by his means being somewhat appeased, the mutinyers were conten∣ted to receive a donative of four payes, and some moneys in part of their arrears; that cruel rigour being laid aside which was always used in all the other insuing mutinies, which would never be ended before the mutinyers received their full pay. But howsoever, what through the difficulties the Duke found in raising of moneys, and in those Vitelli met withall in bringing his endeavours to an end, the whole summer was almost spent; and the best season to work in low and wa∣try Countries was lost: so as Holland was incumbered on all sides. Nor did the Rebels let slip this so favourable conjuncture. In the most Northern part of the
Province of Waterlant, there are many good Towns, of which Alkmar is one of the chiefest. Here a Treaty which the hereticks within the Town held first se∣cretly, and afterwards more manifestly, with the rebels who were without, the effect at last insued. The one of them at unawares possest themselves of one of the Gates, and the others sent men presently to make themselves Masters of the whole Town. On the other side, the Catholicks, taking up arms, saised likewise on another gate, which lay the fittest for the receiving of succour, and dispatcht away messengers to the Kings Camp with their earnest desires: but this availed but a little: For whilst they were consulting whilst things were defer'd, and that intreaties were rather to be used then commands with the yet obedient souldiers, who were notwithstanding ill paid, the rebels sent presently to aid their confede∣rates, and made themselves Masters of the Town. Alkmar being lost, the Spani∣ards had not any thing at all in Waterlant, for all the rest of the Towns there joyned in rebellion with the rest of the Province. Which made them resolve to endeavour the regaining of it by all possible means. Alkmar is not strong, save only by situation; lying, as do all other Towns in that Country, drowned a∣midst water and mud. It is within five hours journey of Harlem. It may be said to be the gate whereby to enter by land into Waterlant: For that side of the Province being shut up on one part by the Sea, on another by the Gulf of Zuder∣see, and almost all the rest by other waters and channels, and making the shape of a Peninsula, it leaves but a very narrow space for entrance by land, and there a little within, stands Alkmar. That therefore they might be sure to enter in that part, and because without the possession of that Town, they could not hope to get the rest on that coast, the Spaniards resolved, without more delay to besiege it. Of the rest, Enchusen and Horn are the best, which are both of them seated upon the Sea. The first upon the very mouth of the Gulf of Zudersee, and the second within the Gulf, not far from the other, and upon the same side: both of them very famous for building of ships, and versed in affairs of Merchandise. Necessary provisions to maintain the siege were forthwith sent to Alkmar from these two Towns, and from all the others of Waterlant. As soon as the Kings Army was encamped about it, their first action was to take a little Fort from the enemy which they had built upon a Channel, which not far from the Town en∣ters into one of those neighbouring Pools, and whereby succour might easilyest be brought from without. The defendants made some resistance at first: but upon second assaults, they were driven from the Fort by the Spaniards. Here Frederick ordered batteries on two sides, both which were effected with furious storms of shot: and a no less furious assault was prepared from both those sides. The designe was to fall on, on both sides at once, to the end that the Enemy being doubly assailed, might neither have courage nor force to sustain it. But they met with many difficulties in the execution thereof: for the Town being invironed by a large and deep ditch, it was requisite to have bridges in both parts to pass it over, and when they should have passed it, the enemy was well provided of in∣works to hold the assaylants play. When they came to the assault, the event pro∣ved very unfortunate: They were to have a signe by fire, to adjust their mo∣tion at one and the same time; which was not accordingly executed. They had made two bridges to pass over the ditch, and to mount the breach, and these like∣wise had various defects: so as the one of them moved some hours before the other, whereby the enemy might the more easily resist them both. And the Kings men found afterwards such difficulties in the bridges, and in the breach, as be∣coming for a good while a mark for their enemies to shoot at, they were forced at last to retreat, many of them being wounded, and leaving full out 150 of their men dead behind them. 'Twas said in the Army that the two Camp-masters, Ju∣llan Romero, and Francisco Valdes, who were to lead on the rest to the assault, on the two appointed sides, having some private grudge between themselves, to the publick prejudice of that action, did not correspond in the execution according as it was agreed on between them. This so sinister success took from them all hopes of having any better in that enterprise. And the rain and usual moisture of the climat began to fall in great aboundance earlyer then they had wont to do: so as the Army began to suffer very much in that low situation, and were likely to
suffer every day more, if they should not suddenly rise from thence. They there∣fore resolved to give over the siege for that time; and to see whether the frost would invite them to return upon better terms. But another expedition by sea, at the same time, had no less unhappy event. Count Bossu could not make use of those Naval Forces, which in the siege of Harlem had served the Kings party up∣on that Lake, whereof we then spoke, in the other waters, which by reason of their depth required much greater Vessels. And therefore the enemy having gotten a great Fleet of ships upon the Gulf of Zudersee, they fell from thence into the Channel of Amsterdam, and did in a sort besiege it. The City was much prejudiced hereby, and consequently the Kings party. Wherefore the Duke of Alva going thither in person, made divers ships be put in order, much greater then usual, and paticularly one which was called the Admiral, and was of an ex¦cessive greatness. But the time being short, and the expence very great, only twelve of them could be finishied With this Fleet, (the quantity whereof was thought sufficient to supply the want in numbers) Bossu came out of Amsterdam, and with him were some foot-companies imbarked, which were taken out of his own German Regiment, five other of the Spanish Companies, and one of the Walloons. This Fleet being come forth, the enemy left the Channel of Amster∣dam free; and retreated towards their nearest Havens of Enchusen and Horn; and hastened likewise greater provision of ships on their side, hoping to get the upper-hand by their superiority in numbers. Those of Enchusen exceeded all the rest of the Inhabitants in those parts, not only in numbers of ships, but in Maritine skill; and therefore the enemies Fleet was soon increased by them, in so¦much as their number did very far exceed the number of the Spanish ships. Bos∣su being this mean while entred with his into the Gulf of Zudersee, he hovered thereupon, being much in doubt whether he should provoke or shun the combate. His Orders from the Duke were to fight as soon as might be; for it greatly im∣ported the King that the enemies Forces by sea should be abated, his affairs in Flanders suffering most thereby. And the securing of so gallant an Arsenal as was Amsterdam. did too much import his service. On the contrary, Bossu consi∣dered the small number of his vessels; what preparation the enemy had made; and that inforced fights are seldom fortunate. He therefore kept in the deepest part of the Gulf, where his ships by reason of their greatness had the advantage over the enemy, and hoped to find it so in their fight. Some skirmishes had al∣ready been had between the two Fleets, and so there did dayly: but the adver∣saries ships were afraid to come to any greater ingagement in that place. The Duke the meane while prest the combate very much; wherefore Bossu delayed no longer: but falling down nearer land where the Gulf was more shallow, he with much esolution set upon the enemy, who kept there safe together, as in the best place for them. They did not refuse the combate, but gladsomely accepted of it, and fell to work with the Kings ships. Bossu did manfully incourage his, and so did all the Captains of the other ships: in so much as the battel was at the first very bloudy on both sides. But ere long the day began to lean towards the ene∣my. The bickering was not between ship and ship, or between souldier and soul∣dier, upon equal terms, so as it was not valour which was to give the victory. The enemies ships did too far exceed the Kings in number, who could not, as did the others, supply one ship when it was battered, with another, nor the wounded with fresh men; so as in a short space every one of the Kings ships were inviron∣ed by the enemy and the conflict lasted not long. Except it were the Admiral, with which the Vice-Admiral kept always company, all the rest of the Kings ships gave over fighting, and betook themselves to sundry parts, one of them be∣ing sunk, and the rest sorely shattered. The Admiral stood like a stately Castle in the sea; of such a vastness was her body, having so many fails, so many mar∣riners, and such a number of souldiers and guns. Bossu could not indure to see himself thus lost. He had with him, besides his own Germans, a hundred choice Spaniards, together with their Captain Corvera. They were all of the same mind, and had already turned valour into despair: so as the battel growing more blou∣dy then ever, the success hung long in doubt; till such time as Fortune favouring the enemy likewise, and causing the wind to cease, the Spanish ships ran on
ground  Alva retired to Brussels, whether his son Frederick came soon after to find him out; having first distributed his men into those parts of Holland which remained yet unto the the King and which, except Harlem, were almost all of them open places. All such places about Leyden as were though fittest to besiege it, were till then possess by the Spaniard for the Duke was resolved to do his utmost to take that Town. But the siege thereof, which was afterwards likewise very me∣morable, was reserved for his successour. For the Duke was not well gotten to Brussels, when Letters came from Spain with leave for him to quit the Govern∣ment of Flanders. He had often earnestly desired it, as had the Duke of Medi∣na-Celi done also, to the end that he might not be burthened with that Govern∣ment. The King having granted both their requests chose Lodovico di Rechesens, the Commendador, di , who was one of the chief Lords of Spain, and who was then Governor of Milan, to be Governour of the Low-Countries. The King among all his other Subjects of Spain, pitcht upon him, for that seeing how the Flemish did abhor the Duke of Alva's severity, he would have him suc∣ceeded by one more mildly given, who in his Authority might, as much as might be, decline severity. Such a one he took Rechesens to be, and such were the di∣rections which the King sent him from Spain. He departed from Milan about the end of October 1573. and went through Savoy, Burgundy and Lorain, taking no other Militia with him save only two Companies of horse, one of them launces, other Harquebusiers. Being come to Brussels, the Duke of Alva soon delivered up the Government unto him and together with his son Frederick, took the same way by land, because he would return by Italy, and go by sea from Genua to Spain. The Duke of Medina-Celi took shipping upon the coast of Flanders, and went back the same way as he came, by sea.
THE HISTORY OF THE WARS OF FLANDERS. Written by CARDINAL BENTIVOGLIO. BOOK VIII. The Contents. The Commendador-Major resolves to succour Midleburg, to this purpose he disposes of two Fleets in several parts: but had ill success therein; the one being routed by the enemy whilst he himself looked on, and the others indeavours proving vain. Midleburg is therefore surrendred. Count Lodovick in Germany moves to enter with an Army again into Flanders. Orange makes great preparations, and con∣spires with him to that purpose. Incitements used by him to this end. The Com∣mendadors perplexities and dangers. Lodovick comes into Flanders. Draws near Mastrick, and hopes to win it: but the Royalists secure the Town. Their forces oppose the enemy; various successes and incounters between the two Armies. A battel insues. The Royalists get the victory. The Spaniards presently mutiny. Things best worth knowledg in matter of mutinies. The mutiners go to Antwerp. The City is in great dread of them. They are at last pacified, and joyn with the rest of the Camp-Royal. A great loss of many of the Kings ships. Orange his proceedings: against whom Vitelli is sent by the Commendador. A new general pardon publisht in Antwerp in the Kings name. An indeavour of accommodati∣on with the Rebels; but in vain. The siege and description of Leyden. Divers difficulties in the prosecution, and in the maintaining thereof. Actions which suc∣ceed thereupon. Those of Leyden are in a desperate condition. More desperate resolutions taken by the Rebels to relieve the Town. Which is at last succoured, with great slaughter and prejudice of the Spaniards. WHen the Government was in the Commendador, he ap∣plyed himself with all his might to relieve Midleburg. Mandragone was (as hath been said) at the defence of that City, and had continually prest very much for spee∣dy succour: and turning his desires into protestations, he declared that unless he were reliev'd within very few days, he should be constrained to put the City into the Rebels hands. He wanted all sort of victuals, not only of the better sort, but even of the most vile. The Commendador gave order then, that two Fleets should with all diligence be prepared, the easilyer to relieve the Town
by two wayes upon the Scheld. The one Fleet were of lesser Barks, to be sent by that narrower and lower branch, which parts not far from Berghen ap Zome, and which (as we have said) retains the name of the River: The other consisted of greater Vessels, which were to pass through the Honte, the Scheld being so called in her other larger and deeper branch. The Commendador added his own diligence to that of others. Going there∣fore himself in person to Antwerp, he did so hasten the preparation of both the Fleets, as about the end of January both of them put to Sea, to effect the intended succour. Bevoir, the Admiral of Zealand, was then fallen sick, who was to have had the chief charge thereof: So as Signior de Glimes was appointed to be his Vice-admiral. Sancio d'Avila commanded the greater ships, and Glimes the lesser with whom the Camp-master Romero went, as chief Commander of all the Soul∣diers that were aboard; who in both the Fleets were either Spaniards or Wal∣loons, but the greatest part were Spaniards. Avila put from Antwerp, and sail'd before upon the Honte. The other Fleet put from Berghen ap Zome, in sight of the Commendador himself, who followed it upon the Schelds bank, till he came to a Village called Schacherlo, which is over against Romerswal, a Town feated on the other side. Here Glimes and Romero staid, expecting a more favourable Tide, that they might the easelyer free themselves, and get rid of those Sands which occasion many Shelfs in that branch. The Enemies were very well acquainted with the design, preparations, and proceedings of the Royalists, by reason of the intelligence held between the Flemish, and especially in that maritine part, where the people did exceedingly favour Orange. Nay, it was held for certain, that many of the chief Pylots who served the Spaniards, were wrought upon by him; and that this Fleet of the lesser ships was unluckily lost (as we shall relate) rather by fraud then fortune. A much greater provision of shipping being made by the con∣trary part. the Enemies Fleet which was commanded by Lewis de Boisot Admiral of Holland, made straight towards Romarswal to hinder the Kings ships from go∣ing any further. The Vice-admiral would not have fought, knowing the great disadvantage which was on his side: The enemies ships were much bigger built, and very much more in number. But Romero, were it either that his courage did transport him, or for his want of skill in maritime affairs, or rather that he was ne∣cessitated to adventure, because succour could suffer no longer delay, and that this Fleet carried much the greatest part of the victuals, was of a contrary opinion, and would by all means fight. Hereupon the Vice-admiral together with all the rest made towards the Enemy: but whether it were chance, or fraud (as it was doubted) the Vice-admiral ran on ground, as did likewise some other ships which were nearest her. The Enemies were not slack in setting upon them on all sides: A showre of Musket-shot poured down upon them from their taller ships, and the great Guns thundred apace. But a tempest of artificial fires proved most pre∣judicial, which the Enemies ships hurl'd into those of the Kings: the Viceadmiral suffered most of all hereby; for the fire bursting forth in her in sundry places, and continuing pertinaciously to do so, she sunk at last; it being questionable whether the fire or water wrought most in swallowing her up. Romero made speedily to∣wards them with his Admiral, and some other ships; but his courage was greater then the help he gave; for he partook so deeply of the others danger, as he threw himself into the water, and so saved himself by swimming. Divers others of the Kings ships ran the same fortune of being either consumed by fire, or sunk in the river; and all the rest fell into the enemies hands, who triumphed very much in the victory. And that their joy might be the greater, the Commendador himself was upon the above said bank of Shacherlo, and saw with his own eyes this so un∣happy misfortune: which made him foresee others of no less consequence, which were of necessity to be shortly expected. Glimes was slain, together with many Spanish and Walloon Officers, and about 800 common souldiers. This defeat being given, Avila thought only how to retreat, and save his ships: but being pursued by those which the Enemy had severed from the others, which Boisot commanded, he had much adoe to get into Tergoes, and at last brought his Fleet safe to Antwerp. This was the end of the relief. So as Mandragone having nei∣ther time to expect succour, nor hope to get any; and having first made good
Conditions to march himself with all his men safe and freely out of Middleburgh, he presently surrendred the Town to the Enemy. Ramua fell likewise into their hands, which till then had kept its obedience to the King. And thus they were possest of the whole intire Island of Walcherin, which they had so much desired; and were puft up with hopes, that they should shortly be masters of the whole Province. The new year of 1574. was now begun: when the Commendador had not well received this blow by Sea, but that other novelties were heard of, and of greater danger to the Kings affairs, more within land. We told you before how that Count Lodovick, brother to the Prince of Orange, after the loss of Mons, leaving his brother in Holland, was gone to Germany: where he was not idle; but being eg'd on by his own courage, and more by that of the Prince his brother, he had there occasioned divers practises, that he might again enter Flanders with the Forces of that Nation. The unhappy success of the two Brothers taking up Arms against the Duke of Alva, had made them be rather commiserated then scorned by the Germans. And the Spanish Forces in Flanders being by such success be∣come more formidable to all their neighbours, the suspition thereof grew daily every where greater. Orange in all those parts made alternate use of the instiga∣tions of Fear and Hope: representing sometimes what danger Holland & Zealand were in; sometimes what advantages he had there, and the hopes of their daily increase, not only in those two Provinces, but in all the rest, if some Foreign aid might be added to the Domestick forces of the Country. The Spaniards mutiny falling out afterwards; and the Kings expeditions by land at Alckmar, and by Sea under Bossu, proving so very bad; and finally the Duke of Alva being gone from Flanders, he had so much the more set on fire the minds of his partakers both within and without Flanders, to favour the new preparation which his bro∣ther was contriving. That at last the Duke of Alva was gone: but that Rechesens was chosen by the King in his place, Medina-Celi having refused to accept it. That the one and the other of them were Spaniards; and that both of them, as likewise the Duke of Alva, were reduced to such a condition of fortune, as the Flemish had reason to be scan∣dalized at such a choice. That the Kings neglect of the affairs of Flanders did clear∣ly appear, and that he did intend to introduce by violence the Government of Spain into those Provinces. That then the person rather then the intention was chang'd in the new Governour. That this man had a more pleasing aspect and more benigne ap∣pearance; but in his soul the like pride, and the same resolutions in his thoughts. That the allurement of words were to be esteemed treacherous, while the force of Arms continued: Nor could the Flemish ever confide, till they saw their Country free of Foreigners, their Cities free of Citadels, their goods of paying Tributes, their Con∣sciences of oppression, and the Laws of their Country free from that violation which had been occasioned in them by Forein Laws. That to compass so just an end, Holland and Zealand had at last taken up Arms: That their success had been alternately va∣rious; but that yet the greatest part of both these Provinces were in the hands of their own inhabitants. That the new Governour was not acquainted with his Souldiers, nor his Souldiers with him: That his experience in war was not great: That he found the Spaniards in mutiny, the others but ill satisfied, and that monies were very scarce to give them satisfaction. That the Empire of Spain, by reason of the too great division and largeness of its bulk, was so incumbred within it self, as it could not furnish Flanders with sufficient Forces to maintain war long. Then let the Flemish once resolve to joyn in one, and those their neighbours with them, who were most inter∣essed in their cause. That thus the Country would be soon restor'd to her antient form of Government, and her present miseries be turn'd into her formerly enjoy'd Felicity. Otherwise, how could it be hoped for, but that the Flemish divided at home within themselves, and forsaken by their friends abroad, were shortly to receive all hardest and proudest Laws from the Spaniards Orange gave abroad these conceits, as well to incense the Flemish still more a∣gainst the Government of Spain, as also to make the neighbours the more ready to joyn with his brother in his aforesaid endeavours. But these practises were chiefly had in Germany, and were, as usually, fomented by the Heretick party of
England and France. The design of the Nassaw Brethren was, That Lodovick should enter Flanders from the side of Germany with all the Forces he could as∣semble together; and that Orange at the same time coming out of Holland should endeavour to joyn those which he had mustered in the Country, with the Forein∣ers. To this end very close intelligence was held by both of them in sundry parts of Flanders, and by Lodovick particularly in some Cities which were most com∣modious for him for his passage over the Rivers: but of all others he coveted to be master of Mastrick, a very fitting place towards the Frontiers of Germany, there being a bridge there over the Mause, as hath been formerly shewn. When Lodovick had got all things necessary for the body of an Army, he marched from those parts about the beginning of February, not valuing the threats of the season, that so he might not lose the opportunity of the Crisis. He knew in what straits the new Governour was, by reason of the difficulties which were raised against him by Orange and his partakers. Having therefore past the Rhine and Mosel, he drew near Ghelderland; intending, as might be conjectured, to pass over the Maus, and get into Brabant, where his brother was to joyn with him. 'Twas said that he had in his Army 7000 Foot & 3000 Horse, gathered out of the neighbouring Nations; and that his greatest strength lay, as it had done formerly, in German Souldiers. These, and all the rest came with great opinion of good success, which would prove so advantagious to them, as might make abundant satisfaction, yea with use, for their last unfortunate losses. Lodovick had with all industry strove to nurse them up in this belief shewing all which made for his advantage and his Brothers in the affairs of Flanders, which might most confirm hope in them both of making large Conquests, and of getting the Victory with ease. This expedition of Lodovicks was so speedy, as the Commendador heard of the effects thereof, before he heard of the preparation. So as very much troubled at the news, and meeting with difficulties on all sides, he knew not what resolution to take. He saw the Kings men were mightily decreased in their numbers; that to muster them together, and march towards Lodovick to defend the Land frontiers, was to leave all the Sea-side in prey to Orange; that to divide his Forces, were not to have sufficient to break their designs as it behoved on both sides; that to draw them out of the garrisons was not without danger, because peradventure they would not be drawn out without receiving their pay, at least in some proportion; that howsoever it was requisite to make other great Levies shortly, which would cost great sums of money: that the provisions from Spain were not sufficient to furnish requisite monies for so many affairs, and that Flanders was every day more backward then other in contributing thereunto. When Rhechesens had ad∣vised upon all these difficulties, with all the chief of the Army, the resolution which was taken, was, That he and the Marquis Vitelli should not go far from Antwerp, where Orange's secret practises did threaten most: That leaving a suffici∣ent number of Souldiers in Holland to keep what they had gotten, they should only stand upon their defence on that Frontier; and that all the rest of the Army being assembled together, Sancio d' Avila should lead them towards the Mause to secure the Kings Towns thereabouts, and to hinder Lodovick from passing over that River. This being resolved upon, it was suddenly put in execution: Necessary orders were speedily given forth for the making of great Levies of new men in the neighbouring Catholick parts of Germany, Burgony, and the Walloon Provinces of Flanders. But because they were straitned in time, they betook them∣selves to draw the old Souldiers out of the garrisons, using all the means they could to satisfie them with hopes, since they could not doe in effect. This mean¦while Lodovick still advanced; and halting with his Camp near Mastrick, he staid expecting whether he might, according to his hopes, steal into the City by way of Intelligencer. The Commendador fearing this, dispatcht away Bernar∣dino di Mendoza suddenly thither with some Troops of horse, to which he after∣wards added some Foot-companies. And the Royalists flocking thither from all parts to make it their rendezvous, Sancio d'Avila came thither likewise about the beginning of March, who was to be the chief Commander there. Thus that City was secured in its obedience to the King; and Lodovick was likewise kept from passing over the River on that part. He took up his quarters near the Castle
of Walchemburg, little more then two leagues from Mastrick, in divers Villages thereabouts. Avila had likewise disposed of the Kings men, towards that side, accordingly as they came to the rendezvous. And in the interim, the more to encourage his men, and to discover the Enemies courage the better, he sent forth Skirmishes almost every day; in one of which, which proved more bloody then the rest, Francisco de Medina who was Commissary-General of the Kings horse, was slain, the remainder of the loss being equal on both sides. But Avila, taking his advantage another time, took a number of selected Spaniards and Walloons, and set upon the village of Bemelen, wherein divers Companies of the Enemies German Foot lay, and slew above 400 of them; the rest sorely confused flying for safety into their neighbours quarters. Lodovick being out of all hope of get∣ting into Mastrick by fraud, or of being able to pass the Mosel there, he resolved to follow the course of the river, and to go towards Ruremond; hoping likewise to get into that City by the way of Treaty: wherein if he should fail, his deter∣mination was to continue his march still on, and between the Mause and Vahal to joyn with Orange, who to that purpose was to march that wayes and joyn with him. When he was come near Ruremond, he lost all hopes of being received in there by way of underhand dealing; either for that the Kings men had discover∣ed his plot, or for that his partakers had not courage enough to perform cove∣nants. He therefore marched suddenly from thence; and keeping along the River side, he marched towards Niminghen, the chief City of all Ghelderland, situated upon the Vahalle: where he and Orange had many adherents, who gave them hopes of making them be received in by surprise: which would have been much for their advantage, as well by reason of the wealth of the Town, as by its situ∣ation. But Avila, who had already either suspected or discovered these designs, followed him apace on this side the River, to keep him from passing over, and from joyning with his brother. The Kings Army was this mean while more recruited both with Horse & Foot: the Campmaster Bracamont was in particular come from Holland with 2000 old Spanish Foot; and almost all the other Spanish Camp. masters, and those of other Nations were with Avila: the Army till then not being above 4000 Foot and 800 Horse. Avila being ascertained of Lodovicks last intent, after his vain attempt upon Ruremond, which was, not to pass over on this side, but to joyn with Orange on the other side; he likewise increased his di∣ligence and made his men mend their march. And all the Towns upon the Mause which were convenient for passage being in the Kings hands, Avila sent therefore such Scouts forth as were requisite, to scour the contrary shore, and to learn con∣tinual news of the Enemy, that he might the better know how to govern his af∣fairs on this side. It appeared at last, that the greatest advantage lay in making haste, and in the preventing of one another: So as the Kings men passing the Mause, might hinder the Enemies Camp from advancing further; or the other hastning his march, might prevent the passing over of the Kings men, and so joyn as he intended with Orange. But the difference was too great between the Soul∣diers of the two Armies: The Kings men being trained up under accomplisht Commanders, might be said to know their orders before they received them; and obedience being as readily given as was Command, all things were quickly under∣stood, and readily executed: whereas on the contrary, the Enemies Souldiers being tumultuously gathered together, all of them almost new men, divers Prin∣ces subjects, and who were not incited either by punishment or by reward in the service of their own Prince, they had no other sense of military affairs save only Prey and Plunder; and what by difficulty of victuals, and incumbrance of bag∣gage depending oftentimes more upon necessity then choice, they could not ad∣vance so fast as occasion required; and some disorders were already grown a∣mongst them. Therefore those hopes failing which Lodovick had very confidently built upon; and finding the Towns upon that Frontier ready to keep him out, which he thought would have willingly received him; and the scarcity of victuals and difficulty of lodging being hereunto added: Out of these reasons a great ma∣ny of the Enemies Horse were already disbanded, and their Foot lessened every day; and the Captains authority availed very little, the Souldiers not caring much to obey them to whom they had no natural obligation. The Kings Army
advancing then with speedy march, it came to Graves, before Lodovick could get over against it with his men. The Town of Graves is seated upon the Mause on the left side; and Avila having given formerly order for the throwing a bridge of Boats over it, his Army without loss of time past over to the other side and quartered there. Monsieur de Hierges came soon thither from Niminghen, having first made that Town sure for the King, and brought with him 300 Spa∣niards: And soon after came two other Spanish Companies, and one of Burgo∣nians, which were a good recruit for the Army. The Enemy marched likewise a great pace; when being come to the village of Mouch, they understood by their Scouts that the Kings men were on that side the River, and not above a league off. Hereupon they must either retreat, or fight. To retreat, was dangerous: For to boot that retreating bears always fears with it, the enemy had neither provision of victuals, nor any place of safety to stay in on that side: And to hazard a battel against old Souldiers, though fewer in number, appear'd to be too doubtful a bu∣siness. But at last they must go on, though they cut the way through with their swords. Wherefore staying in Mouch, they presently raised a Trench on the side where they feared most to be set upon by the Kings men, the better to fence their Foot: Their greatest hopes lay in their Horse, though they were not above 2000 in number, yet were they more then the Kings Horse; who were notwithstanding more favour'd by the situation, which was somwhat narrow, by reason of certain hils which stood not far from the river, and allowed but a small space for the Horse to exercise in. The Kings men having the Enemy on the Front, prepared with much resolution for combat. And because either the preservation or the loss of the Low-Countries in the Kings behalf lay almost wholly on the success of this Battel, it is not to believ'd how the Royalists encouraged each other: And Avila, before he gave out his orders, did rather by reason, then by words, in a mi∣litary manner exhort them thus to fight. Our reward is to be measured by the service which we shal this day do our King: who doubts but that if we overcome, these countries will by our swords be preserved unto his crown? He hath not many other forces in these parts then what are now with us; then consequently the merit of so important an action will be wholly ours: And as the King is to acknowledge it from us alone, so is it not to be doubted but that he will royally reward it. And what greater security can we have of obtaining the victory now, then the so many which we have already won. This very Lodovick had not the better before in Friesland: 'twas we who through too much eager∣ness of fighting did force him to overcom. How soon were we afterwards quit with him at Gimingen? where that river saved him peradventure that he might perish the more unworthily upon this: all the ingagements in fine, which either he or his brother through their perfidiousness have undertaken against these countries, have always had the same end; they have not so soon been entred, but they have been beaten out, to their slaughter and shame, and to our everlasting glory and honour. And upon all these occasions expe∣rience hath sufficiently shewn how much valour exceeds numbers, order before confusi∣on; and what advantage th y have who fight out of the zeal of honour, over those who bear arms only for rapines sake. The same will certainly be seen in this present conflict, since our conditions, and the conditions of our enemies are not the same: Ours, by being bred so many years in the wars, and the knowledg how to defend a good cause, being added to the favour of the cause which we defend; and that of the Enemy, in bringing new men to all military actions, and in basely maintaining wicked causes under rebellious Captains. The narrownes of the place makes much for our advantage, which will not suffer their Horse which are more then ours, to have too much the better of us; and yet ours shalbe so well fenced by Foot, as that advantage shall supply the other default. And that weak Trench which the Enemy have raised for defence of their Foot, what doth it argue but an abjest fear in them, & an evident desire rather of flight then of fight? We on the contrary shall assault them with our wonted resolution and undauntedness; & shall assuredly have the like success as formerly in overcoming, and they in runing away. This Speech of Avila's was received with great acclamations by the souldiers, Whereupon he with the other field-Officers disposed their orders thus: For the more safety-sake he placed the foot towards the River, on the right hand, and di∣vided them into proportionable squadrons, lining the Pikes with shot where it was most convenient. He divided the horse likewise on the left side into divers squadrons, and munited them toward the field-side, with a good wing of Spanish and Walloon musketiers, the better to break the enemies greatest force, which was to be expected on that part. The Camp-masters, Consalvo di Bracamonte,
Fernando di Tolledo, and Christopher Mandragone, who had brought with him his Walloon Regiment, which did remarkable service that day, had the chief command of the foot. And the chief places in the Cavalry were supplyed by Bernardino di Mendoza, and John Baptista de Marchesi del Monte, with whom were other Captains of try'd valour. The German Harquebusiers under Schinck, were placed in the front, together with those of other Nations: and after them the Lanciers, which made up the greatest body of the horse, and this was so exe∣cuted as if the enemies Rutters should charge upon the Harquebusiers, the Lan∣ciers might charge them. To boot that the wing of Musketiers which flankt the Kings horse on the outside, might be of great use to break their first violence, as hath been said. The enemy this mean while had not omitted any thing which might make for their advantage in the battel. Lodovick had his brother Henry with him, who had likewise a warlike spirit. But Christopher, one of the sons of the Prince Elector Palatine, was of great preeminence in their Army. He com∣manded all the horse, and the whole Government of the Camp was almost e∣qually had between him and Lodovick. They left some foot-companies to defend the Trench which hath been spoken of, and which lay nearer the river on the left hand. On the right hand they composed a great squadron of the other foot in good order, and extended their horse towards the hill, as far as the narrowness of the place would permit them; and made thereof one choice squadron apart, wherein were the two Generals, and Count Henry. Which made it be doubted whether they did this, to be in that part of the battel where victory was most to be hoped for; or in case they should be worsted, so to make their way sooner through the enemy, and joyn with Orange, who was already come with great for∣ces to Niminghen. The two Generals, as they ordered their squadrons, were not wanting in encouraging their souldiers. They affirmed that this was the day which must free the Flemish from slavery, the Germans from jealousies, and which would throw a thousand rewards upon them the souldiers for obtaining the victory, of which no doubt was to be made. That the new Spanish Governour trusting little in himself, and peradventure less in his men would not be in person where the greatest danger was. That he was constrained to draw his people out of their Garisons almost by force: who howsoever came rather with a mind to mutiny then to fight;; and were so lessened in their numbers, as they were able to make but a very weak body of an Army. How much did they exceed the enemy, espe∣cially in horse? And how great would their storm be? That when the victory should be got on this side, it would the more safely be had on the other side: where the foot would notwithstanding so signalize themselves, as they needed no other to assist them in overcoming. That the enemy being routed, and made to fly, Flanders was to be wholly at their disposal: And what Laws would not she be ready to receive having the Prince of Orange with his forces on one side, theirs on the other; or when they should be all joyned together? Holland and Zealand, invincible Provinces in the defence of their Country, would certainly share in the fruits of so happy a success; as also every other Province which would cordially joyn with them in the same Cause. That in such Provinces as would prove refractory, the sword should do, what fair means could not effect: and as they should be joyfully received by those, so should they find rich pillage in these. That every souldier should therefore enter the combate with firm resolution of being victorious. And that adding one incitement to another, e∣very one of them should think they were looked upon by the eyes of both the Germa∣nies; which expected by means of their valour that day, the one to recover what she had lost; the other to keep what she had feared to lose. When both Armies were ordered in manner aforesaid, they began to skitmish. Avila advanced 300 foot, part Spaniards, part Walloons, against those who guar∣ded the Trenches on the other side: who coming forth with a proportionable number, received the Kings men with much stoutness but these, as being more experienced, began to get advantage over the others, driving them back into their Trenches, and endeavouring to fall in with them. Here the fray grew hotter; and each side received new courage accordingly as they received new succours. But the Kings men still prevailing they at last got upon the Trenches, and of them Cap∣tain Diego di Montesdock was one of the first that was slain. Then the chief
squadron of the enemies foot began to move. Whereupon the others making a stand, who before began to give back, they fell all again a fighting, and for a while did manfully withstand the Kings men; whose squadrons being likewise come up, had brought the whole burthen of the war on that part hither; but the hereticks still giving ground, they at last began to run. The business was better disputed between the horse of both sides, the Kings horse Harquebusiers were so furiously assaulted by Lodovicks Rutters, and especially the Germans led on by Schinck who stood forwardest, as being first broken, and then totally disordered, they did not only forsake the place, but running away to the next neighbouring Towns, they gave out every where that the enemy had won the day. The Rutters having discharged their first Volly of shot, wheeled about to charge again, and make a second more furious assault; but the Kings Lanciers afforded them not time, who fell on with such violence, and did so vigorously charge them on di∣vers sides, as breaking their orders, they forced them back, and opened them. In this the foot-wing played their part miraculously; by whom the Rutters, being gauled on their flank, were put yet into greater disorder. Lodovick and the Pala∣tine couragiously endcavoured to re-order them, and incouraged them by their own examples acting the parts rather of common souldiers then of Commanders in chief. But the Kings horse still more inheartned, both by the apparent victory of the foot, and by the advantage which they themselves continually got; did so closely pursue the Rutters, as not being able longer to be withheld, and fear get∣ting the upper hand of shame, they turned their backs, and at last ran directly a∣way. Fortune would likewise have her share in this battel, as usually she hath in all. For just as the Rutters began to give back, three Company of Lanciers came up to the Catholicks, led on by Nicholas Basti, by George Macuca, and by Pe∣ter Tassis, all of them Captains, and this new inforcement finisht the business, so as instead of fighting they fell to execution. The Kings men being masters of the field, slaughtered the enemy horribly in all places; and it was commonly be∣lieved that above 4000 of them perisht. About 200 of the Kings men were mis∣sing. This success was particularly innobled by the death of the two brothers of Nassaw, and of the Palatine, which being all of them joyntly resolved either to make their way by their swords, or by indeavouring to do so, to lose their lives, were slain fighting valiantly. The Kings forces got great advantage and reputa∣tion by this victory. For though the battel was not between numerous Armies, yet the chief consequences of Flanders lay at stake on both sides. And those which concerned the King being particularly considered, 'tis no doubt but if the enemy had got the better of the day, their Forces being joyned with those of the Prince of Orange, would have overrun the Country every where, and would have made the Stanshest raise new rebellions. But this so important victory was not well gotten, when they who had been the chief Authors of it, spoyled the effect thereof. Instead of expecting their re∣ward from the King the Spaniards to the great disservice of his Majesty, would be their own pay-masters. The very night after the day of battel and upon the very place where the battel was fought, they resolved to mutiny. And the effect thereof was seen, before the thing it self could be imagined. It began at first to be whispered by a few, afterwards it was put in practise by many, and at last it was fully consented unto by all. They complained, and seemed much incensed to see their labours so ill rewarded. 'Twas their hands and their bodies by which Towns were taken, Battels won, and all other actions of greatest danger done. The honour and advantage redounded to the Commanders; their reward was only wounds and poverty. That their bare pay was given them rather as a reward, then as of due. Which yet being so far in arrear, they could not fully receive. How could so miserable a condition be longer tollerated? that it was in their own power to satisfie themselves for the monies which were every day promised them, and never paid. And that therefore they were now rather to have it at their command, then to wait for it any longer, and that perhaps in vain. They made no long delay; they in a great hurly-burly flew to their arms; and violently laying aside their former Officers, they chose new ones. This being done, they went immediately from Mouch, and marched towards Antwerp, in∣tending
to enter the City, and there with all safety and commodiousness to cause their whole pay to be given them. Sancio d'Avila, and all the Camp-masters used all possible diligence to remedy so great and so unexpected a disorder: but they could do nothing that would prevail. And because after this mutiny, so many o∣thers of the like nature insued in the progress of this war, whereby the Kings af∣fairs in Flanders were more prejudiced by the arms of his own souldiers, then by those of his enemies. It will not be amiss to relate here anticipately, with as much brevity as may be, what is best worthy knowledge in a business which we shall so often have occasion to treat of. An Army in the field is a great moveable City, governed by Military Laws, within walls of Iron: this City is distinguish∣ed into personages of divers qualities. The chiefest place is possest by the Cap∣tain-General, who hath supream Authority in the Government thereof. The other chiefest Commanders follow after him, and after them the lesser. And in the last place remains the inferior order of common Souldiers, who having no share in Command, are only to obey. In this popular order of the Army (if I may term it so) do mutinies fall out: the usual cause whereof is the want of pay. In the meaner sort of souldiers, Interest prevails more then Honour; wherefore being unpayed, first they complain, then they grow angry, and at last mutiny. In long Wars this is oftner seen, by reason of the excessive expences which they occasion. This length of time makes souldiers mary, whereby they have children: and in that respect grow still more necessitous: and this necessity at last turning into corruption, they mutiny many times rather because they will do so, then that they have any just occasion to do it. The Laws of obedience being then broken, this popular order riseth up against their Superiors, and out of their body, do tumultuarily chuse new Officers. This happens usually when the Armys are in the field, because it would be almost impossible to compass it with security in Garisons. In the change of Government, 'tis commonly seen that we degenerate from the better to the worse. And thus it happens upon this occasion. The su∣preme Command of one only, passeth then into the whole multitude, which be∣ing composed of horse and foot, makes a body of each of them, which they call the Squadron of the incensed, so to shun the always ignominious title of muti∣ners. The Authority consists then in the Squadron, and all the command in the united body thereof. This tumultuous Commonwealth will notwithstanding have a head, who is called the Elect. Next him it will also have some others of greater imployment, and these they call Councellors. The foot and horse are likewise distributed under two chiefer Heads. They call the head of the horse Governour, and him of the foot Sergeant Major. The Captains and usual Of∣ficers follow in either sort of these men; and divers other places are distributed according to occasion. The Offices are distributed by votes allowed; and in the like sort all other resolutions are taken. The Squadrons first intention is to pos∣sess itself of some good Town or City; and here to fortifie it self so as it cannot be forced. From thence it takes in all the Country thereabouts; which to shun greater damage, is brought to pay equal Contributions. The Office of the E∣lect is barely to propound what upon all occasions is to be resolved on, the busi∣nesses being first well weighed in the Councel. He therefore dwels in the best Piazza, or Market-place of the Town possest; and out of a window makes his Propositions to the squadron which meets there to that purpose. The multitude grumble often at those which they like not; and being born away by rage, in∣stead of shewing their negative by the usual way of votes, they many time wit∣ness their gainsaying by a peal of musker-shot. They are hereunto chiefly indu∣ced through the jealousies which reigne amongst them. One souldier fears to be betrayed by another; and they easily grow to distrust their heads wherein they did at first impose their chiefest trust. The Elect is therefore never left without one particular sentinel; he can neither receive nor write any Letters without the knowledge of the squadron: and thus in all things else, his voice is as well bound up as his hands, unless the impediment be first taken away by the squadron. The Ministry of his Councellors is bounded in like manner. Amongst the other soul∣diers all separate commerce is absolutely forbidden; it being their pleasure that by irretractable rigour as the squadron makes but one body, so it have but one will.
Their discipline in all other things is very severe: so as it may be doubted whether it were introduced with straiter laws, or executed with more severe: And no fault in point of execution is pardoned. Never did disobedience beget better obedience. The Squadron in withdrawing it self from the command of its first Commanders, doth with so much rigor bereave it self of all liberty in submitting to second heads; though (as hath been said) it keeps the supreme authority in it self, and will ever and anon make it appear by horrid examples. It therefore often punisheth great faults with its own hands; making those who according to their laws have de∣served it, sometimes pass the pikes, and sometimes be shot to death. Their laws offend for the most part on the more severe side; but many of them are so well regulated, as better cannot be desired in whatsoever compleat Commonwealth. Theft, play, blaspheming, drunkenness, dishonest women, all brawls, running in debt further then men are able to pay, and many other such like excesses are for∣bidden upon heavy penalties; which in the form of all good Governments are born withall, since they can never be fully irradicated. In this their chief respect is, to avoid all occasion of contention or discord, which may disunite the Squa∣dron. Of so much greater force with men is service done to themselves, then when to others. And so much prevails the uniform consent of many, though of differ∣ing births, customs, and language. For, in the war of Flanaers divers Nations have been seen to mutiny together, and all of them to make but one body, and lead to one end, as if they were but one onely people. Generals and other War∣riors have sometimes endeavoured to break and punish Mutinies; but they have seldom hit in their designs: For the better sort are oft-times won over to side with the worst, and the remedy is turn'd into a greater malady. It is therefore best to agree the divided Souldiery; which is done by delivering up some princi∣pal Personage into their hands for a Pledge, till full satisfaction be given: And we in our time have seen the Duke of Ossuna, a Grandee of Spain, given up for an Hostage. This in brief is the form of Government observed by Mutiniers. When they have received their Pay, they soon return to their former obedience, and there is no sign left of any such pestilence: For so may all Mutinies which happen in Armies be called, since so great a part of their body is infected thereby the union thereof is broken, the government disturbed; their forces then rendred weakest, when they should be strongest; and those advantages are either lost, or those evils caused by their own Forces, which the Enemy could never have effected. Now to reassume the thread of our discourse. The Spaniards when they had formed this Mutinie, took their way suddenly towards Antwerp, passing over the Mause at Grave. Sancio d'Avila gave speedy advertisement of this to the Com∣mendador: who forthwith went himself in person to that City, to keep the Mu∣tiniers from entring thereinto; which if he could not doe, then at least to keep them from sacking it. Of one side of the City the wall met not by a good space with the Ditch of the Citadel, and that open place was only shut up with certain Palisadoes. Towards this part did the Mutiniers march in such diligence, and pre∣sented themselves before it with such resolution, as neither the Inhabitants of the Town, nor yet the Garrison, which were some German Companies, durst with∣stand them. They might have been best resisted by the Spanish Garrison which was in the Citadel: but these, not being very well pleased neither, did rather incline to joyn with them; nor had the Governour thereof Sancio d'Avila little to doe in keeping them from so doing. At their entrance into the Piazza, the Mutiniers put themselves in order, and made the Citizens sorely afraid that they would have plundred the City. Here the Commendador came before them on horse-back, and with fair words endeavoured to reduce them to their obedience, assuring them that they should very shortly receive full satisfaction with advan∣tage. But neither were his intreaties of validity, nor did his Authority prevail: yet they assured him, that set their present maintenance aside, the City should not suffer any prejudice, provided always that they did receive speedy satisfaction. They then took up their quarters in houses in the Town, having first made the German garrison which was in Antwerp, under Frederick Perenotto Lord of Champigni, and brother to Cardinal Cranville, withdraw out of the City. But
were it either for some particular distaste which they had taken against him, or that they could not well moderate their own heat, they could not forbear plun∣dring his house, together with some other houses, where either their jollity or hatred did most transport them. After this, all possible diligence was taken to give them satisfaction: Neither did they let slip any occasion of hastening the effects thereof by way of terror, and especially of Plunder. So as threatening it every day, and the Antwerpians every day fearing it, they were so much affected therewithall, as they were resolved to contribute whatsoever monies were requisite to free themselves as soon as might be from so dreadful a danger. The Mutiniers were notwithstanding contented to receive six payes in Cloth and other Draperies which the City furnisht them withall; they were paid the rest in mony. And having obtained a large Pardon from the Commendador in the Kings name, upon solemn oath in the greatest Church, they at last went out of Antwerp, and return'd to joyn with the rest of the Army, which had already re-entred Holland, and had begun to besiege Leyden. Amongst other prejudices which the Kings affairs re∣ceived by this mutiny, one of the greatest was, the loss of many ships which the Commendador had prepared upon the shore of Antwerp, for new designs upon Zealand. In Glimes his place, who was slain in the former related Sea-fight, was Adolphus Hansteede put: Who fearing lest the Mutiniers might fall upon the Navy which he had the charge of, and would have it in their power, for their bet∣ter security of getting their pretended satisfaction; resolved to launch forth with it into the deepest part of the Scheld, and there secure himself from that fear. But by shunning this danger, he ran into a greater. The Zealanders had quickly notice hereof, and would not lose the opportunity. They came unexpectedly with many armed Vessels, and without much adoe took most of the Kings ships, which what great, what little, were about forty, and almost all of them well provided of Artillery and all Naval preparations; and the rest they either burnt, or sunk, or shatter'd them so, as they were for no more service. The design was to assault Zealand with this the Kings Fleet, by the Rivers and Gulfs which inviron it with∣in, and which cannot receive great Vessels; and at the same time to doe the same with another Fleet of greater ships on the outside, which ships were with all speed preparing in Spain: intending chiefly to possess themselves of some good Haven, and stil to streighten that maritine Tract the more, and to endeavour by all means possible to possess themselves of that Province, without which the King could never hope to keep Flanders firm in his obedience. And although the same design was continued in Spain, after the unfortunate success of the Navy in Flanders; yet so many difficulties arose on all sides, as it was impossible afterwards to ef∣fect it. The Prince of Orange was this mean with many Forces about Niminghen, whither he was come to joyn with his brother Lodovick, as we have said: whose defeat, and death ensuing, and instantly thereupon the Spaniards Mutiny, he staid still in those parts; and failed not to make his advantage of the disorders hapned in the Kings Camp. But seeing the Enemies forces hindred by the said mutiny within themselves, he made many incursions into those parts, hoping to make some considerable progress. He was possest of the Town of Bomel, a strong place, and which gives the name to a large Island, made by the Mause and Wahale. Here Orange staid, as in a place naturally very advantagious; and annoy'd the neigh∣bouring parts which were still in obedience to the King. And because Balduke, which is one of the chiefest Cities of all Brabant, was in greatest danger, the Commendador sent men suddenly to secure it, and fortified the chiefest Passes thereabouts. The Mutiny being afterwards accommodated, he dispatched away the Marquis Vitelli with a good strength, to disturb Orange in all his designs. With him went John Baptista, and Camillo, brothers to the Marquis del Monte, and Vitelli his Nephews by the sisters side: Each of them commanded a Com∣pany of Lances, but came to much greater preferment afterwards in the continu∣ation of the war, and won therein a great esteem of valour. The greatest weight of the military affairs in Flanders lay then upon Vitelli; as well in regard of his place of Campmaster-General, which was the chiefest charge in the whole Army next to the supreme command of Governour; as for his long experience in war,
which appeared yet more after the Duke of Alva's departure, so cry'd up a Commander, and of so great reputation: of the Italian Nobility which were then in the Army of Flanders, Rafell Barberino was in great esteem, and was much imployed in many weighty actions. He was very well skill'd in particular in matter of Fortification; and therefore his advice was asked, and his opinion followed upon all occasions of that nature. He was as well esteemed in treating of businesses as in Military imployments, and therefore having been formerly sent into England by the Duke of Alva, the Commendador continued to make good use of him in divers negotiations which were then in hand, to breed, if it were possible a better intelligence and correspondency between that Queen and the King of Spain in the occurrences of Flanders. This Rafell was Uncle by the Fathers side to Maffeo Barberino, which our age hath seen pass through all the chiefest degrees of Prelatship with much applause in the Apostolick See, and who by his worth becoming afterward Cardinal, and lastly Pope, precedes now in the universal Government of Christs flock, by the name of Urban the eight: A Prince, who amidst his so many sublime vertues, leaves it in doubt which of them merits more praise; and in whom it is no less questionable which of his Principalities becomes him best, or that which the Church gives him over men, or that which he by his learning hath acquired over knowledge. Vitelli being then gone towards the Island of Bomell, he reduced many Towns thereabouts to the Kings devotion, and built two Forts there the better to curb the enemies in those parts. The chief Towns which he took were, Leerdam, Aspe∣ren, and Huechelen, all of them seated upon the River Linga, which runs through Holland. He hoped likewise to surprise the Town of Bomell: but were it that his practises were discovered, or not well managed, he could not effect his hopes. From hence Vitelli returned to Antwerp, and of the people which he had with him, a Regiment of Swissers were dismist, which the Commendador had lately raised, and the rest marched more inwards into Holland, to joyn with those of the Kings men who were in that Province. A new general pardon was at this time publisht by the Commendador-general in the Kings name, like that which was formerly in the Duke of Alva's time came forth with such solemnity. And be∣cause the other had begot more fear then trust, by reason of the so many excep∣tive clauses which were in it; therefore in this the King inlarged his clemency goodnesse and to all such as would enjoy the fruit thereof, except such as were guilty of the most heynous offences; and he thereunto added also the Ecclesiastical Authority touching such faults as were committed in matter of Religion. But neither did the one or the other Indulgence avail any thing; nay this latter met with less of faith in the Flemish then the former had done; by how much they were more alienated from the Church and King, since the coming forth of the former. The Commendador had at this time some little hopes of reducing the Rebels to some pacification. Philip Marnice, Lord of Aldegonda was made the Instrument herein: who in some Military action had formerly been taken and was then prisoner in Utricht. This was one of Orange his chief Councellors, a man of great courage and abilities in whatsoever imployment. And to him were attributed chiefly many of those actions which had occasioned the first tumults in Flanders, particularly the drawing up of that Covenant of which we have formerly spoken. He gave some hopes, that he would bring Orange to such conditions as the King should be satisfied withall. Whereupon by the Com∣mendadors order, il Signior de Champigni, who was Governor of Antwerp and Gunio di Jongen, entred into Treaty with him for certain days; but it quickly ap¦peared that the Treaty was commenc'd either out of fraud or vain glory. For the proposals on Marnice's behalf, bore conditions which were impossible to effect. He first proposed, That all foreigners should be made to quit the Country, in∣deavouring by sundry wayes to honest the motion. And for what concerned Re∣ligion, he represented what had so often been proposed by Orange: to wit, That the States General might be called, and that they should maturely consider, what means were best to be used as a remedy therein: so this Treaty of agreement was quickly broken off, for the Commendador would not have it to continue any longer: judging that Religion and the King should suffer too much prejudice by only listening to such Propositions.
Now follows the siege of Leyden, which was particularly memorable, for the condition of the succour, which so altered the order of affairs, as the besiegers became besieged; and look what unhappy success the assailed expected, the Assai∣lant made trial of the very same. Leyden is one of the chief Towns of Holland; it is seated low, amongst, as may be said, a labyrinth of channels, part of which are running, part standing waters, and which cut through the Territories there∣of on al sides. The Rhine runs through it with one of its branches, which now is the weakest, but hath formerly been the most frequented; though this retain its antient name, whereas the rest, as they draw near the sea, change it into that of other Rivers. So many other channels are derived from this branch within the Town it¦self in several parts, as the space which is there broken off by the Islands, is in a sort larger then what is united to the Continent. But if it be divided by so many channels, it is re-joyned by many more bridges. Of which there are about 150. where they may serve either for use or ornament; and the most of them are of stone. The Town is well peopled, her streets are large, buildings well polished; it is well flankt round about; her ditch is every where deep; and in fine, she is in all circumstances of such condition, as the Kings men had good reason to use all endeavour to gain her, as also the Rebels to keep possession of her. The Towns of Delf, Roterdam and Gouda, are much about half a days journey distant from Leyden, the Noblest and best peopled Towns in all Holland. The Hague is like∣wise within two leagues of it, an open Village; but which for beautious situation, for number of Inhabitants, and gallant buildings, may compare with many of the best walled Towns of that Province. Yet is not this Village watred, or cut through by any river. The Town of Delf lies upon a river which joynes up∣on the Mause; Roterdam upon the Roter, from whence it hath its name: and Gouda upon the Gowe, from whence it hath also its nomination, where it joynes with the Isell, and together therewith falls afterwards into the Mause. To these rivers many other channels cut by hand, are annext; so as there is no Village thereabouts near which there is not either running or standing waters in divers places. The Holland Rebels knew long before, that the Spaniards intended to besiege Leyden: and that the Duke of Alva after the taking of Harlem, had de∣clared his intention therein, by possessing himself of al those places aloof off, which in the winter season were most opportune to effect it. The Duke being gone Re∣chesens had continued the same resolution. Wherefore the Rebels to prevent the danger, intended to fortifie those Passes which were of greatest importance, ei∣ther to impede the Rebels, or to bring succour to the Town. Two Villages a∣mongst the rest, were most considerable for this purpose; the one toward Gouda, called Alfen, which is seated upon a channel over which there is a bridge, which according to the Custom of that Country, opens and shuts in the passage of the water with sluces, or floudgates. The other towards Delf, which is called Ma∣sen-sluce, and which commands one of the chiefest passes upon the way to Leyden. In these two places the enemies had fortified themselves, and especially in that of Alfen, in respect of the bridg which they guarded by a particular Fort. When then the Kings side had resolved to besiege Leyden, it was thought necessary be∣fore all other things to possess themselves of both these passes. The Commenda∣dor had given the chief care of the siege to the Camp-master Valdes; who to this purpose having assembled together a good many Spaniards, and joyned some Germans and Walloons with them, was gone towards Leyden. His first designe in approaching it, was to assault the Village of Alfen, and to bereave the enemy of the abovesaid bridg. Wherefore picking out some of the stoutest souldiers, they assaulted the enemy so furiously, as after a bloudy fight they won the fort which was built to defend the bridg. And following those with the same violence who retreated, they entred together with them into their fortifications, where∣with the Town was munited, and slew many of them rather in their flight, then in their making resistance; so made themselves Masters of that place, and quar∣tered there. As much as the Kings men were hereby incouraged, the Rebels were as much discouraged; which made the taking of the other fort of Masn∣sluce more easie to the Royalist: and thus these two places fell within a few days into their hands, who by so favourable a beginning, hoped very much in a no less
prosperons end of the Siege. They then betook themselves with diligence to be masters of all other Avenues whereby succour might be kept from the Town. The parts thereabouts (as hath been said) are full of Channels and Rivers: wherefore 'twas thought necessary to block up all passages with sundry Forts, by which the City might be come to, either by land or water; so as ere long there were little less then 60 Forts built round about it, whereby almost all possi∣bility of relieving it was taken away. The Leydenists this mean while were not wanting on their parts in preparing for defence. And judging that the Reyalists intended rather to take the Town by Famine then by the sword, they thought it not convenient to receive many foregin Souldiers into the City; as well the longer to preserve their victuais, as for that they hoped they had men enough of their own to maintain and defend it. There hapned therefore but few skirmishes on either side; though those with∣in fallied out sometimes to keep the Kings men as far off the City as they might, and especially on those sides where they found greater disturbance or danger by the Assailants approach; who amongst the rest had raised one Fort which they called Lamsfort, and which was nearest Leyden. The Ley denists sound them∣selves much incommodiated by this Fort; for it troubled divers of their pasture grounds wherein they fed much Cattel, and put the City into other great straits. Provoked therefore by anger, and inforced by necessity, they fallied out one day against those that kept it, and assaulted it with such resolution, as it was long doubtful which side had the better: But at last the Royalists prevailed, and the Fort continued still in their possession, which they fortified better then before, that they might not any more fear the loss thereof, nor those within hope to get it. The Leydenists cooled not notwithstanding in their making resistance: But fearing by reason of the Royalists still nearer approach unto the City, that they would hasten the end of the Siege also by an Assault, they omitted not to provide for all things necessary upon such an occasion. They wrought upon the walls night and day, the women wrought as well as the men; every one lessened their own victuals, to furnish the publike longer therewithall: And they encouraged each other on all sides to maintain the defence; concluding that it was better to suffer any how hard conditions soever, and even death it self, then to undergoe such punishments as they had not long before seen inflicted upon the Harlemists. John Douza, a famous Latine Poet in those dayes, very nobly born, and of other high deserts, had the chief government of the affairs of the City. He failed not in acting his part well; he still encouraged the Leydenists, and fed them with hopes that the other Cities would speedily joyn with them, and relieve them. In confirmation of this, sometimes Letters, sometimes Messages came from without, and some News was cunningly raised within the Town it self: Though it were very true, that Orange and the rest of the Rebels in that Province labour'd nothing more, then how to keep a place of such consequence still at their devotion. 'Twas now the month of August: and the Leydenists began already to suffer want of victuals. Therefore the States of the Country met to treat of so weighty a business, and to find out some way whereby the City might be relieved: And this affair began to be mightily canvest. The Deputies differ'd in their opinions. Some thought that the Town might be easeliest got into by making a gallant as∣sault by Land; others held, it might better be relieved by some River or Channel; but the greatest part concluded that there was small hopes of doing it either one way or other, the Kings men having so strongly fortified themselves every where. Lewis Boisot, Admiral of Holland, chanced to be at this meeting; A man very expert in maritime affairs, of a manlike spirit, and good at execution; and one who was very well esteemed of over all the Province. He, whilst they were hottest in the variety of their opinions, stept forth to propound his, and began to speak thus: I wish that our own misfortunes did not too deplorably teach us, how perverse the fury of the Sea proves sometimes to our Countries. Who sees not how we are daily in∣forst to oppose our industry to the threats thereof? Nor hath our mountainous banks been sufficient so to curb the tempest of her waves, but that some time se hath swal∣lowed up whole Islands on some sides, and caused miserable and unbeard of ruines in
other parts. Wee are now to seeke for remedy in this our present necessitie, from these evills which doe so often afflict us. Let Nature worke the some effect to day for our good, which she useth upon so many other occasions to doe for our hurt. And by those weapons wherewith she makes war against us, let us by her example make war upon our enemies. Every one knows that at the two Equinoxials of the year, the Ocean swels extraordinary high upon our Coasts; and by the season of the year, we are shortly to expect the effects thereof. My Councel shall therefore be, that we may im∣mediately at the high tides begin to let the waters loose into the neighbouring grounds of Leyden: greater tides will hereafter follow. And thus, turning the siege upon the Besiegers, we may hope to destroy our enemies within their own works, and at the same time to free the City from all danger. It may be thought impossible to relieve it by land, or by the ordinary way of channels and rivers; whereas by the way which I have prescribed, we may believe that our enterprise will be smiled on by success. It will be in our power to let in the Inundation where we please. We shall see the enemy strangely astonished and confused, between the shame of abandoning the siege, and the horror of continuing it. But being forced at last to fly, we shall see our own weapons, and those of nature conspire together in slaughtering them on all sides; and shall see that punishment justly transfer'd on them, which they with open violence prepared for the innocent. The Country which shall be drowned will doubtlesly be some what inda∣maged thereby; but who would not bear with such an inconvenience, whereby their Country shall receive so great a benefit? On the contrary, whose hair will not stand on end to think that after the loss of Harlem, and of Leyden, all the whole Province will shortly remain at the cruel will of the Spaniards? we must sometimes be wick∣ed to be good. How oft do we cut off some one member for the welfare and safeguard of the rest of the body? yet this evil will not prove finally so great, but that it will in time be paid with great usury. Some worldly actions prove so memorable, as they strike envy dumb, and add new tongues to fame. This of ours will certainly be such, and will be every where highly celebrated. I who so boldly give the advice, do as con∣fidently pronounce the augury; and hope that the event will crown both of them with fortunate success. At the hearing of so strange a proposition, the Deputies were much confused whether they should accept of it, or reject it But it is oft times seen that need passing into necessity, necessity passeth luckily into desparation. And thus it pro∣ved in what we shall now relate. For all of them joyning at last in opinion that Leyden was not to be freed by any other way, then by what Boisot had propoun∣ded, 'twas resolved that at all adventures they would follow his advice. The chief banks or ditches of the Mause and Isel, between Roterdam and Tergowe were pre∣sently cut in divers places. And at the high-tide the waters began to break in e∣very where, and overflow all the grounds which lie between Tergowe, Roterdam, Delf and Leyden. At the sight of this unlooked for inundation, the Spaniards were at first much astonished, but they were soon aware of the enemies designe. The Kings Forts were very many, as we have said; and divers of them were sea∣ted in the lowest places. These the inundation did quickly reach, and therefore they were quickly forsaken, and those who kept them, went to joyn with those who kept the chiefest Forts, which were so placed as they might be more easily maintained. This mean while, when once the enemy had pitched upon the afore∣said resolution, they applyed themselves apace to get together great store of ves∣sels, which should be fitting to relieve Leyden. They were very careful to build them with shallow bottoms, to the end that they might pass over such grounds where the waters were shallowest: the greatest part of them were built in Roterdam by reason of the nearness and oportunity of its situation. Whole Holland was in great expectation what the success would prove, and therefore people flockt from all parts to help to build boats: many of which were to be in the form of Gal∣lies with oars, to the end that they might the easilyer get by the passes, and assault the Forts which were yet in the Royalists possession. These boats were therefore furnished with many peeces of Artillery, and such people as were judged fit to fight. Whilst they were making this preparation, the Admiral of Holland indea∣voured with some ships prepared for that purpose, to force certain passes, and to bring some succour into Leyden; for the besieged suffered very much for want
of victuals, and did very earnestly sollicite succour. But his design did not at that time take effect: For the waters were not yet so far increased, as that his Vessels could come near Leyden. All Holland joyned therefore in their prayers, That the Sea might suddenly swell higher; and that the Province, by raising the Siege of Leyden, might receive so desired a misfortune. On the other side, the Kings men were not wanting in securing their Forts, and repairing them with earth, hay, and whatsoever else they could come by of most commodious. And hoping that the waters would swell no higher, they perswaded themselves that they should within a few dayes finish their business. They very well knew the Townsmens ne∣cessities; and that all their victuals being already spent, the affairs within were drawing to great extremity. Whilst both sides were in these fears and hopes, the time came wherein Nature by way of her hidden causes was likewise to work her effects. About the end of September the Sea began to swell exceedingly, according as she useth to doe in that season of the year: And pouring in at the high Tides no longer waves but even mountains of waters into the most inward channels and rivers made so great an inundation, as all the Country about Leyden seemed to be turned into a Sea. It cannot be said how much the Rebels were hereby incou∣raged, and the Kings men discouraged. The former came presently forth with their Fleet, which consisted of about 150 Bottoms, a great part whereof were made like Gallies; and to these were added many other Boats, which served only to carry victuals. The whole Fleet was thus assembled together about the beginning of October, and put to water in good order to execute ther designed re∣lief: the Gallies went on the outsides; the other greater Vessels, which if need should be were to play upon the Forts, in the midst; and those which bore the victuals, in the rear. But there was no occasion of any great contention: For the Kings men having valiantly defended themselves in sundry places, considering that they were not now to fight with men, but with the Elements, thought rather how to withdraw themselves into places of safety, then rashly to oppose the ene∣my. Yet they could not forgoe their Fortifications neither so soon, nor in so good order, but that many of them remained a prey either to the sword or to the water. And truly it was a miserable spectacle to behold from all parts, one slain, another drowned; and many endeavour to save themselves in the highest places, where when they were freed from the waters, they were inexorably slain by the Enemy. 'Tis said that above 1500 of the Kings men perisht thus, and most of them Spa∣niards, as those who were chiefly imployed in ordering the Siege, and who de∣sirous to bear away the greatest glory, fell into the greatest misfortune. Thus was Leyden at last relieved, after five moneths siege, to the exceeding great joy of the Rebels, and all that favoured them. But howsoever the memory of this siege remained a long time very sorrowfull in the City: for about 10000 dyed within the town of hunger & other sufferings; and all the most unclean & vilest nourish∣ment was already so consumed when the relief was brought in, and the besieged resolving rather to die then to yield, nothing was expected but that the City should give up her last breath, and remaining a miserable carkass should be buried within her own wals and houses.
THE HISTORY OF THE WARS OF FLANDERS. Written by CARDINAL BENTIVOGLIO. BOOK IX. The Contents. The Emperour endeavours to procure the Peace of Flanders, and sends an Ambassa∣dor to this purpose. The Commissioners for the King and for the Rebels meet, and confer at Pireda. Difficulties met with in the Treaty, not to be overcome. The Treaty is soon dissolved, and all hopes of Agreement vanish. Arms are reassumed on all sides. The Catholicks progress in Holland, and in Zealand, and with what design. Description of the Islands which lie on the East-side of Zealand. To take them, it is propounded to wade through a large Channel, the difficulties whereof are held very great. The Commendador resolves to make tryal, and hath happy success therein. The Kings men take divers Forts. Quricksea is besieged: the Town begirt, and great resistance made, but at last those within yield. The Commenda∣dor this mean while dyes, and the Government passeth into the hands of the Councel of State. The Spaniards mutiny again; who are therefore declared Rebels, and are set on on all sides by the Flemish. Divers hostilities between them. The States cause the Castles of Antwerp and of Gaunt to be besieged. The mutinous Spani∣ards run to relieve that of Antwerp: and having secured it, sack the City in revenge. A General Assembly of the Deputies of the Catholick Provinces, and of those of Holland and Zealand which are infected with Heresie. Peace and Union insues thereupon; and the thing chiefly resolved on, is, that all Foreiners shall be expelled the Country. FLANDERS was thus consumed with the flames of war, Anno 15. when the Emperor imployed his authority to reduce those Provinces to peace. Maximilian the 2. was then Emperor: To boot with the common Austrian tye, he and the King of Spain could not be more nearly joyned in their own persons; for the Emperors wife was Sister to the King, and the King had taken to wife a Daughter of the Emperors. Wherefore Cesar valued the Kings affairs in Flanders as his own. And on the other side, that fire so near Germany, to foment the which the Heretical Faction of the Empire had been so ready, kept his thoughts greatly agitated; fearing left the fire being redoubled by passing
likewise into the German Provinces, his house might thereby be set on fire, as was the King of Spains in the Low-Countries. He therefore well weighing in his Councel what (the condition of the affair considered) was best to be done; and having adjusted what was most necessary for the Catholick Kings interest and ho∣nour, sent an Ambassador to procure a Treaty concerning it in Flanders. This Ambassador was Count Suarzemburg; one of the ancientest Counts of Germany; and who was no less esteemed of in chose parts for his wisdom, then for his bloud. He came into Holland about the beginning of the year 1575. he staid some days in Dort, whether Orange and some of the Deputies of Holland and of Zealand came to meet him. The Ambassador negotiated with him in particular in the name of Cesar, and gave unto him a Letter from his Imperial Majesty, wherein mingling authority with intreaties, he exhorted him to be a means of facilitating the Ambassadors negotiation. After this private Treaty, they came to the pub∣lick management in Breda, a Town situated upon the uttermost bounds of Bra∣bant towards Holland, and therefore very fit for the intervening of the people on both sides. Orange was master of that Town before the troubles began in Flanders; but being afterwards forfeited to the King, 'twas kept as one of the Kings Garisons, as we shewed in the beginning. Here then met the Deputies on both sides in March following for the King, there was Monsieur de Rassenghien, the Connt Della Rocta, Arnold Sasbout, Charis Suys, and Albertus Lexino; and for the Rebels, James Vanderdoes, Philip Bernice, Bharls Boisot Arnold Dorp, and Junius de Giuge. And for their security whilst they were to stay in a Town gar∣ded by the Kings Forces, the Camp-master Julius Romero, and Christopher Max∣dragone, together with Mihell Cruiglias, and Mihell Allentor, all four Spani∣ards, were committed into particular custady in Dort, as Hostages. In the open∣ing of the Treaty, the Ambassador in a very grave and gracious manner, exhor∣ted the Deputies on both sides, that they would set their whole minds and endea∣vours to procure a happy issue of this Treaty: and he laboured the Rebels De∣puties apart, giving them a Letter which the Emperour had writ to the States of their Provinces. They then fell to Treat. We told you in the former book, that in that Treaty of peace which was then indeavoured to be introduced, the Rebels Proposals were chiefly reduced to two heads: The first, That all the Spaniards, together with all other foreign souldiers should be made to leave the Country; and that then, the General States being assembled, Religion, and the peace of the Provinces should be esta∣blished as they should think best. The Rebels Commissioners made the same Proposals at Breda. As for the first Head, the Kings Deputies answered, That the Vassals of the same Prince were not to account one another strangers; That indeed the Germans, French, and English were such; of which the Rebels made use; and that notwithstanding as soon as Flanders should be reduced to peace, the King would forthwith cause the Spaniards, and all those others that they called fo∣reigners, leave the Country. As for the convocation of the States General, they an∣swered, That the whole body of the Provinces, which by the troubles of War were now so divided, was likewise first to be re-united by peace. Which being done, the King would willingly and suddenly call such an Assembly, would hear their opini∣ons, and would agree unto whatsoever they should think fitting. After this, the Kings Deputies fell to propound such conditions, as they thought fittest to effect the desired concord. Which were these, That in the first place, all past effences should for ever be forgotten: That the revolted Cities and Towns should be restored to their Pri∣viledges; and every other person to their former Honours and possessions. That all the Towns, Cities, strong Holds, Artillery, Warlike Ammunition, and Arms which were now in the Rebels possession, should return into the Kings hands. That the Ca∣tholick Religion should be restored in all places, without the permitting of any other Sect. That notwithstanding the King would out of his clemency and goodness, per∣mit all those that had followed Heresio, to go freely out of the Country, and would allow them time to sell such goods as they could not carry with them. All business between the Commissioners, was transacted in writing: The Re∣bels Commissioners having seen the Propositions proposed by the Kings side; an∣swered
fully on their behalfs; but in so bitter words, and in so contrary a sense, as it was easie to be seen, how little hope there was of bringing the begun nego∣tiation to a happy issue. The Papers which were propounded were very prolix; and therefore to avoid tediousness, we will give you here only a breviat of them. The Rebels Deputies, in the ranswers, made first rather a long Invective, then a∣ny complaint against the Spaniards; exagerating that they had been the chief cause of all the evils that had befaln those Provinces. Then reassuming the head concerning foreigners, they repeated the same things over again more at large. They said, That the Spaniards, and all the rest which were not native Flemish, were not (as strangers) any ways to participate of that Government. That those foreigners which they on their sides were forced to make use of, were meer mercenaries. But that the Spaniards contrary to the immunities and priviledges of the Provinces, were by vio∣lence brought thither, and there by violence established. That the Government of Ci∣ties, keeping of Forts, chief Commands in the Army, were in their hands: And that it was they who according to their arbitrary will, gave now the Laws. That if the King when he went from Flanders was pleased to take away those who were then there, he ought much more be induced to do the like now, when it was seen by evident proofs, how prejudicial their stay there was. Touching the Convocation of the States General, they stood stiff to their first principles Saying, That in making such a peace as might be best for Flanders, the King could not be better advised then by those who were best acquainted with her malladies, and who knew best what were the firtest remedies for her cure: wherefore recourse must needs be had to that Assembly. For what remained, they said, That they would never relin∣quish those Cities strong Holds, Munitions, and Arms, wherein their safety did con∣sist, till they saw a setled peace in the form by them proposed. That they held their reformed Religion to be good, and that they would not for such an occasion abandon their Goods, Parents, and Country, nor leave the two Provinces of Holland and Zealand made desolate by the excluding from thence so many who profest the same Re∣ligion, which would redound very much to the Kings disservice, by his losing so many Subjects, and by the too much impoverishing of both the Provinces in the lesning of their Commerce and Merchandise. The Kings Commissioners saw very well by this opiniatracy of the adverse party, that no reply which they could make would be to any purpose. Yet more to justifie the King in his proceedings, then out of any hope of good success, they resolved to present another paper, whereby to confute the oppositions made by the contrary party. They said, That to speak in that manner against the Spaniards, and the rest of the Kings sub∣jects, shewed they had no mind to a reconciliation, but that they were still more radica∣ted in their enmity. And yet the end of this Treaty was only to take away all mis∣understandings, and to establish peace and concord. That they again replyed, when peace should be once made, the King would not stick at removing the Spaniards, and all those that they termed strangers, out of those Countries. That to do this before, were for the King to lay down his arms before his time, contrary to his dignity, con∣trary to all reason of war, and contrary to all right of justice. That as the King did not pretend this at first in respect of those men who did serve the Rebels, and who were indeed all of them strangers; so when peace should be made, he would on his part agree that all that sort of souldiery should depart the Country. As for the assembling of the States General, they shewed how that it would require too long time, and that the Treaty being to pass through their hands, would cause a much longer expence of time. That such Treaties were never known to be handled by the States General. That this would be to make the Subjects authority greater then the Kings, and to make them the Law-givers, whereas they were with all moderation to receive them. That therefore when the peace should be established, the King would suddenly call the States: And in the re-ordering the affairs of Flanders, would follow whatsoever was convenient, and which had been formerly practised by his predecessors, those Coun∣cels and Records which upon like occasion, should be given him by them. Concerning the restitution of Towns, Munitions and Arms, they said that no more reasonable
demand could be made: That in all reason, when the alienated Provinces should re∣turn to the Kings obedience, the Towns and Arms thereof should likewise return into his hands as formerly: That this was practised in the making of every Peace between Prince and Prince; then much more ought it to be so between Princes and Subjects. Touching the point of Religion, they replied again, That the King would not in any the least degree alter his resolution taken therein, and which they had declared: That to change Religion was not in the power of Princes, much less of Subjects: That the Apostolick Roman Religion had for so many Ages, and with so much piety been the onely Faith profest in Flanders: That at the Kings taking possession of those Pro∣vinces, the King and People had reciprocally sworn to defend and preserve that alone: That by the departure of those that were infected with Heresie, Holland and Zealand would not suffer any considerable diminution of people, much less would they be left desolate, for they were not so many; nay, if the Heretick Preachers were driven from thence, who had brought with them, and upheld that infection, the Catholick Religion would soon return to flourish there again: That notwithstanding the King would suffer such as would continue pertinacionsly in their Sects, to transport their goods in form aforesaid. And to be sure that whatsoever was promised should be performed, the King would to that purpose pledg his Royal Faith in the most ample manner, and would thereunto adde (if the adverse party should so require) the like of the Emperor, by whose authority, through his express Ambassador, this Treaty which was now in hand was introduced. When this Paper, which was very long, and spoke home, was presented by the Kings side, the adverse part took time to answer, shewing that they must fully communicate the whole to the States of Holland and Zealand, and therefore they their Commissioners were inforced to goe themselves in person into those parts. Count Zuarsemburgh endeavoured very much to keep them from going from the Conference, fearing (as indeed it fell out) that the Treaty, if once interrupted, would hardly ever be reassumed. But they would by no means be perswaded, and therefore at the same time the Hostages were set at liberty. It was a good while ere the Answer came: which was at last sent in a long paper; and repeating the same things yet more bitterly against the Spaniards, and against the Kings de∣mands, did conclude, That they stood firm to the Conditions propounded by them concerning Peace: that they thought them altogether necessary, and that they would never accept of any other Accommodation. When this Answer was made known to the Ambassador and the Kings Com∣missioners, the Treaty forthwith broke, and the Ambassador soon after returned for Germany. In fine, the business between the King and the Rebels was grown to too great a diffidence. The Publike Faith is sufficient between King and King; and to this Tribunal it is that recourse is had for Justice in differences which arise betwixt them: But the Rebels more considered the Kings Forces then his Faith; for the Treaty being betwixt Prince and Subjects, they were still afraid, and there∣fore demanded such terms for their security, which they neither ought to ask, nor the King to give. The Prince of Orange was sole Arbitror and Moderator of what∣soever was treated of by the Rebels; and 'twas he who fill'd them with so con∣tinual suspitions. It was every day more clearly seen, that amidst the revolutions of the Country, he hoped to reap good advantage for himself; and therefore he chose rather to hazard the Common interest in Wars, then to see his own designs quite overthrown by Peace and quiet. Nor did the Heretical Faction in Germany, France and England, for the conformity of their ends, desire the continuance of the troubles in the Low-Countries less then he. 'Tis therefore not to be imagined with how much industry all those of that party did strive to hinder the proceed∣ings of that accommodation which was introduced by Cesars means; and how much afterwards they laboured to make the Ambassadors endeavours subject to suspition, and much more the like of the Kings Commissioners, to overcome the difficulties which arose. The Treaty of Peace being thus vanisht, all sides fell eagerly again to the re∣assuming of war. The Commendador having miscarried in his design upon Ley∣den, made all the Kings men that were at the Siege tarry in Holland. It was clear∣ly
seen, that his intentions were totally to subdue that Province, and to set him∣self with all his might against the other of Zealand, that he might get that oppor∣tunity of reception which was necessary for the ships of Spain; towards which the Sea of Zealand opens, and affords the best Havens that are to be desired in all the maritime coast of the Low-Countries. Egidius di Barlemonte, Lord of Hierges, was Governour of Holland; a man of known zeal to the Kings service, and of approved skill in military profession. The Commendador commanded him to gather together as many of the Kings men as were in that Province, and to exe∣cute those Orders he should receive. The first was, to take the Town of Buren from the Rebels. Hierges prepared therefore for this design: And that he might the sooner succeed therein, he seemed as if he marched elswhere, and afterwards bent suddenly thitherward. The Town belonged to Orange, and he possest it in right of his first wifes portion, who was daughter and heir to Maximilian Age∣mont Count of Buren. This place lies very opportunely to molest Brabant and Ghelderland; and to this end Orange had furnisht it with men, who making in∣cursions into all those Confines, hindred much provision which was brought from those two Provinces to the Kings Camp in Holland. For what remains, the Town is seated upon a mean River, built about with an ancient Wall, and with∣out any Bulwark; it hath an ancient Castle; the greatest strength which they within had, was a large and deep Ditch. Hierges coming thither unexpectedly, threatned the Townsmen with all severe hostility, if they did not immediately surrender the Town. He had with him about 6000 Foot and 400 Horse, all choise men, and long trained up in discipline. They within seemed little to fear the threats from without; but their actions did not correspond: For Hierges having made a great Battery, and in despight of them thrown a bridge over the Ditch, did with his men assault the Town so furiously, as the Defendants think∣ing rather how to save themselves, then how to fight, retreated into the Castle, where neither did they make any greater resistance. Hierges encouraged by his first success, redoubled his former threats: whereupon the Defendants courage failing them, they quickly articled to surrender, contenting themselves basely with the bare safeguard of their lives, and came forth without either Arms or Colours. The Castle and Town were both of them sackt; and Hierges presently went from thence, having first secured the Town. He from this Angle re-entred the Province; and receiving a new recruit of Germans and Walloons, besieged the Town of Oudwater: A place considerable in it self, and much more for the way it made for the taking of others of greater importance. The Isel runs on the one side, and it is incompassed every where else with a great Ditch; and the ground all about it is so low and spongie, as there is no coming to the Town but upon Banks, nor any getting in but by Channels. This kind of situation made the Siege more difficult; for the place was of it self weak, and had no strong works. The Kings Army lay chiefly upon the banks, and their greatest battery was placed upon one of the greatest of them, which for want of earth was inlarged by a great mass of old Nets, with flax and hemp, with which the Country thereabouts doth infinitely abound, and with the same materials they provided to pass over the Ditch. Those of the Town seemed very resolute to defend themselves; and making necessity yield to industry, they likewise instead of Rampiers had fortified their wals where it was most needful with such like materials as the besiegers had made use of. The Townsmen had received a recruit of a good many Dutch and English, and Orange promised them to send another succour speedily. Here began the op∣pugning and the defence, which continued not long: Those within having at first made some resistance against the batteries, the Kings men return'd with such fury again to the assault, as mixing themselves with the defendants in the breach, they entred together with them into the Town, and putting all to fire and sword, they in a short time did quite destroy it, and laid it desolate; nor did Hierges any wayes hinder his Souldiers heat. He went immediately from this Siege to another, and sate down before Sconoven, a little Town, but considerable, and not above a league from Oudwater. These two Towns are situated much alike. Schonoven stands upon the Lech, and is surrounded on every side with mire and water, it hath a large Ditch about it; and some Companies of Dutch and French were
entred thereinto. But the Townsmen, desirous rather to return to the Kings o∣bedience, then to remain under that of the Rebels, instead of incouraging, dis∣couraged those that were come from without. Orange therefore laboured to send a good succour thither by the river, it being then a very high tide. Which danger Hierges being willing to prevent, he crossed the river over where he thought the greatest danger lay, with a bridg of great boats, and munited them on the same side with pieces of masts, so fastned together as they might be an obstacle to the enemies ships if they should set upon the bridg on that side. This being done, he placed his Battery on the highest part, and began to play upon the Town. The Townsmen murmured against the Garison, fearing their Town would fare like Oudwater: which Orange being advertised of, he resolved to send three ships laden with men, Artillery, and other provisions to relieve and suc∣cour the besieged. They were led on by the Master of the French Guard, who was mightily favoured by the flowing tide. The Kings men discovering the de∣signe, ran from all parts to the banks to frustrate the effect. Here began a fierce bickering; for the guns playing from all sides, and each side endeavouring to o∣vercome the other, many fell on both parts, and the victory was a good while doubtfull. But Fortune seemed at last as if she would make the successes equal. The enemies ships broke the bridg, and the Master of the Guard passed over it with his ship, fighting still couragiously; but the other two were lost, and the bridg suddenly made up again: so the Town was more narrowly besieged then before, Here Hierges renewed his Batteries, and threw down above three hun∣dred yards of wall; whereat those within being stil more terrified; and the garison fearing more the Townsmen threats then those of the Kings men, a Parly was soon had, and the Town was surrendred with good conditions to the Inhabitants, and with safety of persons and goods to the souldiers. Oudwater and Scown being taken, Hierges quickly took two Forts upon a point of land called Crimpen: which being surrendred, and the parts thereabouts munited, Hierges returned to Utricht, expecting new Commissions from Rechesens. At this same time Christo∣pher Mandragone made another considerable atchievement in Holland, on ano∣ther side towards Brabant, where the Mause doth most inlarge it self, and joyns with many other rivers, all of them falling soon after into the sea. Amongst di∣vers little Islands which lie on the West side, there is one of a very narrow com∣pass, but considerable for its situation, called Finaert: here the enemy had fortified themselves, and had there some ships for their safety and guard. This Island is parted from Brabant, by a Channel not above three quarters of a mile over. Mandragone caused diligent search be made for a Ford over it, at a low sea; and found that with some hazard it might be past over. He was not troubled, but rather incouraged at the danger, which was no new thing to him, who had overome a much greater in his so famous relieving of Tergoes. He chose a thousand Walloons out of his Regiment, and 300 Spaniards; and furnishing every souldier just as he had done at the aforesaid relief, they marched very se∣cretly to the Channel, that they might take the enemy at unawares, and effect the passage the more easily. Nor was he deceived in his designe. Steping himself first into the water, he met with no difficulty save in passing through it: for the enemies being of themselves very weak, and greatly disheartned by this sudden success, withdrew their ships, and not making any resistance, abandoned the place, studying only how to save themselves. These were the proceedings of the Kings Forces then in Holland: but there was no less need of them in Zealand. The King, amongst other resolutions, intended to send a great Fleet suddenly into Flanders, which was to this end preparing in Spain: knowing too well what ad∣vantage the Rebels had over him in their Flemish ships. And considering like∣wise very well, that as their Rebellion was chiefly begun, and continued by sea, so must it likewise by the same way be allay'd and extinguished. He had there∣fore straitly commanded the Commendador, that he should by all means indea∣vour to get footing in Zealand, as the place fittest for receiving aid by sea from Spain Wherefore Rechesens without any delay apply'd himself thereunto. He sent word to Hyerges that he should forbear indeavouring any thing more in Holland; and that detaining only so many souldiers as were requisite for those parts, he
should send the rest into Brabant. He himself was this mean while gon, toge∣ther with the Marquis Vitelli and other Spanish Commanders to Antwerp, and had there with all diligence prepared a Fleet of divers ships, which might serve for the several Channels and Gulfs, which do on so many parts divide, and sur∣round Zealand. Many were likewise prepared to serve with Oars, and in the shape of small Gallies, to the end that the speed of the fleetest, might supply the slowness of the more sluggish. Hereupon they began better to consider up∣on what was to be done. The two abovesaid places which Mandragone had so luckily taken, made them believe that they might have the same success in the o∣ther channels and Gulfs of Zealand. To this purpose some places were observed by experienced personages, which were herein most hopefull. In the East side of Zealand, many Islands lie upon the sea, one in pursuit of another, which are di∣stinguished by divers channels, and lie at several distances one from another. But three of these are the chiefest: that of Tolen, which is the first that is severed from the Continent; that of Dwellant, which lies next it; and the last called Scown. Other little Islands lie near to these, which are almost nameless, as being almost unhusbanded. The least of these is called Filislant, which stands on the left side of Tolen, towards Scown. The Island of Tolen, as likewise that of Zuit∣beveland, by the succour which was given to Tergoes, were yet in the Kings pos∣session; and therefore the Spaniards desired to get the other two, Scown and Dwellant, out of hopes that they might afterwards easilyer come by that of Wal∣cherin, which is the greatest Island of all Zealand, and wherein stands Midleburg and Flushing, the most important places of the Province, and which lie nearest Spain. By these successes the whole Province would fall into the Kings hands; and he would likewise the sooner have got all that maritine Tract; especially by those aids which were the mean time to be sent from Spain to Flanders. The fleet which the Commendador had got together, was not thought sufficient to take the two aforesaid Eastern Islands, because the enemies forces in that part were much greater. There was then no hope left but to wade over some of those wa∣ters at the low ebb, and by that way to get footing on land: and it was affirmed by divers well experienced people, that from the Island of Filislant, the channel which runs from thence to Dwellant, being about four miles over, might be wa∣ded through, The Commendador and all the rest of his Councel of War, were greatly perplext what to resolve upon in this point. They doubted lest the ene∣my might already have dived into this designe; for their Navy was mightily in∣creased, and especially in little barks, that they might the better (as it was guest) approach the Kings men, and offend them if they should at any time venture to wade over any of the aforesaid channels. The Councel differed therefore in their opinions touching this. The Proposal by one side was withstood; alleadg∣ing, That the Enterprise was now to be esteemed quite another thing from what those other two were which Mandragone had been so fortunate in. That in that which was the chiefest, the relief of Tergoes, the waters were principally to be fought with, and the victory lay in every souldiers overcoming himself by bea∣ring the trouble of so large a passage. But that in doing it they had not been withstood by any adverse Fleet, by any Artillery which might thunder upon them from afar off; by any muskets, nor other weapons which might wound them near hand. That the besiegers being taken at unawares, fled suddenly of their own accord: And in brief, that that business being well weighed, very much of it was certainly to be ascribed to valour, but no less also to Fortune. That now they were to meet with a channel of almost the same breadth, where∣in the way was a like blind, and the dangers of the voyage no less uncertain; to which if you will add the opposite Fleet as our men shall be on their passage, and armed enemies to entertain them at their coming to land, how could such an undertaking be thought feasable? That unfortunate events follow unforta∣naie advices. That then 'twere better to take some other course; and that the best would be, to expect till the maritine forces which were preparing in Spain, were come. The which when they should be joyned to those of Flanders, the businesse though it might be somewhat slower, would certainly be more secure.
But on the other side, many of the chief Commanders were altogether for try∣ing the new passage, saying, That give the safety of the passage for granted, there was little else to be doubted. That the more to facilitate the success, they were to chuse the quietest hours of night, under a faithful Guide well practised therein. What damage was to be feared in the dark from rash and blind shooting? That the difficulty would rest in coming to land, wherein the Kings mens greatest danger lay, and the Enemies greatest advantage. That notwithstanding when they should be brought face to face, why should not the like success be looked for from them both? The Kings men, according to their wonted resolution, would assuredly either overcome or dye, especially when they should know they had no third choice to make, having the Enemy on their face and upon their backs so great a water. But on the contrary, the Enemies, who were for the most part merce∣nary, cowardly-minded, and greater cowards of their hands, thinking rather how to flie then how to fight, would long for nothing more then to forsake the firm land, and to retire into their close holes when they should have fearfully abandoned the open fields. That this mean while the Fleet would play her part, and landing the men by another way who were destin'd to the enterprise, they could meet with no other disturbance. That when they should have got good footing thus in Zealand, the maritime Forces which were to be sent from Spain would have the easier entrance; that this must needs precede that, and the one be guided by the other. That fortune did for the most part rather fa∣vour bold resolutions, then such as were too cautelous. And so it was to be hoped for now: The rather, for that her favour would be accompanied with the justice of the Kings forces tending to so good an end, and by the Souldiers valour in making use of them upon so worthy an occasion. 'Twas evidently seen, that to make this passage would prove very dangerous; yet the Commendador, after having been again well assured of the ford, resolved to try it; being very desirous, and also full of hopes to get the aforesaid Eastern Islands, and especially that of Scown which lay nearest the Sea; which was very considerable in it self, and very proper to secure those ships the better which were shortly expected from Spain. Within it is the Town of Ziricsee, the great∣est Town in all those Eastern Islands, and where the Commendador chiefly in∣tended to establish the Kings Forces on that side. He then without delay put 3000 Souldiers into the Island of Tolen which lies nearest Brabant, as hath been said, and composed them of Spaniards, Dutch, and Walloons in equal numbers; and went himself thither afterwards, the more to encourage the expedition by his presence. He made Sancio d' Avila Admiral of the Navy which was assembled thereabouts, and resolved to imbarque half his men in it, which when they should be landed were to be commanded by Christopher Mandragone. The other half, composed likewise equally of the abovesaid three Nations, were destin'd for the passage which was to be taken from the furthermost point of Filislant, where the Channel was broadest: For there at the low ebb the ground was highest; so as though the passage were the longer, it was the more easie. With the 1500 Foot were 200 Pioniers, to the end that those together with these might the sooner fortifie themselves when they should be come to land. They imbarked all of them first in the Island of Tolen, that afterwards they might divide themselves in Filislant in such order as hath been said. At their imbarking the Commendador presented himself before the Souldiers, and especially before those who were to wade over the Channel; and in a grave manner-did thus encourage them. He said, That the hardest enterprises were most familiar to them: that many of these very men had been in the two-precedent actions; that therefore they went to dangers which they had formerly experienced: that they should remember this was the same cause, that they served the same King, and that they were to meet with the same enemies: that therefore they could not doubt but that they were to be seconded by Divine favor, by Princely reward, and by that advantage which they had always had over those who were Rebels to the Church and King. That they were such against whom they now were to fight: that the Foreiners who were joyned with them, were of more mercenary
souls then hands; so as all instigation to fight ceasing in them, they would strive who should run fastest away. At these words they all chearfully imbarked themselves, that were to tarry in the ships, and the rest went in little Boats to the Island of Filislant. Here the Fleet staid, till the rest had passed over the Channel. John Ossorio d'Uloa, a Spa∣niard, one of the valiantest Captains of that Nation, and one who of all the rest did most counsel that enterprise, led on the men, and would himself make the pas∣sage. They waited the coming of the night, which was Michaelmas-Eve: and upon the beginning of the ebb, Osorio entred the water the very next after the Guides, and was followed first by the Spaniards, next by the Dutch, and then the Walloons; after them came the Pioners; and Captain Paralta, a Spaniard, closed up the Files with a Company of the same Nation. The Files consisted not of above two or three Souldiers at the most a-breast; to the end that being so strait or narrow, and walking upon the highest shelves, the Adversaries might have the greater difficulty in encountring them, and hindring their passage. The Enemy stood this mean while upon their watch, having already clearly pry'd into the Spaniards design. Wherefore when they knew they had begun to wade, they ordered their Boats likewise in long Files, especially the least, both on the one and the other part against the Spaniards Flank: they then began to play upon them a good distance off with their Artillery, and nearer hand with their Muskets, but did them but little hurt, by reason of the obscurity of the night. The success al∣tered with the change of the Tide: the Enemies Boats were not able to come near the Spaniards whilst the Ebb was low; but when the Flood began, and that as the Tide rise, the Enemies Boats drew nearer, the Kings men were then divers times in great straits; for they were at one and the same time to hasten their pas∣sage, to keep their Files in order, to contend against and to overcome the waters, and chiefly to resist the Enemies assaules, who were not content to gaul them with their Muskets and Harquebuses, but they annoyed them nearer hand with Iron-hooks, and struck and molested them with other instruments which they had provided for that purpose; endeavouring by all means possible to hinder, at¦least to disorder their passage. Yet the Kings mens courage increasing as did their danger, they marched on in good order, and made resistance at the same time, turning their Pikes upon the assailants, and shewing most courage where most dauger lay. Indeed the Night made very much for them; for the Enemy could go but blindly to work, and with great disorder in the dark; which made them guide all their actions more by chance then by advice. The Kings men then, having still kept their order, and made manfull resistance where it was needfull, past over the Channel in such a space of time, as they were not to receive any other disturb∣ance neither from the increasing of the Tide, nor from the Enemies Barks. Having escaped this danger, they thought to have met with a much greater in getting to land: For the Enemies, who were all of them almost Mercenaries, and of the aforesaid Nations stood upon the shore ready to oppose them. But scarcely stay∣ing the first assault made by the Royalists, they basely ran away, and shamefully forsaking the shore retreated to some parts more inward in the Island, where some of them had fortified themselves. Yet this action of the Royalists was ac∣companied with some misfortune; for the Pioners being overtaken with the Tide, not being able to go further on, nor yet to go back time enough, were al∣most all of them drowned: And for the same reason Captain Peralta with his Spanish Company could not enjoy the commodity of the passage, but was forced to return to the Navy. Of the rest who made the passage, Captain Isador Pacecco was slain, together with some Souldiers of lesser account; and some other that were wounded perisht in the water. For what remains, the Enterprise, all the cir∣cumstances considered, was certainly one of the most memorable that ever the war of Flanders produced; and such a one as deserved indeed rather to have been beheld by day-light, then to have the lustre thereof lost by the obscurity of the night. John Rivas, a Spaniard, who in the time of our being in Flanders was Governour of the Castle and Citadel of Cambray, was in this action of Ziricsce, as also in that other of Tergoes, as we touched upon in that place. He hath not only often related both these passages to me, but comparing them together, he
concluded, that in his opinion that of Tergoes was in one consideration more to be preferr'd, as being a novelty never before tryed; and this last in another respect, as having met with much greater difficulties. When the Kings men were past over, they forthwith gave the appointed signe to their ships, which with∣out any considerable opposition put also to shore; and the men being landed went presently to joyn with the rest, and without any difficulty drive the Enemy out of the whole Island of Dwellant. The Channel which divides this from the other Island of Scown, was yet to be waded over, where their chief intention of getting footing was, that they might come by Zurrichsee. That Channel is almost a league over, and therefore required new resolutions and courage for the passing through it, especially for that the Enemy stood on the contrary bank in a posture of opposition. Mandragone would needs make one here, as also Sancio d' Avila, who was with him. Whereupon the Royalists being encouraged by the example of two such Commanders, with their wonted daring overcame all the difficulties of the passage; and the Enemy in their endeavouring to withstand them, shewed likewise their accustomed cowardliness. Running basely away, they retired to Zurickzee, and there joyned with the Townsmen to sustain the Siege which they expected. The town of Zurickzee stands not far from the aforesaid Channel which divides the Island of Scown from the other of Dwellant. On that side, a lesser Channel cut by hand enters into the greater, and so the Town enjoyes the Sea as it were within its own bosom. The ground about it is very low; and by the cutting of some banks, it may easily be overflown on all sides: the walls thereof are but weak, and the Ditch very ordinary. The Inhabitants hoped much in the relief which Orange had promised them, as also in that which they expected from the season of the year; which drawing towards winter, made them believe that the Royalists would not be wel able to bear with the bitterness thereof. The enemy had fortified themselves in three other places upon the shore∣side; and on the North, in the Villages of Brouversaven and Bommene, in each of which there was a commodious Haven; and on the South, upon a certain point of land which lies between the Village of Borendam and the Town of Zuricsee. The Kings men would first make themselves masters of these Forts They found no resistance in that of Brouversaven; from whence they went to the other upon the aforesaid point of land: and falling to the Assault more out of eagerness then good advice, they lost 60. Spaniards, amongst which Captain Peralta was slain; and some other Dutch and Walloons. Irritated therefore by Anger, and no less by shame, they prepared to make a more orderly assault. But the Defendants not staying for it, forsook the Fort; and setting it on fire, went to Zirickzee. Bommene yet remained, which was the best munited, and according to appearance ought to have been the best guarded. Captain Lye, a French-man, a stout soul∣dier, commanded within: He had with him the Flower of all the Foreigners, who all of them shewed equal resolution with him to defend themselves, and to recover the honour lost in the last actions. The Fort was inexpugnable at high Sea, because the Sea-water came then into the Ditch, and likewise into a Channel which cut through a good part of the Fort on the other side: so as at that time the Enemies ships might both greatly assist those within, and molest as much those without. When the Kings men came near it, they advanced with their Trenches, and set up a great Battery near unto it, from whence they plaid for two whole dayes against the Fort: Then at the next Ebb they made a fierce assault, which the besieged did as couragiously withstand, and made the oppugners re∣treat at last with much loss; for above 150 of them were slain, and twice as many hurt. The Kings men, angry to be beaten back with so great a loss resolved to fall upon the Fort the next day on sundry parts at once: but the like resolu∣tion was found in the assailed as was in the assailants, both of them resolving ei∣ther to die or to overcome. The Kings men at the Ebb set upon the Fort in di∣vers parts; and those within, running to all places, and shewing much undaunt∣edness, were not wanting in defending themselves manfully on all side. Equal fear and hope did both encourage and discourage both of them, but with con∣trary effects: the Royalists feared the coming of the new tide, and hoped to force the Fort first; the Defendants on the contrary hoped to defend themselves till
the tide should come, and feared to be first forced by the Royalists. Wherefore the conflict proved exceeding bloody, great numbers falling on both sides, and worth and fortune varying the success a long time. They fought thus for six hours together; when the Kings men perceived that the Tide began to come, which brought them to their last endeavours; which was such, as those within not being able longer to hold out, were forced to give back, whilst they still defended them∣selvs valiantly, til they were in so doing all cut in pieces: there were slain about 200 of the Kings men, and the number of the wounded was much greater. The chief of each Nation wan much renown in this conflict: and amongst other Italians, the two Brothers of Monte, Nephews to the Marquis of Vitelli, Raphael Bar∣berino and Curtio Martinengo; each of which playing the part of a Common-Souldier, exposed themselves to each common danger. After the reducing of the Forts, the whole body of the Kings forces betook themselves to doe the like to the Town of Zuricsee: the greatest difficulty lay in bereaving them of the suc∣cour which might be brought by the abovesaid greater Channel, and by the lesser which comes (as we have said) into the Town. Signor di Dorp was the Gover∣nour thereof; a vigilant and stout man. For the better securing of the concourse of the lesser Channel with the greater, he had fortified the banks thereof on both sides to where it joyned with the other; he likewise from the very first caused all the fields round about to be overflown. So as the Kings men had no hopes of taking the Town by the wonted way of Trenches, Batteries, and Assaults. Succour was easily conveyed thereinto; nor was the Kings Fleet, though disposed of in the most convenient places, and assisted by the Boats made like Gallies, able to hinder them. Wherefore the Siege drew on in length, and the cold weather was already come; yet was it so favourable this year, as it did never hinder the passage of the Boats upon those Channels. The chief care of the Siege lay upon Mandragone, who was not wanting in using all means possible to shut up all passages whereby relief might be brought to the town. He planted a great Palisado at the mouth of the lesser Channel, and placed some big Barks there to hinder the entrance. But to work in that place, cost both time and blood: for Musket shot hail'd down continually from the fortified banks, and much harm was done likewise by the Artillery. Two little Islands of very small circuit lay on that side at the entry of the greater Channel, the one near the other. Towards that which lay most inward, and where the Channel grew narrower, Mandra∣gone caused also another Palisado to be planted on both sides, and sought to block up the passage on that side also by great chains of iron. He likewise raised a Fort upon the Bank neer Doveland, the more to hinder that succour. And lastly he resolved to inclose the two fortified Banks of the Channel which leads to the Town, planting a Fort upon both sides of the chief Bank, the better to impede all entrance on that side. Raphael Barberino was author of this last advice, which proved to very good purpose. The Marquis Vitelli held particular correspon∣dencie with him; who not being able to be himself in person at that enterprise, he reposed very much upon Raphael in all the most weighty affairs both by sea and land. The enemy were brought thus every day into greater streight; yet their vigilancie still in∣creasing, they provided for succour one way or other, so as the Kings forces were not able to disturb them. Count Hollac brought in a very considerable succour in the beginning of February. But Mandragone did so secure the Traverse which lay at the month of the Channel which leads to the City, and did so well shut up that passage on all sides, as the Enemy could come to the Town no more by that way. They had cut many gaps in the chief Bank, as hath been said, to overflow the ground about the town, the largest part whereof was towards the village Dreischer, lying in the midst of the Channel. The Enemy endeavoured to enter into the little Island by this gap, and so into the Town; from whence divers little Boats were to be sent out the better to receive such provisions as should be brought, which could not be brought in by greater Barks at a low Ebb. Count Hollac endeavoured to relieve the Town by this way: but the Kings men who for want of high situations elswhere had placed themselves chiefly upon the said greatest bank, and did very well guard it in all parts, did so behave themselves, as the enemy failed in their design. This bad success moved Orange the more to try a greater by the same way again; for it was thought impossible to bring relief by any other way. To this purpose the Rebels as∣sembled together as great a strength of Boats, men, and victuals as possibly they could. Orange would be present himself at this succour, and Lewis Boisot Admiral of Holland bad the chief care thereof. But the preparation was not answerable to the need, not did the success answer the hopes. Orange, by the advantage of the high tide, came about the end of March to the
abovesaid Gap of Dreischer, he assaulted the Kings men, and at first put them in∣to some disorder; slew some of them, and took some of their Canon from off the banks. But their courage increasing together with their danger, and the ebb being by this time come, they drove the enemy away from all parts; many of which were slain, many drowned, and amongst the rest, the Admiral Boisots self; for his ship running upon the sands which were very deep, neither the ship, nor any of the souldiers that were in it could be saved. This last indeavour of the rebels proving vain, they dispaired of ever relieving the Town; which notwith∣standing under the sufferings of a lingring siege, which lasted almost eight months, did still hold out, till it was at last surrendred about the latter end of June, which we have thought good to relate here, so not to break off the thread of this suc∣cess, with other narrations. This mean while many other important affairs hapned, which we shall now set down. For the better incouragement of the siege, Marquis Vitelli was come in the midst of Winter into the Island of Scown; great were the moystures in these low Teats, especially this year the cold not being so very bitter as usual. Here he who was already well strucken in years, were it either by reason of the air, or other disaccommodations, fell dangerously sick; and taking a boat that he might be carried to Antwerp to be cured; his mallady so increased as he died by the way before he could get thither. His loss proved very prejudicial to the King affairs: for upon him at that time lay (as we have often said) the greatest weight of the military administration. And indeed he was a Commander of very great renown; who to his honour won first in the Wars in Italy, had made the like correspond which he did purchase in the wars of Flanders. But this loss was ad∣ded unto by another of much greater importance, which insued within a few days after; to wit, the death of Rechesens, the Commendador; who about the be∣ginning of March falling suddenly into a violent feaver, died within five days at Brussels. His bodily sickness was preceded by a great malady of mind: for be∣ing brought into a very great streight for want of mony, he was not furnisht with any from Spain; neither was Flanders any ways able to supply him there withall. In so much as a little before his death, a part of the Spanish horse mutinyed, to the Countries great indignation for which he was forced to suffer the people to re∣assume their arms, which were formerly taken from them by the Duke of Alva: knowing that they would have done so of themselves, though he had not given them leave. Four ordinary ships were at this time only come from Spain with some few souldiers: the maritine preparation from thence not any ways answer∣ing expectation. By reason of all which obstructions the Commendador had rea∣son to fear that the siege of Zurickzee would end unfortunately, and that other sinister events would befall the Kings affairs in Flanders. Whilst thus agitated in mind: he fell sick, and died, with a reputation rather of great goodness, then of great valour: and of being fitter for peacefull imployments then for those of War: in the manageing whereof, so great a Paragon as was the Duke of Alva, proved (to say the truth) too disadvantagious to him. Many, and especially the wiser sort of Spaniards, thought that a mixture of them both might have done well; if joyned together, the one had been wholly imployed in Military, the o∣ther in Civil affairs. Here insued one of the greatest and most tempestuous agi∣tations that ever Flanders felt in the whole pursuit of the war which we will now describe. You shall see a Government without Government; the whole Country about to revolt: the Kings Forces at enmity within themselves; and his cause more op¦pugned then defended by them: More Governours then one bear his name at once in Flanders, and use his Authority: the Provinces of various sences, and no less differing Councels: Neighbouring Princes manifestly aspiring to the Govern∣ment thereof. A new introduction of foreign Forces: No publick, nor no pri∣vate faith observed. Cruel sacking on one side, fatal sieges on the other: More then hostile violence and fury every where: and in fine, the successes in these re∣volutions of affairs will prove such and so strange, as will doubtlesly move great curiosity here in the expectation of them, but much greater compassion towards Flanders hereafter, when they shall be come and seen. One of the greatest mis∣chiefs
which the affairs of Flanders suffered by the death of Rechesens was, that he died without declaring who should succeed him in his Government: He had a Patent from the King to that purpose, with a blank left for the name. But he was so suddenly surprised with the violence of his sickness, as he could not do it. It was notwithstanding discovered by some appearances, that he would have left the Military Government to Count Peter Ernestus Mansfield, and the Civil Go∣vernment to Count Barlemonte, which two, of all the Lords in the Country, were those the King did most confide in, and from whose valour and wisdom most might be expected. The Commendador failing thus, the Councel of State took upon them the Government, who presently dispatched away an express to Spain, to give the King an account of what had happened, and to represent unto him at full the present condition of the affairs of Flanders. The King approved of the Provisional resolution taken by the Councel, and declared therewithall that he would forthwith send a new Governor, and such a one as should be fully to the mind of those Provinces. The administration this mean while began by the hands of the Flemish themselves. But nothing is more to be despised in Government, then wavering and divided Authority. Nor doth any thing hurt more then interessed and disagreeing Councels. And it is seen in the Government of Kingdoms, that State-Ministers by their private passions do usually ruine the common Cause. The Councel of State had no sooner taken upon them the Government, but great troubles began to be seen in all things; for their orders were not observed as they ought to have been; and the orders themselves were given with apparent discord, which appeared much more in their minds then in their Votes. Philip de Croy, Duke of Ariscot, Governor of the Province of Flanders, did for his Nobility, riches and adherence, hold the chief place amongst those of the Councel. And with him the greatest part of the Councel did go along in their Votes. All these leaned towards the Liberty of the Country; as well out of their own nature, as out of a particular aliena∣tion which they had to the Spaniards. Orange was not this mean while idle nei∣ther; but seconding by his lively wit the favourable conjuncture, from the very day that the Commendador died, he incited all his followers in all the parts of the Country, to imprint such opinions in the people as might draw them most to be of his mind. Alleadging, That this was the time to reunite all Flanders in one will. That by fortune, and more by justice, the Government was now in the hands of the native Flemish, and therefore it was not to be suffered to pass any more into the Spaniards hands. That the yoke of so sore a servitude had lasted too long already; imprisonments, confiscati∣ons, deaths, sackings, firings, and so many other deplorable calamities, too long. That Liberty would notwithstanding be so much the more welcome, by how much it was formerly more desired. Then let the Flemish resolve unanimously to recover it, and so to enjoy it with the greater contentment. That the Cause could not be juster in it self, nor of greater applause both within the Provinces, and in all other places. Finally, to what worser end could affairs be brought? since though the designe should not suc∣ceed, the present miseries were so great, as greater were not at any time to be expected. These passions of the Prince of Orange were easily kindled in the minds of o∣thers, nor was it long ere immence troubles burst forth every where. And to make them arise the sooner, the Spaniards themselves gave such an occasion by a new mutiny of theirs, as those very Flemish who till then had shewed themselves better addicted to the Kings service, did at last concur thereunto. Part of the Cavalry, as we told you before, were mutinyed during the life of the Commen∣dador, but they were quickly quieted; as well for that horse cannot establish a mutiny without foot; as for that the Commendador had quickly procured them satisfaction. The Town of Zirickzee being afterwards taken, and having com∣pounded for 20000 l. to save it self from being sackt, it is not to be believed how much the Spaniards were moved hereat; who for default of their pay, and in recompence of their pains, had in their hopes swallowed up the plunder of that place; or at least expected that the whole composition should be theirs. Nor were they long in shewing their resentment. Without any regard either to their
own danger, or to the peril they occasioned to the Kings affairs in such a conjun∣cture of time, all delay laid aside, they presently ran to their arms, and in man∣ner as we have before fully described, mutinyed: and deposing their former Com∣manders, chose new ones, and an Elect above them all. They forthwith forsook Zealand, and re-entred into Brabant, intending to possess themselves of some good Town or City, and there to fortifie themselves; that they might after∣wards with large consideration receive satisfaction for their pretended labours. They first endeavoured to enter Brussels but could not get thereinto, as neither into Malines. Count Mansfield spake and treated with them as they were upon their march, in the Councel of States name, to bring them to some agreement. And to this purpose he offered them 10000 pound of that 20000 which the town of Zirricksee was to pay, and three paies of the first monies that were to be sent from Spain; but this did no good, nor any other future Treaty. Still more incen∣sed with anger and rage, not being able to prevail in Brabant, they turned to the very Province of Flanders, and on the sudden took the Town of Alst, one of the best in all that Province. The place is rather convenient then strong; it lies in the midst as it were between Brussels and Gaunt, and much at the same distance from Antwerp. No sooner was the Colours of this new mutiny displayed, but almost all the rest of the Spaniards came in unto it from all places. They fell with all diligence to fortifie Alst, and began to treat those of the Town bitterly, and with like cruelty to overrun the Territories thereof, and all the neighbou∣ring Country, to get the greater contribution. The Councel of State much scan∣dalized hereat, gave order that the people should arm themselves every where, and imployed many men to hinder the incursions of the mutiners. Jerolimo Rhodes, a Spanish Lawyer, was President of the particular Councel or Commit∣tee for Mutinies, which was instituted by the Duke of Alva, and was therefore the more detested by the Flemish. His very person made the Office be the more hated, and the Office his person. Which occasioned so great a commotion in Brussels by reason of the mutiny, as that a great tumult arose inevitably amongst the people, against the said Rhodes, against Julian Romero, the Camp-master, and against Alonzo Vargas, who commanded the Kings horse: in so much as they were all three in great danger, and had much adoe to save themselves in the Kings Palace; and notwithstanding Rhodes had a son slain in that popular uproar, and he himself was afterwards made prisoner. The Spaniards on the contrary, fin¦ding so universal an abhorition against them in the Country, they likewise resol∣ved to do what they could for their own safeties. Sancio d' Avila was the chief∣est amongst them, by the prerogative of his years, places, and their opinions: he therefore deferred no longer: but assembling some other Commanders, par∣ticularly some German Colonels, fell to consider what was best to be done for their men, and for the Kings service: and resolved to muster all their souldiers in one body, before they should be hindred by those which the States gathered to∣gether The whole Flemish Militia which took up arms against the Spaniards was called by this name of States. And on the contrary they were termed Spaniards, not only who really were so, but all those who appeared for them against the Fle∣mish. The spetious name of the Kings service did equally resound on all sides, and each party would attribute unto themselves greatest fidelity. A usual confu¦sion in civil wars, which affords matter to honest the worst cause as well as the better: and which very often makes the false pretences of the one, prevail over the just reasons of the other. Great difficulty was met withall in effecting the resolution taken by the Spanish and German Commanders: for a great part both of their horse and foot were distributed in divers quarters and garisons, much re∣mote one from another. They were not to deprive the Towns of them; and therefore their men being to be reduced into a very small number and to march divided before they could meet, this doubtlesly assisted the Flemish much to hin∣der their meeting The Castles of Antwerp, Gaunt, Valentiennes, Utricht, and some other less considerable were in the Spaniards hands. That of Antwerp was in the custody of Sancio d' Avila and that of Gaunt in Christopher Mandragones, who was then in Zealand. Julian Romero kept in Sira, a Town of very great con∣sequence in the very heart of Brabant. and in Mastrike (a place of such moment
as hath been experienced upon so many several occasions) some German Compa∣nies of Foot were in garrison. The Spaniards did notwithstanding draw out as many men as they could from out the rest; and their design was, when they should have made a strong body of them, to bring them into Antwerp, and to secure that City chiefly, which was so conveniently situated, so rich, and so great. They hoped to receive powerful Forces there from Spain; and by the way of Mastrick, good succours from Germany and Italy. But all these provisions re∣quired time. The States were likewise in the same straits: So as both sides strove to gain it. To this end Letters past between the Councel of State and Sancio d' Avila, equally complaining of the present Mutiny, and seeming desirous to come to some accommodation. They met to this purpose in the Village of Villebruck, two leagues distant from Brussels; some of the Councel of State on one part, and Sancio a' Avila, together with the abovesaid German Colonels on the other. But their resolutions came not to much: Only Gerollemo Rhodes was set at liberty, and Romero and Vargas were likewise suffered to go free out of Brussels. Jealousies increasing thus rather then diminishing on all sides, the States hastned their provisions every day more and more: which they might much ea∣silier doe then the Spaniards; for all the Provinces, except it were that of Lucem∣burg, did already openly joyn in one and the same sense which was Not to suffer any Spaniards or other Foreigners to tarry amongst them. Sigmor Campigm, a Burgonian, brother to Cardinal Granville, was Governour of Antwerp; and the Baron of Erbestine, a German Colonel, was there in garrison with his Regi∣ment. The States wrought so, as they drew them both privately over to be at their command; though in publike both of them were bound to Sancio d Avila and the other German Colonels, not to admit any of the States souldiers into Antwerp, as Avila was likewise bound to call in no more Spaniards thither. By another secret intelligence they had likewise gained over the aptains of the other German Companies which were in Mastrick, who likewise were of Er∣besteins Regiment. Having these advantages, the Councel of State resolved to temporise no longer. As soon as they had placed good store of Horse and Foot near Brussels, they treated of proclaiming all the Spaniards which were in Flanders Rebels, and to pursue them every where with their Arms as such. The two Counts of Mansfield and Barlemont appeared mightily against this; and Vighlio yet more, who was President of the Councel; A man, who as he did ad∣vance in yeares, so did his zeale for the good of Flanders still increase. He said, Out of what fault shall we declare this Rebellion? If the Spaniards have fallen thereinto by mutinying, this is not the first time they have done so, nor will it per adventure be the last. War causeth expence; Expence, want of Pay; Want of Pay, the Souldiers anger; and the Souldiers anger, Mutiny. As long as the wars conti∣nue, these disorders will fall out: other Countries have had experience of it, as well as ours hath now. But when was it ever heard that in such a case the Mutiniers were esteemed Rebels? aay, how often have whole Armies rather commended then condem∣ned their cause? insomuch as at last it hath been thought the best course to suffer some∣thing in accommodating them, then to run hazard of greater dangers by going about to punish them too severely. I heartily wish that in the like cases, as also in divers others of the world. Necessity prevailed not too much above Reason. Kingdoms give way, and Empires bow to this force: To this we must now likewise submit. The Spaniards are too much incensed to see Flanders every where so hatefully bent against them: they storm already for being declarea Enemies; how much more will they doe so when they shall be declared Rebels? The other Spaniards will flock to defend the Mutiniers, and will make this a common interest. And with whom is it that we shall contend? What Nation is there to be found which hath been longer trained up in Arms, more acquainted with blood and more accustomed to fight and overcome? To what a rage will despair carry them? I therefore am of opinion, that this wound is to be cured by the accustomed ways. Armies, as well as humane bodies, are liable to infirmities: And if this may be easily cured, we ought not by danger of so great an impairment make it our selves incurable.
The Reasons alleadged by Vightio, and divers others other Considerations offered by the two Counts, did no whit avail to alter the opinion of the oppo∣site part of the Councel, which was the more numerous, and the more powerfull. But these accusing the other of perfidiousness, injuriously said that they were Spaniards, and no longer Flemings, and broke forth into open threats against them Nor were they long in putting them in execution, taking new pretences, and still palliating the appearances thereof the more, they imprisoned the three above-named Councellors, as also Signior d' Asonville, and made the Duke of Ariscot President of the Councel. I hey then proclaimed on Edict of Rebellion against the Spaniards, the Contents whereof was in substance this. That all the mischiefs of Flanders had proceeded from the Spaniards. That to have the total domination thereof, they had taken away the government from the Dutchess of Parma, and given it to the Duke of Alva. That from that time forward the Country was opprest in all parts by sad and fatal chances: Amongst which that of Mutinies was to be accounted among the most fatal. That one of these was now on foot in the very heart of the Provinces; and that under pretence of having their Pay, the Spa∣niards design was generally to devoure the substances, and to drink the blood of all the Flemish. That therefore the Councel of State, which by order from the King did now govern, judging it necessary to withstand with Arms this threatening ruine, had therefore put on the most convenient resolutions. That notwithstanding in this so great necessity, there were some Councellors who shewed themselves averse to the com∣mon good, so as the rest had thought fit to secure them. That the Spaniards desired now more then ever to bring in the Inquisition into Flanders. That out of their zeal to the Kings service, the Councel of State had published this Edict, whereby the aforenamed Spaniards were declared Rebels to the King, and whereby it was ordered that they should be pursued every where and slain as Enemies. The Edict concluded with an invitation to all the Provinces to joyn in the same sense and opinion, since the same was the cause amongst them all. It is not to be believed how much the minds of the Flemish were moved after this publication; and how, as if the Edict had been a general Trumpet which had summoned them, they strove who should shew themselves readiest to goe against the Spaniards, and drive them out of the Country. The Councel of States chief intention was, to call together the States Generall; to the end that the re∣solutions which they had already taken might be of greater authority, as also those which they should hereafter take. Nor was there need of any great trouble herein. At the very first invitation, every Province (except that of Luxenburg, as hath been said) shewed themselves willing to meet in this General Assembly, either by express Deputies, or by open consent. In Governments where the Kings Prerogative and the Subjects Priviledge doe interfere, the one fide is usually glad to get the advantage of the other. And therefore in Flanders, Princes have al∣wayes been unwilling to have the Generall Assembly of the Provinces meet, it being a time wherein they pretend rather to give Laws then to rceive them: And on the contrary the Provinces have always imbraced such occasions, wherein by the meeting of their whole body together they might keep the power of Princes within its precincts. And the Flemish did this now the more readily, for that they thought it a fit conjuncture of time, having no Kingly Governour amongst them who might oppose them or at least be over them. When then the Edict against the Spaniards was published, and the convocation of the States Generall made, Hostility began suddenly on all sides: The chief design of the States was, to have Mastrick, and the Citadels of Antwerp and Gaunt in their possession; hoping that by their examples the other Castles would soon doe the like. On the other side, the Spaniards studied chiefly how to keep all the aforesaid strong Holds and Towns, but especially Mastrick and the Citadel of Antwerp, for the reasons above mentioned. Many Souldiers were mustered together in Gaunt to besiege that Castle and a greater number were gathered together in Antwerp, because they thought that would prove the harder work. The Governour Champigny and Colonel Erbestine had already discovered themselves to be for the States, and received all that came into the City, who were sent from them. But the States chief endeavour was, to keep the Spaniards, and also such Germans as ad∣hered
to them, from meeting together. The Walloons, as natives of the Country, did already intirely obey the orders of the Flemish. Nay after the surrender of Ziricsce, those Walloons who were at the taking thereof, seased upon their Colonel Mandragone, and kept him forth-coming. The Flemish Commanders did then to the aforementioned end, shut up all the Passes, and for∣tified them, and placed many men about them in sundry parts. The Spaniards on the contrary were very diligent in getting together as many of their Forces as they could, and to quarter themselves in some of the most commodious parts in Brabant. From this opposition of designes, they came quickly to the like of arms: and the first effect thereof fell out about Lovain. The Spaniards had as∣sembled together a good strength of horse in the parts about Mastrike, towards the Country of Liege; and came towards Lovain, that they might get to Alst; and by new endeavours, try whether they could get the mutiners from thence or no, and make them joyn with the other Spaniards. Which they refused to do till they should have received their full pretended pay. The Councel of State had notice of this their moving; and speedily dispatched away the Seignior di Glimes, with 2000 foot and 600 horse to hinder them. The Spaniards had 800 horse, but came without any foot at all. Both parties met in the Village of Visenack, not far from Lovain The Spaniards, whose chief Commander was Vargas, endea∣voured first to pass friendly by, which they signified by a Trumpet to the contra∣ry party. Who being more in number, returned a negative answer, and forced the Spaniards to open their way with their swords. They were all choice men; where as the others horse consisted most of the old Companies of Flanders, and usually but little exercised; and amongst their foot there were many new soul∣diers but then raised by the Councels Authority. The Spaniards, seeing a neces∣sity of fighting, supplyed their want of foot, by putting a Company of Burgoni∣an horse on foot, and took the best advantage they could of place, whereby they might receive the less offence from the adverse foot. Here they came to blows. The Flemish charged violently at first; but the Spaniards knew so well both how to evade them, and how to stand them, as turning furiously upon the Fle∣mish, they easily broak them, and cut almost all their foot in peeces. The horse suffered but little harm; for not intending to fight, they soon ran all away. Those Burgonians who were on foot behaved themselves gallantly: with whom John Baptista del Monte, leaving his Company of Lanciers, and fighting on foot gave great testimony of his courage and stoutness in that action. Amongst the other Captains of Lanciers, George Basti, Barnerdine Mendosa, and Peter Tassis, fought likewise very valiantly: particularly Basti, upon occasion of charging the ene∣my in the most dangerous flank; and in the first heat of the combate, Rafael Barberino was dangerously hurt. The Pass being won, Vargas went to treat with the mutiners in Alst: where he met Sancio d'Avila, and the Camp-masters, Romero and Toledo. All these indeavoured very much to get those other to joyn with the rest who followed the same Colours. They represented unto them in what danger the Castle of Antwerp and Gaunt were, and the Town of Mastrick; by reason of the intelligence that the States held there. And they concluded, that their men if they would joyn together, might hope to overcome, but being divided they were sure to be all lost. But all this was in vain: for the mutiners, appearing more deaf in their minds then in their ears, with a greater sense of rage then reason, remained firm in their resolution of not quitting Alst, till they were fully paid. So Vargas and the rest returned to from whence they came. It was not long ere Vargas, with whom the Toledan was joyned, met with a new occa∣sion of fighting. They were not gon far from Alst, when they heard the Ger∣man Garison, together with the Townsmen in Mastrick were ready to rise, in fa∣vour of the States. That City (as we said in the beginning) is divided by the Mause: the greatest part thereof lies towards Brabant; and on the other shore towards the Country of Liege, doth the lesser part stand, called by the name of Vich. There were here some few Spaniards; and some few others in a gate pla∣ced between two great Towers on the other greater side of the City, which was therefore chiefly in the Germans custody. Montesdock, a Spaniard, was Gover∣nour of the Town, who when he found the contrivings of the garison with the,
Townsmen, he end eavoured by sundry ways to remedy it, but the issue was, he himself was imprisoned. They then took up arms to drive out the Spaniards, and to put the City absolutely into the hands of the Flemish. This news was sudden∣ly brought to Vargas, and he in great haste ran to assist his companions. He forth∣with assembled together many of the nearest Spanish foot; and passing over the Mause, gave such succour as was needfull to the part called Vich. And this hap∣pened so opportunely, as that the enemy were driven from the bridg which joyns the two parts of the Town together, and pursued into the Town with great slaughter. The others had the like success also at the fighting of the aforementi∣oned gate; for the Spaniards that were within having still manfully defended it, at last let those in that were without, who secured the City; which in revenge was afterwards sackt by both parties. The States indeavoured this mean while by all means possible, to have the two Castles of Antwerp and Gaunt in their possession. They had already said siege to the latter, and begirt it with many men, which were commanded by John Croy, Count of Rouls, subordinate to the Duke of Ariscot, who was Governour of the Province. The Emperour Charls the fift made the Castle to be built in that year 1540. upon the occasion of the rising of those of Gaunt, so to curb their con∣tumacy the more for the future. It consists of four Bastions which look on one side upon the City, on the other side towards the fields. The Governour of the Castle was at this time ill provided of all things, and had not above 200 men to defend it. It was commanded by a Lieutenant of Mandragone's (in lieu of him) who notwithstanding all his wants, prepared manfully to defend it. Count Rouls raised a platform on the side which was nearest the City; and began to open his Yrenches on the same side, to fall as soon as he might into the ditch. He placed some peeces of Artillery upon the platform, which commanded the Castle: and did so streighten it on all sides, as those within could receive no relief from those without. At the same time a great many of the States men were gone likewise to Antwerp, to besiege that Castle; the foot, which consisted all of old Walloons, and new raised men, were accompanied by a good body of horse; and the States did not omit any other sort of provisions which were requisite, suddenly to come by their desires in both places. The Citadel of Antwerp lies upon the banks of the Scheld, upon the South side of the City. It is a Pentagon, composed of five Royal Bastions. Of all modern fortifications, it hath been esteemed so famous, as it hath served for a pattern to almost as many Citadels as have been built in any Country since. Some of her flanks lies towards the City; and the rest lean to∣wards the Champian. Respect being had, as in all other Castles, to be able on one side to command the City, and on the other to receive necessary succours up∣on all occasions from without. There lies a good space of ground between the Castle and the City: The Flemish resolved to streighten the siege on this side, which they began to do with two Cavalliers of a great hight, upon which they places some peeces of great Artillery. From hence they began to play upon them within; and imployed a great number of men in making their Trenches. The Canon shot which played upon both the Castles were heard in Alst: at the hearing whereof the mutiners began to rescent themselves, and to be inraged both with anger and shame. John de Navarese was their head under the title of Elect: who had always used his best indeavours (though still in vain) to make them joyn with the other souldiers. He did not let slip this occasion; but calling the multitude into the Piazza, said thus unto them. And what shall we expect more? you hear the sound of the shot that are made a∣gainst the Castles of Gaunt and Antwerp. Shall we suffer these that are really re∣bels to God and the King, boast that thy have (though falsely laid the imputation of rebels upon us? shall we suffer them to bereave us of two such important strengths? and which keep their perfidious necks under so just a yoke? will it not be in their pow∣er afterwards to punish us? and shall not we then receive correction instead of inflicting it? What will our pertinaciousness of not joyning with the rest, serve us for then? So instead of getting our pay in monies, we shall be paid shamefully with bloud. But we have yet time enough to revenge us, if we can but know our own strength, and manfully make use of our hands. I am then of opinion, that without any delay, we
depart from hence, and that we hasten to relieve the Castle of Antwerp, which is of greater importance then that of Gaunt: And that when we shall have secured that Fort, we may with the same fervor suddenly assault the City. I doe not any wayes doubt the Succour, and I hope for all good success in the Assault: We know that the Besiegers are almost all of them Townsmen; who astonished at our arrival, and much more at our assault, will immediately run to their houses, and to their Magazine of Merchandise. Here we shall quench our just thirsts with their blood, and our no less just longing after their wealth. Antwerp alone will put us into possession of all the Northern wealth, and by the Plunder of one City we shall enjoy the spoils of many Provinces. But this is an opinion (my Companions) which would be sooner put in execution, then given: the worth thereof consists in expedition: For if we shall put off time, and that the Castle be the mean time well begirt, what will it avail us then to have taken such a resolution, when meeting with insuperable difficulties we shall not be able to effect it. The Elect would have said more, when the Mutiniers violently interrupted him; and with a loud voice, as if it had proceeded but from one mouth, began to cry out, To Arms! To Arms! And running from all parts rather to snatch them, then to take them up, they resolved to march immediately towards the Citadel of Antwerp. There were not many houres of day-light left; and 'twas upon the 3. of November 1576. Having then taken up their Arms, and each of them com∣manding rather then obeying, they hastily left Alst, intending to enter the Cita∣del the next morning, and then suddenly to assault the City. They could not not∣withstanding get thither till after noon, because they were longer in passing the Scheld then they had thought: which while they were passing over, Vargas and Romero came luckily to the same place with 400 Horse and some Foot; and being joyned together, they quickly entred the Castle by the Relief-gate. Sancio d' Avila would have had those that had come from abroad to have taken some refreshment before they should have fallen upon the Enemies Trenches: but all of them shewing the eagerness of their minds by their eyes, cry'd out, We must immedi∣ately goe out, and either dye, or sup this night in Antwerp. The number of those that came from without, and those that were in the Castle, came to somewhat more then 3000 Foot, and 500 Horse. They made not any long delay: The Foot being put in order, they went out of the Citadel, and were divided into two parts; the one under the Camp-master Romero, the boldest, and most for∣tunate at execution that peradventure came ever out of the Spanish Nation; and the other, to doe that honour to the Mutiniers, under Navarese. The Souldiers of both parts, being of Companions become Rivals, marched with such violence against the Enemies Trenches, and assaulted them with such resolution, as the Flemish began at the very first to be troubled, and to shew manifest signs of fear, and of running away. The failing of courage in the one, increased the like in the other; so as redoubling their force, they quickly put the Enemy in such disorder and confusion, as not being able longer to make good their Trenches, they were forced to retreat and forsake them. The Antwerpians, who were come to defend them, fled immediately away, never looking back: but the Walloons and Germans sometimes facing about, retreated less shamefully. This mean while, the Spanish Foot pursued them more hotly by the two chief wayes which lead from the Cita∣del to the City; and being followed by the Horse, and beating down whatsoever withstood them, they came to the Piazza, where the Town-House stands; which was very sumptuously built, and to which the whole North might very well give then the precedencie and honour of Merchandise. This Piazza was built about with many noble structures. Here the Antwerpians made a stand; and some Dutch and Walloons joyning with them, endeavoured with new Forces to make head: but being again broken and routed, a good many of them got into the Town-House, and into the Houses about the Piazza; and striking the Spa∣niards who were below, with much advantage from the windows above, they for∣ced them to finish their victory by fire, since it would either be too hard or require too much time to doe it by the sword. Thus on a sudden was a fire kindled, which in a short time devoured the goodliest part of so gallant a City. All the Piazza's, streets and nooks fell into their absolute power; who confounding Im∣prisonments
with Death, had not hands enough to doe both. Many Flemish of good quality did notwithstanding save themselves; and amongst others, the Mar∣quis of Haure, brother to the Duke of Ariscot, saved himself, and fled over the Scheld, as did also Campigni the Governour of the Town. The Baron Erbestein had not the like good fortune; for the Boat wherein he was with his Arms on, overturned in the water, so as he was drowned. Infinite others sought to shun the Enemies rage by the same way: but either not finding Boats so ready at hand, or not being able to get so many thereinto, they were made a miserable prey either to the water or to the sword. Others in a blind madness threw them∣selves over the walls, and perished in the City-ditches. Others more advisedly hiding themselves in the secretest places of their houses, trusted Fortune with their safety. And many in a generous despair, rather seeking out danger then shunning it, chose sooner to die, then to out-live so sore a misfortune both private and publike. Count Egmont, the Lord of Capres and Goygni, and divers others considerable persons, together with almost all the chief Citizens and Merchants, were taken prisoners. The number of the dead was said to be about 7000. the most of them Townsmen: not above 200 of the Spaniards were slain, and one of these was the Mutiniers Elect, John de Navarese. As soon as they had glutted themselves with blood, the Spaniards fell presently to plunder the City. Antwerp by the concourse of Poreigners did at this time wonderfully flourish in Merchan∣dise; the City abounded in riches, and in all those happy accommodations as were to be wished for in so luxurious a juncture of time. Amongst other Foreign∣ers, great were the number of the English, and Easterlings, which are those of the Hans Towns upon the Baltick Sea. These two Nations had two Houses in Antwerp of such a largeness and capacity, as they rather seemed to be Plantations then Ware-houses Luxury, the constant companion of Riches, made the Mer∣chants not only live handsomly, but with a great deal of sumptuousness; many of which abandoning all parcimony, lived like so many Kings: they had got to∣gether great store of Jewels, Pearls, Gold and Silver, and their houses were full of all other sort of merchandise. How great the gain was which the Spaniards got in these Indus of one City, may sooner be conjectured then said The Plunder lasted three dayes. And notwithstanding, so great Riches not being able to satisfie the insatiable Souldier, the houses were heard to sound with outcryes, and the streets were full of people that ran away, by reason of the violences committed by the Souldiers against the Inhabitants, to make them confess where their most preti∣ous things were hid, and to make them produce them. Thus they proceedrd from Avarice to Cruelty, and from Cruelty again to Rapine; and thus they con∣tinued. till weary rather then satisfied, and matter to plunder wanting rather then will to plunder, they reduced themselves to the obedience of their Comman∣ders. Thus did Antwerps misery end; the Town remaining so afflicted, as if that decay of Commerce had been then Prognosticated, which fell out unto her in the insuing years, by reason of the Warre, and other calamities. At the news of this, whole Flanders was incredibly astonished. The meeting of the States General was already appointed, and to this purpose the Deputies of almost all the Provinces were in Gaunt. Whereupon the desire of driving out the foreigners exceedingly increasing; the Flemish did again bend all their endeavours to re-pos∣sess themselves of the Citadel of that City. Which at last they did, without any great difficulty. There were but very few people within it, and there was scarcety of all things else, as we have formerly said, so as the siege was not rendred famous by any important action. But that which the Flemish did chiefly aim at was to make a general union of all the Provinces; and that the Government being esta∣blisht in men of their own Country, all forein government might be excluded. To this purpose the Deputies of Holland and Zealand met with the other Deputies. Nor was it hard for the Prince of Orange (who was the chief leader, and layer of all these practises) in this present crisis of time, to agree the diversity of Interests, which were between these two Provinces infected with Heresie, and the others which kept yet Catholick; and to make them afterwards joyne in one opinion. The former Treaty of Breda was reassumed; and the Propositions which were then made by the Rebels, were almost all of them
assented unto. By a joynt resolution taken in Gaunt, many Articles of agree∣ment were established between the one and the other Provinces; and peace and union was agreed upon by them all, save that of Lucemburg. To which the Kings authority was also fully made use of by the Councel of State. These were the chief things agreed upon: That there should be peace, friendship, and confederacy for the time to come, between the Catholick Provinces on the one part, and Holland and Zealand together with the Prince of Orange on the other part; and that all past injuries and offences should for ever be forgotten by all their Inhabitants. That from that time forward their people should return to joyn the liberty of the former commerce, and their respective correspondency. That all the Provinces should with a joynt consent drive all the Spaniaras and their adherents immediately out of the Country, and take such course as should be needfull to that purpose. That the Provinces being freed from this op∣pression, they should all immediately meet in a general Assembly, as was done the last time, in the days of the Emperour Charls the fist; and that then such resolutions should be taken as should be thought best for the re-ordering of the Government, and for the reducing of it to its primary, true, and natural form. That in the mean time the so many Laws come forth with so much rigour by the Duke of Alva for the pu∣nishment of heresie and tumults, should be suspended, but that no other religion, save the Roman Catholick should be used in the Roman Catholick Provinces; and as for the other two of Holland and Zealand, they should expect what the States General would determine in that point. That concerning the restitution of Cities, Places, strong holds, Ammunition and Arms which was to be made unto the King; that should likewise be done which should be resolved on by them. That all prisoners, par∣ticularly Count Bossu should be set at liberty without any maner of ransome. That all goods should be likewise restored to their former possessors: respect being had to many irreparable impossibilities which the war had produced. These were briefly the contents of the chiefest Articles which were agreed upon between the one and the other Provinces: many others being by us omitted, which related to matter of Justice, and touching the restitution of goods; so to shun the tediousness of relating every little matter; and not to detain you with superfluous prohxities. This peace and union being concluded in manner afore∣said, the Provinces would begin to put them in execution, upon those few Spani∣ards which were in the Castle of Gaunt: the which was surrendred at the same time that the peace was agreed upon: and therefore they conducted those Spa∣niards to the Frontiers of France, and so sent them out of the Country; and prepared with very great resolution, to drive out all the rest also as soon as possi∣bly they could by force.
THE HISTORY OF THE WARS OF FLANDERS Written by CARDINAL BENTIVOGLIO. BOOK X. The Contents. Don John of Austria comes to the Government of Flanders. Much diffidence ari∣seth amongst the Flemish touching his person. He endeavours as much as he can to remove them: and Orange labours to nourish them. An agreement is at last made between Don John and the States. But the Prince of Orange with the two Provinces of Holland and Zealand, oppose it. Don John is received into the Government. He useth all means again to bring all the Provinces to be of one min but fails therein. Hence suspitions arise on all sides; and from thence trou∣bl. The Queen of Navar passeth by the Frontiers of Flanders towards France. Don John goes himself in person to receive her, and to carry her to Namures. Up∣on which occasion he makes himself Master of the Castle of that City. The States complain hereof unto the King. They resolve to call the Prince of Orange into , and receive him with unusual honours. Which causeth jealousies in the st of the chief Nobility: who therefore determine to offer the Government of Flanders to Archduke Mathias. He accepts of the offer, and comes thither pri∣vatly Orange his opinion, and the opinion of the States General, touching his coming. They resolve to accept of him for the Governour of the Country. The Flemish take up arms on all sides against Don John. And endeavour to besiege Namures. The Kings men return speedily into Flanders: And a battel insues thereupon near Geblurs; wherein they have the victory. The proceedings of the Kings Forces. Preparations on the behalf of the Flemish do encrease continually more against them. To this end an Army is raised in Germany, by the Palatine John Casimere. And the Duke of Alanson prepares another in France. John Casimere moves first, and being come to Brabant, takes Diste. The Flemish quarter themselves strongly in the fields, to expect the arrival of all the foreign fres Don John marches with all his men towards them: but cannot draw them forth to battel. His hopes of seeing the enemies foot soon dissolve. By favour of the he etical aids, the Flemish sectarists demand a general liberty of conscience: and obtain it. The Catholicks are much scandalized hereat. A new action of the
Malecontents. Some accommodation of the affairs of Flanders, is again endea∣voured by tht Emperour, by the King of France, and by the Queen of England: but in vain. Alanson exters the Country with his Army. Orange doth all he can that the Flemish and the foreign forces may joyn. Don John fals sick; dies. And leaves the Prince of Parma in the administration of the Government. WHilst Flanders was thus agitated with tempestuous troubles, An 15. and that a new Governour seemed to be most necessary; news came that Don John of Austria, the Kings bastard brother, was unexpectedly arrived in the Province of Lucemburg. In his journey he had passed through France in disguise: and had made such haste by Post, as he was the first man that brought news of his arrival. Don John was then in the prime of his age, and in the height of his glory. Whilst he was yet very young, he was imployed by the King to allay the insurrection of the Moors, with which Spain was then very much molested, and won very great renown in the success thereof. Being from thence sent into Italy, upon occasion of that memorable league against the Turk, it is not to be exprest how gallantly he made the valour of his own person, cor∣respond with the supreme authority of his command throughout the whole car∣riage of the enterprise: in so much as the so famous naval victory of Lepanto wherefore Christendom was so happily freed from so eminent danger, was chief∣ly attributed to him. Being returned to Spain, he kept near the King in very great esteem; and by the publick votes of his whole Nation, was cryed up to whatsoever greatest imployment that Monarchy could bestow. Whereupon oc∣casion arising of sending him to be Governour of Flanders; the King readily imbraced it; joyning in opinion himself with the like of others, that Don John by reason of his so great indowments, might better then any other, both keep the obedient Provinces in their loyalty, and reduce those that were in rebellion, in a short time by his forces. He departed from Spain unknown, and made the aforesaid haste to the end that his arrival in Flanders might be the sooner, and the safer. With him was Octavius Gonzaga, son to Ferrante, so famous formerly in arms, who was Viceroy of Sicily, and afterwards under Charls the fift, Gover∣nor of Milan. He passed every where in disguise, as a servant of this Octavius, though he tarryed some days in Paris, out of a curiosity of seeing the King, as he did, and to treat with the Spanish Ambassador, who was then Resident there. When he was come to the Town of Lucemburg, which denominates the whole Province, he understood in what a troublesome condition those Countries were. And his coming fell out to be just then when Antwerp was so miserably plundred. He was very much displeased thereat, and soon foresaw how much the peoples minds would be thereby every where exasperated, and what difficulties he should meet withall, in the first introducing of his Government. To make use of arms, neither had he sufficient wherewithall, neither was it a fitting time. To boot that at his departure from Spain, he had received particular instructions from the King, that by all means he should first try what good was to be done upon the Flemish by fair means, before he should use any force. He therefore did not delay to give the Councel of State which was at Brussels, notice in all civil manner of his arri∣val in the Province of Lucemburg. He told them that the King desired nothing more then to see Flanders in peace and quiet. That he had brought with him ve∣ry large Commissions to this purpose; and that he for his part would be ready to execute them with all speed and alacrity. He shewed himself to be highly dis∣pleased at the Tumults and disorders that had lately happened; to witness which, he said he would give sudden order to the Spaniards that they should desist from all hostility: and that he would endeavour fully to assure the Provinces, that through his Government they should receive all the just satisfaction from the King which they could desire. The Deputies of the States General were gone from Gaunt to Brussels; and the Councel of State went with them, still adhe∣ring with them in opinion. They were all of them greatly astonished at the sud∣den coming of Don John: for they saw it was impossible he could bring such re∣solutions
from the King as could stand with their designs. Yet after a while, they dispatched away the Vicecount of Gaunt, the Lord of Rassenghein, and Lord Vigliernel, to present their services to Don John; but indeed, to dive into his most inward thoughts Don John failed not to receive them with all shew of ci∣vility, and acquainted them at full with the Kings exceeding good intentions to∣ward those Provinces. He assured them in particular, that the King would by all means have all the Spaniards, and foreign souldiers to depart from thence; and that he would grant a very ample pardon to all those, who by reason of the late revolts, might have any need thereof. This tidings being brought to Brussels, they must needs very much please one side; since in the point concerning foreig∣ners, the Flemish had what they so much desired. But then again, they did so di∣strust all the Spaniards actions, and so fresh, and detestable was the memory of the calamities which they had suffered by them, as the more favourahle the of∣fers were which were made by Don John, the more deceitfull they thought them to be. The Prince of Orange was as the Oracle of the Provinces, after the agreement made between them: so as he was the main wheel upon which all their resoluti∣ons were turned: wherefore the Councel of State, and Deputies of the States General, desired to know his opinion concerning the coming of Don John; and in what manner he would have him received into the Government, before they would take any resolution therein. Whereupon Orange began a long discourse, the substance whereof was this, That the larger Don Johns promises were, the more they were to be suspected. That it was apparent the Spaniards end was to cheat the Flemish, and to lull them asleep, that they might the more easily oppress them. That Don John was not to be received day otherwise then upon such terms, as (their obedience always preserved unto the King) the former Government might be restored unto the Provinces. That therefore in the first place, all the Spaniards should be expelled: That the Citadels should be all demolished, and put into the hands of the Flemish. That no Authority at all should be granted to Don John; not so much as over the Militia of the Country. That the States General should retain the prerogatives due unto them. That to this purpose they might have a power to meet once or twice a year, to preserve the priviledges of the Provinces. And that Don John should resolve on nothing without the Authority of the said States General. That it better behoved him to trust the Flemish, then the Flemish him. And that howsoever it was not to be believed that the King would ever pardon them, since he held himself too much injured by them: That therefore they ought to consider his anger together with his forces; and put themselves into such a posture, as since they could never secure themselves from the one, they might not at least be opprest by the other. This was Orange his opinion, which he desired to distill into all the Flemish. And this was the foundation which he even then laid of that Commonwealth of the United Provinces, which hath been since so formed and established in these our times by powerfull forces: and of which we formerly sent a particular Relation from Brussels to Rome; which together with some other writings of ours touch∣ing the affairs of Flanders, were afterwards published by Ericio Puteano, our ve∣ry good friend, and the worthy successor of Justus Lipsius, no less in learning then in place, and in the Inheritance of his fame, no less then of his labours. Orange hoped by this means to make himself Moderator, and Arbitrator of the Government; and assisted by the present conjuncture of time, to make himself at least as good as Prince of Holland and Zealand if he should not arrive at the Principality of all the Provinces, joyned together in one body. And peradven∣ture he would not have missed in his designe, had he not been slain (as shall be said in its proper place) and so had the thread of his life, as well as that of his hopes cut off. This answer increased such jealousies in the Flemish, as not think∣ing themselves sufficiently united by the agreement made at Gaunt, they resolved to make another union which should be more strict, and more efficacious. They therefore drew up a Declaration in the name and Authority of the States Gene∣ral; wherein repeating the calamities suffered by the Spaniards, they did again confirm the confederation of Gaunt, promised to observe it inviolably, and decla∣red
all such to be Traitors and infamous persons who should in any whatsoever manner countervene it. This Writing or Declaration was afterwards signed and sealed in every Province, by every Magistrate and Governour; and was imbra∣ced with great applause by the whole Country. And because Orange had chiefly minded them that the States should put themselves in Arms, shewing what dan∣ger they were again to expect from the Spaniards, therefore the States General betook themselves to raise new men, which they brought together in a good bo∣dy, under the command of Count Di Saleigne, of the Vicecount of Gaunt, and Monsieur de la Mota to Vaures, a Town between Brussels and Namures, very opportunely seated, especially to withstand Don John. The States General made likewise divers expeditions into Germany, France, and England, to pray aide in all those parts, and to make the cause of the Flemish common with all their neigh∣bours A considerable sum of money was sent from the Queen of England; who under hand shewed her self well inclined to greater demonstrations. On the part of Germany the greatest confederacy was had with John Casimere one of the Count Palatines of Rheine; and the thing desired was to furnish him with monies, whereby to raise men in that Nation, and lead them into Flanders. On France's side, they did not only endeavour to raise the Hugonot Faction, but to draw likewise the Catholick party to be of the same mind, under the Duke of Alanson, brother to the King: particularly inviting the Duke to endeavour to raise a Fortune worthy of himself in Flanders, now that he had little hopes of finding any in France. Don John was easily acquainted with all these practices; who notwithstan∣ding patiently bearing with them, and willing to take away all pretences which the discontented Flemish could make use of, confirmed the aforesaid offers in sa∣tisfaction to the Provinces; and concluded, that obedience being rendred by them to the Church, and to the King, he would in all things else accept of such Propositions as they should propound unto him. The Vicecount of Gaunt, and Lords of Rassenghean and Viglirual went sundry times to and fro between the States and Don John; and the easilyer to agree upon what was fitting for the re∣ceit of Don John into the Government, a Truce was made for 15 days, which was afterwards prolonged for some few days longer. All the difficulties arised from diffidence: For the States would, that in the first place, all the Spaniards and whatsoever other foreign souldiers, should go out; which Don John seemed to agree unto; but then he thought it a just demand, that at the same time the States foreign Militia should likewise go out. And because the States appeared very obstinate against this, it was propounded, that at least for security sake, some considerable men of theirs might be put as Hostages into the Castle of Huy, a Town in Liege, under the custody of the Bishop of that City, till such time as the Spanish Forces being first sent out, their foreign Militia might likewise be made depart. And 'twas added, that at the same time a Guard should be given to Don John under some Captain of that Country, who should swear due loyalty to him. He chiefly desired to know what form of obedience should be observed to the Church and King; and instanced that the condition of his being received into Government might be such, as Religion might not thereby receive too much prejudice, nor the Royal Dignity be too much offended. The Town of Huy as a nutral place, was likewise propounded for a place of security, where the agree∣ment which was managed on both sices, might be made between Don John and the States. But divers difficulties arose in all these points; which Orange particu∣larly fomented with all his might, because his end was, either that Don John might not at all be received: or at least that he might only have the bare title of Governour; and that the Government might remain absolutely in the States hands, which was almost as much as to say, absolutely in his own power. The Emperour Maximilian was dead a little before this. And the Flemish having had recourse to him for protection before he died, they therefore made the same application to his son Rodolphus, who succeeded him in the Emperial dignity. Not could the King of Spain be hereat offended. Rodolphus had therefore made choice of Gerard Grosbeck, Bishop of Liege, together with two other of his Councellors, to mediate some agreement between Don John and the States. Ce∣sar
thought it likewise fitting, and herein the King did likewise agree with him, that the Duke of Cleves, as a Prince so nearly interessed in the neighbourhood of Flanders, might likewise send some express personages in his behalf to facillitate the accommodation. In the beginning of the year 1577, these Ambassadors went to the Town cal∣led Marcha in Famines, which is in the Province of Lucemburg, towards the Country of Liege; where Don John was himself in person, that he might be near∣er Huy, where the Commissioners were, which the States made use of in the a∣bovesaid Treaty. The States stood inflexable to two points: The one was, That first of all, the Spaniards together with all the other foreign souldiers should be sent away. The other, That this new agreement with Don John, should in no ways prejudice the union made between the Provinces at Gaunt. Very great were the difficulties which were met withall, in these and divers other points; and Don John knew very well how much the Kings Authority and his would at last suffer by this accommodation. But rather then return to arms he being desirous to try all means of accommodation, and being much prest thereunto by the Imperial Ambassadors, and by those of the Duke of Cleves, who were perswaded that when the Spaniards should be sent away, Don John should receive all manner of satisfaction from the Flemish in all things else; he at last condescended to the a∣greement in such manner as the Ambassadors thought fit. Which was. That all the Spanish souldiers, as also the German, Italian, and Burgonian, should effectually depart out of the Low-Countries within forty days. That the Towns and Castles should forthwith be delivered up into the hands of the Flemish; That all pri∣soners should be set at liberty; particularly Count Buren who was prisoner in Spain; upon condition that his father the Prince of Orange should after the meeting of the States General, make good on his side whatsoever they should determine. That the King should permit the Provinces to enjoy all their former priviledges and immuni∣ties. That on the contrary, the Catholick Religion should be by them maintained in all places: That they should likewise dismiss all their foreign souldiers, and should renounce all foreign confederacies and leagues. That they should presently pay down 60000 pound sterling, for satisfaction to the Spaniards who were to be gone; and should take upon them also to satisfie the Germans. These were in substance the chief Articles of the agreement; and upon these conditions the States obliged themselves to receive Don John for their Governor. This agreement being made, order was immediately given by Don John for the de∣parture of the Spaniards, and all the other foreign Souldiers; and he sent Octa∣vius Gonzaga, and the Secretary Escovedo a Spaniard, to see it effected. But Orange hearing the Agreement, declared publickly that they were not such as did satisfie him, nor yet the Provinces of Holland and Zealand. He complained, That his son was not freely restored unto him; that sufficient provision was not had for the safety of the Provinces; since there was no order for the demolishing of the new erected Castles: That it was an unworthy action to pay the Spaniards, the great wealth considered which they had got by plunder from the Fle∣mish. That convenient respect was not given to those Princes whose favour and as∣sistance had been so advantagious to the Flemish. That by this agreement, that other of Gaunt was not sufficiently made good: from which he and the Provinces of Hol∣land and Zealand did not intend to recede, nor run such hazards as the rest were quick∣ly like to do. The States replyed unto these Objections, and endeavoured to make it appear that the agreement of Gaunt was not any ways altered; and that howsoever they would see it observed. But Orange by cavils or subterfuges, continued still of the same mind; so as it was impossible to get him, nor the other two Provin∣ces, which depended absolutely upon his arbitrement, to approve of this agree∣ment. Don John was this mean while gone from the Town of Mark to Lovain, to see the Spaniards depart, and that the Citadels should be put into the Flemish hands; that then he might make his solemn entrance into Brussels, and begin his Government. A great many of the Nobility came presently to Lovain to visit him, who received them with all the civility the Country could expect, and with such dignity as became his person. He from thence sent Doctor Leonino into
Holland to acquaint the Prince of Orange, and the State of Holland and Zealand with the agreement made between him and the other Provinces, and to use all means to draw those two Provinces and Orange to be of the same mind. But this brought forth nothing else, but the greater discovery of the obstinacy of those parts and of Orange his industry in fomenting them therein. Don John had this mean while made the Citadel of Antwerp be delivered up to the Duke of Ariscot. And all the other Castles which were in the Spaniards hands were delivered up to the Flemish. Whereupon all the foreign souldiers being assembled together at Mastrick (except the Germans who for want of their pay had little longer time allowed them for their departure) betook themselves to leave the Low-Countries; and so they did according to the agreement. It is not to be exprest what joy, and what demonstrations thereof, this caused throughout all Flanders. In all Cities, Towns, and in the meanest Villages, all the people ran to hear the news, and then to tell it; as if this were the greatest happiness which they could have expected or desired. Sancio d' Avila the then Governour of the Citadel Antwerp, would not be present at the delivery up of the Citadel of into the hands of Ariscot; but left it to be done by his Lieutenant: publickly shewing by the freedom of his demeanor and words, that he would have no part in an action which he thought to be very prejudicial to his King, and not answerable to so many other acts which his Nation had so gloriously performed in Flanders. Nay 'tis said, that in his taking leave of Don John, he with the like freedome of speech said unto him, Your Highness makes us go out of Flanders: but remember that I tell you, you will quickly be forced to call us back again. And so it fell out, as in its place shall be told. A Garison of Walloons was put into the Castle of Antwerp, and the States were as diligent as they could be, in gathering together the monies, wherewith to send away the Germans also; wherein they found much difficulty, by reason of the great expences the Coun∣try had already been at, as also in those of sending away the Spaniards. Don John came at last from Lovain to Brussels, where he made his publick entry on May-day; which was done with such solemnity, as well by reason of the so ma∣ny Nobility, and other inferior people; as for the acclamations of joy, which his first receiving was accompanied withall, as there is hardly the memory of any the like, at the reception of any absolute Prince of Flanders, much less at that of a bare Governour. But it was not long ere this scene of joy was changed into o∣thers, full of sorrow, and horrour: as we shall by degrees make known unto you. When Don John had taken upon him the administration of the Government, he soon found his part was rather to obey then to command. No Order could issue forth from him, which was not to be subordained by the Councel of State; who unwilling to quit the Government which till then they had provisionally exer∣cised, sought in an indirect way to keep it still by the prerogative of Authority. They alleadged sometimes the common priviledges of their whole Country, some∣times the particular priviledges of this or that Province; and sometimes by one pretence, sometimes by another, they endeavoured still to increase their own Authority, and to lessen Don Johns Government as much as they could; and O∣range was sure not to be wanting upon all occasions. He had for his Architecture of sedition, Philip Marnice, Lord of Aldigonda, and the Lord Hees, particular Governor of Brussels, was likewise a great follower of his. The first was more wary, the other more zealous; and therefore both of them of a better mixture to do evil. These two in Brussels, and divers others in other parts, who depen∣ded upon Orange, did continually disperse seditious speeches, to incite the Fle∣mish to novelties more then ever. They gave out that Jerolimo Rhodes, Sancio d' Avila, and other Spanish Commanders who were gone into Spain, after their departure from Flanders, had been very gratiously received by the King, and by his Court with promises of new and greater imployments. Was not this (said they) a manifest declaration of the Kings, wherein he gave sentence in favour of the Spaniards against the Flemish in the last troubles which the Country had suffered? Was it not an accusing of the Councel of State of infidelity?
did not the Kings intention touching the affairs of Flanders appear plainly in this? and what could he fancy else to himself, but to expect that the Flemish should be dis∣armed, to the end that he might again the easilyer oppress them; That the example of past things did prognosticate future successes. That so in the Dutchess of Parma's time the Country did trust; and about the end of her Government, did expect much better treatment; when loe the Duke of Alva came at unawares armed, and brought with him that cruel and miserable slavery which they had till this day experienced. That in fine, Don John was a Spaniard; that he brought conceal'd Councel from Spain, and that he had John Escouedo for his chief Councellor, one of that Nation, and to whose secrecy the King had trusted the most misterious secrets of the affairs of Flanders. That then unless the Flemish would again perish miserably, they were not in any ways to lay down their present Authority. That the Councel of State should preserve their prerogative. That the States General should keep their superinten∣dency; but above all things that the Provinces should not suffer themselves to be lul'd asleep by too much quiet: for the Spaniards would be sure, quickly to make use there∣of. That the King could at once both raise and bring in an Army; in which case, what would the tediousness of their meetings avail the Flemish, to muster together their Forces? and what good would the yet more slower hopes doe of being assisted by Foreigners? Thus they endeavoured to corrupt the minds of the Flemish, and to imprint such affections in them, as might alienate them from Don John, and still more from the Spaniards, and make them fall again into yet greater troubles. Fraud reigns in the South, and Candor in the North. But this so candid proceeding de∣generates too easily into credulity: so as it is no wonder if any wary weaver of novelties wind the people in those parts as he pleaseth: and make them sencible of the evil of deceit, before they can discover that they are deceived. Flemish na∣tures use to erre on this hand: which if they ever did at any time, 'twas when they so easily believed what was suggested to them at this time in prejudice of Don John, and to make the Spaniards seem hateful to them. Don John was rather a∣bandoned, then put into the Government of the Country: he enjoyed the bare name of Governour, but not any authority at all. The Spaniards were gone, the Germans were to be gone; and which imported most, all the Castles were already in the custody of the natural Flemish; and yet they returned as easily to their suspitions, as if the Duke of Alva had been again at their gates with a more pow∣erfull Army then before. Don John endeavoured notwithstanding diligently to free them of them; he made use of the abovesaid reasons, and many others which he represented in confirmation of the Kings good will, and his own towards the Nation. But such endeavours availed but a little, for there were too many deceits woven to the contrary, and those who wove them wrought their end too easily. One of the chiefest Articles which was established at Gaunt, and afterwards con∣firmed at Marks, was that as soon as the Foreign Souldiers should be gone, the States Generall should be assembled with all solemnity, just as they were the last time in the reign of Charles the 5. and that then it should be determined what should be thought most convenient in point of the Catholick religion in Holland and Zealand. When Don John was admitted into the Government, he prest the execution of that Article; and the Councel of State seemed as if they would do the best they could with Orange. But were it either that the endeavors were too cold on the one side, or that the answers were more obdurat then usual on the other, there could be nothing concluded therin. The States did then resolve, and did therin par∣ticularly request Don John to send the Duke of Arescot in their name into Holland, as also the Lords Hierges and Viglierval: and Doctor Leonino, and the Treasurer Schets Lord of Grobendorick, in the name of Don John, to endeavour again to perswade Orange and the two aforesaid Provinces to joyn in one and the same opi∣nion with the rest. Which if it should not succeed, Don John thought their obsti∣nacie and pertinaciousness would the more evidently appear Upon this occasion Orange and the Deputies of Holland and Zealand came to a more determinate an∣swer They said, those two Provinces could not change the reformed religion, which was now received throughout them both. They complained, with various inter∣pretations, that the Agreement made at Gaunt was not observed as it ought to be;
That the new Forts should of right be demolished, and particularly that of Ant∣werp, thereby to take away all occasion from the Spaniards of re-entring there. Orange demanded the free redelivery of his Son: And pretending complaints up∣on complaints, they could not be satisfied because they would not be satisfied. Ariscot returned to Brussels with a Non est inventus; the States did not so much resent it as Don John expected they should. But Orange his faction growing still more strong, his adherents endeavoured to justifie, boldly and to the very teeth of Don John, every action that came from that Party. Heez walked through the streets of Brussels with a particular Guard, as if he acknowledged no other Com∣mand but his own in that Town; and the People laying aside all reverence to Don John, committed divers misbecoming actions to his Family; the most hair-brain'd of all the meanest sort of people not sticking to give out insolent speeches tending to sedition. For all this Don John dissembled, and in many things seemed as if he either did not take notice of them, or did not regard them. He endeavoured all he could to win Ariscot, and the other chief men, and to divide them and Orange, and to make them aware of his artificial designs; shewing, That they tended apparently to aggrandise himself with popular Authority, by the abusing of all the other States of the Country. That being already become an Here∣tick, he had consequently made himself an Enemy to Church-men: and did he not by making himself the Peoples prime Protector, declare himself to be the chief against the Nobility? To shew his greater confidence in Ariscot, the King had put the Castle of Antwerp into his hands, and had given him his eldest son the Prince of Samai for his Lieutenant. And doubtlesly there was great emulation between Ariscot and Orange, who should be the greater. But the former was of an open and voluble nature; whereas the other being a man of great knowledge, and deeply subtile, and already of so great repute both in Flanders and elswhere, had too great ad∣vantage on his side in all things. To this was added, That the Popularity enjoying so great a part in the Government of Flanders, especially in Towns and Cities, (for that the Monastical Abbots, and the Nobles did usually live in the Country) riscot, nor no other Governour of any Province would distaste that sort of people upon which their chief attendance and authority in the Country did depend. To boot that all the Nobility, and amongst them those that were the greatest, desirous to shew their zeal in favouring the welfare of the Country, they could not vary much from those opinions which Orange appeared to be of, since they were too speciously coloured over to that purpose. The Viscount Gaunt was likewise then in great esteem, who was afterwards Marqnis of Rubais; and who in the divisi∣ons which fell out between the Provinces, did afterwards serve the King very faith∣fully in military imployments of very great weight. Don John desired likewise to make him his friend: So as to shew his confidence in him, he sent him into Eng∣land, to give account to the Queen of his being received into the Government, and to keep all fair correspondencie with her, at least in appearance; since for other things he could not be ignorant, that the Rebels in Flanders had in former times ever been most fomented from thence, and were likely to be so more then ever in the future. The States this mean while sollicited the payment of the Ger∣man Souldiers, that they might rid the Country likewise of that sort of Foreigners that yet remained there. But the business proved very difficult; for the States knew not where to find the mony, which were greatly exhausted by reason of the so many past expences, & for what they had lately disbursed for the sending of the Spaniards away. They liked therefore very well the Vicount of Gaunts being sent into England, and thought to have intreated the Queen by him, that she would furnish them with some monies to that purpose: They owed her other sums of money before, and peradventure she would not have been unwilling to have thrown in this. But Don John thinking it not fitting to pawn more of the Coun∣tries revenues to the Queen, then what was already pawned, and knowing that this was one of Orange his plots, he would not suffer the Vicount to move any thing in it. The States complained much hereof, and began from hence to suspect that Don John would be unwilling to see the Germans depart. This suspition in∣creased very much afterwards upon another occasion. The Colonels and Officers
of that Nation were by orders from the States come to Malines to audit up the monies which were due unto them: And their pretensions reaching very high, the business met with great difficulties. To overcome the which, the States sent the Duke of Ariscot to Malines, and to that purpose Don John went thither him∣self in person. But all was in vain: which afforded new occasion of suspition that Don John was gone to Malines rather to nourish then to remove the difficulties which arose in that business; and that his design was to keep the Germans from departing, to the end that by their forces he might retain that Authority amongst the Flemish which otherwise he could not get. But the wiser sort thought that this difficulty was rather fomented by Orange his Faction, that they might lay the fault upon Don John; And to the end that the Germans not going away, there might be some colour of raising new troubles. The truth is, that when Don John returned to Brussels, jealousies grew so fast on his part, as he could no longer dis∣semble as before. He was received by the people of that City with manifest signs of aversion, Heez despised him insufferably; he found by divers things that there was treachery plotted against his person: And that which troubled him most was, to see how strait correspondencie the States kept with Orange, and that he was as it were the Arbitrator of whatsoever they did. Don John's suspition of trea∣chery against his person was afterwards confirmed in him by very good Authors; the one was the Duke of Ariscot, who seemed to know that there was a conspiracie either to kill him, or to imprison him: And the other was the Vicount of Gaunt, who parting in great haste from that City, came to Brussels, and acquainted Don John with the eminent danger he was in. Yet Don John seemed not to trust these reports, doubting lest there might be some cunning mixt amongst them, to make him fall upon some desperate resolution, by which the accusations laid unto his charge might be the better justified. But his occasions of fear still increasing, he at last resolved to send the Secretary Escovedo into Spain; and for a pretence, told the States, that he would doe his utmost endeavour to get the King of Spain to send some good store of money wherewith the sooner to satisfie the German soul∣diers. But his true intention in sending him was, to advertise the King at full in what condition the affairs of Flanders stood, and to let him know what evident necessity he Don John had suddenly to secure his own person. Escovedo being gone, Don John came to the knowledge how that the Prince of Orange his faction did in several places tamper with the chief German Commanders, to draw them over to his side. He then delayed no longer; he called the Counts of Mansfield and Barlemont (in whom he knew he might boldly confide) into private Coun∣cel, and acquainted them with what straits he was in. Mansfield was Governour of the Dukedom of Lucemburg, and for his great fidelity to the King did after∣wards (as shall be said) divers times govern the Low-Countries, and continued his particular government of that Province till he dyed a very old man of above fourscore and ten years old. Barlemont, who together with his Sons was likewise very faithful to the King, had the government of the County of Namures; which Province together with the other lay nearest to Lorain, and consequently nearest Italy. The Mause runs through the midst of the City of Namures, and into this River doth another River fall, called Sambra, which joyns with it in the seat of the same City. The passage over both these Rivers is always free by two Stone∣bridges, which makes the place both more commodious, and more beautiful. The ground in one side of the City lies high, upon the top whereof there stands an antient Castle, but naturally strong enough. Barlemont opinion was therefore, that Don John should take some pretence to go to Namures, and should make that City and Castle sure for his own safety; for from thence he might at any time pass freely into Lucemburg, and there such Forces might easily be received from Italy which of necessity were again to be recalled into Flanders. But above all things he was of opinion, That all diligence was to be used to win the Germans, and break the practice which the contrary party held with them. And doubtlesly this was an important point: For to boot with the condition of the Souldiers, many of the chief Towns might be said to be in their hands, they being therein quartered. Mansfield leaned likewise to the same opinion: But being a grave man, and one that did naturally rather imbrace wary then hazardous councels,
he would willingly have tarried till Escovedo might have been arrived in Spain, and have more clearly discovered the Kings mind, for then Don John might with more safety effect his. He said, It was not to be doubted but that the possessing himself of the Castle of Namures would be like a generall Alarm, which would make the Flemish flie to their Arms in all places. And what else could Orange his faction desire? how would they rejoyce to see that Don John should be the first that should use violence? and how hard would it be to be justified? To boot that Justification would peradventure be more needfull in Spain then in Flanders. That Principality had miseries mixt with its happiness; one of the greatest whereof was, That conspiracies were not credited till compassed. That then it was better to wait for answer from Escovedo, and in the mean time to be very vigilant in the shunning of all danger. That God doth protect good causes, as it was assuredly to believe he would doe in this, which might be said to be more his then the Kings. These reasons of Manssilds bore such force with them as Don John did for a few days suspend the resolution which he was advised unto by Barlemont. But know∣ing that preparations to troubles increased every day more and more in Holland, and the dangers against his person still more and more in Brussels, he would no longer expect the perfecting thereof, and therefore resolved to go to Namures as soon as he could. Being thus resolved, the greatest difficulty was to find a pre∣tence for his going thither: For the City of Namures was not so near Brussels, as that under a pretence of hunting, or any other colour, it could handsomly be done. These two Towns are distant almost two days journey one from another. In so much as it would be a great remove for Don John to go with all his Court to Namures, and 'twould afford great occasion of discourse. But it is not to be be∣lieved how much the blind Will of fortune rules in human chances. Margaret of Vallois, Queen of Navar passed at this time about the beginning of July to∣wards France, by those Frontiers of Flanders, upon occasion of going to the Spaw. This was given out for the end of her journey, but the true meaning thereof was, that she might be nearer at hand to help the practises on foot on the behalf of her brother the Duke of Alanson, as we gave you a former inkling. The Duke received but little contentment in the King his brothers Court: and there was a great correspondency of affection between the Queen and Duke, to boot with their alliance in bloud, wherefore to advantage the Dukes Interest, the Queen passed by Cambray, and there endeavoured to win the Archbishop of that City, and the Governour of that Castle. She afterwards used the like di∣ligence to the Count of Lalleyn, Governor of the Province of Hennault, and to divers other chief personages of those parts. Nor were her endeavours of small avail; for Margaret was a Lady of a high spirit; and in her Book of Memori∣als which came forth in Print, elegantly written after her death, the successe of what she Treated of in Flanders, in the behalfe of her Brother, is by her self told. This business was therefore managed with great secrecy, in so much as Don John was not then aware thereof. Fortune having offered him so good an occasion, he presently laid hold of it, and gave out the necessity he was in, of receiving, and lodging the Queen in Namures, which was the place near∣est Brussels that she came to. To boot with the considerations of her so much greatness, 'twas known that an elder sister of hers many years before was married to the King of Spain, by whom she had two daughters: wherefore Don Johns journey there was thought so just, as there was no sinister interpretation to be gi∣ven to it. Nay many of the Nobility offered to wait upon him on that occasion, whose offers he accepted of; the Duke of Ariscot, and his son the Prince of Li∣may, the Marquiss of Haure, brother to the Duke, and divers other principal per∣sonages went along with him. When he had received the Queen, and waited up∣on her as long as she tarryed there, he was not long in executing his designe of making himself Master of the Castle. The Governour of the Castle depended upon the States, so as it behoved Don John to use industry; the business was thus carryed: He feigned one morning to go a hunting, and took his way towards the Gate to which the Castle leads: and feigning that a desire took him at that instant of seeing the Castle out of meer curiosity, he sent for the Governour,
and freely gave him his hand, and went with him to go into the Castle. Don John was accompanied by the Count Barlemont, and four of the said Counts sons, which proved all of them valiant men, and got very good Military imploy¦ment. One was the Lord Hiergee, of whom we had formerly occasion to give very honourable testimony. The others were the Count Mega, the Lord Floyon, and Lord of Altapenna. Together with these Don John had provided divers o∣thers who followed aloof off, and were all of them furnished in secret with arms, to make use of as occasion should serve But the Governour of the Castle part∣ly ravished with the favour he had received from Don John, and partly moved out of the respect he bore him, made no difficulty of letting him in, but seemed to take it for a very great honour that he would vouchsafe to come into his Ca∣stle. Don John staying then a little to attend the coming up of the rest who were partakers in the designe, possest himself suddenly of the Gate, and made the usual guard go out; they were but very few that were there in garison, where∣fore the Governour durst not do any thing to the contrary. Many were of o∣pinion that Don John was advised hereunto by Orange his artifice, that he might make him be the less believed in by the Flemish. But the business was carried as we have here told you; and so it hath oft been related to us by Count Barlemont, Knight of the Golden Fleece, and son to the before mentioned Count, who succeeded his father in the Government of Namures, and who in the time of our being in Flanders past to the Government of Lucemburg; and who together with his father and brethren, was present at this action. Don John having made himself sure of the Castle, (and the Governour Barlemont having already made all obedience be given unto him by the Town) sent presently for Ariscot, and the rest of the chief men who were at Namures, and endeavoured to justifie this his action. He shewed them the express necessity he had of securing his own per∣son, which he said he had miraculously saved till now. He added, that he recei∣ved advertisement from all sides of new treacheries; and that he knew for cer∣tain that the Counts, Egmont, Laleigne, and Hees, together with divers others unquiet and treach erously minded people, had laid snares for him about Na∣mures, expecting when he should return for Brussels. And finally he said he would make the States acquainted with the whole matter; assuring himself that they would resent his injuries according to the demerits thereof: as he for his part would remain constant to all things agreed upon with them; and would en∣deavour all peace and prosperity to the Country. He presently dispatched away Signior di Rassenghien to Brussels, and by a Letter written to the States, endea∣voured to justifie what he had done, representing what made most for that pur∣pose. He desired them that they would see to the remedying of disorders, and declared that being necessitated to retire into the Castle of Namures, he would out of the same necessity stay there, till his safety might be by them provided for in such manner as was fitting. Great was the commotion that this accident oc∣casioned amongst the States. They immediately sent away three of their mem∣bers to Namures; the Abbot of Maroles, the Archdeacon of Ipry, and Signior di Brus, by whom they writ unto Don John, and earnestly desired him that he would lay aside all jealousies, and return to Brussels. But he, who would not re∣turn thither unless it were in a more honourable and safe way then before, sent the Lord Gravendon, the Treasure-General back with them to Brussels, and by him demanded divers things of the States, which he thought he very well might doe, by virtue of the agreement made with them. The chief of them were these, That he might use such Authority as became his place of Governour and Captain General: That he might have such a guard as he might trust in; and the necessa∣ry command over the Officers of War; That he might confer the Offices of the Coun∣try, as the precedent Governours haa done; and above all, he required, that in case the Prince of Orange, and the two Provinces of Holland and Zealand, should not perform to do what became them on their parts, that then the States should break off from holding any Intelligence with them, and should joyn with him to use such reme∣dies therein as should be requisite. The States reply'd, That in the first place Don John should return to Brussels,
where he should receive all fitting satisfaction. But he persisting in the resolution he had taken, and they on the other side being no less firm in their resolves, jea∣lousies increased suddenly on all sides. It was this mean while every where known that Don John was retired to Namures, whereat Orange (you will easily be∣lieve) was not any whit displeased, thinking that from this novelty many others might suddenly arise which might make for his purpose. Yet he appeared in pub∣like to be very much grieved for it, and complained very much of it in all parts. He inflamed the States to resentment: And to aggravate Don Johns offences, he divulged certain Letters, which (as his Associates said) were come into his hands by the King of Navars means, who they affirmed had intercepted them in Gascony upon occasion of their being sent by Don John and Escovedo through those parts into Spain. These Letters contained divers particulars, which not without reason might render Don John suspected, if they had been true, as Don John affirmed them to be false. The Contents thereof were chiefly this: That he exhorted the King to make himself be obeyed by Arms in Flanders, for that otherwise he would lose all authority there. These Letters were held to be very true by the States, and as such were by them disperst throughout all the whole Country, and were translated into divers languages, that they might be the better understood by every one. Orange growing hereupon daily into more credit with them, he strongly perswaded them to Arm, representing the danger which might insue, if any delay were made. Affirming, That assuredly Don Johns actions in Namures were anticipately plotted in Spain; and that therefore it was to be presupposed that the Kings forces, brought but a little before into Italy, would suddenly be led back to Flanders. That therefore they must be prevented. Don John must suddenly be driven from Namures: A passage of such importance must be taken from him; let him then go into his so faithful Province of Lucemburg, and let him try how much he would be bettered by that Provinces not joyning in uniform consent with all the rest. This counsel was soon imbraced, and with equal readiness executed. The States gave out divers Commissions to raise men, and prepared to use force against Don John, unless he would return to Brussels in his former condition. The mean while they wrote a long Letter unto the King, laying all the accusations they were able upon Don John, and offered to justifie the cause which they would by all means maintain on their sides: They did inlarge themselves particularly in the business concerning the Germans, in that of Namures, and upon the Letters which had fallen into their hands. That Don John by artificial practises had hindred the auditing of the Pay with those of that Nation; that under false pretences he was gone to Namures, and upon falser suggestions of fear had made himself Master of that Castle. That doubtlesly the aforesaid Letters were written by him and Escovedo, he not be∣ing able to deny his own Characters which were found in some of them. That his evil mind to the Country did here by appear, his intention of not standing to the Agreement made between him and the States; and that his desire of bring∣ing all things again to Arms, was thereby manifestly discovered. That Escovedo had nourished this opinion in him; and that being a Spaniard, he did strangely maligne and hate the Flemish. They therefore desired the King that he would shew his heavy resentment by his proceeding against him; and that he should injoyn Don John duly to observe what with so many circumstances he had so∣lemnly agreed upon with them. Otherwise they should be inforced to protest, that he failing on his behalf, the mischief and disorders which would necessarily insue, to the prejudice of the King, Religion, and of the Countries welfare, were not to be imputed to them. Don John writ likewise into Spain, endeavouring to clear himself of the im∣putations laid upon him in that Letter; adding what was most needfull to what had formerly been represented by Escovedo. He shewed, That the difficulty in the German business rise from Orange his Faction, who endeavoured to gain that Souldiery to themselves. That having miraculously saved himself from so many treacheries and conspiracies, he with much adoe had got with some of his trustiest friends into the Castle of Namures. That
those Letters which were ascribed to be written by him, or by Escovedo, were certainly to be judged as either wholly fained, or in a great part altered by the same faction. And what greater contradiction could there be, then that he should first send the Spaniards away, and afterwards advise the King to proceed with violence against the Flemish? That at that time such an advice would have been very much contrary to the season, to reason, and to his Majesties service. But that now, instead of giving it, he did avow it was very requisite to doe it: For that if his Majesty did not suddenly by his forces prevent those dangers which did so eminently threaten Flanders, all the Provinces would revolt; which when they should once be lost, they would not be so easily regotten. This was the opposition between Don Johns Letters and those of the States: but neither of them forbore this mean while to advantage themselves by pre∣paring Arms; for it was almost impossible ever to return to a new agreement Don John endeavoured to get the chiefest places of the County of Namures into his hands, and in particular secured himself of Charlemonte and Mariamburg, both of them very well fortified; and which had taken their names, the one of them from the Emperor Charles the fifth, and the other from his sister Queen Mary. He likewise held very secret intelligence in the Citadel of Antwerp, to draw over the Walloons who had the keeping of it to side with him, and so to be∣come master of that so important strength. He dealt likewise with some Ger∣man Companies who were in the Town, and which were of Fromsberg and Fou∣chero's Regiments: and did the like with other Officers of that Nation which were in Bergen ap Zome, in Tolen, in Breda, in Balduke, and in other places. But in the government of these negotiations, the event shewed that Fortune did fa∣vour the States much more then she did Don John. The practise in the Citadel of Antwerp was discovered, and prevented. And the Flemish having a vigilant eye every where, and having better conveniencie to use either monies or force with the Germans, they forbare not using either of them, as occasion did best serve: So as in a short time they sent them out of all the abovesaid places. And in Berghen ap Zome, where Colonel Fuchero was quartered, and in Breda, where Fromsberg was in garrison, their Forces proved so perfidious, as that they put both the Towns into the States hands. They then fell to demolish the Castles. That of Antwerp was first slighted, but only on that side which lay towards the City, the rest was left in its former strength. The people ran with great joy to this business, striving who should outdoe one another in the pulling down there∣of; and expressing such rage against those insensible Platforms and Walls, as they could not have shewed greater against the Authors of them. By example of the Antwerpians, those of Gaunt did the like to their Castle: and so were all the rest dismantled, except the Castle of Cambray, which the States durst not meddle with for that it was in a City which was subject to the Empire, and to Archiepiscopal jurisdiction. Yet they wrought so, as they got Signor d' Insy to be put into it, and to keep it for their service; causing Signor di Lich to be put out of it, who kept it formerly under the Kings protection. Don John was now all alone in Namures, the Duke of Ariscot and almost all the rest of the Nobility which had waited upon him thither being under several pretences gone; so as no persons of any quality remained with him save Barlemonte and his sons, and Mansfield in the contiguous Province of Lucemburg. He was not failing in representing to the life his dangers and his necessities to the Court of Spain; and notwithstanding kept still fair with the States, telling them that he had desired the King to send another Governour into Flanders who might be more acceptable to the Country: He offered to withdraw himself into the Province of Lucemburg, and there to expect the Kings orders; and propounded, that the States in this interim might not come to any act of hostility, nor make any innovation. But they suspecting that Don John's end was to make them foreslow their preparations, and so allow more time to the King to make his, did not any whit cool in their former resoluti∣ons. They therefore signified unto Don John, that in the frist place he should cause the City and Castle of Namures to be put into their hands, together with the o∣ther owns which he had taken in that Province. Which he absolutely refused to do, unless such provision were first had, as was requisite for his dignity and safety.
Thus were the minds on all sides daily more and more exasperated. The States General gave present order that Orange should come himself in person to Brus∣sels; and to this purpose they sent four of their Deputies to him. There was no∣thing which he did more desire then this. Wherefore he came quickly to Breda, a Town of his own, and which he had then recovered, after having been many years deprived of it. From thence he went to Antwerp, and so to Brussels. It is not to be said with what concourse of people, and with what Jubilee he was re∣ceived in both those Citys. The multitude being impatient to see him within their Walls went to meet him whole miles off in the fields, and following him with great acclamations of joy; called him the Father, the Protecter, and the Uphol∣der of the Belgick Liberty. Nor were the demonstrations of gladness less in all the more civil orders in such sort as his entry and receiving, looked much more like the absolute Lord of the two abovesaid Provinces, then of the Vassal of a Prince who had just and soveraign power over him and them. Hardly was he well setled in Brussels, when to witness the great respect they bore him, he was by the gene∣ral Orders created Governour of Brabant: an honour altogether unaccustom∣ed. For the General Governour residing usually in that Province, there needs no other particular Government. 'Tis true that nothing is more pernitious in States then faction: but from this evil, this good doth sometimes arise; That whilst the one beats down the other, the lawfull Prince may the more easily subdue them both. Orange his Faction was grounded upon the favour of the people, and of the new Sects, as may sufficiently be comprehended by what hath been already said. Wherefore when 'twas seen that his Authority grew to that hight not only in Holland and in Zealand, but even elsewhere; and that his designe was every day seen of lessening the Kings Authority, as also that of the Church; high dis∣dain arose in the chief Nobles of Brabant, of the Province of Flanders, and of the Walloon Provinces, and from this disdain did a practice proceed of framing another Faction, which might at least counterpoise this. The Duke of Ariscot, as we have told you before, had a particular emulation to the Prince of Orange: and many in Flanders being of opinion, that after the death of Rechesens, the King would have sent some of the Emperours brothers to be Governour of Flanders, and especially the Archduke Mathias, Ariscot had therefore from that very time endeavoured more then any other, to insinuate himself into the favour of that Prince. Mathias was not then above 22 years old; his fortune was not answerable to his birth; for he had many brothers, wherefore his house was rather opprest by them then upheld. He was therefore very desirous of this imployment in Flanders, thinking he could not find another like it in all Germany. Ariscot making himself head of this faction, and judging that nothing could make more for the advantage thereof, then to have a Gover∣nour chosen by their Authority, he sent an express Messenger Privately away to Vienna, and alleadging all the reasons which might most perswade him thereunto, he endeavoured to make him take upon him the Government of Flanders. In this proposal it was questionable whether the arrogancy of the propounder was greater, or the easiness of the accepter thereof. And to say truth, there could not well any more rash action been undertaken, then for the abovesaid Nobles to appoint a Governour over Flanders, of their own Authority. And on the o∣ther side, the Archduke appeared too easie in accepting the offer, not weighing as he ought to have done, how the King, to whom he was so nearly ally'd, would be thereat offended, and upon whose Supreme and lawfull Authority that electi∣on did of right depend. But Mathias being perswaded that the King would ap∣prove of it, and that in effect he could not wish more then to have an Austrian Prince of Germany at the Helm of Government in Flanders, by reason of the conformity of the two Nations; especially a Prince who was invited thereunto by the chief Nobility of the Countrey, he did not any longer dispute the bu∣sinesse This action was of such a nature as it was to be executed ere it were divulged. Wherefore Mathias in the silentest hours of the night, took Post, and with all speed made towards Cullen, and passing over the Rhine there, entred the Low-Countries within a few days, and came into Brabant. When this was known in
Vienna, the Emperour was exceedingly troubled at it. He sent speedily to stay his brother; and to this purpose wrote very effectual Letters to all those Princes, through whose States he was to pass But no good insuing thereupon, he justified himself unto the King as it became him to do; chiefly accusing his brother, and shewing himself ready to resent it. When Mathias was come into Flanders, he soon perceived how much Orange his faction prevailed over that of Ariscot; and that he was to compass his desired end much rather by the means of that, then  the other. Orange was not in wardly displeased at the resolution taken concerning Mathias. He saw nothing could make more for his desires then to see Mathias and Don John opposit one to another. That this might occasion great jealousies between the two Austrian Houses of Germany and Spain: and above all, that such an action would make Don John irreconcilable to the Nobility, who had here∣in so hainously offended him. For what remained, be doubted not but to be soon able to make the Archduke throw himself wholly into his hands. He therefore first exhorted the States to dissemble the injury they received, by Mathias his be∣ing brought in without their authority or knowlodg, and went about with some of his trustiest friends amongst them, to discredit Ariscot. Ariscot was Gover∣nour of the Province of Flanders, and prepared to go from Gaunt, the chiefest Ci∣ty of that Province, nobly accompanied to Lyre, where the Archduke by order from the States stayed, till some resolution should be taken touching his person. Orange had a great many of followers throughout all that whole Province, and chiefly in the Town of Gaunt: and of all the people of Flanders, those of Gaunt were always readiest to revolt. Orange therefore handled the matter so, as to make Ariscot be held amongst them for the Author of this novelty; in so much as a great tumult arising in that City amongst some of the most seditious, the whole storm fell finally upon Ariscots own self; as if he, contrary to the Order of the States General, would arrogate that unto himself which did not belong unto him. touching Mathias: Whereupon he was with great scorn imprisoned, and of a Governour made a Captive. Some others of quality were imprisoned with him His imprisonment lasted six days; after which time he was restored to his liber∣ty and former place; but so, as he was to acknowledg Orange for the sole author of it. Indeavours were had afterwards to reconcile them; but ere this must be done, Orange must shew his Authority in Ariscots own Government, to be the same which he with unusual demonstrations enjoyed thorowout the whole Coun∣try. He to this purpose effected an occasion of going to Gaunt, causing himself to be invited thereunto by the publick desire of that City, as also of the whole Province. And he was so received by the Gaunteses, as they could not have shew∣ed greater demonstrations of gladness if the King himself had come unto their City. When Orange had discredited Ariscots faction as much as he thought good, and having made sufficient ostentation of his own; the States resolved to make Archduke Mathias the General Governour. The reason they gave for it was this, That Don John having failed in his duty, and by the example of the former Spanish Governours, having endeavoured rather to oppress Flanders then to govern it, it was thought fit to have such a Governour, as might be satis∣factory to the Country: That the Archduke Mathias was thought to be such a one; both for his own condition, and for that he was so near ally'd in bloud unto the King. And that the States had pitched upon this Election, particular∣ly to avoid the danger of any other Prince his entrance into Flanders, and fixing himself there. Mathias past on to this purpose to Antwerp, where he was solemnly received, and with him was Orange, who treated with him at large in that City; and many Articles were agreed upon, by which he bound himself to govern. The first was, That the Prince of Orange should be given unto him for his Lieutenant. All the rest tended to make his Authority subordinate to that of the States General, so as he could not in any whatsoever manner do any publick action without their will and consent. The States and the said Mathias did af∣terwards by their Letters to the King, endeavour to procure his approbation of that Election, endeavouring to honest it in manner aforesaid, and by divers other colourable pretences. But this mean while the States forbare not to prepare forces,
and they turned them chiefly towards Vaures, a Town between Brussels and Namures as hath been elsewhere said; here they resolved to make their Ren∣desvouz, resolving to befiege Namures. So as when they should have possest that Pass towards Italy, as they had already done the other of Mastrick towards Ger∣many, there might be no passage left for the Kings men who were to enter into Flanders either by the one or the other in an hostile manner. This was the reso∣lution of the States General; and this was Orange his particular opinion, who governed all things then according to his own will. But when Escovedo was come to Spain, and the other news of the novelties hap∣pened in Flanders, being likewise advertised, continual consultation was had there touching what was to be done in the affairs of that Country. The King con∣sidered on the one side, that to return to arms again, would be to return to the former vast expences, and excessive difficulties; and that his enemies, and those that envied his greatness, desired nothing more, then that he might re-enter upon a War of which he should never have an end, and wherein he was to spend the flowre of his Militia. There were not wanting some in his Councel who did no approve of Don Johns retreat to Namures, and of his surprising that Castle; as if he had done it not so much out of necessity, as out of choice, that he might have Forces in his hands, and gather thereout more advantage to himself, then to the Kings service. But on the other side it was considered, that if Don John should not be presently succoured, and that with powerfull forces, the Kings affairs in Flanders would be utterly lost; the plots which were practised to that purpose, both within and without, being too apparent. To boot that there was no way seen whereby to come to a peaceable agreement, but by preparing with all possible power for a new War. These opinions being then justly weighed, it was resolved in Spain, that Or∣ders should be given to all the Kings Officers in Italy, immediately to send back those forces into Flanders, who were some months before come from thence; and who were now almost all of them in the State of Milan, or in the Kingdom of Naples. At the same time Commissions for the raising of horse and foot were sent from the King into Burgony, Lorain, and the nearest parts of Germany. And it fell out luckily that Count Charls Mansfield, son to Count Ernestus, did then lead back a body of 4000 foot from France, which he had formerly brought in∣to that Kingdom for the service of that Crown. So as the Kings Forces began to found aloud in divers places, which afforded the Flemish sufficient matter to think upon Their chief designe was (as we have a little before said) to besiege Namures and to be Masters of that Pass, which was of such importance. Where∣fore the States endeavoured with all diligence to bring their men to the Rendes∣vous in Vaures. And Commanders were already provided for the Army which was a gathering. They had made the Lord Goygni Camp-master-general; the Count de Laleigne General of the foot, the Vicecount of Gaunt General of the horse; and Mr de la Motte Master of the Artillery. But the strength of their forces did not as yet answer to the eagerness of their design: and therfore they labour'd very hard to get potent succours from their neighbours abroad, and to advantage their Cause as much as they might. These endeavors were had (as we have formerly said) in Ger∣many, France, and England. From Germany the Palatine John Casimire, promised to bring a great strength of men, if they would send him mony to pay them. In France, that King would not meddle with the revolt of Flanders, they having been too busie in the Domestical troubles of his own Kingdom. Nor could the Duke of Alanson much favour the Flemish by his own Forces. They therefore placed all their chiefest hopes in the Queen of England. And doubtlesly they might be better helpt from thence then from any other part, both with men and mony. Wherefore they turned their chiefest endeavours thither: and to give it the greater weight and reputation, they sent a solemn Ambassy to the Queen, the head whereof was the Marquis of Haure. The Queen her self desired that this clamorous appearance might be made, to the end that she might the better honest unto the King of Spain, any aid that she should give them, through the pub∣lick complaints of the Flemish. A firm Confederacie was by this means made without much difficulty be∣tween
the Queen and the Belgick States; the substance whereof was, That each side should assist other interchangeably, with proportionable Forces by Sea and Land. The Queen obliged her self thereunto with present effects, and with de∣claring that she would not suffer Flanders to be opprest. And on the contrary, the States promised to assist the Queen whensoever she should be molested by the common enemy. She suddenly sent an express Ambassador into Spain to justifie this action of hers unto the King, and sought to honest it, by making known how much her interest was concerned in not suffering her Neighbours to be opprest especially the Flemish, with whom the English had alwayes kept good correspon∣dencie. She shewed the King, that he ought rather to be well pleased then of∣fended with what she had done in their assistance; for that otherwise they might peradventure through despair have thrown themselves into the hands of some other neighbouring Prince. She exhorted him speedily to send some other Go∣vernour of his own blood, in stead of Don John: but chiefly to comply with the Flemish in their so just demands, and fairly to compound the affairs of those Countries; to which purpose she offered on her side to use her best and most powerful mediation. When she had satisfied this her palliated respect to Spain, she failed not readily to perform her true designs on the behalf of Flanders: she suddenly raised the monies which were needfull to raise the intended Forces in Germany, under John Casimire, which were to be most of them Horse, and gave order that a good number of Foot should be sent out of her own Kingdom. The monies being received, John Casimire was not slack in using such diligence as was behovefull: Nor was the Duke of Alanson wanting in nourishing all hopes of good assistance from his side. The noise of these succours were greatly am∣plified by Orange and his faction, to make the States Generall still the more re∣solute in not listning to any accommodation with Don John. The Bishop of Liege now become Cardinal, had by Commission from the Emperour endeavoured to begin a new Treaty of Agreement; and though the difficulties grew daily great∣er, yet he would never give over the Negotiation, hoping that it might one day prove more successfull. On the contrary, that it might be the harder to effect, Orange caused the States to publish an Edict against Don John, wherein in bitter tearms they declared him to be a Violator of the Peace, and made all those that followed him subject to the punishment of Rebellion, if within 15 dayes they did not resolve to leave him. Don John this mean while, leaving a sufficient garri∣son in Namures, was gone into the Province of Lucemburg, that he might be the readier to receive the Forces which were to come to him from Italy, and which were raised in the other neighbouring parts. And mightily encouraged by reason of the resolutions which were put on in Spain, according to his desire, he had de∣signed the Town of Marks for his Rendezvouz, that he might be the nearer to relieve Namures, if need should be, and afterward to enter with all his Forces more into the heart of the Country. This design, which was soon known by the Flemish Commanders, made them hasten the more to besiege Namures, and to keep Don John from re-entring into Brabant. They therefore approached the City on divers sides, and possest themselves of divers places, that they might be∣gin to begirt it. But neither had they as then men enough, nor did their condition correspond with the imployment. Their men were almost all of them of their own Country, taken up where they could find them, and the most of them ill provided; and their Horse consisted of the old Trained-bands of Flanders, which were but seldom wont to go into the field, and to be imyloyed in war. They not∣withstanding made some progress. For Bovigni a Town upon the Mause and not far from Namures, fell by Treaty into their hands; and in some skirmishes which hapned between their men and those of Namures, they had somewhat the better. But all these were but petty businesses in respect of what they had pro∣posed unto themselves as their chief design. The year 1578. now followed. In the beginning whereof all the men being arrived which Don John expected from Italy, and those being added unto them Anno 1578. which he had raised in the neighbouring Countries, he would no longer defer drawing near the Enemy. At first he temporised, till he was better provided of Forces: but now that he was so well furnished, he thought it made much for
his advantage to fall upon the Enemy as soon as he could, and fight them before they should have received the foreign Forces which they expected. The Flemish Commanders changed likewise their designs: For whereas before they thought to have besieged Namures, they now decermined to retreat to Brabant and to put themselves into some safe quarter, till strengthened by foreign forces they might face Don John. They had about 10000 Foot, the most of them Walloons, the rest Flemish, unless it were one English Regiment, wherein were some Scots and French: They had not above 1500 Horse, composed of the Train'd-Bands of Flanders; of 300 Rutters, and as many Dragoons. In the Kings Army there was about 15000 Foot, and 2000 Horse, the most of which were Spaniards and Italians, all of them choise men, and all of them long practised in military affairs in Flanders. At the Kings first resolution of taking up Arms, Alexander Fernese Prince of Parma appeared in Flanders, being desired so to doe by the King him∣self. and Den John having very much desired it. Don John had had sufficient ex∣perience of this Prince his valour, in the memorable League against the Turks, and particularly in the Battel at Lepanto: wherefore he assured himself he would prove as valiant now in Flanders, Nor was he deceived in his expectation, Fernese was no sooner come, then laying aside all prerogative of blood, wherein he was so nearly allied to the King, and to Don John, he applied himself wholly to those military actions, which were to make him appear as much superior to others in , as he was in quality. None could be more carefull then he in providing for all things from time to time; in receiving of the Kings men, as they came into the Province of Lucemburg in quartering of them, in bringing them to the ren∣dezvous, and in all other imployments of the Army. He applied himself to those of every Nation; he spoke almost all their languages: He was the first in under∣taking any labour, the last in giving it over: He was no wayes curious in his diet, nor sleep; in his apparel more a Souldier then a Prince; and always more intent upon the Kings service then his own. The vigor of his body was no whit inferior to that of his mind; and his martial aspect did promise Victory before it was won. When the Army was come to the Rendezvous, Don John, desirous to make the justice of the Kings cause appear, and thereby the more inflame the Souldiers to defend it, he with a chearful countenance spake thus unto them. After so many Treaties of Peace in vain, at last (valiant Souldiers!) Fortune hath pleased or rather Justice, to put into your hands an opportunity of establishing the Kings authority again in Flenders by Arms. For what concerned Treaties of Accom∣modation, what hath not been done? what hath not the King condescended unto? I am ashamed to remember how I arrived in these Provinces. When I was come, (I cannot say whether more unarm'd, or more unknown) I shewed my self totally disposed to Peace, and endeavoured by all means I could to take away those rubs which might hinder the effecting of it. Let the truth be said, and let the true manner of proceed∣ings be known: which on the behalf of the Flemish, in the handling and concluding of all their Treaties, was much rather to give Laws then to receive them, and to pro∣ceed rather like Soveraigns then Subjects. Would they first of all have the Peace of Gaunt confirmed? I confirmed that Peace. Would they have all the Forts in their own hands? I put them into their hands. Would they have all Foreigners depart? I was contented to be without any Foreign Souldiers. Would they lastly have an ab∣solute Flemish Government? I did likewise so far satisfie them in that, as retaining hardly the bare and naked title of Governour to my self, all affairs were done by the Councell of State, and all Authority lay in the intire will of the Provinces. So ex∣ceeding willing was the King to show his goodness and his particular affection towards them. But all would doe no good. And truly, clemencie in Princes serves to little purpose when the obstinacie and distoyaltie of the Subjects is thereby made the greater. What was not plotted, even from the beginning, to keep me from being received into the Government: and afterwards to drive me out of it? What contempt hath not been shewed against my person? what snares have they not laid to take away my life▪ My retreat or rather my flight to Namures doth sufficiently witness it. I confess I did not so much shun death, as the danger of being so shamefully led to death: For to  a mans life in conspiracie by the hands of murtherers, ought to be reputed as mi∣serable, as it ought to be esteemed fortunate to lese it whiljt one is valiantly fighting
amidst Armies and Batels. After their private, they broke forth into publick con∣spiracies. The whole Country rose up against me on a sudden; and foreigners were called in to assist their home-forces. And who must be the author of the new revolts, but he that was the like of the former? Orange! that seducer of the people; that Architecture of Rebellion: He who plotted treason first against the Church, and then against the King: though to say truth, he could not fall into the first fault, without falling necessarily into the second: for the King hath always made the Churches cause his own. No Forces can be then more just then are these of the King: since it is apparently seen be cannot be more justly called to maintain the obedience which is due unto the Church, and that which is due unto his Crown. Eve∣ry one knows how requisite a good cause is to bring a begun war to a good end. Where∣fore should not we then in this behalf augurate good success to our undertakings? But our Forces shall not prevail more through their cause then through their valour. Let every one of you interrogate your selves, and call to mind your Military actions, and then let him doubt if he can, whether future victories be not largely to correspond with those that are past. What one souldier is there here amongst you who cannot boast of some egregious action, upon so many occasions, of either having routed the enemy in parties, or overcome them in battels, or quel'd them in sieges, or forced by some other sort of loss to make your victory still the more illustrious? On the contra∣ry, the enemies are still the same; to wit, tumultuously gathered up: governed with∣out any manner of order; without many: full of distrusts within themselves; and with such variety of ends, as branching one cause into many, they will not long im∣brace or make good any of them. They are now pitched here about Namures; and with hardly the name of a siege, they keep quiet within their quarters; shewing clear∣ly that they put all their trust in foreign succours, since they perceive they can have none from within their selvos. My purpose therefore is to set upon them at unawares, and to crush them before they shall receive their expected succours. This first victory will make the rest more easie to us: and which of you is it that have not already dyed your swords in the bloud of these very foreigners, which will now again re-enter Flan∣ders? Desperate hereticks who cannot be at quiet within themselves, and much less amongst their neighbours: and who not content to make war upon God at their own homes, carry it with all sort of violence, and execrable impiety abroad to others. Buckle your selves then my souldiers to the battel: I ask no more of you then your former performances; and am confident to make mine own actions appear such, as that, as my past enterprises have proved fortunate against the Turks and Moors, they shall now be as successfull against the Hereticks, in this my present expedition, and against those other rebels that joyn with them. Hardly had Don John done speaking, when the whole Army filled the air with shouts of joy; and gave all such signes as might shew both will to fight, and hopes to overcome. The Kings Camp marched from their Rendezvous towards Namures; and Don John advancing himself, was the first that came to that Ci∣ty; eg'd on by his desire of knowing the enemies proceedings. To this pur∣pose he sent Mut. Pagano, an old souldier, towards them with his Company of Dragoons; who brought him certain tidings, that the enemy did already quit their quarters, and did depart from about Namures. That never the less they seemed as if they would make an orderly retreat; and that their intention was to fortifie themselves at Geblurs, a Town upon the Confines of Brabant, to∣wards Brussels; towards which place they had already sent their baggage. When Armies are near at hand. retreats prove usually dangerous; and Fortune makes the Commanders vie most for valour and industry then, whilst the one seeks to retire with honour and safety, and the others to beat up their quarters with igno∣miny and loss. But the latter have still great advantage upon the former. Don John would not therefore let slip the occasion. Count Peter Ernestus Mansfield was Camp-master-general of the Army; and Octavius Gonzaga General of the Horse. He ordered Mansfield to hasten his march towards Namures; and Gon∣zaga to come up speedily with the flowre of his horse; that he might advance, at least some of them, against the enemy, and entertain them in the reer whilst the rest of the Army might come time enough to give battel, and fure therein ac∣cording to their hopes. Gonzaga readily obeyed; he advanced towards the
Enemy with nine Companies of Lanciers, and four of Dragoons. At the same time came 1500 Foot, most of them Spaniards, which Mansfield had with all dili∣gence dispatcht away. The Flemish were gathered together in S. Martins, a Village between Namures and Geblurs, where they ordered their retreat with all diligence, that they might not allow the Kings men time to joyn, and to come upon them with the more advantage. They rose with their whole Camp from that Village the last of Janu∣ary, and ordered their march thus. They divided their Foot into three bodies, and left the Horse in the rear the better to secure them behind, and to beat back the Kings horse in case they should fail upon them in their rear as they retreated, as they reared they would. When Don John understood that they were on their march, he furnished some advantagious places with Foot, which lay betwixt him and the Enemy; to secure the retreat likewise of his Horse, if need should require. He then set forward; and they were not gone far when they overtook the Ene∣my, whose Foot could not hasten so fast as did the Kings Horse. All their Leaders were men of valour and experience: The Lanciers were commanded by Ber∣nardino de Mendoza, Curtio Martiningo, the two brothers John Baptista, and Camillo del Monte, Nicolo Basti, Alfonso di Vargas, Ernando di Toledo, Au∣relio Palermo, and Georg Macura: And the Dragoons by Antonio Oliviero Com∣missary Generall of the Horse, Antonio d' Avalos, Mutio Pagano, and John Al∣coneta The Dragoons came up first, and galled the Enemy when they were not far from Geblures; and when they had discharged their shot, they gave way to the Lanciers, who charged them more close and more home. The Enemies Horse faced about; and boldly receiving the first onset of the Harquebusiers, they seem∣ed as if they would with the like stoutness stand the second assault of the Spear∣men; but the effect proved otherwise. The Prince of Parma would be on the head of the Kings Lanciers, and one of the first that should charge the Enemy: which he so couragiously did, and was so well followed by the rest, as the Flemish Horse after having made some appearing resistance, gave manifest signs of yield∣ing. Don John came up this mean while with some few Foot, for it was impossible to have many time enough to fight. But the Enemy believing that all the Kings men were come up, or at least the greatest part of them, turned their retreat into a downright running away, and sought only how to save themselves. The Horse, throwing away their Arms, began to run; and being closely pursued by the Kings Horse, they fell foul upon the rear of their own Foot. They charge, and there∣withall confusion past into the body of the Battel, which was likewise soon dis∣ordered and routed: the Van, which had much advantaged themselves in their march, received no harm at all. The Enemy being routed, the Kings men fell to execution; but they were so few in number, as they could not draw so much blood from the Enemy as they would have done. The Enemy fled sundry wayes, and could not be equally pursued by the Kings men; insomuch as many of them saved their heads by their heels. The report was notwithstanding, that about 3000 of them were slain, and many of them taken prisoners, amongst which Il Signor di Goigny, who was the Enemies most considerable Commander. There were hard∣ly any of the Kings men slain, very few hurt: And truly the Victory was such, as it was doubted whether it were more to be ascribed to fortune or to valour. Don John having got the better of the business, pursued his victory. He presently turned towards the Town of Geblures, neer unto which the battel was fought: And putting the Enemy to slight a second time; a good many whereof after their defeat, were got under those wals, and seemed as if they would reorder themselves, he easily perswaded the Townsmen to submit to the Kings obedience. The Kings Camp meeting all here together, the greatest part whereof, as hath been said, could not be at the battel; Don John sent Octavio Gonzaga to take in Lovain, and the Lord Hierges to recover Bovigne. Gonzaga met with no oppo∣tion; and Hierges presenting his Artillery before the walls, he with small resist∣ance reduced that Town likewise. But the Prince of Parma found harder work at the Town of Sichen, to the taking whereof Don John had sent him a part by himself. The Town was not strong by nature, nor was it made so by industry, there was also but a weak garrison in it: And yet the Townsmen and the Soul∣diers
being obstinate in the defence thereof, the Prince was forced to batter the wal divers times, and to make many fierce assaults; in the last whereof the Kings men falling with the Townsmen into the Town, they made great slaughter of them, and afterwards plundred the City in hostile manner. The Captain of the Garrison, and some of the Souldiers saved themselves in a little Castle within the Town, but were forced soon after to yield upon discretion, and all of them were put to death by the Hangman for having been more fool-hardy then stout, and for having chosen force before clemencie. By the example of Sichen, Diste, Ariscot, Leuv, Tilemone and divers other less considerable places of Brabant on  thereof which lies towards Namures, came without any dispute into Don John ands. Neville, one of the best Towns in all Brabant, lay nearer Brussels. Don John would have taken it by force; but he met with such opposition as he was forced to tarry longer about it then he had thought: He came therefore to batttery, and from thence to assaults, which cost much blood. Monsieur de Vil∣liers commanded in chief within the Town, who egregiously performed his part, as did also all his Souldiers. The Town was not strong notwithstanding, nor could it hold out long: whereupon the Kings men being much incensed, and threatening to deal with Neville as they had but lately done with Sichen, the Townsmen upon better consideration came to Articles, and resolved to yield the Town, when the Garrison should be marcht out with their Arms and baggage. From hence the Army entred into the Province of Henault, and without much opposition took the Towns of Reus, Gognie, Bins, and Mabuge, with divers o∣thers of the like condition, which were all but very weak. So as these petty victo∣ries seemed to correspond but badly with that so noble a one which Don John had but a little before got at Geblures. After the taking of Nivelle, Don John would willingly have straitned Brussels, from whence the Archduke Matthias and the Prince of Orange with evident signs of fear were gone to Antwerp, to se∣cure that City, wherein lay the greatest consequence of all the affairs of Flanders. But the besieging of Brussels would not have been a business of such dispatch: For it was a place of large circuit, and greatly peopled, and which might have stood out long. Wherefore the Councel of War were of opinion, That it was better first to possess all the Country which lay about Namures, to secure them∣selves still the more of that passage, which lay so opportunely for the receiving of succours from Italy, and which would make the other Pass over the Mause at Mastrick the more easie; by which Aid in assistance of the King might likewise be brought from the neighbouring parts of Germany. Wherefore Don John en∣larging his Quarters in the two Provinces of Brabant and Henault, that he might receive his victuals with more ease, and in the greater abundance, re-entred into the Country of Namures, and resolved to incamp before Philippaville. This is a Town of five royal Bulwarks, which the King fortified, the better to secure that Frontier towards France and did therefore honour it with his own name. The Quarters being distributed according to the diversity of the Nations, they began to make Trenches on one side: And Don John willing to shew his superiority as well in pains-taking as in command, applied himself with great fervor to such Works as were of greatest importance. The Prince of Parma was alwayes by his side: So as by their example every particular Souldier gave himself to labour hard in the siege. When the Trenches were advanced, some Cannon, and Peeces of lesser bore were planted on that side, to bereave the Enemy of defence; and the Kings men coming at last unto the ditch, began to lodge there. But those within were not less ready in making resistance. Signor di Glimes was chief Com∣mander over them, and with him were five Foot-Colours, and one Troop of Car∣bines on hors-back: The people were but few in respect of the need, and they wanted many things within the Town for their defence. Yet the Enemy seeming as if they would maintain it; and encouraged by Orange, who promised they should within a short time be relieved, they began at first to annoy the Kings Camp with frequent shot, and by some sallies endeavoured to hinder the working of the Trenches, at least to keep them further off. Being come to fight at nearer distance, the actions grew hotter; the assailants sought how to get nearer the walls, and the assailed how to keep them further off. But the Kings men did so
well shelter themselves, and did so advance with their Trenches and Earth-works, and by their batteries threw down so great a part of the Wall, as they prepared to come boldly on to the assault, when the Governour resolved to surrender the Town to Don John. Some succour was endeavoured to have been brought in, but that failing, the besieged were much discouraged. It was notwithstanding thought that the Governour was too easily perswaded to surrender, being more wrought upon by promises from Don John then by any necessity. And his go∣ing over soon after to the Kings side, turned this opinion into a believed certainty. When Don John was rid of this enterprise heresolved to leave Gonzaga with a good part of the horse, and some foot upon those Frontiers of Hennault and Artois, to withstand some preparations which the Duke of Alanson was making in France, against Flanders on those parts. And Gonzaga did luckily defeat some Companies of foot who were already entred the Country. After this he endea∣voured to endamage the Territories thereabouts which were in the hands of the Flemish Rebels, by frequent inroads, and especially by destroying the corn upon the ground, which was then a ripening. Don John sent the Prince of Parma at the same time with other Forces to streighen Limburg, a Town which gives the name to that Province, and lies near the County of Namures, being very commodious for the receiving of aid from Germany. At the first battery the Town surrendred to Fernese; from whence the Governour retired himself into the Castle, which is very strong by reason of its situation, standing upon a very steep rock; wherefore he resolutely prepared to stand out. But his souldiers were of another mind; for being but very few in number, and having but small or no hopes of being relieved; they would not run the hazard of punishment, as∣suring themselvs that they should easily obtain pardon: as they did: for Fernese suf∣ffering the Governor to go out free, did not only pardon the other Soldiers, but took them almost all into the Kings service. This was the proceedings of the Kings Army after the battel of Geblurs. This mean while Norchermes, Lord of Selle was com from Spain: by whom the King had by his Letters signified his plesaure touch∣ing the novelties which had happened in Flanders. The Contents whereof were, That he would not have the Flemish acknowledg any other Governour then Don John. For what remain'd, in a language which relisht both of the sowre and sweet, he commended the States for standing so firm in their obedience to him, and to the Church, & assured them that whilst they should persevere in so doing, they should receive all fair usage from him. And he refer'd himself to what the same Lord of Selle should represent more particularly in his name touching the composing of the new commotions which were raised in those Provinces. But from the time that the States had written unto the King, complaining so bitterly against Don John as we then told you) the affairs on all sides were so imbittered, as there was no means left for any peaceable accommodation. For the States declared themselves fully resolved never to acknowledge Don John for their Governour. That they had chosen the Archduke Mathias to govern them; that therefore they desired the Government might be left to him; which if otherwise, the fault was not theirs, if the service of the Church and King did daily suffer detriment. Selle procured a Treaty between both parties; but to no end. He then endeavoured that the Prince of Parma might negotiate with the States: believing that he, as son to the Lady Margaret, toward whom the Flemish had shewed so great af∣fection, might be well received by them, and might more easily overcome the difficulties which lay on that side. But he proposed that for the Prince his secu∣rity, the Prince of Orange should the mean while be put into the hands of Don John, which made them absolutely refuse the Treaty. And for this particular, which had encouraged Orange, and some others, they grew very jealous of the Treaty mentioned by Selle. At this time the Emperour had likewise inter∣ceded with the Flemish, to bring them to some good agreement with the King. He had joyned complaints with his exhortations, saying, that they had stoln the Archduke Mathias from him; which action of theirs the King had great reason to resent▪ But this intercession of the Emperours did no good neither: for the Flemish lent but little ear to his exhortations; and as for his complaints, they had formerly answered them in their justifying themselves in that point. This
mean while neither side omitted the re-inforcing of their Armies: and the States had in particular much sollicited the hastning of those Forces which were to come to them from Germany and France. At this time a Diet of the Empire was assembled in the City of Worms. Whereupon the States took occasion, being chifley councelled thereunto by Orange, to send the Lord Saint Aldegonde to move the Diet to favour their cause. He spake publickly to this purpose, and sought by all means to exasperate the Germans against the Spaniards, and parti∣cularly against such actions as had proceeded from the Duke of Alva, and which were now discried in Don John. He demanded aid of the Diet as in a common Cause: or that at least they would make some favourable Declaration in behalf of the Flemish. But not being able to impetrate any considerable ad∣vantage from that Assembly; all their expectations on that side lay in the forces which the Palatine Casimire raised by means of the monies which the Queen of England subministred unto him to that purpose. Other preparations were at the same time making in France. But these went more slowly on; either for that re∣ally they met with more difficulties, or that the King and the Queen his mother did cunningly hinder them under hand. Henry the third was then King: who in the time of his brother Charls the ninth, was called the Duke of Anjou; and Charls dying without sons, succeeded him in the Crown. France had not had a King for many former ages, of greater expectation, and who afterwards made it less good. For whilst Duke of Anjou, being made Lieutenant General by his father Charls (he being then so young as he was hardly able to bear arms) he with singular valour had led Armies, won Battels, taken Towns, and by a thousand o∣ther testimonies of Military worth, raised firm hopes that he was ordained to be the only rooter out of all heresie: and that chiefly through his means that King∣dom would return to its former splendor and greatness. And his fame was al∣ready so spread abroad, not only throughout all the corners of France, but even throughout all Europe, as whilst he was at the siege of Rochel, he was with incre∣dible applause chosen King of Poland. But afterwards leaving that foreign Crown, to succeed in his own of France, it is not to be believed how much he dif∣ferred from himself on a sudden; and how soon France wisht for the formerly glorious Duke of Anjou in their new King. It was then generally held that he with more fervency then ever, would have apply'd himself to suppress the Hugo∣not Faction by arms; which occasioned the greatest misfortunes and calamities to his Kingdom. Nor was there any doubt that the fury of the Hereticks being quel'd (as it was well hoped it would be) by that way, he might likewise easily have curb'd the ambition of the Catholicks. But instead of pursuing War, gree∣dily imbracing peace, and turning that peace into a soft and effeminate idleness, he saw Factions grow greater in his Kingdom; and his own Authority less. One of the chiefest evils which afflicted France at that time, was the variance and dis∣cord which arose in the Royal Bloud. There was none to succeed the King but the Duke of Alanson, who was the last of four sons left behind him by Henry the second. The Queen Mother did notwithstanding still live, a woman of a reaching wit, and who long accustomed to the subtilties of the Court, had no less by her industry then by her valour, gotten unto her self the chief power of Government, But neither was her cunning, nor the Kings diligence sufficient to keep the Duke of Alanson from making himself still head of some one or other Innovation, which still most troubled the Kingdom. He was but indifferently indued with parts, either of mind or body, yet his prerogative of being the on∣ly brother to the King, and the Kings having no other successor, added Autho∣rity to his weakness, and was sufficient to give advantage to unquiet minds; that they had such a head for their party. During the so many, and so great troubles of France, the Flemish Rebels could never ingage the King thereof, to shew any manifest demonstration of favour towards them. Nay when they offered to put themselves into his prote∣ction, he would not be perswaded to accept thereof. Applying themselves after∣wards in the same kinde to the Duke of Alanson, the King did not only not shew himself averse therunto, but thinking it might make much for his advantage, he was tacitely content his brother should accept thereof; to the end that going out of
the Kingdom himself, he might likewise take many others with him who were raisers of novelties. This design being afterwards published, the Catholick King complained very much thereof, upbraiding the most Christian King how ill this did correspond to the so many assistances which were given by Spain to France, since that from thence so great a fomentation was now preparing to his Rebels in Flanders. But Henry partly dissembling, and partly not being indeed able to hinder it, excused himself, saying it was not in his power to withhold his Brother; and that since he was not permitted to use force to others, he could much less use it to him. The Duke of Alanson then resolving to assist the Flemish openly by Arms, he had already (as hath been said) sent some Souldiers into those Frontiers of Flanders which lie nearest France, and was raising as many more as he could thereabouts to that purpose. But before he should proceed further in matter of Arms, he thought it necessary to justifie his action publikely in writing. He therefore published a Manifesto, the Contents whereof were, That being oftentimes very much prest by the Provinces of Flanders to ease them of the oppression which they daily suffered more and more by the Spanish State∣ministers, He could no longer refuse so just intreaties, nor abandon so honest a cause. That those Princes of the House of Burgony who had for so many years governed those Provinces, were descended from the blood-Royal of France: That many of those Provinces had been also possest formerly by the House of France, and had from thence upon divers occasions enjoyed those rights and priviledges, which have since with infinite violence been taken from them by the Spaniards. That the interest of Flanders with that of France was too much concerned in their neighbourhood. That it was the duty of true Princes to protect the innocent and the oppressed. That in taking upon him to defend this Cause, he was no less serviceable to the King of Spain, then to the people of Flanders: since it was known that they being already brought to the point of de∣spair by the bad usage of the Spanish State ministers, would at last put themselves under some more moderate Dominion, and would by all means possible endeavour a more supportable condition. This mean while the Forces which the Palatine John Casimire had assembled together in Germany, were already upon the borders thereof. For he being fuller of respect, and abounding more in monies by reason of those the Queen of Eng∣land had furnisht him withall, might easily raise an Army, and have it ready to enter Flanders. But he would likewise first honest his coming by some specious pretence; which was, That he could not deny his assistance to the Flemish (who were so united to the Germans) in so just a cause, as not to suffer them to be op∣prest by the Spaniard. Having mustered his men about the end of June, at the Rendezvouz appointed to that purpose in the Territories of Zutfen, beyond the Rhine, 'twas said they came to about 16000 Foot and 8000 Horse, being of di∣vers Nations, but most of them Germans. The States endeavoured then to draw over unto them all that Country beyond the Rhine, especially the Province of Overisel, a good part whereof remained yet in the Kings obedience. The Count Renenberg bore Arms for the States there, who did every day somewhat advance their affairs, not meeting almost with any opposition, by reason the Kings forces were so far off He had newly taken Campen, a place of great consequence, where the Ysel fals into the Sea; and prepared to straiten Deventer, which is the chief City of that Province: To facilitate the which, and to make the States Forces greater in those parts, John Casimire resolved to leave some of his men with him. He marched from thence; and advancing with those men which were fittest to travel, he suddenly past over the Rhine and Mause, and within a few dayes entred Brabant. He incamped himself suddenly about Diste, and finding the place but ill provided, made himself soon master thereof; and by the taking of that Town got footing in that Province. The Conditions in this interim were agreed upon, by which the Duke of Alanson and the Rebels of Flanders obliged themselves together in endeavouring those Advantages, which in the Dukes expedition the one part was interchangeably to receive from the other. These were the most considerable Articles That the Duke of Alanson, under the title of Protector of the Belgick States should be bound to warfare for a certain time in their service with 10000 Foot and
2000 Horse: That as much as he should get beyond the Mause towards Flanders, should belong unto the States; and as much as he should win on the other side of that River towards France, should fall to his own share. That for his greater security, and the better accommodation of his Army, the Towns of Landresey and Quisnoy in the Province of Henault should be assigned over unto him, and Bapalma in Artois; all which places were after a certain time to be restored upon certain conditions. That the States should not make any agreement with Don John without the Dukes con∣sent, and the like of the rest that were joyned in league with them That if there should be occasion of chusing a new Prince, they should prefer the Duke before all others: That in the mean while the Government should remain wholly in the Authority of the States, and that the Duke should not innovate any thing therein. This Agreement being made, the Duke went presently to the Town of Mons, which is the chief Town in the Province of Henault: And here in the name of the States he received a solemn Ambassie by the Duke of Ariscot, who was attended by many other personages of quality. He was sent particularly to sollicite the Duke to move with his men, and to enter as soon as he could, to the end that the Forces of Germany and France joyning quickly with the self-Forces of Flanders, Don John might be the sooner and more easily driven out of the Country. The States had this mean while brought their men to the Rendezvouz about Lira, in the bowels of Brabant; and Archduke Mathias was gone thither in person, next whom Count Bossu commanded in chief, he being chosen Camp-master General of the Army. Their Souldiery was composed part of their own Flemish, part of Foreigners, and they were chiefly English and Scots: Nor were they as then above 8000 Foot and 2000 Horse. Whilst so great a body of Arms was pre∣paring against Don John on all sides, he had likewise been diligent in making all necessary provisions on his behalf: He had raised as many men in the nearest parts of Germany, and particularly in the County of Burgony, as the shortness of time, and his scarcity of mony would permit him to doe. He expected fresh and powerful Supplies speedily from Italy, as the King had promised him, as also to furnish him with monies to maintain the war galantly. Having then assembled the body of an Army together, which might consist of 12000 Foot and 4000 Horse he made no longer delay. Having left the places of greatest importance which were in his possession well provided for, he resolved speedily to fight the Flemish forces, and to doe his utmost to break them before the Foreigners were come to them. The Flemish were come from their rendezvouz, to quarter in a strong and very opportune situation near the Village Rimenante, not far from the City of Malines. Brabant is cut almost through the midst by the River Demer, which having about the end of its course watered the City of Malines, fals after∣wards into the Scheld. The Flemish were quartered between this River and the Village Rimenante; the River served them for a rampier on one side, and they were covered on the other side by a Wood which stood in the neighbouring fields not far from the Village; they were well fortified in all other parts by good Trenches, especially on that side where they might be the easisiest assaulted by the Kings men Towards that place Don John bent his course; and being past the Town of Ariscot, situated upon the same River, he approached orderly to∣wards the Flemish quarters. His chiefest endeavour was to draw the Enemies out of their Trenches, and to engage them in some hot Skirmish, which might afterwards bring them to a downright Battel. To this purpose he sent forth a good number of Horse to provoke the Enemy; but they making only such op∣position as was needful, would not engage themselves further. He laboured once more to provoke them, and facing them with his whole Army, boldly bade them battel though still with lesser hopes to bring them to it; for the Flemish knew themselves to be too inferior to the Kings men, both in numbers and in valour. There hapned notwithstanding a bloody skirmish. The Enemy had a place of great consequence without their Trenches, which was guarded by the English Foot, and who were commanded by Colonel Norris, a Gentleman of the same Nation, and a Souldier of great experience and courage. Don John would try to make himself master thereof; hoping still, that when they should be enga∣ged in fight, all the rest of the Flemish Camp would be drawn to battel.
Hee therefore assaulted the English with a number of choice Spanish foot and in their front were placed 200 yet more choice men of a particular famous Company which Alonzo Martines di Leva had brought out of Spain to Flan∣ders at his own cost and charges. The same Leva had a little before quitted the place of General of the Spanish Gallies; and to shew his greater zeal and valour in the Kings service, had by his own monies raised the aforesaid 200 foot, and re∣solved to lead them to the Kings Army in Flanders. There was not any one of them that was not either a Gentleman born, or a souldier of quality: for many that had formerly been Officers in Flanders, had put themselves into this Com∣pany. The assault was exceeding fierce; but it was no less couragiously sustain∣ed by the English who were all of them likewise old souldiers, and who being fa∣voured by the neighbouring Trenches covered by Artillery, did by the advantage of their shot make more lively and more stout resistance. Here the conflict grew greater: according as hope or fear altered on either side, the succours on both sides did likewise alter. But the Kings men fought upon too great disadvantage; for the enemy fighting in sight of their own works, and under the shelter of their own Canon, might easily repress the violence of the Spanish souldiers: whereas the others not having any of those helps, must trust only to their cou∣rage, and to their swords. Don John knew this very well; and advancing with all his squadrons in order to give battel he staid a while, to try again whether the e∣nemy would accept of it. But failing in his designe, he caused a retreat to be soun∣ded, and withdrew his foot in good order from the fight. This action was on the first day of August; it lasted many hours with equal valour and slaughter; though the Flemish pretended to be victors, and that the Kings men not being a∣ble to compass their ends, were worsted. Don John departed then from therea∣bouts and resolved to put himself wholly upon the defensive part, in some strong situation, which might joyn his quarters with the City of Namures, hoping that the tempest of so many contrary Forces would soon vanish, and that then he might have his share of the advantage. He considered that though the ends of England, Frrnce and Germany were the same in general, either to make the King of Spain lose the Low-Countries, or at least to keep them troubled with war; yet their several particular ends did very much differ. The Queen of England aimed at some particular conquest of her own, especially in those Maritine parts of Holland and Zealand: and she could not any ways tollerate those advanta∣ges which were to redound to France out of the ruining of Flanders. The French on the contrary were very jealous of those aids which were lent unto the Flemish by the English. The Germans ends were rather plunder then purchase; who when they should have overrun the Country, wanting mony to maintain them∣selves, they would soon be inforced to return to their own homes. Amongst the Flemish themselves Orange had likewise his particular ends. The Archduke Ma∣thias had his ends also; and the whole body of the Provinces was greatly divi∣ded in its parts, as well in point of Religion, as in their obedience to the King. For those parts which were infected with heresie, seemed well inclined totally to throw off the Spanish Government; and those which remained Catholicks, de∣sired to be rid of the Spaniards and other foreigners, but yet still to remain in their obedience to the Crown of Spain. So as amongst such diversity of ends, Passions and Opinions, Don John verily believed that this machination prepared and plotted against him, would soon dissolve; and that he might afterwards meet with many happy occasions whereby to maintain the cause of the Church and King with honour and advantage. And really at that time the two Provinces of Hennault and Artois began to fall out with the Province of Flanders, and par∣ticularly with the City of Gaunt, which is the chief Town thereof. The two a∣bovesaid Provinces had always kept firm to the Catholick Faith, together with the rest of the Walloons Country, which contains all that large Frontier, which lies along the whole body of Flanders, towards France. In the Pece of Gaunt which was so solemnly concluded by the States Gene∣ral, and which was afterwards confirmed by Don John in his agreement with them, the Walloon Provinces had laboured more then all the rest for all advan∣tages to the Catholick Religion; nor were the people thereof ever inclined to
forgoe their obedience to the King, so long as they might enjoy their ancient Priviledges, and he according to the form of their former Government. On the contrary, the two Provinces of Holland and Zealand had still fomented the new Sects; and the more the Country was troubled, the more did they labour to make the evil thereof be felt every where. These were Orange his inward drifts, and his efficacious Councels. And to his industry in knowing how to give them, the favour of the times had added great Authority in him, to make them be received. Briefly his end was to increase the heretical faction, and still to alie∣nate the Flemish further from the Spaniards, out of those reasons that we have often mentioned. Wherefore minding the conjuncture of times, he thought it now a very fitting season to bring together the two Armies which came from Ger∣many and France; the one of which was composed almost altogether of Luthe∣rans, and the other in a great part of Calvenists. The Sectaries were not then idle in Flanders. Some of them joyned together, and presented the States with a Petition in the names of them all, wherein under the most specious pretences that they could find out, they desired that liberty of conscience might be permit∣ted throughout the Country. There wanted not those who opposed this request; but the contrary side prevailed. Nor had Orange forborn tacitly to infuse a great fear, suggesting, that upon the coming up of so many Forces who profest the Re∣formed Religion, it was not good to deny that to the pressures of intreaties, which might easily be afterwards gotten by force of arms. And because the peace of Gaunt made against this, the sense thereof was so wrested, as that the peace was judged rather favourable, then contrary to this sort of concession. Yet the Provinces of Hennault and Artois, and the rest of the Walloon Coun∣tries were firm for the sole exercise of the Catholick Religion. But the Provinces of Brabant and Flanders did for the most part give way to the liberty of consci∣ence. This mean while the Palatine John Casimire was come, as hath beeen said, and Alanson drew still nearer on the other side. Whereupon the Sectaries bold∣ness increasing, not contented with many Churches which were assigned to them, but resolute to have the best and the greater number, they brought affairs to that pass, as on a sudden there was hardly any Churches left for the Catholicks. And because one presumption usually cals on another; after they had usurped the Churches, they came soon after to the driving out of Votaries; and their fury and madness grew to be such, as there was hardly any safety to be found for any Catholicks. Those who had any zeal of true religion in them, were therefore highly scandalized hereat: and the Walloon Provinces fell particularly into such commotion by reason of these novelties, as they began to separate themselves from the rest, first in their Councels, and then in their executions. The Flemish souldiery was maintained by the Countries contribution mony. And by the same moneys provision was to be had in a great part for the pay and other necessaries of the foreigners. The Provinces of Hennault and Artois becoming therefore refractory to this contribution, the States began to be in great straits for money, and to foresee the disorders which would quickly insue hereupon. They used all means industry, and authority to overcome the aforesaid difficulties; but they increased rather every day, for the occasions thereof did so likewise. The Ca∣tholicks in those parts stormed mightily, complaining, That under false pretences of liberty, Flanders was now faln into greater slave∣ry then ever. That Arms were taken up for driving out the Spaniards, but not for that the Country should be more tyrannized over by the Flemish themselves, To what other end did Orange his ambition tend? What other designe had his adherents? That Arms were at first taken up in Holland and Zealand under spetious pretences. And finally, it was not enough that the Inquisition should be hindred, but that in lieu there∣of the new sects of heresies should have defused their venom throughout all those parts, should have alienated those Provinces from the Church, and begun manifestly to a∣lienate them also from the King. That the former disobedience made way for the se∣cond; the one not being to be severed from the other. That in the interim, Orange under the name of Governour, did retain almost the whole authority of Prince. That by the same cunning he had rather forced then gotten the Government of Brabant. That now under fals pretences liberty of conscience was demanded thorowout the whole
Country. And with what intent? unless it were to make Liberty fight against Liberty to wit, the unjust Liberty of Heresie against the legitimate Liberty of the Church: to the end that the latter being opprest, the people might the easilyer withdraw themselves from their Allegiance to the King. That it was time now to dive into the knowledge of such ends; and not only to know them, but to break them. Let Brabant and Flanders be of another opinion, and let those other Provinces joyn with them: the Country of Walloons would still continue in the sole Catholick Religion, and (with safety to its Priviledges) in their sole Allegiance to the King of Spain. These words full of indignation, were soon accompanied with acts as angersom. For the two Provinces of Henault and Artois would not assign over Landresy, Quisnoy, and Balpema to the Duke of Alansons men, as was ordered in the agree∣ment made between him and the States: and with the same resolution denied to pay their share for the Souldiery. This commotion of the Walloons made those of Gaunt rage horridly, as those who were naturally most given to revolt, and had more readily received Liberty of Conscience, allowing all advantage to He∣resie amongst them, and taking up Armes, they resolved to use force against the Walloons. John Casimire, after having spoken with the Archduke Mathias was at this time gone to Gaunt. In this his coming his chief aim was to get money for his Souldiers; who not able to move for want of Pay, did not at all advance, but talked rather of mutinying then of fighting. The Gaunteses did in part satisfie his desires; and favoured by him, took so much heart against the Walloons, as they resolved more then formerly to force them to joyn with them. The Province of Flanders is divided into two parts: The one, and which is the greater part, and wherein Gaunt and the other chief Towns and Cities are contained, is called by the name of Flemicant, because nothing but Flemish is spoken there: The other, which is the lesser but which hath in it likewise many good Towns, is called Gallicant, because the French tongue is commonly used there. The former lies towards the Sea, and the other towards the Walloons Country. The Flemicant part of the Province went hand in hand in all things with the Gaunteses; and the Gallicant inclined towards the Walloons, as being more addicted to the Catholick religion then to Heresie. As soon as the Gaunteses had taken up Arms, the Wal∣loons did the like, and divers acts of hostility were committed by both sides; in particular the Walloons entred the Town of Menin, situated upon the River Lisa, which divides the Flemicant part of Flanders from the Gallicant, and here they began to fortifie themselves, and to prejudice the adverse Country. The Walloons would not notwithstanding, for all this their difference with the other Flemish, either acknowledge Don John for their Governour, nor any wayes adhere to the actions of the Spaniards: which caused some of them to take unto themselves the name of Malcontents This was a name taken at the first by some of the prime Nobility; from them it spread abroad into divers of meaner quality and was finally used by every one of that Country. Many of them wore a Chaplet of Pater-nosters, and of Ave-Maria's about their necks, to shew that they would keep good Catholicks; and all of them did generally declare, that they would continue loyal to the King when they should be restored to their former Go∣vernment. This was the so famous Faction of Malcontents, which afterwards proved very advantagious to the Kings affairs, as shall be seen in the pursuit of this Story. Orange was not this mean while so blinded in endeavouring his ad∣vantage by Heresie, but that he clearly saw how great a prejudice such a division might work: He desired the Heretick Army might prevail, but yet that the Ca∣tholicks should have all their due rites for the satisfaction of those that would not abandon them. Wherefore he failed not to use all possible means, as also his own and the States authority to compound the aforesaid differences. To this purpose the Lord S. Aldegond went with some other personages of quality to Gaunt: but the people there listening more to their Ringleaders, who were seditious, and for their own private interests more inclin'd to foment then to finish the begun differences, would by no means be brought to alter their resolutions. Thus stood the affairs of Flanders when the Duke of Alanson came in with his Army, which was more expected then well received by Orange his own faction:
for he brought not so many with him as he was tyed to do, and those but ill pro∣vided of what was necessary for their own maintenance. Alanson had found it more easie to raise men, then to raise money; for he had little or none of his own. And the King his brother being neither able, nor willing to assist him open∣ly, for the reasons touched upon before, his hopes fell very short likewise on that side. And the King of Spain had again renewed his complaints to the King of France for this business of Alanson. He had likewise done the like in very sharp tearms with the Queen of England, for the assistance she had given the Rebels in Flanders. And for Germany, he complained likewise of the Emperour be∣cause he had not used more effectual means to hinder John Casimires expedition; and all these complaints wrought this effect, that express personages were sent from each of them to see if it were possible to bring the Affairs of Flanders to some good agreement. The King forbare not to make great preparations for War; but he would much more gladly have seen peace in Flanders, so as it might have been done without prejudice to Religion, or to his honour. Nor were there wanting some of his Councellers, who interpreting Don Johns actions worse then before, thought him to be in a great part the cause of all the new Tumults which had happened since the so solemn agreement made between him and the Provin∣ces: as if that he had desired to govern rather armed, then unarmed; and that he believed he might compass some of his own ends easilyer by troubles then by quiet. So as by reason of these jealousies which were had of Don John, and which had got a little rooting in Spain, peace in Flanders was the more desired by the Spaniards. Wherefore about the end of August all these Ambassadors met in Antwerp: The Count Zuarzemburg from the Emperour, President Belliure from the King of France; and from the Queen of England Walsingam, her first Secretary, and with him another called Gobham. But it was soon seen that Cesars endeavours wanted authority; and the rest candidness: For both Eng∣land and France did sufficiently desire to have the troubles and disorders where∣with Flanders was afflicted, continue. Nor did this opinion prove vain. The meetings were more for shew then substance, and their endeavours ended almost as soon as they were begun: to boot that in very deed the difficulties which were met with on all sides were very great. Each party would justifie all they had done, and all that they pretended to. Wherefore all Treaty of Agreement being sud∣denly broken, they continued in their former heat of preparing for war. The Flemish regained Ariscot, and Nevile; and tryed (but in vain) to recover Lo∣vain. On the other side the French entring into the Province of Henault, besie∣ged Bins, and after some assault, took it, and put it to the plunder. But these were businesses of small importance, in respect of what the Rebels hoped for from the union of so many Forces which they had received, to side with them from all parts. Orange laboured more then all the rest to bring them together: and herein his adherents used likewise their best diligence. Miserable Flanders! every where so full of Arms, and so lacerated, as it was questionable whether she were more afflicted by her own, or by foreign Forces: and whether those or these in seeming assistance bore the most spetious title? Don John this mean while kept with his men within his quarters which he had fortifi∣ed without Namures, to withstand the assaults of the enemy. These Fortificati∣ons were about two miles and a half in compass, and did so much the more shel∣ter the City; so as that passage towards Germany and Italy was very well secu∣red, and his Army very well provided of all things necessary for the maintenance thereof: Wherefore Don John hoped shortly both to receive powerfull aid, and to see those disband which the enemy had assembled together for their service. These were his designs these were his hopes; when in their very hight he fell sick, his malady so increasing as he died within a few days. When he was near his end, he sent for the Duke of Parma, and after having in a very affectionate manner recommended the Kings service to him, he substituted him in his own place not any ways doubting but that by the so many Prerogatives both of bloud and valour which met in him, the King would suddenly confirm him in that Government. Thus dyed Don John, not being yet full thirty three years old. The Emperour
Charles the Fifth was his Father; and Madam de Plombes, a Lady of noble birth in Germany, his Mother. The Emperour before his death gave the King his Son great charge of him: who at first had in his private thoughts destin'd him to an Ecclesiastical life; but afterward changing his mind, bred him up in the Military profession. Wherein by three memorable enterprises he eterniz'd his name. In the first, he bridled the Moors Audacity; in the second, the Ottoman Pride; and in the third, the Fury of the Flemish. In each of these his successes did much ex∣ceed his years: He overcame the Moors, when but yet a Youth; he abated the edge of the Turk, at the very entrance into the flower of his age; and he did so master-like suppress the Belgiques, as greater skill could not have been shewn by any whatsoever antient and most perfect Commander. He had in him very ex∣cellent gifts both of body and mind. In his aspect, Majesty and Grace; strength of Body to undergoe labour: He was affable with the Souldiery, vigilant an∣swerable to his Command; wise in the greatest difficulties, but having a heart much willinger to encounter then to shun them. Many could have desired that he had been less amorous, and not so easie to believe reports. He was so greedy of Glory, as many judged it to be an aspiring after Empire. Which made him at last be envied, and so far suspected, as made his service to the King doubtful; as if from being Governour, he had aspired to be Prince of Flanders and that to this purpose he had held private correspondencie with the Queen of England, and proceeded more secretly to express negotiations of Marriage. Which was cause why his death was thought to be rather procured, then natural. But what∣soever the business was, (wherein truth might be overclouded by Calumny) He dyed with the fame of singular valour, and great applause: Worthy assuredly to have lived longer, and not less worthy to have proceeded from a Conjugal bed; and to have commanded rather as absolute Prince, then as a subordinate Officer. Finis Partis Primae.
THE HISTORY OF THE WARS OF FLANDERS, Written by CARDINAL BENTIVOGLIO. The Second Part. BOOK I. The Contents. The Prince of Parma is confirmed Governour of Flanders by the King. The Prince thought first to draw the Walloon Provinces to side with the King by the way of negotiation: but in the interim he applies himself with all fervor to the manage∣ment of Arms. He stands at first upon his defence. The Foreign Forces vanish: Alanson returns for France, and John Casimir for Germany. The Prince here upon passeth from the defensive part to the offensive. He resolves to besiege Mastrick. The description of that place. The Royalists endeavours in oppugning it, and the resistance made by the Defendants. The Royalists at last prevail, and the Prince is master of the Town. An agreement between him and the Walloon Provinces. It is endeavoured to reconcile all the other Provinces likewise to the King; but in vain. Small successes of War on all sides. The Flemish think of choosing a new Prince, and to cast off their obedience to the King of Spain. This is chiefly foment∣ed by Orange. Their Deputies meet together in Antwerp to this purpose, and there is much consultation about it. Some of the Hereticks are for the Queen of England, other some for the Duke of Alanson. The Catholicks opinion in this point. The Assembly leans much more to Alanson. The Deputies depart, and return to their own Provinces, to make each of them severally resolve fully up∣on the choise. The war continues this mean while on both sides. The King would
have the Dutchess of Parma return to Flanders, and why. She is not well come thither, when she earnestly desires to go back to Italy: which she obtains leave to do. The whole Government of the Country remains therefore in the Prince her son. The Flemish Rebels agree in their former resolution of chusing the Duke of Alanson for their new Prince. What followed thereupon; and with what con∣ditions. THe Kings Army was much afflicted for the death of Don John; it is hardly to be believed what sence of sorrow was shewed for it, for many days throughout the whole 1578. Camp. The news thereof coming to Spain, the King staid awhile before he would confirm the Prince of Par∣ma in the Government of Flanders. He very well knew the Prince his Military worth. But then again he fea∣red, lest that his warlike spirit might not rather make him desire the continuance of the war, then to see those Pro∣vinces restored to peace: which the King desired above all things; always pro∣vided (as hath been often said) that all due obedience were given to the Church, and the like to his Crown. Moreover the King had had it often formerly in his thoughts, to send the Dutchess of Parma back again into Flanders, if it should prove needfull to remove Don John from that Government. He called to mind what satisfaction her former Regency had given unto those people; and to make it prove the better again, he thought to place her son the Prince of Parma with her for the part of Arms, thinking that the Government being thus tempered, the people would be much better pleased, and his service might on all sides be bet∣ter done. The King therefore was a while doubtfull what to do in this case. But because speedy remedy was to be applyed to the evils of Flanders, and for that the King could not doubt but the Prince of Parma would with all loyalty and devotion do as he should be by him directed; therefore without more adoe he approved of Don Johns Declaration, and confirmed the Prince in the Govern∣ment of those Provinces. The Kings Army was greatly rejoyced to hear of this choice; thinking that by the proximity of his bloud, and by his greater re∣semblance in valour, Don John might seem to live still in the Prince. Wherefore Fernese applyed himself wholly to the Government committed to his charge. His first resolution was, To endeavour by all means possible to draw the Walloon Provinces over to the Kings side. He considered of what importance it would be to have so great, and such Catholick forces within the Country, side with the Church and with the King. And that on the contrary, Rebellion and Here∣sie could not be weakened by any means better then by this. He therefore be∣gan to endeavour this by several ways. He treated chiefly with the Nobility, who enjoy particular prerogatives in the Walloon Provinces; and to whom the vulgar sort do usually adhere, when the States do meet. But notwithstanding, this overture of a Treaty, did not at all allay his ardency to War. Putting on therefore Don Johns resolution he determined likewise to keep within those quar∣ters wherein the Army was fortified about Namures; and to expect there, till the enemies forces should vanish; especially the foreign aids, which out of the rea∣sons formerly alleadged, he thought would not be long a doing. Nay his hopes thereof were the more increased, for that the dissentions grew every day grea∣ter amongst the Flemish. He therefore attended the guarding of his quarters; the keeping of his souldiers in perfect good discipline; and did at the same time very much sollicite the King, that he would speedily provide moneys for the ne∣cessaries of the Army, and send over new men. This mean while the disorders grew daily greater amongst the Flemish Rebels. For, divided in divers sorts amongst themselves, both in affairs of Religion, and in other things which respe∣cted the State, of one common cause, they had made many particular ones; and every Province having its own particular ends, few of them joyned any longer in their resolutions (as they ought to have done) with the rest. The chiefest con∣testations were between the Walloons and Gaunteses, as hath been said; nor was it ever possible to find any means how to accord them. Whence falling from
words to blows, neither of them paid their Contributions first agreed upon to the common Cause being kept from doing so by the necessity of converting it to their own peculiar uses. The Faction of the Malcontents grew this mean while still the stronger; for almost all the Nobility of Henault and Artois had wound themselves thereinto. The Gaunteses and their adherents received their greatest indammagements from this Faction; nor could there be a greater contrariety then was between them The Malcontents seemed more resolute then ever to continue in their Ca∣tholick purity and their due Allegiance to the King; and the Gaunteses shewed themselves full as resolute to have only the contrary exercise in point of Religion, and in all other things shewed their abhorrition of the Soveraignty of Spain. So as by reason of this variance between the Confederate Provinces, their first Union was mightily weakned Together with their want of money, they began daily to be wanting in their Souldiers: and not being able to maintain their own home-Souldiers, much less able were they to maintain those very many that they had received from abroad. Wherefore the French and German Aids did no more service; but instead of easing the Country, ran out licentiously on this side and that side; and failing of their Pay, paid themselves with large usury by Rapine; insomuch that it was doubted whether they might not fall from tumultuary Free∣booting to some downright Mutiny. This necessity, and these dangers were re∣presented to the States by Casimir and Alanson, who desired instant remedy. But such evils could not be helped, unless provisions were had first for the discords which were the occasion thereof, which by reason of the aforesaid difficulties were become irremediable, though the States, and in particular Orange used all possible care and diligence to compose them. It was clearly seen, that the great∣est novelties arose from the Gaunteses: wherefore at the States desire, John Casi∣mir went again to Gaunt, and used all the most efficacious means he could to re∣duce the Gaunteses to a more moderate sense. But all was lost labour, especially by reason of the obduration of those Ringleaders, who for their own self-interest did the more willingly nourish sedition in that City. This was the cause why John Casimir, by Orange his advise resolved to go himself to England, to perswade the Queen to be more firm in favouring the Flemish with her assistance, especially in point of monies. But the Queen, after having received him very honourably, were it either that she would not further offend the King of Spain, or that she could not really be at further expences, sent him away with bare terms of good Intention, and with ambiguous hopes, which were soon after resolved to the ne∣gative. John Casimir being returned from England to Flanders without any good issue in his Negotiation, found many of his men already disbanded, and the rest ready to doe the like, unless he would reconduct them to Germany. Alanson's French forces were likewise much lessend, and the Commanders authority on either side did but little avail to retain the Souldiers in their due obedience, when once they failed of their Pay Insomuch as both of them were inforced to return almost at the same time, Alanson to France, and Casimir to Germany; leaving it questionable whether of them had with greater hopes undertaken the expedition, or ended it with less good. The Foreign Aids being thus vanisht, the Flemish Forces were likewise suddenly dispersed into sundry parts. Fernese dallied then no longer: but thinking that it was now time to pass from the defensive to the offensive part, resolved immediately to take the Field, and to endeavour such suc∣cess to the Kings Forces, as might most strengthen his Cause. The Enemy had no more Forces to withstand the Royalists in the Field; wherefore Fernese was forced to betake himself to some of their chief Towns, by the gaining whereof greater advantages might derive unto the King. Consideration being had here∣upon in the Councel of War, they pitched upon one of two important Sieges; either that of Antwerp, or that of Mastrick. But there was great opposition in the Councel concerning which of these they should resolve upon. To perswade to the first it was said, That the Acquisition of Antwerp was much to be preferr'd before that of Mastrick. That Antwerp lay in the heart of the best Provinces of Flanders, and for its so many Prerogatives was esteemed the nown paramount of all the Country: that by it the
Scheld was commanded in particular; so noble a River, and so seated, as having its Ebbs and Floods, it may seem to partake more of the Sea then of a River. That from thence a man may soon be in the heart of Holland and Zealand, in which two Provinces Rebellion was first radicated, and they were the first which ought to be reduced to their obedience. That Antwerp and the Scheld had abundantly furnisht Forces, which had so often been imployed by water against those Provinces. That Zealand was the chief Sea-Port of Flanders, which was by all means to be opened for the receiving of such Aids as were to come by Sea from Spain. And that though the siege of Antwerp was likely to cost more time, more mony, and more blood, yet all these were to be esteemed but light losses, in respect of making so important and so de∣sireable an acquisition. But it was said on the contrary, That first of all they were to secure the Pass of Germany. That from thence the Flemish Army had alwayes received their greatest aids: And by what pass, but by that which by her Bridge over the Mause the City of Mastrick doth so advantagi∣ously open and shut? How oft had that place been made a Rendezvouz, not only to receive Aid from Friends, but to repulse the Enemy. That in the siege of Antwerp, it would prove a very hard business to master the Scheld by any whatsoever Bridge, by reason of her breadth and depth, and by the force which the ebbing and flowing of the Sea would adde thereunto. And yet that was the first thing that was to be done, to cut off the relief which would be hourly brought to the besieged by that way. That on the contrary, in the higher parts towards Mastrick, the Mause was neither very large, nor very deep, nor held she any commerce with the Sea: so as that River might be shut up above and beneath, whereby all succour by water might be cut off from the City; and doubtless the Camp would hinder all relief by land. That when this Siege should be ended, there would be much greater hopes of happily effecting the other. And that, finally, the present conjuncture of affairs did require, that the easiest enter∣prise should be first undertaken; and the Army so imployed within, as first to secure the Aids which might be received from abroad. This opinion at last prevailed, and was willingly imbraced by the Prince of Par∣ma. He saw that really the Army was not sufficiently furnisht with Arms and provisions to besiege Antwerp: wherefore he bent himself wholly against Ma∣strick, resolving to doe his utmost to make himself Master thereof. This mean while the year 1579. was begun. When the sharpest part of winter being over, the Prince began to assemble his Army, and about the end of March marched to Anno 1579. effect his premeditated design. The Kings Army consisted of about 15000 Foot and 4000 Horse, all of them men trained up in war, and much more considerable for their quality then for their number. When the Flemish Rebels had discovered the Prince his resolution they failed not to provide with all diligence for that City; being as resolute to use all means for the defence thereof, as the others were for the taking it. Monsieur de la Nue was then in Flanders, with the title of Lieutenant under Orange. He was one of the chief Heads of the Hugonot Faction in France: But that Kingdom being at this time in some sort of quiet, he was come into the Army of the Confederate Flemish, and had with great esteem the aforesaid place conferr'd upon him, and moreover was made Governour of Mastrick. Wherefore he very much laboured the preservation of that place, which he thought would chiefly consist in procuring succour from without: He therefore thought it not best to keep within the Town, believing he might be more serviceable abroad. But he did so order it, as such Commanders were placed there, as questionless would make stout and manful resistance: These were Suar∣zemburg di Herle, a Dutch-man, and Sebastian Tapine, a French-man; both of them advised and resolute Souldiers, and who were to expect their fortunes only from the hazards of war. They had with them about 500 Foot, part Flemish, part French, part English; and to them were added a great number of Country∣people, who were to be imployed in such manual works as should at any time be requisite for defence of the Town, to which the Townsmen seemed very well di∣sposed. The Kings Army was this mean while drawn near Mastrick; and when the Prince of Parma had distributed the Quarters, they begon to fortifie them in such order, and with such advantages as are used in the best regulated and straitest
sieges. We have formerly in this our History, described the Situation of this City; but rather in general then in particular: wherefore that you may the better un∣derstand what is now treated on, it is requisite that we give you here more parti∣cular and more distinct knowledg thereof. The City of Mastrick lies on both des of the Mause, but not in an equal proportion: it is larger on the left side of the River, and not so large on the right side. The one by reason of the largeness of its circuit retains the name of the City; and the other being of les∣ser compass is called Vich. The former looks towards Brabant, the other to∣wards the State of Liege. Yet both these sides are joyned together by so large and noble a Bridg, as it is not well discerned whether it be of greater beauty, or of greater advantage to the City. The whole compass thereof is about four English miles. But though much of it be inhabited, a great part of it is void ground, especially towards the Walls; which are notwithstanding well provided with platforms and may have all requisite commodity to make inward retreats, or to withstand outward assaults. According to the situation, so are the flanks; some of them being built more after the modern fashion; and some of them be∣ing of the more ancient form. Round about the Walls runs a deep ditch. The earth about it is every where manyable, so as Trenches may easily be made, or any thing else which the necessity of oppugning requires: yet it is not peopled an∣swerable to the circumference of the walls. The people in general partake more of the warlike then of the weak: Though there be many Ecclesiasticks there, by reason of the great revenues which they enjoy in that City. The Govern∣ment thereof in point of Justice, is equally divided between the King, as Duke of Brabant, and the Bishop of Liege as he is a Temporal Prince, who extends his Jurisdiction to within Mastrick. But for what concerns the custody of the City and Garrisons, the power lies wholly in the King: it being seen upon all oc∣casions, that the Empire of Arms admits not of a companion; and that two se∣veral Forces cannot continue so long together, but that at last the weakest will be inforced to submit it self to the more powerfull. Now to pass to the description of the siege. The Quarters being given out by the Prince of Parma, the souldiers fell to fortifie them; especially towards the field-side to hinder the sending of aid into the City. The Prince encamped him∣self against the greatest incompassed precinct; and on that side were the other Commanders likewise quartered, who held the first places in the Army. The Lord Hierges in particular was quartered there (who was General of the Artil∣lery) with a mighty Train of great Canon: for on that side were the Trenches to be opened, the Walls to be plai'd upon, and such assaults to be given as were requisite for the taking of the City. Christopher Mandragone was placed against the Burrow of Vich: and in a short space all the outward Fortifications towards the fields side were brought to so good a pass, as the Royalists had little reason to fear that the besieged could be succoured on that side. At the same time the Mause was likewise shut up both above and beneath with two Bridges of Boats, in such sort as no relief could be brought to Mastrick by water neither. And this served for a double use, the better to unite the Army upon both the banks. Here did the Royalists begin to advance their Trenches the, besieged had no great store of men for their defence, wherefore they could not hazard many in making out fallies: yet did they not forbear to make some even from the beginning: and that with such courage, as they more then once retarded the Royalists from continu∣ing their works: nor were they less diligent in disturbing them with their Artil∣lery. The Trenches of the Camp opened on two sides, which were thought the fittest to fall into the ditch, and batter the Wall. The one was towards the gate called Tongres; and the other over against a Curtain which runs between two Ports, called Hoctor and the Cross. When the Trenches were advanced, the Lord Hierges placed two Batteries on each side, by which he annoyed the enemy. The Royalists were by this time come to the Ditches mouth; and the souldiers working as well as the pioneers, they endeavoured to get thereinto as soon as they could, that they might afterwards fill it up, and be the better able by their assaults to second the breaches which were to be made by the batteries. From the Fort Tongres there was a good Ravelin thrust out; and upon the top of the Platform
a great Cavallier. The Kings men received most disturbance on this side from both these Works. Wherefore to be eased of this impediment, it was necessa∣ry to play upon those two places with some peeces of greater Canon; which was done, and those peeces plaid so furiously, as the Royalists might safely conti∣nue their working, and finally fall into the ditch. Here as the besieged's danger did increase, so did their courage. As fast as the Royalists strove to lodg them∣selves there, the others laboured to keep them out. The labours of the night e∣qualled those of the day: they flock'd to every place, strove who should soon∣est incounter danger, and it was hard to discern, whether the foreign souldiers, or those of the Town, or the Country people who were come to defend the Ci∣ty, were more willing to work. Yet the Royalists did so far prevail, both with their working in the ditch and with the breaches which their batteries had made in the walls, as they thought they might now fall to assault. This resolution be∣ing taken, the Prince of Parma, appointed out so many souldiers as were requi∣site to do it. And he chuse them out of every several Nation of those that were in the Army; desirous that each of them should equally partake both in the ho∣nour and danger of the imployment. In all new Governments the report goes, be it good or bad, according to the tenor of the first successes: but especially in the administration of war it is not to be said how much fortunate beginnings make for the progress of good success. This was the first enterprise which since his Government the Prince of Parma undertook: wherefore to make the rest which were to insue the more successfull, he very much desired he might be fortu∣nate in this. He therefore incouraged his souldiers with lively exhortations, to the assault: nor seemed they any whit less ready on their parts to fall on. The batteries had already made great breaches in the walls, and especially upon one side: and the Kings men were already so far advanced in the ditch, as it was thought high time to come to this resolution on that side. They did what could be desired against the enemies: but they on the contrary made such resistance as all the assailants endeavours proving vain, they were at last forced to retire with the loss of much bloud. This first assault shewed that the breaches in the walls were not yet such as they ought to be: and therefore the batteries were with much violence renewed on all sides. The works in the ditch were still in∣creased; and to these were added mines, the sooner to beat down such repairs as the enemiestill renewed. They then prepared for a second assault; and it was resolved to make it on both sides of the batteries at one and the same time: that the besieged being devided in making their defence, might be the more disabled to do it. When they came to it, the Royalists assaulted the enemy furiously, and strove to get upon the breach, and to make themselves fully Masters of the wall. But on the contrary, the enemy did so stoutly oppose, as it was not for a good while to be discerned to which side the fortune of the day did incline. On the one side Herle, and on the other side Tapine shewed all manner of gallantry in their behaviour, and were no less ready to act then to order. They with their fer∣vent speeches encouraged the defendants; and shewing themselves forwardest to encounter danger, made the rest the more despise it. On the other side the Royalists inraged to see the enemy so obstinate in their resistance, did their ut∣most to overcome them. There could not be a fiercer nor a more bloudy con∣flict. They did not fight a loof off with Musket or Cannon shot, but in close fight, opposing pike to pike, sword to sword, and souldier to souldier; the better or the worse consisted and lay only in their arms and brests. Bloud run down on all sides where ere they fought: all places were full either of wounded or dead bo∣dies; and of weapons either lost or thrown away; and to these were added great stones, and instruments of artificial fire which those within had powred down upon the assailants. And that the action might prove the more horrible, it so fell out, that at the same time fire tooke in the powder which both sides had brought that they might have it nearer at had: which was the unfortunate loss of a great many; the air refounding with miserable outcries, and the ground be∣ing covered with torn bodies: evidencing how many several ways fortune doth oftentimes vary the bitterness of war, and the tragical scenes on which the fa∣tal success of Arms are acted. The conflict lasted many hours, and great was
the mortality on all sides. But the Kings men were at last forced to retire, not having ever been able to advance so far as might suffice to make themselves Ma∣sters of the breach or at least to lodg themselves, as was their designe upon the walls, if they could not wholly drive the enemy from their new rampires raised more inwardly. These two assaults, together with some other skirmishes that had preceded, bereft the Army of many Commanders, and of a great number of other valiant Officers and souldiers. Of those of the better quality amongst the Spaniards, there were lost, John Manrique, Blasco di Acugna, Peter Gus∣man, and Peter Pacecco: and of the Italians, Fabio Fernese, Markantonio Simo∣netti, Guido St Georgio, the Marquiss Conrado Mallespina, and John Grimaldi. Many Germans and Walloons of good account perished likewise. But the Spa∣niards suffered most, as those who both for numbers and place, had upon all occasions had the chiefest imployments. Particularly in one of the aforesaid actions the Lord Hierges was slain, which was a great lose to the King: for of all the Flemish there was not a better souldier, nor a more Loyal Subject. The Kings Camp, by reason of so many and so bloudy conflicts, was much weakened, in so much as it became the Prince of Parma to get new recruits of men. He therefore took as many as he could from all places where the King had any Ga∣risons; he increased the number of Pyoners; and not willing to adventure the flowre of his Army any more in assaults, he resolved hereafter to make more use of works then men: and to proceed more slowly, to the end it might prove more sure. But this mean while the incommodities and wants of those within the Town grew proportionably greater: For not having received any relief from without, they were now reduced to great scarcity of all things. The most of their foreign souldiers were lost, and a good many of the Townsmen, and of those Country people which served for Pyoniers; they wanted Ammunition and Victuals; and to this was added sickness, occasioned by their incessant la∣bour and watching. The Flemish Rebels had it often in their thoughts to ga∣ther together a good body of men which might be sufficient to force the Kings Fortifications, and to bring in some considerable succour into the City. The de∣signe was, that Monsieur de la Nue should have been their Conductor, and that he should afterwards tarry himself in Mastrike, the better to maintain the siege. But the discords being still greater amongst the Rebels then their union, they could never raise men enough for such a business. Yet still they fed the besieged with new hopes, and with great cunning made the effects appear near at hand; wherein Orange and La Nue did chiefly labour. Wherefore the besieged seem∣ed more refolute then ever to hold out. The Prince on the contrary still dou∣bling his diligence, left nothing untry'd to bring his enterprise to a happy end. One of the chiefest disturbances which the Royalists received in their works towards the Gate Tongres, proceeded chiefly from that Ravelin which hath formerly been spoken of. And though they had endeavoured to beat it down with their Canon, and by all other ways to bereave the enemy of that defence, yet could they never fully effect it. The Prince resolved notwithstanding howsoever to gain it. He therefore redoubled the mines, and all the other works in that place which were requisite to effect it: but on the contrary, the besieged were no less fervent in their works against the besiegers. So as the others could advance but very slowly: for they must win what they would have by inchmeal, and lose bloud as wel as time. Here therefore was the hottest doings, and hither was the greatest bulk of the oppugnation brought. But the besieged were at last in∣forced to yeild; though the Royalists spent above a month in taking this Ravelin. The Prince raised the platform yet much higher, which was turned upon the ene∣my on that side, and began to beat down the City, to boot with the batteries which were every day made against the walls, in so much as the besieged could neither find rest nor safety any where: wherefore their hopes of holding out any longer were very small. Yet they seemed willing rather to lose their lives then their resolution of defence, though they were offered very honorable conditions: when fortune favoured the Royalists with an unexpected way how to end the siege sooner then they could have imagined. It was now about the end of June, and the great heats made the defendants labours and sufferings the more insup∣portable,
so as they could not make good their Guards as was needfull. The which being discovered by some Spaniards, they would not let slip the occasion; but stealing privately into one of those ill-guarded places, they found the De∣fendants to be very few, and those few, by reason of their continual labour and watching, fast asleep Whereupon the Spaniards being encouraged, drew their swords and fell to slaughter. The noise occasioned hereby, made many flock speedily thither both from within and from without: And the Royalists having already forced the walls in some other parts, the City at last fell on all sides into their hands. The Town being taken thus as it were by assault, it was impossible for the Prince and other Commanders to refrain the Souldiers fury, who fell with exceeding cruelty upon the conquered. Passing from anger into rage, and from rage almost to inhumanity, they put all to the sword, without respect of age, sex, or condition; and those who did not perish by the sword, perisht by the River, whereinto they desperately threw themselves, rather encountring thereby death then eschewing it. Nor was the Victors greediness of Prey lesser afterwards then their thirst after Blood had been before; for they so miserably plundered the City, as it was questionable whether avaritiousness or cruelty was therein the greater. Yet suffered they Tapine to live, out of the valuation they put upon the great valour which he had shewn. The City suffered so much calamity, as being almost altogether unpeopled, it was a long while ere it could be remitted into its former condition. Whilst the Prince of Parma was thus diligent about Mastrick, he was not idle in the Agreement which was in treaty between him and the Walloon Pro∣vinces; and at last he came to a happy end therein, though he met with such difficulties as he oftentimes had but small hopes. All the other Provinces oppo∣sed themselves against this Treaty and Orange in particular with all possible diligence endeavoured to cross it. But the difficulties arose no less from the self Walloon Provinces, and from the obstinacie of the Malcontents they persisted more then ever in their resolution of having the Peace of Gaunt fully made good, and especially that the Foraigners should again be sent away; and they would have so bounded the Kings authority in other points also, as there should hardly have been any the least appearance thereof. They pretended among other things, That the King should send one of his Sons into Flanders, to be bred up there, and to be the proper Prince of that Province. They would have it in their power to enter into Confederacie again, both at home and abroad, if the King should fail on his part in performing the Agreement And their end was in fine, so far to advance their own prerogatives, as they might never have reason to suspect such as should be left for the King to enjoy. The Prince of Parma was chiefly troubled to think that he must deprive him∣self wholly of all his Foreign Forces, and be inforced to put himself into the hands of the Walloons. For though their Forces should prove never so faithful, they would hardly ever be sufficient to maintain the Kings cause so powerfully as it ought to be. But as in Don Johns time all the Provinces joyntly would have the same Covenant with him, before he should be admitted into the Government; so the Walloons were now inflexible in their desire to have the same thing done by the Prince in the first place; and that in all things else, as it was then, so now the Peace of Gaunt should be made good. The Prince was in a great strait. On the one side he knew how requisite it was to joyn the Walloon Provinces to the Kings party; and on the other side he feared lest he might quickly run upon the same rocks as Don John had done. He therefore wrote to the King to know his direct pleasure in a business of such weight: Who after having weighed all things well, resolved by all means to draw over the Walloon Provinces to joyn with him; not doubting but that time it self, together with his good usage, particularly to∣wards the Nobility, would make the Walloons willing to receive again those Forces into their company, which were now to be sent out of the Country. The Prince this mean while still sweetned the Malcontents grievances. Amongst others of their Faction, the Count de Laleign Governour of Henault, and the Marquis of Rubais Governour of Artois, who was formerly called Viscount of Gaunt, were in great authority with them. The Prince had endeavoured to win over these
two, together with divers others of the Nobility who were in good esteem with the Walloon Provinces, to the Kings service; and the King himself was not want∣ing in doing the same by his Letters, and other carriages towards them. Matthew Mulart Bishop of Arras had been very serviceable in all the Negotiation, especi∣ally with the Ecclesiastical Orders of those Provinces. So as coming at last to the conclusion of the Treaty, the Deputies of all sides met in Arras about the end of May, and made up the Agreement. There were theeein the Provinces of Henault and Artois together with all the Gallicant Flanders; under which are particularly comprehended the Towns of Doway, Lilla, and Orsies. The rest of the Walloon Country were not there, because they were already at the Kings devotion. The chief Articles of the Agreement were these. That the Peace of Gaunt should be fully performed. That according to the Arti∣cles of that Peace, all Foreign Souldiers should be gone out of the Country within the space of six weeks and that they should not return without the express pleasure of the Provinces. That the mean while an Army should be raised out of their own Coun∣try by the Kings mony, and by what the Provinces should contribute on their behalf. That all the Magistrates and other Officers should swear to profess only the Catholick Religion. That the Country should without any violation keep all its wonted privi∣ledges, and that the Government in all other points should be maintained in the same form as it was in the Emperour Charles the Fifth's time. That the King should al∣wayes send a Prince of his own blood to be Governour; and should be pleased, if it might be, to confirm for the present the Archduke Mathias in the Government. That he would be pleased to give ear unto their earnest desires, whereby they beseeched him him to send some one of his Sons, as soon as conveniently might be, to be bred up in those Provinces, who might afterwards succeed his Father therein. Thus was the Agreement made; at which it is not to be said how much Orange and the rest who were of a contrary opinion stormed. At the same time that this Agreement was in agitation, and was concluded on apart with the Walloon Pro∣vinces, other greater practises were had to make a full and general Accommoda∣tion between the King and the other Provinces also. To this purpose the Emperor was not only resolved to use, as formerly, all the means he could, but Pope Gregory the 13. had shewed the like desire of using all diligence on his behalf, that Flan∣ders might be brought to return wholly to the Catholick unity, and to their for∣mer obedience to their natural Prince. The City of Colen was judged a fit place to treat in of such an important business. For the better to facilitate the event, the Elector of Colen had offer'd to interpose his endeavours, as also the nearer Elector of Treves. The resolution being taken to go on with this endeavour, the Pope determined to send John Baptista Castagna Archbishop of Rossano, to be present there on his behalf: A man of great fame for the many Nunciatures which he had with much reputation discharged: Who was afterwards created Cardinal by the same Gregory; and after Sextus Quintus, ascended, though but for a very few dayes, to the Popedom. Otto Henrico, Count of Suarzemburg, was by the Emperor deputed to this Negotiation, together with two other Commissioners. And the King himself would likewise send some Personage of quality thither, which was Charles of Aragon Duke of Terranova, one of the chiefest and most esteemed Subjects of Sicily; and joyned some Flemish Deputies with him. The Duke of Cleves and Bishop of Liege, by reason of their neighbourhood, sent likewise particular Deputies on their behalfs to the same Treaty. All these to∣gether with the two abovesaid Electors, met about the beginning of May at Colen to treat of the aforesaid business. The Heretical faction of the Flemish Rebels were unwillingly brought to listen to this endeavour; and they, particularly Orange, used all possible means to disturb it; for they feared that such Mediators would favour much more the Churches and the Kings cause, then theirs. But be∣cause the Catholick part was as yet maintained by the Rebels, the contrary part could not sufficiently withstand the necessary deputation to the Treaty. Where∣fore by authority of the Archduke Mathias, as Governour of the Confederate Provinces, and chiefly by their own, a good many Deputies were chosen to this purpose, and the Duke of Ariscot for their Head; and these met at the appointed time, and in the same place with all the rest. There was great expectation had of
this Treaty; but it was soon known that the event would not be answerable: For coming to the Treaty, they fell upon the same difficulties which were former∣ly met withall, when the Emperor likewise interceded in the Conference at Breda. Nay, they were the greater on the Rebels behalf, for that they thought they had got advantage by the since succeeding novelties. They therefore appear'd more resolute then ever in point of Religion, that they would have Liberty of Consci∣ence, especially in Holland and in Zealand, which were already the Heretick San∣ctuaries. And for what concerned their obedience to the King, they would min∣gle so much of advantage therein for themselves, as the Government should par∣take much more of a Commonwealth then of a Principality. And even then it was seen that the common sense of the Rebels was, to bring themselves to that form of Free-government which now the United Provinces of those Countries enjoy, after having totally withdrawn themselves from the obedience of the Church and King. Those who intervened in the Treaty used all diligence to mo∣derate the difficulties, and to bring them to some fair agreement: but all was but lost labour, especially for what concerned Religion; for the stiffer the Deputies of the Flemish Union were for the Liberty of Conscience, the more resolute were the Royalists in not admitting that any Religion save the sole Catholick should be professed throughout the whole Country. For all things else, the King would have been willing to have used those same favours towards such Sectaries as would depart the Country, which were so largely offered in the Conference at Breda. But the contrary Deputies, sometimes cunningly dodging, sometimes plainly de∣nying, and most commonly turning the Proposals into bitter complaints against the former Spanish Governours, and against the whole proceedings of that Na∣tion, shewed apparently at last that the Rebels would by no means be drawn from their former resolutions. Wherefore there being no hopes of agreement, the Treaty after some moneths broke up. In which because the same things were treated of which were discust formerly in the Conference at Breda, and after∣wards in Gaunt in the Peace concluded amongst the Provinces, and lastly with Don John in what was lately establisht between them and him; therefore to shun the prolixity of saying the same things over again here, we have only given you an incling of what may suffice to know what was done in this new Meeting at Colen. Yet in it the Kings cause was greatly justified, in that the Duke of Ariscot resolved to take part no longer with the Rebels, as did also some of their Com∣missioners, especially those of the Ecclesiastical Order; who at last discovered plainly, that Orange and the other Fautors of the Heretical faction would have beaten down too much the Kingly Authority, together with the Catholick Religion. Whilst they were in Colen upon the Treaty of Peace, they did not any whit omit the managing of Arms in Flanders. The Prince of Parma had ended the Siege of Mastrick, as you have heard. Upon the which he got another consider∣able place, which was Malines. This City was in the Rebels hands, but therein was a great dissention amongst the Citizens; some of which, won by the Prince, wrought it so as they conveyed in some of the Kings men by stealth, and drove out the States garrison. The Village of Villebruck, which the States had forti∣fied, as being a place of importance between Antwerp and Brussels, fell likewise into the power of the Prince. And on the contrary, the Rebels grew every day stronger beyond the Rhine. The Count of Rinemberg commanded for the States in Friesland: Who not only in that Province, but every where else thereabouts, endeavoured the advantage of the Flemish Union. Deventer in the Province of Overisel was fallen into his hands; and afterwards Groninghen more luckily. And on this side, the Gaunteses in their particular war against the Malcontents, had by surprise recovered the Town of Menin: And the Malcontents had made them∣selves masters of Alst. Insomuch as the Hostility grew hotter then ever on each side. The Agreement being made between the Prince of Parma and the Wal∣loon Provinces, and all the Foreign Souldiers being sent out by the Prince ac∣cording to the Articles, the Kings Forces were so weakned, as the Prince could no longer be Master of the Field, nor besiege any considerable place. The Wal∣loons laboured to gather men together who might be sufficient for their num∣bers
to prevail over the Enemy: But neither had they sufficient monies for their expences, not other such preparations as their need required; there was parti∣cularly such wants in point of the Cavalry, as the Prince was inforced to keep some Italian horse, called Albanois, under the name of his Guard; to which the Walloons had given way, till such time as they could raise so many of their own men. But howsoever, the contrary Forces were no whit the stronger: For the Flemish having likewise cashier'd their foreign Aid, their Forces were but weak, and those without any Commander in chief of their own Country. The Count Bossu was dead a little before; and the other principal Walloons, who were most considerable next to him, had imbraced the Kings side: Archduke Mathias, young in years, and yet younger in experience, could only undergoe a titular Command; and Orange, who was wholly taken up with Civil negotiations, could not take upon him the Military government. So as the management thereof lay chiefly on Monsieur de la Nue, a French-man, and Colonel Norris, an English-man; but the authority and estimation of the former was much greater then the others. Their Forces being of this condition, the military affairs proceeded but very slowly on both sides. Each of them could rather withstand then overcome, and each of them hoped for better success in time. The year 1580. came now in, which brought with it one of the most memo∣rable events that ever the war of Flanders produced; through the resolution Anno 1580. which the Rebels then took of chusing a new Prince, and of continuing no longer under the King of Spains obedience. The Prince of Orange had driven on this design before now; and being between Despair and Hope, he could no longer resist their violences. On the one side despair assailed him, setting before him all the greatest and most dreadful dangers which could be expected from the wrath and power of the King of Spain, being then made greater by the accession of the Kingdom of Portugal. And on the other side he was highly invited by hope, desire making him believe that new greatness would be added to his fortune by a new Principality. He argued within himself, That at least the two Provinces of Holland and Zealand would be well-nigh wholly at his disposal And wherefore in such a case might not greater good fortunes befall him? since it might easily happen, that the Flemish being again angry at, or weary of a foreign Prince, might at last resolve to choose one of their own Nation? And if so, wherefore should not he hope to be preferr'd before all others? He then without any further delay, having first prepared mens minds in every Province, by his Adherents, of which he had great store in each of them: He, I say, caused the proposition of change of Prince be put; and made all such things be suggested as might facilitate the business. The Rebels had no more weighty affairs at this time then this was. Therefore that they might treat and resolve thereof with such maturity and honour as was needfull, it was thought necessary to call a meeting of the States Generall, wherein they might afterwards come to such a resolution as might be best for the whole Country. This advice was chiefly given by Orange, and Antwerp appointed for the place of meeting. Here then about the beginning of the abovesaid year, the Deputies of the Provinces met, and Orange was there himself so they began to fall close to the business. The Heretick Deputies, of which the greatest part of the Assembly did consist (such industry and means had Orange used in causing them to be chosen) inclined to choose a new Prince, as also still to strengthen Heresie. Yet they differed within themselves in their votes; some of them were for the Queen of England, and some for the Duke of Alanson; the one holding they might receive more ad∣vantages from England, the others from France. The City of Gaunt in particular was much inclined to the Queen of England, which was the chief City of all those that then followed the rebellion of the Confederate Provinces. Wherefore James Tayard, the Deputy thereof, together with some others who represented the peculiar Province of Flanders, that is to say the Flemicant part; one day, when the business was hottest in agitation, spake thus. When I consider (most worthy Deputies!) how much France is at this time divi∣ded and afflicted within it self, I confess I cannot be perswaded to preferrre the Duke
of Alanson before the Queen of England, in the subjecting of our Provinces under a new Principality. Every one knows what the unhappy agitations of that Kingdom at the present are; it totters on all sides amidst mighty dangers: The several Fa∣ctions strive who shall rend it most. The King hath only the shew of a King, and is forced to use intreaties much more then commands. How often, and with what pre∣judice to his authority hath he been inforced rather to yield to the will of others, then to use his own? So perverse under the variety of their specious pretences are they some∣times grown who favour the Catholick religion, and sometimes they who follow the Reformed, in causing one revolt after another, all tending to the great diminution of the Royal majesty and splendor France being then in so low a condition, what ease or advantage can Flanders expect from thence? Our end is to put our selves under a Prince, who who may by his Forces strengthen ours, that we may the better defend our selves against so powerful and so bitter an Enemy as is the King of Spain. Then tell me I pray you, what State, what Forces, what advantages can the Duke of Alanson bring with him, that should make him be desired for our Prince? Doth he enjoy any thing else in France, save the bare Title of being the only Brother to the King, with other such Prerogatives much greater in shew then substance? Hath not the King treated him sometimes more like a Prisoner then like a Brother? hath not the Duke sometime gone from Court in form of a Fugitive, endeavouring by all means to pro∣tect Faction, but rather to receive assistance from thence then to give it? To boot, his being the Kings only Brother, bears with it a condition which we may very well suspect: For if he, when he shall be our Prince shall peradventure succeed his Brother who is childless, in what condition shall we be then? what dangers will our Provinces be then again in? we shall be under so great a King, who peradventure may treat us so much worse then the King of Spain now doth, by how much the Forces of France are nearer us, and more ready to oppress us. From what I have said against France, I shall now come to what may be taken into consideration as making for England. States doe then most flourish, when they are mst quiet: which may easily be seen by the happiness which that Queen now enjoyes Her Kingdom enjoyes full Peace; and her people strive who shall most witness their obedience to her. An obedience notwithstanding which she hath very will deserved of them: For what Princess was there ever seen of a more masculine spirit? who indued with more excellent vertues? She hath nothing of woman but the appearance. She is born to Empires; and to command those chiefly, which require most merit to enjoy them. It is confest, her King∣dom is et a little divided in point of Religion: but the Catholicks are so few, and  so low, as they can in no sort weigh against the Reformed: She maintains these, and by these is she maintained; her pleasure is, that only their Religion shall be profest in England according to the custom of that Country: and with this her plea∣sure hath the Authority of the Estates general met in Parliament often joyned. And how much doth this make for our advantage? For the most of us having resolved to imbrace the Refomed religion, doubtlesly the Queen of England will in that respect much more concur in our defence then will the Duke of Alanson, who is a profest Catholick. Together with this advantage in matter of Religion, we shall also receive from her all other things which we stand most in need of: her Kingdom abounds in People, nor wants she Mony proportionably How much ought we to esteem her so near, and so potent Maritime forces? We may by that means expect at all times all manner of Aid in a very few houres: and by that means that Country will be joyned to ours as well as if we were both one firm land. And how much is England and our Province already joyned in Commerce? May not the English-House here in Ant∣werp, be envied by their own hamber of London? And if we consider the Form of Government how much more conformable to ours is that of England then that of France? For in France the Kingly power may be said to be almost absolute; where∣as in England it is so limited, as in al affair, of greatest weight the Princes there can resolve of nothing without the supreme authority of Parliament. Which ought to make us expect a much more moderate government certainly from the Queen of Eng∣land, then from the D. of Alanson, who hath already too much drunk in the too haughty and Kingly spirits of France. This my short comparing of the present condition of these two Kingdoms, doth sufficiently discover my opinion touching the business now in hand Yet all private opinions ought to submit to the publike interest: And so
shal I do, when the contrary shal be approv'd of by this most wise Assembly: for I have no consideration of any foreign good, which is not altogether subordinate to what concerns our selves. This discourse wrought very much upon the Deputies. But the Lord of St. Aldegonde, one of those that was deputed for the Nobility, one of the best esteemed amongst all those of the Flemish Union, took upon him to defend the contrary opinion. And spake thus, I wish it had pleased God (most worthy Deputies) that our calamities had not clearly taught us what the remedy is to free us thereof. This remedy consists in having one for our Prince, who being amongst us in person, may rather with a Fathers, then Princes affection, imbrace, maintain, and govern the concernments of these our Pro∣vinces, as if they were altogether his own. And to pass by the more ancient exam∣ples; let each of us consider what happiness they enjoyed in more modern times. 'Tis very well known to all how they flourished under the House of Burgony. And that out of no other respect, but for that the Princes did then of themselves, and in their own persons steer the Government: and shewing themselves from time to time in al∣most every of our Provinces, did both give and receive such satisfaction as was most to be desired by each in each of them. The Government then altered, and began to grow worse under the House of Austria: nor was it to be otherwise expected, by rea∣son of the many States and Nations, which fell under the Empire thereof. A great bulk cannot long maintain it self; and when one part thereof is wrested, all the rest are usually out of frame. So in States which are too far divided a sunder, the good of Government not being able to be joyntly united in them all, the most remote must needs suffer therein; and afterwards those that are nearest joyned will rescent it. But notwithstanding, in the times of Maximilian, of Philip the first, and of Clarls, Flan∣ders enjoyed such a share of their own personages and presence, as look how much it sometimes suffered by reason of their absence, it reaped other whiles as much advan∣tage by their being present. And each of them did still retain as well the sence, as the bloud of Germany and Flanders: Countries, both of them almost alike seated, and of the same nature. The ow King being afterwards born in Spain, and being be∣come a Spaniard more by will then by birth, he resolves to keep there, and not to absent himself in any manner from thence. What our miseries have been since then, and what those in particular which we have suffered through the pride and cruelty of Spa∣nish Governours, we may all very well know, since we have all too well tryed it. Then to conclude, as I said at first, that the only help for these our Provinces consists in ha∣ving here a Prince of their own to govern them, I confess I cannot see who can be fitter for that purpose then the Duke of Alanson. The Dukes of Burgony descend∣ed, as it is well known to all, from the Royal bloud of France; then since Fortune pre∣sents us again with a new Prince of the same bloud, wherefore should not we greedily imbrace the occasion of receiving him? would not the very Government be by this means rather continued, then any other of a different Form instituted? How great a part of our Provinces do yet retain the French tongue? and the Customs more then the tongue? Are not all the confines of the Walloons, and half the Pro∣vince of Flanders it self called more by the word Gallican, then Flemican? so as in respect of the conformity of nature, 'tis clearly seen that the French are much more conformable to us then the English, who had never any dominion over us. That France is now in great turmoyls cannot be denyed; but what better remedy then this can be found out to rid her of them? to wit, by drawing Alanson himself out of her, and with him so many others who at the present do molest that Kingdom? In which case it is not to be doubted but that the Duke will abound sufficiently in Forces; and that the King his brother will largely maintain them in so just a Cause. Every one may clearly see how much better these of France will be, then those we should receive from England. France doth over-abound with people every where; especially in gallant Cavalry. The coming from thence into this our Country can receive no impe∣diment neither by the seas nor wind; since both their confines by land joyn together. And how opportune for us ought their neighbourhood now to be thought? since almost the whole Walloon Provinces, being re-united to the King of Spain, the French For∣ces will prove very commodious on that side to force that Country to return to their former Union with our other Provinces, and to joyn with us in chusing the Duke of Alanson for our Prince. For what concerns all the other rubs, me thinks they may be easily removed. As for the Kings having no children, his age is such as may cer∣tainly promise enough. The mean while the Duke his brother will likewise marry, and have sons of his own to succeed him: but say that the Duke were to succeed un∣to
the Crown; wherefore may not we in such accse oblige him to leave us one of his sons to be our Prince in his stead? As for Religion, every one knows how great a freedom France enjoys therein. Wherefore it is not to be doubted but that the Duke will allow a greater liberty therein in Flanders. For though our intentions be that the Reformed Religion should be the most prevalent yet it will behove us to allow of the Catholick; there being so great a part of our Provinces which is obstinate therein; and chiefly the Walloon Countrys; to the regaining whereof we must with all our in∣dustry apply our selves. And as for what authority the Duke may assume unto him∣self, by the example of what the Kings of France enjoy in their Kingdom: May not we limit it as we shall please? so as he may know he hath the Flemish to Govern, and not the French? and that he must use our Laws only, without any participation of theirs I therefore conclude that all the reasons considered in this present affair, make much more for the French then for the English. And this is likewise my opi∣nion. The which I am not notwithstanding so far in love withall, but that I shall be ready to quit it when I shall hear a better. None shall be more ready then I to ad∣here unto the sence of this most vigilant Assembly; nor be more willing to endeavour the fulfilling thereof after it shall be maturely advised upon. This opinion of Aldegonds bore great weight with it. And to enjoy a Prince who was in his own person to sustain the Government, and the Interest of the Provin∣ces was a business exceedingly considerable. This so important business was not agitated without the Catholick Deputies. For though those of the Walloon Provinces were wanting, and that there was no respect at all had to the Ecclesia∣stical Orders; yet were there a great many Catholicks in the Provinces, who leaned more to heresie: wherefore in this Assembly there were divers Catho∣lick Deputies chosen together with the Hereticks. The Propositions which were made by the others, were generally very ill rescented by these. For though they did likewise greatly hate the Spaniards, yet they thought it a too desperate busi∣ness to treat of changing a Prince, and almost altogether Religion. They shewed, How much the King would be irritated by both these. That if he would never tolerate any liberty at all of consequence in Flanders; how much less then would he suffer heresie to domineer every where. And what more unworthy thing could there be, then to make Religion subservient to the State? the anci∣ent Church to the new Sects? and the Piety for so many years professed in those Provinces, to rescent Doctrins, which had involved almost all Europe in mighty troubles? To this injury which should be done to the Church, and which cer∣tainly the King would own as his own; how much would the other add, which belonged wholly to himself; of bereaving him of his due soveraignty? which after so long a succession of his ancestors was past into him? and so strictly ac∣knowledged, and solemnly sworn unto by the Provinces? That therefore it was to be believed he would rescent both these injuries with the whole Forces of his Kingdoms. That his Forces had been formerly formidable; but how much more now that he had gotten the Kingdom of Portugal? That there could no relyance be had upon those of France, by reason of the divisions by which that Kingdom was at the present so terribly rent in pieces. And say the King of France could, he would not assist his brother, lest he might thereby draw upon him the Forces of the King of Spain. That the Catholick Faction in France held already great correspondency with the King of Spain. And now, having so justifiable a pretence, how much more might that King foment it? and how many foreign evils might he add to those home-bred ones? That from Eng∣land they could not receive the benefit of a Prince of their own. So as the ad∣ministration must pass by the hands of Governours And what certainty was there that the English would give better satisfaction then the Spaniards? espe∣cially in a new Principallity, wherein they would never proceed so far by fair means, but that they would much more use force. That the same King had great commodity of making diversions likewise against the Queen; and to in∣cite England to some insurrection, either by open war or under-hand practises: and much more easily Ireland; a Country which was almost altogether Ca∣tholick, greatly devoted to the Church, and well affected also to the Crown of
Spain. And thus the Provinces having no foreign helps, would be wholly expo∣sed to the indignation and forces of a potent and injured enemy: from whom they were afterwards to expect the greater punishment, in that they had given so just an occasion thereof. For these reasons the Catholick Deputies past on to this opinion. That above all things, an agreement between the Provinces should be endea∣voured: for that if they were well united, their own union might furnish them with sufficient Forces, at least to defend themselves. That they should never lay down their Arms, till the ancient form of Government were first restored by the King. That touching Religion, the peace of Gaunt should be observed, which was so maturely handled and concluded by the full consent of the Provin∣ces. That if things should be brought to that necessity as that the Provinces of Flanders must needs be severed from the Crown of Spain, they should procure, as it was most reasonable, a Prince of the House of Austria, or one of the Kings sons, if he should have more then one, or some other body who should marry with a daughter of the Kings, upon whom the Dominion of those Provinces might be transferred. And that at last, if they should fail of all these means, the Provinces should take the Soveraignty into their own hands. In which case, it was not to be doubted, but that they should have a much better Cause, more justifiable to the world, better made good by their people, and more favoured by their neighbours. But the Hereticks did so far prevail in this Assembly, as there was little regard had to this opinion of the Catholicks: so as the question remained between the o∣ther two. But at last that which Aldegonde had maintained in the behalf of Alan∣son was preferred. Orange, out of some private considerations of his own, to boot with what concerned the Publick, leaned more willingly likewise to this side. For his Principality of Orange lay in France: his wife was at that time of French bloud. And great correspondency was had, as had always been, between him and the chief of the Hugonot Faction in that Kingdom. Yet by reason of the weight of the Affair, the ultimate conclusion was not at that time taken: but the De∣puties departed that they might first acquaint each Province with their Opinions: and to bring from thence an integral resolution. This mean while the business of War past on but coolly on both sides, as hath been said. To say truth, the Wal∣loons could not shew more willingnesse to defend the Kings Cause; but they had not Forces answerable to their wills. Wherefore the Prince of Parma made no considerable progress. He took Cortray by surprise; a Town of some moment in the Gallicant part of Flanders. But Count Egmont, who had laid the plot, was soon after taken prisoner by the enemy: who entring by stealth into Nienove, where he recided with his wife and a brother of his, they seased upon them all, and took them into their own power. The Walloons took likewise Mortagne, and St Amonde, places of but small concernment; and overrunning the Territories of Torney and Cambrey, they endeavoured to streigh∣ten both those Cities of victuals, that they might the more easily bring them in∣to the Kings power. Cambray looks upon the Frontiers of France more towards the extream on that part; and Torney lies more inward, towards the Gallican part of the Province of Flanders. They are both of them principal Cities, and Fernese desired very much to recover them: for only they two in all that Tract of the Walloons Country adhered to the Flemish Rebels: and he feared more∣over lest Insy Governour of Cambray, might put that City into the hands of the French. But the Prince having not as then Forces sufficient to besiege either of them, he suffered the Walloons only to annoy them with inroads. On the other side the City of Malines fell again into the hands of the Rebels. For the here∣tical part prevailing lately there, they brought the enemy in; who meeting with little resistance, made themselves easily Masters thereof; and in hostile manner plundered it. They took likewise Diste, Sichem, and Ariscot in Brabant, rather by Treaty then by force. But at the same time the Marquis of Rubays, who had the chief command over the Walloons, much to his praise, deprived the enemy of one of their prime leading Commanders. He had intelligence that Monsieur de la Nue was gone with a good body of men to surprise Lilla, and that failing
thereof, he returned to his former quarters. Rubays not letting such an occasion slip, set upon Nue at unawares, as he retired, and pursued him into his quarters: where Nue made what resistance the time and place would permit him. But such was Rubays's violence, and especially that of the Albanois horse, as La Nue was at last forced to yield himself, with some other personages of quality, and was brought prisoner into the Castle of Limburg, where he was kept for many years; and during his imprisonment, composed the greatest part of those his Politick and Military Discourses which are of such esteem in France: For which he receives this praise from his Nation, That he knew as well how to handle his pen as his sword and to be as worthy in peace as in war. The same Rubays endeavoured under-hand to surprise Brussels: but because his practices were mingled with de∣ceit, they proved fruitless. The Signor di Selle had worse success in his plots against Boucain, a considerable Town upon the Scheld between Valentiennes and Cam∣bray: For being come near unto the place, he was by double dealing taken pri∣soner, together with divers others. But the Walloons soon after besieged the Town, reduced it to a necessity of surrendring, and much to their advantage took it. The King, as we told you before, had it in his thoughts to send back the Dutchess of Parma into Flanders; intending that she should have the total ad∣ministration of the Government, and that the Prince her Son should have the particular charge of the Militia. And although the King had afterwards con∣firmed the Prince in Don Johns place, yet his mind ran still upon it. And resolving at last to doe it, he had by his own Letters, and by his Agents in Italy acquainted the said Dutchess with his intention herein, and had earnestly desired her that she would again take upon her the Government of those Provinces. She was much troubled hereat: She was beset on one side by a desire to satisfie the Kings plea∣sure, as also to procure new glory to herself; and on the other side by her desire of seeing her Son more glorious in the full Government of those Countries. But in fine the Kings pressures were so instant, as she could not keep from conde∣scending thereunto. Wherefore beginning her journy, and leaving Italy, she came to Namures: where she staid, and would go no further, till she might more fully understand the Kings pleasure. She found that the affairs of Flanders were in a very troublesom condition; that she herself was well advanced in years, and therefore much fitter to desire her quiet, then to thrust herself into new troubles; that the Prince her Son was in the full strength of his age, and had given such proof of his wisdom and valour in this the beginning of his Government, as that the like progress was undoubtedly to be expected. Her motherly affection was so much the greater in her, by his being her onely Son. So as setting aside all self-respect, she turn'd all her endeavours to the King as so many intercessors in his behalf. He went immediately to Namures to meet her, and to pay her such affection and reverence as in duty he was bound to doe. But being also full of generous thoughts, he could not well endure that his Government should be any way diminished, after having had so full Authority therein, and so prosperously exercised it. The Mother thought this her Sons resentment very just, which confirmed her the more in her own opinion. Wherefore she reiterated her desires to the King, and wrote him a Letter, the Contents whereof were these. How ready I have been to obey your Majesty by returning into Flanders, your Majesties self hath vouchsafed to witness, by being graciously pleased to like well of it. Now that I have obeyed your Royal commands in this behalf, I shall, for what concerns the Government, humbly lay before you again my sense thereof; and that the more freely, for that it shall clearly appear I aim only at your Majesties service therein. I came not long since to Namures, as I quickly signified unto your Majesty. And though whilst in Italy, the troubles of these Countries were not unknown unto me, yet I confess I find them now, as an eye-witness thereof, to be much greater then I had conceived them. Which inforceth me humbly again to beseech your Majesty, as I did in Italy, to consider how little available my service will be unto you in this Government. Here is no more way left for fair means; all hope of accommodation is lost; the Rebellion grows every day hotter: This wound must be drest by the
sword, and cured by fire. Since then this Government is wholly to consist of Force, your Majesty cannot chuse but see how much fitter my Son is to serve you therein then my self. He is in the full strength of his age: After having spent his younger years in your Majesties royal Court, he hath imployed the rest either in the Theory or Pra∣ctice of Arms; and as yet he hath so managed them in Flanders, as every day greater additions may be hoped for to your service. His loyalty unto your Majesty is answerable to mine: nor should he be of my blood, if he were not of my opinion. To boot that he can∣not but be the more like therein of himself, in respect of the so many gracious favours which your Majesty hath pleased to confirm upon him. The height thereof will now be in your being pleased to leave the Government of these Provinces wholly to him alone, and that he may bear the sole weight thereof, which is to consist in Arms, wherein my company can be of no advantage at all unto him. I humbly beg this of your Majesty, with as much affection and reverence as I am able. Quiet better becomes my age: And not being able to doe more, I will continually send my wishes from Italy into Flan∣ders; and we will both at the same time conspire to serve your Majesty, I with my Prayers, and my Son with his Forces: Nor can we doubt but the one will be heard, and the other prospered by God; since the war first begun here, hath hitherto been continued, and is now prosecuted more then ever, more for the glory of his Name, then for any self-interest of your Majesties. The King at last granted the Dutchess her desire. Whereupon she returned to her former peaceable condition into Italy, and the Prince her Son remained in his former full Command of Flanders. The Flemish Rebels had this mean while fixt upon their resolution of changing Prince; nor were the Catholicks able to counterpoise the Hereticks. Yet to satisfie the Catholicks, Orange had procured that the Treaty concluded in favour of Alanson, a Prince who profest and who might give hopes of favouring the Catholick religion. And to say truth, the Queen of England little valued his being preferred before her: For she con∣sidered very wisely the uncertainty of such a purchase, and how certain she had been on the other side to draw upon her the revenge and Forces of the King of Spain. Wherefore she in deep wisdom did rather favour the canvasing for A∣lanson; judging that it would make much more for her security, that the Forces of France should be wasted bootlesly in the wars of Flanders; that the King of Spains Forces should be likewise consumed at the same time; and that by the almost necessity of those two Kings going to war with one another, it must come to an open feud between them: Nor did she despair, but that the Low-Countries more involved in troubles then ever, the Flemish would at last have recourse to her protection; that she might then draw from thence such advantages as time and occasion should offer her. When then the Provinces had resolved to transfer their Government upon the Duke of Alanson, they failed not to chuse a noble Embassie out of some of their Deputies, to acquaint him with the resolution which they had taken; the chief whereof was the Lord Aldegonde. They began their journey in August, and passing into France found the Duke at Tours, where they discharged their Commission to him. The Duke accepted of his new Domi∣nion: and upon the same Conditions which he was to observe on his part, if he would enjoy it. Which were these: That the Belgick States chose Francis of Valois, Duke of Alanson and of Anjou, with the usual preheminencies and titles, for their Prince. That in case the Duke should have more Sons lawfully begotten then one, the States might chuse which of them they should like best for their Prince; and that if he should be a Child, they were to appoint him a Governour, and that in the interim they themselves should administer the Government of the Provinces. That if the Duke should die without heirs, it should be lawfull for the States to chuse a new Prince. That the Duke should inviolably maintain the Priviledges of the Country, and call together the States-Generall at least once every year; in whose power it should be howsoever to assemble themselves together upon any needfull occasion. That the Officers of War, Councellors of State, Governours of Provinces and Towns, should always be chosen by him, with the approbation of the States. That the Duke should reside in the Low-Countries; and upon any occasion of going from thence, should leave some Nobleman of
the Country Governour, with the participation of the States. For what con∣cerned Religion, that the Duke should not have power to innovate any thing, out should equally protect both the Catholick and the Reformed religion. That Holland and Zealand, in point of Religion and Government, should continue in their present condition; submitting notwithstanding together with the other Provinces unto the Duke, in point of concurring to the necessity of Contributi∣ons, and in the coyning of monies. That the Duke should procure all help and assistance from the King his brother, and from France against the common e∣nemies; carrying it so as the War should be made joyntly between them; yet so notwithstanding as the Low-Countries should not be understood to be incor∣porated into France. And that the Low-Countries should furnish him with 240000 pounds a year for necessary expences. That all former Confederacies should be renewed; and that the Duke should not make any new ones, nor treat of any alliance, without the consent of the States. That all foreign souldiers, yea even the French should quit the Country when the States should desire it. That if any other places of the Country would joyn with the States, and be under the Duke, they should be comprehended within the present Treaty. That such places as the Duke should take by force, should be by him disposed of, with the approbation of the States. That if the Duke should fail in the things pro∣mised and sworn unto, the States should be understood to be free from all sub∣jection. And for what concerned the Archduke Mathias, who was called into the Low-Countries, and had plaid his part so well, the Duke and States should give him all convenient satisfaction. Upon thse Conditions the Provinces of the Fremish Union, agreed to come under the obedience of their new Prince. An obedience notwithstanding which bore with it so much of command, as certainly they were much more free then subject. In fine, the Duke possest almost nothing of Principality but the title. Nor could he exercise any other Authority in the Country, then what belonged to the bare Governour of a Province: to boot that in Holland and Zealand the whole Government was to be in the Prince of Orange apart. The King of Spain quarrelled very much with the King of France for this action. Who seeming not to blame it, excused himself notwithstanding for the aforesaid reasons, as not able to hinder it. For as for the rest, he confessed he very well knew how much the Rebellion of the Hereticks in Flanders, might assist that which the Hugo∣nots had so often raised in his own Kingdom of France; where he should more suspect their ways then ever. Alanson his new principallity being pro∣claimed throughout the Provinces of the Flemish Union, when their Deputies were returned: the King thought it was no longer time to defer the utmost re∣scentment of his indignation against Orange, who was the framer, and chief con∣triver of this action. And therefore by his Royal Proclamation in print, he de∣clared him to be the Author of the troubles in Flanders, the Seducer of those people against the Church and against their Prince; and therefore guilty of High Treason, both Divine and Humane, and to be a publick Rebel in both those re∣spects; and that as such a one, he deprived him of all Dignities, Goods, and Ho∣nours, condemned him to the most capital punishments: and set 25000 crowns upon his head, to be given to whosoever should bring him to him either alive or dead, together with other greater rewards. Orange answered this Writing, with another very long one, in print also; and endeavoured therein to justifie whatsoe∣ver he had done. And for the better confirmation thereof, made it to be under∣written and confirmed by the States of the Provinces: exagerating again therein rather in an invective then bemoaning manner, the same things, which had been so often before both said written, and printed by him and his followers, against the King, against his Ministers of State, and against the Spanish Nation.
THE HISTORY OF THE WARS OF FLANDERS, Written by CARDINAL BENTIVOGLIO. The Second Part. BOOK II. The Contents. The War proceeds on several sides with diversity of success. Fernese besiegeth Cam∣bray at a distance; but Alanson by mighty Forces, succours and secures it. Where∣upon Fernese prevails with the Walloons to give way to the returning of Foreign Forces. The mean while he besiegeth Torney, and takes it. The Archduke Ma∣thias departs, and goes to the Emperours Court. The Duke of Alanson, the new Prince comes from the Court of England into Flanders His reception in Antwerp. Orange is treacherously wounded by a musket shot in the face: but the wound proves not mortal. The danger which Alansons French men run thereupon. Fernese is better encouraged by the daily increase of his Army. He begirts and takes Oden∣arde, and gets many other advantages. The Rebels storm thereat, and complain of their new Prince. A Noble combate between the Royalists and the Enemy under the Walls of Gaunt. Alansons expected men come at last. The opinion of the French Commanders to make the Duke lay the ground-work of his new Principallity upon arms. Their Councel chiefly to surprise Antwerp. They com to the execution thereof; but the success is not answerable. The Confederate Provinces are hereat greatly offended. And though Orange re-unites them and Alanson, yet great diffidence is had on both sides. Alanson resolves therefore to return to France. And soon af∣ter his men do the like. By this means Fernese's advantages increase. Orange endeavours again to reconcile the Flemish and the French. But in the mean while Alanson dies: and soon after Orange. THese were the novelties which Flanders was threatned with∣all from France. But in the mean while those were no less felt, under which the Country already laboured; and though the Kings Forces were very weak, as were also those of the enemy, yet such endeavours were had on both sides, as still some atchievement, or loss of impor∣tance was had and made by each of them. The Rebels took Conde, a Town of some moment in the Province of Henault, towards Flanders: But the Royalists suddenly recovered it: and each time that it was taken, it was miserably pundered. The Walloons this mean
while continued their inrodes into the Countries of Tornay and Cambray: And the Prince of Parma resolved to besiege Cambray at large at the preient, till e should have sufficient Forces to beleaguer it nearer hand. That place  particular cause of jealousie, out of the aforesaid reasons; and howsoever  would have been willing to have bereft the French of so commodious and advantagious a place of receipt. This year there was nothing else of importance done on this side Rhine towards the Provinces of Brabant and Flanders: but there was somewhat done on the other side which was very considerable. Fernese endeavoured to advance the Kings affairs by the way of Treaty, as well as of Arms. He had secretly drawn over the Count de Berg to the Kings side, who was Orange his Cousin, and Go∣vernor of Ghelderland for the States. But Orange discovering the practise, was so much the more incensed, as he less lookt for such an action from one so near allied unto him: He made him be deprived of his Government, and sought how to trouble him divers other wayes. Nor was this of any great consequence to the Kings affairs out of any self-consideration of the Count; for he was not verst in the Military profession, and was much more respected for his House sake then for his own Personage. Yet it made for the King by the acquisition which he thereby made of his Sons, who were many, and who all proved valiant men, and were much imployed in Arms. Another such like business fell out more luckily to Fernese at the same time, being of more advantage to the Kings service. The Count of Renemberg was Governor of Friesland and of Groninghen for the States, and he had done them very good service in those parts, as you have heard before: But resolving at last to adhere unto the Catholick cause, and to the King, and being hereupon privately agreed with the Prince of Parma, he waited to declare himself by some act of consequence, which might render his merit the greater with the Church and King. Yet could not this be so closely handled, but that Orange got some incling of it. The States therefore prevented him, making them∣selves sure of the Castles in Leverden and Harlinghen, which were kept by the Counts souldiers. Wherefore the Count fearing lest they might doe the like in Groninghen, resolved to be beforehand with them there, as he luckily was: He made those that sided with him within the City take up Arms, and made some other of his Followers that were without enter at the same time; and possessing the Town and Gates, made himself wholly sure of that City. Orange was much enraged at this news: He made no delay, but raising such strength as he could in those parts, he sent the Count of Hollack away with them to recover Groning∣hen; who sate down before it, but rather with a slow then strait siege, by reason of divers difficulties which he met withall at the beginning. But his men increasing every day and coming to make Batteries, the benegers began to hope better, by reason the Kings forces were so small, and so far off. Martin Schinck had won great renown in the wars, and more particularly on the other side of Rhine He was of Ghelders, of no very great family: Quick of wit, and hand; and such a one in dangers, as it might be questioned whether he were better acquainted with them, or valued them less; and therefore whether he shewed himself more cauti∣ous, or less circumspect in his military actions. Amidst these contrary mixtures, after having past through the common degrees of the Militia, he came to others of better quality. He then having by orders from Fernese gathered together some of the Kings Germans who were yet in those parts of Friesland, and assembled a good many of the self Friesland Souldiers resolved to relieve Groninghen, and to that purpose marched thitherward. Hollack would not wait this assault un∣derneath the City-walls, for fear that at the same time he might be set upon by those within the Town. Wherefore marching to meet Schink, who was fewer in number then he, he endeavoured to break him, at least to keep him from his designed succour: but he found the contrary for coming to battel, after a fierce fight, Hollack was routed, the City freed from the siege, and Schink greatly renowned for this action. Renemberg being hereupon encouraged, marcht towards the Town of Delfeziel, and after some opposition took it. He afterwards upon a great encounter routed Hollack, and recovered the Town of Coverden, which a little before was fallen into the States hands: And carried on by one success unto
another, he besieged Stenwick, a place of importance. The year 1581▪ was this mean while begun; and the Colds being very great, the Enemies endeavoured divers times to relieve the Town by Ice, and were divers times beaten back. But Colonel Norris, an English-man, who commanded there in chief, and by whom this Relief was chiefly managed, having gotten more men, Renemberg, after he had maintained the siege three moneths, was inforced to rise, and marcht away in good order with all his Camp. Nor was it long after, whilst pursuing such like actions, and whilst he raised expectation of greater, he dyed; to the great grief of the Prince of Parma, who hoped for great good to the Kings service from his fidelity and valour. The Prince made Fraencis Verdugo, a Spaniard, Governour of the Kings forces in Friesland; who was equally good at councel, and action. At which Schinck was not well pleased, who armed at that place; and he was the more offended, for that he did not look that a stranger should be chosen there∣into. Wherefore for that and some other new occasions, he after a while past over to the contrary part. But whilst he continued yet in the Kings service, he met with another occasion of making himself famous: For he routed the Enemy who besieged Goer, doing great execution upon them, and taking many of their chief Commanders prisoners. Verdugo this mean while began his Government also with good success: For he presently took Embden, a place thereabouts of great moment; and coming afterwards to grapple with the Enemy, he defeated them, and got thereby a notable advantage. But he could not get Newziel, which he afterwards besieged; for the place was well guarded within, and op∣portunely succoured from without. At this time there happened a very considerable surprise in favour of the King on this side the Rhine in Brabant. By intelligence with some Catholicks, il Signor d' Altapenna was privately brought into the Castle of Breda; and entring from thence into the Town, he made himself wholly master of it, and the Prince of Parma placed a good garrison there. Orange was hereat mightily displeased, for that Town was his own, wherefore he esteemed the loss to be wholly his. Alta∣penna by the like intelligence endeavoured afterwards to get by stealth into San Getremburg, and into Heusden; but he failed of both. As the States did likewise in the surprising of Balduke, which was endeavoured by John Junius Burgomaster of Antwerp: who afterwards in his return took Eindoven and Elmont by sud∣den assault, both of small consequence. Whilst they proceeded thus on both sides of the Rhine, the Prince of Parma had at large besieged the City of Cambray. He would very willingly, for the aforesaid reasons, have sate down before it with a Royal siege, to force it to return to its former obedience to the King; and the whole Country of the Walloons joyn'd with him in this desire: but he had not sufficient Forces. Wherefore the Prince, after having infested that City with continual incursions, and endeavoured still to bring it to a greater scarcity of vi∣ctuals; finally with some Forts from a certain place where he might most molest it, he was come so near it, as there was already great scarcity of all necessaries in the Town. In former times that City depended wholly upon the German Em∣pire: but of later times, having always shewed great affection towards the Princes of Flanders, it at last permitted the Emperor Charles the fifth to build a Citadel there, that he might keep it so the better from ever falling into the French mens hands. It had still kept in the same devotion to the King his Son. But in these last revolts, Signor d' Insy, the Governour thereof, being desirous to adhere unto the Flemish Insurrection, the City was likewise induced by him to doe the same. The Walloon Provinces being afterwards reconciled unto the King, the Flemish Rebels could not provide sufficiently for it, by reason of the impediments caused by the same Walloon Country, lying between those parts which favoured the Rebels, and Cambray. The Governour therefore seeing it in so great straits, and being of the same mind with the Rebels in favouring the Duke of Alanson, he addrest himself to the same Duke and earnestly desired succour of him protesting that otherwise the City would soon fall into Ferneses hands. The Flemish Rebels and Orange in particular had likewise with great fervencie intreated the same of the Duke. Wherefore he thought he must by no means lose such an occasion to bereave Spain of such an advantage, and to turn it to the benefit of France. The
Dukes designe of succouring Cambray, together with the hopes of winning it, being known in the King his brothers Court, the Nobility ran from almost all the parts of the Kingdom to be with him upon such an occurrancy. Wherefore the Duke having in a short time gathered together a gallant Army of 12000 foot, and 3000 horse, he marched towards Cambray, to relieve it, and free it from the straits wherein it was. Fernese knew he could not withstand so powerfull a strength; having so few Forces as he could neither incamp himself in face of the enemy, nor sufficiently fortifie himself about the walls of the City. Wherefore forgoing the Forts, he resolved to retreat. Some slight skirmishes happened up∣on this occasion between the two Camps; and the Country being finally left wholly free to the French the Duke had leasure to relieve the City, and to fur∣nish it aboundantly with all things necessary. He himself entred thereinto, and being solemnly received, he made a large Declaration, that he was come into it, as into a City of the Empire, and that as such a one he would keep it and defend it: He upon this occasion took likewise the Castle of Cambresis. From hence he suddenly returned to France; though he was earnestly desired by the Flemish Rebels, who were now become his Subjects, to come further into the Country, and make good use of the so many Forces as he now had, upon that occasion. But because they were really to be esteemed rather lent Forces, then any of his own, being hastily, and tumultuously gathered together; and be not having mo∣nies to maintain the Army any longer at that time; he could not satisfie them in their desires, but made such excuses as were necessary. He assured them notwith∣standing that he would be suddenly with them with good Forces. And that to that purpose, he would not only use all possible dilligence and industry with the King his brother, but go himself, if need should be, into England, and use all other efficacious endeavours with his neighbours. These Forces of Alansons being vanished sooner then it was believed they would be, the Walloons took courage again, and hoped for good success. Yet was the Prince of Parma very much troubled within himself, as well by reason of his retreat from Cambray, as also for that he verily thought he should never do any thing of consequence by the sole help of those Countries who kept loyal to the King. He had upon divers occasions endeavoured to make this known to those who were of greatest power amongst the Walloons; and had dexterously sug∣gested unto them, how much they themselves ought to desire, not only for the Kings service, but even for the good of their own Country, that the foreign soul∣diers might again return. But he could not so represent the necessity thereof, but that they had their equal jealousies: for all the Country desired very much to be free of Foreign Forces. The Prince found not therefore such a disposition in them thereunto as he desired. The Marquis of Rubays was in great esteem amongst the Walloons, as you have often heard. And doubtlesly he deserved to be so, by reason of his bloud, valour, and adherency of friends. The Prince had con∣tracted a particular friendship and trust with him: wherefore he resolved to use all the means he could to draw him over to his opinion of fetching back the Fo∣reign Souldiers into Flanders. He therefore took him one day by the hand, and after a Flemish familiarity, joyn'd with a Military Authority, he spake thus unto him. How weak the Forces are (most valiant Sir) which we have now here in the Kings Service, cannot be better known to any then to your self, who have so great a share in the Command thereof. The Agreement made with the Walloon Provinces hath certainly been of great advantage to the Kings Affairs. It is every day seen that their Forces can neither be more faithfull nor more valiant: But every day likewise confirms that which was then feared; that their forces alone would not be sufficient to carry on the Warre. And to descend to particulars, tell me, I pray you, What thing of consequence have we done, since the taking of Mastrick, wherein the Fo∣reign Souldiers did intervene? Have we ever been able to take the field with any con∣siderable Army? or by any sufficient Siege forced any place of importance? rather how shamefully have we been compelled to rise from before Cambray? and also with how much loss? The French before our eyes have not only relieved the Town, but fully taken possession thereof: which was the strongest out-work your Countrey had
towards their Frontiers. How much is the union of the Rebeis also encouraged by our weakness? Is not their rash perfidiousness come now to the greatest height? what more execrable thing could they devise to do, then so affrontedly, and by their own sole authority to chuse unto themselves a new Prince? Then since reason requires that such enormous faults should be punished, and that this cannot be done by the sole forces of the obedient part of the Country, why should it not be thought necessary to be done by strangers? Why should not the former souldiery be suffered to return a∣gain, and an Army be thereby made which may be worthy of our King, worthy of the Cause which he maintains, and by which this still renewing Hidra of Rebeliion may be tamed? When this wicked Monster shall be corrected, and Peace and Loy∣alty shall be every where established throughout the Country, it is not to be doubted but that the King will presently of his own accord remove all foreign souldiers, and leave the Custody of the Country to their own Militia. And thus when the Kings forces shall be returned hither in their former vigour, how great shall our advanta∣ges be together with his? Then, when we with a flourishing Army shall be able to be Masters of the field, storm all places, win all battels, and compass all our desires; I, who am the Commander in chief, and you who next to me have the chiefest Com∣mand, what shall our share of glory be in all these successes? what rewards are not we to expect from the Kings bounty and goodness? and how triumphant shall we be in the Church by suppressing Heresie? Out of all these considerations, Sir! I most heartily desire you, that you will be pleased particularly to interpose your endeavours, and your Authority where need shall require it, that the foreign souldiery may re∣turn hither again with the good will of the obedient Party. Your desert was certain∣ly highly valued by the King, when you reconciled, your Provinces to his Royal Crown; but how much will it now be increased? and how glorious shall I make it ap∣pear? And I already pawn my faith unto you, that if this may be done, the King shall acknowledge it chiefly to be your work; for what remains, you know the friend∣ship that I have promised you: which you may be sure shall be inviolably observed by me: in fine, either I shall be of no power in this Government, or your part therein next mine own shall be the greatest. Rubays was much moved at these words. He thought himself too much ob∣liged by the confidence which the Prince seemed to put in him; and he desired to signalize himself as much as he could in the Kings service. He considered moreo∣ver that the service of the Walloon Countries was sufficiently joyned to his good, since if they would not admit the company of foreigners who were their friends, they ran hazard of being inslaved by their ennemies, who were likewise foreig∣ners; or under the like of their own Flemish Hereticks, or that of their Chief tain Orange; whose chief end was to abase the Nobility, and by the favour of the multitude to build up a Tyrranny to himself. Wherefore wholly inflamed, both with devotion to the King, and affection to the Prince, Rubays answered him in resolute terms, that he would do all that lay in him, to effect the Prince his desire. Rubays being won, it was not hard for Fernese to draw the rest to be of the same mind, who were the chiefest either amongst the Nobles, Ecclesiasticks, or Commonalty. So as the business was suddenly so well carried on by all sides, as the Walloon Provinces instead of hindring it, resolved to facilitate it as much as they could; and not only to give way for the return of the Foreign Militia, but by a particular person of their own, to desire it of the King. The Flemish Rebels were by this time come to the proclaiming of their new Prince. To which purpose a General Assembly being called in the Hague, the first by a long wri∣ting in Print, Declared, That the King of Spain had forfeited his Soveraignty over those Provinces, and strictly commanded that no further obedience should be given him. And the reasons which they alleadged for this were, Because he went about to oppress the people in their consciences, and by open force to vio∣late their priviledges. Then the Assembly being fully informed of all that their Deputies had resolved in France with the Duke of Alanson, they publickly gave out that he was now their Prince, and resolved to receive him, and acknowledge him as such a one with all greatest solemnity. And being still fuller of hopes, by reason of those advantages which Alanson bad so luckily atchieved by the re∣lieving of Cambray, and taking of Cambresis, they did verily believe that be
would very speedily send the people that he had promised, and would come quickly himself to take possession of his new States. They notwithstanding did much sollicite him to hasten them both. But he said, that he must needs first goe into England to speak with the Queen, and that the Queen her self did much desire he should doe so. And indeed it was true: For she did desire to engage him still more and more in the revolts of Flanders, for the aforesaid reasons. And she carried the business on with such cunning, as she fed him with hopes that she would marry him. Which hopes were notwithstanding judged to be but vain, by reason of the inequality of their ages; he being very young, and she already inclining to old age. Moreover every one knew, that when she was of a fitter age for marriage, she being of a masculine spirit, and very desirous to govern, had always refused to take any for a Companion into her bed, for that she would have no Companion in her Princely government. But howsoever the Duke was not displeased with this deceit; for he turn'd it to his advantage with the Flemish, by making his expectation the greater amongst them, and by giving the greater cre∣to his Forces. Which proved notwithstanding so weak, as he could not as then send any considerable strength to the Rebels. Wherefore Fernese having this advantage, and encouraged the more by the speedy return which the foreign Forces were to make, he resolved to besiege Tournay, wherein the obedient Provinces joyned fully with him. The City of Tournay, together with the Country of Tournesis, hath a particular Government of its own; which was then administred by the Prince of Espenoy, who adhered to the Flemish Union. It lies upon the Gallican side of the Province of Flanders: wherefore the Walloons desired very much to take it, so to reunite that tract of ground which joyns upon their Country, to its allegiance to the King. The Prince of Espenoy was not at this time in Tournay: but his wife Maria de la Laigne was there; A woman of great spirit, and who performed in this Siege (as shall be shewn) whatsoever could be expected from her husband. Tournay may be numbred amongst the noblest Cities of Flanders, as well for its antient foundati∣on, as for being amply furnished both with people, trafick, and edifices. It is every where surrounded with fruitfull and pleasant fields; and through the midst of it, under divers bridges runs the Scheld, a River which begins there to ennoble it self, not being well navigable before. Whilst this City was under the English, in the time of Henry the 8. they built a good Castle there, esteemed strong in that Age, but not to be compared to the latter Royal Fortifications: It is only flanked with Towers, after the old fashion; and the antient walls of the City have the same imperfection, yet these are in some parts helped by Ravelins raised after the modern fashion. On the lower side the Scheld joyns to the Ditch, which on the upper side is wholly dry. In lieu of the Prince of Espenoy, il Signor d'E∣trael, his Lieutenant, governed the City at this time: but he had but a small Garrison in the Town; for Espenoy being busie with the Prince of Orange about some other imployment, had carried away with him many Souldiers who former∣ly belonged to that Garrison. But the Inhabitants, who were for the most part Hereticks, supplied the defect of the Garrison; who were therefore so bitter against the Kings party, as they could not appear more alienate from the one, nor more affectionate to the other: They had unarm'd the Catholicks, as not con∣fiding in them; and in all other demonstrations shewed themselves ready to stand upon their defence. On the other side, Fernese was not ignorant how weak they were within and how small hopes they had to be relieved from without. Where∣fore without any longer delay he marched with his Army, and about the begin∣ing of October drew near to Tournay, and began to order his Quarters. His Camp was not then very great, but he hoped to have it speedily ingrost by some Germans, which by his directions were raising in those parts near Flanders. And the Abbot of St. Wedasto being sent from the Walloons into Spain, to sollicite the King to send some new Forces again, as soon as might be, into Flanders from Spain and Italy; Fernese was in great expectation of having shortly one of the most flourishing Armies that was ever seen in those Provinces. Having then or∣dered his affairs, and secured his quarters, the Officers of the Army consulted on which side they ought to make their batteries: The opinion was, that they should
play upon one of the longest and worst flankt Curtains on that side where the Ditch was dry. This space lay between two gates, the one called S. Martins, the other Valentiennes. A good Ravelin was thrust out for the defence of the former, and a great Platform stood over the other. Yet these two Defences were so far from another, and the Curtain which ran betwixt them bowed so far outward, as neither could the one defend, nor yet see the other. Wherefore to make good this defect, there was a great Cavallier of Earth raised about the midst of the Cur∣tain. But howsoever all that side was so imperfect, as the Prince of Parma judged it most advantagious for him, and therefore turned the strength of his siege upon it. The Kings men coming before it with their wonted Trenches, they began to plant three Batteries, to deprive the besieged of the three aforesaid Defences. They within were not wanting this mean while on their parts. They with frequent shooting annoyed those without, from the aforesaid Works; and opposed them∣selves unto them nearer hand by stout Sallies, though they were sparing therein by reason of the paucity of their Souldiers. The Princess of Espenoy with great gallantry did herself encourage them; and with incredible vigilancie performing all the manlike actions which her husband could have done, exhorted some, in∣treated other some, used sometimes threats, sometimes a more moderate power; she herself did sometimes execute her own orders; and in fine she omitted not any thing which might make for the sustaining of the siege. On the oher side Fernese, having his eye every where, and playing himself also the part of a private Souldier more then of a Commander, did con inually sollicite all the Works, even the furthest off, that he might come the sooner to those that were nearer hand. So as within a few dayes the Trenches were so far advanced, as they might come to the Batteries, upon each of which were many Pieces of great Cannon placed, and they began to thunder apace upon the Enemies works. The Kings men were not long in falling into the Ditch; the which being dry, they might the more easily come to the wall, and by their Mathooks and Mines the sooner throw it down. Yet those within were not at all discouraged; but with incessant labour both by day and night, repaired the wall where it was most needfull, and pre∣pared for every other part of greatest danger. The Siege past on quietly some dayes amidst these less noisefull endeavours But the Kings men renewing their batteries more hotly then ever, as also their works in the Ditch, they made such breaches in the wall, as they thought they might by assault make themselvs masters of it: wherefore with a great deal of courage and alacrity they prepared for it. The besieged were no less couragious, nor no less resolute to defend themselves. Great therefore was the fierce and bloody Conflict, when they came to it. Many of the best of both sides were slain: and Fortune smiling alternately, sometimes on this, sometimes on that side, their hopes did accordingly vary. In the very heat of the fight the Princess shewed miraculous courage; and throwing herself where the danger was greatest, Am not I here (said she) my self? Doe not I here in mine own person repre∣sent the Prince my husband? I am here no less ready then he to despise death, that I may, as we all ought, be serviceable to the Country. Let us therefore resolve, my souldiers, rather to lose our lives then our station: Let us undauntedly make it good, as we have done hitherto. The Enemy must at last yield: And the winning of this Battel, will secure the like success unto us in all others. She accompanied these her words with no less manlike actions; for thrusting herself into the crowd, whilst she either fought herself, or encouraged others to fight, she was wounded in the Arm. The Defendants still more set on fire by such an Example, continued making so stout resistance, as the Royalists were at last forced to give over, and retreated with the loss of many of their men. Be∣sides many Captains and other Officers, the Count Bucquoi, the Signor de Gloine, and de Bours, perisht in this assault; and the Marquis of Barambone, John Ba∣ptista di Monte, Signor di Montigni, and the Baron of Bigli were wounded. From the very beginning of this Siege, the Duke of Alanson, who was then in England, had encouraged the besieged, and assured them that he would undoubt∣edly soon relieve them, either by coming to them himself in person, or by sending succour. Wherefore they betook themselves the more boldly to this defence.
Orange had fed them with the like hopes; and more then all others their own Governour Espenoye. But seeing that there came no men from Alanson, and that the Flemish Rebels did nothing to relieve them, their former vigour lessened with their hopes. Yet was not the Princess wanting in keeping their hopes alive as much as she was able. And Etreel the Lieutenant did the like. And some days after the assault, Colonel Preston, a Scotchman, forcing his way through some German Companies of the Kings Camp, got with some horse into the City; the besieged were at first somewhat inheartned by this success; hoping that after this small relief, some greater would shortly appear: But when they understood by Preston, that there was no tidings heard any where of the coming of any French into Flanders; and that there was no appearance of any succour from the Fle∣mish, the besieged lost all hopes of being further able to continue their defence. The City was of a large circuit; the men in pay but few in number; nor were the Inhabitants so many as were any ways able to supply all necessary occurren∣ces: besides, many of both sorts were perished in the actions; and they began already within the Town to have scarcity of many things. On the contrary the Kings Camp was increased by Germans. And Fernese encouraged by his expe∣ctation of having more men speedily from Burgony, as also from Spain and Italy, renewed all such works as were necessary for the taking of the City, and speedy reducing it to the Kings obedience. There were notwithstanding some amongst the besieged, who blinded with rage, and desirous to confound the privat with the publick evils, would have had them stand it out till the last gasp: but at last the more advised Councels prevailed. For the City having no hopes of suc∣cour, they foresaw it would be taken by force, and like Mastrick, plundered, and put to fire and sword. They therefore thought of a Parley, wherein they might have the best conditions they could get. The Princess was akin to the chief∣est of the Kings Camp; particularly to the Marquis of Rubays. Wherefore she by their means agreed to surrender up the City upon such conditions, as more ho∣nourable could not well be had. The Town was surrendred the last day save one of November; and the conditions were these. That the City should receive a full pardon from the King. That the Citizens should return to the true obedience of the Church and King. That those who would not live after the Catholick profession, might enjoy their goods any where out of the Country, That the souldiers should be suffered to march out with theirs Arms, bag∣age, and Colours flying. That the City should pay 20000 pound to keep from being sackt. And that the Princess of Espenoy might be suffered to go freely whether she pleased with all her wealth, goods, substance and family. Thus was Tornay yielded; and the Princess at her coming forth, was recei∣ved with such applause in the Kings Camp, as it might be judged she came forth not as Conquered, but as Conqueress: The news this mean while continued that the Duke of Alanson would be quickly in Flanders; and that without returning to France, he would come directly from England, and land in Zealand. The Archduke Mathias had till this time kept in the Low-Countries, and agita ted with many hopes, could never fix upon any. From the beginning he could not be Governour there by the Kings approbation. He had enjoy'd nothing but like∣lyhoods in the Rebels Government; and nothing but the Title in the manage∣ment of the Militia: yet he thought he merited by suffering. Wherefore disco∣vering the Rebels resolution of changing Prince, he flattered himself mainly up∣on that occasion, with new and ardent hopes. He omitted not to make those things be suggested which might make most for his advantage: and particular∣ly his Austrian bloud of Germany, which for so many years, and with such satis∣faction to the people had Governed Flanders. But being but little listned unto, and less considered, and afterwards excluded out of all, he was fain to be con∣tent, and to return to his friends, and former condition in Germany. VVhen therefore it was noised that Alanson was in England, and that he would be speedi∣ly in Flanders, Mathias tarryed no longer, but going by Cullen, past over the Rhine, and returned to his usual abode in the Emperours Court. This year end∣ed with his departure, and with the Signior d' Altapenna's indeavour to surprise Bergen ap Zome; which Town he was very near surprising: for he and his men
had already won one Gate, and were begun to get more inward; when the Ga∣rison betaking themselves to their Arms, and the people flocking from all parts, the Royalists were forced to go out, many of them being slain, and many woun∣ded. In the beginning of the year 1582. certain news was brought to Flan∣ders 1582. at last, that the Duke of Alanson was departed from England, with intenti∣on of landing in Zealand. After having been entertained many days, with much feasting and honourable treatment, he went from London, and within three days came to Flushing. The Queen made him be attended with a great Fleet of her ships which were commanded by Charls Howard Lord Admiral of England, and would have him waited upon by divers of the chiefest Lords of her King∣dom amongst which was the Earl of Lester, who was then in great Authority and favour with her. When Alanson was come to Flushing, he was received by Orange, Espenoy, and a great many other personages of quality who were come thither to that purpose. They brought him from thence to Midleburg, where stay∣ing a few days, he came to Antwerp attended by above 50 Flemish ships gloriously trimed; he landed upon the banks of Scheld, near the Citadel, and was met with an incredible applause, and concourse of people. After the wonted ceremonies of interchangeable oaths, he entred on horseback into the City, which was every where set out with triumphant Arches, and other publick demonstrations of joy for his arrival. Alanson being thus brought into his new Principality, it was not long ere he began to know that hardly was the appearances or shadow thereof left unto him. On the other side, the Flemish began quickly to comprehend that he had brought with him nothing but the outside of vain hopes, and of spe∣tious titles. He could not obtain any Forces of consequence from the King his brother; and from the Queen of England such and so many only, as by his means the Dominion of those Countries might rather be taken from the King of Spain, then enjoyed by himself. Wherefore the heat of that first welcome quickly cooled; and the Inhabitants of Antwerp began to take some distaste at the Duke in point of Religion. The Hereticks were already so prevalent there, as but very little share of exercise remained for the Catholicks; who had re∣course unto the Duke to remedy the oppression which they received. On the con∣trary, the others endeavoured by all means to continue their advantages: and though some satisfaction was at last given to the Catholicks, yet were not they therewithall quieted, nor did the Hereticks on their sides seem to be satisfied. But an untoward accident which happened not long after, had likely to have given him an ll favoured welcome, and to have indangered his life. Which was this, A young Spaniard of mean birth in Biscay, having resolved to kill Orange, and taking bothtime and place fitting for his purpose in Orange his own hous, discharg'd a mus∣ket in his face, and wounded him so as at the first he was thought to be dead. The noise being heard, many hasted thither, and astonished at the spectacle, without further adoe slew the offender. The news of this flew suddenly from the house to the Piazza, and from the Piazza to every least corner of the City. Nor is it to be said what a commotion it caused amongst the people. Every one ran with anxiety from one place to another to know the truth thereof; and lamenting one another, and as if not only the Father of the Country, but even the Father of e∣very particular Family had been slain, they bewailed the privat and publick mis∣fortune which they thought had befaln them. In this agitation it was whisper∣ed that the French had been the authors of this misdeed, that they might rid their hands of Orange, and thereby make the Duke of Alansons Authority the more free. The baser sort of people turning their commisseration into fury, ran head∣long to Alansons house intending to kill all the French that they should find there, and peradventure not to spare his own person. In this interim the first fear was seised in Orange his house, for the wound being searched, was found not to be mortal: the bullet had only past through both his cheeks beaten out some of his teeth, and occasioned the loss of much bloud, which for a while hindred his speech. But when he knew it was a Spaniard who had shot him, and heard what danger the French were in, and even Alanson himself, he writ some Tickets with him own hand, and sent abroad divers in his own name, who cleared the business, and freed the multitude of their suspitions. When all tumults were ceased, they
fell to search into the fact, that they might make the juster resentment. The most common opinion was, that the Bischeyard to gain the fine that was set by the Kings Proclamation upon Orange his head, and out of hopes of greater re∣wards, had rashly resolved to undertake the business. One Jaspar Annastro, a Spanish Merchant had a share therein, but he was broken, and therefore gone from Antwerp. And one Antony Venero, and a Votary of St Dominicks called Antony Timmermanno were put to death, and cruelly torn in pieces as complices in the misdeed. This accident caused a great commotion in the Confedrate Provinces: And the Prince of Parma hoping that thereby some advantage might result to the Kings affairs, was not falling on his behalf to doe what was fittest upon that oc∣casion. But Orange being quickly out of danger, and afterwards perfectly cured, all fear ceased amongst the Rebels, and they continued more firm then ever in their former resolutions. Whilst these things past thus in Antwerp, the Forces of both sides were not idle, though they did but little. Verdugo had made some further proceedings on the other side of the Rhine, and had taken some Towns in Friesland, and in the parts thereabouts. And on the contrary, the States had better secured the Towns of greater importance, and strove to preserve those advanta∣ges which they had got on that side. And they got one advantage of great mo∣ment at that time, by the taking of Sehink prisoner as he returned from Germany, being sent thither by Fernese to raise more Horse. On this side the Rhine they had at unawares assaulted the Town of Alst with some of their men, and taken it. And the Walloons had done the like to Gaesbeck, a Town not far distant from the other. But this mean while Fernese growing stronger in men, and yet more strong in hopes after the success of Tornay, and after the accident which had befallen Orange, resolved to besiege Odenhard one of the best esteem'd Towns in the Province of Flanders, both for its situation, traffick, and people. Odenhard lies upon the Scheld, almost in the mid-way between Tornay and Gaunt. It is be∣girt with a good Wall, and the Wall with a large Ditch: within the Walls it is furnisht with good Platforms; but it hath never a Royal Bulwark without, and therefore is but imperfectly fortified every where: It hath on one side an emi∣nent Rise, which commands the whole Town. Fernese incamped himself before it; but first he seemed as if he would besiege Menin, so to draw the greater number of the Enemy thither, and that Odenhard might be thereby the more weakned. And the effect did correspond with the design: For there were not left above 500 Souldiers in Odenhard, but under a very gallant Commander, called Frederick Borch; as he together with the Garrison made it appear to the very end of the Siege. The Kings Army having taken up their Quarters, Fernese quickly possest the Rise, and from thence began to play upon the Town with his Canon: he then came to the working of Trenches, and preparing of Batteries. The Prince was desirous to spare as much as might be the blood which is usually shed in As∣saults; wherefore his intention was to make a less bloody, but more secure Siege. Yet a great breach being made in a Ravelin which fenced the Gate, they made an Assault; but the event proved not fortunate: For a Bridge which was to serve for passage over the Ditch, and so to get upon the Breach, not being so long as was requisite, was with great disorder thrown down; and those within made such re∣sistance, as the Royalists were forced to give over the attempt. Wherefore Fer∣nese was the more confirmed in his former opinion of proceeding with greater caution, and in lieu of Assaults to use the Pick-axe and Mines. This Siege did very much vex the Flemish Rebels: wherefore mustering a considerable strength of Foot, which were almost all of them English and Scots, under Colonel Norris and Colonel Seaton, together with a good number of Rutters, they sent them in∣to the Province of Flanders, and disposed of them about Gaunt, intending to adde thereunto, and to endeavour the freeing of Odenhard. But Ferneses Forces being likewise increased by Germans and Walloons, and expecting the aforenamed others, he fortified himself so well on that side, as the Enemy could never bring in any the least succour into the Town. This mean while a Mutiny hapned in the Kings Camp for want of Pay, amongst some of the Germans; and the Enemy both within and without hoped to reap some advantage thereby. But the Mutiny
being in a few dayes quieted, and the Prince having by the punishment of some made the rest more obedient, the Enemy despaired of holding out longer. The Siege lasted notwithstanding from the beginning of April till almost the end of June: And the Town was surrendred upon such Conditions, as the Garrison marched out honourably, and the Townsmen were contented. Soon after the Royalists took Lira also, a great Town in the bowels of Brabant, not many houres march from Antwerp, and therefore very proper to annoy that City. There was in it, amongst others, Captain William Simple, a Scotch-man, with his Foot-Company of the same Nation. Simple holding secret intelligence with Altapenna, he under some other colourable pretence brought him in by night, and driving out the rest of the Flemish garrison, put the Town into the hands of the Royalists. The Flemish seeing these continual losses, not any assistance appearing as yet from Alanson, and not being very well satisfied with him before his coming to Flanders, they could no longer forbear breaking forth into sharp and spitefull speeches against him. Where are (said they) these so many promised Forces? where the Armies which would suddenly fall from France down into Flanders? and where the helps which should also come from England? That upon these assured hopes the Flemish had chosen, declared, and received him for their Prince; and that in lieu thereof what had he brought them save only vain Titles, and all other vain Appearances? That his so many in vain reiterated promises were every day renewed by him, but no per∣formance seen. That this mean while their losses were still increased, and consequently the Enemies atchievements. That by the taking of Tournay, the Prince of Parma had gotten the whole Country of the Walloons into his hands. That from Odenhard he might goe even to the wals of Gaunt, and from Lira to the wals of Antwerp. That his Army was already ingrost with Germans; that he expected Recruits from Burgony, and soon after from Spain and Italy: So as now how did Flanders swarm with Foreigners? and in what danger were the chiefest Cities of the Flemish Union? That their new Princes succours would come just then, when they should make not the strength, but the scorn of his new Principality the greater. These and the like Complaints did the Flemish make against Alanson and the French. Nor did they spare Orange himself, complaining that under pretence of procuring the publike felicity of the Country, he had rather minded his own pri∣vate advantages. He was not ignorant of these the passions of the Commonalty; but knowing very well how to make use of them, he was not offended that the vulgar should vent them; and maintaining such correspondencie as was needful with the graver sort, and minding with them the carrying on of the common de∣signs, he slackned not a whit from his fervencie in advancing Alansons affairs. When the first Ceremonies of the new Principality were ended in Antwerp, A∣lanson past by Sea with Orange into the Province of Flanders, and made his solemn entry first into Bruges, and then into Gaunt. Here they stayed, expecting the Forces which were to come from without, and to reinforce those that were within. Those Souldiers which were first sent to succour Odenhard, were now almost within sight of Gaunt. But Fernese being past from hopes to manifest effects, had received the Militia which was expected from farthest abroad; which consisted of two Brigadoes of Spanish Foot, under the Camp-masters Christopher Man∣dragone, and Peter Paze,; and of two other Italian Brigadoes, under the Camp∣masters Camillo de Marchesi del Monte, and Mario Cardoine; together with many Troops of Horse of both those Countries. He then delayed no longer; but picking 6000 Foot and 2000 Horse out of the Army, he went to find out the Enemy. His Quarters were (as hath been said) near the wals of Gaunt in a Village well intrenched. At first the Enemy seemed not to refuse battel; they drew out in good order, but went not far from their Trenches, not from the shelter of the wals of the City which were well furnisht with Artillery. Yet did not the Royalists cease advancing, but skirmisht with the Enemy; hoping that as the skirmish should grow hot, they might be brought to a full battel. But the Enemy making valiant resistance, and yet loth to lose his advantage, kept still in good order, till at last they resolved to draw nearer to the wals of Gaunt, as to a place of more safety. The Kings men advancing charged the Enemy very
fiercely; and they, facing about, and sustaining the Charge with their Horse, retreated very valiantly and in good order to where they would be. Alanson and Orange stood upon the wals looking upon this action, and encouraging their men without, and assisting them with the Artillery from within, they made their Retreat the more noble, and the more secure. This Combat lasted many hours, being much more then a bare skitmish, and much less then a joyn'd Battel. The Kings men lost most; and of the Italians, Ferrante Gonzaga was in particular grievously wounded. Of the Enemies, amongst others, Monsieur de Sansoval and Monsieur de Rochepot won great praise; both of them being French Gentle∣men that were come with Alanson. The Enemy being retreated, Fernese did for a while keep his men in good order, that he might to their faces taxe the Enemy for refusing battel all that day, and challenge them to it again: But seeing they did not stir, he resolved at last to retreat also, and to bethink himself of somwhat else. 'Twas said that those Forces which were to come from France into Flan∣ders to serve Alanson, were a gathering up about Cambray. Fernese therefore turn'd his men thitherward to oppose them: But understanding afterwards that the said French were resolved to enter by Dunkirk, he being more at liberty, be∣girt the Castle of Cambresis and took it. He then threatned to besiege Cambray, but they were only threats: For winter now drawing on, hindred him from pro∣secuting his design; and moreover necessity called upon him to oppose the Ene∣my elswhere; who seeing Fernese so far off, and hoping thereby to reap some ad∣vantage assaulted and took Gaesbeck in Brabant, and soon after they likewise took the Town of Mega upon the Mause. But Fernese returning speedily upon them, he retook Gaesbeck, took Nienove, and secured Lira, which was in some danger. Verdugo this mean while continued making further progress on the other side the Rhine: He had tryed the Town of Lochem, and had lain some moneths about it; but not being able to get the Town by siege, he easily took Stenwick afterwards by surprise. On the contrary, the Enemy had stormed the Town of Hasselt, situated upon the River Haa, and much advantaged their affairs on that side. But the whole body of both Armies was reduced to this side the Rhine: And now after so long expectation, Alansons men were come. They were not in all above 3000 Switzers Foot, 2500 French Foot, and 1000 French Horse. Their Leaders had brought them into Flanders by the way of Dunkirk: And because winter was already begun, 'twas fitter thinking of putting them into garrisons, then of drawing them into the field. Their chief Commander was the Duke of Mompensiere, a Prince of the blood-royal; and with him was the Mar∣shal Biroun, a very gallant Gentleman, and who was highly esteemed through∣out all France for his valour in war. The men were distributed to winter in Dun∣kirk, in Newport, in Ostend, in Bruges, in Dixmund, and in Terramonde, and in some other part of the Country of Vas; all which were garrisons within the Pro∣vince of Flanders. Alanson having been solemnly received in Bruges and in Gaunt, was come to Antwerp. Here all the other French Commanders that were newly come, staid with him. But when they saw how little account was made of A∣lanson, that he hardly enjoyed the bare title of Soveraignty, that the Government was wholly in Orange his hands, that the Flemish did already discover themselves not very well minded towards the French, and that in effect they did not pay the Duke the monies which they had promised him for the maintenance of his men, nor did adde such men of their own as were needful to his: It is not to be ex∣prest how much the Marshal, amongst others, fretted within himself, as also did the other Commanders that were come with him. Those who were of best esteem with the Duke, and who were come first in with him, were likewise sensible of the same shame and anger, insomuch as some of the forwardest of them could no longer contain themselves. Entring then into a very secret consultation, they re∣solved to perswade the Duke to ground his new Principality upon Arms, since the other Form of exercising it, which was prescribed him, was altogether vain and unworthy. Monsieur de Fervaches, a Gentleman of a very Noble family, very discreet, and stout, and who during the Civil wars of France was also made Mar∣shal of that Crown, was in great favour with the Duke. This man easily arro∣gating unto himself the chief place in this design, took upon him the care of
propounding it to the Duke; and taking a fitting time spake thus unto him. How much (most gracious Sir!) had we who have the honour to enjoy the prime places in your Highness his service, rather never have come into Flanders, then in coming hither find the Royal blould of France so much vilified? consider, Sir! your birth; and then fee whether your present condition here doth correspond therewithall or no. You the only brother of the King; you the Dolphine of France; you who are like∣ly every hour to succeed to the greatest Monarchy of Europe: in what posture, I beseech you are you now here in Flanders? You the Ruler of these Countries? You the Duke of Brabant? Earl of Flanders, Holland and Zealand, and Lord of these Confederate Provinces? 'Tis true these are your Titles: these are your appearing greatnesses; but set these vain shadows aside, tell me I pray you, what do you enjoy here which makes you not rather subject to obey, then to Command? You cannot say a word but Orange must first put it into your mouth: you can frame no designe whatsoever, which must not first be assented to by the Soveraignty of the States Ge∣neral, nay by the particular States, not only of every Province, but of every City and meanest Town therein. And where are the monies they premised you? where are their paid men? where so many other conditions so ill made good by them? 'Tis Orange then that is rather the true Prince. And he will have the people to be their own Soveraigns, to allure them still more with the bait of Liberty, that he himself may hereafter the more easily invade it, and reduce it to final slavery. And truly what honour is not given to him even before your face? whether doth not his opinion reach? and the authority of his name? And will your Highness sit down still by such a scorn? will you forget your self, your Royal bloud, and your glorious Nation? how much better will it become you to accompany your right with force of Arms? there is no ruling without Forces. Nor was the bare consent of the people ever sufficient to make a Princes Government of secure as it ought to be. The people alter hourly: and who hath had better tryal hereof then your self? hardly was the Ceremonies of your first reception over, when out of a slight suspition of the common people, you and all yours ran bazard of your lives Little less then 6000 choice foot, and 1000 choice horse are brought hither for your service: to boot with a great number of other French horse and foot who are here in service under the Union of the Confederates. The for∣mer are disposed of in divers of the chiefest Towns of Flanders. Wherefore then do not you resolve to make your self Master of all those places at once? but chiefly why do you not make this City of Antwerp your own? when you shall have made your self Master of these places, as you may easily do; how can you doubt but that all France will be suddenly up in arms, and that the whole Kingdom will come in to your assistance? and that the King your brother will endeavour by all means to pro∣cure so fair an acquisition to his Crown? an acquisition of Countries, which your Royal bloud hath in former times in a good part governed and enjoy'd? you will then be Prince of Flanders indeed. Then must Orange and the rest receive Laws from you, and not you from them. And your new Empire being thus grounded upon force, you may afterwards as you shall please, use that other way of intreaties. It is not rashly nor unadvisedly that I give you this Councel. It is the common opinion of all the best Commanders of your Forces. We all strive who shall contribute most to your greatness, and raise up your honour as much as it is now abased here. I who am the first to advise you hereunto, will be one of the first who shall help to bring it to pass: and shall account it my greatest glory either to live to see this done, or to die in the en∣deavouring of it At the hearing of this Discourse Alanson was much more confused then per∣swaded. On the one side the difficulties appeared to be very great which this ad∣vice brought with it; which he could not sufficiently discern. And on the other side, he desired it might be effected; but was not so resolute as he ought to have been to go about it. After awhiles wavering within himself, he (as was his cu∣stom) left himself to be disposed of as the rest should please. Wherefore his an∣swer was, That Ferraches, and the rest of the Commanders should do what they thought best for his safety and advantage. They were not long about it. The resolution was, That upon a certain prefixt day, (which was appointed to be the 17 day of January) all the Dukes souldi∣ers should take an occasion to mutiny in the several places where they were quar∣tered,
and should drive the Flemish Garisons out of them. The greatest diffi∣culty lay in the making of themselves Masters of Antwerp. They could not do it by open force, the City being so great and populous. And if they should go about to surprise it, they might likewise meet with many impediments: yet ne∣cessity pleaded for the latter: but because neither could it be done by surprisal, unless at the same time that force should be begun to be used within the City, an∣other sufficient force might be without; it was resolved that a good strength of the Dukes horse and foot, should be brought at the time appointed into some Villages near the Walls of the City, as if it were by the way of passage. The new year 183 was then begun, and the colds were exceeding sharp. The States therefore hoped by means of the Ice, which makes the low fields of Friesland more passable then any other time of the year, to do somewhat for their advan∣tage in those parts. Wherefore they desired the Duke to go with some good forces into Ghelderland to increase their other forces on the other side the Rhine; and to this end they had made certain sums of mony be payed unto him. Nothing could have faln out more fortunately for the French then this. So as about the midst of Jenuary all their men save such as were to stay in their Garisons in the Province of Flanders, to make themselves Masters of those Towns as was resol∣ved upon, were in the Villages about Antwerp; this mean while there were ma∣ny French with the Duke in Antwerp, and particularly the chief of the Nobility; as well for the honour which they rendred unto his person, as for some other feigned occasions which the Duke had purposely caused arise at that conjuncture of time. Yet few were acquainted with the designe, which was thus ordered. On the 17 day the people which were lodged about the Town, were to be stirring early in the morning, as if they were to march towards Friesland. The Duke was to go out by St James his gate, which was the nearest, as if he were to make the same journy; when he should be gone out, those that remained behind were suddenly to possess themselves of that gate. Another gate near unto it, called Cesars gate, was suddenly to be possest also. The Curtain which runs between these two gates, being easily won, the Artillery which were upon it, were to be turned upon the Town, for the greater terror of the Inhabitants: the souldiers that were without should suddenly enter the City and joyn with those that were within the Town. And for a token to know themselves the better by, the Dukes souldiers should cry, The Town is taken, may the Mass prosper. and particular order was taken that above all things the French should not be suf∣fered to plunder the City, lest the souldiers might through avarice be diverted, and so the Inhabitants be the more incensed to rise up against them. In all sur∣prises secrecy is of mighty importance, to have them succeed well, they must be done before they be declared. But it is often times found, that many orders can∣not be executed because they are not understood. And those being confused, the whole designe must needs suddenly vanish. The business coming to the birth, the Duke, according to the agreement, went on horseback from his house, and with many others in his company, rid towards St James his gate, so to get out of the City. When he was gotten out, those that staid behind seemed to fall to∣gether by the ears, and laying their hands upon their swords, turned upon them that kept the gates; and killing some, and driving away the rest, they were easily masters of the Gate. The people flocking together at the noise hereof, were much confused at such a novelty. The Antwerpians were not at this time free of suspition, seeing so many French men amongst them; yet could they not fear such a thing as this. They were in some posture of taking up arms, upon any occasion of tumult that might arise. The French this mean while possest them∣selves easily likewise of the Caesarean gate, and of the abovesaid Curtain. Here∣upon the novelty appeared the greater on their side, and the commotion much greater on the behalf of the Inhabitants: and chiefly when the French began to run up and down the streets, and in a loud and hostile manner to pronounce these words, The Town is taken, may the Mass prosper.
At the same time 15 Foot-Companies, and 10 Troops of Horse entred the Town; and the Switzers being further off then the rest, were the longer in coming. In this interim their happened an accident which much disordered the French∣mens business. S. James's Gate had a Percullis to shut out all entrance when need should require, upon a sudden. Were it either that the French had not thought upon it, or that they had neglected it, there was none of them that took care of it. Which the Antwerpians failed not to make use of; for they threw down the Percullis, and so inhibited all entrance at that gate. The French-men were entred by this gate, and by this gate were the Switzers also to enter. The Inhabitants were this mean while still in greater commotion, and had better armed themselvs; they were at this time very numerous, and by the so long experience of war, and their own so many sufferings, well verst in Arms. The French-men at first had the better: But having had the first slaughter of the people, believing that they should not afterward meet with any considerable resistance, and that their fellows that were without would share with them rather in the prey then in the peril; neglecting, or peradventure not having received the Orders from those few that were within, they fell immediately to plunder. The people then incensed with anger and fury, joyned their Forces together, and behaved themselves valiantly against the French: The love of their Country, Children, Parents, substances, and of themselves, added to their strength; but when 'twas known that no more of the Dukes men could come in by S James's gate, the Antwerpians were so en∣couraged, and the French discouraged, as the faces of affairs began wholly to alter. The Antwerpians without any further delay recovered the Caesarean gate, and then setting upon those that guarded the aforesaid Curtain or Line, drove them easily away, and threw many of them down from off the wall; deceiving those that were without, who thought it to be an effect of the surprise. This being done, the French that were within the Town could not much longer resist the Towns∣men, they were every where encompast by them. Of the Citizens, those that were not armed, joyn'd with those that were armed; and even the women with the men, to make at first the better defence, and afterwards to take the better re∣venge. So as the French-men having no whither to fly unto in the City, and not receiving any succour from without, for any thing that the Duke and the other Commanders that were gone forth with him could doe, they were all at last ei∣ther wounded, slain, or taken prisoners. About 1500 were slain, and of those some of the best both for birth and valour. Those that were wounded and taken prisoners were almost as many; and these were also likely to have perished, had not Orange by his authority interposed and saved them. Of the Townsmen not many more then 00 were slain, but a great many more hurt. Orange had some occasions which kept him from waiting upon Alanson out of the Town, as otherwise he had in honour been bound to doe. And because he lay in the Castle, which stands a pretty distance from the most frequented part of the City, he could not come in so soon as was needful; besides, he thought it at first to be but some squabble between the looser sort of the People and the Souldiers. Not∣withstanding there were some who suspected his carriage in this business, as if he had had a hand in the surprisal. But how was it possible to believe, that changing his principles, he should destroy his first ends, and serve in stead of commanding? And therefore it was rather to be believed, that when he understood the truth, he thought it better to quiet the minds on all sides, and not to break off the A∣greement, which after so long, so many, and so doubtfull endeavours had been made with Alanson. Thus ended the intended surprisal of Antwerp. The com∣mon opinion was, that the Duke of Mompensier, and the Marshal Bironne were averse to this design; and that judging it not feasible, as partaking more of rash∣ness then of stoutness, they had oftentimes endeavoured to disswade the Duke from it, but still in vain; for that the rest who were the authors of it, and who were more in favour with him, had made him too fond of it. The surprisals of Dunkirk, Dixmund, Terremond and of some other less considerable places, suc∣ceeded better. In the other Towns of greater consequence, were it either that the French were too inferior in numbers to the Flemish, or that Fortune was more favourable to the latter then to the former, they took no effect at all. The Duke
much confused, and not knowing what to doe, went from the walls of Antwerp to Terramonde, and from thence by letters, messages, and particularly by Orange his interposition, he began to use all means to return again to his former good in∣telligence and agreement with the Flemish. This so unexpected design of the French against the Flemish being divulged, it is not to be said how much the Confederate Provinces were troubled at it. But the Province of Flanders was most troubled, wherein the design was laid, and in a good part effected. In so much as Gaunt, Bruges, and generally all the Flemicant part of the Province, broke forth into grievous complaints against the Duke, and seemed to be fully minded no longer to endure Alansons Principality. The rest of the Provinces were of the same opinion. But Orange his sole power was sufficient to make his sense prevail over all those who were of a contrary mind. At first he did very much blame this action of the French, that he might be of more credit after∣wards in excusing them. He laid the fault much more upon the Advisers, then upon the Duke; alleadging, That of his own nature he was a Prince of great goodness; and that he was rather inforced by the others then advised to do what he had done. That an a∣greement should not by any means be broken which had formerly been ripened by so many consultations, and at last through so many difficulties established. That it was apparent, if it should be broken, their affairs would be in worse con∣dition then before. For France would be thereby alienated and offended, where∣as otherwise they might receive favour and advantages from thence. That some∣times a great disorder proves very beneficial. That therefore it was to be belie∣ved, that the French by this rash action would learn to be better advised in their future proceedings: and the Flemish on the contrary would better satisfie their duties on their behalf. And finally that by all means it was necessary to piece up with Alanson: so to get the French out of the places which they were pos∣sessed of by way of Treaty; since that to go about to get them by force, would be both a bloudy, difficult, and uncertain business: and that the mean while the King of Spains forces would the more freely, and with the more advantage o∣verrun all places. The Antwerpians, and all the rest being wrought upon by Orange his Autho∣rity, and by reason, listned to a new agreement with Alanson. He first excused himself, and by express Messengers, representing the wrong that was done to his men by not paying them; and that afterwards it was not in his power to hinder them. Proceeding from hence to Treaties, The Duke obliged himself to re∣tire for the present to Dunkirk, taking with him but a reasonable number of horse and foot; to leave the other Towns free to the Flemish; taking a new Oath to imploy all his souldiery in all faithfullness in the common service of himself, and of the Provinces. On the other side, the French prisoners were set at liberty; the Dukes men had some moneys paid them, and he was promised that they should be well treated in all other kinds afterwards. And so affairs returned to their former condition between the Duke and the Provinces: but rather in a feigned, then real way of Demonstration; for indeed there never past any good correspondency betweem them afterward, though the King of France by very efficacious endeavours, and by Agents of his own, had strove to appease the Flemish, and to confirm them in their former favour to his brother. The Prince of Parma hoped some notable advantage might accrue to the Kings service, from this occasion which had so exasperated the Flemish against the French. To this purpose he opportunely moved the chief Cities of Flanders and Brabant, which were alienated from the King; thinking that if he could re∣duce those two important Provinces wholly to their allegiance, the restmight the more easily be reduced afterwards either by the way of Treaty or force. But these his endeavours wrought no other effect, then the others had done which he had used when Orange was wounded. He therefore resolved wholly to use force; wherein he found himself already so far to exceed the enemy, as he doubted not but that by this means only he might promise unto himself all good success in the Kings affairs. Before Alansons Frenchmen had endeavoured the aforesaid no∣velties, Monsieur de Bonivette, one of their Commanders, had at unawares taken
the Town of Eyndoven in Campigni, which is a very considerable part of Bra∣bant. Which Fernese was not slow in regaining; to which purpose he dispatched away Count Charls Mans field towards it with good forces. On the other side, the Confederate Flemish desired greatly to keep that Town in their hands; wher∣fore after their agreement with Alanson, they carried it so as some of his men went thitherward to make Mansfield raise the siege. But he had already so forti∣fied himself about it, as those within not receiving any relief from those without, they were at last forced to yield. The French which were in Eyndoven went to joyn with the other French which were with Marishall Byronne in Brabant; on that side which lies nearest Holland. Here he stormed the Castle of Woude, and took some other places thereabouts. On the contrary part, Turnault, Ho∣strat and Diste fell into Mansfields hands, with some other places of less moment. This mean while Fernese arrived, who presently marched towards Byronne. The French had fortified themselves towards the Town of Rosendal: but yet the Prince assaulted them with such resolution, as they thought it their safest course to retreat to within the Town; which they could not do in such order, but that what by slaughter, running away, and by being taken prisoners, they lost a great many of their men, and Byronn's self was hurt in the foot. Fernese resolved af∣terward to take Herentale, and therefore incompassed it with considerable forces. But understanding that the Duke of Alanson either for the small satisfaction he received in Flanders, or for some other affairs in France, was gon from Dunkirk to Call is; Fernese changing his mind, marched suddenly with all his Camp to∣wards Dunkirk, to recover that Town which stands upon the Sea, and which for other considerations is of very great consequence. There was but a weak Gari∣son in it, and the Townsmen could not be worse minded towards the French. The States got Bironne to go with those French which he had with him to succour it. But such was the abhorrition which the Flemish had for the French, as they could effect nothing in time to any purpose; wherefore Fernese within a few days re∣covered that Town, suffering the French to march out with all honourable conditions. He likewise recovered Newport, a Town of great consequence likewise upon the sea-side. And from thence he tryed to take Ostend, a Town up∣on the same level: but he found it so strongly situated, and so well provided of men, as he would not spend any long time in besieging it; and leave so many o∣ther happy opportunities which presented themselves unto him in divers other parts. Having soon recovered Dixmund, he besieged the City of Ypri; and set divers other practises on foot in Gaunt, Bruges, and other Towns in the Flemi∣can part of Flanders, to draw that whole Province again to the Kings obedi∣ence. This mean while the year 1584 began; nor did the Winter hinder the Anno 1584, continuance of the siege before Ypri. The Rebels endeavoured oft to relieve it; but being either hindred or defeated, they could never effect it. The siege endu∣red till the middle of April; and the City was surrendred vpon almost the same conditions as Tornay had formerly been. The Prince of Parma fared as fortu∣nately in the getting of Bruges by intelligence. The Prince of Semay, eldest son to the Duke of Ariscot was in it. The father adhered unto the King, but the son changing sides upon various pretences, adhered afterwards to the States. And the Flemican part of Flanders was governed by him in their names, and in the name of Alanson. The son being sollicited by his father to come post to Bru∣ges, obeyed him: for he knew how fitting an opportunity this would be to make amends for his former error, and to reingratiate himself with the King, by re∣ducing such a City as this under his obedience, and himself again under his ser∣vice. They came then to conditions; and the largest which upon such an occa∣sion could be demanded were granted, relation always being had to their giving due obedience to the Church and to the King. This hapned in May: and this helped to further the Kings affairs in many other things in the same Province. At the same time Verdugo had very much advanced the Kings affairs on the further side of the Rhine by the taking of Zutfen, He got this Town of such impor∣tance by surprise. And the enemy immediately endeavoured to regain it; where∣fore Count Hollach was sent thither with good forces, and was sate down before it. Verdugo being thus begirt, craved relief, and Fernese knew very well how
needfull it was to send it him. But being busied in so many other affairs on this side the Rhine, which grew every day more ripe, he could not assist him so soon nor with such Forces as he willingly would have done, or as the occasion required. Count Aremberg was at this time about the Rhine, being sent thither by the Prince of Parma with a considerable strength of Foot and Horse, to assist Er∣nestus of Bavaria, newly chosen Archbishop of Colen, and to exclude the former Archbishop Truxes, who was deposed for having gone about to marry, and for sustaining his Apostasie from the Church by favour of the Heretical faction there∣abouts. The good cause prevailed at last: wherefore Fernese ordered Aremberg to go either with all, or a good part of his Forces to the relief of Zutfen. And this fell out so luckily likewise, as Hollack was forced to raise his siege, and to re∣treat. In this interim Bironne, with the rest of the lately come French, was gone from Flanders, the Flemish having afforded them commodity to do so by Sea, for they could not without great danger have gone by Land. Diffidences and di∣stastes did still increase on both parts. Nor was Orange's authority at last suffi∣cient to reconcile Alansons affairs, though he still laboured to doe it; by reason of the news which was come from France, that the King had declared himself much more freely in his Brothers behalf, in his interests of Flanders; and that he was much better pleased with him then he formerly had been. Orange took occasion hereby to induce the States to send the Signor of Schonowel purposely to congratulate with Alanson for this; endeavouring by this means the more to engage both parties in the formerly establisht resolutions. But soon after came other news, that Alanson was dead in the Castle of Tierry, after a long sickness, with some signs that poyson had been also used. Thus he dyed, not being above 30 years old. He was a Prince, of whom it might be questioned whether he had been the causer of greater troubles in France or in Flanders. He was alwayes more ruled by others then by himself, wavering in all his actions, were it either out of weakness of understanding, or easiness of nature. Suffering himself therefore in France to be carried away sometimes by one Faction, sometimes by another, and afterwards abandoning them with equal easiness, he applied himself again to the Court-Faction, there to receive more scorn then respect. Wherefore either weary of expecting, or despairing of at∣chieving greater preferments in the Kingdom, he with the like fickleness was per∣swaded to seek for them abroad; and therefore passing into Flanders, he carried Forces with him thither, and with those Forces new Troubles. For what remains, his Conditions both of body and mind did no wayes correspond with his Birth: He was low of stature, and not very well shaped; he was notwithstanding of a gracious and lively aspect: Nor were his actions so altogether worthy of blame, but that they were in many things praise-worthy; he was kind, liberal, not much given to pleasures, and naturally inclined to follow the best advices, unless his Favourites prevailed too far with him to imbrace the worst. He dyed, when to∣gether with his years his hopes did most flourish: For the King having no hopes of Issue, he did not only promise to himself to enjoy the Principality of Flanders, but by a greater fortune to succeed to the Crown of France. His death was accompanied by the like of Oranges Alanson dyed the begining of June, and Orange left this life in the beginning of July following. The manner thus. One Baldasar Serack a Burgonian, a man but of mean birth, but of some natural endowments, had wrought himself into his acquaintance, and more do∣mestically into that of his Followers, with an intention to kill him. Orange was then in the Town of Delf in Holland, about divers publike affairs; one of the chiefest whereof was, the better to reestablish the affairs of Alanson. Sirack ta∣king his opportunity, and coming to Orange in his chamber under pretence of some important business, he shot him with a Pistol in the flank, and instantly slew him, he not being able before his death to speak any one word. Then taking him∣self to his heels, he was got so far before he was overtaken as he was already got∣ten upon the Town-wall with intention of throwing himself down into the Ditch, and so swim out, when he was overtaken by those that followed him, who took him alive, and delivered him up to the hands of Justice. They endeavoured by most cruel torments to draw from him the reality of the act; and the common belief
was, that he would have confest he had received orders for it, and that he expected a reward from Spain. But they could never get any thing from him, save only that he had slain Orange, moved thereunto only by himself, and to merit much more thereby from God then from the King. He was afterwards condemned to die and suffered death by the most cruel punishments that might be. Thusdyed William of Nassaw Prince of Orange, in the 52 year of his Age. He was a man born certainly for very great renown; if contented with his own peculiar Fortune, he had not through precipices sought after a greater. The Emperour Charles the 5. and his Son Philip the 2. did undoubtedly alwayes acknowledge him to be their chiefest Subject in all Flanders: and each of them seemed to strive with the other which should most favour him or put a higher esteem upon him. He was notwithstanding still in the condition of a Subject; but he had so high-pitcht thoughts, as would not suffer him to be at quiet under the condition of a Prince. He aspired therefore to raise himself thereunto, as hath been seen, by the Revolts of Flanders. And the heat of his ambition being still carried on by the ordering of his designs, he had brought his ends to that pass, as had he lived there was little doubt to be made but that he would at least have been Prince of Holland and Zealand, Vigilancie, Industry, Liberality, Elo∣quence, and a quick insight into any business, did vie in him with Ambition, Fraud, Audacity, Greediness, and with an application of himself to all Natures. And these his good and bad Qualities were accompanied with all others which the most skilfull School of Ruling could teach. At all publike Meetings, and in all other kind of Negotiations, no man knew better then he how to dispose of mens minds, how to wheel about opinions, how to colour pretences, how to hasten business, or how to prolong them; nor in brief, how more artificially to take his advantage by all other means. He was therefore thought much better at the government of Civil affairs, then at the Military profession. He altered his Re∣ligion, according to his Interests. Whilst he was a Child in Germany, he was a Lutheran: Passing into Flanders, he seemed to be a Catholick: At the begining of the Revolts, he declared himself to be a favourer of the new Sects, but not an open professor of any of them; till at last he seemed to follow Calvinism, as that which of all other Sects is most contrary to the Catholick religion, which is maintained by the King of Spain.
THE HISTORY OF THE WARS OF FLANDERS, Written by CARDINAL BENTIVOGLIO. The Second Part. BOOK III. The Contents. In this Book the memorable Siege of Antwerp is described. The Prince of Parma re∣solves upon this enterprise the rather, because Orange is dead, and by reason of the great perturbancie of the Consederate Provinces. He sits down before that City. Its great advantages both in situation, and in all things else. Fernese in the first place treats of shutting up the Scheld, to hinder all succour on that side. To this purpose he designs a Bridge, and the difficulties in making it are mentioned: How∣soever it is resolvod to be made. Fernese begins it: He raiseth a Fort-Royal at each head thereof; and these greater Forts are accompanied here and there with lesser. Oppositions made by the besieged. Their chief Fort at Lillo upon the Scheld. By this means the Antwerpians receive great Aids from the Hollanders and Zealanders; and therefore they pass freely up and down the River. Fernese causeth a Navigable Ditch to be cut, the better to bring the materials which were requisite for the Bridge. Hereby the labours are increased. Fernese endeavours likewise to keep the Enemy from succour by Lillo on the Land-side: And therefore secures himself still better there by a Counterdike. What is to be understood by a Dike and Counterdike Rubais takes the particular care of the Bridge, and of some men of War to oppose those of the Enemy. The Antwerpians begin to be trou∣bled: They use divers means both in France and in England for succour. The Lord of S. Aldegonde endeavours by a perswasive Oration to encourage them as much as he can. They therefore resolve to make all manly resistance. Divers of their preparations to that purpose. They build a Ship vastly great. Their Fire∣ships. They first make use of them to the prejudice of the Bridge, which is already perfected; but doe no great good thereby, nor doth the great Ship prove more for∣tunate. They try their Fire-ships again, but still to no purpose. Then they bend all their might to prejudice the Counterdike, and hope by that means to bring in succour. Their first Assault does no good: They with better order, and greater
Forces try a second Assault. A bloody business thereupon. Fortune varies the dangers, and at last gives the victory to the Royalists. The Antwerpians treat of a Surrender, and after many difficulties deliver up the Town. NEver was the loss of Father, Benefactor, or Prince so be∣wailed, as was Orange his death by those of the Confede∣rate Provinces. And since they could no longer enjoy his person alive, they without any manner of delay substi∣tuted his son Maurice in his place, a Youth but of 16 years of age, conferring all those self-same honours and offices upon him, which they with so liberal a hand had bestowed on his Father. Count Buren, Orange his eldest son, was still detained in Spain, being sent thither by the Duke of Alva, as hath been said: And therefore the Confederate Provinces chose Maurice to succeed in his Fathers commands. This Maurice was Orange his second son, and by his second wife, Anne of Saxony. They gave Maurice the Count of Hollack for his Lieutenant, and to be assisting to his youth in the Government of Arms. The Prince of Parma hoped that this novelty might occasion some great commotion in the Confederate Provinces, which would make for the Kings advantage; judging that having lost such a Governour, as their councels were thereby weakened, so would their courages be also. And truly so it fell out with many particular men. But in the generall, this action did so in∣horrid and so incense the people. as they resolved to continue their former reso∣lutions more obstinately then before, and to keep dead Orange his sense still alive. Wherefore Fernese soon saw that he was to place all his hopes in Arms. He had then a very strong Army; and such were his advantages over his Enemies, as he thought he might assuredly hope yet for much greater every day. From the time that he had besieged Mastrick, he had still had a great desire to begirt Antwerp. But the then difficulties, and those which every day arose, would never suffer him to undertake a business of so great consequence. But all things seeming now to smile upon such a design, he would no longer delay the doing of it. We there∣fore will here proceed on to the description of this Siege: which we will doe with all brevity, and yet with great diligence; that by the one we may shun the tediousness of trivial things, and by the other present you as punctually as may be with so cry'd up an enterprise. And doubtlesly such and so memorable was this action, as by the common opinion it was sufficient of it self alone to make Alexander Fernese his merits be very highly valued by the Church and King, and his honour immortalized by the world. Antwerp lies on the right side of the Seheld, and extending its walls for a long space on that side which looks towards the River, it afterward makes a great compass toward the other which commands the Fields. That River cannot be ma∣stered by a more noble City, nor that City watered by a more noble River. Every one knows how Antwerp flourisht before the wars, both in the number of Inha∣bitants, in the beauty of buildings, and in merchandizing: But howsoever, still afterwards one of the greatest Commerces of all the Northern parts is in it. Which is chiefly occasioned by the commodiousness of the Scheld, it being a River of so great a breadth and depth, and ebbing and flowing so far into the Sea, as it is there capable even of the greatest Vessel which sails upon the Sea. Towards the fields side the City is invironed with one of the stateliest Wals that can be seen, as well for the breadth of the Platform within, as for the noble Ba∣stions without; and the Ditch is every where answerable. On the other side to∣wards the River, the River it self serves for a defence, and therefore on that side there is only a single wall. The platform of the wall towards the fields is of such a breadth, as many rowes of Trees stand round about it, so as it serves no less for delight then for defence. The Citadel enjoyed formerly also its praises apart: But being fallen into the Rebels hands, those sides of it were only maintained by them which lay towards the fields, and all the rest which lay towards the City were slighted. Antwerp is in, or to say better, joyns upon Brabant; of it self making one of the ancient 17 Provinces, by the name of the Marquisat of the sacred Empire. The Province of Flanders joyns upon the contrary side of the
River, which therefore partakes thereby of all the advantages afforded both by o large a River, and of a City of such Merchandizing. Here therefore had the Flemish placed the scene of all their most weighty negotiations; and the situa∣tion of the City, and its other advantages to withstand all sieges being considered, they could not dream of ever losing it by siege, but rather be confident of always preserving it. On the lands side, so strong a Wall promised them all safety. And as for shutting up the River, and keeping the City from being relieved by water, they thought Fernese would never be able to do it both in respect of the nature of the River it self, and by reason of their Naval power, whereby they were wholly Masters of it. These difficulties were not unknown to Fernese; but yet he thought them not to be such but that they might be overcome. He saw that in the first place all succour must be cut off; and that consequently the River was to be blocked up, whereby it might continually be supply'd. And therefore laying aside all thought of assault, he resolved to besiege the City, and to build such a bridge over the Scheld, as might master the violence of the River it self, as also the enemies ships. When he should have bereft them of relief by water, he doubted not but that he might much more easily do the same by land, since he was so superior in forces, as he might at his pleasure be Master of the field every where. About three leagues beneath Antwerp the Scheld makes a great Arch and here the ships do usually alter either their sails, or their course, and oftentimes do make som stay: wherfore that place is very opportune either to facilitate or to hinder the na∣vigation of the River. The enemy had at this time two forts upon the banks of that Arch; the greater was called Lillo, being the name of a neighbouring village: and the other on the opposite bank was called the Fort of Lifechensuch Fernese there∣fore first of all endeavour'd to take both these at unawares, that he might make his advantage thereof in the siege. The Marquis of Rubais did so furiously assault that of Lifechensuch, as within a few hours fight he took it; Christopher Mandragone had the charge of the other, who did likewise manfully assault it. But the enemy made such resistance, both through their souldiers worth, and the Forts condi∣tion, as he was inforced to retreat. He afterwards returned unto the siege; and Fernese this mean while went to besiege Terramonde, in the Province of Flan∣ders. This Town is seated upon the Schelds side, almost midway between Gaunt and Antwerp. Wherefore it afforded great communication between these two Cities. It is a Town greatly peopled; and was then so well fortified, as it was thought it would have held out longer then it did. The Kings Camp drawing near it, they began to play fiercely on the Town, & came afterwards with no less fierce∣eness to the assault. The besieged withstood the first assault with much gallantry; but seeing themselves threatned with a second, and considering the danger of not being able to withstand it; and that then the Town would be put to fire and sword, they resolved to yield: and thus within little less then a week, the Prince ended this enterprise. It cost notwithstanding the loss of some bloud; and in par∣ticular Pietro di Paez, one of the Spanish Camp-masters, and a greatly reputed souldier, perished in this action. Fernese having taken Terramond, he continued to begirt the very City of Gaunt with a siege at distance. Antonio Oliviera, a Spa∣niard, who was Lieutenant General of the horse, had formerly much annoyed that City by making incursions into all the Countries thereabouts; so as it began to suffer great scarcity of all things. But the Prince not content to reduce only the aforesaid City to straits, he endeavoured to make Brussels and Malines sen∣sible of the like. He therefore made himself master of the most frequented passes, by which victuals were brought; and in particular he took Villebruch, and Ville∣ford, two of the chiefest of them. And scouring the Country all thereabouts with his horse, he soon reduced both Brussels and Malines to such ill condition, as they were afterwards forced to surrender, during the siege of Antwerp; which Gaunt did likewise much sooner, inforced by the like necessity. But we will give you a more particular account of these passages when we shall have ended the siege of Antwerp, the narration whereof was not to be interrupted by any o∣ther diversion, but ought to be displaid in one continued narrative. After the taking of Terramond, the Prince returned to before Antwerp, and knew how hard it would be to bereave the enemy of the Fort of Lillo by way of
assault. They had already munited the Fort by way of the River (which was commanded by their Vessels) with all things that were at that time needfull; and by the same way they might at all times continue the succouring thereof. And though Fernese should have been master of it, yet might access have been had unto the enemy by the River, so far distant were the banks of the one and the o∣ther Fort, so strong was the ruling Tide, and so bootless would it have been, at least by night to have shot at the ships which should have been sent to bring suc∣cour to the City. 'Twas therefore concluded as necessary, that the Scheld must be block'd up by a bridg: and that this being to be done in some fitting place be∣tween the City and the Fort, they were not to lose any time in getting the latter but that howsoever it was much better to bend all their forces against the for∣mer. It was therefore thought that it would suffice so to begirt the Fort on the land side, as that the enemy might be kept from making excursions that way. Mandragone took the particular care of this, who still kept his quarters therea∣bouts during the whole time of the siege, as you shall upon all occasions hear. They came then to consult about the bridg. And in taking the business more se∣riously into consideration, so great difficulties began to appear, first in what con∣cerned the making of it, and then much greater touching the keeping of it when it should be made, as many openly opposed it, shewing that it could never be suc∣cessfully done. These said, That an immence quantity of wood was to be had for such a Fabrick: and that when means should be found where to have it, there would be no means found how to have it brought. That this was not to be done by land; and that there was little or no hopes of doing it by water, since the enemy did fully command all the River about the banks of Antwerp, and that between those banks all the materials were to be brought which were to make the bridg. That it was impossible ever to find rafters of such a length as might suffice to block up the deepest part of the River, as well for the natural depth thereof, as for the excrescency which the usual tides added thereun∣to, So as in this only respect all thought thereof would be but in vain. Nor would the difficulties be less if they should go about to make a bridge of boats. That the Kings Army wanted all materials for these also; and that these were likewise to be brought through the enemies ships, and under the walls of Antwerp, before they could come to the place where the bridge was to be built. But when the River should be block'd up either by the one or the other way, what hopes would there be to keep it? it was to be presupposed so difficult a siege would be of long durance; in which time why should it not be feared that the full and impetuous tides should not bear down the bridge? or that this might not be done by the enemies ships by annoying it hourly on all sides? or finally the river being so often frozen over in the winter, why should not the ice when it is broken and carried down by the violence of the tide, in danger the ruining of the bridg? But on the contrary, those that were for the making and maintaining of the Fa∣brick, reply'd, That as for the first Objection of finding, and of fetching materials, there was no doubt at all to be made of it. That the Kings Army was every where Master of the field. That Terramond was already taken; and that in all likelyhood Gaunt would be presently surrendred. By these successes the Scheld would be free for the Kings oc∣casions even almost to the walls of Antwerp. Wherefore by the vicinity of so large a Country, and of such Cities, it would be no hard matter to get timber enough, and by such means as necessity would instruct, to carry it where it should be requisite. That in the mean time to make the way more passable, they might raise divers Forts on both sides of the River, and thereby either keep the enemies ships from troubling them, or at least make their hindrance the less. That they might place their Summers in the parts nearest the banks, and where the River was shallowest, and in the middle where it was deepest, their boats; which were neither to be so many, nor of such a conditi∣on but that they might be easily found. So the ice which the winter should occasion in the river, the force whereof would certainly be greatest in the middle, where the tide runs strongest, might pass through the void places between the boats, and no ways prejudice those parts which should be filled up with the rafters and summers of wood.
That then the Bridge being thus varied, and defended, and such things done in the advantage thereof as daily experience would teach, why should it not be built and maintained? And thus they might happily end their Siege, which otherwise could never be either begun or ended. The necessity of blocking up the River was so apparent, totally to cut off all succours, as the Prince of Parma not listening to any thing that made against it, resolved immediately to have the Bridge made, and to divide it into rafters and Boats in form abovesaid. And as for the place where to build it, it was thought fittest to be almost just over against two Villages, upon the two sides of the River, the one called Ordam on Brabant side, the other Callo on the other side of Flanders. Here the Channel was somwhat narrower, and seemed to bend alittle, so as the Enemies Barks could not invest the Bridge on that side in a direct course. This place was some two leagues distant from the City; and it was judged fittest likewise for other works which were to be done, particularly for those Forts which were to be made on both sides. The Bridge being thus designed, the Prince betook himself with all ardencie to the putting of it into execution. He forthwith raised a Fort-royal on each side the river; and called that which was on Callo side S. Mary, and the other S. Philip. These two chief Forts being raised, and well furnisht with Artillery, they began to build the Bridge, though but slowly at the first, there not being yet such preparation had of things necessary for the building of it, especially of rafters, as was requisite for the work. Great diligence was therefore made every where thereabouts in gathering together what greatest quantities all places either champian or chiltren could afford. The taking of Terremonde made much for this; and afterwards the taking of Gaunt, which hapned at this time: For all manner of commodities were to be had in this so great City, and so full of all things, first to begin, and afterwards to finish the building of the Bridge. The Scheld passeth through that City, as doe also some other Rivers which cut through it in divers places. The Scheld continues its course from hence to Terremonde, which was very convenient for the conveying of rafters and all other necessaries for the aforesaid work. But as they came near the banks of Antwerp, the Enemies ships did so oppose the passage, as many of the Kings Barks were often endangered, and often sunk. Therefore to secure the passage the better, some other Forts were added to the former chief ones of S. Mary and S. Philip. But the proof did not answer the design; for notwith∣standing any shot that could be made from the Royal Forts, the Enemies ships had ever the better of the business. For this so great difficulty this remedy was thought on. They made a great Cut in the bank of Scheld on Flanders side near to the Village Burcht, which lay higher then where the Bridge was made; and by means of that Cut they drowned all the neighbouring Country even to Callo, where by another opening of the bank the water past again into the River a little above the Bridge: and so the necessary preparations for the fabrick were at last brought with more safety. The adverse ships ceased not notwith∣standing to molest that situation likewise; but to make the greater obstacle, they raised a Fort on one side of the Cut, to the which the Kings men opposed another on the other side, but with little advantage, for it did not sufficiently bridle the Enemies Fort; so as their ships keeping still thereabouts, were always prejudi∣cial to the Prince his Barks. The Bridge went therefore but very slowly on; the which did as much glad the Antwerpians, as it did trouble the Prince. Great numbers of Boats appeared daily from Holland and Zealand with victuals and all other sort of provisions to furnish the City, and to put it in a posture of stand∣ing out stoutly. The great Fort of Lillo was already munited answerable to occasion; and Monsieur de Teligni, son to Monsieur de la Nue, was put in to defend it, one whose valour shewed him to be descended from his Father. Wherefore the Enemy full of hopes, thought that Fernese would never be able to finish the Bridge; and if he should not thereby block up the Scheld, the Siege would in all other considerations signifie nothing. But no binderance can be so great, which industry will not at last either overcome, or make more easie. The abovesaid remedy of the Cut not proving sufficient to convey materials by water answerable to the work, the Prince bethought himself of another expedient, which
furnisht afterwards all things sufficient for the building of the bridg. By the gap or Cut which was made in the bank at Burcht, all the tract of Country from that Town to Callo was drowned, as we have said. From the utmost inundation with∣in land, the Prince purposed to make a deep and large Ditch, and to lead it away from that part of Flanders to a certain Town called Stechen, where the Ditch was to fall into a River which passeth by Gaunt; by which all things which were necessary for the building of the Bridge might be brought by water from that City. An egregious work; of great praise to him that first proposed it, but of greater glory to him who undertook it, as did the Prince with very much re∣solution; though many other were affrighted at the immense expence of monies, time and labour; for the Ditch was to be full 15 miles long. The Ditch was after∣wards commonly called Parma; either for that it was first motioned by the Prince himself, or that the Kings Camp did willingly shew their approbation thereof by giving it that name. And not without reason: for it may truly be said that this Ditch made the bridg, and that the Bridg did afterwards fully compleat the Siege. On that side towards Flanders was Fernese's own Quarters, in a Vil∣lage called Buren, which lay very opportunely for the giving out of all requisite Orders for all that was done thereabouts, and especially for the making of the new Channel: To sollicite the making whereof the Prince himself did almost continually intervene in his own person; nor was he wanting in doing the like in all the rest of the proceedings: He encouraged others by his own example; sometimes he himself would put his hands unto the work; he oft-times trans∣formed himself from a General to a private Souldier, and set aside all rest and delight, that the burthen of so great and difficult an undertaking might be the better sustained by his own labour and disquiet. This was the condition of the Siege on Flanders side. On the opposite side towards Brabant was the Lieutenant of the Army, Count Peter Ernestus Mansfield, quartered in the Village of Stra∣buch, a little within land; and Mandragone was quartered near Lillo, almost up∣on the river, and had intrencht himself there against that adverse Fort, to keep the Enemy in on that side: who did what they could to advantage themselves there; and their design would have been to overflow the inland Country, as well to incommodiate the Royalists, as to make use thereof themselves for bringing succours the more easily to Antwerp. But this their last design was conterdicted by a Counterdike, which came to joyn with the principal Dike of the River from the Village Cowstein: For it was seen, that without either the breaking, or gaining thereof, they could by no means compass their ends. A Dike in Flemish, is a Bank in English; and a Counterdike, a Counterbank, (if I may so call it) which is drawn out against another bank. From the Village of Cowstein there was a lesser Dike thrust out for the space of a league, which went to joyn with the greater Dike of the River, which was commonly called the Counterdike of Cowstein. This lesser Dike was made that it might be gone upon, particularly in the winter; all that part, which lies very low, being then full of water and mire. It was not above ten or twelve handfuls broad, nor higher then was requisite for the necessary service of the Country people. This Counterdike was guarded by the Royalists, chiefly to hinder the excursions which the Enemy might make from the Fort of Lillo, and out of no other fear of danger on that part. But when the Enemy letting in the water of the river, had drowned the Country thereabouts Mandragone suspected the truth; which was, that they would either make some Cut or gap in the Counterdike, or endeavour to make themselves wholly masters of it, so to have that passage free to bring in succours into Antwerp. And at the first they did make a Cut: but the Royalists running quickly to where the dan∣ger lay, did soon remedy it, driving the Enemy from thence, and stopping the gap as well as for the present they could. And indeed if the Enemy had either sooner, or with more forces endeavoured to cut the gap, the Royalists could never have brought their Siege to a good end. But all those of Holland, Zealand, and Antwerp were so verily perswaded that the River could never be blockt up by a Bridg, as they neglected the taking of the Counterdike, and even the victualling of the ity more then it became them to have done, whilst yet the passage by Scheld was but weakly secured by the Royal Forts.
Fernese finding what danger the siege might inour on that part, gave order to Mansfield to munite it on the one side, and to Mandragone on the other. Mans∣field therefore fortified the Village of Cowstein, from whence the counterdike was thrust out, and that Fortification was called the strong House; he inlarged and heightned the counterdike where it was most needfull; he planted a little Fort upon the one side, which was called La Motta, because Signor de la Motta had the command thereof. He made also another on the other side, and named it Palata, because for want of earth it was made of pales; which want was found almost every where in fortifying the counterdike: so as they were fain to supply it with fagots, and other such like materials. Where the counterdike joyned af∣terwards with the chief dike of the river, Mandragone raised a Fort, and called it the Cross, in relation to the position of the place, which was almost of the same form: and because 'twas doubted that the enemy might make a great cut in the chief bank of the river beneath Lillo, which might have more prejudiced the counterdike: Fernese caused three Forts be raised in that place, which for that they were triangular, were called the Forts of the Trinity. All these Works which we have named, were made from time to time, accor∣ding as need required, which we have here set down, the better to present them before your eyes, and to give you the clearer intelligence thereof. The Prince had shut up the Passes towards the land side about Antwerp, which coasted upon Brabant by Garisons which were placed in Hostrat, in Herentales, in Breda, in Lira, in Diste, and in divers other Towns, by which Antwerp was kept from be∣ing relieved on that side. Particularly the horse scoured the whole Country every where; not only out of a bare intention of incommodating the Antwerpians, but to keep them from having any communication with those of Brussels, or Ma∣lines, so to make both them Towns fall the sooner into their hands. The fiege being thus ordered on each side the river, it remained totally to block up the same river, which was the chief business, and which brought with it not only the greatest advantage, but also the greatest necessary, and met with greatest opposi∣tion. The Marquis of Rubays, General of the horse was of great authority and esteem in the Kings Camp. Wherefore Fernese gave him the chief care of the bridg; and gave unto him likewise the command of a great many men of War, which were a preparing to facilitate the enterprise. Rubays was not wanting in acting his part in all these imployments. He was in action both day and night; he uncessantly divided his labours, now on this side, now on that, with infinite indu∣stry and valour. So as by his dilligence, all necessary provisions for the building of the bridg did in time so increase, as all the Army began to hope to see their work soon brought to perfection. Whilst the Kings Camp was amongst these labours and difficulties, the besieged within the City were not agitated with less uncertainty and perturbances. From the very beginning of the siege, they had sent expresly into Holland and Zealand, and to the rest of the Confederate Pro∣vinces, to desire the best and speediest assistance which could be sent them from those parts. But knowing that they could not receive sufficient succour from thence, they had sent particular personages into France, and into England, to do the like in those Courts, and endeavoured to interest both those Crowns again if it were possible in their cause. They had good hopes from France, but the ef∣fects were not answerable. That Kingdom was still full of troubles, and that King would not more irritate the King of Spain, who was already too much in∣censed for what the Duke of Alanson had done in Flanders. They received grea∣ter hopes from England, and might much more easily come by them. But the Queen after Alansons death, willing to make such advantage of the Flemish as she could not do before, made them believe she would assist them, but was very slow in doing it. It appeared at last, that her end was to see them reduced to such necessity as they should be inforced to throw themselves into her hands; and contenting her self at first with a bare title of protection, she might come more easily afterwards so to be totally master of them. These practises from abroad pro∣ceeding but very flowly, and with much ambiguity, the Antwerpians hopes consist∣ed chiefly in succours from Holland and Zealand; Provinces which were nearest them, and which by their naval forces might best disturb the siege, especially by
way of the river. Nor were these parts wanting in doing what possibly they could to this purpose. But the work about the bridg advancing every day, and the Forts of the Kings Camp being already increased on both sides, and Rubays having commanded his barks to withstand those of the enemy; victuals could not so freely be brought to Antwerp by water as formerly. And all passes by land being shut up, they had less hopes of any relief from thence. Their wants therefore still increased. But the Inhabitants were chiefly afflicted to see that Commerce began already to fail, and that by continuation of the siege, they were likely to be totally deprived thereof. And peradventure not without dan∣ger of new plunder and firing; which was that that they most apprehended; cal∣ling to mind what they had undergone not many years before in that kind by the Spaniards. A great part of their people, especially of meaner sort lived upon Merchandizing and Traffick; wherefore they began to complain very much of their already sufferings, and of those yet greater which they daily feared more and more. And those who were of better condition, were not well pleased to see themselves thus incommodiated. And those that were of the best condition and wealthiest amongst them, the more they feared to lose, so much more did they desire to avoid the danger thereof. And though they did all of them abhor to return again under the Spanish Command, especially those who were most infected with heresie; yet well weighing all Interests, they preferred that of their lives and estates before all other respects. The meaner sort of people began already to speak freely of these inconveniences and dangers: and whispers were heard to the same purpose amongst the more civiliz'd people. So as wavering thus in their minds, it appeared that they could not but grow very cool in sustaining such a siege so vigorously as they ought to do. Il Signor di Santa Aldegonda was chief of the Magistracy which governed the City, by the Title of Burgamaster. Before Orange his death he was put into that Office, that he might particularly advance Orange his ends, as he had always endeavoured to do, and as we have often told you. And when Orange was dead, there was not any one that more partially maintained his memory, nor his passions with more vehemency then did Santa Aldegonda. Wherefore occasion being one day offered, when the Magistracy was much more great then usual, for the heads of all Trades, and all those who bore any Office amongst the People, were then present, he spake thus. Since we that are here (most worthy Citizens!) represent the whole body of the City, and that through your goodness I enjoy the prime place amongst you; I conceive it belongs properly to me to propound unto you that wherein the publike service in these present occurrences is most concern'd. We are besieged round: doubtlesly a sad spe∣ctacle, the inconveniences being great which must be suffered within besieged wals: It is no wonder therefore if many amongst us doe already wisely foresee this sort of evil, and fear it. But then we must be wary, lest through too much apprehension and fear of the necessity which those that are besieged must undergo, we forget not the mischiefs which so cruelly doe oft-times befall those who surrender. We have seen two memo∣rable Sieges, these late years past in Holland; the out of Harlem, the other of Leiden. The Harlemists would at last yield; and rather then to come to the last desperate re∣solutions, try the humanity and clemencie of the Conquerors: But how much did they repent it afterwards? and doubtlesly they had better have sallied out, and with their swords in hand have willingly incountred their own deaths, then to die as many of them afterwards did, suffering such barbarous and horrid punishments. On the con∣trary, those of Leyden resolving rather to dye then surrender the Town, did so main∣tain it, though reduced to the utmost extremity of difficulties, as at last they were freed from that so cruel siege, by that so miraculous succour. Which of these two examples shall we follow? I believe it will be soon resolved. Who can doubt that it is not bet∣ter to under go not one, but a thousand deaths, rather then to fall again under the cruel, proud, and unsupportable Spanish yoke? The Countrey groans every where through the so many horrible calamities which it yet suffers thereby. But especially for the loss of so much famous bloud. Where are the Egmonts? Where the Horns? Where so many of the Nobility of all sorts? Finally where is our glorious Orange, that true Father of his Country? that unconquerable defender of the Liberties thereof? It is
no ways to be doubted but that as the first blow came from the hand of a Spaniard, whereby he had then almost lost his life; so did the second likewise from Spanish orders, which brought him so miserably to his end. If this our City shall ever prove so unfor∣tunate, (which God forbid!) as to fall into their hands, what doe you think their first actions will be? They will certainly put the Citadel into its former condition: which is as much as to say, they will put the former insupportable yoke upon us. To these and many other violences which they will use upon our persons, we shall suddenly have many no less intolerable put upon our consciences: The Reformed religion will be forbidden the very first day, and the Inquisition will soon after be brought in. And thus Antwerp being no longer a Flemish City, but a Spanish Colony, all Foreigners will forsake it, all Traffick will decay, and it will finally be intombed like an unhappy Carkass under its own desolate and decaying wals. But let us talk no more thus dejectedly: Let good auguries prevail. And very well they may doe so, if we consider the condition of the Enemies siege. It is in vain to think that they will ever be able to finish the Bridg, or to maintain it when it shall be finished. The River it self will oppose them; the flowing and reflowing of the Tide will oppose them; our Ships will continually oppose them on all sides: the Winter with her ice will fight against the Bridg; nor will there be wanting many other inventions to discompose and break it down, and leave that passage always free unto us. And how much more easily may we open their Counterdike? On Lillo's side our men have already begun to drown the neighbouring fields: We will doe the like on Ordams side towards the City. And the Counterdike being inclosed round between these two inundations, and between our two Fleets, it must of necessity either be born down by the water at the highest tides, or being so often assailed by us, we may cut it, destroy it, and freely re∣ceive all assistance likewise on that side. In which case, when we shall have com∣modity of being succour'd, the Enemies can have no hopes in the continuation of their siege. This mean while the Forces of our Confederates will still the more unite: they will be accompanied with aids from France; but chiefly with those which we may in greater numbers, and with much more ease receive from England. And having so many Forces both by land and sea, why shall we not hope to see Antwerp restored to her full and entire liberty, and to her former happy condition? Let us then (most honoured Citizens!) return all joyfully to our own homes; And being to encourage others, let us first take courage our selves. But let us return always with an immu∣table resolution of rather perishing, (let our condition be what it will, then of sur∣rendring. In fine, Or Liberty, or Death! Thus ended stout Aldegonde: Nor can it be said what power this and his other discourses had alwayes with the Antwerpians in making them receive his advices. By his perswasion a new form of Oath was composed, by which the City obliged it self never to return to the obedience of the King of Spain: And an Edict was likewise published, wherein it was prohibited under severe punishment for any one to listen to any whatsoever agreement, which should at any time be pro∣pounded on the Kings behalf. They then applied themselves with great fervencie to withstand the Siege. Great care was had in the delivering out of victuals: Such Citizens as were fit to bear Arms, were put under Colours, and disposed of in several Companies, each of them having a Commander given them. But above all things they betook themselves by all possible means to hinder the building of the Bridg, and the defence of the Counterdike. To boot with the Men of War which annoyed the Bridg, they ordered some artificial Fire-boats, whereby to assault, indammage, and utterly destroy the Bridg, if it were possible. And be∣cause the Kings Forts which were upon the River banks did very much hinder any thing that could be done by the Enemies ships, the Antwerpians bethought themselves of building a Ship of such a vast greatness, as being too good for the Kings Forts, and furiously playing upon them with Cannon shot, the absolute command of the River might by means thereof remain unto the City. It was to be of a bulk answerable to a manageable Castle in the water. And the Antwerpi∣ans confiding mainly therein, and falling to work thereupon, they gave it a no less vast title then was the bulk, calling it The Wars End. They ordered likewise all things which were necessary for the opposing of the Counterdike. And though they could not much better their condition on the Fields side, where the Kings
men commanded all; yet they lodged some of their Troops on that side, to curb the Royalists so much the more, and that they might be the better able to come by some victuals. Thus the Antwerpians sought to advantage themselves: but the Royalists were no less fervent in their endeavours. Fernese had divers times invited the Antwerpians with large proffers to return to the Kings obedience; but they refusing them at first, and afterwards demonstrating full resolutions to the contrary, it was sufficently evident that all hopes of negotiation ceasing, he was to place them wholly in his Arms. He therefore by out-doing not only o∣thers, but himself in toil and labour, gave himself wholly to procure the defence of the Counterdike, and to proceed in the business of the Bridg; those parts thereof which consisted of rafters and summers being so far advanced, as there wanted but little to the perfecting of them. Rubays with great diligence had got together a great number of Men of war, to oppose upon any occasion those of the Enemy; and scouring up and down every where, and chiefly where most need was, it is not to be believed how much he thereby advantaged the building of the Bridg. But the middle part was yet to be finished, which was much larger then that of the rafters on both sides. This was wholly to be supplied with Boats, and a requisite number could not suddenly be got together; the void space between the rafters was as yet made up with but about twenty. But experience shewed that that number was not near sufficient; for the Enemies Boats found means to pass through the void spaces, though they were linked together; either cutting in sunder that which they were linked together withall, or breaking through them with full sail by the force of the Tide. Some succour was therefore by this means from time to time brought to the City; and much of action happened be∣tween the ships of either side, the Kings ships endeavouring to block up the passage, and the Enemies to keep the passage open. One of these Naval conflicts proved fortunate for Rubays: For Teligni, as he was going for Zealand, was found to be in one of those ships which he took; and being taken prisoner, the Enemy lost one of their valiantest and wisest Commanders. The next of best e∣steem amongst them was the Count of Hollack; who was not wanting on his part neither in giving good testimony of his valour, sometime by water sometime by land. But for all they could doe, they could not keep the Kings men from bringing Boats enough at last to block up the middle space between the rafters on both sides of the shore. And thus after a long dispute between hope and fear, wherewith the Royalists were a long time agitated, the miraculous fabrick of the Bridg was finished, which we have so often mentioned, but never sufficiently described, for we could never till now come to give you a full relation thereof. This was then the shape of it. From the two contrary shores upon which lay the two greater Forts of Callo and Ordam, divers rowes of great Piles of Trees were thrust out, and being driven into the River, extended as far as the current thereof would permit. These which went streight forwards, were closed together overthwart with divers others of the like greatness; they were called Steccadoes at the first, and ever after con¦tinued the same name. The Steccado of Callo advanced about 120 usual paces, not being able to reach further, for on that side the river of Scheld grew presently deep. The other of Ordam advanced about 150 paces, the river affording better commodity on that side. At the end of each of these Steccadoes, and where the Boats began to be placed, a large space was composed, as if it were a Pi∣azza, able to receive a great many Souldiers, for the better defence both of the Boats and of the Steccadoes. On the flanks of these towards the upper part a series of Parapets were raised, which were made of great doubled boards well fill'd in the midst with earth, so as the Souldiers might be thereby fenced or sheltered, and endure a volley of musket-shot, and from those Fences pour musket-shot upon the Enemies ships. Both the Forts served for Curtains (if I may be permitted to say so) to both the Flanks of the Steccadoes, and to that purpose were alwayes furnished with good store of great Ordnance. At the other end of the Piazza's, where the Steccadoes ended, some Peeces of Artillery were placed on both sides, the better to defend that part. And adding new securities without to those with∣in, both the outsides of those Piazza's were garnished with certain great Rafters
of wood, armed with iron at the ends, which advancing for a considerable space into the river, and upheld by some others which were planted in the bottom thereof, might keep the enemies ships the further off, and make their assaults the weaker. This was the form of the Steccadoes: from the ends whereof began the ank of boats, wherewithall the rest of the river was shut up, which was her deepest and largest part; and the space between the two Steccadoes might be about 4500 paces. This was filled up with 32 great barks; all of them of almost an equal body and form, they differed but little in their poup and forecastle, or in any o∣ther part. They were joyned together at the ends and sides with strong chains of iron; each end was furnished with a piece of Artillery, and the body of each bark with a convenient number of souldiers and Mariners. Ten men might walk abrest upon the Steccadoes; and sufficient commodity for passage was left likewise upon the barks. And because 'twas already known that the Antwerpi∣ans had prepared some fireboats to prejudice the bridg, and that they were always to provide for the assault of their other ships, and of those which their friends would send unto them; therefore the Kings men bethought themselves to shelter the barks of the bridg with another exterior defence, that they might the less fear being injured by the enemy. The invention was this, Many masts of ships were fastned together which made as it were a float; and as many of these were made as sufficed for the whole length which the barks took up. The one float was joyn∣ed to the other like a wall or great parapet, and then thrust out in a proportion∣able interval before the barks; and they were fastned to great anchors on both sides; so as they might not fear being moved or loosened by any assault of the enemies ships, or by the rage of any incensed tide. And because they floated up∣on the water, they were floats. This was the whole Fabrick of the Bridg: a proud one of that kind; and which well deserved the glory of having perfected so memorable a siege; and of having at last reduced so important a City to the Kings obedience. Above six months were spent in the building of it; nor could it be fully finished till the be∣ginning of March in the next year of our Lord 1585. The winter seemed even to smile upon this designe: for neither did it produce any ice, nor any unusual Anno 1585. tides. The Antwerpians wondred very much, and were strangely astonished when they saw the bridg fully finished. Yet hoping to be able to disorder and open it by means of their fire-boats, and of that vast ship which they were pre∣paring, they used all diligence in compleating both those and this. Much labour was requisit to such a work. An Italian Ingeneer born in Mantua, by name Fre∣derick Giambelly, was then in Antwerp. This man took upon him to build the fire-boats, which he did thus: He built a Vessel made of very great and firm planks, and it was made in the midst like a good large Mine proportionable to the Vessel. The Mine was made of brick and lime, so closed up as it had only that vent which was necessary to bring the fire at its due time to the gunpowder, whereof it was to be full. All the rest of the Vessel was covered with stones, little and great bullets, and other such materials condenc'd together as much as might be, to the end that the Mine finding the greater opposition might doe the more mischief. 'Twas said the Ingeneer wrought thus for 8 months together up∣on several barks; but more time was spent in the building of the other so huge before mentioned ship. By these machines, though too long a making, did the Antwerpians hope to open the passage of the river; and this was what was to be expected on that side. On Lillo's side, their friends were to be in a readiness, and be sure to move with their men of war, at the same time when the fire-boats should play on the other side. We told you how on the opposite side to Lillo there was another Fort built, called Lifechensuch, which Rubays took at the be∣ginning of the siege. The enemies ships were much prejudiced from this Fort in their passage, and much more in their retreating under the Fort of Lillo where they used most to lie. The Hollanders and Zealanders did therefore resolve to use all possible endea∣vours to take this place of offence from the Kings men: and they luckily effect∣ed it. They placed some Culverins on the contrary shore, which might reach the
further; and having prepared such other ships as were necessary, with other pee∣ces of Canon to batter, and with a good number of souldiers, they landed, and gave so furious an assault to the Fort of Lifchensuch, as after having plaid upon it some hours, and threatned to put all those that were within to the edg of the sword, they made them come forth, and surrender the Fort. Fernese hearing of this danger, sent some men presently to remedy it, and went himself in person thitherward; but the surrender was made before the succour came; and this mischief drew suddenly on another: for the enemy did immediately assault ano∣ther Fort which stood more inward, called St Antony, and took it with like easi∣ness. Fernese stormed to hear of these losses: and the two Captains of those Ga∣risons, not being able sufficiently to excuse their misdemeanours, he made both their heads be struck off upon the top of those dikes. He afterward planted new Forts to curb those, and to secure the bridg the better; and continued his former diligence every where. By these two acquisitions the enemy were secure on those two shores whereon Lillo and Lifechensuch were placed; wherefore they began to assemble a great number of their ships together on both shores under the shel∣ter of those two Forts; which made it be apprehended in the Kings Camp, that they would with some unwonted force assault the bridg from thence, and at the same time also endeavour to prejudice the counterdike. But the effect shewed that all their preparation was to expect the motion of the fire-boats from Ant∣werps side. Which when they should play upon the bridg, and ruine some part of it, as the enemy well hoped, their ships might incontinently likewise move, and joyning both forces together, do the greater and more irreparable damage to the bridg. Winter was already over, and April was begun. Whilst then the Kings Camp stood in this suspence, and that Fernese with all diligence had reinforced the guards every where; some barks began to fall down upon the Scheld from Ant∣werps side, of such a shape and appearance, as the Royalists believed they were the before mentioned fire-boats. Every one stood in great expectation of the success, and several judgements were given thereupon, some thought that the se∣quel would not be answerable to the invention; and others that the effect would equal it. Yet the curiosity of seeing the event was equal in every one. Where∣fore the Royalists flockt in great numbers some to the Steccadoes, some one where, some another, upon the bare banks, to see what the success of so new a spectacle would be. Two of the barks were greater then the rest that followed. They fell down with the return of the tide; and not having any one to govern them, they were guided only by the tide, and were left unto themselves. A while after they had begun their course, a circle of fire might be seen to rise up above them, which continued for a while, till not long after to the great wonder of all the lookers on, that fire consumed and vanished quite away. Nor was it known whether this was according to the designe; or whether it were but a piece of art the better to disguise it. In the mean time one of the lesser boats, whilst it was yet a good way off the bridg, blew up and vanished working no considerable effect. Nor did any of the rest of the lesser sort do almost any other good. But the two greater fol∣lowing their course, were by the tide brought, the one of them to give against the left shore towards Flanders, but somewhat distant from the bridg; and the other more luckily where the Steccado began to joyn with the row of boats. Up∣on this Steccado was the Prince of Parma then himself in person, being come likewise to partake of such a novelty. He was desired by all means to go from thence to free himself from any danger that might befall; he refused, and knew not what to resolve upon: for he would willingly first have known what news certain gunners and others of the Maritine profession would bring back, who were gone down to enter into the boat, the better to discover what she was load∣ed with, and to hinder the effects thereof. But he was so much importun'd, as at last he retired himself to the Fort St Mary. And not without great good for∣tune; for hardly was he come unto the Fort, when with a terrible and fearfull noise, the first great boat which was faln upon the aforesaid shore blew up, and slew many souldiers in a neighbouring Fort, and divers others who were therea∣bouts. But the other occasioned much more bitter dread, and likewise much greater prejudice. Those Gunners and Mariners were not well entred into the
Boat, when the fire arriving at its due time, made the Mine play, and suddenly de∣voured not only those who were within the Boat, but most of those who were upon the Boats of the Bridg, and upon the Steccadoes. It is not to be imagined, much less to be exprest what horrible effects this raging fire made. The Air was for a good space darkned with a thick cloud; the Earth shook for many miles a∣bout; the River broke forth out of her bed, and with great violence threw her waves beyond the banks: The bodies of men that were blown up by the fire, were so torn, as no shape thereof could be found; and the tempest and hail of great stones, and other lesser materials of offence scattering abroad further off, so many of the Camp were slain, or wounded, as nothing was to be seen all there∣abouts but a sad and dismall spectacle, of people either slain, or maimed, or ill ac∣conciated. Above 500 of the Kings men were slain by this misfortune, and a great many others of them were maimed or wounded. But that which made the loss the more fatal, was the death of the Marquis of Rubais; who while in order to his office he viewed all parts, and went from one place to another, was unfor∣tunately kill'd. A death generally bewail'd by the whole Camp, but with a par∣ticular tenderness by Fernese, who had a singular affection and esteem for him. Jasper Robles, a Spaniard, perisht by the same misfortune, who was Lord of Bigli, and a Souldier likewise of great experience and valour, as may oft-times have been seen in the successes of this History. Divers other Officers of inferior qua∣lity were likewise lost; and there was not any Nation who did not share in the misfortune. The confusion and astonishment being ceased, which so strange an accident had occasioned in the Kings Camp; it was found, that the prejudice which the Bridg had received was not so great, but that it might be repaired. The greatest harm that was done was on that part of the Steccado where the Fire-boat had disgorged its fire; and the Flote likewise there was greatly disordered. But a great danger yet remained, lest the assault of the Enemies ships which were in readiness for that purpose on Lillo's side, might succeed the fury of the fire. Wherefore Fernese, using all diligence for the defence of the Bridg, was come thither himself in person, and made the Forts on all sides stand prepared with their Artillery. But whatsoever the matter was, none of the Enemies ships were seen to move: It was thought that the Tide hindred them; and that expecting the Wind to overcome it, that failing, they could not second the Antwerpians. The danger being thus past which was then most feared, Fernese had leasure to restore the Bridg to its former posture: It was notwithstanding thought best to take the Flote quite away which lay towards the besieged, to the end that if any more of their Fire-boats should fall down, they might the better pass through those of the Bridge; to which purpose an useful invention was found out, as also in the other Flote which was on the other side. The Antwerpians began to be very much troubled that their Fire-boats had no better success; and even the stoutest amongst them began to lose their courage. But Aldegonda, and those that adhered most unto him, endeavouring to keep their hopes alive, strove to make them believe that the next Fire-boats would be more successfull then were the former: That the great Ship being now likewise finished, would be in effect as it was in name, The Wars End: That certainly the Royalists would never be able to make such resistance as was needfull, to keep the double forenamed Forces from beating down the Counterdike; and that when the passage should be once open, the City would be wholly freed from the Siege. Of these trials which were to be made for the benefit of the Antwerpians, that of the great Ship was the first. This immense moveable Castle began to appear upon the Scheld about the beginning of May, with mighty expectation on both sides; on the Antwerpians, out of their hopes of reaping advantage thereby; on the Royalists, out of the curiosity of seeing such a Fabrick, and to see what the effects thereof would be. The Ship drew near one of the lesser Forts which the Royalists had on Brabant side, and began to play furiously upon it: There were above a thousand Souldiers in the Ship, who accompanied the fury of the Cannon with the hail of Musket∣shot. They then landed to annoy the Fort nearer hand. But the effect was not an∣swerable to the design; for the Fort received no great harm from the battery, nor
they who were within the Fort from the Souldiers that were landed; nay the ship was so torn and shattered, as they had much adoe to mend her, and to make her serviceable again. This experiment coming to so little good, they fell to the other of breaking down the Counterdike; and the business was thus carried. The ships of the Hollanders and Zealanders were to fall from Lillo and enter into the drowned Country in that part by those Cuts which were made in the chief bank of the River. The Antwerpians were to doe the like on the other side to∣wards the City; and to that purpose they had likewise fitting Cuts in the same bank. Between these two drowned parts of the Country did the Counterdike run: but it was very hard to assault it on both sides at once, because the Tide could not equally serve both the one and the other in their uniform motion; wherefore such a middle season was to be taken, as that the conjuncture might not be lost. This was the design of the Enemy; nor was it any news to Fernese, who had long before expected it. There were four of the Kings Forts which guarded the Counterdike: The one, that of Crosse, where the Counterdike joyn∣ed with the greatest Dike, which Mandragone had the charge of: About the middle in some distance one from another stood that of the Palata, then that De la Motta, commonly called S. George his Fort; and at the end where the ground began a little to rise, was the strong House of Cowstein, wherein Count Mansfield did usually keep. To boot with these Forts a row of great Stakes were pitcht at equal distance on both sides the bank, which rose up above the water where the ground was therewithall drowned, that the Enemies ships might find more difficulty in accosting. These situations we have here again repeated, the more to awaken the memory, and to give the clearer intelligence of the Counter∣dike, where the Besieged's chiefest hopes lay, and where the Royalists had finally the victory. Fernese gave order that all the Guards should be every where re∣inforced. And to increase emulation amongst the Souldiers as well as their num∣bers, he mingled Spanish, Italians, Dutch, and Walloons together: though there were most Spaniards with Mandragone, and with Mansfield most Italians. Fernese gave the particular command over these, upon this occasion, to Camillo del Monte, who not long before had quitted his Brigado of Foot, being imployed about other affairs, wherein he won great honour and estimation in the Camp. Things being thus ordered, the Enemy made no longer delay. About the midst of May, the Count of Hollack fell down from Lillo, and entred with more then 30 Bottoms into the parts that were overflown thereabouts: All his ships were well provided of Artillery to batter down the Counterdike, of Instruments to cut and open it, and of Earth and all other requisite provisions to fortifie the Cuts which the besiegers had gained. Hollack made towards the Fort of the Palata: here the water was deepest, and the Counterdike was most restrained by reason of the difficulty that was found in enlarging it on that part. Wherefore for want of Earth, they were forced to assist the neighbouring Fort with Pales of wood, whence it was called the Palata. When the Enemy were come near with their ships, they began to play furiously upon the Counterdike; and having easily opened the Stakes that were pitched, they came to give the assault; and sheltred by the Artillery on the Dike, they endeavoured to possess the Counterdike. But the Kings men fighting valiantly, made it good. The scuffle was not long: For Hollack not seeing the Antwerp ships appear, resolved to retreat soon enough, having lost above 300 of his men, some of which were of some consideration. But few of the Kings men were slain, and none considerable but Captain Simon Padiglia, a Spaniard, who wan much honour in that action. It was not known whether the uncertainty of the Tide, or some other impediment had kept the Antwerpians from sending their ships according to the first appointment. But whatsoever the matter was, Fernese perceiving still that the Enemies chiefest hopes lay in opening the Counterdike, he missed not visiting those Forts daily himself, and used incredible diligence to secure their defence. Mansfields men were therefore mightily increased with Spaniards and Italians, by reason of the accom∣modation of lodging in the contiguous Villages of Strabuch and Cowstein; where∣as there was great scarcity of lodging where Mandragone was. After this assault which the Enemies without made upon the Counterdike, those within proceeded
to set upon the bridg again with their fire-boats. But by this time the Royalists had bethought themselves of an invention whereby either wholly to hinder their operation, or to make it little available; which was this. They prepared some boats with such Mariners as were requisite, who were to make up as soon as they could to the fire-boats, and quench that Train, if they could, which conveyed the fire to the Mine; which if they could not find, they were immediately to fall off, and with long ropes to draw the fire-boats after them to the naked shore, where they might have their operation with little or no prejudice to the Kings men. But the Antwerpians, considering that there was no float on that side the bridg which was next them, and that therefore they might the more freely set upon it on that side with their ships, resolved to assail it once more with a good number of them, taking a time when both wind and tide might serve them; whereby they thought they might give the bridg the greater shock; and find less resistance by the same. And that they might by a double assault, do a double harm, they resolved to send some fire-boats immediately after those other ships, which at the same time mit do all the prejudice they could unto the bridg. This was their designe, and thus it was put in execution. They fastened 15 ships close together, and with full wind and tide sent them to assault the bridg; and to make the indamagement the grea∣ter, they garnished those ships in their prow with great and sharp irons, to the end that the shock assisted by the cutting of those irons, might work the greater effect upon the ropes and chains wherewith the boats that made the bridg were joyned together. After these 15 ships came 4 fire-ships. But it was too hard a business either for the one or the other of them to do what was designed, with∣out Mariners to govern them, and souldiers to fight. The first gave a great justle to the bridg; but did it no great harm; for some of them were soon suffered to pass between the boats of the bridg, and the rest without any dispute fell into the hands of the Royalists. Nor had the fire-boats any better success: two of them were won with the aforesaid invention, and their operation hindred; the third fired after it was drawn aside where it could do no harm; and the fourth passed through the boats of the bridg, and being past on a good way, fired likewise to no purpose. For all this did not the enemies forbear to send new fire-boats to preju∣dice the bridg, not only from Antwerps side, but from Lillo. But as the forces were alike, the conformity of the success was almost always the same. Which we thought good to touch upon here only, not to nawseate the Reader, with oft repeating the same things, or others the like, varying but a little in circum∣stance. Now follows the last essay of the Antwerpians, and of their friends, to make themselves thereby Masters of the Counterdike. And which was likewise the last essay of the siege: and in which such variety of fortune was seen in the fight which insued, as it was questionable for many hours whether the besiegers or besieged would have the better of the day. But at last the besiegers got it; and there was no hopes left but that Antwerp must irremediably be lost. The for∣mer agreement being again renewed between the Antwerpians and those of Lillo great preparation of boats was made on both sides, which were to move at one and the same time both from Antwerp and Lillo: to endeavour the getting of the Counterdike. In this double assault, they would likewise make use of that their great ship, which was at this time within the drowned Land of Ordam, it being brought thither by the Antwerpians to be calked. But that great bulk was afterwards so unmanageable, as opprest by her own weight, she ran there on ground, and was rendred totally unusefull. Setting then all delays aside, about the end of May, the two fleets moved according to their appointment. That of Lillo appeared first, very early in the morning: it consisted of above a hundred bottoms, better provided this time then they were before with souldi∣ers, artillery, woolsacks, and all things else, to fortifie themselves in the Coun∣terdike, and in the cuts thereof, when they should have compassed their intent. They directed this their first assault not as before, against the narrowest part of the bank, but towards the broadest part, that they might the better fortifie them∣selves there; and this happened to be about the Fort St Georg, which was nearest the strong house of Covesteyn. The Royalists received the assault with much
gallantry, and suddenly a great fight happened here; the one endeavouring to get upon the bank, the others to keep them down; the one incouraged by their ships, from whence issued a furious tempest of Artillery and the others by the shot made from their Forts. This mean while the Antwerpians came in with a great number of ships likewise on their side; and furnished with the like provisions as were those of Lillo. The enemy then redoubled their assault with greater eager∣ness, and prevailed so far as they got upon the counterdike on both sides. Nor did they only get footing in that one place, but in divers others. Wheresoever there was less of land, there was the bickering the more bloudy. And one soul∣dier coming out of necessity close up unto another, there was hardly any blow given without a wound, nor wound without inevitable death. Here the enemy began to make divers cuts in the banks. But their chiefest force was against the place of their first assault. The difficulty of making the cuts, though it was great, yet was it no ways so great, as that of maintaining them. They must there intrench themselves with sacks of earth, with sacks of wool, and with other such like materials. And this the enemy boldly did. Hollack and Aldegonde were both of them there in person. Neither of them were wanting, in exhorting, in inforcing, and in executing both by their voice, deeds, and example. These (said they unto the combatants) shall be your last tryals; these your last dangers. When this pass shall be opened, Antwerp will be free; and that City being freed, how glorious will your labours be? and how advantagious to all our other con∣federates? they will ok that their wives, children, brethren, and whatsoever else they esteem dearest, are here present. And considering that the welfare of so many relations consist in the success of this conflict, be sure to see the end thereof, either by death or victory. The enemy being still more and more inflamed by these words, plaid their parts gallantly; but all they did cost them dear. For the Kings men did valiant∣ly likewise defend themselves. Many men fell on both sides; the slaughter was e∣qual; and fortune altering the advantages, smiled and frowned alternately, now on one side, now on another. Mandragone sent many men from his side conti∣nually to assist the Royalists. And though very aged, and ill handled by wounds which he had received in so long a war, and amidst so many dangers, yet did he undauntedly present himself in his own person to all dangers. The like did Mans∣field; though he were likewise very old, and even wasted with labours. In the strong house of Covesteyn, which was in his quarter, and from whence the coun∣terdike began on that side, as hath been said, he had raised a great platform, the better to defend the neerer Fort of St George, and the other somewhat further off of the Palata. This defence did excellent service upon this occasion. For playing in a right line upon the bank, the enemy could in no ways shelter them∣selves from it. The Spaniards and Italians which were in those quarters, incou∣raged hereby, fell fiercely upon the enemy, and began to put them into confusion. At the first beginning of the conflict, Camillo del Monte did likewise excellent service. For Carbone, of the same Family, and four other Captains, together with a great many other Officers, and souldiers being slain close by him, yet he still valiantly sustained the violence of the enemy. Marquis Hipolito Bentivoglio our brother was with him, who not long before the siege was come into Flanders; nor was he wanting in behaving himself as became a man of honour upon such an occurrency. And his actions were so well approved of by the Prince, as soon after he gave him a company of Launciers, and shewed him many other particu∣lar demonstrations of esteem. The fight being afterwards renewed by the Spa∣niards and Italians; their Commanders, John del Aquila, and Camillo Capitzuc∣chi, the one Campmaster of a Spanish Brigado, and the other of an Italian, did amongst others signalize themselves. And the valour of the inferior souldiers did so well corrispond with the like of their Commanders, as St George his Fort, which for a good while was in danger of being lost, was at last secured. The Fort of the Palata was still in hazard. To boot that it was but very weak of it self the enemy had invironed it with the gaps they had made, and with their ships; playing upon it furiously every where with their Artillery and muskets. Here then was a fierce fight, but with such advantage to the enemy, as they already
hoped for the victory, when the Prince of Parma appeared himself in person upon the Counterdike. He had been there the night before; and after having with great care viewed the Forts, and given such directions as was fitting every where, he was returned to his quarters at Beveren on the other side of the river. There was a considerable distance between that quarter and the Counterdike: but when the Prince early that morning heard the noise of the Cannon on the other side of the River, he quickly imagined that the Enemy had assaulted the Counterdike on both sides. He therefore lost no time. At his coming out of his quarters he heard that he had guessed aright, and ever and anon advertisements came of the fight, and of what danger his men were in. As soon as he was come upon the Counterdike on Mandragone's part, he heard by him and by others what danger the Fort of the Palata was in. The Prince was usually followed with many of quality and worth, and this occasion had increased their number. Wherefore marching in the head of them, he went together with them to where the fight was hottest: And when he saw how much his men were troubled, and the Enemy so much their superiors, Is this (said he) the valour which my Souldiers shew? Is this that which they learn under my discipline? Shall the Enemy glory of being Conquerors, after they were conquered? And are they not overcome, if after having lost the passage of the River, we keep the passage of the Counterdike likewise shut up? 'Tis here then, O my Souldiers, that you must either dye or overcome. I will share with you in the one and in the other. But if we shall overcome, as I hope we shall I will content my self with the honour, all the rewards shall be yours: Nor can so impornant a Victory be sufficiently rewarded but by so great a King. The Prince accompanied these his words with actions. Arm'd only with his sword and shield, he gave strange proof of his valour: By which example there was not any one of them who did not willingly run upon the greatest dangers; and who did not endeavour to save their Prince his life, by exposing their own to danger. The Souldiers suddenly reassumed their courage: but that which did most inhearten them, was to observe that the Tide began to ebb, which would soon inforce the Enemies shipe to retreat. But as this consideration incited the Royalists to doe their utmost, so had it the like effect upon the Enemies. They thought the Victory already so sure their own, as Hollack and Aldegonda were gone to carry the news thereof to Antwerp, which occasioned an incredible joy in those Citizens. The fight was then renewed more hot then ever upon the Counterdike, and particularly near the Fort of the Palata; and each side had their hopes and fears for a while: But it was clearly seen that the Enemies courage ebb'd with the Tide, and the courage of the Royalists did as much increase. In fine, the Enemy could no longer hold out; for many of their ships being already on the ground on both sides the Dike, they saw there was no more hopes left for them. All the rest was blood and slaughter; being void of all succour, they were hewed in pieces every where; nor did the Royalist thirst more after victory before, then they did now after cruelty. Above 2500 of the Enemy were slain, and many of them men of quality. Of the Kings side little less then a thousand, most of which were Spaniards and Italians, though the Dutch and Walloons did sufficiently act their parts. Some 30 of their ships fell into the Royalists hands; and but few of the Enemies were taken prisoners, for all but those that were slain got easily away by water. The fight being ended, Fernese gave forthwith order for filling up the Cuts which the Enemy had made in the Counterdike; he better secured the Forts, he reinforced the Guards, and did so provide for all things on that side, as the Enemy was either not to make any more assaults, or if they did, they were to hope for no good thereby. But the Antwerpians, falling from so high hopes into so deep despair, knew not what to doe, nor how to evade their threatning misfortune. They could hope for no assistance from France: The Queen of England, by the aforesaid artifices, held them on in hopes: Their confederate Flemish could doe no more then they had done: To boot with Gaunts being long before fallen into Fernest's hands, as hath been said, Brussels, Malines, and Niminghen the chiefest City in all Ghelderland, were likewise surrendred unto him; wherefore as the
Flemish Union was brought very low by so many losses, the Kings party was as much advantaged by so many acquisitions. Antwerp began long before this to suffer much in scarcity of victuals; which increasing every day, they began to think daily more and more upon the horror of Famine, and upon the inevitable necessity of yielding to that enemy. The Antwerpians kept as yet some Towns about the walls of the City, and kept gartisons in them, that they might likewise enjoy some part of the open fields: wherefore all their hope lay now in getting maintenance by the means of that neighbouring Territory, expecting what might afterwards fall out to their advantage. But Fernese soon foresaw this their design, nor did he lose the benefit of the opportunity. Rubais being slain, he had given the chief command of the Horse to the Marquis of Vasto, who scouring the Country every where, suffered not the Enemy to breath, and had already laid waste all that Territory of those Country people. And the Enemy opposing the Marquis one day with some of their Horse, they were by him routed, and defeated. Wherefore Fernese presenting his Cannon before some of the forenamed Towns which were the best munited, he quickly reduced all the rest. And so the Ant¦werpians were shut up within the precinct of their own walls. They began then allso far to despair, as there was no talk amongst them but of their necessity of surrendring; and the mind of the most was, to begin a Parley, so to get the best Conditions that they could. Hollack and Aldegonda were still obstinate, and those that did most pertinacioufly adhere unto them; and by sophisticated Let∣ters endeavoured to make the people believe that the Earl of Leicester was alrea∣dy parted from England, being sent by the Queen with a powerfull Army to re∣lieve Antwerp; that he was every day expected to enter Zealand; and that so many Foreign forces being added to those of their own Confederates, they might very well hope to see that City quickly free from fiege. This cheat might pre∣vail for a while: but the deeds speaking a contrary language, and famine toge∣ther with other extremities which usually are suffered by those who are besieged every day increasing, the people would be no longer deluded: They were first seen to gather together in small companies, and then in more open assemblies, which at last brake out into open tumults. They chafed at the obstinacie of a few, saying, that for their own private passions they would make the City run hazard of suffering its late misfortune and misery. Those who were better ac∣commodated, and who had most to lose either by plunder, fire, or other miseries which Cities are accustomed to suffer, when either taken by force, or surrendred upon discretion, began to be of the same mind. On the other side Fernese was not backward in inviting the Antwerpians to surrender, and not by standing out to make their conditions the worse. Thus the Magistracie resolved at last to send some to the Army, to treat of surrendring the City. They were fairly received by the Prince, and so the Treaty began on both sides: wherein at first was found a great deal of intricacie and difficulty, and therefore many dayes were spent in adjusting them: till such time as Aldegonda coming forth himself, with some others of the best of the City, the Articles of Surrender were concluded of about the midst of August, which made up a just year since the first begining of the siege. The Articles in effect were these that follow. That the City of Antwerp should return under the obedience of the King of Spair. as formerly. That the Prince of Parma, in the Kings name, did pardon and forgive the Inhabiants thereof all faults committed in the late revolutions, as well in taking up of Arms, as in what soever else they had done against the King and his Royal crown. That to maintain Traffick in that City as much as might be, it might be lawfull for any body whosoever to live there for four years next ensuing, without any particular tye in matter of conscience and religion, provided no scandalous act were committe against the Catholick religion, which was solely to be profest and exercised for the future in that City. That the aforesaid four years being ended, those who would not profess the Catholick religion might freely depart from thence, and carry all their goods away with them, without any manner of hinderance. That the City should by the least grievous way that might be, find means how to repair the Churches which were ruined either before, or upon the occasion of this siege. That the City should be fuly restored to her antient priviledges, and to all her former liberty and prerogatives
of Traffick. That in the mean while she was to pay 40000 pounds sterling, to help to relieve the Army, for the so much pains and expence which it had been at in that siege. That the Antwerpians should give way to the receiving into the City, and long∣ing of 2000 foot, and 200 horse in Garison: till it should be seen what resolution should be taken in Holland, Zealand, and the other confederate Provinces, of turning to the Kings obedience: which if they should do, the Prince promised to free the City of all Garisons; and not to remake the Citadel as it was before. That prisoners on all sides should be set at liberty; except Monsieur de Tiligni, concerning whose person, the Prince was of necessity to receive some particular Orders from Spain; and that the Signor de Aldegonda should promise not to bear Arms against the King of Spain for the space of one year. These were the chiefest Articles of the surrender: to which many others were added touching the restitution of Goods, the restoring of Traffick and Mer∣chandizing to the City, and divers other petty interests, which respected the ac∣commodation and satisfaction of the Inhabitants. This agreement being made, the Prince for his greater applause in having made such an atchievement, received the Order of the Golden Fleece which the King had sent him a little before. The Ceremony was performed in the Fort St Philip, accompanied with all the grea∣test Military celebration of joy and Jubilee: and 'twas done by Count Mans∣field, one of the antientest of that Order in all Flanders. The Prince entred af∣terwards solemnly into Antwerp, not only as a Conqueror, but in Triumph: he appeared in stately Arms on horseback; many horse and foot in arms went be∣fore him: and many in the like sort followed him. Long files of armed foot were on each side. And a little before him was all the flowre of the Nobility on horse∣back; whereof there were very many then in the Army. Thus he entred by the Cesarian Gate, where he was received by the Magistrate, by the heads of all the Orders of the City, and by an infinite number of common people. He found many Arches, many Statues, many Colums erected in divers parts; with whatso∣ever else of glory could be shewn upon the like occasion, by the conquered to such a Conqueror. He then returned all due thanks to God in the chiefest Church; and being still accompanied with both Military and City-like acclama∣tions, he lighted at the Castle, and staid awhile in Antwerp to put in order such things in the City as stood in most need thereof.
THE HISTORY OF THE WARS OF FLANDERS, Written by CARDINAL BENTIVOGLIO. The Second Part. BOOK IV. The Contents. The Cities of Gaunt, Brussels, Malines, and Niminghen return to the Kings obe∣dience. The Confederate Provinces are hereupon in so great straits, as they offer the Queen of England the Soveraignty of their Provinces, that they may the more freely enjoy her protection. The Queen accepts not of the offer; but takes upon her their defence much more then formerly. In lieu whereof she hath some of their Towns deposited in her hands. The Earl of Lester arrives in Holland, sent by her as Supreme Head of the Confederate Provinces. The Prince of Parma re∣solves to march into the field. He besiegeth Graves, and takes it. He continuing his victories, takes Venlo, Nuys, passes the Rhine: and succours Zutfen, Lester looking on. Distastes between Lester and the United Provinces. The Duke of Parma continues his acquisitions; takes Sluce, a place of mighty importance. During the heat of War, an endeavour is moved between the King of Spain and Queen of England, to accommodate in some sort the affairs of Flanders: but the endeavour is thought but artificiall on both sides. The King this mean while con∣siders whether he ought to make open War upon the Queen or no. Consultations had hereupon in Spain. The King at last resolves to set upon England with most powerfull forces. Preparations made hereupon in Flanders and in Spain. Prepa∣rations made by the Queen. The Spanish Fleet begins to move, and with an unhap∣py beginning, is detained many days by a great tempest; it comes to the English Channel. The English Fleet hasts to incounter it. The Spanish ships begin to suffer prejudice. Fire-boats like those of the siege of Antwerp. The Spanish Fleet is afraid of them, and grows into great confusion. At the same time the sea grows rough, and makes the disorder the greater. Some of the Spanish ships are lost; and
the rest at last are forced to return for Spain. A horrible tempest ariseth, which occasions the loss of many of their ships as they return; and their whole Fleet is parted, torn and shattered by the fury of the sea. THese were at this time the advantages of the Kings Forces. We told you before, that ere Antwerp was taken, Gaunt, Brussels, and Malines were reduced. And not to inter∣rupt the siege of Antwerp, we forbore as then to ac∣quaint you with what befell them; if at least they may be called sieges: For they were taken by only stopping up their Passes, and keeping the Cities from victuals on all sides. We will now briefly relate the several succes∣ses, together with what insued in other parts, during the siege of Antwerp. Af∣ter that the City of Bruges was faln into Fernese's hands, Gaunt began to suffer great scarcities, especially of victuals. The Confederate Provinces held two pla∣ces of very great importance on that Maritine Coast of Flanders; to wit, Sluce, and Ostend And because relief might be sent from thence to Gaunt, Fernese af∣ter the getting of Bruges, endeavoured to possess himself of all the Passes there∣abouts, so as there could no communication be had between Gaunt and those two places: and the success was answerable to the designe. Those of Gaunt not be∣ing able to receive any help from abroad, fell suddenly into great necessities: yet they continued still to be contumacious. And persisting in their opiniatracy a∣gainst the Church and King, they seemed as if they would rather undergoe any thing, then submit themselves again to the Kings obedience, and to the Catholick Religion. On the other side Fernese, though already busied about Antwerp, ceas∣ed not to use all diligence to reduce those of Gaunt to the utmost necessity of Famin. Wherefore scouring the Country round about with his horse, and de∣stroying all every where, he kept those Inhabitants from receiving any help or security from without their own walls. There were not wanting many in the Ci∣ty who were well minded towards the Church and King. Famine increasing then every day more and more, those that were better inclined, took occasion to lessen the obstinacy of the most contumatious; which Fernese had formerly indeavour∣ed to moderate by many gratious offers. And so finally to keep from falling in∣to greater mischiefs, the Gauntesses resolved to come to an agreement, which followed about the end of September the preceding year. They obliged themselves to give all due obedience unto the King; to admit onely of the Catholick profession, as formerly; to rebuild the Castle, which was slighted on the side which lay towards the Town, and to pay twenty thousand pound for main∣tenance of the Kings Army: and Fernese on his part did in the Kings name grant them full pardon; they were restored to their former priviledges, and those who would not profess the Catholick Religion had two years space allowed them to be gone, and to carry away their goods whether they would. By the same way of siege at large, the Cities of Brussels and Malines fell like∣wise some moneths after into the Prince his power, and were surrendred upon al∣most the same conditions: The getting of Nimenghen was also of great consi∣deration, which was taken likewise during the siege of Antwerp, as we then told you: but it was effected by the self resolution of the inhabitants; among which, those who were faithful to the King, and well affected to the Church prevailing they inforc'd the others, and gave up the Town to Fernese, who reaped great ad∣vantake thereby, by reason of the expeditions which followed afterwards in those parts. At the same time that Antwerp was besieged, two very consi∣derable surprises were indeavoured, the one of Balduke, in Brabant, by the uni∣ted Flemish; the other of Ostend, in the Province of Flanders, by the Kings party: The first was managed by Count Hollack and he himself indeavoured to effect it, being got privately before the gate, by means of some intelligence which he held in the Town; his design succeeded so well at the first, as he put in some of his men through the gate; but the people taking up arms, and il signor d' Altapenna being then casually in the Town, the enemy were soon driven out, and with much loss caused to retreat from thereabouts. The surprisal indeavou∣red
in the Province of Flanders by the Royalists, had the same good beginning, and unfortunate end. Monsieur de la Motte was sent about it by Fernese, with such a strength of men as was requisite. He assaulted the old Town of Ostend so at unawares, as he suddenly made himself master of it; but his men having been careless in the keeping of a bridge which joyned the old and new Town to∣gether, the enemy growing couragious, first regained the bridge, and then drove the Kings men out of that part which they had won: these were the events of the Forces in Brabant and Flanders during the siege of Antwerp. On the Rheins side the Kings men during that time got no considerable advantage over the Enemy, unless it were the recovery of Niminghen; but the affairs were so equally bal∣lanced on both sides, as each Party was better able to withstand, then to over∣come the other. Colonel Francis Verdugo commanded the Kings Forces on that side; and next him, John Baptista de Tassis, both of them Spaniards; these aimed above all things to preserve the City of Groninghen, together with the lit∣tle remainder which in those parts continued under the Kings obedience; and they met with some occasions, wherein meeting with the Enemy, they both broke their designs, and weakned their Forces. Adolphus Count de Meurs, a man of quality, both in consideration of his Family and valor, commanded in those parts for the united Flemish; and he had with him Martin Schinck. already turned from the Kings service to serve the Enemy, for some il usage which as he pretended he had received; these two with such forces as they could gather and keep toge∣ther, indeavoured to keep the Kings men from making any farther progress, and to do also what they could to advantage their own party. They had surprised the Town of Nuis upon the Rheine, which belongs to the Arch-bishop of Cul∣len, and had much advantaged themselves thereby thereabouts: but finally, the successes of neither side were, as we have said, of such consequence, during the siege of Antwerp, that in respect of the others which did precede, or of those which shall follow, any farther distinct relation should be made of them here. Returning then to the Kings Army, and to the more important affairs which calls us elsewhere: when the Prince of Parma had set in order the affairs of Antwerp, he resolved to depart from thence, and to go whether the best occasions should invite him: during that little time which he tarried in Antwerp, he had sufficient∣ly discovered, that Holland and Zealand, and the rest of the united Provinces (so we shall call them hereafter, for so they were already begun to be commonly called) would continue in their resolution of not returning to the Kings obedi∣ence: wherefore before his departure he made the Citadel be rebuilt towards the Town, though for the present but with a single plat-form, which was soon after clad with walls; after it was plainly seen, that the aforesaid Provinces did not only seem not to reconcile themselves to the King, but that rather out of new desperate Councels they were resolved to offer the Soveraignity of their Coun∣try to the Queen of England; the carriage whereof was thus. The aforesaid Provinces had formerly intreated the Queen of England to assist them in the so important business of Antwerp; but she entertaining them with bare hopes, never did any thing for them; to say truth, the Queen expected to have them reduced to some greater necessity, so as she might have thereby received those advantages which the Duke of Alanson could not do; as we touched upon before. The fear of loosing Antwerp, increasing daily in those Provinces, and their onely re∣course being to the Queen, they resolved to send her a solemn Ambassy in the common name of them all; and to this purpose they chose such Deputies as suf∣ficed to represent each of them, and sent them into England about the end of the preceding May last. They were received by the Queen with particular grace and honour; they fell then to the business, and this was the offer which they made unto the Queen. That in the first place, their Provinces did in all integrity of soul thank her, for her having been so gratiously pleased to favour them and protect them against the King of Spain's violence, since the very first time that he used any against them; That be continuing more then ever to oppress Flanders, and those Provinces not being able of themselvs to defend themselves from so powerful and cruel an enemy, were inforced to seek for necessary protection elsewhere; That therefore they had re∣solved
to fly unto her for it. A Princess so conjoyn'd to them in territories; so uni∣ted in religion; and so interested in the cause. That to say truth, they were then in a very low condition, that notwithstanding they were yet possest of Oestend, and Sluce in the Province of Flanders, which were both of them Maratine Towns of great concernment; That Holland, Zealand, and Freisland, Provinces which lay all of them upon the Sea, were yet wholly free from the Spaniards, and that within land there were yet many of the most secure places under their union, and a great part of the best of the Country. That they doubted not but that so puissant a Princess as she, would Patronise their defence, much more out of magnanimity then out of Interest; so as leaving the first part to her, and considering themselves the second, they repre∣sented unto her how great an advantage the addition of such Provinces, and particu∣larly those of the Maritine Coast, would be to England: And what doubt could it be, but that these two Naval Forces being joyned together, would give the Law by sea to all the Western, yea and Northern parts? That they then offered to submit themselves wholly to her Soveraignity, so to injoy not onely her ordinary protection, but to be de∣fended by her absolute authority, as by their Princess; hoping that she would be plea∣sed to admit of such an offer, under such fair and reasonable conditions, as their peo∣ple were to enjoy, according to the moderate form of their ancient Government: for what remained, she might assure her self, that the Flemish would alwayes vye for Loyalty towards her, with the English; in readiness in concurring to all her greater exaltations, and in joy to see all her ends effected according to her own desire. This was the substance of their Proposal. Having said this by word of mouth, they presented it in writing to the Queen; who graciously received it; and did in as gracious a manner reply. That she would with all attention study to send them back as speedily as might be to their Provinces, well satisfied. That such an offer bore with it matter of great con∣seqnence; and that therefore she would take particular care that it should be diligent∣ly discust by her Councel. The English had at first seemed very much to desire this. But as usually seen things move more then such as are but meerly imagined; so when the weight of this affair was seen nearer hand, the Councels differed much in their opinions concerning it. Some more boldly were of opinion, That so fair an offer was by all means to be imbraced. That the United Provinces had already lawfully made themselves their own Soveragins; out of their so requisite necessity of not being able to suffer the King of Spains so great oppression. They might therefore lawfully dispose of that their Soveraignty as they should best please. That they had once already confer'd it upon the Duke of Alanson; and wherefore might they not now confer it upon the Queen? The King of Spain would undoubtedly be scandalized hereat; and would peradventure make war again upon England. But how oft had he already offended the Queen? Were not the Insurrections in Ireland fomented by him? had he not a designe to do the like in England? Did not he favour the Queen of Scots Cause as much as he might? and did not he upon all other occasi∣ons shew his ill will to the English? That if he would fall into open war with the Queen, it was to be considered how greatly her usual strength at sea would be increas∣ed by this new Maritine addition of Flanders. Let therefore the King of Spain as∣sault England when he should please, he should finde it as secure in forces, as inex∣pugnable by situation. But there wanted not those that were of a contrary opinion. They said, It was the common concernment of all Princes, that their subjects should keep within their due obedience; what a ruine would it be to Principality, if the rendering or denying of obedience should be at the Subjects pleasure? That hitherto the Queen had favoured the Flemish, not as free people, but as those that were opprest: that she might still, without proceeding any farther, do the same justly for the future; but to acknowledge a Soveraign power in them, and then to accept of that Soveraignty offered by them, was an action of bad example for other Princes; and particularly of very dangerous consequence for the Queen her self: How much more just reason would the King of Spain have in such a case to make her taste of the same evils at her own home? How great a disposition was there generally thereunto in Ireland? And how great in the so many Catholicks which were yet in England? By her example the
King would doubtlesly pass from fomenting secretly, into open invasion. To his Tem∣poral Forces, the Pope of Rome might likely enough add his Spiritual ones. And it would then be seen what would be got by making so uncertain an acquisition in neighbouring Countries, when by doing so, certain hazard must be run at home in her own Dominions. Amidst these two contrary opinions there was one in a middle way between them, which was, That the Queen, without accepting of the Soveraignty, or using any other title of Protection, should assist the Flemish with a good strength of men. That for security of the expence which she should be at in assisting them, they should put some good Town of Zealand into her hands, and some other also in Holland. And that the Forces which should be maintained by the United Provinces should be under his command whom she should send in Chief with her men. Thus having gotten footing in those Maritime parts, and her Authority likewise being in the above said manner extended further within Land, the Queen might wait for what time would produce, who is the best Councellor, and whose advantages are infallible to those that can discern and make use of them. The Queen inclined to this opinion. And because Antwerp was already in very great danger, she gave order for the immediate sending over of 3000 Foot into Zealand to facilitate the relief of that City. And the Flemish resolved to put Ostend for the present into her hands. But this was not performed, because the Aid came not time enough. Wherefore they past on to the chief Negotiation, and these following Capitulations were agreed upon between the Parties in∣teressed. That the Queen of England should be obliged to assist the States of the United Provinces with 5000 Foot and 1000 Horse, (all of them to be paid by her) and that she should send a Commander in chief over with them, who should have the Government of their Forces, and the chief Command over all their Souldiers. That to secure the repayment of the monies which the Queen should spend, the States should put Flushing and the Ramekins into her hands in Zealand, and the Bril in Holland, and leave the same Artillery and ammunition of war in them which was at the present. That when the war should be ended, and the monies repaid, the Queen should be bound to restore the same Towns, in the same condition as they were now assigned over unto her. That the United Provinces should not make peace with the King of Spain, nor league with any other Princes, without the Queens consent; neither should the Queen come to any particular treaty with the King of Spain, without the knowledge and appro∣bation of the Vnited Provinces. That to boot with the Queens General Governour two other of her State-Ministers might intervene at all the Councels and negotiati∣ons of the Vnited Provinces. That in the default of any Governour of Province or Town, the States should name two or three personages, of which one should be chosen by her General Governour, with the participation of the Provinces Councel of State. That in case war were to be made by Sea for the common service, the States should concur thereunto with equal Forces to those that the Queen should therein imploy, and that her Admiral should have the chief Command over them all. That the General Governour, and the other of the Queens Officers should swear obedience not only to her, but to the States also. That all of them should inviolably maintain the wonted Priviledges of the Country, and that there should be no the least alteration of Government made in those Towns whereinto there should any English garrisons be put; and that such Garrisons should be suffered to live, for matter of Religion, according to the manner of England. These were the most essential Articles. Which being agreed upon, sudden order was given for the putting of them in execution. The Queen declared the Earl of Leicester for supreme Head of her Forces, of whom mention is made in other parts of this our History; and many of the Nobility of England prepared to go along with him. That year in this interim ended, and the year 1586 insued. Annò 1586. In the begining whereof, Leicester being imbarked with all his people, arrived at the Hague in Holland about the first week of February, where he was received with all the expressions of Honour and joy that the States could make. The Places which were assigned over unto him were of very great importance. Flushing
and the Ramechins were the chief Key of Zealand; and the Bril was likewise a Port-Town of very great concernment in Holland. The Garrisons being placed according to agreement, the States did so very much intreat Leicester that to boot with the chief Command of their Forces he would likewise accept of the general Government of their whole Country, as he inclined to yield thereunto. At which the Queen seemed to be displeased, and sorthwith sent an Express to complain thereof. But the States renewing the same intreaties to her, she did not any further repugn it; thinking perhaps that she had already so highly offended the King of Spain, as he would be but little pacified though she should forbear this second irritation. Besides, to say truth, 'twas hardly to be believed but that this decla∣ration of the States had been secretly made known unto the Queen, and that Leicester would not have accepted of it without her tacit consent. But howsoever it was, Leicester accepted of the Administration: He distributed his own men and those of the Provinces where it was most needfull, and prepared to impede the progress of the Kings Forces as much as might be, and to doe all that he could expect was to be done by his men. Fernese, through the acquisition of so many chief Cities, and particularly that of Antwerp, did verily believe to put an end to the troubles of Flanders, either by some way of fair Agreement, or by absolute Conquest. Wherefore he was won∣derfully moved to see this Victory which he had so assuredly fancied unto him∣self either by the one way or the other, taken from him by this English succour and the King thought himself thereby so highly offended, as he did not long delay the resenting of it, as you sall shortly hear. But though the Enemy had received such a succour, yet Fernese did not doubt but that as his Forces were far the great¦er, so likewise should his successes be. He therefore resolved as soon as the winter should be over, to march with his Army into the field. The Enemy, though they had lost Mastrick were yet masters of two Towns of great concernment in that lower side of the Mause; the one was Graves, which belongs to Brabant, and the other Venlo in Ghelderland. It made very much for Fernese to have all those parts at his devotion, to the end that he might the better unite his Forces on both the sides of so important a River and that he might likewise with the less impe∣diment carry them on the other side of the Rhine. Wherefore he resolved by all means to make himself master of those two Towns. And though the winter were not yet over, he resolved to send Count Mansfield to straiten Graves at a distance, and gave him such men as were requisite for that purpose. He gave order likewise for the besieging of Venlo after the same manner. And being much prest there∣unto by the Archbishop of Colen he likewise sent the Signor d'Altapenna Go∣vernour of Ghelderland, to make the like preparation against the Town of Nuys where the Enemy had still fortified themselves more and more, and still more prejudiced the adjacent parts by their continual excursions When Mansfield was come before Graves be planted two Forts upon the two banks of the Mause, that he might have the freer passage over the river; and he raised some others more within land, towards where the Town stood. The River did very much help the fortifying of the Town on the River side, and on the Land side the Enemy had likewise very well bastion'd the walls. The Souldiers that were in it were most of them English Foot, part of those that Leicester had brought over with him; and their Commander in chief was the Lord of Hemert, a Dutch-man The Enemy did very much strive to preserve that place, and Leicester prepared to relieve it: He to that purpose sent out a good proportion of Horse and Foot; and the Kings men were not wanting in making such opposition as was needfull, though they had not men enough as then to keep those that were within from making excursions, and hinder the designs which the Enemy had without. During this uncertainty of the Siege on the one side, and of the Succour on the other, there hapned divers actions and skirmishes, one of which proved very bloody The English intended to relieve the Town chiefly by the way of a greater Dike which ran along the Mause; and to this purpose they had fortified themselves upon the Duke, & had likewise prepared divers Barks upon the River. Wherefore taking their time, they began to march with some Squadrons of Foot, and advan∣ced very boldly towards the business. The Royalists were very watchfull on their
part; and resolving to keep back the succour, they likewise marched boldly to encounter the Enemy. The business was very hot for a while, till the English be∣gan to give back and to retreat, which made the Kings men the more forward in advancing: but being too jovial in their pursuit, they did so discompose them∣selves, as being set upon by a fresh Squadron of English Foot, they were driven back, and routed with much slaughter. The most of these were Spaniards, of Don John d' Aquila's Brigado, and the loss was great, for there was slain above 200. of which seven Captains, together with divers inferior Officers. Yet could not the English force the Dike which was first possest by the Spaniards: but by their favorable success they succored the Town by some Boats by the way of the River, and so made them continue the longer in their vigorous defence. The P. of Parma was much displeased with this success; wherefore he gave present order to Alta∣penna to leave the Siege of Nuis for the present, & to come to that of Graves. And he himself came thither soon after in person, and brought the whole body of the Kings Army with him, the sooner to end this Siege. May was already over; and the Prince being exceedingly desirous to end the Siege of Graves, that he might the sooner go to those of Venlo and of Nuis, he caused great haste be made in finishing the Trenches, Batteries, and whatsoever else might the sooner expe∣dite the making of Assaults. Great speed was then made of all the Works, in so much as within few dayes two Batteries were raised, and a dozen Peece of Artil∣lery placed upon each of them, wherewith they began to play upon the Town; the one was placed on the River side, the other on the Lands side. The former plaid upon a Flank, wherein the Enemies chiefest defence on that side lay; but they might notwithstanding resist a long while. And the Earl of Leicester being already come first to Utricht, and then to Arnhem with good Forces, he gave the besieged good hopes of being relieved; when the Lord of Hemert with some of his Captains, being poorly timerous, began to treat of a surrender. Nor did the Prince refuse to give them any Conditions they could desire, that he might the sooner rid his hands of that enterprise. He came forth then with safety to Persons, Arms, and Baggage: but he soon repented his doing so; for not many dayes after Leicester put him, and all the Captains that partook with him in the Surrender, to an ignominious death. The siege of Graves being so happily ended, Fernese went suddenly to that of Venlo. He had then a very gallant Army: For he mustered above 20000 foot, and 3000 horse, all choice men. And the several Nations whereof they consist∣ed, vyed which should outdoe other in each Military action. Fernese being in∣camped before Venlo, he quickly took and fortified all the chiefest Avenues without; and then turned himself to begirt those within, with his wonted works. A certain Island which they had fortified, served the besieged for a good defence on the river side. Fernese would by all means deprive them of this advantage. And because the river was not fordable, and that it was not sufficient to annoy the defendants in the Island barely by Artillery, he made four of the greatest Barks that were in those parts to fall down from Mastrick, resolving to assault them therewithall nearer hand. On their flanks he raised a firm parapet of planks, the better to secure the souldiers who were to enter into them: and he put into each of them a Company of Spanish foot, with a Captain over each Company. The Barks accoasted the Island on divers sides; and the order which was gi∣ven them was, That the souldiers which were within them, should all of them make the attempt at one and the same time; and that they should be seconded from the river side by the Artillery. Nor could the event have proved more luckie: For the Fort being played upon from the river side by the Artillery, the Spani∣ards discharging of their muskets, their landing, and the driving of the enemy from the Island, was almost done at one and the same instant. There were but few of them slain; the rest saved themselves in some boats. This infused much terror into the besieged: But they were incouraged by Leicester, and chiefly by Schinck, who had his wife and a sister within the Town: wherefore his private Interest concurring with the common Cause, he did all he could to bring in some succour: But Fernese had so shut up all the Passes, as it was too hard a matter to effect. Yet Schinck did several times endeavour it, till all hopes being lost, he
gave over the designe. The Kings men this mean while played furiously upon the Town from several parts; and those Nations who before strove who should ad∣vance furthest, strove now who should be the first to give the assault: But the defendants not willing to expect it, resolved to yield. The Conditions were al∣most the same that were given at Graves. From hence Fernese went with all speed to before Nuis. And with him did the Elector of Cullen joyn, at whose in∣treaties it was that the Army marched thither. The Town was already a little curbed by some Forts; but those within had not forborn making of many stout fallies; and seemed still more resolute to defend it. This Town lies upon the Rhine, as you have heard: and the River makes an Island just in the face of it, not far from the walls of the Town. Here the enemy had particularly fortified themselves; and from thence Fernese would by all means drive them. The care of this was given unto he Spaniards, who did attempt it boldly. But the enemy issuing out with like courage made good the Island, and slew some of the Spa∣niards. Who notwithstanding returned more resolutely then before, and at last the defendants were forced to yield. Fernese allotted all that side to the Spani¦ards, to accost the Town on that part; and planted a good number of Canon a∣gainst the walls. On the land side he placed the Italians with a like battery, in o∣ther places he likewise set those of other Nations against the Town; in so much as the besieged were soon brought into great straites. One battery play'd after ano∣ther and sometimes they plaid all together. The wall towards the river was very well desended by a great Tower but the Spaniard did assault it so fiercely, as at last they lodged themselves there. Whereby the Town was still more infested on that side, and was still in more danger to be taken. Nor had the Italians reduced them to lesser straits on their side. Wherefore the besieged failing in their cou∣rage, and the Governour of the Town being sorely wounded, they began to think of surrendring. The Army was much incensed against this Town; for they found that the Townsmen were inclined to receive in the enemy; besides, many of the Inhabitants were hereticks, and were still openly disposed to favour that aforesaid Apostate Bishop Truxes. Whilst then there was a cessation of Arms by agreement, and that they were upon Treaty of Surrender, and that they were weighing the Conditions: The Spaniards and Italians despising all good Milita∣ry , assaulted the Town with blind fury on two sides at once. The e∣nemy astonished hereat, endeavoured as much as they could to desend them∣selves; but had no good success. For the Royalists being thereat more incensed after they had over come all obstacles, entred the Town in a hostile manner, and in ex∣cess of anger, which soon turned into down right fury they put all they met with to the sword. Nor did bloud satisfie their cruelty Neglecting the avarice of plunder, they fell to fire the Town; which they did in so many places, as the Town which was almost wholly built of wood, was suddenly all on a fire. One house served to fire another; and the division of streets no whit availing, the flames flew from one side to the other, and in a rapid motion spread themselves over the whole Country. And that the Town might be the sooner, and the more miserably destroyed, the wind conspired with the fire, whereby it was in very few hours wholly reduced to ashes. With much adoe two Churches were saved, whereinto many sacred virgins, together with other women of the Town, had re∣course for shelter. And the Marquiss of Vasto did in particular shew himself generously pious in saving them all from the fury of the souldier; he being greatly respected by the Army, no less in consideration of his bloud, then of his valour and imployment. Before the Duke of Parma, (for so we shall call him hereafter, his father Duke Octavius being now dead) went from about Nuys, the Bishop of Vercelles, who was the Popes Nuntio in the City of Cullen, came unto him, and in the name of Pope Sextus Quintus presented him with the Trunchion and Helmet, which the Popes do use to bestow as a token of their esteem and affection to such Princes as deserve well of the Church. The Ceremony was solemnly performed in the Camp; and the Elector of Cullen, and Duke of Cleves would be present at it for he was likewise come at that time to visit Fernese. And at the same time the Mar∣quis of Vasto received the Order of the Golden Fleece. Which the King had
sent unto him a little before; and Fernese's self put it about his neck. The enter∣prise of Nuys having received this Tragical end, the Camp past to before Rein∣burgh, which Town depends likewise upon the Bishoprick of Cullen, and lies low∣er upon the Rhine. It was then in the enemies possession; and the Archbishop and Fernese did both of them desire to see it reduced under the Catholick power. The enemy had fortified it very well: and had likewise munited a certain Island, which stands before the Town. Lester thinking it too great a shame, that Fernese after having made so many acquisitions, even as it were before his eyes, should likewise make this; reinforced his Army as much as he could, resolving either to relieve the Town, or to make some diversion by besieging some of the Kings Towns. He was on the other side of the Rhine, in the Province of Overisel; so called for that the river Ysel runs through it. On the right hand thereof stands Zutfen; one of the Towns of greatest importance in all those parts. Lester be∣thought himself to take this place; and in order thereunto, he would first take Deosburg, a little Town upon the same river, but which might help him in his chief designe. There were 300 Walloon foot in Deosburg, who assisted by the situation of the place, might make it good a long while; but as soon as the ene∣my had opened their Trenches on their side, and ordered their Batteries, the de∣fendants offered to parley; and put the Town into Lesters hands. From hence he went with his whole Camp to Zutfen: the City had a great Fort made of earth on the side opposite to the River; and two lesser ones which did so much the more defend it. Lester incamped himself on both sides the river, and having made a bridg of boats, the better to joyn his Camp together, he endeavoured first to take the Fort, hoping that the taking thereof would facilitate the taking of the Town. John Baptista di Tassis, of whom you have heard before, was Governor of the Town. Who forthwith advertised Fernese what danger the City was in of being taken, unless it were very speedily relieved: for they had not provisions answerable to the circuit of the place. Fernese had already made some progress a∣gainst Reinburg, and had taken the Island; yet fearing he should not take the Town time enough to succour the other, he left the Island well munited, and re∣solved to tarry no longer before Reinburg, but to go speedily to the relief of Zutfen. Wherefore in great haste making a bridge of boats over the Rhine at Burick, and raising a Fort at each end thereof, he went with all his Army to the other side, and marched towards the enemy. As he was upon his march, he was advertised that there were 2000 Rutters on that confine of Germany, who were raised by the Count de Meurs, to assist the enemy. He therefore chose out 1500 horse, and put one of the Spanish foot behind each of them, commanding them that with all speed they should march thitherward. And he himself followed with more men to back them. The Rutters expected not such an incounter, and therefore marched not in any good order, nor any waies provided to fight; wherefore meeting at una∣wares with the Kings men, they were soon routed and defeated. The Duke con∣tinued his march from hence, and came so neer Zutfen, as he prepared to send in succour; to this purpose he put all his Camp into battel array, and made the Marquess of Vasto advance with some Troops of Horse, all of them almost Ita∣lians; with a great Squadron of Foot, composed of Spaniards, Italians, and Walloons, and with many Cart loads of the necessariest provisions to be brought into the City. The Horse went in the Van, with whom the Marquess coming up unto the Enemies, some Troops of English Horse boldly opposed them, and charged so home, as they disorder'd them, and inforc'd them to give back; but reassuming courage, they fell to fight again; and the combat was such, as for a while the success was doubtful: The Marquess plaid his part manfully: The Ita∣lian Troops were commanded by Apio Conti, the Marquess Hanibal Gonsaga, the Marquess Bentivoglio, Georgio Cressia, and Count Nicolas Cesis; who strove all of them who should most signalize themselves upon this occasion. But the conflict seemed most to favour the enemy; for Cressia was taken prisoner, and Gonzaga dangerously wounded. When the Kings squadron of foot advanced, and heartning the horse, stopt the violence of the enemy; and afforded time for the Duke himself to come up. He came in battel array, with resolution to fight,
if the enemy should endeavour with all his forces to hinder the succour. But Leicester would not hazard himself so far; but making a retreat be sounded, suf∣fered Fernese to pass on; who entred himself in person into Zutfen, and left the Town well provided. Then going suddenly out again, he entertained himself thereabouts till Leicester had quite given over the siege; and winter drawing on, after he had put good Garisons into all the Towns that formerly and of late were reduced into the Kings obedience in those parts, he returned about the midst of November to Brussels, with much honour for having made so many and so con∣siderable expeditions in so short a time. The Duke being gone from Zutfen, and having distributed his Army into their quarters, Leicester returned again to as∣sault the Forts which were raised on the banks opposite to that Town. One of the lesser was suddenly taken by assault. And Count Hollack was the first that en∣tred it, the more to incourage the rest; and in the action he received an honou∣rable wound. The other lesser Fort made no better resistance. The greatest Fort yet remained, which might have held out longer; but Tassis inclined rather to withdraw the men into Zutfen, the better to defend the City in case the Enemy should resolve to beguirt it. Leicester did notwithstanding dispose of all his men about it, and did as it were besiege it at a distance, that he might do it neerer at hand when the season should permit him; he returned from hence to Holland, and made his abode in the Hague, where the States of the Provinces were then met: They seemed but little satisfied with Leicester, either in his Civil or Military Government; they saw what atchievements the Duke of Parma had continually made, whilst he was a looker on in most of them; nor could they endure that together with the Towns deposited into the Queens hand, he should put English garrisons into divers other Towns as he had done: they therefore still grew more and more suspitious, judging that such proceedings tended more to domination then to defence; and that Leicester intended to use rather an absolute, then a limited power; nor did they forbear to acquaint him with their sense, in a decent and moderate way: but he striving to justifie his actions sundry waies, sought to ap∣pease the States, and to dissolve the Assembly; which not being able to do, he resolved to go for England, seeming to depart angry; and the States seemed no less offended: The distastes on both sides past afterward so far on, as the Provin∣ces sent some of their Deputies to the Queen with complaints against Leicester: and he on the contrary sought to cross all their negotiations. These discords made much for the Duke of Parma's advantage; which as he very well knew, so did he not fail to make use of it. The new year of 1587 was already begun; and Anno 1587. the Souldiers were all in their winter quarters; wherefore by divers practises he wrought it so as that some Towns of very great importance fell into his hands. William Stanly, an English Gentleman, was Governor of Deventer, and Colo∣nel of a Regiment of the same Nation: This man agreeing with Tassis, who was Governor for the King in Zutfen, resolved to put the City of Deventer un∣der the Kings obedience. Stanly was a Catholick, and seemed to do it chiefly out of the zeal to Religion; yet he was largely rewarded by the King; and so much the rather, for that he drew along with him to the Kings service all the English which were with him at Deventer; which were the greatest part of his Re∣giment and he still kept the command of them, together with the title of Colonel. By his example, Rowland York, who kept the Forts of Zutfen, delivered them up not long after to Tassis. The Castle of Vouve not far from Bergenapzome was likewise a little before faln into Fernese's hands, which is a strong place, and might much facilitate the taking of Berghen. The people of the confederate Provinces did mightily storm at these new losses made by treachery, to boot with those which were formerly taken by force. Were these the aids; were these the advantages which they expected from Eng∣land? Was this the fruit that they reaped by the Earl of Leicester's Government? At his coming into Flanders he made miracles be expected at his hands: but how soon were these miracles turned into shame? How many places had the Duke of Par∣ma taken whilst he looked on? And how much to his dishonor, had he in particular relieved Zutfen? That hereupon departing for England, instead of siding with Flanders, he was become their enemy. Nay, he had rather made himself Soveraign
then Governour thereof; having placed English where he pleased in lieu of native Flemish. That he did now oppugne the cause of the Provinces before the Queen, in stead of defending it. Since then it was not known when he would return, or how minded, wherefore should not the Provinces the mean while by their own authority re∣solve upon what was best for their common service? They delayed no longer, but immediately summoned the States Generall. Who when they met, it was resolved amongst them, that Count Maurice of Nassaw should immediately take upon him the Government of the Militia, and that having Count Hollack for his Lieutenant, he should provide for all necessary occurrences of the war. The Assembly took also divers other resolutions, and sent their complaints again into England against Leicester, and against the other English Commanders which he had left in Flanders; and prest very much that the Queen would remedy so many disorders. The Queen was hereat troubled: wherefore she suddenly dispatcht away the Lord Buckhurst, one of her prime Privy-Councellors; to the end that he, together with Colonel Norris, (who had many years before served the United Provinces with great praise and reputation) might endeavour to compose the differences between those Provinces and Leicester, and free the Flemish from those jealousies which they seemed chiefly to be fallen into by reason of him. This mean while the sharpness of the winter was over, wherefore the Duke of Parma resolved to take to the field again. He much desired to cleanse the Province of Flanders so throughly, as that the Enemy might be masters of no place there. They had still therein (as hath been said) Ostend and Sluce. The Duke therefore resolved first to besiege the latter, that he might afterwards doe the like to the other, according as he should find opportunity. His Camp was at this time very much lessened; for many of his Souldiers were lost in the so many expeditions of the last year, and many were imployed in guarding the Towns that were newly taken. He thought not∣withstanding that he might besiege Sluce with but a moderate number of Soul∣diers, that Town standing as it were in the midst of Marish places, and having but little dry ground about it, where it was requisite to take the Passes, and to defend them. He therefore resolving upon this, try'd first to deceive the Enemy by feigning another enterprise. He sent Il Signor d'Altapenna, together with Marquis Vasto, into the utmost Confines of Brabant, and gave them so many Horie and Foot as he thought necessary for that purpose. They went their wayes, and with several appearances infused fear into the Enemies in those parts; in so much as Count Maurice and Count Hollack came suddenly thither. Having made this diversion, Fernese turn'd presently upon Sluce, and towards the end of May incamped before it. Sluce does not lie altogether upon the Sea-side, as doth Ostend but a little more within land: yet there runs a Channel on the right hand of it, whereinto the Sea enters, and is large enough to receive any whatsoever Vessel; on the other sides thereof some other lesser Channels joyn with this greater, so as there is but little manageable earth, unless it be of one side only, which is towards the part called Bruges, because it lies nearest to that City. An Island of about two leagues about lies almost over against Sluce, between the bigger Channel and some others on that part, which fall all of them into the Sea; and it is called Cassante. Sluce might be relieved by Sea from Flushing particularly by this Island, and by Land from Ostend, which lies upon the same Sea coast towards the West about some five leagues from Sluce, Flushing lying much upon the same distance towards the East. The Enemy had a Fort midway between Ostend and Sluce, which was very commodious for bringing succour to the besieged on that side, which was called the Fort Blanchemberg. When the Duke was incamped about the Sluce, he forthwith went about to take the Fort. The Enemy had not provided very well for it; as well for that they were busied about other things of greater necessity, as for that they did not expect the Kings Forces at that time thereabouts. This Fort being set upon by the Kings men, made not much resistance: yet those within it would wait till the Cannon was brought, which when they were presented, they made no further defence. The Fort being left well guarded, the Duke returned presently to his already begun enterprise. He had not much above 8000 Foot with him, and but a very few
Horse; for there was no need of any more, in that so low and watery situation. Many of his Souldiers were gone to the diversion which was to be made by Alta∣penna, and the Marquis Vasto. The Quarters being taken and fortified, the first thing the Duke did was to plant a Fort upon the Island of Cassante, in a certain bending of the greater Channel which washeth Sluce. By it succour might be brought from Sluce. And because the Fort was not able to hinder the bringing of it, there were some great Barks placed in the midst of the Channel, fastned one to another, and well furnisht with Mariners, Souldiers, and Artillery, whereby the passage of the Boats with which the Enemy might endeavour to relieve the Town was so much the more disturbed. The Duke, the better to defend the Boats, made some Works over against them on each side of the River. The Channel was not notwithstanding above three quarters of a mile over; and as for the rest, no re∣lief could be brought by them. Yet to be the surer on that side, the Duke sent some Horse and Foot into the Island of Cassante to watch over all the proceed∣ings of the Enemy on that side which was nearest Flushing. He then bent to∣wards the taking of the Town. He could not accost it (as hath been said) save only on the side towards Bruges; and the ground was there likewise very soft. Min heer Groneveld was Governour of Sluce, a valiant Souldier, as he very well proved himself to be in this defence: He had with him 2000 good Souldiers, part of which were sent unto him by the Governour of Flushing, at the first ap∣pearing of the Kings men. No sooner then did the Kings men begin to approach, but that the Defendants issued out in accustomed sallies to oppose them. The Fort of Bruges was well fortified with good Flanks; and the besieged had like∣wise raised a Fort without the Gate to keep the Kings men the further from the Ditch. Fernese knew that this Fort was by all means to be won, which he reso∣lutely went about. It was oft-times assaulted, and as oft stoutly defended; but at last the Enemy were glad to quit it. Hereby the Royalists had the better con∣veniencie to make their approaches. The Marquis of Renty had the chief care of the Trenches, who was one of the chief Lords of Flanders, and of most credit for valour and fidelity. By him the Works were with great vigilancie led on: but being too fervent and forward therein, he was ill wounded, and was inforced to withdraw from thence. Monsieur de la Motte succeeded in his place, a man of quality likewise, and of like valour and fidelity: But he proved no more for∣tunate; for as he was with equal fervencie surveying the Works, he received so dangerous a wound in one of his Arms, as to save his life it was cut off. In the defence of the Trenches, John d' Aquila a Spanish Camp-master, together with many Captains, and Souldiers of inferior condition were so sorely hurt, as the Royalists could not pay dearer for their endeavours on that side. And yet they suffered very much on another side. To come to the Trenches, the Kings men were of necessity to pass over a Bridg which lay so open to the wall of the Town, as those within might with great safety to themselves shoot at them. The Roy∣alists placed a great Cloth before it, so to make the Enemy shoot at less certainty. But notwithstanding this, the damage was very great which they received, and continued so to be till the Royalists had advanced further, and so bereft the Enemy of that advantage. This was the condition of the Siege, when the Earl of Leicester being sent by the Queen, who had agreed the business between him and the Flemish as well as she could, returned from England. He arrived in Zea∣land about the middle of June, and brought with him a good recruit of English Horse and Foot. When he came to Flushing, he met Count Maurice there like∣wise, who had left Hollack to grapple with Altapenna and Vasto. When they came to treat of relieving Sluce, the resolution was to endeavour it by Sea. To this purpose as many ships as was needfull being provided, about 5000 Foot and 600 Horse were put aboard them, with all other necessaries to secure the City when they should have brought in the succour. Within a few houres the Fleet appeared in the Channel, and Leicester within sight of the besieged strove to en∣courage them, and signified to them by signs, that for certain he would relieve them. But having discovered further into the Channel, he found that passage so blockt up, and so secured, as he thought it was impossible to be overcome. The Fleet stood in suspence three dayes in the same place, between their desire of ef∣fecting
the succour, and the difficulty of doing it; at last weighing anchor, he steered towards Ostend, the Councel having resolved to endeavour the succour on that side by land. Fernese being aware of the designe, forthwith reinforced the Fort of Blanchemberg with some foot and horse: which obstacle was to be remo∣ved by the enemy, before they could relieve Sluce. And so they resolved to do, as soon as they had landed their men, to whom they added the whole Garison of Ostend; they marched against the Fort of Blanchemberg. The loss thereof was of as great consequence to Fernese, as the getting of it was to them: wherefore leaving the siege every where well provided, he himself together with all the rest of his men, marched towards the enemy. They were already ready to play up∣on the Fort; but when unexpectedly they saw the Kings men in their faces, af∣ter they had awhile consulted whether they should fight or retreat, they would not at last joyn battel; but withdrew again to Ostend. From thence they return∣ed again with the same Fleet, to the same place where they were formerly near Sluce. But Fernese returning likewise suddenly back, gave them no greater hopes of succouring the besieged. So as they fell off again, and appeared there no more. The hindring of this succour did much incourage the King men; and though it had the contrary effect upon the besieged, yet did they not omit to make resis∣tance. The Kings men had not as yet made any formall batteries. The work of the Trenches was prolonged longer then they thought it would have been, by reason of the condition of the ground, of the opposition made by the enemy, and divers other things. But at last the Trenches were advanced as far forward as was requisite: wherefore they delayed no longer to play upon the Town. This could only be done (as hath been said) on the part towards Bruges. They rais∣ed but one only battery; marry it was one of the greatest that hath been seen in as many sieges as hath been made in Flanders. For 40 great pieces of Canon were planted thereupon. And at the first bout in the space of eight hours they made above 4000 shot, as was particularly counted: which made a breach in the wall nearest the gate, of above 20 yards long. The breach being made, before the Royalists resolved upon the assault, they saw that the defendants had raised a great half moon behind the wall and that they had so fortified themselves there, that it would have cost them much bloud to enter by assault. Nor were some defences wholly taken away which were thrust forth from out the wall that was plaid upon. So as Fernese thought it better to advance by the wonted way of fil∣ling up of ditches, with mathooks and mines; and spare his souldiers bloud, though he were somewhat longer in getting the Town. By which way at last (af∣ter the enemies had made all possible resistance, in defending the ditch, in mee∣ting with their Mines, and in all other manner of opposition) the siege was brought to an end, and the Town surrendred upon all the most honourable con∣ditions that could be desired. The 2000 of the Garison that were in it, were re∣duced to little more then 600. and more of the Kings men were lost in this siege, then in the three preceding ones of Graves, Venlo and Nuys. This mean while the before mentioned diversion was made by Altapenna and Vasto; but the mo∣tion was afterwards turned to necessity: for the enemy thinking likewise to raise the siege from before Sluce by diversion, had assembled a good strength of men about Balduke, and threatned that City. The Kings men being then past from Brabant into Ghelderland, had no other end but to wait upon the enemy, and ra∣ther to hinder their proceedings, then to make any further progress themselves. They notwithstanding advantaged themselves by getting the Town of Ghelders, which by Treaty was delivered up to Altapenna. Colonel Paton, a Scotchman was Governour thereof; who fearing lest Lester would take that Government from him, and bestow it upon some Englishman, would by this act of persidious∣ness prevent the act of injury, at least by him so reputed. But the Royalists on the contrary received two great losses. The one was, that Altapenna as he would have relieved the Fort of Engelen, received a mortal wound whereof he died the next day. The other, that the Count of Hollack did within a few days take that Fort. The name whereof was afterwards changed to Creve-coeurc, alluding to the sorrow which the loss thereof would cause in the Kings men; they were both
really great losses. For Altapenna was a Gentleman of much valour, great com∣mand, and of very great fidelity; and that Fort guarded a Pass over the Mause, which was of the greatest importance for the service of Balduke of any that was thereabouts. The Duke of Parma having taken Sluce would presently have be∣sieged Ostend. But the enemy had so well munited that place, and it was so diffi∣cult a business to keep it from being relieved by reason of its situation, as the Duke forbore doing it at that time. Moreover the resolutions which the King of Spain had put on against the Queen of England, summoned him to other de∣signes. The loss of Sluce had this mean while caused much quarrelling between the Flemish and the English; each blaming the other for not relieving it. The Fle∣mish imputed it to Leicester, as having endeavoured it too late; and Leicester complained of the Provinces, for that they had not time enough furnished him with requisite provisions. Wherefore the Queen weary of hearing so many com∣plaints; as also of being at so great expence; or rather finding her self disdecei∣ved in her hopes of coming to greater Authority amongst the Flemish: she thought it better to move some Treaty of accommodation in the Affairs of Flan∣ders. Which it may be believed she was chiefly perswaded unto, thereby to try whether she could avoid the Tempest of Arms which the King of Spain already threatned her withall. She thought the King of Denmark might be a fitting Instrument for this purpose, wherefore she turned her self to him. Nor was he backward therein; but readily imbracing it, sent John Ronsovio forthwith to Brussels, who was well received by the Duke of Parma, and was afterwards well approved of by the King of Spain. The Schools from whence the negotiations of Princes proceed, are always full of deep mysteries. And though it be desired, their hidden and reserv'd ends, either cannot or ought not to be penitrated into. It was notwithstanding conjectured, that the Queen and King desired inter∣changeably to delude one another in this kind of negotiation so as those provisi∣ons which were making on both sides, might be a little slackned. The United Provinces seemed most averse to this kind of negotiation. For their answer to Leicester, who had sundry times made several proposals to them about it, was re∣solutely this. That they would never return again under the King of Spains obedience: and that though the Queen should abandon them, they would not notwithstanding desist from doing what they could in their own defence even till the last gasp. But whatsoever should come of it, or what ever the end of this Treaty might be, the King and Queen resolved to set it on foot; and chosing Burborg, a little Town between Dunkirk and Gravelin, for the place, they sent some per∣ticular Commissioners thither to that end. In the Kings name there did intervene Count Aremberg, Knight of the golden Fleece; Mousieur de Campigni, Lord Treasurer; and John Richardotto, President of the Councel of Artois. And for the Queen, the Earl of Darby, Knight of the Garter, and two others of her privy Councel: whilst arms were handled in Flanders in one part, and this Treaty was in hand in another, many frequent consultations had been had, and were yet had in Spain, touching in what manner the King should rescent the in∣juries done unto him by the Queen of England. The King had been provoked long before this by the Queen of England, by her continual fomenting the trou∣bles of Flanders; yet he thought he might dissemble the offence, because she dis∣sembled the injuries: But the King was so moved at this last action, wherein she had by so many helps so openly revived the rebellion of Flanders, when it was almost extinguished, as he thought he could no longer forbear, shewing how ill he took it, by declaring open war against her: Yet openly to make war upon England, was of great consequence to the affairs of Spain; so as the King be∣fore he would resolve thereupon, would have it very well disputed by his ablest ministers of State. Alvaro di Bassano Marquess of Sancta Croce, a Personage very much cryed up for Naval Militia, was one of those that perswaded him most to this enterprise: he bore a great command at this time over the Kings Fleets in the Ocean; and by reason of his imploymenr, hoped it would fall to his share to be the prime man in this famous expedition. Wherefore whilst they were treating one day of this business in presence of the King, he spoke thus.
When I consider (most mighty Prince) the glory and advantage of the propositi∣on in hand, and the hopes of seeing it happily effected, I confess I cannot forbear ex∣horting your Majesty with all the power and efficacy I have, by all means to lay hold of it: your Majesty may chiefly glory in the August Cognomen of most Catholick: and that you have much more made it good in your actions, then used it in your Title. What greater glory can you then desire, then, in the first place, to restore so great and so noble a Kingdom, as is England, to due obedience to the Church, and to the anci∣ent veneration of the Altars? And what greater renown, then to beat down Heresie there, where her most rebellious ensignes are raised up; that Island being made as it were an inexpugnable Sanctuary thereof? How much hath Piety and Religion flou∣rish'd formerly in that Kingdom? How many Catholicks are there yet there? And how do they long to see an end of that bitter persecution which they suffer there? And to proceed to the advantage of the proposal: It is well known, that Spain can reap no greater advantage, then in being no longer opposed by England. From thence are the Indies infested, and your Fleets threatned. From thence is the Rebellion of Flanders fomented, and the manifest usurpation of the Dominion therefore aspired unto. And fi∣nally, From thence proceeds all the greatest damages which the Crown of Spain suf∣fers at this present: and from thence will the greatest evils alwaies derive which shall at any time hereafter befall it. And for the happy success of the enterprise; why should not your Majesty assure your selfe thereof? Your Forces at Sea have formerly been most powerful: How much more formidable wil they be made now by the addition of Portugal? And your resent succession to that Kingdom does plainly denote, that God hath been thereby pleased the more to facilitate this enterprise: 'Tis then to be beleeved that the Spanish Fleet by Sea will be of that Potency, as it will not to be with∣stood by all the maritime Forces of England, though assisted by Holland and Zea∣land. The Army by land which the Duke of Parma hath lately increased in Flanders may at the same time correspond with the Fleet which shall come from Spain. When the Channel shall be possest by your Fleet, the Army may be easily conveyed over into the Island: where when it shall be landed, and all your Majesties Forces joyned, what shall withctand them from entring suddenly into the heart of the Kingdom? For it be∣ing an Island, nature defends it onely by situation, no use being made to fortifie it by industry. When this shall be once done, and England's fomenting be ceased, it is not to be doubted, but that the Rebellion in Flanders will soon cease likewise. Fire lasts as long as do the materials where with it is fed; when those fail, the greatest fires go out, and end in ashes. John Idiaques, one of the Kings Officers most imployed in Court at that time, appeared in Councel to be of a contrary opinion. Idiaques had been for many years Ambassador, first at Genua, then at Venice; and after his return to Court the King had always imployed him in managing the most important affairs of the Crown. He spake thus. The first thing that is to be taken into consideration (most mighty Prince!) is, in my opinion, the difficulties of the undertaking which is now in dispute. And to speak my mind freely, I think them so great, as there is but very little hope of good success. England (as every one knows) is so situated, hath such Forces, such Inhabitants, and is governed after so peculiar a manner, as it will be too hard a matter for any Foreign Nation to land there, much more hard to keep there when they are landed. That Kingdom is inclosed and fortified on all sides by the Sea; the Havens there are but few, and any Fleet may be easily kept from entring thereinto. The English yield not to any Nation of the world for skill in maritime affairs; and their maretime Forces, together with those that will be added to them by Holland and Zealand, may without doubt oppose whatsoever Fleet Spain can set forth, at least by way of defence. But say that our men were landed in the Kingdom, how can we hope to establish them there? Usually in the making of Conquests, some internal disposition is required, and there is a continual necessity of external aids to maintain them. There can no safe correspondencie be hoped for from the English, it being a Nation which will suffer no other Government then its own: And succours from elswhere will be so hard to be effected, so expensive, and so uncertain, as the Forces of Spain which are al∣ready so distracted will never be able to supply them. Hath not your Majesty expe∣rience by your marriage with Queen Mary, how much the English doe hate all manner
of Foreigners, and how contrary all the Laws of the Kingdom are there unto? Is not the Rebellion of Flanders sufficient to let out the best blood of Spain, without adding thereunto that which you shall suddenly see arise in England? Then since there is so little hope: of any good success in this affair, methinks it were better to let it alone, and so to resent the wrongs done unto you by the Queen, as fighting with her at her own weapons, not to come to open war upon her States. If war shall be made and the design not succeed, how much more will she oppress the Catholicks of England and of Ireland? How will she foment the troubles in Flanders? nourishing still her own desire of usurp∣ing the government thereof? And how much more justly shall she plot all manner of mischief with the Hollanders and Zealanders to the Crown of Spain in the Indies, and in all other parts? So as by this enterprise no glory or advantage will redound to your Majesty, but shame and loss. Let your Majesty therefore bend all your might to end the Rebellion of Flanders. The Duke of Parma's Army being reinforced by Land, and the Provinces of Holland and Zealand being set upon by Sea with the same Forces which would be imployed against England, your Majesty may safely believe to see that Rebellion subdued, and the Church restored to its former right, as also your Royal Crown. If in the mean while the Queen of England shall continue to aggravate her offences yet more against your Majesty, then may you resent your self against her in open war with more expedition, more advantage, and more happy success. The former success will doubtlesly very much help the other: where as on the contrary, if the design of assaulting England misgive, as it is to be feared it will; for my part I fear (and I wish my fears may prove false) the Rebellion of Flanders will never have an end. The Duke of Parma being desired to signifie his mind in this point, seemed to incline to this second opinion. And howsoever, if the business concerning Eng∣land were to precede, he said that some Port or Haven in Zealand was first to be won; and this out of two very important reasons: The one, that upon any oc∣casion the Spanish Fleet might have some safe and near refuge; and the other, that the Kings Havens in the Province of Flanders might not be hindred by the Hollanders and Zealanders, in the Duke of Parma's transporting his Army into England. The King staggering between these two opinions, was a while in di∣spute with himself which of them to follow: But in fine it appeared, that the se∣curing of England did so absolutely draw with it the putting an end to the Rebel∣lion of Flanders, as it was resolved in Spain to make all the speed and all the great∣est preparations that might be for the execution of this enterprise. The King was afterwards the more encouraged herein, by the disposition he found in the Pope not only of approving, but of favouring the design. Sixtus Quintus was then Pope, who appeared very zealous in maintaining the universal cause of the Church. In the particular of England, he considered what had befaln in the time of Pius Quintus, by whom he had been made Cardinal. When Pope Pius found that the Queen of England grew still more perverse in prosecuting the Catho∣licks, and to doe all ill to Religion both at home and abroad, he at last published an Apostolical Bull, wherein was contained such punishments against her, as the Church in like cases had alwayes wont to inflict. But instead of being thereby bettered, the Queen grew more cruel and impious: Nothing was seen or heard of in that Kingdom, but a perpetual, irremissible fury against Catholicks; some were banisht, others imprisoned, others deprived of their goods together with their Country, and many bereft both of goods and life: The Priests were chiefly persecuted; and Heresie triumphing over their punishments, and to see their Ministery already wholly routed out, 'twas thought the Queen intended fully to extinguish all the remainder of Catholick Religion, and all the footsteps of that Piety which for so many Ages had so exceedingly flourisht there. Nor was her hatred towards the Church bounded within her own Dominions; it was known how greatly, and how continually she fomented the Heretical factions of Ger∣many, France, and Flanders, to nourish troubles there, and particularly to beat down the Catholick religion: by her means likewise Scotland was greatly sub∣verted; and her beheading of the Queen of Scots, who had been alwayes very zealous in the Catholick cause, was generally detested by all the Catholick Prin∣ces of Europe, and in particular had caused much horror in the Pope. Wherefore
joyning this with many other actions whereby the Queen did so cruelly afflict the Church, and disturb the publike peace almost every where, he considered he was not to let slip the occasion now presented of favouring the King of Spains aforesaid enterprise, thereby to advantage the Catholike cause universally over all Europe, and particularly in England and Ireland. To this purpose he thought it fit to make a Subject of England Cardinal; and this was Doctor Allen, who was one of the antientest and most qualified Ecclesiasticks, both for learning wisdom, and goodness, of all those of that Nation that were abroad. Allen was then at Rome; and the Popes intention was to send him into Flanders, and then into England (in case the design should succeed) there to exercise such Ministerial duties, as should upon such an occasion be most needfull for the service of the Church, and particularly for those Catholicks. The Pope being thus minded, the King applied himself with all fervencie to the business, and to make very exceeding great preparations both by Sea and Land. He gave the care of the maritime preparations to the Marquis de la Croce, and destin'd him to the Naval command. As for the Land, he would have the greatest Forces be raised in Flanders; and that the Duke of Parma should carry that Army which was under his command over into England, and that he should have the chief command thereof, as also of all the rest who were brought in the Fleet to land in the Island. These Orders being given out by the King, the noise thereof began to be heard throughout all his Kingdoms; each of them strove which should provide most ships, greatest store of victuals and warlike ammuni∣tion, in so great ampleness as so high a design did require. Great preparations of all these things were made in Sicily, in the Kingdom of Naples, and in all the ma∣ritime Coasts of Spain, and especially in the building of great abundance of ships whereof the Fleet was to be composed. Such men as were necessary for the service were also raised in all parts; and in fine, the resolution was to make an Armado so powerfull in all conditions, as the like had never been known at any time to be upon the Sea. The Duke of Parma's diligence in making preparations in Flanders in behalf of the enterprise, was this mean while no whit less. After the getting of Sluce he went to Bruges, and kept there as in the fittest place of all the Province of Flanders, to dispose of all things necessary for the transporting of his Army into England: To recrute it with men, the King had given order that Biaggio Cappizucchi in Italy should raise a Brigado of Foot in the State of Ur∣bin: and that Carlo Spinulli should do the like in the Kingdom of Naples; That the Marquess of Brogaut, brother to the Cardinal Andrea d' Austrea, should raise another in Germany, greater then ordinary: That the rest of the German Nation that were on foot, should be filled up; and that the like should be done amongst the Burgonians and Walloons: That a good body of men should be sent from Spain to recruit the old Brigadoes: That in in fine, the field Army of Flanders should be composed of 30000 Foot, and of 4000 choise Horse; all of which, or at least the greatest part were to be imployed in the expedition for Eng∣land. An infinite provision of things was required to transport such an Army, and to provide it with all things necessary to lead on the enterprise successfully on that side. They purposed to embarke the men at Newport and Dunkirk; and a great number of vessels was necessary to transport them: And though these were rather to be for burthen, then war, and rather low built then high; yet the assembling so many of them, brought with it both great expence of time and mo∣nies: and amongst other things, a great number of Artificers were requisite to be had to do the workmanship, and of Mariners to govern them. The Duke of Parma had great scarcity of both these, and was likewise jealous of them, by reason of such mens being inclined to follow rather the Hollanders and Zealan∣ders, (in whose Seas they were for the most part born and bred up) then the Kings party, where their profession was but little practised; insomuch as the Duke was glad to send for some from the Baltick Sea, and to make provision of them in divers other parts of the lower side of Germany. The aforesaid Vessels were most of them built in Antwerp, and many in Gaunt, Newport, and Dun∣kirk. Those of Antwerp were to be brought by the Scheld to Gaunt, and from thence to Bruges by a Channel cut by hand, which goes from the one City to the
other. And upon this occasion the Duke cut another channel likewise from Bru∣ges to Newport, to the end that the Vessels might fall the more commodiously into the sea, and there joyn with those of Dunkirk. During the noise of so great preparations made in all parts of Italy, Spain and Flanders, to assault England, that year ended; and the year 1588 commenced; which was particularly remarkable for this enterprise sake. The designe was not notwithstanding publickly declared; but the King striving as much as he could to Anno 1588. conceal it, made it be given out, that so great a preparation by land and by sea, was intended against the Rebels in Flanders. And to keep them likewise in su∣spence, he caused the begun negotiation between him and the Queen touching the accommodation of the Affairs in those parts to be continued. Other reports were given out, that the King intended a good part of the Fleet by sea for new designes which he had upon the Indies. Some times the preparations seemed to cool: But at last they grew to such a greatness, and so many signes appeared of their being precisely destin'd for England, as there was no room left for doubt: The Queen, seeing her self threatned by so great a tempest, betook her self to make all such preparations likewise on her part, as might be necessary to with∣stand it. She gave order to Charls Howard, Admiral of England, a Lord of a very Noble Family, and of great imployment, that he should powerfully rein∣force her usual Fleet; and that he should make all other such provisions as were needfull to furnish it with Souldiers, Mariners, Victuals, and Ammunition of War. But she gave unto him Sir Francis Drake, for a particular assistant herein; one that was then the most esteemed amongst all the English for sea affairs, and famous likewise thorowout all other Nations, for many memorable sea-voyages which he had made, and for many enterprises which he with great boldness had effected. Such a preparation required great expence, and a great inclination of the Kingdom to effect it: Wherefore the Queen called a Parliament: without the Authority whereof the Kings of England cannot receive any supplies of mo∣nies upon any extraordinary occasion: The Parliament being met at London, the Queen would one day appear there in person and went thither in the greatest glory that might be. Where being placed under her cloth of State, and having so composed her countenance, and other gestures of body, as might most take the Assembly, she spake thus. What a weight of war, my Lords, and you my beloved of the House of Commons, is threatned against me at this time by the King of Spain, each of you who know the preparation, will easily believe the designe: nor is the pretence less apparent. That King complains that I have always favoured his Rebels (as he is pleased to term them) of Flanders. And especially with so many forces, and so openly in these their last necessities. I confess the action; and do still more commend the advice given unto me therein by my Councel. Since in effect I could do nothing which was more praise worthy for Justice, or more necessary for convenience, Every one knows the near Confederacies which past between the Kings my predecessors, and the house of Burgony, whilst the Provinces of Flanders were under the Government thereof. Nor was this a bare Union between Prince and Prince; but it extended from Na∣tion to Nation; and almost from private man to private man; so great were the considerations both of neighbourhood, Traffick, and the conformity of Government, and of all other Interests, to make both peoples as it were but one and the same. Every concern being then so united between the Flemish and the English, how could I aban∣don those, and not abandon these? Nothing is more just then to defend the oppressed: nothing more becoming a regal condition, then to take such into protection. And if the most remote people may merit such a favour, how much more may our neighbours desrve it, and those between whom and us there is so near a conjunction. Nor ought the Flemish to be ere a whit less assisted by me, out of justice, then out of conveniency. You see whether the vastness of the Spanish Empire is arrived. And how much more this Kingdom in particular, is now indangered by the addition of the Crown of Por∣tugal thereunto. The designe of oppressing Flanders is apparently seen, to the end that such Forces both by land and by sea, may be planted there, as may serve to make Spain impose what Laws it shall please, both upon the North and West. In this case England and Ireland being incompassed therewith, why may we not fear that they
may suffer the like evils as Flanders should have done? So as by my succouring of those Provinces, I pretend to have at the same time secured my own Dominions. Here it is that the King of Spains shoe wrings him; and hence it is that he accounts that an injury, which I have done in mine own necessary defence. And could I appear more moderate then in refusing the Soveraignty which the United Provinces did so freely and unanimously offer me? And yet how justly may I complain of so many in∣juries done to me by him? What, hath he not endeavoured to make Ireland rebel a∣gainst me? What are his continual machinations to the same purpose with the Catho∣licks in England? and what doth he not in all other parts in hatred to my Kingdoms and to my person? It may then be safely concluded that he now makes open war up on me, not out of any true reason, but out of a false pretence: and that his true end is to in vade this my Kingdom, and to endeavour by all the power he hath to get the Dominion of it. I therefore summon and exhort you my faithfull Subjects to the defence thereof: to the defence I say of a Kingdom which is more yours then mine; I being more yours then mine own. The marriage from whence I derive, was established by Parliament: by the Authority of Parliament was I brought to the succession of the Crown which I wear. The Religion which I follow is imbraced by the Parlia∣ment. I have acknowledged the Parliament to be my Father: and as I may say, have taken the Parliament for my Husband. For I have forborn marriage to avoid bringing of a foreign Prince hither, who by new Customs and imperious demeanours might trouble, not so much my own quiet, as the common happiness of the Kingdom. By the miseries of Flanders it may be comprehended, what those of England would be, if the Spaniards should enter here. We should soon see new Tribunals of Inquisi∣tion, new yokes of Citadels, new Laws, new burthens, new Customs, horror, cruelty and violence every where. I know you would not willingly fall into this condition; and that to keep from doing so, you will of your selves do all that lies in your power. This consists chiefly in providing such subsidies as so great an occurrency requires. Wherefore I beseech you to give them so, as that the preparations on our side, may just∣ly counterpoise those which the enemy doth by so many ways order on his behalf. For what remains, every one knows what advantage the assaulted hath over those that do assail. We shall particularly have the advantage very much, by defending a King∣dom to which the sea serves for a Bulwark on all sides. With our Forces, those of our Confederates in Flanders will joyn; and all the Northern parts will unite them∣selves with us, when they shall see this new designe of the Spaniards to invade Eng∣land, after having endeavoured so cruelly to oppress Flanders. I the mean while, who may term my self no less your servant then your Queen, will perform what it be∣comes me to do; and though a woman, rest confident you shall find a manly spirit in me. And that I will cheerfully incounter death, if it shall be requisite, so to end my life upon so worthy an occasion. The Queen was indued with a very great wit, and with almost all sorts of lear∣ning: which she had particularly studied in her younger years. And by reason of her then great age, and the opinion which was had of her singular gift of Go∣vernment, she was generally no less reverenced then beloved by her Subjects. Wherefore it is not to be exprest, what affection her Parliament shewed towards her, and what indignation against the King of Spain, in their answer. She was assured by both the Houses, that in her service, and the service of the Kingdom they would spend both their fortunes and their lives; and that they would be as ready to give Subsidies, as she had been in desiring them. To this their disposition of will, the universal diligence of effects did soon correspond. Exact Guards were forthwith put into all the Ports of the King∣dom. Many men were raised for the Fleet by sea, and to make two Armies also on land. The one under the Earl of Leicester, who was sent for back into Eng∣land by the Queen; and the other under the Lord Hunsdon, who was likewise very much esteemed of in the Military profession. Leicester was chiefly to de∣fend the banks of the Thames which runs through London, and to keep the Spa∣nish Fleet from entring thereinto. And Hunsdon with his Army, which was the greater, was to keep more within land, and to guard the City of London, and the person of the Queen. All this while the aforesaid Treaty of agreement in Flan∣ders was continued by their Commissioners between the King and Queen. But
this Treaty suddenly vanisht: For the Spanish Fleet being ready to put to Sea, and such preparations as were needfull being likewise made in Flanders, the King would no longer defer the execution of his design. The Fleet consisted, as it was generally reported, of 160 Sail of Ships, most of them Men of War, the rest were for Carriage: They were almost all of them Galleouns, except some Galleasses and Gallies, which were to be rowed upon any occasion. The Galleouns were like so many Castles in the Sea; they had high Towers in their Fore and Hinder-Deck, their Masts were of an unmeasure∣able greatness, their bodies were of a vast bulk, and the very least of them bore no less then 50 great Guns. 22000 Foot and 1200 Horse, all of them almost Spanish, were imbarked in the Fleet; amongst the which there were above 2000 Voluntiers, all of them of the best Families of Spain. Of so great expectation was this enterprise, and so much had the King laboured to have it perform'd in the gallantest way that might be. The Fleet was to set forth about the beginning of May, and to hoyst sail. To hasten the which, the Marquis of Santa Croce was gone to Lisbon, where he was seised upon by so sudden and so fierce a disease, as he dyed thereon in a few dayes space. A great loss, and whereat the King was very much grieved; who presently substituted Alonso Peres di Gusman, Duke of Medina Sidonia, in his place; a Personage of a very great Family in Spain, but one who had never been out of those Kingdoms, and who was no wayes knowing in the maritime profession. He made haste to Lisbon to execute the Kings com∣mands; but howsoever, this change of Admiral retarded the expedition for many dayes, insomuch as the Navy could not get from Lisbon, in the Haven whereof the rendezvouz was, till the end of that moneth. John Martines di Ri∣calde, one very much verst in Sea-affairs, was next in command under the Duke; nor were there wanting other Commanders of very great experience, who go∣verned the particular Squadrons into which the Fleet was divided. At the same time the Kings Army in Flanders was in a fitting posture for the design on that side: All the new men which were expected were come, and a great many of the Gentry were likewise come to fight under the Duke of Parma upon this occasion; He gave a very honourable reception in particular to the Marquis of Burgaut, a Prince of the House of Austria. There were come thither from Italy Don A∣madeo of Savoy, Don John of Medicis, Vespasian Gonzaga Duke of Sabionetta, together with divers other Italians of very good quality. And from Spain, the Duke of Pastrana, with divers others of very good esteem in that Nation also. But to return to the Fleet. As soon as it was well got out of the Haven, a great Tempest arose, which did greatly disorder and divide it; and was cause of the loss of some of their Bottoms that were rowed with oars, which could by no means be saved. So as it was necessary to gather the Fleet together again, which could not be effected till the midst of July, at Corugna in Galatia, not without great labour and suffering. It put forth again to Sea from hence. The Generall went in a Gally called St. Martin, famous for the Victory which the Marquis of Santa Croce had got in it in the business of the Terzeri. This ship was the Capitana or Admiral, and from this did all the other ships receive their orders. The Fleet advanced with a favourable wind, and about the end of July came within ken of England. Nor did the adverse Fleet delay appearing, which consisted of not above one hundred Men of War, all of them very much inferior in body to those of Spain, but much superior in nimbleness and agility. As soon as the Spaniards were entred into the English Channel, Luis di Gusman was instantly sent by the Duke of Medina Sidonia to the Duke of Parma, to let him understand of his arrival in those parts, and to sollicite him to doe what was requisite on Flanders side. The Spanish Fleet desired nothing more then to fight and to grapple with the Enemy: wherefore as soon as the English Fleet appear'd, the other put themselves in order. The Ocean never saw a more glorious spectacle then now. The Spanish Navy put it self into the form of a Half-moon, there being a huge space between the one Horn and the other. The Masts, Sail-yards, the towring Fore and Hind-Castles which were seen to rise up in such an height and number from so great Piles, appear'd a Horror full of wonder, and made it be doubted whether it was a Wood upon the Sea or Land;
and whether of those two Elements had the greatest share in so glorious a sight. Thus was the Fleet ordered. It came but slowly on, even when their sailes were full; and the waves seemed even to groan under, and the windes to be weary in ruling such a weight. Their end was, as I have said, to come up close up to handy blows with the adverse Fleet; thinking themselves much too good for them, the difference between their ships and souldiers being considered: but the design of the English was clean otherwise: they desired to shun all formal battel, knowing their dis∣advantage therein. They considered that if they should be worsted, England would be lost: whereas if the Spaniards should come by the worst, all their in∣damagement would consist in the loss which they should thereby suffer. The English therefore resolved to annoy the Spaniards onely aloofe off, and to wait till some one of so many great Machines might quit the company of the rest, which then they might assault; for they thought it impossible but that this might happen among the Spanish ships, either by some tempest, or change of winde, or some other accidents which are usually seen in Navigation: and it was not long ere they met with such an occasion; for a great Galleoun of Biscay falling on fire, it was forced to tarry behinde; as likewise the greatest Galleoun of Anda∣lusia, the main Mast whereof broke in two: Wherefore Sir Francis Drake in∣vironing both the one and the other of them, with divers of his ships, took them both. In the first which was torn and consumed was John di Guerra, pay∣master to the Fleet, with good store of money. And in the second, Pietro di Valdes, Camp-master of a Spanish Brigado, and a very valliant souldier. This first loss was a great one, and did forebode others which ensued. In the beginning of August the two Fleets were in sight one of another again: it fell out, that the Galleoun St. John of Portugal, wherin was the Admiral John Martinus di Ricalde, was divided from the rest: The English did not let slip the occasion of assaul∣ting it; and were likely to have ane it, had not the General himself with his great Galleoun St. Martin come into the aid thereof: which for some hours did almost it self alone sustain the violence of the whole adverse Fleet. The English ships had a great advantage, as I have said, in being so manageable and dexte∣rous; they were equally nimble in assaulting and in retreating; they tack'd a∣bout with all windes; they joyn'd and then sever'd again in an instant, as it made best for them. And their building was chiefly advantagious, in that they could easi∣ly shun the banks of sands, whereof the English Channel is full, and all the Sea Coast thereabouts. To this was added, that their canon shot did seldom or never miss: whereas the Spanish ships which were built so very high, did still thunder in the air, without almost ever touching the English vessels; and therefore the two Galleouns of the General and Admiral were ill handled by their Cannon shot: and upon that occasion a Galleass was likewise but ill treated, which at last ran on ground on the Coast of France, neer Haure de Grace, the Captain thereof being slain, and but few saved that were in her. The Catholick Fleet advanced afterwards further into the Channel, and came at last between Calis and Dover: from thence the Duke of Medina sent Rodergio di Telio to the Duke of Parma, who was still at Bruges, to advertise him thereof, and did very much solicit him to imbark his men, and to do whatsoever fell to his share. The Duke of Parma went presently from Bruges to Newport, and began to imbark his men; shewing notwithstanding, that it was impossible for him to put from that place and Dunkirk unless the D. of Medina would first free those two Havens from the ships wherewith the Hollanders and Zealanders did as it were besiege them. He affir∣med, That this was the agreement made with the King; That his ships were there∣fore only to transport the Army; That they had no provision of Artillery; That they were no waies able to buckle with those of the Hollanders and Zealanders; And that, in fine, he would not rashly make the King of Spain lose the most flourishing Army that was ever seen in Flanders, and consequently Flanders it self; which would be left without any Forces or defence. This mean while the Spanish Fleet was advanced so far, as it might be seen from Dunkirk; where it cast anchor by reason of a great calm, which rendred it immoveable; and so happened to be in the midst between the English Fleet, and that of the Hollan∣ders
and Zealanders. Thus did all the Fleets stand still for one whole day, till the night came: when it was dark some vessels all on fire of a middle size might be seen to come at unawares towards the Spanish ships; they were eight in num∣ber, and came at a distance one from another, that they might enter on divers sides upon the Spanish ships: they had not yet forgot the so hideous Fire-boats which were seen in the siege of Antwerp. Wherefore the Spaniards on the sudden thought that these flaming vessels of the enemies were of the same sort, and were to work the same effect: They made no delayes; but astonished with blinde fear, which was yet made more blinde by the darkness of the night; not staying till the Enemies fire-boats came amongst them, they began to weigh anchor, that they might run away. And such was the fear, that many of the ships cut their cables, lest they should not save themselves time enough: And as if Fortune would favour the Enemies invention, the winde rose on a sudden, by the blow∣ing whereof the Spaniards feared the flames would gather force. One ship gave against another; those that were farthest off thought the danger nearest: the confusion was such as would allow of no command; and the horror of the night increased the disorder every where, which howsoever would have been great enough by day. The aforesaid fire-boats were notwithstanding chiefly made for terror, and to make it be beleeved that they were such as were those of the siege of Antwerp. The Spanish Ships having avoided those imaginary fears of fire, could not shun the other true apprehension of indamagement by a storm which arose at Sea. At the appearing of day the Fleet found it self in a great disorder, and so parted, as many of the greatest Galleouns being sever'd from the rest, they were suddenly set upon by the two adverse Fleets. In one of those Galle∣ouns called the St. Mathew, was the Camp-master, Diego di Pimentel; and in an∣other which was called the S. Philip, was Francis of Toledo for Captain. Both these ships fought a good while, and were succour'd by the Capitana, which made them hold out the longer; but she being likewise many times shot through and through, was at last forced to leave the other two, and seek to save her self; the other two continued a valiant fight, till being born by the winde upon the sands, both of them perisht; Francisco Tolledo being drowned in the Sea, and Pimentel, with some others taken prisoners A Galleass of Naples, over-set likewise upon the Coast of Calis, in which was Hugo di Moncada; who together with almost all that were in her, betaking themselves to swim, were most of them drowned. These great losses being had, and the Sea still threatning greater; the Duke of Medina and his Councel thought fit, by all means, to carry back the Fleet to Spain as soon as possible might be: and it was already plainly seen, that it was impos∣sible to cleanse the coast of Flanders from the Enemies ships, as it was absolutely necessary to do, if the Catholick Army were to be transported into England. Moreover, it was already known how well the Queen was provided for them within land: to which purpose, she being pleased to shew her self couragiously on Horse-back to both the abovesaid Armies; the applause of such an action is not to be exprest, nor what courage the Queen did both receive her self, and infuse into others by doing it. The Duke of Medina resolving then to return for Spain, it was thought best to lanch farther into the Northern Sea, and take a greater compass, to shun the danger of the shelves of sand which lye so thick upon the Western coasts of England, Scotland, and Ireland. The General gave orders to this purpose; and amongst other orders, commanded, that if the Fleet by occasion of new Tem∣pest should be again disordered, all the ships should come to Corugna, and there stay one for another; nor was it long ere the apprehended danger hapned; and so unfortunately, as the former order could by no means be obeyed. Hardly had the Fleet set sail towards the North, when one of the fiercest tempests arose, that peradventure was ever seen at Sea: The day was at an instant turned to night; nothing but thunder and lightning, and other fatal signes were seen or heard every where throughout the air; the winde arose, and grew so high, as the waves transformed into mountains, and mounting up unto the skies, made voraginous caverns in the Sea: insomuch, as the Mariners did almost lose the use of their eyes; all the operation of their hands, and all such orders as are
used to be observed between Pilot and Pilot, between ship and ship. Which driven on by the fury of the winds, gave forceably one against another; till enlarging themselves by the same violence, they were at last disperst here and there, and whither so great an opposition of fortune would carry them. The Admiral Ri∣calde was one of the first that vanisht from the Navy, and some other ships fol∣lowed after his, more by constraint then choice. They thought at first that they were carried to the Islands of Orkney in Scotland: but at last they fell upon Ire∣land, where after being ill dealt withall by the Sea, they were but badly treated by the Inhabitants of those parts. Yet before they could get thither, and after∣wards in their return for Spain, some of those ships perished unfortunately; and amongst the chiefest and best qualified Spaniards which were there lost, was Alonso di Leiva, Generall of the Gallies in Sicily, who chose to quit that Com∣mand, and to be a Voluntier in this so famous Enterprise. It would be too long to relate how many others of Quality perished in this imployment: It will suffice to say, that there were not any parts of the English, Scotish, or Irish coasts which were not innobled either by shipwracks, or by the death or imprisonment of some of the choisest and best born Personages of all Spain. Some other ships came up to the Admiral Ricalde in Ireland; but all of them so shattered, as they had much adoe to recover Spain, and in the remainder of that voyage many of them perished. The place whereunto the rest came for refuge, was St. Anderos, where Ricalde within a few dayes dyed, as also another chief Commander at Sea. called Oquendo; together with divers other persons of quality, who through their so great sufferings at Sea, dyed almost as soon as they came to Land. The Duke of Medina Sidonia, after having together with the common dangers fallen into many particular hazards of his own, arrived likewise about the end of September at the Port of St. Anderos, from whence he acquainted the King with his arrival, and gave him a full account of the whole success of that expedition. This was that which befell the Spanish Armado which was sent to assault England. Few enterprises were ever longer premeditated; few ever made with greater preparations; and none ever executed with greater misfortune. So fallacious doe the designs of Mortals usually prove: And thus the Divine Providence doth often in the secret Decrees of Heaven determine things contrary to what Humane wisdom hath in her pride determined here below.
THE HISTORY OF THE WARS OF FLANDERS, Written by CARDINAL BENTIVOGLIO. The Second Part. BOOK V. The Contents. After the unfortunate success of the Spanish Fleet, the Duke of Parma goes from the Province of Flanders into that of Brabant. The situation of the Enemies new Fort, called Schinck-Sconce: What was the occasion of making it, and how pre∣judicial it is to the Kings affairs and those of the Archbishop of Colen in those parts. At the Archbishops desire, the Prince of Samay is sent by the Duke to re∣cover Bona. The Duke hopes to get Bergen ap Zome by secret intelligence, but is deceived He sends Count Charles Mansfield to besiege Vachtendonch, who takes it. S. Getrinburg is delivered up unto him by the Garrison thereof. The mean while he again straitens Reinberg. Schinck dyes in attempting to surprise Ni∣minghen. Reinberg soon after is surrendred. A Spanish Brigado mutinies, to Fernese's great displeasure: which is increased by the loss of Breda. Count Maurice raiseth a Fort-Royal against Niminghen. The Duke of Parma prepares to go into France. The King of Navar and Duke of Parma compared together in Military qualities. The Duke goes from Flanders, comes to Meos; finds Paris reduced to the greatest extremity of famine; resolves to use all means to succour it. The King of Navar opposeth him with all his Forces. The Dukes stratagem in shunning Battel, when he seems most desirous to fight. The mean while he un∣expectedly assaults and storms the Town of Lagny upon the Mearn, and relieves Paris with great store of victuals. The King of Navar retires much incenst from thence. The Duke of Parma besiegeth, and takes Corbel upon the Sene. From thence he returns to the Low-Countries. The King follows him, and endeavours
to discompose him. But the Duke marches in so good order, as with ut receiving any considerable damage, he leaves France, and returns to Flanders. THe Spanish Fleet being departed with so unfortunate success, the Anno 1588. Duke of Parma went presently with his Army from Bruges. Whilst he was in those parts attending the expedition for Eng∣land, he had not omitted to do what was fitting for the service of the affairs of Flanders. We told you before that at the in∣stant intreaties of the Archduke of Colen, the Duke had reco∣vered the Town of Nuys, and besieged Reinberg, both which places appertain to that Church. Being diverted from Reinberg, and drawn to relieve Zutfen, he could not as then do more in service of the Archbishop. This mean while things went very much the worse for him. Schinck was never quiet. Neither was it well known whether the vivacity of his understanding, or his vi∣gorous proceeding was the greater. The Rhine after having run for a long space in one only Channel, not being able any longer to keep within its own bounds, falls into two Currents, which become almost as capacious as the first. By these two is the Island of the antient Battavians formed, and the same name (though somewhat corruptly) is at this time preserved there. Schinck thought it would be very convenient to build a Fort upon that point which the two arms of the ri∣ver make. Wherefore presenting himself before Count Maurice, he spake in a Military manner thus. Since my fortune was not (most illustrious Count) to serve under your Fathers Ensignes, I will wholly dedicate my self to you, who are left in his place. And doubt∣lesly you will imitate him much more in valour then in bloud. What Martin Schinck is, his actions have already shewn. Being ungratefully dealt with by the adverse side, I will never be at quiet till I have revenged my self. To this end I beseech you hear a Proposal of mine. Why do not we fortifie that point which is made by the Rhine, where it divides into two branches? How much advantagious will it be to raise a Fort there? All Vessels which pass from the one or the other part, will be inforced to strike sail, and to pay Tribute to it. It may be called the Bridle of the Rhine. And from thence may the banks thereabouts be overrun, and still new progresses be made; and those already made the better confirmed. In fine, no fort can be more ad∣vantagiously seated. I desire no more but the trouble of building it, and of keeping it; and that it may be called by my name, that I may be the more obliged to defend it. Either my Military industry deceives me, or the enemy cannot receive a greater blow then this upon the banks of Rhine. Count Maurice, though he was yet very young, knew that Schincks propo∣sal must needs be of great consequence: and he represented it so unto the States, as they resolved it should be done. And it was not long ere the Fort was made defendable, with such flanks every where as the situation most required. It was afterwards munited with a good Garison, and with all things else that was thought necessary for the security thereof. This is the so famous Fort called Schincks Sconce, possest for almost fifty years together by the United Provinces: but which is of late years so much in every mans mouth, by reason that the Car∣dinal Infanta of Spain, did first so fortunately surprise it, and made it be so vali∣antly defended since; and for having been immediately indeavoured to be re∣gained by so many ways, and by so great Forces by the United Provinces. From this Fort did Schinck every day make excursions thereabouts, watching continu∣ally for some occasion of surprisal. Niminghen is not far from thence; the ta∣king of which by stealth, it being a City of such importance, was his chief design. But not thinking that he was then able to do it, he betook himself to surprise some Town belonging to the Archbishop of Colen, which might make amends for the late loss of Nuys. Upon the same side of the Rhine, a little above Colen, stands the Town of Bona, which is one of the best that stands upon that river. Schinck gathering a number of men suddenly together, came by night to the a∣foresaid Town; and through intelligence that he held with some that were with∣in, placed a Petard against the gate which opens upon the river, broke it open, and suddenly made himself Master of that Town. The Archbishop of Colen had
recourse immediately to the Duke of Parma for help; who though his mind were then fully bent upon the expedition for England, would notwithstanding send him assistance. Whilst then the preparations to assault England were at the hottest, the Duke dispatched away Charls de Croy, Prince of Simay with 6000 foot, and 1200 horse, to endeavour therewithall, and with those which the Arch∣bishop should add thereunto on his part, the recovery of Bona, and to put it ab∣solutely into his hands. Simay went his way, and came before the Town. The foot which he had along with him were Italians, Loraineses and Germans: and the horse were almost all Spaniards and Italians. Schinck had provided the best that he could for the Town: but yet not so as that it could make any long de∣fence. The Kings men drawing near it began to streighten it: it might be easily∣est relieved on the side next the water; wherefore Schinck had raised two Forts on the contrary side of the river. The Kings men thought it therefore requisite to raise one themselves on the bank where the Town is situated, which they forth∣with did. The chief care of this was given to the Italians, whose Campmaster was Carlo Spinelli. But as much as they endeavoured to advance this work, as much did the besieged seek to hinder it. Divers actions followed therefore here∣upon, wherein the Royalists had the better at last; with particularr praise to A∣lexander di Monti, who was one of the Captains of that Brigado. The Kings men having placed themselves thus advantagiously in the chiefest part of the river, they thought it was best to take away the two aforesaid Forts from the enemy, which were on the opposite side of the river, before they should begin to play upon the Town; to the end that they might have no hope of relief. To this purpose Si∣may sent over as many men as were needfull to the other side of the river, and playing first upon the weakest Fort, they soon took it. The other was somewhat greater and better munited; they were therefore somewhat longer in falling in∣to the ditch, when as the Italians could not be kept from falling to the assault, though the batteries which were begun, were not yet perfected. But they paid dearly for their too great boldness; for they were beaten back, many of them being wounded, and many slain. The Fort was again plaid upon, and at last taken. The Kings men intending then to storm the Town, prepared batteries in divers parts against it. But the defendants, weighing their hopes of keeping it, with the ap∣parent danger of losing it, would not hazard themselves in making any longer defence. Wherefore they resolved to put the Town immediately into the Arch∣bishops hands. And the souldiers which were come into it from elsewhere, were suffered to go out upon honourable conditions. Simay having thus acquitted himself of that siege, returned immediately to the Duke of Parma, who was al∣ready preparing to go from the Province of Flanders. Before he went from thence two Scottish souldiers who were of the the Garison of Berghen ap Zome, came se∣cretly to treat with him, and had plotted with him how to put a great Fort which was close by Berghen into his hands, which when he should have gotten, he might easily make himself Master of the Town: the having whereof would be of great advantage to the King. The Duke listned therefore willingly to this practise, and promised great rewards to the two souldiers who were the projectors. Resolving therefore to make tryal of it, he sent Count Mansfield before, with such men as was thought necessary: but he desired that the Count might first get footing in the Island of Tolen, near unto Berghen. Which pass being taken, the chief exe∣cution of the siege would be afterward the more easie. VVhen Mansfield was come thither, instead of finding the enemy unprovided, as he hoped he should have done; he found them so well prepared, as he could by no means get into the Island. They were to wade through divers Channels, and then to pass over certain banks, and they met every where with so stout opposition, as he was for∣ced, and not without great prejudice, to retreat. The river of Zome passeth tho∣row the Town of Berghen, and a little beyond, it falls into a great Channel; where the enemy had raised a great Fort, and this was the Fort which was by secret intelligence to be put into the Dukes hands. VVhen the Fort should be taken, all relief would be cut off from the Town, and consequently it would be the sooner taken. The Duke himself was already come into the parts about Ber∣ghen: and one of the two Scots was in the Camp, who still fed him more and
more with hopes of effecting the business. VVherefore the Duke, chusing out 3000 Foot, the greatest part whereof were Spaniards, the rest Walloous; and giving unto them the Camp-master Zanchio di Lieva for their Commander, he sent them towards the Fort upon the coming on of night. The Souldiers were divided into Squadrons; the first whereof being come unto the gate, the Scotch∣man entred, and was followed by many who thought the business already done. But the fraud quickly appeared; for some thirty or forty of them being entred, an Iron Percullis was suddenly let down which shut up the gate, and all those the Kings men that were within were cut in pieces; and a great hail of musket-shot was poured out upon those without that were nearest the gate, so as many of those were likewise slain, and many wounded. The cheat being discovered, the Duke withdrew from Berghen; and fortifying some neighbouring places, the better to bridle that Garrison, and the excursions which it was used to make, he returned to Brussels about the midst of November. Before the Duke went from these parts, he sent Count Mansfield into Ghelder∣land, to take Vachendunch from the Enemy. This is a little Town, not far from Venlo: but the low situation thereof, and the Fortifications which the Enemy had made about it, made it considerable, and the neighbouring Country was thereby much indammaged. The Count went, and having past the Manse at Venlo, he sate down before Vachendunch; the men that were with him were almost all of them Germans. The Souldiers that were in the Town, though they were but few, seemed notwithstanding resolute to defend it. Wherefore when the Count drew near, those within failed not in making all necessary defence. Yet the Royalists advanced every day, till at last they might come to their Batteries: Then entring into the Ditch, and falling to work with their Mathooks ahd Mines, they proceeded so far, as the Defendants not being able to hold out longer, were inforced to surrender the Town. With the end of this Siege did the Year likewise end, and the next of 1589. Anno 1589. began. The Kings Army was this mean while mightily diminished. The Marquis of Borgaut with the most of his Germans was gone from Flanders; and all the Souldiery of the other Nations were much lessened. The Pay grew likewise every day scarcer; insomuch as it was feared some disorder might happen by way of Mutiny, to avoid the which the Duke had been still very carefull. And though he had acquainted those in Spain with the danger yet he found but little remedy, by reason of the excessive expence the King had been particularly at in the late expedition for England. Fernese was much afflicted to find himself in this con∣dition; but chiefly for fear lest the King should quickly send him to succour the Catholick League in France, to the so great prejudice (as doubtlesly it might be feared) of the affairs of Flanders. To these afflictions of his mind, the like of his body was added. The Duke had abstained from all sorts of wine from his first coming into Flanders, for fear lest the Gout (a disease hereditary to his family) might make him the less able for military exercise. In his strongest dayes he might have suffered such an abstinence: but increasing in years, his blood began to be corrupted, and some signs of a Dropsie appeared in him; which being increased by his labours and sufferings, grew to that pass, as it brought him (as you shall shortly hear) irrepairably to his end. Now to return to the new Year, and to relate the successes of the beginning thereof: The Duke had an occasion of making an acquisition of great importance; but which soon drew with it a much greater loss. Edward Lanzavecchia, a Souldier of great experience, and who of the Italians was well esteemed by the Duke, was Governonr of Breda. Breda as a place of great consequence in Brahant: not far from St. Getrenberg, a place likewise of very great concernment. In St. Getrenberg was a Garrison which was almost wholly English; who being ill paid, and but badly satisfied in divers other things, made it be feared that some novelty might happen there. Count Maurice knew how affairs went there and sought to appease the Garrison with some Pay; but the Souldiers having received part of their monies, grew more earnest to have all the rest: wherefore growing again importunate, they came from desires to threats, nor was it long ere they broke forth into open mutiny. They said not∣withstanding, that they would maintain the Town for the Queens service. Nor
could Colonel Norris, a gallant Countryman of theirs, who was sent to them by Count Maurice, and told them that the Queen would be offended at this action of theirs, prevail any thing with them. The mean while Lanzavecchia would not lose this opportunity. From the very first time that the Garrison had begun to be in commotion, he had underhand used all means to increase it, and to bring them at last to deliver up the Town to the Duke of Parma. To this purpose he offered them large rewards in the Dukes name; and particularly, that whatsoever Pay was due unto them by the States should be forthwith paid them, and five Payes more by way of donative. Such a practice was shamefull, and would admit of no colour to honest it: yet the Garrison kept it still on foot, till growing more familiar with infamy, they resolved privately to consent there∣unto, and to put it presently into execution. Count Maurice was this mean while upon his march with a considerable strength, to force the garrison to their due obedience. On the one side he had taken a certain Bank, whereby to draw nearer to the Town, which is seated very low; and had provided certain ships in the Channel by which the Town is watered, on the other side, from which he pre∣pared to play upon them with his Canon. The Garrison delayed then no longer. The intelligence being soon discovered, they opposed Count Maurice every where, and made the Kings men march at the same time, that they might deliver the Town up unto them: The Duke himself would be present at this success: wherefore leaving Brussels, and gathering the Garrisons of the neighbouring Towns hastily together, he suddenly marched towards St. Getrinberg, resolving to inforce Maurice either to fight, or to retreat. Maurice was not strong enough to oppose the Kings men by land; and his men who were in the Channel could not easily be brought to joyn with those on land. So as drawing off from the Town, the Duke entred thereinto; and causing full satisfaction to be given to the Garrison according to the agreement made by Lanzavecchia, he put a Garri∣son of the Kings thereinto, and returned again to Brussels. St. Getrinberg about the midst of May fell into Ferneses hands, who left the same Lanzavecchia there for Governour, continuing him still notwithstanding in the government of Breda. All the Souldiers who had surrendred the Town, past immediately under the Kings Colours; and the States made a severe Proclamation against them for so detestable and perfidious an act. A little before this the Archbishop of Colen was come himself in person to the Duke of Parma, and had very earnestly desired him that he would by all means besiege Reinberg again. The Duke seemed willing thereunto, and gave order to the Marquis of Barambone Governour of Ghelder∣land, that he should immediately straiten the Town; but rather with intention to hinder the Garrison from making excursions at the present, then to make a for∣mal siege before it. The Marquis of Barambone was one of the chief Lords of Burgony, and had the command of a Regiment of that Nation. He then went his way with that his Regiment, and with some other Regiments of Walloon Foot, and some Troops of Horse. Schinck had fortified a little Village near Reinberg, called Bliembech, from whence the Enemy might the better make excursions into the neighbouring parts. Wherefore Barambone resolved first to take this place from them: Yet he had a tough business of it; he was forced to batter it, and to spend some time before it; till at last the Enemy agreed to come forth, and the Kings men entred the Village. Hence Barambone went to Reinberg, and sate down before it; but not by way of any close siege, because (as hath been said) he had not men enough to that purpose: wherefore it was not hard for Schinck to relieve it often; though upon a certain occasion he was routed, and lost many of his Souldiers. The Duke of Parma in this interim, after the taking of St. Ge∣trimberg, hoped to get further advantages thereabouts. He therefore dispatcht away Count Charles Mansfield with a great body of souldiers, to take first some weaker places, that he might afterwards the easilier force Huesden, a good Town, very well fortified and garrison'd. The Count took Hemert, and Brachel, places of small importance, and hoped by intelligence to get into Romersvel, a more con∣siderable Town, and by the getting thereof to come the more easily by Huesden. But neither did his intelligence take, nor could he by any means compass his other great design. This expedition proving but weak, the same Mansfield was sent by
the Duke towards the Mause, to try whether he could get the Castle of Lovestein, situated upon the lower point of the Island of Bomele, as hath been formerly said. But he found both that Town, and all others in those parts so well provided for by the Enemy, as he could doe nothing considerable there. Schinck this mean while overran all those parts; and the terror occasioned by the Sconce which he had newly built, and which was usually called by his name, still increased. Find∣ing out an occasion to assault some of the Kings Foot-Companies, who past over the Rhine to assist Verdugo, and who conveyed some monies to Groninghen, he hasted towards them; and meeting with them at unawares, he routed the men, took away their monies, and retired safely to his own Sconce. His chief design was, as we have said, against Niminghen. Where the Rhine divides it self at the point of Schincks Sconce, leaving its former name, the left branch thereof is called Wahale, upon the right side of which branch stands Niminghen, not above sixe hours march from Schincks Sconce. Schinck being exalted in his imagination by so many advantages which he had gotten in those parts, watcht continually for some opportunity to surprise Niminghen: the Citizens whereof were very watch∣full, and already a great hatred was conrracted between them and Schink. But it was not long ere he lost his life in that design. And thus it fell out. Having made a great preparation of Boats and men, he went from his Sconce, and from thence entred the Wahale, to try a new surprise upon Niminghen. He intended to come thither unexpectedly in the greatest obscurity of night, and to assault the City on the Rivers side, where he thought he might easiliest atchieve his enterprise. But were it either that he did not well compute his Navigation, or that his Boats were over-heavy loaded, he could not get within sight of Niminghen till it was day. Yet the greater the difficulty was, the greater grew his daring. Wherefore ad∣vancing some of his fleetest Boats, he gave order that by all means the Souldiers which were in them should endeavour to get upon the bank, and to make it good, till he with the rest of his men should come up to them. The first Souldiers suc∣ceeded in what they undertook: But a great rumor arising amongst the Citizens at the first news hereof, many of them hasted to that place. Schincks men were on the contrary coming up against them; and those that were first landed having taken a certain house which stood near the wall, and near one of the gates, staid there, and fought very manfully. In this interim comes Schinck himself, and with couragious words, which were accompanied with no less couragious acti∣ons, he began to hearten his men, and chiefly with the hopes of plunder which they should have by the winning of so rich a City. Those within the Town were already in danger; when all the people joyning together, and men and women, old men and children, sacred and profane personages, striving who should out∣doe one another, the Enemies were beaten back on all sides; who could hold out no longer, but being driven from the house which they had taken, and from the gate which they thieatned, they were sorced at last to think of retreating. Nor could that be done without great disorder and prejudice, by reason of the diffi∣culty in imbarking, and of the advantage which those of the Town had over them upon such an occasion. Yet Schinck for a while made an undaunted resistance, and many of his men proved themselves to be Souldiers worthy of so valiant a Commander. But at last being wounded and bleeding apace, and a great many of his men being likewise wounded and slain, he could withhold his men no long∣er from throwing themselves headlong into the Boats. Many of them could not get to them time enough, who were all cut in peeces; others striving to save themselves by swimming, perisht in the River; and others who were got unto the Boats, not finding any room there, for that they were already too full, were made a prey either to the River which swallowed them up, or to the Enemy who slew them from the bank. Five of their Boats sunk, as being too heavy-loaded; in one of which unfortunately was Schinck. So this was the end he made. At which those of Niminghen were so overjoyed, as for many dayes there was no∣thing but feasting and jollity heard of in the Town. It was now July, at which time the Marquis of Barambone had not advanced much nearer about Reinbergh: wherefore the Enemy hoping to relieve it, prepared succour, and sent it chiefly under the Command of Colonel Sir Francis
Vere, an English-man, who had already gain'd the opinion in those parts of being a gallant Souldier, and whom the United Provinces made use of in their most weighty military occurrences. Barambone was advertised hereof, who speedily made it known to Mansfield; desiring him either to joyn with him in person, or else to send him some of his men. Mansfield promised to come speedily to him, and in the mean while sent some Companies of Spanish and Italian Foot. Vere withheld not for all this; but hastening his expedition the more, began his march with 3000 choise Foot. Which when Barambone understood, he began likewise to move. They came with great resolution, the one to relieve the Town, the other to hinder the relief: So as the business was gallantly disputed for a while, and many fell on both sides; but at last Vere prevailed, and routing the Kings men, and killing many of them, he entred Victor into the Town, and did so pro∣vide for it, as it might preserve it self, though amidst the Enemy, for some months. A little after the conflict came Mansfield, who took upon him the managing of that Siege. Barambone having occasion to leave it. The Town kept from sur∣rendring afterwards till the beginning of the next moneth of February. And be∣cause nothing insued of great importance, we will therefore here rid our self of this success, to continue the narration of others which more require it; though little considerable hapned that Summer, or the Autumn following, either in the field, or any where else. Wherefore the Duke of Parma having this leisure, went to the Mineral waters of the Spaw in the Country of Liege; which being drank, are observed to be very good for obstructions. He went thither to apply that remedy to the in∣firmity of the Dropsie, which began already to threaten him very sorely. About the end of Autumn he returned to Brussels; and to his great grief, saw the year end with the Mutiny of a Spanish Brigado under John d' Aquila. That Brigado was many Payes behind-hand and was quartered in Cortray, a great Town in the Province of Flanders: where the Souldiers beginning to rescent themselves, and breaking soon after out into terms which savour'd much more of threats then of complaints, it was not long ere they threw off all obedience and at last resolved to mutiny. The remedy was, suddenly to apply all means which might satisfie them; which was done: For the Duke finding, though not without much diffi∣culty, monies sufficient to satisfie them, made them be paid; so they returned readily to their former obedience. This was the first Mutiny that hapned after the Duke of Parma's so many years government in Flanders. And he was very much troubled thereat, as well the condition of the disorder considered within it self, as for fear it might take deeper root by example. Now the Year 1590 began. In the beginning whereof the Kings party suffered a loss which did likewise very much afflict Fernese. Edward Lanzavecchia was Governour of Breda, as likewise of St. Getrinberg, as hath been said. He kept at this time in St. Getrinberg, upon occasion of the making some Fortifications in that Town, the better to secure it from the Enemy. Yet he went often over to Breda, which is not above three houres journey from the other place. The mean while his son Paulo Antonio commanded in his stead in Breda, who was Captain of an Italian Foot-Company; and with him were five other Captains of the same Na∣tion, all which had their Foot-Companies in Gaston Spinola's Brigado, a Sicilian; and moreover the Marquis of Vasto's Troop of Horse was there, commanded by his Lieutenant Tarlatino. A River called Merch runs by Breda, upon which stands a noble Castle, which is rather for habitation then for strength. Three leagues from this Town the River fals into a large Channel in Holland, and some Barks of merchandise were to pass to and fro (having Pasports to that purpose) upon that River. All the while that the Governour Lanzavecchia kept in Breda, he had always caused diligent search be made in every Boat that past, lest by some trick or other he might run hazard of surprisal. But his Son being but young in years, and yet younger in experience, was neither so considerate, nor yet so dili∣gent In other parts of this History you have heard of a certain kind of earth called Turf, which for want of wood serves for firing. This is much used in Friesland, Holland, and in other of the lower parts of Flanders. It fell out so therefore sometimes, as that some Barks of Turf came from Holland into the
Merch, it being the speedier way to bring them either into Breda or some neigh∣bouring Towns thereabouts. Upon this occasion there was a Mariner, a master of a Boat, that was better known then the rest, and particularly by those souldiers who did most usually guard the Castle, whereby all those Boats were first to pass. This Mariner went to Count Maurice, and told him that a good many souldiers might be hid underneath the Turf in his Boat, and that so he might hope through some stratagem to surprise the Castle by night, and by a fresh sup∣ly of men enter easily afterwards into the Town. Maurice was pleased with the plot, and resolved to make trial of it as soon as he could. The Turf-barks are usu∣ally of a great length, supplying in length their want of breadth the lesser Rivers and Channels not being capable of broader. The Bark being fitted as it ought to be, the Mariner came to Breda. Underneath the Turf, which was upheld by great Poles, were 80 Souldiers, all choise men; and Captain Charles Harawger, an an∣tient and valiant Souldier, had the command of them. The Bark being come into the Castle, Paul Antonio gave order that it should be searched according to cu∣stom but the order was so carelesly given, as the other Officers were as careless in the execution thereof The Mariner was hereby encouraged; and passing from one thing to another, and from more serious affairs to sports and jollity, he wrought it so, as to delay the time till night came on: His craft increasing in him, he min∣gled wine with his pastimes, inviting those few souldiers to drink who were come to search the Boat. Nor did they refuse the offer. Being well warm'd with wine, it was not long ere they fell asleep; the rest were already withdrawn into the Castle to take their rests. When so the Enemies came out of the Bark, and as∣saulted the Kings men on all sides: who being astonished at the first were soon aware of the surprisal; and being more dejected then they ought to have been, not making almost any opposition at all, they poorly left the Castle to the Enemy; some of them were hurt, and some slain in this first assault, and Paul Antonio was taken prisoner. The oldest and most esteemed Souldier of those in the Town was Tarlatino; to whom all the rest had recourse, intreating him to take upon him the care of defending the Town, till succour might be had from some of the Kings nearest Towns: but he would oblige himself to nothing, but to doe his part on hors-back. Wherefore all the other Captains being much abased, and in great confusion, they could neither break down the Bridge whereby the Town was joyned unto the Castle, nor yet secure some one Gate of the Town, were it but for some few houres, to allow time for succours to come in on the Kings be∣half. This mean while in assistance of the Enemy came Count Hollack, and soon after Count Maurice; at whose entrance the Garrison went shamefully and basely out, and left the Town wholly unto the Enemy. The Italian soul∣diery never did a more unworthy act then this: But the chief of the aforesaid Garrison did soon pay dearly for their shamefull dealing; for being by order from the Duke brought to Brussels, some of them were according to Martial law sentenced to death, and others to other punishments, which were publikely performed. The Duke desired to try immediately whether he could recover Breda, before the Enemy should have fortified himself more strongly there. Wherefore he presently sent Count Charles Mansfield away to take a Fort which the Enemies had upon the mouth of the Merch; hoping that when that Avenue should be shut up, Breda might be kept from being succour'd by that River; and that the same impediment being put on St Getrinbergs side, the Town could not make any long resistance. Mansfield endeavoured to take the Fort, but in vain. Where∣fore he raised up another in opposition to it, and began afterwards to begirt the Town. Count Maurice had provided very well for it; yet for his greater se∣curity, he betook himself to the usual remedy of Diversion: He therefore went with very considerable Forces towards Niminghen, and threatned a siege. This loss, which would have been much greater then the other, made Fernese use all means to prevent it: wherefore he ordered Count Mansfield to rise from before Breda and to go with all speed to relieve Niminghen. Count Maurice had this mean while past from threats to effects, and had begun with great vigilancie to begirt that City. Yet Mansfield came time enough to bring in succour, nor
would he depart from thence till he saw it totally secured. And Maurice on the other side, before he would depart from thence, would leave a curb there which might keep it in great subjection. To this purpose the Enemy had formally endeavoured to build a Fort on the opposite bank of the River, but were always hindred. Maurice returning now with greater resolution to the same design, re∣solved to erect there a Fort-royal, which might command Niminghen, and which might serve as then as it were for a siege at large; which as soon as might be he might reduce to one much straiter. Having therefore got together a great many Pioners, and making the Souldiers work as well as they, he began to erect the Fort in the very face of Mansfield; & to secure the work, placed sufficient guards wheresoever it was requisite. Mansfield had orders from Fernese not to hazard the Kings men, which were the Flower of all his Army; but to return, when he should have relieved Niminghen. Fernese gave him this Commission, because he himself had received a very strict one from the King, to go into France with all the speed he could, to assist the Catholick League in that Kingdom: wherefore Mansfield would not adventure further, to keep Maurice from building the Fort; though he knew how much the making and keeping of it would redound both to the honour and advantage of the Enemy, and that undoubtedly it would at last be the loss of Niminghen. All which fell out. For the Enemy were puft up with pride, to see the Kings Forces withdrawn thus: Niminghen, by the continual playing of the Enemies Artillery, was forced to leave the commerce of that River free; and ere a year was over, Maurice returning to straiten that City, compell'd it to yield, and to come under the Flemish Union. The Duke of Parma was again returned to the Spaw-waters; hopes being given him, that the more he should use them, the more good he should receive by them: But he could not tarry there so long as he ought. A little before this, the Duke De Mayn, Head of the Catholick League in France, had received a sore defeat by the King of Navar at the Battel of Jury, where Count Egmont was kill'd who had brought a great body of Horse from Flanders to assist the League, by order from the King of Spain, who began already openly to favour it with his Forces. After this misfortune, the Duke de Mayn was gone himself in person into Artois, to speak with the Duke of Parma, and to agree with him in what was best to be done for establishment of the Cause, which the Catholick King had publikely declared he would imbrace as his own. Wherefore setting all other things apart, the Duke of Parma was gone to treat with the Duke de Mayn up∣on the obcurrent necessities of the League; and the result was, that Fernese should goe himself in person with powerful Forces, as soon as possibly he could, to assist it. Wherefore applying himself wholly to this so important expedition, the af∣fairs of Flanders must of necessity be very much weakened every where; in so much as before the Duke departed, Count Maurice made many incursions, to advantage himself particularly in the Provinces of Brabant and Flanders, by the taking of many places, but yet not of such weight, as requires any more express declaration of them here. July was now well nigh over, and Fernese was still sollicited to pass into France, and to provide against the danger of Paris, about which City the King of Na∣var was incamped, threatning to reduce it to such necessity as it should soon fall into his hands. At this time Pope Sixtus had likewise very fervently imbraced the Catholick cause of that Kingdom; and Cardinal Henry Cajetan was already in the City of Paris, from the Pope, by title of Legate; a personage who for the nobleness of his blood, and for his personal adornments, made that imployment the more remarkable. Bernardino di Mendoza was at the same time likewise there as Ambassador from Spain; to whom the King would have John Baptista de Tassis, come from Flanders, Muster-master General of his Army in those Provinces; both of them men excellent at councel and government. Fernese was continually more egg'd on by all these to pass speedily into France. He foresaw to his infinite displeasure, how prejudicial this would be to the King in his own States of Flan∣ders, and had oftentimes with much efficacie represented the danger thereof, and shewn the natural instability of the affairs of France, and how uncertain the event of affairs then on foot in that Kingdom was to be reputed. But the contrary
opinion being more prevalent in Spain, he could not chuse, but must apply him∣self to execute the Kings commands with all vigilancy and industry. Preparing then for his departure, he by the Kings appointment left Count Peter Ernestus Mansfield, father to Count Charles, to execute his place in Flanders: and with him was his son, who had the chief care of the Forces; and with such men as were thought more necessary for defence, then offence during the Dukes absence. To follow then this so great, and so memorable diversion, we will accompany the Fle∣mish Forces, and will pass into France with them; not meding notwithstanding with any other negotiations, of which that Kingdom was then full: for we will not have this our History to transgress its confines; and we do beleeve, that as it will not be irksome to us to relate, so it will not be unpleasing to others to read the successes of war, which upon this occasion happened between two of the most famous Commanders, and doubtlesly the most cryed up that were then in Europe. The King of Navar was not as yet full forty year old; and the Duke of Par∣ma was some few years above forty, each of them in faces very much differing, had an equal Martial aspect; each of them were naturally addicted to arms; the King was upon occasions bred up therein; and the Duke likewise did upon occasions spend his time therein: they were both of them popular in winning the souldiers love; but no less severe in maintaining the power of command. The King was more ready in resolving; and the Duke more circumspect in ripening his resolutions. The King loved battels, it being the custom of France so to do; the Duke a wel-wisher to industrious advantages, according to the manner of waging war in Flanders: but in the diversity of action, they were notwithstanding so conformable in reputation, and in the glory of souldiery, as few will be found amongst either the modern, or ancient Commanders, more famous at one and the same time, who in such a difference have continually so much resembled one another. The Duke of Mayne had very much prest the Duke of Parma at their mee∣ting, that if Fernese could not go then himself in person to relieve Paris, he would at least furnish him Du Maine, with some men to recruit his Forces in France, whereby he might indeavour that succour; the which Fernese easily granted; and to that purpose gave him a Brigado of Spanish Foot, under the Camp-master Antonio di Zunica: and another of Italians, under Camillo Capi∣zucchi, and moreover 500 Horse. But Du Maine could never compass his design: wherefore the Duke of Parma hastning his departure, went from Brus∣sels in the beginning of August. The Army which he carried with him consisted of 14000 Foot, made up of Spaniards, Italians, Germans, and Walloons; and 2800 Hose, which were of two sorts; the one of the Flemish usual Train-bands, and the other of the abovesaid Nations. The Prince of Semay commanded the former, and Marquess de Renty the others, for that Marquess Vasto was not then in Flanders: and the Lieut. General of the Horse being likewise wanting, George Basti supplyed his place, who was Commissary General of the Horse, and a gal∣lant souldier. With the Duke were the Princes of Ascoly, and of Castelve∣trano: the Counts of Aremberg, and Barlemonte, with divers other Flemish Lords; and Count Charles Mansfield General of the Artilery, not being to be dispenst withal in Flanders, the Duke had assigned that command over to Mon∣sieur de la Motte, one whom he greatly esteemed, and who for many famous military acts, had won the same opinion of all men. Amongst the Camp-ma∣sters, Peter Cajetan. Nephew to the Legat was particularly in very great esteem; and Alonso d' Ideaques, as well in consideration of himself, as for the reputati∣on that John his father was in, in the Court of Spain, who hath been spoken of before. The Duke of Parma being come with this Army to the Frontiers of Flanders towards Picardy, he called all the Commanders together, and gravely advertised them whether he was going. He told them, That the Kings Forces were now entring into a Country which did naturally hate the name of Spaniard. That those of the League had now invoked the Kings Forces, and desired his protection, meerly out of necessity of Interest. That therefore they were to be reputed of the like nature; that is to say, soon jealous, and therefore apt to
change. That then out of all considerations, as well Civil as Military, they were to proceed so in the leading on, and in the ordering of this Army, as not to hazard any action, nor put any in execution without great maturity. He desired, that if Mili∣tary Government were ever well observed under him in Flanders, it might be now ex∣actly observed in France, that therefore he straitly commanded every Captain to be all of them very diligent in the performance of their duties. That they should not permit the souldier to do any the least imaginable prejudice unto the Country people. That they should always march in as good order as if they had the enemy before them. That they should be very accurate in fortifying their quarters. That to afford the better commodity for all things necessary, he would make short marches. That he would be moving by the sun-rising, and be in his lodging before it should set; Munite the Camp continually well: bring it into as little a compass as he could; have di∣ligent Gards kept on all sides; and especially in safely conveying the victuals which were to serve for the great necessity of Paris. For what remained, that they should all follow him couragiously; That he hoped that France would now prove a Theatre still more and more to confirm the honour due to the King of Spain's Forces in Flan∣ders, that he would not be wanting on his behalf; but that he would expose himself to all labour, and shew himself no less equal to every one of them, in incountring dan∣gers, then he was superior to them all in point of command. Fernese prest very much the observance of these things: and to move others the more by his example, after he once began to march, he was almost every hour every where, and more by night then by day: he alwaies marched with his Ar∣my in good order, which he divided into three parts. The Marquess of Renty had charge of the first: the Duke himself took the charge of the second, and Monsieur de la Motte guided the third; after whom followed twenty peeces of Canon. In this manner, and with short marches, the Duke came on the 23d. of August to Maux, a City not above ten leagues from Paris: Here did the Duke du Mayn's Army joyn with him, which was about 10000 Foot, and 1500 Horse: the souldiers of both the Camps were selected men, and under well di∣sciplin'd Ensignes. Paris was this mean while reduced to the very utmost of ne∣cessity; after that so numerous a people had suffered what possibly was to be under∣gon in point of Famine, their necessity grew at last so great, as they must either dye, or throw open the gates to the King of Navar. The Duke of Parma was much troubled at this news; for he would by no means be precipitate in his councels, and yet found the necessity of hastening the succour. He therefore incouraged the Paresians, and put them in great hopes, that he would in a very short time free them from that siege. The Legate incouraged them to suffe∣rance, and the Spanish Officers; but chiefly the Duke of Nemours, who was Governor of Paris, and brother by the Mothers side to the Duke du Mayne. Wheresore the people overcoming their misery with new constancy, did with unexpressible anxiety number the hours, in expectation of being succour'd. When the Duke of Parma marching from Meos with both the Armies joyned in one, came towards Paris. The King of Navar was then in his hight of hopes, that that City would every day fall into his hands. The Seene runs through it, and two other rivers accompany the Seene neer Paris: the one is the Marne, two leagues before the Seene come to the City walls; and the other the Oyse, a little lower on the contrary side. These rivers are the nurses which continually give milk to this vast City; to boot with the wonderful abundance of its own Territo∣ries. The King had possest himself of all the Avenues as well by the rivers as by the land. Upon the Marne he made Laigny in particular be guarded; a good Town, having a large bridge, and Corbel upon the Seene, on the same side, which is a great Town, and provided likewise of a bridge. He caused likewise the places of greatest passage upon the Oyse to be guarded. And thus Paris be∣ing kept from victuals on all sides, it was reduced to the utmost necessity of Fa∣mine. When the King heard Fernese was on his way, and that he already drew neer Paris, he called together all the chief of his Army, and exhorted them, that they now would make their accustomed military worth appear more then ever. He said, That the Duke of Parma was now in France with the Forces, and sense of Spain.
That the true intention was to oppress that Kingdom, under pretence of defending the League; and that the Duke came with so great Forces to effect it as soon as he could. That those of the League who called in such assistance were perfidious: and the rest no less perfidious who made so false a cloak thereof. That therefore such opposition as was fitting was to be made by those that were true French-men by birth, and faithfull to their legitimate King, against the Forces of these Rebel French, and the Spani∣ards their enemies. That it was Gods pleasure the Crown should fall upon him; and that he hoped the Catholicks should very shortly receive such satisfaction as they desi∣red in matter of conscience. That the adverse forces were great; but his no whit in∣ferior. Nay for number and goodness of horse he was far above them. That there∣fore he desired to come to battel as soon as might be. And that he thought to endeavour it on his side, was a no less generous, then profitable resolution. That when the enemy should once be routed, they knew not where to get new Forces; and so the battel being won the war might be said to be ended. That on the contrary, if any ill should be∣fall his men, he could much more easily return again into the field. But why should they doubt victory? were not many of the Spaniards forces of Flanders joyned with the Rebels of France in the late battel of Yury? yet where the cause was justest, there was the greatest valour shown, and there did fortune smile. That doubtlesly the presence of so gallant a Commander as was the Duke of Parma, in the enemies Ar∣my, ought to be considered: That therefore it was more necessary to use all such prepa∣rations as should be thought most advantagious upon such an occurrency, not only in point of valour, but also of discipline. That to this purpose he had called this Coun¦cel wherein were so many and so famous Commanders in War. He desired them that they would speak their opinions: as well for what concerned the continuing of the siege, or the raising of it, as in the other point of provoking the enemy to battel. That he would ground his opinion upon theirs; nor should his acts come short of those words which he now had spoke. The principal and most esteemed Chieftains of war that were with the King, were the Duke of Monpenciere, Prince of the bloud; the Duke of Nevers, the grand Prior; the Marishals of Aumont and Bironne: the Lord his son: Messi∣eurs de Ghishe, and de l' Avardine, who were all Catholicks. The Duke of Tre∣mullia; the Vicecount Tureine, and Messieurs de la Nue, and de Chatillion, who were Hugonots. It was first considered whether the Kings Forces were sufficient both to continue the siege, and to march to withstand the Duke of Par∣ma. And it was joyntly resolved they were not sufficient to do both these at one and the same time. Wherefore the common opinion was, that they should raise the siege, and go with their whole strength to incounter with the Duke of Parma, and to endeavour by all means, but also upon all advantages, to provoke him to battel. That very oft, and in very many wars, the most cry'd up Commanders had raised sieges; that to do so now would little advantage Paris, if thereby the Duke of Parma might be kept from relieving it: for that numerous people would soon consume whatsoever victuals they could at the pre∣sent receive from the inlarged Country; that the relief being hindred, the King might soon reassume the siege; and that then that City would immediately fall into his hands: and he should with the greater glory compass his designe. The King was very much troubled to think he must be inforced to rise from before Paris; but conforming himself to the opinion of his Captains, and to what his own Military experience did dictate to him, he raised his Camp on the last day save one of Auguct; and marched towards where the Army of the League was quarter∣ed. In the Kings Army then was above 20000 foot, and above 6000 horse. His whole body were French, except it were some Dutch and Swissers. All the cavalty were choice men; for the better half of them were Gentlemen, who ser∣ved upon their own inclinations, and much more out of honour then for gain: The King went from Paris to lodg in the Village of Celles, some four leagues from thence. This Town is situated in a spacious Champian, having notwithstanding some appearances of waters and woods about it. From this plain you mount by easie ascents upon two little hils, betwixt which when you have gone a little, you afterwards descend towards Maux. The King possest himself of all that Cham∣pian about Celles, till he came to those two little hils. And the Army of the
League was come to lodge on the other side towards Maux; where the Duke of Parma had fortified himself in all places where it was necessary, and the King of Navar failed not to doe the like on his side. Who was not well got thither, when desirous to make his Enemy acquainted with his intention to fight, he sent a Herald with a Challenge to the Duke Du Mayn, telling him, That it would be much better to end all the Differences by another pitcht Battel, then to carry them further on to the Peoples so great misery. The Duke du Mayn excusing himself, that he could not give the Answer, for that he had not now the supreme Command, sent the Herald to the Duke of Parma; who returned answer, That he was used to fight as he thought fit himself, and not at the pleasure of his Enemy. That he would not refuse battel, when it should not become him so to doe; and that upon other occasions, he himself would offer it, when he should think good. There was only the two aforesaid Hills between the Kings quarters and the Dukes; wherefore their being so near, caused some skirmishes daily. The Duke kept four whole dayes in his quarters; in which time he himself had several times advanced towards where the King lay, to the end that he might the better and more distinctly observe his Quarters. He then began to move with his whole Army. He had with great secrefie resolved to cozen the Enemy, and his own men too; and when he should feign as if he intended to joyn battel, to avoid it, even when the two Armies were nearest falling on, and to gain the Pass over the Rivers on the upper side, and so free Paris from the siege. This was the design, which he thus executed. He made the Marquis of Renty advance with the Vantguard; and with him were the Prince of Semay, and George Basty, with most of the Horse, all of them almost Lanciers. He placed the Duke of Mayn in the Battel with the greatest strength of Foot; and put Monsieur de la Motte in the Rear with the rest of the Foot and Horse. As for his own person, he would not oblige himself to any one part, but be at liberty, that he might the better effect what he intended. Having caused the Army to move in this manner, and giving out that he would draw the Enemy to battel, he gave order to the Marquis of Renty, that when he should be come to the top of the Hills, he should descend slowly, and should ex∣tend the Lanciers on both sides in large wings, the more to obfuscate the eyes of the Enemy. He commanded him therewithall, not to offer, or to accept of any occasion of fighting, without some new orders from him; and that he would in the mean time let him know what should happen from time to time. The Army of the League appearing thus, the King of Navar thought verily that they came with an intention to fight, and all his Captains were of the same mind; insomuch as it is not to be exprest how much they were overjoyed, and especially the King, in seeing that offered which they had so much coveted. His Army was then sud∣denly put into the best and most advantagious order that could be; and was like∣wise divided into a Vantguard, a Battel, and a Rearguard, over each of which the King appointed a Head, reserving leave to himself to be every where where need should most require. The Marquis of Renty marched this mean while in the same order as he was commanded by the Duke, and after him followed the Duke Du Mayn. When Renty had extended the Lances, and darkned the sight of the Enemy, Fernese made then no longer delay; but coming up to the Duke Du Mayn, and taking him by the hand, said unto him with a merry and smiling countenance, We shall have fought very well, and have overcome too, if we relieve Paris. He then commanded Renty to halt in that place, but yet still to make as if he meant to fall on, till the night should come. Then turning the Battel into the Van, and ordering La Motte to follow, so as Renty might fall into the Rear, he bent on the left hand towards the Marn, and towards La Laigne, which was not far from thence, resolving to make himself master of that Town. He then ac∣quainted Renty with his design; and commanded that Trenches should be raised both there, and every where else towards the Enemy, and Fortifications, to the end that the resolution which he had taken might not be disturbed by the Kings
Army. Drawing towards night near Lagny, he staid at Pompona, a Village with∣in less then half a mile of that Town; giving order that the whole Army might be assembled thereabouts, and with all diligence might there munite themselves. The King this mean while could not imagine why Renty first halted, and then returned back; Nor could he ever perswade himself, that the Duke of Parma, in the face of such an Army as was his, should assault Lagny, especially the Town being on the other side of the River, and the passage over the Bridg in the Governour of the Towns hands. He therefore advanced some Troops of Horse to discover the Duke of Parma's design; who being entertained by George Basty, returned as uncertain as before. In which time, the Duke causing the For∣tifications about his Camp to be made with incredible vigilancie, he brought them to such a pass, as he thought he might now prepare to batter the Town. Lagny lies, as it hath been said, on the left side of the River: on the right hand, (on which side were both the Camps) there is an open Borough just over against it, to which men pass from the Town over the said Bridg. Fernese suddenly possest himself of the Borough or Suburbs; and that very night, which was the 5. of September, planted ten Peeces of Cannon there to play from that opposite side without delay upon the Town. Monsieur de la Fin had the keeping thereof, and had 1200 French in garrison, who seemed all very ready to defend it, hoping chiefly in the King who was so very near them. La Fin thought the Duke would doe little good with his Battery, the Bridg being between him and them, which would hinder the assault. But he was soon deceived: For the Duke causing a Bridg of Boats to be thrown over the River three miles more upward, he past over a good number of Foot, and sent over George Basti with them with some Troops of Horse; he ordered the Foot to prepare for the assault, so soon as the Battery should have made its operation. The King of Navar storm'd at this success, when he came to know it; and would not willingly suffer Lagny to be lost, whilst he looked on. Some of his Captains propounded that he should pass over the River, and go with his whole Army to the relief of that Town. Others were of opinion, that he should go with all his Forces against the Works which the Enemies Camp had begun to make, and should endeavour to throw them down, and to fight the Duke. The first advice was very dangerous; for the Duke of Parma might assault the Kings Army, and defeat some of them at least, as they past over the River. And the second might be thought bootless; for the Dukes Works, especially towards the Enemies Camp, were already raised to a good heighth, and so well guarded, as there was small hopes of forcing them any where. The King notwithstanding took the second advice; and having drawn out his Army into large Squadrons, came to assault the Army of the League: but he found it in so very good order within its Fortifications, which were continually increasing, as he was at last forced to retreat, and much to his grief, to see the Town of Lagny not long after storm'd, taken, and plundred be∣fore his eyes; for so indeed it was. For the Duke of Parma having given order that a Battery should be planted against the Town, and that his men should pass over in manner aforesaid, caused the Walls of the Town to be immediatly plaid upon abundantly, and preparation to be made at the same time for the Assault. The Walls were but weak of themselves, and had no Rampiers: wherefore a sufficient Breach being soon made, the aforesaid Souldiers strove who should first get upon the Breach. The French for a while shewed equal courage; but being overcome by the first number, and by new Recruits which came hourely in to assist the Enemy, they must yield at last. Monsieur de la Fin, with some few others, was taken prisoner; the rest were put to the sword, and the Town sud∣denly sackt. Lagny being taken, great store of victuals was immediately con∣veyed into Paris: where the Joy and Jubile was so great as is not to be exprest; nor can it be said how much they celebrated Fernese's vigilancie, cunning, and military worth. The Bridg of Chiarranton and of St. Maure did without any contestation fall almost at the same time into his hands; places situated like∣wise upon the Marne: And so Paris might be the more securely victualled like∣wise on that side.
After this so prosperous success on the behalf of the League, the King of Navar thought, that if the Duke of Parma had formerly refused to fight, he would much more doe so now that he had compast his ends. And as for bringing him into any other difficulty, he thought it would be too hard a matter to effect, Fernese having so great Forces and being so well provided of all things necessary. On the contrary, the Kings Forces began already mightily to decrease, both through great sicknesses which had happened amongst them, and for that the Gentry that were in his Army, having no more hopes neither of getting Paris, nor yet of coming to a pitcht Battel, were not willing to be any longer under Command in that condition; moreover, maintaining themselves for the most part upon their own expence, they could no longer be at so great charges. The King then resolved to be gone from about Paris, and to go to S. Dennis, intend∣ing to dismiss most of his men for the present, and to reserve only a flying Army, that he might wind and turn about every where, where it should make most for his advantage. When he was gone from his Quarters, those wherein the Army of the League was were wholly free; yet the King in his retreat would try whe∣ther he could doe that unexpectedly by way of stratagem, which he could not effect by siege. He thought it might so fall out, as that the Parisians being re∣lieved, and wholly drowned in enjoying the effects thereof, and in restoring them∣selves with sleep and rest, and with the case of negligence, might neglect to keep that Guard about the walls by night which they formerly had been very vigilant in doing. He therefore resolved to try whether by Sealado he might come to assault the Town by night. Passing therefore over the Sene, (for he thought the Walls might be more negligently kept on the other side where the Armies were not) he with great silence formed three Squadrons of Foot, and sent them with many Ladders about midnight towards the Walls; the one of them came to the Walls of St. Germains, the other to those of St. Mihil, the third to that which is between St. Jaques and St. Marcelles. But the success did not any where answer the expectation. The Duke of Nemours, who was Governour of Paris, was exceeding vigilant, and had not any wayes lessened his Guards, though the Siege was raised; wherefore the Kings men were every where couragiously repulsed and beaten back. Paris had not well escaped this first danger, when it fell into another greater then the former: For the King entertaining himself thereabouts, and suffering the present fear of the City to pass over, he turn'd to make the same trial again on St. Marcelles side only. There were but two Ladders set up at first, to discover in what posture the Guards were thereabouts; and truly they found them to be so weak, as if the number of Ladders had been greater, the Surprise might easily have been effected: but the first that got up being thrown down to the ground, so many others came afterwards to defend the Walls, as the King had no more hope of any good success. Wherefore retiring with all his Forces to St. Dennis, he lighten'd himself as 'twas said before he meant to doe; and kept with himself the Marshal of Byroun, and the Baron his Son, together with a se∣lect and choice number of men, to make use of them upon all occasions where it should be most necessary. This mean while the Duke of Parma's Army was likewise much lessened. To the sicknesses which reigned more there then in the Kings Army, many other sufferings and disaccommodations were added, and victuals began to grow scarce, by reason of so many Souldiers having lain thereabouts, and particularly the Kings Army so long. For these reasons the Duke resolved to return to Flanders: and carrying with him the honour of so glorious a Succour, not to wait the hazard of some unthought of adverse Fortune. To boot that the King of Spains occasions touching his own affairs of Flanders, which every day received pre∣judice by the Dukes absence, did apparently require his speedy return into those Provinces. He acquainted the Duke de Mayn with this his resolution, who was thereat mightily afflicted: He had well hoped that the Duke of Parma would have tarried much longer in France, and that the League would have received many more advantages by his abode there. He was therefore very much prest by those of the League who were of greatest power, not to depart; at least not so soon. And finding him resolute in his opinion, they fell into divers suspi∣tions
and Complaints. They seemed to beleeve, That this proceeded more from the premeditated cunning of Spain, then from the particular necessities of Flanders. That the intention in Spain, in their assistance of the League against the King of Navar, was onely to make it be able to resist, not to prevaile. That Paris was no sooner relieved, but the Duke of Parma would be gone. That he had let slip the occasion of giving the King of Navar Battel, though he were much superior to him in Forces: and now that the King had dis∣mist a great part of his men, wherefore would not the Duke make use of so appa∣rent an advantage? Wherefore did he not with all speed endeavour to suppress totally the Heretical Faction, and establish the Catholick party for ever in that Kingdom? Fernese was much scandalised to hear of these speeches; yet thinking it was best to dissemble, spoke to the Duke Du Mayne in moderate terms, and which might serve to satisfie him and the rest of the Adherents to the League. Saying, That the King of Spain's intentions could not be more sincere in his succours which he had so often afforded unto France. And in these his last so potent Powers, what could he do more, then almost wholly abandon his own particu∣lar affairs of Flanders? Did he ever demand any Towns or Hostages in pawn for his security? He alwaies measured the Faiths of others by his own: And in matter of Religion, made that the interest of Spain, wherein France was particularly concern'd. That even for the benefit of the League it self, it was not fit to lose Flanders: For that if the Catholick Forces should be wan∣ting there, those would certainly be wanting which had at all times been, and might still be the greatest and readiest for the service of Religion in that King∣dom. That he was therefore inforc'd by all means to return to Flanders: but that he would leave such a strength of men in behalf of the League, as the cause thereof might not onely be alwaies sustain'd, but by new achievements, be still more advantaged. The Duke Du Mayne finding this to be Fernese's resolution, earnestly desired him, that before his departure he would at least endeavour to take in the Town of Corbel upon the Sene; so as that River might be free like∣wise for the bringing of victuals to Paris. The Legat Cajetan was at this time gone from France, upon the death of Sixtus Quintus; and had left in his place Monsignor Sega, a Bullonian, Bishop of Piacensa, a Prelate of great worth, for divers imployments of Nuntiature, and for other negotiations which had won him great honour. This Monsignor di Sega was induced by the Duke Du Mayne to make the same intreaties, which he effectually did to the Duke of Parma; who was un∣willing to hazard himself in a new siege; especially knowing that the chief Commander in Corbel was a Frenchman, and a very gallant souldier, called Rigant, who had given proof of his worth in Flanders under Monsieur de la Nue. Yet not to give further occasion of jealousie to those of the League, he resolved at last to besiege that Town, and encamped before it a∣bout the midst of September. Corbel lies upon the Sene on the left side, and hath a stone-bridge which passeth over to the other side: the Town is but little, and no waies strong, having walls after the ancient form, with∣out any barworks: the defence thereof consisted therefore in the valour of the souldiers, and in the example which they should receive thereof from their Commander. The Duke of Parma was not long in drawing neer it with his Trenches. Those within the Town fallied out, and couragiously resolved to oppose him: Rigant's vigilancy was very great; he was alwaies the first at undergoing labour, at incountring dangers, and in whatsoever else was necessary, as well in action as in command; insomuch as the Duke had already lost many men, and the siege proved much longer then at first it was thought it would have done: But resolving to see an end of it suddenly, after a great Battery, he made it be so furiously assaulted, as Rigant being slain, the Assailants entred the Town, and cutting the Gari∣son in peeces, did with great hostility plunder it. The Duke was notwith∣standing
troubled about it till the midst of October following; and had not Rigaut been slain in that assault, the Town peradventure would not have been taken so soon. Corbel being taken, the Duke suffered his men to rest till the beginning of the next moneth: he then betook himself to return for Flanders; and the more to deceive the Enemy, he went not the neerest way through Picardy, but through Campania; thinking that the King of Na∣var would quickly follow him; and that it would be best to leave the King in doubt what his intention in retreating might be. He kept the same order in going out of France, as he did in coming into it. He divi∣ded his Army into four parts, to the end that each part being less incom∣bred, they might all of them proceed on the faster; and upon occasion be the readier to succour one another. He gave the Van to the Marquess of Renty the first Battle to Monsieur de la Motte: he kept the second Bat∣tle for himself; and gave the Arrear guard to George Basti. In this last part was the greatest danger likelyest to consist: for the King of Navar might infest them behinde: this was therefore furnisht with select men; and in particular Peter Cajetan was placed therein, and Alonso Idiaques, with their two Brigadoes of Foot. The Duke of Parma being gone from Paris, he was not well got into Campania, when he might hear of the loss of Corbel; and not longafter, the like of Lagny: so ill were they kept by the Parisians, who had taken upon them the care thereof. Upon this occasion the Duke was again intreated to stay, and to return back to the recovery of those two Towns. But he being scandalized to see his pains slighted through so much negligence; to boot, that his necessity of returning into Flanders did daily more and more increase, would not any whit delay the pursuing of his intended jour∣ney. The King of Navar was by this time got to Compigy, a Town which lies towards Champagnia and Picardy: and having here gathered together a choice number of Foot, but more Horse, wherewith the easier to infest the Enemies Camp; as they retreated, he past on and followed them. He lost no occasion of drawing neer them, and of endeavouring to indamage them, or any waies to molest them: he set on them sometimes on the sides, sometimes on the front, but oftest on their back: sometimes onely threatning, sometimes suddenly assailing them; but never adventuring upon any greater engagements, by reason of the too much inequaility of his Forces. This his altering of places, and of assaults, did not notwithstanding make the Duke of Parma any whit vary his order in marching. His Squadrons marched the same pace, kept the same distances, environed on all sides with the carriages, which served for well forti∣fied Trenches; ready to fight if provoked, but still upon such advantages, as might cause the Enemy repent. The way was continually cleared by the Cara∣bines: and their quarters were every night very carefully fortified. Thus did the Duke of Parma march amidst slight skirmishes for some dayes. He was al∣ready entered into Picardy. The King willing to have one other bout with the Duke, sent some Squadrons of Horse against the Dukes Van about the end of November: the Dukes Horse came out to oppose them, and the dispute grew very hot. Of the French, the Baron of Biroune in particular, shewed himself very forward; who unwilling to yeild to the greater power of the Enemy, was so engaged amongst them, as his horse being slain under him, he had undoubted∣ly been taken Prisoner, had not the King himself, despising all danger, rescued him and fetch'd him off. The night coming on, ended the dispute. The next day the Duke of Nevers came in to the Kings assistance with some new Forces which he had gathered up thereabouts, and some other Forces from elsewhere came likewise in to the King. The Duke of Parma was at this time about Guise upon the utmost confines of France towards Flanders. Here did the King again as∣sault the Duke in the Rear. At first the Dukes Carabins came forth against the Curassiers; and the former not able to withstand the Curassiers, had been ill handled, had not George Basti come in unto them with a great Squadron of Lan∣ces and beaten back the shock of the Curassiers. But these being again reinfor∣ced by some of the Kings men; and on the other side Idiaques and Cajetan's Foot coming in to assist Basti's Horse, a very hot skirmish had likely to have
been; had not the King considering his disadvantage made his men retreat in a warlike posture. The Dukes men pursued them no farther, least they might break their establish'd order of marching. And here did end the King of Na∣var's assaults & all the molestations which Fernese till then had suffered by them. Who being come with all his Army safe into the confines of Flanders, he and the Duke Du Mayne parted. He again confirm'd more then ever hopes in the Duke Du Mayne of new and potent succours in assistance of the League; and assured him that he himself would very speedily be their Conductor. The mean while he left with him about 4000 Foot, and 500 Horse; thinking that such a recrute might serve for the present, to boot, with a Regiment of Germans which was formerly maintained in the service of the League, and defray'd by the King of Spain, under the command of Count Colalto. The Duke passed forward, and distributing the souldiery into Garisons, to rest themselves after so great labours: he came about the beginning of December to his winter quarters which was usu∣ally in Brussels.
THE HISTORY OF THE WARS OF FLANDERS, Written by CARDINAL BENTIVOGLIO. The Second Part. BOOK VI. The Contents. The Duke of Parma, after his return from France, findes the Kings affairs in Flanders but in ill condition. Advancements made in many parts by the Enemy. They take Zutfen and Deventer: both of them places of great importance. The Duke incamps before the Fort, opposite to Niminghen; does all he can to take it from the Enemy: Count Maurice draws neer it with great Forces to relieve it. This mean while Fernese receives precise orders from the King, to prepare sud∣denly to return again to France: he therefore immediately raiseth his siege. Mau∣rice maketh use of this occasion. He goeth to before Hulst a Town in the Province of Flanders, and quickly takes it. From thence he goes to before Niminghen, and hath the like good fortune there. The League in France does this mean while decline daily. Their danger of losing the City of Roan, which is straitly besieged by the King of Navar: Wherefore the Duke of Parma presently enters France. The Army of the League joyns with his. They march towards Normandy to re∣lieve Roan. The King of Navar marches to oppose them. A noble fight between both the Camps at Umaile, wherein the King is hurt, and in danger to be taken. The Army of the League advances, draws neer Roan, and puts some succour in∣to it: It then falls further off, and the King reinforceth his siege. But at last the Duke of Parma forceth him to quit it. The Colleagues enter forthwith into the Peninsula in the County of Caux, and besiege Caudebeck. In discovering the Place the Duke is wounded, and is much disturb'd in continuing his command. The King makes use of this occasion. He possesseth himself of the entrance into
the Peninsula, and reduceth the Colleagues to great scarcity of all things. The Duke that he may not be forced to fight upon too much disadvantage, resolves to secure his Army by passing over the River. Which he fortunately doth. He then leaves France, and returns with speedy march to Flanders. New successes on that side to the advantage of the enemy; and to Fernese's great grief. His affli∣ction is increased, by his growing every day worse and worse in his health. And yet he is again commanded by the King to return with all speed possible into France. To this purpose he goes to Arras; and deligently prepares for his third passage in∣to France. But his sickness increasing still upon him, he dies. WIth the Dukes return to Flanders, we will return to our former narration: though we shall be soon diverted from it, by the new necessity put upon the Duke of re∣turning again into France. Great had the sufferings been which he had undergone in his first journey; where∣in those of his mind were more then those of his body. He had learned by experience how hard a business it was to joyn the Kings designes together with those of the League. That the King after the vast expence he had been at in his late expedi∣tion against England, did now consume himself in these disbursments which he was at for the League of France. And that in the interim his own Territories of Flanders was but ill furnished with men, mony, and almost all things else; in so much as doubtlesly much damage was to be expected thereby. To boot with the men that were left with the Duke Du Mayn, it was necessary to place many on the Frontiers which lay towards France: to encourage the League nearer at hand; and that they might be ready to march in the behalf thereof, when it should be needfull, at any hours warning. So as the Kings Garisons in Flanders were much lessened; even in the most important places. And the Towns them∣selves left but slenderly provided with victuals or warlick ammunition to main∣tain a siege, if the enemy should sit down before them. Which they, knowing their own advantage, were not long adoing, as we shall successively relate. A∣mongst other things which had mightily afflicted the Duke of Parma whilst he was in France, one was the mutiny which happened at that time in Emanuel de Vega's Spanish Brigado which remained in Flanders: which the Duke after his return, did very much rescent at both the Mansfields hands; they not having been diligent enough, as he thought, in preventing it. And the disorder grew so much the greater, because it was above a year before those people could be paid, and reduced to their former wonted service. At the beginning of the year 1591. the enemy did not delay seconding the good conjunctures on their parts. Colonel Norris an English man, of whom we Annò 1591. have often spoken was in Ostend; who with that Garison which was then very nu∣merous, by reason of a new recruit of men which the Queen of England had newly sent thither, overran all the parts thereabouts. Yet the Fort of Blanchem∣berg, which lies between Ostend and Sluce, as hath been said, was a great obstacle in his way. Resolving therefore to free himself thereof, he assaulted the Fort so unexpectedly, and upon such advantage, as he soon took it; and it was soon af∣ter dismantled. This happened in the Province of Flanders about the midst of February. Not long after the enemy made two other surprisals in Brabant. The one was of the Castle of Westerlo; and the other of Turnehaut, which is one of the greatest Villages in all Brabant. There is likewise a Castle in this Village, in∣to which, as also into the Village, some souldiers did enter in country attire; as having something to sell, and without any difficulty made themselves Masters of them both. But these were but slight acquisitions in respect of others which Count Maurice intended to make, and which he sufficiently did that year, as you shall hear. He prepared necessary forces for this purpose. And therefore assoon as the season would permit him to go into the field, he deferred not to be moving. He judged that his greatest advantage did at this time invite him to the further side of the Rhine, towards Friesland, by reason of the great distance from thence of the Kings strongest Forces; as also of the Duke of Parma's own person.
wherefore turning thitherward about the midst of May, he resolved to besiege Zutfen; and with an Army of 10000 foot and 2000 horse, well furnished with Artillery, and with whatsoever else was necessary for this and other sieges, he sate down before it. A little while before he came thither, the Fort which did defend the City on the contrary shore, was fallen into his hands, by the like stra∣tagem as the aforesaid Castles of Westerlo and Turnhaut had formerly done. Having got this advantage, he suddenly begirt the Town on all sides; and with great celerity opened his Trenches, and prepared for battery. But the Garison in Zutfen was so small, and the Town was so weakly provided of all other necessa∣ries, as at the end of three days those within the Town, before the Artillery had played so much as once, began to treat, and soon after surrendred the Town Deventer is but two leagues off from Zutfen. Both these Towns lie upon the Ysel. And you have already heard how Colonel Stanly an English-man, put Deventer into the Duke of Parma's hands. Amongst other Commanders of great esteem, Count Maurice had with him Colonel Vere, an English-man. This Vere did of all the rest, chiefly desire that they might immediately go to the recovery of De∣venter; and that he might have the greatest share in that affair, to make amends for the fault which was by all the English attributed to Stanly. Count Maurice was easily perswaded hereunto. He therefore without delay turning upon that City, began to besiege it on both sides the River; and secured the passage to his own men by two bridges, whereby he also hindred the enemy from bringing in relief. Count Herman de Berg, was Governour of Deventer: he was eldest son to William de Berg, who married a sister of the Prince of Orange, so as this Herman was full Cousin-german to Count Maurice. He proved to be very judi∣cious and stout, and very faithfull to the King, though he was very young. But he had so small Forces in the Town, and was so ill provided of all things else, as he could not think to make any considerable resistance. He prepared notwith∣standing to do what he could: and acquainted Colonel Verdugo (who command∣ed the Kings Forces in chief in those parts) with the danger that he was in. Count Maurice, having advanced his Trenches, raised batteries on three sides The greatest was placed towards that part of the City which looks upon the River. And Colonel Vere took upon him the guidance hereof, to do it so as might speedi∣lyest effect the work. And immediately he began to batter the walls with such violence, as above 100 yards thereof fell at the very first battery. The defen∣dants retreated more inward; and Count Herman was not wanting in valiantly performing his part; when he received so grievous a wound, as he could no lon∣ger continue in the work that was begun. Wherefore the besieged being the more discouraged; and the Townsmen doubting least the enemies assault might occa∣sion the plunder of the City, a Treaty was had of surrender upon fair conditions: whereunto Count Maurice easily gave way. And thus in a few days he made this second acquisition, which was far greater then the former. From thence he went hoping to storm Stenwich; but Verdugo, who had not men enough to relieve Deventer, had enough to secure Stenwich. Wherefore Count Maurice turning upon Delfziel, (a place of importance of itself by reason of its situation; and more particularly to facilitate the siege of Groninghen, when (as was his intenti∣on) he should be in a fitting posture to incamp before it) made himself-soon Ma∣ster thereof; and then faced about, to effect by these his advantages, other pre∣meditated resolutions. The Duke of Parma was this mean while on his march; and having mustered all the Forces he could get in Ruremonde, he marched to∣wards the parts about the Rhine, intending to pass over it; and hoping to relieve Deventer, and secure it, which next to Groninghen, was the place of greatest con∣cernment in those parts. But hearing that it was lost, he resolved to attempt some enterprise; and feigning (to abuse the enemy) that he would assault Schinck Sconce, he passed over the Wahall at another place, and incamped himself. Before the Camp opposite to Niminghen, from whence the Inhabitants of that City re∣ceived much prejudice. That side of the City which was opposite thereunto was continually infested by the perpetual playing of Artillery from that Fort; in so much as all the houses on that side were already beaten down. The Garison of the Fort did as much command the passage of the River; as did the Inhabitants
of the City. Excursions on all sides were very frequent. And in fine such, and so grievous were the molestations, as it was apparently seen that the Royalists must either win that Fort, or else they must very quickly lose the City. It was a∣bout the midst of June when Fernese began to besiege that Fort. But he could not come before it so on the sudden, but that Count Maurice had reason to suspect his intention. Wherefore he sent the Count of Solmes thither with good forces, and new provision of Victuals; whereby the Fort was so well provided, as Count Maurice did no wayes fear the loss thereof, at least not so soon. The Duke ha∣ving ordered his Quarters, and fortified them on the out-side, he began to advance inward with his Trenches: But the Kings men paid dearly for all their works: for the Enemy sallying out oft-times, made strong opposition on all sides: Yet after some dayes they came to Battery, of which Monsieur de la Motte had the chief charge, and wherein he used all diligence; but yet proceeded but slowly. For the walls of the Fort being made of earth, which as it was thick, was also soft, the shot of the Artillery could not any ways considerably indamage it. And it was likewise very hard to come to the filling up of the ditch, which was very broad and deep, and was well defended on all sides. But in this interim Fernese's Cavalry received such a blow, as did still much lessen his hopes of getting the Fort. Count Maurice's Camp lay very near the Dukes Camp, in so much as there passed divers skirmishes betwixt them. And the Kings men could not pro∣vide necessary forrage for their horses, without continual danger of some am∣buscado. The Duke had given command that his men should avoid coming to any set business, by reason of the condition of the Country, which was very ad∣vantagious for the adverse party. Pier Francisco Nicelli, Captain of the Dukes lifeguard, going one day forth for forage, with divers other Captains of horse, he could not guide himself as he ought to have done: but suffering himself to be surprised in a narrow passage. wherein he was inforced to fight, he was quick∣ly routed by the enemy, and lost many of his men. He himself, and divers o∣ther Captains were taken prisoners: and of 400 of the Kings horse which were in this conflict, very few were saved. The Duke was mightily displeased hereat; but yet he did not give over his siege, but streightned the Fort more and more; when express Orders came to him from Spain, whereby the King did precisely command him that leaving such Forces in Flanders as should be sufficient for de∣fence, he should pass again with all the rest as soon as might be to succour the Ca∣tholick League in France. This Order being received, the Duke prepared pre∣sently to rise from before the Fort. In his retreat his men were to pass over the Wahall; not without danger of being indamaged by the enemy. But he with very great forecast soon secured himself from all danger: For causing a great Trench to be suddenly raised, and making it be continued even to the River, with redouts and flankers to shelter and defend his men at their imbarking, if the ene∣my should go about to hinder them, he passed over the River without any ob∣stacle, Count Maurice not being minded to molest him, by reason of the diffi∣culty he saw he should have to do it. At this retreat, wherein the Duke won great applause, it being done in the face both of the Fort, and of the Enemies Camp, was Prince Ranucchia, the Dukes eldest son, who was then come from Ita∣ly to serve under his father in Flanders. And he was not only present at the suc∣cess, but had his share in the execution thereof, it being his fathers pleasure that he should be the last man that should see the retreat compleated. The Army being brought safely over to the other side, the Duke came to Niminghen. This City would never accept but of a very slight foreign Garison, to preserve it self in the greater liberty, and because it thought it was able to defend it self of its self alone. The Duke was greatly displeased hereat: And knowing that there had been already some underhand dealing in the City, in favour of the enemy, he u∣sed all possible diligence to get the Inhabitants give way to the augmenting of their Garison; but he could not prevail with them: wherefore he went his ways, and left Verdugo the better provided with Forces; to the end that if need should require, he might the easilyer succour that City. It was now about the end of July; and because the Duke had received good by the the Spaw waters formerly, he went thither again to seek help for the Dropsie, which daily
threatned him more and more. Being come thither, he began to give all requisite Orders for the raising of Horse and Foot in Germany, in Burgony, and in the Low-Country it self, to the end that he might leave sufficient Forces for defence in Flanders, and yet carry such a strength of men with him, as the succour which he should now bring unto the League might exceed the former. Count Maurice this mean while did not omit making further advancements. Leaving the abovesaid Intelligences on his behalf on foot in Niminghen, he went from thence to go where he might make his designs the more advantagious, by their being the less expected. Great was the accommodation he had of trans∣porting his men from one place to another by Rivers and Sea-gulfs. Imbarking about the midst of September with 4000 Foot and 600 Horse, he unexpectedly landed with them in the Province of Flanders, and fell upon the Country of Walse, to take the Town of Hulst. This is a place lowly situated, and of great concernment; for it commands all the Country thereabouts. The Kings men, for the better defence of that Town, guarded some neighbouring places; which Count Maurice soon made himself master of: Then begirting the Town, where∣in there was but a small Garrison, and but slender provision of all things else, he soon brought the Inhabitants to Parley, and afterwards to surrender the Town. Colonel Mandragone, Governour of the Citadel of Antwerp, was upon his way to relieve it; and the Duke had so wrought with the Spanish Mutiniers, though they were not yet altogether appeased, as they were content to joyn with Man∣dragone. But the Surrender prevented the Succour. Wherefore the Kings men returned back, and the Town was by Count Maurice furnisht with all things ne∣cessary. He then imbarked his Army again, and recruiting it both with Foot and Horse, he overran all the Maritime Coasts of Flanders, threatning Newport and Dunkirk; but did this rather more to deceive the Royalists, then for any setled de∣sign he had in those parts. His true design was to turn upon Niminghen, & to use all possible means to take it. Wherefore reentring by the same way of the Rivers and Maritime gulfs into Ghelderland about the midst of October, he staid in the Wahal; and throwing over a Bridg near Niminghen, to the end that he might have that passage free, and that he might the better be victualled, he disposed of his Camp thereabouts. At the same time that he prepared with Forces without, Inelligences were held on his behalf within the Town, which had so good suc∣cess, as there was little need of the Forces without. The Garrison, which con∣sisted of some few Germans and Walloons, went sometimes out, but were not able to make any considerable opposition. Verdugo was at this time also moving, though not so soon as need required; for his Forces were no ways answerable thereunto. Wherefore those who favoured Count Maurice, taking occasion up∣on his delay, began to make a Tumult. This boldness soon spread from a few to many; who still increasing the commotion, drew all the rest to be of the same mind; and they all agreed to surrender the City: To which Maurice was as gra∣cious as could be desired in the Conditions which were established on both sides at the Surrender. He then entred the City and was received with great honour: And before he went from thence, he did largely repay this honour to Schincks bones, making them be interr'd with much pomp in the chiefest Church, and in the very Sepulcher of the former Dukes of Ghelderland. Count Maurice having added this last acquisition of so great concernment to the so important former, went to the Hague in Holland, where the Ordinary Deputies of the General Uni∣on of the Provinces had already made the place of their constant abode; and where he was received with unexpressible demonstrations of joy and affection: For though he had not met with any great opposition in the atchievements which he had made, yet he had shewed so great vigilancie in his Command, such ad∣visedness in his Councels, and such vigor in Execution, as doubtlesly he might even then be expected to prove that Gallant Commander, which our Age for his so many other famous enterprises hath fully declared him to be. This mean while the Duke of Parma was returned to Brussels; and wholly intent upon his pas∣sing again into France, he endeavoured to get as great a strength for that pur∣pose as he could. The news which he heard from those parts was, That the affairs of the League did every day decline; that the Forces thereof were very
much diminished; and that the King of Navar did still grow stronger; and that being Master of the Field, he had besieged Roan, which is the chief City of all Normandy, and the second of all France. The Duke de Mayn had sent Count Brisack a little before this, to acquaint the Duke of Parma with thus much. And the danger of Roan every day increasing, Fernese was again the more sollicited to come for France as soon as he could. Preparing then for his departure, he left as formerly the two Mansfields his Deputies. And a solemn Ambassie being at this time sent by the Emperor into Flanders, to endeavour some accommodation in the affairs of those Countries, the Duke upon that occasion did stay some dayes at Brussels. The Emperor had likewise signified the same intention to the United Provinces. But they fearing that the Ambassie was sent by the King of Spains procurement, would not consent to any Treaty. About which though neer upon a Moneth was spent, yet we have chosen to acquaint you with the re∣sult thereof briefly here, to dispatch the account of a Negotiation wherein there was hardly any Overture made. The Duke being gone from Brussels, went towards Picardy; and there in Peroun met with the young Duke of Guise, who not long before having escaped out of the Castle of Tours, where Henry the Third had shut him up after his Fathers death, and where the King of Navar had likewise detained him, was suddenly come to find out his Uncle the Duke Du Mayn. From Peroun the Duke of Parma went to the Town of Guise, where the Duke Du Mayn came to speak with him. In the same place was likewise Hercules Sfondrato, Duke of Montemarchiano, who a little before was sent by his Uncle Gregory the 14. with a very considerable strength both of Foot and Horse to assist the League. But Gregory dying, and Innocent the 9. succeeding him, his men were much diminish∣ed; Innocent excusing himself that he could not continue so great an expence, by reason of the scarcity of monies which the Apostolick Sea was then in. Nor did the Duke of Montemarchiano know whether he were to continue in that Com∣mand or no: though in all things else, Innocent seemed as if he would protect the League of France; to which purpose he had made the Bishop of Piachensa Cardi∣nal, declaring him also to be Apostolick Legat in the place of Cardinal Cajetan, who as we have said was already returned to Italy. At this meeting of the Duke of Parma and the Duke Du Mayn, the first thing that was agreed upon was, That Fera, one of the most considerable Towns of Picardy, should be delivered up to the Duke of Parma, that upon all occasions he might have a Town upon that Frontier towards Flanders, which might serve for better security to his Army. Here all their Forces joyning, each of the chief Commanders muster'd his men, and the whole amounted to about 25000 Foot, and 6000 Horse; the greatest part whereof belonged to the King of Spain, and were composed (as usually) of Spaniards, Italians, Germans, and Walloons; the Foot were about 16000. and the Horse 3000. The Duke of Lorain had sent the Counts of Vaudemonte and Shalligny with 700 Lances and Curasiers in assistance of the League. Of all the Forces which the Duke of Montemarchiano brought with him into France, there remained little more then 2000 Foot Switzers, and 200 Horse: The rest of the Forces were made up by the League. The Duke of Parma commanded over all in chief, and next to him the greatest authority lay in the Duke Du Mayn; with whom were then the Dukes of Umale and Guise, the first his Cousin-german, the other his Nephew; to boot with the aforesaid Counts of Vaudemonte and Shal∣ligny, who were of the same house, but in a degree further off. During the preparation, mustering, and marching of this Army, the year end∣ed, and the next of 1592 began. All their men being met at the entrance into Anno 1592. Picardy, the Army began to move about the midst of January, and marched towards Amiens, that it might enter on that side into Normandy, and endeavour to relieve Roan as soon as might be. The King of Navar, as hath been said, was before this City; and had advanced so far forward already in his siege, as the besieged were not likely to defend it much longer. Yet Monsieur de Villiers su∣stained the siege valiantly, and endeavoured by all stout resistance to afford time for the aforesaid succour: And much encouraged to hear that the Leagues Army was upon its march to that purpose, he continued in his defence more resolute
then ever: though by reason of the straits that he was in, he prest the Colleagues very much to come to his relief as soon as they could. Roan lyes upon the banks of Sene, and this River doth there much inlarge it self. Some leagues a∣bove it the King had a Town called Pont d' Arke, which is the last bridge which is now upon the Sene in its current to the Sea; some of the Arches of that bridge being broken and gone to decay, which the English did anciently build at Roan, whilst they were Lords of Normandy. The Town of Cawdebeck lyes some leagues beneath Roan, upon the banks of the said River; which was likewise in the Kings hands; insomuch as he commanding the River both above and be∣neath, by means of these two Towns, and by some men of war which scour'd up and down the River, had reduced that City into great straits. But hearing of the Duke of Parma, and that the Army of the League was already on its march towards Normandy: he called his Councel of war to consider what was best for him to do upon this occasion. The King had very great Forces; he had between nine and ten thousand Horse, and his Foot were as many as those of the Col∣leagues: all the Horse, unless it were some Dutch, were French; in the Foot there were likewise some considerable number of Dutch, and some English which the Queen had sent to assist the King: and three thousand Flemish Foot were likewise sent from Holland in his assistance. It was argued in the Councel of war, whether it were better to abandon the siege, and to march against the Army of the League to fight them in the field, as it was formerly determined in the business of Paris; or continuing the siege, to wait the Enemy within the works, and to defend those works so as the succour might by that resistance be hindred. The Mareshal of Biroune inclined particularly to this opinion; who by reason of his long experience and worth in military affairs, was highly esteem∣ed throughout the whole Kingdom; and of whom the King did alwaies make use in all his most important, and most difficult enterprises. In maintenance of his opinion he spoke thus, 'T is now (most glorious Prince) somewhat above a year since your Majesty was with your Army about Paris; every one knows that the end of that siege was onely to inforce that City to surrender by Famine; since so great a circuit of walls, and so thick a forrest of houses and inhabitants were not otherwise to be forced There were no quarters therefore fortified about it, no trenches were opened, no batteries raised, no assaults made. When afterwards the Army of the League drew neer, it was thought fitting that your Army should encounter it, and endeavour by all means to engage it in battel, since there was no other way to hinder the relief then by a field fight. I, together with the rest of the Commanders, was of that opinion, which was likewise approved of by your self, who do no less excel others in counsel, then in command. Let us now consider this present siege. In this, the end of begirting Roan consists much more in using opugnancy, then means of Famine. It makes much for us doubtlesly, that we are masters of the River on the upper side by means of Pont d' Arke, and on the nether side by the Town of Cawdebeck; so to keep Roan from victuals, but the hopes of winning lyes chiefly in our arms and swords. And how far are we already advanced with our trenches, with our batteries, with our works in the ditch, and with assaults? I am therefore of opinion, that upon this occasion we ought to shun giving battel, and that we ought with all industry to fortifie our quarters, and use all vigilancy in de∣fending them, so as the Leagues Army may not be able to force them; succour being hindred from without, it is not to be doubted but for what within, our flege will ad∣vance fortunately against the walls. We have already made such progress, as the City is in great terror: the Inhabitants whereof being accustomed to Traffick; and not acquainted with the Military profession, will not run the hazard of exposing themselves to ruine, plunder, and other dreadfull calamities, which often accompany the taking of places by storm and violence. Doubtlesly Monsieur de Villiers doth sufficiently discharge his part in making defence. But when he shall want victuals, when his souldiery shall lessen, and when he shall despair of succour, how can be then hold longer out? As for us, the river furnisheth us with plenty of victuals; we doe so abound in gallant horse, as we shall keep a good part of the neighbouring parts at our devotion. We expect new succours by sea from Holland, we receive fresh aid dai∣ly by land from the Provinces hereabouts. Wherefore since the advantages doe every
day increase on our side by way of siege, why should we not with all fervor and con∣stancy prosecute it? These neighbouring wars of France and Flanders have begot a common saying, that sieges are there learn'd, here battels. Let it be once seen that Erance can do both the one and the other. And that though it use to prevail by the force of field-fights, yet it can use patience in bringing oppugnations, when it shall be requisite, to their right end. It cannot be denyed but that the Duke of Parma won much praise the last year, by taking Lagne whilst our Army looked on But how much greater will your Majesties glory be, if you shall take Roan, in the face of his Ar∣my? Roan, which is the second City of the Kingdom, and which will quickly give you entrance into the first? For it is not to be doubted but that the Duke of Parma being recalled by his own necessities into Flanders, Paris will soon be reduced to your Majesties obedience; and that by the example thereof all the rest of the Kingdom will strive to do the like. But the Vicecount of Turein (not long before made Duke of Bullion by the right of his wife) who was one of the chief Commanders in war amongst the Hugonots of that Country; and who through his valour, and by his knowing how to make use thereof, by a particular vivacity of wit, became afterwards like∣wise one of the most esteem'd Marishals of France, was of another opinion, and spake thus. I must confess (unconquerable Prince) I know not wherein the so great difference lies between the siege that was before Paris, and this which is now before Roan, as that the resolutions which were then taken should be now shun'd. It was thought then that your Majesties Army was not sufficient at one and the same time, both to maintain the siege before Paris, and to fight the Army of the League; but that ei∣ther the one or the other of these resolutions must be pitched upon. At last the lat∣ter prevailed over the former; and therefere we marched with all our Forces against the enemy, to give them battel in the field, and by that means to keep Patis from be∣ing relieved. 'Tis true there were no quarters taken nor fortified in that siege: nor was there any sort of oppugning made. But notwithstanding I shall never be of opi∣nion, that to hinder the present relief, we should rather shut our selves up within our own quarters, then march with our Army into the field, as we did then. Roan is of such a bigness, and doth consequently require that our Fortifications about it be of such a compass, as we cannot bring them to such perfection as to be able to keep within them, and to defend them. Wherefore shall we expect to be doubly assaulted within them at one and the same time? Onceby the Leagues Army without, and again with∣in, by the Garison of the City? What will our danger be when we shall be thus in∣vironed by so great Forces on all sides? The Duke of Alva some years agoe, at the siege of Mons, waited for the Prince of Orange, within his Trenches; the Prince came, drew near, was beaten back, and the Town was afterwards surrendred. But what? Orange did then assault high and well munited Rampires, defended by ancient and experienced souldiers, against Tumultuaries. And Count Lodovick, brother to Orange, had a very weak Garison within the Town, and a people as con∣trary to him as well might be. Let us pass from this President of Flanders, to ano∣ther of Italy, which may be much better applyed to our present case. The memory thereof is sad, and will ever be so to France. I speak of the unfortunate fiege of Pavia. King Francis, as it is well known, suffered himself upon that occasion to be reduced to between the Spanish Army without, and the German Garison within; who were all of them men trained up in Arms: and being set upon on both sides at once, those mis fortunes and calamities befell him which are sufficiently known to all men. The Ar¦my of the League comes now, and is furnished with particular choice foot. There is in Roan a great and valiant Garison; and the Citizens, though not accustomed to Arms, are yet ready upon all occasions to take them up. Wherefore then, say I again, shall we expect a double assault of such Forces, between weak and distant works; and where our horse which do so far exceed those of the enemy, shall not have those advan∣tages which they may have in the field? I therefore advise by all means to give the enemy battel in the field. It hath formerly been seen that the Duke of Parma hath always shun'd it. He will certainly be now of the same opinion. And why should not we be as forward to provoke him to battel, as he is backward thereunto? his foot may be thought somewhat the better, but our horse are almost twice as good as his, and
may so advantegiously spread themselves in these spacious fields of Normandy, as the Flemish may oft-times have reason to wish themselves within those Dikes, Ditch∣es, and Channels, which are so frequent in those Countries. Hence it is that sieges are there so much used. And what greater glory can we have, then to see battels more frequent here? Where true Military force and worth is manifested on the bright Theatre of the day, not amidst blind Trenches, and buried Mines and base fighting in ditches; but in open field between Squadron and Squadrons, between Colours and Colours both of Foot and Horse, orderly drawn out. For what remains, the former reasons will be equally valid now. When your Majesty shall once have won the battel, the war will soon be at an end: And say that any misfortune should befall you, you may without much difficulty gather new forces, and take the field again. But it may assuredly be hoped that the misfortune of the war, or to say better, the punishment of Justice will fall upon your Enemies; who joyned together by the true reason of Interest, and the false pretences of Religion, imbrace the wickedest and most unworthy Cause that was ever at any time imbraced and defended. These two opinions being duly weighed, the King on the one behalf thought that the Siege being so far advanced, was not to be abandoned; and on the other side he thought he did so far exceed the Enemy in Horse, as he might spare a con∣siderable strength thereof to go against the Enemy, and so infest them, as that they should either not be able to advance, or atleast too late to relieve the Town. But the event shewed, that the not wholly adhering to either the one or the other advice, made them both prove unfortunate. The King having taken the above∣said resolution, resolved to go himself in person with 5000 Horse to encounter the Army of the League; and the mean while left the Marshal of Byroun with all the rest of his Forces, who should continue to straiten Roan as much as he could. With these people the King went first to Chasteauneufe, and then to Aumaile; Towns which confine upon the Provinces of Normandy and Picardy. He was not well got out of Normandy, when he was advertised by his Scouts, that the Enemy were well advanced into Picardy. The Army of the League marched in the same manner, as by the Duke of Parma's orders it had done the time before: The Foot were placed in the midst, the Horse with long wings in the Flanks, and the Garriages on both sides without. Monsieur de la Motte, together with his place of Generall of the Artillery, was Campmaster Generall of all the Flanders Souldiers; and the same office was discharged in the proper Forces of the League by Monsieur Rony, a valiant Souldier, and great Commander, and who had a particular dependencie upon the Duke du Mayn. Each of them were very carefull in keeping the whole Camp in order, and in securing their quarters; and yet the Dukes of Parma and of Mayn ceased not to be every where in their own persons. The Vantguard was led on by the young Duke of Guise, who had with him two French-men of experienced valour, the Baron of Scatres, and Mon∣fieur de Vitry: In the Battel were the Dukes of Parma and Mayn, the Duke of Montemarchiano, and Count Vaudemonte; and the Rear guard was guided by the Duke du Male, and Count Saligni: Prince Ranucchio marched usually with the prime Horse in the Van, and Marquis Vasto took his place most commonly there also; who repenting his having given over his former place of Generall of the Horse in Flanders, to command the Horse in the State of Milan, being to that purpose gone the year before into Italy, was now (born by a desire of glory) come to serve as a private Voluntier in the Duke of Parma's second expedition into France. Ten peeces of Artillery did precede the Vantguard; and from the Front thereof was thrust forth a flying Squadron, composed of Spanish and Ita∣lian Foot, who might be ready either to stand or charge the Enemy, according as occasion on either sort should require. The Army of the League made but short marches, that they might the better keep their ranks, fortifie their quarters the better, and to keep their souldiers from being weary. So as the Camp came not till the beginning of February near to Aumail, where (as was said) the King of Navar was himself in person. Here the Scouts of both Camps met to learn news; but the King, not very well satisfied with the tidings which his Scouts brought, would be an eye-witness thereof himself. The King was so naturally given to waging battel, as oft-times wholly forgetting himself, he would be present
upon the most common occasions, and would therein meet with the most fre∣quent dangers, as it now befell him, and thus it was. The King going out of Au∣maile with 500 Horse, gave order that the Baron Jury and Monsieur de Laverdein should follow him with more Horse, and with 400 Dragoons; and commanded likewise that the Dukes of Nevers and of Longneville should be ready with the rest of the Horse which were in Aumaile. The King advancing further then he ought to have done with the first Horse, fell upon the Scouts of the Enemies Camp, which he easily routed and put to flight: but George Basti coming in soon after with a great body of other Horse, charged those of the King so home, as the King himself was in apparent danger; and so much the more, for that his person was known by many tokens. This danger forced the King to retreat; which he did the hardlier, for that the Enemy charging him still more, the greater was the slaughter of his men. The Enemy endeavoured all they could to cut off the Kings way on all sides, and to take him prisoner. He on the contrary sustaining their force with incredible courage, endeavoured to bring himself as soon as he could into safety. In this interim many of his stoutest men dropt by his side; nor could the King himself scape unhurt; for as he descended a little rise, whilst he gave back, he was shot with an harquebuse about the reins, which made him hasten his retreat. At the news here of the Dragoons came in, and lighting on foot, were of great service to the King in sustaining the fury of the Enemy. But almost all of them being slain, the King had run the like hazard, had not Jury and Lavardine advanced to defend him, though they were accompanied but with few of their men; for the rest frightned with the news that was given out, that the King was either slain or taken prisoner, had most of them abandoned the field. So as their succour was not sufficient neither; for fresh horse of the Leagues coming in, the Kings men could not stand this new tempest: Jury had his horse kill'd under him, and Lavardine was ill hurt. The Leagues Vantguard was already all in Arms, and the Flying Squadron in particular was ready to move: And the Duke du Mayn said unto the Duke of Parma with a loud voyce, That such an advantagious occasion was not to be lost: That the King of Navar was upon has flight, most of his horse full of ruine and terror; wherefore what labour would it be to dissipate all the rest? That wanting Foot, and having rashly run into such straits, the King could by no means escape, if they would be but as resolute to as∣sault him, as it was easie to oppress him. 'Tis said, that the King seeing himself in so great danger, made one of his Captains of set purpose be taken prisoner, who was to affirm (as he did) that to boot with the Horse which the King brought with him, he was followed by a good body of Foot. The Duke of Parma detained by this relation, and by his diffidence of being in a Country which he was not acquainted with, and with Forces which did not fully depend upon his command, would by no means ha∣zard himself further in this conflict, fearing some ambush, or some other sinister accident which might befall him. And he was chiefly perswaded thereunto, for that he thought in reason of war it was impossible the King of Navar should with such resolution have exposed himself to such a conflict against the Army of the League, unless he were accompanied with a great strength of Foot also Wherefore the King being no further charged, the Dukes of Nevers and of Lon∣gueville came the mean while in to his aid; and affording him sufficient commo∣dity first to get into Aumaile, and then to get out of it, (For it was no place wherein to resist the Leagues Army) he put himself quickly into safety. He lost a great many of his men in this action, and Noble blood was mingled with blood which was more ordinary. There were very few of the League that were either slain or hurt. This was the Action at Aumaile; so considerable especially, for that on the one part the King of Navar through too much rashness was wound∣ed, and likely to have been taken or slain; and for that on the other part the Duke of Parma through too much wariness did not bear away a victory, which might have put the King into his hands either dead or alive, together with the whole Kingdom. The King retreated from Aumaile to Chasteauneufe: which was not a con∣siderable place to make resistance. But because it mightily imported the King of
Navar to entertain the Duke of Parma as much as might be, the Baron of Jury seemed ready to tarry there, and within it to make what resistance he could. To this purpose the King leaving with him such men as were needfull, drew off with the rest, to have his wound cured, and that he might again upon the first design turn to infest the Enemy. Fernese being come to Chasteauneufe, did so narrow∣ly beset the Town, as he took it within four dayes, suffering Jury to goe out at the particular instance of the Baron of Shatres, who was very near a kin to him. Here the Duke staid some dayes longer, to provide himself of victuals, with part whereof to keep his Army in good plight, and to succour the besieged with the rest. The Duke having Chasteauneufe, continued his march as formerly; which was but slow, because he would have it sure. Wherefore the King being cured, returned again to infest him, and to use all means of detaining the succour, till such time as he might be master of Roan. Continual skirmishes were therefore had between the two Camps; no great advantage being at any time had on either side, save only that in one of them the Count of Saligni was taken prisoner. The Leagues Army was now come so near Roan, as there remained nothing but to resolve of the manner how they should endeavour to effect the succour. In that upper part of Normandy wherein the two Camps now were, there is a Peninsula, which contains the Country of Caux. It is flankt on the one side by the Sene, and on the other by the River Diep even to the Sea, which incompasseth the great∣est part thereof; so as there remains but a narrow entrance into it by land, be∣tween the two Rivers. Upon the Sene beneath Roan, the King was master (as hath been said) of Caudebeck; and upon Diep, he was master of the Town called Diep, and of Arques not far from thence. The King with almost all his whole Horse was towards this side of the Peninsula, as being the neerest part to annoy the Leagues Army: having taken those horse from the siege, as well because there was no need of them there, as for that they might be the better kept in those spa∣cious situations where he was. His Horse-quarters were therefore five or sixe leagues distant from where his Foot were puartered about Roan. Fernese was the more encouraged by this distance of the King of Navar's Forces. Where∣fore rejecting the counsels of some who advised that they should endeavour to steal in some relief into Roan by night, he marched with his whole Camp in Battel∣array; and going towards Pont del Ark, at the furthest distance that he could from those places where the Kings horse lay, he drew near Roan. The resolution which was taken was, to march as quietly as they could by night, and to come unexpect∣edly about the break of day to the Enemies trenches, and violently to assail them on the outside: whereupon the Garrison sallying out from within, and the assault being thus doubled, and the King by reason of the too far distance not being able to succour his Foot time enough with his Horse, it was not doubted but that the Enemy would forsake their Trenches, and full of terror raise the siege wholly. With this resolution and hope the D. of Parma was ready to march on the 26. of February, when a Messenger came who was sent to him and the D. du Mayn with this advertisement from Monsieur de Villiers, That the Garrison sallying out at four gates the day before about break of the day, they had furiously assaulted the Enemy; that great fear and execution had insued thereupon, and their quarters had been much indamaged; that many Peeces of their Artillery had been clog'd, and many of them brought into the City; that their munition was in part spoil'd, and their victuals prejudiced; that the Marshal Biroun himself was hurt in the fight, divers other Captains and Officers of quality slain, together with above 600 common souldiers: That since they had no other urgent occasion, Monsieur de Villers desired only a small recruit of men; and advised that the Army of the League might bend somewhither else, where it might be more necessary or more advantagious to imploy their Forces. In this Sally was Villiers himself in person, and had shewed singular valour, for which he wan great praise throughout the whole Cawp. But as for his present advice, Fernese seemed not to approve there∣of: He rather thought, That by all means the occasion ought to be seconded; that it did manifestly invite to finish what had been so well begun; and how could it be believed but that to the Assault within, this other of so great Forces without being added, the Enemy must
needs raise the siege. That it was to this purpose that the Army of the League was joyned had marched, and were come so near; and not onely to bring a small relief to Roan. If this so advantagious an opertunity should be now lost, when should they ever expect the like? And what doubt was there but that when their Army should be drawn off the Enemy would return to besiege the City more stricktly? But the Duke Du Mayne urging many reasons to the contrary, said, That for the present, the succour which was required would suffice; and that the Army ought not to be adventured to another more dangerous conflict; That it might be imagined the Enemy had been more afraid then hurt within their Trenches; That it was to be imagined the King of Navar would immediately come out of his quarters upon the news of such a sally, upon the noise of such a succour: That he was very strong in Horse, wherefore his forces being soon joyned, it would be a very dangerous business to assault them: That it would be better therefore to secure the City for the present with the desired succour: That in the mean while the King would grow weary so would his Nobility also; and many of them would abandon him, when they should see the siege should be again prolonged, and all hopes of coming to a battel lost: That the sharpness of the winter was yet very great; great the sufferings in the Enemies Camp: And that therefore the Army of the League going now upon some more im∣portant design, and where they might be more commodiously lodged: they might after∣wara with greater advantage imploy themselves to a total freeing of Roan. The Duke of Parma would have his opinion to yield to that of the Duke Du Mayne's▪ though he thought it a manifest error to lose the present advantage in expectation of an uncertain futurity. Wherefore sending 800 Foot to Villars, part French, part Walloons, the Duke made the Army suddenly turn back, and brought it almost in its former quarters from Normandy into Picardy. The King of Navar was this mean while on his march to relieve his Foot; and seeing the League's Army draw off, he thought that the Duke of Parma continued still his former opinion of evading battel: wherefore assuming the more courage, for that he thought his Enemies cooled therein, he forthwith returned to remake the Trenches, which had been prejudiced in the sally. He endeavoured to for∣tifie them better every where: and with all necessary provisions applyed himself intentively to continue and to straiten the siege on the other side. The Army of the League when it was entred into Picardy, and was got beyond the Some to∣wards the confines of Artois, it was brought to besiege the Town of Rue, a place seated low and which together with the advantage of its situation, was made very strong by works. This place was at the King of Navar's devotion; though almost all the rest of the Province adhered unto the League. At the first begir∣ting of it, they began their usual work of Trenches, but slowly and reservedly, that they might save their men as much as it was possible, and not to imploy them so much here, but that they might be alwaies ready to return again to Roan when the occasion might peradventure require it; which was not very long before it did For the King of France growing still hotter upon that siege, the City grew into so great necessities, as it was reduced to the same danger as before. The Dukes of Parma and of Mayne were hereof advertised by Villiers, to Fer∣nese's great astonishment, who could hardly perswade himself that Villiers would have desired so weak an aid in the former succour, unless he had known he had not needed a greater. This mean while daily news is brought of the besieged's necessities. And though what the Duke Du Mayne had guest at touching the diminishing of the Kings Army had partly proved true; yet were his forces suf∣ficient doubtlesly to have taken Roan, if it had not been quickly relieved again. 'Twas thought the King had not then above 5000 Horse, and 16000 Foot; wherein was comprehended 3000 which were lately come from Holland with some men of war, that they might the better command the River. But on the other side, the League's Army was likewise much lessened. The Popes Zwitsers were not above 1000, and the change of Pope had made the Duke of Monte∣marchiano leave France, and almost all the rest of that aid vanish. Lorain's Forces were likewise brought very low, and being so near Artois, many Wal∣loons and Flemish were run away from the Army, and returned to their own homes. Yet was the League's Army as numerous as the King of Navar's, and
their Foot were much the better. Upon these terms were the Forces on both sides when Monsieur de Villiers renued his desires of being speedily succoured, with much more earnestness then before; and protested openly afterwards, that if he were not relieved before the twentieth of April he should be forced to deli∣ver up the Town. Wherefore the Duke of Parma, rising speedily from before Rue, and passing the neerest way over the Some, re-entred Normandy, to come speedily where the greatest necessity of succour required. He saw he must of necessity assault the Enemy within his Trenches, and consequently come to a down right battel. Great certainly was the advantages which the Enemy had in his rampiers; but Fernese thought his advantage the greater, by the double as∣sault which should be given to the Enemy at one and the same time, by his Army without, and by the Garison within. The Duke of Parma drew near with this designe to Roan. He marched after his former fashion, thinking that the King of Navar might peradventure meet him, and rather chuse to give battel in the o∣pen field to the Leagues Army alone, then adventure to receive and to sustain the two afore mentioned assaults at one and the same time. At the hearing of the Duke of Parma's march, the King was in great dispute what to do. But consider∣ing well his Forces, and not thinking them such, as that he was upon so great un∣certainties to place all his hopes in them, he set aside the more hardy advice; and for the present giving way to the more cautious, resolved not to undergoe the ha∣zard of either of both these bickerings. Wherefore he raised his Camp from be∣fore Roan on the 20 of April, and marching in great order to Ponted Ark, he stayed there to observe the enemies proceedings, and to do what should make most for his advantage afterwards. The King of Navar being gon from before Roan, the Dukes of Parma and Main presently entred the Town, and staid there the next day, to the great joy of all the Inhabitants who ran from all parts to meet them and to receive them. The Army was quartered in the neighbouring Towns, till they might consider, and resolve what designe to fall upon next. Concerning which there were seve∣ral opinions in the Councel. But that which was most pursued, especially by the French Commanders, was, that Rean not being to be reputed totally free till such time as it had the free passage of the river, it was therefore necessary to take Cau∣debeck from the enemy; by which Town they might be always much prejudiced in receiving their victuals by way of the river. The Duke of Parma endeavou∣red upon all occasions to second the opinion of those of the League, and particu∣larly in working their advantages more in one part then in another of that Coun∣try, wherein he was not well vers'd. Though that resolution was to prove the ruine of the whole Army, as shall be seen. The Duke turning to the aforesaid siege of Caudebeck, incamped before it with his whole Army. This Town lies, as hath been said, upon the right hand of the banks of Seene. It is three leagues distant from Roan; of an indifferent bigness, and without any considerable For∣tification. Yet those within the Town, seemed as if they would defend it: so as a battery must be prepared against it. The Duke of Parma for his better sa∣tisfaction, would go himself in person to discover the situation of the place. And whilst in company of one Propertio, an Italian Ingeneer, and only three more (having advanced too far) he was observing the walls, it so fell out, as some with∣in the Town giving fire to their Harquebuses, he was wounded by one of them on the left arm, between the hand and the elbow. He said not a word; nor seemed to be any ways concerned in the wound; but with singular sufferance con∣tinued the work begun: when great store of bloud was seen to fall from his arm, and he was necessitated to retire. Being come to his lodging, his wound was drest, and it was judged not to be mortal, but that the cure would be long and troublesome. A great disturbance insued upon this accident throughout the whole Army: it not being known how the Government should be ordered. The Duke du Main had the chiefest part in the general command: but the Duke of Parma would have the Prince his son, to command over all the Flanders Forces. The former resolution of forcing Caudebeck was thus continued, A great bat∣tery was planted against the walls, which quickly made a great breach: where∣fore
the next day the defendants began to parley, and upon good Conditions went out of the Town. The Duke of Parma was brought in thither that his wound might be the better tended; nor was there any resolution taken wherewith he was not acquainted. Good store of provision was found in Caudebeck; and the gaining of that Town, made the River more open in the behalf of Roan: though the Hollanders men of war did continually infest it. But this mean while new Forces flock'd continually to the King of Navar, and particularly the Nobility on horseback, out of new hopes of a field-battel, since the siege had succeeded unfortunately. The King hereby incouraged, went from Pont d'Arke, and be∣gan to inlarge himself in the field, intending to keep it as much as he could from the Leagues Army. The designe was to hinder them especially from that Pass which lies between the Rivers of Seene and Diepe, and which serves for the com∣ing by land into the Peninsula of Canx, as hath been said. The Army of the League was of necessity to return by that way, as they should go out of Nor∣mandy, to reenter into Picardy. And this sort of opposition might certainly put it into great straits. After the taking of Caudebeck, the Duke du Main, and the Prince of Parma, with the approbation of the Duke his Father, led the Army to quarter more within the Country, and came to the Town of Yuetot, little more then an hours match from Caudebeck, that they might the better observe the King of Navars resolutions, and oppose themselves thereunto the best that they could. The Village was full of houses, and very advantagiously seated; and victuals might easily be brought thither from the Seene. Here then the Army staid, and to the natural strength thereof, they added such Fortifications by handy work as were necessary. By this the King of Navar judged that the Colleagues intended to quit Normandy as soon as they could; which he being desirous to hinder, advanced with all his Camp, and lodged not above a mile from where the Colleagues were. Here the King began likewise to fortifie himself; and at the same time to scoure the Country, to straiten it as much as he could from the enemies Camp. And he might very well do it: for the Nobility being come a∣gain from all parts to assist him, his Cavalry was increased to the number of 8 or 9 thousand horse: and his foot did likewise daily increase. This their so near neighbourhood occasioned continual skirmishes, each party endeavouring to ad∣vantage their own situations, that they might the more offend the like of the ene∣my. The King of Navar went not long after to lodge in another place, where he might keep the enemy much more from victuals. 'Twas evidently seen that his end was either to fight them upon great advantage, or to reduce them to such a scarcity of victuals, as he must at last have the victory without fighting. The Colleagues began to be much incommodated by these his last quarters. Where∣fore not to be too much straitned neither in place nor in victuals, they were often forced to sally out in great bodies, in opposition of the Kings forces, which were by the King with ineredible vigilancy kept in continual exercise. The skirmish∣es were therefore usually turned into parties; one of which happened to be so fierce and so long, as it was likely to have turned to a set battel. On one side the Duke du Main, and Duke de Guise were ingaged; and Prince Ranucchio on ano∣ther, whose horse was slain under him, and his own person was evidently indan∣gered. At the noise of this conflict, and for fear lest it might come to a general battel, came the Duke of Parma himself in person at last; being brought in a Chair, and afterwards set on horseback, not failing to be wheresoever it was most needfull, though his wound did exceedingly pain him. But the coming on of night kept them from coming to an intire conflict: and it was seen that to come thereunto, each side desired either to have the greater advantage, or would not hazard greater losses. There were two Captains of Launces with the Prince who had particular occasion to signalize themselves: the one a Spaniard, Carlo Colon∣na; and the other an Italian, which was Hannibal Bentivoglio our brother, a youth of but 20 years old, who received a sore wound in his leg. This Carlo Co∣lonna wrote the History of the Military Successes of Flanders which happened in the time of his own being there, in his own Language; a History very much e∣steemed of; and which hath made the Author so much more famous, for that he was ever after meritoriously employed by the King, not only in matters of
War, but also in Civil negotiations. Many hot conflicts insued upon this, neither side having much the better. Neither do we think it fitting to represent every particular success thereof here, that we may not too long defer the reassuming what more properly belongs to our particular History of Flanders. The King of Navar continued scouring the Country up and down every where, particularly where he might most incommodiate the Enemy in their victuals, wherein they already suffered exceeding much; Bread was sold at a very dear rate, and was not had without great difficulty; Forage for Horses grew every day scarcer; and all other sufferings were proportionable to that of victuals, throughout the whole Army. Wherefore many Souldiers began to disband; and all in generall to complain, That their so many and so renowned labours should terminate in the miserable necessity of Famine. How much better would it be to dye with their swords in their hands, and by that way to attempt their return? So as the Enemy should not boast, at least, to have overcome without fighting, and glory in the triumph before they had well got the victory. And this was the King of Navars mind: For it was apparently seen, that lay∣ing aside all thoughts of fighting, his only end was to reduce the Colleagues to the utmost extremity by Famine; and he seemed already not any wayes to doubt it. He considered that the Leagues Army, before they could come out of Nor∣mandy, and enter into Picardy, was of necessity to pass through the entrance into the aforesaid Peninsula; That that Pass was possest by his souldiers, and that the Colleagues could not without manifest ruine force their way through that pas∣sage. There remained then only the passage over the Sene: But how difficult and how dangerous would this be likewise to them? since they were to pass over a River of so great a breadth and depth, continually infested with the alternate ebbing and flowing of the Sea; and being flanked with so powerfull an Army as was his. By reason of which straits on both sides, the King thought he had the victory so sure, as (as I said before) he made no doubt of it. The Duke of Parma did also very well know all these difficulties; and weighing them together, re∣solved at last to pass over the River, and to put his Army into safety. Nor did he any whit delay the doing thereof; for the necessities of his Camp were grown to that extremity, as it began to threaten an intire dissipation, unless some op∣portune remedy might quickly be found. Having therefore secretly communi∣cated this his mind to the Duke Du Mayn, to Prince Ranucchio, and to some few others who were to be actors in the business, he in the first place resolved to draw near the River, the better to facilitate all such preparations as was necessary for that end The Colleagues were, as it hath been said, in Yvetot, which was a good way from the River. Fernese going then from thence, went to another place with∣in less then a mile off Caudebeck, where he likewise fortified himself as well as he could. On the other side the King of Navar failed not immediately to draw near unto him; so as continual skirmishes, and parties were had as before. This mean while such provisions were made as were requisite for passing over the River, as Fernese had designed. Wherefore not able to defer it any longer, he ordered it thus. With great speed he caused two Forts to be raised upon the two shores, one over against the other: Into that which was on the shore next the Army, he put Count Bossu with 800 Foot of his Walloon Regiment; and into that on the contrary side he put Campmaster Barlotta with as many of his Regiment of the same Nation also; and he furnished both these Forts with some Peeces of Artil∣lery, whereby to secure the Barks wherein the Army was to pass. The Forts be∣ing thus raised and provided, he caused a great many great Barks, and some of a middle sise, fall down from Roan, which were made of such a form as was needfull for the said design: There were some flat-bottom'd, like to Floats, for the better transporting of the Artillery; and all these greater Barks were accompanied by lesser Boats with oars, which were to serve to make the passage of the greater the more easie. On the 22. of May all these Barks came to the place destin'd for the passage; nor did the Duke of Parma delay one moment the putting of it in exe∣cution. That very night he past over all the French Horse, and the next day al∣most all the Flanders Foot; some part thereof staid on this side the River, to
cozen the King of Navar, by feigning to make the wonted skirmishes, and to make him believe that they would go to some other quarters. And because the Barks would have been too long in conveying over the whole Army, almost all the Flanders Horse, the Baggage, and the Artillery were suddenly sent to Roan, to enjoy, as afterwards they did, the commodity of the Bridge before spoke of, and which was patcht up in the broken parts thereof in such sort as necessity up∣on such an occasion could permit. The next day, as the Kings Hors-men were making their wonted excursions, they were at last aware that the Enemies Army were passing over the River. The King was mad to hear of this, especially when he knew that there were but few left on this side the River, and that those were sheltred by the Fort raised on the same side. He without delay picked out a se∣lect number of Horse, and came to the River, to see if he could rout the afore∣said men, who were all Spaniards and Italians. But he found them so valiantly sustained by Prince Ranucchio, and so well defended by the Fort, as he could no wayes impede their passage. To perfect the business, the Duke of Parma would have his son the Prince bring off the Rear; who imbarking that remainder, past them all safely over: And the like insued to the other Souldiers who were in the Fort, and to the Artillery which defended it. Yet the King causing some of his Cannon be brought to a certain place which did most command the River, endeavoured to sink those Boats wherein the residue of the Dukes men were; and some of those Boats which were come from Holland came likewise up, and endea∣voured to hinder the passage. But all was in vain: For finally the Prince landed himself, and all the rest of his men safe on the other shore; and presently set all the Barks on fire, to bereave the Enemy of making use of them in passing over the River also. The King of Navar was still mightily incenst, to see that Victory escape him which he made so sure of. He was minded to pass over the Pont d'Ark, to en∣counter the Enemy again, or at least to infest them as much as he could in the Rear. But the compass being great which he was to make, and the Foot not be∣ing able to follow the Horse so fast, which of themselves alone were not able to reduce the Enemy into straits, he did not any thing more against them. When the Army of the League was past over the River, the Dukes of Parma and Mayn suspected lest the King of Navar might fall upon the aforesaid resolution of pas∣sing over the Pont d'Ark: They therefore went far from the River, and quar∣tered in a Village called Newburgh, more within land. From hence Du Mayn went with some Forces to Rohan, the better to secure the affairs of that City by his own presence, whilst the King of Navar kept still thereabouts with so great a strength. And Fernese pursued his Retreat, marching still in very great order; till being come into the Country of Brye, contiguous to Champania, he thought he might with more commodiousness and safety make less haste out of France. Being come to the Confines, he left certain Foot and Horse under the Command of Monsieur Rony, to be disposed of in the Leagues service, as the Duke Du Mayn should appoint him. And from thence entring Flanders, he went again to the Spaw, being thereunto invited by the hot weather which already began: But with small hopes of getting any good by it for his infirmity, which since his wound grew every day greater. He was much afflicted at this his bodily weak∣ness being thereby deprived of following the most necessary military actions, which he had formerly indefatigably undergone in his own person. But he was chiefly vexed to see how much evil the diversions of France had occasioned to the affairs of Flanders; and that the King of Spain did still persist more then ever in his desire of succouring the League; and that to that purpose he was again to pass into France as soon as he could. At his arrival in Flanders he found a mutiny of the Italians on foot; and that Count Maurice had straightly besieged Sten∣wick, a place of importance towards Friesland, on the other side of the Rhine. Maurice did lustily begirt it on all sides; and having first fortified himself with∣out to keep the Kings men from bringing relief, he omitted no diligence in making inward advancements. He plaid upon the Town furiously from divers parts with his Artillery: And though the besieged were not wanting in making resistance by frequent Sallies, and by all other stout resistance, yet it was known the Town
could not long hold out, without some succour. The siege was at this pass when the Duke of Parma arrived in Flanders. He had left a good many men in France; and the remainder were so lessened, and so out of order by reason of so many sufferings, as they were not in any condition of undergoing new ones. The Duke endeavoured notwithstanding that all means should be used to relieve the Town. And Verdugo did likewise labour in it with his wonted diligence and in∣dustry. But his assistance was so weak, and came so late, as the besieged not be∣ing able to hold out any longer, were at last inforced to yield. Maurice won much honour by the getting of this place, and it was a great advantage to the Confederate Provinces in those parts. Nor did they stop here: Count Maurice turned presently upon the Fort of Cowreden, which was in the Kings possession, and guarded a pass of great moment thereabouts: and did so narrowly besiege it, as those within wanting many necessaries for defence, and withall having no hopes of succour, they were at last forced to quit the place. Much afflicted at these losses, the Duke of Parma came to Brussels about the midst of October; at his arrival in Flanders, the Prince his son departed from those Countries to return for Italy. And the Duke being grown so very weak, as he thought he could not continue his Military labours in that Government, he very much prest the King for leave to quit it. But the King thought not good to condescend thereunto: hoping that the Duke might yet again pass once more into France: and knowing of what importance his very presence would be there. On the other side the King knew in what a languishing condition of health the Duke was: he knew how he was affected with the Dropsie, which was become now incurable; and that it was likely some time or other to prove his death. Wherefore the King thought it necessary to send some personage of worth and esteem into Flanders, who might more attentively observe the Dukes condition, and might likewise have such Commissions about him from the King, as should be thought fittest to be put in execution, as well in consideration of the Dukes great want of health, as also in case the Duke should die. To this purpose he sent away John Pachecco, Marquis of Ceralva, who died before he got out of Spain; wherefore he was fain to send another in his place, which was Pietro Henrichuz di Azevedo, Count of Fuentes. This mean while the King being earnestly re∣quested by those of the League in France, had commanded the Duke of Parma, that he should prepare to go again into that Kingdom, with as great a strength as his occasions in Flanders would permit him. In performance whereof the Duke gave out present orders for the raising of new men, as he had formerly done. And going from Brussels, went to Arras, that he might be as soon as might be on the nearest Confines of France, and give the greater incouragement to the business. Here through the strength and vertue of his mind, he continued as much as possi∣bly he could to govern the weakness and languor of his body. He was indefa∣tigable in his negotiations, and more by night then by day. And as if he scorn'd to yield to nature, which made him now unable for any exercise, he would some∣times appear on horseback, and did strive to deceive himself by going on foot. Thus did he persevere to do for some time. And in the interim Count Fuentes arrived in Flanders: who prepared to go from Brussels, to find out the Duke at Arras; but he could not come time enough; for the Duke, not able to hold out any longer, and knowing himself first to be dead, before he would, as it were con∣fess himself to be mortal, breathed forth his very last spirits about the beginning of December. Thus ended Alexander Fernese, Duke of Parma, in the 7 year of his age. The Pontifical greatness of Paul the third, placed the Title of Prince in his house. This Alexander being from his birth highly minded, began to give all signes thereof even in his childhood. Whilst yet a youth, he went to the Court of Spain, to give the greater pawn of his dependancy unto the King: and consequently to obtain the livelyer effects of protection from him. But passing quickly from the Courtier to the Souldier, he laid the first foundation thereof un∣der Don John of Austria, upon the memorable occasion of the League against the Turk. Even then he gave such proofs of his warlike spirit, that amongst the richest choice of Commanders that Christendom had in that enterprise, he was chosen to take in Navarino, one of the most considerable places of all the Ea∣stern
Seas. Don John being afterwards made Governour of the Low-Countries; he at the first news of the revolts which arose there, hasted, as hath been said, to find out Don John. And so behaved himself in every Military action, as it was questioned whether he had better performed the quality of a common souldier, or the greater prerogatives of a Commander. Succeeding afterwards himself in the same Government, it seemed Don John did still survive in him: so near were they ally'd no less in affection then in bloud, and so conformable were they both in their years, in their conditions, and in their valour. Whilst Fernese fought a∣mongst the Flemish, his Forces were almost always waited upon by great good success; but being forced to pass divers times into France, he was necessitated to see the Kings affairs in Flanders mightily decline. For what concerns the reputa∣tion of his Military profession, none hath more in France then he, for the two so memorable Succours of Paris and Roan: And finally his glorious Retreat from Caudebeck, won more renown unto him without fighting, then if he had joyned battel in each of those actions, and had overcome. He was indeed a gallant Com∣mander: and doubtlesly of so clear a fame, as his renown may rank him amongst the most cry'd up Chieftains of Antiquity, and render his memory so reverenced in the present age, as to make him be admired by posterity.
THE HISTORY OF THE WARS OF FLANDERS, Written by CARDINAL BENTIVOGLIO. The Third Part. BOOK I. The Contents. Count Peter Ernestus Mansfield succeeds the Duke of Parma in the Government of Flanders. He sends his son Count Charls into Picardy; where joyning with the Duke du Main, they besiege and take the Town of Noyon. But the Spaniards in that Army, mutiny awhile after in the Town of St Paul in Artois. Count Mau∣rice makes use of this; he strongly besieges St Getringberg, and takes it; Mans∣field having in vain endeavoured to relieve it. Disorders increase in the Kings Army by another mutiny of Italians and Walloons, at Pont in Hennault. Arch∣duke Ernestus comes to Flanders, and is by the King declared Governour thereof. A new expedition of Count Charls in Picardy, with the taking of La Chapelle. The Archduke indeavours a Treaty of peace with the enemy. But they reject all Treaties. Not long after they besiege Groninghen, which after some opposition is taken by Count Maurice. The King of Navar declares himself a Catholick. And the League languisheth. The King enters with great forces into Picardy. He besieges Laon. Du Main and Mansfield march to relieve it. But cannot doe
it. Their noble retreat in the face of the King. This mean while another Mutiny happens amongst the Italians in Flanders, who take the Town of Sichen. The Archduke endeavours to break the Mutiny by force; and not being able to doe it, comes to composition. The Confederate Provinces endeavour to find a nearer way by Sea to the East-Indies by the North. The design succeeds not. It is briefly touched how they entred by the usual way into the East-Indies, and afterwards into the West. Archduke Ernestus dies, and leaves the Government of those Provinces to Count Fuentes. BY Commissions from the King of Spain, which were Anno 1593. brought by Count Fuentes into Flanders, it was ordered, That if the Duke of Parma should chance to dye, the Government should remain in Count Peter Ernestus, in the same manner as it had been in the Dukes two prece∣dent expeditions into France: That his son Count Charls should still keep the chief management of the Forces; that he should continue to give all possible assistance to the League in France; and that the greatest endeavours being made on that side, it should suffice to stand only upon the defence on the Kings part in the affairs of Flanders. These Orders being come from the King, the first thing Count Peter Ernestus did, was to dispatch away his Son with new Forces into France, to boot with those that were there already in behalf of the League. The Duke Du Mayn prest very much for these succours; and that he might the sooner receive it, he himself was already gone into Picardy. Count Fuentes was in the first Place with Mansfield; and bore such a sway with him, as the power of Government seemed to be more in Fuentes then in Mansfield. Fuentes then remained chief Superintendent in Flanders; and Count Charls past into France with 6000 Foot and 1000 Horse, part old souldiers, part new men but then raised. You heard before, how that the Duke of Parma, that he might have a safe retreat upon the Frontiers of Picardy, had in his second expedition the Town of Fera delivered into his hands. Here Count Charls made his rendezvouz, and here did the Duke Du Mayn joyn with him. Between the Flanders Forces, and those of France which depended upon the League, was framed an Army of 15000 Foot and 3000 Horse; and in the beginning of March, in the year 1593. the Camp moved against Noyon, which is not far from La Fera. It is a Town very much peopled; it hath a Bishops See in it, and certain other circumstances which makes it be esteemed one of the most considerable places of all Picardy. Noyon adhered to the King of Navar, and was of much advantage to him in that part of the Province which lies nearest Paris. For all things else, it was not so strong, neither by nature, nor by industry, nor by the condition of the people or garrison, but that it might be soon won. A little Rivolet runs through it, which not far from the City falls into the Oyse. When the Army of the League had be∣girt Noyon, they began to fortifie their quarters towards the field, lest the King of Navar might endeavour to succour the Town; then according to custome they fell to work upon their Trenches, and to prepare for Battery. The ground was rather moyst then dry on the one side; and therefore they began their works there, where the ground would best permit them so to doe. The two Camps con∣tended in the making of them; and especially in that of Flanders, the Spaniards, Italians, Germans and Walloons strove according as usually to outdoe one another in opening and in advancing the Trenches. The besieged made some sallies, but with weak forces, and weaker courage: by which it was judged the City was not in condition to make any long resistance. One of their best defences was a Rave∣lin without the walls, built about with good stone, and furnisht with a Platform. The Batteries were therefore chiefly turn'd upon that Ravelin: Nor was it long ere they fell with their Trenches into the Ditch; where Mines being joyn'd to the Batteries, so great a breach was soon made in the Ravelin, as it was now thought fitting to make an assault. Which hapned luckily. The Spaniards and Walloons did herein particularly signalize themselves; and of all others, the Camp masters Luis Velasco a Spaniard, and Claudius Barlotta a Walloon: Barlotta and divers
others were wounded, and some were slain. The Ravelin being taken, those that won it lodged there; and planted some peeces of Artillery upon it, to play upon the Town nearer hand, and with the more terror. A certain strength of Horse and Foot was still maintained by the Apostolike Sea, who were commanded by Appius Conti, who plaid his part valiantly. But a quarrel arising between him and the Baron Chateaubrain a Lorainer, and Colonel of the Germans, and falling from words to blows, Appius was wounded, whereupon he quickly dyed; to the grief of the Army, which held him in great esteem. This occasioned some dis∣order in the Pontificials; for Chateaubrain's German Regiment was maintained by the monies of the Apostolike Sea. Yet was the Siege so hotly continued by all parties, as those within were within a few dayes reduced to parley; and at last yielded upon honorable terms, their hopes of succour failing them, though the King of Navar had often endeavoured it, but more by stealth then openly. After the taking of Noyon, the Duke Du Mayne went suddenly towards Paris. The Catholick States-Generall which followed the League, were then met in that City; and this meeting was chiefly had for the chusing of a King that would be obedient to the Church, and who would preserve that Kingdom in the antient Religion. The two aforenamed Officers of State, Mendosa and Tassis, were then in Paris for the King of Spains service in the business then on foot; and a little before Don Diego d'Yvara was come thither likewise on his be∣half, a man of courege, and who was likewise thought very fit for the conducting of that business. But to give it the greater reputation and advantage, the Duke of Feria was at last sent by the King of Spain to Paris; A personage who to the prerogative of his family had the addition of all others which upon such an occa∣sion were to be desired. Their chief endeavour was to overthrow the Law Salique, which excludes Women from succeeding to that Crown. In which case the In∣fanta Isabella the Kings eldest daughter was to have succeeded, as daughter to Queen Isabella, who was the eldest daughter to Henry the 2: King of France, and who had been formerly wife to the King of Spain. And as for a Husband for the Infanta, since she could not have one of the House of Austria, as the King her Father would have desired (but it may be all in vain, by reason of the invincible repugnance of the French it was discovered that in such a case the King would condescend to the choice of some one of that Nation, and particularly of the House of Lorain, upon which the League in France was chiefly built. It was fore∣seen by all the aforesaid Agents how much advantagious it would be for the maintaining their negotiation, that the Flanders Forces which entred France in favour of the League should be vigorous: wherefore they prest this point hard upon the Governour Mansfield, and upon Fuentes, who (as we have said) was next under him. But these on the contrary represented, That the affairs of Flan∣ders were not to be abandoned; that the Enemy began already to move with potent Forces on that side; and that it behoved to maintain the Kings cause there likewise as much as might be. And yet the event shewed in a short while, that the thus dividing of the Kings forces, did so weaken and disorder them, as that they did little or no good in France, and were the cause of very great losses in Flanders. And that which greatly increased the disorders was, that almost at the same time divers Mutinies broke forth; by occasion whereof the King of Spain was more indammaged by his own Souldiers, then by his Ene∣mies. Now to return to the affairs of Picardy. When the Duke Du Mayn was gone from Picardy, Count Charls parted from thence likewise, and went with his Camp towards the Sea-side, into the lower parts of that Province, where there were yet some places which held for the King of Navar; and especially the Ca∣stle of Rue, strong both by situation and handy-work, as hath been said: And because to besiege it, would be a business of long time, and which did require greater Forces then Count Charls had with him, he therefore contented himself with making easier acquisitions. Hembercourt, a weak place, and more within land; and S. Vallery, more considerable as being seated upon the Some where that River falls into the Sea, fell into his hands. Here when the Count would have made
Further progress, he must sheath his sword by reason of a Truce which was at that time made for three moneths, between the King of Navar and the Duke Du Mayne. Arms being laid aside in Picardy, the Count distributed his Army in the parts of that Province which lay towards Artois. The expences which the King of Spain was then at in France was excessive: wherefore the Souldiers being but slowly paid, it was impossible to keep them from rapine; so as those parts found more of damage by the cessation of Arms, then they had done in the time of war. Neither did the mischief rest here, licentiousness increasing every day, and pillage degenerating by degrees into disobedience, at last they fell into divers mutinies: The first fell out amongst the Spaniards; which being first practised with great secresie, was soon after concluded; and except it were the Officers, and some Souldiers of more respect then the rest, it was exactly per∣formed by all others. They murmured, according as is usual, to see their labours so ill requited: And to honest their Error, they endeavoured to excuse it by Necessity. Having then gathered together a sufficient number of men and horse, they designed to possess themselves of some of the nearest Towns in Artois, and there afterwards to fortifie and defend themselves, and to draw all the Country thereabouts into contribution for their maintenance, till they should receive full satisfaction for their pay. The Town St. Paul was pitcht upon for a very fitting place to this purpose. Going therefore unexpectedly thither, and not meeting with almost any resistance, they fixed there. At the first hearing of this riot, Count Charls was minded to reduce them by force: But doubting afterwards, that when the rest of the Nations, being come nearer them, should more narrow∣ly consider the Spaniards design, they would rather imitate then impede it, he thought it better to shun so great a hazard: Which served to defer, but not to evade the danger, as shall be said in its proper place. These were the successes of the King of Spain's Forces upon that Frontier of France. And now to proceed with the peculiar affairs of Flanders: The United Flemish failed not to make use of this occasion which made so much for their advantage. The Duke of Parma being dead, and finding the King more eager then ever in his designs upon France, they used all the means they could to be early in the field with a potent Army. Wherefore the winter being over, and Count Charls being gone with so great a part of the Army into Picardy, Count Maurice deferred not moving, but discovered his design of entring with his Forces into Brabant. He desired particularly to secure Breda better, as a place which belonged properly to his Family; and which had so luckily fallen into his hands by surprisal, as you have heard. And being of opinion that the too neer neighbourhood of St. Ge∣trinberg did threaten continual danger thereunto, he therefore advised that by all means that Town might be likewise recovered; and so that first acquisition be the better ascertained, by the advantages which this second would bring with it, which would certainly be very great by the importancie of such a place. This opi∣nion of Count Maurice was very much approved by the Councel of War of the Confederate Provinces. The business being therfore resolved upon by the publike authority of the whole Union, he forthwith applied himself to make such provi∣sions as were requisite for such a design. He used all means he could to keep the Royalists from being aware of it. Marching several wayes, he seemed as if his intentions were to turn now upon Groninghen towards Friesland; now upon Sluce or Dunkirk in Flanders, and now upon Balduke or Graves in Brabant. The Royalists therefore ran from all parts to defend these places. Wherefore their Forces being the weaker by being divided. St. Getrinberg could not consequently be so provided as was fitting to sustain the siege which was afterwards laid unto it. At last Maurice discovering his true design, threw himself suddenly into Brabant, and began to fall to work with very great Forces both by land and water. St. Ge∣trinberg lies towards that out-skirt of Brabant which is subject to Holland: The seat thereof is very strong; it hath the Mause on the one side, with its name turned into Merwe, and of such a breadth, as being there ready to fall into the Ocean, the Channel thereof seems rather a Sea then a River. There falls also into Merwe on another side, another little River of but a short course, called Donge, and it terminates the course neer the walls of that Town; yet is the bed thereof
also so broad and so deep, as it is capable of any whatsoever Vessel. The other places thereabouts are likewise so lowly situated, as men walk more upon the top of the banks, then upon the plain ground. The manual fortification is answerable to this of situation: wherefore by reason of these prerogatives, this place is held to be of greatest concernment not only in Brabant or Holland, but even in any other Province of Flanders. Maurice being then incamped with the said Forces before St. Getrinberg, he begirt the Town on the land-side with divers well com∣parted Quarters; and he added thereunto a good number of Boats by water, to block it the better up on that side also, and to end his work the sooner. In every Quarter he began a Fort-Royal, intending to joyn them together with other smaller Forts, and to make Trenches and Ditches from all these on all sides, so as the whole outward Line should be perfectly inclosed and munited. In the in∣ward Line also the like care was had of flanking and fortifying it where it was the most needfull, the better to curb the besieged. And because all these Works requi∣red extraordinary diligence and labour, Count Maurice had with him in his Army above 3000 Pioners, who were only to be imployed in digging Ditches, in raising Trenches, making Forts, and in doing whatsoever else the Siege required of ma∣nual work. This was the first Siege which was undertaken by Prince Maurice in a more exact form then all others till this time; and in the success whereof he pro∣pounded greatest difficulty unto himself. He therefore desired very much to ef∣fect it; that by the taking of such a place, the fame which he had already won in military affairs might be increased. The aforesaid Works were then begun, and pursued with incredible diligence: And the Souldiers often vying with the Pio∣ners in their labour, and one Commander with another, and Maurice himself with them all, they had soon raised the outward Fortifications in such sort, as they had small cause to fear any harm that the Kings men could doe them. And Mau∣rice had all the commodity he could desire fully to perfect both the outward and the inward Line. And truly till then there had hardly been seen any such works. The Forts were raised very high with earth; the Trenches and Ditches were every where answerable: Many great Palisadoes were added for the greater se∣curity in divers places; and every Fort was well furnished with Artillery. So as the place was invironed with almost as noble Fortifications as any it self had. And yet the more to take from the Kings men all hopes of succouring it, Maurice made the land be overflown in divers parts, to make the difficulty the greater in endeavouring it. Thus was the Siege ordered. In the Town which was besieged, there were about 600 Burgonians, and 400 Walloons; good men, but not enough for the present occasion, nor the condition of the siege. Monsieur de Messiers command∣ed the Garrison of the Town in stead of Signor di Vatervid, who was Governor of the place, and who upon some occasions of his own was then in Spain. To boot with the want of Souldiers, the City was not sufficiently provided of victuals, nor of warlike ammunition to make such defence as was needfull. When the Ene∣mies Camp appeared, Messiers gave a present account to Mansfield of what con∣dition the Town was in, and prest him very much for speedy succour: Nor did he forbear providing the mean while to make such preparation for resistance, as became a valiant and faithfull Commander to doe. He made the Townsmen la∣bour together with the Souldiers; he reviewed the Place very attentively, and endeavoured to put it into such a posture, as that Mansfield might have time to prepare succour, and to endeavour how to introduce it. On the other side, Count Maurice thinking that his outward. Fortifications were sufficient to keep him from so doing, bent himself with all his might against the Town within. When the Duke of Parma had got the Town, he caused a Fort to be raised upon the chiefest Bank on the side of Donge. The Fort was near enough the Town, and guarded a Pass of great importance. From the very first that Maurice had begun the Siege, he had propounded unto himself to take this Fort; which from the name of a neighbouring Village was called the Fort of Steenlo: And giving the care thereof to Count Hollack, the few Souldiers that were within it having made a slender resistance, abandoned it. From this Fort Maurice began to ply the Town with Cannon-shot; nor contented with several Batteries by Land, he
did the like by water; loading to that purpose many ships with great guns, which were placed on the one side in the Donge, and on the other in fitting places in the Merwe and were well joyned together. The Town was continually plaid upon with above 60 piece of Canon. Amidst these hard dealings which the besieged met withall on all sides, they did not notwithstanding omit manfully to defend themselves. They oft-times falli∣ed boldly out upon the enemy: and supplying their paucity in number with their valour, they endeavoured to hinder their works as much as they could, and to use all other means to retard the siege. Messieres was the first, no less in pains taking then in command; being both within and without continually where occasion most required. But with unfortunate success at last; for ere many days were over, he was slain with a Canon-shot. The Garison substituted Monsieur de Gi∣san in his place, who was the eldest Captain, and held for the valiantest; who fail∣ed not to continue the like diligence and labour. The Town was notwithstan∣ding straitned every day more then other, and the danger of the loss thereof eve∣ry day increased, unless it were all the sooner relieved; which both General Mansfield and Count Fuentes had from the first beginning of the siege effectual∣ly apply'd themselves unto. But the Kings Forces were so weakened by the di∣version of France, as it was requisite to recruit them with new levies both of horse and foot; and this could not be done without time, and many other difficulties. Mansfield had therefore given out orders for the speedy raising of Germans, Lo∣rainers, and Burgonians, and took divers Plemish and Walloons into pay within the Country also. To boot with these provisions of men, he provided likewise for all other things that were necessary. And passing with Fuentes into Antwerp, that he might be the nearer bringing relief, he resolved to go from thence imme∣diately about it. But by reason of the aforesaid difficulties, his marching thither∣ward proved so late, as it was judged almost impossible to force those Fortificati∣ons which the enemy had so advantagiously raised against the Town. Amongst the Maxims of War, none is more practised then to endeavour to raise one siege by the diversion of another. The Commanders who were with Mansfield did therefore consult whether that it were not better to besiege Breda, then to endea∣vour the relief of Getringberg; so to force Maurice to raise that siege, the bet∣ter to defend himself from the danger of the other. To perswade unto the diver∣sion, it was shewed how well the enemies had fortified themselves; and how well their Trenches were munited on all sides; in so much as there being but very small hope of ever overcoming them, it would be but in vain to endeavour it. That therefore the only means was to try a diversion; to which purpose none was more fit then to sit down before Breda with all the Kings Forces. It was represented that Breda was of so great concernment both in respect of the publick union, as also for Count Maurice his private considerations, as doubtlesly the enemy would not suffer such a place to be lost; wherefore it was to be believed that Maurice would raise the present siege, and presently run to disturb the other. And final∣ly it was taken for granted that the enemy had come with so great Forces before St. Getringberg, as it was to be believed Breda was but ill provided for, and there∣fore the Kings men should be the better incouraged to go against it. But many o∣ther weighty reasons were urged to the contrary. And first it was said that the enemy were already so advanced in their siege, as they would not by any means abandon it. And that therefore it was the rather to be believed, that when they should see Breda threatned, they would lay the closer siege to St Getringberg, so to make themselves the sooner Masters of it, and afterwards apply themselves sud∣denly to relieve Breda. It was added that they might easily do the one or the o∣ther; for that if St. Getringberg were not quickly succoured, the Town would be surrendred before Breda could be well besieged; and that then the enemy might turn with all their Forces to the defence thereof. That this way of oppug∣ning was of it self to be thought very difficult; for that the enemy since the sur∣prisal of Breda, had fortified it, and provided better for it; and was affirmed that in reason of war, the Kings Army was not to be brought between such a Town. and so great Forces as were in the enemies Camp. Through all these contrarieties it was resolved that the better course would be, to endeavour by all means possible
to relieve St Getringberg: for that peradventure the difficulties in doing it would not prove so great as was thought for; and that howsoever they ought rather to endeavour the succour, though in vain, then by undertaking a vain siege be dou∣bly shamed, by the loss of Getringberg, and by the not getting of Breda. These last reasons prevailed in the Councel of War. To boot that the Kings then For∣ces being well considered, they were not thought to be such, as whereupon to ground so weighty a designe, in hopes to execute it. For when Mansfield had sufficiently provided for all such places as it was judged the enemy might assail, he could not muster above 8000 foot, and 2500 horse. Resolving then howsoe∣ver, to endeavour the relief with these men, he pitched upon Turnault for his Rendezvouz, and brought his Camp thither about the end of May. Turnault is an open Village, but the greatest and most populated that is in all Brabant. It lies in equal distance, almost a days journey from Antwerp, and from Getring∣berg. Here again it was taken into consideration by the Kings Camp, on which side they should meet with least difficulty in bringing in the succour. And through Intelligence which they had, they resolved to go with all their men into Steeloune, which lay near the enemies Trenches. On this side they resolved to assail them, though they had small hopes or none of doing any good. For making the Trench∣es he surveyed on several sides, they found them to be so strong, as the enemy had no reason to fear any thing. And to this was added the inundation almost on all sides, with which it was first to be contended, before they could come to try the Trenches. Mansfield passed notwithstanding from Steeloune with all his Army divided into squadrons, and halted in sight of the Quarter where Maurice him∣self was lodged; where a certain point of a chief Dike stood out which was for∣tified by a great Trench; which Mansfield would endeavour to take from the e∣nemy, as he by assault did, but not without much adoe, by reason of the opposi∣tion of the water, and of those that did defend it: but he soon lost it again, and therewithall all hopes of effecting the succour on that side. Upon these occasi∣ons some skirmishes happened between the two Camps: and Mansfield staying but a little while there, went to the Village of Waestech, towards which Count Hollack was quartered. The Kings Army was not well got thither, when it was unexpectedly set upon in the reer by 800 of the enemies horse, who were come to this purpose a little before out of Breda, and who put their quarters into some confusion; but suddenly re-ordering themselves, and opposing the enemy, they beat them back, and with some slaughter put to flight. They then with all dili∣gence endeavoured the succour on this side; to facilitate the which, Mansfield sent for some further provisions, and particularly for some Artillery from Ant∣werp. But the difficulties appeared alike here also. All this while Count Mau∣rice slack'd not his proceedings against the Town on the inside. One battery play'd continually after another, and oft-times they thundred all together. And the enemy falling out of their Trenches were already lodged in the Ditch; which being very large and deep, Maurice had formerly caused the water to be drained from thence, and drawn into lower situations. Wherefore the besieged found themselves not only weakened in their defences, but in danger to lose them. Nor was it long ere they lost a Ravelin, against which Maurice had made a great battery, and accompanied it with a fierce assault: yet did the defendants make valiant resistance: and Gesan their Commander in chief, dyed in so doing. But the Town not being able to hold out longer of it self, and no succour appea∣ring from abroad, they treated of surrendring, which upon good conditions was done about the latter end of June. Count Maurice being entred into Getrinberg, and made all fitting provisions for the City, he distributed his men into the adjacent parts, that he might observe the Royalists designs, and oppose them the best he might. This mean while the abovesaid Recruit which Mansfield expected, was come from Antwerp Where∣fore desirous to try whether he could make any acquisition, which might at least in some part make amends for so great a loss; he resolved to turn upon the Fort of Crevecoeur. This Fort is situated upon the mouth of a River called Demel: which taking its rise in Brabant, and having past through the City of Balduke, or the Busse, falls about a league from thence into the Mause. The Country
thereabouts was infested from this Fort, and particularly Balduke was thereby indammaged; great was the advantage moreover which the Enemy received from it, by the further command of the River. Mansfield advancing with his Army, made some of his men draw nearer the Fort, intending to possess himself of some convenient seat. These men had much adoe to pass forward; for they found the fields overflown, and the Fort so well defended on all sides, as Mans∣field despairing of ever getting it, drew quickly off from it again. He then disposed of his Army as he thought best. And because the Enemy did already openly threaten Friesland, and in particular the City of Groninghen, he therefore sent new men to Verdugo to sustein the Kings affairs in those parts as well as for the present they might be. Verdugo commanded the Kings Forces thereabouts; who was not wanting in using all his accustomed diligence, as well in doing what might be for the service of his party, as also in impeding the Enemy from advantaging themselves The two Counts, Hermano and Frederick de Berg, did every day signalize themselves more and more with him in the Kings service: And Verdugo making use of them chiefly, was in continual action on one side or other. But to say truth, he was so inferior in Forces, as the Adverse party prevailed for the most part in all that was undertaken. But the successes on neither side were of such consequence, as that by making a distinct relation of them here, that of the greater and more important events ought to be retarded. One of the greatest and most prejudicial which hapned on the Kings behalf at this time, was the Mutiny of the Italians & Walloons, who were with Count Charls for the service of the League in France. A good number of the Spaniards which were with the Count in those parts had mutinied (as you have heard) before. And because there was some discourse had of giving some Payes to the rest of the Spaniards who kept under the obedi∣ence of their Commanders, the like respect not appearing to be had to the other Souldiers who had kept in the like obedience; therefore the Italians and Walloons resolved to mutiny, as they easily did afterwards. They made up a body between them of 1500 Foot, and 700 Horse; and possessing themselves unexpectedly of the Village of Pont in Henault, upon the borders of France, they diligently forti∣fied themselves there; and providing for their necessities by excursions, they re∣solved not to return to their former obedience, till they were fully satisfied for their pay. Count Charls his Forces were so lessened by these Mutinies, as they could be of no longer service neither for the affairs of France, nor yet of Flanders. Thus ended this year, and the next of 1594 began. In this interim Archduke Ernestus, brother to the Emperor Radolphus, was come from Germany to be Governour of Flanders. The King had very much Anno 1594. desired, that a Prince so near allied to him both in blood and affection, would take upon him the care of those Countries; and the Emperor joyning with the King in the same desire, the Archduke was easily perswaded to please them both. Parting then from Vienna about the beginning of the year, he came to Flanders, and was received in Brussels with all demonstrations of joy and honour by the obedient Provinces. At his arrival he found the affairs of the League in France very much declining: For the King of Navar having at last declared himself to be a Catholick, and having setled his Cause well in this point wherein he stood in most need, it was not hard for him afterwards to advantage it in all others. Wherefore being received without any expence of blood into Paris, by the exam∣ple of this chief City of the Kingdom, not only the Cities, but the Provinces in all other parts strove who should most follow the King, and more submissively acknowledge his authority. To which, his gratious making use of Victory, even to those who had most highly offended him, served him in good stead. Growing therefore stronger every day both in Cause and Forces, he made daily further progress throughout the whole Kingdom. But he endeavoured to doe it most in Picardy, and in the parts thereabouts; where the French League was still in some power, and where it was most fomented from the Frontiers of Flanders. On the contrary, the Archduke the new Governour, and the Spanish Ministers of State who were in greatest authority under him, judging that the more the League declined the more it needed to be sustained; resolved to send back Count Charls with new Forces into Picardy, who at the Archdukes arrival was come
also to Brussels. The King of Spains affairs were then in a very low condition, for the reasons which have been often alleadged. Wherefore to keep from wholly neglecting their own peculiar affairs of Flanders, Count Charls could assemble no more then 8000 Foot and 1000 Horse for the occurrences which summoned him again into France. With which Forces staying in Picardy; after he had well observed the Enemies proceedings, he thought he might be able to get La Cha∣pelle, which is seated on the very utmost precincts of that Province towards the Flemish frontiers of Henault. This place is four-square, well flankt in all the four angles, and with other Defences on almost all the sides of the Curtains; it hath likewise a good Ditch round about it, and in all other circumstances it is held one of the best-Towns in Picardy. Count Charls resolving to besiege it, sate down before it; and in a few dayes with the wonted winding of Trenches he came near the Ditchs whereinto that he might the easilier fall, and facilitate the Assaults which were to succeed the Batteries, he drew away the water thereof to where the ground was lower: He then began to play upon the Town; which had but a weak Garrison in it, and was found to be but ill provided of all things else. Yet were not they within wanting in preparing to make what defence they could. Count Charls put them presently to the test. The Myre which yet remained in the Ditch was very deep; and there was no such breach yet made in the wall, as afforded the Assailants sufficient commodity to mount thereupon. Wherefore the Count failed the first time in his design; and his men being beaten back with the loss of much blood, and with the death of some Captains and other Officers, he must prepare more maturely for a second assault. But they within would not wait it: For, fearing lest they should not be able to maintain it, and that they must then be all put to the sword, and the Town be sackt, they yielded upon good Conditions, and the Garrilon was suffered to go freely out. This mean while the United Provinces on Flanders side had diligently made their Forces ready, to turn to some new important design. The Royalists feared Groninghen most: wherefore the Archduke gave order that Verdugo should be assisted, who prest very much to bee so, and shewed in what danger the Kings affairs in those Parts were. The Archduke caused likewise requisite provisions to be made in other places where it was most needfull. But this was but weakly executed every where; so great was the scarcity of monies amongst the Kings men, such the disorder of the Mutinies which had hapned, and such the daily fear of new Mutinies. Amidst these preparations which were made for the continuance of Arms, the Archduke would notwithstanding try whether there could any way be found out for the introducing of Peace. He was naturally given to love quiet; and the King having always shewed the same inclination, he thought that the King being already weary and disdeceived in the affairs of France, and having so little hopes to advantage himself in those of Flanders by the way of Arms, would willingly imbrace any Agreement, which with safety to his and the honour of the Church might reduce the affairs in those Provinces to some tranquility. Two Councellors at Law, the one called Ottone Hertio, and the other Jerolimo Comans, were by reason of some private occurrences at this time in the Hague, where the Confe∣derate Provinces had established their chief Councels, representing the General Union. The Archduke thought that by their means, without making any further noise, he might come to some Treaty of accord with those Provinces. And think∣ing it fit to invite the United Provinces thereunto, he writ them a Letter, the Con∣tents whereof were, That he had left the Emperor his brother, and was parted from Germany with a particular desire of seeing the Peace of Flanders restored by some good accommodation during the time of his Government. That he knew the King would very graciously incline thereunto likewise: to the end that the people there might once be free from so many calamities of war, and might enjoy the fruits which might so largely be ex∣pected from Peace. That the United States would consider how uncertain the fortune of war was, and how dangerous it was to promise unto themselves still the same good success therein, by reason of some happy ones which they had already had. That it was now time to come to some agreement. That for his part, he offered all sincerity in the
Treaty thereof, and allconstant application towards the effecting of it. That therefore they should reduce their demands to so just a sense, as that he might the more wil∣lingly propound them unto the King, and use all means afterwards to have them granted. This was the contents of his Letter; in the end whereof the Archduke refer∣red himself to what the two afore named Councellors at Law, should more at large add. In the Archdukes Councel of State, there were divers opinions con∣cerning the introducing of this Treaty. The Councellors of the Country who had propounded it, did still favour it; shewing a great desire that all means might be used, whereby to free Flanders from Arms. Alleadging that the King him∣self was of the same mind; and that let the event be what it would, this would serve to justifie the continuation of the war on his part. But the Spanish-State Officers were opposite hereunto, especially Count Fuentes, who was of more Authority then all others next to the Archduke. He said, That the enemy did very well know in what condition the Kings affairs were then in Flanders. That doubtless they would account this Proposition an effect rather of weakness then humanity. That peace was then advantagiously made, when there was an advantage in the war. Wherefore it was better to expect awhile, till such time as the King might have the better of the business, as it might be hoped he would have; and that then it would be his part to grant peace, and not to receive it; and that then his grace and goodness to such wicked and obstinate Rebels would appear to be volun∣tary, and not inforced: But how much more arrogant would they become by such an invitation now? and into what contempt would the Kings Authority fall? The opinion of the Flemish Councellors was notwithstanding followed. For the Archduke thought good to give them satisfaction, believing that it would likewise be satisfactory to the whole Country. But it was soon seen that Fuentes was not deceived: For the Letter being received in Holland with but small respect, and they that brought it but little listned unto, the business was soon at an end, and the two Councellors at Law were dispatched away; and answer was made by the States Generall to the Archduke, by rather a long writing then Letter. The answer extended chiefly into bitter complaints against the meanings of the King and Councel of Spain. Against the Officers maintained by the King in Flanders; and against the Spaniards who had warred, and did still wage war in those Provinces: In the paper all the most fatall businesses that had happened were rip'd up; and all the blame laid upon that Nation. They shewed how that all former negotiations of peace, had always been fraudulent on the behalf of Spain. And finally they concluded, That the United Provinces would not listen to any new Treaties, lest they might be deceived; but that they were resolved to maintain their Cause till their last gasp; that they might preserve that Liberty which they did so justly enjoy, after being freed from that slavery, which amongst so many miseries they had formerly suffered. They therefore did not delay drawing out into the field. Count William of Nas∣saw had been before this (as we have said) on the other side the Rhine with many men; and though Verdugo had always stoutly opposed him, yet most commonly William got still some advantages in those parts; especially in securing those passes whereby the siege which Prince Maurice intended to lay to Groninghen, might be made the more easie. All things necessary for this purpose being then prepared, about the end of April Maurice past over the Mause and the Rhine, and made his Rendezvouz at Suol, a Town near Deventer in Overisel. Here Count William joyned with him; and Maurice going soon after from thence with a∣boundant provisions of all things which concerned the determined siege, he went towards Groninghen; and with his whole Army incamped before that Ci∣ty. Groninghen (as it hath been already said) lies upon the utmost bounds of that Confine which joyns together the Lower and the upper Germany, there is not in that part of the Low-Countries, a more noble City then this, either for the num∣ber of Inhabitants, for the quality of buildings, or for the frequency of Com∣merce. It formes the body of a Province which lies about this City; and which takes the name, and almost the whole Government from thence. It is seat∣ed low, well provided of a wall and ditch. It hath some works within the circuit thereof after the modern fashion; and the rest are for the most part, of the anti∣ent
form. It enjoys very large Priviledges. And the Citizens thereof desirous out of a sense no less of Liberty then of courage, would themselves alone defend the City, and would not admit of any other souldiery amongst them. And though a little before, when they were threatned with this siege, they were at last perswaded to receive in five foot Colours, which Verdugo had sent them into an outward Borough, yet would they not till then receive them into the City. John Balen, the first Burgamaster and chief Magistrate had the chief Command there both in Military and Civil affairs. He and all the rest did shew outwardly a great resolution of resistance; but Maurice did not notwithstanding want friends within the Town. and many Hereticks being mingled amongst the Catholicks, the former did secretly desire a change of Government: and it was discovered that they would willingly have assisted therein: nor was it doubted but that such intelligence had caused Maurice more willingly undertake this business. Yet was the Catholick and the Kings Party much the greater in Groninghen who sent away express Messengers to Brussels to pray succour from the Archduke; wherein they were seconded by Verdugo. But Count Maurice hoping that the Kings men were not able to send relief, at least not so soon; and Count William having secured all the Passes better then before, he betook himself with greater diligence to the siege. He infinitely desired to effect this business, by the which, gaining so noble a City, and a Province so opportunely seated, he might at the same time advantage so much the general Cause of the whole Union, and his own particular glory. He had with him divers valiant Commanders, who had accompanied him the year be∣fore at the siege of Getringberg; to whom he assigned out the chief Quarters: and Maurice took up his own quarter where the greatest difficulty of the siege lay. He then fell to fortifie all quarters; and within a few days the fortificati∣ons were such, both on the fields side, and towards the Town, as those about Gro¦ninghen, being compared with those which were about Getringberg, it was not ea∣sie to be judged in which of the two Maurice had more signalized himself. In so much as not fearing any succour which might be brought by the Royalists from without, he applyed himself wholly to perfect his inward works. He had great store of Artillery in his Camp, with which he infested the City on all sides: ma∣king the trenches the mean while be the more speedily advanced that he might the sooner come to a formal battery. The besieged shewed a ready willingness to de∣fend themselves: and the souldiery which were lodged in the Suburbs had very well munited themselves, and going whethersoever occasion did most require, they were a great help unto the Townsmen, who had placed a good number of Artillery upon their walls, and by incessant shooting, indeavoured to anoy the enemies Camp, and to hinder their works as much as in them lay. They indea∣voured likewise to indamage them by sallies, whereof they made divers which proved very bloudy on both sides: but being in a short time come unto the ditch, Maurice forth with made his batterys; by which bereaving those within of their defences, he consequently brought them into greater straits. They had planted a Counter-battery upon a new Ravelin which they had made, the better to shelter one of their gates, and had placed thereupon 6 pieces of great Canon; Maurice had inforced the siege most on that side which was thought to be the weakest. The besiegers saw how much is imported them to be Masters of the Ravelin; and the besieged how much it concerned them to defend it: in so much as all in∣deavours being made on both sides to these ends, the whole weight of the oppug∣nation was soon brought to that only place. The enemy at the last fell into the Ditch on that side, and began to fill it up, and to advance with their works on both sides. leaving a narrovv space in the midst which they called the Gallery. Their chief designe was to undermine the Ravelin, if they could not ruine it by their batteries, vvherevvith having at last made, as they imagined, a sufficient breach, they delayed coming to an assault no longer: but in the doing of it, though they shevved great resolution, they could not get upon the ruines of the Ravelin, because they were not sufficient for them to mount upon; but much more because they were very gallantly defended, yet did the vigour of their re∣sistance seem to cool every day, by reason of their small hopes of succour. Those who they had sen to that purpose, had still very much prest the Archduke in
that behalf. But to boot with the want of monies, and to the prolongation of time which the making of new Levies would have required, the disorders still in∣creased in their former Souldiery, who for want of Pay did mutinie upon easie occasions; as hapned just at this time amongst a number of Italians who were quartered in Brabant. Those of Groninghen were the more disheartned by this new disorder. Nor were Count Maurice his Fautors backward in representing unto the Inhabitants the danger the City was in of being storm'd, sackt, and suffering still greater calamities. The Magistrate was therefore inforced to send some to discover what hopes there might be of getting good Conditions from Maurice. But those who were more firm for the King and the Church, being of opinion that it was yet too early to do so; making use of this opportunity, they brought those five Foot-Companies into the City which were lodged without, as was before said. This occasioned a great tumult amongst the Citizens; every one clothing their private interests with appearing zeal unto the publike. But the dissention being at last appeased, they continued in making defence. On the other side, Maurice seeing himself deluded, grew more fervent in his oppugning. The chief contest of the siege was brought to about the aforesaid Ravelin. Therefore great was their ad∣vantage which were without: For being Masters of the Ditch, and falling al∣ready to work upon the Walls they had begun to undermine the Ravelin, to blow it up into the air, that they might the sooner and with the more safety come to the Assault. They would notwithstanding try a new Assault, before the Mine was fully finished: And it proved to be so fierce a one, as those within had much adoe to sustain it. But the Mine being at last perfected, they presently went to work with it; and the effect was this: The besiegers feigned as if they would give another assault; wherefore the besieged flocking to defend the Ravelin, the others on a sudden retreated; and at the same time the Mine plaid, which blew up almost all the men that came to defend it: Then the oppugners returning to a new, and true assault, they easily won the Ravelin. Great was the danger, but greater the fear that hereby arose unto the City. It was suspected that the chief Burgomaster did adhere to Maurice: Taking therefore the conjuncture of time when the Magistracie was fullest, he spake thus. Had the King (most worthy Citizens!) done his part in preserving this City under his obedience, as well as we to our utmost have always done ours in maintaining it therein, we should not be subject to that change which now past all redemption and of necessity we must prepare for. The troubles of these Countrits have lasted now these 30 years; and when did we in all this time ever forfeit our fidelity to his Ma∣jesty in the least degree? The Duke of Alva came to the Government of Flanders with cruel and imperious designs, as every one knows; and having yoaked Antwerp with a Citadel he began to doe the like to Groninghen. We then resisted it as much as we might; shewing that the best Citadel for the Kings service would be our Hearts. But our intreaties were in vain as well as our former complaints had been. Yet this new Work soon ceased, for the troubles would not suffer it to be pursued. The City therefore remained in her former condition: And since then till now, I must ask a∣gain, when did she ever vary in her allegiance to the King? How oft have the Ene∣mies past and repast with great Forces through this so jealous Confine between the two Germanies? How often have they threatned this City either by underhand dealings, or openly? but still in vain: so vigilant have we always been in keeping it, and re∣solute in defending it. This may be witnessed by as many as ever governed the Kings Forces in these parts: And Verdugo himself, a Spaniard, who hath the chief Com∣mand here now, can best testifie it. I wish it had been Gods will that his councels had been followed a good while ago: The Kings affairs hereabouts would not then have been in that drooping condition that they are now, nor would this our City be in the danger that she is in at present. It will not then be we that have abandoned the King, being enforced thereunto by necessity; but the King will rather appear to have aban∣doned us, neglecting, as it is well known, his own affairs here no less then ours Nay, it must be said that by his so many diversions in France, he hath been willing totally to forsake Flanders How great have the losses been which by reason of this have in∣sued to these Provinces? But I now come to the Siege, which is that which my pre∣cedent
discourse doth point at. Every one knowes to what terms we are brought: And this last loss of our Ravelin hath as much advantaged the Enemy, as it hath put us into greater straits. I confess notwithstanding we may for a while sustein the siege, if we had any hopes of being freed by the wonted way of succour. But where is there any appearance thereof? nay, does not all signs make for the contrary? The greatest strength of the Army is imployed in France; Flanders is full of Mutinies; there is not time to raise new men, and mony is yet more wanting. Shall we then expect that this succour shall fall from the air? I shall thhrefore advise to treat as soon as we can of a surrender. It will be some sort of merit to have done that anticipately of our own choice, which must of necessity be done at last: And so making advantagious Articles, we shall the better unite our City, and the Country which depends upon it, to the States-Generall of the other Confederate Provinces. We shall not (as I have said) have quitted our obedience to the King; but it is he who will not have us conti∣nue longer therein. For what remains, how much is such a change to be desired? In our subjection to the States Generall, we shall find Liberty which shall be enjoyed by this particular Province; we shall withdraw ourselves from a Foreign yoke; we shall be freed of the Taxes which are imposed upon us; we shall fight no longer for the interests of others, but for what concerns our selves: And in fine, all the good, and all the bad will be our own, which in defence of the common liberty we shall here∣after find. This discourse wrought so upon the minds even of those that were most affe∣ctionate to the King, as they knew not how to gainsay it. The no appearance of succour was particularly of great force. Nor is it to be believed how much indig∣nation it wrought, not only in Groninghen and the parts thereabouts, but in all other places which were under the Kings obedience, to see that his own affairs in Flanders were by him almost wholly abandoned, to sustain those of France which did daily decline. The chief of the Magistracy and of the Communalty went therefore to Count Maurice to agree with him touching the surrender of the City. And being very graciously received, the Agreement was made; and these were the most essential Conditions thereof. That the City of Groninghen, together with the neighbouring Country which makes up that Province, should for the future be under the obedience of the States-Generall, representing the Body of the Confederate Provinces. That it should oblige it self to the Union of this Body, by being a particular member thereof for the time to come; and that it should submit it self to those Lawes wherein the other Provinces were joyned for the defence of their common Cause. That the City of Groninghen and all the aforesaid Country should enjoy their antient priviledges, and all their for∣mer immunities. That that City and Province should by the authority of the States Generall receive Count William of Nassaw for their Governour; and that for the present five or six Foot-Companies should be permitted to come into the City, to prevent all occasion of Tumults which might happen there. That there should be Liberty of Conscience for matter of Religion in that City and Country: but that that which was called the Reformed Religion should be exercised there publikely, and no other. That the City and Province should concur in contributing such taxes as did corre∣spond with their abilities, for the maintenance of the Souldiery, and for other necessary expences concerning the common Cause. That it should be free for any man to trans∣port himself and goods into whatsoever place he would, provided it were not in the Ene∣mies country. That the Government of the City should depend as formerly upon the Magistracie; and that the Magistrate should be changed according to custom, taking an oath to be true and faithfull to the States Generall, as the other Cities under the Union had done. These were the chief Articles of Agreement which were made with those of Gronin hen. And as for the Foreign souldiers which were entred into the City, they were permitted by Count Maurice to march forth honourably with their Arms and Baggage, but upon promise not to serve the King of Spain for three moneths space on that side the Rhine. The City was surrendred about the end of July; and Count Maurice made his entrance into Groninghen afterwards with all military pomp and solemnity: And leaving Count William there for the better ordering of all things in that City and Province, he within a few dayes re∣moved
his Army from those parts, and went himself unto the Hague. Where it cannot be expressed with what applause and honour he was received by the States General, for having so much increased the advantages of the Union on that side the Rhine, by an acquisition of such consequence. Whilst affairs went thus in Flanders, the Forces which were on the aforesaid Frontiers of France were not idle. The Duke du Main was Governour of Bur∣gony; the Duke of Guise Governour of Champania; and the Duke d' Umale Go∣vernour of Picardy: all of them being of the house of Lorain; and upon whose personages the League did principally depend: some discord was already faln out in their former Union; and finally the Duke of Guise would be kept no lon∣ger from moving some Treaty of agreement with the King: since he had imbra∣ced the Catholick Religion, and after his so many atchievements which had made him now be almost generally acknowledged for King of France. Neither was the Duke du Main much averse from coming to a Composition with him. But he endeavoured to negotiate with his sword in hand, that he might thereby get the better conditions. Only the Duke d'Umale, were it either that he was more firm in his former adhering to the League; or that he was a back friend to the King for some private respect of his own, was resolved to come to no accommo∣dation with him; but rather in case the League should wholly cease, to go into Flanders, and put himself wholly into the King of Spains hands. To this end he favoured the Flemish Forces more then ever in his Government of Picardy. But such partiality was of no great availment: For the Kings reconciliation with the Apostolick See, being then mainly negotiated in Rome, the League declined dai∣ly, in so much as even almost whole Picardy was already come over to the King. To get the full possession whereof, the King was a little before entred into that Province with a potent Army, and had laid siege to Laon. The City of Laon be∣ing very strong both by situation, and Manual Fortification, the Duke du Main did much indeavour the not losing of it. To boot that the Count of Sommari∣va, du Main's eldest son, being within the Town, and one that defended it; who though he were but very young then, was notwithstanding of great expectation; the Father did the more desire to see his son free together with the Town. To this purpose du Main was gon himself to use what diligence might be with the Arch∣duke. And returning with new and very strict Orders to Mansfield, that he should use all the means he might for the preservation of the Town, they joyned both their Forces together: which were notwithstanding so weak as they exceed∣ed not 8000 foot and 700 horse. The Rendezvouz being made at la Fera which is within four leagues of Laon, they marched from thence about the end of June, with a resolution of relieving the besieged. There was a choice Garison in Laon, of 1200 foot, and 30 horse: nor were the Inhabitants less willing to make de∣fence then were the Garison. The King had about 12000 choice foot, and 4000 horse, which were the very flowre of his Army. And having already taken and fortified his quarters, he was very diligent in advancing his Trenches, and other usual Works. The besieged shewed all manlike resolution to resist, which they witnessed by frequent sallies: to the which they were the more encouraged by the expectation of relief so near at hand. In the Colleagues Camp, which still held the exterior Title of the League, though it were almost wholly composed of Flemish Forces, the Duke du Main commanded in chief; the Archduke having thought it fit he should do so, that he might seem to put the greater esteem and confidence in him: and to keep him from falling into any precipitate accommo∣dation, in his Treaties with the King in France. The Army going therefore from La Fera, came marching in great order to Laon. Betwixt these two places there lies a great Wood on the left hand called Crepy, taking its name from a little Town hard by. The Colleagues Camp coming out of this Wood into the open Champian, drew near the Kings Trenches. There lay also between the two Camps another lesser Wood, in view whereof the Colleagues lay. Their intention was to possess themselves of that Wood, and to advance so advantagiously on that side, as that they might the easilyer from thence bring succour into the Town Which designe being by the King discovered, he resolved to oppose them with all his might. Skirmishes grew therefore very hot between them; the one endea∣vouring
to enter the wood, the others to keep them out. The former placing their chiefest hopes of relieving the Town, in making themselves masters of the wood. And the others the greatest security of their siege in defending it. But the skirmishes growing continually hotter, one of them turned almost into a set bat∣tel. In hazardous adventures, Barlotte, the Walloon Campmaster, was rather rash then daring. This man advancing with his Regiment into the wood, char∣ged the Kings men so home, as he made them withdraw a good way within, not without the slaughter of many of them. It was not long ere fresh aid came in on the Kings part. Wherefore the Walloons were forced to give back; when the Campmasters, Augustin Messia a Spaniard, and the Marquis of Trevico a Neo∣politan appeared with their Brigades in their defence, and did vigorously sustain the conflict: which was no less vigorously sustained on the French side by the Baron of Birouns coming in with new men. Who being made Marishall of France after the death of the Marishall his Father, shewed himself to merit the title of his Son, much more by valor then bloud. The son was naturally very fierce; and herein only it was to be wished he had had a little more of his fathers circum∣spection. The advantage growing still greater on that side by Birouns coming in, du Main came in likewise to assist his men, and soon after Mansfield came in too. And the King himself coming in on the other side, the conflict did so in∣crease, as it was now almost turned to a set battel; the Commanders in chief of both Armies being present at it; and if not all, at least the most select men of both the one and the other Camp. The King had much the better in horse; but by reason of the thickness of the wood, there could but small use be made of them. On the contrary, the Colleagues Camp was much the superior in foot, if not in number, at least in goodness; but neither could they make use of that ad∣vantage within the wood, which they might have done in the open field. For the same straitness and narrowness of situation did not admit of the forming of squa∣drons, nor of their orderly moving. The fight was therefore much more con∣fused then regular. And thus it continued with much slaughter on both sides, the victory remaining very uncertain, till the night coming on, both sides were forced to retire unto their quarters. The King removed afterwards with a great body of men to another quarter where he might better keep the enemy from en∣trance into the wood. But their Camp began already to suffer very much in point of victuals: For the Kings Cavalry scouring the Country continually, the Col∣leagues came by their victuals upon hard terms: And just at this time as Nicolas Basti was bringing a good quantity of provision with a strong Conduct from Noyon, he was set upon by the Duke of Longueville, who with such forces as he had with him, soon routed him, and to boot with his provisions, took from him his carriages and draught horses. They afterwards endeavoured to get some with greater forces from la Fera. To which purpose great store of victuals, Munition, and whatsoever else the Colleagues stood in need of being provided, a select num∣ber of Spaniards and Italians were sent from their Camp, to bring them the more safely. But this their second endeavour proved no more fortunate then did the former. For the King being advertised of this preparation, and that the busi∣ness was to be effected by night, he commanded Marishal Biroun to impede them. Who having secretly ordered an Ambuscado in a very opportune place, did with such violence, and so unexpectedly set upon the adverse party, as that being overpowred in numbers, they were forced to give ground, and leave all their victuals, and whatsoever else in Birouns hands. Yet the Spanish and Italian foot resisted stoutly for a great while, making use of their Carriages for their defence, and turning their faces wheresoever the assault was hottest. In so much as not en∣deavouring to save themselves by running away, they were almost all of them slain upon the place. But they died not unrevenged; for they flew above 200 of the Kings men, and wounded above as many more. The Colleagues by reason of these two unfortunate events, lost all hopes of being able to effect their intended succour: wherefore they resolved to raise their Camp, and to retreat. They were minded to rise privately by night; but this was not to be done without great difficulty, they having an Army so near them, so much superior to theirs, and which particularly did so far exceed them in horse, by which they might upon
such advantage assail them on the Reer, and on the Flanks, as they retreated. Mansfield inclined therefore to retreat privately by night; but Du Mayne thought it would reflect too much upon their reputation not to retreat by day light. Be∣twixt these two differences of opinions, it was resolved, that the Camp should move by night; and that the Van and Battel being advanced in that silent season, the Reer should march by day; and that the greatest resistance should be made where the greatest danger should lie. Thus then was the Army divided: The chief care of the Van, with which the Baggage was to go, and the greatest part of the Artillery was given to Camp-master Barlotte; Mansfield guided the Battel; and Du Mayne brought up the Reer: this was notwithstanding to be turn'd into the Van, if it should have any occasion to face about upon the Enemy, who were to fall upon them on that part: and certainly if ever the Duke Du Mayne pro∣ved himself to be both a gallant Commander, and a good Souldier, it was at this time. That he might make the better resistance he kept with him the flower of the infantry, which were for the most part Spaniards, the rest Italians, and who divided into well ordered Squadrons of Pikes and Musketteers, was to sustain the violence of the Enemies Horse, when they should charge hotlyest upon them. The flying Squadron thrust forward before the rest, which being used to march before the Army upon occasion of fight, came now in the Reer; for the Reer, as hath been said, was now to be the Van. This Squadron consisted of choice and select Captains, Officers, and other Souldiers, and Augustine Messia, one of the most esteemed Spanish Camp-masters that was then in Flanders, had the particular charge thereof. The Duke Du Mayne had placed himself in the last files of Foot of that Squadron, which were to be the first toward the Enemy Saying, That he would that day serve as a Souldier under Camp-master Messia: and divers others of the best of the Army were there likewise. They were to march almost three leagues before they could bring themselves in safety into La Fera. The Van rising thus about midnight, the Battel began to move in its due time, and about the break of day the Reer began also to march. When the King heard of this Retreat, he delayed not doing what he could to disturb it. Assembling the Flower of all his Cavalry, he charged the Enemies Rear on divers sides as they came out of the Wood into which the Leagues Camp for their better advantage had taken their way: And often renewing his assaults, endeavoured to overcome them. But still in vain: For the Squadrons keeping still a stedfast order, and the Muskets serving the Pikes with admirable discipline, and the Pikes the Muskets alternately in making the fittest opposition, the Kings men could not in the least part effect what they desired. Every encounter was valiantly sustained in particular by the flying Squadron; they ever and anon faced about, and received the Charge with their Pikes couched; so great a shower of Musket-shot hailing down continually upon them, as they oft repented their being so far advanced. In all these conflicts wheresoever the greatest danger was, there was the Duke Du Mayn, with his Pike in his hand, discharging the duty of a private Souldier much more then of a Commander: And the vigor of his mind was the better seen by the proportion of his body; for being very tall of stature, and his limbs very well proportioned, and armed with all such peeces as he ought to be upon such an occasion, he drew not only the eyes, but the praise of all men upon him. The assaults continued a while on the Kings part; but the Colleagues being more molested then prejudiced thereby, and still marching in very great order, at last free from all disturbance their Camp came safe to La Fera: And the King having compast his end in hindring the succour, he presently betook himself to finish the taking of Laon. The besieged defended themselves gallant∣ly for many dayes; making many bold sallies, and persevering with singular courage in all other resistance: But the batteries never ceasing from without, af∣ter having sustained many assaults, and many of the defendants being slain, and having no hopes of further assistance, the City was at last delivered up unto the King upon honourable conditions about the end of July. This mean while the King of Spain's own affairs in Flanders were still in grea∣ter disorder and confusion; to boot, with the former two mutinies, which have been already mentioned: another had at this time hapned in Brabant; some
Foot colours of Italians were quartered in that Province, in the Towns of Ari∣scot, and of Sichem, which Towns were very neer one another, the want of pay was very great, as you have often heard, by reason of the excessive charges the King was at both in France and Flanders; and it was the greater at this time in Flanders, because the people which had mutined in St. Pauls and in Pont, had but just now received satisfaction of thir pay, which had cost a great sum of money. The foresaid Italians being therefore moved thereto in part by need, but certain∣ly much more by the example which they had before their eyes, of seeing so fowl an action in their companions, so advantagiously recompenced: they re∣solved by the same means to endeavour the same satisfaction. The practice being carried on with wonted secresie from the beginning, it was soon after put in exe∣cution; and those of Ariscot vying for dispatch with those of Sichem, at last all of them being agreed, they met together in Sichem, as in the greater place, and which might be the better fortified: and here throwing off all obedience, they openly mutined. This licentious ensign being raised, many other Italians flock'd suddenly unto it, and many souldiers of other Nations mingled also with them; their whole number came to between two and three thousand. The Arch Duke was highly displeased at this disorder; both in it self and for the consequences it drew after it: he saw that one mutiny begot another, nay, that divers were on foot together; that though they pretended necessity, it was ra∣ther out of corruption; and that the King of Spains condition was now very lamentable, his own forces proving more prejuditious to him then those of his enemies VVherefore he concluded, that laying aside all fair proceedings, 'twas best to try once, if such a mischief could be supprest by rigour. The Councel of VVar inclined hereunto: but howsoever, it was thought to be too dangerous a busi∣ness, and of too bad example to set those souldiers one against another, who did militate under the same Colours: wherefore they resolved to proffer some just satisfaction to the mutiners, whereby to reduce them to their former obedience. The offer was large enough, but they would by no means accept of it; for being become resolute both by reason of their own numbers, and by the good success of their other fellows in their mutinies, they obstinately refused ever to return to their former Colours, till they were fully satisffed for their whole pay. These contumacious speeches were followed by much more contumacious actions. Not contented with such usual contributions, as in such cases are imposed upon the adjacent Countrie; they began to lay heavy taxes upon the Towns round about, which were further off. And they grew to that insolency, that in raising their contributions, they came once even to within the sight of Brussels, where the Archduke and the Court was. But neither did their audaciousness stop here. Fearing lest open force might be used against them, they began to hold intelli∣gence with Count Maurice: not that they would turn over to the adverse party. They never were so base) but that they might have a safe refuge in case of necessity, if they should be pursued by Arms. The Archdukes anger was much increased by these actions: nor made he any delay. He raised a good body of men out of the Spanish mutiners, who had already received their pay, and of many others of the said Nation; and resolved to send them against the last mu∣tiners. Amongst other Commanders Lewis de Velasco, a Spaniard of great e∣steem was of the oforesaid opinion, that this new mutiny was to be quelled by force. The business was therefore assigned to him; being come with his men, to whom were joyned certain VValloon foot and horse) near Sichem, he began to straiten the mutiners. His chief end was to take from them those contributi∣ons which they gathered from all the adjacent parts. But he could not so easily compass his intent; for the mutiners horse scouring the Countrey where it was most necessary, secured their Passes, and brought victuals as formerly into Sichem. This Town lies upon the River Demer, and the mutiners, for the better securing of that Pass, had raised a good Fort there, and sheltered it with a lesser. Velasco goes against these Forts, indeavouring first to take the weaker, that he might have the lesser difficulty in winning the other. But were it that the Spaniard had bin too immature in their moving, or that the mutiners made too stout a resistance, the Spaniards were forced to retreat, leaving above 200 of their men dead behind
them, amongst which divers Captains and Officers, and particularly Pietro Por∣tocarrero, very near akin to Fuentes. Velasco going then more deliberately to work a∣bout the one and the other of these Forts, and beginning to begirt them with trenches and usual works, the Mutiniers resolved to abandon them. Yet could not the people that were within them retreat to Sichem in so good order, but that some of them were routed, and many slain and wounded. The Forts being lost, the Mutiners were much less secure in the Town; and their difficulties of coming by victuals increasing every day, they were already brought into great straits. They therefore betook themselves to more strait in∣telligence with Count Maurice: and sending some of their men to Breda where he then was, they at last obtained of him, that they might be permitted to come thereabouts under the shelter of Breda and Getringberg, till they saw what reso∣lution the Archduke would take with them. They desired no more then this, nor to more then this did Maurice oblige them. They parted thus from Sichem about the midst of December, and marched still in good order till they came to within the Territories of Langhestrat, within the Enemies Country, where they were recei∣ved with all security. Their affairs being brought to this pass, the Archduke, Fuentes, and all the rest of the Kings Officers, were of opinion that their former resolutions against them were to be mitigated, to keep them from falling into greater precipices. Therefore it was moved that the same mea of accommoda∣tion might be used with them as was used with the others: which was not by them refused. So with Count Maurice his permission, who ever treated them with much humanity, without ever endeavouring in the least manner to tempt them to violate their loyalty; Count John Jiacomo Belgioso, a Gentleman of Mi∣lan, was oft-times by them received, who was imployed to this end by the Arch∣duke. The agreement was, That they should go to Tilemone, a place which did belong unto the King in Bra∣bant. That they should keep there with all fitting security. That some Spaniard should be left with them for hostage, till such time as they should be satisfied; and that when they should have received their pay, they should return unto their former service. Francisco Padiglia was therefore given them for an hostage, and so they went to Tilemone; where they staid above a year, such difficulty was found in raising moneys to satisfie them; there never having been any mutiny wherein there were more Captains, inferior Officers, Souldiers who received great advantages of pay, and other old Soldiers, who likewise had large pay, then there was in this. This mean while the year ended, with the divulging of a memorable Navigation tho∣roughout Europe, which the Hollanders and Zealanders had that year found out, of finding a nearer cut to the East-Indies by the North. They had already wrought themselves into the East-Indies by the wonted way of the South. Though they had not apply'd themselves to so far remote and so laborious Traffick, till after the Crown of Portugal was come again into the King of Spains hands. Before this happened, they by their neer hand, and com∣modious navigations, frequenting often the Coasts of Portugal, and especially their chief Port of Lisbone, did much to their advantage partake of the Merchan∣dises which were more peculiar to the Indies. But when the King of Spain suc∣ceeded to that Crown, and forbad all manner of Trade to the Hollanders and Zealanders with Spain or Portugal, they resolved they would go themselves in∣to the East-Indies by the same way of the South, which the Portugals had at first so happily discovered, and still more happily pursued. This enterprise pro∣ved very hard unto them at the first; finding themselves to seek in the immencity of so long a voyage, and no less in the knowledg of winds, seas and people, which they had never before practised nor seen. The greatest obstacle which they met withall was in the opposition made unto them by the Portugeses; who being the only men who had formerly sailed upon those seas, and given what Laws they listed to that Commerce, could not admit of any associates therein, much less of enemies, and such enemies. But the Flemish growing the more hardy in the pursuance of their enterprise, by how much they were withstood at first, have at last proceeded so far therein, as (as it is well known to all men) the Crown of
Spain could not be more indamaged then it hath been by them in those parts; Nor could this satisfie their hatred to that Crown, or yet their own thirst after gain. Hoping by one good success for the like happiness in others, they were not long in trying whether they could not by the same means work themselves in∣to the VVest-Indies, and get footing there. And truely therein either their for∣tune, or their audacity, or rather their singular skill in Navigation, hath been such, as having at last tamed and overcome the Ocean, they have landed there, on divers sides: have built Forts there; established Garisons; and gotten no less advantage in those Western Indies, then they had formerly got in the Eastern. Nay it may be said to be greater, by how much the occasion of enjoying it there hath been the greater. Out of hopes especially that they may ransack the Spa∣nish Plate-Fleet which through that immence way by sea, is every year brought in∣to Spain. Or at least that they may so annoy them, as the danger of the passage growing every voyage greater, their trouble and expence in making them might likewise daily increase. Designes which have in a good part been since effected. For to boot with the great increase of expence which the Crown of Spain hath been forced to be at since, to maintain the Empire of those Seas and Lands; their Fleets have been indangered more then once; and the necessity of having them safely convoyed, hath made the passage much more difficult and expensive then it was before: Though it may be said on the contrary, that all these oppositions have served to make the greatness of Spain appear the more, both in maintaining greater Forces and greater expences, where it hath been necessary to increase them; and in preserving the reputation of their Arms both by Land and Sea; where there hath been any occasion to imploy them. But these Navigations of the Hollanders and Zealanders on both sides of the Indies, especially in the West-Indies have happened for the most part, since their having found out the North∣west passage into the East-Indies; to return to which, their resolution was to sail by a nearer cut if they could, and to come to the Oriental regions of Cataia, Chi∣na, and the Indies, steering their course on the right hand, and drawing still near∣er the Pole. In which short Voyage, they thought that at some seasons of the year, they might find such access into that almost continually frozen Sea, as that they might at last get out of it. And to this purpose they prepared four ships, and furnished them with all things necessary for such an enterprise. Then going out of their own seas, and having passed through those of Norway, and then the others of Greenland and Iseland, which are the utmost on the North side most under the Pole, they wheeled about to the right hand and came successfully to the Strait which is called Nova Zembla. There began the difficulty of the passage, which increasing still the more by how much they advanced further, it proved so excessive at the last, as their trouble to return back was incredible. They saw the sea freeze into mountains, the skies hidden in thick clouds, and amidst those horrors, Nature seemed almost wholly to fail. Being staid by Ice, they were for∣ced to break one of their ships, and turn it into Cabins and Cottages. Nor were they then free from new dangers. They were oft-times set upon by great numbers of white Bears, of an extraordinary bigness; and were by other necessi∣ties reduced to such a point, as they oft-times dispaired of life, or that they should ever be able to return: but at last they did: for the chiefest dread being over, and the Ice melted, they might (though not without great sufferings) return home by the same way they came. Thus did they end this Navigation. Of which, and of others, which they have made into the Indies, we have been desirous here to give you this short account. For though they may be accounted successes, which do in some sort appertain unto the Arms, which the United Provinces of Flanders, have by all possible means opposed against the Crown of Spain; yet being so dis-joyned from those which we describe; the making of them known, and joyning of them by distinct relations, to the others of this History, would doubtlesly rather breed confusion then perspicuity. At the expiration of this year the Archduke grew to be very weak in body, by reason of a lingring feaver, wherewith he had been a good while troubled, and whereof he finally died, not being full 42 years old. It was thought that the indisposition of his body was occasioned by the like of his mind, finding the af∣fairs
of Flanders in so bad condition, and by reason of the little hopes of their amendment. Nor peradventure was he less troubled, for fear left the Treaty of Marriage between him and the Infanta Isabella, the King of Spains eldest daugh∣ter, which had been a good while in agitation, might either prove totally vain, or by long delays be too long deser'd. The time of his Government was not above one whole year. He was a religious, grave Prince, and singularly good; and his German candor made him the more acceptable to the Flemish. For what re∣mains, he was not good at action; no Warriour; made much more for Peace, then for the managing of Arms; and who coming with very great expectation into Flanders, had better satisfied that expectation, if he had not come to the test thereof in that Government. He declared at his death, that Count Fuentes should succeed in his place, till the King should take some other resolution. Who after∣wards ratified his Government, with such necessary Authority as Count Mans∣field had divers times formerly exercised it.
THE HISTORY OF THE WARS OF FLANDERS, Written by CARDINAL BENTIVOGLIO. The Third Part. BOOK II. The Contents. It is resolved in France to declare open War against Spain. The Duke of Bovillon enters therefore in hostile manner into the Province of Luxemburg; and at the same time the United States surprise the Castle of Huy, in the Country of Liege Verdugo is sent with considerable Forces by Count Fuentes, to chase the French from out that Province: wherein he had good success; as had also Monsieur de la Motte, in the recovery of the aforesaid Castle. From hence Fuentes resolves to pass into Picardy. His design touching the recovery of Cambray, and many diffi∣culties in the undertaking; yet Fuentes prepares for it. He first besieges Chatelet, and suddenly turns from thence, in hopes of winning the Town of Han: But being deceived, he returns to his Siege, and quickly ends it. From thence he goes to be∣fore Dorlan. The French come to succour it. A field-fight, wherein Fuentes hath the victory: He therefore straitens the Town yet more, and after a fierce assault the oppugnors storm it, and commit all manner of hostility in slaughter and sacking. Immediately he incamps before Cambray. The description of that City, and the particular ordering of the Siege. Duke Retel enters the Town with a small succour; and soon after comes in Monsieur de Vich, a valiant and greatly ex∣perienced Souldier. He makes the Spanish Camp resent his opposition soundly; yet Fuentes loseth neither hope nor courage. His secret intelligence with the Citi∣zens, who are ill affected to the Marshal of Baligni, as Usurper of that Dominion. He joyns threats to his practices, and prepares to storm the walls by assault. But the
Citizens prevent him; and falling into tumults, resolve to deliver upthe City into Fuentes his hands. Which they doe. The Confederate Provinces move this mean while with their Forces; but succeed not neither in their Siege before Groll, ner in the surprise which they attempt upon Lira. Archduke Albertus comes to the Government of Flanders, in the name of the King: And soon after his arrival Fuentes departs, and goes into Spain. WE will begin the year 1595 with the resolution taken by the Anno 1595. King of France to break into open war with the King of Spain. He considered that many Towns in Picardy, were under the self Forces of Spain. That indeavours were still had to win more. And that look how much more the League did decline in France, so much the more was it fo∣mented by Flanders, his having declared himself to be a Catholick, and his having advanced his endeavours of re∣conciliation to the Church of Rome, with the Pope so far, not causing them any whit to alter their designe. Wherefore thinking that he was already too much injured, he resolved not to indure it any longer. To the which he was the more incouraged for that he saw his Authority and power did daily increase in France. He therefore proclaimed War against the King of Spain; and endeavoured by a bitter Declaration to invite all his Subjects to the War. Nor was it long ere an∣other contrary manifesto came from Flanders, wherein the King of Spain in∣deavoured to justifie all that he had done in order to the affairs of France. And some other Declarations were added, which were requisite upon such an occur∣rence. War being thus declared between the two Kings; the greatest designs of both sides were turned towards the Frontiers of France and Flanders. The King of France had sent the Duke of Bullion with good Forces a little before into the Country of Lucemburg. Wherein the United States did likewise joyn with a certain number of horse and foot on their behalfs. Wherefore Bullion having soon won the Towns of Frette & Yvois, which lay nearest the Frontiers of France, he marched further into the Country, pillaging and preying upon that Province in hostile manner. At the same time the States took likewise the Town of Huy in the Country of Liege, that they might advance nearer the Confines of France on that side, and in the mutual communication of their designs, communicate their Forces also the easilier. The Town of Huy lies upon the Mause, with a Bridg which expedites that passage, and a Castle eminently seated, which com∣mands the Town. The Town belongs to the Bishoprick of Liege; and till this time had always enjoyed Neutrality between the Kings Forces and the adverse party, as all the rest of that Country had likewise done. Ernestus the Elector of Bavaria enjoyed that Bishoprick, together with the Archbishoprick of Colen. The invasion being made, he applied himself to the United States for the restitu∣tion of that Town which was taken. But his endeavours proving vain, he had after∣wards recourse to the Kings forces, to which he promised to joyn his also, that such a novelty might be the sooner remedied. The Archduke was no less moved upon this occasion, nor less ready on his part to remedy it. And he being dead, Count Fuentes appear'd to be of the same mind. He therefore (and 'twas his first action) sent Monsieur de la Motte with good Forces to recover Huy; which were quickly augmented by those which the Elector added unto them. La Motte be∣ing come near the Town, began to play upon it, and within a few dayes took it, and reduced the State of Liege into total security. He being afterwards sent for back by Count Fuentes to Brussels, who intended to imploy him elswhere; Colo∣nel Verdugo was sent by the Count with a great strength of men, to free the Country of Lucemburg from the excursions made by the French, and to recover the Towns which Bullion had taken. Verdugo went thither, and did so handle the French, as making them first forsake the field, he made them afterward quit the Country and the Towns which they had taken. The King of France his Forces were then chiefly turned upon the Dukedom of Burgony, to take it from the Duke Du Mayn: To the defence whereof, as also of the County of Burgony which was likewise threatned by the King, the Constable of Castile, Governour
of Millan, was come with very gallant Forces from Italy. Fuentes had thought to have sent Verdugo thither also with some assistance from Flanders. But he dy∣ing at that time, it could not be effected. In him the Spanish Nation lost one of the most valiant and best experienced Commanders in War, that was then in all those Provinces. Wherein he had served the King of Spain little less then 0 years. And passing through all the degrees of the Militia, he had still shewed himself most worthy in the last; and particularly most in such as required either greater vigilancy in command, or greater wisdom in advice. He commanded the Kings Forces with great authority a long time on the further side of the Rhine, with much variety of acquisitions and losses; till that the Spanish Forces being diverted too much in France; the Kings own affairs in Flanders were brought to too bad a condition. Count Fuentes being freed from that diversion which the enemy had occasion∣ed in the Countries of Liege and Lucemburg, and leaving Colonel Mandragone well furnished with forces thereabouts, he applyed himself wholly to the Fron∣tiers of Picardy, resolving to go thither himself, accompanied with a great strength of men, and to advantage the Kings affairs there as much as he could. Count Charls Mansfield did formerly command the Kings Flemish Forces which were upon that Frontier, as hath been often said. But he being gon into Germa∣ny, to serve the Emperour against the Turk in the VVars of Hungary; the Arch∣duke, before he died, had substituted the Marquis of Barambone in his place; who was Governour of Artois, which joyns upon Picardy. VVho being entred into that Province, had overrun it in divers parts, and taken Anker, and some o∣ther Towns, all but of small importance. He afterwards returning into his own Province, had sent Monsieur di Rone in his place, of whom and whose Military worth, mention hath been often made already. He was one of the chief of the League of France; but resolving at last actually to establish himself in the King of Spains Service, he was received thereunto, and had a great stipend allowed him, and was made Campmaster General of the Army. VVherefore the com∣mand of those parts being past into his hands, he went thither, and made likewise some small acquisitions. The Spring was by this time over; and Count Fuentes did no longer delay to prepare for putting his designs into execution. He desired above all things to take the City of Cambray from the French; and to reduce it, as formerly it was, under the particular Authority of the King of Spain. In the revolutions of Flanders, soon after the death of Don John, that City was fallen into the hands of the Duke of Alanson, as was then said. Alanson at his death, left the Queen his mother heir to those parts which he could pretend to, by such an acquisition; and she had confirmed the Government of Cambray, and of the Castle and Ter∣ritory of Cambresis upon Signor di Baligni, who had the same charge whilst A∣lanson lived. Nor did Baligni omit to make use of the present conjuncture of times, by becoming as it were absolute Lord of that City, and of all that depended upon the Dominion thereof. He having always wrought his advantage on both sides during the troubles of France and Flanders; had brought that Country in∣to a condition as it were of neutrality. Yet upon all occurrences he lean'd much more to the French, where his acquisition might cause less jealousie, and conse∣quently receive more protection. But the King of France his affairs bettering e∣very day in that Kingdom, and especially upon that Frontier, Baligni had con∣descended to put the City of Cambray under the direct dominion of the King, reserving unto himself the usefull part thereof, together with the Prerogative of calling himself Prince of Cambray. Baligni being thus become Lord of that City, he began to be diligent in fortifying it, and muniting it with Bulwarks, Arms, Ammunition and Victuals. He foresaw the Tempest which was likely to fall up∣on him from the King of Spains Forces in Flanders, if ever any occasion thereof should be offered. And doubtlesly as that was the greatest advantage which France had reaped in those parts during the troubles of Flanders: so could not the King of Spain benefit himself better upon that Confine, then by reducing Cambray to its former condition. In former times the City of Cambray had been as it were a strong Bulwark to the whole Walloons Country against the French
assaults on that side. And the Emperour Charls the fifth, the better to secure himself thereof, had by the Archbishops good will, who was Lord both spiritual and temporal of that City, built a strong Castle there; which was better furnish∣ed and fortified afterwards by Baligni. He kept the two neighbouring Provinces of Hennault and Artois in great subjection: grieving them with quartering, indamaging them with inroads, putting them to pay contributions, and using o∣ther great violences against them; such as if greater could not have been used by a declared enemy; at least not by a bad neighbour. They therefore greatly de∣sired to see that Town return under the King of Spains devotion. And had of∣fered all possible assistance to Count Fuentes, to make him the willinglier resolve upon that enterprise. But in the mature agitating thereof in the Councel of War there was some opposition found; and there was great ambiguity in Votes. Monsieur de la Motte, General of the Artillery, and a man of long experience and known valour, was particularly against the Enterprise. He said, That the Kings forces were not as then strong enough to be thought proportionable for such a siege. That the City of Cambray was of a very large circuit, and very well mu∣nited with flanks and ditches on all sides. That the City was secured by a very strong Citadel; and that it was to be believed that neither the Citadel nor City would want either men, ammunition, or victuals requisite to make resistance; That on the contra∣ry the Kings Forces being well considered, it would clearly appear that they were not sufficient so to begirt such a Town as that, as it ought to be. That if it were not well surrounded with Trenches, it could not be kept from being relieved; and say it should be perfectly incompassed; was it not to be believed that all means possible would be used by France to force those Trenches? That lesser Interests gave way to more ur∣gent necessities. That there could be none of greater consideration for France, then to keep Spain from making so important an acquisition. That therefore it was necessa∣rily to be supposed that the King of France, laying aside all other affairs, would bend all his Forces to keep the City of Cambray in Baligni's command, which was as much to say, as in his own. That the agreement between him and Du Main was still in hand; which the King would endeavour the more, that the concord might be made in such a conjuncture of time. Neither would the United Provinces lose that oportuni∣ty; but seeing the Spanish Arms in Flanders more languishing now then ever, they would certainly apply themselves to some important siege, which they might as easily effect as designe. These were the Objections made by Monsieur de la Motte against the Enter∣prise. But the new Camp-master-General, Ronye, was very stiff for it; shewing himself the more to be a Spaniard in his opinion, lest he might be thought to be too luke-warm, as being a Frenchman. He said, That the Provinces of Hennault and Artois had made large promises of assistance, toward the effecting of the Enterprise. And that it was to be hoped all the rest of the Walloons Country would concur thereunto: That therefore the Kings Forces might be so increased by such and so opportune helps, as they might be sufficient to make such a siege, and manage it as it ought to be. That the City of Cambray seemed very much to hate Baligni: and that he was acknowledged by the people thereof rather as a Ty∣rant then a Prince. Wherefore by reason of the iealousies within, he would be the less able to withstand the forces without. That it was doubtlesly to be believed the French would not omit doing of any thing which might keep the Town from being lost. But that the King was already so deeply ingaged in Burgony, and was so prest upon on one side by the Duke du Main, and on the other by the Constable of Castile, as he would hardly free himself of that trouble. That the King being held in play so far off, there was small fear to be had of his Captains that were nearer hand. And what a madness would it be thought in the Duke du Main, if when he might better his con∣dition the more, amidst Arms, he should so slightly forgoe them? That if in the mean time the United Provinces should make any opposition, they might be met with forces sufficient to suppress them. That all men were usually set upon in their highest de∣signes by hopes and fears. That in this, hope was to have the upper hand. And why should they not hope to find a friend of Fortune, since their Cause was so just? For what remained, that the recovery of Cambray was of so great consequence, as all the expences the King of Spain had been at in the present occurrences of France might be
thought well imployed, if only thereby Flanders might be again possest of such a Bul∣wark as this in that so suspitious corner. Fuentes inclined to this opinion, being naturally full of high thoughts, and de∣sirous to innoble his Government by some extraordinary success. He therefore acquainted the Provinces of Hennault and Artois with this his resolution, mo∣ving them the more to assist him. He easily drew over likewise the Cities of Torney and Lillo, with the Countries which lie more inward upon the Walloons, to be of the same mind. But the Archbishop himself seemed more desirous of this Enterprise then all others. VVho also offered some monies towards the ef¦fecting of it; hoping by the King of Spains power and protection, to return to his City, and enjoy his former Government thereof. VVhilst these aids were preparing, and that divers other necessary provisions were made to the same purpose, Count Fuentes resolved to enter Picardy, with those men which he had already gathered together; so parted from Brussels about the beginning of June. Being come upon the Frontier, his first design was to get Chatelet, a strong place, and so near Cambray, that unless he could bereave the enemy of it, it might much hinder the intended enterprise. He treated like∣wise at the same time with the Town of Han, to get it into his hands; it being a place seated advantagiously likewise thereabouts. Monsieur di Gomeron was Governour of this place, and Monsieur Orveglier, his brother by the mothers side commanded the Castle, which joyn'd upon the Town on one side. VVith both these there had been much tampering already, and at last Gomeron received 1000 foot, part Neopolitans, part Spaniards and VValloons into the Town. He promised faithfully to make Orveglier do the like in the Castle. And for a grea∣ter gage of his fidelity, he was gon to Brussels with two of his younger brethren, and gave himself up into Fuentes hands, who therefore caused 20000 crowns be given to him. And loaded him with divers other great offers, in case that the Town and Castle of Han should remain in the King of Spains absolute possessi∣on. And this Fuentes did the more hope for, for that Gomerone, and Orveglier, had been always partial for the League upon that Frontier. This was the condi∣tion of Han, when Fuentes began to begirt Chatelet. VVhich was fortified in opposition of the Citadel of Cambray even from the first time that that Citadel was built by Charls the fift; Chatelet being the nearest Town of France to the Frontiers of Flanders on that side. The form thereof is four square, like that which was described in the siege of La Chapelle, but it is not altogether of so large a content. At every corner is placed a Royal Bulwark, the ditch about it is part dry, part full of water. And it was so well provided with all other things necessary for defence, as it might be feared it would hold out a long time. The greater the acquisition was known to be, the greater was Fuentes his desire to compass it. He therefore with much fervor begirt the Town; and advancing with his Trenches, prepared to batter the VVall on one side with a many great guns. VVhen on the sudden news came, that instead of his taking of the Castle of Han, the Marishal Bullion, with the Messieurs of Sanseval, and Humiers, all of them Commanders of the French forces in those parts, were entred thereinto; and that they prepared to storm the Town likewise. Fuentes began already to su∣spect Orviglier, the Governour of the Castle, by reason of some of his no sincere proceedings: But then he thought that the Garison which was placed in the Town, would keep from all novelties. And he was herein the more confirmed by his having Gomeron the Governor of the Town, and two of his brothers as gages, in his hands. Captain Checco di Sangro, a Neopolitan, and Olmedo a Spa∣niard commanded the Kings of Spains Flemish Forces in Han. These immedi∣ately acquainted Fuentes with what danger the Town was in. He made no de lay, but suspending the continuation of the siege, and leaving Campmaster Au∣gustine Messia with so many men onely as might keep any relief from being brought into the Town, he went immediately away with the rest of his Camp toward Han: hoping that when he had secured the Town, he might take the Castle: but it fell out otherwise. For the French Commanders not losing any moment of their advantage, as soon as they were entred the Castle, did forth∣with furiously assault the Town. VVhich first assault was no less vigorously
sustained by the Kings Flemish Forces. But being assailed not many hours after with greater violence and more men, a second time; they were at last forced to yield, and march out of the Town; a great slaughter being first made; and al∣most all their Commanders taken prisoners; particularly Sangro and Olmedo. Nor did the French escape without loss of bloud. Particularly Humiers was there slain, who was highly esteemed of for his valours by the French. Fuentes hea∣ring this news, returned as suddenly to his siege, and apply'd himself more hot∣ly thereunto then before. That he might make amends for the loss of one Town by getting another. Advancing therefore still forwards with his works, he came soon to battery. And having made one very great one, the Spaniards with e∣qual ardor fell to the assault. But the defences not being sufficiently taken away, they could not storm the wall: to boot that the besieged plaid their parts man∣fully. Monsieur de la Motte was in the Camp, who failed not in making all di∣ligence, to facilitate a second assault by his batteries, he being the General of the Artillery. And they were now ready to fall on more fiercely then before, when an unfortunate accident befalling them within, did mightily discourage them. For som fire lighting among the powder which they had brought to the wall that was play'd upon, as to the place where they were to use it most, blew it almost all up, and consequently very much weakened their defence. Wherefore having no hopes of relief, not waiting for a second assault, they came to parly, and delivered up the Town upon honourable conditions to Fu∣entes, where he rested his Army a few days, and at which time he received new hopes from Orveglier, of putting the Castle of Han into his hands. And Go∣merons own mother came to the Camp and confirmed the same; fearing lest o∣therwise Fuentes might proceed against her sons. Fuentes being then allured by these second hopes, marched again with his Army to within sight of Han: but failing of his expectation, and thinking himself too much deluded, he could con∣tain himself no longer, but in view of the whole Camp made the eldest Gome∣rons head be cut off, and sent the other two brothers to be kept at Antwerp. He returned from thence towards Cambray again, intending to besiege it: but thinking that it was not sufficient that he had taken Chatelet from the French, unless he should also take Dorlan; he resolved to incamp before Dorlan, and to bring that Town likewise into his power. In his march he took the Towns of Clery and Bray, which made hardly any resistance; and about the midst of July began to begirt Dorlan. There is no Town in all Picardy which is nearer the op∣posite Confine of Flanders then this; nay it doth rather interfere then joyn upon the Confines of Artois. It is little above an easie days journey from Cambray. It is a large Town well invironed with a wall and ditch: and it is munited on one side by an indifferent strong Castle. The Duke of Nevers commanded o∣ver all the King of France his forces upon all those Frontiers, being made Gover∣nour of Champagne, in stead of the Duke of Guise: who having made his peace with the King, had the Government of Province given him in lieu of Champag∣nia. Nevers began already to suspect that Fuentes intended to besiege Dorlan. and therefore he had added a good number of horse, and choice foot to the Ga∣rison thereof, before Fuentes sate down before it. The King had conferred the Government of Picardy upon Count St Paul; after that the Duke d'Umale had been proclaimed Traitor in Paris by the Kings Commission, and had his head struck off in Effigies. And in Normandy Monsieur de Villiers commanded un∣der the King; who was established as formerly in his Office of Admiral of France, in recognition of his being also resolved to adhere unto the King, and for his having drawn the City of Roan to do the like. To boot with these Go∣vernours of Provinces, the Marisnal of Bullion, and Monsieur de Sanseval had a great influence upon the Forces within the same Frontiers, but the chief com∣mand lay in the Duke of Nevers. All these Commanders used the greatest in∣dustry they could in gathering together such Forces as might suffice to keep Dor∣lan from falling into the King of Spains hands. Fuentes was this mean while incamped before the Town. And it was argued in the Councel of VVar, whe∣ther were the better to begirt it on the Towns side, or on the Castles: and at last it was resolved that they would bend all their forces against the Castle. For
that being won, they might much more easily take the Town. Amidst which contrariety of opinions, whilst Monsieur de la Motte in order to his office was viewing where he should fittest dispose of his Batteries, he was casually shot in the eye with a musket, and slain. A great loss: For Flanders had not a more ex∣perienced Commander in Arms, nor who had passed with greater approbation through all offices, even from the meanest to the greatest. The winning of the Castle being then resolv'd upon, divers Forts were raised on that side in such places as were most requisite to secure their quarters on the & outside, the Works which were to be made within. They fell presently to making Trenches. On one side which was of greatest concernment, the Spaniards, Burgonians and Walloons were so fervent at their work, as they soon fell into the Ditch. Hernando Teglie Portacarera Serjeant-Major of a Spanish Brigado did in particular merit great praise herein. To become masters of the Ditch more easily, it was necessary to take a little Ravelin from the besieged. To this end the Spaniards and the rest made a furious assault upon the Ravelin, which was so well sustained by the French, as the success was doubtfull for some hours: But those without being still reinforced by new men, they took the Ravelin at the last, and lodged in it. The Town was thus begirt, when Fuentes came to know that the French came to relieve it. The Admiral Villiers had brought 400 Horse a little before this, to this purpose, out of Normandy; and a great number of Horse was raised to the same end in the neighbouring Frontiers by Saint Paul, Bullioun, and Sansevalle. The besieged desired only to be succour'd by 800. or 1000 Foot. And though the Duke of Nevers was diligent in his endeavours likewise to secure the Town as soon as might be with new men, yet he maturely judged that it was needfull to assemble yet greater Forces together, whereupon the succour might be better grounded. To the which he was the rather moved, for that he knew Fuentes had received considerable Recruits from the Flemish and Walloons, But the French Commanders confiding in the Cavalry which they already had, and which con∣sisted of prime Gentry, sent word to Nevers, who was at S. Quintains, that he should no longer delay endeavouring the succour; and that undoubtedly they would effect it with the Forces which they had. Going therefore from Amiens, which is the chief City of Picardy, and which is within a short dayes journey of Dorlan, they moved with 1500 Horse and 1000 Foot, intending to convey the Foot into the Town, and that the Horse should make their way. When they were come within sight of the Spanish Camp, Fuentes and the rest of his Com∣manders thought that this was rather to make a discovery, then to fight. But when they saw that the real intention of the French was to endeavour the suc∣cour with those men; Fuentes getting on hors-back, and in that posture suddenly sending for the rest of the Commanders to Councel, they resolved to leave the Trenches well provided, and to march and meet the Enemy with the rest of the Army. And Fuentes foretelling the certainty of the Victory, This (said he) may be termed a French Butado. Do they think to find us asleep with∣in our quarters? or that we be not able to sustain that double assault which they per∣adventure intend to make at once, these from without, and the besieged from within? I believe they will soon find they are deceived; and that this their design partakes much more of fool-hardiness then of courage. Then taking all requisite or der for the defence of their Trenches, and particu∣larly for withstanding the Assault which the besieged might make, he drew forth the rest of his men into the field, observing first in what order the Enemy march∣ed. They had made three almost equal bodies of Horse: The first was led on by Admiral Villiers; the second by Monsieur Sansevalle; and the third by Count San Paul, and the Marshal Bullion. Under the shelter of these Horse the Foot marched on the right hand; and in such order as they might easily disjoyn, and get into Dorlan, when the Horse should have opened them the way. Thus came the French marching on; and Fuentes ordered his Camp thus: On the right hand he formed a Squadron of Flanders Train-band Horse, which in their seve∣ral Companies might come to 6:0 Curasiers, and who upon this occasion were commanded by Count Bossu. He placed the Light-Horse on the left hand under the command of Ambrosio Landriano, who was Lieutenant-Generall of the
Horse; the Duke of Pastrana, who was Generall, and who was a little before returned from Spain, being not well then. He himself kept in the midst with his wonted Guard of Lances and Carabins; and followed by a great many Perso∣nages of great Port, amongst which were the Duke d'Umale, the Campmaster Generall Ronye, the Princes of Simai and Avelino, the Marquis Barambone, and divers others of the best quality that were in the Camp. The Foot were divided in the most advantagious places; and there was therof particularly one little flying Squadron of Spaniards, which might be ready to turn wheresoever occasion should most require. Fuentes having thus ordered his Army, Villers advanced, and with great fervencie charged the first Squadrons of the Light-horse: Those first Squadrons, which were all Spaniards and Italians, did not stand the charge of the French; but wheeling about, were disordered and almost made to run. The second Squadrons did then advance, who were Spaniards led on by Carlo Colonna; and fiercely setting upon the French on the Flank, they came to close fight. The French Vanguard being thus advanced, Sanseval made forwards with the Battel; against him came Landriano with the rest of the Light-horse, which were placed there: And here began a fierce and bloody conflict; where Villers Sanseval, and the rest of their Company fighting couragiously, the Spaniards Light-horse were again disordered. Fuentes gave the sign then to the Curasiers, who charged so close and home upon the French Horse, as they beat them back; and the rest of the Horse being rallied together and come in to them, they at last routed and dissipated them. Wherein notwithstanding the Foot had a great share; who advancing, and letting flie with their Muskets on sundry sides upon the French, did more facilitate the success in opening and breaking their squa∣drons, and in making a bloody slaughter: But it proved particularly most bloody against the Foot; for they being quite abandoned by reason of the Rout given unto the Horse, were almost all of them cut in peeces; with a great desire of revenging the blood which the French had drawn of the Spaniards in the a∣foresaid assaults at Han. And for the same reason the like cruelty was used against the Horse, after they were routed and defeated. Yet the third Squadron of the Rereward got almost all safe off: For San Paul and Bullion seeing what ill success the other two had, retreated without further fighting, and did it so early as they could not be pursued. Whilst they were thus busie on this side, the be∣sieged failed not to sally out upon the Spanish quarters, endeavouring to over∣come them, and then joyn with the French that were without: But they met with such resistance, as all they could doe was in vain. And thus Fuentos had the victory on both sides. Few in his Camp were either hurt or slain. On the con∣trary, few of the Enemies Foot were saved, and great slaughter was made amongst the Horse. Many Prisoners were likewise taken, and of those, many of the chief men: One, and the chiefest of them all was Admiral Villers: when contention arising amongst those in whose hands he was, and he offering a very great sum of money to satisfie all their greediness; John Contrera, a Spaniard, who was Com∣missary-Generall of the Horse, fuller of rage then anger, made him be cruelly put to death. An action whereat Fuentes was highly displeased. Another of chiefest esteem amongst them that were slain, was Monsieur de Sanseval, who was Lieutenant-General of Picardy; of a noble family, and of high deserts in war. Many others of the prime Nobility of those parts were either taken pri∣soners, or slain. And Fuentes, were it either to boast his victory or civility, sent the bodies of Villers and Sanseval to the Duke of Nevers, that they might be honourably burried by their friends, according to their merits. Fuentes having gotten this Field-victory, returned with more fervencie then formerly to besiege the Town, and the besieged seemed as resolute in the defence thereof. Count Dinax was Governour of the place; and he had a very numerous Garison in the Town, composed almost altogether of Gentry, who were resolved rather to die then yield. Resistance was made in the Ditch, as you have heard; and though the Spaniards had won the little Ravelin, yet the French did still de∣fend themselves there with Galleries and such other works. But Fuentes resol∣ving to force the Town as soon as possibly he could, placed a great Battery al∣most close to the Counterscarf, and began to thunder furiously from thence
upon the walls: He planted likewise some Artillery upon the rise of a Hill, which from above, shot point blank upon the French, much to their prejudice, and might continue doing so without hurting the Spaniards, when they should make an as∣sault. The wall was plaid upon for many hours; and a great part thereof with its platform being thrown down, insomuch as the breach was almost levell'd, those without presented themselves to make the assault, and those within to re∣ceive it. Fuentes ordered the Assault on his side thus. He made 3 Squadrons, the first consisting of 600 Foot, and the other two of not full out so many: The second was to second the first, and the third the second. The besieged on their behalf likewise prepared to make all manly defence, with military order and resolution. The chiefest for valour and birth were placed in the first Files; who keeping close together, and well arm'd, seemed like a great high bank covered with iron. And a sufficient breach being made, those without marched to the assault. The first Squadron advanced first, and with great courage endeavoured to get foot∣ing upon the wall that was beaten down; but it was so much better defended then assailed, as the second Squadron must come in to assist the first. Then the combat began to be very fierce; for those within being likewise reinforced with fresh succour, they did renew their resistance with more ardor then before. In the heat of the conflict, like waves successively, now these, now those were seen to give way: Pikes were succeeded by swords, and swords by all manner of other close fight, which not only the desire of defence, but of offence might teach upon that occasion. The ground was all covered with dead bodies, or such as were sorely wounded; and those who were unwounded seemed much more desirous to dye then to live: Blood ran down every where; all was full of horror and death. And the conflict was so various between hope and fear, as it could not be discerned to which side the fortune of the day would turn. Thus did the combat for a while continue: But Fuentes resolving to try the utmost, made the third Squadron come in; and those within were likewise invigored with new aids: insomuch as it is not to be said how fierce and how uncertain the fight was for a while. Yet the assailants began already to prevail, by reason of two manifest dis∣advantages which the assailed suffered under: The one was the great slaughter which was made amongst them from aloof off by the Artillery that was placed upon the little Rise, while they fought at nearer distance: The other, that the place where they fought being very narrow, they could not make way one for an∣other, nor keep such order as they ought to have done. Not being therefore able any longer to resist, they were at last inforced to yield: But they still gave back with their faces towards the Enemy; and with so great undauntedness, as the most of them, at least the better sort chose rather to lose their lives then their station. The Castle being forced, the Victors soon entred the Town; and the Gates be∣ing opened, all the rest of the Camp came in, who straightways pillaged and plun∣dred it all over in hostile manner. Great was the number of those that were slain, and great the number of prisoners. But the Plunder proved not to such a value, as did any ways satisfie the Souldiers avarice; which was the cause, as it was thought, why (the Prey not answering their hopes) some houses were despightfully set on fire; which firing a great many others, the whole Town would quickly have been consumed, had not Fuentes come in himself in person, and remedied the disorder. Count Dinax, the Governour of the place, whilst he gave proof of great valour, dyed in the Assault: And his Brother Monsieur de Ronsoy was so sore wounded, as he lived not long after. All the rest of the better sort were slain or taken priso∣ners. Divers Captains of the Spanish Camp were slain, and many-inferior Offi∣cers, together with a great number of common souldiers. In fine, the success of this Assault was such, as a more fierce, bloody, and longer doubtfull fight had not till that time been heard of neither in the Wars of France nor Flan∣ders. Fuentes having taken Chatelet and Dorlan, and gotten the aforesaid victory in the field, he had the greater desire to incamp before Cambray; and he hoped the more to win it at last. He first rested his Army for some days, and in the mean while sollicited those aids, which diversly and plentifully was preparing for him in Henault, Artois, and in the other neighbouring Countries, and by the Bishop of
Cambray The aids consisted in monies, souldiers, victuals, ammunition, Artil∣lery, together with a great number of Pyoners, to serve for the mannual work of the fiege. But in the Interim, he being willing to gain as much time as he could, parted from Dorlan; and with those men which he had, incamped about the midst of August before Cambray. His Camp consisted not then of above 7000 foot, and 1500 horse. VVherefore the Duke of Nevers who was then in Peroune, re∣solved to try whether he could bring any relief into the Town or no, before his Army should be increased. He to this purpose sent his eldest son, the Duke of Retel, who was not then above 15 years old, accompanied with 500 horse. By sending such a pawn Nevers desired to assure the besieged the more that he him∣self would soon come to succour them with other forces. The young Duke met with a brisk opposition, wherein Carlo Colonna with his Cavalry did particularly signalize himself. But the French prevailed, and having lost some of their men, entred most of them into the City. Fuentes his Army did this mean while daily increase; in a short time his Camp consted of 12000 foot and 300 horse; he had moreover above 80 pieces of Artillery, great aboundance of Ammunition and victuals, and 400 Pyoners. At his first incamping, Fuentes had rather de∣signed where he would take up his quarters about the Town, then taken them up, deviding them the most advantagiously that the several situations would suffer him to do. But now abounding in all things that was necessary to fortifie them, he applyed himself suddenly to bring them to intire perfection. Cambray is seat∣ed (as hath several times been said) upon that edg of Frontier made by the two Provinces of Henault and Artois on Flanders side towards France opposite to Picardy. It hath under its command abroad, only the little Castle of Cambre∣sis, with a very narrow precinct of ground; but the Prerogatives of the City, make good the smallness of the Territories. It enjoys a free Government, under the spiritual and temporal dominion of its Archbishop. It is indowed with ve∣ry large Priviledges; full of noble Churches, whereof the Cathedral is such as hath not its like in any of the chief neighbouring Cities. It is sufficiently provid∣ed also of other Edifices; either for use or ornament; yet are not the Inhabitants answerable in numbers to the houses. Many of which being Ecclesiasticks, fo∣reign Commerce, and Merchandizing doe rather languish then abound there: Neither doth the Scheld, though it run through the City, afford Commodity for it; for that River takes its head but from a little above that City, and hath there∣fore there so slender a Channel, as it is hardly Navigable in those parts. The City is about a league in compass, and is invironed with an antient wall, flank'd for the most part after the ancient manner; but with many Bulwarks also after the modern way of Fortification. It hath a ditch which is very broad and deep on the one side, whereinto for a great part the Scheld runs; but the rest thereof by reason of the hight of its situation is dry; but so much the deeper. On the highest side, which is on the East, stands a Citadel, with four royal Bulwarks, ha∣ving a great half Moon between two of them which are next the fields; and di∣vers other defences for the better custody of the ditch. The ground descend∣ing from hence towards the South side, and still more and more as it inclines to∣wards the VVest, stands the Port Neufe, and then that of St Sepulcher; afterwards another called Cantimpre; and more towards the South, that of Selle. And lastly more higher towards the Citadel there is another Gate called Malle. Be∣tween these Gates is the compass of the City divided. It had for the de∣fence thereof about 2500 foot, and 600 horse. besides 500 foot which were reser∣ved for the Citadel. Amongst the foot some Companies of Swissers were com∣prehended, and some others of the confining VValloons which served Baligni. The rest were French, all of them well trained up in wars. The City and Cita∣del did abound in Victuals, Ammunition, Artillery, and with whatsoever was re∣quisite for the maintaining of a long and hard siege. Now to turn to the adverse party. Fuentes had taken up his quarters chiefly over against the Gates, that he might block up the most frequented avenues; and that he might the better keep out succour. On that side which lay nearest France, from whence relief was most to be feared, and which was on the South side, he raised a great Fort near the Village Nierny, and gave the custody thereof to the
Prince of Simay. He raised another Fort towards the west called Premy, taking its name from a near neighbouring Village; and gave the charge thereof to Count Bilio, Colonel of a German Regiment. Then turning towards the North, he added another Fort, which was called St. Olao, the name of a Church not far from it; and he committed the defence thereof to the Baron Ausi. On the fourth side towards the East did Fuentes his self quarter, by reason of the near accommodation of the Village Evendunre; and here he raised the greatest Fort; for on that side which was the most eminent, and where the ditch was dry, he intended to open his Trenches and to make his batteries. These were the chief quarters; and the defence was to be secured by the abovesaid Forts. From one Fort to another, did certain little Forts, or rather Redouts run, with double Trenches; because the inward might serve to refrain sallies, and the outward to keep out succour. To each Fort and Redout he assigned such men as were re∣quisite, together with all things necessary for the well maintaining of them. And the horse were likewise distributed in places most-needfull to scoure the Country and to be ready to disturb relief. The siege being thus setled, they began to work their Trenches against the wall. But as that highest or most eminent place which hath been spoken of, was most commodious for the opening of them, so was the wall on that side the City hardest to be forced. A half Bulwark was thrust out from the Citadel with a great Orillioune: which with the well covered fences within, did serve for a curtain to a long line of wall which ran between that Bul∣wark and the Port di Malle. Between that Port and that of Selle, another great Ravelin stood out likewise, called La Nue, and so high was the ditch every where thereabouts, as it appeared more difficult being dry, then if it had had water in it. But in all other parts thereabouts the earth was so soft and myery, and so troublesome for the making of Trenches, as Fuentes no less out of necessity then choice, resolved to accoast the City on that higher and steeper side; and to storm it there. The works being then begun with great fervency, great and sodain ad∣vancement was made therein through the incessant labour of so many Pyoners; though it cost much labour by reason of the quality of the earth, which most commonly was too hard, and sometimes stony. They wrought upon two Trench∣es, the one just over against the wall, which ran along from the Port di Malle, towards the Bulwark Robert (so was the abovesaid Orillion called) and the other towards the same Port di Malle, which the Townsmen by reason of the siege had then block'd up with earth. Fuentes had given the care of all these works to the Campmaster Augustin Missia; who with the Spaniards did most tend that which was the chiefest, and which led towards the Bulwark Robert. The Campmaster Barlotta, with his VValloons apply'd himself to the other which led towards the Port di Malle: and great diligence being had in the making of both these Trench∣es, they were within a few days brought even to the edg of the ditch. This mean while those within the Town ceased not continually to molest these works both nearer hand and at a further distance; neerer hand by frequent sallies, and at a further distance by their Canon from off their walls: So as many actions had, and did daily happen; sometimes between foot and foot, sometimes between horse and horse; and often between both horse and foot. Baligni was one of the Marishals of France, and his wife was in Cambray. A woman so highly spi∣rited as she would not yield unto her husband in sustaining the difficulties of the siege. She her self made the round. She reviewed the sentinels, incouraged the souldiers, took care for what they wanted: and behaving her self valiantly in all other Military exercise, she appeared to be of so warlike a spirit, as almost no∣thing of womanish was seen in her. The husband and the wife striving thus who should most incourage their men to resistance they indeavoured to retard the enemies proceedings as much as they could. But these did every day advance more and more, and had already begun to fall into the ditch, and to place their batteries on two sides; the one being of 14 great piece of Canon, against that part of the wall towards which the Campmaster Messia's works tended; and the other of to such like Canon, against the Port di Malle, towards which the Campmaster Barlotto did address his works. Nine pieces were placed in a bat∣tery apart against the Bulwark Robert. And above 30 others here and there, to
play where it was most behovefull, and so much the better impede the Defence. They fought this mean while in the Ditch; and the dryer the Ditch was, the greater was the Contest. But those within seeing themselves daily to be more and more straitned, Baligni began to be afraid, and to press very much for speedy suc∣cour; which was no less desired by the French. The King of France had just now reconciled himself to the Apostolick See: and as Pope Clement the eighth could not have shown more zeal in endeavouring the preservation of that Kingdom in the unity of the Church, nor more wisdom in guiding that business throughout; so did not the King omit doing any thing which might make the reverence and honour most appear, which he desired upon such an occasion to render to the Holy See. His affairs in France were hereby migh∣tily advantaged; and no relicks of the League now remaining, it was daily ex∣pected when the agreement already begun between the King and Duke Du Mayne should be perfected. The King was therefore much grieved, that amidst so much felicity, he must be in danger to lose Cambrey, unless it were speedily re∣lieved; Wherefore he resolved to go thither in person with powerful Forces; but not being then in posture to do it so suddenly, he resolved to send one of the prime Captains of France thither for the present, very speedily, by whose au∣thority and valour the siege might in the interim be the better sustained. To this purpose he chose Monsieur de Vich, who was esteemed the best of all France, par∣ticularly for what concern'd a siege. Du Vich visited the Duke of Nevers first at St. Quintain: And taking from thence 500 choice Dragoons, he marched a∣bout the midst of September upon the coming on of night, towards the Enemies Trenches; and winding about on the left hand towards the gates Cantimper and Selle, he came before them, intending to enter by one of them into Cambray. As he advanced the Spanish Scouts gave the alarm. And Landriano advanced suddenly with some Troops of Horse, and 300 Foot to obviat him, Landriano knew not by which of the two gates Du Vich intended to enter; wherefore placing himself between them both, he hoping to keep him from entring at either of them. Du Vich fained as if he would enter by the gate of Selle, and drew Landriano with all his men thitherward; but turning sudden∣ly towards the other of Cantimper, and making all his Dragoons light on foot, that their sorrowful horses might serve for prey to Landriano's souldiers, who al∣ready followed him, and so to entertain them the longer, he came to the City without the loss of so much as one man. He was welcomed thither with great applause, and soon confirmed the opinion, both of the King that had sent him, and of the others that received him. He suddenly reviewed the Line, and en∣deavoured divers wales to advantage it on that side where the Enemies Trenches, and the Batteries which they were preparing, did most threaten it. He first rai∣sed a great half moon between the Bulwark Robert, and the gate Malle; think∣ing that that Curtain was not sufficiently Flank'd. Upon the Rampire, between the gate Malle and the other gate Selle he raised a great Platform, the more to anoy the Enemies works; and he furnished it with good store of Artillery: he disposed of many other peeces by way of Counterbattery to the fourteen which were placed without, to play upon the Curtain between the Bulwark Robert, and the gate Malle. He placed some likewise against those nine which were to play upon the Bulwark Robert in a Battery apart: He raised divers other advantagious works in the ditch; and from the first day that he entred into Cambray, those within the Town were so encouraged, as they ceased not afterwards to make continual sallies. It was now towards the end of September; and the Artillery on the outside were so prepared for Battery, as they were ready to fall to execu∣tion; when Du Vich prevented them with his from within, and began to showre down a horrible tempest upon the Enemy. These continued to play a whole day and a half uncessantly, and had such effect, as they dismounted nine peeces of Canon of the Spaniards Camp, and slew many Canoneers, and many other souldiers. Those within the Town, by their accommodation of working within the dry ditch, had underminded the nine peeces which were to play upon the Bulwark Robert, so to blow them up, and cause some impediment to the Enemy. And though the effect was not altogether answerable to the design; yet did the
mine so much indamage them, as four of those Canons were buryed in the ground, and the rest were made unuseful for the present, and for a good while after. This so lively and so well wieghed resistance, caused great confusion in the Spanish Camp. Some of the Commanders propounded to Fuentes, that the Assault might be removed from the higher to the lower side. Nor were there those wanting, who seeing further into the difficulties of storming so large a Town, and which was so well defended, advised to raise the so close siege, and to beleaguer it at a further distance by the way of Forts. These thought it impossi∣ble but that the cold and rainy weather would come in before the siege should be ended, and that likewise the King of France would appear in succour of the City with great Forces; in either of which cases they must of necessity doe that with shame, which they might now doe out of choice, with leaving at least such Forts as might keep those of Cambray from making such excursions as they formerly were wont, to the great annoyance of all the parts thereabouts. As for altering the place of assault, Fuentes did no wayes incline thereunto: For he considered that that would be to begin the siege anew; that peradventure the difficulties would not prove less elswhere; and that the mean while all the labour which they had imployed in making Trenches and raising Forts would be lost. But he was much more against raising the fiege: How could he excuse such an act to the King of Spain, to the Walloon Provinces in Flanders, and to his own Honour? Nor yet could he approve of a siege at a further distance by the way of Forts: For if the Duke of Alanson had formerly freed Cambray from those that the Duke of Parma had planted about it, certainly the King of France might much more easily doe the like now to these. Wherefore no ways yielding to the diffi∣culty of the undertaking, he resolved to continue the siege in the same place. The Commanders in chief, in all governments, use always to keep somwhat to them∣selves of secret and of weight. And thus did Fuentes at this time. One of the chiefest motives which had made him fall upon that siege, was the secret intelli∣gence which chiefly by the Archbishops means he held in Cambray: He had re∣ceived much encouragement from his Complices within the City, for his incamp∣ing before it, and for his continuing the siege, which had been so well begun. Hoping therefore no less in these secret machinations of intelligence, then in his other openly put in execution, he appear'd more firm then ever in his former re∣solution. And he did this the rather by reason of his new recruit of Forces, of which a strength of 700 choise Horse was very considerable, which the Mutiniers of Tillemone prepared to send to serve him in that enterprise, but upon certain conditions whereby those Mutiniers were more ascertained of their pay. They returned then again to work upon their Batteries; the two Campmasters Messia and Barlotta being very diligent therein. A great Rampier of Earth was raised to shelter Messia's greater Battery from Du Vich's new Platform; and some pieces of Artillery were placed upon a Rise without towards the Gate Selle, which did command that Platform; which Pieces did not only serve to weaken that defence, but also to clear all that wall which ran between the Gate Selle, and the Flank Nua, as also to beat down the houses within the City. Another way to issue out was also opened in the Ditch over against the Bulwark Robert, that they might have more Avenues, and come the easilier to the Assault which was in∣tended to be made on that side. To these divers other Works were added to hasten the business as much as might be; and all parts where succour was most apprehended, were chiefly reinforced with souldiers. This was the condition of the siege in the beginning of October: when Fuentes thought he might now come to Battery, and then fall suddenly to assault. All the Batteries began to thunder tempestuously on the Enemies wall, at day-break; which they did with such uniformity, as they seemed not to be severall, but one sole Battery. Barlotta's ten Peeces plaid against the Gate Malle; Messia's four∣teen against the Wall which ran from thence to the Bulwark Robert; and Mes∣sia's other nine against the Orillioun of the same Bulwark; to discover, and take away that Defence, which might more hinder the Assault which was intended to be made in that place, then any other. Nor did the rest of the Artillery which
were placed elswhere cease playing at the same time, especially those that were on that higher part without; from whence the houses of the City were beaten down. Alike was the Tempest which plaid from the batter'd Walls upon the Batteries. So as by so great and horrible a Thunder, the Fields shook without, and the City within: The use of Eyes was lost, and almost the use of Ears: Smoak clouded the Day; and the horror was the greater, for that it was obscured by Horror. Whilst the great Batteries plaid thus from one part, the Spanish Camp was in Arms in all other parts; Fuentes being very carefull that at the same time the outward Line of the Siege should be well guarded; to which purpose he had assigned particular stations and Forces to the Duke d'Umale, to the Campmaster Generall Rony, to the Prince of Avelino, and to divers other Commanders. And to the end that when sufficient breach should be made by the Batteries, the As∣sault should immediately ensue on Messia's and on Barlotta's side, Fuentes gave likewise such Orders as were most requisite for them both: He gave Messia espe∣cial charge, that when the Assault should be given, he should by all means hinder the Town from being plunder'd, and from suffering any other kind of disorder. The Batteries continued the space of eight hours; and had made such ruine, as the Spaniards began to prepare for the Assault: when it appeared, that the ma∣chinations within the City had wrought more upon the Citizens minds, then those without whereby the City-walls were so cruelly batter'd. Those who were for Fuentes, and especially the Ecclesiasticks who depended upon the Archbishop, taking this occasion, had sundry ways endeavoured to incite the People against Baligny, and against the French: And just at this time Baligny and his wife were become more odious then before, by having coyned a great quantity of Brass∣money, which went at the rate of silver; giving out, that when the Siege should be over, every one should be satisfied with their true value: but this was not be∣lieved. Baligny, whilst the Batteries were a playing, had assembled a great num∣ber of armed Citizens together in the largest Piazza, that they might be ready to succour the Wall which was plaid upon. When the aforesaid Firebrands dispers∣ing themselves boldly here and there amidst those Citizens, with a loud voice said, Shall we through obstinacie rather sustain the interests of a base Tyrant, then our own concernments? nay, not of one onely Tyrant, but of two? the Wife having by her actions done more to merit that name, then her Husband. Were not the past in∣ventions sufficient to get monies, but that this of equalling Brass to Silver should be added? What defence is there now to keep our wealth from being devoured by the one or the other of those whirlpools? Where is the antient splendor of our Cambray? where her glory amidst so many negotiations both of Peace and War, and of all other kinds which have hapned in the greatest occurrences of Christendom? The Duke of Alanson brought us first into these miseries; and now we are enforced to endure them more then ever by the King of France his Arms. Cambray is full of French garri∣sons, our houses full of their rapines and violences; and in all other kinds, in all other places, the City groans under this so heavy yoke. It is now therefore time to throw it off. And what better occasion can we have to doe it, then to stir now whilst the French souldiers are imployed, and to call in the Spaniards? So the throwing open of the Gates shall be our work; it shall be our work to restore the Archbishop to his do∣minions; and it shall be we who will make so great and so Catholick a King enjoy his former Priviledges on these Frontiers. But this resolution must be acted, before it be consulted upon. The Guns thunder from without against our walls: Assaults will quickly follow; and we in Cambray shall have our houses plunder'd, and our selves slaughtered, according to the fresh and fatal example of Dorlan. And finally, when our City shall be storm'd, we shall lose all our rights, and in lieu thereof receive whatsoever either the reason of war, or the will of the Conquerors shall please to im∣pose upon us. These Citizens being by such incitements moved to new and greater anger, and their number still increasing, a great Tumult suddenly arose. From tumults they came soon to insurrection; and from insurrection, to resolution of letting in Fuentes, and of withdrawing themselves from Baligny's yoke. To these Citizens, which were 3000 in number, did 300 Walloon Horse joyn, which served
under Baligny; and 200 Switzers, who were in another neighbouring Piazza, were what by threats, what by intreaties drawn to be of the same mind: where∣by the Citizens were the more encouraged; who made no longer delay, but chu∣sing out some of the best of them, acquainted Fuentes with the Cities resolution, and intreated him that he would give over shooting. Baligny, together with his Wife, Du Vich, and the other French Commanders were this mean while very much troubled at this unexpected novelty; and knowing that to use force would be but in vain, they thought it better to use intreaties. Baligny and Du Vich went therefore to the Piazza, and strove by divers wayes to appease the Tumult; and Baligny's Wife appeared there likewise, with great store of money, seeking by that means to mitigate the Citizens anger; but she did thereby the more exa∣sperate them; for they thereby saw that it was rather avarice then need which had made Brass be turned to the value of silver. The Citizens did there∣fore utterly refuse to treat with Baligny; and continuing the Treaty which they had already begun with Fuentes, it was soon concluded: The substance where∣of was, That the Archbishop should return to his former Government; and should be as formerly, under the paerticular protection of the King of Spain. But the so jealous considerations of that Confine, and the like jealousies touch∣ing the Government of that City, did not long after make those that governed under the King extend their authority almost as much to the Civil as to the Mili∣tary Government. This Agreement being made, Fuentes sent Messia with such numbers of men as was thought fit, into the City; and he himself entred soon after, with resolution to fall afterwards upon the Citadel with all ardencie. But Baligny and Du Vich, together with the other Commanders, thinking that they were not able to defend it, for that it was not so well fortified towards the City as it ought to have been, treated of surrendring. Which insued upon all the most honorable Conditions which could be desired. Fuentes received the young Duke of Retel, as also all the rest of the French Commanders, with all possible honour. But Baligny's Wife, (who was a woman of a high and domineering spirit) not being able to digest such a fall, and to return to her former condition, fell so very sick for sorrow, as at the instant of the surrender she ended her Principality and life together. Thus did Fuentes happily end the Siege, to the unexpressible joy of the obedient Provinces, and particularly of the Walloons, who had assisted the enterprise with so great Forces, and were now with so much advantage to enjoy the fruits thereof. Whilst they were thus busie on the Frontiers of France, with so greatly con∣siderable success, the United Provinces suffered not their Forces to lie idle in Flan∣ders. Fuentes being entred at the time as we have told you into France, Count Maurice delayed not to march with a great strength into the Field, and in the beginning of July turn'd upon Groll in the County of Zutfen. This was almost the only place of any consequence, which as then remained under the King of Spain's Forces in the parts beyond the Rhine: And therefore the United Pro∣vinces desired to make themselves masters thereof, and to have all those Countries at their free will and disposal. Groll is but a little Town; but strong both by situation and handy-work, and placed in a very important Pass. Maurice had not above 8000 Foot and 2000 Horse; with which he sate down before the Town and began to begirt it, hoping to win it before Mandragone could come to succor it: who, as we told you before, was left in those parts with good Forces, after Verdugo's death, to counterpoise whatsoever of evil which might be endeavour∣ed there by the United Provinces to the Kings prejudice. But Maurice was soon deceived: For Mandragone who had a watchfull eye to all dangers, provided quickly for this. To boot with his former body of men, he gathered as many more together as the Kings near Garrisons could furnish him withall; so as he was almost as strong as Maurice. And passing suddenly over the Mause and Rhine, he marched towards Groll; resolving either to relieve the Place, or to fight the Enemy. Maurice, though in his prime of youth, began even then to shew that he listned more to wary then to hazardous councels. To the which inclina∣tion, as was then seen, and afterwards in the continuance of his military command,
he was not so much drawn by his own proper addiction, as by the express orders of the Confederate Provinces, which have always made it their maxim, to hazard their Forces as little as may be to the uncertain event of battels. Therefore shun∣ning the Combat he rose from before Groll; and retreating towards Zutfen, tar∣ryed there to observe Mandragone's ways. There was some conformity in the ends of these two. For as Mandragone had determined to keep Maurice from making any acquisition: So Maurice resolved to entertain Mandragone with such jealousies, as he should not be able to go from those parts, and consequently not to joyn with Fuentes. This was particularly agreed of likewise between the King of Fraxce and the United States. For the King hoped that Fuentes his For∣ces alone, would not be able to effect what you have already heard, and particu∣larly not that wherein Cambray was concerned; though it proved otherwise. Mau∣rice being retreated from Groll, and Mandragone having provided well for that place, he tarried not far from the Rhine, over against Reinburg, the better likewise to secure that place, and that passage, and to be victualled from thence with more safety. Maurice drew afterwards towards the Kings Camp, each party endea∣vouring to hinder the others design. Between the two Armies ran the River Lippa, which falls into the Rhine not far from Weesel; and over which River they had often occasion to pass and repass to get Forage. There happened therefore divers skirmishes between the two Camps, which for many days were but very slight, without any considerable e∣vent. But there happened one in the beginning of September, which was very notable, and wherein much bloud was spent. The Kings Camp suffered much more for want of Forage then did the other; wherefore they were to fetch it from far, and with great convoys: Maurice thought therefore to light with such advantage upon the enemy, upon this occasion, as they should not by any means be able to escape his hands, to this purpose he made Philip of Nassaw, General of the horse, to lie in ambush with 500 horse, and gave him such other orders as were requisite for the effecting his designe. Woods are very frequent in these parts: and Plains as frequent between them. Mandragones vigilancy was such as he got notice of this ambuscado. Wherefore willing to delude one fraud with another, he first reinforced the forragers convoy, and then placed divers troops of horse in a wood, giving them such further orders as were requisite upon such an occurrency. John di Cordowa commanded the horse of his Army, an ancient Commander, and whose valour was well known: and this Cordowa was present at the prepared action. He had with him Count Henry de Berg, Jerolomo Carafa, Marquis of Montenegro, Paulo Emilio Martiningo, and their troops, together with his own, and some others without their Captains. In so much as these horse were not only equal, but rather more in number then those of Count Philip. The forragers appearing where the enemys were placed, they were set upon on divers sides, nor was their Convoy through reinforced, sufficient to defend them. VVherefore many of them either ran away, or were taken, or slain; Then came Count Henry out of the wood; and many of the enemies horse issued likewise out of another wood. In so much as the action falling out there, and coming from secret ambushes to an open field, a fierce and bloudy fight began, the ene∣my at the first had the better over the Kings men; Count Henry and his as∣sociates being worsted, but being suddenly back'd by the rest, his men rallied and returned couragiously to the conflict. And the enemy being again reinforced by their whole horse, the success was for a while doubtfull. Count Philip in particu∣lar fought egregiously on their side: when being mortally wounded, he drop'd off horseback; which did so much discourage the rest, as beginning presently to give back, they were soon disordered, and at last quite routed. To boot with Count Philip who was taken prisoner, and who soon after died, his brother Count Ernestus, and another Ernestus Count of Solme, and who was their kinsman, were taken prisoners, and Solme died likewise of his wounds. Divers other Captains and persons of quality were likewise taken. There were above 300 slain, many of which were drowned as they passed over the Lippa. Of the Kings men there was not above 60 salin: but Caraffa, Martiningo, and Caratcholo were all three sore∣ly wounded. After this, the two Camps made no further attempts: but remain∣ing
in the same quarters till the end of October, Maurice first went from thence, to lead his men to their winter quarters. And Mandragone did the like; going himself to his wonted Government of the Citadel of Antwerp. VVhere not long after he died, being 92 years old; but so lusty, as in the late mentioned oc∣currency, he was able both to undergo the greatest weight of Command, and in∣dure the greatest troubles also of the field. He spent about 50 years in Flanders; and very few actions of consequence happened there in his time, where he was not present either in execution or command, and wherein he did not merit great praise for something done by him. He was rigid in Discipline; and yet so belo∣ved of all Nations, as each of them desired him for their Commander; and all of them strove who should most reverence him, as their Father. A little before Count Maurice and Mandragone left the field, the Confederate Provinces attempted a surprisal in Brabant; which if it had succeeded, had much advantaged their affairs in that Province. And it fell out thus, Charls Harawger was Governour of Breda, by whose means the place had been so happily surpri∣sed. He had likewise lately gotten the Castle of Huy in the Country of Liege, by stratagem: though Monsieur de la Motte did soon recover it, as you then heard. Being therefore encouraged by these past surprisals, Harawger resolved to try whether he could have the like success upon Lira in Brabant, and joyn so important an acquisition to the other two not long before effected, of Breda and Getringberg. Lira lies almost in the midway between Antwerp, Malines, and Lo∣vain; it is a good Town strongly situated, and of great consideration, being concentred between so principal Places. Alonso di Luna was Governor thereof, who was a Spaniard, and had but a small Garrison there of the same Nation. Ha∣rawger therefore making use of the present conjuncture, and suddenly gathering together about a thousand Foot, and an hundred Horse, which he had out of Breda, and other neighbouring Garrisons; he marched unexpectedly, and came with great silence, and in the quietest hours of night to the ditch of Lira, and to the place which he had intended for the surprisal. One of the gates towards Ma∣lines, had a certain Ravelin, which was begun for its defence, but which was not finished. Thither did Harawger address himself, and passing over the ditch, which was not very deep, he easily scaled the Ravelin, and as easily did chase away some few souldiers who had the guard thereof; then forcing the gate a∣bout the break of day, wherein he met but with little withstanding, he came unto the Market place, where the Governor for a little while opposed him; but being at last forced to give back, retired to the gate which looks towards Ant∣werp, and indeavoured by all waies possible to fortifie himself there: he sent with all speed at the same time to acquaint Antwerp and Malines with what had happened, and to crave aid from them, hoping that he might defend that gate, till relief might come. Neither of these Cities are above three leagues distant from Lira: nor was he deceived in his opinion; for Gaspero Mandragone issu∣ing immediately with 200 Spanish Foot out of the Citadel of Antwerp whereof he was Governor in the others place; and 2000 Inhabitants of the City being with extraordinary diligence armed and put together by the Magistrate thereof, he marched speedily vvith all these tovvards Lira: 600 armed Tovvnsmen vvere also sent vvith like diligence from Malines; and both these Forces meeting by the vvay, they endeavoured to get to Lira as soon as they could. The Town was this mean while plundered by the Enemy; and giving them∣selves over to joy in the victory, before they had fully accomplish'd it, they for∣got themselves in pillage, and in all other kinde of dissoluteness. So as when Harawger went to possess himself of the aforesaid gate, he found not souldiers with him sufficient to do it; and the weaker his Forces were, he met with the stronger resistance. But ere long news came to those of the gate, that the suc∣cor was coming: and soon after they were assured for more certain, that they were neer at hand. The Defendants thereat incouraged, held the Enemy play till such time as their Companions might be expected: who when they came, the face of affairs soon altered. Luna and Mandragone advanced with the Spanish souldiers of Lira, and with those of the Citadel of Antwerp, and being fol∣lowed by the rest who came in to the relief, they entred the Town, they put the
Enemy to flight, and slew many of them, and many of those who were not slain were taken prisoners, and many were stified in the ditch, seeking to save them∣selves that way. Thus within a few hours was a place of suth consequence lost and recovered. Count Fuentes hearing of this novelty sent the Prince of Avelino with 4000 Foot, and 500 Horse, to succour the Town if he could; and in case he could not, to begin to begirt it, till Fuentes himself should follow him with greater Forces. The Mutineers of Tilemon had likewise readily sent away 1000 of their Souldiers to relieve Lira. But these and Avelino's men hearing by the way, how that the surprisal had not succeeded, they all returned back. Fuentes this mean while had setled the affairs of Cambray, and leaving Camp∣master Messia there for Governour, he came himself to Brussels, where he was received with much honour, for the so much good that had been done by the Kings Forces, in the time of his government, vvhich vvas just then to end; for the King had resolved to send the Cardinal Arch-Duke Albertus into Flanders, to succeed in the place of his deceased brother Ernestus: and the flying nevvs thereof vvas soon confirmed by more certain intelligence, that the Cardinal vvas already parted from Spain, and vvas come by Sea to Italy. From thence he made his journy by land, and leaving Savoy was come into the Country of Bur∣gony and Lorain: and being at last come into the Country of Lucemburg, he staid some days in Namures, to tarry for the souldiers which he brought with him, that they might accompany him to Brussels. He brought with him two Spanish brigadoes, under the Campmasters Emanuel de Vega, and John Tesseda. An Italian brigado, under the Campmaster Alfonso d'Avalos, and also certain Neopolitan foot, and some troops of horse; and he moreover brought with him a million and a half of Crowns. But by reason of the winter, and so many other sufferings, the souldiery was so much lessened, as in Namures it was thought necessary to make a general reformation, and to recruit the old Bands with these new men. Duke Ernestus of Bavaria, Elector of Cullen, and the Bishop of Liege, came to visit the Cardinal whilst he was yet in the Province of Lucemburg, and would accom∣pany him to Namures, and from thence to Brussels. Fuentes came likewise to him at Namures, with all the flowre of the Nobility, which were then with him at Brussels. But the Duke of Pastrana being come a little before into Burgony, as General of the horse, with several Troops, for the better safety of the Cardinals person, dyed suddenly when he was come to the Town of Lucemburg. At the Cardinals departure, the King was contented to restore Philip William, eldest son to the Prince of Orange that was slain, to his intire liberty, and to let him return to Flanders, and enjoy his estate, and such a place of honour in the Cardinals Court as was due unto his quality. He had been kept in Spain almost 30 years; but in such a sort, as though a prisoner, he enjoy'd much of liberty. Thus ac∣companied, the Cardinal entred into Brussels about the midst of February in the year 1596. and it is not to be said how great the concourse was from all parts, to celebrate his arrival, and how magnificently he was received into that City with Arches, Statues, Inscriptions, and all other extraordinary Pomp. Fuentes tarried here some days to inform the Cardinal fully with: all necessary Instructions for that Government. And then taking his leave, went back the same way into Italy, and so to Spain; whither the King sent for him, assuring him that he would shortly give him new and honourable Imployments.
THE HISTORY OF THE WARS OF FLANDERS, Written by CARDINAL BENTIVOGLIO. The Third Part. BOOK III. The Contents. The King of France besiegeth la Fera; it receives a small succour, and the Cardi∣nal Archduke thinks to go thither with his whole Army. But afterwards re∣solves to make a diversion, and unexpectedly incamps before Calis. The situation and importancy of that place. The Sea-Port being won, the Cardinal takes the Suburbs; and soon after the Town is surrendred to him. Means are used to put  likewise into his hands: But the King of France sending succour, the Spaniards assault it and take it by storm. The Cardinal turns suddenly upon the Town of Ardes, and begirts it round. The King of France storms at the former loss, and at the danger of receiving a second. Yet will he not rise from before La Fera, to go and relieve Ardes. So as almost at the same time he loseth the one Town, and gets the other. He then draws near the enemies Camp with all his For∣ces, and endeavours to draw him out to battel. Which the Cardinal avoids; and having provided well for the Towns which he had newly taken, he retreats with the rest of his Army into Artois. From thence he passeth into Flanders; and seem∣ing first as if he would make some other sieges, sits down before Hulst. The descri∣ption of that place; the Country about it; and the whole siege, with the insuing surrender thereof. This mean while the Marquis of Barambone is routed and taken by the Marishal of Biroun upon the Frontiers of Picardy. And soon after
Barambone's brother the Count Varras, is put to flight and slain in Brabant by Count Maurice. AT the Cardinal Archdukes arrival in Brussels, all mens eyes were turned upon the Frontiers of France and Flanders. Anno 1596. It being the generally conceived opinion that, the greatest heat, and chiefest seat of war between the two Kings would be there. The King of France, not long before the Cardinals arrival, was in Picardy. He had hoped to establish himself at one and the same time in Burgony, and to relieve Cambray: not thinking that either Balig∣nie's misfortune would be so great, or yet Fuentes his happiness, as to end that siege so soon. Touching the affairs of Burgony, the King had had all good suc∣cess in those parts; for Interest at last prevailing over Arms, the Duke du Main had made his peace with him, quitting the Government of Burgony, and taking in lieu thereof that of the Isle of France, together with divers other conditions wherewith he was fully satisfied. Wherefore the Constable of Castiel returning to Milan, Burgony remained eased of Arms, and the King began already to have intire obedience therein. The greater advantages he got on that side, the more was he displeased with those which Fuentes had obtained in Picardy; but he was chiefly troubled that Cambray should be fallen again into the King of Spains hands. The King of France had not any great Forces as then, yet they were such as he thought he might besiege la Fera, and soon take it. La Fera is strongly seat∣ed; for being almost wholly invironed with Marishes, there is no access unto it but by two narrow avenues. It stands a good way within Picardy; wherefore the Duke of Parma had chosen it, as one of the best places that were in that Pro∣vince, and whereby the King of Spains affairs in those parts might receive the most advantage. There are two avenues whereby access may chiefly be had unto the Town; of both which the King did quickly possess himself: and having block'd them up with good Forts, he fell to dividing out his quarters. Alvarus Osorio, a Spaniard, and a greatly esteemed souldier commanded in chief within the Town; he had with him a choice Garison, and had sufficient ammunition for war; but was so very much straitned in victuals, that unless he should receive good store thereof all the sooner, it was impossible for him long to sustain the siege. The King was not ignorant of this; wherefore quitting all thought of assault, he resolved to straiten it only by siege: hoping that by keeping them thus from succour on all sides, and especially from victuals, he should soon be Master of it. This was the condition of la Fera, when the Cardinal Archduke came to Brus∣sels. Wherefore the first thing that was taken into consideration by his Councel of War was, Whether they were to relieve Lu Fera with all their Forces, or en∣deavour to necessitate the King to raise the siege by some important diversion. There were so many and so efficacious reasons which made against the succour as they were not to be answered: It was considered, That La Fera being situated so far within Picardy, it was as it were invironed with St. Quintain, Han, Guise, and Peroune, and some other Towns also, which were all of them in the Enemies possession, and were all very well garisoned and munit. That therefore if the Spanish Army would approach La Fera, it must of necessity leave di∣vers of these Towns upon its back; that if so, the enemy might at their pleasure scour the Country, cut off the ways, hinder victuals, and especially disturb forage. That La Fera was almost unaccessible on all sides by reason of the Marishes. That the best Avenues were well guarded with Forts by the King of France. That the siege was still more straitned by him on all sides; and that new men came in daily unto his Camp, which would abound, as usually it did, especially with choice Cavalry. What hopes could they then have either of coming near La Fera; or by doing so, of introducing re∣lief? unless they would at the same time assault the enemy in his own quarters. But what hope of good success could they have herein? the King was intrenched ready to fight, or not to fight, according as should make for his most advantage. That if he thought his Forces were such, as he might buckle with the Spaniards in the field, no
reason either of war, or yet of State would permit that the Spaniards should hazard themselves upon the uncertain event of a battel. That if the King should be routed, he might easily gather new forces; but put the case the contrary should happen, what difficulties would the Cardinal Arch-Duke meet withal, and what expences would he be at, in making new Levies of Spaniards, Italians, and of other Forraigners, of which the chief body of the Kings Forces in Flanders is usually framed? And say such a losse should insue, what new acquisitions would the Confederate Provinces hope to make? These reasons bore with them so much weight to plead against the abovesaid succour, as the votes were already for proposing some diversion, which might force the King to rise from before la Fera: when news was brought that by George Bastie's means that Town was victualled sufficiently for at least two moneths, not long before this Basty was returned into Flanders; with leave for some short while from the Emperor, who had long before imployed him in the wars of Hungary against the Turks: he had won very great experience in war, by his having spent so much time in the war of Flanders, and by reason of the so many noble employments, wherein he had served the Duke of Parma in particular: in whose last expeditions in France, Basti had almost al∣waies commanded the Armies horse: in which sort of service, there was no man held more able at that time then he, nor who knew better what belong'd thereunto neither in point of command, nor execution. He had received orders from the Cardinal, that he should endeavour to relieve la Fera with some victu∣als, from the neerest Frontiers of Flanders: to which purpose 800 choice horse were in readiness upon the same Frontiers, which were to take each of them a sack of corn behinde them, and to cause them to be brought by small boats into la Fera. This design required great secresie; wherefore Basti having very secretly acquainted Osorio, Governor of the Town therewithall, and suddenly assembled the 800 Horse together, upon some other pretence, came with such speed so near the Town, as he might easily effect the Succor. The Agreement made between him and Osorio was, that Basti should come at a certain prefixt time to a part where the Marish was most watry, and that Osorio should send all the Boats he could get to receive the Corn, & to bring it to the Town. And just so it fell out, to Basti's unspeakable praise and honor; he having been continually on Hors-back for little lesse than Forty hours, and having known so well to choose his time, to deceive his own men first, and then the Enemy much better: and how to return without the loss of so much as one man; nay more, having defeated some of the Enemies horse which would have opposed him as he returned. This small succour gave some hopes that a greater might ensue; but the for∣mer oppositions still arising, and it being known that the King did still more and more fortifie his quarters and that his Forces grew still greater: the Cardi∣nal began to incline to the making of some important diversion, and hereupon they gave their opinions in the Councel of war. Some were for besieging Peron∣ne, others St. Quintain, and others other Towns thereabouts. The Camp-ma∣ster General Ronye, was very well acquainted with every corner, and every pass of the Province, by reason of his being so long thereabouts in the time of the League: he was more averse to the succour then any other, and advised more to the diversion, and willing to speak his minde clearly therein to the Cardinal; but with such secresie as so jealous an affair required: He took an occasion to speak thus unto him in his Chamber, when but some few were with him. It is now agitated (most excellent Prince) whether it be better to succour la Fera by all our Forces, or to endeavour such a diversion, as the King of France may be thereby more damnified, then he shall be advantaged, though he doth not raise his siege. enough hath been already said touching the difficulties of the siege; which truly are so great, as there is no hopes of overcoming them: Let la Fera then be lost, provided that in lieu thereof we get another Town which may recompence the loss thereof with advantage: I must confess the keeping of la Fera, and other Towns in Picardy, was of some concernment during the League, and Civil wars of France; but now that there is no sign of League left, nor of civil commotions, and that la Fera is surrounded with so many Towns towards the Frontiers of Flanders, what
considerable advantage will it be to the King if be do chance to get it? Nay how great will his trouble and expence be to keep it? Let the King continue then at that siege, and let us betake our selves to a diversion: but, as I have already said, let it then be such a one, as the acquisition which shall thereby be made may much exceed the loss which may be apprehended by the other. I shall not propound Peronne, St. Quin∣tain, nor any of those other Towns wherewith la Fera is surrounded, unto your High∣ness; every one of which may be thought equal, or rather inferior to this; I shall advise you to another, of so much greater concernment, as it may of it self alone, weigh against all those put together. I mean Callis. Callis, a Sea Port; the Key to the English Channel, from whence passage may be had in a few hours into that Island, and in a few more into Holland and Zealand. Callis, where succour may so commodi∣ously be received by Sea from Spain, and which certainly will be the sharpest Thorne at the present in the sides of France, which fears nothing less there abouts then to see Callis besieged. The Commander there is a very weak man, the Garrison at the present is as weak, and you shall find all other provisions for defence of equal weakness. This is the diversion which I propound in enterprises of this nature, in the first place great secresie is requisite in the resolving thereupon; and then speed in putting it in execution. Your Highaess must therefore possess your self of all the Avenues about Callis, before the E∣nemy get any inkling of it; otherwise succours will be soon sent thither both by Sea and Land, and so the undertaking will be defeated before it be begun when on the con∣trary, if the Avenues be speedily secured, either my military experience deceives me, or our Arms and your Ensignes shall in a few dayes be seen to enter there. The Cardinal seemed to be mightily pleased with the propounded diversion, which was fully approved of by the rest that vvere vvith him, vvho vvere the chief commanders of the Flanders Forces. They then fell to treat of putting it into execution, and the Cardinal chose Ronye to be the guider thereof, vvho was the first adviser: but for the better concealing it, they gave out, that they vvere resolved to relive la Fera, or attempt some diversion thereabouts. To this purpose Valentiennes vvas chosen for their Randezvous; one of the neerest Ci∣ties upon that Frontier: and after having made great store of victuals be brought thither, the Army began to march, vvhich vvas one of the most flourishing ones that had of a long time been seen in Flanders. It consisted of 5000 Spani∣ards, 1500 Italians, 1000 Burgonians, 1000 Irish, 2500 Germans, and 6000 Walloons, all these vvere very choice Foot; and to these vvere added 3500 Horse, the Train-bands of Flanders being numbred thereinto, vvhich did serve up∣on that occasion. The Cardinal vvas in Valentiennes about the beginning of A∣pril, and had with him the greatest part of his Army, and ordered divers mar∣ches the more to confound the King of France, and to keep his true design un∣knovvn to him. From hence he sent Ronye vvith great celerity and secresie to∣vvards Callis, vvith the Camp-masters Lewis di Vilasco, Alonsa di Mendosa, la Barlotta, and the Count Buckquoy: The tvvo first Spaniards vvith their Briga∣does, and the other tvvo Walloons vvith their Brigadoes also: and these Foot vvere accompanied by 400 Horse. Callis lies upon the very brink of the Chan∣nel vvhich divides France from England; and in that very point of Land vvhere the two Kingdoms are nearest one another. This vvas the last place from vvhence the English vvere driven, after they had so long possest Normandy, together vvith so many other provinces of France: and as the repurchase thereof made by the French, vvas thought a great concernment; so did they ever after studiously en∣deavour to keep it. But the Kingdom falling into civil discord, Callis vvas no happier then vvere the other Tovvns, vvhich being all of them almost in private mens hands, for their ovvn ends, could not be so vvell kept as the service of the Kingdom and Crovvn required. Callis vvas not therefore novv so vvell provided of Flankers, Platforms, and other vvarlike provisions for its defence, as vvas ne∣cessary. It is no Tovvn of any great Circuit nor much inhabited; but it is of good Commerce by reason of its situation: it hath a Suburbs but meanly fortified, vvhich looks tovvards the Sea; and a Castle of four Bulvvarks vvhich command the Haven. On the Land side it is fortified more or less, according as the several si∣tuations vvill allovv of. From the side vvhere the Tovvn lies, a great bank of sand thrusts it self out into the sea, and then bends back again towards the land;
which being reduced to better form by Art, makes the Haven, which is one of the best that is upon that Channel. Upon the utmost point of the bank stands an antient Tower, called the Rise-bank, which commands the mouth of the Haven; and usually this Tower is very carefully kept. More within land, and about a quarter of a league from Calis, there is a Pass or Avenue of great consequence, called Nieulet, by reason of a Bridge which opens and shuts the coming to the Town on the lands side; this Pass is likewise guarded by another Tower. The other situations about it are for the most part low and watry, so as but little part thereof is tractable Monsieur de Gordan, a valiant and well esteemed Souldier, had for many years been Governour of this Town; and a Nephew of his called Monsieur di Bidossan succeeded him therein, rather for his wealth then merit. This man being but young in years, and younger in experience, had not been so carefull as he ought to have been in causing the Town be well munited and provided for; and at this time there was not above 600 Souldiers in the Garrison. Rony parting with his men from Valentiennes, drew so unexpectedly neer Calis, as at the first assault he took the Tower of Neiulet. The Tower was munited by a little Fort; but all was so weakly looked unto, as the Assault met not with almost any resistance. Having won this Pass, Rony turn'd immediately upon the Rise-bank which com∣manded the mouth of the Haven: here some more resistance was made; but the Artillery was no sooner presented before the Garrison, but that some of them being slain, the rest were so discouraged, as that Rony within a few houres made himself master thereof likewise. He did not believe he could so soon have taken these two Passes: And doubtlesly had either of them been better guarded by the French, such a succour would soon have entred Calis, as there had been little hopes of taking it. Bullen, which stands upon the same Sea, is within six leagues of Calis, from whence some Boats with men in them were speedily dispatcht to relieve Calis; and soon after many others appeared both from England and Holland to the same end. But Rony had already so fortified himself in the Rise∣bank, as none of them could get in. The Cardinal being advertised of this so fortunate beginning, went presently from Valentiennes; and mustering all the men who upon occasion of the aforesaid March were divided into sundry quarters, brought them all before Calis; which being surrounded on all sides, they began to play upon the Suburbs. Before they could come to an assault, they must needs wade through a low peece of Marish ground, which was overflown by the high Tide, so as they were forced to expect the Ebb. About break of day they began their Battery; nor was it long before they had thrown down above 30 yards of Wall. The Assault fell to Mendoza's Foot, with whom were likewise some Companies of Velasco's and Barlotta's Bri∣gadoes. The Tide was no sooner over, but the Assailants fell on with great re∣solution, who found so weak withstanding, as they presently took the suburbs: then turning their Battery upon the Town, which was likewise but weakly fortified on that side, the Inhabitants began to parley and the Articles agreed upon were, That the Governour might go from the Town with all his men, and with what goods he pleased into the Castle, leaving such ammunition and victuals in the Town as were there at the present. But thinking himself as unsafe in the Castle, he parlied again, and had six dayes space allowed him to surrender in; in which time he was permitted to wait relief, which if it should not come in that time, he was to retreat with all his men either by land or by sea to Bullen. This mean while Arms were suspended, and it was agreed upon by both sides, That for those six dayes it should be lawfull for each of them to make what Works they pleased. To which agreement it was inter∣changeably added; That if the Castle should be relieved within the aforesaid time, it might be lawfull for them within to defend it, and those without (as for∣merly) to oppugn it. Wherefore they without fell immediately to making of Trenches, disposing of Batteries, and to preparing all things which might make for their Assault. They within the Castle on the other side built a great Half∣moon, in the place which was fittest for it, and two great Platforms; they fill'd that Wall which was to be batter'd, better up with Earth, and did all things else
which might make most for their defence. And for that these Works were made without any opposition, there were never better know of their severall kindes. And certainly you have hardly heard of so strange a novelty in any other siege: For in this, all those that were without, save such as were imployed about the Works, stood with a great deal of safety and quietness, looking upon the Works made by the besieged; and on the other side, those within the Castle were spe∣ctators on the wall, as in a scene, observing with all quietness and attention all that the besiegers did. So as the spectacle seemed rather to be a fiction then a truth; and it appeared rather to be a gratulation for Peace, then any thing that bore with it a necessity of real War. The King of France was this mean while mightily incensed, considering in what danger he was of losing Calis, unless the Castle were all the sooner succor'd. The King was come from before La Fera, upon the first news that Rony had taken the Towers of Neiulet, and the Risoank: And was come in all haste to Bologin with only 1000 Horse, that he might be near Calis, and take the best course that might be for the relief thereof. He would not abandon his Siege, knowing that La Fera could not keep long from falling into his hands for want of victuals; and believing that the Suburbs and Town of Calis might have held out much longer, and that he might so have succoured it as it might not have been so soon lost. But seeing what progress the Cardinal had on a sudden made, and that the Castle was in so great danger, the King was strangely madded to think he should be in such a condition, as he could not with his whole Forces en∣deavour the succour, and that those that were with him were too weak to effect it. Four of the six dayes granted for the relief of the Castle, were already past. Wherefore the King not willing to leave any thing unattempted which might contribute to the preservation of it, resolved to send 300 choise men with all possible secresie from Boloign to Calis; with a resolution that hazarding them∣selves upon all dangers, they must either get into the Castle, or die in the attempt. He would have many Captains and Officers of known valour to be of this num∣ber; and he gave them the Signor of Campignuola for their Commander, a Soul∣dier of great esteem, and who was Governour of Boloign. Campignuola marched on; and being come two hours before day to within half a league of Calis, he went to enter the Castle. The chiefest difficulty lay in getting over certain low Marishes whither the Tide came, and which were guarded by a Fort govern'd by the Marquis of Trevico a Neopolitan, with his Brigado of the same Nation. But the French had such luck to come at a low Ebb, and such was the carelesness which was used in the Fort, as Campignuola entred into the Castle with all his men not meeting with any obstacle. Here he declared the Kings Commissions, con∣cluding, that they must either defend the Castle or die in the defence thereof: That if they could but make it good for a small time, the King would come him∣self in person with full Forces to relieve it; and that he was so resolved thereupon, as he would use all imaginable means to doe it quickly. These words did much inhearten those within the Castle; insomuch as the Governour Biddosan, toge∣ther with the Garrison, and the rest of the Inhabitants assured Campignuola that they would be faithfull in making the defence. The Spanish Camp began to su∣spect, by the proceedings in the Castle, that it had received some succour; which when the Cardinal was better assured of, he complained much of Trevico. Yet that he might come to the more perfect knowledg thereof, the six dayes drawing now to an end, the Cardinal sent to the Castle, to demand the delivery of it ac∣cording to the agreement. To which the Governour answered, That without violation of faith, he was at liberty to defend it; for he had received succour, and such, as he hoped he should be very well able to hold out. This being known, those without prepared for the assault, and those within to defend the Castle. And during these preparations, the sixt day was fully expired. The next day did hardly well appear, when they began from without to play furiously upon the Castle; and the chief Battery was placed against the chief Bulwark which did most command the gate. Many other Peeces of Attillery were made use of, at the same time to bereave them of their defence. Wherefore the tempest of shot was so great, and so continual for so many hours, as the greatest part of that side of
the Bulwark being beaten down, the oppugnors thought they might fall to the assault. The Artillery had plasd incessantly at the same time from the Castle; and they within received the Enemy with great courage, so as a sore conflict in∣sued. The Assailants were Spaniards and Walloons, with their Campmasters Mendosa, Velasco, and Barlotta: Who striving to give example, and their Soul∣diers to imitate them, there could not be a fiercer fight on this side. Yet those within did so stoutly withstand the first assault, as the Assailants not able to mount the breach, were beaten back: But at the very instant of their giving back, being asham'd that they had done so, they suddenly returned, and falling more fiercely then before to the assault, they so renewed the fight, as at one and the same time almost they got upon the Breach, planted their Colours there, and entred with the Defendants into the Castle. In this renewing of the assault, the Governour Bidossan was slain, together with many Captains, and other valiant Souldiers, who were present at the defence-making. For what remained, military fury was used, few being left alive, of which Campignuola was one. From blood they fell to plunder: which though it was not answerable to expectation, yet it was thought to come to about 50000 Crowns worth in goods, together with a very considerable quantity of victuals and ammunition. Many of the assailants Captains and Officers were slain: The greatest loss they suffered was in the death of Count Pacchiotto an Italian, chief Enginer of the Spanish Camp, who through a desire of honour would be present at the assault, where fighting valiantly he was slain. Thus in less then 20 dayes, Calis, one of the chief Towns of France, tell with so little opposition into the King of Spains hands. Guines and Hames, two Towns near Calis, surrendred themselves also quickly to Monsieur de Rony: The first was of some consequence; the other very weak, and not able to make any resistance. The Cardinal staid ten dayes in Calis, that he might leave the Town well munited and provided To the recovery whereof it appeared that the Queen of England. and the Provinces of Holland and Zealand would buckle themselves with great Maritime preparations; both these parties thinking themselves more concern'd in the loss of Calis, then the King of France him∣self. The King having received so great a blow, returned speedily to his siege of Fera, that he might put an end thereunto as soon as he could, and keep the Town from being relieved with victuals. Yet before he went from Bullen, he secured that Town from all danger, and furnished Montruille and Ardres with sufficient Garrisons and all manner of necessary provisions; but especially the last, as being nearer Calis, and against which it was most to be feared that the Spani∣ards would address themselves. Wherein he was not deceived: For after divers consultations had, the Cardinal being still thereunto advised by Rony, made his Army march towards Ardres, and on the beginning of May incampt before it. The Town of Ardres is placed in a vally which is much more long then broad, not above three leagues distant from Calis: The Country about it is more watry then dry: It is but of a small circuit, but very strong both by nature and industry in the highest part thereof there is a suburbs, which being formerly but weakly fortified, was now very well munited by the Garrison and Townsmen. Monsieur de Anneburg, a well reputed Souldier, was Governour of the Town; And there were about 2000 Foot, and 150 Horse there in garrison, with good provisions for all things necessary for defence: And for its greater advantage, the Marquis of Belin, the Kings Lieutenant of Picardy, was come thither; and with him Monsieur di Monluck, a young man, but one of the most cry'd up valour that was in all France. Rony had the chief care of the siege: wherefore having first well disposed of the Quarters, and then provided for their security, he be∣gan to advance with his Trenches. They were first led on towards the Town; but Rony thought it better afterwards to endeavour the winning of the Suburbs, the taking whereof would make much for carrying the Town. The besieged this mean while made out frequent sallies, in all which Monluck was still the formost; nor made they less opposition by their Artillery which were placed upon their walls. So as great was the damage which those without received by both these means. Yet overcoming all difficulties, they still straitned the Town more and
more. And Monluck being slain by a Canon-shot, it might soon be discerned that those within cooled in their courage. Coming at last to battery, Rony was very sollicitous in indeavouring the effect thereof, for fear lest the King having rid his hands of la Fera might come with his whole Army joyn'd together, time enough to relieve Ardres, as it was clearly seen he intended to do. But the Suburb was so well defended, that such progress could not be made by battery as the strait∣ness of time required. Between the Suburb and the Town there was a certain secret way, which led out afterwards into the fields abroad, and which was but little known save to such Inhabitants as most frequented that place. The Camp∣master Tesseda had notice hereof by a Walloon Souldier, who upon other occur∣rences had been conversant in that passage. Tesseda therefore acquainted the Cardinal that entrance might be had into the Burough secretly by night, through that passage; and he desired that he might be trusted with the Government of the design. The Cardinal yielded to the proposal and to the desire. Wherefore Tesseda went to the aforesaid place the next night, taking with him 1000 foot, part Spaniards, part Walloons. To divert the defendants the more, a brisk alarm was given against both the Town and Suburb, from the part without, where the batteries were placed. The enemy flocking apace to those parts, Tesseda passed on, and began to enter the Suburbs with his men. But the enemy being aware thereof, they suddenly turned all their opposition thither, so as for a while the business was hotly disputed on both sides; till Tesseda being recruited with new forces, got a good way into the Suburb, and forced the enemy at last to quit it, and to retreat to within the Town: in which retreat there happened a misfortune which added much to their loss. For the Percullis being too hastily let down by those that guarded the Gate, for fear lest the assailants might enter into the Town pel mel with the assailed, 200 of their own men were shut out, who were al misera∣bly put to the sword by the assailants. The Suburbs being won, Rony immediately turned the batteries upon the Town; and that they might be the more terrible, some pieces of great Canon were brought from Calis, and planted upon the chief battery; and many other pieces of Artillery were planted against the fen∣ces; in so much as the like preparation for thundring shot upon the Town, had not been seen in many former sieges. It was this mean while disputed between the Marquis of Belin, and the Go∣vernour of the Town, whether it were better to do their utmost to withstand the assault, which was to be expected would insue the batteries; or not to hazard a fight, the event whereof was so uncertain, and dangerous. The Governour was for making good the defence, alleadging, That the Garison could not be more incouraged, and that the mean while the King having dispatched the business of la Fera, would undoubtedly come himself in person to the relief of Ardres. The Captains were of the same opinion, and the souldiers likewise shewed great resolution therein. But Beline was of another mind. He said, That if it should come to the tryal, they should not be able to withstand the assault. That the greatest part of so valiant souldiers would be lost. And that it tended much more to the Kings service, to preserve then to lose them. These reasons were not admitted of neither by the Governour nor Garison. But Belin urging Authority, which was discerned to proceed wholly from fear, would by all means, that without expecting so much as one shot, they should treat of surrender. He desired that he might first send unto the King. But his request being denyed, he yielded to the surrender, upon such honourable terms as he could get. One thousand five hundred souldiers marched out of the Town with him: at which Action it cannot be conceived how hainously the King was in∣censed. Both in respect of the action it self, and for that la Fera falling just then into his hands, he did verily hope either to make the Spanish Camp quit the siege of Ardres, or else to force them to fight with him in the open fields. And his Forces were by this time so increased, as he had great reason to hope for one of these two. Belin would have gon to have justified himself; but the King in∣stead of hearing him, thought to have put him to an ignominious death; though
afterwards, together with his anger he mitigated Belins punishment, and only banished him the Court. This mean while those of la Fera, being reduced to the utmost necessity of hunger, could no longer defer the surrender of the Town. The King, that he might the sooner be gon from thence, and come to the relief of Ardres, grant∣ed them all the honourable conditions they could desire. But Ardres being lost, and the King still more incensed thereat, he seemed to be much perplexed in his thoughts, not knowing what to resolve upon. His Forces were then very strong: he had no less then 18000 soot, and 6000 horse, together with the flowre of the chiefest of the Kingdom, and a numerous other Nobility which did then wait up∣on him. His end would have been, either to have recovered Calis, or some o∣ther of the Towns which he had lost; but he foresaw all sieges would cost much expence both of time and monies: and the Kings monies were at this time so ex∣hausted, and Picardy, together with the other Provinces, so wasted with the so long quartering of Armies, as out of each of these considerations, it was impossi∣ble for him, long to maintain so great Forces, or to make use of them in any long siege. He therefore by the consent of his Councel of War, resolved to draw near to the Cardinal Archdukes Army: and to endeavour by all means possible to draw him forth to battel. But the Cardinals intentions were far o∣therwise; for being fully informed of the Kings mind, and knowing himself to be much short of him in men, as being inforced to leave strong Garisons in the places which he had won; he thought it might suffice if he could secure these, and for what remained shun all field-battel. His people had likewise suffered much disaccommodation in these last expeditions. In so much as being willing to refresh them with the most commodious quarters he could, he resolved to go into Artois; and going himself into St. Omers, he disposed of his Army in di∣vers Towns thereabouts; having first left that part of the Frontiers of France which was then in the King of Spains hands, well provided. The King of France perceiving this, resolved to dismiss the Nobility and Gentry that followed him; and leaving Marishal Biroun with 4000 foot, and 600 horse, to secure such pla∣ces of Picardy as he was most jealous of, he went himself for some other impor∣tant affairs to Paris. Whilst the Cardinal Archduke was in France about these aforesaid enterpri∣ses, the United Provinces of Flanders took this occasion, and infested and over∣run divers parts of Brabant with 800 horse. But soon meeting with such oppo∣sition as was needfull, and particularly by the Italian mutiniers, who sent the greatest part of their horse from Tilemon against the enemy, the excursions last∣ed but for a while, nor did they do any great damage. The Cardinal this mean while raised 3000 Walloons, and as many Germans, to supply the place of those that were found wanting, and of those that were left in the French Towns. The particular Province of Flanders could have very much desired that he would have undertaken the taking of Ostend, a strong Sea-Town; and from whence the in∣land Countries thereabouts were much damnified. The Cardinal seemed no less desirous thereof; to witness which, he went himself to Newport, which is not a∣bove three hours journey from Ostend, and being there nearer at hand, he caused the condition of the Town to be diligently examined. But judging that it was impossible to keep it from being relieved, and that being so near Zealand, it might be succoured every hour, the Cardinal thought it was not a thing feisable, and that therefore it was by no means to be undertaken. On the other side, not be∣ing willing to lose the Summer, without imploying his Army about some new ex∣pedition, he thought good to know his Councel of Wars opinion therein. Some propounded the siege of Hulst in the particular Province of Flanders: as well for the importancy of such an acquisition, as for the satisfying of that Province in some sort, since it was impossible to please it in the enterprise of Ostend. Others thought upon Berghen ap Zome, Getringberg or Breda, all of them Towns in Bra∣bant. As for Breda, it might the easilyest be kept from succour, because it lay more within land. But for all things else, it was so well munited, and so well provided to make long resistance, as there were found great difficulties in bring∣ing that siege to a good end. The other places were so seated by nature, as enjoy∣ing
the opportune neighbourhood of Holland and Zealand, either by the accom∣modation of Channels or Rivers, it would be very hard to keep the enemy from relieving them whensoever they would. The difficultys of the propounded sieges being weigh'd, and the hopes of overcom∣ing them, the Cardinal resolv'd at last to besiege Hulst, and to use al possible means for the taking of it. On the East side where the Province of Flanders termi∣nates, and where with the interposition of the River Scheld it joyns to Brabant, there lies a small Territory called the Wasse. It is bounded on the East by the Scheld, that River keeping still its own name; on the North it is bounded by the Honte, a branch of the Scheld; but which is already grown so large, and so ready to fall into the Sea, as it may rather be called an arm of the Sea, then the branch of a river. On the West and South it reaches more within land, and is not far from the Territories of Gaunt. The Wasse hath many great Villages in it, and also some walled Towns. And though the situation thereof be very low, yet it enjoys many commodities as well by its own natural situation, as by the Inha∣bitants industry. In almost the midst of it, stands the Town of Hulst. Which is but small in circuit, yet of great Traffick: and out of some other circumstances, the chief Town of that Country of Wasse. Count Maurice had won it five years before, whilst the Duke of Parma was upon his diversion in the French ex∣pedition, as was then more largely related. To boot with its situation and some handy works, which made it even then a considerable place; the fortifications thereof had since been much increased by the United States; flanking it better where it was most needfull, and securing it better by Pallisadoes, and other Works. But not content with having fortified the Town, they would for as much as they could make the Country for a good part unaccessible. They therefore re∣solved to make it an Island between two large Channels: and to this purpose they cut one, which fell into the Scheld, and another which fell into the Honte. The former was over against their great Fort of Lillo, which lies upon the other shore, and the latter drew nearer Zealand; with equal design notwithstanding of receiving such succour as was requisite, from the one and the other of them: to which purpose they had built two Forts to secure both their mouths; calling that towards Lillo, Nassaw; and the other towards Zealand, Maurice. By means of these two Channels, they at the high tide could overflow the Coun∣try, and make it thus almost unaccessible. The Town of Hulst, and the circumjacent Country being thus secured the Confederate Provinces assigned a great Garison, not so much for keeping the Town, as to overrun the Kings Country thereabouts; and to get either greater tontributions of free-will, or larger bootie where they would not contribute in a friendly way. This prejudice grew sencible, even in the time of Archduke Er∣nestus, and Count Fuentes. Wherefore to bridle their inroads in some sort, they had then placed two chief Forts upon the banks of Scheld, turned towards the Country of Wasse, and called the one the Fort Austria, and the other the Fort Fuentes. And to these two they added some other lesser ones, more inward, in such places as were thought fittest. These Forts being raised, the enemy raised some likewise against them on their side. They built two upon the banks of the neighbouring Channel which fell into the Scheld; and for the greater security of them both, they raised a lesser in the midst between them. They called one of the greater Morual, and the other Rape; and that which was in the midst, and might rather be termed a Redout then a Fort, they called little Rape. Unless it were the rise of the Duke; which served for building the Forts; (and it was that which was towards Hulst) all the rest on both sides was laid level, to make the greater overflowing, and the difficulties of the two chief Forts of Austria, and Fuentes the greater, either in hindring the Garisons excursions, or in attempting any other enterprise against the Town. In the Islanded ground between the two Channels, not far from Hulst, there was a rise spacious enough, and of such a hight, as the highest tide never reaching it, the Town was chiefly to be indama∣ged from thence, and might be best from thence besieged. The Cardinal having exactly informed himself of the condition that Hulst, and the Country therea∣bouts was in, and being resolved to besiege the Town, he feigned, as is usually
do ne in such cases, to besiege another, that he might divert the Enemies Forces in sundry parts, and so make them the weaker. Count Maurice was chiefly jea∣lous of Breda; wherefore the Cardinal seemed as if he would sit down before it and to colour it the better, he made Monsieur Ronye pass over the Scheld with 7000 Foot, and 1500 Horse, and to bend thitherward; nor was this done to no purpose. There was little less then 5000 souldiers in Hulst, all almost Foot, and the best that the united Provinces had. Upon this concevied danger of Breda, Count Maurice made almost half the Garrison that was in Hulst pass suddenly into that Town, and into other Towns in Brabant, which might be subject to the like su∣spition. Of which the Cardinal being advertised, he delayed no longer discove∣ring his true design▪ but mustering his Army, he marched in the beginning of July, to enter into the Country of Wasse, and to straiten Hulst, by all such waies as might make him hope for good success in that enterprise. The chief care of the two abovesaid principal Forts of Austria and Fuentes, and of the other lesser ones were given to Signior Bissa, who had been formerly Commissary General of the Horse, and who divers times had carried himself very gallantly against the Garrison of Hulst. The Cardinal therefore gave orders to him, and to the Camp-master Barlotta, that they should do their utmost to enter the Island, and to possess themselves there of such a place, as they might keep footing in. To this purpose 2000 Foot, part Walloons, part Germans, were chosen out, who were led on by their own Colonel Tesselinghen, and to these were added 300 Spa∣niards, and 200 Italians. These were mustered in Fort Fuentes; and Signior Bissa the mean while, with great diligence, made some Barks be rowed over the drowned Country at a low ebb. The Superficies of that Earth, though the wa∣ter was gon off, remained still very soft and miery, wherefore it was very hard get∣ting over it. Yet those difficulties were overcome, and the barks were at last brought to the Channel, upon the banks whereof stood (as hath been said) the Enemies two greatest Forts, Morual, and Rape, and the little Rape between them. Under the same silence and obscurity of the night, the souldiers began to move, and Barlotta led the Van with his Walloons, Spaniards, and Italians. When he was come to the Channel, after having suffered very much in his pas∣sing over that miery peece of ground, he arrived at the banke over against the little Rape, intending to storm it. The march, arrival, and assault was so sudden and unlooked for as those within were much perplext. And though the Ene∣mies neerest great Fort, when they discovered the Kings men, failed not to an∣noy them with its Artillery; yet did they but little harm thereby, since it was by night; so as the assault growing still hotter, Barlotta at last took the little Fort, and began to fix his foot in the Island: where he fell to fortifie. The mean while Tessilinghen came in with his Germans, and he fortifying himself also, as much as the narrowness of the bank, and the anoyance from the Enemies Forts, would permit him to do, he endeavoured the more to secure the entrance into the Island. The Count of Solme was Governor of Hulst, and he had with him a Garrison of little less then 3000 souldiers, and had all such provisions as were requisite for the defence of any how important a place soever. He then seeing himself assaulted, in manner as hath been said, failed not upon break of day to sally out against the Kings men, to chace them from the little Fort which they had taken, and from the bank where they were fortifying themselves. The Germans had not yet sufficiently fenced themselves; wherefore turning upon them with a great Squadron, he easily disordered them, which was much occasio∣ned by Tesselinghen's being suddenly slain, whilst he valliantly withstood the fury of the Enemy. But Barlotta coming suddenly in with more men, after a fierce bickering, wherein many of each sides were slain, the Enemy retired into the Town, and the Kings men kept themselves in the places they had possest, with more security then before. At the news of this the Cardinal would approach himself in person, and took up his quarters in a Village, called St. Nicholas. From whence sending Ronye suddenly back, he ordered that he, together with all the rest of the Commanders, and the whole Army should presently en∣ter the Island, and that they should beleaguer the Town on all sides where it was
possible so to do. Ronye being entred the Island with his men, all the rest of the Kings Camp passed over thither: but not without some slowness and trouble, by reason of the myre, and the narrowness of the space which they had won Ro∣nye began then to distribute his quarters, and his chief end being to keep off suc∣cour, and particularly such as might be had neerest hadn from Zealand by the Channel which was turned towards Honte, he used all possible diligence to that purpose. The Fort Maurice vvas built on that side for the service of the Enemy; so as neither then, nor during the whole siege, could they keep off succour on that side; and especially by little boats, which passing through the Channel by night, received very little harm. The Walloon Brigadoes of Count Bucquoy of Grison and Cochella were quartered thereabouts, as also Augustine Messia's Spanish Brigado, which in his absence was commanded by his Sergeant Major ietro Ponze. Nearer the Town lay Alphonso di Mendosa, with his Spanish Brigado; the Signiors Frisen, and Lyches, with their Walloon Brigadoes; and Count Bilia with his German Regiment; the Spanish Camp-masters Velasco, and Zuniga were quartered in the highest part of the Island, and near the them Mar∣quess Trevico an Italian, with his Brigado of the same Nation; and further off in other parts, where the more firm ground afforded commodity of joyning with the more muddy, Count Sols was quartered with a new German Regiment which he had raised; as also Count Bossu, and il Signor Barbenson with two other Walloon Brigadoes. Not any Horse was brought into the Island, because they could be of no use there. Thus did Ronye divide the quarters; each of which began afterwards to open their Trenches. But this mean while the Kings Camp began to be in great want of victuals. There was no entrance to be had into the Island, save onely by way of the little Fort which Barlotta had taken; vvhich lying in the middle betvveen the tvvo greater of Morual and Rape, and in a nar∣rovv space, it vvas very hard to get thither, and very dangerous to keep there: vvherefore Ronye resolved in the first place to possess himself of all that vvhole bank upon vvhich the tvvo aforesaid greater Forts stood; and then to use all his endeavours to vvin Morual, vvhich lay nearest the Tovvn, and from vvhence the Kings Camp received most prejudice. To effect vvhich the tvvo Camp masters Velasco and Barlotta, after midnight, and vvhen the tide vas at the lovvest, began to move vvith some of their Spaniards and Walloons. The Enemy had fortified themselves upon that bank vvith divers earth vvorks and hoped also to be better defended by the Artillery from the Tovvn, and Forts: Yet did the Royalists make so fierce an assault as after a bitter bickering, the Enemy vvas forced to re∣tire from the bank, and the Royalists remained in full possession thereof. But this business cost them much blood, and in it divers of the best Spanish and Wal∣loon Commanders, and other Officers vvere slain. Then Ronye began to batter the Fort Morual vvhich lay nearest the Tovvn, and the Kings men being already lodged betvveen the Tovvn and the Fort, so as the one could not succour the o∣ther, the defendants vvould not vvait an assault, but resolved to surrender the Fort; vvhich vvas accepted of, upon condition that the defendants, vvho vvere al∣most 800 in number, should not re-enter into Hulst but should retreat vvith their Arms and Baggage to the Holland Fleet vvhich vvas then about Lillo in the Scheld. The taking of this Fort, together vvith the command of the bank, gave free passage for the bringing of victuals; great store of vvhich vvas quickly brought into the Island, and their very sore sufferings for many daies for vvant of victuals vvas remedied. After this the Cardinal came himself in person to vievv the quarters, trenches, and all the other vvorks. And then returning to his former quarter at St. Nicholas, it was resolved in the Councel of vvar, that all diligence should be used in advan∣cing the Trenches, upon vvhich in that higher part, Velasco's and Zunigo's Spa∣niards, and Trevico's Italians, vvhich vvere quartered near them, vvrought. These Trenches vvere dravvn out against three Ravelins, by vvhich the Tovvn vvas defended on that side. Those Ravelins stood loose from the principal vvall, and though they vvere made onely of earth, yet they served for a good defence, because they had a good ditch vvithout, and there vvas a high Platform on that side vvithin the Tovvn, vvhich did much disturb the oppugners: insomuch as
many persons of account were slain from thence, and the prejudice grew daily greater. Yet since it was thought the works could not be better advanced from any other part, the Cardinal resolved they should be chiefly prosecuted there. But a sore mischance rendred that resolution soon fatal. Rony went oft thither, to give such orders as were requisite: and being one day under the Campmaster Velasco's Tent, which lay open to the Canon from the Town, an unfortunate shot came, which took off his head. A loss which was highly rescented in the Kings Camp. Monsieur de Rony was born in Champania, where that Province looks nearest Lorain. And because in all the French revolts, he always adhered to the Princes of the House of Lorain, he was usually taken to be a Lorainer. He was come of a noble family, and was called Christian of Lavigny. The Princes of the League had not a more zealous Officer, nor a more worthy Commander then he, in all their affairs both of State and War. He executed the chiefest part under the Duke Du Mayn, in those two so famous succours of Paris and Roan; and may be said to have executed the second, under the Duke of Parma. Then putting him∣self wholly into the King of Spain's service, valour was ever seen to vye in him with loyalty, and loyalty with valour. He was master of all the most practised Tongues; and all they of so many and so different Nations, took him for their Countryman: so greatly was he beloved and esteemed by every particular Soul∣dier. He was equally good at Command and Execution; though his being very corpulent made the latter somewhat troublesom to him: But for the former, there was never any who gave out more cleer Orders, more speedy, nor more re∣solute. The Cardinal exprest more sorrow for this loss, then any one. To witness the which, he made his Corps be carried to Brussels, where by his direction his ob∣sequies were solemnly celebrated in the chiefest Church. The Cardinal declared the Count de Varras General of the Artillery, to be Camp-master Generall in Rony's place. He was brother to the Marquis of Barambone; and of himself a person of great experience, and much cry'd up in Arms. He had used much dili∣gence and industry particularly in this Siege, in conveying many Peeces of Ar∣tillery into the Island, notwithstanding the difficulties sometimes of the high Tide, sometimes of the low and miery situations. And having already placed many of them against those Ravelins, towards which the Trenches of the Spani∣ards and Italians pointed, those Ravelins were furiously plaid upon, and likewise their Defences with other Peeces. They this mean while labour'd their falling into the Ditch. which succeeding, and then falling to fill it, wherein they were much opposed by the Enemy, the Spaniard at last, and at the same time almost the Italians, marched to go to the assault. The Spaniards endeavoured to get upon a side of the Ravelin which was beaten down; but meeting with stiff re∣sistance there, the Campmaster Velasco made the other side be assaulted. By which the Assailants entring whilst they within were busied in making the first defence, the second unexpected assault proved so lucky, as the Enemy were forced to re∣treat from the Ravelin, and to get into the Town. The Italians had not so good success in their assault; yet they lodged themselves under the very foot of the Ravelin, and after three dayes making a Mine play, and then returning with great courage to the assault, they likewise possest themselves of that the Enemies Flank. The two Ravelins being won, Count Varras planted ten Peeces of Canon between them, to play therewithall upon the opposite Wall; and many other Peeces of Canon in places which were thought most fit to discurtain it on the sides and to take from it its defences. The wall was likewise made of Earth, and there∣fore the Batteries could not much ruine it; and the Earth yielding, they found that to make themselves masters of it they must use Pickaxes and Mines; but they could not come to this kind of work, till they had fill'd up the Ditch. To effect the which all possible diligence being used, and the Spaniards vying with the Ita∣lians who should most advance the Works, they endeavoured to put an end to the Siege as soon as might be. But still they met with many difficulties; so often did the besieged sally out, such bold opposition did they make on all parts, and so fierce were the contentions every where. A continual shower of shot powred
down from their Artillery; and the tempest of fire which was thrown, by reason of the abundance thereof proved almost greater. The which was done in several sorts; particularly by Granadoes which shot off three or four times, miserably lacerating the souldiers which were near at hand, and indammaging those that were further off. It was impossible to keep the Enemy from being succour'd by way of the above mentioned Channels: wherefore the more to encourage his men, the Cardinal resolved to draw nearer the Camp, and lodged in the Fort Fuentes. From thence he went to view both the Channels, and consultation was had how the use thereof might be taken from the enemy. But the two Forts of Maurice and Nassaw did too much intricate the business. In so much as all their indeavours in that point proved to no purpose. For by night, and especially at the high tides, some boats by the said channels did continually bring victuals into the Town: the Enemy being still incouraged by these advantages, made out a great sallie against the Campmaster Mendosa's Trenches; and did so resolutely assault them, as they killed above a hundred Spaniards, and clog'd some of their Artillery. Mendosa after this, fortified his Trenehes better, and the rest of the Kings men grew more wary in theirs. And being more vigilant then formerly in keeping out relief, which was convoyed in by the Channels, the Kings men took some of their boats, and by the example thereof, bridled the boldness of the rest. Velasco's Spaniards, and Trevico's Italians, did this mean while eagerly attend to advance against the wall that was plai'd upon; and being al∣ready entred into the ditch, they endeavoured as much as in them lay to fill it up: wherein the enemy manfully opposed them. So as there was not any day that past which brought not forth some contest, nor no contest which drew not the best bloud on both sides. Mines, and Counter-mines were used by these and those. And all was done that Art could instruct, both on the offensive and defensive part, upon such an occasion. The Kings men were this mean while notwithstan∣ding so far advanced, as they lodged at the foot of the wall; which being conti∣nually plaid upon, seemed as if it might be soon assaulted. But the Cardinal un∣derstanding that the enemy had undermined it on sundry parts, to blow up the as∣sailants as they should mount the breach; and that they had provided themselves within with a new and strong defence; it was therefore judged better by the Councel of War to use countermines, and to defer the assault for some few days. This was the condition of the siege, and these the difficulties which appeared of ending it; when the Count de Solm gave the Cardinal to understand that he would listen to some honourable Treaty of surrendring up the Town. The Car∣dinal greedily imbraced the offer: and that the surrender might be all the sooner made, he willingly granted all whatsoever large conditions to the Count, as well for himself, as for the Garison, and for the Inhabitants. And the agreement be∣ing made, the Town was delivered up to the Cardinal about the end of August About 2500 souldiers marched out of Hulst; besides those that were in the two Forts of Maurice and Nassaw. Wherefore so numerous a Garison being consi∣dered, and that of so select Souldiers: and that by reason of the plenty of all provisions, the Town might have held out longer; it was thought that Solm had received express orders, not to delay the delivering up thereof, that so he might preserve those men, for the Confederate Provinces other greater affairs. The Cardinal went from Hulst to Antwerp, where after he had tarried awhile, he went to Brussels, full of glory and reputation, for the so many noble enterprises which he had undertaken, and so happily atchieved in the beginning of his Go∣vernment. When he was come thither, the first thing he did, was to pay the Mutiniers of Tilemone, that he might the sooner make use of so good a strength of men. Though when they had received their pay, a good part of them returned to Italy, to enjoy the moneys in quiet at home, which they had got by so long and bloudy service. The Arms which on the behalf of France an Flanders lay then on that Fron∣tier, were not this mean while idle. The Marishal Biroun commanded the French; and the Marquis of Barambone, the King of Spains men, as hath been said in its proper place. Nothing considerable had notwithstanding been done all this while. But soon after the surrender of Hulst, there happened an incounter of
concernment. Which ws this, Biroun was resolved to enter the Country of Artois with soome troops of horse, and to overrun it as far, and in as hostile a manner as he could. Barambone had notice hereof, who with a good number of horse likewise, went to meet Biroun. Scouts being sent out to make the usual discoveries on both sides, Biroun haulted, and placed the greatest part of his in am∣bush in an opportune place. This mean while Count Alfonso Montecucully, Cap∣tain of a Company of Lanciers, came up. He immediately charged Biroun, who being afterwards overlaid with the rest of Barambones horse, retreated till he had drawn the Enemy into the Ambush. The French came forth then very fiercely, and Biroun fighting according to his wonted valour, more then any of the rest, Barambones men were soon routed and put to flight; he himself and Montecu∣cully, were taken prisoners; and Count John Jacamo Belgioso, who was there also with his Company of Lanciers, was sorely wounded. The Marishal was much incouraged by this success; who therefore endeavoured to do the afore∣said damage, and greater also to the Frontiers of Artois But meeting still with such opposition as was sufficient to break his designs, and the winter coming on, he retreated with his men into their Garisons, as did also the Spaniards. Now began the year 1597. in the beginning whereof there happened another successe in Flanders, which was of great dammage to the King of Spain's Party. During the siege of Hulst, the United States had caused Brabant be infested and overrun, in so much as a good part of that Country, to keep themselves from further evil, had submitted to pay contribution; by means whereof the States did so much the more easily maintain their Garisons of Breda, St. Getrinberg, and of other Towns which they were Masters of in that Province. This grievance was likewise felt in Campagne. VVherefore the Cardinal as soon as he was re∣turned to Brussels, he sent Count Varras, General of the Artillery with 4000 foot and 300 horse to Turnaut, a Town which lies towards Campagne to free the Coun∣try (as he did) from the contributions which they paid. Look how much the Kings party was thereby eased, so much were the United Provinces perplexed. Nor was Count Maurice slow in endeavouring to regain the same advantage. VVherefore gathering together with great speed and secrecy 6000 foot, and lit∣tle less then 1000 horse, and making the Rendezvouz near Breda, he marched with these men about the end of January, towards the Royalists who were in Turnaut. Maurice could not make the aforesaid preparation neither so soon nor so secretly, but that Count Varras got notice of it. He had with him the Marquis of Trevico's Italian Brigado, which was commanded by his Serjeant Major. Count Sols his new Regiment of Germans, and two Walloon Brigadoes of Barlotta, and Assicount. These Germans and Walloons were also without their Commanders, and were Governed by other inferior Officers. Nicholas Basti Commanded the horse, which were all Spanish and Italian. Count Varras having discovered the Enemies march, and thinking that he had not sufficient Forces to fight him in the Field, knowing also that Turnaut, as being an open Village, was not a place for defence, resolved to go to Herentales, a Town which he might easily get unto, being but three hours easie march from Turnaut. Yet he would retire by day, lest if he should have marched by night, his retreat might have seemed a running away. Thus resolved, and sending out his baggage by night, upon the break of day Varras left Turnaut, and made his men march in this manner. He devided the foot into three squadrons; in the first he placed the Walloons, in the second the Germans, and in the third the Italians. But that which at their first going out was the reer, if the enemy should come upon them, was to be the van. The horse were placed on the right hand, where the field was more free; and a great wood served for a sufficient defence on the left hand. Maurice hearing of this removal, he suddenly advanced with all his horse, and with 300 musketiers behind so many Curassiers en Croup: and the Curassiers advancing foremost, with the musketiers en Croup, he gave them order to charge the enemy home in the reer, and that they should endeavour to hold them play till his foot should come up. With Maurice were the Counts of Hollack and Solm, Colonel Vere an English-man, and divers other Commanders of great experience
and valour. The Kings Horse valiantly opposed the like of the Enemies; and the Squadrons facing about, did likewise sustain the first charge of the Enemy. But all Maurice his Horse coming in, and soon after his Foot, the Kings Horse being no more in number, could make no longer resistance. So as these being routed, the rest were discouraged; though Count Varras galloping here and there, and in every place, shewed all the proofs of valour and undauntedness which could be desired of him upon such an occasion. And finally pressing forwards amongst the Italians, when he saw their Squadrons begin to flie, he was suddenly slain; and he failing, the Kings men were wholly overcome, and the Enemy had the total victory over them. The Walloons fought not that day according as they were wont to doe; and the Germans made but little resistance: And therefore the most that were slain or wounded, were Italians. In all there were above 1200 slain, and almost as many taken. There were 37 Colours lost, and a great part of the Baggage. There were not above 100 of the Enemy slain: And Maurice wan such a Victory with the loss of so little blood, as made much for the advantage of the Consederate Provinces, and for his own Honour in War. After this mis∣chance, the Cardinal failed not suddenly to provide for the necessities of Bra∣bant, by sending in many Horse and Foot. He was about likewise to make many great new Levies: But the King was in so great scarcity of monies, as the Cardi∣nal could not make provisions so soon, nor yet so fully as the necessity of the Flanders affairs required, and much more those which were of so great con∣cernment on the part of France. Nor was it long ere an occasion arose in France, which being one of the most remarkable which the wars of France or Flanders hath produced in point of Surprise and Siege, you shall have a particular diligent account thereof in the next Book.
THE HISTORY OF THE WARS OF FLANDERS, Written by CARDINAL BENTIVOGLIO. The Third Part. BOOK IV. The Contents. The Spaniards surprise the City of Amiens by stratagem. The King of France immediately besiegeth it. The chiefest successes thereof, and of the Defence are re∣lated. The Cardinal-Archduke goes himself in person with a powerfull Army to relieve the besieged: but being kept off by the Enemies forces, the Town returns at last into the Kings hands, who presently fortifies it with a strong Castle. The Car∣dinal retreats to Artois, and from thence passeth into Flanders. Here he visits Ostend; but not attempting any thing, he returns to Brussels, and puts his Army in garrison. The acquisitions this mean while made by Count Maurice, to the great advantage of the Confederate Provinces, are related. Nor is it long ere Peace is declared between the two Crowns; so as the Kings Forces are now at li∣berty to attend only the proper affairs of Flanders. At this same time great con∣sultations are had in the Court of Spain about a Marriage propounded between the Cardinal-Archduke, and the Infanta Isabella, the Kings eldest daughter; with the giving of the Low-Countries to the Infanta for her portion. The King inclines thereunto out of many good reasons, and therefore will have it effected. The Archduke parts from Flanders, to go for Spain; and Cardinal Andrea d' Austria stayes in his place. The Cardinal-Archduke is not well gone, when the King of Spain dyes; and his son Philip the Third succeeds him. To whom
the King had also a little before destined the Archdutchess Margaret of Austria for Wife. HErnando Teglio Portocarrero was Governour of Dorlan, being left there by Count Fuentes after the taking of that . place, as chosen by him for one of the best Souldiers that the Spanish Nation had in Flanders. Portacarrero not satisfied with the bare custody of Dorlan, wherein he was extraordinarily vigilant, he oft-times issued out with his Garrison; and assaulting the Enemy sometimes in open fields, sometimes by ambushes; now preying upon their Cattel, and then setting their Villages on fire, he was al∣most become the Terror of that Frontier. But neither did his thoughts end here: He had an earnest desire to doe some great action for the Kings service in those parts, by which he himself might likewise acquire reward and glory. Amiens is the chief City of Picardy; and Dorlan is not above seven leagues distant from it. This neighbourhood afforded occasion to Portacarrero to penetrate almost urly into what was done in Amiens, and thereabouts. That City had appeared much for the League, and being now fallen into the Kings hands, it coveted much to have its antient priviledges observed, and especially that the City should be governed by Personages of their own Inhabitants, and by their own proper Forces. Nor would the King (the present condition of affairs considered) doe any thing to the contrary. Thus the City was its own Guardian. And though there were a great number of Citizens who had listed themselves under Colours, yet were they not any way disciplind according to custom in the handling of their Arms; nor were they so vigilant as they ought to have been in guarding their Gates: The Country without was not well surveyed before they opened them; and being open, they were but carelesly lookt unto, and more for form sake then our of duty. Portocarrero being fully informed hereof, he thought he might by some stratagem surprise that Gate of Amiens which lay nearest Dorlan; and  then bringing in a great body of men, he might possibly possess himself of the rest of the City. To this end he by fitting means made the Gate be first well surveyed, and all the Country and wayes thereabouts, whereby with all possible secresie such men might be brought in as were to back the enterprise. And this was the order he took to effect it. Three Souldiers clad like Peasants of Picardy, with sacks upon their backs, full of Nuts and Beans, and such like stuff, were to seem as if they brought this ware into the City. After the three Souldi∣ers a Cart was to follow under the same pretence, loaded with sacks of Corn; but these sacks were to lie uppermost; so as the superfices being only surveyed, the rest of the body of the Cart should be full only of great Planks. His design was to get within the Gate by means of this Cart; and by the Planks to keep the Percullis from falling to the ground, which otherwise might have been let down, and so have kept the Assailants from coming in. The guidance of the Cart and horses which were to draw it, was given to eight or ten other Souldiers, clad as were the other like Peasants, who together with the other three were to be the first actors in the surprise. The gate being thus got, and the sign being given by the shooting off of a Pistol, 300 Souldiers were presently to make in, who were lodged as near the Gate as was possible; and to behave themselves so in getting further into the City, as the rest might have time to come up, and perfect the work. Thus had Portacarrero plotted the surprise; and hoping still more and more to see it happily effected, he with very great secresie dispatcht away Francesco del' Arco a Spaniard, to Brussels, to acquaint the Cardinal therewithall, and (if he should approve of it) to receive such Orders from him as were necessary for the putting of it in execution. The Cardinal approved of all that was propounded, and such Commissions were given as were requisite to such Commanders whose Garrisons lay nearest Dorlan, Francisco del' Arco being returned from Brussels with these Orders, Portacarrero deferr'd the business no longer. He gathered to∣gether with as much secresie as might be, about 2200 Foot, and 600 Horse; and
did so well lay the time, and the places, as they met all at Dorlan on the tenth of march. The Foor consisted of 600 Spaniards; of Germans, Irish, and Wal∣loons, all of them about the like number. The Horse was composed part of Launciers, part Curassiers, part Harquebusiers; in a like equal numbers of Spa∣nish, of Italians and walloons. There could not be a more select company of Souldiers, nor could they be commanded by more experienced Officers. Jerolle∣mo Caraffa, Marquess of Montenegro, a Neopolitan, commanded the Horse. But Portacarrero was to have the chief command, as author of the design, & he as who had received ful authority from the Cardinal for the leading of it on. Porta∣carrero was low of stature, but of a very strong body, and yet stronger soul; and capable of guiding any enterprise, no less for the maturity of his judgment, then for his courage in execution. Having then disposed of his men in such order as they were to march, he went from Dorlan about the coming on of night, and took his way towards Amiens. He had not as yet discovered his design to any of them; but after they were a little advanced, he haulted; and drawing aside the Captains both of Foot and Horse, he with words full of Millitary vigour, ac∣quainted them with the occasion why they were first summoned to meet at Dor∣lan, and wherefore they were now marching towards Amiens. He shevved them the Cart and vvished them to speak to their souldiers that vvere to surprise the Gate. He further added, How great will be our good fortune, how great our glory, if we coming in with the rest of our men can purchase such a City for our King, which is the chiefest of all Picardy, and one of the most esteemed of all France? How great wil the present plunder be for all of you? And how much greater rewards are we hereafter to expect from our King But this action will prove particularly glorious to us the Comman∣ders, who making this success memorable to perpetuity, shall thereby likewise eternise our own names. Amiens is within three short dayes journeys of Paris; the Country open, without either rivers, woods, or any other obstacles. Amiens may then be made so great a Magazin of Arms, and may admit of so numerous a Garrison, as may rather be termed an Army then a Garrison; and how easily may we then march even to the gates of Paris? Infest all the adjacent Country? And every day add to our ecquisitions in Picardy? So as the King of France will at last have good reason to repent his having chosen rather to make war then peace with our King. I confess, as there cannot be a purchase of greater importance, so must we expect to meet with all ssile difficulties therein. I know that the nature of a surprisal is; and how great the difference is between the framing it in our fancies, and the effecting of it. I know that Amiens is a great City, full of a warlike people: and who will speedily make in, either to keep us from making our selves Masters of the Gate, or to take it from us, when we hall have gotten it. But I would we had got it, as the careless keeping of it, may make us hope we shall; as for the rest, it will be our parts, by the vigour of our bodies, and the valour of our arms, not onely to maintain the entrance but to ad∣vance further into the inhabited places, and at last to make full conquest of the City I soeake my hopes; let us then couragiously pursue our march, and let each of us dis∣cover the design unto our Souldiers, and enflame them thereunto. I for my part will rather act then command. And whether I shall live or dye, How can I live or dye more gloriously? Portacarrero was very attentively listned unto▪ for all the Commanders, as also all their souldiers desired much to know what enterprise they were led unto at that time of the night, and with such secresie. The Commanders thought almost it impossible that so negligent guards should be kept in Amiens; there being so many Spanish Garrisons neer it, and the war being so hot round about. They had therefore but small hopes of the surprisal judging that they should meet with much greater difficulties in endeavouring it, then was thought up∣on when it was first designed: but Portacarrero, did so aver for truth all that he had told them, as both they, and their souldiers shewed themselves ready, to do what upon such an occasion might be desired of them. They came to within sight of the Gate vvhich lies tovvards Dorlan, and vvhich is called Montrecurt, about the break of day; there vvith great silence they possessed themselves of a certain Aey, vvichin less then a mile of the City: they took likevvise another place,
yet neerer the City, where was a little Hermitage; from thence those that were clad like Peasants advanced towards the Gate, with their Cart and Sacks full of Apples, and such other things as have been spoken of. This mean while the Ci∣tizens opened the Gate; and surveying the Country about with their wonted neg∣ligence. They stayed in the Court de Gard under the same Gate; but the soul∣diers were so few in number, and so unfit for such an office, as the Gate could not be more weakly, nor more negligently kept. It was now Lent, and Ser∣mons being usually made in France early in the morning, almost all the people were then at Church. Francisco d' Arco had the command of those that were clad like Peasants, and who were to make the surprise: he who, as you have heard, Portacarrero sent to Brussels to negotiate the business with the Cardinal; Baptista Dognano, a Milonoise, was another chiefly imploy'd; and Captain la Croy with particular diligence attended upon the Cart, who was a Burgonian: The rest were almost all Walloons, who by reason of the neighbourhood of Frontier, were better known both in the language and fashion of the Peasants of Picardy: But were all of them Souldiers of tryed fidelity and valour. As they drew neer the gate, these mingled themselves with other Country people, who entred the Town at the same time either to buy or to sell commodities. Where∣fore entring more easily with them into the Ravelin which covers the Gate, they stayed under the Arch thereof, and one of them letting the Sack fall, which was upon his shoulders, the nuts and things that were in scattered upon the ground; those of the Guard ran in, and mocking either the simplicity or po∣verty of the Peasants, began to scramble for what was on the ground; the Cart came in this interim, which being made to stay by him who guided it, at the first entrance into the Gate, the horses were presently fastned; lest frighted at the noise which was to ensue, they might run away elsewhere with the Cart. Fran∣cisco d' Arco was to give notice to Portacarrero of the Carts being entred, by the shooting off of a Pistol; which he failed not to do, for carrying two under his counterfeit habit, he discharged one of them in the brest of one of those that kept the Gate. Which when he had done, his assotiates did the like; and sei∣sing upon some Halberts which belonged to the same Corps de Gard, they so be∣haved themselves, as they slew or deadly wounded all those few French who had the custody either of the gate, or of the ravelin. For the better security of the Gate it had two Perculleses which over-hung it, they were guarded by a sentinel, who let them both down; the first was easily kept from falling to the ground by the Cart, but the second broke it all in peeces, and almost quite shutting up the passage, brought the Assailants into great straits, when the other who were hid in the Hermitage came in with all speed, who securing themselves first of the Ra∣veling without, and suddenly taking away all hinderances within, made them∣selves Masters of all the avenues to the Gate. The noise was already grown so great, as many of the neerest Inhabitants taking up arms, and hastning thither, began boldly to oppose the assailants; who increasing still in number and in cou∣rage, easily overcame all opposition: insomuch as having won the first Avenues to the City, and fully secured the Gate, as also the contiguous walls, they af∣forded time for the rest of the Foot and Horse to come up, and fortunately to perfect the premediated design. Nothing is so prejuditial, or doth more endan∣ger surprises, then giving way to fall suddenly, and tumultuously to plunder: for in such a case, the Townsmen within may either take up arms, or the Enemy may come in from without, so as the Assailants may be easily supprest, by reason of their being disperst, and disordered amidst rapine, and other military licentious∣ness. For this cause Portacarrero commanded under penalty of the severest pu∣nishment, that none of his men should dare to fall to plunder the City, till the market places, chief streets, and all the Gates were fully taken, and well guard∣ed; which being by him performed in great order, and the souldiers in much o∣bedience, they fell to plunder, of which they found such, and so great store, as few the like was met withal in all the vvars of France and of Flanders. Count St. Paul, Governour of Picardy, vvas in Amiens at the time of the surprisal; but he vvas got out as the Assailants first entred, providing in great haste for his ovvn safety, and leaving his vvife there, vvho vvas presently set at liberty by Por∣tacarrero,
and used with all respect and honour. The plunder lasted one whole day; and nothing else of cruelty was used, nor of dissolute licentiousness There were not above 100 of the Inhabitants slain, and three or four of the assailants, and some few others were hurt. At the news of the surprise and plunder, many other souldiers of the neighbouring Spanish Garisons, came flying in, to partake of the plunder; and who afterwards helped very much for the defence of A∣miens: for Portacarrero would not permit them to go out again. Yet for grea∣ter security he disarmed the Citizens; and with great vigilancy ordering all things every where as best befitted the safety of the City, he together with the rest of the Commanders and all the souldiers, prepared with all courage to sustain that hard and dangerous siege which he foresaw would soon befall them by the King of France. This mean while the King had speedy advertisement, both of the surprise so boldly undertaken, and of the happy success thereof. It is impossible to relate how much he was afflicted at this his mischance, and how much he was inwardly tormented in his mind, particularly in the point of Honour. He seemed to be much offended with himself. Had he so quelled the Rebelloin of France, and so supprest the League maintained by the Spaniards, to the end that breaking into war with them, their sole Forces should triumph over his? How many victories had Fuentes got the year before, sometimes by sieges, sometimes by open field-fight? and how many other great acquisitions had the Cardinal Archduke lately made? was not that of Calis sufficient by open siege, but that the other of Amiens must issue by surprise? What two other Towns could the Spaniards have desired, whereby they might receive more advantage in the affairs of France, both by sea and land? The way was short and free between the Gates of A∣miens and Paris: Nor did Calis afford less opportunity to offend so noble a part of the Kingdom by sea. And what would Europe think of a King, who contented with his only home-victories, should suffer himself to be thus overcome by For∣reign Forces? How much would the Malcontents of the Kingdom be hereby incou∣raged? to set the League on foot again, perhaps, which was or too lately supprest, or not yet fully extinguished. Thus did the King of France with great anger storm against himself, for the surprisal of Amiens. Being then thus agitated by these considerations, he spee∣dily removed from Paris to Co bie, a Town standing upon the banks of Some, not above three leagues from Amiens. Here he together with Marishal Biroun, and other Commanders in war, resolved immediately to incamp before that City, and not to leave any thing undone, whereby to drive out the Spaniards, and to free Picardy from all their Forces. Biroun Commanded the Kings Forces, who being naturally very haughty, thought it redounded much to his own particular dishonour, that the Spaniards should daily make such advancements in those parts. The King therefore commanded him, that mustering together as many of the French souldiery as might be had from the neighbouring Garisons, he should begin to begirt Amiens, and to take a particular care that no fresh men should enter into it. This order being given, and such others as were requisite upon such an occurrency, the King went again to Paris, to sollicite such Forces and pre∣parations from all parts, as were requisite for such an undertaking. The River Some runs a long course through Picardy; and cutting it as it were through in the middle, fals afterwards into the British Sea. Upon the Banks of this River stands the chiefest Cities and Towns of the Province. But Amiens doth flourish there beyond them all, as well for the antiquity of its foundation, as for the beauty of its buildings, and for the quality, industry, and number of Inhabitants. The Some enters it with many Branches, and washing the wals in many places, makes the circuit thereof stronger on those sides then on the others; it is also well pro∣vided of Curtains, Flanks and Ditches: but that part which looks towards Flan∣ders, as being most subject to danger, is best fortified. And because the Spani∣ards in likelyhood would have endeavoured to relieve the City on that side, and especially from Dorlan, the Marishal Biroun did therefore incamp himself on that side; and began to break up the ways, to possess himself of the Passes, and to de∣sign out his quarters for the future siege.
Portacarrero had this mean while sent back Francesco d' Arco to Brussels, to advertise the Cardinal of his happy success, and to desire him to send some new recruits of men with all speed. Great store of Artillery, Ammunition, and Vi∣ctuals was found in Amiens: Portacarrero did therefore for the present, only de∣sire a recruit of men, that so he might make good the Town, till such time as the Cardinal might come to relieve it with a compleat Army. The Cardinal shewed such signes of joy as became such a purchase, and sent back the same Francesco d'Arco, having first honoured him upon this occasion with a Company of Spa∣nish Foot, to assure Portacarrero that he would speedily send him some good suc∣cour; and that he would forthwith muster the whole Army, with which he him∣self would come in person, and undoubtedly raise the siege. On the other side the King of France being fully resolved to continue it, went perpetually from one place to another to raise what moneys he could, what men, and what provisions, as were requisite for such a purpose. A Renovation of League was then in Trea∣ty between him and the Queen of England; which he very much desired might be effected. And he Treated likewise with the United Provinces of Flanders, that they might make some considerable diversion against the Spaniards, and that in particular they might send him some aid for the business of Amiens. The mean while Marishal Biroun prosecuted the already begun works; he had thrown a bridg of boats over the uppermost part of the River between Corbie and Amiens; and another over the lower part thereof, where the Village Lompre stands, to the end that he might have free passage from the one side of the River to the other, and might at his pleasure joyn the Kings Forces on either side. He drew a Line in compass from the one bridg to the other, of well Flank'd Trenches, to∣wards the City; but of much greater compass towards the field-side. All these Works were made on the side towards Flanders, as hath been said, because the besieged were to be succoured from thence. Nor did he forbear beleaguering the Town in such sort as was fitting on the side which lay towards France. It is not to be said with what ardency and eagerness Biroun behaved himself; adding a ri∣gid imperious command to his innate pride, and making it evidently appear in his Military haughtiness, that he would bequeath the siege in such a condition to the King, when his Majesty should come thither, as he should acknowledg the good success thereof chiefly from him. Thus had Biroun laid the siege; but at the same time he hoped to make so important a surprise on the neighbouring Frontiers of Artois, as the Spaniards should be so much the more hindred from the freeing of Amiens. To this purpose he did so unexpectedly assault Arras by night (which is the chiefest City of Artois) with 4000 foot, and 1200 horse, as he indangered it. He planted a Petard luckily, his men began already to enter the Gate; but the people thereof which are numerous, and warlike, taking up Arms, the French were so on repulst; wherein Count Bucquoy's valour did very much appear, who being in Arras, had the fortune to signalize himself more then any other upon that occasion. Biroun being returned to his quarters about Amiens, attempted another sur∣prise by sealado against Dorlan; but failed therein also. So as quite forgoing these secret machinations, he applyed himself wholly to the siege which he had begun. No less vigilancy was in the interim used on the Spaniards behalf. The Cavalier Pacciotto, an highly esteemed Italian Ingenier, and brother to the other Ingenier Pacciotto, who was slain at the assault of Calis, was by stealth gotten in∣to Amiens, and had brought Captain Lechiuga with him, a Spaniard who very well understood the management of Artillery. These two applyed themselves diligently, the one to better the Fortifications where it was most needfull; the o∣ther to dispose of the Artillery where they might be of greatest annoyance to the enemy. And Biroun not having as yet fully finished his Trenches, the Cardinal Archduke had given strict command, that some endeavour should be made to put some new recruit of souldiers into Amiens, from the Frontiers of Artois. Count Bucquoy was to this effect in Dorlan with 4000 Walloon foot; and John de Gus∣man with 300 horse. And because it was afterwards feared that such a body of men could not march so concealedly, as upon such an occasion was requisit, it was resolved that Gusman only should attempt getting into the City with his horse.
He marcht away by night; but being discovered when he was got near the Ditch, and the French men moving furiously against him, he would have had much ado to have got into the City, had not the Defendants who fallied out in great num∣bers, and did valiantly withstand the Enemy, received him. In this action those of the Town lost Captain Fernando Dezza, a Spaniard, and Captain Tomas, an Irish-man, two valiant Souldiers, with divers others of ordinary rank. The num∣ber of the French that were slain was greater, but of meaner quality. Portacar∣rero, that he might have the Field more free, and might the readilyer go out to skirmishes, resolved to pluck down the Suburbs, and all the houses which were near about Amiens: which he did chiefly by fire. It was a miserable spectacle to see such and so many delightfull contentments, the blessings of Peace, consumed in an instant by the fury of War. There was above 3000 choise Souldiers in A∣miens; and therefore Portacarrero thought good not to suffer the Oppugnors to breath, but to endeavour by frequent and fierce Sallies to hinder their Forti∣fications which every day increased, so as the Cardinal might have time to come and relieve the Town with a full succour. Nor was the Cardinal wanting in making all possible preparations to that purpose. A Levy of 4000 Foot was expected from Italy, which Alphonso Avalos was raising. Other Levies were made to the same purpose in Germany, and the same diligence was used in those parts of Flanders which were under the Kings obedience. But the monies re∣quisite for such an affair fell far short, by reason of the Kings so many former ex∣cessive expences, and by reason of the charge he was forced to be at in considera∣tion of the vastness of his Empire. And just at this time there had hapned a great disorder in this point: For the King desirous to curb the insatiable covetousness of Merchants had who traffickt Mony with him, he had in those dayes published an Edict whereby he moderated the excessive gain which they formerly made. The Merchants therefore retired themselves; and Antwerp which was wont to fur∣nish such monies as were requisite to maintain the Kings Army, was so pincht, as the Cardinal could no longer find necessary supplies there: And this (as shall be seen hereafter) was the chief cause why he could not lead up the Army time enough to Amiens, and preserve the purchase he had made of so important a City. Now to return to the Siege. The Fortifications without increased exceedingly every day, Biroun being continually very sollicitous therein. He munited the two aforesaid Bridges with good Forts on the one and the other bank, but especially on that side which looked most towards Flanders. He raised likewise such Forts as were requisite to defend the innermost Line of the Trenches, and did the like in the outward Line which looked towards the Fields. And because succour was chiefly to be kept out on that side, therefore the more Forts, and the more nobler were raised there, and greater care was had of all those Works. Birouns souldiery increased also daily, so as he would no longer delay opening Trenches against the City. He intended to lead them on just upon a great Ravelin, which sheltred the Gate Montrecurt; and upon the adjoyning Ditch, which was dry, and where he thought he might easiliest fall in. But Portacarrero was as vigilant as might be all this while in making defences. His chief design (as we have said) was to annoy the Enemy as much as he could by Sallies, and hinder their Works. The Marquis Montenegro fallied therefore out one day with 400 Horse, he having the command of all the Horse in Amiens: And placing a Company of Carabins in the first Front, commanded by Captain Francisco Fuentes a Spaniard, he gave in so fiercely and so unexpectedly upon the Enemy, as he slue above 200. some Soul∣diers, some Pioners, without losing almost any one of his men. This Sally was pursued almost every day with some other the like; which being so very many, to shun prolixity in relating every least passage, and to maintain the Decorum due to History, we will acquaint you only with the chiefest. Affairs were in this condition both within and without, when the King of France came himself in person to the Camp, attended by many Princes and great Lords who were then at Court; particularly by the Duke Du Mayn, from whose valour and councel as much good was expected upon this occasion, as the Kingdom had experimented prejudice in the late troubles thereof. Biroun was
not very well pleased that the King should come so soon unto the Army; for he would willingly have brought the Siege first to better perfection. But the King very much approving all the Works, and for a sign of honour confirming him in the same superiority of Command, did so far satisfie him, as he continued more fervent then ever in his former endeavours. The King being arrived, it was re∣solved by the Councel of War, that the business should be orderly carried on, and that winning ground by the spade and mathook leasurely, great care should be had in preserving the Souldiery, and that the rashness of too immature assaults should be shunned. The number of Pioners was therefore mightily increased: by whose handy-work the further the Trenches were advanced, the broader and the deeper were they made; and to boot with the usual windings thereof, many and greater Redouts then ordinary were raised in them for their better defence. The King lay in the aforesaid Hermitage; and the Constable, the Duke Du Mayn, the Duke of Espernon, the Prince Jeanvile Brother to the Duke of Guise, and other great Personages were lodged in the several Forts; whereof the Marshal Biroun kept that for himself which was nearest the Works, that he might from thence hasten their progress the more. The Kings Army did not as then exceed 1600 Foot, and 4000 Horse, but it increased every day; for it is not to be said with how much impatiencie he desired the recovery of Amiens, nor how much he was seconded therein by the inclination of the Kingdom, and particularly by the desire of the Nobility. His Forces consisted of 3000 Swissers, 4000 English sent by the Queen in relation to the aforementioned Confederacie which was concluded but a little before; and the rest were all French Foot and Horse. Monsieur de Montigny commanded the Horse; and Monsieur de S. Luke the Ar∣tillery, which were brought unto the Camp in great abundance: Both of them Commanders cry'd up, and of a cleer reputation. And the King willing that they should no longer forbear annoying those within with the Artillery, they began to play furiously upon the City; and Batteries were disposed of in divers places, which were afterwards to indamage the Besieged nearer hand. Amidst these publick works appertaining to the Siege, the King forbore not listening to a secret intelligence by which the City-might be fraudulently delivered up unto him. There was a Covent of Augustine Friars in Amiens, which did almost joyn upon one of the Gates of the City. Many Citizens came usually to this Covent, where they plotted a secret practise to put the City into the Kings hands, by privately taking in some Souldiers from without by night, who should possess themselves of certain Bridges under which the River ran as it went out of the City. But Portacarrero discovering the business, he made those whom he suspected sure, and putting some of the Ringleaders to death, he ordered that all the Votaries should go out of Amiens, and afterwards by degrees drove out most of the Citizens. Portacarrero being freed from those dangers which threatned him within, minded with greater security the advancing of the outward works, which consisted chiefly in defending the Ditch the most that might be: And therefore he fortified the Chemine Couverte in sundry sorts; other new Defences were added even within the Ditch it self; and Mines were wrought under the Chemine Couverte which might be made to play when the Enemy should approach. Moreover, for its bet∣ter defence, it was invironed with great and sharp stakes, hanging outwards with some little distance between them, which might keep the Enemy from suddenly assailing it, and the Defendants might have the advantage of being thereby shel∣tred. All such Fortifications as it was capable of were added in particular to the great Ravelin of Montrecurt. And all this while the Defendants cooled not in making their frequent Sallies; but making them every time more forceable then other, there seldom past a night that they did not issue out to disturb the Works; in which the Countrymen there abouts supplying the place of Pioners, it is not to be believed what a slaughter was made of those miserable people during the siege. The field-side towards France was less fortified, and consequently worse guarded as being the most secure. The besieged issued forth on that side to provide ne∣cessary Forrage for their Horses, but with good Convoyes of Horse and Foot; they were many times fortunate herein; but falling at last into a great Ambush of 600 horse of the Enemy, they were routed, and in their retreat lost many of
their Foot and Horse, and particularly a great number of the meaner sort of people who were imployed in getting together the Forrage. This misfortune did not abate, but rather increase the besiegeds courage in continuing their sallies. Portacarrero would therefore make out one which should be so strong and so well ordered, as it might make large amends for the loss lately suffered. Which he disposed thus. He sent out two Spanish Captains, Diego Durango, and Francisco del l' Arco, with their two Foot-Companies; and to them added two Troops of Horse, commanded by Jovanni Gusman, and Martin Aguilas, both of them Spaniards; after these came the Marquis di Montenegro with 300 Horse more: And the order which was given them was, that they should at one and the same time assault the Trenches which were a working on the two nearest sides, and afterwards to make into the quarters from whence the Works proceeded. It was about the end of July, when the weather is hottest, and men aptest to sleep about Noon-day. At this time it was resolved the Sally should be made: Nor were the besieged deceived: For finding a great many of those that labour'd in the Trenches wearied with their working by night, and taking their rest, as also the others that guarded them, they meeting with little resistance made great slaughter amongst them; then assaulting the nearest quarter of the English, they slue many of them before they could well put themselves in a defensive posture; and assaulting another quarter with the like violence where the Swissers were lodged, they likewise slue and wounded many of them. But the Camp flying to their Arms, & new succour coming in from all parts, the fray did so increase, as it could neither be more obstinate nor more bloody. The Marshal Biroun did first ap∣pear, who thrusting in where the business was hottest, gave miraculous proof of his courage. Nor did the King himself do less; who transported by his too war∣like genius and too much despising danger, would likewise be himself where the greatest peril was. Till such time as the besieged being forced to give back, the fray ended. In which the besieged lost above 20 of their men, amongst which John Gusman, who was in the flower of his age, of a very noble family, and of very great expectation. There were some 600 of the contrary party slain, as it was said; amongst which divers Captains and other inferior Officers. Those without were still very much indamaged by the Artillery which were placed within upon the walls, and still so much the more by how much the trench∣es drew nearer the ditch. Wherefore Monsieur S. Luke planted two Batteries; the one of ten Peeces of Cannon against the Ravelin of Montecourt, and the other of twelve Peeces against the neighbouring defences: He raised also against the same parts a great Platform furnisht with other Peeces, and munited it with a strong Redout, to keep it from the so impetuous sallies made by those within. Neither did these Batteries fail in their expected service; for they soon greatly indammaged one Ravelin, they threw down the Parapets of the contiguous wall, and batterd down the highest Defences, so as none but the lowest defended the Ditch. This mean while the Trenches did daily approach nearer the Counter∣scarf, the Works never ceasing, over which Marshal Biroun had a particular care. But though he, the King being present, had the principal care of the Siege, yet the King forbore not to have it most in his thoughts; who continually viewed all the Works being indefatigable in his labour both by day and night; abound∣ing at once both in a Princely and Warlike spirit: but notwithstanding of so af∣fable a nature, and so long accustomed to be amongst Souldiers, as laying down for the most part his Regal Majesty, it seemed as if he desired rather to be a Fellow-souldier then a King amongst them. All degrees of Souldiery strove there∣fore who should most willingly follow and serve him; and the King did infinitely desire out of Military glory to bring this Siege to his wisht for end, that it might be known he knew equally how to be a gallant Commander as well in the most difficult besieging of Towns, as in the greatest Field-conflicts. These extra ordi∣nary diligences which were used about the aforesaid Works, made that those within had every day less field-room to make out sallies: wherefore they resol∣ved to make one sally more, which being perhaps to be the last, might prove for as much as in them lay the most prejudicial to the Enemy Portacarrero assem∣bling therefore together little less then 1000 select Foot, with their Commanders,
gave order that about noon-day, they should with all possible secrecy be in the dry ditch of the great Ravelin of Montecourt, that they might the more privatly go from thence, and assault the enemy upon greater advantage. And because the horse now did not much service abroad, he added only 30 Curassiers to the foot, who might behave themselves according as occasion should require. The appointed hour being come, the sign of issuing out was given by a Canon shot. The first assault was strangely resolute and fierce. But the Trenches be∣ing much better provided, and defended, then the former time, and especially by a good part of a Picardy Regiment, which were almost all old souldiers, great re¦sistance was made; mingling themselves couragiously one with another in fight, and many falling interchangeably on both sides. Yet the besieged receiving new recruits of men, they entred the Trenches, committing still more slaughter, and advancing so far, as they came to a chief Redout, and endeavoured to nail up some pieces of Artillery. But being manfully opposed by a great Court of Guard of Swissers which were there, and a great number of other souldiers flocking thi∣ther from several other parts of the Camp, they were forced to think of retrea∣ting, wherein the Curassiers proved not useless; for they likewise sallying out, and giving upon many of the enemy who had disbanded them∣selves in the first fights, they slew many of them; and were moreover of great assistance in helping their companions to retreat. This combat lasted for above three hours, and from without Biroun shewed his wonted undauntedness; and amongst other Cavalliers of the Kings Camp, Prince Janville did in particular win great praise. 500 of the Kings men were slain, and about 200 of the besieg∣ed, together with very many wounded on both sidesr After this, the King cau∣sed the works so speedily to be advanced, as they came within a few days almost to the Ditch. And they might be still better inforced on his part; for his loss of souldiers and Pioners, was soon remedied by the supply of others; and the King had now an Army of 24000 foot, and 6000 horse; together with aboun∣dance of all other things necessary for the continuation of the siege. But howsoever he was very desirous to see it soon at an end. For news came every day of great succour which were coming from the Cardinal; and it was every day discovered that the besieged would hold out till the last gasp. It was not long therefore ere the French came to the Chemine Convert, and blowing part of it into the air with secret mines, and winning the rest by fierce assaults, they lodged in the counter∣scarp. From whence indamaging the Ditch by their Artillery, and at last falling thereinto, they strove to make themselves masters thereof. Which was very stif∣ly disputed; for though those within had lost their uppermost defences, yet those below were industriously repaired, from whence they did in sundry manners mi∣raculously resist the assailants. The chiefest part of the siege being then reduced hither, it is not to be said with how much obstenacy and fierceness they fought on both sides: those within relying upon the expected succour; and those without willing to prevent it. The one desirous to recover what was lost, the others to keep what they had got. The assailants fighting whilst the King looked on; and the adversaries as if the Cardinal had been present. And both sides so set on fire by wonted emulation, and by innate hatred one to another, as were it only in that respect their very souls could not be more incensed. They fought no lon∣ger therefore with harquebuses and muskets, nor yet with swords; but with shor∣ter weapons, as daggers and pistols. Stones hailed down from the walls, and fires of divers sorts. And on the contrary the enemies batteries playing incessantly had so skarrified the Platform, as there was but very little space left for the defen∣dants to keep upon. Portacarrero began therefore to make inward retreats, by half moons, and other good defences. And he had thought also to have thrown up a great Trench more inward upon the inside of the River, which past with one of its branches through the City, neer enough to the wall that was plaid upon. That after the loss thereof, and of the new retreats which he was making, he might yet make what opposition might be. And because many of the defen∣dants were already slain, and many lay languishing of their wounds; many be∣ing likewise dead of sickness, Portacarrero had oft-times renewed his intreaties to the Archduke, that he should no longer delay sending relief. Nor did the Car∣dinal
omit any diligence that was requisite to that purpose. Avilo's Italians were already upon their march for Flanders; as also the new raised Germans; nor had the Cardinal omitted any possible means for raising such monies as were necessa∣ry upon such an occasion. The King of France was fully informed of all this. Wherefore quickning himself, he did so inforce the works in the ditch, as his men made themselves ful∣ly masters of it. They then fell to mining, that they might blow up the wall, and the better order their assaults which they were shortly to make. The be∣sieged were already reduced to these straits, when Portacarrero undertook ano∣ther business to damnifie the assailants. The River entred on that side with two branches into the City. He therefore resolved to block up the Arches of the Bridg with great beams of wood fastened together, so as the water might regorge back again into the fields, and might particularly fall into the ditch which was op∣pugned, as might easily be expected by the situation of the place. Nor failed he in his design. For the River being thus withstood, threw her waters abroad into the neighbouring parts, incommodiating the Kings men who lodged there; and falling with such violence into the aforementioned ditch, as made the French hasten out of it, and spoyled almost all their Works. The Kings Camp was much confused at this unexpected accident. But the King, calling his Councel of War, resolved to turn two great batteries against two Towers, the one on the one side, the other on the other side of the Gate Montrecourt, hoping that the ruins thereof, when they should be beaten down, should fill up the ditch which they stood over, and where the River chiefly entred into the oppugned Ditch, and kept there. The batteries proved very furious. Nor was it long ere the Towers falling, and that passage being filled up, the water began to forbear running there. Moreover the Beams and Summers of wood not being able any longer to with∣stand the violence thereof, the River returned to its former natural course; and the Ditch being thus soon dry, the French returned thither with more ardency then ever, to their former oppugnation. The falling of the Towers had almost beaten down the great Ravelin; in so much as those defended it could no lon∣ger be succoured, unless it were by a narrow Bridge which had Clothes hung up on both sides, the more to blind the passage. But that served but for a mark for the continual musket-shot to play upon. By which some of the defendants be∣ing continually slain, it unfortunately fell out that Portacarrero passing by there upon a certain occasion, he received a shot in the flank, which immediately threw him dead to the ground. The greatest loss certainly which could befall those within, and which was generally much lamented. But almost at the same time another misfortune befell those without, which greatly displeased the whole Ar∣my, and especially the King himself: which was the death of Monsieur de Saint Luke, who approaching too near the Batteries, was likewise slain by a musket∣shot. The Marquis Montenegro was by full Military consent, chosen in the place-of Portacarrero, as he who even in the others life time, had always sustained the se∣cond place, both in commanding the horse, and in all the other most considerable actions of the siege. He failed not together with the Office to make good the va∣lour of the former commander in chief who was slain. Labouring indefaticably and excellently performing all things that belonged unto him. But the French were this mean while so farr advanced, as they already lodged upon the Platform of the Wall; and with new impetuous Batteries, had brought the great Ravelin to that pass, as no longer defence could now almost be made. And yet though often assaulted, the Kings men met still with stiff and stout resistance. This was the condition of the siege, when newes was brought to the Kings Camp, that the Cardinal Archduke was already upon his march with a powerfull Army to come to the relief of the besieged. It was now September, and the Car∣dinal could not assemble together such Forces sooner, as were requisite to carry on the propounded business, for want of monies. Declaring the rendezvouz to be at Avene del Conte, a place within a league of Dorlan, the Cardinal came thither in the beginning of the aforesaid Month with all his men. His Army con∣sisted of 20000 foot, and 4000 horse. The foot were composed of 4000 Spa∣niards,
300 Italians, 6000 Germans, and 7000 Walloons, Burgonians, and Irish; and the Horse of 1500 Flemish men of Arms; and of 2500 other Horse, Lances, Curasiers, and Harquebusiers, of the oft aforenamed Nations. Upon this occur∣rencie Count Peter Ernestus Mansfield took upon him the office of Campmaster Generall, which was formerly exercised by Monsieur de Rony; though Mansfield was full fourscore years old, and much fitter for rest then labour. The Count de Sora commanded over the Flemish Men at Arms, being one of the chief Lords of that Country: and the rest of the Horse were commanded by the Admiral of Arragon, who being come with the Cardinal into Flanders when he first came thither, and being suddenly sent in the King of Spains name by way of comple∣ment to the Emperor and King of Poland, was just then returned. The first thing consulted on in the Spanish Camp, was, on what side they were to bring in the succour. The River Some passeth through the midst of Amiens, as hath been said; and doubtlesly the side best fortified by the French, and hard∣est to be overcome, was that which lay towards the Frontiers of Artois, as hath likewise been said. And therefore the Enemies Trenches being weaker on the o∣ther side the River, toward France, they might easeliest be forced on that side. But they must first pass over the River, the banks whereof the French had forti∣fied: And when the Spaniards should have past over the River, either above, or beneath, where-ever it was worse guarded, how to get back over it again was too uncertain, by reason of the opposition which the French would make: So as the Army being shut up by the River, and in an Enemies Country, and without con∣tinual recruits of victuals, in such a case it would be in very great straits, and in evident danger to undergo some strange misfortune. These things being well weighed, it was resolved that they should endeavour the relief on the nearest side towards Artois; and that if need should be, they should give battel. For though the Enemy did far exceed them in Horse, yet it was thought that the Spanish Foot was so much better both in discipline and valour, as all their Forces being duly considered, they might very well hope for victory. The Cardinal staid four days at the Rendezvouz; in which time he ordered that John Contrera. Commissary Generall of the Horse, and Gaston Spinola, formerly the Italian Camp-master, should go with 500 Horse to discover the Enemies quarters nearer hand. The King had notice hereof; and getting on horseback himself, he sent divers Troops into other parts, that they might the easilier light upon and defeat the Enemy: And it so fell out, as those Horse wherein he himself was met first with them. The King was far fewer in number then the Enemy; yet with his wonted un∣dauntedness despising all danger, and all his men fighting valiantly by his exam∣ple, the Enemies Horse were routed and put to flight; who knowing the Kings person could not believe but that he was followed by a greater body of men. The Cardinal came afterwards to a full knowledge how the Fortifications of the Kings Camp stood, by another means: wherefore he marched with his Army towards Amiens on the 13 day of September, in this order. The Admiral of Arra∣gon and Count Sora marched foremost with all the Horse, divided into divers squadrons. The flying squadron marched before the Foot, which was composed of 2000 very choise Foot, pickt out of those of every Nation; and these were led on by Diego Pimantel, formerly one of the most esteemed Spanish Camp∣masters in the whole Army. Then followed three great Battalions one after an∣other, with 6000 Foot, and 4 Peeces of Field-Cannon in the front of each of them. In the first marched Luigi di Velasco, a Spanish Camp-master, with his Brigado of the same Nation; and the Counts of Suls and Belio, with two Regi∣ments of Germans; and to these were added three Walloon Brigadoes. In the second were the Campmasters Luis di Viglier, with his Spanish Brigado; Al∣phonso d' Avalos, with his new-come Italians; Count Bucquoi, with a Brigado of Walloons; and Colonel Eslegre, with a Regiment of Germans. And in the last were Carlo Colonna with a Spanish Brigado, of which he was chosen Camp∣master but a little before; Il Signor di Barbenson, with a Regiment of Germans; Colonel Estenly, with a Regiment of Irish; Count Varras, with a Brigado of Burgonians; and the Campmaster Barlotta, with his Brigado of Walloons. The Cardinal Archduke took his place in the Front of the first great Battalion;
and with him, to boot with his particular Guards, were the Flower of all the Court. After the Souldiery there were a convenient number of Boats carried up∣on Carts, whereof to make a Bridg and Pass over the Some, when they should think fit so to do. In this manner did the Army draw near the River below Pic∣chingny, a good Town, seated upon the same River, and not above three leagues from Amiens. The Army was sheltred on the right hand by the Channel of the River; and on the left by the Carriages and Baggage, which joyned together in a long Train by three and three, did shelter and secure that Flank. Thus was the Spanish Camp ordered. It was argued at the same time in the Kings Camp by his Councel of War, what they were to do in this behalf. Some were for going out of their Trenches with all their Forces, and giving battel in the field: And Mar∣shal Biroun was stiff of this opinion, saying, That the Kings Horse was far superior to theirs both in number and goodness; that they ought likewise to hope very well of their Foot: so as what better occasion could there be wisht for to fight the Enemy, and get a glorious victory? That the whole Genius of France was naturally addicted to such fights as these, and particularly the King himself, who excelling each other man in all military qualities, had only over∣come himself in this, in knowing how to win so many and so dangerous battels. That the present Victory being got, not only Amiens, but whole Picardy would be the Kings; and with what advantage might they afterwards assault the Enemies fron∣tiers of Flanders, and carry those mischiefs thither wherewith France had been so long afflicted. Marshal Biroun, as we have often said, was naturally very fierce; and fell often upon businesses which partook much more of precipitation then boldness. And amongst other things it was observable how much he differed from the opi∣nion of the Marshal his late Father; who no less couragious, but much more circumspect then his son, had in the siege laid by the King to Roan some years be∣fore (as we then told you) perswaded the King to keep the Duke of Parma from relieving the Town, by defending his own Works. But divers others of the Coun∣cel were of another opinion, chiefly the Duke Du Mayn, who was a compleat Commander, and was thought to be the best that was then in France. He in a grave and considerate manner said thus. That the Kings end in this siege was to recover Amiens, and not to call all France thither to see him vainly defie the Enemy in a Battel. And what military wisdom was it that taught to provoke Fortune unnecessitated; which was always deceitful in all Feats of Arms, and chiefly in the success of a Field-battel? Then let the King enjoy those advantages which his Trenches gave him, and suffer the Spaniard to come and assault them at their pleasure: For finding them well defended, they would ei∣ther not assault them, or if they should, it would be in vain. Nor was it to be feared that those within would move at the same time; both by reason of the same opposition of the Kings Trenches, and for that they were already reduced to so small a number, as they were hardly able to man the remainders of their own Defences. Thus the Ene∣my soon despairing of ever effecting the succour, the King without any further danger would happily compass his desired end of the siege. This opinion carried it. But howsoever the King desirous himself to see at a near distance in what posture the Spanish Camp marched, went out with the greatest part of his horse: which meeting with the Enemy, afforded occasion of skirmishes which lasted for a while, no advantage appearing on any side; and the King wheeling about, came in good order back to his Trenches. The Spanish Camp still advanced, till from the top of a little Rise within two Cannon-shot of the Enemy, it made them a gallant and stately spectacle; and passing forward from thence, came almost within musket-shot of the Enemies Trenches. The French thought for certain that the Spaniards would assault them; insomuch as many of the meaner sort of them began to waver; many of the Victuallers and those who had care of the Baggage, transported by blind fear, went to convey their goods to the other side of the River, for their more safety sake. This dis∣order began also amongst some of the more ordinary souldiers, which manifestly appeared in the ambiguous form of defence which they put themselves in. Which the Admiral of Arragon and Count Sora perceiving, who led the Van of the
Spaniards horse, they failed not suddenly to advertise the Cardinal thereof, and did earnestly perswade him not to lose so advantagious an occasion of assaulting the Enemy. But Count Mansfield, who had the first place under the Cardinal, and some other of the Commanders were absolutely of a contrary opinion. He said, That it would be manifest rashness to give so upon the Enemies Works. That the tumults which were seen there might be caused by some occasional confusion, which the French Commanders would soon remedy. That if they should resolve to present Battel, and consequently come out of their Works, it should be accepted, and a good end hoped for: But that to assault the Exemy within their own Fortifications, with so much advantage to them, would be to adventure that Army to too evident a blow, and all Flanders to too manifest danger. The Cardinal thought this the safest councel, which he resolved to follow; though the whole Army was generally of opinion, That if the Enemy had been assaulted then with due resolution, they should have met with but small resist∣ance; and that together with the sudden relieving of Amiens, the Cardinal might peradventure have obtained one of the greatest victories that the Spaniards had of a long time gotten over the French. The French Commanders had this mean while provided for the abovesaid disorders; and the King coming himself in person to where it behoved most to secure the Trenches, he furnisht them with such men as were most valiant. Nor herewithall content, he went forth with all his Horse; and dividing them into many Squadrons, he extended them a great space, and sheltred those parts of his Trenches which were most threatned by his Enemies, to defend them so much the better. Then letting his Artillery flie furi∣ously against the Enemy, he did so prejudice them, as they resolved to remove from that so near place, and went to another where they were sufficiently shel∣tred. The night came on this mean while, and the Cardinal staid there with all his Army, resolving to accost the Enemy again the next day, and to provoke them to battel. The night past over more quietly then was expected, the so very near∣ness of two so powerfull Armies being considered. Nor did the Cardinal fail to draw near with his, as formerly, to that of the Enemy. But the King being sted∣fast to his former resolution, and preparing in like manner as before to defend his Trenches, he would not lose his advantage. The Cardinal having staid with his Army drawn out into Battel-array, as long as he thought fitting, resolved at last totally to retreat; considering that he could come by victuals but too hardly in those parts, and that the other incommodities which his Army suffered in those quarters were too great. Turning therefore his Van into the Rearguard, he made his Army march leasurely and in good order off. The French endeavoured more then once to indammage the Rear; but the Flying-Squadron facing about, and with miraculous discipline now handling their Pikes, now their Muskets, and being sheltred by the Horse likewise on both sides, all the Enemies assaults proved vain. Thus they marched for above two houres; after which the Cardinals Camp being free from all molestation, took up its quar∣ters with all security, and was by degrees divided in the neighbouring Frontiers of Artois. At the Armies retreat, the Cardinal signified to the besieged in Ami∣ens, that it being impossible to relieve them, they should immediately surrender the City, and not lose any more men to no purpose. He infinitely praised their pains, and promised them reward; leaving them to make such conditions as they could at the surrender. Which when they came to be treated of, were granted them by the King, in as ample manner, and upon as honourable terms as could be by them desired. He highly commended the worth they had shewed in defending themselves; which had made the like of his Army appear in oppugning them. The Marquis Montenegro marcht out of the Town with 800 sound Souldiers, and above as many more that were wounded; and was very graciously received by the King at his coming forth, as also the other Commanders that came out with him. When the King came into Amions, he presently caused a strong Citadel to be designed there, which was soon after built, that it might serve for a greater curb to the people, and be a greater safety to the City. Then leaving Picardy, he went to Paris, where he was received with great applause by that multitude of people,
for his new atchieved glory in having so happily conducted so difficult a Siege, for having hindred so powerfull a Succour, and recovering a City of so great con∣sequence to the interests of that Kingdom. The Cardinal Archduke being retreated to Artois, he presently sent some of his Forces to take Montalin, the onely Town which remained in the French hands within the precincts appertaining to Calis, and from whence Calis was much in∣commodiated. The care of the enterprise was given to the Admiral of Aragon; who finding the place not very strong, nor yet well guarded, took it within a few dayes. The King of France was already gone from Picardy; nor was it known that he had as then any further end upon that Frontier. Wherefore the Cardinal resolved to leave Artois likewise, and to give some satisfaction to the Province of Flanders, which did very much desire that Ostend might be besieged. The Cardi∣nal would therefore go thitherward himself; and causing the Town to be well surveyed, he thought it was impossible to keep it from being succour'd. Where∣fore, as also because Autumn was already well advanced, the Cardinal determined to leave the enterprise till a better conjuncture. Nor having any other in which it was fitting to imploy his Army at that time, wherein there was hapned a new Mu∣tiny again, he resolved to send it to its winter-quarters, and came himself with his Court about the end of November to Brussels. But the United Provinces lost not the opportunity this mean whiles which of∣fered it self so favourably to them. The Cardinal by reason of the siege of Amiens being gone with so many Forces towards the Frontiers of France, and having left the peculiar affairs of Flanders in a forlorn condition; Count Maurice took presently to the Field. And having speedily raised about the beginning of Au∣gust an Army of 10000 Foot, and 2500 Horse, together with a great Train of Artillery, and whatsoever else was requisite for his designed ends, he went to be∣siege Reinberg, a Town situated upon the left side of the Rhine. It had but few Souldiers in Garrison, and was but weakly provided of all things else. Wherefore Maurice coming without any difficulty to the Walls, and playing upon them with his Cannon, he forced the besieged in a few dayes to surrender the Town. From thence he went to before Mures, a Town not far from thence, but somwhat remote from the Rhine: And meeting with the like weak defence, he with the like easiness won it. He this mean while had thrown a bridg of Boats over the Rhine, and passing with all his Army to the other side, he sate down before Groll, a strong Town both by nature and art: He found some greater resistance there; yet many provisions being wanting which are most necessary for sustaining a siege, having dryed the Ditch on one side, and threatening a furious Assault, he forced the Defendants to deliver up the Town. From thence he turned to Olden∣sel, a weak Town, which he therefore soon took. And no Town remaining now at the Kings devotion in those parts but Linghen, a place well flanked and fortified by a good Castle, Maurice incamped before it, and besieged it straitly on all sides. Count Frederick de Berg defended it, which he did very valiantly for many days: But that place being but ill provided, as were the rest, he was forced to surrender it upon very honourable conditions. So to boot with Reinberg and Mures, all the whole Country on the other side the Rhine fell in a short time under the Domini∣on of the United Provinces; which in acknowledgment of so advantagious suc∣cesses did forthwith give the same Town of Linghen, with the Territories there∣unto belonging, which make up a very noble Lordship, to Count Maurice and to his heirs for ever. About the end of Autumn, Maurice returned with his men to their quarters; and passing himself afterwards to the Hague, he was received there with demonstrations of great joy. Which afforded new occasions to such Provinces as were yet obedient to the King, to complain and grieve; considering that for the interests of France, which were very uncertain, the self-affairs of Flanders were so much neglected: And they were more scandalized, that to defend the Catholick cause in that Kingdom for the advantage of strangers, the same cause was abandoned in the Kings own Country; suffering so great a part thereof to fall into the hands of Rebels and Hereticks, who by all the most de∣sperate means would implacably maintain their double perfidiousness against the Church and King.
Thus ended this year, and the year 1598 insued, memorable for two of the greatest events which could then have hapned. The one, Peace concluded be∣tween Anno 1598. the two Kings, after so bitter war; and the other the Marriage be∣tween the Cardinal Archduke, and the Infanta Isabella, the King of Spains eldest daughter, to whom the King her Father gave the whole Low-Countries for her Dowry. As concerning the Peace, Pope Clement the eight had mediated it a∣while before; moved thereunto by the same zeal whereby he had already so hap∣pily reconciled the King of France to the Apostolick See, and afterwards indea∣voured to reconcile the two Kings, by making such a peace as might conduce to the establishing of universal quiet in Christendom. To this purpose having first wisely and maturely ordered all things, he sent a Legat into France, which was Alexander de Medici, Cardinal of Florence; who was judged the fittest for such a Negotiation, for his candor of life, grave behaviour, and dexterity in handling of business. And these vertues, together with some other, raised him (though but for a very short while) to succeed the said Clement in the Apostolick See. He then parting from Paris in the beginning of the year, and going to Vervin, an op portune place, upon the Confines of Henault and Picardy: and the Deputies of both Kings joyning there with him, he laboured by all possible means to over∣come those difficulties which interposed themselves to the effecting of the Peace. The King of Spain did very much incline thereunto: though he were thereby to restore so many Places which his Forces had taken in Picardy. But the agree∣ment could not be made without full restitution. For what remained, he knew he was near death, by reason of his great age, opprest by continual indispositions of health. That he had only one son, and he very young. That it would be very advantagious for that his son not to inherit so bitter a War, and with so powerfull an adversary. That he would find his Kingdoms exhausted by such excessive ex∣pences; and finally that it would redound much to the advantage of the new Prin∣ces to whom he intended to give Flanders, if they should find France and him first at peace. These were the chief reasons which made the King of Spain incline so much to peace. But the King of France had altogether as many motives to make him willingly imbrace it. He considered that the greatest impediments which kept him from succeeding to that Crown, proceeded from the Spaniards. That his King∣dom was rent in pieces by so many discords, and wasted by so many vast expences. That it was now time to enjoy it in secure obedience; and if it were possible, un∣der one and the same Religion. That this could not beeffected but by his reconci∣liation to the Apostolick See; and by making a good peace with the King of Spain. That the one having already had happy success, he should desire the like in the o∣ther. So as France after having suffered so many calamities, horrible Factions and troubles, might once enjoy those accommadations, which by a happy change might turn her troubles into quiet. Out of these efficacious reasons, the King of France was well inclined to de∣sire peace. Wherefore after a long Treaty, the knots which gave most distur∣bance to the happy ending of the business, being untyed by the Legats abilities and authority, about the beginning of May the peace was fully agreed upon and concluded between the two Kings. To the so much glory in particular of Pope Clement, as he was mightily applauded for it every where; it not being easie to be judged by which of those two actions he merited most: either by his late re∣uniting so powerfull a King as the King of France to the See of Rome, or in ma∣king universal peace throughout Christendom by according these two Crowns. This may suffice to be said here touching this affair, as a success which doth not properly belong to the thred of this our History. Wherefore passing now to the Treaty of Marriage, we will with all brevity first relate the consultations which were had thereupon; and the Kings resolution. The Negotiation of separating the Provinces of Flanders in perpetuity from the Crown of Spain, was doubtlesly one of the weightiest affairs that hath of a long time been resolved on by that Court. The King was then past threescore and ten years old. But though as well by reason of his years, as of his so long and weighty affairs, he was a Prince of infinite wisdom, and who could of himself put on any resolution how difficult soever; yet was he very doubtfull what to do
in this point. He was assailed on one side by his love to the Infanta; and on the other by his duty to his Crown. The King desired nothing more then to Marry the Infanta to any whatsoever highest degree: as well for that she was his eldest daughter, and one, upon whom, if his only son should chance to die, the successi∣on of so great a Monarchy was likely to fall: as out of the tender affection which he always bore her, and had still bred her up with great contentation, in his own company. And truly it was commonly famed and thought, that there had not been any Princess of a long time in Europe, in whom so many rare indow∣ments both of body and mind had met, as now in her. Great was the affection likewise which the King bore to the Cardinal Archduke; for passing into Spain whilst he was a young man (as we have already touched upon) and having pur∣chased great praise in those Kingdoms, sometimes in the Court at Madrid, and sometimes in the Government of Portugal, he had so particularly conformed himself to the Kings ways and humour, as he made him his example, after a pro∣portionable measure, in all his actions. For which the King so loved and favour∣ed him, that he treated him not as a German, but as a Spaniard; nor with de∣monstrations only belonging to an Unkle, but with a true Fatherly affection. These considerations made the King very much incline to the aforesaid Marriage, and to give the Provinces of Flanders in dowry to the Infanta. But on the other side, to devide so noble a member from the body of that Empire which he had inherited from his fore-fathers, pleaded hard for the contrary. The truth is, he was of opinion that the best course he could take to keep the yet obedient Pro∣vinces in their allegiance, and to reduce those that had rebell'd, would be to give them a Prince of their own, who might become a Fleming, and from whom a Fle∣mish discent might be expected. And he feared that if this were not done, the whole Country might one day be lost. Yet he thought he was not to give way so soon to this danger, nor so easily lose the advantage, which for other conside∣rations the Crown of Spain received, by possessing even the yet remainder of those Provinces. The King was therefore much agitated amidst the several difficulties which arose in this affair. Nor was his Councel less uncertain. Where by his appointment the business was with all attention discust. Count Fuentes, being returned with great reputation from Flanders, was at this time in the Court of Spain. After the Duke of Parma's death, he had supplyed the chiefest place (as we then told you) under Count Mansfield, and likewise under the Archduke Er∣nestus both which were Governours of Flanders. And in the time of his own Go∣vernment had won great renown, in the battel of Dorlan, in the recovery of Cam∣bray, and by his other prosperous successes, gotten by the Arms of Spain, in the Frontier of Picardy against the French. The King had already designed him to be Governor of Milan, and of all the Spanish Forces in Italy. And doubtlesly there was not any one of the Spanish Nation, who was as then highlyer esteemed in the Military profession. This Fuentes opposed himself with all his might to the propounded marriage, with the cession of the Low-Countries. But on the other side, Christoval di Moura, Count of Castel Roderigo, who was in great au∣thority with the King, did stiffiy maintain the contrary opinion. Moura was come out of Portugal many years before the devolution of that Kingdom, and came to Madrid with the Dowager Princess, Donna Jovanna, the Kings sister, being in a very good place about her; and after her death he was suddenly taken into the Kings Court, where he was entertained in many noble imployments. When the devolution did afterwards happen, the King imployed none more then Moura in the occurrences of that so important Negotiation; in so much as the dif∣ferences which were therein met withall were soon overcom by the Duke of Alba with Forces on the other part, and by Moura his negotiating, on the other part: wherby Moura stil increasing in favor, merit, and authority with the King, none sha∣red more thereof then he in these latter times. The King being willing therefore to put on his fall resolution touching this business, sent for his Councel one day into his own bed-chamber, where for the most part he lay in bed, by reason of his great years, and the gout which he was troubled withall; and where ount Fuentes spake thus The advantage is so great (most powerfull Prince) which those so many members whereof your Majesties Empire is composed, do receive from Flanders, as to bereave
it of so noble a member now, cannot in my opinion but be of great prejudice to the rest Wheresoever the run goes, it looks upon some one of your Kingdoms. But though the world reverence you in so many parts, and bow unto you, it is notwithstanding seen that your Enviers and Enemies respect your Greatness and fear it more from that of Flanders then from all the rest. What, and how great the opportunities of those Provinces are, none knows better then your self. There were you put into the In∣heritance of that so glorious Emperor your Father, before you were yet his Heir, by that his so memorable Renunciation: There you began to take the conduct of so emi∣nent and so painfull a Government: And tarrying there afterwards about a year, you your self had still better occasion to know how much the possessing of those States did import your greatness, together with the rest of your Empire. By the Arms of Flanders you did then make an advantagious Peace with the King of France; with those Arms you have ofttimes succoured the Catholick Cause in that Kingdom, and maintained your own with much honour in these last times against the now present King. And how oft have you from thence assisted the Catholicks of Germany? and in what a terror, from that side more especially, did you put England not many years ago? The world turns round with perpetual vicissitude, and is continually producing new things. And therefore it is to be believed, that by the occasion of past times, other the like will arise in times to come; insomuch as the Arms of Flanders are likely to be no less necessary hereafter thereabouts, either for the good of the Church, or of this Crown, or of them both; their welfare being seldom severed. I know not withstand∣ing how much those Provinces are lessened; and confess that dangers may daily grow greater there by the obstinate home-Rebellion, and by the malignant correspondencie which hath always been had there from neighbours. Yet when you shall well weigh the remainder of the yet obedient Provinces of Flanders, and shall add thereunto the other Forces which your so powerfull Monarchy will be able to subminister thereunto; wherefore may it not be hoped that your Majesties so just cause may be thereby bet∣tered, or at least be secured from growing worse? If the wars in those parts should cease by reason of this new propounded Principality, and that the expences should likewise cease there, this Crown would doubtlesly be thereby much eased; and in such a case it might the better be without those Provinces. But it being to be believed that War will grow hotter there then ever, through the love the Rebels have taken to Liberty and Heresie, and through the hatred which they consequently bear unto the Austrian blood, and especially to this Kingdom from whence the new Principality is to proceed; will not the burthen of the Forces and Expences lie still upon this Crown? If otherwise, To what purpose should a new Principality be erected, if it were not to be maintained by the Forces of Spain? So the prejudice which would redound to your Monarchy by the one side, would not be recompenced by any benefit from the other: And so wanting that advantage which it hath always received from the Flanders Forces, it might receive thereby such prejudice as might every day peradventure prove worse. Let Spain then keep Flanders; and let that your Empires Magazine of Arms be preserved. Great Empires cannot be without Arms; nor can Wars be made without Souldiers; nor Souldiers be bred but amongst Arms. And what more flourishing Seminary of Souldiers can Spain desire, then that of Flanders which she hath for so many years enjoyed, and doth still enjoy? My opinion therefore is, that your Majesty shall not doe well to mutilate those so important Provinces from your other Domini∣ons. Your Majesties greatness and infinite wisdom will not want other means whereby to accommodate the Illustrious Infanta according to her own high worth, and her exalted degree. But the Count of Castel Rodorigo was of another opinion, and spoke thus. I should never be of opinion (most glorious Prince!) that your Majesty should diminish any the least part of your Kingdoms and Dominions, if I should not think that that diminishing should tend rather to the advancement then prejudice of your greatness. The marriage of the most illustrious Infanta is now the business in hand; every one know what, and how sublime prerogatives both of blood and of merit meet in her Highness. Now if out of the immense body of so many States which your Majesty by Gods goodness are Master of, her Highness may be endowed with some of them, by the parting wherewith the rest may rather be bettered then impaired, where∣fore should not your Majesty willingly give way thereunto? And this being granted,
it is not to be doubted but that your infallible wisdom will presently point out unto you your Provinces of Flanders: They are most remote from all the rest of your Empire, the most differing both in tongue, custom, laws, and all things else: It is they, who more then all the rest abhor to fall under the Government of Foreigners, as they term them; and consequently do most desire to have a particular Prince of their own. Out of all these reasons, hardly was your Majesty gone from thence, when Heresie began to creep in amongst them From thence they proceeded to Tumults; from Tumults to Rebellion: and from Rebellion to a cruel War: The unquenchable fire whereof hath now burnt above these forty years; and how oft to bring it to an end, to boot, by the way of force, have you used treaties of concord? But still in vain, so unappeaseable hath the double rebellion of the Flemish proved against the Church, and against your Crown; and so very much have they continually been fomented by their neighbours on all sides: inso∣much as Holland and Zealand, and many other of those Provinces which are up in Arms, grow every day more obstenate in resolving never to return under the obedi∣ence of Spain. Then if you, who have lived whole years in those Provinces with such experience of their own particular affairs, and of the affairs of the whole world, with so many Forces, and so many valiant Commanders; when France was most grie∣ved with inward wounds, and England apprehended the like sufferings under a wo∣man; have not been able to shun such great losses in Flanders: why should we not fear that your successors may yet suffer every day greater? So as at last (which God forbid) this Crown may be wholly deprived of those Provinces. How much better souldiers do those Rebels daily grow? And how much better may France and England foment them now then they could have done formerly? France being at peace within it self; and England which daily expects the King of Scots for their King? The vils which Spain suffers from Flanders reacheth even to the Indies: & it is to be fear∣ed they may indammage you more in the West-Indies. then they have hitherto done in the East. As a Canker in any one member of a mans body works upon, and consumes the vigor of all the other members: So the ulcerate part of Flanders, makes the body of your whole Empire daily languish. The gold of the Indies, the people sup∣plyed from Spain, from Italy, and those which for the like end are continually raised in Germany, are not sufficient (as by experience is found) to maintain that war. The hunger of that ravenous Beast is still increased by food; and how much do muti∣nies devour? Which are now grown so Domestick, that as one ends another begins, and often teo much to our loss, divers happen at one and the same time. This is the condition of Flanders, and this is the state of the losses which the Crown of Spain hath thereby suffered till now, and of what they may suffer hereafter. My opinion therefore is, that your Majesty shall do well to give the Low-Countries in Dowry to the most Illustrious Infanta; whereof framing a principality in your daugh∣ter, and honouring the Cardinal Infanta your Nephew with her, by making him her husband, the Flemish will by this means have at last a Prince of their own, which is that which they at all times have so thirsted after. If the marriage of these new Princes prove fruitful, (as it is to be hoped it will) the yet obedient Provinces will continue their obedience to the Church, and Austrian blood at least, if not to the Crown of Spain. Nor is it to be doubted but that the same good and profitable cor∣respondency will pass between that branch and this, as hath past betwixt this and that other established in Germany. And to say truth, of what use may such an example be? In which it is seen that the Emperor your father, in great wisdom would there a∣grandise that Austrian branch, because he thought it impossible that the greatness of that and this joyned together, should continue here in your Spain, though the chief branch, but too far remote from Germany. Their neighbours will then rejoyce at this new Flemish Principality, and will assist it as much hereafter, for seeing it dis∣membred from this Crown, as they have been formerly averse thereunto; for that it was joyned to your Majesties Kingdom. Jealousies will be succeeded by assurances; instead of having the wars fomented from those parts, friendly offices will be done for the introducing of Peace: And the Flemish race being by this marriage established; why should we not hope that at last even the rebellious Provinces should by degrees reunite themselves, according to the ancient form with those which are obedient? In sine; either is this the remedy which remains to heal the wounds of those Countries; or we shall never finde any sufficient to effect it.
When Moura had spoken, the other Councellors gave their opinions. Jovanni d' Ideaques, a Councellor likewise of great authority with the King, joyn'd with Moura. Idiaques (as we have told you upon another occasion) had been Am∣bassador in Genua and Venice; and after other imployments being returned to Spain, did now exercise a place of the greatest importance belonging to that Crown. But there were divers others of the Councel who adhered to Fuentes his opinion. Wherefore the King was for a while in doubt what to doe: yet at last those reasons prevailed with him which first inclined him to give the Low-Countries in Dowry to the Infanta his eldest Daughter. He considered, and fore∣saw how France would grow daily greater in power; That the Queen of England being now very old, was to be succeeded by the King of Scotland, who would unite that Kingdom to England, and of them both make but one of all Great-Britain; That from those parts the Rebellion of Flanders would still be more and more fomented, and still he should be in greater danger of losing all those Provinces. He likewise foresaw the dangers wherewith the Indies might be con∣tinually threatned; and thought that if Flanders were reunited under an Austrian Prince, the Maritime Provinces returning again to enjoy as formerly the Com∣merce of the Indies, in that of Spain, they would no longer think of their new so long and so expensive Navigations. But the King seemed to be chiefly affected with the losses which the Church had already suffered in Flanders, and which they might again suffer at the same time together with him. And lastly it was be∣lieved, that to boot with the reasons formerly touched upon, this consideration swayed much with him, That in case his onely Son should dye, and the Infanta being in such a case to succeed him, he should doe wisely to give her a Husband who was already so well known, already becom a Spaniard, and who would cause no alteration in the affairs of Spain. The King being thus fully resolved, he caused the Articles of Marriage to be drawn up, the chief whereof were these. That he gave the Provinces of Flanders, together with the County of Burgony, in Dowry with his Daughter, which she was to enjoy joyntly together with her Hus∣band. That either Males or Females which should proceed from that marriage, should succeed; the men being notwithstanding to be preferred before the women, and still the first-born sons or daughters. That if the inheritance should rest in a woman, she should be bound to marry either a King, or Prince of Spain. That be the Heire either man or woman, they should not marry without the knowledg and consent of the King for the time being. That if the issue of the Princes of Flanders should fail, those Countries should revert to the Crown of Spain. That those Princes should be bound to make their Subjects desist from their Navigation into the Indies. That when they should come to their succession, they should swear to profess the Catholick Apostolick Roman religion. And that if they should fail in any of all these Conditions, those Countries should again revert to the Crown of Spain. These were the chief Articles. Neither in this Grant did the King reserve any thing to himself nor to any of his successors, save only that they might intitle themselves Dukes of Burgony, and retain the Order of the Golden-Fleece. The Marriage being agreed upon, the King immediately sent the Articles away to the Archduke, to the end that he calling together the States-Generall of the obedient Provinces as soon as he could, should procure their necessary consent. The As∣sembly was held in Brussels; and after some difficulties, the Articles were ap∣proved of, with unexpressible signs of joy & Jubile by those people to think that Flanders might hope to return again under its own ancient Principality. But it is not to be said how much contrary at the same time the other Provinces which had withdrawn themselves from the obedience of the Church and King of Spain, appeared to the sense of these Catholick Provinces: They spightfully gave out, that this would prove but a naked and vain Principality; That the Infanta being already well advanced in years, the Spaniards would with specious allurements give a barren Marriage unto Flanders; That therefore the new Princes would rather appear as Governors then as Princes; That being still to be maintained by Spanish Forces, the Spaniards would domineer over them more then ever; That in the Articles of Marriage, Flanders was spoke of as a Feudatory to Spain, and not as a Country depending upon its own Soveraignty; to witness which, those
Articles were full of Conditions whereby the States of the new Princes might soon fall again to the Crown of Spain. But that let what will happen, the United Provinces would never change their former Resolves, nor ever acknowledge any other Empire then their own. The Archduke prepared this mean while to go for Spain, whether the King was very earnest with him to come. But it behoved him first to provide for ma∣ny necessities appertaining to the affairs of Flanders. In particular the mutiners disorders were grown to that excess, as the plague thereof infected even the best qualified Garisons. It began first to creep into all those Towns of Picardy, which the Spaniards were to quit in relation to the peace. So as to restore them with satisfaction to the Garisons had cost a vast sum of mony. Afterwards in Flanders, the Garisons accustomed to be in the Citadels of Cambray, Antwerp and Gaunt, which were the three most suspicious Bulwarks of the obedient Pro∣vinces, did likewise mutiny. And this Infection in fine, was dispersed into so ma∣ny other parts, as one Garison seemed to contend with another, in shewing no further inclination, but rather a repugnancy to the service of the King of Spain Their want of pay might in some sort excuse them; but the corruption was much greater then it needed to have been. But at last, new monies coming from Spain, and the Country having furnished some, the Archduke was able to satisfie the souldiery, and to betake himself to his intended voyage for Spain. In his absence the Admiral of Aragon was to have the chief command of the Militia; and in the intire administration, Cardinal Andrea d' Austria, Bishop of Constance, who to this end was already parted from his house in Germany to come for Flan∣ders. The King desired very much to see his daughter married before he should die; wherefore he renewed his desires to the Archduke, that laying aside his Car∣dinals habit, and taking upon him the habit of a secular Prince, he should come unto him with all speed. Yet could not the Archduke hasten his journey, for to boot with the aforesaid reasons, the marriage being at the same time concluded between the Prince of Spain, and the Archdutchess Margaret of Austria, who was then at Grats, the chief Town of Carinthia, the Archduke was to take her from thence, together with the Archdutchess her mother, and to carry them both to Spain. This mean while Cardinal Andrea came into Flanders to govern those States, as you have heard, till such time as the new Princes should come. The Cardinal arrived some few days before the Archduke went thence: And having received full information concerning the affairs of those Countries; about the midst of September the Archduke took his journey towards Germany, first to vi∣sit his brother the Emperour, and then to go for Grats, as aforesaid. But he was not well thereinto entred, when he heard news that the King, still more opprest with years, and sickness, died about the midst of that very month. Who was then little above 70 years old; the last of which had been very painfull to him by reason of the extraordinary torment which he had suffered by the gout. Thus after having reigned three and forty years, dyed Philip the second, King of Spain, and Lord of so many other Kingdoms and Countrys. He was little of stature; but well proportioned; of a Noble aspect; in all the lineaments and colours thereof Austriacal. No age peradventure ever saw a graver, nor a more composed Prince. He had a capacity in Governing answerable to so large an Em∣pire. He was notwithstanding still more inclined to peace then war. Wherefore passing into Spain after his last voyage and abode in Flanders, he kept continual∣ly there; issuing out his Commissions from that Center, in his Chamber and like an Oracle: and governing Wars at all times where it was needfull by his Com∣manders. He had four wives, and by three of them he had many sonns and daughters. By the first he had Charls, whose Tragical end shews with what reason Princes thereunto constrained by just necessity, prefer the obligation due unto their States, before the love of their bloud. And by the last he had Philip the third, who hath given another Philip to the Government of the Spanish Mo∣narchy. By nature, and much more by choice, the second was very jealous of his Authority, in so much as he inclined to severity; nor was he almost ever seen to lay aside that Majestical gravity which he at all times, and in all his actions observed, both in his speech and countenance. He was very easie to give audi∣ence;
nor was he less gratious in tollerating them, then in giving them. It not being known that he ever interrupted any one, how much so ever the speaker might abuse his benignity and patience. He spent almost all the rest of his time in business; knowing that so vast an Empire required frequency in business. In the first place he was severely carefull of Piety and Justice. And did always imploy his worthiest Subjects in the administration of them both, chusing them of himself unexpectedly, according as their merits did suggest unto him. His so great age and so long Government, made him try the more various turns of Fortune; and made it the more appear how equal, how constant, and how much superior to himself he was in all successes. And indeed it may be doubted whe∣ther prosperous or adverse Fortune swayed most with him. For what greater fe∣licity could he desire then to enjoy Spain with so much quiet? then to command it wholly every where, with the addition of Portugal? then to enjoy so peaceably his Territories in Italy? and see himself so much respected in those that appertain∣ed to others? then to have the memmorable victory of Lepanto in favour of the Christians in so great a part attributed unto him? then to have so highly main∣tained the reputation of his name? and made the Majesty of his Empire be still so reverenced and feared? But he accounted it his greated fortune and glory to be held so great a defender of the Church; and that upon so many occasions, and in so many parts recourse was had to his zeal for the favouring and protecting there∣of. These and many others were his prosperities sundry times, both in peace and in war. On the contrary, what greater adversity could befall him, then to see Flanders amidst so long and so horrible troubles? then to lose so much of that his most antient patrimony? then to have his most remotest Countrys of the Indies wounded by that wound? Then to have so unfortunately lost that great Armado, which was to have assaulted England? Nor had his designs in the revolutions of France, any ways answered his hopes. The domestical events of his own house may likewise be said to have been not very fortunate. Having hardly one son by so many marriages. The fatal death of the first; with the suspitions also of Don Johns death. So much more seeming then true, are the felicities which the vulgar do so much adore in Princes. And so much greater proof thereof do they give who are in highest places with them. But in affairs of Fortune, as most of these were, humane wisdom is not to be blamed. For what remains, so eminent were Philip the second's vertues, and which made him so memorable a Prince, as doubtlesly few like him have been found either in former or in latter times.
THE HISTORY OF THE WARS OF FLANDERS, Written by CARDINAL BENTIVOGLIO. The Third Part. BOOK V. The Contents. The Archduke goes to carry the new Queen of Spain from Germany. They arrive happily at the King her husbands Court. The King hath this mean while power∣full Forces in Flanders. But great mutinies insue; and great sums of money are spent in appeasing them. So as for want of pay the Army is wintered in the neigh∣bouring Countrys of Cleves, and Westfalia, and in other places under the juris∣diction of the Empire. The Princes that are interessed are sensible of this No∣velty. They indeavour to receive satisfaction by way of Treaty; which not obtain∣ing, they at last resolve to have it by force. Yet they move but slowly. The Kings Army is this mean while drawn out into the field under the Government of the Admiral of Arragon General of the Horse, They advise what to fall upon; and by Cardinal Andrea's intervention, they resolve to enter the Island of Bomel, and to besiege the Town of Bomel which denominates that Island. But Count Maurice opposeth them with such Forces; as the Admiral is forced to forgoe that design. The Cardinal resolves afterwards to plant a great Fort upon a narrow passage of the Island; to the end that so he might command the chiefest passes over the Mause and Wahal; and cals it the Fort of St. Andrea. Great haste is made in the ere∣cting of it, and notwithstanding all the enemy could do, it is brought to perfection. The German Camp begins at last to move. It first besiegeth Reinberg, but soon
retreats with no great honour. From thence it goes to recover the Town of Res, and rises from thence likewise in great disorder and confusion. Great discords hap∣pen between the Commanders thereof: So as it soon disbands, and is afterwards dis∣solved. The new Princes of Flanders part from Spain. They come to Italy, and pass the Alpes at Turin. They come to their own Country. An Interview be∣tween them and Cardinal Andrea, who returns into Germany, and the new Prin∣ces are received with all solemnity in Brussels. PHILIP the second, King of Spain being dead, the Archduke hastens his journey, that he might the sooner Anno 1598. bring a wife to the succeeding Philip the third, to which purpose the Archduke was gone for Germany, as you heard before. He came with all speed to Prague, where having visited his brother the Emperor, he went to Grats; and from thence to Italy by the way of Tirol, with the new Queen, and her mother the Archdutchess. Pope Glement the eight was then in the City of Ferrara, which together with the Dukedome thereof, was devolved the year before to the Apostolick See. The occasion of this his neighbourhood was very acceptable to the new Queen and the Archduke, that so they might have their marriages celebrated by the Pope. Nor was the Pope less glad to celebrate them. They therefore passed from Trent with all their atten∣dance to Ferrara; where being received as became so great Princes, both their marriages were effected by the Pope in the Cathedral Church with such solem∣nity and magnificence as was most requisite for such an action, by such a hand, between such personages. The Kings part was supplyed by way of Proxy, by the Archduke, and the Infanta Isabella's by the Duke of Lasse, the King of Spains Ambassador in the Popes Court. The Queen departing then from that City, to∣gether with her Mother and the Archduke, they followed on their journey to∣wards Milan, where having staid a while, they went to Genua; and taking ship there, they in a few days fail arrived happily in Spain. Where we will leave them, and continuing to relate the affairs of Flanders, we will with all brevity acquaint you with what passed there till such time as the new Princes came thither. The Archduke at his departure had left these particular directions with the Ad∣miral of Aragon, That he should endeavour to preserve the Army as much as he could till his return from Spain. That therefore he should shun all difficult sie∣ges, so not to lose his men, nor be at greater expences. That by all means be should endeavour to get some good pass over the Rhine, that so if it were possible, he might enter the Enemies Country on the other side, and quarter his Army there. Which if he could not do, that then he should strive to quarter it in the neutral Countries of the Duke of Cleves, and others of the like nature therea∣bouts. The Archduke left this last condition in particular; to the end that such quarters might serve for pay to the Army; the needs whereof he could not sa∣tisfie otherwise, by reason of the vast sums of mony which the mutinies in so many parts had exhausted. To boot that the Archduke was necessitated to be at great expences by reason of so long and costly a journey, in which he had carried a flou∣rishing Court along with him, both for his own honour, and that he might attend the new Queen with all the greater magnificency. The Admiral having received these directions, and the Archduke being gone, the Admiral went immediately to the Army. Not many months before 4000 Spaniards were come to Flanders, to supply the foot which were wanting in the old brigadoes. One of which being formerly commanded by the Campmaster Velasco, who was now made General of the Artillery, was given to Gaspero Za∣pena. The Army was then composed of 7000 Spanish foot, 3000 Italians, 2000 Burgonians, 1000 Irish, and 7000 Germans and Walloons; and to these were added 2500 horse, all very gallant men. The Army past over the Mause near Ruremond, and continuing its march drew near Orsoy, which is situated three hours journey above Reinburg, upon the left side of the Rhine. The Admirals designe was to possess himself of that pass, and to fortifie it; and raising a Fort upon the other side, to secure the passage over the Rhine in that place. The Town
of Orsoy belonged to the State of Cleves; and therefore, it being a neutral Coun∣try he would not willingly have used any violence in entring into it: but it could not be effected otherwise, by reason of some opposition which was made; which soon ceased and the Admiral entred, causing all fair usage to be observed. When he was Master of the Town of Orsoy, Count Frederick di Berg, who then sup∣plyed the place of Camp-master General. past over to the other side of the Ri∣ver. to raise the aforesaid Fort as soon as might be on that shore. He had such men given him as were requisite to secure the work: nor was he wanting in using all diligence to perfect it; yet he was forced to imploy above a moneths time a∣bout it; during which the Admiral kept still in Orsoy, and quartered his Army thereabouts. When this pass was secured, it was judged by the Councel of war that that of Reinberg would have been much better, both in respect of the place it self, & for its nearness to Skincks Sconce. This Town was in the Enemies hands, and well guarded, as it was known; and by the Arch-Duke's direction the Admi∣ral was to shun sieges; yet the Councel though that this of Reinberg might soon be ended; for that the united Provinces had no Army in the Field, nor could they muster Forces any waies able to oppose the Kings: wherefore about the begin∣ning of October, the Admiral incamped before Reinberg. This Town, as hath been said, stands on the left shore of the River; it is but of a small circuit, it hath a Castle which guards the River, and an Island made by the River in that very place. For the greater security of the Town, there stood a Fort in the Island, which Fort was likewise defended by the Town: on the left side of the River did the Admiral quarter, with the greatest strength of the Army; and on the right side Count Frederick di Berg, with those that were al∣ready with him. And because it was thought fit first to get the Fort within the I∣sland, they began to play upon it cruelly from the side where Count Frederick was, till such time as the Camp-masters Lewis d' Villiar with his Spanish Brigado, and Barlotta with his Walloons entred the Island on that side; and Carlo Colonna and Estinley entred it likewise on this side with their Spanish and Irish Brigadoes. Then, the Fort was played upon nearer hand with regular batteries; and the Kings men prepared already to fall on; when they found that those within, not willing to abide the assault, had abandoned the Fort: which being taken, they hoped soon to take the Town; for the Army had already straitly besieged it on all sides, and having advanced their Trenches, prepared their Batteries, that ac∣cordingly they might come to the assault. But by a strange accident, they came by the Town sooner then they could have hoped. All the Gun-powder, where∣of there was good store, was kept in a Chamber of one of the Towers of the Castle. It so fell out that a Cannon Bullet, one of many which were continual∣ly shot from without, both against the Town and the Castle, entred by a win∣dow into the Chamber where the powder was kept, and gave suddenly fire there∣unto; which caused so terrible an earth-quake, not onely in the Castle and cir∣cuit of the Town, but in all parts thereabouts as the very river was much agita∣ted, and many ships which were upon that shore were likely to be drowned: the houses in the fields were shaken thereby: great stones and great store of Ashes caused by the fire fell down: but the force thereof was particularly such against the Castle, as it blew it almost wholly up into the air. The Governor of the Town with his wife and children were thereby slain, and great was the number of others that perish'd in the Castle and in the houses neer unto it. This made the Defen∣dants quite loose their courage; wherefore they treated that very night of surrendring, and afterwards marched out of the Town upon honorable condi∣tions. The Kings Forces being entred into Reinberg, all the adjacent Countries were put into great terror. A little below Reinberg, on the same side stood Burich, a Town belonging to the Duke of Cleves: This Town immediately accepted four Foot colours, which were sent thither by the Admiral. Over against Burich, on the other side lyes Wesel, one of the best inhabited, most merchandising, and best seated Towns of as many as stand upon the Rheine; which River runs by the best part thereof, and on another side the Lippa, anoble River falls into it. Wesel was likewise in former times under the Dukedom of Cleves: but being in∣fected
with Heresie, and by that means having brought it self into liberty, it hath ever since maintained it self therein, particularly by imbracing the Sect of Calvinism, as that which is most opposite to Monarchy. The Townsmen being sore afraid when they saw so great an Army approach it, that if they should receive in a Spanish Garrison, the City might fall into the Kings hands, or else that he might restore it to the house of Cleves, they treated presently of compounding by money for their not receiving in of Souldiers: And thinking that to promise free liberty for the exercise of the Catholick Religion hereafter in Wesel, would be of great help to them in their Treaty, they added this second offer to the for∣mer. The Admiral accepted of them both, willingly; so to get, in so great a strait such a sum of money, which was agreed to be 50000 Crowns, as also that so great an advantage might be got in such a City for the Catholick Religion: the monies being paid, and divers Priests and Votaries being admitted into the City who might excercise Ecclesiastical Rites, those Citizens were freed from being burthened with a Garrison. It was hoped that the Catholick Religion, and the exercise thereof would daily increase in Wesel, wherefore the Apostolick Nuntio for that coast of the Rheine, who usually recides in Colen, went thither, and was there received with great respect and honour: though the event shewed after∣wards, that all this was done fraudulently, only to give way to the present neces∣sity, as shall be said in its proper place. The Admiral passed with his Army from Burich, to the other side of the River; but very slowly; for they had not as yet made a Bridg of Boats, as they intended to doe. The Admiral would not therefore longer delay providing of winter∣quarters for the Souldiery. The Town of Res lies six leagues from Wesel, upon the same side on the lower part of the River. It is one of the best Towns in those parts; and the Inhabitants for the most part are Catholicks. The Admiral en∣deavoured by fair means to get some Souldiers into it: but the Townsmen refu∣sing to receive any, he was forced to use threats, and brought his Artillery before the Town; at the sight whereof they granted the desired Quarter. The City of Emrich did after the same manner receive likewise a Garrison. This is the greatest, and most Catholical Town in all the Dukedom of Cleves; and not above three leagues from Res. Emrich stands very near the River Ysel, upon which the United Provinces had many important places. The first which presented it self was Des∣burg, the taking whereof would have afforded the Kings Camp conveniencie of entring into the Velo, an Enemies country, which was very fruitfull, and where they very fain would have been; and which was also one of the straitest Orders that the Archduke had left at his departure. But the Enemy fearing this, had caused Count Maurice to come to those parts with good Forces. Considering therefore what opposition they were to meet withall, and the difficulties of the Siege it self, and especially the Year being so far advanced, the Councel of War did in no sort think it fit to make that attempt. The Admiral turned therefore a∣gainst Dotechem, a little weak Town not far from thence, but commodious for the better securing the quarters in Westphalia. The Town was plaid upon for some few hours, and the Kings men prepared already for the assault; but the Defend∣ants without any further opposition yielded of themselves. The Castle near Scu∣lemburg fell also into Velasco's hands, the Generall of the Artillery; and therefore very fitting to preserve the acquisition of Dotechem. And because so great rains had fallen, as the Army could keep no longer in the field, the Admiral resolved to quarter his men in the best Towns of Westphalia, as he had done in the Duke∣dom of Cleves. And he soon had his desire: For fair means not prevailing, such force as was thought necessary without much difficulty was likewise used in that Country. Yet it cost the Kings men some blood to get into some places: And particularly, as Velasco would have storm'd the Town of Dorst, he himself was wounded by a musket shot in the arm. The Admiral chose Res for his own winter quarters. He placed the Count Bucquoi for Governour of Emrick: which being so neer Schinks Sconce, and other places belonging to the Enemy, had so much the more need of a valiant Commander, as the Count was; though not long after being too forward upon a certain occasion of fight, he fell into the Enemies hands and was taken prisoner.
Whilst these affairs were in hand, the year 1599 began. And in the interim it was noised every where, that the Kings Army was by force quartered in the County of Cleves, and in Westphalia, both which belong to Germany. In former Anno 159. times those parts, as also the Countries of Juliers, Liege, Colen, and Trevers, and the other adjacent parts, were suffered to stand Newters both by the Spani∣ards and the United Provinces, both of them receiving friendly Quarter only by the way of passage. Wherefore seeing the Neutral right violated so openly, and in so wany places; it is not to be said how much all parties interessed were offend∣ed. A good part of Westphalia is subject to some Ecclesiastical Principalities, espe∣cially to those of Munster and of Paterborn, which were at that time enjoyed by Duke Ernestus of Bavaria, Archbishop and Elector of Colen, and also Bishop of Liege. The Dukedom of Cleves was also under its own peculiar secular Prince; who being at the present somwhat shallow-witted, suffered himself to be wholly governed by his Officers. These two Princes were most scandalized at the Kings Army, as being thereby most injured. But the Elector of Colen, by reason of the good correspondencie which he had always held with the King of Spain in the affairs of Flanders, inclined not to rescent himself by Arms, nor to joyn his Forces with those of the other interessed Princes; wherefore he could have desired that remedy might have been had fairly by the way of Treaty. On the other side, the Duke of Cleves Officers, were it either of themselves, or that they were won to do so by the other Princes, were of opinion that they must joyn their Forces and openly fight with them: and that making up a good body of an Army, they must at least drive the Kings men out of those places of theirs which they had possest themselves of; and by this present remedy secure themselves from all fu∣ture invasions. This advice was chiefly given by the Elector Palatine of Rheine, whose Territories lying very neer those parts where the Kings men were lodged; and knowing how much his family had ever favoured the insurrection and heresie of the Low-Countries, was therefore more affrighted then usually at this success. The Landtgrave of Hesse seemed to be agitated equally out of the same considera∣tions of neighbour-hood and heresie, nor were some Hans Towns upon the Rheine less moved out of the same reasons. It being then made a common cause, chiefly between the Duke of Cleves, the Elector Palatine, the Landtgrave of Hesse and many other Counts and Lords of quality, who were comprehended under the circle of Westphalia, they all endeavoured to draw the other circles of the Empire into the same cause or at least the nearest circles, which were conse∣quently most concern'd. Great was the commotion every where; but it being thought fittest first to use Treaty before Arms, recourse was had unto the Empe∣ror, who was easily perswaded to use his Authority, in such manner, as upon this occasion he thought best. He therefore published a strict Edict, wherein he commanded the Admiral and all the other heads of the Kings Army, that they should forth with restore those Towns which they had taken, and march with all their men out of all such places as did any waies belong unto the Empire. He mediated the same likewise very much with Cardinal Andrea; but the necessities of the Army not being otherwise to be provided for at that time, the Cardinal and Admiral alledged many excuses by way of justification; and still endeavo∣red to enjoy that conveniency which they received by being so quartered. The aforesaid Princes and Hans Towns had often before, according to the use of Germany, had meetings to treat of this common cause: but being desirous to re∣solve at last on somewhat, their last meeting was appointed at Confluenza, a Town belonging to the Arch-bishop of Treves, and seated where the Mosel falls into the Rheine. Here the Deputies wo met, striving who should most complain a∣gainst the Spanish Forces, they in dispiteful terms exagerated how worthily the German Empire was then delt withal. That in former times the very name thereof was reverenced in all parts. And when was it ever known that the neutrality profest in her Countries neighbouring up∣on Flandess, touching the Forces of Spain and their Adversaries, was openly viola∣ted? That now the Spanish Forces, breaking all Laws, both of particular neutrali∣ty and common justice, had not onely possest themselves of one or two of their Towns, but had hostily invaded whole States. Say money was wanting to maintain them;
must Germany therfore supply them? and by the estates of her miserable people satisfie the vast immealurate desires of others? That they had first recourse to Cesar; but reaped little good thereby. That this occasion shewed, as it was seen in so many others, of what advantage it was to the house of Austria in Spain, to enjoy the succession of the Empire as hereditary, from that other branch of the same house in Germany: and that therefore fair means having done no good in so weighty an occurrency, they must now resolutely betake themselves to arms. That if so small a part of the Lower Germany had thrown off the Spanish yoke, how much more easily might it be denyed to be received by so great, so powerfull, and so majestical a body as was the Upper Germanies. With these and the like bitter complaints, the Deputies raged against the above∣said Novelty of the Spanish arms. Nor did they any longer contain themselves. Monies and men being promised according to the abilities of every one that was concerned, whereby to raise an Army, they resolved to put it speedily in executi∣on: and even then they chose the Count di Lippa to be the head thereof. He was one of the chief Lords of Westphalia; and was already Lieutenant General of all the Forces of that Circle. This was the resolution taken at this meeting. But when they were parted, their actions bore no correspondency with their words. So as the Army was very slow in being brought into the field, as shall be said in its proper place. The Cardinal Andrea had this mean while with all fervency taken upon him the administration of the Government. According to the use of other Governors, he had taken up his usual residence at Brussels; whether in the beginning of the year some of the Elector of Cullen, and Duke of Cleves Deputies were come un∣to him from their Masters. Who added their own intercessions to those of the Emperor, to the end that the Cardinal might take the speedier course to remedy the novelties committed in their Ecclesiastical and Temporal States. They were honourably received by the Cardinal, and sent back with good hopes. And real∣ly he seemed to be very sensible of such a disorder: yet not being able to over∣come the necessity which the Army was in, he must himself yield to the same Force. The Elector of Cullen for the aforesaid reasons was still for the way of Treaty; but the Duke of Cleves, or to say better, his Officers by whom he was governed, quickly falling from their desired hopes, had already resolved together with the rest that were concerned to take up arms. The Spanish Carisons which were in mutiny in the Castles of Antwerp and Gaunt, could not yet receive satis∣faction. Therefore the Cardinal went in the beginning of February to Antwerp, that he himself might see those payments made, and to see whether he could bor∣row so much money as might in some sort satisfie the Armies necessity, and make them the sooner go out of those States which appertained to the Empire. Both those Garisons were paid. And because in that of Gaunt they were so modest as not to receive any souldier from without, the same Garison was therefore permit∣ted to guard the Castle. On the contrary, that of Antwerp had used great inso∣lencies, both by shamefully driving out the Governour Augustine Messia; and in receiving in many other Spaniards, to those of the usual gard, and in being ex∣tream in their demands of pay. Wherefore it not being thought fit to leave such an excess unpunished, the Cardinal changing the Garison, caused Proclamation to be made, That upon pain of life all those that had been of the former Garison, should within fifteen days be gon out of all the Provinces which were obedient to the King of Spain. Nor did their punishment cease here: for, for the odious name of Mutiners, and of the Kings Army, against which all the neighbours were then so incensed, and for that it was said they went away full of mony, the most of them were seased upon by the way, pillaged, and slain. When the Cardinal had put a new Garison into the Citadel of Antwerp, and had the luck to raise some considerable sums of money, he went from thence to Mastrick; where he was met by the Admiral, and the other chief Officers of the Army. And long discourse was had touching what was to be done, when the Ar∣my should go into the field. But there was no resolution then put on, because it was too early in the year. About the end of March the Cardinal parted from thence, with all the rest towards the Town of Res, where the Admiral had made a bridg of boats over the Rhine. And having tarryed some days there, he went
to Emrich, and threw the bridg over thereabouts. The souldiers by reason of their so good quarters were but little lessened in their number; so as they might still make a body of 18000 Foot, and 2300 Horse. The time of drawing into the field being then come, they first consulted to what sort of enterprise they should apply themselves. Schinks Sconce is some two leagues beneath Emrick, the situation whereof we have described in another place, when Martin Schink from whom it had its name propounded it to Count Maurice, and had afterwards the charge of seeing it built, and of keeping it. But we will here touch upon somwhat of new, and will likewise give you a particular notice of the Island called Bomel, which is not far from thence; because the Kings Army was then imployed in those parts. The Upper-Germany is for a long trackt of ground watered first by the Rhine. Here as it comes nearer the Low-Countries, not being able to keep longer within its former Channel, by reason of so many other Rivers which fall every where into it, it divides it self into two branches, each of them almost of equal greatness with it self. These two bran∣ches frame the ancient Iland of the Battavians, and at this hour it continues the corrupted name of Bettow. That of the right hand doth for a good space keep the name of Rheine, till assuming the name of Lech, it goes with other waters, and with other names thorow Holland, till it looseth it self in the Sea. The left branch as soon as it parts from the Rheine, takes upon it the name of Wahal, con∣tinuing which name for a long space, it at last joyns it self with the Mause. But these two Rivers are not well joyned, when they part again, and do not rejoyn till they have made an Iland of some good circuit, which is called Bomel; taking its name from the chief Town therein. Having formed this Island, these two enter not long after joyntly into Holland; where together with other Rivers dispersing themselves into divers Gulfs, and carrying as it were new Seas into the Sea, they at last by many spacious mouths disgorge themselves and falls into the Ocean. Upon the very point of this great Island of Bettow stands Schinks Sconce, and is raised there with so much advantage, both of Nature and Art, as greater is not peradventure seen any where else. Four leagues lower upon the Banks of Wa∣hal is the City of Niminghen seated, with her great Fort on the right hand bank. Descending much lower from thence, where the Mause and Wahal meet first to∣gether, you finde the Fort Worden, and presently the other point of the Island called Bomel, formed by the Mause and Wahal, in manner aforesaid. The Town of Bomel stands upon the banks of Wahal, about the midst of the Island; on that side the River it self secures it sufficiently. And it is provided with ne∣cessary defences on the other side: And this may suffice for the abovesaid discription. Cardinal Andrea not willing to keep longer out of the field, mustered the whole Army, about the end of April, in the parts of Rheine towards Emrich: and to satisfie them in some degree, gave them one pay. And upon discourse what was to be undertaken, the Councel of war were of several opinions. They all agreed that in the first place Wahal was to be past over, and that they were to ad∣vance as far as they could into the Enemies Country. But divers were the opinions concerning what they should fall upon. The Admiral of Aragon was very earnest for the straitning of Schinks Sconce. And what greater acquisition (said he) can we make? It is the most important seat of the Rhine. By this Key the passage of greatest consequence thereabouts is opened and shut; So as when we shall have fixt our foot there, we may endeavour other ac∣quisitions in those parts, and hope to atchieve them with much safety. When we shall be entred first into the Island, we must draw a great Trench from one branch of the Ri∣ver to the other, so as the Fort shall not be able to be succoured by land. If the Ene∣my will send any relief by way of the Rivers, they must send it against the streame; so the effect thereof may easily be hindered by armed barks on both sides. Such a fiege considered with all its circumstances, will doubtlessly prove difficult; but when it shall be effected, as it is to be hoped it will be; the more difficulties we meet with, the grea∣ter will our honour be. So many weighty objections were made against this the Admirals opinion, both for bringing the Army into the Island, by reason of opposition which might
be made by the Enemy; and for their not being able to keep out succour by wa∣ter, wherein the enemy did so far exceed them in power, as many of the Coun∣cel thought it would prove a desperate siege. They instanced in the Duke of Parma for example, who when the sconce was hardly tenable, would never en∣deavour to take it. Others advised to go at the same time against Niminghen and against its Fort on the contrary shore. Thinking that so great an Army might undertake both these sieges at once. But in this, the opposition which they should find in passing the Wahal, to besiege the Fort was considered. As also that the Duke of Parma was sate down before it, and forced to raise his siege. And that the difficulties in besieging Niminghen would afterwards prove much greater. A City of a large circuit, and which as it was well munited, would be well defend∣ed. Others finally propounded, that passing lower over the Mause, as they might easily do, the Army should march into the Island of Bomel, and should try to take the Town, situated, as hath been said, upon the Banks of Wahal. Thinking that by the taking thereof they might command the whole Island, as also the Pass of that River. The City of Balduke which was then in the Kings hands, is very near the Island of Bomel. Wherefore it was considered that the making of this purchase would be very advantagious for that City and that it might be the better kept when it should be united to that Frontier. The Cardinal inclined to this resolution: and keep∣ing it very secret, it was resolved that to cosin and divert the enemy, they would seem to besiege Schincks Sconce. Count Frederick di Berg parted thus from Em∣rick with 7000 fot, and 1000 horse, and came almost within Canon shot of the Sconce on that side: and the Cardinal passing over to the other side of the River, with the rest of the Army, made the Admiral advance in like manner towards the Fort. They then began to play upon it furiously from both sides with many pieces of Artillery: not being able notwithstanding to do any thing but batter and indamage it. Upon this motion of the Kings Camp, Count Maurice made his move also, and came to within sight of the Fort. He doubted that the Kings men would effectually pass over Wahal, and get into the Island to begirt the Fort by land. Wherefor he immediately fent away a great number of Pyoniers, that they might raise a Trench towards the suspected shore, whereby the pas∣sage of the Kings men might be the more impeded. He afterwards manned it sufficiently for defence, and sent 80 English into the Fort. And passing him∣self afterwards with a great part of his Army into the Island, he totally secured it. The Kings men continued notwithstanding to play incessantly upon it; nor were those of the Fort less slow in letting fly at them. And because the seat there∣of is low, Count Maurice caused a great Platform to be raised without, and pla∣ced some great Canon upon it, whereby he so much indamaged the Kings men on that side the Admiral was, as he slew above four hundred of them in a few days. The Enemies Camp being by the Spaniards cunning thus imployed, the Cardi∣nal had in the interim sent the Campmasters, Zapena, Estenly and Barlotta, with their Spanish, Irish, and Walloon Brigadoes, and with some horse commanded by Henry di Berg, to try whether they could get into the Island or no, by passing over the Wahal on any side a little lower. These made up the number of 4000 foot, and 600 horse. The Cardinals Orders were, That they should endeavour to pass the River two leagues above a certain Town called Tiel, where for divers circumstances it was thought more feisable. The good event thereof con∣sisted chiefly in secrecy. But Maurice having an eye every where, got notice of it and sending some armed boats down from Niminghen, he ordered them to make fitting opposition by the River. Wherefore these men, when they found their de∣signe discovered, were very much in suspence, and afterwards varied much amongst themselves touching what they were to take in hand. Zapena was of opinion, that howsoever they were to try the passage, and Estenly was of the same mind; on the contrary Barlotta thought it would be to no purpose, and that to endeavour it, would be the loss of many men. They notwithstanding put some of their boats into the River, and from the shore-side sunk three of the enemies boats, with the Artillery which they brought with them. And endeavoured to get with their
men which were imbarked, to the contrary shore. But finding great obstacles both by land and water, they saw they could not make the passage. From thence the Kings men went down the River, with their boats and the rest of their soul∣diers and provisions, on the left shore. And the enemy did the like on the other side, that they might be the readier to meet with them every where. The Cardi∣nal had given order that if they could not pass the Wahal, they should at una∣wares affail the Fort Worden, and indeavour to take it: which if they could not do, that then the Campmasters were to use all diligence to get into the Island of Bomel, and to secure themselves there of the Pass, in the best manner they could. As for getting the Fort, they had no hopes to effect it, considering what the ene∣my had done. Wherefore leaving Wahal, and carting their boats again, they went forthwith towards the Island of Bomel; and coming to the Mause about the Village Emple they past it with such secrecy, as they scarce met with any im∣pediment. At their entrance into the Island, they took the Castle Hill which was nearest the shore; and did thereby so much the more secure themselves of the Pass Then coming again out of the Island, according to the directions which the Cardinal had first given them, they went against the Fort Crevecoeur, which was not far from thence. This Fort was very prejudicial to Balduke, because it shut up the mouth of a River, which runs through that City, and which not a∣bove a league from the walls thereof, falls into the Mause. The Cardinal there∣fore intending to make himself Master thereof willed the aforesaid Campma∣sters, that when they should have secured the pass whereby to enter into the Island, they should incamp before that Fort. Which when they had done, and had given the Cardinal notice of it, and of all that they had done besides; the Kings Camp rose presently from before Schincks Sconce, and went to before Cre∣vecoeur; which was not in a condition of making any considerable resistance; wherefore the Army was no sooner quartered about it, and had threatned it with batteries and assaults, but that those within, expecting no longer, and without making almost any resistance, quitted the Fort. The Cardinal was this mean while gon to Balduke, to make divers provisions there for the business of Bomel. And therefore the Admiral after the taking of Crevecoeur, turned towards the Island of Bomel, and entred thereinto with all his Army about the beginning of May. Great banks are made all along the sides of those Rivers, to defend the fields, which are subject to innundation. The Army parting thus from the Mause, marched upon the bank on the right hand, and bending towards the Wahal, staid in the Village Hervin, which stands upon the same River; in which were many of the enemies men of war: For Count Maurice had discovered the Cardinals intention, and therefore had not o∣mitted to prepare such obstacles as were fitting by water, that the Kings men might find more difficulty in passing it. They notwithstanding indeavoured by their Artillery to drive away those Vessels, and did somewhat prejudice them; but they putting themselves into some creeks that were in the River, the Kings men could never free themselves from that opposition They past from Hervin; and drawing nearer Bomel, they quartered their Army in sundry parts: one part thereof was lodged upon the bank; and the rest more inward, according to the opportunity of the situations. Maurice was this mean while come with all speed, and with the most of his Army; and quartering on the other side of the River in the face of Bomel, he had sent 1000 foot thereinto for the better defence thereof. Here with all diligence he placed two bridges over the River; the one above the Town, the other beneath it: the one was of small boats for the foot to pass over; and the other of greater flat-bottomed boats which served for the horse, and commodity of Carriages: and this was so broad as two Carts might pass one by another upon it. The Bridges being thrown over, he sent 3000 foot more, and 400 horse for the defence of Bomel: and the Town not being capa∣ble of so many men, hequartered them without the Town; and did so shelter them with Trenches, Flankers, Redouts, Ditches and strade coperte, as Bomel of a little Town, seemed suddenly as if it were a large City. The Kings men were ve∣ry much indamaged by the Enemie; Artillery, before they could sufficiently fence themselves on the Rivers side: For being at the same time thundred upon both
by those of Bomel, and by those that were placed upon the contrary shore and in the ships that were in the River, they knew not well what to doe, nor how to defend themselves. But at last, such Rampiers of earth as were requisite being made, and many Peeces of Artillery being placed upon the bank, they likewise began to play furiously upon the Town of Bomel, and upon all those Works wherein the Enemies Forces were lodged without the Town; nor was the damage little which they did them, till they sheltred themselves better. This mean while the Enemies whole Army was met together; which was so increased, as it amounted to 18000 Foot, and above 3000 Horse. And Maurice having quartered them in divers Towns and Villages on the same shore that he was, seemed not any thing to value the siege which the Royalists had undertaken; nay rather, his men, which were in such numbers in Bomel, resolving rather to play the parts of assailants then assailed, began to issue out against the Kings men, and to annoy them in sundry sorts both day and night. They notwithstanding forbore not to advance with their Trenches, covering them as well as they could, and securing them better then formerly by oblique Windings and Redouts. But the besieged, willing to use all their force to the contrary, sallied out on divers sides, about the midst of May, against the Royalists; and in such numbers, as it might be thought rather an intended Battel then a Sally. The Italians and Wal∣loons were quartered upon the Bank above Bomel; the Spaniards in certain Pa∣stures; and the Germans, Burgonians, and Irish were quartered on another side. The Enemy being recruited by new men which Count Maurice had sent unto them from the other side the River, sallied out about Noon at once, against all the aforesaid quarters; and that they might the more indamage that which was quartered upon the Bank, they placed above 30 Barks loaded with Artillery in the River just over against it. The first assault was made on that side by 3000 Foot, and 400 Horse; and 4000 Foot, with a proportionable number of Horse, divided into two parts, gave on upon the other quarters. The Kings Camp was very vigi∣lant; so as the Enemy came not so suddenly out, but they were ready to receive them. The fight was therefore very resolute on both sides; the Enemy striving to get into the Kings works, and the others valiantly defending them. Nor was the business less hotly disputed between the Horse: nor did the Artillery of both parties forbear to play at the same instant violently. But the Enemy at last not being able to have the better of the Royalists, they resolved after three houres fight to retreat. The number of the slain and of the wounded was much alike of both sides; and the action well considered was cause of greater noise, then loss of blood. The Enemy returned the next night to assault the Kings men; thinking that they should find them the less provided, for that they would not in likelihood expect so suddenly such an assault. The charge was notwithstanding only upon the Italians and Walloons: And truly it came so unexpected, as at the first falling on many of both those Nations were slain and wounded; and Avalos the Italian Campmaster was in particular sorely hurt. The Enemy had the better of the Assault for a while: But the Kings men rallying together, and reassuming cou∣rage, did so well defend their Trenches, as the Enemy not being able to injure them, retired. They were notwithstanding much inheartned by finding their numbers still so increase, so as within three dayes after they returned to make a brisk assault upon the Kings men, and resolved to make it by night, to the end that it might come so much the more unlooked for, and be the more dreadfull. Monsieur de la Nue was come from France, with many Hugonots, to serve the United Provinces. He was son to the late Monsieur de la Nue, a so cry'd up Commander, and of whose valour you have often heard in divers parts of this History. This man in his military comportment proved himself worthy to be the son of such a father. Count Maurice therefore gave him the chief charge of this new sally; and would have it performed chiefly by the French Foot, together with a select number of English, which in all might come to about 5000 Foot. The assault was chiefly to be made against the Works which the Kings men con∣tinued to make upon the bank, and in those neighbouring parts. La Nue there∣fore sallied out couragiously, and assisted by a fog, gave so fiercely on upon the
Royalists, as he put them in disorder. The Walloons had the Van, with the Camp∣master Achicurt, who had then the command thereof: He and his men failed not to make all possible resistance; till being himself sorely wounded, and the Enemies force still increasing, he was forced to retire, and to crave a new recruit of men. But the noise of the Assault had already caused those of the Royalists who were nearest hand to move, and had given the Alarm to those that were further off, so as the whole Army was in a readiness to fight. Some Companies of Spanish and Italian Foot were to come first in to the assistance of the Wal∣loons. These stopping the fury of the Enemy, did stoutly sustain them; and fresh men coming in, they secured their Trenches. And the Enemy despairing of doing any further damage when the day began to break, retreated in very good order; being pursued by the Kings men to beneath the Fortifications and wals of Bomel, and the fight continuing still fervent on both sides. The siege had by this time been laid twenty dayes, and no considerable progress had been made. And it was plainly seen, that the enterprise would prove totally vain; since they could not keep the besieged Town from being relieved, and that Count Maurice was there∣abouts with so great Forces. The chief end of the Kings men in endeavouring to get Bomel, was that they might have a strong Hold upon the Wahal, so as they might command the Pass of that River, and might introduce themselves into the heart of the Enemies country, and especially into Holland. Despairing then of the enterprise of Bomel, the Cardinal propounded, that a Fort Royal might be raised in some part of the same Island, whereby they might reap the same end. Where the Mause and Wahal met first together, and then imediately part again, they shape a certain point of ground, which delating it self a little, doth afterwards grow straiter; from thence doth the Island afterwards inlarge, and extend it self, till the two aforesaid Rivers meet again and inclose it: it was therefore propounded unto the Cardinal that a great Fort should be raised in that narrowest neck of ground, by which they should possess themselves of all that Avenue which lay between the one River and the other; which might prove a great curb to the Enemy, and which would keep them more in awe then that of Schink would have done, for that it was nrer their very bowels then the other was. The Cardinal was mightily herewithall pleased; and causing it to be well discussed in the Councel of War, it was with a general applause agreed upon. Nor herewithall contented, he would go with some of the chief Commanders to the very place it self, and there put on his last resolve; which was, That by all means the Fort must be raised and must with all speed be begun. The Cardinal resolving upon this, presently raised the Camp from before Bomel, which was done about the beginning of June; and the charge of seeing that effected which was resolved on, was chiefly given to Velasco Generall of the Artillery. The siege being abandoned, the Camp removed to the Village of Hervin, and came coast∣ing from thence to the place where the Fort was intended to be built. Count Maurice, having discovered the design, past over likewise a little higher upon the contrary shore and staid just over against the Kings Camp: He afterwards placed many Peeces of Artillery upon that side, and with them began immediately to annoy the Kings men who were to begin the raising of the Fort on the other side of the same Wahal. The like was done by Velasco on the other side against the Enemy. And because the Artillery plaid furiously from both sides, Maurice raised a great Trench on his side for his better defence; and added thereunto a great Platform so large at the top, as 20 Peeces of Cannon might be placed upon it. Velasco put himself in the same posture on his side, with a like great Trench and Platform. Insomuch as the like Offences and Defences were made at the same time by both Parties. But before these were sufficiently raised, the Artillery and Muskets did so incessantly play from both sides, as more then 1200 men were slain or wounded in both Camps. Velasco having at last sufficiently fenced himself, great hast was made in raising the Fort. It was planted (as we have said in the nar∣rowest part of that point of Land: Two royal Bastions were raised towards the Wahal, two the like towards the Mause, and a fifth towards the Land. All these were well suited with Curtains, and the Rivers were to serve for Ditches on the sides, the other parts being to be munited with other large and deep Ditches in
the best befitting manner. Three thousand souldiers guarded the works; one thousand of which with two thousand Pioniers, wrought incessantly upon them. The Fort Worden, which was in the enemies hands, was very near the place where the Kings men raised their Fort. Maurice resolved to go thither; wherefore passing with the most of his men over the Wahal, he tarried there, intending to an∣noy the Royalists works at a nearer distance: which that he might the better do, he threw over a bridge, and sent 3000 foot unto the point of the Island of Bo∣mel, and possessed himself of a Village called Herverden. Here those men did so fortifie themselves, as the Kings men began to be much indamaged by them, Who were not long in using all means to drive them from thence. To this purpose Count Frederick de Berg went with a great body of foot, al∣most all Spanish, who made a fierce assault; but they were so stoutly withstood by the enemy, partly through their works, and partly through their own valour, as they were forced to retreat, after having lost above 300 of their men, amongst which were divers Captains, and other personages of quality; yet did the work∣ing about the Fort never cease: For all the foot being quartered in those parts, diligent gards were kept, and were reinforced according as occasion required. The horse could not be quartered within the Island by reason of the straitness of the place, and for that there was no forrage there to be had: wherefore they were gon beyond the Mause, towards Brabant; and kept there about Mega in diverse Villages which were nearest the Camp, from whence they might receive necessary succours, by a bridg over the same River. But for their better security, they raised a Fort upon a certain part of the bank, where they might have been easilyest injured by the enemy: yet they being thus parted from the rest of their Company, Count Maurice hoped he might assult them upon advantagious terms, and that he might give them a notable blow. To this purpose he threw a bridg over the Mause from the Fort Worden to the other side, and giving 6000 choice foot to Colonel Vere, an English-man, and to Monsieur de la Nue, a French∣man, and 1500 horse to Count Ernestus of Nassaw, he ordered them to be rea∣dy to fall upon the enemies horse, when he should think it fitting. The aforesaid Fort was not as yet made sufficiently defensible, which was called Durango, for that Diego Durango a Serjeant Major of a Spanish brigado had the charge there∣of. The horse were commanded by Ambrosio Landriano who was their Lieute∣nant General; who was not negligent in using all necessary diligence both in placing the gards, and in being himself present where any occurrency called him. To boot with this Fort Durango, which was not yet finished, Landriano had en∣deavoured to secure all that tract of the bank about which the horse were quar∣tered, with divers good Redoubts. Maurice resolved to effect his aforesaid de∣signe before the Fort Durango should be made fully defensible. It was in the Beginning of June, when one morning about the break of day, Count Ernestus, Vere and La Nue, passing over the Mause with their foot and horse, began to move. They were of necessity to possess themselves first of the Fort Durango, that they might not have it as an obstacle both in their assault and retreat. Vere and La Nue went therefore with the most of their foot to assault the Fort: Count Ernestus sheltering the foot with his horse, as well as the place would per∣mit him to do. The assault was exceeding resolute and fierce: Vere's English, and La Nue's French, were seen to vie with one another in the fight; and not only souldier with souldier, but Captain with Captain. A good many ladders being applyed unto the walls, they all strove to get upon the Fort; nor could they now make any longer use of muskets, or of pikes, but flew to it with their swords and shields. In the Fort were 500 Spanish and Walloon foot; and they striving likewise which of them should best make good the defence, fought with wonderfull undauntedness: and though the works of the Fort were yet but weak, the imperfections thereof being supplyed by the valour of hands, the fur∣ther the assailants advanced, the greater resistance did they meet withall. The business lasted thus a good while: at the noise of the assault, the Admiral was this mean while advanced, with the greatest part of his foot to come in unto the succour. This caused much terror in the enemy; wherefore first cooling in their fight, they began at last to give back, and in fine, resolved to retreat, above 300
of them being slain, and about 70 of the Kings men. The foot succeeding but ill in their assault. Count Ernestus would make no further attempt with his horse. And Landriano was already prepared with his horse so, as the enemy could have done him but little hurt though they should have assaulted him. This was the last action which happened between the two Camps; for the Fort Durango being soon afterwards compleated, and the horse quarters being still better secured, Count Maurice betook himself to nothing more on that side; nor could he do any thing on the other side within the Island of Bomel, where the great Fort was in building: for the work was already so far advanced, as it want∣ed but very little of being perfected. Cardinal Andrea desired very much to see it finished before he should quit the Government, and therefore he himself went often thither to sollicite the building thereof. Not long before, his brother, the Marquis of Burgaut was come to visit him; who had formerly served the King under the Duke of Parma. The Fort being then almost totally finished, the Cardinal came to give it his last visit, and brought his brother with him; each of them very well viewing all the works, and giving such orders as were requisite in all places. In midst of the Parado, a Church was intended to be built; the first stone whereof the Cardinal's self did lay; and in relation to his own name, and for the particular devotion which he bore to that Saint, he called both the Church and the Fort St. Andrea. This Ceremony was performed with all military rejoy∣cing, the Canon thundring on all sides out of the Castle, which were seconded by the souldiers joyfull acclamations, as if that Bulwark should be perpetually kept for the Kings advantage, and that Holland should be thereby chiefly curbed. And yet you shall quickly see, that the Fort was afterwards basely delivered up to the Enemy, or rather sold unto them to the great ignominy of the Garison that was in it: and certainly in common opinion the Fort was impregnable, if it had been well provided for and defended: and it was thought it would have been a great terror to all the enemies Country over against it; and particularly to Hol∣land, nearest the very heart whereof it stood: Nor was it long ere it was fully finished. It commanded the Mause on one side, and the Wahal on the other. Each of the five Bastions were of equal proportions, and stood very handsomly at equal distances from forth the Curtains. And where the ditches were made, the water was above a Pikes length deep. Thus by their means was the one Ri∣ver joyned to the other; the Mause sometimes contributing water to the Wahal, and sometimes the Wahal to the Mause, according to their several exuberances. The Strade Copertè ran to without about the Ditches; from which likewise ma∣ny Redoubts were also thrust out to defend them the better: and the more to anoy the enemy, twelve great Frigats were placed in the Ditches, that they might be continually the readier to put into those Rivers. This was the condition of the Fort St. Andrea. The United Provinces knew very well how prejudicial it might prove unto them, and therefore Count Maurice caused another Fort to be built on the contrary shore; not a Royal one; but only sufficient to keep the Kings men from making that passage, if at any time they should attempt it, and that they might make the fewer incursions into those parts. But it is now time that we should acquaint you with the successe of those Forces which the Confederate Germans were to put together, for the aforesaid occasions. Persevering in the resolution which they had put on at Confluence, they did not let slip making necessary provision for the putting of it in execution: yet mony not coming in either so plentifully or so speedily as the condition of the business required; and all things else being carryed on with the wonted slack∣ness of the Nation, and with the usual difficulties of making several interessed parties joyn in the same opinion. The Count di Lippa, who was chosen Com∣mander in chief, could not so soon assemble all the Forces together which were to come from so many several places. The United Provinces used all possible means to incite the Confederates, pressing the opportunity of the present con∣juncture, whilst the Kings Army was busted in the taking of Bomel, and after∣wards in building the Fort St. Andrea. They advised particularly that the Ger∣man Camp might joyn with theirs, alleadging that by this means, and by so many
Forces, the Spaniards might not only be driven out of the Empire, but might be brought to great straits in Flanders. To make these their endeavours the more efficacious, the same Provinces had sent their desires by Count Hollach: who meeting with Count Lippa, did no more part with him. These demonstrations of the United Provinces were very welcom to the Confederate Germans, and were willingly imbraced by them, to cause the more fears and jealousies in the Spaniards. On the other side, Cardinal Andrea had used all diligence so to sweeten affairs, as the Confederates might be kept from breaking forth into Arms. When the Kings Army marched into the field, that part thereof which was quartered in Westphalia was taken totally from thence. The Cardinal had caused the City of Emrich to be again delivered up to the Duke of Cleves, and gave assured hopes that Res and the other Towns appertaining to the same Prince should be suddenly likewise surrendred. Nor was the Elector of Colen wanting in continuing his former intercessions with both the parties. These Negotiations had this of operation, That not to irritate too much the Forces of the King of Spain, the Confederate Germans would not joyn their Army in a body with the United Flemish; thinking that it was sufficient for them to reassecure their Neutralities which had been violated. They seemed to be very resolute herein: And therefore not any whit relying upon the aforesaid hopes, but fearing lest the Kings men would not only not go out of the Neutral Towns where they yet were, but that they might think of wintering again in those where they had not yet been, they resolved no longer to delay the assembling of their Army. They appointed their Rendezvouz to be upon the banks of the Rhine to∣wards Reinberg; where all their Forces met not before the beginning of August. Their numbers were much more considerable then their conditions: They con∣sisted of 25000 Foot, as it was said, and of 4000 Horse; but most of them new and weak men, under a Generall of but small experience, and under other Com∣manders who were but weak also, and of little esteem. The first effect of their marching was, that those of Wesel would no longer continue in the Catholick re∣ligion. We shewed you before, that they fainedly received it; but now encou∣raged by the neighbouring German forces, and for that the Kings forces were imployed in other parts, they resolved again to inhibit all Catholick rites in that City, and that Heresie should only reign there and the profession thereof, as before. The Apostolick Nuntio of Colen was as yet in Wesel; who understand∣ing what resolution they had put on, went out of the City, as did also all the Priests and Votaries; which the common people did not forbear to injure, espe∣cially some Votaries, whom they seemed most to detest. The affairs of Wesel being returned to their former condition, the German Camp marched, and quartered about Reinberg; it being pretended by the Con∣federates, that that was likewise a Neutral town, and subject to the Empire; and that sundry times, now the Kings men, now the contrary parties had unjustly possessed it. It was not long before fallen into the Kings mens hands, as you then heard; and there was in it a Garrison of German Foot, and some few Walloons. Mutinies were at this time grown so domestick, as every day some of them were seen to arise in one place or other. One of them had hapned a little before in Reinberg, where the Garrison took up Arms, and shamefully drove out the Governour of the Town, putting their Elect in his place, with other subordi∣nate Officers. Before the Confederates incamped about it, the two Counts of Lippa and Hollach had made great offers to the Garrison, to perswade them to put it into their hands; shewing, that they had a community of blood, which did also render the interests of the Nation common between them. But the Garrison though they had failed in their obedience, yet would they not be failing in their faith; wherefore they rejected all offers, and betook themselves manfully to de∣fend the Town. Nor did they come short in their deeds: For the German Camp having sate down before the Town, and besieged it many dayes, they found the Defendants still more stout and resolute in making resistance; wherefore they were at last forced to rise from before it, little to their honour. Count Lippa did notwithstanding raise a Fort on the opposite side of the River, and put many men into it, to incommodiate that Town; and intending to besiege it again, if it should be needfull.
From Reinberg the Camp past to Res, which was the only Town almost that remained to be restored to the Duke of Cleves, and the Kings party gave con∣tinual hopes that it should be speedily restored. But the Germans, either not be∣lieving them, or else desirous to doe somwhat with their Arms, resolved to be∣siege it. The United Provinces did still press them very much; and shewing that they had a great desire to be interessed in their cause, they sent a certain number of Horse and Foot to Count Hollach, to be imployed in their service. Count Lippa incamped then before Res about the end of August, and besieged it on all sides. Ramiro di Gusman, a Spaniard, commanded in chief therein, and had with him little more then 80 Souldiers, some Spaniards, some Germans, some Wal∣loons. Just over against the Town, on the other side of the River, there stood a Fort to secure that Pass the better; so as some Souldiers must also be imployed there. And because the Garrison was not sufficient to defend both the Town and Fort, the Governour sent to the Admiral, desiring him that he would with all speed send him some more men. The siege being begun, the Germans fell to fortifie their quarters where it was most behovefull: The Count de Lippa was quartered on the lower part of the River, and Count Hollach above. These were the two chief Quarters; and both of them began to open their Trenches. Count Hollach, an old Souldier, and one well verst in sieges, would have had them have past some men over the Rhine, and so at the same time to have straitned the Fort, which was possest by the Kings men on the other contrary shore; fearing left by that way (as it not long after hapned) the besieged might receive succour. But were it either through ignorance, or through the emulation of the other Commanders, his advice was not followed. The Trenches were quickly so far advanced, as they were not long in falling joyntly to their Batteries. A great Bank ran along the River, to defend the Town and the circumjacent grounds from being thereby overflown. Upon the highest part of this Bank, the two Counts caused divers Peeces of Artillery to be planted; by which commanding the Town, they began to play upon it furiously afar off. Then placing many great Guns nearer hand, they came to a nearer oppugnation: wherein Count Hollach being better verst, all things were better performed on his side. He plaid particularly upon the point of a walled Bulwark; and at the same time advancing with his Trenches, he was confident he should soon be able to make a happy as∣sault there. The Garrison was not this mean while idle, but had endeavoured by frequent sallies to incommodate the Enemy in divers sorts. Yet were not the numbers of their Souldiers any wayes answerable to their need of defence. Where∣fore Gusman continually sollicited the Admiral to send him some succour: which was ere long done: for 700 choise Foot coming at the silentest time of night to the banks of Rhine, where the aforesaid Fort stood, they past over the River, and got without any disturbance into the Town. This increase of Forces did so in∣crease their courage that were within in the Town, as they resolved to sally out suddenly with good numbers, and to assault the Count de Lippa's quarter, where there was less opposition made. The one half of the Garrison sallying out in three equal Squadrons, they assailed the Enemy on that side with such resolution and valour, as they not being able to resist them, began quickly to give back, and soon after to fall into manifest disorder. The more these were disheartened, the more were the others encouraged. So as the first blow being seconded by an∣other, and the Garrison continuing still manfully to fall upon them, they made the Enemy forgo many of their Trenches; and coming to their Batteries, they unhorst some of their Peeces, they nail'd up some others; and being of necessity afterwards to retreat, they carried a Demy-Canon in triumph with them into the Town. In this action about 200 of the Enemy were slain, and but very few of the Garrison. This bad success did much augment the discords between the German Commanders; one complained of another, but almost all of them blamed Count Lippa, and the weakness of his government. And the confusion, disorder, and fear was so generally spread throughout the whole Army, as no obediance being given, nor discipline observed, the Commanders were forced two dayes after to raise the siege. More shamefull councel could not have been given; nor could it have been more shamefully followed: For the Camp re∣treating
without any manner of order, and the Souldiers striving who should get furthest from the walls of Res, much Baggage was left in their Quarters, many Carriages left in the fields, and some Barks loaded with victuals abandoned upon the River. Nor failed the Garrison to come out upon such an occasion; but fell upon those that went away last, slaying many of them, putting many of them to flight, and rendring the Retreat still more base, and more con∣fused. The Army having raised this their siege, came before the City of Emrick; but being here still molested by the souldiers of Res, and the discords amongst the Commanders still increasing, and the complaints amongst all the rest, the people began to disband, and afterwards wholly to dissolve. The United Pro∣vinces sent Count William of Nassaw, Governour of Friesland to the German Camp; a very grave and valiant man, and who was full cousin German to Count Maurice, that he might endeavour to compound the differences, and to reduce them to some better discipline: but he could do but little good. So as Au∣tumn being already advanced, and great store of rain being fallen, in such sort as the Army could no longer keep the field about the end of November, it of it self did wholly disband: and to compleat their disorders, a good part thereof did at last mutiny for want of monies, as they retired to their own homes: in so much as it was requisite to have an Imperial Proclamation, and likewise to use force, to extirp that malady which had so easily taken root every where. The effecting of the promised hope was not after omitted by the Kings Party; for the Town of Res was put again into the Duke of Cleves hands, and whatsoever else of his was holden in those parts: and in the other neutral Countries, all things were return∣ed to their former condition. Thus ended the movings of the German Camp; and the effects thereof proved, as it is usually seen in other Leagues, greater in appearance then in reallities: few joyning in the Government of Chieftains, as the Interests of Princes are seldom alike; and which use to last as long, as each that is interessed, may compass, not the ends of others; but their own intents. Whilst the aforesaid affairs were in hand, the Archduke Albertus and the In∣fanta Isabella, having consummated their marriage in Spain, and tarryed some months with the King, had at last taken their journey to come and enjoy the new Principality of Flanders. They Imbarqued at the beginning of June in Barce∣lona, in 24 Gallies, commanded by Prince Doria▪ and within a few days-arrived safely at Genua. Coming from thence to Milan, they tarryed in that City al∣most all July; where they were honoured with an Ambassy from the Pope, who to that purpose sent the Cardinal Piechtristain, a German, to them. From thence passing the Alpes at Piemont, and going through Burgony and Lorain, they entred into the Province of Lucemburg; and about the beginning of Sep∣tember they came to Brussels, having first staid two days at the Town of Hall, which is three hours journey from that City: where at the same time Cardinal Andrea was; who having given them an account of the affairs of Flanders, took his journey presently towards Germany, as his brother, the Marquis of Burgaut had done but a little before. Preparation was had this mean while in Brussels for the receiving of the new Princes with all solemnity; and upon this occasion there was already an infinite number of Foreigners in the City. They made their entry on the 6 of Septem∣ber, which was full of extraordinary pomp and magnificence; as well on the Ci∣ties behalf which erected many Triumphant Arches, all richly adorned; and which added thereunto all other demonstrations of joy; as on the behalf of the new Princes, who came attended by a most flourishing Court, and who took plea∣sure to make it appear so that day. Being come into Brussels, the Archduke began to take the administration of Government into his hands; the Infanta having thought it fit he should do so, though the chiefest Prerogatives of the Principa∣lity were in her. The first business was to form the reciprocal Oaths, which were in the first place to be taken by the new Princes, and by the States of those Provinces which were under them. Nor were the difficulties small which arose therein, by reason of the wonted jealousie of Priviledges wherein the Countrey
would be maintained: But all impediments being removed, the new Princes went about the end of November to Lovain, which holds the first place of all the Cities of Brabant, as that Dukedom does amongst the Provinces of Flanders: and here the ceremony of Swearing was performed in such manner as gave best satisfaction to all sides. The like was afterwards done in the nearest Cities; and the City of Antwerp in particular, did receive the new Princes with more splen∣did and sumptuous demonstrations, then upon the like occasion had been known. The like was done in many other Provinces, where the Archdukes (for so would the new Princes be stiled) thought it fittest to shew themselves. And having given and received all possible satisfaction in all places, after having made a large progress, they at last returned to Brussels, which was to be the ordinary abode of their Court.
THE HISTORY OF THE WARS OF FLANDERS, Written by CARDINAL BENTIVOGLIO. The Third Part. BOOK VI. The Contents. The new Princes being come to Flanders, their affairs proceed but ilfavouredly: many of their Souldiers mutiny, and other disorders happen in their Army. Count Maurice fails not to make use hereof. He surpriseth Vachtendonch, a place of importance in Ghelderland; and then by open siege takes the Forts of Crevecoeur and St. Andrea. Some Ambassadors from Caesar come to Brussels; and passing afterwards into Holland, a Treaty of Agreement is commenced by them between the Archdukes and the Confederate Provinces, but proves at last bootless. The like endeavours between the King of Spain's and the Archdukes Commissioners on the one part, and those of the Queen of England on the other, proves vain like∣wise. Count Maurice marcheth this mean while into the field with great Forces. He exters into the Province of Flanders, and incamps before Newport. The Archduke goes himself in person to obviate him. A Battel insues between the two Camps, and Maurice gets the Victory. He returns to besiege Newport. but can∣not get it. Wherefore he returns to his quarters: And the next Spring marcheth into the field, besiegeth Reinberg, and takes it. The Archduke resolves to incamp before Ostend. The situation and description thereof. It is begun to be straitned on sundry sides. What progress is made therein, and what vigorous opposition. In this interim Count Maurice goes to before Balduke. The Archduke relieves
the City, and Maurice retires. The siege of Ostend continues, and the Town is bootlesly assaulted. A new Treaty of Peace is reassumed between the King of Spain and the Archdukes on the one side, and the Queen of England on the other. The Queen dies, nothing being concluded. She is succeeded by James King of Scotland. GReat were the demonstrations of joy which were shewed by the Catholick Provinces upon the coming of the new Prin∣ces Anno 1500. to Flanders. But the adverse Provinces continuing more then ever in their formerly taken resolutions, and more then ever confiding both in their own Forces and in those of their Confederates, they omitted not to prepare dili∣gently for war. The year 1600 was already begun, where∣in the Archdukes new Principality had but unfortunate successes. They were not well come to those Provinces, when their Souldiery in the retiring from the field began to break forth into divers mutinies. The first arose amongst the Spaniards; who coming in small numbers at first into the Village of Hamont upon the State of Liege, and fortifying it, did soon make up a body of 2000 Foot and 800 Horse. The Garrisons of Germans and Walloons, who kept the two Forts of Crevecoeur and St. Andrea, followed this example; and generally the Army in all parts, for their want of Pay, and by being so long used to this abuse, was so inclined to doe the like, as had not the Commanders particularly minded the danger, it was to be feared the disorder might have pro∣ceeded to a general Mutiny. It was endeavoured to appease the Spaniards; and they had the Town of Diste in Brabant assigned over to them, with such monies as might suffice for the present, till they might be wholly satisfied in point of Pay. So the excess proceeded no further on their behalf. But the Spaniards were not well gone from Hamont, when many Italians entred thereinto; who resolving likewise to mutiny, chose the same place: From whence they were afterwards removed to Verte, a Town likewise in Brabant, upon the same terms as was first agreed upon with the Spaniards. The Italians might amount to 1600 Foot and 1000 Horse; but many others of other Nations were mingled with them, as also with the Spaniards. The Archdukes Forces being thus weakened, the adverse Provinces failed not to take advantage thereby. The weather was then exceeding cold in Flanders, and so very sharp, as not only all standing waters, but even almost all running streams were frozen over every where. By the opportunity of this Frost Count Maurice resolved to endeavour the surprisal of Vachtendonch, one of the strong∣est Towns of Ghelderland. This Towns greatest advantage lies in its situation for it is almost every where surrounded with marish grounds, and therefore there is hardly any coming to the walls thereof. Maurice having with all secresie as∣sembled together all those of the nearest Garrisons, gave order that unexpectedly by night the abovesaid surprisal should be endeavoured. The Souldiers found no difficulty in passing over those marish grounds, for they were then all, frozen; And by the same conveniencie passing over the Ditch, they set their ladders a∣gainst the wall. Those within were all asleep; insomuch as the Assailants being entred before they were discovered, possest themselves suddenly of the Town, and soon after with little resistance took the Castle. From thence, the rigor of theice not being well over, Count Maurice marched openly against the Fort Crevecoeur; and straightly besieging it, he in a shorttime brought the Mutiniers, who had the defence thereof, to put it into his hands. From thence he went against the other great Fort of St. Andrea. The speediest succour which could there be expected was to come from Balduke. Wherefore Maurice not content to besiege the Fort by his Forces, resolved to drown all the fields thereabonts with water; and to secure the higher places so, as it should be kept from being succoured on all sides. The banks of the Mause being therefore cut in sundry parts, a great space of ground towards Balduke was soon overflown; and the waters did increase so much likewise towards the Fort, as the Garrison could not get out on any side. On the highest situations Maurice planted divers little Forts where it was most
needfull, and began briskly to infest the Town. The Garrison had mutinied, as we told you before; and it consisted of about 1500 Foot, part Germans, part Walloons, who were under their Head the Elect, and under other Captains which they had tumultuously chosen, in their places whom, together with the Gover∣nour, they had driven out of the Fort when they began first to mutiny. They shewed at first as if they would make an honorable defence; the rather for that they knew that Velasco, Generall of the Artillery, was preparing to come and re∣lieve them with a great strength of men. But Velasco not being able to advance, for that he found the wayes all stopt, the Garrison began to cool. Maurice this mean while advanced further and further every day: And yet thinking that In∣terest would prevail more with such men then Force of Arms, he offered to pay unto them all their Arrears, which came to 50000 Crowns, if they would sur∣render the Fort. Nor was he deceived in his opinion. The Mutiniers were at first somwhat backward in enttrtaining the offer; but afterwards foregoing all shamefastness, and then growing infamous, they at last yielded to deliver up the Fort upon the aforesaid price, or rather to sell it; and to make the action the more unworthy, they condescended to fight under the Enemies Co∣lours. The Archdukes were very much moved at these losses, and particularly for that of St. Andrea, which had cost so much the building, which bore with it so many advantages; and which may be said was lost, ere fully finished. It was moreover known, that Count Maurice made great pre∣parations to come into the Field with powerfull Forces: And the Archdukes having but small hopes so soon to satisfie the Mutiniers, but rather fearing the increase of those disorders, they saw their new Principality reduced into straits before they were well warm in it. By reason of their being newly come to Flan∣ders, the States-Generall of the Obedient Provinces were then met at Brussels. Which was done, that such an Assembly being together in one place, the mutual needs both of Princes and Country might be the better considered, and conveni∣ent remedies applied thereunto. The greatest mischief, and which required the most efficacious remedy, was the Mutinies which had happened, and which might happen. Wherefore the Archdukes did very much press the Provinces, that by some extraordinary quantity of monies they would supply the necessity of the Army. The Deputies seemed to know very well the urgencie thereof, and to be willing that the Country should by their endeavours contribute as much as they could thereunto. But they made it also plainly appear, that the Obedient Provinces would be much better pleased to come, if it were possible, to some good and reasonable Agreement with those which had thrown off their Obedi∣ence, then still to suffer under the miseries and calamities of wars. Which whilst they were discoursing of, a good occasion presented it self of commencing a Treaty to that purpose. And this it was. There were then likewise some of Caesars Am∣bassadors at Brussels, the chief of which was Salentino Count of Ysemberg: The Emperor had sent them chiefly upon the occasion of that Novelty which had hapned the year before in the Neutral Countries, with strict command to endea∣vour by all means possible that things should be there restored unto, and main∣tained in their former condition. It was pretended that Reinberg did belong un∣to the Archbishoprick of Colen; and that the ground whereon Schinks Sconce was a little before built by the United Provinces, did depend upon the State of Cleves; and that the same Provinces had also under various pretences possest themselves of the Town of Emrich, after the Spaniards were gone out of it. This was all the Ambassadors chiefest Commission. They were also in the Em∣perors name to congratulate the Archdukes for their new Principality, and to see whether they could introduce any Treaty of Agreement between them and the United Provinces. The Ambassadors discharged their trust in all the aforesaid businesses. As con∣cerning the Neutral Countries, the Archdukes excused the late excesses as much as they could, and assured the Ambassadors that it should be amended for the time to come; without binding themselves to any thing concerning the particular of Reinberg. For their congratulating their new Principality, they answered them
in terms full of respect and honour And as for their mentioning a Treaty of A∣greement between them and the United Provinces, they seemed to desire nothing more then the peace and tranquility of those Countries; affirming that for their part they would never be wanting in contributing their best endeavours there∣unto. Having thus declared their Commissions first to the Archdukes, the Am∣bassadors went afterwards into Holland, and there did the like to the Deputies representing the States Generall of the United Provinces. Touching the novelties happened in the Neutral Countries, the Deputies answered with all obsequious∣ness towards the Emperor and Empire, and complained bitterly of the Spaniards. As for Schinks Sconce, they endeavoured to justifie the success thereof with di∣vers reasons: And the Ambassadors giving assured hopes, that if the United Pro∣vinces would restore Emrich, they would make the Archdukes restore Reinberg, the Deputies promised that that Town should be restored, as it soon after was. In the point of the Treaty of Agreement, the Ambassadors found great reluctan∣cie in the Deputies, who said, That the United Provinces would never confide in the Spaniards; that therefore they would not enter into any Treaty with them; and that the Archdukes, by the form of their new Principality, did wholly de∣pend upon the King of Spain. Notwithstanding all these difficulties, the Am∣bassadors did so work it, as at last the United Provinces gave way that their De∣puties should meet with those of the obedient Provinces, to make if it were possi∣ble some good agreement between both sides; and the Convention was agreed upon to be at Berghen-ap-Zome, a Town belonging to the United Provinces, and but a short dayes journey from Antwerp. Thus was this Conference occasioned by the means of these Ambassadors; though no good came thereof, it being broken almost as soon as begun, as shall be related in its proper place. About the same time almost, another Negotiation was put in hand to bring the affairs to some good correspondencie between the King of Spain and the Archdukes on the one side, and the Queen of England on the other. Cardinal Andrea had laid some ground-works hereof whilst he had yet the Government of Flanders. Nor did the Queen shew herself averse thereunto. When the Archdukes were come to Brussels, they took occasion to continue the friendly offices begun by the Cardi∣nal; and the Queen did the like with them. Wherefore these demonstrations proceeding from both sides, by letters, and particular personages, it was believed that the Treaty might hold on, and that they might come to some good agree∣ment. Not long after, the Town of Boloign in France, which lies upon the English Channel, was chosen for this end. Where about the beginning of May, Baltazar de Ziniga, who was Ambassador for the Spanish King in the Court of Flanders, and Fernando Cariglio, came in behalf of the King of Spain; and with them the President Richardotto, and the Audienciarie Verrechin on the Archdukes part: And on the behalf of the Queen of England, Sir Henry Nevil, who was her Am∣bassador at that time with the King of France, Sir John Herbert, and Sir Thomas Edmonds. But all these being met in Boloign, such difficulties arose in point of precedencie between the Spanish and the English Agents, as it was not possible to reconcile them: wherefore they came not to any agreement at all; but depart∣ing almost as soon as they were met, the Negotiation was put off to a better con∣juncture of time. Count Maurice was by this time ready to march into the field. It was thought he would go against the peculiar Province of Flanders; for he imbarqued his men in the maritime Gulfs which were nearest that Province; and therefore it was judged that his principal designs tended thitherward. Nor was it ill imagi∣ned: For about the midst of June he landed all his Army about the Fort Sasso, which consisted (as it was commonly said) of 15000 Foot, and 2500 Horse. Divers Rivers run through Gaunt, which is the chiefest City of the Province of Flanders; one of them streams out in a large Channel, which falls into the near∣est maritime Gulf to that City, and which afterwards joyns with the rest which doe incompass the Islands of Zealand. Here stands the Fort called Sasso of Gaunt, as not being above five leagues from that City. This Fort was very carefully guarded by a Spanish Garrison, especially for the securing of some Sluces by
which the water of the aforesaid Channel might either be raised or let down, and drown all the fields thereabouts. Neer this Fort upon the brink of the same Gulf, two lesser Forts were placed. Maurice assaulted these, and easily taking them, it was thought he would have assaulted the great Fort of Sasso; but he fearing he should be entertained there longer then he could be dispenced withal by his other greater designs, he went from thence and marched with all his Army towards Bruges, and past almost by the Gates thereof. It was thought, that having many in that City who sided with him, he hoped that up∣on occasion of his being so near the Town, they might occasion some tu∣mult which might happen for his advantage. But failing of his expectation, he pursued his march, with evident signs that he would lay siege to Newport, a Town near the Sea, and not far from Ostend. At the same time as he march by land, those many ships waited on him by sea, which served to land his Army in the Province of Flanders. When he was entred into Ostend, he publickly declared his resolution of besieging Newport. The Archdukes had divers Forts to with∣stand the excursions which were made by the souldiers of Ostend; and in particu∣lar three, called St. Albertus, Snaescherch, and Bredene; and there was another be∣tween Ostend and Bruges, upon the pass of a river in a place called Audemberg. Mau∣rice turn'd first upon these Forts, which were but weakly garrisoned and muni∣ted; and meeting but with little resistance, possessed himself speedily of them all. He thought that the Catholick Camp would not adventure to relieve New∣port, unless they had first recovered those Forts, and that if they should not re∣cover them all the sooner, he might the mean while take the Town, which was neither very great, nor very strong, nor sufficiently provided of men, nor of other things requisite to make defence. With this design and these hopes he drew near to Newport, and being still followed by his Maritime Train, by means whereof his Army might continually be largely furnished with whatsoever he wanted, he began to straighten the Town both by sea and land. Newport doth not stand fully upon the sea-shore, but very neer it: on the one part there∣of there runs a little River; which though it be but of a mean Channel, yet where it fals into the sea, makes a considerable haven, and especially at high tydes. Upon the first news of Count Maurice his being moved, and of his Armies be∣ing landed in the Province of Flanders, the Arch Dukes went presently from Brussels to Gaunt▪ the better by their presence to secure both that City, and the other Towns of that Province. Where mustering as many men, with all dili∣gence, as they could assemble together, they made them all come into the same Province, that they might make use of them against the Enemy, and oppose all their designs. A good part of their men had mutinied, as you have heard, and therefore they could not make so great a Body, nor so vigorous Forces, as so weighty an occasion did require. The Spanish mutineers, who as you have heard, were in Diste were contented to come unto the Army with 800 Foot, and 600 Horse, provided they might serve under their own Commanders and Officers. It was impossible to bring the Italian mutineers at Hamont to this, because they were not yet wholly agreed, nor gone to Verte, as you heard before they were to do. By reason of these mutinies, and for that the Arch-Dukes souldiers did still diminish, they could not assemble on their sides above 12000 Foot, and 1200 Horse. These came marcing apace, and before the Arch-Duke's was come to Gaunt, Velasco General of the Artillery was already march'd forwards towards Bruges with 3000 Foot. and 300 Horse: the rest followed under the two other chief Commanders, The Admiral of Aragon, General of the Horse, & Count Fre∣derick de Berg, who supplyed the place of Camp-master General, in lieu of Count Mansfield, who by reason of his great age could no longer exercise that place in his own person. The Army was made up of Spaniards, Italians, Germans, and Walloons, together with some Burgonians, and Irish. The way by which they marched led them close by the walls of Gaunt, which the Arch-Dukes were well pleased withal, that they themselves might appear in Person, whereby the more to encourage the souldiery upon this so great Emergency. They therefore went out into the field, and the Infanta getting on horse-back, and followed by all her Court on horse-back likewise, she presented her self before the colours
where in particular the Spanish mutineers were. She was endowed with a Prince∣ly aspect and masculine valors, and being so long bred up amidst the chiefest ne∣gotiations of the world, in the School of such a father, she was very knowing therein, and capable thereof. Suffering her self first to be fully seen, and the Army being much joyed with her presence, she by her weighty and sprightly words, did yet more enharten them against the Enemy. Saying, There were never any souldiers who fought in the defence of a more just cause. That many of them had been in Flanders, from the very first beginning of the war; and therefore knew how oft by all convenient waies the King her father had endeavou∣red to reduce the Rebels to their due obedience. That now they had peculiar Princes of their own, separated from the Crown of Spain, according to their ancient desire, and were notwithstanding still more obstinate then ever in their Rebellion. That they war∣red likewise against God more then against their Soveraigns, having opposed from the beginning, and still continuing to oppose Heresie to the Catholick Religion. That therefore neither she nor the Arch-Duke could any waies doubt, but that the souldiers of that Army, who were all of them so Catholick, so valiant, and so Loyal, would shew themselves to be the same men in the present occasion, as they had alwaies been formerly; That to boot, with the certain reward that their service, which they should do to God, bore with it, they might also assure themselves to be rewarded by the Arch-Duke, by her, and by the King her Brother, with whom their cause went joyntly hand in hand. That they should not doubt of pay. For monies were expected from Spain, and some large sums were hoped for from the obedient Provinces of Flanders. But that if all other waies should be wanting, she would make use of her own Jewels to that purpose, and of the very Plate she used for her own service. These words were received by the Army with incredible applause; each soul∣dier striving who should shew himself most ready to dye for the Infanta with his sword in his hand, and especially upon this occurrency. Nor was the Arch-Duke wanting in adding what he thought fitting, to continue the souldiers the more in their present good disposition; declaring at last that he would be there himself in person, and run the same fortune with them. The Army being marched on, the Arch-Duke went likewise from Gaunt, and about the end of June came to Bruges; where the whole Army was mustered. The first counsel they took was to regain the Forts which were faln into the Ene∣mies hands: in consequence whereunto, that of Audemburg was suddenly set upon with such resolution, as the defendants either for want of Forces, or want of courage, did immediately surrender it: From thence the Catholicks went, and with equal violence assaulted the other of Sneascherch; and being withstood by those within, the Fort was soon stormed, and all the Garrison put to the sword. By this example the Enemies did of themselves forgo the Forr of Bre∣dene. From hence without any delay the Army marched towards the Fort St. Alberto, which was the greatest and best provided; and marched towards the Enemies Camp,. Count Maurice did then send 2000 Foot, the most of which were Scots, with some Troops of Horse commanded by Count Ernestus of Nassaw, to possess themselves of a Pass, wherein he thought to entertain the Catholick Camp longer, thinking that it would not so soon advance towards his Army. These souldiers of the Enemy gave at unawares upon the Catholicks, who finding themselves so much superiour in numbers, and with such advantage of fresh success, soon routed the Adversary, and made a bloody slaughter amongst them. This happened on the second of July in the morning, and they had yet a considerable way to march, before they could come up to the Enemies Camp, to assault it Wherefore the Arch-Duke desired to know what his Councel of war thought fittest to be done. Velasco, the General of the Artillery was so far behinde with above 3000 Foot, as he could not come up time enough to the rest of the Army, when the Arch-Duke would notwithstanding have marched spee∣dily to the Enemy. Who were likewise lessened in their numbers, by reason of the late loss of the Scots, by reason of those that were either lost or left in the Forts, & for that Maurice at his coming to Ostend had added to the former Gari∣son thereof. When the Archdukes Councel of war came to speak their opinions, it was variously disputed. Amongst the Spanish Commanders, Camp-master
Gasper Zapena was particularly well esteemed of for his valour, and for his long experience, which notwithstanding made him always rather imbrace cautious then hazardous resolutions. He was clean against falling violently upon the Enemy then. He considered, That they were to make above an houre and a halfs march before they could come to where they were; that the Catholicks would come thither after their journey, and their that mornings fight. And what military Maxim (said he) is it, that doth teach to fall with blind resolution upon an Enemies Camp, without having first well known what it is? and when so considerable a number being behind, the Catholicks would come short of them in numbers? Then turning more freely towards the Archduke, he said, Most mighty Prince! Your Highness in my opinion hath a glorious Victory safe in your hands, if you will be carefull in the carriage thereof. Doth not your Highness apprehend Count Maurice his rashness? He is come, firmly believing that he should take Newport before it could be succour'd; and did confide more then became him to doe in the Forts which he had taken, and which were afterwards so easily lost again. Now when he shall see himself faced by our Army, he must of necessity think of retreating; which must be done either by land, or by sea. He hath no place whither to have refuge by land, but Ostend; and if he retreat by sea, he must of necessity re∣imbarque his men, together with all his Artillery, munition and baggage which were formerly landed. Let our Army then halt between the Towns of Newport and Ostend; so as Maurice shall not be able to get by land to the latter. He will then be inforced to retreat by sea: which if he doe, how great will his disorder in imbarking be? and how great opportunity shall we then have to assault the Enemy with all ad∣vantage? to rout, and to disperse them? This opinion was grounded upon very sound reasons. But Claudio Barlotta, the antient Walloon Campmaster, a lover of hazardous enterprises, and who oft∣times degenerated from audacity to rashness, did with such vehemencie oppose it, as he drew most of the other Commanders to side with him. He said, That it was too great an error to let slip so fair an occasion of assaulting the Enemy; that it was to be believed they had already received a great blow, both by the loss of the Forts which they before had got, and much by their loss of so many men that very morning. That they did not expect so furious a tempest: wherefore it was to be be∣lieved, that possest with fear and confusion, they would in all haste imbarque them∣selves, and rather think of flying away, then of fighting. That he did therefore ear∣nestly press, that the Army might be speedily led on to pursue their begun vi∣ctories: That of all others, the Mutiniers were impatient of delay; and of what ad∣vantage was it upon such an occasion to make use of the Souldiers forwardness? That some of the Catholicks were behind; but that it was very well known the Enemy was likewise very much lessened in their numbers; nor was it numbers, but valour that gave the victory: That this victory might be built upon for certain, if they would march immediately towards the Enemy, and fall upon them. And what doubt was there to be made of it? since the Souldiers were to fight under the command, and in the eye-sight of their own Prince, who would likewise be their Captain-Generall? and to detain the Army in so fair a course, would it not be totally to discourage the Soul∣diery? would it not be to bereave them of certain hopes, and to feed them with more uncertain? For if time were allowed unto the Enemy, they would peradventure pro∣vide so for their retreat, as the success of victory might prove as doubtfull, as it might now be thought certain. The Souldiers ardencie to fight was really very great, and chiefly the fervor of the Mutiniers; who stormed, saying, that they had not left their Companions to stand idly now before the Enemies; and they did very much press to fall im∣mediately upon them. The Archduke notwithstanding did stand somewhat in suspence between these two Opinions; when a Chance made him resolve to march immediately against the Enemies Camp. Fortune hath always a great stroke in all humane affairs here below: But in the concernments of war she does almost what she pleaseth; and ofttimes by unexpected accidents causeth losses to insue, where victory was expected. The Army marched upon the Sea-shore; and it so fell out, that just as the Archduke was to put on his resolution, a great many of
the Enemies ships were descried, which upon several occurrences came from Newport towards Ostend. The Catholick Camp did then verily believe that the enemy was resolved to retreat, and that this was already the beginning of it. Wherefore being now more incouraged then before, they pursued their march, each souldier with all fervor solliciting one another. There remained yet four hours of day when the Catholicks came within sight of the enemies Camp; 60 horse marched foremost in the van, and then the foot followed, devided into two great Battalions; each of which was confusedly mixed of all Nations; the rest of the horse took their place in each of them where it was fittest. And the Spa∣nish mutiners, both horse and foot, that they might signalize themselves the more upon this occasion, had obtained to march in the head of the Army. Count Maurice was not this mean while idle. At the first news that the Ene∣my came to assault him he called a Councel of war, where it was resolved that they would manfully joyn battel. They thought that to retreat by imbarking themseves, would not onely appear base and unworthy, but that it might like∣wise prove dangerous. That the Catholicks would come weary, whereas their men were in good plight and vigor. That the Catholicks were fewer in number then they, and that their men were not to yeild in goodness to the Catholicks. That the mean while they might make choise of the most advantagious place to fight in; and out of so many reasons have assured hopes of victory. This being resolved upon, Maurice rose with all his men from before Newport, and drew as far from thence as was needful, to keep unmolested by that Garrison, whilst he should fight the Catholicks; and that he might the more incourage his men, by leading them to encounter with those of the Arckduke's: Then staying in an op∣pertune place, he was very diligent in fitting his Army for the battel. And that he might necessitate them the more to fight, he gave order that all the ships should stand off at sea, that there might be no hope of safety that way. His camp consisted likewise or divers Nations, furnished with gallant Commanders, and long accustomed to the wars of Flanders, to boot, with the Flemish, which consisted chiefly of Frieslanders, and men of Ghelderland; there were in the Army of the united Provinces a great number of French, English, and Scots, and there were then also some Foot of Switzers amongst them. Colonel Sir Francis Vere, an old Souldier of known valour, and of whose Military actions you may have often heard in this our Story, Commanded all the English foot. But Count Maurice, willing to encourage his Army to battel, before he composed his squa∣drons, advanced before them, and said thus, I ingeniously confess, my fellow souldiers, that I am deceived in the hopes I had when I first undertook this siege; I hoped that the Passes and Forts which we had ta∣ken, would have so long entertained the Enemy, till the Town being, as we know, but ill provided, might have faln into our hands. The Fortune of war alters the condition of affairs in a moment, and so she hath dealt with us upon this occasion. But we ought to thank her for it, because that suddenly altring the face of affairs, she hath proved more favourable to us, when it was to be feared she might have proved more averse. And truly, if the Arch-Duke, weighing affairs better on his behalf, had made his Army stay betwixt Newport and Ostend, in what straits should we now be? All hereabouts, unless it be Ostend, is the Enemies Country; we should not have been able to have got thither. And then being enforced to have retreated by Sea, with how much advantage might the Enemy have assaulted us? Clean contrary, the advantages will now lie wholly on our side. They come wearied with marching, short in numbers, blinde with rage, and with the very fury of mutineers. Did they perad∣venture, after this mornings tumultuous action, think that we either buried in sleep, or born away by fear, would either not have taken up Arms at all, or else have thrown them away without any waies disputing the business? Will this be the first time that our Forces shall have beaten theirs? Nay I hope this shall prove the most noble victory that we ever got of them. Our men are as good as theirs: we exceed them in numbers; and we will take the most advantagious place to fight upon. But still our greatest advantage must lye in our Arms and courage. I for my part will be in all places and from this time forward I declare my self unworthy the prerogatives of a Commander, if upon this occasion I be not equally forward in all danger with
every common Souldier. And that there may be no escaping out of the Battel, I have given order that all the ships stand off at Sea far from the shore. That I might make the Victory certain, I have chosen to adde despaire to hope. In fine, my Souldiers, we must this time either overcome, or die with our swords in our hands. This discourse was received by the Army with joyfull acclamations, and all readiness to fight was shewn. Then Maurice gave out his Orders. He assigned the Van to Colonel Sir Francis Vere, the Battel to Count Solme, and the Rear to Monsieur de Temple; mixing together the Souldiers of all the several Nations. He disposed of the Horse, (of which Count Lodovick de Nassaw was Generall) some on the Front, and some on the Flanks; and kept no particular place for him∣self, resolving to be at his liberty of transferring himself wheresoever the greatest need should require. He had with him his brother Henry, a Youth of 16 years of age, and the Duke of Alsatia, the Prince of Henault, and Count Coligni, Grandchild to the late Admiral of France; together with divers other young Gentlemen of great quality, who were come a little before from the Heretick Countries into Flanders to be trained up under him in the exercise of Arms, would keep near his person. The Armies met upon the Sea-shore. From thence more towards the Land appears great Hills of Sand; which seem to be on purpose placed by Nature, to keep the Land from being swallowed up in those low situations by the Seas when they are most tempestuous. Those little Mountains of Sand lie all along the Coast of Flanders, and are called Downs. The Sand is there moveable, and is easily raised by the wind, which makes them the more troublesom to be dealt with. The Tide began to flow when the Armies marched: wherefore they were forced still to draw towards the Downs; and in fine the Main Battel must be given there. To boot with the Catholicks being wearied and fewer in number, the Sun was then going towards the West, on which side the Enemies Camp was; and therefore his beams gave upon the Catholicks faces, which were on the East side. It was in July, and the hottest hours had very much inflam'd the sands; and there was then likewise a little wind stirring, which raising the sand, did much more in∣commodiate the Catholicks Camp, then it did their Enemies. Count Maurice placed some Peeces of Artillery between the Downs and the Sea-shore, where the high Tide had left way, for his better advantage on that part. He possest him∣self of the highest parts of the Downs, where on one of the most advantagious sides he likewise placed some Peeces of Artillery. And having all these advan∣tages, expected that the Enemy should come and assault him. Nor were the Ca∣tholicks long in coming. The Archduke in few words endeavoured still to en∣courage them to the conflict He put them in mind of their former victories; of the service they did to God to the Infanta, to himself, and to the King of Spain. And that as he himself would be an eye-witness of their this dayes behaviour, they might with more security expect to be largely recompenced. The Mutiniers Horse gave the first assault; who led by the Admiral through that passage which remained then betwixt the Downs and the Sea, met with a fierce encounter, and were quickly very much indammaged by the Enemies Ar∣tillery placed with the aforesaid advantage. At the same time almost did the Foot fall on on both sides, upon the Downs; betwixt whom happened one of the fiercest fights that hath any time been known. The Spanish Mutiniers were on foot in the Front of the first Catholick Battalion; who together with the rest gave miraculous testimony of their valour: And the Enemies Van began al∣ready manifestly to give ground; for Sir Francis Vere who commanded them being wounded, and many of their first Ranks slain, the rest observed orders no longer. But new Souldiers of the Battel coming in to reinforce the Van, the latter was sustained by the former, and the fight continued more hot then before. Their Muskets and other Fire-weapons being discharged, they came to closer fight; to the push of Pike, and managing of their swords. Various, but equally fierce were the instigations on each side. They fought out of Honour, and out of Hatred; as if what for hope, what for despair, they had been mad. Each side
hoped to overcome; and as if they had despaired at the same time, they would rather die then be vanquished. You might therefore see the Squadrons of each side to billow up and down like waves, sometimes advancing, sometimes giving back; the place whereon they fought being full of dead and wounded men, and the fighters full of sweat, blood, and fierceness. And by this time all the For∣ces of both sides were joyned in Battel. But the disadvantage on the Catholicks behalf was too great: Tired men fought against those that were fresh; and the excessive heat of the sand made them more sensible of their weariness; they suf∣fered likewise more by the dust, and by the sun. Yet did they valiantly make good their party: when the Catholick Horse being oft-times disordered, and oft times raed again, were at last wholly routed; and as they turned back, fell foul upon their own Foot, and disordered them also; which gave so great ad∣vantage to the Enemy, as it totally secured the victory to them. Amongst the Enemies Horse, there were some Troops of French Curasiers who gave particular pro of their valour that day: And questionless the Enemies Horse were so much the more in number, as the Foot being sundry times thereby invigored, which was likewise more numerous then that of the Catholicks, they also had the better of the battel. The Arrchduke by being present every where, was not wanting in playing the part which upon such an occasion became a generous Prince and Commander; thrusting himself sundry times into where the fight was hottest, he exposed himself to apparent danger of death: Nor did he this without the loss or blood; for wearing no helmet, to the end that he might be the better known, he was struck with a Halbert on the head towards the right ear; but the blow was given so at random, as it did him but little harm. The Archduke being by reason of his wound retired, it was noised abroad amongst his men, that he was not only wounded, but taken. The Enemy had already taken the Admiral prisoner; slain, taken or wounded almost all the Campmasters, Captains, and other most considerable Souldiers of the Catholicks Army. In somuch as the rest, discouraged through so many great losses, threw away their Arms confusedly here and there, and seeking to save themselves by flight, yielded the final victory to the Enemy. The number of the slain in Battels is always uncertain; but at this time it was most uncertain: For many thought it was equal on both sides; and many, that the Catholicks lost many more men. It was certain, that the best and valiantest amongst them were found missing. Besides the Admiral, two of the Spanish Campmasters, Gasper Zappena, and Luis de Viglar, were taken prisoners; the first whereof was so sorely wounded, as he soon dyed. The Campmaster Bastock, an Irish-man, was slain in the battel. Roderigo Sasso, Captain of the Archdukes Horse-guard, was wounded to death; so likewise was the Italian Campmaster Avolas. Count Bucquoi and Barlotte, both of them Walloon Campmasters, were more slightly wounded. And in fine, all the Catholick Officers, as well greater or lesser, were either slain wounded or taken. They lost above a hundred Colours, together with all their Artillery, Baggage and Ammunition; and the common report was, that above 3000 of each Army were slain in the battel. Amongst divers Italian Nobles, Alexander and Cornelius Bentivoglio dyed in the first ranks, and when the battel was at the hottest; the one of them was our Brother the other our Nephew; both of them being young men about 20 years of age, who were come a little before into Flanders. There were slain of the Enemy to boot with the ordinary Souldiers, above 30 Captains, and a good num∣ber of Under-Officers. They fought certainly upon great advantage; and Count Maurice knew very judiciously how to make use of it; and in all things else proved himself to be a good Souldier, and a gallant Commander; and by that dayes action he either caused, or continued the opinion, that if he were good at Sieges, he was no less good at Battels. This Battel lasted the space of three hours; and the Catholicks being fled, many councelled Count Maurice to purfue them: but because night came on, and much blood was spent, and for that his side like∣wise had laboured hard, he thought it sufficient to have prevailed thus far, with∣out attempting other advantages, which might have proved uncertain. The Archduke retiring that very night to Bruges, went soon after to Gaunt, where the
Infanta was; who welcomed him with a manlike spirit, as she had likewise done the various reports that he was either slain, wounded, or taken. He came accom∣panied by the Duke d' Aumale, who was likewise slightly wounded, and but by few other people of quality; for all the chief Lords of the Country were then at Brussels, by reason of the States-Generall which as yet continued, being desired so to doe by the Archdukes themselves, that by their presence and authority they might facilitate such resolutions as were to be taken. This is the so famous Battel of Newport, or of the Downs, for it is equally called by those two names: wherein according to the usual sports of Fortune, that Ar∣my was overcome, which thought it self sure of the victory. From Gaunt the Archduke returned suddenly again to Bruges; where having rallied the Souldi∣ers that were dispersed here and there after the Battel, he gave order that they should joyn with those that were under Velasco Generall of the Artillery, who had not been at the Conflict, and that they should all of them draw down near Newport. To this purpose Velasco marched to Dixmuda, a good Town within three hours march of Newport: This was done with such diligence, as Velasco was able to reinforce Newport with men, and to furnish it likewise so with all things else, as there might be no fear of losing it. This mean while Count Mau∣rice, after he had got the Victory, had resolved to reassume the Siege, and began already to open the Trenches on one side: but understanding that Velasco was thereabouts, and that the Town was well provided, he would not ingage himself any further therein; considering how much his Army was diminished by the Fight, and the new difficulties which he might meet withall, in case he should be inforced to retreat. He therefore raised his Camp from before Newport, and with all his Naval preparation past to Ostend. We told you before, that to keep the Enemies of that Town from making excursions, the Archdukes had divers Forts about it, to boot with those which were a little before lost, and again re∣covered; and amongst the rest, one which was called Sancta Catherina, and which was well garrison'd and munited. Maurice, before he left Ostend, would try whether or no he could make himself master of that Fort, and began to be∣girt it: But Campmaster Barlotte being sent by the Archduke to relieve it, and Count Frederick de Berg coming in afterwards to the same intent, the Fort was so secured, as Maurice was forced to quit the enterprise. Yet there happened a loss which the Archduke was much displeased at; which was, that as Barlotte was advancing from a certain place against the Enemy, he was shot into the head by a Musket, and presently knockt down dead. In him certainly the Catholick Army lost a Souldier exceeding forward in execution; though it may be said, that throwing himself too oft into dangers, he had delayed his death therein too long. Count Maurice, losing all hopes of making any further acquisition in the Province of Flanders, went quite away from thence, and returned with all his men from Ostend by Sea, into Hollaud and the adjacent parts; not reaping al∣most any advantage by so noble a Victory, save only the cry'd up glory of having so happily atchieved it. In this interim, about the end of July, the Deputies of the Obedient Pro∣vinces were met with those of the United, to come to some Treaty of Agreement, as it was touched upon before. But as we then told you, the Assembly was hardly well met, when it was dissolved: For the Proposals of the several sides were so far differing, as it was thought impossible to find any way of adjusting them. The Deputies of the United Provinces persisted in thier former opinions in mat∣ters of Religion, Liberty, and detestation of the Archdukes their new Principality; and were the more resolute therein, by reason of the advantages which the last Victory, and their other preceding successes had brought to their affairs. Where∣upon the Catholick Deputies departed very ill satisfied from the Assembly; and the Obedient Provinces shewed themselves presently ready to assist their Princes with large Contributions; that since the others would not come to any Treaty of Peace, the War might be the more vigorously maintained on the Catholicks behalf. Nor did any thing else of considerable happen on either side, that Year.
The Year 1601. being begun, the Archduke, who together with the Infanta was returned to Brussels, gave order for the raising of new men in Germany, and Anno 1601. in the Walloons Country; and in Spain they resolved to send a Brigado of Spanish Foot, and three others of Italians. Neither did the United Provinces use less di∣ligence in their providing to come strong into the field that new year; and they were speedier in their proceedings. For as soon as the season of drawing into the field came, Count Maurice failed not to muster his Army. He made the Rendez∣vouz near to Schincks Sconce; and seeming to threaten Balduke, he turned upon Reinberg, and about the beginning of June incamped before it. He began from the opposite side of the Rhine to batter a little Fort, seated in the Island, whereof you have formerly heard, and easily took it: Then begirting the Town round about, and having first well fortified himself on the outward side, to keep off succours, he began his Trenches. The Archduke was not yet in a condition of coming into the field; wherefore he was troubled at this news, and at the diffi∣culties he should meet withall in relieving the Town. He notwithstanding com∣manded Count Herman di Berge, who was Governour of that part of Ghelderland which was yet under the Archdukes, that he should endeavour to convey some men into the Town and to doe what else was requisite. But diversion was judged the best remedy for securing of Reinberg; and that of Ostend was thought the most important. The Province of Flanders did greatly desire (as it hath been often said) that that place might be taken from the Enemy, by reason of the great prejudice it was to all the parts thereabouts for they must either be sub∣ject to excursions, or else must pay great contributions to be free of them. The same Province, by contributing monies much more largely to the Archdukes then all the other obedient ones, had renewed with all eagerness their former de∣sires of getting Ostend, offering what further assistance they could therein. The Archduke applyed himself therefore to this diversion: And parting from Brussels, came to Bruges; and about the end of July he himself began to straiten Ostend. This mean while the people which were expected from Spain and Italy were come to Flanders. The Campmaster John de Bracamonte commanded the Spanish Bri∣gado: And the Italian Brigadoes, were one of them Lombards, under Count Theodore Trivulsio; and the other two Neapolitans, under the Marquis di Bella, and John Tomaso Spina. The Archduke commanded Bracamonte, that he should come with his Brigado, & joyn with the Army which was incamped before Ostend; and that the rest of the new come Italians should joyn as soon as they could with Count Hermans men, that if it were possible, they might speedily relieve Reinberg. But neither did this new succour doe any good; nor did the diversion against Ostend keep Reinberg from being taken. For upon Count Hermans march, Count Maurice had so fortified himself without, as there was no hope left for the Town. Luigi Bernardo d' Avila, a Spaniard, was Governour thereof: He had in it a Garrison of 1200 Foot, and 100 Horse; and from the beginning endeavoured as much as in him lay, by many stout sallies to keep the Enemy from the Ditch. Which when they had got, those within did for a while valiantly defend the breach which was made. But the terror of Mines, whereof some one was every day made to play by those without, succeeding the Batteries, and especially there being no hope of succour; upon the last of July, the Town was surrendred up to Count Maurice upon honorable terms. We will now come to the Siege of Ostend: which being one of the most me∣morable of this our Age, doth certainly challenge, that as much brevity and dili∣gence as may be being joyned together, it be duly considered and represented with all clearness. It was above three years before it was brought to an end; and it was almost as uncertain at the last day as at the first, to which side the vi∣ctory did incline. The besieged never wanted fresh succours by sea, nor did the besiegers at any time cease advancing by land Infinite were the Batteries, the Assaults infinite; so many were the Mines, and so obstinate the Countermines, as it may be almost affirmed as much work was done under ground, as above ground. New names were to be found for new Engines. There was a perpetual dispute between the Sea and Land: The works on the latter could not operate so much, as the ruines made by the former did destroy. Great store of blood ran
every where, and men were readier to lose it, then to preserve it; till such time as the besieged wanting ground, and rather what to defend, then defence, they were at last forced to forgo that little spot of ground which was left them, and to yeild. In as many other memorable sieges as are contained in this History, we have endeavoured alwaies to give the continued description thereof; that lay∣ing the daily success thereof before your eyes, they might be the more fully and clearly conceived: But it is impossible to do so in this siege of Ostend; for con∣tinuing so long as it did, we shall be forced often to divert the Narrative thereof to other important successes which cannot waite the end of this. Ostend stands upon the sea shore, and in the midst of a marish ground, and of divers Channels, which comes from the continent: but it is chiefly environed al∣most on all sides by two of the greatest of them, by which the sea enters into the land, and grows so high when it is full sea, as you would rather think the Town were buried, then situated in the sea. In former times it was an open place, and served rather for a habitation for shepheards, then for souldiers. But the impor∣tancy of the seat being afterwards considered, the houses were inclosed with a Platform, instead of a wall, and from time to time the Line was so Flank round about it, as it proved to be one of the strongest Towns of all the Province of Flanders. It is divided into two parts, which are called the old-Town and the new. The former which is the lesser, stands towards the sea; the latter and greater lyes towards the land. The old-Town is fenced from the fury of the sea by great piles of wood driven into the ground, and joyned together for the de∣fence of that part, and there the waves sufficiently supply the part of a ditch. The Channel may be said to do the like on the sides, and especially at full sea, of Channels they become Havens, being then capable of any kinde of vessel, and by them at all times the middle sise of Barks enter into the ditches, and from the ditches in divers parts into the Town it self; to boot, with the chief well flanked Line on the outside of the ditch, towards the land side is a Strada Coper∣ta raised, which is so well furnished with new flanks, and with a new ditch, as this outward fortification doth hardly give way to any of the inward ones. The Town is but of a small compass, and is innobled rather by its situation, and forti∣fications, then by any splendor either of Inhabitants or houses. The united Pro∣vinces caused it to be very carefully kept at this time, wherefore it was largely provided of Men, Artillery, Ammunition, and of whatsover else was necessary for the defence thereof. In this condition was the Town, when the Arch-Duke resolved to sit down before it. When Count Maurice went from thence, he cau∣sed the Fort St. Alberto to be abandoned, Wherefore the Arch-Duke entred there∣into, and on that side was the chiefest quarter of the siege placed. This Fort stood on the West-side, amidst the Downs, neer the Sea; and on the East-side, about the Downs likewise stood the Fort Bredene; into which the Arch-duke put Count Frederick de Berg, and made another quarter there. And from both these places they began presently to advance with their Trenches, and to straiten the Town. After the Fort St. Alberto divers other little Forts were raised more towards land, called by the name of St. Isabella, St. Clara, and St. Michael; which were all erected before the Arch-duke besieged the Town, to hinder, as hath been said, the continual excursions of the Garrison. In St. Alberto's quar∣ter lay most of the Spaniards, Italians, and Walloons, and the Camp-masters Jerolimo di Monroy, a Spaniard, and Nicholas di Catris, a Walloon were already got to a little sandy Hill, neer enough the Town; where placing some peeces of Artillery, they did from thence much indammage the Enemy. The better to for∣tifie themselves there, they drew a great Trench towards the field side, and there raised a Redoute. And Count Frederick being likewise advanced from the Fort Bredene, he had also possessed himself of a high seat of one of the Downs, and from thence did much prejudce the Town. In this first beginning of the siege, Charles Vandernot was Governor of the Town, nor did he omit any diligency which might make for the defence thereof. He thought the weakest part of the Town was that which lay towards St. Clara; and therefore going further into the land, he began to entrench himself there. On the contrary, the two Camp∣masters, Monroy, and Catris, did likewise pursue their begun works: and having
already finish'd their first redoubt, they would add another, when Monroy was kild with a musket shot. The Archd. gave his Brigado to Simon Antunes, a Portuguese, a valiant, and an ancient souldier, who together with Catris, continuing the same de∣sign, made the second Redout, and joyned it to the other by a great Treneh. The siege being thus begun, the united Provinces put Colonel Sir Francis Vere in∣to Ostend, to the end that a Commander of known valour and authority might be there, he brought with him 3000 Foot, and new provisions of all things necessa∣ry for defence: nor was he long in making use of such a recrute, by sallying out almost immediately, and assaulting the Enemy; but being repulsed with some loss, he thought to fortifie himself better to landward, towards St. Clara, and there he raised three new redouts, which were by a popular word of souldiery called Pouldrons; in which placing such men and Artillery as were requisit, he was very diligent in making the fortifications which were already there, yet more secure on all parts of the chief Line, and on the Strada Coperta thereabouts; judging like a souldier of great experience, that the Arch-duke would turn the chief weight of the siege upon that side: nor did his reason deceive him; for the Arch-duke being minded to straiten the Town more on that side then on any o∣ther, would have Count Frederick to forgo his quarters of Bredene, & to take them up in the Fort St. Clara, and hinder the Enemy from advancing further into the field with other new redouts. To this purpose Count Frederick raised presently two Forts in opposition of the aforesaid Pouldrons, and called the one of them St. Mary, the other St. Martin. Yet the Enemy endeavoured to advance with another fortification; but Count Frederick assaulted them, killed divers of them, forced them to forgo the work, and possessing himself of that seat, planted a Fort there which he called St. Anne, because the place was won on St. Annes day. These were as yet the works of the Catholick Camp more within land towards the Fort St. Clara; and at the same time they were no less busie about their works begun in St. Alberto's quarter, to boot, with those that were still continued towards the fields, they were resolved to draw a bank so far forward between the Downs and the Sea-shore towards the old Town of Ostend, that it might hinder Barks to enter into the Town by the Channel which runs on that side. They supplyed the ground which was there all sandy, with other materials; they made bavins of twenty foot long, and they incorporated bricks, which they joyned well to∣gether, and placed one on the top of another, in so great abundance, as the bank was raised and drawn out in length by peece-meal, according as occasion requi∣red. They were called Saucidges, but they were almost still contested with by the Sea, which especially when it flowed gave against them with such violence, as it ofttimes threw them down, and did often so disperse them, as they could no longer be of any service. The workmen were likewise greatly indammaged by the continual Hail of Musket-shot which poured down upon them from the Town: Yet the Bank was brought to perfection, and a Fort was raised at the end thereof, on which many peeces of Artillery were placed, which did after∣wards totally hinder the use of the aforesaid Channel. They within had also a Bank without, which beginning from the Downs towards the Fort St. Alberto, came to joyn wirh the great Bulwark of the old Ostend, called the Sea Bulwark. This Bank served to obviate the prejudice which the high-tyde, which their out∣ward fortifications might suffer thereby on that side: but because they saw that the Catholicks made use thereof, the better to advance with their works in that place; they resolved first well to secure their aforesaid Fortifications with other materials, and afterwards cut gaps in the Bank in divers places, and thereby made the Catholiks dispair of advancing any further there. This mean while the works on Bredene's side were not slacked: when Count Frederick was gone to the quarter of St. Clara, the Arch-duke had put Count Buckquoy into that of Bredene; he forthwith advanced a little redout, to which he added another grea∣ter, and called it St. Charles; whereupon placing some peeces of Artillery, he began to prejudice the Enemies Barks, which entred on that side into Ostend. The Channel there divided it self into two parts; the one whereof entred into the chief ditch of the Town, and the other into the narrower ditch, which shut up the Strada Coperta on the outside. The Enemies Barks were therefore so plaid
upon by the Artillery from the new Redout, as they were forced to get into the Town by the chief Channel. But this was no considerable damage, by reason of the more commodious ingress which the Barks had; and because the Artillery of the Redout shot from so far off, as they did but little harm. Wherefore the Archduke resolved that a great Bank should be led towards the master Channel from the Redout, which was afterwards called a Fort; which should be brought so near the shore side, as that a Fort being there raised, and well furnished with Ar∣tillery, the Enemies might be as well hindred from making use of their Barks on that side of Bredene, as they were on the other of S. Alberto. These were the works about Ostend. But at the same time Count Maurice suf∣fered not his Army to be idle. Having taken Reinberg, he went to before Balduke; hoping either to get a place of that concernment, or to make the Archduke re∣move from before Ostend. Incamping therefore before that Town, he began to begirt it, but with some leisure, by reason of the great compass thereof. Mon∣sieur de Grolendunk, a valiant Souldier, and one the best esteemed of all Flan∣ders, was Governour thereof. That City would always defend it self by its own Citizens, who had always proved themselves very faithfull to the Church and King; yet were not they of themselves able to defend themselves against so great and manifest a danger: wherefore the Governour advertised the Archduke of what condition he was in, and prest very much to be relieved. The Archduke found himself in a great strait fearing lest his Forces were not sufficient at the same time to maintain the Siege before Ostend, and to relieve Balduke. Yet taking heart, and leaving only so many men as might keep the Siege from rising, he sent Count Frederick de Berg towards Balduke with 7000 Foot and 1500 Horse, giving him order, by all means to relieve the Town. He likewise got the Italian Mutiniers at Verte to joyn many of their Souldiers to those of the Count. And therefore having got together a reasonable good body of an Army, he seemed as if he would fortifie a certain Town called Helmont, within four leagues of Bal∣duke: But dispatching away privately by night Count Jovanni Giacomo Belgio∣ioso, Commissary-Generall of the Horse, by a certain way not well observed by the Enemy, with 1000 Horse and 800 Foot, he gave him order to convey those Foot into Balduke, and to back them, if need should be, with the said Horse. No order could be better given, nor better pursued: For the 800 Foot having with much resolution forced a Pass, wherein they met with some opposition, entred all into Balduke; and did so secure that City, as November being now near at an end, and the season being colder then usual, Maurice resolved to give over the Siege and to retreat. Balduke being thus luckily relieved, the Archduke turned to begirt Ostend with all his Forces. And it so fell out, as at this time it was thought that the Town would for certain have been surrendred. For about the end of December a terri∣ble storm at Sea did so shatter the Town in divers parts, and especially the old Town, as the Inhabitants despairing to resist an assault which upon this occasion they did expect, began to parley and Hostages were delivered on both sides for observancie of what should be agreed upon. But soon after this unfortunate chance, there fell out another so favourable, by the access of new men to the besieged, together with all manner of provisions, as they would treat no longer of surrendring, saying they could no longer doe it with their honour. The Arch∣duke being thus deluded of his so firm hopes of having the Town, gave order that a great Battery should be raised against the Old Town, which had been most prejudiced by the Tempest. That part was therefore furiously plaid upon; and there was such a breach made, especially in the Sea-bulwark, as they hoped to make a happy assault: Which was thus ordered. The Campmaster Durango was to go against the Sea-Bulwork, with the Spanish Foot; and the Campmaster Gambaloitta, a Milanese, and Knight of the Order of St. John, against another neighbouring Flank on the left hand, with the Italian Foot. These two Camp∣masters were accompanied by divers of the best Captains of the Army; and the Foot of divers other Nations were mingled with the Spanish and Italian Foot. The assault was to begin about the coming on of night, when the Tide was at the lowest. And Count Bucquey was likewise ordered to pass over the Channel on
the side of Bredene, and to sall with his men upon the wall that was there beaten down. To divert the Enemy on more sides, it was commanded that Alarms should be given every where against the Town: And the Archduke chose Au∣gustine Messia, Governour of Antwerp Citadel, who had for many years before been a Campmaster amongst the Spaniards, and ever held in good esteem, to see these Orders well observed. When they came to the Assault, the Assailants be∣haved themselves gallantly, and used all means to get upon the wall; and though many of them fell down dead and wounded, and that the horror of night which already came on made their dangers the more terrible, yet did it serve rather to set the Catholicks on fire, then to make them cool in their fight. But there ap∣peared no less resoluteness of resistance in those within: For opposing themselves valiantly on all sides, and being very well able to doe it, as having so many men, and such store of all other provisions, they stoutly did defend themselves on all sides. Upon the coming on of night they had set up many Lights in divers parts of the Town, whereby they the better maintained the places assigned unto them, did with more security hit those that assailed them, and came the better to where their help was required. They also soon discerned that they were all false Alarms that were given without; and that the true Assault was made only in one place. To this was added, that Count Bucquoy not finding the water of the aforesaid Channel so low as he believed, he could by no means pass over them. Yet the Catholicks did for a long time continue their assault; but the Defendants ad∣vantages still increasing, the Assailants were at last forced to give over with great loss; for there were above 600 slain and wounded, part of them being Gamba∣loita's men, who was slain himself; and part belonging to Durango, who was sorely wounded. Nor did those within let slip the occasion of prejudicing yet more the Catholicks, as they retreated: For plucking up some of their Sluces, by which they both received the Sea-water into their ditches, and let it out again, they turned the water with such violence into the Channel, which the Catholicks had passed over before they came to the assault, and which they were to pass over again in their retreat, as many of them were unfortunately drowned. John Benti∣voglio, Knight of St. John's Order, our Brother, who was but a little before come from Italy, after having served the Emperor some years in Hungary, was in this action; and therein gave such trial of himself, as the Archdukes not long after honoured him with a Company of Lances. The year 1602. was already begun; and with so bitter cold weather, as many advised the Archduke to give over the siege of Ostend, as a business which might Anno 12. be despaired of. But he would not be perswaded thereunto; thinking the Kings honour and his own too much engaged, not to continue that siege still, and bring it to a good end. Wherefore he resolved to raise a great Platform in St. Alberto's quarter, which might command the Town as much as might be possible on that side; and gave new orders that Bucquoy should from St. Charls his Fort advance with all possible speed that great Bank which was designed to command the Channel of Bredene, as we touched upon before. Having given out these directi∣ons, and leaving the Spanish Campmaster John di Rivas, a valiant and well expe∣rienced Souldier, to have the chief government of the Siege, the Archduke re∣tired to Gaunt to make such provisions against the Enemy as were requisite; who on their side made very great preparations, that they might be early in the field with great Forces. The Treaty of Agreement which had been formerly on foot, and almost at the same time broken (as we told you then) between the King of Spain and the Archduke on the one part, and the Queen of England on the other, was this in∣terim continued by many means. Great desire of coming to some good corre∣spondencie appeared on both sides: And the Queen being now very full of years, did particularly shew her self every day more and more inclined thereunto. When in March she fell very sick, of which sickness she dyed, after she had lived 70 years, and reigned 4. Thus dyed Elizabeth Queen of England and Ireland; who so much afflicted the Church, and who so long and by so many wayes fomented the War which we describe. She was Daughter to King Henry the Eighth, by Queen Anne of
Boloign. After the death of her Father, being bred up in Heresie, she was much made of by her Brother King Edward the Sixth, who was likewise a Follower of the new Sects, which were formerly introduced by his Father. But Queen Mary who soon restored the antient Religion, succeeding him, Elizabeth ran hazard of her life, and was either imprisoned or confined all her Sisters Reign: who dying without issue, the Crown came to Elizabeth. The marriage of her Father with Anne of Boloign was always detested by the Catholick Church; wherefore she openly maintained Heresie, and persecuted the Catholicks. And to secure her self the better in her Kingdom, she was not content to favour Heresie in her own Dominions, but still joyned with the Heretical Factions of Scotland, France, Germany, and Flanders; endeavouring thus to keep her neighbouring Countries still in turmoils, that she might be the more quiet at home. For what remains, it is not to be denyed that (by Common opinion) such gifts both of body and minde concur'd in her, as would have been worthy of the highest praise, had she so much illustrated them by the true Religion, as she did eclipse them by false worship; a comliness of Aspect, graceful behaviour, weight in her words, or a winning speech, and a pleasing greatness both in her private and publick actions. She was endowed with a rare understanding and wit, which made her be a great friend to learning; to the choicest, and most delightful whereof she applyed her self: she was particularly so ready in the Latin tongue as she was often pleased publickly to make use thereof, and therein to receive the applause of the most learned in both the Universities of Oxford, and Cambridge. it may be no marriage was ever more coveted then hers: Many Princes in several parts of Europe did for a long time strive to be her husband; hoping that the re∣fusal of the one, might facilitate the pretences of another; and she very cun∣ningly still nourished hopes in them, and endeavoured divers waies to honest her excuses, thinking her self so much more worthy, by how much the more she was pretended unto. Coming at last to her declining years, those seeming appearances ended; and then it was clearly seen, that she being full of haughty thoughts, not caring for issue, would never receive a Companion in her Bed, because she could not admit of a Companion in her Throne. She exercised her greatest enmities with the Pope of Rome, and King of Spain, as may have been seen in this our History: she kept good correspondencie with all the other Potentates of Europe, and was by the most of them continually much honoured. She was a woman of a manlike spirit; infinitely intent upon Government, and desirous of retaining the chief hand in managing thereof, as she had the prime authority. Great were her expences both within, and without her Kingdom. It is not to be credited how much she spent at home, especially in keeping England well munited with Naval forces; being ofttimes used to say, That her well arm'd ships in that Island were her Armies and her Citadels. She enjoyed good health; and that so long, as none of her Predecessors lived so long as she, and but few reigned so long. And although she detested the Queen of Scots, whom at last she put to death, yet she was pleased that her Son King James, who was likewise fallen into Heresie, should succeed her, and unite the Island of England and Scotland into one body; which whilst divided, had formerly for so many Ages been cause of so many dis∣cords, wars and calamities on both sides.
THE HISTORY OF THE WARS OF FLANDERS, Written by CARDINAL BENTIVOGLIO. The Third Part. BOOK VII. The Contents. An Agreement is made between the King of Spain and the Arch-dukes on the one part; and the new King of great Britain on the other. The siege of Ostend continues; and with what success. Frederick Spinola comes into Flanders with a Squadron of Gallies. And his brother Marquess Ambrosio Spinola, comes thither likewise with 8000 Foot raised in Italy. Both their intentions to advance themselves by the military profession. But Federick is slain not long after in a Sea fight. Count Maurice prepares great Forces: besiegeth Graves, and takes it. A new mutiny in the Catholick Camp. The Arch-duke resolves to turn his Forces against the mutineers. Maurice comes into their aid, and secures them from all danger. With their Forces and his own he besiegeth Balduke: The Arch-duke goes in person to relieve it: whereupon Maurice retreats from thence. Slow proceedings about Ostend: The siege thereof is put into the hands of Marquis Spinola. Who with great fervency embraceth the managing thereof. Maurice the mean while incamps before Sluce. Spinola marcheth to relieve it; but not succeeding therein, the Town is lost. Spinola returns to the siege of Ostend; and at last ends that enterprise. He goes afterwards into Spain, and returns from thence made Camp-master Ge∣neral of the Catholick Army in Flanders. He opposeth divers of Count Maurice his proceedings; then suddenly passeth the Rhine, goes towards Friesland, and
there takes Oldensel and Linghen. And soon after Count Bucquoy takes Vach∣tendonch. Spinola goes again into Spain, and is sent back by the King into Flan∣ders with addition of Honours. He passeth again with his Army towards Fries∣land; takes Groll and Reinberg; and forceth Maurice afterwards to raise his Siege from before the same Town of Groll. JAmes King of Scots succeeding Queen Elizabeth, came forthwith to London, which is the Metropolitan City of England: where his arrival was celebrated with great de∣monstrations of joy; the Scots and English contending by usual and natural emulation who should glory most, the one for having given a new King to the English, or the others for having got him from them. But amidst these mirths, the Catholicks were much afflicted; who soon lost all hopes of being better treated in matter of Religion, as the new King, in the latter time of the Queen, to make them well disposed towards him, had made them believe they should be. For even from his very first coming to London, they found they should suffer no less bitter persecution under him, then for so long a time they had done under her. That he might unite the two Nations together as much as it was possible, the new King would be stiled King of Great Britain, comprehending thus both the Kingdoms under one Title; and endeavouring by all other means, according to the Form of that Heretical Government, to establish himself at home in all se∣curity He then applied himself to Foreign Correspondencies; knowing how much the well grounding of these, would contribute to his own domestical af∣fairs. He renewed the Confederacies which the late Queen had with the King of France, and the United Provinces of Flanders: And with the like inclination which she had shewed a little before her death of coming to some agreement with the King of Spain and the Archdukes, he heartily gave himself to continue the Negotiation: wherein the King of Spain and Archdukes did not refuse to correspond on their behalfs. So as the business growing every day nearer an end, it was not long till they came to mutual splendid Embassies, by which such cor∣respondencie was at last established, as the so contrary Interest between them in point of Religion, and matter of State could admit of. Which we have thought fit to touch upon only here, not to digress too far from the particular affairs of Flanders. Then, that we may return to the Narration thereof, the chief business which did then depend in those Provinces, was the Siege of Ostend. The greater the diffi∣culties appeared of bringing it to an end, the more resolute was the Archduke to endeavour it by all possible wayes; being particularly instigated thereunto by the Province of Flanders, which shewed it self very ready to continue all the lar∣gest Contributions which to that purpose could be thereby subministred. The Archduke, when he came from that Siege, had left the care thereof as we told you to the Campmaster Rivas, who failed not to use all diligence in daily advancing the Works. The most important whereof were two: The one, the great Platform in St. Alberto's quarter, which was raised as fast as might be, to annoy incessantly the Old Town of Ostend from thence, by many Peeces of Artillery: And the other the great Dike already begun in Bredene quarter, with intention of leading it on so far, as it might command the great Channel, and so hinder the continual and large succours which by means thereof were received into the Town from the Sea. To make this Dike, a great quantity of those Sauceges which we spake of before, were made use of, and were much greater then the former. To the first and largest foundation, which was well incorporated with wet sand and other condense matter, others of the like sort were added, till the Dike was grown to the height it ought to be; and the breadth thereof was very extraordinary great. To boot with the ordinary Plain thereof, upon which two great Canons might stand abrest, there was a great Parapet raised in it against the Town to shelter the Souldier; and which being in divers places furnished with Artillery,
did greatly indammage the Enemy likewise on that fide. This work was made in a sandy and low situation, and whither the Sea at full Tide came; so as it can∣not be said with how much expence, labour, and loss of blood this work was ad∣vanced. Whilst such diligent work was had by Land touching the Siege of Ostend, Frederick Spinola did continually scoure that Sea-coast with a Squadron of Gal∣lies, which he had a little before brought from Spain. Frederick was come to be trained up in Arms in Flanders, in the Duke of Parma's time: And though he had not then any particular Imployment, yet was there generally great hopes had of him in all those occurrences, wherein his wit, industry, and capacity did plainly appear. He had learnt by experienced men, that by maintaining a good Squadron of Spanish Gallies upon the Coast of Flanders, the Hollanders and Zealanders might be very much prejudiced in their usual Navigations in those Seas and Gulfs. It was considered, that those Vessels which frequented those parts, were either Fisher-men, or Merchants that the Gallies by their nimble∣ness might continually infest that passage; that to boot with the great prejudice which the Enemy might receive thereby by Sea, they might peradventure receive more damage by Land; for the Gallies might at all times run into the nearest Sea-gulfs, land men, pillage their Villages, and upon good success attempt some important surprise, whereby they might get footing in Zealand. Which if it should so fall out, how much would the affairs of the King and Archdukes be thereby advantaged? It not being to be doubted, but that as the Enemy had done most mischief by Sea, so most mischief was to be done to them thereby And for what concerned the place wherein the Gallies were to keep, the Haven or Channel of Sluce was thought the fittest; it being nearest Zealand, capable of all manner of Vessels, munited with good Forts in the mouth thereof, and having so important a Town on the back thereof as Sluce, whither the Gallies might at all times easily come, and keep with all safety. Frederick having then fully in∣formed himself of the Maritime affairs of Flanders, and especially concerning the aforesaid Squadron of Gallies, he resolved to go himself to the Court of Spain, to propound the business to the King, and to get the imployment for himself. Marquis Spinola, Fredericks eldest Brother, joyned in opinion with him; de∣sirous to raise his House as much as he could in his Country of Genua, and to agrandise it by the way of War, especially with the Crown of Spain. And though the Marquis being thirty years old, had not till then taken upon him the military profession, yet he had always had a great inclination thereunto, and had parts to make himself famous therein, when he should be invited thereunto by any honor∣able imployment. Frederick being come to Madrid, he so negotiated the business, as the Propo∣sition of the Gallies was fully approved of both by the King and his Councel, and the Command thereof with all fitting authority was assigned to him. Six were thought sufficient for that time and they were taken from out the Spanish Squa∣dron; with intention to increase them, if the effects thereof should answer their hopes. Frederick having brought these Gallies to Flanders, it is not to be be∣lieved how much the Navigation of the Hollanders and Zealanders in those parts was thereby incommodated. For putting forth for the most part unexpectedly from the Channel of Sluce, particularly in Calms, when Vessels of sail use not to move; he flew boldly sometimes upon one, sometimes upon another; taking some sinking others, and much indamaging others. It was notwithstanding found by experience, that the six Gallies were not sufficient to carry men enough to in damage the Enemy by Land also, and to endeavour some important surprise. He therefore went again into Spain, where being well received, he used such pre∣valent reasons as prevailed with the King to send eight other Gallies to the for∣mer six; and to give way, that for the service of the whole Squadron, he and the Marquis his brother might raise 800 Foot in the State of Milan, and might carry them to Flanders. Frederick went with these Orders to Genua, and from thence with his Brother to Milan, where Count Fuentes was Governour; from whom having received requisite authority for the raising of 8000 men. the Mar∣quis took the sole care thereof; and with the like diligence Frederick returned to
effect the aforesaid business in Spain. They did both of them act their parts very well: To which their own monies did contribute very much; for thereby they were a great help unto the King in the monies he was to disburse, and they did likewise procure many of their kindred and friends in Genua to doe the like. So as what was to be done by each of them, was with all speed effected. When the Marquis had raised his men, which were all very gallant men, he departed in the beginning of May, in that year 1602. towards Flanders. The Levy was divided, as we told you, into two Brigades. The Marquis himself was Campmaster of the one, and had for his Serjeant-Major Pompey Justinian, an old Flemish Souldier. And Lucio Dentici was Campmaster of the other, and Augustine Arconato was his Serjeant-Major, both of them having served many years formerly in the same war. The Marquis went by the way of Savoy; and being well come to the Pro∣vince of Luxenburg, he presently went to Gaunt, where the Archduke then was, that he might receive such Orders from him, as he upon such an occasion should think fitting. But Frederick had not the like good success in the conducting of his Gallies: For tarrying longer in Spain then he needed to have done, as he went from Porto Sancta Maria, two of his Gallies were taken from him in fight by some of the Hollanders ships; and three more in the same manner as he past afterwards through the English Channel, so as he could bring but three to Sluce; yet most of the men were saved, which were all of them Spaniards, under the Campmaster John di Menesses a Portuguese, who came likewise safe to the same place. But to return to the Marquis. He came with his men, just at the time when the Archduke stood most in need of such a recruit. Count Maurice was already marched into the fields, and with such Forces as the United Provinces till then had never had greater. He had made his Rendezvouz at Niminghen, and his Army consisted of 24000 Foot and 6000 Horse, with all other abundance of Artillery, Ammunition, and Victuals. 'Twas thought that his design was to cross through Brabant, and so advance forwards to the relief of Ostend, and then to to besiege Newport again. All which he might easily have done: For had it not been for the Aid which at that time came from Italy, the Archdukes could have made no opposition in the field to so many adverse Forces, with theirs of Flanders alone. The Orders which the Marquis received from the Archduke was, That he should presently go with all his men to find out the Admiral of Aragon, who with other 6000 Foot and 4000 Horse was marching towards the Enemy, to discover all their design, and then to disturb them therein as much as he could. The Marquis being joyned with the Admiral, the Army was brought to Telemone, a good Town, almost in the heart of Brabant: where making their rendezvouz, it was resolved that the Army should lie without the Town towards that part where it was thought the Enemy would appear. Nor was it long ere Maurice came to St. Truden a Town in the Country of Liege, and within three leagues of Tilemone. From thence Count Maurice came to within one league of the Ca∣tholick Camp; but finding the opposition greater then he thought he should have done, he resolved to retreat backward: And after several false appearances of sieges, that he might the better conceal the true one, he at last sat down before Graves; which as it hath been formerly said, lies upon the left side of the Mause. It is a Town which belongs to Brabant; strong both by situation and art; and which commands a Pass of great consequence upon that River. On the opposite side there stood a little Redout, which served for the better guarding of that Pass. Maurice divided his Quarters on both sides; and endeavoured par∣ticularly to secure them on the outward side, which might be easeliest assaulted. Antonio Gonsales, a Spaniard, was Governour of Graves, and he had with him about 1500 Foot of several Nations; good men, but not so well provided as they ought to have been with necessaries for defence. Yet the Governour and Gar∣rison did with equal courage prepare to defend the Town; hoping that the Town might in good time be relieved from the Catholick Camp. Maurice turn'd first of all upon the aforesaid little Redout, and playing furiously upon it took it within a few dayes. He then began with great fervencie to begirt the Town on all sides; and advancing with his Trenches on three sides, he accompanied
them with three Batteries: nor was it long ere he came to the ditch. But those within shewed themselves no less valiant, both in making use of Counter-batte∣ries, in defending the ditch, and in endamaging the enemy by their fallies. It was argued this mean while by the Captains of the Catholick Camp, whether it were better directly to relieve the Town or by assieging some other place, make Mau∣rice raise his siege. It was thought a hard matter immediately to relieve the Town; for the Catholick Camp-stood in need of many things to accost the enemy; and they could not so soon make provision thereof. But it was yet thought harder to be able to besiege any of the Enemies Towns, for they must then pass the Mause, and provide great store of Victuals and Ammunition for their Army, whereof, as also of all other things they knew the Enemy had great abundance. They at last resolved to relieve Graves; to which purpose the Admiral went presently to Ru∣remonde, which is a City standing upon the Mause, not far from Graves; and which was therefore better able to furnish such things as they needed; but yet they could not make such hast thereof, but that many dayes were spent therein. From Ruremonde, the Admiral went for Venelo, a good Town, standing likewise upon the Mause, that he might enjoy the oppertunity of the River, by means whereof victuals might be the more easily brought to the Army. From thence he marched strait upon the Enemy; but as he drew neer their fortifications, he found them such, and so far advanced as he was clean out of hope of doing good upon any of them; yet he knew that one of their quarters was neither so well fortified, nor so well guarded as were the rest; wherefore he resolved to try whether he could relieve the Town by that way or no. He therefore ordered John Tomaso Spina, formerly a Neapolitan Camp-master, that advancing unexpected by night towards that quarter with a thousand Italian Foot, he should endeavour to force the Enemies Trenches, and to get with that relief into the Town. And that Spina might have a safe retreat, in case he should not succeed therein; the Admiral commanded Camp-master Simon Autunes, to follow Spina at a propor∣tionable distance with one other thousand Spanish Foot. To divert the Enemy as much as it was possible from the defence of that quarter, he likewise ordered that Marquess Spinola, should move with two thousand Foot at the same time against the opposite quarter, and should give a counterfeit hot Alarm, to the end that the Enemy might the likelyer give over the defence of the other afore∣said quarter. All these orders were fully observed, but without any fruit; for Spina found the aforesaid quarter so well defended, as he was forced presently to retreat; nor did the Marquis his fained assault on the other side any thing avail; for though the Enemy flocked thither in great numbers, yet the other defence against which Spina had made the true assault was not a whit weakned. After this ill suc∣cess the Admiral dispaired of any more succoring the Town, wherefore he resol∣ved to retreat. Yet did not the besieged forbare defending themselves for many dayes, making the business much more bloody to the besiegers. But having no hopes of relief, they at last resolved to yeild, and upon the best conditions they could get, delivered the City up to Count Maurice. A little before the surren∣der of Graves, upon the retreat of the Catholick Camp, there began a mutiny in it amongst the Italians, which every day increasing, quickly became one of the greatest, and most dangerous that had yet happened in Flanders. The muti∣neers endeavaured first to possess themselves of Diste; and not being able to get in there, went hastily towards Hostrat, a small Town in Brabant, but provided of a Castle, and so near Breda, as they might receive succour from that Town of the Enemy, if the Arch-duke should use violence against them, which the Arch-duke was resolved to do, that he might once more try, whether he could by se∣vere means remedy that mischief, which grew still worse by being fairly procee∣ded with: and truly they gave too much accasion of it at this time; for growing every day more perverse then other, and being in a short time gotten to be two thousand Foot, and a thousand Horse, there could be no mischief done by excur∣sions, which they did not, nor any other sort of hostility which they did not threaten. Being therefore declared Traitors and Rebels, the Arch-duke resolved to proceed by force against them: which when they discovered, they began to fortifie themselves so in the Town and Castle of Hostrat; and did still receive
such advantages from the Enemies parts thereabouts, as all the endeavours to suppress their audacity by force, proved vain, as shall be afterwards shewed; nor did there any thing else of military action succeed that year. The next year, being 1603, they resolved in the Court of Spain to reinforce the Army in Flanders, as much as they could possibly. It was by this time clear∣ly Anno 1603. seen that the marriage between the Arch-duke and Infanta would prove ste∣ri. Wherefore it being considered in Spain, that the Provinces of Flanders would again revert to that Crown; they therefore treated of providing for the necessities of those Provinces with the Kings Name, Authority, and monies, as in case of a Country that were intirely his Count Frederick was returned to Flanders with three Gallies only, as we told you. He had in this his second voyage to Spain, so negotiated in that Court, as the King being willing vigourously to assist the affairs of Flanders, was resolved, that the two brothers Frederick, and Ambrosius Spinola, should levy twenty thousand Foot, and two thousand Horse, that these should be attended by a proportionable number of Artillery. And in fine, that there should be an entire Army raised apart, which should be com∣manded by them alone, and which might be imployed where the most advanta∣gious occasion should require. When Frederick was come to Sluce, his brother the Marquess came to him: nor was it long ere orders came from Spain for them to raise the aforesaid men; and because they were to be composed of Germans, Italians, and other new Flemish, the Marquess went about the end of March in∣to Germany, being to go afterwards for Italy, and the mean while Frederick stayed to infest the Enemy upon the Coast of Flanders with his Gallies. But a new unfortunate fight soon bereft him of his life, and overthrew his whole design: whereby he did notwithstanding the more highten those, wherein his brother still continued; and brought him afterwards to the greatest exaltation, that might be atchieved in the millitary profession. Frederick putting forth with eight Gal∣lies well maned, met with two of the Enemies Gallies, and three other men of war. The season was then softned into a calm, and therefore the sail vessels stood immoveable. Frederick taking this advantage assaulted the Enemies vessels on divers sides; which did not fail to defend themselves: the Gallies and round vessels giving each other such interchangeable assistance, as the one sort of them could give to the other; and for a while the conflict was very fierce. Many fell of each side; yet the Catholicks were still more advantaged by the calm. when on a sudden the winde rose, which made so much for the contrary vessel of sail, as winding about in several sorts, and pouring down Canon shot upon Frede∣rick's Gallies, he himself received a shot from one of them in his side, whereof he suddenly dyed. This happened about the end of May; at which time the Marquess, having given requisite orders in Germany for the raising of two Regi∣ments of Foot, went from thence to Italy, to take two other Brigadoes of Foot there also into pay, and to return afterwards with all these men to Flanders: But his brothers death did so disorder the first designes, as for divers difficulties the men could not be raised; though the King continued the same commands of his brother upon the Marquess, who quickly returned to Flanders, with all demonstration of honour and esteem to his person, Yet the Gallies were then almost of no longer use; for the Marquess was soon after imployed (as you shall hear) in the enterprise of Ostend; but before it was taken Sluce was lost, which drew after it the the loss of the Gallies. The Marquess in the inte∣rim indeavoured to preserve the men which he brought with him the year before from Italy; but because they were much diminished, as was likewise the whole Army; the Arch-duke gave out orders for the raising of new Horse and Foot; resolving to turn the greatest strength thereof that he could against the mutineers. The Duke d' Aumale raised one thousand Horse, the greatest part Lorrainers. Three thousand Dutch were raised in Germany. The Walloon Brigadoes were fild up: and two other Brigadoes came to Flanders from Italy, the one of Spa∣niards, under Inico di Borgia, and the other Neopolitans under Lelio Brancat∣chio, Knight of St. John, the people that could be soonest raised being assem∣bled together, and the season being already fit for the field, the Arch duke sent Count Frederick di Berg against the Mutineers with 7000 Foot, and 3000 Horse.
The Mutiniers were got into Hostrat where what by means of their own For∣tifications, and what by the aid which they received from the Enemies neighbour∣ing parts, they seemed little to value any force that could be brought against them. They were above 2000 Foot, and were grown to have 1500 Horse; all good men, of several Nations, though the most were Italians Yet Count Frederick began to set so close to them, as beginning now not to trust any longer in their own forces alone, they sought to be openly backt by those which Count Maurice had oft∣times offered them. It hath been known in other Mutinies many times, how much more prejudicial his own Souldiers have been unto the King, then those of his Enemies: but in this of Hostrat, the excess of disobedience did degenerate in∣to such a degree of infamy, as the example thereof ought ever to be abhorred. The Mutiniers were not ashamed, in their Treaty between Count Maurice and them, to bargain in this manner with them. That they should be taken by Count Maurice into the protection of the United Pro∣vinces. That to this purpose they should be by him defended against the violence of the Spaniards. That on the other side, they the Mutiniers should fight under him as long as the Army should lie in the field that year. That in case they should agree with the Archduke, they should not for four moneths space bear Arms against the United Pro∣vinces. That if the Town and Castle of Hostrat should not be thought to be sufficient, some good Town should be assigned unto them by the United Provinces, and that their safety should by all other means be provided for. The Agreement being thus made, Count Maurice went presently into Hostrat with many Forces, to secure the Mutiniers. And their affairs grew quickly to such an advantage, as Count Frederick being forced first to stand rather upon his defence then otherwise, was at last necessitated to remove from thereabouts, and to retreat. Nor did Maurice lose this occasion. Hostrat is very near Balduke; against which it was clearly seen, that Count Maurice had sundry times plotted his greatest designs. Marching therefore speedily against Balduke, he incamped about it; and disposing of his quarters in sundry parts, he gave one of them to the Mutiniers apart. The Archduke was mightily troubled at the news hereof. He feared (as I told you upon another occasion) that he had no sufficient Forces both to continue the Siege of Ostend, and sufficiently to succour Balduke: But that which most moved him, was; That upon other occasions, that City not de∣sirous to admit of any external Garrison, was resolute to defend it self with its own peculiar Forces; which were not thought sufficient for the security of such a place, of too great a circuit, and which had need of men trained up in Arms, and not in City-affairs. Just at this time were come the two Brigadoes of Borgia and Brancatchio which were expected from Italy. Joyning therefore these men to those which were formerly with Count Frederick, the Archduke ordered that Frederick should with all diligence follow Maurice, and should by all means endeavour to hinder him in his intended Siege. Maurice could not in so short a time possess himself of all such places about it, as the Siege did require. So as it was not hard for Frederick to make himself master of one of them, by which he drew as near as was needfull to Balduke, and secured such intercourse as was ne∣cessary with the City. He immediately endeavoured to put in a strong Garrison into the City: but the Citizens seemed unwilling, as before, to admit of them. Maurice knew this; and hoped that some dissention would arise thereupon; and from dissention, some tumult in the Town; and that this tumult might produce some other disorder which might make for his advantage. He therefore continued to fortifie himself, both without towards the fields, and on the inside towards the City; raising good Forts and Redouts every where, and accompanying them on all sides as was fitting with Trenches, Ditches, and all other most advantagious Fortifications. Count Frederick did the like on his part; yet thinking the City to be but in a very weak condition, he advertised the Archduke thereof. The pre∣servation or loss of such a place was indeed of too great a consequence; nor was there any way to convince the pertinacie of the Inhabitants, then for the Arch∣duke to come himself in person to Balduke. He therefore went presently from Brussels; and taking some other Forces with him, came to the same place where Frederick was, and where he had fortified himself. From hence the Archduke,
the better to acquaint himself with the Citizens, went ofttimes into the City, and out again. At last feigning an occasion, that upon necessity a great strength of Walloon Foot were only to pass through the Town, to oppose the Enemy in a certain place; after that he and the Souldiers were come in, he sent for the chief Magistrate, and spake thus unto him. That for as much as that City had upon all occasions ever shewed it self faithfull to the antient Church, and to her natural Princes, so much the more ought it to be endeavoured to be preserved under the obedience of them both. That the Rebels did daily attempt either by private surprisals, or open hostility to make themselves masters of it. And this out of no other end, but to suppress their Liberty and Religion, and in lieu thereof to introduce Tyranny and Heresie, and to punish such a people which had alwayes so much detested their perfidiousness. That it was clearly seen the Forces of the City were not able of themselves alone to obviate so important a danger. That Cities were oppugned and defended by people that were inured to hardness amongst Arms in the field, and not by such as were bred up in ease and idleness at their own homes. That therefore it was necessary that the City should be perswaded to receive such a Garrison as might be able to defend them. That be himself did very heartily beg thus much of them, which he chiefly did for the good of the Town. Yet because the preservation of such a place did so much import both Him, the Infanta, and the King of Spain; he did declare, that as they should share of the service, so would they at all times answerably acknowledge their obligation to the City for it. The Magistrate was much moved at these words; and they were also accom∣panied with Arms: wherefore the City, either not willing, or not able to gain∣say the Archdukes desires, seemed willing to condescend fully to his desires. So he left 3000 Foot therein, part Walloons, part Germans, and secured it by such men as were requisite; and furnishing it likewise with victuals, ammunition, and with whatsoever was fitting upon that occurrencie, he returned again to Brussels, leaving Frederick to oppose Maurice: Divers actions had this mean while past between the one party and the other; in one of which, which proved very bloody, the Neapolitan Campmaster, the Marquis di Bella, whilst he fought valiantly, was slain; and upon another occasion, a certain Canon-shot made from the Ca∣tholick Camp, killed Monsieur de Temple the Enemies Campmaster Generall, and one highly esteemed of amongst them. The Archduke being gone, Maurice was not long in retreating; for he knew he could doe no good upon Balduke, after it was so well secured. And because it was now about the end of October, and the weather began to grow cold, he therefore brought back his Souldiers to their Winter-quarters, giving Graves to the Mutiniers instead of Hostrat; and the Catholick Army was likewise quartered in several places. Now to return to the business of Ostend. The Town continued to be succour'd more then ever; so as in respect thereof, as for many other advantages which it enjoyed, the Works proceeded on so slowly without, as the hopes of bringing the Siege to a happy end did daily rather decrease then increase. Yet Rivas was very diligent in discharging his duty. The besieged had three little Forts, without the Counterscarf towards the Land, by the name of Pouldrouns, as you heard before. Rivas, watching his occasion, unexpectedly assaulted them; and was so fortunate therein, as they were all taken at the same time that they were assaulted. Then furnishing them all with Artillery, he turned them upon the Fortifications which sheltred the Town on that side. The Pouldrons leaned towards S. Albertos quarters, in which the aforesaid Platform was daily raised higher. The Plain thereabouts was all sandy; so as there was no conveniencie of raising Trenches of Earth. Rivas therefore made one of Gabiouns lined with Earth, and drew it along from the Pouldrouns to where the Platform was made, thrusting out a Flank towards the Town for the better defence thereof. Nor was it long ere the Platform was fully finished, and many great Canons were placed upon the top of it by Rivas, who likewise munited it below against the Town, as made most for the security thereof. Some progress was likewise daily made on Bredene's side, in the advancing the great Dike. Bucquoy had the chief charge thereof, and it was called by his name. And he used all possible diligence to infest the Town, and the entrance of the Channel on that side: But there appeared no less vigi∣lancie
in the besieged; their courage abounded, according as the Town did a∣bound with all sorts of provisions. There was hardly any one day in which they did not sally out; nor did the besiegers doe any thing which cost not much la∣bour and blood. The Platform was made chiefly of Bavins, and other wood; and the great Dike was composed of the like materials. Two furious Batteries were therefore level'd from the Town, with artificial Fire-balls against these two Works, to set them on fire, and indammage them by that means. Nor did they fail in their design: For by long Battery they at last took fire, and were thereby so torn rnd spoiled, as it cost much time and the death of many men to remake them. In these and other actions which then insued, Durango and Zavaglios, two Spanish Campmasters were slain, together with divers Captains and Officers, of that and of other Nations. Nor was the Enemies loss less either in number or quality. Pompein Tergone; a famous Enginier, was at this time come from Italy to Flan∣ders, drawn thither by the fame of this siege. He had a very ready wit, which made him apt for Inventions in his Calling: but having never till then past from the Theory to the Practical part in Military affairs, it was soon seen, that many of his Imaginations did not upon trial prove such, as in appearance they promised to be. He began to build a Castle of wood upon Boats fastned together. The Castle was round, high, and large proportionably: On the top thereof it was capable of six great Peeces of Artillery on one side; and on the other side there was place enough for those Souldiers who were to attend them. Tergone intended to bring this Machin into the mouth of the Channel, and to firm it there, where succour was brought into Ostend, hoping hereby to keep the Town from relief. But this could not so soon be done, but that it was preceded by the other work of draw∣ing the great Dike to the same Channel, whereupon to raise afterwards a Fort, by which that passage might be so much the more impeded. To accelerate this work likewise, Targone bethought himself of other Engines, by which that so great quantity of materials whereof the Dike was made might the more easily be brought to imployment. The said materials being put together in manner as they ought to be, he put a certain number of little Barrels under the hollow of the middle thereof, and on the sides, by which at full sea the Engines floated, and were afterwards brought by Cranes to joyn with the Dike in that part where the work was continued on. These Engines were called Flotes. But such was the tempest of the Enemies Canon-shot which incessantly fell upon them when they rested upon the sand, and then again they were so prejudiced by the Sea-storms, as ofttimes the work of many dayes was destroyed in a few houres. And really it was a pittifull case to see how much blood was there shed, and how little the meaner sort of people who were imployed therein, did out of a desire of gain value it. This was the condition of Ostend, when the Archduke bethought himself to give the care of that Siege to Marquis Spinola. Great certainly was the honour of such an imployment; and Spinola in his coming so soon thereunto, may al∣most be said to be become a Generall before he was a Souldier. Yet the Archduke hoped his fervencie in the service would supply his want of experience: And he had already shewed great abilities in those few military affairs which had passed through his hands. The Archduke likewise hoped that Spinola by his credit in matter of monies might much help those expences which so difficult a Siege re∣quired; when it should be managed by himself, and from which, if it should have good success, such way should be made for him to greater Honours. When the Archduke made him the offer, the Marquis, before he would accept of it, would first consider what the event thereof might prove. He therefore went to the place itself, and was very diligent in making the business be well weighed by old Souldiers, upon whose opinions he thought he might safely build. But they differed very much in their opinions: Some thought the business so difficult as there was no hopes of compassing it. That it was one of the most generally received Maxims in the military profession, not to venture upon a siege, unless there were first firm belief of keeping out all succo And how was it possible to be hoped that this might be done to Ostend? That the
great Channel by which relief was brought was totally open and free. That on the contrary the great Dike which was intended to hinder the ingress thereof, was but slowly proceeded in; and that by reasons of the ruins sometimes made by the Enemy, sometimes by the Sea, it was as fast torn in peeces as built. But say it should be brought to a good end, and that by the raising of a Fort there, as was intended, the mouth of the Channel should be commanded, would the Enemies vessels notwithstan∣ding forbear frequenting that passage? For certainly so many would never be sunk by Canon-shot but that a great many more would succesfully pass by. And as for the Ca∣stle which Targone proposed, what foundation could there be for such a machine? Which being exposed sometimes to be plaid upon from the Town; sometimes to the as∣saults of the Enemies ships; and sometimes to the fury and tempests of the sea, the expectations of such as were unexperienced would certainly be soon seen to vanish. Then since succour was not to be kept out, the siege was onely to be pursued by maine force. And that this would either never be done, because of the continual retreats which the Enemy would make within their line; or if it should be effected, it would cost so much monies, labour, and blood as the purchase of Ostend would be too dearly bought. But to this it was answered. That to keep out succour was not so hard a matter as to be dispaired of. That the Dike went still forward; nor yet so slowly but that it might at last satisfie expectati∣on. That when it should be brought to the Channel, and a great Fort be built there, it was not to be doubted, but that that passage would be thereby much impeded. That truly for the Castle propounded by Targone the success thereof was to be thought un∣certain; but that if it should succeed, how much more would the Channel be there∣by hindred? And say that machin should perish, the Fort would yet remain, by which though succour should not be totally taken away, it would be at least so weak∣ned, as certainly the siege would be thereby much advantaged. That in fine, their greatest hopes were to be therein placed. That the line of Ostend was not so large, but that by winning now one fortification, now another, it might be kept from making retreats in perpetuity. That so happy progress was to be expected, from Batteries, Mines, and other continual works of the Spade and Mathook, as the besieged should not at last know whether to retreat. And in this case, how glorious would the vi∣ctory be? And how great the profit which would be thereby got? Since the Province of Flanders, would be once free of so great a yoak, nor would the expence of monies, time or blood in such a siege be so considerable, but that in all other considerations the atchievement of such a Town, would be of far greater consequence. The Marquess strugling between these two contrarieties of opinions, thought at last that there was more hopes then fear in the offer which was made him; and therefore resolved cheerfully to accept it, and thought this a fair field for him to march in, and to advance his fortune still further in, in the wars. Going then in the beginning of October to the siege, he began to take upon him the command thereof, and gave his Brigado to Pompeo Justiniano, who was Serjant Major thereof, leaving the other in Lucio Dontici, as before. The first thing the Marquess did was to make great store of provision of all such materi∣als as were necessary, as well for the work of the great Dike on Bredene's side, as for the other works which were to be made on the side of St. Alberto, on which side the Town was chiefly intended to be straitned and forced; the ground over∣against it was all sandy, and full of several Channels and little revolets, besides those two greater Channels which fell into the sea, as you have often heard. The same sea likewise at the flood did so whirle about every place thereabouts, as ground was not any where to be found to make Trenches, which were therefore to be supplyed with the abovesaid materials. These were chiefly brought by the Flotes invented by Targone, and though the great Dike did daily advance; yet it was known that such a work would prove too long, and too uncertain. The hope of keeping out succor growing then every day less and less, Spinola bent all his endeavours to take the Town by force. We told you before that all vessels were hindred from coming into the lesser Channel, on St. Alberto's side, which fals there into the sea, by a Fort. Yet the Channel it self was of great advantage to the Enemy on that side, for it served for a great ditch to their Counterscarfe, which
was strong of it self, and yet made stronger by many Flanks by which it was defended. Before the Catholicks could come to assault the Counterscarf, they must first pass over the Channel; which was so hard to doe with safety or shelter in any place thereof, as it was evidently seen that many of them must perish, being so exposed to be injured by the Enemy. The oppugnation was led on, on four sides from St. Alberto's quarter. The Germans wrought nearer the Sea; then followed the Spaniards; after them the Italians; and on the outmost side, more towards Land, the Walloons and Burgonians. Great was the fervencie of all these Nations; and such a contention there was amongst them in striving which of them should most advance the works, as the Souldiers emulation seem∣ed rather a contest between Enemies, then between Rivals. The Channel was narrower, and more shallow where the Burgonians and Walloons wrought. They were therefore the first that past over it, and afterwards the other Nations did the like. To pass over it, a great quantity of the aforesaid materials were thrown into every part thereof where the aforesaid Nations wrought. Those materials were reduced to Dikes or Banks, upon which the Souldiers advanced towards the Town. But very many of them were slain and wounded: For the Defendants, with their hail of Musket-shot, and tempest of greater Artillery, charged with little bullets and murdering shot in great quantity, and ofttime with artificial fire, made the Catholicks work on all those sides very bloody. The Souldiers, that they might go the best sheltred that they could, invented many Fences: some consisted of Gabions fill'd with earth, well joyned and fastned together; others of long Bavins, which stood upright, and stood so thick as they were muket-proof; and others in several forms made of the aforesaid materials. Targone invented likewise a great Cart, from which a Bridge made of Cloth and Cords might un∣expectedly be thrown over the Channel, and so the Enemies Defences might the easelier be assaulted. The Cart stood upon four very high wheels; and upon the forepart thereof rose up as it were the Mast of a ship, which served chiefly to let down, and to take up the Bridge. But the whole bulk proved to be of so cum∣bersom a greatness, and so hard to be managed, that before it was undertaken, it was known it could work no effect. The aforesaid Fences were wrought where the Artillery from the Town could not reach; and at the flowing of the Sea, they were brought upon the Flotes to the places where they were made use of. Great was the mortality likewise of those that wrought here; the Enemy making usually such havock of them with their Muskets, Artillery, and Sallies, as ofttimes hardly one of them could be saved. But mony still got new men; and ofttimes the Souldiers themselves wrought. Nor was Spinola wanting in being in all places at all times, and in exposing himself as well as any of the rest to all labour and danger; encouraging some, rewarding others, and behaving himself so, as his imitating without any manner of respect unto himself the most hazardous works of others, made the rest the more ready to imitate his. When each Nation had past the Channel, each of them began with like emu∣lation to force the Ravelins and Half moons which sheltred the Counterscarf: And the Walloons and Burgonians, by reason of their quarter, were the first that did it: But with much effusion of blood, even of the Noblest amongst them; for amongst the rest, Catris, a Walloon Campmaster, was lost, a valiant and greatly experienced Souldier, and whom Spinola highly esteemed both for his deeds and councel. With the like progress, and no less loss of blood did the other Nations advance. So as the Enemies at last lost all the Fortifications which they had without their principal Line; about which a great Ditch ran, but not so hard to pass as was the Channel which fenced the Counterscarf. The easier doing of it made the Catholicks hope better in the effecting thereof. Wherefore full of fresh courage, they prepared to continue their labours more heartily then ever, that they might the sooner end the siege. But the winter being already come on, did much hinder their Works; and the Sea did then more destroy them by her Tempests. The Enemy did likewise make very fierce opposition; they set up Batteries within, against the Batteries without; to Mines opposed Countermines; they repaired themselves on all sides, and as fast as one Rampire was lost they set up another. So as the Catholicks were to advance by inchmeal; and yet they
did so advance, as by the Spring they were got well forward into the Ditch. These already progressions of Marquess Spinola, together with his still daily proceedings made the united Provinces shrewdly afraid that they should at the last lose Ostend. It was therefore consulted amongst their chief Commanders, how the Town might be best preserved. Which might be done by two waies; either by some important diversion, or by raising the siege by main force. The second affair brought with it such difficulties, as the first was imbraced. Where∣fore they resolved to besiege Sluct. A Town which likewise stood upon the Sea, and of so great consequence, as did rather exceed then come short of those of Ostend. Having then made a very plentiful provision of vessels to carry their soul∣diers from Flushing, to the neighbouring Country where Sluce was seated, Count Maurice about the end of April in the new year 1604, moved with fifteen thou∣sand Foot, and two thousand five hundred Horse to compass the said design. Anno 1604. We acquainted you with the discription of the situation of this place, and of the Territories thereof when it was besieged, and taken by the Duke of Parma; so as we shall need to touch but briefly upon it here. Sluce lies more within land then does Ostend; but so neer the Sea, as it enjoyes the conveniences thereof no less then doth the other; all the Country thereabouts is so full of Channels, Shores, and standing waters, as it is hardly commerceable at any time of the year, unless it be by banks or barks. From the lesser Channels a greater doth proceed, upon the shore whereof the Town stands, and which falling into the Sea, makes a very fit Harbor for all sorts of shipping. Upon divers sides of the same Channel stood sundry Forts, the better to command it, and one in particular called St. Anno, stood neerer the Town then the rest did. Maurice being entred into the Channel with his men, he tryed to land them and to take this Fort, by which his landing might be much withstood: but it was so well defended by Camp-Master Justinian, who was sent by Spinola into those parts, to observe the pro∣ceedings of the Enemy, least they might tend to the prejudice of the siege of Ost∣end, as Maurice could not make himself master thereof; wherefore he thought to land his men in an other part. Matheo Serano was Governor of Sluce; a Spani∣ard, and a souldier of much esteem; but who had but a small Garrison to guard the Town and Forts; wherefore he acquainted the Arch-duke with the need he stood in, both of victuals, men, and amunition. The Arch-duke encouraged him; and soon after sent him three hundred Foot, promising that he would ere long provide for the necessities of the Town and Forts. A little before this the Ad∣miral of Aragon was returned to Spain, and Velasco was made General of the horse in lieu of him; Velasco being formerly General of the Artilery, in which place he was succeede by Buckquoy, who quitted his Brigado of Walloons. The Arch-duke then ordered Velasco to go to Dama; a very strong place between Sluce and Bruges; and that he should there hinder the Enemy as he should see occasion. Maurice this mean while had landed his men in another place, and taking now one situation, now another, prepared to besiege the Town. But all the Country there abouts was like a great Labyrinth of Channels and Banks. One branchisprung from another, and these framed a great number of little I∣slands, which were joyned together by bridges, and there was still every where more marish, then dry ground. These situations were in one respect a great ad∣vantage to Count Maurice, by affording him oppertunity to Fortifie himself; but were very disadvantagious to him in an other behalf, by reason of the vast circuit he was forced to take, ere he could finde ground fitting to place his quarters in. Amongst other Channels, there was one which ran from Sluce to Dama, which was of great concern to impede Maurice. Here particularly did Velasco oppose him, and making a bridge over it, began to build a Fort, he had not then men enough with him for his purpose. Wherefore being set upon by the Enemy, he was forced after a sharp fight to yeild the Pass, and was ill routed; above 400 of his men were slain and wounded, and above three hundred taken prisoners, the rest got back to Dama, whether Velasco also came. The Enemies loss was but very little; they were very much incouraged by this happy success: where∣fore they continued to possess themselves by degrees of the rest of the Passes which were of greatest concernment; and Maurice was incredibly vigilant in
joyning one of them to another, and in securing them with Trenches, Redoubts and Forts. The Governor of Sluce had this mean while often renued his request to be recruted with men, and with some good store of ammunition and victuals. One thousand five hundred men were therefore at several times conveyed unto him, and he was put in good hope, that all his other needs should be soon provi∣ded for. But before this could be done, Count Maurice was so far advanced in his siege, as the Town began to be in manifest danger. He had taken either by assault, or composition almost all those Forts by which the great Channel was commanded; and because he knew that the Town was ill provided, especially of victuals, his design was to take it without assault, onely by keeping out relief. But that they might come by some the best they could, the Arch-duke was come to Bruges, which lies almost in the midst between Sluce and Ostend, but he had not men enough to continue the one siege, and obstruct the other. Yet he did all he could to gather together as many as he was able: and to that purpose went about to accord the Mutineers, that he might make use of them upon this occasion. He was therefore content to assign over unto them the City of Ruremonde till such time as they were fully paid, and in the interim made them a monthly assign∣ment of certain monies: and that they might be the more sure of what he pro∣mised them, he delivered up unto them as Hostages, the Duke of Ossuna, a Gran∣dee of Spain, who was come the year before into Flanders to militate in the Ca∣tholicks Camp: Count Fontanoye, one of the chiefest Flemish lords, and Ava∣los, who had formerly quitted his Italian Brigado. Whilst these preparations were a making, Justinian endeavoured to convey some victuals and ammunition into Sluce; but met with such an obstacle as he could not effect it. And by this and other attempts it was known, that Maurice his fortifications were on all sides such, as there was but little hopes of Forcing them. Marquis Spinola had this mean while made such considerable progress about Ost∣end, as the Arch-duke having stil a better opinion of him, resolv'd that he should try to relieve Sluce. Spinola saw that the Catholick Forces were then too weak to effect this; and thought that though they had been stronger, Maurice had already fortifi∣ed himself too advantagiously on all sides. He doubted likewise least by bootlessly endeavoring to relieve Sluce, the siege of Ostend might be endangered, by too much weakning the forces which wrought upon it: out of these reasons he denied this em∣ployment as much as he could; but being compelled by the Arch-duke, he obtained that some of the chief Commanders of the Army might go along with him, that he might be the better ruled by their advice, and that he might in this manner the bet∣ter justifie the event touching the succour which he already foresaw would not be favourable. Leaving then so many men onely before Ostend as might serve to con∣tinue the siege, he took away the rest, and with some other men, to which the Mutineers did in a great part joyn: he made up an Army of six thousand Foot, and two thousand Horse, with ten peeces of Canon, and a large provision of vi∣ctuals, which was that which Sluce wanted most. The want thereof was already so great, as if all the speedier care were not taken, the Town could hold no lon∣ger out, and this the Governor had openly made known. Spinola therefore af∣ter he had assembled his men together about Bruges on the beginning of August, hastned his march as much as he could, and went towards Dama. By the notice he had of the condition of the Enemies fortifications, he hoped to bring in the succour by a little Village called Terverde. Justinian had likewise tryed to con∣vey some victuals into the Town by that way; but he not being able to overcome the resistance made by the Enemy; they had afterward fortified that place better. So as Spinola endeavouring the same again, he could by no means force the Pass: taking a farther compass about, he attempted afterwards to get into the Island of Cassante; on which side he imagined that the Enemies Trenches were nei∣ther so well fortified, nor so well guarded as in other parts. He met with some obstacle in passing over some Channels; but he got over them, and gi∣ving the best sitting orders to march by night, and to come unexpected∣ly upon the Enemy, it was impossible for him by reason of divers difficul∣ties he met with, to get thither before it was day. The Catholicks did notwithstanding valliantly assault the Enemy; by whom being as
stoutly withstood, the fight continued a great while; but Count Maurice coming in himself in person, and reinforcing the defence answerable to the dan∣ger, the Catholicks were at last forced to retreat There were some 400 of them slain, and as many hurt; amongst which the Campmaster Borgia was sorely wounded in both his arms. In this action the Marquis of Renty was particular∣ly slain, who was in the prime of his youth; of great expectation, and one of the chiefest of the Nobility of that Country. The enemy lost likewise much bloud, and that of the best, in this fight. The assault proving ineffectual, the Town was soon after delivered up upon honourable conditions. Little less then 4000 souldiers marched out of it, and went to Dama, making a most compassio∣nate spectacle: for they were all so macerated with hunger, having suffered the utmost extremities thereof, as they rather seemed skellitons then men. And in two short hours march (for it is no more between Sluce and Dama) threescore of them dropped down dead for very weakness. Sluce being lost, Spinola returned likewise to Dama; and went from thence to the siege of Ostend again. Sluce was surrendred about the midst of October, when Count Maurice entred there∣into: glorying that in three months time, and with the loss of so little bloud, he had made a greater acquisition then that of Ostend, which would cost above three years expence of time, and an infinity of Spanish gold and bloud, if it could not at least hold out longer. Great store of Artillery of all sorts was found in the Town, and in the Forts; and all the Gallies which were well furnished with all things which were requisite to the designe for which they were intended, fell likewise into Maurice his hands. The Archduke appeared much displeased hereat. And it being to be doubted that the enemy favoured by so important an acquisition, and having all their Forces almost still intire, would presently come with displayed Banners to the re∣lief of Ostend; the Archduke therefore gave forth immediately all necessary Orders to keep them from so doing. Those places towards which it was thought that Maurice might lead his Army from Sluce to Ostend, were therefore speedi∣ly provided for and well fortified. And the Archduke gave the chief care thereof to Spinola; as to him who bore the whole burthen of the siege. A∣mongst other places, he endeavoured to secure the Town of Dama, and the Fort Blanchemburg; the former being seated more inward into the Country, and the other upon the Sea, almost in equal distance between Sluce and Ostend. Maurice must needs pass either by the one or the other of these, to bring his men to the relief. And because it was feared that he would rather do it by Blanchemburg side, Spinola drew thither as great a force as was necessary to withstand Mau∣rice, if he should have the aforesaid intent. These Orders being given, he re∣turned to the siege, resolving to carry it so as it might the speedilyer be ended. And he already thought himself almost sure of it: For the loss of Sluce had not only not disheartned the Catholicks in the siege of Ostend, but had rather in∣flamed them the more, out of a desire that the loss of that place might be coun∣terpoised by the winning of this. At the same time then that the enemies were hottest against Sluce, the Ca∣tholicks were no less servent against Ostend. Each of the aforesaid Nations had proceeded on in their several quarters, pursuing to lead on their works in man∣ner aforesaid; but not without continual loss of bloud; and amongst the rest, Camp-master Melzi was ill hurt in his leg; and Camp-master Justinian recei∣ved such a wound in his arm, as he was forced to have it cut quite off. Yet the Catholicks at last made themselves masters of the ditch; nor were they long af∣terwards in winning the first Line; though the enemy made as many retreats as they could in every Bulwark; making of one flank many and very much retar∣ding the oppugnors proceedings. When they had won the first Line, they dis∣covered a new Fortification which those within had raised with ditches, flanks, and other defences. Sluce was just then lost; and it was feared that Count Maurice would come to the relief of Ostend. The Catholicks being therefore so much the more moved, and Spinola being again returned, it is not to be ex∣prest with what servor they fell to their works on all sides. The greatest pro∣gress was made towards the old Town of Ostend. And because when they should
have won that, they might easily hinder the entrance into the Channel, by the mouth whereof succour was brought from the Sea; and for that the new Town was much commanded by the old, therefore Spinola did more reinforce his Bat∣teries, assaults, mines, and all his other most efficacious works on that side then on any other. Nor was it long ere the Catholicks had almost wholly taken it. They likewise advanced after the same manner against the new Fortification, so as now the besieged had no where whither to retreat: wherefore wanting ground to defend, when they most abounded in all things for defence, they were at last forced to surrender the Town: which was done about the midst of Sep∣tember, upon all the most honourable conditions that they could desire. Count Maurice was often minded to attempt the succour by main force; but conside∣ring that he was to enter into an Enemies Country, amongst strong and well garded Towns, and that he should meet with men that were very ready to fight, he thought it not fit after his prosperous success at Sluce, to hazard falling into some misfortune, as upon such an occasion he might peradventure do; and there∣fore he forbore to do it. It was a remarkable thing to see so many souldiers march out of a Town: For there were above 4000 of them, all strong and healthfull, they having enjoyed great plenty of all things in Ostend, by reason of their continual succours. So as besides great store of Artillery, there was found in the Town such aboundance of Victuals, ammunition, and of whatsoever else may be imagined for the defence of a royal Town as the like was never known to be in any other place. Thus ended the siege of Ostend: very memorable doubtless in itself; but much more in consideration of the so great expence of monies and time, which the winning and losing of it cost. The siege continued above three years; in which time the constant opinion was, that there dyed what by the sword, what by sickness; above a hundred thousand men, between the one and the other side. Whereby it may be conceived what proportionable monies, and other things were therein spent. The Town being yielded up, the Archduke and Infanta had the curiosity to go see it, and went from Gaunt thither; where they found nothing but a mishapen Chaos of Earth, which hardly retained any shew of the first Ostend. Ditches filled up, Curtains beaten down, Bulwarks torn in pieces, Half-Moons, Flanks and Redouts so confused one with another, as one could not be distinguished from another; nor could it be known on which side the oppugnation, or on which side the defence was. Yet they would know all, and receive the whole relation from Spinola's own mouth. He represented at full the last posture of the siege; he shewed the Spaniards quarters, and that of the Italians, as also those of each other Nation. He related how stoutly they con∣tended who should outvie one another in pains taking on which part the greatest resistance was made within; where the dispute was most difficult without; where they wanted ground to retreat unto; where the Enemy used their utmost pow∣er; and where at last the Town was surrendred. The Archdukes saw the great Platform, the great Dike, and whatsoever else of curious might be suggested by the unusual face of that siege; but not without the Infanta's great compassion, and even almost tears, by looking upon the horror of those parts where the sword, fire, sea and earth may be said to have conspired together in making so long, and so miserable a destruction of Christians. They both of them did ve∣ry much commend Spinola, and did also thank the rest of the Commanders who had deserved well in that enterprise. Nor did they less gratulate the inferior, Of∣ficers and Souldiers, who had exposed themselves, most to those dangers. They left the Seignor de Grison, the Walloon Camp-master, Governor of Ostend; and giving such other Orders as were fitting for the keeping of that place, they returned to Gaunt, and soon after to their usual abode of Brussels. Autumn this mean while ran on; and that Summers extraordinary toyl and labour had very much tired the Armies of both sides: wherefore it was needfull for them to repose. They were therefore drawn out of the Field and put into Garrison. Soone after that yeere ended, and the other of 1605 began Marquis Spinola had not as yet been at the Court of Spain, and therefore he would no longer delay going thither. He hoped that his taking of Ostend would
make him be the better received in that Court, and cause him return the better satisfied to Flanders. The Archdukes were not willing to let him go; but after∣wards sent all such praises with him, as might best further his going, and return. He went away about the latter end of the year, and was very honourably recei∣ved both by the King and the whole Court; wherein he treated long of the affairs of Flanders, shewing in particular, that they must use all means to carry the War into the Enemies Country, by passing the Rhine, and by displaying the Kings Banners in those parts: so as the Rebels might receive their greater punishment nearer home. He lively represented the unruly Mutinies, and that there was no way to prevent them, but by paying the Souldier well; and he was so well listen∣ed unto in all other things, as the King thought it fitting to return him with all possible speed back to Flanders. At his departure, he made him, and declared him to be, Camp-master-General, and Governor of all his Forces in those Pro∣vinces; giving him very great authority, not only in the destributing of monies, but also in the exercise of his Command. He was honoured with the Golden Eleece, and so fully satisfied with all other manner of demonstrations, as he re∣turned very well pleased to Flanders. Arriving at Brussels with very good Bils of Exchange, he forthwith caused the mutiniers to be satisfied; and strict or∣ders were given for the raising of new men in Germany, and some others in the neighbouring Countries: besides, a Brigado of Neopolitans was expected from Italy, and one of Lombards, and another which came by Sea from Spain. This great preparation of Arms made by the Catholicks, being discovered, the Enemy were no less vigilant to come with good Forces likewise assoon as possi∣bly they could into the field. They were the first that marched; and with such a designe, as none more bold, nor of greater concernment could be imagined, if they had been therein answered by Fortune. Count Maurice having assembled together in the beginning of May, 15000 foot, and 2500 horse, and imbarking the greatest part of them, Count Ernestus of Nassaw entred into the Scheld with them, and Count Maurice met him with the rest by land, near the great Fort of Lillo, two leagues peneath Antwerp. The United Provinces possest that Fort on the right hand shore, and another just over against it on the contrary shore. The designe was to cut those Dikes on both the sides by which the Sea is chiefly kept out at high Tide: So as the lower scituations being thereby over∣flown, the Enemy might the better fortifie the higher parts, and by this means begirt Antwerp, and so come by so important a City. They could not move so unexpectedly, but that the Archduke and Spinola had got notice of it long be∣fore. Necessary orders were therefore taken for the preservation of those Dikes, by certain Forts which stood on divers sides where there was most need. To this purpose Spinola dispatched away the Spanish Camp-master Inico di Borgia, and Alonso di Luna, with their Brigadoes and Signor Balanson with his Brigado of Burgonians, immediately thither. The greatest danger lay on the left side of the River, and here likewise was the greatest defence made. Maurice knew very well what difficulties his designe would meet withall by this opposition: yet he would put it to the tryal. Wherefore assaulting the Dike which was nearest Callo, his men endeavoured by all means to possess themselves of it: But Borgia, who had the defence of it, did so repulse the Enemy, as many of them were slain, many wounded, and many drowned in the River. Count Maurice falling off this enterprise, resolved to retreat, and came again to Lillo with all his Naval Preparation, and from thence went to Zealand, inten∣ding to advance into those parts which were nearest the Province of Flanders, and to endeavour some new acquisition near Sluce. The Archduke suspected this very much, and feared lest Maurice would fall upon the Town of Hulst, or upon the Fort Sasse: wherefore Spinola went presently to those parts; throw∣ing a bridg of boats over the Scheld, that he might the sooner get over, be past with many Foot and Horse into the Countrey of Wasse, in the midst whereof Hulst stands, and here he prepared to oppose the enemy as he should see occasi∣on. Count Maurice being entred into the Gulf which is nearest the Fort Sasse, and landing his men, he possessed himself of the Seats thereabouts, and began
to fortifie himself in a certain part: shewing clearly that he intended to begirt that Fort. But it was so well provided to make defence, by Spinola, as there was no fear of losing it; Nor was he long in appearing thereabouts himself. Spinola had with him thirteen thousand Foot, and three thousand Horse, with great provision of all other things. He fortified himself also; and the Armies were so neer one another, as daily skirmisher past between them. At this time came the three Brigadoes which were expected from Italy: But the other which came by Sea from Spain, had not the like Fortune. Pietro di Sermiente who was Camp∣master thereof, conducted it in eight ships; and meeting with many great ships of Holland in the English Channel, which lay waiting for him, he was assaulted by them; and after a fierce fight, most of the Spanish ships, with the men that were in them were taken by the Enemy. The Camp-master saved himself with the rest of the ships and souldiers, and got to Dunkirk At the same time the Germans, and those of the neigbouring Nations were likewise raised. Where∣fore the Arch-duke resolved Spinola should no longer delay to put the design in execution, which was agreed upon in Spain; which was to pass the Rhine, to advance into Friesland, and to make some great diversion against the Enemy on those parts. Count Frederick de Berg stayed therefore only with such Forces, as might suffice to oppose Maurice, and Spinola went from the Province of Flanders, and coming to Brussels, past with all speed to make his randezvouz at Mastrick. Prince A∣velino conducted over the Neopolitans, and returned presently for Italy. Fran∣cisca Colonna, Prince of Palestrina was then in Flanders, being a little before come thither from Rome; and there was likewise Andrea Matteo Aquaviva, Prince of Caeserta, who came thither likewise about the same time. One of the two Neapolitan Brigadoes was given to Colonna; and Alessandro di Monti was Camp-master of the other. Count Guido St. Georgio commanded the Lom∣bard Brigado; and Christophero de Conti d' Emden was the principal of the Ger∣man Colonels. Before Spinola came to Mastrick he had dispatched away Count Buckquoy, General of the Artillery, to begin a Fort upon the right side of the Rhine, which was the most suspected. The place he chose was neer Case∣suert, a little Town belonging to the Arch-bishoprick of Cullen. Here Buck∣quoy began to build the Fort; whither it was not long ere Spinola came, who hastning the work, caused it soon to be erected, with a Line of five Flanks; and raised another lesser one on the other side towards Cullen. The Arch-duke and Spinola kept their intentions of passing with their Armies over the Rhine very se∣cret; and therefore the Arch-duke seeming to his own Captains, as if he had some other design, had ofttimes had it argued in Councel, whether it were bet∣ter to endeavour the recovery of Sluce or Graves, or to besiege Berghenapzome, or rather Breda, never touching upon the true design: Upon the variety of these Proposals, there was variety of opinions; and the Arch-duke had industriously wrought it so, as that the Enemy might be advertised of these consultations, to make them the less suspitious that they intended any thing beyond the Rhine: nor did his thoughts abuse him, for the Enemy being thus deluded, and out of other respects, not beleeving that the Catholicks would put on so bold a resolu∣tion, they were not time enough to relieve the Towns which Spinola begirt, and took in those parts, (as shall be related) this so speedy march of Spinola's to∣wards the Rhine, made the Enemy beleeve he would besiege Reinberg, and the same opinion was conceived in the Catholick Camp, which did not yet know the true design. Of all others Count Maurice beleeved the like; who therefore had made Count Ernestus march away with good Forces; to the end that the forti∣fications of that place might be by him so strengthned both without and within, as there might be no fear of losing it. This mean while the two aforesaid Forts were finished by Spinola, by which that passage of the Rhine was secured. He then no longer deferred the making known whither the Catholick Camp was bent: but calling a Councel of War, he said; That the King and Arch-duke had resolved to carry the war to the Rebels own homes, and more inward if they could. That so strong an Army was prepared to this
purpose. That to this purpose monies were prepared to maintain the Army; And that to the same end he had already secured the passage over the Rhine. That the determi∣nation was to enter the Enemies Country towards Friesland; and particularly to make use of all their power to take the Town of Linghen in those parts. That his Highness pleasure was, that this design should by all means be kept secret, that so it might be the easilyer effected; and that there was almost no doubt to be made of it. That they knew the Town was at this time but ill provided; the Enemy never having dreamed, that it could at such a distance, and so at unawares be assaulted by the Ca∣tholick Forces. That it was true it was a great way off; and that they were to pass through a great part of the Neutrals Countries, where it might be feared they might suffer for want of victuals. But that there was already great provision made thereof; and that they were to march through that Country with such discipline, as the souldiers being no ways troublesome, and having sufficient monies for plenty of victuals, they need fear no want. That for what remained, the taking of such a Town would be of very great importance. That Count Maurice had still fortified it better; that it lay in the Havens of Friesland, almost upon the Confines of Ger∣many: and that if once they should get footing there, wherefore might they not hope that this happy success might be insued by many more happy. The Councel of War did much approve of this advice; and it was likewise very chearfully received by all the Souldiery. The Army was compounded of the usual Nations; and consisted of 16000 Foot, and 3000 Horse. They were particularly to pass over a great part of the neutral Countrey of Cleves, and Westphalia. And to the end that all things might be the fairlyer carryed on, both in them, and in all other places of the like nature; Spinola had with him the Count di Lora, one of the chiefest and best esteemed Lords of all Flanders, who was to negotiate with the Magistrates of each Town, and to give them all due satisfaction. To secure the passage of the Rhine. and the Army also on their back Count Bucquoy had the charge of the new Forts, having 6000 Foot and 00 horse with him. From whence Spinola marched away with the rest, and began to enter into the Countrey of Cleves, and after into Westphalia. He marched still orderly, and with so exquisite and severe discipline, as victuals were brought unto the Camp in great aboundance from all parts. Coming out of those Countries, he entred into the Province of Overisel, belonging to the Uni∣ted States, and very near Friesland. The first considerable Town he met with there, in that passage was Oldensel; not above one short days journey from Linghen. The Councel were of opinion that the taking of this Town would facilitate the taking of the other. Oldensel was weak of it self, and the enemy not expecting to have it assaulted, had neglected to fortifie it Spinola incamping before the Town, opened trenches on three sides; and in each of them prepared a battery; and all this was done with such speed, as the defendants failing in their courage, or rather in their forces, the Batteries were not wel begun, when they treated of surrender, and went out of the Town. Spinola had in this interim sent away Count Theodore Trivulsio, with almost all the Horse, who was Lieutenant General of them, that he might possess himself of all the chiefest situations about Linghen. And coming him∣self after with the rest of the Army, incamped before the Town, and according to his custome, gave out quarters to each Nation. Linghen lies almost at an e∣qual distance between the western Friesland belonging to Flanders, and the ea∣stern one appertaining to Germany: It hath a good Country about it. And (as we have already told you) the United States had formerly given that Town, with the Territories thereof to Count Maurice, in acknowledgement of the ser∣vice he had done them. He had therefore fortified the Town very Royally, adding a great Platform to the Line thereof, and muniting it with six Bulwarks; each of which had a large and deep Ditch about it. But the Town being set up∣on so unexpectedly, it wanted many other things appertaining to the defence thereof. When the Catholicks therefore incamped before it, they met with al∣most no resistance in their beginning their Trenches, and in their leading of them on There were hardly 600 foot in Garison there and they had hardly ten pieces of Canon. In so much as making but few sallies, and doing but little harm with their Canon, at three days end the Catholicks came to the Ditch; and pla∣ced their Artillery to play upon the Town on sundry sides. The greatest diffi∣culty
lay in getting over the Ditch. It was broadest, and deepest where the Spaniards wrought: wherefore they thought to drain the water from it, and to lay it dry. But there was no lower parts about it. The place easiest to pass over fell to the Italians and Walloons; and these two Nations striving which of them should be foremost, strove likewise who should expose themselves to great∣est danger; in so much as many of each Nation were slain and wounded, yet they did so advance with Earth, Bavins, and other materials, as they both of them pas∣sed over the Ditch almost at the same time. They then fell to mining that they might the sooner come to assaults. But they within were not in a condition to expect them. Wherefore hanging out signes of surrender, they were suffered to march out honourably, and Spinola entred the Town, not having spent above eight days in the taking of it. He presently applyed himself to fortifie it better then it yet was: adding a half-Moon betwixt one Bulwark and another, and by raising a Strada Coperta well flank'd without the Ditch. This mean while Count Maurice was likewise upon his march; and parting from the Province of Flanders, had also passed the Rhine to oppose Spinola: and staying in Deventer, the chief Town of Overisel, he bethought how he might preserve Linghen. But being prevented by the speedy siege, and then by the surrender, he had not time to make such preparations as were fitting for that pur∣pose. He therefore turned with 7000 Foot, and 2000 Horse towards Coworden, to secure a great Fort which was there, in case that Spinola should assault it. But the new Fortifications about Linghen being finished, and leaving that Town well provided for, as also the other of Ouldensel, Spinola would tarry no longer in those parts. Great complaints were made in Germany against the Forts of Casesuert, a place situated in the Territories of Cullen, which is a City belonging to the Em∣pire. Wherefore the Archduke not willing that the neighbouring Countries should be again irritated, as they had been a few years before; ordered Spinola that he should slight those first Forts, and should erect two others, upon the Rhine, at Rorort, a Town in the County of Mures, which County did belong to Flanders. Spinola went therefore from Linghen thitherward, and with all dili∣gence began to raise the new Forts upon the banks of Rhine And the season being yet very good for lying in the field, he resolved that Count Bucquoy should go take Vachendonch. This Town stands very low, and is held for one of the strongest both for nature and industry, that is in the Province of Ghelderland, as you may have heard before. Bucquoy began his works upon a little rise, and fortified certain passes, where succour was most to be suspected: though it were credibly believed, that Mau∣rice would not attempt it, to shun putting himself betwixt the men which Spi∣nola kept with him at Rorort, and those that Bucquoy carried along with him to besiege Vachendonch. These consisted almost wholly of the Brigadoes belonging to Instinian, Branchatchio, and St. George. These Italian Camp-masters, and their Souldiers vying who should be forwardest therein, more then if they had been to contend with other Nations, they quickly advanced their Trenches. One Camp-master succeeded the other, after every days work, which continued also the insuing night, that they might advance the speedyer, and with the more safe∣ty. There were 1300 foot in the Town, nor wanted they sufficient Artillery by which at a further distance, and by their sallies nearer hand, they endeavour∣ed to hinder the assailants Works. On the side where these wrought, there ran a little Rivolet, which did almost joyn with the Town-Ditch on that side. When the Catholicks came to this Rivolet, they were withstood in passing over it; but repulsing the Enemy, they came to the Ditch; where meeting with fresh obstacles, they again overcame them. Being entred into the Ditch, they were very diligent to win it; filling it with earth, and other materials, and mainly en∣deavouring to get to the Line. It was now about the end of October, and it was apprehended lest the Autumnal rains might hinder the works more, then the low and miery situation of the Town it self did retard them. Wherefore they continued their works with such eagerness, as at last the Ditch was totally won at the price of death and wounds. They then fell to Mines, and from Mines to Assaults; in so much as the Catholicks lodged in the Platform of the Wall, being
brought to this bad condition, the defendants did no longer delay to treat of surrender, which being agreed upon, they quitted the Town upon good con∣ditions. Whilst Buckquoy besieged Vachendoncke, there happened a very considerable party between Spinola's Camp, and that of Count Maurice. Spinola kept a∣bout Rorort by reason of the new Forts which he caused to be erected upon the Rhine, and Maurice was not far of, upon the same side of the River; each Camp observed the others proceedings, either to get advantage, or not to be in∣dammaged thereby. Maurice knew that the Catholicks Cavalry was quartered far enough from the rest of the Camp, and that they were sufficiently at odds within themselves. Wherefore he hoped that by assaulting them suddenly, he might greatly disorder them, and peradventure totally defeate them. They were quartered in the village Mulem, and in the Castle Bruck; the one of which was seated upon the left hand, and the other upon the right, of the little River Roer: The said quarter was kept by Trivulsio, Lieutenant General of the Horse, who had given very accurate orders every where, where it was behoofeful, that he might not be set upon at unawares. But these orders were very ill observed, and Maurice being advertised of the Souldiers carelessness, he went with three thou∣sand Foot, two thousand Horse, and some peeces of Artillery; and mar∣ching by night, came upon break of day to the quarter. He forthwith made his brother Henry advance, who was General of the Horse, a young man about some twenty years of age, but sprightly and bold beyond his age; and who af∣ter Count Maurice his death, succeeded him both in the same command in war, in the like reputation of name, and did afterwards prove so gallant a Comman∣der. Henrie's unexpected assault put the first Guards to flight, and likewise dis∣order'd Francisco Arirazaval, a Spaniard, who was quartered with a Troop of Horse in certain houses near the Castle Bruck There Henry would have passed over the River, and have assaulted the chief quarter of Mulem. But in this interim Trivulsio and many of his men were got on horse-back, and encountring Henry did so stoutly oppose him, as he could not pass over the River. Velasco General of the Catholicks Horse, was then with Spinola, to solicite likewise the raising of the Forts, and casually both of them came to visit the Horse quarter, when by the way they met a messenger whom Trivulsio had sent to pray aid. Spinola returned presently to the Forts to bring on succour, and Velasco advanced in all haste towards the Quarter; and meeting with Frabritio Santomango a Neopolitan Captain of Horse, who was going with three other Horse Companies to Rorort to guard the Forts, he made him turn back with him to Mulem. Velasco came in just when Trivulsio over powred by the Enemy, could no longer withstand them. But this aid did so enharten the Catholicks, as a fierce fight ensued thereupon; wherein Velasco in particular, wan great praise: commanding, executing, and in all things else making his courage and his long military experience appear. Spinola came in this mean while with six hundred Spanish Foot, which suddenly followed him, and two thousand more were to come after. He made use of a Stratagem often practised by Commanders, which was to send forward some Drums on Horse back, which might beat a march, to make the Enemy believe that new and greater succour was with like haste com∣ing to the Catholicks; nor did the invention prove vain: for Maurice judging (as it was likely) that Spinola was either coming with new men from the Catho∣lick Camp of Rorort, which was not far distant or that he sent some fresh aid; would no longer forbare retreating. And yet Spinola came time enough to preju∣dice the Enemy in their retreat; for after his coming many of them were slain as they departed: But this was not done without a great loss to the Catholick party. Trivulsio being slain with a Canon shot, whilst he, having fought even to the last, and still with the same courage saw the Enemy almost wholly retired. On the Catholicks side Santomango was likewise slain, and Nicola Doria another Captain of Horse, was ill hurt, and taken prisoner. Above three hundred o∣ther Catholicks were slain or hurt, and above five hundred in like manner of the contrary party. The fight being over, and the quarter being well secured, Spi∣nola and Velasco returned to Rorort. In the Territory of Moeurs, which joyns
upon the other Bank of the Rhine, there was a Garrison of the Enemies in the Castle of Cracove, which did much annoy the Country thereabouts. Vachen∣doncke, lately taken by Bucquoy was not far from thence: Spinola therefore thought that by all means that Garrison must be driven from thence: and send∣ing Bucquoy with the same men, to see it done, the Castle was soon invironed on all sides. Those within expected a formal battery; and the weakness of the place being such, as it would be in vain to make any resistance, Bucquoy would have the Garrison yeild upon discretion; yet suffered them afterward to come forth with their lives saved. It was now about the end of November, and by reason of the rain there was no longer keeping in the field; wherefore Spinola having made the Forts sufficiently defenceable, and leaving men enough to guard them, resolved to put his Army in Garison; and Maurice did the like. Spinola being come to Brussels, he discoursed a long time with the Arch duke, touching what they should undertake in the field the next year. The re∣solution was, That by an Army apart, they should continue what they had al∣ready begun beyond the Rhine, and use all means to pass over the Ysel, and pre∣judice the Rebels as much as they could on that side. And that at the same time they should endeavour to pass over the Wahal with another Army, and to get footing in some considerable place in the Island of Betway, that the Catho∣licks Armies might advance so much the further into that part of Holland. This was a high designe, and the difficulties that were therein to be met withall were foreseen: for it was not to be doubted but that the United Provinces would en∣deavour with like Forces to hinder those passages, and would use all other need∣ful opposition. Spinola thought it therefore fit to go himself again to the Court of Spain, to the end, that by his more efficatious shewing of how great a concerne the aforesaid undertakings were, the King with the Authority of his Councel might approve thereof; and so deal with his Forces, as that they might prove fully effected. The Arch-duke was of the same opinion, and Spinola departed in the very latter end of that year. Now came in the next year of 1606. memorable for that it was the last for that time, in which after so long and bitter war, the Flanders Forces went into the Anno 1606. field. For in the ensuing year the Treaty of Truce began, which was afterwards concluded for twelve yeare, as we shall by and by tell you. Spinola being arri∣ved at Madrid, it was not hard for him to perswade the King to the same things which the Arch-duke had formerly approved of: the greatest difficulty lay in finding out sufficient monies for such enterprises; for, to boot, with the usual contributions of the obedient Provinces of Flanders, it was cast up that three hundred thousand Crowns a moneth would be requisite to come from Spain. An excessessive expence in it self, and much more in respect of the so many other great expences, which the vastness of the Spanish Empire did necessarily require in so many other parts: yet such diligence was used, as there was course taken for it; and some part thereof was disburst in Flanders before hand, to raise new men, and in providing divers other things which were necessary for going into the field. These negotiations kept Spinola longer in Spain then the affairs of Flanders would allow of. At his departure, the King to witness his confidence in him, and esteem of him, made him one of his chief Councel of State. He at last began his journey backward by the way of Italy; and parting from Genua, was stayed in his journey by a Feaver, which kept him from coming to Brussels till the first of June. Nothing of considerable had this mean while been done in Flanders: only Monsieur de Teraglia, a Frenchman had put himself into the Kings service, he being very well versed in matter of Artillery and Petars, which are made use of in surprisals. Whereof he made use of divers on both sides the Rhine; but since none of them wrought any considerable effect, we will forbare to mention them. Spinola being arrived, and the Army being increased by new Germans and Wal∣loons, and by 2000 Spaniards, who were come from Italy under the Camp-ma∣ster Jovanni Bravoi; the Archduke would no longer forbear putting the afore∣said designes in excution. And thus it was carried. Spinola made his Rendez∣vouz about the Forts upon the Rhine, and having mustered there 12000 Foot and
2000 Horse, he resolved to advance into that other part where Oldensell and Leghen were taken the year before. The resolution was, as we told you, to passe over the River Ysel, and to get into Vela, which is an open Country, and near Utricht, a City of great circuit, but badly fortified; in so much as they might hope to take so principal a Town, and having well fortified it, to trouble Holland, near which that City stands on that side. Count Bucquoy prepared at the same time to pass over Wahal, intending to bring the Catholick Forces into the Island of Betna, and there to get footing, and take some place of impor∣tance. Niminghen would have been the most considerable of all others; a great City, scituated upon the left side of the same River, and which bore great conse∣quences with it. We have so often, upon so many other occurrences, spoken of this City, and of the same Rivers of Wahal and Ysel, as it will be superfluous to make the same relations again here. Bucquoy had with him 10000 Foot, and 1300 Horse, with plenty of all ne∣cessary provisions; and in Spinola's Camp there were above 3000 Carriages with great store of Victuals and Ammunition; with Mils, Ovens, and all other ac∣commodations necessary. This extraordinary great preparation on the Catho∣licks behalf, made the United Provinces first very suspitious, and then very fear∣full. They had not then Forces enough to oppose the Catholicks in the open Field; they therefore resolved to supply that want, by fortifying those River∣banks, where most fear was to be had that the Catholicks would endeavour to pass over; by better fortifying those Towns which they thought they would assail. And truly they made wonderfull Fortifications upon this occasion. They made a great many Redouts upon the banks of all that shore of the Wahal, which runs along the Island of Betua, where it might be feared the Catholicks might attempt to possess it on that side. A Corps de Gard was assigned, with Sentinels to every Redout; and according to occasion one Redout was to assist another. At the same time divers men of War, and other Boats were to scoure up and down upon the River, to be another sort of impediment; and strict Orders were given to all the Towns thereabouts, that with great vigilancy they should be prepared to send forth men, to make the like opposition. The other yet grea∣ter tract of ground which ran along the shore of Ysel, was likewise equally de∣fended. So as having made these provisions, the Enemy seemed little to dread what the Catholicks could do. And yet Count Maurice assembled so great a body of an Army together, as being added to those so advantagious Fortificati∣ons where most need required, might cause the greater hopes of rendring all contrary designes vain. Spinola parted from the Rendezvouz about the beginning of July, and march∣ed towards Ysel. The season was very rainy before he could pass the Rhine: The Climate of Flanders doth naturally abound in moysture and rain. And the Spring, and Summer, and Autumn, are usually there so confounded together, as one season can hardly be discerned from another; but extraordinary store of rain fell particularly that Summer, and all the while the Enemy kept in the Field during that year. Spinola marched through low grounds, where the water which was already fallen, and which still continuing to fall, had made the ways through which he marched, extraordinarily durty, and slippery. It is not to be said how much the Souldiers suffered thereby; how much the Artillery was in∣commodiated; and particularly how great the disorder was in conducting such an unusual number of Carriages. Spinola, and the rest of the Commanders, and the whole Army, were greatly afflicted in seeing the season prove so per∣verse; and they were more grieved when they heard that the Rivers were so swoln, as they were not to be forded over in any part. Spinola knew likewise what great Fortifications the Enemy had made on the contrary shore, and whatsoever else they had done to impede the passage. Yet he still drew towards Ysel; and afterwards marched towards those parts where Zutfen and Deventer stand. Be∣tween these two Towns, on the other side the River did Count Maurice keep with his Army, that he might turn where occasion should most require. Spinola did studiously endeavour to make him still keep there, till such time as Count de Sora might come to a certain place a good way from thence, which was a little
below the Town Suole, where he intended that Sora should by all means attempt to pass over the River: and in the mean while Spinola thought it might be ad∣vantagious for him to take Lochem, a little Town, not very strong, but oportune for the condition of the scituations where he at that time kept. He therefore sent the Camp-master Borgio, who was a little before chosen Governour of Ant∣werp Citadel, to begirt it with 3000 Foot, and 500 Horse. He met with but short resistance: For the Catholicks being come in two days to the Ditch, and having began a Battery on the third day those within surrendred the Town. Spi∣nola hoped still that the River of Ysel would fall, and that Count Sora might get over it, at the aforesaid place. But he being come thither, and having made some tryal, found both the water so high, and the opposition made by the Enemy so great as he failed in his defigne. Whilst Marquis Spinola laboured thus on the other side of the Rhine, Buc∣quoy had also gathered his Army together on this side, in Brabant; and passing the Mause over against Moch, kept there. Moch is an open Village not above four leagues from the Wahal. Bucquoy's intention was to attempt a passage in a certain place which lay just in the midst between Schincks Sconce and Nimin∣ghen; he had caused a great many of Barks proportionable to the designe, to be carryed upon Carts, to put them into the River; and to put thereinto men suffi∣cient to make way through the contrary shore. Amongst other Commanders, Camp-master Justinian was with Bucquoy, who imployed him in attempting the said Passe Justinian going therefore with 4000 Foot, two pieces of Arrillery, and necessary Barks for the transporting of them, prepared to put the designe in execution. But he found the Enemy no less ready to oppose him on that side the Wahal, then they had been on the other side of Ysel The River was much greater, and much more rapid then usual. Wherefore the Marriners could not govern their Barks as they would have done; nor were their Artillery of any advantage to them; for the contrary shore was better furnished therewithall: and there∣fore all attempts proving vain, Justinian retyred to joyn with the rest that were with Bucquoy. Spinola having notice hereof, knew there was no more hopes of passing over either in the one, or in the other place; he resolved then not to part from those places where he was, without making himself Master of some place of importance. The chiefest Towns the Enemy had thereabouts were Zutfen and Deventer, both of them seated upon the Ysel, but so munited both by the River on one side, and by their Fortifications on the other side, as they required longer time, and greater Forces then Spinola then had to offer at the winning them. Besides, Maurice kept with his Army almost in the midst between them. Nor was it to be doubted but that he might be at liberty to succour which of the Towns he would. The Town of Groll is not far from thereabouts; and though it were not to be compared with the other two, it was notwithstanding to be esteemed a place of great consequence, both in it self, and because by the scituation thereof the other two Towns of Oldensel, and Linghen, which were won the preceding year, might be the better sheltered. Spinola therefore resolved to apply himself to this siege. And the designe being approved of in the Councel of War, he marched towards it on the beginning of August. Groll lies in a plain; and on the one side thereof runs Berchel, a little River, but sufficient to serve for a good defence to the Town on that side; on the other side the Line was well Flanked, and beyond the chiefest Ditch stood other Flanks, with Ditches likewise. Spinola distributed his quarters out on three sides, with his usual division of Nations; to boot with the Irish, who in Queen Elizabeths time were naturally inclined to fight under the Catholicks Colours in Flanders, many English and Scots did the like now. Which was permitted by the new King who succeeded her, to witness the good intelligence which he held with the King of Spain, and the Arch-dukes. The siege being begun, and the Catholicks striving to end it as soon as they could, they came with their Trenches in three dayes to the Ditch which invironed the Half-moons without. Then the several Nations strove a main who should first pass over it: in which some bridges of cloath extended upon rafters and little casks did great good; a device invented by the Engineer Targone. The first
Ditch being past over, some contest was had, and not without the loss of much blood, before they could get the Half-moons: but the Assailants making them∣selves masters of them also, betook themselves to storm the chief Line; nor were their Batteries this mean while Idle; assisted by which, they possessed themselves of the greatest Ditch, and came to the aforesaid Line. Those with∣in laboured as much as they could to make good their defences: but all of them being at last beaten down by the batteries from without, they knew it would be but vain to make any further resistance, and therefore resolved to deliver up the Town, and thus in nine dayes space Spinola took it. Having gotten this place much sooner then he expected, and thinking that he had yet time enough, to attempt some other Town of better consequence, he be∣thought himself of Reinberg; which had been several times taken and retaken by the King of Spain and the Arch-dukes, and by the United Provinces. But being last taken by Count Maurice, he had fortified it much better them former∣ly it was; particularly the year before, and this very year, fearing least one of Spinola's chief ends about the Rhine, might be to besiege that Town. This was very much approved of in the Councel of war, and it was hoped that it might be soon effected. Spinola's Army was so diminished by reason of the unusual troubles which it had undergone, as his Forces alone were not sufficient to un∣dertake such an enterprise: wherefore he writ to Bucquoy to come with all speed to him. Bucquoy drew first near Reinberg on that side which lies towards Bra∣bant: and Spinola soon after came on the other side which looks towards Fries∣land. When Maurice had discovered the design he suddenly dispatched away his brother Henry with two thousand Foot, and two hundred Horse into the Town, and began to make fitting provisions to come to the full relief thereof himself. This mean while all the Catholick Forces came on both sides the Rhine; insomuch, as about the end of August Spinola incamped himself formally before the Town on both sides. Reinberg is seated on the left hand of the Rhine, which is thought to be one of the most advantagious situations which is to be had a∣bout that River. To her former ancient and but ill flancked Line, was added a second, which had a great number of Ravelins, Half-moons, and other greater, and lesser Flanks, which were all accompanied with a Ditch and Strada Coperta. Nor did the outward Rampires end here, but a third Line was almost finished, with new works, flanckt, and of a large circuit, to the end that embracing so much compass abroad, the inward fortifications might be the better sheltered, and defended. Not far from the shore where the Town is situated, an Island of small circuit riseth in the River: in it there was a Fort with four flancks, to which other fortifications were added, which took up almost the whole Island. And a Fort was likewise placed on the other side of the shore, but with greater Flancks, with Trenches, and other defences near it. The siege began hottest on this side, for they desired first to bereave the Enemy of the Fort on the aforesaid shore, and then of the other in the Island. Here then they began first to fight. The Catholicks were first to win the great Trench: but they met with great resistance; and the besieged sallyed so fiercely out upon them both with Foot and Horse, as they could not take that fence from the Enemy so soon as they thought to have done: yet they did so vigorously reinforce their assaults as they won the Trench, and made use of it afterwards to go the better sheltered to the taking of the Fort. Where the business was more hotly disputed, and the Camp-masters Autunes, a Spaniard, and St. Georgio an Italian behaved them∣selves therein very gallantly. But after some dayes stout resistance, those within the Fort were at last forced to quit it, and went into the other Fort in the Island, which was commanded by the other, which gave great advantage to the Catho∣lick for the easier coming by this also; and which hapned after divers bickerings, which cost much blood on both sides. The Forts being taken, Velasco, the Ge∣neral of the Horse, stayed on that side the River, and was very careful in fortifying a quarter; for Count Maurice was on that side, between Weesel and Res, intending to come himself unto the succour very speedily, Spinola would go to the other shore, that he might be an eye witness of the works which were to be made on that side. He from the beginning had made the bridge of boats, first built at
Rorort, to fall down near Reinberg, to the end that his Army might have such communication as was needful from the one and the other side. Maurice had likewise throwne another bridge over the Rhine, a little beneath, that he might the more easily pass to relieve the Town; to which purpose he assembled men to∣gether, and made all other necessary provisions. The chief bulk of the business being then brought to that part whither Spinola was gone, the Catholiks began to advance with their Trenches. There was above 4000 Foot, and 300 Horse in the Town, many pieces of Artillery, and great provision of all things that were necessary for the defence thereof. There was particularly much French Nobili∣ty, who were come to exercise their Arms under Count Maurice. The besieged therefore sallied almost every day out of the Town; and ofttimes acting the part rather of besiegers then besieged, they fell furiously upon the Trenches, hin∣dred the works, and endeavoured by all means to retard the Catholicks procee∣ding. They made one very fierce sallie in particular against the Italians Trench∣es: But the Camp-masters, Justinian and Brancherone did so valiantly defend them, as the Enemy was forced to give back, and to retreat. A like action, and with a like success happened where Bucquoy made his men work, who were al∣most all of them Germans and Walloons. Nor were the sallies less frequent a∣gainst the Spaniards quarters, nor less stoutly withstood. Spinola had a great care at the same time over all the works, visiting the quarters, encouraging the souldiers, and studying to hasten the inward works, and to secure the fields with∣out; in which the Cavalier Meltzi, who succeeded Trivulsio in the Lieutenan∣cy of the Horse, did worthily behave himself; and wherein amongst other Captains, our brother Cavalier Bentivoglio, was much imployed with his Compa∣ny of Lances, most commonly augmented with other Troops of Curassiers and Harquebusiers. The Catholicks did every day thus advance; and the Enemies defences were continually played upon by them, with above 30 pieces of Canon; and the foremost which were furthest outward and were the least exact, could already no longer resist their assaults. Wherefore the Catholicks having won them, laboured to fall into the Ditches of the second. Here the contest was longer and fiercer: For it was not to be doubted but that if the enemy were dri∣ven from thence, the siege might be accounted at an end: But if the oppugnati∣on were great, the resistance was no less vigorous: the besieged using likewise counter batteries, countermines, and artificial fires, and with all gallantry oppo∣sing nearer at hand, Pikes to Pikes, Swords to Swords, and all closser defence, to the more close opposition of the Adversaries. Many therefore were slain on both sides; and very many were wounded; nor were the chief Commanders less ad∣venturous then those of the meaner sort. On the Catholicks part Spinola did worthily behave himself; as did also Velasco, and Bucquoy: the Camp-masters of each several Nation doing what could be desired at their hands. Nor ought the Duke of Ossuna to be forgotten; who though he were one of the chief Subjects of Spain, did notwithstanding, without any respect to his person, expose himself to the most usual dangers with the common souldiers. The Princes of Caserta and Palestrina laboured with like ferventy. And the Marquis Sigesmond d'Este, and Marquis Ferrante Bentivoglio, our Nephew, being come a little be∣fore into Flanders; neither of them did ever stir from Spinola, but imbraced all occasions wherein they might signalize themselves amidst dangers and labours. The defendants shewed equal courage; and those most who were greatest either for office or bloud. They did notwithstanding conceive that they must shortly be forced to yield, unless Count Maurice should come all the sooner with the expected succour; of which he gave assured hope, and prepared for it. But the Catholicks were already well fortified every where. And Maurice thought that to go about to force their Trenches, would be too hard a business: having them for his example who upon other occasions of sieges had so oft in vain endeavour∣ed to force his. He had with him 12000 Foot, and little less then 3000 Horse. Seeming as if he would attempt the relief, he at last resolved to pass over to the other side of the Rhine, and deviding the foot into divers squadrons, securing them on both sides with wings of Horse, he marched towards Alpen, a Town belong∣ing to the Country of Meurs, and not above three hours march from Reinberg.
He from thence put 2000 Foot into Meurs, a Town not much further from Rein∣berg; and it was thought that he would leave some other men in Alpen, and make no further attempt at that time; but that returning again more unexpect∣edly, he would give a very hot false alarm against Velasco's quarter, and make true assaults elsewhere, making the Garison sally out suriously at the same time. Spinola was advertised by his spies, that Maurice was removed, and drawn nigher. Wherefore he caused Velasco to joyn with him, together with all his men, save onely such who were of necessity to guard the quarter; and sending in like man∣ner for Bucquoy, he prepared to give battle. But Maurice did advance no fur∣ther, and Spinola still better securing his quarters, it was not perceived that Mau∣rice would make any further attempt to entroduce succour. As much as the be∣siegers were inhearted, as much dishartned were the besieged. The former con∣tinued to make great ruins with their Batteries, and advancing every day further in filling up the Ditches, and then in undermining the Flanks, they brought the besieged to bethink themselves rather of surrendring, then of defending them∣selves. Yet divers parties passed before they treated of surrender; in one of which Signior di Tortes, a Walloon Camp-master, an ancient and highly estee∣med souldier, was slain. All possible military worth being thus exprest, the be∣sieged condescended at last to treat of delivering up the Town; and having ob∣tained the most honorable conditions from Spinola which they could desire, they in the beginning of October delivered the Town up into his hands. Above three thousand Foot, and one hundred and fifty Horse marched out of the Town in good order; besides those who were wounded which were above seven hundred, five hundred of which dyed. On the Catholick sides more men were slain, and hurt, and the siege lasted but little longer then a moneth. Spinola had not well ended this siege, when as the souldiers retreated, a new mutiny began to be discovered; which was endeavoured to be remedyed first by fair means, and then by foul; but all proved to no purpose. Their number in∣creased in a short time to two thousand, what Foot, what Horse, and fomented, as usually, by the Enemy, they went to the parts about Breda, and did there se∣cure themselves; to boot, with the diminution of the Army by reason of these men, many more were lost in the late enterprises; so as the Catholick Army was very much lessened. Wherefore Maurice made use of this occasion: He having brought his Army suddenly together, he turned towards Friesland thinking to recover some of the Towns that were lost: and with firm belief that he might do it, before the Catholick Army could bring succour. His first assault was against Lochem, a Town not able to make any defence, and therefore he took it in three dayes space. From thence he threw himself upon Groll, and besieged the Town. Spinola was very much troubled at this unexpected resolution of Maurice: he considered the danger that Groll might run; (as for Lochem the matter was not much) but he could not endure, that a place of such consequence as was Groll, and which he had won but a little before, should fall again so quickly into the Enemies hands. He therefore inclined to relieve it; but propounding it to the Councel of war, they were most of them against it. The season was now too far advanc'd to transport the Army again beyond the Rhine. And if they had suffered so much in those low situations but a little before, whilst it was yet Summer; how much greater would their sufferings be now about the end of Autumne? Then how many hardships had they undergone in the last siege? That therefore the Army required som rest after so sore labour. That it was to be conside∣red how much it was lessened; a part thereof being mutinied, the rest but little sa∣tisfied; and there being two great a scarcity of monies to content them. Wherefore what certainty could there be of bringing them so soon into the field again? That they were also to pass through Countries of the Enemy, or at least such as were suspected. That they should finde the Enemy very strong; and already fortified about the Town: so as it would be little less then rashness to assault them. And if the Catholick Ar∣my should chance to be endangered, what other Forces had they to relieve them? And consequently into what danger would the affairs of the King and Arch-dukes fall. These were very efficatious reasons; but it was no less efficatiously urged on the contrary.
That upon this occasion the loss of Groll was not onely to be considered; but the manifest danger of lofing Oldensel, and Linghen also. And how could it be doubted but that Groll being eut off from them, and the other remaining open and without such an aid; both of the other Towns must be inevitably lost? In which case, the King nor Archdukes having no Towns at all beyond the Rhine, what would it avail them to have Reinberg on this side, which was taken chiefly for the securing of that pas∣sage? Were these to be the advantages; these the glories of two fields, which had cost so much Treasure, blood, and trouble? That then since the question was now, whe∣ther whatsoever they had beyond the Rhine was either to be lost, or to be preserved, it must consequently follow that they must endeavour by all means to overcome those difficulties which presented themselves to the contrary: That Armies were made use of in severer seasons, and upon lesser necessity. That if the Army might receive some relief, it might be believed they would willingly undergo this new trouble. That whether the Country were foe, or Neutral, they would march in such order, as by means of their Forces in the former, and their good Reglement in the other, the soul∣diery should be sensible of no sufferings. That succour was therefore by all means to be carried with all possible speed. That it was not possible the Enemy should so soon have fortified themselves on all sides. Wherefore being resolutely assaulted in some of their weaker quarters, it might very possibly be, they would not wait the encounter. That uncertainty alwaies attended Armies: And that if in so many, not altogether so unecessary occurrances, Commanders did adventure themselves, much more ought they to do so in these, where manifest necessity did not admit of any more circumspect resolutions. In wise debates it is seen, that a few weighty reasons, prevail over the numbers of a great many to the contrary. Spinola was of this opinion: the particular consideration was of too great force with him, that if Groll should be lost, Ol∣densel and Lingben would be lost likewise almost unavoidably. Wherefore he resolved to attempt the relief This resolution being taken, and the Arch-duke approving thereof, he came to Reinberg, and passing over the Rhine, began to march towards the Enemies Camp. He could not muster above eight thousand Foot, and twelve hundred Horse; all of them notwithstanding people long experienced in Arms, and who came readily to their colours, to be made use of upon this occasion. Count Henry de Berg was at the defence of Groll, but with a far less Garrison then the Town required. He therefore made known the apparent danger of losing it, if it were not all the sooner relieved: nor did Spinola fail to march as fast as he could; insomuch as about the midst of November he drew near the Enemy. Maurice by reason of the so short time, had not yet sufficiently fortified his quar∣ters; nor did he believe that Spinola would have put on so bold a resolution, be∣ing to meet with so many difficulties therein. when the Catholicks camp was come to the Enemies Trenches, and when Spinola spyed out their weakest situation, he turned thitherward. The design was to fall on at the same time, both those who brought the succour from abroad. and those that expected it from within. Spi∣nola thus ordered his Army; he made a flying Squadron, which according to his custom he placed in the Front, with two peeces of Artillery; and in it were twelve hundred choise souldiers, picked out of all the Nations; and this he as∣signed to Camp-master Antunes, who was one of the valliantest and oldest soul∣diers of all Flanders. A little behinde this followed two other Battalions of Foot, with two peeces of Artillery likewise in the Fronts of each of them; the one Spaniards under Camp-master Menesses; the other Italians, under the two Camp-masters, Justinian, and Branchatchio. These two Battalions stood on equal brest, but at a befitting distance one from another. After these came ano∣ther greater Battalion of Foot; and because it was the last, it had two peeces of Artillery on the Rear thereof; and it was led on by Count d' Emden, a German Camp-master; and by Monsieur d' Ashshurt, a Walloon Camp-master. The Horse were placed on both the Flanks, divided into divers Squadrons: two whereof which were the greatest, and which were called the reserve, as being reserved for the greatest need, were commanded by Cavalier Bentivoglio, and Luca Cairo, both of them Italians, and who were the ancientest Captains. On
the Front of the Cavalry, and in the Van stood Velasco their General, on the right hand; and Melzi Lieutenant General on the left. And because the Enemy were much superior in Horse, their wings were sheltered with long and redou∣bled Files of Carts, which were likewise furnished with some Files of Musket∣teers, and with a peece of Artillery on each side. Spinola chose no particular place for himself, that he might be at liberty to turn whither he listed. This was the order of the Catholick Camp, and in this manner they still drew nearer the Town; and though they had all a great desire to fight, yet Spinola to confirm it the more in them, by shewing his own forwardness, added such incitements, as upon such an occasion was most requisite; he told them, That the preservation of Groll was not onely in dispute now, but even the like of all that they had purchased at the price of so much blood and labour on the other side the Rhine. That therefore they must either dye or relieve it. But that he belie∣ved, though the Enemy were more in numbers then they, yet they would not come to the tryal of a battel. That it was not numbers, but valour that got the victory. And had they not newly tryed even in those very parts, that Count Maurice would still keep sheltered between Ditches and Rivers, not ever coming forth to open battel? And more of late at Reinberg, when, did he shew any true good will thereunto? Let them then according to their custom, play their parts valiantly. That he would not fail on his behalf; nor would he forget to let the King and Arch-dukes know their several good services, and endeavour their reward. But these exhortations needed not: For Count Maurice, were it either by ex∣press orders from the Confederate Provinces; or for some particular sense of his own; or that in reason of war, (he being so great a Commander) it ought in∣deed to have been done; he would not lead forth his Army into the field, nor put himself upon the trial of a Battel. And not being sufficiently fortified, to attend the Catholick Camp within his Trenches, he resolved to retreat; and first stay∣ing in a certain place where he was safe on all sides, he afterward withdrew from the Town, and led his Army into other parts. And Spinola after he had furnish∣ed the Town with what was necessary for the defence thereof, did the like. And sending his souldiers to their Garrisons, he himself past back again over the Rhine, and came to the Arch-duke at Brussels: Spinola's designs had then been really very great, as may be gathered by what we have said. And though by reason of the unexpected difficulties which arose, the success did not correspond to expectation; yet these two affairs of Reinberg and Groll proved such, as doubt∣lessly the one may be numbred amongst the noblest Sieges, and the other amongst the most famous Reliefs, that the War of Flanders had till then produced.
THE HISTORY OF THE WARS OF FLANDERS, Written by CARDINAL BENTIVOGLIO. The Third Part. BOOK VIII. The Contents. The opinion of the Popes of Rome in advantage to the affairs of Flanders. A suspension of Armes insues in those Provinces. They then fall to a set∣led Treaty, that they might come either to a settlement of a perpetual Peace, or of some long Truce. The reasons why the King of Spain and the Arch-Dukes do incline to bring the Affairs to some accommodation. Great con∣sultations hereupon had in the Confederate Provinces. The Emperors, King of France, and King of Englands sense therein. Count Maurice his declared opposition: yet the Treaty proceeds; and Deputies on both sides meet. The Businesses are propounded. Great difficulties in those of the In∣dies, and afterwards in other things. Whereupon all Treaty of Peace soon ends. They therefore enter upon the second Consideration; Viz. Of a long Truce. The Ambassadors of France and England labour hard therein. Count Maurice does what he can again to interrupt it. Yet the Treaty is held on foot by the said Ambassadors. And the Ambassadors of France doe particularly stickle very servently therein. Divers difficul∣ties arise on the Spanish side: And great diligence is had to overcome
them. Which at last is done; and a Truce for twelve years is con∣cluded. IN this condition were the Affairs of Flanders when the year 1607 began; the forty sixth year wherein those mi∣serable Anno 1607. Provinces had been so long and so surely agitated with the troubles of war, was now on foot. Nor for as many Treaties of agreement as had been begun, was it ever possible to bring any of them to a good result. The hottest negotiation was that of Cullen, wherein Gregory the thirteenth had imployed an extraordinary Nuntio, (as was then shown) that those Provinces might take into consideration the preju∣dice which the Church had suffered in Flanders by occasion of the Wars: And on the contrary, what benefit she might reap by the introducing of some sort of accommodation. His successors did still retain the same sense. And more mo∣dernly Clement the eighth in his having endeavoured and procured a peace be∣tween the two Kings, did amongst his other ends ayme at making so good a cor∣rispondency between them, as that France might for the time to come afford all favorable assistance to the new Principallity of Flanders; and might reduce the affairs of those Provinces to some peaceful end. Leo the eleventh, who suc∣ceeded Clement in the Pontifical See. did abound yet more in the same sense, as he who being imployed as Clements Legat in France, had been the chief instru∣ment of making that peace. But being suddenly snatched away by death, he could not witness it by his endeavours. After him Paul the fifth was Pope; a Prince very zealous in exercising the Pontificial office; endowed with great worth and goodness; and who being make Cardinal by Clement, had drunk in the same sense of labouring peace in Christendom: and of still preserving that between the two Crowns, particularly in respect of the service that Flanders might receive thereby. Paul sat at the helm of the Universal Goverment of the Church this very year of 1607, which was the second year of his Popedome. Cardinal Maffeo Barberino was then Nuntio in France, who was a little before promoted to the Cardinals Cap, together with Jovanni Garzia Millino, Nuntio of Spain, with divers others of great merit; amongst which the same Cardinal Barbarino, by the eminency of his deserts came afterwards to the Supreme dignity of the Church, and continues still happily therein. These two Cardinals did in the name of Pope Paul the fift, do all the best offices they could still better to esta∣blish the aforesaid Peace between the two Kings. But great were the difficul∣ties which were met withal on the behalf of France, in order to the Affairs of Flanders, by reason of the near confederacy which was between the United Pro∣vinces and that Crown. Yet Cardinal Barberino took often occasion to put the King in minde, how much it became him to see the pride of the Flemish Rebels abased. He told him how that they had alwaies conspired together with the Hugonots of France; and the French Hugonots no less fervently with them; that each of these had at all times, with mutual intelligence favoured the others rebellion. That in point of Religion, Calvenism raigned equally in them both; a Sect which was no less an Enemy to temporal Monarchy, then to the supreme premecy of the Church: and that it had already been seen, and was still seen to what end the Politick Government of the Hugonots did tend: and particularly by their so many Towns of safety; wherein doubtlessly their onely ayme was to make a separation of themselves from the State, and to bring the Government of Holland into France. These reasons, together with divers other which the same matter did administer, prevailed much with the King. But because the Car∣dinal knew very well how desirous the Pope was to fasten the two Crowns close together by all possible means, he bethought himself of uniting them together by marriage. They had both of them several sons and daughters; and though they were very young, yet by the example of so many remote espousals, which had at all times insued between great Princes, in order to the Publick good, he thought the negotiation hereof ought very suddenly to be commenced. The Pope approved of his purpose, and gave order to the Cardinal that he should as dexterously as he could, set on foot the Treaty there in France. Monsieur de
Villeroy was then chief Secretary of State in the Court of France, a State Mini∣ster very much versed in the management of the weightiest affairs of that Crown; wherefore by reason of his place, and the particular esteem that he was in with the King of all the other State Officers, the Cardinal did most usually ne∣gotiate with him. He therefore made the first overture to him, and thought he found such a disposition in him thereunto, as he began afterwards to move it to the King, who seemed to approve of it from the very first. The Pope was hereat very well pleased, and so much the more, for that the like introduction being by his order made by the Cardinal Milino in Spain; upon the same motives which Cardinal Barbarino had made use of in France; he found alike inclination there also, applying himself especially to the Duke of Lerma, who was in chiefest fa∣vour and authority with the King of Spain. And though by reason of the ten∣der years of the Princely progeny, and for divers other reasons, the business past no further at that time; yet the same Pope having at other times set the negotia∣tion more maturely on foot, it was at last to the great honor of the Holy See, and to the great glory of his endeavours, perfected and consummated, in two mutual marriages between those two Crowns. But amongst Barbarino's main motives, and Paulus quintus his chief ends this was one, that by the near alliance of the two Crowns, for both their general welfares, a third marriage might be made, by joyning a second son of Spain to a daughter of France, and by placing this young couple near the Infanta Isabella, who might succeed in the Principal∣lity of those Provinces, now that there was no hopes of succession between her and the Arch-duke; and this would at the same time have redownded to the ad∣vantage of the affairs of Flanders; and without doubt it might be thought, that no tye would have proved more tenacious then this, to unite both the Crowns to∣gether by interchangeable advantages, and to make Flanders injoy the benefit which by the precedent marriage between the Arch-duke and the Insanta Isabella was hoped for, as well in matter of Religion, as in point of State, and which for want of succession did not afterwards insue. A thought which the Pope himself alwaies had, and which often was made known to us in the time of our Nuntio∣ture in Flanders: to the which he was chiefly moved by the example of what had been done in the case of the same two Princes, by Philip the second a King of great piety and prudence, and by the same considerations which were then di∣scerned in Clement the eighth, who was so worthy and so zealous a Pope. These intercessions which were so efficatious made in the name of Pope Paul to the two Kings still to establish more good intelligence between them, made much then for the service of the affairs of Flanders. There was a Treaty begun that Winter touching some suspention of Arms, that they might afterwards come, if it were possible, to some former negotiati∣on either of a perpetual Peace, or of a long Truce. The Authority which the King of France had with the United Provinces, could not be greater then then it was; and it was plainly seen, that no overture made by the Spaniards would have been listend unto by those Provinces, and would much less have had any good end without his appearing, and particular favour therein. Wherefore it was not to be doubted, but that the aforesaid intercessions would greatly help to dispose that King to favour so much the more the negotiation which was already begun, and which afterwards by his authority chiefly was concluded, and ended in a Truce of twelve years (as shall hereafter be related) though through the wonted jealousies of Princes, he seemed at first rather averse then willing there∣unto. At this very time were we destined to be Nuntio in Flanders, and came to Brussels. just when the suspention of Arms was, which afterwards past into a greater Treaty. Before the suspention was had which was about the beginning of May no military action was done that deserves any relation. We will therefore fall to give you an account of all the aforesaid negotiation; and because when the Truce was established, we did then compose a full historical Narration there∣of apart, which was afterwards printed, together with some other of our wri∣tings concerning the Affairs of Flanders; and that even since then we had a thought of composing this intire present History of the War which happened in those Provinces, till by the Truce, Arms were laid down: we will therefore here
insert the same Relation, though it were formerly printed; it being a member which ought also to be joyned to this body in this place: and which will now fully compleat it. The Command of the Catholick Army being past into Marquis Spinola's hands, great were those designes (as you have heard) which he brought with him from Spain to Flanders, to make the chief seat of the War on the other side the Rhine, and to straiten the enemy the most they could in those parts. To this purpose were the extraordinary Forces in the two last fields raised. But though great advantages were gotten thereby, yet fell they far short of the conceived hopes. It was seen that Spain could not continue to maintain so excessive an ex∣pence. That for want of money, a new Mutiny had again happened. That ano∣ther might insue; and that one of these disorders did much confound, and di∣stort the whole body of the Army. Spinola was so troubled with these and some other reflections of importance, as he at last fell upon those very considerations, which already divers of the gravest, and best experienced State-Ministers both of Spain and Flanders had faln upon, touching the difficulties and dangers which the Warre of Flanders, and the going about to weaken or subdue the E∣nemy by force of Arms brought with it. They discoursed thus amogst them∣selves. That all the good they had reaped by forty years War was, their having made the Enemy the more strong; more resolute to defend their usurpt liberty; more firm in the union which they had established amongst themselves; and better united to the forein Princes whho sided with them: That Nature's self might be said to have fought al∣ways for them, by their Bulwarks of Sea and Rivers, and their strong scituations in all other parts; and that where nature was wanting, there industry, together wih their so many well munited places did make amends: That their power by land was verygreat in all things else; and their power as sea so great, as that the Crown of Spain had been much indamaged thereby, even in the East-Indies; and was in danger of being a greater sufferer by them in the West-Indies also: What amass of strength (on the other side) and money must it cost the King to maintain the War of Flanders? That doubtlesly his Empire was very large, but much discunited; Flanders, the most disunited member of the whole body of his Dominions both by sea and land. That the sea was blocked up by the Enemies ships: That their passage by land did depend upon many Princes, which alwaies caused great difficulties in their sending of aid, and destroyed their men more by their marches then by their bickerings. Then, how many corruptions and disorders had been rooted in their Army? and how could they be remedied during the War, they being the effects which so long a War had ine∣vitably produced? That instead of obedience, strife reigned amongst the Nations. That there were now more wives then souldiers; more mutinies then years; that their own Forces were almost as dangerous to them as those of their Enemies: And mutinies growing so familiar, now of one, now of another Nation; and ofttimes of many Nations at once, what a sad day would that be when the whole Army should mutiny together? a day which would bring the Kings affairs in Flanders to their utmost danger, as also the Cause of the Catholick Religion; for the defence whereof the War at first was chiefly made, and hath been so long maintained by the Spanish side. If then by so many reasons and so long experience, War against the Enemy were to be esteemed so fruitless, is it not better (said they) to come to some fair agreement with them? is it not better to order our Army anew? and in the mean time to get strength, and laying down Arms, except what with time would make most to the Spanish advantage? Arms being laid down, the King of France already grown old, might in this interim die, and with him that assistance might chance to cease, which was subministred to the E∣nemy by a Prince of such power and repute: That after his death the affairs of France might peradventure change face, their King being so young: the like might be expected in the affairs of England, their King being a new King, and a Scotch∣man, but ill looked on by that Kingdom; the Enemy having likewise received consi∣derable succours from Scotland: And in case any of these things should happen, how much would the affairs of Spain be bettered? But above all, it was to be hoped that even peace it self might turn to a secret war against the Enemy: That the fear of the Spanish forces was the bond which fastened their union closest; so as this fear ceasing
through the enjoyment of quiet, some domestick evil might arise amongst them which might break the union; and some opportunity in favour of the King and Arch-dukes, of regaining some of the Rebelious Provinces by underhand-dealing, and of subjugating the others afterwards by force. These reasons were doubtlesly very weighty, and of great consideration, and had been oft-times argued in Spain; whereupon the King had at last resolved that if he could not effect his ends by arms, all possible means should be used to come by some convenient Treaty of agreement with the Enemy in Flanders: and the affairs of Flanders may be said totally to depend upon the King: For the marriage between the Arch-duke and the Kings sister proving barren, and the Provinces of Flanders being consequently to return unto the King again, he had therefore chiefly maintained the War with his Forces, and consequently all Treaties' of agreement were chiefly to depend upon his Authority. The Arch-duke inclined also very much to bring things to some accommodation; he being a Prince naturally given to love his quiet, and full of years and experience, might comprehend better then any other the dangerous consequences which the War of Flanders brought with it: but it was very hard to find out a way how to treat of accommodation. A while since the enemy seemed to be quite averse unto any such Treaty; and still swelling with prosperity and success, they resolved never to listen to any whatsoever Treaty, till such time as the King and Archdukes should first publickly declare that they treated with them as with Free Provinces and States, unto the which the King nor Arch-dukes made no claim nor pretence whatsoever: wherein the Arch-duke found great repugnancy in himself, and foresaw the like in the King. He thought that to declare those now to be a free people, against whom they had fought as against rebels, would be to confess that their former war had been unjust; and that to seem now so willing to put an end unto it, would be likewise a declaring that they were no longer able to maintain it; what honour should they lose herein? how could they with credit treat of peace or truce with their own rebels; and how dangerous a president would it be, to make liberty the re∣ward of rebellion? for such an example in favour of those Provinces which had rebelled, would be an invitation to such as yet kept their obedience to doe the like. This preparation of the affairs of Flanders was in the beginning of the year 1607. Father John Neyen, a Franciscan Fryer, was then at Brussels, he was born at Ant∣werp, and after having taken upon him that religious habit, he had staid awhile in Spain, to pass the course of his studies there, and by that reason was well ac∣quainted with the affairs of that Court. He returned from thence to Flanders, and being become Commissary General of his Order in those parts, he kept very much at Brussels: He was very religious, of an eloquent tongue, very well fitted to the nature of his Countey, and therefore as well acceptable in private discourse as in the Pulpit; and much versed in the negotiations of the age. The Commis∣sary had some acquaintance in Holland; and by chance a Holland Merchant who was a friend of his was then in Brussels; This Merchant was very inward with divers of the chiefest that sate at the Helm in the United Provinces. The Arch-duke being at privat councel with Spinola and some others of the Kings Offi∣cers in Flanders, 'twas thought expedient that the Commissary should dispose the Merchant to go to the Hague in Holland to endeavour some new overture of Treaty. The Merchant went; but he found no ear would be given thereunto, till the abovesaid Declaration of their being Free-States were granted, and that this should precede all other things. The Arch-duke was sencible of the afore∣said repugnancies in condescending thereunto: yet all the former considerati∣ons being again weighed, it was at last judged, that it was best to yield to the pre∣sent necessity, and that all means should be used to procure a cessation of Arms, and to enter into a Treaty of accommodation. If the Treaty should have good success, the success would sufficiently applaud the Treaty; if it should not succeed well, but that they must be forced to con∣tinue the war, the making of such a verbal Declaration would not import much; 'twas added, That to declare that they treated with the United Provinces,
as with Free States unto which the King and Arch-dukes laid no pretension, was alwayes to be understood by way of supposition, to wit, as if they were free, not signifying a true and legitimate liberty; which they by their rebellion could never justly come by, nor justly enjoy: which being so manifest, neither did the King nor the Arch-dukes lose any right which they formerly had to the United Provinces, though they should make a Declaration thus limited. Sudden advertisment was sent to Spain of what had been discovered by the Merchants means; and all things were again represented unto the King, which were thought likelyest to induce him to give way, that some Treaty of agreement might be had with the United Provinces, in such manner as hath been said. The reasons which prevailed in Flanders, did so likewise in Spain, in perswading the King to give way to the Treaty which was desired. Whereupon the Arch-duke resolved to send the Commissary General in person, into Holland, to endeavour once more some fairer way of commencing a Treaty, and to yield at last, if there were no remedy, to what the United Provinces pretended unto. The Commissa∣ry took his journey about the end of February; and being come to the Hague, he soon perceived there was no hopes of ever being heard in any thing whatsoe∣ever, unless the abovesaid Declaration should precede: whereupon being admit∣ted into the Councel of the States Generall, which is the supreme magistracy by which the whole body of those Provinces is represented: he opened himself thus unto them. That the Arch-duke Albertus, and the Arch-dutchess the Infanta his wife, had alwayes desired to see the Low-Countries once free from civil wars; that so many and so bitter calamities of war, might be turned to the enjoyment of a happy peace. That peace was the end of war; which not being to be had but by the way of Treaty, they did consent on their side that the Declaration of Li∣berty which they knew the United Provinces do pretend unto should precede; that it became all good Princes to endeavour all means whereby to cause quiet unto their people, and that to justifie this their so just and religious end to the world, they had willingly descended now to an overture of Treaty; and to second the success thereof, would be as willing to do any thing that might tend to the good of the weal-publick. This Proposition being well discust in the Councel of the States General, they thought that whatsoever could be desired, made then for the advantage of the Low-Countries; whereupon they resolved to accept of the offer: and before the Commissary departed, a suspension of Arms for eight months was agreed upon, which was to begin the next May; and it was likewise concluded that the Trea∣ty should begin the next September. The Commissary went from Holland with this answer. Not long after the Arch-dukes declared by a particular Edict or Proclamation, that they came to suspension of Arms with the United Provinces, as with Free Provinces and States, unto which they did not lay any pretence; the States-General did also the like on their side the Commissary did likewise pro∣mise that the King of Spain should by the Arch-dukes procurement ratifie the same within three months: and he did likewise desire in the names of the Arch-dukes, that the States would inhabit all hostility by sea, promising that the Arch-dukes would oblige themselves that the King of Spain should do the same: to the which the States after some difficulties condescended: all this was afterwards published by the United Provinces to their people with great demonstrations of joy; and they gave an account thereof to their Confederate Princes; but more particularly to the King of France and King of England; from both of which, Ambassadors were forthwith sent to congratulate with them. The affairs of Flanders were at this pass when I came to Brussels, which was on Saint Laurence his eve, 1607. It cannot be exprest how all men on all sides did rejoyce, in expectation of what the event would prove. Soon after my com∣ing to Brussels the Kings ratification came; to procure the which, as also to give a more particular account of what had past, the Arch-duke had dispatched away Commissary Neyen. The ratification came in general terms; and so pen'd, as it was to be doubted the United Provinces would not allow of it: yet Lewis Verrey∣chen, chief Secretary of State to the Arch-dukes was suddenly sent with it into
Holland. The United Provinces shewed strange arrogancy in these negotiations; and particularly a great suspition of being over-reached by the Spaniards: whence it was to be beleeved that they would interpret all that should come from that side in the worst sense. You have heard what the number and Government of the United Provinces are, and how they are seated. How Holland and Zealand are seated in the bo∣some of the Sea, and the other five lie more inwards into the land; these there∣fore did more willingly give way unto the Treaty at the first, and did afterwards appear more inclined to continue it. The principal and Fundamental Law of their union is, That in resolutions appertaining to the common interest, the Votes of all of them must equally agree; so as their businesses proceed but slowly; they being to be treated of apart in every several Province, and alike uniform consent to be gathered from them all by long and tedious perswasions, as their liberty is in all of them alike; The Kings ratification being then sundry times consulted on, and with great jealousies, these difficulties were objected by the Uni∣ted Provinces. That the ratification came in general terms; that it did not contain the essential clause touching their liberty; but that the King still styled the Arch-dukes Princes of the Low-Countries; that the King writ himself, I the King, as he used to do to his own Vassals; that it was written in ordinary Paper, and not in Parchment, as is usually done in things of great importance: and finally, that it was sealed with a little seal, and not with a great one; as ought to have been. Verreychin being afterwards sent for in, these difficulties were propounded unto him and exaggerated rather in an insolent then free manner: and it was at last concluded, that the United Provinces would by no means accept of the ratificati∣on in manner as it was by him presented. The common peoples madness is alwaies very great, but more when they are smiled upon by Fortune. They are full of arrogancy, and rashness, in time of Prosperity; and as base and abject in adversity: So as a multitude must either not be treated with at all, or these alternate defects must be patiently born withal Ver∣reychin used therefore such dissimulation as was requisite: and endeavoured to remove their suspitions. He assured them that such a ratification would not have been sent from Spain, did not the King intend to make it good; that his inten∣tions were excellent, and that he did vie therein with the Arch-Dukes; he pray∣ed them to allow time for another to come; that he did again promise in the the name of the Arch-Dukes to cause another ratification bee sent in same form as was by them desired. The resolution put on in Holland was; that the Arch-Dukes should procure a new ratification to be sent from Spain within six weeks, which should contain word for word the same Declaration of Freedom, Which the Arch-dukes had made in their instrument; that it should be written in Latine, French, or Dutch, and should be subscribed by the King, with his own name; and to the end that no more errors might be run into, the form thereof was given to Verreychin in all the three Languages. Father Neyen was this mean while returned from the Court; he acquainted them how hard it was to procure the King to send the former ratification, though in general terms; yet he affirmed that he did verily hope that a second would come in particular terms. The Spaniards knowing what necessity there was to commence a Treaty thus with the United Provinces; since no other way would be admitted of. The Arch-Dukes did again signifie this necessity; so as not long after the second ratification came from Spain, but it was so penhed as it was feared the United Provinces would raise new seruples in admitting it; it contained the pretended declaration of liberty; and all the other clauses that were desired. But in the conclusion this was added by the King; that if the matters of Religion should not be agreed upon as well as the other points, his ratification should signifie nothing; and affairs should still continue in their for∣mer posture. It was also written in Spanish, subscribed as usually, I the King; and in all things else according to the former manner. Yet it was believed that these last rubs would easily be removed, by the example of the Kings having done the same in the two Peaces which were lately concluded with the King of France, and King of England. The other difficulty touching the new added
clause, was thought the greater. And that word Religion seemed to be imma∣turely put in; since it might raise jealousies in the United Provinces; as if it were already determined in Spain to make propositions against the liberty of their Government, and against that declaration which the King at the same time made in form aforesaid. The Commissary and Verreychin were sent both together with this second ratification into Holland; who in the presenting thereof, made large professions to the States general again, of the great good inclinations of the King and Arch-dukes towards the common good, and how desirous they were parti∣cularly of the Low-Countries welfare. The States took time to give their answer; and after much consultation, their answer according to their wonted arrogance, was thus: That the Kings ratificati∣on was not answerable to the form which they desired: and that amongst other things the new added clause could not be allowed of: since the King knew very well, as did also the Arch-Dukes, that the United Provinces were free Pro∣vinces, and would alwaies be so, though no agreement were made. That notwithanding the States would acquaint every Province with the ratification, and would within six weeks make their resolution known: But with this protesta∣tion, that they intended not that by vertue of such a ratification any thing should be propounded which might tend to the prejudice of the freedom of their Government, in case the Treaty went on. This answer being given, the Commissary and Verreychin returned to Brussels. Whilst affairs were thus negotiated in Flanders, divers interests, passions, and ends were upon this occasion discovered to be not onely in the neighbouring Princes, but almost in all the Princes of Europe. In Germany, the Emperor Radul∣phus the second, pretended that no Treaty of agreement could be made in Flan∣ders without his participation and consent; taking for granted, that the Low-Countries did depend upon the Empire: and therefore no separation could be made therein without his Authority: Wherefore he had written some Letters to this purpose to the Catholick King, the Arch-duke, and the United Pro∣vinces. The King and Arch-duke answered him in general terms; as did also the Uni∣ted Provinces; save onely that they added a long justification of their cause, and of their war against the Spaniard till the present. Neither was there any more news heard of the Emperor in the whole progress of the Treaty. But Henry the fourth of France, was not so negligent in the consideration of these passages. He had sent Ambassadors upon this occasion at the first into Holland; the truest and most intrinsecal end whereof was, that he might have a share in what was to be done, and specially to cause jealousie in the Spaniards, and by this means to induce them to make use of him, and to make him Arbitrator in the differences. The King of France was then in his chiefest greatness and prosperity: and en∣joying his Kingdom in perfect peace and honour; after having arrived thereat through many difficulties, all which he had overcome with incredible constancy and valour. He considered the Affairs in Flanders, after several manners; on one side he could have wished that the war might continue, and that thereby the affairs of Spain might still be impaired, even till at last, they might lose whole Flanders. On the other side he saw himself well stricken in years; his children very young; and that in case he should fail, fresh troubles might in a short time arise in his Kingdom, which might chiefly be fomented by the Spanish Forces of Flanders; that the disorders of those Forces were not so many, but that if the war should continue, very necessity would force them to finde out a remedy: nor the danger of their losses such as might not be evaded by the power of so great a Monarch; which made him desire to see Flanders without war, and the Spaniards without Forces so near at hand. Neither did he like that the United Provinces who were already become so formidable at Sea, might by their growing too great be as dreadful at Land. For the Hereticks of his Kingdom could from no part else be better fomented to rebel. The King amidst these various considera∣tions had his eye fixt upon these passages of Flanders, and because his authority was very great in the United Provinces, he beleeved they would never come to a∣ny accommodation with the Spaniards without his consent.
At the first he seemed to be averse to the affairs in hand; though to say truth, he did not well know what he had best to do: but he did this of purpose to en∣force the Spaniards to put the Negotiations into his hands. Great dexterity and cunning was requisite to the leading on of these designs. He therefore chose for this so important affair the President Jannine, a man of great experience and abili∣ties, and one who was then chieflyest employed by him in State affairs. He sent Mr. de Rosse along with Jannine (who was then extraordinary Ambassador into Flanders) to continue afterwards his ordinary Ambassador in the United Provin∣ces. Having both of them exercised their Offices in the entrance into the affairs spoken of, they stayed in Holland, Jannine did diligently observe the whole carri∣ages, and wrought himself every day more and more into the affairs, which still increased the jealousie of the King of Spain and the Arch-dukes: who then be∣gan to see clearly, that it behoved them to have recourse to the King of France his mediation; who already had complained to the Commissary General in his return to Flanders, that the King of Spain, and the Arch-dukes had proceeded so far without his knowledge in the aforesaid business. Almost the like passions and artifices appeared in James the first King of England, who was newly come to that Crown. The same reasons appeared in him for desiring the continuance of the war in Flanders, as did in the King of France: for the King of England being strong at Sea, and confiding in the strength of all his Kingdoms situation, as also in the conformity of his ends with those of the United Provinces in favou∣ring heresie, he could not much fear their Forces; though they should grow greater. He was the more secure likewise by having Flushing and the Ramechins in Zealand; and the Brill in Holland, Sea Towns of great importance in his hands; as pawned for monies lent by Queen Elizabeth to the United Provinces, and for that their chiefest strength consisted in English and Scottish souldiers, who were in their Army. He foresaw he should have greater cause to be jealous of the Spaniards, if being free from the war of Flanders, they might endeavour to molest him in any part of his Dominions: especially in Ireland, an Island which is almost wholly Catholick, well-affected to them, and much dis-affected to England. Out of these reasons it was believed, that the King of England desired the war in Flanders might continue. But being a great lover of Quiet, and much given to Hunting, and to his Book, and wholly fixt in warring by writings with the Church, it was therefore judged he would not at last, shew himself totally averse to see the affairs of Flanders in some sort pacified. To boot, that not being able for scarcity of Monies to give any considerable succour to the United Provinces, his power would be but small in perswading or counselling the continuance of war, since he could not much assist it by his Forces. Yet it very much imported those Provinces to preserve his friendship, were it onely that they might raise souldiers out of his Kingdom. Wherefore they entertained his Ambassadors which were sent into Holland at the beginning of this Negotiation with very much respect, and treated with them with all confidency. The King of Englands end in sending of them was almost the same as was that of the King of France: To wit, that he likewise would have a share in the business which was in hand, and to enforce the Spaniards to make use of him likewise therein. The King of Denmark sent likewise Ambassadors to Holland; as also the Prince Elector Palatin, the Elector of Brandenburgh, the Lantgrave of Hesse, and other German Heretick Princes; who all of them seemed to shew their good affections towards the united Provinces in so important an occasion. These businesses which were thus begun grew very hot in Holland: every thing was in motion, and great was the expectation what the united Provinces would resolve, as well touching the second ratification come from Spain, as also whe∣ther they would continue or break the Treaty. But of all others Count Mau∣rice of Nassaws thoughts were most busied at this time. His father the Prince of Orange being dead, he being yet but a youth of sixteen years of age, had got into all his fathers Military and Civil employments, with the great good will and approbation of the united Provinces: And encreasing no less in valour, then in years, after so many enterprises and prosperous successes, his authority grew
daily greater amongst them. He had won it by arms, and he thought he could best preserve it by arms. And by means of the publick trouble of war, he hoped some favourable conjuncture might the easilier be opened unto him, of making himself one day Prince of those Provinces. It is not to be doubted, but that his ambition carried him thus high; for his Father was very near attaining thereunto; and his own deserts being added to his Fathers, his hopes ought rather to be augmented then diminished. To boot with the Supreme Government of the Army, he had succeeded his Father in the Civil Administration of Holland Zealand, Utricht, & Overisel. His brother Count Henry, General of the Horse of the united Provinces, and the Counts William and Ernestus, the one of them Governour of Friesland and Groninghen, and the other Governor of Ghelderland, were all of them of his House, and depended on him almost in all things, so as the whole Government of the united Provinces, as well Military as Civil, may be said to be in his hands: and his domestick power was the greater by his great friendship and alliance with Forraign Princes. The Negotiation in hand made nothing at all for his present condition, nor for that which peradventure he had an intention to raise up unto himself. And say he had a minde to have hindred it at the beginning; what colour, or what pretence had he so to do? Since the united Provinces in the Proposal made by the Arch-dukes for a Treaty, had gotten all that they desired; when the first ratification which came therefore from Spain proved vain, Maurice began to hope well in the begun breach of the Negotiation; & by occasion thereof augmented the cōmmon jealou∣sies. He inlarged himself very much and with great fervency in calling to minde their late good successes; so many mischiefs, cruelties, and horrible in humanities committed as he affirmed, by the Spaniards. together with many other things, to make all manner of Treaties with them suspitious, and to encrease the hatred which those of the united Provinces alwaies bore to that Nation. And though the second ratification was come in very ample manner, yet did not he go less in continuing to do the same, hoping to make this second appear likewise faulty in many things. The time drew near of giving their resolution therein, concer∣ning which they had had many meetings; at last, one day when the Councel of  States General was fuller then usual by reason of the importancy of the bu∣siness, 'tis said Count Maurice spoke thus: How much most worthy Deputies I have alwayes desired the prosperity of our Republick, all my precedent actions which have made me appear no less my Fathers competitor then his son, in her service, may sufficiently manifest. I have not laboured less then did my father, in all wayes procuring the common good, and if he lost his life in the publique cause, I have exposed my self to no less dangers in the defence thereof; and certainly it would have redounded much more to my honour and glory to have died amidst Arms, then it did to him to perish by the hand of that base and detestable Paricide, who so unwor∣thily slew him. None therefore should more rejoyce then I, to hear our Pro∣vinces declared to be Free-States, even by our Enemies themselves, did I not think that all these proceedings were but couzenages, whereby more easily to draw our Liberties again into their subjection. I apprehended this even from the beginning of these practises; so that, as I have hitherto ever abhorred them, so do I now abhor them more then ever, and think it now more necessary then e∣ver to break them wholly off, and to throw back this second ratification with the same resoluteness as we did the former. How many tricks, and how many cheats the Spaniards have alwayes used in their like Treaties, is too well known to us all. But what need we look after past-times? hath not the like been seen, and is it not now seen in these present negotiations? The first ratification came in general terms, nor did it contain any thing of ratification but the bare name. The second is come since, which is likewise so defective, as in my opini∣on it ought in no way to be excepted. Do you perceive how the King would have it sent in the Spanish tongue? a tongue unknown to us, the true meaning and efficacy whereof we do not understand. Do you observe how he uses the same subscription as he useth to his Vassals? Not having changed any of the o∣ther things excepted against. And the addition of the last clause, doth it not e∣vidently
enough shew his pretensions that it shall wholly depend upon his will whether we shall be free or no? As if from the time that the Duke d' Alva, (that Fury and Firebrand of all the troubles of Flanders) and after him the o∣ther Governours had bereft their Countrie of its priviledges, brought forein colonies thereinto, put the whole Country to fire and sword, and given sen∣tence themselves against our Liberties, and we had not known how to defend it by our unconquered Forces? We then are free, whether the King declare us to be so or no. And our pretence to this Declaration is, because it is due to us from all the world, and due to us by him absolutely, without any conditional limitation of insuing agreement, as he pretends in the additional clause; so as it is now too well seen that the Spaniards treat with their wonted frauds; and that they would pretend they can never lose by any whatsoever accord that should insue; the right which they presume to have over our Provinces; that they may afterwards expect new opportunities to oppress them again; it may then be granted, that it is not any publique respect, but their own particular necessity which induceth them now to come to agreement with us. The necessity I say of their disorders, which doubtlesly are so many and so great, as we may expect their utter losing of Flanders. What darkness, what obscurity is it then that doth possess our senses? or what hoodwinkt and untimely wisdom is it which teacheth us to intermit and slacken the course of our Victories, whence they are nearest and most certain? their Army is in very great confusion, without any discipline, without any obedience; corrupted by perpetual mutinies: And if the war continue, we shall doubtlesly see the whole body of the soldiery muti∣ny, and then their whole Countrey will rise. How great a part thereof does there already abound in our sense? We on the other side have a flourishing Army, well disciplin'd, well paid, and well provided of all things. We have the assistance of France, of England, and of the greatest part of Germany. We maintain a Cause, then vvhich none can be more just; nor can there be more constancy desired in our peoples wills to defend it: To these our advantages by land, our other progresses at sea do fully correspond. What greater blovv could the Spaniards receive from us, then that which we have given them in the East-Indies? What will the other prove vvhich vve are preparing for them like∣vvise in the West? To this end, to boot vvith the publicke forces, particular Companies of the richest Merchants of all our Provinces are oppointed: so as when we shall get footing there, to what straits and hazards shall we reduce the Spanish Fleet? On the contrary side, how much both publick and private advantages, how much honour and glory shall our Common-wealth receive thereby? Our having gon round the Sea where ever the Sun shines, with so many and so illustrious Navigations, and having made our name so famous by so many and so glorious Victories, will be the most memorable things spoken of by our posterity in after Ages. The fear of losing the Indies is that which chiefly causes the Spaniards to come to some accommodation with us. Who will then per∣swade us to let slip these so propitious opportunities which now offer thenselves unto us, and see them turned peradventure hereafter to their advantage? True Victory lies in the making good use thereof; Which not being done, the too late remedy of repentance serves but in little stead. We ought by all means possible endeavour not to fall into such errors; and not suffer our selves to be deceived by the false names of repose and Peace, and other specious alluring pretences. These are the means wherewith those full people asleep, whom they intend afterwards to oppress. No Lethargy is more mortal then a Peace, which is to prove worse then war it self. Our people this mean while will grow unsi∣newed by idleness. We shall lose those friends which our wars have purchast to our cause. But the worst of all evils will lie in the secret venome of discord, which the enemy will in this interim endeavour to introduce amongst us; and this sort of plague will sooner be radicated amongst us then driven out. Thus by means of rest more fatal far then arms, our Common-wealth would fall into the geatest misfortunes and the Spaniards by their machinations quietly enjoy what hitherto they have not been able to do with their Armies in the fields. But I never was an Orator; and as a Souldier methinks I have spoken more then
I need upon such an occasion. Nor can I deny but that my particular passions sway me in what concerns the common good, which is now in hand; which may notwithstanding all of them be reduced to the implacable hatred I bear those who are our implacable enemies; and hope to make their power more formida∣ble to others by the ruin of our Republick. The Authority of so great a man assisted by so many and so forcible reasons, prevailed very much with the hearers. John Barnevelt, Advocate General of the Province of Holland, and one of her Deputies in this present Councel, was one of those who did most favor the things which were now in Treaty. His Authority was very great not onely in Holland, but even throughout the whole Union; in the service whereof he had ever had the chiefest employments, and had therein continually faithfully discharged his trust. So as his credit was such at this time with the Union, and his estimation so great, as he drew commonly most men to adhere to him in all his opinions. He desired to see Count Maurice his power lessened, to the end that the common liberty might be the more secure both at home and abroad: though this his emulation cost him afterwards his life: For not many years after Maurice his faction prevailed so far, as for divers faults laid to his charge, (were they true or false) he was publickly beheaded in Holland. When Maurice had ended his discourse, Barnevelt, still resolved to defend the contrary opinion, spoke thus. Of so many egregious acts (most worthy Deputies) which the Prince of Orange, of ever happy memory, did and which have been since continued by the Illustrious Count Maurice, the worthy son of so gallant a father, in service of our Common∣wealth, this is one of the fruits we reap, that every one may freely speak his minde in this Councel, for what concerns the common good; and if it were ever requisite so to do, the nature of the business in hand doth now require it. He hath certain∣ly shewed great gravity and wisdom in what he hath said: But since the more weighty the affairs are, so much more necessary it is to have them maturely debated, I hope it will not be displeasing, if I alledge all those reasons to the contrary as may be considered in so important an affair. We shall differ in our opinions, but not in our ends; which is the like in us all, to endeavour all the advantage and stability which we can to this our Common-wealth. The Illustrious Count did, If I be not deceived, urge two points chiefly: the one that the Spaniards do not proceed with sincerity in these their negotiations; and the other, that it is meer necessity which makes them now seek to come to some agreement with us, that they may hereafter finde some more fa∣vourable opportunity to oppress us. As for the first, I hope that none will deny, but for what concerns the affairs now in hand, we have hitherto obtained all that we have demanded of the Arch-dukes. 'Tis true that afterward, the King of Spains first ratification was faulty, and as such a one, was justly by us refused: but to speak tru∣ly, I do not think this second such a one as ought to be rejected: the defects whereof being well considered, do more transgress against the circumstances, then the essence of the ratification which we demand. The essence lies in this; that the King should acknowledge our Provinces to be free, and that he should declare he had no pre∣tence or claim thereunto; this, this second ratification doth fully contain, as doth also the first Declaration made by the Arch-dukes. And in fine, it is the very same which we did desire, except it be in the diversity of Language, and in some other petty things of small importance, and in the last clause added by the King. Faults which in my opinion cannot be held any waies essential. First, how can it be doubted but that the true sense and meaning of the Spanish tongue must be understood by us? Here, where the frequent commerce of so many of our Cities with all the Principal Cities of Europe, makes all Languages common and known? To boot, that the Arch-dukes Deputies affirm, and give it under their hands that it is in the same lan∣guage, with the same subscription, and alike in all other things to the ratifications of peace between the Crown of Spain, and those of France, and England. Ought we to pretend to more then what was then done to two so great Kings? The greater diffi∣culty would lye in the additional clause, if it were not evidently known that it were to be understood, though it were not exprest; since how can it be denied, but that if no agreement should be made, both parties would continue in their former rights? To wit, the Spaniards in what is grounded upon violence; and we in what is grounded
upon so known Justice. But say the Spaniards after some agreement made, should pre∣tend a Title of right over us, tell me I pray you, wherein could our affairs be therein prejudiced? Should they peradventure, be Judges in such a cause? In such a case re∣course must be had to the Tribunal of the whole world; and each party to the favour of their friends; or rather to the Tribunal of arms where Armies pronounce sen∣tence, and for the most part the justice of the cause gives the victory. It imports but little then whether their ends be sincere or fradulent in case of agreement; for then they cannot oppress us by their forces. We must above all things endeavour to secure our selves from this danger, which necessarily consists in one of two remedies; either in continuing the war out of hope that their necessity will daily grow greater; or else in ending it by some accommodation after which our affairs might be better secured. And from hence I come to the second point. I deny not but that their pre∣sent disorders and necessities are great; but I cannot think them past remedy so far, but that if the war in ure the Spaniards may finde sufficient Forces to do it. I for  own part finde the Monarchy of Spain to be the same thing that it hath alwaies , during the whole course of this war; nay rather increased in this interim by the addition of the Kingdom of Portugal, and of the East-Indies, which depend there∣upon. I finde it to be very strong both at land and sea. Where hath the formidable∣ness of their forces been better seen then here in Flanders? What other power hath at any time maintained so long, so far distant, so hard, and so expensive a war? And shall we believe that the Spaniards cannot still maintain it? And that they are not likely to finde a remedy for their disorders in these parts; and for any hazard they may run in the East-Indies? The very necessity of making war, will doubtlessly furnish them with means enough to continue it. So then we are again engaged in war; in a new and more obstinate war then the former: and what security can we have that fortune will alwaies favour us? We have likewise our necessities; and if they be at present great amongst the Spaniaads, remember I pray you that they have been greater amongst us; and that all humane things being subject to alteration, and the events of war usually very uncertain: the time may prove propitions again to them, and averse to us. Do not we know how much our war depends upon the aids from France and England? May not the King of France die? Is he not already very old? May not the Kingdom afterwards alter? And shall we not then be deprived of all succour from thence? Do not we likewise know upon what fickle terms the affairs of England stand? The King being a Scotch-man, a stranger in that Kingdom, and there being many other occasions which may cause some fear of alteration on his side? How much would the affairs of Spain be bettered by any of these accidents? How much worse would ours be? We ought then to be taught by all reason, and by all the rules of good Government, not to let slip this happy conjuncture of coming to some good agreement with the Spaniards. Fortune is flitting, inconstant, dis∣dainful and exceeding apt to be provoked: 'Tis now the time to know how to lay hold of her: So as my opinion is, that by all means we ought to accept of this ratification come from Spain, and proceed on to some Treaty of agreement: I confess it is not al∣waies in the power of man to enjoy the happiness of peace; but I verily bel eve it is now in our power to shun the dangers of war; which in my opinion ought by all means to be indeavoured: and certainly we may hope for great advantages from the Spani∣ards by this accommodation which they do so much desire to make with these our Pro∣vinces in this their present necessity: As all Pilots prefix the haven for their end; all Travellers their Country, and all motion rest; so all war hath peace for its end, wherein consists means chiefest happiness; and shall the wa of Flanders be the onely thing which shall never have an end? And shall all our most advantagious successes, depend alwaies upon the so uncertain event of war? We shall be free from the uncer∣tainties, and from so many dangers which troubles brings with them, by reducing our selves at last to a quiet condition: we shall then much better re-order the Government of every of our particular Provinces, and of the intire body of the union, when we shall be in a quiet condition: This our Common-wealth will then break forth from out the duskishness and horror of arms: which how wounderful a sight will it be, and what unaccustomed praises will it produce in the Theatre of the Universe? When it shall be seen how our Provinces do unite themselves in one body; with what sort of Lawes and Magistracy they conspire together; how unwounded the Liberties of
each of them remain, and how uninjured it passeth through every one of them, as through so many veins to the intire body of their general Union. We shall have Am∣bassadors sent to congratulate with us from all parts; who will return rather envying then rejoycing at this our so great felicity. We shall pay the debts we have contracted abroad: we shall ease our selves of those we have here amongst our selves; and we shall enrich our treasury, by taking off so many and so grievous expences: our people shall then know that they are truly free, when they shall enjoy liberty without any contesta∣tion: and being once got into such a condition, what need we fear to be at any time reduced under the yoak of that proud, cruel, and tyrannical Spanish Go∣vernment. Barnevelt was listned unto with much attention: and the reasons alledged by him, appeared to be so weighty and wisely grounded, as after some other con∣sultations, it was at last resolved on by the States General, that they would ac∣cept of the ratification; yet there was much ado before Zealand could be brought to joyn in this Vote, so absolute Authority had Count Maurice in that Province; whereof he was not onely Governour, but had a great estate there, and enjoyed such prerogatives, as he appeared rather to be Prince then Go∣vernor of that Country. The Arch-dukes were then acquainted with this the States Generals resolution, and 'twas almost in the same words which were used in the answer which was first given to the Commissary and Verreychin when they brought the ratification into Holland. And because the term for suspension of Arms was already expired, it was by both sides prorogued, and continued to be so from time to time in new terms till the end of the Treaty, which was after concluded. I thought good to insert this in this place, to shun the tedious repetition of the same things sundry times. Now all the eyes of Flanders were fixt upon that Deputies the Arch-dukes would chose to send, according to the first agreement, into Holland. The greatest weight of the Spanish affairs which were agitated in Flanders lay upon the Marquess Spinola, Camp-master-general of the Army, and upon Manchichidor the Spanish Secretary of War; and as for the Arch-dukes business, John Richardotto, President of the Privy Councel, and Verreychin so often named before, were chiefly trusted therewith. These four were chosen for Deputies, and Father Nyen was added for a fift, as one who had hitherto had a great hand in the business. Marquess Spinola was already got in∣to great Authority by reason of his so many Imployments and Trusts. He was Camp-master-general and Governor of the Army; Administrator, or Pay-ma∣ster-general of the Kings monies: of the Councel of State in Spain; and through his hands all the Kings affairs in Flanders, as hath been said, did chiefly pass: and the Arch-duke likewise seemed to put much confidence in him. In∣deed a States man of singular judgment and valour, of incredible vigilancy and industry in the managing of whatsoever business either Military or Civil; and indowed with so many other gallant parts, as he had reason to be esteemed one of the greatest States-men that the Crown of Spain hath had these many years. The Secretary Manchichidor was likewise highly esteemed of, for his long expe∣rience in the affairs of Flanders: for he had been Secretary of war, even from the time that the Arch-duke whilst he was yet Cardinal, was come to the Go∣vernment of those Provinces. In the affairs which belonged properly to the Arch-dukes; the President Ricardetto was no less esteemed of; he had for a long time been the man chiefly imployed in affairs of greatest importance by the Duke of Parma, and other Governors: and the Arch-Duke being made Prince of the Low-Countries, chose him particularly to employ in making the last Peace with France, and the like with the King of England; so as almost all the impor∣tant business of the Country passed through his hands. Verreychin was likewise present at the making of the two above named Peaces, and had long before ex∣ercised the place of first Secretary of State, and was alwaies held a man of great wisdom and integrity. Enough hath already been said of the Commissary-gene∣ral and of his endowments. But when the Spaniards who were in Flanders, un∣derstood who the Deputies were, and that they were to go to the Enemies own homes to treat of agreement with them, it is not to be believed how much they stormed and how much they complained of the Arch-Dukes in particular.
Are the affairs of Spain (said they) come to so low an ebb, that our King must abase himself thus? hath so much time, bloud, and treasure been spent a∣gainst the traterous rebels to bring things to this end? That the affairs of Spain were now in as glorious a condition as ever, but that there wanted fitting in∣struments in Flanders to manage them: That the Arch-duke had alwayes shewed himself to be better at peace then at war; and that now that he saw himself not likely to have any children, his only desire was to spend the re∣mainder of his days in peace and quietness: That it was impossible so great a Monarchy should be without a war; nay it was to be desired that it should al∣wayes have an Army in the fields for its service. And what other more fitting Theatre could there be found for the seat of its Arms then Flanders? a place so opulent, and of such extent, and placed in the midst of Spains chiefest ene∣mies and maligners? That if the war could not be alwayes so plentifully main∣tained, their Forces might be lessened, and consequently their expences: That thus the vigour of so great a Monarchy might be preserved even to eternity. The Spaniards broke forth into these complaints, and sent them from Flan∣ders into Spain; but to no purpose: for it was then seen, as also during the whole Treaty, that the King and the Arch-duke did always jump in their opini∣ons: and s for the Deputies going into Holland; without all doubt it might seem in all appearance no wayes to agree with the Kings and Arch-dukes digni∣ty: but the form of the Government of the United Provinces considered, no other manner of negotiation could well be had; for their Deputies were so ma∣ny, that Commissions so bounded, and so many sendings to and fro, as they were inforced to make Orders: to receive new Orders, and new Consents from every Province; which if it had been to be done out of their own Country, the Treaty would never have had an end: and though afterwards, as you shall hear, it was concluded in Antwerp; 'twas because all things were already digested, so as they went thither as it may be said, to a business already concluded. The De∣puties departed about the end of January 1608. and being come into the United Provinces, they were received by the Governors of their Frontier Towns with all honour, and bravely lodged in all places They came to the Hague the first of February, and were met half a league without the Town, by Count Maurice of Nassaw, accompanied by the other Counts of his House, and all the chief men of those parts. The Second BOOK of the TREATY of the TRUCE of FLANDERS. HOLLAND is the greatest, richest, and best peopled Province of all the United seaven: Nay, it so far exceeds all the rest, as it furnisheth half the monies which are issued out by the whole seaven Provinces. It is made by the Sea, and sundry Rivers a Peninsula, it is incompassed on many sides by the Sea, cut through in many parts by Rivers: many Channels cut by hand, joyn with these Rivers, and there be many lakes within it: so as it may be doubted whe∣ther it consist more of land or water. Besides, it doth so abound with shipping of all sorts, as it may likewise be questioned, whether the number of moveable habitations on water, or of houses fixt on the land be the greater. This Pro∣vince is full of Cities, and of a great many lesser Towns. Amsterdam is its chiefest City, and here is the greatest Traffick, not only of Holland itself, but al∣most of the whole North: of all its Towns Hague is the principal, an open Vil∣lage;
but so large, so well peopled, and so delitious as it may compare with many Cities. Here did the Counts of Holland formerly build a Palace for themselves to live in, which the Vnited Provinces do now make use of for the meeting of their Councels which depend upon the Vnion. Here likewise the Councel of the States General do meet almost every day; wherein things of greatest impor∣tance are agitated and resoved by the Deputies of the whole seaven Provinces. The chief affairs of the whole Vnion are then handled in the Hague; and here staid the Catholick Deputies to give a beginning to the Treaty: Before they ar∣rived, the Vnited Provinces had likewise chosen their Deputies; one was chosen for every Province, and two of the best of bloud amongst them, in the common name of them all. And these were Count William of Nassaw, full Cousin Ger∣man to Count Maurice, and Min here Bredrode: for Holland, Barnevelt was named, and by him the business on the behalf of the Vnited Provinces was chief∣ly to be agitated. At their first meeting, nothing was done but the producing of the credential Letters on all sides, they then began to discuss affairs with an in∣tention to come to a perpetual peace if it were possible. The Vnited Provinces offered one Article in the first place, wherein they pretended, that the King of Spain and the Arch-dukes, should acknowledge them to be absolutely Free States, and should at large renounce all right or claim which might be pretend∣ed unto by them or any of their successors, to, or over those Provinces, with an obligation not to make use of their Arms or Titles, or whatsoever other ap∣pearance. This last addition appeared too arrogant to the Catholick Deputies, who complained very much thereof to the Ambassadors of France and England, with whom from the beginning they had had communication in what concern∣ed the Treaty: alleadging. That it was an usual thing amongst Princes, still to retain the Title of States or Kingdoms, though they were lost, or but pretended to, whereof there was examples in the greatest Kings of Christendom. That the Catholick King sti∣led himself King of Hierusalem, and Duke of Burgony; the King of France, King of Navar; and that the King of England did still keep the Title of King of France: That the Vnited Provinces would be they alone who would introduce new Laws in the world, and not content to pass from rebellion into liberty, would pretend, as it were by usurpation to such and so rash advantages: in fine, that this was a cause common to all Princes, and wherein they were all by this one act injured. The answer which the Catholick Deputies gave hereunto was, that they had no Authority to admit of the Article in manner as was desired: That they would acquaint the Arch-dukes therewith, and expect their Answer; but the Ambassadors thought these their complaints to be artificials, they imagined that the Catholick Deputies meant to indear the said renuntiation as much as they might; that they might the easilyer induce the Vnited Provinces to give way on their parts in other things, in which opinion they were confirmed by the Answer which came from Brussels, which was, that the Arch-dukes would consent to the Article in the same manner as it was propounded, if the Vnited Provinces by acknowledgement of so great a benefit, would in lieu thereof abstain from their sayling into the Indies. The Vnited Provinces seemed to be as much moved by this answer; and their Deputies made equal complaints thereof to the Ambassadors of their Confederate Kings and Princes. What do the King of Spain and the Arch-dukes grant (said they) more then what the Vnited Provinces do already possess? that what should be granted by the King and Arch-dukes was nothing but wind, and a bare Title; whereas if the Vnited Provinces should give over their sailing to the Indies, they should deprive themselves of the principal and most important part of their Traffick. That they had begun and would continue that their Navigation, which by the Laws of Nature, and right of Nations is allowed to all men. That some other thing might be thought upon which in this point might give reciprocal satis∣faction to both sides: But that they should exclude themselves from sailing in∣to the Indies, was neither to be thought on nor hoped for: and why ought not the spoiles of that new world be common to all? That it was of that im∣mence
vastness, as more thereof was undiscovered then discovered as yet: and that the right of the occupiers in those parts, differed only in the better knowing how to manage what they possess. Both parties argued this point touching the East-Indies with great stifness and pertenacity; nor would the Catholick Deputies ever discede from their first answer. At last the Deputies of the United Provinces made three Propositions: The first, that according to the nature of all peaces, Commerce might be free both by sea and land to both parties. The second, that for the space of seaven years, the United Provinces might continue their Navigation to the Indies; and that one year before the expiration of those seaven years, some new compositi∣on might be made. The third, that upon the insuance of peace, and due obser∣vation of all things on this side the line, the Vnited Provinces might at their own peril continue their Navigation on the other side. The Catholick Deputies were not pleased either with the first or the third Propositions. Not with the first, because it left the Vnited Provinces absolutely free to Traffick in the Indies: Not with the third, because they saw a peace mixt with hostility was not likely to last. They did not appear to be totally averse from the second, so as they would now agree, that when those seaven years should be ended, the United pro∣vinces should for ever forbear from their Navigation to the Indies. To this their Deputies would by no means consent; this point of the Indies was much stood upon, and the difficulties thereof inlarged by the particular Company of Mer∣chants in the Vnited Provinces which traffick into those parts. The Company was chiefly composed of the Merchants of Amsterdam, and of Midleburgh: and one was sent in the name of that Company to the Hague, to shew how great the gain was which they made by their trafficking in the East-Indies, and how much the continuation thereof did import in other respects. They alleadged that they had already introduced Commerce in sundry parts of those Countries; that many were the frienships and confederations which they had established there; and that those seas were already frequented by a∣bove 150 of their Vessels, and by above 8000 of their Mariners and Souldiers; that great was the gain of particular men, and the advantage no less which the publick received thereby: that to keep so many of the baser sort of people im∣ployed who would be alwayes troublesome, when at quiet, what was it but to purge their Publick of so much ill bloud, ready to grow corrupt? That the Navigation of the United Provinces into the Indies had already made Lisbon groan; that the Merchant Towns of the Portugueses in those parts went to wrack; and that their ships were seen to go and come much possest with fear and apprehension; and were inforced to be at much greater expence then for∣merly; for they had wont not to be greatly vigilant in that their Voyage, not meeting with any contestation, save from the seas and wind. These and many other considerations were represented by the Company, to keep the Vnited Provinces from consenting to the Spaniards demands touching the Indies: So as both parties adhering to their opinions, nothing was done therein. The Catholick Deputies resolved therefore to send Father Neyen into Spain to acquaint the King with what past; and particularly to receive Orders for what they should do concerning the Indies; having first declared to the other Deputies that they had no Commission to conclude any thing in that business. They told them also, how that the Commissary should be back within two months; whereupon he suddenly took his journey for Spain; and I to shun the tedious prolixity of the less important affairs, will here mention only things of greater moment, wherein their differences consisted. The King of Spain and the Arch-dukes, to shew their ingenuity, and the more to honest all conclusion of a∣greement, desired that the exercise of Religion might be left free throughout all the United Provinces: towards which I had not been wanting; but particularly before the Deputies went for Holland, had prest the Arch-dukes much therein: and certainly the United Provinces should by all rules of good Government, of their own accord have endeavoured to give the Catholicks, who were in no small numbers amongst them, satisfaction: but the hatred to the Catholick Religion prevailing on the one side with the leading Hereticks, and the suspition that this
was the more to oblige the Catholicks which were amongst them, to the Spani∣ards on the other side, it was to be believed they would not consent to any thing in favour of the Catholicks. The second chief point was that which concerned Commerce; The United Provinces would have had it absolutely free; and the King and Arch-dukes would have the Indies excepted, and desired that many in∣sufferable Taxes might be taken off, to which the Merchandizes were subject in Zealand, which were necessarily to pass from thence to Antwerp, and which every day much lessened the Traffick of that City. The other chiefest affairs consist∣ed in the exchange which was to be made of divers Towns and other places, which the one side were Masters of, in the others Country; in the adjusting of confines; in contributions which were paid in several parts by those whose habi∣tations confin'd on both sides, to free themselves from Military incursions: in the restitution of goods confiscated in the time of War, and in other the like things of Justice. They treated sometimes of one of these, sometimes of ano∣ther, but very leasurely; for great difficulties were met withall in all of them, without coming to any resolution. The point of exchange of places was in particular much argued. The United Provinces were possessed of Sluce in the Province of Flanders, together with the Island Cassant, which is but of small circuit, but commodious for the unlading of Goods; having in it some Forts. They likewise were Masters of Breda, Bergen-ap-zome, and St. Getringberg, all of them strongly scituated both by Nature and Art in Brabant; together with some lesser places, fortified likewise. On the contrary the Arch-dukes had Linghen, Groll, and Oldensel beyond the Rhine toward Friesland; Linghen is a very strong Hold, and the other two, pla∣ces of good consideration. The Arch-dukes would have desired to have chang∣ed these three places, with those which the United Provinces had in Brabant and Flanders. And because that which was possest by the United Provinces, was much the greater and better part, it was thought that the Arch-duke to make the change more qual, would willingly have quitted unto them all the rest which they were Masters of in Ghelderland, or at least the greatest part thereof. Long dispute was had upon this Article, but to no purpose; for it was not possible ever to a∣gree upon it. And with the same difficulties and prolixity they proceeded like∣wise in the other affairs. This mean while the time was expired wherein the Commissary was to return from Spain; who did not only not appear, but not any news was heard of him; whereupon the United Provinces grew very jea∣lous, and their Deputies began publickly to complain thereof. The King of France was all this while very attentive upon the proceedings in Holland; and to make the Spaniards the more jealous, he was easily perswaded upon this occasion to make a new League with the United Provinces. The Contents whereof was, That in case the peace now in Treaty should succeed, the King of France should be bound to assist the Vnited Provinces with ten thousand paid Souldiers, to make the Spaniards the better keep it; and that they on the other side should give the King of France five thousand paid foot in case the Spaniards should make war upon him. The Spanish and Flemish Ambassadors which were at Paris, quar¦relled with the King hereupon; but he justified it with divers pretences, and shewed how that the King of Spain and Arch-dukes should rather be beholding to him therein, as a business which might the easilyer facilitate the peace of Flan¦ders which was in Treaty. These artifices were not unknovvn in Spain, and it was every day better seen, that no agreement would ever be made with the Vnited Provinces, without the King of France his interposition and authority. To the end then that he might obtain his mediation upon this occasion, the King of Spain resolved though upon other pretences, to send Don Piedro de Tolledo, or of the chief Lords of Spain; into France, And this was thought then the fitter to be done, because the King of France at the-same time had sent for President Jannines to Paris; with whom advising up∣on the affairs of Holland, and the King resolving upon the forementioned things which might make him desire to see the affairs of Flanders setled; he sent him
suddenly to the Hague. But Jannines grew quickly to dispair of seeing any Peace concluded. He found the business more perplext with difficulties then before, and the mindes of both Parties more exasperated. The United Provinces could not tollerate the Spaniards slowness; for the Commissary did not appear at all, nor was there any news heard of what he had done in Spain. Whereupon their Deputies resolved to know directly the King of Spains final intention touching the Indies, which when they should not know, presently to break off the Trea∣ty; and this they prest upon the Catholick Deputies with much inconstancy, who made them this Answer: That the King desired a happy end of the begun Treaty, and that he would at last condiscend to that renunciation which they desired, and in manner as was by them propounded: But that on the otherside, he expected that in re∣quital of so important an Affair, they should forbare going to the Indies; and that moreover they should permit liberty of conscience to the Catholicks with∣in their Provinces. That the Commissary was already dispatched from the Court with this answer; and that they had already received orders to acquaint them the United Provinces therewithal. This Answer quite overthrew all hopes of Peace. The United Provinces had put on an unalterable Resolution neither to abandon the Indies, nor yet to admit the Catholick Religion amongst them. Whereupon having heard this, they in Writing did presently declare the Treaty broken, and presented the writing to the Catholick Deputies. The Treaty of Peace being thus faln to the ground, it remained to see whether they might the easilyer compass a long Truce. The King of England had all this while seemed rather averse then otherwise to the Negotiation in Holland, and having the same ends which the Kings of France had, to raise jealousie in the Spaniard, as hath been said, he also made use of the same means. In imitation of the King of France, and almost after the same man∣ner, he had at this time made also a new League with the united Provinces; and though his Authority was nothing near so great with them, yet was it such, as it might much impede the proceedings of the new Treaty for a long Truce: and he had already complained to the Spanish and Flemish Ambassadors who were resi∣dent in England, that the King of Spain had sent Don Piedro de Tolledo to Paris, putting thereby so great an esteem upon the King of France, and that he had made no manner of address at all to him. For these respects the King of Spain resolved to send likewise Don Fernando Girone who was then in Flanders, and who was one of the chiefest Commanders in his Army to the King of England; who seemed to be very well satisfied therewith; and made large promises to in∣tercede for the continuing of the negotiation in Holland, being thereunto per∣swaded by his natural addiction to peace, as also for the aforesaid Reasons. Be∣fore the Catholick Deputies departed from Holland, the Ambassadors of France and England began to set again on foot this new Treaty of a long Truce: inso∣much as the Ambassadors meeting one day, Jannines in the name of both the Kings made this insuing Proposition in the Councel of the States General: That both their Kings had alwaies considered the affairs of the United Pro∣vinces, as their own particular concernment, having maintained them all this while as such by their Councels and defended them by their Forces; but that the end of War must be Peace; That to this purpose the United Provinces had been assisted by both of them; and that both of them were therefore much troubled to see the Treaty of Peace which was begun, thus broken: and that they thinking it howsoever much better for the United Provinces to enjoy a commodious and honorable quiet, then to return to the former difficulties and dangers of war; were pleased to propound unto them by their Ambassadors joyntly, a long Truce instead of Peace. That notwithstanding in this Truce, in the first place, and before all other things, it should be declared both by the King of Spain and by the Arch-dukes, that it was made with the united Provinces as with free Pro∣vinces and States unto which they made no pretence at all; and that they should be left Free in point of their Navigation to the Indies. That both their Kings did believe that the United Provinces might be content with a Truce which was to bring with it such important advantages for them; and not onely these but
peradventure some others also. That greater difficulties were to be foared on the other part; but in case the war were to continue by reason of the Spaniards fault, the Forces of the United Provinces would be thereby the more justified, and both their Kings still the more obliged to mantain their Cause. The States General took time to advice upon the whole with their Provinces. The Ambassadors with like conformity applyed themselves to the Catholick Deputies, who having lost all hopes of Peace, did very much desire to come to some other accommodation, or composition: so they willingly listned to this new proposal of a long Truce; though they thought many difficulties would be met withal in Spain touching the form thereof: They promised the Ambassadors notwithstanding to use all the diligence they could to overcome them: and ha∣ving received assurances from the Ambassadors that they would do all good of∣fices for the continuation of the Treaty, and especially from Jannines, on whose means and authority they did chiefly relye, they at last went from the Hague, af∣ter having been eight months entertained there, and went to Brussels. The Ne∣gotiation of the Truce lying then chiefly on Jannines hand, he did all he could to perswade the United Provinces to allow of it, in the same manner as had been propounded by him and the English Ambassadors. Those Provinces seemed well inclined in general toward the Truce, though they wanted not some amongst them who would have had the King of Spain and the Arch-dukes make the same renunciation in the Treaty of Truce as they pretended unto in that of Peace; but the wiser and more moderate men amongst them considered that this would be too unjust a pretention, due regard being had to the difference between a Truce and a Peace. This difficulty proceeded chiefly from Zealand, and was Fauter'd by Count Maurice by reason of his abovesaid power in that Province, and the almost absolute dependency which Maldereo the particular Deputy of Zealand had upon him. Maldereo had been a menual servant of the late Prince of Orange, and to say truth, the Interest of Zealand did accord with Count Mau∣rice his particular ends; for the Traffick and wealth of that Province was greatly increased by the war; the choice Marriners who had served and did as yet serve in the voyages to the Indies, were likewise Zealanders; and next unto Hol∣land, certainly this was the chiefest and most considerable of all the United Pro∣vinces. The same difficulties, out of the same reasons were insisted upon by the City of Amsterdam in Holland; but it was thought, that at last the rest of that Pro∣vince would prevail over the particular opposition of that City, in a favourable acceptation of the Truce; which Zealand did still pertenaciously resist: And Maldereo very zealous in the cause, endeavoured to make those words suspected, wherein the King of Spain and the Arch-dukes were to denounce the United Provinces to be Free-States, in form abovesaid: Whereupon one day that this Clause was treated on, he with great fervency broke forth into these words: Are we Free-men, or still Subjects? If we be Free-men, why ought we not to be publickly acknowledged for such? Shall it depend upon the Spaniards to allow us what sort of liberty they please, now that they cannot impose that slavery upon us which they would? To wit, a liberty more servile then our for∣mer servitude; since it must depend upon the interpretation of their own words? Do not we know what interpretation they have already given to those words? Do not we know that they take them in such a sense as doth not take from them any pretended right to our Provinces? At this rate we shall get no∣thing more by this long Truce, then what was had in the bare suspension of Arms: And yet this Truce shall rather look like a Peace; and it may so fall out, as by often prolongation, it may at last be insensibly turned into the nature of a Peace. Then, as in the Treaty of Peace we did pretend in the first place, That that absolute abnegation should be made by the King of Spain, and the Arch-dukes which is now Treated of; so ought we still to pretend unto it, and in that form which may clearlyest declare our Provinces to be Free and So∣veraign. Shall not he ackowledge them, when all the world Treats with them as such? To what corner of the Earth, or of the Sea is it that the Fame of their
Liberty together with the Fame of their Forces is not flown? Let the Spaniards then do the like, or let all Treaties be broken. That necessity which enforceth them to come to agreement with us, will likewise compel them to do it in this manner. So since we would make no greater advantage of this their necessity, with our swords in our hands, as we ought, and peradventure might have done we shall at least come by it by this contestation of Treaty, in such manner as the victory of words can most promise. These reasons against the above named clause, and many others against the Truce in general, were exagerated by Maldereo, or rather through his mouth by Count Maurice, who laboured by all other means, and used all his industry that this Treaty of Truce might prove vain, as the other of peace had done; the same things were scattered abroad by his followers, giving out many printed papers to this purpose, not owned by any: they seemed to distrust the forraign Am∣bassadors, and it was whispered that though the two Kings advised to Truce yet for their own self-interest they would not totally forbare assisting the United Provinces, though contrary to their Councel, they should reassume their Arms; that howsoever it was requisit to return to Arms, since it was undoubtedly to be believed, that the present necessities being over, the Spaniards would no longer observe the Truce. That in the mean while, the people of the United Provinces, cheated by the abusive names of Peace and Quiet, would lose their former vi∣gour and constancy? That they would hardly be brought to contribute those monies afterwards, for the war, which at first they did so willingly part withal: And that all these would be seeds to produce pernicious discords amongst their Provinces. Lastly, they concluded, That though the Spaniards should observe the Truce, it would be requisite howsoever to keep their Frontiers still well look'd unto; The which being so many, and the jealousies on all sides being now like∣ly to prove so great, the expence in time of Truce would be well nigh as much as in the time of war How much better would it then be to continue the war, and not to lose the present occasions which did all of them so smile upon them, and frown upon the Spaniards? Affairs leaning already towards discord, and the Zealander Deputies threatned openly a separation from the rest of the Provinces, if contrary to the form of common Government, the rest would resolve upon Truce without the particular consent of Zealand. Jannines loitred now no more, but judging this a fitting occasion to shew his experience, and force of his advi∣ces, one day when their contestations grew highest, 'tis said he spoke to the De∣puties of the United Provinces in this manner. Neither did my King ever think (worthy Deputies) that so long contesta∣tions could have had place here amongst you in so great an Union; nor did I ever beleeve that such distrust were to be found here, as some of you seem to have of my behaviour. I will speak of mine own, leaving the English Ambassa∣dors either to justifie themselvs, or make their just complaints. For what concerns my endeavours, I will onely say, Execution is the onely share I have therein. So as to mistrust them, will be much more to offend my King then me. And to say truth, what greater injury can he receive then this? He having alwaies shewed himself so partial to your Commonwealth, as he hath almost never made any difference between the interests of his own Kingdom, & of your Com∣mon-wealth. When he was hardly yet come unto the Crown, and had hard∣ly, after so many Domestick and Forraign oppositions, setled his own affairs, the first thing he did was to assist your Provinces. From that time to this he hath not been wanting in aiding you with Monies, Men, and Counsel; and to make your Cause appear the juster in all other respects, by his owning it. Doubtlesly he pretended to assist a just Cause: but the justest actions do not al∣waies prove the most useful. Nay these of yours might have been thought the more dangerous, by how much their power is the greater, who take themselves to be offended. The liberty of your Provinces may be said to have sayled into the Haven, chiefly by the sayles of his favour. And because we cannot now establish it upon the Anchor of Peace, my King endeavours at least to fasten it upon the Anchor of Truce, which may prove as advantagious to you. Let us then consider whether such an Agreement may be truly advantagious to your
Affairs: Which when it shall be known, as I hope it will, sinister discourses will then soon cease; which if they do not, it will appear at least, That they proceede from particular passions, vailed over with the semblance of Publick good. The business is then touching the making of a long Truce; and whe∣ther the chiefest endeavour ought to be, That your Provinces should be therein clearly acknowledged to be Free. We Ambassadors think the clause by us pro∣pounded sufficient to that purpose: That the King of Spain and Arch-dukes should declare that they made Truce with your Provinces as with Free Provinces and States, unto which they make no pretence at all. But there are some amongst you who differ from us in opinion, thinking it to be too generical and dubious; and who would have the King of Spain and Arch-dukes make the same absolute renunciation now, as was pretended unto when there was a Treaty of Peace. I cannot notwithstanding part from my first opinion; for it appears to me that to boot, with the difference that there is between a Peace and a Truce, this Declaration may be thought to make more for your liberty then the other. Tell me I pray you! Have not you alwaies declared, That you have taken up Arms against your Prince, infored thereto by necessity? And that the war on your side could not be more just, because it could not be more necessary? And by the same reason have you not set your Provinces at Liberty by your own Autho∣rity? Then if you pretend upon so good grounds to be free, what need you now that the King of Spain and the Arch-Dukes should make these renoun∣cings? Do not you see, that such like renouncings of right would presuppose it to be more manifest on their behalf? And that in such a case much more should be confest by you, then granted by them? Do not you know that they can grant nothing to the prejudice of their successors? Kingdoms cannot otherwise make any contract, nor Kings make any alienable part therein? And since they give the laws to others, they must likewise in this behalf receive it from their Crowns. How much better is it then that your Provinces be declared by the King and the Arch-dukes to be free by a general clause, and that the agreement which is now spoken of, may follow with this presupposition of your Liberty, without making it doubtful by any other kinde of clauses, instead of making it more clear? This form is not onely sufficient, but best. And if it be not suf∣ficient with the contrary party; think you that if the Spaniards would not ob∣serve the Truce for some other end of theirs, they would ask your opinion first before they would break it? And that they would first argue whether they have any right over you, or no? This is the custom of private suites, not of pub∣lick Causes; The controversies whereof are at last reduced to Field Forces, where hee that overcomes hath the right, and no account of the victory is given. So as you need not care what interpretation the contrary party will give to those words wherewith they do acknowledge you to be free. That which im∣ports you, is, That your people hold themselves to be confest to be free by those words, & not to be made so. And that the Princes your friends understand them in the same sense. So as if it be needful to fall to arms again, your peo∣ple may be more ready then ever to reassume them, and that your Friends may shew themselves more disposed then ever to favour your cause. But it is too well known how much more easie it is to use constancy in troubles, then mode∣ration in prosperity. Tell me I beseech you, those who are the most zealous a∣mongst you, when did they ever think that the King of Spain and the Arch-dukes were to condiscend to Treaties so advantagious for your Provinces? And will you lose this so happy occasion? Shall vain shadows prevail more with you then essential reasons? Shall seditious Papers which are every where scattered abroad, be of more validity amongst you then the sincere and wise Counsels of two Kings who are so affectionate unto your Cause. Now is the time then to re∣solve upon, and to embrace this agreement which is now offered. Do you see how the Swissers have fared? Take them for your example. And by the simi∣litude of their affairs and yours, hope for the like success. The Swissers took up arms at first against their Princes, not being able longer to undergo the grie∣vances of their Government: nor were they above two or three Cantons at
the beginning, and those the weakest amongst them; but their People gasping for Liberty, and defending it with equal vigor both of body and minde, they made invincible oppositions to their Enemies Forces; till being unconquerable by the Forces of the other Cantons, and the strength of their own Alpester situation, their Enemies despaired of ever subjugating them. At last they cea∣sed fighting, and from tottering agreements they came to a firm and continual peace. And who will now dispute the Swissers Liberty? Why may not your Provinces hope for the like success? The severity of the Spanish Government made Holland and Zealand take up arms at first; their People valiantly with∣stood their Enemies: The Sea, Rivers, and the strength of their Natural situ∣ation fought for them; your other Provinces came in afterwards unto them; and all made such resistance to the contrary Forces, as there is not any example to be had of so long a war. The successes have been various; but at last they have proved so propitious to you, as a Treaty of accommodation was sought for by your Enemies; and now we are upon the point of a long Truce: which if it succeed, will doubtlesly prove very advantageous for your affairs, and will easily be hereafter renewed upon the same advantages, or turned into a perpe∣tual peace, which may prove yet better for you. That which I have hitherto said, seems to me to be sufficiently clear. In fine, there will be no doubt of your liberty by this Clause, which is pro∣pounded: Nor is it less to be doubted that a Truce will be more advantageous for you, then unnecessitated to subject your selves to the uncertain events of a new war. Fortune is generally seen to have too great a sway in war; and that mocking at humane arrogancy, she too often makes the more powerful give way unto the weaker; and losses insue where victories were expected. To wit∣ness which, and pass by so many other examples; What more memorable presi∣dent can you have thereof, then what so lately befell here before your own eyes in the Arch-dukes own person at Newport? Where instead of being Victor, as it was assuredly hoped, he was overcom, wounded, and very near being taken prisoner. By means of this Truce you will escape so many and so-dangerous uncertain∣ties of war; you will in the interim establish your Government the better; you will ease your people of their disbursements; you will continue your former Traffick into the Indies; and you shall finally see an end of those hateful titles of Perfidiousness and Rebellion, which hath hitherto been given by a great ma∣ny in the world to your motions and proceedings in arms. And who can doubt but that your Provinces will hereafter willingly concur in such expences as shall be needful, since they will be so easie in comparison of what they have been? And so much the more willingly, by how much men do more naturally desire to enjoy quiet, then to live in troubles: and by how much liberty is the sweeter, after having made tryal of servitude. And surely it is to be believed that those to whom the Government of your people shall be committed, will use the same care and vigilancy in the admini∣stration of publick affairs in time of Truce, as they have prudently done hither∣to in the time of war: their chiefest care will be still more to establish the pre∣sent concord, which is the soul which gives life unto the body, and the heart which maintains it: and hence proceeds that miraculous temper which of ma∣ny makes but one, and of but one many; but yet such as whether they be seve∣red or conjoyned do alwaies conspire to the same end. Thus your affairs being well ordered within your selves, you shall have little need to fear forraign dan∣gers: and thus your Truce being at last turned into peace (as 'tis to be hoped it will be) my King shall see the same success in your affairs as he hath seen in his own, and whereby his Kingdom is now made happy: to wit, after war peace, after troubles rest, and after the sacking and burning of Towns, and all the o∣ther miseries of Arms, the commodity, security, and felicity of quiet and peace. The Majesty and presence of the King of France himself, seemed to break forth in the President Jannines countenance and words. He afterwards gave what he had spoken more fully in writing, to the end that the People might come
to the better knowledge thereof, and that they might the easilyer effect the a∣greement which was in Treaty. The like offices were done by the Ambassadors of England, and to overcome fully the pertenacy of the Zealanders, it was resolved that Deputies should be sent into Zealand in the name of the six other Provinces, to induce that Province to conformity with the rest: which after muc difficulty was at last effected, and all of them concurring now in the same resolution; the Ambassadors began again to labour to overcome the difficulties in dispute. Continual corresponden∣cy was had by Letters between Jannines and Richardotto; so as the Negotiation of what was needful past between them; but the King of Spain needed no less labouring to be brought to give way to the Truce: news was sent to the King of Spain of the Proposition made by the Ambassadors of France and England, and of the new Negotiation introduced by their means. The King would have been well enough pleased with the Truce, had it been according to usual form, and all things left in the same terms on both sides, as they were at present; but to declare the United Provinces to be altogether free, and to suffer them in express words to traffick in the Indies, seemed to put too great a difference between the present Treaty, and ordinary Truces: yet 'twas seen that 'twas impossible ever to come to any accomodation without this Decla∣ration of Liberty; and that if the United Provinces had stood so absolutely up∣on it before they would be brought to a bare suspention of Arms for a few months, they would now be much more resolute in it, in a Truce which was to endure for many years. The Arch-dukes who saw the difficulties and dangers of the war in case it should be continued, at a nearer distance, were easilyer induced to give way to the Proposal made by the Ambassadors; and Jannines both by word of mouth, and by Letters, had endeavoured to perswade the Catholick Deputies, that to declare they made Truce with the United Provinces as with free Provinces and States unto which the King and the Arch-dukes made no pretence at all, did not any waies prejudice, the right which the King or Arch-dukes might pretend to have over them. He had shewed how that it was a general Declaration; that the word (as) bore with it a sense of similitude, and not of propriety: That in the declaring of one mans being friends with another, 'twas never said I hold him as a friend; that the adding in the last words, not to pretend unto a∣ny thing, had reference to the ambiguity of the former words: And finally that such a Declaration could not admit of any interpretation, save onely du∣ring the time of the Truce. That then the King and the Arch-dukes ought to be content to make it; since it was involved in words which might satisfie both parties. First, The unskilful multitude of the Vnited Provinces, for the outward ap∣pearance of their pretended Liberty; then the King and the Arch-dukes, for the true substance which was retained in them of leaving their former right still unhurt. Then opening himself more freely, Jannines said; My King in such a case, would not make any difficulty in granting this Declaration; for if the Vnited Provinces when they shall betake themselves to Arms shall not have bet∣ter Canons and Muskets; words and interpretations will avail them but little. In this manner, and by these wary and wily waies Jannines as a good mediator, endeavoured to draw both sides to a Truce; to which the Arch-dukes were easily perswaded, and endeavoured to bring the King to be so likewise; shewing that by this, neither they nor the King should do any thing more, then what was yeilded unto at the first suspension of Arms; much repugnancy did notwithstan∣ding appear in the King. 'Twas thought in Spain that the Clause wherewith the Vnited Provinces were to be declared Free States, though it were limited, vvould generally be interpreted in savour of their Liberty; and that vvhen they should have got their desires in that behalf, the King vvould not obtain leave for the ex∣ercise of the Catholick Religion in their Country, vvhich he vvas resolved to have by vvay of interchange; and moreover if the Article concerning the Indies should be condiscended unto, how much would the King be thereby damnified?
How much reputation would he thereby lose? To which difficulties the Arch∣dukes replyed, shewing that when the King resolved to have the abovesaid requi∣tal, 'twas onely to be understood, if the peace should be concluded; and that the King and the Arch-dukes having absolutely renounced all their right, the Vnited Provinces were absolutely free; that the present Negotiation of the Truce did differ very much; by which the King nor the Arch-dukes could not lose any piece of their former right; that it was not to be doubted but that a clause so ge∣neral and so limitated, would be interpreted rather in favour of them, then of the contrary party. That the Ambassadors themselves thought so; as also di∣vers of the Inhabitants of the Vnited Provinces, who were against the Truce, as that which would be no whit more advantagious for them, then was the bare suspension of Arms. And as for the point of the Indies, they seemed to have hopes to end it so, as it should be no considerable prejudice to the King. These reasons were not taken as fully satisfactory in Spain; but on the other side the King did very much desire the Truce, and that the so great, and so un∣necessary expences of Flanders should cease. The Duke of Lerma was then in great authority with the King; and having gotten the sole power over the King by such arts as were available in peace, he was unwilling to share it with them who might gain it by such means as war affords: which made him from the very be∣ginning very earnest in endeavouring the Negotiation: and he did now no less labour that it might come to some good event of agreement; the same desires were known to be in the Arch-duke; who therefore resolved to send his Con∣fessor to the Court of Spain, to answer all the difficulties which were insisted on in Spain, the which was thought necessary also to put an end to so long a Ne∣gotiation, wherein above two years had already been spent; which had so tyred the two mediating Kings, as they began already to protest that they would med∣dle no more therein, if it were not all the more speedily ended. Father Inico di Brazuela, of the Order of the Dominicans, was the Arch-dukes Confessor, a very learned and upright man, and one who had been long experienced in the affairs of Flanders: so as men hoped well of him, and of his fidelity, that he might reconcile affairs with the King and State-Officers, he being a Spaniard, a Votary, and of a very noble Family, and commendable life. He was particularly to take all scruples from the King in the point of pre∣tending by way of interchange the exercise of the Catholick profession in the time of Truce, whereof he was to press the necessity even for the cause of Reli∣gion it self. By representing, That if they should return to Arms again, mani∣fest hazard would yet be run of losing more then formerly on the King and the Arch-Dukes behalf in Flanders, and consequenly of quite losing the Catholick Religion in the yet obedient Provinces, instead of regaining it in those that were revolted. The business was all this while put on by the two Kings Ambassadors: but because to Negotiate by way of Letters was long and tedious, the Ambassa∣dors minded the Catholick Deputies who had been in Holland, that it would make more for the purpose to have the meeting in Antwerp, to end those diffi∣culties which yet remained concerning the Negotiation. This Proposition was willingly listned unto by the Arch-dukes; whereupon the Ambassadors, and the Catholick Deputies, met in Antwerp in the beginning of February 1609. The greatest difficulty was touching the point of the Indies. The Ambassadors had alwaies assured the Vnited Provinces, that in the Truce they should be per∣mitted to Traffick thither; and they therefore desired that that Article might be laid down in clear and express words. On the contrary the Catholick Deputies desired that if it should be impossible to come to a Truce without condiscending to that point, it might at least be understood by tacit circumlocutions, then by nominating the Indies expresly. They desired also howsoever, that the Vnited Provinces should forbear from coming into or from trafficking in those parts of the Indies, which were already under the Crown of Spain. At last after much arguing, this point was agreed upon, and was couched in such tearms as both the Vnited Provinces, and the Catholick Deputies were satisfied therewith: for the name of the Indies was left out, and the said Provinces were forbidden entring into the Kings Countries in
those parts: And Richardotto had wont afterwards to say, that this Article was so obscure, as he himself did not understand it: much disputation was likewise had upon the Article of Contributions: 'twas said that the United Provinces re∣ceived every year 300000 Crowns of Contribution money, which was a great help to their expences. The Arch-dukes did not receive near so much; but be∣cause these monies were all raised by hostility, it was thought a thing too repug∣nant to the publick tranquility which was endeavoured, that this kinde of Ho∣stile proceedings should be continued in times of quiet: so as the United Pro∣vinces were at last perswaded, that all contributions of both sides should be laid down. On the contrary 'twas necessary to yeild to the pretention moved by them, that the precincts which did appertain to such Towns as were enjoyed both on this and on that side, should be restored to the said Towns. Touching which point little or nothing returned to the Arch-dukes hands, whereas large boun∣deurs were restored to the Towns of Breda, and Berghenapzone, together with some others in Brabant which were in the possession of the United Provinces? Yet the Arch-dukes did so far prevail, and my endeavours were also so earnest therein as the exercise of the Catholick Religion onely was left in those precincts, as it was before. To the which the united Provinces obliged themselves apart, being promised by Jannines and Rossi his Collegue, who gave it them under their hands, that the King of France should oblige himself to see it performed. Touching the point of exchange of Towns, there was no means of accommoda∣tion therein to be found; so as it was resolved that each party should still enjoy what they did possess at the present: nor would the Vnited Provinces ever suffer themselves to be perswaded in the point of taking away the Taxes and other im∣pediments to which those vessels were lyable in Zealand which passed through the Scheld to come to Antwerp, whereby that City was much indamaged, as hath been said. This business was refer'd to be propounded and examined in a friendly manner after the Truce should be concluded. And the Arch-dukes ho∣ped by the benefit of the Truce, the better to accommodate their own Ports in Flanders, into which much merchandize was to be brought, which in time of war went necessarily into Holland and Zealand; because their Havens were continu∣ally block'd up by many of the Vnited Provinces men of war. These were the chief points on which the Ambassadors of France and Eng∣land treated with the Marquess Spinola, and the other Catholick Deputies in Antwerp: the Catholick Deputies endeavouring to proceed as slowl as might be, that the Arch-dukes Confessor might have time to Negotiate in Spain, and to send away the resolution which was expected from thence; which not long af∣ter came; and was the same in sum which the Arch-dukes had desired, and the Confessor by the reasons alledged by him, had perswaded the King unto: great consultations were had notwithstanding before this determination, both in the Councel of State, and amongst the gravest and learnedst Ecclesiasticks of Spain: for the King would be fully satisfied in all those affairs which were to be conside∣red in so important a business, before he would suffer it to be brought to a con∣clusion. The Confessor himself returned soon after; so as the affairs being fitted by all parties for an agreement, the two Kings Ambassadors, who after the Negotiati∣on at Antwerp, were gone to give an account of the whole business to the Vnited Provinces, thought it fitting to return again to that City, and to bring thither the same Deputies of the Vnited Provinces, who were first imployed in Negoti∣ating the business in Holland; which was approved of by the Arch-dukes, and at the same time the Catholick Deputies returned thither likewise, amongst which was Commissary Neyen, who was then returned from Spain. The Vnited Provinces thought this to be the business of highest nature, and of greatest importancy which had befaln them since their withdrawing them∣selves from the obedience of the Crown of Spain, and therefore it was judged necessary that it should be concluded by the Authority of the whole body of the great Assembly representing the general Vnion; and that the Assembly should consist of as many Deputies, as could be gathered together upon so great an Oc∣currency. The Town of Berghenapzone was made choice of to this purpose,
situated not many leagues from Antwerp. Here the great Assembly met, and 'twas said that the Deputies were eight hundred in number. The Deputies of both sides, together with the two Kings Ambassadors, met every day in Antwerp, in the publick Palace of that City. From whence whatsoever past from time to time was sent to Brussels to the Arch-dukes, and to the Vnited Provinces in Ber∣ghenapzone, and resolutions were suddenly taken. When all points were then adjusted, after so many and so long obstructions, a Truce for twelve years was esta∣blished and concluded on the ninth of April in the year of our Lord one thousand six hundred and nine, betwixt both parties: The Articles were eight and thirty. In the first it was declared, that the Arch-dukes made Truce with the Vnited Pro∣vinces as with Free-States and Provinces, unto which they did not make any pre∣tence at all; and they obliged themselves that the King of Spain should ratifie the same Declaration, together with all the rest, which was afterwards done in such manner as was requisit. The other chief Articles contained the affairs of chiefest importance, as hath been shewed above; and in the rest divers resoluti∣ons were contained, touching the affairs of Justice; and concerning rather par∣ticular then publick interests. Thus did this Negotiation of Flanders end at last; the issue whereof was so long expected throughout all Europe. And truly at this Truce, as if it had been at an universal Quiet, all Europe seemed to rejoyce, which had seen for so many years, and amidst so many fatal and dreadful spectacles, the blood of all her Nations run upon the Theatre of Flanders. FINIS.
A TABLE Of the most remarkable things contained in this FIRST PART. A ABBOTS monasticall in Flanders complain against the new erection of Bishopricks 11 Adolphus, Oranges brother, slain in Battail 57 Alcmar in the Rebels hands, 109. Besieg∣ed by the Kings party ibid. Alexander Farnese prince of Parma, in Flanders, upon oceasion of his marri∣age with Mary princess of Portugall 21 Alst in Flanders sezed by the Mutiners 141 Amsterdam, 96. A City very faithfull to the Church and the King, ibid. Infe∣sted with the other Towns of Holland ib. Again molested by them 10 Anne daughter to Maurice Elector of Saxony, 19. Married to Orange, ibid. Anne the Archdutchess daughter to Maximilian the Emperor, married to the Catholick King, 71. Is accompa∣nied by the Archdukes Albertus and Wenceslaus her brothers ibid. Anthony Stralen a principall man in Antwerp, 46. Is executed 58 Antonio Pittore endeavours to seize up∣on a passage, and hinder victuals from being brought to the Kings Camp, 102 Is routed, slain, and his head thrown in∣to Harlem by the Spaniards, ibid. Antwerp is threatned to be sacked by the Mutiners 122. Contributes a sum of money to satisfie them, ibid. Taken by the Kings men, 14. Sackt, 147. The Commissioners from the Emperour, from France and England meet there, 177 Archduke Albertus, and his praises 71 Archduke Matthias, 162. passes secretly into Flanders, ibid. Made Governour of the Countrie by the Councel of State 163 Archbishop of Colen in the Kings Army 86 B THe Baron of Battembourgh seeks to relieve Harlem, 105. Is routed and slain 10 The Baron of Erberstein makes a secret agreement with the States, 142. Re∣ceives their men into Antwerp, 143 Drown'd in the Scheld 147 Bartholomeo Campi, Ingineer to the Kings Camp, 99. He is slain, 105 The Battel of Friesland, 59. Of Gemin∣ghen, 62. Between the Kings men, and the Hugonots of France, near Mons, 8. By Sea in the Lake of Leyden, 104. By sea in the Gulf of Zuyderzee, 110. In the Scheld between the Kings Forces and the Rebels 113 The Battel of Mooch, 117. Of Geblours 18 Berghen-ap-zome and its scituation 76 Bernardino di Mendozza sent into Spain by the Duke of Alva, 103. He wrote of the Wars of Flanders, 104 Was sent by the Commendador to Mastrick, 115 Breda, a Town belonging to Orange, 23 What passed among the Confederates there ibid. Brederode makes himself Head of the Pe∣titioners, 24. His Oration to his Com∣panions, ibid. He presents a Petition to the Lady Regent, 26. raiseth sedition, 39 goes into Holland to set up Tu∣mults there, ibid. Seconds Orange in e∣very thing, ibid. Dies miserably, ibid. Brill taken by the Geuses, 73. Fortified by Lumay 74 Buren, a Town confining upon Holland,
taken and sackt by the Kings Party 132 The House of Burgundy, soveraigne over all the Provinces, p. 1 C CAmbray raised to an Arch-bishop∣rick, 9 Captain Plumart, 91 His Proposition to Avila and Mandragone, ibid. He finds the Food by which they were to go for the relief of Tergoes ibid. Capitulations between the Duke of Aian∣son and the States 172 Charls the fifth, son to Philip the first, 2 He peaceably enjoys Flanders, ibid. Born in Gant, 3. His favours to the Flemings, ib. How much he was loved and reverenced among them, 4. A com∣parison between his nature and that of his son Philip ib. The Castle of Gant besieged by the States 145. It is surrendred 148 The Castle of Antwerp besieged by the States, 145. It is aemolished, 147 The Castle of Namours seized by Don John, 159. The Catholicks and hereticks in Ant∣werpt come to an agreement 39 Christophoro Mandragone, Camp-Ma∣ster; goes to the relief of ter-Goes, 91 Enters the Town and succours it, 93 Is Commander at the defence of Mid∣dleburgh, 108. Sends very earnestly for relief, 112. Yields up the place, 114 Seizeth upon the Isle of Finaert, 133 Wades through the Channel of Scow∣en under Ziriczee 136 Coligni Admiral of France, Head of the Hugonot Faction, 83. His negotiations with Orange ib. The Commendador Maggiore of Castile sent to govern the Low-Countries, comes to Brussels, 111. Prepares two Fleets for the succour of Middleburgh 113. Sees one of them routed, ib. Much troubled at the new expedition of Count Lodovick, 115. Goeth over to Antwerp to appease the Mutiners, 122. His de∣signes upon Holland and Zealand, 132 His perplexity about attempting the Ford from Filisland, 134. He dies, 139 His Character ib. A Confederacy in Flanders, which they call a Covenant, 22. Subscribed by a great number of the Nobility ib. The Confederates come to Brussels 24 They meet in the Count of Colem∣burghs Hourse, ib. Admitted to the Lady Regents audience, 26. They take upon them the name of Gueses, 27. many of them goe in one Livery, ib. their Li∣centious actions 28 The Conference in Breda for a Treaty of peace in Flanders 129. It is dissol∣ved without coming to any conclusion, 131 The Councel of State and its authority with the Lady Regent, 9. What their o∣pinions were concerning her designe for taking up of Arms, 34. It enters upon the Government, after the Commenda∣dors death, 139. Prepares for War a∣gainst the Spaniards, 141. Much daunted at the coming of Don John, 150. They send Commissioners into Holland and Zealand, 155. Their jea∣lousies of Don John, 157. They storm at his surprizing of the Castle of Na∣mours, 159. Writes to the King a Let∣ter against Don John, 160. Their pra∣ctizes with foreign Princes, 16. Pub∣lishes an Edict against Don John, 165 Declares, it will not acknowledge him for Governour, 170. Dispatcheth away a very solemn Ambassy to the Duke of Alanson 173 A Consultation held in Brussels upon mat∣ters of religion 21. what is resolv'd upon it, ib By Frederick di Toledo, whether the siege of Harlem should be prosecu∣ted or given over, 103. by d' Alva, whether the Kings Forces should be imployed upon the siege of Mons, or a∣gainst Holland and Zealand, 81. In Spain whether the King should go in∣to Flanders, 41. In Spain about the in∣novations in the Low Countries. 164 Count Egmont a Flemming born, 5 His nature and Customes, ibid. Gover∣nour of the particular Province of Flanders, and of Artois 12 Goes over into Spain, 20. Returns well satisfied by the King 21. Is committed to pri∣son, 46. Is condemned 58 Count Horn, Admiral of Flanders, 12 Inraged against Granvel, ib. His opi∣nion that the people ought to be stirred up to innovations, 36. Is attached, 46. Is sentenced to death 58 Count Peter Ernestus Mansfield raises men to secure the Lady Regent in Brus∣sels, 3. Offers to pacify the Spanish mu∣ciners, but in vain, 141. His opinion concerning Don Johns retreat to Na∣mours 158 Count d'Aremberg, 34. Sent against Lo∣dovick of Nassaw, 56. Cannot keep the
Spaniaerds from falling on, ib. Is slaine, 57 Count di Bossu enters the Lake of Ley∣den with a Fleet, 104. Overcomes the Harlemers there, ib. Assaults the ene∣mies Fleet in the Gulfe of Zuiderzee 110. Is routed and taken prisoner 111 Count of Swarzenburgh Ambassador to Flanders from Maximilian the Empe∣rour 129. His negotiations with O∣range, and after with the Commissio∣ners at the Conference in Breda, ib. He returns into Germany 131 Count di Barlemont imprisoned by order from the States, 143. His councel to Don John concerning his retreat to Namours 157 Correspondencies of Orange, and his brother Lodowick in Germany, 35 Their designes in Holland and Zea∣land ib. D THe Deputies for the States General relate to the Provinces the Duke of Alva's Proposition, who make great complaints against it, 68. What con∣ditions the Kings Deputies offered in the Conference at Breda, ib. What an∣swers they had from the Rebels 69 A Description of the havock made in Churches by the heriticks in Antwerp 30. Of Mastrich, 55. Of Friesland, 56 Of the Battel of Friesland, 57. Of Ra∣remond and Liege, 65. Of the Battel of Ceminghen, 62. Of the Duke of Al∣vas Statue 71. Of Holland and Zea∣land, 73. Of Mon., 83. Of Zuidt Be∣verland, 90. Of Ter. Goes, 91. Of Har∣lem, 98. Of Alcmar, 109 Of the sea∣fight in the Gulf of Zuidt-Beverland, 110. Of the Battel of Mooch, 118. Of Leyden, 124. Of the Castle of Antwerp 145. Of the taking and sacking of Ant∣werp, 147. Of the City of Namours, 158. Of the Battel of Geblours, 168 Disorders caused by the hereticks in Ant∣werp 31 Don John of Austria comes into Flan∣ders unexpected, 150. His personal qua∣lities, ib. What Orders he had from the King at his parting, ib. He gives the Councel of State notice of his arrival, ib. His Declaration that he will send the Spaniards out of Flanders, 151. He sends out the souldiers of Foreigne parts. 153. His enlrance into Brussels, ib. he endeavours to draw the Provinces of Holland and Zealand to some ac∣commodation, ib. His endustry to wea∣ken Orange his Faction, 154. The peo∣ple in Brussels shew themselves very a∣verse to him, 155. Designes upon his person, ib. He adviseth with the Counts of Mansfield and Barlemont, ib He re∣moves to Namours, 159. He makes sure the Castle there, ib. His demands to the States concerning his return to Brussels, ib. He writes to the King in justification of his proceedings, 160 Designes of his on foot in divers places 161. He gets the day at Geblours, 168. Takes Nivelle, 169. And after that Philippeville, 169. Falls upon the Flemish Camp, 174. Quarters his Army in a place of great strength near to Namur, ib. He dies, 177. His Cha∣racter, 178 Duke of Alva, design'd by the Catholick King for Flanders, 45. He comes into Italy: the number and qualities of the men he brings with him into Flanders 46. He is made absolute Governor there∣of, 48. He frames a new Councel for ex∣amination of the late Tumults, ib. His rigorous proceedings, ib. He secures Ru∣remond, 50. Is much troubled at the defeat in Friesland, 58. His Maximes in War, 59. The order of his march a∣gainst Count Lodovick, 61 He comes off Conqueror, 62. His preparations a∣gainst Orange, 64. He gets the better of him, 66. He returns to Brussels in Triumph, ib. Laies new Impositions up∣on Flanders, 67. Erects his own Statue in the Citadel of Antwerp, 71. Besie∣ges Mons, 81. His memorable sayings, 86. He hinders Orange from suc∣couring Mons, 87 And drives him the second time out of the Country, 88. He resolves to relieve Ter-Goes, 91. His resolution for continuing the siege of Harlem, 103. He relieves Middleburg 107. Composes the Mutiny at Harlem, 108. Goes to Amsterdam, 110. Re∣turns to Brussels, 111. Gets leave to quit the Government of Flanders, ib. And departs out of those Countries, ib. D. of Alanson prepares to enter Flanders 172. He comes in with his Army, 177. The Dutchess of Parma Lady Re∣gent of Flanders, 9. Her answer to the discourse the King had with her, 10 Displeased at the actions done in con∣tempt of Granvel, 14. Sends Egmont over into Spain, 20. Publisheth a new Edict in behalf of Religion, 22. Is per∣swaded
to take up Arms, 23. Her an∣swer to the licentious Petition of the Covenanters, 27. She is troubled at their meeting in Geertruydenberk, 30. Thinks her self not safe in Brussels 31. Declares in favour of the Petitio∣ners, that all use of the Inquisition should be taken away, ib. Takes up Arms against Valentiennes, 37. Seeks to compose matters in Antwerp, 39 Defeats the seditious there, and settles the Catholick Army, ib. Her solemn entrance into that City, 40. Not privy to the imprisonment of Egmont and Horne, 47. Displeased at it, she craves leave of the King to quit the Govern∣ment, ib. She departs with much sorrow to the Flemmings, ib. Her praises ib. E THe Ecclesiasticks in Flanders do not well like the Kings courses 5 Edicts published in Flanders by Charls the fifth, Emperor, 4. Confirmed after∣wards by Philip the second, ib. Those of the King in favour of the Councel of Trent, meet with great difficulties a∣mongst the Flemings, 18. An Edict of Rebellion against the Spaniards, 143 An Elect, a head set up by the Mutiners 120. Wherein his Office consisted ib. How strictly every Decree of his was observed ib. Elizabeth Queen of England, 6. Gives courteous entertainment to the Low-Countrey fugitives, 50. Is troubled at d'Alva's prosperity, 66. Causeth a great sum of the King of Spains money to be stopped in England, 67: Secretly che∣rishes Lumay, a Low-Country runa∣gate, 73. Sends him souldiers to the Brill, 89. Will not openly discover her self an enemy to the King of Spain 105. Justifies her self in Spain for con∣cluding a League with the States in Flanders 165 F THe Fight between d' Alva and O∣range, 88. Between d' Alvas Camp and Count Lodovicks, 62. Between the Kings men and those that were besieg∣ed in Mons, 84. In the Lake of Leyden between the Kings men and the Rebels 104. Between the Spaniards and the States men near Lovain 144 Frederick of Toledo, the Duke of Alva's son commands the foot, 64. Endeavours by the Amsterdammers mediation to bring over the Harlemers to the Kings side, 97. Grows much inraged with those of Harlem, and besiegeth the Town, 98. He routs Lumay, 99 Reinforces the siege of Harlem, 103 Will not receive the Town upon Arti∣cles 106 The Flemings hold King Philip too much Hispanioliz'd, 4. They speak against the Inquisition, 8. They shew much content∣ment at the departure of Granvelle▪ 17 Their extream sorrow for Egmonts death, 58. Their bitter complaints a∣gainst d'Alva for the new Impositions, 68 Routed at Vicenac, 144. They draw up a new form of agreement among themselves 151 The Flemish hereticks demand liberty of conscience 175 Flushing, and the Haven thereof, 75 G GAnt infected with heresie, 32. Those of that Town take up Arms against the Walloons 176 Ter-Goes, 89. Besieged by the hereticks ib. The Kings men endeavour to re∣lieve it 91 Granvel, his qualities and customs, 11 Exhorts the execution of Edicts a∣gainst hereticks, 14. Fears his own per∣son, and gets leave to depart 16 H HArlem, one of the chief Cities in Holland, made a Bishoprick, 97 Treats to side with the King, but sud∣denly changes, ib. Some Companies of German hereticks enter it, 98. It is be∣sieged by the Kings men, ibid. It receives a very considerable succour, 100. Their cruel actions, 102. Their sallying out upon the Spaniards, ib. The Town is assaulted on many sides at once, ib. It makes stout resistance, 103. Relief is brought in by water 104. It is assured not to be sackt, and yéilds, 106. The cruel punishments inflicted on the Citi∣zens, ib. & 107 The Hague, a gallant Village 124 Henry the third King of France 171 The Heresie of the Countries neighbou∣ring upon Flanders, 4. The mischiefs proceeding thence 13 The Hereticks in Flanders, how they used the Churches and Images in Antwerp, 30. Their rage against Church-men 89 The Hereticks that come to the relief of
Valentiennes, defeated, 38. Those of Flushing got a great Prize of Flemish ships 86 Holland opposeth the Duke of Alvas Taxations, 70 It rebelleth 81 The Hugonots relieve Orange, 66. Pro∣mise to aid the Flemish geuses, 72. are beaten by the Spaniards 84 I AN Inundation of the Sea upon the Country about Leyden 126 Isabella Infanta of Spain, her praises' 71 The Island of Finaert in Holland 133 Of Duyveland, 134 Of ter-Tolen, ib. Of Scowen, ib. Of Walcheren, ib. Of Filisland ib. L LAncelot of Brederode in Harlem 97. Beheaded 106 A League between the Queen of England and the States of Flanders 165 A Letter of Orange, Egmont, and Horn, against Granvel to the King of Spain, 15. Their reply to the Kings answer, ib. of Montigny written to Count Horn, 34. Of Francesco Alava, Spanish Am∣bassador in France, intercepted in Flanders 35 Letters published against Don John, 160 Leyden, one of the chief Cities in Holland that stood out, 98. Besieged by the Spa∣niards, 124. Those of the Town make gallant resistance, ib. They assault the Fort of Lammen, and are beaten off, 124. They are freed from the siege, 127 Lodovick of Nassaw, brother to Orange, shews himself very arrogant 35. leaves Flanders, 46. Enters Friesland with an Army, 55. Fortifies Dam, 56. Fights Aremberg and overcomes him, 57. Pitcheth his Camp in strong quar∣ters, 62. Is routed by d'Alva, ibid. Hath much adoe to save himself by swimming, ib. Goes over into France to his brother, 66. Surprises the City of Mens, 78. Yeilds up the Town to d'Alva, 88. Retires into Holland, and thence into Germany, ib. Prepares once more to enter Flanders with an Army 114. He lies down before Mastrick 115 Attempts Ruremoad, but in vain, ib. He comes to Mooch, 117. Is slain there in a pitcht battel, 119 Lovain compounds with Orange 85 Lovesteine recovered by the Spaniard, 72 Lewis Boisot Admiral of Holland, op∣poseth the Kings Fleet, 113. remains Conqueror, ib. Goes to relieve Zirick∣zees, and dies in the enterprise 129 M MAdonna Margarita, Aunt to Charls the fifth Emperour 4 Madama di Lorena, and Madama di Parma, proposed for the Government of Flanders, 7. She of Parma preferred, and why, ib. Malines taken and sackt by the Duke of Alvas Army 93 A Manifesto published by Orange 75 A Manifesto of the Duke of Alanson 172 The Marquiss of Berghen despiseth Granvel, 14 Sent into Spain, 29. Bad∣ly entertained at Court, ib. He dieth 47 Marquiss Chiappino Vitelli passeth with the Duke of Alva into Flanders, 46 Sent into Friesland, 59. His advice for turning the Kings Forces into Holland and Zealand, 82. Wounded before Mons, 83. Wins a victory not far off against the Hugonots of France, causing himself to be carried in a chair 84. Sent by the Commandador against Orange, 12. Undergoes the main charge of the Militia in Flanders, ib. Passeth over to the Island of Scowen, 139. Where he dies, ib. His praises, ib. Mary Princess of Portugal marryed to the Prince of Parma, 21. Cometh to Brussels, ib. Mary Queen of Hungary, sister to Charls the fift governs the Low-Coun∣tries 4 Maximilian the Emperour interposeth for the quiet of Flanders, 128. His reasons ib. Merchandize, how it once flourished in Antwerp 147 Middleburgh, 74. Stands for the King 107. Comes into the Rebels hands, 114 Mons surprized by Count Lodovick of Nassaw, 78. Besieged by Frederick of Toledo, 83 Yeilded to d'Alva, 90 Mutiny of Germans in Alvas Army, 70 Of Spaniards in Harlem, 108. At Mooch, 119. In Zealand, 141. Of Spa∣nish horse 129
N. NAerden, and its scituation, 94. Besieged by Frederick of Toledo, ib. sackt, ibid. Nature of the Flemish, 2. quality of their Countrey, 3 The Nobility of Flanders shewes it self discontented that the King absents himself from thence, 5. despiseth Gran∣vell, 16. the Catholick Nobility sets up a Faction apart, 161. the number of the Provinces of the Low-Countries, when they were joyned in one body, 2 The form of their government, ibid. & 3. O THe Oration of Granvel, at the Kings departure for Spain, 7. Of the King (or rather his discours) to the Dutchess, at his leaving her Governess, 9. Of Brederode to his Companions. 24. Of Orange, at the Meeting in Terra∣mond, 36. Of Egmont in opposition to him, ibid. Of the D. of Feria, to disswade the King from sending an Army into Flanders, 42. Of the D. of Alva to the contrary, 43. Of Orange at the Diet of Germany, to move them to favor the Fle∣mings, 52. of Count Lodwick of Nassau, before the battel, 57. Of the D. of Alva to his Souldiers, 59. Of the President Vigilius against the Impositions propos'd by d'Alva, 69. Of Avila at the succour∣ing of Middleburg, 77. Of Vitelli to move the Kings Forces against Holland and Zealand, 81. Of Norchermes to the contrary, 82. Of Captain Plumart to attempt the ford, 91. Of Montdra∣gone to the Souldiers, 92. Of Romero to the Souldiers, 100. Of Riperda to the Harlemers, 97. Of the same man to the same, 106, Of Orange, (or his incitements) still more and more to kindle the Insurrections in Flanders, 114. Of Avila at the battel of Mooch, 117. Of Count Lodwick, and Christo∣pher Count Palatine in the same bat∣tel, 118. Of the Admiral of Holland for the relief of Leyden, 125. Of the Commendador to his Souldiers, 135. Of President Vighlius in the Councel of State, to hinder that the Spaniards might not be declared to be Rebels, 142 Of John Navarre, see Elect, perswa∣ding the Mutineers to relieve the castle of Antwerp, 145. Of Don John to the Souldiers, 166. The Ordering of the Kings Army in the battel of Friez∣land, 57. Of Count Lodowick's in the same, ibid. Of the Catholick Army in the fight at Geminghen, 62. Of the enemies in the same, ibid. Of the Royal party in the battel of Mooch, 117. Of the enemies in the same, 118. The Order the Spaniards observ'd in marching through the foord of Zirickzee, 130. Octavio Farnese D. of Parma at Brus∣sels, 21. Octavio Gonzaga, 150. takes in Lovain, 168. routs some Companies of French, 170. Oudewater in Holland, and its situation, 132. Besieged by the Spaniard, ibid. Utterly ruined, ibid. P. PEace establisht between the Provinces of Flanders, 148 Pope Urban the eight, 123 The Popes General Pardon proclaimed by the D. of Alva, 70 Pius Quintus his particular demonstrati∣on of honour to the D. of Alva, 66 Practises of the Germain Princes to fo∣ment the Flemish Hereticks, 51. Of Orange and the Flemish vagabonds, with the neighbouring Princes, 73 The Predicants driven out of Antwerp, 40 The Prince of Orange born in Germany, 5. Coming over yong into Flanders, he became a Catholick, ibid, His Nature and Cústom, ibid. Opposeth Granvel, 12. Proposes that there may be a Convo∣cation of the States General, ibid. His intelligence with the Admiral of France 13. He opposeth the bringing in of the Councel of Trent into Flanders, ibid. His propositions to the Covenanters in Geertruydenberg, 30. He goes into Holland and Zealand to pacifie the tu∣mults there, 32. terrified at the news of d'Alva's coming into Flanders, he leavs the countrey, 4o. His Answer to the D. of Alva's citation, 49. He seeks to in∣teress Germany in the revolt of the low Countreys; to which end he procures a Diet there, 52. His discourse at it, ibid. He raises an Army to enter Flanders, 64. He desires to come to a battel with d'Alva, & his reasons for it, 65. A great part of his men routed, 66. He retires into Flanders, where his Army disbands it self, ibid. He assembleth new Forces to enter those Provinces a second time, 85. He masters Ruremond and sacks it, ibid. He takes in Malines, ibid. He makes a hault in Henault, ibid. He of∣fers to give the D. of Alva battel, 86. He retires with his Army defeated, 88.
He goes into Holland, ibid. He passes to Leyden, to ayd the Harlemers, 98. He attempts the relief of the besieged there, but those whom he sends are routed by the Royalists, 102. He makes many in∣roads about Nimegen, 122. In the con∣ference at Breda, he is absolute Umpire for the Rebels, 131. He doth his utmost to relieve Zirickzee, 138. He makes use of the Commendadors death for che∣rishing of the Flemish rebellion, 140. his opinion concerning Don Johns coming, 151. His ends in the affairs of Flan∣ders, ibid. He approves not of the A∣greement made at Marck, 153. He expresses his conceit of Don Johns re∣treat to Namure, 160. He is received into Brussels by the States Generall, 162. Created Governor of Brabant, ibid. His Judgement concerning the Archduke Matthias, his comming into Flanders, 163. his diligence to com∣pose the discords between the Provinces of the Low-Countreys, 176 The Prince of Parma comes into Flanders 166. his Military employment, ibid. He fights with singular valor at Ge∣blours, 168. storms the Town of Si∣chen, 169. substituted by Don John in the Government of Flanders, 177 The Propositions of the Provinces con∣cerning the citadels designed by the D: of Alva, 71 Philip the second, son to Charls the fifth, 4 comes into Flanders, ibid. Returns in∣to Spain, and upon what occasions, 7 Before his departure he cals together the States Generall in Gaunt. Ibid. creates some Knights of the Golden Fleece, 9. his discourse with the Dut∣chesse of Parma, ibid. his secret Orders to her about the Tumults in Flanders, 33. his perplexity about sending an Army thither, 45. he prepares a fleet in Spain to be sent into Flanders, 134 with great secrecy he sends away his brother Don John of Austria, for Go∣vernor to the Low-Countries, 150 endevors by his means to compose mat∣ters in the Low-Countries, ibid. is again constrained to take up armes a∣gainst the Flemmings, 164. makes great complaints in France about A∣lansons march into Flanders, 177. the Provinces of the Low-Countries divi∣ded into many Principalities, 1 Q. QUeen of England, 6. see Elizabeth. The Queen of Navarre passeth by the Frontiers of Flanders, 158. A Book of hers, ibid. R. RAphael Barberino and his quali∣lities, 123. Uncle by the Fathers side to Pope Urban the VIII. ibid. how bravely he caryed himself at the taking of the Fort of Bomell, 138. he is woun∣ded at Visenac, 144 Efficacious Reasons for the Inquisitin, 26. For King Philips going into Flan∣ders, 41. Against it, ibid. Count Lodovicks Ruyters rout the Ca∣tholicks German-horse, 119. They are defeated by the Kings Lanciers, ibid. The Rebels in Holland doe their utmost to cut off all Victuals from the Kings camp before Harlem, 101. they attempt ter Tolen, 107. they seize upon Rame∣chins, 108. they become Masters of the Isle of Walcheren, 114. a Treaty of accommodation with them, 123 but it goes not forward, ibid. they prepare for the defence of Leyden, 124. they drown the Country all about it, 126. they raise the Siege, 127 A Relation of the Mutinies, 120. The wonderfull Obedience yeelded to their Laws, ibid. The course that was ta∣ken to reduce them to an agreement, 121 A Rising in Maestricht against the Spa∣niards, 145 Rodulphus the Emperor interposeth for the quiet of Flanders, 152. he conti∣nues the Treaty of agreement by the bi∣shop of Liege, 164 Ruremond made a Bishoprick, 9. Sacked by Orange's army, 85 S. THe Sacking of Valenciennes, 78 Sancio d'Avila comes into Flanders with the Duke of Alva, 46. Sent a∣gainst the Flemish Vagabonds, 50 Captain of Antwerp-castle, 76. Routs the Enemy, and secures Middleburgh, ibid. brings Relief to ter-Goes, 91 Overcome by the Rebels in a Sea-fight, 107. is commander over a Fleet for the relief of Middleburgh, 113. he enters Mastricht with the Kings men, 115. he assaults the Enemy, and routs him. 116. he discovers Lodowicks de∣signs, and prevents them, ibid. Conque∣ror at the battel of Mooch, 119. Made Admiral of the fleet in ter-Tolen, 135. Fordeth the channel of Scowen, 136. his counsel to defend the Kings Soul∣diers against the States Militia, 141.
His words to Don John at the depar∣ture of the Spaniards out of Flanders, 154 Sconhoven, a Town in Holland besieged by the Royalists 132. It yeilds 133 The Suspicion of the Flemings, and the conceit of the chiefest among them con∣cerning the Inquisition 4 Spain greatly infested with the Moors, 7 The Spaniards assault Harlem disorderly and are made to retire by Romero, 100 They mutiny after the battel of Mooch 119. They take the way of Antwerp, which they enter without any more adoe 121. They make the Garison there re∣treat, ib. They are satisfied and return to their obedience, 122. Many of them perish before Leyden, 127. They pre∣pare to defend themselves against the Flemings, 141. Their designe to meet in Antwerp, ib. The difficulties they met with ere they could get together, 144. They assault and take Antwerp 146 States General of the Provinces of Flan∣ders, 2. Called together by the Duke of Alva 67 The States of Holland meet to consult upon the relief of Leyden, 126 The States of Flanders, 140. see the Councel of State 102 The Sufferings of the Kings Camp before Harlem 102 T TOrney and the Country thereabouts infected with heresie 28 A Treaty of accommodation between Don John and the States 153 Tumults, how they began in Flanders, 2 A popular Tumult in Brussels 140 A Throne set up in Antwerp by the D. of Alva 71 V VAldes, a Spanish Campmaster hath the principal charge of the siege of Leyden, 124. He takes two Forts from the enemy, ib. He shuts up all the Ave∣nues about the City 125 Valentiennes riseth, 37. Is surprised by the Hugonots of France 8 Vargas, a Spanish Captain relieveth Ma∣strick 145 Vahelius, President of the Privy Councel, follows the opinion of Granvel, 11. Op∣poseth Orange, and for what reasons, 19. shews himself contrary to the new Impositions 69 Utricht, an Archbishoprick 11 W WAlcherin, an Island 76 The Walloons take up Arms a∣gainst the Gantois 176 Seditious Writings against the Inquisi∣tion 22 Z ZEaland opposeth d'Alvas Impositi∣ons more then all the other Provin∣ces 70 Zirickzee, a principal Town, 135. Its sci∣tuation, ib. It is besieged, 137. Is yeild∣ed up, 138 Zutphen and its scituation, 94 Besieged by Frederick di Toledo, ib. stormed and sackt ib.
A TABLE Of the most remarkable things contained in this SECOND PART. A ADolphus, Count de Meurs, Com∣mander in chief for the Flemish, opposeth the Kings party 237 Altapenna surpriseth Breda, 199 Mortally wounded before the Fort of Engelen, 247 Antwerp in danger of being surprized, 210. Its description, 217. Besieged by the Prince of Parma, 218. What dili∣gence the Townsmen use to get in relief 222. Their uproars for the streight∣ness of the siege, 223. They contrive fireboats to annoy the Bridge made up∣on the Scheld, 224. Their great ship called the Wars end, ib. Their new de∣signe against the Bridg, 228: They re∣solve to surrender 233 Arch-duke Matthias returns into Ger∣many 204 The Arch-bishop of Rossano sent to Col∣lein, for the accommodation of Affairs in Flanders 187 ALexander Farnese. See Prince of Parma Army of Farnese, before Mastrick, how quartered, 183. How placed about Antwerp, 220. Of the League, and its strength 281 B BErghen-ap-zone attempted by Far∣nese, but in vain 260,261 Bona surprized by Skinck, 259. Recover∣ed by the Prince of Simay 260 Breda surprized by Altapenna, 199. and with a stratagem recovered by Count Maurice 265 Bruges taken by the Kings party 213 Brussels comes in to Farnese The Bridg before Antwerp, and the de∣scription thereof, 220. What mischief the fire-barks did to it 227 C CAmbray straitned by Farness, 198 Relieved by the Duke of Alanson 200 Cardinal Allen 251 The Cardinal Infante takes Skincks Sconce 259 Christophoro Mandragone Campma∣ster, where quartered before Mastrick, 183. How gallantly he plaid his part in defending the Counterdike 231 The Conference held at Colein for ac∣commodating the affairs of Flanders 187 A Consultation held by the Prince of Parma, Whether Antwerp or Mastrick should be first besieged, 181. by the same, about building a bridge upon the Scheld, 219. by the Queen of England, upon the proffer of the soveraignty o∣ver the United Provinces, 237, 238 by the King of Navar, whether the siege of Roan should be suspended or conti∣nued, 282. in Spain concerning the man∣ner of expressing their grudge they bare to the Queen of England 248 The Count of Aremberg forceth Hol∣lach to retreat from the siege of Zut∣phen 214 The Count della Laigne, Governour of Henault 186 The Count di Berg turns to the Kings side 198 Count Herman di Berg besieged in De∣venter, 278. is wounded, ib. yeilds up the Town ib. Count Charls Mansfield taketh in Eyn∣doven, 213. Assaults and routs Mar∣shal Biron, ib. Besieged the Grave, 240 Relieveth Nimeg 265 Count di Fuentes sent into Flanders 292
Count Holack at the siege of Gronin∣ghen, 198. Made Count Maunce his Lieutenant, 217. Assaulteth the Coun∣terdike 229 Count Maurice put into the place of the Prince of Orange (his father) 217 Commands the Militia of the United Provinces, 245. Surprises Breda, 265 Raises a Fort against Niminghen, 266. Makes himself Master of Zut∣phen, 278. And then of Deventer, ib. Takes in Niminghen, 280. Takes Steenwick, 292. and the Fort of Co∣verden ib. Colonel Norrice surprizeth Brankem∣berg Fort 277 Colonel Vere relieves Reinberg 264 Count Peter Ernestus of Mansfield left by Farnese to govern Flanders, 267 The Count of Reinberg turns to the Kings side, 198. He besiegeth Steen∣wick, but is forced to retreat, 199. His death, ib. The Counter-dike of Covestein, 221 Defended with four Forts by the Roy∣alists, 229. Assaulted by the Rebels, but in vain, ib. Assaulted again by the same 231 Complaints of the Flemish Rebels against the Duke of Alanson, 207. Of the same against the English, 244. Of the Com∣manders of the League against the D. of Parma, 273 Of the Army of the League for want of victuals, 290 The Catholick Commissioners of the Fle∣mish Union, what opinion they were of in point of changing their Prince, 193 The Character of Alanson, 214. Of the Prince of Orange, 215. Of the Duke of Parma, 292. Comparison between the King of Navar and Duke of Parma 267 D A Description of Mastrick, 183. of Antwerp, 217. of the Bridg built upon the Scheld at the siege of Ant∣werp, 225. Deventer won by Farnese 244 It falls back into the hands of the Uni∣ted Provinces 278 The D. of Alanson returns into France, 181. Comes into the Low-countries as their Prince Elect, 193. Upon what condition he  of the Government 195. He  the City of Cam∣bray, 200. He goes over into England, and thence to Zealand, 204. His so∣lemn entrance into Antwerp, 205. He receives his expected forces, 08. He is perswaded to establish his new Princi∣pality by force, ib. and he attempts the surprisal of Antwerp, 210. but with bad success, ib & 211. He goes away into France, 213. where he dies, 214 His character, ib. The Duke of Medina Sidonia, made Commander of the Spanish Armado in the place of the Marquiss of Santa Croce, 254. His unfortunate expediti∣on 256 The Dutchess of Parma comes over into Flanders, 194. Her Letter to the Catholick King, ib. She returns into I∣taly, 195 The Duke of Parma, 242. See Prince of Parma The Duke du Main gives the Duke of Parma a meeting, 267. His opinion that the victory of Aumale should be follow∣ed, 285. He exhorts Farnese to keep a∣loof from Roan, 287. He continues Ge∣neralin the Camp of the League, 288 He carries a supply of men into Roan 291 E THe English rout the Spaniards be∣fore the Grave 241 The English Fleet, 255. The advantages it had of the Spanish ib. F THe Faction of the Malcontents, what it pretended to, 181. It seizeth upon Alst 188 Monsieur di Feruaches, and his speech to the Duke of Alanson 209 Francesco Verdugo, Governor of Frie∣sland, 199. Takes in Embden, ib. Sur∣prizes Zutphen 213 The French, in danger for Oranges wound, 205. They run up and down Antwerp in hostle manner, 210. But are repulsed by the Inhabitants, 211 They secure the Towns of Dunkerk, Dixmund, and Terramund, ib. The Fort of Blankemberg taken by the Duke of Parma, 245. Recovered by Co∣lonel Norrice, and by him demolisht, 277. of Engelen, taken by the Rebels, who change the name, calling it Creve. coeure 247 Francis Drake 254 Fire-barks in Antwerp for destruction of the Bridge, 224. How they were made, 226. what was the effect 237, 228 A gallant Fight between the Duke of Par∣ma's
men, and the Rebels 279 Fire-ships sent out by the English against the Spanish Armada, 256. what was the effect ib. G THe Gantois oppose the Catholick Religion, and the Soveraignty of Spain, 181. They seize upon the Town of Menin 188 Gaunt, taken in by Farnese 236 George Basti fals upon the King of Na∣var, and puts him to a retreat 285 Groninghen besieged by Count Hollack, 198. tis freed, ib. H HEnry the third, King of France, how he excused himself for the D. of Alansons accepting the Government of the Low-Countries, 196. Signior d'Hierges, General of the Artil∣lery in Flanders, 183. Slain at the siege of Mastrick 185 I IPre taken by the D. of Parma 213 The Island of Cassante 245 Signior d' Insy Governor of Cambray, 193 K THe King of Navar besieges Paris, 266. His exhortation to the Com∣manders of his Army, 268. Raises his Camp from before Paris, 269. Challen∣ges the enemy to a set battel, 270. At∣tempts the surprizal of Paris, 2, 2. An∣noys the Enemies Camp, 274. Besieges Roan, 281. Removes to Aumale, whence he goes in person to view the Camp of the League, 284. Is shot with a fire-lock, 285. Returns to streighten Roan; he riseth from that siege, 287 He cuts off all Convoys from the Lea∣guers Camp, 289. His hope to conquer the enemy by way of Famin 290 L LAgny stormed by the Duke of Parma, 271 Lyra in Brabant, taken by the Royalists, 207 The Earl of Leicester sent into Holland by the Queen of England, 239. He be∣siegeth Zutphen, 243. But is forced to retreat by the Duke of Parma, 244. He returns thither afresh, and takes in some of the Forts, ibid. The jealousies which the United Provinces entertain of his actions, ib. he brings over new aid from England, 246. He is appointed by the Queen to defend the banks of the Thames 253 M MAlines taken by Farnese, 188. re∣covered by the Rebels, 193. redu∣ced the second time by Farnese 232 Maria della Laygne defends the City of Tornay in the absence of her husband the Prince of Espinoy, 203. her words to encourage the souldiers, ib. She is wounded, ib. She yeilds up the Town, 204. The honours done her by the ene∣mies Camp at her going forth of it, ib. The Marquiss of Rubays, Governor of Artois, 186. He fals upon Monsieur Della Noue, and takes him prisoner, 194. He prevails with the Walloon Provinces, for the returning of foreign souldiers, 201. He takes the Fort of Lifetensuch, 218. Oversees the buil∣ding of the Bridge upon the Scheld, 223. Takes Monsieur de Teligni pri∣soner, 225. his death 228 The Marquiss of Vasto, General of the horse in Flanders, 233. Made Knight of the Golden Fleece by the Duke of Parma, 242. Returns out of Italy into Flanders, to wait upon the Duke of Parma in his second expedition into France 284 Marshal Biron comes into Flanders, 208. Takes the Castle of Vouda, 213 Is routed by Mansfield, ib. Returns in∣to France, 214. His Oration for not breaking up the siege of Roan 282. he is left there by the King of Navarr to continue it 284 Martin Skinck, and his conditions, 198. He relieves Groninghen, ib. His vi∣ctory over the Rebels at ter-Goes, 199 He is taken prisoner, 206. He comes o∣ver to the States service, 237. His speech to Count Maurice for the raising of Skincks Sconce, 259. He surprises the Town of Bona, ib. He routs some Companies of the Kings party, 263. he attempts the surprisal of Niminghen, ib. where he loseth his life ib. Mastrick besieged by the Prince of Par∣ma, 182. Assaulted by the Royalists, 183. It is stoutly defended, ib. is storm∣ed and sackt 186 The Meeting of the States General in Antwerp for chusing of a new Prince, 189. They shew themselves inclined towards the Duke of Alanson, 193
To whom by a solemn Ambassy they proffer the Government of the United Provinces 195 A Mutiny of the Germans in the Kings Camp 206 N NImegen comes in to the King, 236 Is in great danger of being sur∣prized 263 Monsieur de la Noue Lieutenant to the Prince of Orange, and Governor of Ma∣strick, 182. Will not be shut up in it, ib. His diligence to relieve it, 185. He is taken prisoner 194 Nuys stormed and sackt by the Spaniards, 242 O OUdenarde in the Province of Flan∣ders besiged by Farnese, 206. the assault made upon it, ibid. it is yeel∣ded, 207 The Oration of James Tayard, in behalf of the Queen of England, 189. Of the Seignor de St Aldegonde in behalf of the Duke of Alanson, 191. Of the same to the Antwerpians, 223. Of the Pr: of Parma, that foraign Souldiery might be suffer'd to return, 200. Of the same to the Commanders of the Army at their entrance into France, 267. Of Seigneur di Feruaches to the Duke of Alanson, 209. Of the Deputies of the United Provinces to the Queen of En∣gland, 237. of the King of Navarre to the Commanders of his Army, 268 Of Marshall Biron, that the Siege be∣fore Roan might not break up, 282. Of the Duke of Boloigne, to the con∣trary, 283 P PAris besieged by the King of Navarre, 266. Relieved by the Duke of Par∣ma, 269 The Princess of Espinoy, see Maria de la Laigne. The Prince of Orange takes great care for the Relief of Mastrich, 185. He useth all possible diligence to disturb the Treaty of accommodation in Colen, 186. He follows close the Election of a New Prince, 189. his particular ends herein, ibid. He holds with those that stand for Alanson, 193. he divulgeth a Writing in justification of himself, and in Answer to the Kings Proclamation issued out against him, 205. He is wounded with an Harquebuse shot, ib. he endeavours to re-unite the Flemish Rebels and Alanson, after the mis∣chance at Antwerp, 212. He is slain, 214. His character, 215 The Prince of Parma receives a Confir∣mation from the King for the Govern∣ment of Flanders, 180. He besiegeth Mastrich, 182. And at last stormeth it, 185. he brings the Walloon Provin∣ces to an Agreement, 187. He takes in Malines, 188. Besiegeth Cambray, but is forced to Retreat by the D. of Alan∣son, 200. his Speech that the Foraign Souldiers-might be suffer'd to return, ibid. he besiegeth Tournay, 202. and takes it, 204. recovers the castle of Cambresis, 208. makes himself Ma∣ster of Dunkerk and Newport, 211 Resolves to besiege Antwerp, 217. Fals to making a Bridge upon the Schelde, 220. causeth a Ditch to be cut of 15. Miles in length, 221. Ran a great ha∣zard at the playing of the fire-Barques, 227. beats off the Enemy from assaul∣ting the Counterdike, 232. Receives the Order of the Golden-fleece, 234 his solemn entrance into Antwerp, ib. he besieges the Grave, and carries it, 241. he incamps before Venlo, ibid. which at length is yeelded to him, 242 thence he goes against Nuys, ibid. which is storm'd and sack'd, ibid. He takes on him the title of Duke upon the death of his Father, ibid. the Honour conferred upon him by Pope Sixtus the fifth, ibid. he goes to the Relief of Zutfen, he takes in Deventer, 243. and after that the castle of VVowe, 244. he layes Siege to Sluce, 245. which at last is yeelded to him, 247. his Opinion concerning Spains making war upon England, 250 he goes over to Newport to further that enterprize, 255. a Designe of his upon Berghen-ap-Zome, 260. but it hits not, 261. he falls sick of the Dropsie, and passeth into France, ibid. he joines with Du Main at Meaux, 270. He be∣siegeth and stormeth Laigny, 271. storms and sacks Corbeil, 274. Returns into Flanders, 275. Encamps before the fort of Nimeghen, 278. but can do no good upon it, 279. He receives order from the King to pass again into France, ib. In the fight of Aumale against the K. of Navar, he carries the day, 285. He sends a supply of men into Roan, and thence marcheth into Picardy, where he besiegeth the Town of Rue, 287. He returns speedily towards Roan, and raiseth the King of Navars siege, 288
Is wounded in one of his arms before Caudebec, ib. resolves to pass the Seine, & performs it fortunately, 290. march∣eth towards Flanders, 291. Petitions the King for leave to quit the Govern∣ment, 292. He prepares for the third ex∣pedition into France, ib. He dies in Ar∣ras, ib. His Character, ib. Prince Ranuccio, the Duke of Parmas el∣dest son, brings off safe the Kings army in their retreat from the Fort of Nime∣ghen, 279. He marcheth in the van with the horse of the Leaguers Camp, 284. In the retreat from Caudebeck he makes good the rear with singular valour 291 Philip the second confirms Parma in the Government of Flanders, 180. Resolves to send back the Dutchess of Parma into Flanders, 194. yet afterwards gives her leave to return into Italy, 195. Declares that he will aid the Catholick League in France 266 Q. THe Queen of England, how she li∣ked of the new Principality of Alan∣son, 202. She examins in her coun∣cel the offer of the Severaignty of the U∣nited Provinces, that had been made to her. 239. Endeavours to compose the differences between the United Provin∣ces and Leicester, 244. She procures a Treaty of agreement in the affairs of Flanders to be moved for, by the King of Denmark, 248. But all Treaties come to nothing, 252. She resolves to op∣pose the Spanish Fleet, and prepares for it with great Forces, both by Sea and Land, ib. Her Oration to the Parlia∣ment ib. R. REberg, besieged by the Marquiss of Barambone; 262. Relieved by Skinck, ib. and after by Colonel Vere, 264. At last it is yeilded up to the Roy∣alists, ib. The Flemish Rebels at great difference a∣mong themselves, 180. For want of moneys they cannot maintain the soul∣diers that flock to them from other parts 181, They feed with fair hopes of re∣lief, those that are besieged in Mastrick, 184. They resolve upon chusing a new Prince, 189. and publickly declare the election they have made, 201. Their complaints against Alanson, 207. How much they were inraged at the surpri∣sal of Antwerp by him attempted, 211 They are reconciled to the French by the workings of Orange, 212. They rout the Kings party near Nimegen, 279 Roan besieged by the King of Navar. 281 Receives a supply of men, 363. Is in ve∣ry great danger ib. S SEbastian Tappin, a French-man, and Swarzemburg at the defence of Mastrick, 182. Their vigilance, 184 They very stoutly beat back the Roya∣lists 185 The Signior of St. Aldegond in great e∣steem with the Flemish Union, 191. He is Governor of Antwerp, 223. His speech to encourage the Antwerpians to hold out the siege ib. Sixtus Quintus Pope sends a Present to the Duke of Parma, 242. Exhorteth Philip the second to the enterprise against England 250 Skinck, See Martin Skinck. T TOrnay besieged, 202. The batteries that are raised against it, 203. It stands out the first assault, ib. Takes in a small supply, 204. At length is yeild∣ed up to the Duke of Parma ib. V VErdugo. See Francis Verdugo. Venlo besieged by Farnese, 241. It yeildeth before it comes to an assault, 242 Sign. di Villars at the defence of Roan, 281. Falls very valiantly upon the Camp without, and sorely annoys it, 286. Adviseth that the Forces of the League should turn some other way, 286 Makes great suit for relief 287 W WAchtendonck yeilded to Mans∣field, 261 The Wallon Provinces contest with the Gantois, 181. they come to an Agree∣ment with the Prince of Parma, 186. And upon what conditions, 187. They consent to the return of the Foraign sol∣diers, 201 Z. ZUtfen besieged by Leicester, 243 Relieved by Farnese, 244. Taken in by Count Maurice.
A Table of the most remarkable things con∣tained in this THIRD PART. A AUgustin Messia, a Spanish Camp∣master, 309. Enters Cambray with Forces 329 Is declared Governour of that City 332 The Admiral of Arragon seizes upon the Town of Montulin, 363. Made Go∣vernour of the Militia in Flanders, 369. The Orders left him by the Arch∣duke 372. He takes in Remberg, 373 He distributes his Army in divers neutral places, 374. His opinion for besieging Skincks Sconce, 377. He makes the enemy retreat from the fort of Durang, 382. Is taken prisoner, 397 Being after released, he attempts to re∣lieve the Grave, but in vain 409 Amiens the Metropolis of Piccardy, 350 Surprised by the Spaniard, 352. and after sackt, 353. The description ther∣of ib. besieged by the K. of France, 355 The rendring of it up 362 Admiral Villars Governor of Normandy 320. Routed and slain at Dorlan, 322 Archduke Albertus by way of Proxie espouseth (in the Kings name) the new Queen, in the City of Ferrara, 372 Departs from Madrid with the Infan∣ta his wife, 386. They both come into Flanders, ib. He cals a consultation of the Officers of the Army, 393. Resolves to assault the enemies Camp at New∣port, 394. His words to the souldiers 396. He is wounded in the battel of Newport, ib. He besieges Ostend, 399. His constancy in pursuing that Enterprise, 406. His speech to the ma∣gistrates of Balduke, 412. He commits the care of the siege of Ostend to Mar∣quiss Spinola, 413. He goes thither in person, 418. He sends his Confessor in∣to Spain, to facilitate the conclusion of the truce 457 Archduke Ernestus Governor of Flan∣ders, 302. Sends with fresh men Count Mansfield into France, ib. Endea∣vours to bring in some treaty of peace with the United Provinces, 303. He sends Campmaster Velasco against the mutiners of Sichen, 311. He aies, 313 The Archdutchess Margaret of Austria intended for wife to the Prince of Spain, 369 Ardres, besieged by the Spaniards, 339 It is yeilded up 341 Arras suddenly assaulted by the French, 454 Articles of Marriage between Arch∣duke Albertus, and the Infanta Isabel∣la 368 The Articles of the Truce 458 The Assembly general of the United Provinces in Bergen-ap-zoom 459 The Army of the German Confederates, 383. How strong it was, 384. Dis∣solves of it self 386 B THe Battel of Dorlan, 322 The Battel of Newport 396 Balduke besieged by Count Maurice, 402 Is relieved, ib. Bommel, how scituated, 377. The Kings Army encamps before it, 379. Relieved by Count Maurice 380 C CAmbray govern'd by Signior Balag∣ni, 317. Besieged by Count Fuen∣tes, 324. The description thereof 324 re∣lieved by Signior de Vich 326 The valiant resistance made by the be∣sieged, ib. The Townsmen rise against Balagni, 328. The Town is yeilded, 329 Cardinal Archduke Albertus declared Governor of Flanders, 332. His entry into Brussels, ib. He besiegeth Callice, 336. and carries it, 339. He encamps before Ardres, ib. and makes himself master of it, 341. He takes the Town of Hulft, 342. He goes to relieve  miens, 360. He is councelled to assault the enemy in their Trenches, 361. He cannot relieve the Town, wherefore he returns to Flanders, 362. He puts off his Cardinals habit, and goes into Spain to consummate his marriage with the Infanta Isabella 369 Cardinal Andrea d'Austria Governor of Flanders, 369. Entertains the Depu∣ties of the Elector of Colen, and of the Duke of Cleves, 376. Besiegeth Bommel, 379. retires from that en∣terprise, 380. Causeth a great Fort to be begun in the Island of Bomel, 381 and names it St. Andrews, 383. Re∣turns into Germany, 386.
Cardinal Mapheo Barberino, what Offices he did in the court of France, with rela∣tion to the affairs of Flanders, 434 Christoval di Moura count of Castel-Ro∣drigo, 365. His Oration, wherein he perswades the K. to give up the Low-Countries in Dowry to the Infanta Isa∣bella his eldest Daughter, ib. Claudio la Barlotta a Walloon Camp-Master, 296. assaults the French be∣fore Laon, 309. Gains a Fort near Hulst, 344. Is slain, 398 Colonell Christopher Mandragone with good Forces in the countrey of Lucem∣burg, 317. Forces Count Maurice to retreat from the Siege of Grol, 329. his good successe against the same man, 330 He dies, ibid Colonell Vere sent to surprize the Fort of Durang, 382. Wounded in the battell of Newport, 396. At the defence of O∣stend, 401 Colonell Verdugo commands the Kings Forces in Friesland, 302. Makes the French retreat out of the country of Lu∣cemburg, 316. he dies, 317 Considerations on the Spains part, to see some accommodation with the United Provinces brought to passe, 457 Consultations held in the Spanish camp, concerning the laying siege to Cambray 318. about the besieging of la Fera, 334 concerning the getting of Relief into Amiens, 360. and in the French camp for opposing of the Enemy, 361. in the councell of State in Spain, about surren∣dring the Provinces of Flanders to the Infanta Isabella for her Dowry, 365 In the Spanish camp in Flanders, about besieging either Schincks-sconce, or som other place, 376. in the same Spanish camp, whether it were convenient to fall upon the Enemy at Newport, 393 Whether it were better to prosecute or give over the Siege of Ostend, 413 Whether the relief of Groll were by all means to be attempted, or whether it were to be let alone, 430 Count Charles Mansfield passeth into France in aid of the League, 296. He goes with the D. du Main before Noyon ibid. Takes in many places in Picardy, 297. He conducts a new Army into Flanders, 303. He makes himself ma∣ster of la Capelle, ibid. Count Frederick di Bergh camp-Master-Generall, 392. a Fort raised by him in Ostend, 402. Governor of Linghen, 363 Presents himself with part of the Army before Schincks-sconce, 378. Relieves Balduc, 402. goes against the Muti∣neers of Hostrat, 411 Count di Fuentes of great authority in Flanders, 296. his Opinion that the vnited Provinces ought not to be sought unto for Peace by Spain, 304. he suc∣ceeds Archduke Ernestus in the Go∣vernment, 314. he sends la Motte to recover the Town of Huy, and Verdugo against the French in the countrey of Lucemburg, 316. he resolves to fall in∣to Picardie, 317. Gains Han by Intel∣ligence, 319. and a while after loses it, ibid. Besieges Chatelet, 320. And carries it, ibid. routs the French, 322 Takes Dorlan by assault, 323. Layes Siege to Cambray, 324. his Opinion concerning the continuation of that Siege, 327. gains the place, 329. De∣parts from Flanders, 332. his Oration, wherein he exhorts the K. not to sever the Low-countries from the Crown of Spain, 365 Count Henrick of Nassau Generall of the Horse to the United Provinces, 424 Fals upon the quarters of the Spanish horse, ib. Relieves Reinberg, 428 Count Hollach sent by the United Pro∣vinces to the German confederates, 384 Count di Lippa Generall of the Army, to the German confederates, 376 Count Maurice besiegeth Gertrudenberg, 299. he carries it, 301. comes before Groninghen with his Army, 305. and gains that, 307. Incamps before Groll 329. but afterwards draws off, ibid. Overcomes the Royalists at Tornaut, 348. Seizes upon Reinberg with other places, 363. succours Schincks-sconce, 378. relieves Bomell, 380. Surprises. Wachtendonch, 389. Takes in the fort of Crevecoeur, ibid. and then St An∣drews, 390. Enters the Province of Flanders with an Army, 391. Resolves to besiege Newport, 392. prepares to give batail to the Archduke, 395. comes off conqueror at Newport, 397. Besie∣geth Reinberg, and takes it, 399. In∣camps before Balduc, 402. whence he is forced to retreat, ibid. Besieges the Grave, 408, and carries it, 409. Goes to the Relief of the Mutineers at Ho∣strat, 411. Besieges Balduc again, ibid. and shortly after gives over the Enter∣terprize, 412. Encamps before Sluce, 416. Routs Velasco, ibid. his Designe upon Antwerp, 420. he fortifies near Sas, ibid. He cannot relieve Rein∣berg,
429. Encamps before Groll, and is forced thence to retreat, 431. His Opinion of the Negotiations then on foot for a Peace and a Truce, 442. His O∣ration against them, ibid. Count Peter Ernestus of Mansfield, suc∣ceeds the D. of Parma in the Govern∣ment of Flanders, 296. Sends away his son Count Charles to the assistance of the League in France, ibid. His dili∣gence to relieve Gertrudenberg, 301 to which effect he faces the Enemy with his Army, ibid. Goes against the Fort of Crevecoeure, ibid. is in the Army appointed for the relief of Amiens, 360 his discourse against falling upon the Enemies Trenches, 362 The Conde di Varras one of the chiefe Commanders in the Catholick Army, 345. hinders the Enemies incursions in Brabant, 347. is routed and slaine by Count Maurice, 348 Complaints of the Loyall Provinces, 364 made by some Provinces and Hans-Towns of Germany against the Spa∣nish Armies invasion, 375. Of the Spa∣niards, about the going of the Spanish Commissioners into Holland, 447 The Commissioners of the Princes and Hans-Towns in Germany resolve on a War with the Spaniard, 375. Of the Provinces obedient and United, met to Treat of some Agreement, 398. Those of the Catholicks that are to goe into Holland to Treat of a Peace or Truce, 447. They come to the Hague, ibid. their Negotiations, 448. They meet in Antwerp, 457. those of the United Province to intervene at the Treaty aforesaid, 447. their Negotiations, ib. Characters of Philip 2. 347. Of Arch∣duke Ernestus, 414. Of Verdugo, 317 Of Mandragone, 331. Of Campmaster Rosne, 345 D A Description of Geertruydenberg, 299. of Groninghen, 305. of Cambray, 324: of Calice, 336. of Ardres, 339. of Hulst, 342. of Ami∣ens, 353. of Ostend, 400. of Sluce, 416 of Linghen, 422. of Groll, 427. of Reinberg, 428. of a fierce Assault made upon Dorlan, 323. of another made upon Ostend, 403. of St An∣drews fort, 383. of Schincks-sconce, and the Countrey about it, 377. of the battail of Dorlan, 322. of the battail of Newport, 396. of the United Pro∣vinces, and their form of Government, 438 A Declaration of liberty pretended to by the United Provinces, 437. how inter∣preted by the Archduke and Spanish Ministers of State, ibid. Ratified in Spain, 438. the first Ratification therof not admitted in Holland, 439. How the second was afterward accepted of, 446 Dorlan besieged by Count di Fuentes, 323 taken by assault, ib. The Duke of Sessa by way of Proxie acts the part of the Infanta Isabella, for effectuating her marriage with the Archduke Albertus, 372 The Duke du Main recruited from Flan∣ders, 296. he takes in Noyon, 297. he concludes a Truce with the K. of Na∣var for three months, 298. he endevors to relieve Laon, 308. his memorable Retreat, 310. he comes to an Agree∣ment with the K. of France, 334. His Opinion that they were not to tarry in their Trenches for the Spanish Army, 361 E. ELector Ernestus of Bavaria makes suit at Brussels for the recovery of Huy, 316. the dammage done to his Estate by the quartering of the K. of Spains Army upon it, 375 The Elector Palatine of the Rhine, 375 F. A Fight of great consequence before Laon, between the K. of France his Forces, and the army of the League 310. between Count Maurice and Mandragone, 330. between Marshall Biron, and the Marshal of Barambone 347. between the K. of Spains men, and those of the United Provinces, 348 betwixt Marquis Spinola, and Count Maurice before Sluce, 418. and after∣wards at Bruch, 424 Frederico Spinola, 407. Commander of some Gallies in Flanders, wherewith he indammages the Enemy, ibid. he goes a∣gain into Spain for a greater number, ibid. he loses five, 408. is slain, 410 La Fera besieged by the K. of France, 334 Relieved, 335. yielded, 340 Forts erected by Spinola upon the Rhine, 421 Forts raised by the United Provinces up∣on the banks of the Wael, and the Ysel, 426 G. SPanish Galleys in Flanders, 407 Gaspero Mandragone relieves Lyra, 331
The Grave besieged by Count Maurice, 408. It is yeilded up to him 409 Groll besieged by Spinola, 42. it is yeild∣ed, ib. Count Maurice strenghtneth it, 430. It is relieved by Spinola, 431 Groninghen besieged by Count Maurice, 305. Its description, ib. tis yeilded 07 Geertrudembergh besieged by Count Maurice, 299. The description of it, ib. It is yeilded up 301 H HAn, a Town in Picardy yeilded up to Count Fuentes, 319. Recovered by the Marshal of Bulloigne ib. Hernando Teglio Portocarrero, Gover∣nour of Dorlan, 350. He projects the surprisal of Amiens ib. The order in which he disposed of the enterprise, ib. His oration to the souldiers, 351. He seizeth on the City, 352. He craves a supply of men, 354. His diligence in defending the Town, 355. He sallies out upon the French Camp, 357. He is slain, 359 The Hollanders and Zealanders put for a shorter navigation into the East-In∣dies, 312. How they got into the West, ib. Their ends for the aforesaid navi∣gation, 313. The difficulties they met with therein, ib. Hulst and its scituation described, 342 Besieged by the Catholicks, 343. It yeilds, 346 Huy, a Town in the Country of Liege seized on by the United Provinces, 316. Recovered by Count Fuentes, ib. I JAmes Maldereo, Commissioner for Zealand 452. His oration, ib. James King of Scotland succeeds in the Kingdom of England, 406. Stiles him∣self King of Great Britain, ib. comes to an accommodation with the King of Spain, and the Archdukes, ib. His ends in the war of Flanders 441 John of Balen in Groninghen, 305. his oration to the Townsmen 306 John Guzman brings relief into Amiens 355. his death 357 John Barnevelt, Advocate of Holland, and his oration in behalf of the negotia∣tions for peace, 444. His opinion pre∣vails beyond that of Count Maurice, 446 Infanta Isabella, Philip the second his el∣dest daughter, 364. her singular qua∣lities, 365. She parts from Madrid, 386. comes to Brussels, ib. presents her self to the Army on horseback, and makes a speech to the souldiers, 392 Her constancy in entertaining the Archduke wounded in the battel of Newport. 398. She comes with the Archduke to see Ostend, 418 Frier Inico di Brizuela the Archdukes Confessor sent into Spain, 457. He re∣turns to Brussels 458 The Intelligence that Count Fuentes held in Cambray, 328. that the King of France held in Amiens 355 Italian mutiners in Sichen, 311 They seek to hold intelligence with Count Maurice, ib. Besieged by Campmaster Velasco, ib. withdraw into the enemies country, 312. come to an agreement with the Archduke, ib The Journey of Albertus upon occasion of going to fetch his wife into Flan∣ders, 399. Of the new Princes in com∣ing thither 386 K KIng of England, see James King of Scotland The King of France declared a Catholick 302. He besieges Laon, 308. and car∣ries it, 310. comes to an open war with the King of Spain, 316. Is fully recon∣ciled to the Apostolick See, 326, Besieg∣es La Fera, 334 and takes it, 340. How much he was vexed at the loss of Amiens, 353. He concludes a League with the Queen of England, 354 Goes over to the siege of Amiens, 355 What Intelligence he held there, ib. His affability to the souldier, 357 He routs some troops of the enemies horse, 360 Enters Amiens in triumph, 362. makes a peace with the Catholick King, 364 His Interests in the affairs of Flan∣ders, 440. His authority with the U∣nited Provinces, ib. He sends an Am∣bassador extraordinary into Holland to assist the negotiations of peace, or a Truce 441 The King of Spain, Philip the second, and his ends in the affairs of France, 296 He sends the Duke of Feria to Paris, ib. He makes peace with the K. of France, 364. His intention to marry the Infan∣ta Isabella to the Gardinal Archduke, 365. which he puts in execution, 368 His death, 369. his character ib. The King of Spain, Philip the third, re∣solves to make up an Army apart, to be commanded by the two Spinolas, 410 He approves of the Archdukes designes
against the enemie, 425. he resolves to give way to an Overture that shall be made, for an accommodation with the United Provinces, 437 L. ALeague between the K. of France, and the Q. of England, 354. Between the K. of France and the United Pro∣vinces, 451 A Letter from Archduke Ernestus, to the United Provinces, 303. Their an∣swer, 304 Linghen taken in by Count Maurice, 363. Besieged by Spinola, 422. Yeilded to him, 42 Lewis di Velasco, a Spanish Camp-master' goes against the Mutineers of Sichen, 311 he is made General of the Artillery, 372 Afterwards of the Horse, ibid. Routed by Count Maurice, 416. he succours Trivnltio, 424 Lewis Verreychen chief Secretary to the Archdukes, carries into Holland the ratification come from Spain, 438 M. MArquis Ambrosio Spinola raises Souldiers for Flanders, 407. Joyns his forces with the Admirals, 408. Goes over into Italy, and returns again into Flanders, 416. he commands in chief before Ostend, 414. his proceedings against that Town, 415. he goes to the relief of Sluce, 417. he returns to besiege Ostend, 418. which at last is surren∣dred to him, 419. he goes to the Court of Spain, 420. where he is declared Camp-Master General, and Governor of all the Kings Forces in Flanders, ibi. Forts raised by him upon the Rhine, 421. his speech to the Councel of War, ibid. he takes Linghen, 423. his strata∣gem to relieve Trivultio, 424. he re∣turns to the ourt of Spain, 425. he takes the field, and with what forces, ibid. he takes Groll, 428. And after that Remberg, 430. his Oration to the Army, 432. he relieves Grol, ibid. The Marquis of Barambone infests Pic∣cardie in hostile manner, 317. is routed ad taken Prisoner, 347 The Marquis of Montenegro commands the avalry in Amiens, 351. Falls upon the French Camp. 355. succeeds Porto∣carrero in the command of Amiens, 359. Yeilds up the place, 362 Marshal Biron routs the Leaguers, 309. Left to defend Piccardie, 341. he routs Barambone, 347. his diligence for the recovery of Amiens, 353. his attempts against Arras and Dorlan, 354. his undauntedness in defending the trenches 357. his opinion that the Spanish Army was to be encountred with all their strength, 361 The Marshal of Balagny, Governor, and after Prince of Cambray, 317. The people rise up against him, 328. he loses the City, 329. his wives war-like spi∣rit, ibid. her death, ibid. A Marriage proposed between the Cardi∣nal Archduke, and the Infanta Isabella, 364. 'Tis concluded on, and upon what Articles, 368. Solemnized in Ferrara by Pope Clement the VIII. 372 A Marriage between the Prince of Spain, and the Archdutchess Magaret of Au∣stria, 369. Celebrated in Ferrara by the Pope himself, 372 Mutual Marriages between the two Crowns of France and Spain, 434 The Meeting of the Catholick Commis∣sioners, and those of the United Pro∣vinces in the Hague, to treat of an ac∣commodation, 447. Matters there pro∣pounded, ibid. All negotiation for peace is quite dasht, 451. A proposition made by the English ond French Ambassadors for a long Truce, ibid. The meeting is transfer'd to Antwerp, 458 The Mutiny of the Spaniards, 297. Of Italians and Wallons, 302. Of Italians, 311. in divers Spanish garrisons, 369. amongst the Germans and Wallons, 389 N. THe memorable Navigation of the Hollanders and Zealanders, 313 A Negotiation for Peace, set on foot in Holland by the Emperors Ambassa∣dors, 390. It comes to nothing, 391 Neutrality violated by the Spanish Army, 375 Noyon besieged by those of the league, 296 It is yeilded. 297 O OLdenziel taken by Count Maurice, 363. seiz'd on by the Royalists, 422 Divers Opinions of the Kings Captains concerning the siege of Ostend, 413. Of the same men, about the relieving of Grol. 430 Orations of John di Balen to the citizens of Groninghen, 306. Of Monsieur de la Motta against the besieging of Cam∣bray, 318. Of Monsieur di Rosne for it, ibid. Of Fuentes party in Cambray to the Townsmen 328. Of Monsieur di Rosne for the be∣sieging
of Calice, 335. Of Portocarre∣ro, to encourage his men at the surpri∣sal of Amiens, 351. of Count Fuentes, that the Low-Countries should not be sever'd from the crown of Spain, 365 of Christoval di Moura, Count of Ca∣stel Rodrigo, that they may be made over for the Infanta Isabella her dow∣ry, 366. of the Infanta Isabella to the souldiers, 393. of Campmaster Zapena against assaulting the enemy in his trenches, 394. of Campmaster Barlot∣ta for it, ib. of Count Maurice to his Army at the battel of Newport, 39 of the same against the negotiations of peace then on foot, 442. of Archduke Albertus upon occasion of the battel of Newport, 396. of the same to the Ma∣gistrates of Balduke, 412. of Spinola to the councel of war, 421. of the same to his souldiers at the relief of Groll, 432. of Barnevelt for the negotiations of peace, 444. of James Maldereo a∣gainst all accommodation, 452. of Pre∣sident Jannin for the Truce. 453 The Ordering of the French Forces be∣fore Dorlan, 321. of the Spanish Camp there, ib of the same camp, in attempt∣ing to relieve Amiens, 360. of the Ca∣tholick Army at Newport, 395. of the enemies camp there, ib. of the Ca∣tholick camp before Grol 431 Ostend, 399. the description of it, 400. endammaged by the sea, 402. assaulted by the Royalists, but in vain, 403. closely streightned by Spinola, 414. is rendered up 419. great store of Artil∣lery and Ammunition foundthere, ib. P A Peace concluded at Vervin, between the two Crowns of France and Spain 346 Pope Clement viii. establishes the recon∣ciliatiation of the King of France to the Apostolick see, 320. he interposes to reconcile the two Kings 364. and brings it to pass ib. Paris peaceably receives the King after he is declared a Catholick 302 President Jannin Ambassador extraordi∣nary for the King of France in Hol∣land, 441. his proposition for a long truce, 451. his oration to perswade them unto it, 453. Reasons brought in by him to satisfie all sides 455 Q THe singular Qualities of the Infan∣ta Isabella, and the Cardinal Archduke 365 The Quarters of the Catholick Camp how distributed at the siege of Hulst, 344 R REasons that moved the two Kings to come to a peace 364 The Ratification sent from Spain the first time, in favour of the pretended liberty of the United Provinces, 438. It is not accepted of 49. The second, how it is explained, 440. How recei∣ved 446 Rembergh taken in by Count Maurice, 363. Recovered by the Admiral of Ar∣ragon, 373. Besieged by the German confederates, 384 Besieged again by Count Maurice, 399. Is surrendred, ib. Besieged by Marquiss Spinola, 428. tis yeilded up to him 430 Res a good Town upon the Rhine, infor∣ced to take in the Kings souldiers, 374 Besieged by the Army of the German confederates, 384. Restored by the Spa∣niards to the Duke of Cleves 486 The Rising of those of Cambray against Balagni 328 S SLuce besieged by Count Maurice, 416 Weakly relieved, ib. yeilded up 417 The Spaniards rout Count Ernestus of Nassaw, 393. How they like of the Ca∣tholick Commissioners going into Hol∣land 447 The Catholick States General meet in Pa∣ris 297 The States General of the United Pro∣vinces reject the negotiation of peace which Archduke Ernestus offers to set on foot, 303. They aid the K. of France with men, 316. They seize upon the Town of Huy, ib. They give to Count Maurice the Town of Lin∣ghen, 363. Their opinions of the mar∣riage concluded between the Arch∣duke Albertus, and the Infanta Isabel∣la, 368. They joyn their Army with that of the German confederates, 384 Their vigilancy in guarding Ostend, 400. They raise a great number of Forts upon the banks of the Wahal & Ysel, 46. The Declaration of their pretended Liberty before they will en∣ter into any negotiation of agreement, 43. They admit of the Archdukes proposal, and establish a suspersion of arms, 438. They reject the first ratifi cation brought from Spain, 439. The answer they give to the second 440
which yet is afterwards accepted of 446 The Catholick States General of the Pro∣vinces of Flanders, allow of the arti∣cles of marriage between the Archduke and the Infanta, 368 they assemble to∣gether in Brussels upon occasion of the arrival of the new Princes 390 The Stratagem of Portocarrero, for the surprisal of Amiens 350 Spanish ships beaten by the Hollanders, 421 T TElimone assigned for quarter to the Mutiners 312 A long Truce proposed by President Jan∣nin, 451. Difficulties exprest on the Spanish side, in accepting of it 456. It is concluded upon 459 W WAchtendonch taken by Count Bucquoy 423 Wesel compounds with the Catholick ar∣my 374 Z ZApena, a Spanish Campmaster, 378 His oration to disswade the Arch∣duke from assaulting the enemies quar∣ter, 394. Wounded and taken prisoner in the battel of Newport; he dies soon after it 397 FINIS.
