B207 R37046 16196805 105038
Cupids Court OF SALUTATIONS. Full of Complemental Dialogues, and other amorous passages, as well Commodious as delightful for Young-men and Maids to Read and Exercise. This may be Printed, R. P. Printed for J. Deacon, and are to be Sold by R. Kell, at the blew Achor in Pye-Corner, near West Smithfield: 1687.
To the READER. Courteous Reader, IT is a custom, that in every small Pamphler, the Epistle to the Reader must fill up some room: therefore I present these few Lines unto you, and with them my Book, which I intreat you to peruse with an impartial judgement: For it is the first I ever ventured into the the World, and must only commit to your censure, which, according to your estimation of it, shall either imbolden or direct my hopes; I could tire my Pen with Comple∣ments to you, and praise the use of eloquent Phrases, and force that fair
speeches bear, in expressing that pas∣sions of a Lover to his best Beloved; and instruct you how to behave your self before you encounter your Mistris. First in the gesture of your body, and other passages, either at Table, or in other Company, when con∣ference will not be admitted; but I know that he who is a Lover, is ca∣pable enough of such behaviour; and therefore not desiring to trou∣ble your patience, or burthen your Memory with too many superfluous Words, I only Dedicate these few Verses to your favourable Con∣struction of them and me.
He that's a Lover must find out More ways then one, and trace about In several paths; he must not be Discourag'd, though he daily see Strange crosses to perplex his Love, But still in constant crosse; move; And so at length he shall aspire To the full height of his desire. Three things in Love he must endure, E're he the depth of Love procure; First Time, then Opportunity, The next is patient Constancy: Time, Opportunity doth bring, And Opportunity the thing Which he desires, if Patience, Can but Foundation take from hence, And wait the time till it discry, And find out Opportunity. That man who constantly these ways can prove Let me lose mine, if he get not his Love. W. B.
A Direction for Lovers, how to chuse their Mates. WHen Cupid with his Golden Dart, Hath pierc'd your breast, and that your heart Feels amorous flames, if you intend To chuse a Mate, and Bridal Friend, Let them be Young, or let them be Of suiting Years which may agree, And equal to your chast desires, Cherish you still in loves strong fires▪ Or when your love you chance to fix, Place it so firm as't ne'r may mix With wavering thoughts, but always may Be constant to your Dying day: Which shall transport your Souls from Earth, In Love unto a second Birth: Where when pale Death hath born you hence True Love will make you recompence.
CUPID TO ALL HIS SCHOLLARS. YOung-men & Maids, whose constant mind To true affection is inclin'd: Whose modest thoughts yet never knew, Unchast desires, but still were true: Unto your chosen Mates resort▪ With boldnes▪ unto Cupid's Court. If you want words to Wooe, or Art, My best of skill I here impart: But from your breast you banish must All foul desires, that nourish Lust; For Cupid's Shafts is never us'd, Where Love with Lust shall be abus'd.
A Complemental Dialogue Between a Young-Man and a Maid, at the first Meeting. DIALOGUE. 1. Young-man: Fair Maid, e're I begin my suit, I must ask your Pardon. Maid. Pardon Sir! that's easily granted, you never offended me. Young-man. Nor never will: yet least my rude Language, and too hold intrusion into so fair a Virgins presence, especially on so small ac∣quaintance may seem offensive, I crave that, and freedom to speak, that I might reveal a secret, which will break my heart if I conceal it any longer. Maid. Sir, modesty, which is a Maidens chiefest guide, almost forbids me to admit long conference with a single Man in private, lest jea∣lousie might make some suspect, what our chast thoughts never intended. Young-man. Mistris, you may vanish that
fear: 'tis for any sensual affection, as intending in the least point to stain your honour, that I have presumed to utter my mind in secret to you. Maid. If I may be assured of this Sir, that small time I have, which (alas) is but little from my Parents sight, I willingly dispence with, to hear your Suit, and therefore desire you that you would be brief. Young-man. Then know fair Maid, I love you, moved thereunto▪ not upon easie grounds, or a rash and hasty desire of obtaining, but by the report and splendor of those rare qualities which are inherent in your vertuous mind; but since I viewed your Person, and those rich features which adorn it, and equalize your better parts, my heart is re-inflamed with a strong, yet chast affecti∣on; and I could wish this minute were the hour to accomplish my desires, and knit our hearts in a true Lovers Knot, by the lasting bond of Marriage. Maid. I were ingrateful, Sir, should I ab∣solutely deny you, and not return you thanks, though I cannot upon the sudden (for Marriages too hasty concluded, seldom prosper) resolve you fully, yet time and oftner meeting, I hope, shall e're long confirm our affections. I fear my Fa∣thers displeasure, and dare not presume too much upon it, therefore I must intreat you to excuse my abrupt, yet unwilling departure: but yet de∣spair
not, but till our next meeting (which I hope shall be as sudden as our wishes) let it suffice that I am yours, which I will confirm by the conveyance of some private Letters, and find oc∣casion to appoint a time convenient; that when we meet again, we may make our selves more happy in enjoying each others presence more op∣portunely, and a longer space: So for this time, wishing that all the joy and happiness of a con∣stant Lover may still attend you, I take my leave. DIALOGUE. II. A Dialogue between a Young-man and a Maid, at their second meeting. Young-man. FAir Mistris, for so I may now more boldly term you, since I find you stedfast in your Love, es in my absence you have expressed by your Letters, and not wa∣vering according to the Old Proverb; Out of sight, out of mind. I cannot conceive whether my absence so long from you seem'd more tedious or your presence at this instant more joyful to me; since every minute methought seem'd a day, and every day a month, and every month a year, till I saw you. Maid. You discover so much effection to me, Sir, as I should shew ingratitude, if I should
not both accept and require it; and were it not that I might be taxed of disobedience, if I should too suddenly condescend to what you request of me, to conclude a march without the consent of my friends, this minute should give an end to all delays, and consumate our felicities in the happy Vnion of Wedlock: therefore I must intreat you, that they who gave me birth and education in this World, may be a furtherance to our fur∣ther proceedings. Now shall we when the Nuptial knot is ty'd, Be joyful in each others company; You glad in the imbracements of your Bride, And I enjoy my Bridegroom lovingly: For Marriages concluded by consent Of friends, till death divide the knot shall last, When others 'gainst their wills breeds discon∣tent, And are dispers'd by every little blast. Young-man. Mistris, you speak my thoughts, and though I have often seen what strange chan∣ges in affection the deferring of time hath bred in Love, yet I cannot distrust you, for I know it is as impossible that any separation should step be∣tween our hearts, as it is for vertue to depart from yours, where it hath had so long abode; and therefore that you may see I am not over-ha∣sty in a matter which so much concerneth both our goods, I leave it to your discretion to appoint the way, and work the means with an earnest pro∣testation,
that you shall not find me backward in my best endeavours to effect it, since I must ei∣ther dye or live in your imbraces. Maid. Well Sir, we need no greater assu∣rance of our mutual constancy; only let this hast Salutation seal the hand of our affection, till it be more firmly tyed in the publick Congregati∣on, and I hope not only with the correspondence of our own desires, but the assistance and liking of our Parents. DIALOGUE. III. To move a suit to a Father, for his consent to Marry his Daughter. Young-man. WOrthy Sir, I doubt not but your Daughter, and my most intimately affected Friend hath certified you part∣ly of what I intend more at large to request of you, which is your good will and liking, and that you would be pleased to esteem so well of me, as to be∣stow your Daughter in Marriage upon me. Father. Sir, your request is reasonable, and may be accepted: but blame me not if at first I seem somewhat scrupulous, for it behoves a Fa∣ther to regard his Childrens welfare, since in their behaviour towards him (both while they are under his tuition, or from it) and his care of
their prefermet, consists his Felicity or Misery: therefore I must desire some respiie, that I may be essured both of your estate and condition; which when I have been truly certified of, you shall receive an answer. Young-man. I know Sir, you have been a Lo∣ver in your days, and have felt how tedious a small time seems to them, whose hearts have been com∣bined by a Natural consent already, and therefore humbly desire your spredy resolution; for as I in∣large in a fervent desire, lawfully to enjoy your fair daughter, so shall I grow proud to be termed the Son of so grave and aged a Father. Father. Sir, your external qualities both in Person and Behaviour, shew you to be worthy of a better match than my Daughter; nor if I find no other deserts, shall it be long e're I strike a con∣clusion to your lingring expectations. Till then, I pray you to take a freedom of my poor house for your entertainment, in your frequent visitation of my Daughter, and I hope time will not only discover your perfections in deserving her equal, but make my age joyful in two such obedient chil∣dren, and a prosperous issue from them.
DIALOGUE. IV. An earnest Suit of a constant Lover, to a Coy Maid. Lover. FAir Maid, I have long been an earn∣est Suitor, both by Letters, and other rare expressions of my love, but in my ab∣sence, could never obtain the least shew of favour from you, which hath made me at the last present my self, and shall be happy, if I may perceive the least glance of a pleasing Smile from your sweet Countenance to shine upon me. Maid. Sir, it was not a conceit of any defect either in your person or Quality, nor suspition of your descent, that made me all this while conceal my affection from you (though the deceit of Lo∣vers in this age, give a just cause thereof) but the consideration of the misery which purfues hasty Wedlock, made me for a time defer an answer, lest my too hasty consent might move you and some others to imagine that it proceeded rather from a fear of wavering inconstancy, than truth of perfect affection. Lover. Then say dear Friend, you love me now, and let one poor sillable breath'd from your sweet Lip, receive my drooping Heart, that hath thus long languished under the burden of your disdain, O speake quickly, or else My scarce conceived joys will dye, And perish in their Infancy.
Maid. You are too importunate, yet that you may not despair, know, I somewhat affect you, but must defer the conclusion of our Marriage longer, in the mean time you may visit me, and shall be kindly welcome, and for this time I bid your farewel. Lover. My best wishes attend you, but hear you fair one. I have one suit more: O stay a lit∣tle, and do not take away my heart my life, my happiness all at once, for with you goes all, all that this world affords me. But if you will needs go, let this parting salutation leave some impres∣sion upon your sweet Lips, to put you in some remembrance of me, your impatiently afflicted servant. Maid. Now you are immodest, and I must chide you, while you protess true love (which de∣lights not in lascivious kisses) I was partly wil∣ling to imbrace it; but now I must recall my too forward promise. Lover. O be not so cruel, let not a wrinkled frown obscure the brightness of that fair Sun∣shine, which dwells upon those smooth Cheeks: be not unkind and fair, for such the mighty Cupid in his doom hath vowed to be revenged on: let not a cruel Sentence pronounced from those bright Rubies, so soon deprive me quite of Life▪ since you are my judge, whilst I plead at the bar of Love) and can at one word strike me dead, or
reprieve me: O then let one pleasing smile from you lend me a minutes happiness. Maid. Mov'd as much by pitty as Affection, I lend you this minutes happiness if you be constant) as by your seeming passions you ex∣press, you may entertain a resolution that you shall enjoy me: but by a legal way, I prize you as my self, and would not you should miscarry either in health or sickness for a Million: but must intreat your further patience, till I have finisht some business which may highly concern our Marriage, and make us happier when it is perform'd▪ so take a freedom that was never granted to any (a chast kiss) for our pledge ac∣cording to your own unspotted desire. But if an unchast thought you entertain, Never shall you imbrace my Love again: Lover. If I have been too rude, or seemed the least way to abuse your chast intentions with my too bold or unmannerly behaviour, where the regard of fame, honour, modesty, and only such discourse, as a kind Brother might salute his Sister with, should rather have been rendered. O forget it, and henceforth I will always be silent to all discourses, but such as shall suit to your sweet thoughts, and discreet modesty. Indeed I will not ask a Kiss of you, No, not to wring your finger, or to sue To these blest pair of fixed Stars for smiles,
All a young lovers cunning, all his wiles, And pretty wanton dallyings shall to me Be strangers, only to your Chastity I am devoted ever, that shall bind Our hearts as firm as is the Ivy twin'd About a well-grown Elm, and ne'r untye, Till Hymen yoke us in true Loyalty. Maid. Continue in this resolution, and I am yours. DIALOGUE V. A Merry way of Wooing a Widdow, by a Young-Man. Young man. THe time of the day to you Wid∣dow, or the best hour of the night, when you have a Bed-fellow, and had rather wake than sleep. Wid. The like to you Sir, your own wishes are returned, farewel. Young. Y'are very abrupt Widdow. Wid. Faith, would you were so too Sir, that I might be gone, I have more business than to stand prating about had I wist. Young. Nay, but stay Widdow, I have a suit to you. Wid. To me Sir! I pray you then prove a good Taylor, and finish it quickly. Young. Y'are witty Widdow: but in good sooth now tell me, that's my business, what think you of me, or how do you like me?
Wid. Why to tell you the truth, I think you are a very sprute Young-man, and for the other, I like you as I always did, as well be∣fore as behind. Young. And better too I believe: but to be brief, what say you? Could you affect me, Widdow? durst you venture to cast away your self upon a lusty Lad now? I have good limbs, and a strong back, and can work hard for my living. Wid. You were best to go to the Mines, and dig Coals at New-Castle, there will be imploy∣ment for you. Young. Nay, but to leave off these demuring justs, canst thou love me? come, come, be like a Maid for once, say no and take it; you have been long troubled with a cross old Fellow, and now you are rid of him that lay Bed-rid by you so many years; he not a Fool, and lye (as ma∣ny) alone; I le make thee young again. Wid. I thank you for nothing Sir, I can do that with a little Pomar jum and Maiden-blush, dawbed upon my Cheeks. Young. Nay, once again be brief, in truth I love you heartily, and could wish we were going to Church to be Marryed. Wid. Soft Sir, two words to a bargain; old Birds are not caught with Chaff, Marry in hast, and repent at leasure: When I have taken a
little consideration of my Pillow, I will tell you more of my mind, adieu. Young. But when shall I see you again? Wid. When I have nothing else to do. Young. Come, come, we must not part yet, I' saith, you shall take a pint first Widdow. Wid. What must be, must be, let's ha't quickly then. Young. Yet I must not forget my old suit, what can you love me or no? Wid. I cannot tell truly yet, but I think I shall do by and by. Young. Well, the other Blass of Canary to you Widdow; that and a little pause will con∣firm it, speak, is it concluded? Wid. Come, I had as good be serious, and give you your answer; for I perceive I shall be troubled with you: You have won my affection, by your importunance: A thousand bashful Coxcombs might have come and I should have dasht them all our of countenance, but thou hast hit the nail on the head, and hadst not thou tired me with tedious Wooing, thou hadst never got me, but now be as brief to procure a License speedily (that shall be your charge) for tomorrow I must be wedded, & bedded, or I am gone again. DIALOGUE VI. To intreat a Friends assistance, in obtaining his Mistris.
Lover. WOrthy friend, so I hope our long acquaintance hath admitted freedom, to call you, and be assured of it, my occasion makes me earnest to entreat a courtesie of you; and I hope you will not deny it. Friend. Not if it be in the power of a Man to perform; for I prize a true friend as my self: and there is a Sympathy in perfect Friendship, which mutually combines their hearts; and me∣thinks the good that does befall my true Friend, reflects upon my self; and I shall be as glad to be imployed in your service, as joyful that it may be effected prosperously, whensoever you shall command me to undertake it. Lover. Sir, I presume upon the truth of your Friendship, otherwise I should not be so bold either to be so troublesome to you, or to commit so great a secret to your charge, which so infi∣nitely may import my welfare, if I enjoy it; or misfortune, if I miss of it. Friend. You cannot disclose it Sir, so soon as I shall be willing to imbrace, and with my best endeavour and power, strive to bring it to a de∣sired conclusion. Lover. Give ear then worthy Friend, while I relate it: I have a Mistris, in whose fair tountenance dwells more sweetness than the most curious Painters can allow to their best Pieces: In comparison of whose beauty, all the
best expressions of ancient Poets, either of Hellen (or more than mortal Venus) come far short of, of whom I may say with the Poet: Methinks in her fair face, Dwells all the features, all the grace A beauteous Woman can enjoy, No she, whose beauty bore to Troy A fatal ruine; not the Mother Of fair Cupid, nor any other That nature ever fram'd, can be Compared to my Mistris: she Exceeds all these besides Divine; All Vertues that amongst the nine Coelestial Sisters were divided, Are in her fair breast united. From whose fair eyes was glanc'd a stronger tharm, than my weak Soul is able to endure, unless by the same beauty from whence it first was darted, it be again recovered; but alas, I know not which way to accomplish it, without the assistance and furtherance of an intimate friend, whose care may convey some Letters interchangeable betwixt us; for I dare not ad∣venture to visit her my self, because of the en∣mity betwixt our Parents, and some other lets which interrupt my resolutions. Be not angry therefore, worthy friend, that I am thus fami∣liar with you to trouble you so far: you are not ignorant, how wary lovers should be in commit∣ting
fruth to any man in visitation of their Mi∣stris, lest his present familiarity might transport her affections from her absent beloved Friend: It is not policy indeed, but my confidence of you is such, that I cannot entertain a thought that may induce me the least way to suspect your faith, or imagine that you will give the least occasion for the breach of your friendship. Friend. Again, I vow to be your true friend and servant, and to undertake your business, with as sull intent to conclude it, and as true a zeal, as if it were mine own; and if you find me the least way faulty, or negligent in your business, or trea∣cherous to deceive you of your love, may the great∣est vexation of a Lover fall upon me, and my wife (when it pleaseth Cupid to bestow one on me) be like his Mother & with every Clown cornute me. Lover. It is sufficient; let me request you therefore with your best secresie, to convey this Letter to my fair Mistris, and in it inclosed this Ring, the posie whereof is, I long to prove, The joys of Love. And what my rude Language hath not fully exprest, be you my Orator to satisfie her more fully, and how I stand affected and obliged as well to her vertues as Beauty. My impatient desire to hear from my fair Mistris, will nor give me leave to detain you any longer, therefore with my equal wishes for your success and health, till I
am made happy with the sight of you again, by your quick return, I take my leave. DIALOGUE VII. The Friends return, with a Letter from his Mistris. Friend. WOrthy Sir, with as much gladness as speed to bring you these happy tydings, I return you this answer from your second self: that Cupid reciprocally hath wound∣ed her with his Golden Shaft, and she is as much inamoured of you, as your affection possible can be extended towards her; of which this Let∣ter will more at large, and more certainly give you knowledge. The LETTER. WOrthy Sir, I could rather wish to have been the bearer hereof my self, (that we might have expressed our gladness more full, enjoying the happiness of each others presence) then to have sent it in writing, for I shall never rest quiet till I see you be assured of my love, therefore (though my shortness of time, which I borrowed from the sight of my two strict Guardians, will not give me leave to be more copious) and let your resolution be constant, to meet at the place appointed; till when, with as much patience as my impatient affection will permit me, I continue Your truly devoted and dearest Friend. FINIS.
