B4082 12713921 66153
A VINDICATION Of the Reverend Mr. Alexander Osborn, In reference to the Affairs Of the North of IRELAND: In which Some Mistakes concerning him (in the Printed Account of the Siege of DERRY; The Observations on it, and Mr. Walker's Vindication of it) are rectified. And a brief Relation of those Affairs is given so far as Mr. Osborn, and other N. C. Ministers in the North, were concern'd in 'em. Written at Mr. Osborn's Request by his Friend Mr. J. Boyse. Licens'd Nov. 22. 1689. And Entred according to Order. LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, Tho. Cockerill, John Lawrence, and John Dunton, in Cheapside and the Poultry. 1690.
A VINDICATION Of the Reverend Mr. Alexander Osborn, &c. THE Design of this Paper is to rescue the Repu∣tation of a very worthy and pious Divine from one of the blackest Aspersions that could have been cast upon him. And tho' the regard which is due to the deserved esteem of every good man, much more one of that Sacred Profession, set so just and so charitable an Undertaking above the need of any Apology for it, yet our present Circumstances oblige me to premise some∣thing for obviating any ill constructions that may be made of it. As it was a great surprize to Mr. Osborn to find him∣self so strangely misrepresented in Papers Printed at Lon∣don, where so many Persons of Quality then resided, who not only knew his Innocency, but had been pleas'd to ac∣knowledge his good Service: So it was no less trouble to him that some of those Papers wherein he was chiefly wrong'd, bore the venerable Name of a Person whom he so highly esteem'd on the account of his being active in the same Excellent Cause wherein he had Embarqu't him∣self. He is extremely sorry that his own defence lays such an unhappy necessity upon him, to expose any mistake con∣cerning
him in the Printed Account of the Siege of DERRY, or those added to it in the Vindication of that Account. But he hopes none that would not themselves be thought partial and unrighteous Judges of things, will inter∣pret his care of his own good Name as any envious design to lessen the Reputation of the Reverend Mr. George Walker. For that deserving Gentleman may still enioy all the Honour due to his Eminent Service, to the Interest of Their Majesties and the Protestant Religion; tho' the world be undeceiv'd in that ill Opinion of Mr. Osborn, which he has unhappily led 'em into, as if he had done his utmost to undermine it. The asserting Mr. Osborn's Integrity and Prudence in managing those Affairs which the Advice of his Friends, and his Zeal for the publick good had involved him in, will be no Impeachment to Mr. W—'s care and fidelity in overseeing the Stores, and distributing the Provisions of DERRY. Nay, he hopes this Vindication cannot be displeasing to Mr. W— him∣self, who at length has ingenuously profest his readiness to give him all opportunity of justifying himself, and to make him all imaginable satisfaction if he has done him wrong. He owns this offer to be very fair and candid; only he could have wisht that Mr. W— (when he was by a private Letter admonisht of his mistake, and had so much leisure and opportunity to inform himself better) had be∣fore this time excus'd him from this unwelcom Task by that ingenuous Retractation, which he was with all mo∣desty and respect sollicited to. The Plaister would have been acceptable from that hand that first gave the wound; and therefore he can scarce forbear taking it a little unkindly to receive from the same hand a second  without the least provocation. He is sorry Mr. W— should think himself so far interested in his first Errour, as to run into new ones to support the Credit of it, and yet deliver 'em with such an Air of Assurance, as must needs rivet his Readers in the belief of 'em, if they be not undeceiv'd. For after so kind a profes∣sion, as that foremention'd, he is yet pleas'd to conclude
that part of his Vindication, which concerns Mr. Osb. with these words [Though he (i. e. Mr. W—) thinks it ad∣viseable they should not put him on justifying himself any far∣ther in that particular.] And besides him, that Credulous Gentleman, that Writes the Observations on Mr. W—'s Nar∣rative, intends (it seems) to affright Mr. Osb. from any At∣tempt to wipe off this dirt, by more he has yet in reserve to throw upon him. For he talks of no less than more Demonstrative Proofs, that may possibly be ready to be produced, if Mr. Osb. complain of any injury done to him. This were almost enough to perswade a Man out of the belief of his own In∣nocence, if a good Conscience were not Armour of Proof a∣gainst the most confident mistakes. But sure all this is suffi∣cient to shew the reasonableness and necessity of Mr. Osb's appearing at last to clear himself. For to have continued silent any longer under a charge as perfectly groundless as 'tis extreamely odious, and this so often renew'd, would justly be thought Stupidity rather than Patience; and he would not deserve that good Reputation he has formerly had, shou'd he now so wilfully throw it away. I shall therefore in order to the clearer Vindication of Mr. Osb. First, Consider the Charge brought against him in the Account of the Seige of Derry, and what is said to Establish the Credibility of it, both in the Observations on it, and Mr. W—'s own Vindication of it; and then give so satisfactory an Account of Mr. Osb's Proceedings in those Affairs, as is suf∣ficient to convince these Gentlemen themselves, how injurious a Character they have given of him. For the Charge brought against him in the Account of the Seige of Derry; 'tis this, That he was a Spie upon the whole North of Ireland imployed by the Lord Tyrconnel. A Crime so much the more detestable in him if true; not only as it would argue him persidious to the Protestant Interest in ge∣neral, but particularly to that great Trust which his Friends
in the North had repos'd in him: So that by this Cha∣racter all Men must account him one of the worst of Vil∣lains. One wou'd think then there were some clear Evi∣dence of his keeping up some secret Correspondence with the Lord Tyrconnel, some Letters Intercepted or Discover'd, in which he had given him dangerous Intelligence and Advices, how he might most effectually ruine those Designs that were forming in the North. But 'tis strange, that neither in the Account it self, nor in the Vindication of it, is there one Syllable produced to this purpose. But least I should be thought to misrepresent these two Gentlemen, as they have done Mr. Osb. I shall give the Reader their own Words. In the Observation on Mr. W—'s Narrative, Page 7. The Au∣thor thus speaks. I desire every Man who is not byass'd by prejudice and pre-possession quietly to consider, Whether Mr. W— (pen'd up within the Walls of Derry, depriv'd of all In∣formation and Intelligence both of publick Affairs and the Actions of private Men, seeing a Letter from a Person generally known, and an Eminent Leader of a Party, dis∣covering an Admission into the presence of the Popish Lord Deputy, (the great Engine and Operator in the ruine of Ireland) an Intimacy with him, and a Trust and Commis∣sion deriv'd from him, whereby he was directed to cajole the poor distracted and disanimated Protestants with the Terror of Conquest and Military Execution on the one side in case of Opposition; and the delusion of hope to be secure under a Protection, in case of submission, and a tame surrender of their Arms and Horses; I say whether Mr. W— perusing this ambiguous Letter, and observing the pernicious Effects of it, upon the generality of the People in Ulster, especially those of the Writers persuasion, whereby they were influenc'd to a fatal and stupid Com∣pliance, (As if the Doctrine of Non-resistance and Pas∣sive Obedience may be taught on fit Occasions, even
by such as dissent from the Church of England) had not reason to suspect his candour, and become very apprehen∣sive too, and jealous of his integrity. A Paragraph unmercifully long, but very easily pardonable if that were the worst fault of it. To the same purpose Mr. W— in his Vindic. p. 16. For Mr. Osb. Mr. W— is concern'd he had occasion to name any to their disadvantage, but he did it with that notion he had of him in the Garrison, and those of his own Profession there, and thought it wou'd on that ac∣count give the less offence, but he cou'd not easily forget the effects of his Letter which Mr. W— had shar'd in to his sorrow— And Mr. W— adds further, he has heard of the Gentleman's good Intentions in his Proceed∣ings; Mr. W— is sorry they were no better under∣stood, that he might clear him from the imputation of those mischiefs which his Management and Advices brought on that part of the Kingdom. But 'tis hard to serve two such Masters, the British and the Irish. If he was not more industrious and serious, Mr. W— is too sure he was more successful in his service to the latter by his Impression, not only on the meaner sort, but on some of the best Quality. In which words here is something said to render the Cha∣racter Mr. W— had receiv'd by report concerning Mr. Osb. highly probable, and something to apologize for Mr. W—'s Publishing it on the Account of its Probabi∣lity. What is said to render this Character, Mr. W— had received by report concerning Mr. Osb. probable, does part∣ly depend on what is contain'd in the Letter it self, partly
on the Effects which this Letter is said to have produc'd, and partly on the Impression which Mr. Osb's Advices, as well as Letter are suppos'd to have made, not only on the People, but on some of the best Quality in the North. Now if there be nothing in the Letter it self to counte∣nance this Charge of his being the Lord Tyrconnel's Spye; If no such Effects as those mention'd can with any Truth or Justice be imputed to the Letter; If Mr. Osb. gave no Ad∣vices that any way serv'd the Interest of the Irish, nor ever perswaded either the People or any Persons of Quality to a compliance with the Lord Tyrconnel's Offers, but the quite contrary; then all the grounds hitherto alledg'd to favour this report, are but like it self, new mistakes superadded to the first. There is nothing in the Letter it self to justifie this Charge. Mr. Osb's being once introduc'd into my Lord Tyrconnel's pre∣sence, is no Evidence of any such intimacy with him (as the Author of the Observations vainly imagines) that he shou'd meerly on that score be thought one of his great Confidents. For as he never spoke with him but once about that affair, so he never before nor after either spoke with, or receiv'd any Message from him, or any employ'd by him. And I wonder where that Gentlemen's eyes were, when he saith the Letter discovers a Trust and Commission which Mr. Osb. deriv'd from him, when the contrary is suggested in the be∣ginning of the Letter it self; and indeed the Lord Tyrconnel disown'd with some contempt the sending any Commissioner to 'em. And sure Mr. Osb's acquainting those Gentlemen in the North with what he had heard from the Lord Tyrconnel's own mouth, and had his Permission to relate concerning his resolutions of sending an Army thither, can by no Man of sense be thought a proof of his keeping up a treacherous Cor∣respondence with him in order to ther ruine.
To give this the force of so much as a probable Argument: It must be made appear also that Mr. Osb. made use of that message he brought to move those of the North to accept of the terms offer'd 'em by the Lord Tyrconnel; which if these Gentlemen can prove, Mr. Osb. is content they shall call him what they please. But as he never promis'd any such thing to the Lord Tyrconnel himself, so much less did he ever go about it. How earnestly he endeavour'd the contrary, will afterwards appear. And as the Letter alone has nothing in it to prove this Charge, so the dismal effects mention'd can with no Truth or Justice be imputed to it, or the Writer of it; Such as the fatal and stupid compliance of the People of Ulster, as the Observator speaks; or the mischiefs which befel that part of the Kingdom, as Mr. W. expresses it. As the Letter barely relates the Lord Tyr∣connel's discourse to the Writer, without the least mention of his own Judgment or Advice; so it was written to none, but such as were Members of the Consult, and with no other de∣sign than to draw 'em together to take such speedy and ef∣fectual measures, as the sense of their imminent danger, and the consideration of their common Interest should suggest to 'em. And 'tis certain, that Letter cannot be said to influence those to whom it was written, to any such stupid compliance with the Lord Tyrconnel's offers; when not only upon their meet∣ing, the Writer dissuaded 'em from it, but the Consult according∣ly rejected those very offers in the Answer, which they order∣ed him to send back. And the Consult were so far from ap∣prehending any such tendency in that Letter, to discourage the People from their own defence, that they order'd Copies of it to be spread on purpose to incite 'em to it. For what cou'd more effectually do so, than a certain Account of the March of the Lord Tyrconnel's Army, and consequently the necessity of speedy and vigorous Preparations to oppose it? If any were so weak as to make any other use of it (as I believe none ever did) it was owing to their own Fears and Cowar∣dise;
not to the Letter it self, much less the design of the Writer, or those that order'd the dispersion of it. It was their advantage not to be perfectly surpriz'd (as otherwise they had been) for want of Intelligence; and the People had too just apprehensions of Irish Promises of Protection, to be then deluded by 'em. And therefore whereas the Author of the Observ. talks of the pernicious effects of that Letter upon the generality of the people in Ulster, especially those of Mr. Osb's perswasion, whereby they were influenc'd to a stu∣pid and fatal compliance, (as if the Doctrine of Non-resi∣stance and Passive Obedience might be taught on fit occasions, even by such as Dissent from the Church of England.) 'Tis a wonder what ill Genius cou'd hurry that Gentleman to such palpable mistakes, as none on the place cou'd well be ignorant of the falshood of. As for the generality of the people in Ul∣ster, (and since he has given this occasion, I must in justice add) particularly those of Mr. Osb's perswasion; They were so far from being inclin'd to a compliance, that they were most free and resolute for Self-defence, and cou'd scarce forbear very passionate Resentments, when they found that some of their Leaders thought their circumstances and surprize cou'd not ad∣mit of it, and accordingly began to consult their own safety. And 'tis very hard to add this to all their other miseries, the upbraiding 'em so unjustly with bringing 'em upon them∣selves. And for Mr. Osb. and his Brethren, they were so far from what this Gentleman would insinuate, viz. Preaching the Doctrine of Non-resistance and Passive Obedience in this juncture, that they undertook, with the approbation of the Consult, to exhort all their people that cou'd bear Arms to appear with 'em at the appointed place of Rendevouz. (Of which more in the following Relation.) Their Confession of Faith does indeed entirely agree with the Articles of the Church of England, in the Doctrine of Subjection to Lawful Magistrates: But for the notion of Non-resistance (so far as it had been strain'd beyond all bounds by those who to secure their own Interest at Court had, made it the distinguishing
Character of a Party both in Church and State) as it had been an entire stranger to their Pulpits before; so it wou'd have been wonderful indeed if they had preach't it up now, when the dismal consequences of it were actually in their view. What they did in this juncture to the contrary, was consonant to those very Sentiments concerning the just mea∣sures of Government and Subjection, which many of those had upbraided 'em with as Seditious, who were themselves forc'd to take Sanctuary in 'em for the defence of their own truly generous Actions in this great and happy Revolution. And whatever occasion this Gentleman has given, I shall not now take it to retort so foolish and so groundless an Accusa∣tion, though I might do it with all possible advantage. And as those dismal effects cannot be justly imputed to Mr. Osb's Letter, so much less (as Mr. W— now further sug∣gests) to his Management and Advice. Though if Mr. Osb. had from a real perswasion of the inability of the North, to resist the Irish Army, advis'd 'em rather to accept the Of∣sers he brought, I can by no means think this wou'd justifie his being call'd the Lord Tyrconnel's Spy, or accounted a Friend to the Irish. For I think he wou'd do the greatest wrong to the reputation of that great Ornament of his pro∣fession, the Reverend Bishop of Derry, who shou'd Brand him as one of the Lord Tyrconnel's Agents, or a Well-wisher to the Irish and Papal Interest, because he advis'd the Inhabitants of that City to open their Gates after the first shutting of 'em; chiefly, I doubt not, out of a real dread of those dis∣mal consequences he apprehended wou'd ensue on so despe∣rate an undertaking. But Mr. Osb. is very far from need∣ing this Apology for himself: For that he no otherwise serv'd the Irish, than by discovering their designs, and sug∣gesting the most proper methods to defeat 'em; nor made any other Impression on either the People, or the Nobility and Gentry, than to encourage and animate 'em to oppose their Enemies; will be so undeniable evident by the follow∣ing
Account, that I hope Mr. W.— himself will pass a se∣verer Censure on his own Expressions in the Vindication it self, than Mr. Osb. is willing to do, and at length begin to entertain a better Opinion of him. For what is said in the forementioned Passages by way of Apology for Mr. W—'s Publishing this report on those presumptions of its truth, which we have here examined, Mr. Osb. is the less solicitous about it. Only he hopes 'tis capable of a much better Apology than that very weak and miserable one that the Observator makes, and Mr. W— him∣self is pleased to insist on. For sure those worthy Gentle∣men, do not intend to make the World believe, that Mr. W— publish't this mistake, When pen'd up within the Walls of Derry, and deprived of all Information there. And if Mr. W— had received this notion of Mr. Osb. in the Gar∣rison, he might have been informed better, if he had pleased, to Consult those Persons of Quality in London, who were on the place, and knew the whole affair. Nay, he might have been undeceived by Mr. Osb. himself, if he had inquired of him the truth of that report, when he waited on him in Edinburgh, where he was as industrious to raise Mr. W—'s just Reputation, as Mr. W— seems to have been in blasting his. He thinks Mr. Walker's hurry in Publishing his Account a much better excuse; but that will scarce extend to his Vindication of it.
Hitherto then we are far from seeing any demonstrative Proofs of this heavy Charge, whatever hidden ones are kept in store: But to put even those out of Countenance, I need do no more than give a plain Relation of Matters of Fact, that have too ma∣ny Witnesses ready to attest 'em, to be outfac'd by slender Re∣ports, or the greatest Air of Assurance us'd to bear up the cre∣dit of 'em. About the end of November last, 1688. a little after the hap∣py Tidings of the Prince of Orange's Landing had reach'd our Ears in Ireland, Mr. Osborn was entrusted by his Brethren the Non-conformist Ministers, and other Gentlemen of Note and In∣terest in the Province of Ulster, to get some Gentleman or other sent over from Dublin to the Prince with these following In∣structions, signed by those two whose Names are subscrib'd in the Name of the rest. 1. That in our Name you Congratulate the Arrival of the Prince of Orange into England, and his Success hitherto in so glorious an Undertaking to deliver these Nations from Popery and Slavery. 2. That you represent the Dangers and Fears of the Protestants in Ireland, and particularly in the Province of Ulster, and humbly beseech him to take some speedy and effectual Care for their preser∣vation and relief. 3. That you represent our readiness to serve him and his Interest in prosecution of so glorious a design, as far as we have access. Subscrib'd, Archibald Hamilton. Alexander Osborn. Accordingly on December the 8th. they sent over a Gentle∣man, now in Town, who in pursuance of these Instructions
deliver'd in a Memorial, enlarging on these Heads (for they begg'd no particular Favour for a Party) to the then Prince of Orange. The Originals of both which Papers are in my Hands. But besides this piece of Service which Mr. Osborn under∣took, he was further desir'd by his Brethren, and by other Gentlemen in the North upon his return to Dublin, to send 'em an Account from time to time, by the most prudent Me∣thods he could contrive, not only of the Success of their Message to England, but of the Designs of the Lord Tyrconnel in that Kingdom, especially what concern'd the Province of Ulster: Nor was this conceal'd from such of the Conforming Nobility, Gentry and Clergy as it was fit, and there was opportunity to communicate such an Affair to: And if Mr. Walker was unac∣quainted with it, the Reason is too obvious to be mention'd. Accordingly Mr. Osborn wrote many Letters, giving 'em the best Intelligence he could learn; several of 'em I have seen in Dublin, most written in a kind of Character, but two (if I misremember not) of his, written in plain English, are insert∣ed already in a Paper, call'd, An Apology for the Protestants in Ireland, &c. one Dated Feb. 22. (88.) the other Feb. 25. This Trust he so faithfully discharg'd, that several of the most discerning Protestants in the North have often regretted that those Letters of his were no better improv'd, which gave 'em so fair warning to expedite their Measures, and provide against the shock they might expect, as soon as the Lord Tyrconnel was in a Capacity to attacque 'em. And this is so well known, that had not Mr. Walker in this Passage oppos'd Mr. Osborn's Carri∣age to that of his Brethren in Derry, I should have imagined there had been some mistake of the Printer, and Mr. Walker had intended to say, That Mr. Osborn was a Spye for the whole North upon the Lord Tyrconnel; for that had come much near∣er the Truth.
The Noise of the Preparations made in the North, by raising of Regiments, &c. as well as of the Revolutions in England, extreamly alarm'd the Government in Ireland: And though the Lord Tyrconnel went on vigorously with the compleating of his New Levies, yet he was so apprehehensive of the strength of the Northern Forces, that he deferr'd the sending down his Army twenty dayes after it had been first resolv'd on in Coun∣cil. But when Frier O Haggerty (who was unhappily suffer'd to bring up the Capitulation betwixt those of the North and the Garrison of Carrick-fergus) gave him a full Account from his own Observations of the Posture of the Brittish in the North: [Viz. That they were untrain'd, and had few experienc'd Officers; that the most part were without Arms, and such as had 'em, their Arms were unfix'd, and unfit for service; that they were very much scatter'd, and their number not near what had been writ∣ten, and was confidently reported in Dublin; that they want∣ed all Ammunition and necessary Provisions for appearing in the field.] He resolved immediately to dispatch the most conside∣rable and best-train'd part of his Army, under the Command of Lieutenant General Hamilton. I am here oblig'd to omit some material Passages, for a reason too obvious to be nam'd; but as to Mr. Osborn shall add, That as he perceiv'd by his Let∣ters from the North, that their too great confidence of their own Strength, of Aids from England, and of Tyrconnel's fears, made 'em so secure, that they look'd on all the Threatnings of an Irish Army as only bigg words; so he begun to fear they would be perfectly ruin'd for want of such timely notice of their danger, as might enable 'em to put themselves into any good Po∣sture for their own defence: He found all way of communi∣cating Intelligence to 'em by Sea or Land entirely stop'd. He had been, without his knowledge, mention'd to the Lord Tyr∣connel, as a Person very fit to communicate any Message he pleas'd to send to 'em: And his deep concern to prevent their threat∣ned ruine, brought him at last (though with great reluctancy) to yield to the urgent Advice given him, not to refuse so fair an opportunity of conveying to his Friends in the North the best
Information and Advice that could be given 'em. And that this Wisdom of the Serpent may appear fully consistent with the Inno∣cence of the Dove, I shall transcribe all the Discourse that pass'd betweem 'em, besides what is referr'd to in the Letter it self, as transmitted to me in his own Letter. Lord Tyrconnel. I am inform'd you are well acquainted in Ul∣ster with several of the Nobility, Gentry and Ministry living there∣in, having had your Residence there for many years, to which parts I am a great Stranger, and cannot but admire at the rebellious Car∣riage and Actions of some hot and rash-spirited men, who have in∣cited the People to leave their labour and run out into Rebellion, yet I pity the poor People, and am willing to Pardon 'em, upon the de∣livery of their serviceable Horses and Arms, and giving up six of their chief Leaders. To this Mr. Osborn reply'd, He knew the Protestant Nobility and Gentry in the North in former times to have carried it loyally and soberly, but having had his Residence chiefly in Dublin for twelve Months by-past, he could not undertake to give a distinct account of present Irregularities among 'em. The Lord Tyrconnel upon mention of Irregularities grew hot, and said, What Sir, do you call 'em but Irregularities? they are guilty of the very height of Rebellion. To this Mr. Osb. considering his circumstances, thought not fit to make any Answer, but pro∣ceeded to put this Quest. to him, What if the People in the North should incline to deliver up six of their chief Leaders, and these six discovering their Inclinations, should withdraw, or transport themselves to England or Scotland, whether he would send down his Army to destroy the poor People, whom he judg'd to be drawn to take up Arms by their perswasion? To which he answer'd, If they did withdraw and leave the Kingdom, he had done with 'em; and added, That to shew his Lenity, he would be content with three of their chief Leaders. Mr. Osborn Propos'd again, If those three would not be clear to ac∣cept what offers were made to 'em in his Excellency's Discourse to him, but should rather incline to come and Discourse with himself, he grant∣ing 'em safe Conduct for coming to him; and if they agreed not, for returning again, to be in the same circumstances as before: To which he condescended, with a solemn Attestation; adding, That thô
the Earl of Mount-Alexander and Sir Arthur Rawdon should come to him, whom he judg'd the most active in that Affair, he would grant what was demanded. The third Person Mr. Osborn could not learn from him. Mr. Osborn Propos'd again to the Lord Tyr∣connel's consideration, (with a design to gain time for the Assist∣ance expected from England, and procrastinate the March of the Irish Army,) That Ulster was a large Province, consisting of Nine Counties, and therefore begg'd his Excellency would allow him a con∣siderable and convenient time for travelling through those Counties, that he might discourse what he had heard from his Excellency's own month, with the Nobility, Gentry and Ministry scatter'd in 'em, and chiefly concern'd in the Ulster-Association. To which he reply'd, That he would not stop the March of his Army for one day or hour, but would give Directions to Lieutenant General Hamilton, to treat with any that should be sent to him from the Protestants in Arms there. And then he shew'd him a Paper, which he said was a Copy of the Declaration he would send along with Lieut. Gen. Ha∣milton, and publish before he entred into Warr, as contain∣ing the best terms they might expect if they accepted not those proposed to 'em by Mr. Osborn; and he added here that Pas∣sage concerning the Irish Rabble mention'd in Mr. Osborn's Let∣ter, and added further, That had he been sooner ready with his Army, he would sooner have resented their rebellions Actions, and the Indignity offer'd to his Proclamation of Clemency; and being now ready, would delay no longer, and would not be afraid to go thro all Ulster with 5000 Men, and would be at Newry against the 11th. of March, and go on (as in the Letter) being consident he would meet with no resistance till he came to the Walls of Derry, That he knew well the Case they were in, and that their expectations from England made 'em so violent; but they would find themselves dis∣appointed, for no help would come so soon as they expected. This is (as near as Mr. Osborn can remember) the whole of that Discourse that pass'd between them, which the Rea∣der had not been troubled with at this length, were it not requisite to obviate their Reproaches, who rather than fail of something to criminate Mr. Osborn with, are pleas'd to argue, That if Mr. Osborn was true to the Interest of the North, he must be false to his Promises to the Lord Tyrconnel: For he
made him none, nor gave him ground to expect any more from him, than that he would relate what he heard, which accordingly he did in the printed Letter. So unexceptiona∣bly clean and Innocent was this Negotiation of his. And in∣deed the Lord Tyrconnel was as much overseen in permitting Mr. Osborn to go down to the North, as they were in suf∣fering Frier O Haggerty to come up to Dublin. And that the success was so different, was not (as will now appear) Mr. Osborn's fault. Mr. Osborn having obtain'd the Lord Tyrconnel's Pass, left Dublin, March the 7th, came to Newry March the 8th, and the next day he and his two Guards were pursued by the Rapperies, but got safe to Loch-bricklan. Here he wrote the foremention'd Letter to my Lord Massareen; and going on to Hillsbrough, he wrote the same Letter to Sir Arthur Raw∣don, not finding him there as he expected. In which Letter it was as needless as 'twas unadvisable, to give his own opi∣nion of the Lord Tyrconnels Proposals, since the design of it was to draw the Nobility and Gentry to meet and consult their common Safety; and he knew not what necessity there might be of his going back with any Message from them, or about his own affairs, to Dublin. But to those of the Nobi∣lity and Gentry that were there on the 9th and 10th, he deliver'd in a Paper containing many particulars, by way of Information and Advice, of which these that follow were a part. 1. That for the Irish Army, tho their Horses were good, yet their Riders were but contemptible Fellows, many of them having been lately Cow-herds, &c. 2. That their Provisions of Ammunition were not plentifull. 3. That shou'd those of the North comply with the Offers made to them, they had no reason to expect any true performance; the Lord Tyrconnel having broken all such Capitulations as he had lately made in the like case with the Protestants in the South and West of Ireland, and thereby reduc'd them to Poverty and Slavery. 4. That the Eyes of all Protestants were upon them. A great Interest depended on their carriage: And 'twere better to die
honourably, than live miserably under Popery and Slavery: That their self-defence might be of great consequence to Brittain as well as Ireland, either to their advantage or disadvantage, as their part should be well or ill acted. 5. It was advised that they should instantly gather all the For∣ces they could from all parts, and choose out of them a Party of their best arm'd and train'd men, to engage the Enemy, and have the rest ready to fall on their wings and out-skirts. 6. 'Twas advis'd also that the Conduct of their Military Affairs should be committed to their best known and experienc'd Officers. 7. That they should debate with 'em from Pass to Pass, and so weary out their Men, Horses and Provisions, in expectation of Re∣lief from England. These with many other things he suggested. The Irish Army being come to Newry on the 11th. he was on the 12th. call'd for by such as were in the Consult, and his own Advice desir'd: He insisted on the Advice foremen∣tioned, and with all modest importunity urg'd 'em to defend themselves, and not to trust any Irish Promises. And according∣ly he was Order'd by 'em to send back the following Answer to the Message he brought: We Declare the utter abhorrence of the effusion of Blood, and that we will use all proper means to avoid it, but cannot consent to lay down our Arms, which we were forc'd to take up for our own Defence, nor to part with our Goods by any other than legal means; and that we are ready to appoint Persons to treat on such heads as are consistent with the safety of our Religion, Lives and Liberties. On the 13th. Mr. Osborn and several other Ministers being sent for from Bellfast to Hillsbrough, there were Nine of 'em met on the 14th. viz. Mr. Archibald Hamilton, Mr. Alexander Osborn, Mr. Henry Leviston, Mr. William Legate, Mr. Alexan∣der Gordon, Mr. Alexander Glass, Mr. George Lang, Mr. Alex∣ander Macracken and Mr. — Adair; and before they pre∣sented themselves before such of the Consult as were then met, they debated among themselves what they should Answer to the Question, Shall we resist or make peace? They found only
one of their number inclinable to a Treaty, on the account of their bad circumstances; but all the rest were against it, and especially Mr. Osborn, who insisted particularly on these three Reasons against it. 1. That nothing was to be expected but what was contained in the Proclamation that came down to the North with the Ar∣my on the 11th. and was spread through the Countrey on the 12th. 2. That no true performance even of these Terms was to be ex∣pected, which he confirmed by several Instances of the manner of Tyrconnel's keeping his word with the Protestanrs in other parts of the Kingdom. 3. That the safety and peace of Brittain depended more on the Resistance which the North of Ireland might make than they were aware of. For he acquainted 'em, That there was a design laid for transporting an Irish Army into Scotland as soon as the North of Ireland were subdued. Accordingly what the Ministers foremention'd proposed to the Consult, will appear in the following Memoir drawn up by one of the Members of it then present. MEmorand. On the 14th. March last, (168 8/9.) about Nine Presbyterian Ministers came to such of the Con∣sult as were then present at Hillsbrough: They apologiz'd for their offering their Advice in such Affairs, which nothing but a deep sense of the common danger and distress of that great Bo∣dy of Protestants (whereof they were Members) could have put 'em upon. The Consult receiv'd 'em very kindly, and desir'd 'em to proceed. They then acquainted 'em that there were in their several Parishes many able Men, fit for Mili∣tary Service, who had Arms, and were not yet listed in the Army, and yet were very willing to venture their Lives for K. William and Q. Mary and the Protestaat Religion: They therefore Propos'd, if the Consult approv'd it, that they would presently repair to their several Parishes, and admonish all Men in their limits between sixteen and sixty, that could bear
Arms, to meet and rendezvouz on such day and place as the Consult should think fit, with such Armes as they could procure, and Ten days Provision with 'em. For they found by the Information of their Brother Mr. Osb. (one of their number) that the Lord Tyrconnels Army would certainly at∣tacque 'em on the refusal of his Proposals; which Proposals they could by no means advise 'em to comply with, but rather advis'd 'em to make a Vigorous and Resolute De∣fence. To this Advice, those of the Consult then present, rea∣dily assented, and presently employed Clerks to write Or∣ders for Summoning the Country to meet at Blaris-More, on the Tuesday following, being the 19th. Upon which the said Ministers resolved to repair to their several Pa∣rishes, to encourage and excite the People to meet at the day appointed; declaring their purpose also to come to the Field with 'em. They also further advis'd, that the next Monday, being the 18th, should be appointed as a pub∣lique day of Prayer and Fasting, to implore the Assistance and Blessing of God on their Undertaking; which was accordingly agreed to: And the said Ministers (with whom (I am inform'd) that very Ingenious Divine of the Church of England, Mr. Charles Lesley concurr'd) drew up reasons to be read in their several Congregations for that pur∣pose. But these measures came too late. For the Irish Army pressing on 'em with unexpected haste, and their Leaders neither agree∣ing about entrenching themselves, nor about the choice of any Post in those parts which they thought defensible, and some of them leaving the Kingdom: This uncertainty in their Coun∣sels joyn'd with the discouragement, which the delay of expe∣cted succours from England gave 'em, (with other things not fit for me to insist on,) prevented their appointed Rendezvouz, and obliged them to retire in great confusion towards Colerain and Derry. But this should not be forgotten, that though thse Northern
Forces so unhappily failed in their design of Defending those parts; yet many of those Regiments raised there, made up the chief Strength of Derry: Mr. W's own Regiment was rais'd for the Lord Charlemount, Capt. Chichester being the design'd Lieut. Collonel, but afterwards made Collonel of it; and the be∣haviour of such of them as▪ stayed in that Garrison, has (as Mr. W. justly observes in his Narrative) set 'em above Apologies for any miscarriage. This being a true Relation of matters of fact, (of which unde∣niable evidence will be produc'd if desir'd,) every one that re∣flects on 'em, must needs think this worthy Gent. deserv'd some other character then that of Tyrconnel's Spye; nor can there be a greater wrong done to him, then to impute those mischiefs and calamities, which befel that part of the Kingdom of Ireland, to his management and advices, by which he did all that was possible to prevent them. These reproaches are but a sorry requital of those Services, which wanted nothing but that success, which is not in human disposal, to render 'em as considerable as any of his Prosession was capable of, and were not a little expensive as well as hazardous to himself. How different the apprehensions, which the Consult in the North had of Mr. Osb. were from these Mr. W. had receiv'd from idle reports, will appear in the following Te∣stimonial, subscrib'd by several, of whom all but one were Mem∣bers of it, and two of them are the very Persons, to whom the Letter so much talk't of was directed. We whose names are hereunto subscrib'd, do at the request of Mr. Alexander Osborn, a Presbyterian Minister, late of Dublin, hereby certifie, That the said Mr. Osborn, was to the certain knowledge of some of us, and as others of us have credibly heard and believe, for diverse months before his coming down to the North of Ireland in March last, intrusted and employd by diverse Protestants of credit in the North, as a Person of known Integrity and Zeal to the Protestant Interest, under a private method to correspond by Letter, and give Intelli∣gence from time to time of affairs in Dublin, especially of the
Lord Tyrconnel's Proceedings there, in reference to the Army, and his designs upon the North of Ireland, which with other matters of no mean Importance to the Protestant Interest, he (as we have ground to believe) transacted with great care and fidelity. And that about the beginning of March last, when all correspondence between Protestants, from Dublin to the North, was cut off, the said Mr. Osborn, perceiving the Lord Tyrconnel immediately about to march down his Army to the North against the Protestants there, whereof they could in all likelyhood have no notice, but were in manifest danger of being surpriz'd and destroy'd thereby; He then (as we have credibly heard and believe) in order to prevent the same so far as in him lay, by timely Information, found means of procuring the Lord Tyrconnels Pass for himself to the North, where he had his former abode, the Lord Tyrconnel first tell∣ing him, that he might acquaint the Protestants there, espe∣cially some of the Chief, with what his Lordship then ex∣press'd: Whereupon he came down to the North, running a considerable hazard of his life by the way, being notwith∣standing his Pass pursued by some of the Irish on that Road, (as we were credibly inform'd, and believe) Being come to the North, he by his Letters acquainted some of us, and others, with the purport of the Lord Tyrconnel's discourse to him, as he left Dublin; but in the same Letters desir'd if we thought fit some personal conference, that he might have opportunity of discoursing more fully with us touching the matters therein contain'd, as by those his Letters of March 9th (8 8/9) may ap∣pear; whereupon diverse of us and other Protestants meeting with him at Hillsbrough, receiv'd from him a more particular and fall account thereof: He the said Mr. Osborn, at the same time advising us as his own private judgment, and as we va∣lued our lives and interests, not to put confidence in the Lord Tyrconnel or any of his promises, but if we possibly could to defend our selves to the utmost, or words to that effect. And as for his Letters containing the substance of Tyrconnels dis∣courses and threats against the Protestants; Some of us order'd
by common consent, Copies of the same to be sent and dis∣pers'd through the Countrey, that they might the better pre∣pare themselves against the dangers that threatned them. We likewise directed what Answer the said Mr. Osborn should make, and committed the same to his discretion and care. Now in regard some of late, unacquainted (as we presume) with the proceedings then in that part of the Country, or at least with what past on that occasion, have represented the said Mr. Osborn in a publique manner, in respect of his being so concern'd, as an ill man, and Spye upon the whole North, em∣ployed by the Lord Tyrconnel, and as serving two Masters, the Brittish and the Irish, and the like, to his great disadvantage: We cannot but own, that we (who had as we suppose good reason to understand him herein) had and still have better thoughts of him, and are so far from looking on him as guilty of any such matters, that we are well assur'd of his having in∣tended, and done therein the best service he could to the Pro∣testant Interest there; and that he was very faithful to the same to his utmost. All which at his desire by Letter, in order to his just vindication, We do hereby certifie this 19th day of No∣vember, 1689. Massareen. Ar. Rawdon. Arthur Upton, Esq Will. Conyngham, Esq Hugh Macgill, Esq Will. Schaw, Esq This Testimonial is so full, that had I receiv'd it sooner, it had spar'd me a great part of my labour. And I hope Mr. W. him∣self will pay too great deference to the Testimonies of persons who knew these affairs, and whose Reputation is above all ex∣ception, to persist in those mistakes concerning Mr. Osborn, which the little stories of some ignorant people▪ had impos'd on him. And the very same Character of his Integrity and Zeal, has been given, both by the Earl of Mount Alexander, and by other Gen∣tlemen
of the North, who have left this Town, as James Ha∣milton of Tillimore, and James Hamilton of Bangor, Esquires, John Hawkins, Esquire. The principal Members of the Consult, were so well satisfied with his Services, that they judg'd 'em worthy of a publique reward, as indeed they must be thought by all that take their estimate of worthy Actions from the sincerity and prudence of the Actor, rather than the success, which was not in his own power. For my part, thô Mr. Osborn cannot but think this usage very hard, yet I think him not a little oblig'd to Mr. W. for laying on him such an absolute necessity of exposing his own, as well as his Brethren's Exemplary Zeal for the Protestant Interest, to publique view; which their modesty would else have suppress'd the notice of; and doubt not but the Government will in due time take it into consideration. For Mr. Hewson, whom Mr. W. joyns with Mr. Osborn; I sup∣pose he is not ignorant, that he was some years before publickly discarded by the N. C. Ministers in the North, for his scanda∣lous and turbulent carriage; and therefore they do no more then right to themselves in disowning him. His narrow Zeal that would suffer none to fight for the Protestant Religion, but such as would take the Covenant, was certainly very unseasonable as well as foolish Bigottrie; And I hope as Mr. W. spy'd this Mote in Mr. Hewson's Eye, he will not overlook the Beam in theirs, who are as zealous to exclude all from fighting for the same cause, who comply not with their Sacrament-Test. For they equally sacrifice the common Interest of the Protestant Religion to that of a party; and deprive their Majesties of the service of one part of their Sub∣jects, as firm and steady to the Protestant Religion, and the present Government, as any whatsoever. Having done this right to Mr. Osb. I think my self concern'd also to do the same Justice to the Dissenters in Derry. I confess, I think it would become both Parties more, to joyn in their thankful Acknowledgments to God for such a Series of Wonders in their Deliverance, then to quarrel about their share in being only the Instruments of it. But as Mr. W. gave the first publique occasion to these Debates, by that passage in his Preface, which
(as explained by himself) ascribes the chief, not to say the sole glory of it, to the Church of England; so he is chiefly accountable for the ill consequences of 'em. And what I▪ shall here suggest, is only to rectifie, what (if I mistake not) Mr. W. has misre∣presented. As the Dissenters of Derry do not dispute with Mr. W. most of the Principal and Experienc'd Officers in the Garrison being Conformists (for it could not be otherwise, while none else but such had access to Military Employments, till some rais'd Regiments in this juncture) So on the other hand, Mr. W. should as little Dispute with them, their Numbers in Derry being more considerable. By the modestest Account of such Officers in the Garrison as were Conformists, The Dissenters in the Garrison it self, as well as those that stay'd in Town, were near five to one; nay many of 'em make the disproportion much greater. Nor are the Arguments imply'd in Mr. W's Q's Vindication, p. 15. of any force to prove the contrary. For a Governour, Coll. Baker had those advantages to recommend him, that would easily set him above any Competitor in their choice. And he had too great an Interest in the Hearts of Dissenters on the account of his known Affection to 'em, to be excepted against by 'em. All that can be inferr'd from his being a Conformist, on supposition of the Dissenters being more numerous, is only this, That they were too Zealous for their common Interest, to prefer their Af∣fection to a party, before the safety of it, and regarded more in that excellent Person the Qualities that fitted him for that Sta∣tion, then the distinguishing Name he bore. Nor had any other been chosen, if Col. Baker had not desir'd an Assistant to be joyn'd with him, on the Civil part, to take care of the Stores. And it was on his Recommendation that the Garrison assented to the Reverend Mr. W's being his Assistant; which may still consist with the supposition fore-mentioned, if we do but allow the Dissen∣ters the good temper which Mr. W. himself elsewhere attributes to 'em. And they paid too great respect to the Laws, to desire such a share in the Church as they then had, on any other occasion; and were too Modest to go about to engross it. But I would humbly offer to Mr. W's Memory, a much surer way of compu∣ting
their Numbers then this that he has offered. In the Cathe∣dral in the forenoon when the Conformists Preach'd, there was but comparatively a thin Auditory; in the Afternoon it was very full, and there were four or five Meetings of Dissenters in the Town besides. And how any man will reconcile this with the Number of Conformists being more considerable, or indeed near equal to that of their Brethren, I cannot well imagine. And for the Nonconformists Ministers (and the same may be justly said of the Conformists) they not only kept their people Quiet and Obe∣dient, but by their Exhortations constantly animated their Cou∣rage in their many bold and resolute Sallies. And therefore so very slender a Commendation of 'em as the former, needed not have been allay'd, by adding the misbehaviours of their Brother Mr. Osb. which are but feigned, and the real ones of Mr. Hewsons, wherein they are not concern'd. Nor are Mr. W's Reflections on their Brethren here in England (to whom he supposes the tem∣per of their Brethren in Derry a reproach) any better grounded then those on Mr. Osb. but being only General, no Man is con∣cern'd to go about to disprove 'em. I must also add, as to those Ministers in Derry, That there was some real ground to suspect the Ingenuity of Mr. W—s Amanuensis in the omission of their Names. (All being willing to excuse Mr. W. himself from so mean a thing) For not to insist on other things, a Minister here recei∣ved a Letter from two of his Brethren in Scotland, bearing Date Edinb. Aug. 15. (89) wherein are these words, This Account we have confirm'd by Mr. Walker, &c. on whom we waited yesterday at the Abby, in D. Hamiltons Lodgings, &c. to Enquire concerning the Condition of our Brethren there. The Account be gave us of our Bre∣thren is indeed afflicting; There being three besides Mr. Gilkrist remo∣ved (by Death) viz. Mr. William Crook, Mr. Robert Willson, and (as we took it) Mr. John Rowatt. The rest of 'em, viz. Mr. Tho. Boyd, Mr. John Hamilton, Mr. John Mackenzy, and another whose Name he could not remember, were in Health, &c. This gene∣ral hint is all we judg'd needful for the present, but you may have a more full Account from Mr. Walker, who hath taken his Journey this day for London. I alledge this passage only to clear those from any
imputation of ill-will to Mr. W. who were ready to blame this Omission as partial, for I am still so Charitable as to believe it possible, either that he might forget the Names here mentioned in such a hurry of Visits and Business since, or he might intend no more by that passage, then that he could not learn all their Names, and might be unwilling to publish an imperfect List of 'em. I am almost asham'd to mention these Tristes, did not the clearing these matters of Fact tend to extinguish these foolish Heats about 'em: And I am perswaded these slips of Mr. W—s ex∣cellent Pen had not been taken notice of, if they had not lookt too like a Design to diminish the just Credit of a Party, which above all things, an Impartial Historian should avoid all ap∣pearance of. There is but one thing more I would trouble the Reader with, A Relation of Mr. W's has done me the honour to report me the Author of a Paper call'd, An Apology for the Failures, &c. I must be so just to the real Author (whom I do not certainly know) and to my self, as to profess I neither Wrote it, nor knew any thing of the Writing of it; but yet I think this sharp Advertise∣ment at the End of Mr. W's Vindication, has done the Book-seller the kindness of helping off the Impression the sooner. 'Tis true that Gent. has run into some mistakes, by taking things upon slight Reports. As he has been less kind to Mr. Cairns then he intended, in intimating that as a Publique Declaration, which was only Private Discourse and Resolution, and ascribing that to him as single, which he always own'd was done by joint consent with others. Ard he has done the Arch-Bishop of Dublin wrong, by suggesting a common, but (I suppose) ground∣less story of his having receiv'd a 1000l. out of the Fund of Charity for Irish Protestants. But as Mr. W's Pen is no more Infallible than that Gent's, so he should in kindness to himself, have treated these mistakes with softer Names than those of Lies, Malice, Impudence, &c. For I suppose that Gent. will not per∣sist in em. Mr. W. might also, if he had pleas'd, forborn so Ungrateful a Reproach, as that of Dulness, and a Vulgar way of Writing.
And however he had despis'd that Paper 'twas not so decent to consign it into the hands of the Executioner, nor was it so Civil a Complement to the Magistrate to concern him in all the little squabbles of quarrelsom Wri∣ters. For the Reflections which he pretends that Paper casts on the Government, he must have very good eyes that can see 'em. I am indeed much troubled to find so ma∣ny severe ones on some of the Bishops and Clergy, but think Mr. W. had the least right to reprove that Gentleman for it, who in this Paper has so perfectly copied his example in those he casts on the Dissenters, which are as ill-tim'd, and as little excusable as the others. But I foresee so little good from, and take so little delight in these ill-na∣tur'd Subjects, that I shall give no occasion for new heats by descending into any particular examination of their Truth or Justice on the one hand or the other. I could rather wish these two Gentlemen would make the Pub∣lick this reparation for the harm they have done by their unseasonable Reflections, to write each of 'em a Panegyrick on the others Party. This argument would shew more good humour, and the carriage of the moderate and sober Clergy and Laity on both sides, both in the late Reign, and in this happy Revolution, will furnish 'em with mate∣rials enough. And methinks, of all things, the account of the Seige of Derry shou'd never have rais'd these warm Contests. 'Tis pity that distinction of Parties, which was so generously laid aside during the Seige it self, should be soon resum'd in these Discourses it has unhappily occa∣sioned. There is no Reflection which the Account of it can more naturally suggest, than the necessity of all Their Majesties Subjects, being united by their affection to the pre∣sent Government, and to one another. For how certainly had that important place been lost, and thereby the whole King∣dom of Ireland, (and perhaps the Peace of Brittain endan∣gered) if the factious Spirit of a Party on either side had prevail'd either to divide their Counsels, or weaken their Strength! With what admirable vigour did so small a Garrison, struggling under all possible discouragements,
defend those Walls against a numerous Army, when the sense of common danger had cemented their affections! By what a series of astonishing successes did Heaven seem to smile on their united Zeal in so just a Cause! How little then can it befriend the common Interest of the Protestant Religion to set it on the narrow Pedestal of any Party; especially when the mighty opposition it must yet en∣counter, both in these Kingdoms and abroad, require all the hands that can be us'd in the defence of it! And how soon might the honour of our Nation revive, and our Arms become a Terror to our Enemies abroad by the easy Conquest of those at home, if abilities for service and a steddy zeal for the Protestant Religion and the present Govern∣ment, were the only Standard of such as are admitted to Civil and Military Employments! For that excellent Maxim of His Majesty carries it's own convincing evi∣dence with it, That the employing all his Protestant Subjects in his Service will lay the best foundation of Union among them∣selves; And all other narrow Politicks will but hazard our Ruine, because they will certainly divide, and so weaken us. FINIS.
