C4126 07880470 40254
October 31. 1691. LET this Form of Prayer and Thanksgiving for the 26th of November next ensuing, be Printed and Publish'd. Jo. Cant.
A FORM OF PRAYER AND Thanksgiving To Almighty GOD, For the Preservation of Their Majesties, the Success of Their Forces in the Reducing of Ireland, and for His Majesties Safe Re∣turn. To be Used on Thursday the Six and twentieth of November next, throughout the whole Kingdom. By Their Majesties Special Command. LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb, deceas'd; Printers to the King and Queens most Excellent Majesties. 1691.
A Form of Prayer and Thanks∣giving to be used on the 26th of November next throughout the whole Kingdom. ¶ The Service for that Day upon which the Thanksgiving shall be observed, must in all other respects be used, but where it is here ordered otherwise. ¶ The Prayers shall begin with these Sentences. OFfer unto God thanksgiving: and pay thy vows unto the most High. Psal. 50.14. And call upon me in the day of trouble: so will I hear thee, and thou shalt praise me. ver. 15. ¶ Instead of the Venite, this Hymn shall be said or sung. I will alway give thanks unto the Lord: his praise shall ever be in my mouth. Psal. 34. ver. 1. My soul shall make her boast in the Lord: the humble shall hear thereof, and be glad. ver. 2. O praise the Lord with me: and let us magnifie his name together. ver. 3. I sought the Lord and he heard me: and delivered me out of all my fear. ver. 4. The Lord hath done great things for us already: whereof we rejoyce. Ps 126.4. The Lord liveth, and blessed be my strong helper: and praised be the God of my salvation. Ps. 18.47
I will magnifie thee, O Lord, for thou hast set me up: and not made my foes to triumph over me. Ps. 30.1. Great prosperity giveth he to his King: and sheweth loving kindness unto David his anointed. Ps. 18 51. Praised be the Lord: for he hath heard the voice of my humble petitions. Ps. 28.7. The Lord is my strength: he is the wholsome defence of his anointed. ver. 9. O love the Lord all ye his saints: for the Lord preserveth them that are faithful, and plenteously re∣wardeth the proud doer. Ps. 31.26. Be strong, and he shall establish your heart: all ye that put your trust in the Lord. ver. 27. Blessed be the Lord God, even the God of Israel: who only doth wondrous things. Ps 72.18. And blessed be the Name of his Majesty for ever: and all the earth shall be filled with his Majesty. ver. 19. Amen, Amen. Glory be to the Father, &c. As it was in the beginning, &c. ¶ Proper Psalms. LXXXV. CXLIV. CXLV. ¶ Proper Lessons. The first, Isa. 26. the 12 first verses. Te Deum. The second, Luke 18. the 8 first verses. Jubilate Deo. ¶ After the Apostles Creed, and the Lords Prayer, the suffrages shall be as followeth, Priest O Lord, shew thy mercy upon us. Answ And grant us thy salvation. Priest O Lord, save the King and Queen. Answ Who put their trust in thee. Priest Send them help from thy holy place, Answ And evermore mightily defend them.
Priest Let their enemies have no advantage against them. Answ Let not the wicked approach to hurt them. Priest Indue thy Ministers with righteousness. Answ And make thy chosen people joyful. Priest Give peace in our time, O Lord. Answ Because there is none other that fighteth for us, but only thou, O God. Priest Be unto us, O Lord, a strong tower, Answ From the face of our enemies. Priest O Lord, hear our prayer, Answ And let our cry come unto thee. ¶ Instead of the first Collect, the following Prayer shall be used. ALmighty and most gracious God, we bless and magnifie thy great and glorious Name, for thy late Mercies to us of these Kingdoms, in raising up thy Servant King WILLIAM to be a Deliver∣er to us in the day of our Distress, and to rescue us from Popish Tyranny and Superstition, and all those Miseries and Calamities which were ready to break in upon us. We also acknowledge with all thankfulness the wonderful Success which thou hast been pleased to give to their Majesties Forces in Ireland, even to the entire Reducing of that King∣dom. More especially, we bless thee for thy mer∣ciful preservation of the King from the great and manifold Dangers to which his Royal Person was exposed during his late Expedition; and that of thy great goodness thou hast been pleased to restore him to us in safety, to the great Comfort and Ioy of thy People: Humbly beseeching thee still to con∣tinue their Majesties under the watchful Care of thy Providence; and to protect their Sacred Per∣sons from all secret Practices and open Violence,
that no Weapon, no Design formed against them may prosper: And to make them at last the happy Instruments of Establishing that great Deliverance which thy Providence by them hath wrought for us in so visible a manner, that all the World may see that Thou art our Saviour and mighty Deliverer: Which we humbly beg for thy Mercies sake in Iesus Christ, our Blessed Saviour and Redeemer. Amen. ¶ In the end of the Litany, after the Collect [We humbly be∣seech thee, O Father, &c.] shall be said this which follow∣eth. ALmighty God, the just and wise Governour of the World, who lovest righteousness and hatest iniquity; We Adore that merciful and wonderful Providence which hath given so remarkable a Check to the Pride and Power of our Enemies, by the great Success of their Majesties Arms in Ireland; and hath brought that Kingdom wholly under their Obedience. Blessed be thy holy Name, O Lord; for it is thou that givest Victory to Kings, and sub∣duest those that rise up against them. Vnto thee therefore, O God, do we give thanks, unto thee do we give thanks, who hast wrought this mighty Sal∣vation for us: Give us, we beseech thee, such a dutiful sense of thy goodness to us, that we may live as be∣comes a People saved by the Lord. Banish from a∣mongst us all Infidelity and Profaneness; Purge us from all filthiness of Flesh and Spirit; Take away all Hatred and Dissention: And endue us with a Spirit of true Religion and Piety, of Purity and Holiness, of Love and Goodness, of Vnity and Con∣cord: that the Blessing of Peace, and the Gospel of Peace, may be secured to us, and to our Posterity; for the Merits of Iesus Christ our Lord and Savi∣our. Amen.
¶ Immediately before the Prayer of St. Chrysostom, use the Col∣lect of Thanksgiving, [for peace and deliverance from our Enemies.] ALmighty God, who art a strong Towre of De∣fence unto thy Servants against the face of their Enemies; We yield thee Praise and Thanks∣giving for our Deliverance from those great and apparent Dangers wherewith we were compassed. We acknowledge it thy goodness, that we were not delivered over as a Prey unto them; beseeching thee still to continue such thy Mercies towards us, that all the World may know that thou art our Sa∣viour and mighty Deliverer, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. ¶ In the Communion-Service, between the Commandments and the Epistle, shall this Collect be used, instead of the Collect for the King and Queen, and the Collect for the day. O Most gracious God, who of thy infinite good∣ness hast preserved our Sovereign Lord King WILLIAM from the manifold Dangers to which he hath exposed himself for the Publick Good; and hast brought him back to us in safety: We beseech thee to fill our hearts with unfeigned thankfulness to thee for so great a Blessing; and be pleased still to preserve their Majesties by thy good Providence, to guide them by thy Counsel, and to prosper them in all their Vndertakings for thy Glory, and the good of thy Church, through Iesus Christ our Lord. A∣men. ¶ Then shall follow the Epistle. Heb. XI. Verse 23. to ver. 34. BY faith Moses when he was born, was hid three months of his parents, because they saw he was a proper child; and they were not afraid of the kings
commandment. By faith Moses, when he was come to years, refused to be called the son of Pharaohs daughter; chusing rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season; esteeming the reproch of Christ greater riches then the treasures in Egypt: for he had respect unto the recompence of the reward. By faith he forsook Egypt, not fearing the wrath of the king: for he en∣dured as seeing him who is invisible. Through faith he kept the passover, and the sprinkling of bloud, lest he that destroyed the first-born, should touch them. By faith they passed through the Red sea, as by dry land: which the Egyptians assaying to do, were drowned. By faith the walls of Iericho fell down, after they were compassed about seven days. By faith the harlot Rahab perished not with them that believed not, when she had received the spies with peace. And what shall I more say? for the time would fail me to tell of Gedeon, and of Barak, and of Samson, and of Iephthae, of David also and Sa∣muel, and of the prophets: Who through faith sub∣dued kingdoms, wrought righteousness, obtained promises, stopped the mouths of lions, quenched the violence of fire, escaped the edge of the sword, out of weakness were made strong, waxed valiant in fight, turned to flight the armies of the aliens. ¶ The Gospel. St. Matth. V. Verse 43. to the end. YE have heard that if hath been said, Thou shalt love thy neighbour, and hate thine enemy: But I say unto you, Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully use you, and persecute you: That ye may be the children of your Father which is in heaven, for he maketh his sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and sendeth rain on the just and on the
unjust. For if ye love them which love you, what re∣ward have ye? do not even the publicanes the same? And if ye salute your brethren only, what do you more then others? do not even the publicanes so? be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in hea∣ven is perfect. ¶ After the Prayer [for the whole state of Christs Church, &c] this Collect shall be used. O Most merciful Father, who art nigh to all those who call upon thee in truth: We bless thy Name, that thou hast hearkned to the voice of our Supplications, and hast not cast out our Prayer, nor turned away thy mercy from us; but hast kept us in Peace at home, and graciously preserved our Sovereign abroad from Perils both by Sea and Land, and brought him back to his People in Health and Safety, and given him the full and quiet posses∣sion of his Three Kingdoms. What shall we ren∣der to thee, O Lord, for all these benefits? We will love the Lord who hath inclined his ear unto us, and will call upon him as long as we live. Grant, we beseech thee, that being delivered from the hands of our Enemies, we may serve thee without fear, in Holiness and Righteousness before thee all the days of our lives: That thou who hast hitherto been our Helper and Deliverer, mayest be pleased at last to Establish Truth and Peace in the midst of us; to the glory of thy great Name, the comfort and support of the Reformed Churches abroad, the pro∣pagation of the Gospel, and the Enlargement of the Kingdom of thy dear Son: Which we beseech thee to hasten, that all Nations may fall down and wor∣ship before thee, saying, Blessing, and Glory, and Wisdom, and Honour, and Power be unto our God for ever, and ever. Amen.
¶ A Prayer for all Mankind, and especially for the Reformed Churches. O Lord our God, abundant in Goodness and Truth, whose tender Mercies are over all thy Works: We beseech thee to extend thy Mercy and Compas∣sion to all Mankind; more particularly to the Re∣formed Churches abroad; and especially to those who are still under Persecution for Truth and Righ∣teousness sake. Relieve them according to their se∣veral Necessities; be a Shelter and Defence to them from the Fury of the Oppressour. Let the Sighing of the Prisoners come before thee, and ac∣cording to the Greatness of thy Power preserve them that are appointed to die. Visit them in Mer∣cy that are Banish'd for the Testimony of thy Truth: Gather thy Dispersed together, and Restore the Out∣casts of thy People; and in thy good Time bring them Home to Worship thee in their own Land: And whatsoever they have Lost for thy Sake, return it to them, according to thy gracious Promise, in the Blessings of this and a better Life. And we hum∣bly beseech thee to Enlighten all those who are in Darkness and Errour, and to give them Repentance to the acknowledgment of the Truth: That we may all become one Flock under the great Shepherd and Bishop of our Souls, Iesus Christ, our Blessed Saviour and Redeemer: To wham with thee, O Father, and the Holy Spirit, be all honour and glo∣ry for evermore. Amen. FINIS.
