C4991 12117573 54374
AN ACCOUNT OF THE Court of Portugal, Under the Reign of the present King Dom PEDRO II. WITH Some Discourses on the Interests of PORTƲGAL, with Re∣gard to other Sovereigns; CONTAINING A Relation of the most Considera∣ble Transactions that have pass'd of late between that Court, and those of Rome, Spain, France, Vienna, England, &c. LONDON, Printed for Thomas Bennet, at the Half-Moon in St. Paul's Church-Yard, 1700.
THE CONTENTS. PART I. OF the King of Portugal. Page 3 Of the Publick Revenues, and the Forces of the Crown, both by Land and Sea. 19 Of His Majesty's first Queen. 43 Of the late Queen. 109 Of the Queen Dowager of England. 125 Of the late Infanta. 128 Of the King's Issue by his second Marriage. 148 Of his Natural Daughter. 160 Of the Ministry. 164 Of the Marquess of Alegrete. 165 Of the Duke of Cadaval. 171 Of the Archbishop of Lisbon. 172 Of the Marquess of Aronches. 178 Of the Secretary of State. 179
PART. II. OF the Interests of Portugal with Relation to Rome. Page 1 To Spain. 44 France. 62 The Emperor, Holland, the Northern Crowns, &c. 114 England. 119
THE PREFACE THE Contents of the following Papers, were intended to fill some few Cha∣pters, in a General Account of Por∣tugal; but the Author in digesting his Mate∣rials, found them like to swell into almost as great a Volume as he design'd for the whole, which made him resolve to venture them out by themselves, as despairing of being read, should the Bulk become so great, as the taking in of the other Parts of his Subject wou'd make it. This is the true Reason why the Court of Portugal appears thus unaccompanied with such other Matters as shou'd have been plac'd before and after it; which is what the Author was far from designing, when he first began to write; It was then, for many Reasons, the least in his Intention, to single out the Court, from that great Variety of Subjects which Portugal affords to one that is not altogether an idle Spectator in it. It is true, that he thought it convenient in describing the State of that Kingdom, to be more full in this part of his Account, than they
usually are, who write of Foreign Countries: For to understand the Affairs of any Nation, it is absolutely necessary to have some compe∣tent Knowledge of the Court; that is to say, of such as preside themselves at the Helm, or have any great Influence upon those that do; The Court, in this sense, being to a Politick Body, what the Mind is to the Natural, com∣municating Life and Motion to all the Mem∣bers; and as that Vital Principle appears to be disposed, or affected, one may soonest dis∣cover the Symptoms of a Vigorous, or a Weakly Constitution: And one who is well acquainted with the State of That, may be enabled to give a good Account of the Publick Proceedings, by tracing them to their Original Causes and Motives; and may, withal, make some pro∣bable Conjecture, what they are like to be in any suppos'd Case, for the time to come. It was likewise thought necessary, in order to understand the true State of Portugal, to know in what Terms that Kingdom stands with its several Neighbours; those more espe∣cially, in whose Will or Power it is to do any great Good or Harm. Now the best way to know, how far Portugal is to expect either the one or the other from them, is by considering what it hath receiv'd already; former Experience being the surest Evidence in this Case. It is therefore the Design of those Discourses, that make the Second Part of this Piece, to shew how
Portugal hath been served by its real or pre∣tended Friends, as often as they have been put to the Trial, or had any occasion to discover themselves; and it is conceiv'd, that the Transactions that have pass'd between this, and other Crowns, since the House of Bragança came to be in possession of the Throne, are set in a just Light, so far at least, as that the Reader may easily perceive, what the true In∣terests of Portugal are; and whether, or no, they have been duly cultivated, by such as have the Management of Affairs in that Kingdom. But the chief Business of this Preface, is to justifie the Author's Credit with the Reader; which may possibly be called in question, in re∣gard to several Particulars, in the following Account. He is far from the Folly of thinking himself exempt from Mistakes; it is very likely, that he may have been guilty of many, in that great variety of Matters which he hath had occasion to mention. He does not remem∣ber, that he ever saw any Relation of our En∣glish Affairs, made by Strangers, that had not many palpable Errors in it; which makes him the less confident of his own Performance: And he expects the like Allowances, that are usually made to those that write of Foreign Countries. However, he must acknowledge at the same time, that those grosser Faults that are commonly observ'd in ordinary Travellers, wou'd be much more inexcusable in him; he
having liv'd for some Years in the Country he writes of, his Acquaintance was amongst in∣telligent Persons, who had lived there much longer; he hath been somewhat conversant with the Portuguese Authors, and hath brought away with him a Collection of such of them as are most esteem'd; and out of these last, he is ready to produce his Evidence, for such Pas∣sages in this Piece, as are most likely to be call'd in question. In relating that great Transaction, wherein His present Majesty's first Queen had so large a share, he hath taken the principal Matters of Fact, from the Catastrophe de Portugal, written in Defence of the Party which got the Ʋpper-hand; the Substance whereof, as the Writer pretends, was read before the Three E∣states of the Kingdom. It is true, that Re∣flections very different from his, are frequent∣ly made here upon the very same Facts; The Author, on many Occasions, as little approving of that Writers Sentiments, as he does of his Stile throughout the Book; which is that of a most passionate and furious Declaimer, rather than a just Historian. In speaking of the Portuguese Affairs; with relation to Rome, he hath likewise made great use of the Publick Acts of the King, and the Estates, as also of the Conde da Eryceiras Portugal Restaura∣do. He hath also followed the same Noble Author, in what he relates concerning the Nego∣tiations
with the Court of France. The Con∣de had Opportunities to inform himself of these Matters at the best Hand; that is, from the Reports and Letters of Publick Ministers: His Lordship hath indeed given us in England great occasion to complain of him; but that may have been for Reasons, which will never make him suspected of being much prejudiced against either Rome, or France. Cardinal Mazarine's Conduct, in the Cause of Portugal, at the Pirenees, is describ'd from his own Letters. The Information received by the Au∣thor, concerning the great part which the En∣glish had, in the Victories obtain'd over the Spaniards, and in concluding the Peace, and consequently in establishing the Portuguese Throne, was such, that he could desire no better. He hath taken some Particulars about the intended Match between the late Infanta, and the Duke of Savoy, as it was transacted at Turin, from the famous Gregorio Leti: But he hath spoken dubiously of them; tho' if that Writer be of any Credit, he may be belie∣ved, as to things done at Turin, he having lived so long as he did in the Neighbourhood. There are some things likewise in the Chapter of Spain, borrowed from him, Leti pretending to a Personal Acquaintance with the Duke of Giovinazzo. In the Chapter concerning the Ministry, and elsewhere, he hath made some use, and but little, of a Memoir in French,
which was handed about in Manuscript, at Lisbon, written, as 'twas said, by a German, that was Secretary to the late Queen; but he is too severe in his Censures, to be much fol∣low'd by one that would not be thought satyrical. He hath cause to fear, that his Account of the Customs and Taxes, is neither so exact, nor so full, as he could wish, he being little acquaint∣ed with those Matters; however, he shew'd it to one whose Business it was to know them bet∣ter, who did not discover to him any Error in it. Some may think, that the Portuguese Money, is set against our English, at too low a Rate, the Exchange, of late Years, having run much higher on the Portuguese side; but he is assured by those that are more skilful than himself, that he hath justly reckon'd it, accord∣ing to the intrinsick Value. There is nothing material said, concerning the Croisade Bull, that is not taken out of the Bull it self, and the Papers publish'd by the Commissary, by Au∣thority from the Pope; this, and another Bull, with some more Authentick Papers, should have been placed at the End of the Book, had there been room for them: But they shall be forth-coming, whenever it is thought convenient. The Transactions between Xavier, and her late Majesty, have been related upon the Credit of the Authors mention'd on that occasion. The Jesuits Address is faithfully translated only it was forgot to give necessary Directions
to the Compositor, to put Breaches in several places, the Orator making a great many more Flourishes, to the like purpose with those set down, but they are past over, lest he should ap∣pear tedious; however, this Omission hath occasion'd little or no alteration in the Sense; great care was taken in the Translation, not to pervert his Meaning, by the least Turn of Ex∣pression, tho' in one Passage it cost some Pains to make him speak English in modest Terms. The Relation of the Deceased Prince's Investi∣ture in the Ʋniversal Monarchy, is wholly Padre Vieira's own: It is indeed very much contracted; but 'tis hoped, that his Sense is not much obscured; and it is given, for the most part, in a literal Translation of his own Words. The Reader may wonder to see this Father brought in upon the Stage so often as he is; which, in truth, is so very often, that his Name is sometimes suppressed: And some may think it unfair, to insist so much upon the Whimsies of one Man, since from Relations of this kind, People commonly form their Notions of the general Character and Ge∣nius of a whole Nation. But the Author is far from being Conscious to himself of any dis∣ingenuous Dealing in this respect; one great Reason why he thought fit to single out Padre Vieira, from amongst several other of the fa∣mous Preachers in Portugal, whose Works are now by him, was, because he wou'd give for a
Specimen, the very best of the kind, as Pa∣dre Vieira is generally acknowledg'd to be by his Country-men; insomuch, that perhaps there never was a Preacher so universally, or so highly approv'd of in Portugal, by all Or∣ders and Degrees of Men; and the Reason commonly given for his being so much esteem'd is, because he was one of the least guilty of those prodigious Extravagancies which Strangers are so much astonish'd at in the Sermons of other Preachers; tho' the Truth is, one wou'd take that particular Instance now mention'd, to be both an Original, and a Nonsuch.
AN ACCOUNT OF THE Court of PORTƲGAL, UNDER THE REIGN Of the Present KING, Dom Pedro II. THIS present Account of the Portuguese Court, is confin'd to the Royal Fami∣ly, and such of the Ministers as are sup∣pos'd to have a more than ordinary Share in the Direction of Affairs: Other Mat∣ters being reserv'd for a more General Account of the Kingdom and Government. The Subject of this, is commonly the most ta∣ken notice of, in Relations from Foreign Coun∣tries; and will therefore be more enlarg'd upon
than hath been usual in Works of a like Nature: For which, as it is hoped, the Dignity of the Persons to be spoken of, and the Importance, or at least the Novelty of the Matters to be re∣lated, may serve for an Excuse. There will perhaps be occasion for some such Apology, in several of the following Chapters; but if it be any where needless, it is certainly in the first. The KING, since his being setled in the Government, having obtain'd a Character in the World, that is so Fair in it self, and stands in so little need of Shading, that none can with Reason think amiss of an Endea∣vour to draw it at full Length, and to set it in a just Light.
Of the KING. HIS Title is, The High and Mighty Prince, Dom PEDRO the Second, by the Grace of GOD, King of Portugal, and of the Algarves, on this, and on the other side of the Sea, in Africa; Lord of Guinè, and of the Conquest, Navigation, Commerce, of Aethiopia, Arabia, Persia; and of India, with an &c. He was born the 26th of April, 1648. He took upon him the Government, with the Title of Prince-Regent, the 23d of November, 1667; when King Dom Alfonso the Sixth, his elder Bro∣ther, was Dethron'd; and he succeeded to the Crown at the Death of that King, which hap∣ned on the 12th of December, 1683. He is of a robust and vigorous Constitution, tall of Person, somewhat above the ordinary size, and proportionably big; of wonderful Strength, and great Activity of Body, as appears still by the Proof he makes of both, at his ordinary Exer∣cises and Diversions. He is of a grave and comely Aspect, hath nothing of Haughtiness in his Looks; but on the contrary, such an Air of Modesty, as may be thought unusual in Persons of his Rank: He appears somewhat uneasie, when gaz'd upon by a Multitude; and one may discern a little Disorder in his Countenance, when he is Speak∣ing in Publick, to such as he is not used to. He wears a long black Perruque; and when he ap∣pears in Publick, is always habited in Black, with a Cloak, and long Lace-Band, which is the
common Wear, among People of any Fashion, about the Town. At other times he goes with∣out a Cloak, and in colour'd Cloaths, made after the French Mode; unless it be whilst a Pragma∣tica, prescribing the Fashion, is in force, (as he hath several times published Edicts to that pur∣pose); for then the King's Cloaths are made after the Pattern he would have follow'd by his Subjects. 'Till English black Cloth was allow'd of, His Majesty usually wore Colchester-Bays. This Prince is of a quick Apprehension, and a piercing Judgment, sensible, thoughtful, and in∣clinable to Melancholy, which of late Years hath grown much upon him; upon what occasion, I cannot pretend to determine. He is a very Religious Prince, being constantly observant of the Set-Times and Seasons of Devo∣tion: Is often heard, by those that are near him, saying over his Ave-Maries, and Pater-Nosters, to himself. He shews a great Zeal for the Con∣version of Infidels to Christianity, and is at great Charges in sending out Missionaries, and some∣times Ships on purpose for that end. Nor doth he think it below him, to concern himself in bringing over to the Romish Religion, such as he hath been taught to call Hereticks, be the Persons never so mean. But above all, he is exceeding cha∣ritable; and, as I have it from good Hands, ex∣pends large Sums that way. He is very temperate in his Diet, eats com∣monly alone, and sometimes (as they say) sitting on the Floor, according to the ancient Custom of the Country; (which the Women observe to this Day) with a flat piece of Cork under him, sel∣dom more than one Attendant waiting on him while he eats. His Meals are extreamly mode∣rate,
and provided as for a single Person. His constant Drink is Water; for he never uses any strong Liquors. He hath so great an Aversion to Wine, that he doth not only refrain from it himself but obliges all about him to a like Ab∣stinence. Such of the Nobility, or others, that have drunk Wine, must keep from Court that Day: For His Majesty would discover them by the Smell, and not fail to signifie his Displea∣sure. Nor doth he find it difficult to make him∣self obey'd in this Point; People of this Country, Persons of Quality more especially, and, indeed, all that have the least regard to their Credit, be∣ing very shy of drinking Wine: And, I believe, there is no People in Europe, less addicted, to that most inexcusable Vice of Drunkenness, than they are. I can say nothing in Commendation of this King's Temperance of another sort; there being certain forbidden Pleasures, that are too much allow'd of in Portugal: In which, if common Report, among his Subjects, be to be credited, he hath indulg'd himself very much: And they say, he has not been wholly free from the Incon∣veniences consequent to such a Practice. I never heard, that he hath had any declared Favourite of the Sex, unless it were one French-Woman; who had that Title, for some time, at least, a∣mong the People: But those he hath had this Commerce with, are said to be of the lowest Rank (the French-Woman excepted), and very many, and not all of the same Colour. He hath not, as yet, acknowledg'd any unlawful Issue, save one Daughter, whose Mother was a mean Person.
He hath not been brought up to Letters; some say, we may use the Term in the strictest Sense: But 'tis certain, the Publick Dispatches are neat∣ly sign'd with his own Hand. However, con∣sidering the manner of his Education, he can have but little of what we generally call Learn∣ing, yet he speaks Spanish very well; and uses that Language as often as he is address'd to in it by Foreigners. And as for his Native Tongue, it is said, That there is scarce a Person in the Kingdom that speaks it more Properly, or with greater Elegance: And he hath so well improved himself by Practice, that Foreign Ministers do much admire his great Capacity for Business. They find in their Addresses to him; which, in this Court, they have frequent occasion to make; that he comprehends with much ease, the Matter they propose, whatsoever it be; and will, upon the Spot, discourse with them readily about it: He speaks always to the Purpose, and answers to the Point; and if need be, will manage the Mat∣ter with as great Dexterity as any of them. Among other Inconveniences that attend his being unacquainted with Books, this is none of the least; that instead of those more pleasant A∣musements, that delight and recreate the Mind, his Diversions consist most in Bodily Exercises; or if the Time does not serve for them, when the Business of the Day is over, He, instead of such Conversation as may be thought more fit to entertain a Prince, admits into his Presence, not only the younger Nobility, but Persons of a much inferiour Rank, who divert His Majesty with the News and Intrigues of the Town: And they say, That when any thing remarkable hap∣pens, or is talk'd of among the People, of any
Sort, or Nation, His Majesty is sure to have the Story brought him at Night. But at Times of more Leisure, his ordinary Recreations are Hunt∣ing, Shooting, Riding, and this last commonly at the Bull. Going a Hunting, or Shooting, he hath used to take his Queen along with him, to partake of the Sport; and the Time between Christmas and Lent, is always set-apart for these Diversions; to which end, the Court removes, at that Season, to Salvaterra, a Country-House in Alemtejo, about ten Leagues from Lisbon. But above all other Recreations, the King takes a singular Delight in Riding; he manages a Horse so well, that there is scarce a Master in his Kingdom better skill'd in the Art; tho' here almost every Body that is able to keep a Horse, learns to Ride. His Majesty hath a Court on purpose for this Exercise, belonging to his Pa∣lace at Lisbon; but he indulges himself most at Alcantara, a House of Pleasure, a little way out of Town; where he often enjoys himself at his beloved Exercise of Riding with his Lance at the Bull, Performing with admirable Dexterity and Conduct. Nor is he content to deal with that fierce Animal on Horseback, but he frequently engages him a Foot; to this end he hath a small piece of Ground, enclos'd with void Spaces in the Wall on every side, big enough for His Ma∣jesty to escape through, when the Bull proves too hard for him, as he sometimes does, to the endangering of his Person; tho' upon the least appearance of a Discomposure, the Company is ready to come in to his Rescue: And on such Occasions, one shall see the main Body of the Nobility engag'd about the Bull, every one sei∣zing him by that Part he can first lay hold on,
whether it be by the Horns, the Neck, or the Tail. 'Tis true, the King of late hath not used this Exercise so frequently as formerly; not that he finds any failure of his former Strength or Vi∣gour, but because of the Queen's great Tender∣ness for his Person: For Her Majesty would some∣times, when she heard the King was thus employ'd, take Coach presently, and drive to Alcantara; and upon her arrival the Sport was at an end. The King never fails to be present at the pub∣lick Bull-runnings all the three Days, which is the time this Feast usually lasts: Perhaps his Com∣pliance in this, as that of Augustus was on the like Occasions, may be as much to please the People as Himself: For the Portugueses, from the highest to the lowest, are strangely fond of the Sport. It hath been an ancient Custom, which is still kept up, for the Chamber of Lisbon to en∣tertain the People with this Sight, in Honour to St. Anthony, the Son and Patron of the City; and, in Gratitude, for the Birth of an Infante, a Pretence which the King of late hath furnished them with almost every Year: Tho' it is thought one Reason may be the raising of a considerable Sum of Money, which they make by the Scaffolds that are built about a very large Square, before the Palace, which are all sure to be fill'd; for at the News of a Bull-running, the People come flocking in from all parts of the Country round about. The King has a fine Balcony built for him out of one of the Palace-Windows, where he sits all the time with his Queen, and the young Princes, attended by a Nobleman; who receives his Orders, and delivers them out at another Window, for the Conduct of the Cavalier, and the Management of the Bulls. His Majesty, tho'
he sits compos'd all the while, yet is so intent upon the Sport, that he is sometimes heard by those in the Seats under him, applauding the Cavalier, when he hath given a lucky Stroke; and one that comes off with Credit, shall the next Day be received by him in the most kind and ob∣liging manner, and may depend afterwards on his Favour. But there lies a great Complaint against His Majesty on this occasion: That he, for his own private Diversion, abates much of the Satisfa∣ction the People would otherwise take: For be∣fore the Bulls appear in Publick, the King, on pretence of trying what Metal they are made of, will have them to Alcantara, where they are com∣monly so harrass'd out, that very few of them will make head against the Cavalier; and when a sprightly Bull appears, that is likely to make them Sport, and do Mischief, the King will sometimes order him to be taken in again, and reserved for his own use: This sets the People a murmuring. A happy People, were this the greatest Grievance they had to complain of! And, in truth, it seems to be one of the greatest they can lay to their King's Charge, or that ap∣pears to him to be in his Power to redress. For tho' the Opinions of Men are various con∣cerning the Cause and Manner of his first taking upon him the Government, yet it is generally agreed, that in the Administration thereof, he hath all along shewn himself to be most tenderly careful of his Peoples Welfare, and in his whole Conduct, to have highly deserved the Character that is giv'n him, of a truly just and good Prince. I confess, it would be somewhat difficult, to re∣concile to this Character, some former Transa∣ctions,
wherein his Name was much made use of; but then it must be considered, that while those things, which are most liable to Censure, were transacted, he was very young, and in the hands of others. But in what relates to the Ad∣ministration of the Government, I find, upon the exactest Enquiry I could make, People of all Parties to be generally agreed in their Opinions concerning him; and in Portugal they take as great a Liberty in speaking their Minds of their Superiours, as in any other Country whatsoever: But they have here so high an Esteem for their King, that if they blame any thing in his Con∣duct, it is his not making use of his great Power, so often as they could wish; they think he pays too great a Deference to his Counsellors, and to these they impute all the Hardships they suffer. The same thing is taken Notice of by Foreigners, and reckon'd to be the Cause of any false Steps this Court may have taken, inconsistent with the Honour and true Interests of the Crown. But it is a Fault the wisest Men are guilty of, to have too great a distrust of themselves. And this King, they say, is perswaded to do nothing of Import∣ance, without the Advice and Concurrence of his Ministers, as thinking it the safest Course he can take for the Discharge of his Conscience. He is a Religious Observer of Justice, and has thereby delivered his Kingdom from many great Disorders, that it before labour'd under. Rob∣beries on the High-Way are now seldom, or ne∣ver heard of, notwithstanding the universal Po∣verty that appears throughout the Country; and 'tis said, that before this Reign, 'twas unsafe for any to be abroad in the Evening, about, and within the City it self.
Murders are not near so frequent now as for∣merly, the King growing every Day more and more severe against the Guilty: And in truth, there was great occasion for it, Crimes of this Na∣ture being very lightly made of in this Coun∣try, if committed in a Fray, or upon the slight∣est Provocation: A former Grudge, tho' of old standing, was used to be taken for a justi∣fiable Excuse, even when the Murder was com∣mitted in the most cowardly and treacherous manner; the Criminal was acquitted, or sued out his Pardon of Course, or fled to Sanctuary; and being once there, procur'd a Carta de Se∣guro, which is a Protection given by the Go∣vernment, for one that hath the Priviledge of Sanctuary, to appear abroad and sollicit his Cause; whereby he has an opportunity given him to compound with his Prosecutors, or by other means to take off, or elude the Pursuit of Justice. But now Cartas de Seguro are more rarely granted, and Criminals are oftentimes forc'd from Sanctuary. Such Order is taken for preserving the Peace, that a Man may pass through the City at any time of Night, with∣out meeting with the least Affront or Disturb∣ance: Formerly the City was much infested, and great Disorders committed by Night-Wal∣kers of all Ranks and Orders, from those of the first Quality, down to the very Fryars. It is re∣ported of an old Porter, belonging to a certain Convent, that he uses to tell with Regret, how mightily the Time are altered, from what they were in his Days; when a Dozen, or more, Fryars, of his Convent, would sally out in a Night upon Adventures: And there must be something in it, that there goes a common Say∣ing
among the People, That it is equally dange∣rous to deal with a Fryar by Night, as with a Fidalgo by Day. The Reason usually given for it is: That in a Night-Scuffle the Fryar will be sure to stand as stoutly to it, because he is not known, as a Fi∣dalgo wou'd in the Day-time because he is. But now all things are still and quiet, the Clat∣terings of Swords and Targets, which formerly used to be ever and anon disturbing Peoples Rest, are seldom heard; except it be on such Nights, when People of all Sorts and Sexes, are let loose to visit the Churches; but those are Times of In∣dulgence, and they take a Liberty then to commit all manner of Wickedness. The Fidalgo's (a Title common to such as are of Noble Families) who us'd to look upon them∣selves as above the Law, or beyond its reach, are now in a great measure reduc'd to order, Ju∣stice has its Course among them, as well as the meanest Subjects. Elderly People represent them as a sort of petty Tyrants, exercising with great Barbarity, a kind of Despotick Power, over the Lives, and all that belong'd to those about them. But if there were any Grounds for such a Chara∣cter, this King's Government can never suffici∣ently be commended, who hath wrought so great a Reformation among them, that there may be found, at this Day, as Noble Instances of Hu∣manity, and Courtesie, in Portugal, as in any part of Europe. Three times a Week the King gives Audience to his Subjects, Tuesdays and Thursdays to all in general, that desire it; Saturdays to his Nobility, and Officers of State in particular: And this is the Morning's-work of each Day. On the Days of general Audience, the meanest Subject may have
free Access to the King, whether it be to acquaint him of their Grievances, to beg his Charity, or Requerer Serviços, as they call it; that is, to peti∣tion for a Pension on pretence of Service; and Service is pretended, not only by those that have done any thing for the Advantage of the Pub∣lick, or the Crown; but likewise by such as have been for any time in Employment; which they think entitles them to a Pension, or a better Place. His Majesty hears all with great Atten∣tion and Patience, will let the Petitioner per∣ceive he understands his Case, and will remem∣ber him when he comes again, and few part from his Presence dissatisfied. The currant Money of this Kingdom was so miserably clipt, that it was diminished to near half the Value; as appears by an Order made by the Government, That no Pieces of Eight should pass, that weighed less than four Rials and a half: But now it is all reduc'd to a just Stan∣dard; to which end, it being found necessary to Re-coin all the Money, both Gold and Silver, the King, for the Ease of the poorer sort, took the Loss of the Silver upon himself. The Publick Revenues are managed to the best Advantage: The Accounts, which were formerly all in Confusion, are said to be reduc'd into an exact Order, and kept with great Regularity. The Cu∣stoms, and Imposts, are let out to Farm to Mer∣chants; the Contracter is he that will bid most, Native, or Foreigner: The King, it seems, think∣ing, that Merchants, who know best how to deal with one another, can afford to give him more than he could make of them himself; and his Cu∣stoms are said to be much improv'd by this Me∣thod: For the King takes Care to make his Ad∣vantage
of the Farmer's Diligence. The Contract never exceeds the Term of Three Years; which expir'd, an exact Account is taken from the En∣tries in the Custom-House, of the Gains that have been made, and regard had thereto at the next Auction; and the Price, through the Emu∣lation of the Bidders, is often rais'd much higher than was look'd for. A Course not unlike this is taken, when the King has occasion to furnish his Magazines with Stores, or wants any Foreign Commodities; of which Publick Notice is given to the Merchants, and the Bargain is made with him that will take care to procure them at the lowest Rate. The King is so punctual and speedy in his Payments, that the Merchants are encouraged to deal with him for little Profit; so that they are never want∣ing to under-bid each other: And I have been told, that sometimes the King has generously put a stop to them, when in the Heat of Conten∣tion they have been descending below a just Price; His Majesty, it seems, thinking it un∣coming him, to take Advantage at other Mens Follies. By this means he has his Stores al∣ways at the best hand, and no Under-Officers be∣ing employ'd in buying them in, he never suffers by their Knavery, nor can he be cheated by the Merchant who delivers them into his Magazines; for it is always a Condition in the Bargain, That a fair Trial shall be made of the Goods, and no more paid for, than will bear the Proof. The Revenues of the Kingdom are so very great, that did they all come into the King's Hands, he would be one of the richest Princes in Europe, as will appear by the following Cha∣pter. But so many Assignments are made upon
almost every Branch of them, (the King's pri∣vate Patrimony, as Duke of Bragança, not ex∣cepted) so many Pensions paid to particular Per∣sons and Families, that they seem almost wholly diverted from the Publick Treasury. This ex∣travagant Alienation of the Revenues, was set on foot, 'tis thought, by the Spanish Kings; and that in prosecution of their Design, to reduce Portugal into the form of a Province; they sup∣posing, that if the Rents of the Crown were dis∣sipated, Portugal could no longer subsist as an in∣dependant Kingdom; as not having wherewithal to support the Government, or encourage any great Men to head them, in case the People were dispos'd to a Revolt, while the Royal Reve∣nues being divided among private Families, might oblige all that shar'd in the Spoils, to adhere to the Castilian Interest. It hath been often laid to the Charge of the Three Philips, That they did their utmost to weaken the Crown of Portugal, while they had it in possession; they are accus'd of lit∣tle less, than consenting to the Hollanders seizing upon the Portuguese Conquests in the East and West-Indies; and all in pursuance of that Maxim of Philip the Second, That it is much better to be Master of a ruin'd and quiet Kingdom, than one that is rich, powerful, and turbulent. John the Fourth, this King's Father, when from Duke of Bragança, he was made King of Portugal, by the Nobility and People, thought fit to accept of the Crown with all its Incumbrances, and it was not for his Interest to make himself so many Enemies as must have been impoverish'd, had he re-united the alienated Revenues to the Crown: So that he was fain to maintain his Go∣vernment, and carry on the War, by extraor∣dinary
Imposts upon the People; these have been since increas'd, and the Assignments mul∣tiply'd. And this King, tho' perhaps there ne∣ver was a more frugal Prince in his Domestick Management; (for, they say, he knows what every part of his wearing Apparel costs him, and will strive as hard as the poorest Customer to beat down the Price); yet by giving way to his generous Inclinations to do good to others, he has so impoverish'd himself, that he is hard put to it to bear the Charges of the Government; which, as 'tis thought, could scarce subsist, were any other but himself at the Helm, especially at this Juncture, when he is at such extraordinary Expences in making new Levies, and equipping out his Fleet. The People are already so charg'd with Imposts, that nothing further can be ex∣pected from them: For tho' they have had great Advantages by a free Trade, during the late War; yet the Money being convey'd out of the Kingdom, by such ways as shall be mention'd in another place, their Condition is not much mend∣ed thereby. That this is the present Case of the Kingdom, will appear from two Instances of a very fresh Date: The King is, as all the World knows, at this time, putting his Kingdom in a Posture of Defence; to this end, among other things, it was thought convenient to secure St. Ju∣lian's Castle, which stands upon the Bar of the Tagus, and guards the Entrance into the River, and is, in effect, the main Bulwark of Lisbon; or rather, the Key to the whole Kingdom. It is strongly built after the Modern Way, and well fortified with Guns; but hath this Disadvantage, that it may be commanded on one side from a Ri∣sing Ground that is near it. It was therefore de∣bated
in Council, Whether it were cheapest to level that Ground, or to raise a small Fort upon it? But after the Place had been survey'd, it was at last concluded, That both Ways were too chargea∣ble, either of them requiring a greater Expence than the State could well bear, and so neither way was taken. From this Instance, which came from a good Hand, it appears, that the Exche∣quer must run very low at this time. And that the People can afford but small Supplies, will ap∣pear from hence: The King, to enable himself to augment and maintain his Army, summon'd the Cortes, or Parliament, to meet at Lisbon, the First of December, 97: All that he demanded of them, was an Additional Revenue of 600000 Crowns; a Crown in Portugal, is scarce worth Half a Crown English. The Parliament consider∣ing the Occasion, could not but acknowledge the Request to be reasonable; but then, how to raise the Money, was a matter of insuperable difficul∣ty: In short, they sat down, as hath been said, the First of December 97, and were sitting in July 98, and were considering all the while, of Ways and Means, and had made no Progress in the Affair; but, at last, they referr'd it to the King, to lay the Tax as he should judge convenient: For their parts, tho' none could be insensible of the King's great want of a Supply, yet they found the People so burden'd already, that they knew not how to lay on them any further Weight, without danger of their sinking under it. The King, as hath been reported since, has laid the Tax upon Tobacco; which, the Merchant thinks, is the ready way to destroy that Trade, and conse∣quently the best and clearest part of the Re∣venue.
The most considerable Transactions of this Reign, will fall under some of the following Heads, and therefore I have nothing further to add in this Chapter; but that the King of Por∣tugal is an Absolute Prince, having the Legisla∣tive, as well as the Executive Power in his hands: For the Royal Edicts have the Force of Laws, and a Collection of these, is much the same thing there, as our Satute-Book is in England; when these fail, the Civil Law takes place. There are indeed certain Constitutions chiefly relating to the Succession, called the Laws of Lamego, made by the Cortes at the first Institution of the Go∣vernment, which cannot be dispens'd with, but by Consent of the Three Estates. It belongs like∣wise to the Cortes, to lay Taxes upon the People, tho' certain Imposts that are now upon Flesh and Wine, and were given for a limited time, have been continued, by the King's Authority, and the Pope's together; the manner in which this was done, shall be told in the following Chapter.
Of the Publick Revenues, and the Forces of the Crown, by Land and Sea. BEfore I speak of the Revenues, &c. it is re∣quisite to give an Account of the Money currant in this Kingdom. All considerable Sums are here reckoned by Millreis, i. e. Thousand of Reis; sometimes by Crusado's, or Crowns, which consist of 400 Reis a piece. Tho' great Payments are commonly made in Spanish Pieces of Eight, which are reckon'd at 750 Reis. There is no such Piece as a Millrei, nor indeed a Crown at present; for that which was last coyn'd for a Crown-piece, is now rais'd to 480 Reis. Lesser Coyns in Silver, are a Teston, 100 Reis; a half Teston, 50 Reis; a Vintain, 20 Reis. The Gold Coyn called the Moeda de Ouro, contains 4800 Reis, of which there are likewise Half and Quar∣ter-pieces. The Portuguese Money, according to the in∣trinsick Value, answers to our English Money thus:   s. d. q. A Millrei, i. e. 1000 Reis, to 05 10 00 A Crown, 400 Reis, 02 04 00 A Teston, 100 Reis, 00 07 00 A half Teston, 50 Reis, 00 03 02 A Vintain, 20 Reis, 00 01 01 ⅗ The Moeda of Gold, 4800 Reis, makes 28 s.      
The Revenues arise chiefly from Customs, Taxes, Monopolies, Rents belonging to the Or∣ders of Knighthood, and Moneys raised purely by the Pope's Bulls. The Customs paid here, are excessively great; all Foreign Commodities, excepting some few sorts of small Bulk, and easie Conveyance, pay no less than 23 per Cent, 20 for the ordinary Custom, and 3 for a certain Duty call'd the Con∣sulado; which last is likewise paid for all Goods exported, whether by Natives, or Foreigners. They are indeed set at a favourable Valuation, except Fish from Newfoundland, which pays 22 per Cent in Specie. Goods brought hither, in order only to be transported to other Countries, pay 4 per Cent. But it is believed, that nothing of all this comes to the King, or indeed to the Publick, the Consulado excepted, which is appro∣priated to the building of Ships, and buying in of Stores. The Taxes are 7 Reis per Pound, upon all Flesh brought into the Market, and as much per Canada upon Wine, sold in by Retail (few Peo∣ple here keep any in their Houses): A Canada holds something less than Three Pints. Fresh Fish, which is caught here in great abundance in the River, and on the Sea-Coasts, and is the best part of the Peoples Food, pays no less than 47 per Cent; and that exacted with great Rigor, and paid commonly in Specie. At the Sale of Lands, Houses, Cattle of all sorts, and indeed of almost every thing that is known to be bought and sold, 10 per Cent of the Price goes to the King. A great part of these Taxes were granted by the Three Estates in Cortes, to King John the
Fourth, in 1641, and at other times, towards the Charges of the War with Spain; but after the Peace was made; the Cortes, in the Year 1674, rais'd them to what they are at present, by giving the Prince a Supply of a Million of Crowns per An∣num; one half whereof was to be rais'd by an Additional Impost upon Flesh and Wine: But this was then given only for Six Years; yet it hath been paid ever since. The Court, in the Year 1675, thought convenient to procure the Pope's Consent to this last Impost, that the Cler∣gy might have leave to pay their share; because (as it was given for a Reason) the last Lateran Council, and other Canons of their Church, had made it unlawful for any Prince to receive Tri∣bute from the Clergy, without the Pope's leave, even tho' it were voluntarily offer'd by them∣selves; as this had been by the Ecclesiastical, as well as the two other Estates in Cortes. And since that time, at the end of every Sixth Year, a Breve hath been procured from Rome, for con∣tinuing the Taxes for Six Years longer; therein the Pope impowers the Nuncio residing at Lis∣bon, to use his Apostolical Authority, in obli∣ging the Clergy to pay them. This Breve is of course published in Portugal; and tho' it chiefly regards the Clergy, yet it is not unlikely but it may be design'd to induce the People likewise to pay their Taxes quietly, without putting the King, and the Three Estates of the Realm, to the trouble of meeting together in Cortes: For it must needs be a great Argument among them, that the thing is but just and reasonable, since the Holy Father consents to, and approves of it; and it weighs much with them, no doubt, when they consider why his Holiness grants the Breve;
which, as 'tis declared in the Narrative of it, is, The Exchequers being exhausted by the vast Ex∣pences that the Crown hath been continually at, for the maintenance and propagation of the Ca∣tholick Faith, in the Dominions abroad, especi∣ally in Brazil, and the East-Indies, where the Dutch Hereticks, and other Infidels, were endea∣vouring to extirpate it: Which Reason is said to continue still, or rather, to become more strong∣ly urgent every time there is occasion for a new Breve. The Pope gives Commission to his Nun∣cio, to enquire into the Truth of this, and o∣ther Allegations; as that the Three Estates, the Clergy more especially, have given their Con∣sent; the Nuncio cites the King's Procurator before him, and puts him upon the Proof: He shews, that the Nobility and People have agreed to the continuance of the Taxes, because they still pay them; and that the whole Body of the Clergy are likewise willing, because the Bishops have given their Consent; which (as he pretends to prove withal) comprehends that of all the rest. But it does not appear how he makes good the Main Point, viz. The Danger that the Catholick Faith is in from the Dutch Hereticks, and other Infidels. As for the Dutch, they re∣new'd their Peace with Portugal in the Year 1669, and have kept it ever since. However, the Nun∣cio is entirely satisfied with the Proofs, whate∣ver they be; and thereupon gives order for the Execution of the Breve, requiring Obedience thereto from all Persons, Secular as well as Ec∣clesiastical, upon pain of the greater Excommu∣nication, and 500 Crowns, applicable to the Reverend Chamber Apostolick, as the Words of the Order run.
Under the Title of Monopolies, we may re∣duce the other part of the Supply granted at the same time; which was an Impost upon To∣bacco, made into Snuff; by which, 500000 Crowns per Annum, were design'd to be rais'd. In order to make this Sum, the King had the whole Trade of Snuff put into his own Hands; and it became almost as great a Crime in Portu∣gal, for any to Make Snuff for themselves, as 'tis with us in England to Coin Money, tho' People almost universally take it here. This Monopoly was let out to Farm to the Duke of Cadaval, the principal Person in the Kingdom, next His Majesty; and it was so managed, that 'tis said the King receiv'd much more than dou∣ble the Value of what it was given for: The To∣bacco, as it come from Brazil, was bought up for the King, at a Teston and half, or less, per Pound; and sold out in Snuff for 16 or 20, and some∣times more, the best, and 14 the more ordinary sort. But 'tis said, that this Trade is now laid aside, and an Equivalent, with the Advantage of 600 000, tax'd upon Tobacco in Rolls. The King hath likewise in his Hands, a great part of the Trade from Foreign Plantations; as that of Elephants Teeth, from Africa; of Wood, from Brazil: Besides, great Duties upon Sugar; and of all Goods coming from the East-Indies. This last Trade is indeed but of little worth; for he hath several times offered to make it over to a Company of Merchants, but could never get a sufficient Number of Subscribers. The King is likewise Grand Master of the Or∣ders of Knighthood, in his Kingdom, and has the disposal of all the Commenda's belonging to them, viz. of the Order of Christ; which, in Portugal,
succeeded to that of the Knights-Templers, and is still in possession of their Lands, and hath 454 Commenda's belonging to it. 2dly, The Order of St. Jago, which hath 60 Commenda's, and those of considerable Profit. 3dly, Of Avis, which hath 43, and these esteem'd very rich. Besides, the King hath the disposal of the Commenda's in his Kingdom, that belong to the Knights of St. John of Jerusalem, commonly called, the Knights of Malta; the chief of which, viz. the Priory of Crato, accounted one of the richest in the World, is at present bestowed upon Dom Fran∣cisco, the King's Second Son. I reckon these a∣mong the King's Revenues, because they are put to the same use, as the greatest part, by much, of his other Incomes are, viz. given away in Pensions, or Rewards, for Services. But the Kings of Portugal, have, for this last Century, made use of one extraordinary way to raise Money; which, among all Ways and Means, perhaps, hath never been thought of by any other Temporal Prince, the Kings of Spain excepted, who first brought it up in this Kingdom; and this is, by selling Indulgences to the People, for the Pardon of their Sins, and the Deliverance of their own, or their Relations, Souls, out of Purgatory. The Popes having been, for some time, shamed out of this Trade, by the Noise that Luther made in the World, the Kings of Spain thought fit to take it up; and have made more Money of it, with less Scandal. To this end, Philip the Second, after he had got Possession of the Crown of Portugal, obtained Bulls of Pope Gregory the 14th, in the Year 1591; which, since that time, have been publish'd almost eve∣ry Year in Portugal: And the Profits arising from
them, are become a part of the Standing Reve∣nues of the Crown: And, indeed, they may well be accounted a very considerable part of them. The Substance of these three Bulls, are all contain'd in one, which carries for Title, The Bull of the Holy Croisade: But they are retailed out to the People, under the Names of, The Bull for the Living: The Bull of Composition: And, The Bull for the Dead. They have their general Name from the Croisade, as if they were granted for car∣rying on the Holy War; and were we to judge of the Levies, I mean of Money, that are here made, one would think that War was still pro∣secuted, with as great Vigour, as it was 500 Years ago. It's true indeed, that the Kings of Portu∣gal, even since that Expeditions to the Holy Land were no more talk'd of, have, for several Ages, been engaged in continual Wars with the Infidels: They had the Mores, for some time, in the Bowels of the Kingdom; and having driven them out, follow'd them into Barbary, and con∣quered a great part of that Country, and have some Footing there still; and the Popes would, sometimes, to help them out in the Charges of the War, allow 'em the like Indulgences as were granted in the famous Croisades. Yet, in those times, this was done very sparingly, and as an extraordinary Favour. But since the Portugueses have had little or nothing to do with the Mores, and have now only the single Fortress of Maza∣gam, to maintain in Barbary, the Popes are be∣come more profuse of their Graces. The Croi∣sade is publish'd every Year, and Pardons, and Indulgences, more ample, by far, than were ever granted before, are now offer'd to all that shall contribute towards the Defence of the Places,
which the King is suppos'd to hold in Africa. It would be a tedious Task, and not proper for this place, to give an Account of all the Priviledges granted to the Purchasers of these Bulls; I shall only therefore mention some few, that seem most conducive to the End for which the Bulls were obtain'd. The Bull for the Living, grants to the Purchaser, a most plenary (the word is Plenissima) Indulgence, and a complete Remission of all his Sins, and of the Pains which he should have suffered for them in Purgatory. These are the Words of the Absolution to be pronounced upon him after Confession; and this Pardon is, in all respects, as full as if he had gone to Rome for it, in the Year of Jubilee: And one that hath bought this Bull, may, if he pleases, after six Months, for a single Vintain, have all renewed to him over again; so that as the Commissary deputed by his Holiness, to inform the People of these Matters, saith, Here are Two Jubilees granted in One Year. By Virtue of this Bull, any Man in Portugal, may have all the Benefits of the Stations at Rome, the visiting a certain Church out of Devotion, at a Set-time, is what they call a Station there. Sta∣tions are made at several Churches of that City, within, and without the Walls in their Turns, almost all the Year about; but chiefly in the time of Lent, a plenary Indulgence is gain'd at every one of them; and there are eight Days in the Year, on every one of which a Soul is to be drawn out of Purgatory. Now one that hath this Bull, if he will but visit any five Churches, where-ever they are; or if there are not so many in the place where he is, but five Altars; or for want of them, the
same Altar five times, shall gain the same Indul∣gence, as if he had made the Stations at Rome: Or, if he please, he may, Per modum suffragii, apply the Benefit of them to Souls in Purgatory. And the Commissary saith, That regularly this Bull is of more benefit than a Mass said at a Privi∣ledg'd Altar: And yet, they say, That shall draw a Soul out of Purgatory at once. Another great Conveniency gain'd by this Bull, is, that a Man by Virtue thereof may com∣mute for any Vows that he shall make, except only the Vows of Chastity, of Religious Orders, or Pilgrimage to Jerusalem. As for all other Vows, let them be never so solemnly made, tho' they are confirmed with Oaths; and even with ad∣ditional Vows, that the Party will never commute, nor seek a Dispensation for them, one that hath the benefit of this Bull, may, for a small Sum of Money, given towards maintaining the Garri∣sons in Africa, free himself from the Obligation; nay, he may commute for what they call an im∣perfect Vow of Chastity, such as not to marry; not to sin with a single Woman, or another Man's Wife, or any particular Person, and some other things which the Commissary hath set down likewise, too long, or not fit to be repeated. He may also commute for a previous Vow that he may have made to take that Vow of Religi∣ous Orders, and the Circumstances of a Vow of going to Jerusalem, may be commuted for like∣wise; such as making the Journey on foot, beg∣ging all the way, or going without much Com∣pany. But these excepted, there is hardly any Case to be imagin'd, wherein a Man hath occasion to make a solemn Promise; but if he will consult
an Epitome of the Priviledges gain'd by the Bull, which the Commissary hath set forth by Autho∣rity Apostolick, he may know what he is to pay in Commutation of his Vow. To mention some few Instances, as they are set down in that Piece: Suppose a Person should vow, That he would hear two Masses in a Day, or maintain a poor Man for a Day, remain chaste for a Day, or ob∣serve Conjugal Chastity for six Days; not to Play, take Snuff, or drink Wine for a Month, or not speak to any Body for two Days. Or, if a young Woman shall make a Vow to for bear eating Chalk, Earth, or Red Clay (such as the Portuguese Ear∣then Ware is made of) for a Week. In every one of these Cases, the Rich are to pay six Vin∣tains, the Middle-Sort four, the Poorer two, the Poorest one: And this Rate is to be observ'd for the time the Vow was to last. As, put the Case, a Man had bound himself to fast every Saturday in a Year; if he be taxed at the lowest Rate, his Commutation-Money will come to 1040 Reis. But if he be unable to pay the whole Sum, he may be admitted to compound after this manner: Suppose the Person makes his Vow at fifteen Years of Age, this Vow, according to some Doctors, would oblige him till he came to be of sixty, some say 'till seventy. The Com∣missary takes the middle Number, viz. 65, whence take 15, and there remains 50 Years of Obligation to fast, and the Commutation-Money would come to 120 Millreis; for all which, ac∣cording to the Rule of Composition, of which I shall speak anon, he is to pay but 2 Mill, 800 Reis: And if he cannot afford this, he may com∣pound but for 10 Years; and then he will be ob∣liged to pay but three Testons: But it is the se∣curest
way, saith the Commissary, to pay the whole Sum, if the Person can afford it; at least, to pay for ten Years: But if he cannot do that, his Composition will secure him in all Cases, wherein he cannot conveniently fast. One that hath made a Vow of Chastity (sup∣posing it to be commutable) if he would be freed from the Obligation, is to pay a Vintaine a Day at the lowest rate, which will amount to 7 Mill 300 Reis, if the Vow be for Life, according to the rate of 10 Years purchase, it will amount to 73 Millreis. If he be unable to pay this Sum, he must compound: Now, since People live some∣times to fourscore, he (supposing the Vow made at 15) has 65 Years to account for, the Com∣mutation of which amounts to 474 Mill 500 Reis. According to the Rule of Composition (to be explain'd presently), for the first 200 Millreis, he may compound for 6 Mill, and for the re∣mainder at 10 per Cent, which makes 27 Mill, 450 Reis; and in all it comes to 33 Mill 450: but in case the Man be poor, and unable to pay, he may compound for 10 Years only, and come off for fifteen Testons: But this easie Composition is allow'd only in case of Conditional Vows, and that before the Condition be fulfilled; as for instance: Suppose one in a Fit of Sickness shall make a Vow, That if he recovers, he will turn Fryar: If he compounds before his Recovery, he shall be admitted to this easie Composition; but if he delays 'till the Condition be fulfill'd, that is, 'till after his Recovery, his Commutation-Money shall be doubled. All that is required of the Party, in this Business of Commutation, is, for him to come and put his Money into a certain Cash Chest, which is called the Vow-Box; but
he must be sure to put it in with his own Hands, or take care that it be done by some other Per∣son, his Confessor excepted; for the Confessor is not to finger the Money upon pain of Excom∣munication, tho' it be in order to put it into the Vow-Box. All that he has to do in the Case, is to instruct his Penitent, when, and how he is to make his Commutation; and he becomes guilty of mortal Sin, saith the Commissary, if he sets the Commutation at an Under-rate. These are some of the Priviledges granted by this Bull; and, as if they were not enough to oblige People to buy it, it suspends and derogates from all other Indulgences and Priviledges whatsoever, making them of no validity to those that shall neglect to take out this: And to make it more necessary, and which may be a great Cause, why every Body buys it, it grants a License to eat Eggs, Butter, Cheese, and all other Lacticinia, in time of Lent. There are some Diocesses in Portugal, where, by ancient Custom, it was before lawful to eat those things in Lent; but the Bull is nevertheless necessary there, than else∣where: For it suspends, as I have said, all such Priviledges; so that the Custom becomes un∣lawful, when the Bull is published. It likewise gives leave to eat Flesh upon Fast-Days, all the Year about; in case the Spiritual and Bodily Phy∣sician shall think it convenient. The Spiritual Physician is any licensed Confessor, tho' he gives his Judgment out of Confession; and for the other, the Opinion of an experienced old Wo∣man, may, by Virtue of this Bull, be taken in the case. But it is to be observed, that the Bull holds good only 'till the next Publication, when another must be taken out; and it is published every Year.
The Price of it, to those that are worth 400 Millreis a Year, which way soever it arises, is three Testons: Such as are worth 200 per Ann. pay two Testons; the Wife paying always as much as the Husband: All those that are above seven Years old, pay 4 Vintains, excepting these that follow, who pay but two Vintains: Young People that are maintain'd by their Parents, La∣bourers, and Journey-men, that live only on their Wages, Beggars, Common Soldiers, Wi∣dows, and single Women that live on Alms; Priests, that have nothing but their Masses to maintain them; or such of them as are Foreign∣ers, or go begging about the Kingdom, all these pay but two Vintains. Under the same Class are reckon'd such as have Houses of their own, yet live miserably; Coblers, or Botchers, that can∣not set up a Stall, but go about for Work; Je∣suits profest, begging Fryars, unless they have somewhat allow'd them by their Friends, Pil∣grims, and Prisoners: But then all Journey-men that can get two Testons a Day; Priests that live with their Parents, Servants to Persons of Qua∣lity, whose Wages come to 40 Millreis, must pay 4 Vintains. So that the Tax we see is universal, and be∣ing constant, must amount to a considerable Re∣venue; and the two other Bulls must mightily increase the King's Profits: Supposing the Peo∣ple believe any thing of Popery, as certainly they do in Portugal, as much, or more, than in any Country in the World The Bull, for the Dead is sold to all People alike, at the same Price, viz. for half  Teston: But then it is of no be∣nefit, but to such as have taken out the former. By this a Man may apply all the Indulgences and
Remissions contain'd in the other to any Soul in Purgatory, let him choose which he will; and shall, Per modum suffragii, obtain a relaxation of the Pains, to which that Soul stands expos'd by the Divine Justice, (they are the Commissary's words). More than this, he may make a con∣ditional Application of the Bull to any Soul, with a Reserve, That if that Soul shall have no occa∣sion for it, the Benefit shall go to another; and if that be got out already, to another, and so on as far as he pleases; as for Instance: I take out a single Bull, for the Soul of my Friend Francisco, with this Condition, That if he be gone to Hea∣ven, I take it then for Pedro; and, in case he does not want it, for Diego, &c. but he must al∣ways determine the Application to some certain Person; or he may say, It shall go to him that stands most, or to him that stands least in need of it that is, to him whose Turn it would be to go first or last out of Purgatory. But if he shall give it indefinitively to whomsoever God pleases, the Bull loses its Virtue, for want of a determi∣nate Application. And the Commissary declares, That one and the same Person, may deliver as many Souls as he pleases, at the rate of half a Teston per Soul; for each of them he is to receive an Extract of the Bull, with this following Cer∣tificate at the end of it, subscribed by the Com∣missary: For asmuch as you N. N. have given half a Teston, the Soul for which your Intention was to give the said Alms, remains free from the Pains of Purgatory. Lourenço Pires Caravalho. But then the said N. N. must see that the Money be good: For if he, through mistake, should think it so, and it proves naught, the Bull, as the Commis∣sary declares, and the Casuists agree, will be
good for nothing. This Bull may be taken out several times for one and the same Person; which, in my Opinion, should make a body que∣stion its Efficacy, and doubt of the Infallibility of that Determination of Pope Leo the Tenth, concerning Indulgences, that Tantum valent quan∣tum sonant. But however, if it be renewed of∣ten, it will increase the King's Incomes; and therefore the Commissary thinks it advisable that a fresh one should be taken out once every Year for the same Soul, and there can be no great loss in so doing, by reason of the conditional appli∣cation; and by this Means the King comes to have a constant Revenue from the Dead, as well as from the Living, which goes increasing every Year. It is wholsome advice, saith the Commis∣sary, for a Person on his Death-bed to recommend to his Friends, the taking of it out for him, and the best time is as soon as the Breath is gone out of his Body; however, says he and the Casuists, it will have the same effect at one time as another; And I believe they speak their Minds in this. It is Customary to give the Bull to the dead Corps to carry it with him to the Grave; and I have frequently seen it tuck'd under his Girdle (for the Dead are buried here in the Habit of St. Francis, without Coffins.) But the Learned I must own, do not think this to be at all necessa∣ry, but rather condemn it as an Abuse. The Bull of Composition seems to be no less pro∣fitable to the Exchequer, than either of the for∣mer. By virtue of this, such as have made cer∣tain unlawful Gains, upon paying down a small part of them, may, with a safe Conscience, keep the rest to themselves. By it Ecclesiasticks may compound for the Profits of their Benefices, which
they receive when they have fallen from their Rights to them, either by neglect to say their Offices, or by lying under Censures: And this Bull is so accommodated to all sorts of People, that it is of singular use to Traders of what kind soever they be, Usurers, Lawyers, Officers of Justice, Trustees, Gamesters, Rooks, Thieves, Prostitutes: These are all of them, in express, or equivalent Terms, admitted to Composition in the Commissary's Explication of the Bull, as in a word, are all such in general that have occa∣sion to make unlawful Gains; the Merchant who puts off Dammaged Goods, without discovering the Fault to the Buyer, or to enhance the Price pretends they are of one Country, when they come frem another; One that mixes good and bad Wares together, as Corn, for instance, that hath been putrified, with that which is sound, or that puts his Corn into a moist place to make it swell; such as sell by false Weights and Measures, Gold and Silver-Smiths that put too much Alloy into their Works; Apothecaries, who, that they may not be known to want any Druggs that are called for, put others in their stead; Extortioners, whether by way of Usury, or that taking Advan∣tage from their Neighbours Necessity, use to buy things for less than a just Price. All these are ad∣mitted to Composition for their ill-gotten Gains, in case they are incertain as to the particular Per∣sons to whom Restitution ought to be made; the same is to be said concerning Officers of Justice, Advocates, Witnesses, Notaries, who take more than their just Fees, or who appear in bad Causes. There is a very commendable Practice among Trading-People in Portugal, to set aside some part of their Estates for Pious Uses, by way of
Reparation for Wrongs they may have done, through inadvertency in the Hurry of Business. But that which is given this way, being common∣ly left by Will, the Executors may, by virtue of this Bull, compound for one Moiety of all such Legacies, in case the Legatees shall neglect to come and Claim them within a Year: Executors may likewise compound for all manner of Lega∣cies, in case the Persons concerned cannot be found after a due Enquiry. They also that keep Gaming-Houses, where Cheats are practis'd, such as Rook others at Play, or Win Money from Boys, Women, Fryers, Slaves; They that have lost at Play and have no mind to pay, Pub∣lick-Women that exact, or by their Artifices gain more from their Customers than their law∣ful Hire (for their Hire, according to the Casu∣ists, is their due, if it be moderate, or no more than is customary, or than as it is rated by the Magistrates.) Private Women that practice the same Trade are likewise Compounders, and that (as some will have it) for all the Money they take; for some Casuists reckon all their Gains unlawful, for that they do in a manner practice without a Licence. Men are likewise to com∣pound for the Money or Jewels they take on such accounts from Married Women, supposing that what they give be at their own disposal, or of their bona Paraphernalia, as the Lawyers term it, otherwise it is to be restored to the Husband. Such as have gotten Ship-wreck'd Goods into their hands, or Goods taken out of Houses in a Fire, if the Owner be not known, may com∣pound for them: Composition may likewise be made for a Deposite left by one gone into a Far Country, in case He or his Heirs be not heard of
in some time; as also, for the surplusage of the value of a Pawn, that's sold when the Party that hath taken Money upon it, is not found, upon due enquiry. But it is a Question, What Diligence is requir∣ed in seeking out the Party to whom Restitution should be made in any of these Cases? The Com∣missary for his part, is very reasonable, tho he speaks by Apostolical Authority, and declares that Diligence to be sufficient which a Prudent Man, (the Quantity and Quality of the Thing, the Time and the Place, &c. considered,) would use in his own Concerns, and it is a receiv'd Maxim amongst the Spanish Casuists, That in this Case, No es necessario hazer lo ultimo de potencia; which is as much as to say, a Man need not do his utmost: But I have met with a single Portuguese, who very honestly declares against them all, that since it is commonly for Goods stolen or unjustly de∣tained, that People compound, the most exact dili∣gence is requir'd. Composition once made, let the Owner then appear as soon as he will, the Compounder is absolv'd from the Debt, and is no longer bound to Restitution, either in Foro Conscientiae, or in Foro externo, so saith the Commissary, whose De∣claration is a Law in these Matters, and my Por∣tuguese Casuist, who was so honest just now, seems to be of the same Opinion. Another Question is, Whether a Man may be admitted to Compound, who makes his unlawful Gains in confidence of having the benefit of the Bull? The Commissary declares in express Terms that he cannot; however he mollifies the matter not a little, by declaring, That one who hath such a Confidence, may Compound for what he hath unjustly
got through Frailty, and that at the worst, he may apply himself to him (the Commissary) and make such a Composition as He shall think fit; for in this Case, he says, there is no Rate set: He says the same thing concerning such, as shall take that which is another Mans, knowing whose it is at the same time, but hoping they shall for∣get him afterwards, that by this means they may have the Benefit of the Bull, and of such as will not pay Legacies, till the time be expired, in hopes of Compounding; In all these Cases, they must come to the Commissary, and Com∣pound with him at his own Terms. The Ordinary Rate of Composition is a Teston per Bull, for every 5 Millreis ie one in 50 of the aforesaid unlawful Gains; and at this Rate one may Compound for 100 Millreis, but when the Sum exceeds an hundred Millreis, he must pay for the excess 2 Testons out of every Five Millreis, till he comes to 200, but after that there is no Composition, till he applies himself to the Com∣missary, or his Deputy, and he commonly ex∣acts 10 per Cent, but does not so ty himself up, but will require more or less, according to the Circumstances of the Case. The Purchaser of this Bull must receive a Printed Copy of it, or else the Commissary saith it will do him no good; however, he saith, it may be presently torn in Pieces (as that for the Dead may too) and be of as much Benefit as before, but such as will keep it by them, must have their Names Subscrib'd, or if they are shy to do this, as being tender of their Cre∣dit, they must themselves subscribe Foam, that is, Some-body.
None can have the Benefit of these two later Bulls, unless he has taken out the former, They may be all Three had by any that reside in Por∣tugal, whether Natives or Strangers, and by Portugueses residing in Foreign Countrys, in case they design to return Home in any Time; Ma∣ny other Matters, of as great Importance as any thing yet mentioned, might be related concern∣ing these Bulls: The Reader, perhaps, will think I have trifled too long about them alrea∣dy, but he may depend upon it, that nothing hath been said on the Subject, but upon sufficient Authority. The Money rais'd by all these Contributions, goes I suppose, for the most part, the same way as the rest of the Publick Revenues do. The Pope indeed has his Share out of it, but if it be no more than is pretended, it is but a very inconsiderable one, since the King stands so much oblig'd to him for the whole; for it is said to have been no more at first than 12000 Crowns a Year, as I remember, I have been told that it is now 15000; but it has been of late, one part of the Nuncio's business at Lisbon, to get it rais'd higher. However, if his Holiness fails in this, he knows how to make it up out of the Kingdom of Portugal by other ways. Another small part of these Incomes goes to maintain the Portuguese Garison in Mazagam, consisting of about 1500 Men. Mazagam is a Rock in the Atlantick Ocean in the Coast of Bar∣bary, so contiguous to the Shoar, that at Low-Water it seems to be join'd to the Firm Land, and serves sometimes as a Refuge to Christian Slaves from Mequenes, I know not what other use it may be of, unless it be to keep them in
countenance that are employed in Preaching up the Croisade; but they fearing belike, that the Pretence may not be sufficient to bear them out, take care to inform the People, that were there no such Place in being, and not a Souldier Paid in Barbary, they shall have every thing made made good to them to a Tittle that is promis'd in the Bulls, for whatever becomes of the Mo∣ney their Merit is the same; and that, they say, by the help of the Indulgences, will be sure to carry them directly to Heaven; I have the Ser∣mon of one of these Preachers now before me, and he, among other Prodigious Extravagances, is proving, That the Croisade Bull is of greater Benefit to his Auditors than their Baptism it self, or than Martyrdom would be: I shall not repeat his Profane Arguments; But the Conclusion he pretends to make out is, That these Indulgences are able to purifie them from the Guilt of all their Sins, and free them from the Punishment due to them either in Hell or Purgatory. The King of Portugal's Land-Forces, used in Times of Peace, to amount to about 12 or 13000 Men, Horse and Foot, but they have been encreas'd of late Years, and with the New Levies rais'd a∣bove a year ago, they made 25000 Men, and new Commissions are still giving out. But the King's Pay is so poor a Subsistence, that tho' there be Lazy Beggars enough in this Kingdom, and Peo∣ple live as hardly here as in any Part of Europe, yet it would be impossible, even in times of Peace, to get Souldiers to supply the Garrisons, were not Compulsion us'd. The Pay of those that serve about Lisbon, which, as I have been told, is double to what they receive in other
Parts of the Kingdom, is half a Teston per diem, out of which such Deductions are made, that be∣sides a small Ammunition-Loaf, there comes, scarce a Vintain to the Souldier; for which rea∣son, the Officers, whose business it is to raise Souldiers, are dreaded and courted by the Peo∣ple in their several Districts, as Men in whose power it is to do the greatest mischief in the World to their Neighbours; and when any Person is pitch'd upon for the King's Service, lest he should run his Country, his Father or his nearest Relations, are made responsible for his Forth-coming, and this in time of Peace. But it is commonly reported, that during the War with the Spaniards, It was a Customary Thing among the Poor People, to blind their Chil∣dren when they were young, lest when they grew up they should be taken from them for Sol∣diers; and this is usually given for the reason why there are so many Blind Beggars about the City, that gain their Livelihood by singing Pray∣ers at the Doors of the poorer sort, who Con∣tract with them for their Attendance, each Customer allowing them a Pension of about Ten Reis or Vintain per Month; and there are many who think the Parents of these mi∣serable Creatures have well provided for them. The King hath about 25 Ships of War, great and small, most of them well built, and they say after the best. English Models, according to His Majesties immediate Directions, who is said to have great Skill in these Matters, and to delight much therein. It is thought that about Seven∣teen may be Fitted out for Service. Nor hath
this King been less careful to provide himself with Seamen, to which end he hath taken care to have a certain Number Enroll'd and ready always upon Occasion; and for their Encou∣ragement, he has bestowed several considerable Priviledges and Immunities, upon such as being found duly qualified, shall enter their Names in the List. But the Number required is so very small, as shews that there is a great Want of Seamen in the Kingdom; for they are no more than 300, at least they were no more at their first Institution in 1676, and I have not heard that they have been encreas'd since: Whence it appears, That the Portugueses, who were once so famous for Navigation all over the World, are now much fallen from what they were 150 Years ago. Another Proof of this great Change is this, Tho' they have every Summer, a small Squadron out a Cruising upon the Algerines and Sallee-men, they have never been able to take a Prize, at least in the Memory of the Oldest Men of my Acquaintance, who have known the Country for these many Years. We had indeed a Story in the English Gazette, I think it was in 1692, of their burning the Admiral of Sallee, but at last it proved to be but a small Boat that was run ashoar. It might be expected that they should in some measure recover themselves dur∣ing the late War, in which other Seafaring Nations were embroil'd, whilst they enjoy'd the Benefit of a Free-Trade, as in effect they did, almost to the doubling of their Trading Vessels. But it does not appear that they made any great Improvement in the Art of Navigation; for there was hardly Skill enough among them to carry a Ship into the English Channel, very
few, if any of them, daring to venture upon that Voyage without an English Pilot: I suppose it is for want of Seamen that the King's Ships are so much crowded with Land-Souldiers; for these make the greatest part of the Complement, That of the biggest Ships, as I have been told, consisting of 60 Mariners, 80 others not yet qualified for Able Seamen, and 250 Land-Souldiers.
Of His Majesties First Queen. MArie Françoise Elizabeth de Savoie, young∣est Daughter to Charles Amadee de Sa∣voie, Duke of Nemours, by Elizabeth the Daugh∣ter of Caesar de Bourbon, Duke of Vendome, Na∣tural Son of Henry the Fourth, King of France, by Gabriele d' Estrees Dutchess of Beaufort, com∣monly called la Belle Gabriele. She was Born the 21th of June 1646, Con∣tracted to Dom Alfonso the VI. King of Portu∣gal, the 27th of June 1666, arrived at Lisbon the Second of August following, and having co∣habited with that King for the space of near Sixteen Months, was Divorced from him, and Married afterwards, viz. the 2d of April 1668 to his Brother the Infante Dom Pedro, now King of Portugal. This Lady, who before her Marriage, went by the Title of the Mademoiselle d' Aumalle, was at first designed for the Infante, whilst a Match was in Treaty between the King his Brother, and her Elder Sister Mademoiselle de Nemours, the present Dutchess Dowager of Savoy; but that Match not taking effect, she was Contra∣cted, as I have said, to the King, and another Marriage was concluded between the Infante and Mademoiselle de Bouvillon, Daughter to the Prince of Turenne, and Niece to the Mareschal of that Name: But this was Broke off, because the Infante could not be prevail'd with by any
Perswasions or Menaces, the King his Brother could use, or the Entreaties of the Ministers and his own Servants to stand to what had been a∣greed upon in his Name and by his Order: The reasons for his refusal I could never learn. Soon after the New Queens Arrival at Lisbon, King Alfonso began to express an extraordinary coldness towards her, and in a short time he estranged himself very much from her Compa∣ny, his Indifferency growing into an utter Aver∣sion, insomuch that he forbore not openly to Exclaim against the Authors of this Match, who, as he hath been heard to say, had advised him to that which he should have cause to repent of all his life-time; all this was said (by such as were ill-affected to that Prince) to proceed from a certain un-fitness for Marriage, which the Queen afterwards laid to his Charge. Others are still of Opinion, that it was occasioned by some se∣cret cause of Dislike that rendred her Person dis∣agreeable to him. They that accuse the King of Inability, impute the cause of that, and of his Incapacity for Government, which they ac∣cuse him of likewise, to his Sickness in the time of his Infancy; for at Three Years Old he had been seiz'd with a Malignant Fever, and that was succeeded by a Palsie, whereby, as it is said, all his Right Side became withered, from Head to Foot, insomuch that he remain'd Lame ever after, on that Side; but they that tell this, accuse him likewise of delighting to Ride the most fierce and un-manageable Horses, and to encounter with Wild Bulls, and other Violent Exercises, which one wou'd think should sup∣pose a vigorous Habit of Body; they repre∣sent him also as guilty of many Extravagancies
on the account of lewd Women, as in truth, his vicious Inclinations to them were apparent∣ly the cause of most of those Disorders they lay to his Charge. And this may make one suspect their sincerity likewise, when they tell us, That the same Distemper had so affected his Brain, that he was never in his right mind. It may, no doubt, with reason enough, be said of this King, That some have taken the Liberty (upon what grounds I know not) to say of his Father before him, that he was none of the wisest Kings that ever reign'd in Portugal, but then, the Faults he was guilty of, may be as well imputed to his want of Edu∣cation, as to any Natural or Accidental Defect in his Understanding: For perhaps, there never was one designed for a Crown more neglected in his Youth than this Prince had been: He had been suffered to abandon himself to all the Extrava∣gancies his childish Inclinations led him to, and not only his own, but those of his Companions; these were (not the Sons of the Nobility but) such as himself had pickt up out of the Streets, from among the Boys that he us'd to behold from the Palace Windows, dividing themselves into Parties, and Pelting one another with Stones, the usual Pastime of Portuguese Children. They that were of the Party favoured by the King, and signaliz'd themselves most at this Exercise, had the largest share in his Affections, and some of them, as they grew up with him, became his Principal Favourites; these, from the very be∣ginning of his Reign, found entrance into the Court, and would, at times, entice the King down into the Stable-Yard of the Palace, and there, together with a lewd Rabble of Grooms, Blacks, and Moorish Slaves, entertain His Ma∣jesty
with Wrestling, Boxing, throwing the Bar, darting Knives, setting Dogs to Fight, the Young King making One amongst them, and what he learnt from the Conversation of this vile Crew, he afterwards, on some occasions, put in practice. Such Education was not, we may be sure, ve∣ry likely to qualifie him for the Affairs of State. 'Tis true, the Chiefest of his Companions had been put from him immediately before his taking the Government upon himself; and he having had the happiness to fall into better hands, a great alteration was observed in his Conduct; yet he was not so changed, but that he found himself obliged to leave Affairs of Importance to the Care and Management of others. This the new Queen soon perceiv'd; and as 'tis very likely she was encouraged to make her Advantage of the King's Unfitness for Business, and to endeavour to get the Government of him, and his Kingdom, into her own hands. This is certain, that notwithstanding the King's Neglect of Her, she was not wanting to her self; but took all occasions to make her self con∣siderable; She not only procured from him a Grant for the Augmentation of the Revenue settled on her in Marriage, but began to talk of calling to account such as were possest of any Lands belonging to former Queens, and more than this, to interpose in Affairs of State, and Matters of Government, giving the Ministers to understand, that she expected to know how things went, and she made her self to be obey'd so far, that nothing of Moment was transacted in the King's Council, but Her Majesty was con∣sulted about it. Not content with all this, she
seemed to have a further Aim still, and to design no less than a Total Change of the Ministry, in order to engross the whole Power to her self, or impart it to such as she should engage in her In∣terests. The Great Men of the Kingdom were at this time divided into Two Irreconcileable Parties, neither of which could be safe, but by a Total Overthrow of the other; the one consisting of those that had been in the Government in the late Queen Mother's time, or had done their utmost to continue her Regency, and were at this time wholly broken, driven from Court, or deprived of their Charges, and the Principal of them Banish'd into several remote parts of the Kingdom. The other was of them that were then in the Ministry, or had been instrumental in placing King Alfonso on the Throne, in oppo∣sition to the Queen his Mother, and obliging her to retire into a Monastery. The new Queen, presently after her Arrival publickly declar'd for the vanquish'd Party, at least, did that which in effect was the same thing; for she openly sollicited the return of the Duke of Cadaval, and his re-establishment at Court. This Duke was the chief Person of the whole Party, and had shewn himself the most active of them all in the Queen Mothers Service, and thereby had drawn upon himself the largest share of the King's Displeasure. Besides, the Conde de Ca∣stelmelhor, who was then the Prime Minister, and the Principal Man, next the King, at Court, had reason to look upon the Duke as his most formidable Antagonist; and to apprehend his Return as a Step towards the Ruine of himself and his whole Party, especially if it were ob∣tained
by the Queens Sollicitation, which would have engaged that Great Man to her Service; and it might prove impossible for him to hold out against their united Interests. There had that passed between the Duke and the Conde, that the Court could not well hold them both, as it cannot to this day; for they are both still alive; the Duke is now in the Ministry, and for that reason (some give it for the only reason) the Court, for this last Reign, hath remain'd shut to the Conde. But to put things in their due light, I find it will be necessary to look back to the time of the late Queens Regency, and give a brief account of some former Transactions, particularly those wherein either of these two great Men were concern'd. Donna Luisa Francisca de Gusman, who by her Courage had animated Duke John of Bragança, her Husband, to take upon him the Crown, which she is said to have preserved likewise up∣on his Head by her Counsels; was left by that King at his Death, which happened the Sixth of November 1656, Regent of the Kingdom, and Tutress or Guardian to the Princes their Chil∣dren; but her Regency was not like to conti∣nue long, should the Young King, her Son, be reckoned to be of Age at the usual time of Ma∣jority, it having been customary, for Kings of this, as well as of other Nations, to be declared Majors at Fourteen, and Dom Alfonso was near the end of his Thirteenth Year at the King his Father's Death, for he was born the 21st of Au∣gust 1643, so that should former Presidents be observed in the present Case, she was like, in a short time, to be forced to let go the Power out
of her hands, and see a Kingdom which she had contributed so much to procure and preserve for the Family, committed to the discretion of a Child; or entrusted by him to she knew not whom, for he once declared, Major would be at liberty to chuse his own Ministers. The best-esta∣blished Governments in such a case must neces∣sarily be exposed to many great Inconvenien∣cies; but that of Portugal, which was then new and unsettled, and struggling as it were, for life, in a War with the Spanish Monarchy, would be in danger of utter Ruine: For these consi∣derations, as we may well suppose, the Queen resolv'd to prolong her Regency for some Years beyond the ordinary time; to this end she con∣ferred all Offices of Trust upon Creatures of her own, or such as she could conside in, and took such ways to engage those in Power, as should make them more apprehensive of a Change than her self; and in effect, she so manag'd Matters, as to remain possest of the Government till the King was within a Month of Nineteen; and had not the Conde de Castelmelhor, by an unexpected Surprize, broken all her Measures, she might, in all likelihood, have kept it in her hands as long as she pleas'd; and her Enemies used to say, That by her good will she had ne∣ver parted with it while she lived. And in truth, her Conduct in regard to the King her Son may have given some colour to this Aspersion; the Education of that Prince in his tender Age was such as has been now de∣scribed. Its true, the Queen Mother took no∣tice, with what Scandalous Companions he associated himself, and made grievous com∣plaints of it; but still they had access to him,
even while he was of those Years when one would think his Governours should be responsi∣ble for his Carriage. As the King grew bigger he became guilty of such Excesses as might be expected from a Youth so Bred, and left to his own Liberty, without a Curb; He took great pleasure in walking the Streets a Nights in Company of his Braves, to haunt the Houses of leud Women, and sometimes he would order the Prostitutes to be brought to him to the Palace; he is reported likewise to have committed several Outrages upon those he met with in his Night-Walks; nor did he wholly abstain from those Pranks in the Day-time; se∣veral Instances of this nature are reckoned up by those that have made a strict enquiry into his Faults; but I do not find, that he ever did any great mischief; He often endangered his Person indeed, and began to loose himself much in the Peoples Opinion. The Queen Mother made loud Complaints of these disorders; but then she took such a course, as might make her Enemies suspect, she desired that the People rather than her Son might be∣come sensible of his Faults; she exposing them in as Publick Manner as was possible, in order, as some imagine, to make her self thought more Necessary, and him less capable of the Govern∣ment. One time she contriv'd it so, that all the Counsellors of State should wait upon him in a Body, and let him understand how his Person and the Kingdom were in danger by the Cour∣ses he took; The young Duke of Cadaval, Dom Nuno Alvarez Pereira, upon the account of his Quality (he being then, as he is still, the only Duke in the Kingdom) was chosen Spokesman,
and he, at the Head of the rest, in the Name of the Queen, the King's Brother and Sister, the Court, and the whole Kingdom, admonish'd His Majesty to change the whole Course of his Life, and not to expose, as he did, himself and the Nation to ruine. Another time she assem∣bled together the Officers of the Crown, the Courts of Justice, the Nobility and Gentlemen about the Court, and the Magistrates of Lisbon; The Design of this great Assembly was to make a more solemn Remonstrance to the King, and withal to remove one Antonio Conti from about his Person; this Conti had been one of those Boys that had had the good hap to get into the King's Favour, by distinguishing himself at the Exercises aforementioned; and by this means, from serving in a Pedling Shop in the Capella (a small Cloyster within the Palace) he grew to be a considerable Person at Court, becoming the King's constant Companion in his Extra∣vagancies; and he was thought to contribute more to the corrupting of him than any other Person whatsoever. The seizing of this Conti was the first thing to be put in Execution, and therefore whilst the Queen Mother entertain'd the King in private, the Duke of Cadaval, with some other Lords, took him violently out of the Palace it self, where he had shut himself up in the King's own Apart∣ment, which the Duke was ready to force, and had done it, had not Conti opened to him, he having caus'd instruments to be brought in or∣der to break down the Doors, resolving to kill Conti upon the Place, in case he refus'd to sur∣render himself. Conti taken, and with some others of the like Stamp, convey'd on Board a
Ship then under Sail for Brazil, the whole Com∣pany came and presented themselves before the King, and in the Name of them all, the Secre∣tary of State read a Remonstrance to him that had been drawn up by general Consent; it con∣tain'd an account of the Queens Complaints, the Grievances of the Nation, the King's ill Con∣duct, and the Exorbitancies of his Favourites. The King was mightily surpriz'd, to see himself thus unexpectedly attack'd, by so great a Crowd of People; for he had not the least Warning given him of their coming; was so little pre∣pared to receive and answer their Address, that it was some time after the Company was gone before he knew what Business brought them thither; and this makes it look as if there was some further Design in hand than barely the King's Amendment. 'Tis plain, that in case the Queen had a Design to create a mutual Di∣strust between her Son and all the most Consi∣derable Persons in the Kingdom, in order to keep him out, and secure her self in the Govern∣ment, she could not have taken a more effectual Course to gain her Ends. She might be sure, that those she employ'd in such ungrateful Offi∣ces, would be very unwilling to see Alfonso in a condition to call them to account; the Portu∣guese Nation is as little addicted to Forgiveness as any perhaps in Europe; and such as are apt to revenge Injuries themselves, do of course ex∣pect the like Returns from those they have offen∣ded. Alfonso was a Prince, violent of his Na∣ture, had not been bred to restrain or dissemble his Resentments; so that these, who had thus violated the Palace of their King, and had laid open his Infirmities to the World in so publick
and solemn a manner, as they had, wounded him in his most sensible part, could never think themselves seeure while it was in his power to revenge the Affronts. And this seems to me to have been the Rise of that powerful Party which the New Queen found so ready to stand by her, to prosecute her Quarrels, and which enabled her at last to finish what the Queen Mother, contrary to her intentions, no doubt, had begun, that is the Ruine of the Unfortunate Alfonso. This great Assembly dissolv'd, the King com∣ing to understand upon what account they had been with him, and what they had been doing about his Palace, after he had given way to the first Transports of his Passion, began to think it was high time for him to assert his Authority, and to secure himself from the like Insults; or rather to beware of a Third Admonition. His Mother, by using him so like a Minor at the end of Five Years that had past since the time of his Majority, did not a little confirm him in his suspicions, that he was never like to come of Age while she liv'd; nor perhaps, enjoy the Crown at her Death; for he had been for some time perswaded, that her intention was to set up the Infante, his Brother, in his place, where∣fore he resolv'd, once for all, to withdraw him∣self from under her Jurisdiction, by wresting, if it were possible, the power out of her hands; 'tis hard to tell whether these and the like thoughts were suggested to him, or confirm'd by Dom Luis de Vascomcellos & Sousa Conde de Castelmelhor; but 'tis not doubted that the Pro∣ject of putting them in execution, was form'd presently after the Queen Mother and her Party
were withdrawn; when the King shut himself up for some time with the Conde. This Nobleman was of the First Quality, and one of the best Families in Portugal, but of For∣tunes not equal to his Birth, or at least, not to his aspiring mind; for tho' he was then but young, yet he had, for some time, been enter∣taining great Designs in his Head, which an oc∣casion now offering it self, he made appear, that he wanted neither Courage nor Abilities to go through with: He had improved his na∣tural Endowments by Travel, an advantage not common to those of his Rank in Portugal, and he himself had been obliged to it by Necessity, rather than Choice, he having had the Misfor∣tune to be engag'd with several other Noble-men in a Quarrel, wherein one of them was kill'd. It is reported of him, that while he was in Italy, in the time of his Flight. he took oc∣casion to declare, That he must needs go home, for his mind gave him, that it would be his Fortune one day to become the greatest Man in Portugal. The late King having granted him his Pardon, and upon his Death-Bed reconciled the Parties, he came again to Court, and when Alfonso's Houshold was settled, he by means of his Coun∣tesses Relations, got in to be a Gentleman of the Bed-Chamber. 'Twas his Week when this great Stir was made about the Court; but the Queen had not thought fit to make him of the Party; and his Enemies give the World to understand, that it was for this, and no other reason, that he dis-approv'd of the action. But he appear'd a little too warm while the business was transact∣ing, to let one think he was so very indifferent; for meeting with the Duke in a Gallery, while
he was in pursuit of Conti, he took occasion to re∣proach him for having lost his Respect to the King, by using this Violence in a Place that ought to be accounted Sacred; upon which, such hard words pass'd between them, that had not the Queen Mother made up the Quarrel after∣wards, 'twas fear'd that they would have come to Blows; this Discourse happen'd while he was endeavouring to get in to the King to acquaint him of what they were doing about his Court, and had he not found all the Passages Guarded, he might have spoil'd the Design. But in the Conference he had, presently afterwards with the King, 'tis said, he laid the Project of that entire Defeat which in a few days he gave the whole Party. For the present, he prevail'd with the King to dissemble his Resentments, which, contrary to his Custom, he did, and car∣ried it fair with his Mother and her Creatures, so that all things seem'd to be well again. The Queen was highly applauded by the Courtiers for her prudent Resolution and Conduct, and those vile Creatures that Conti had rais'd, took it extreamly ill that they were not thought fit to be employ'd in the Action. But some wiser than the rest, were a little startled at the King's or∣dering the Conde to wait another Week; tho' others were of Opinion that the Conde did not think himself safe, unless about the King's Per∣son: But the Alarm was more general on the Monday after this Transaction (which had pass'd on Saturday the 16th of June 1662) when the King, taking occasion, according to his custom, to go to Alcantara, but in greater State than or∣dinary, the Conde from thence wrote to the Se∣cretary of State in an imperious Stile, that it
was the King's Pleasure to know what they had done with Conti, whether any Order had been given to put him to Death; and whether Ma∣noel Antunes (one of his Associates) had been arrested, but at Evening the King return'd, visi∣ted and caress'd his Mother, and on Tuesday all things were quiet again. On Wednesday, a∣bout Twelve a Clock the Plot broke out; for the King, at that unseasonable Hour (when People in this Country, at this time of the Year are going to sleep) taking the Conde with him in his Litter, withdraws privately to Alcantara, and thence sends to the Court for his Guards, and afterwards for Necessaries to fit up his Lodgings, Summons the Nobility to come and attend his Person, first those that he thought best affected to him, and afterwards all in gene∣ral, dispatches away Expresses to the Comman∣ders of his Army and Garrisons, to give them notice, That he had taken the Government into his own hands. By this hardy Enterprize, the Conde in a few hours time entirely defeated the Queens most numerous and powerful Party, and broke all the Measures which that Princess, the most accom∣plisht of her Sex in the Arts of Policy, had been concerting for several Years. Not that her ac∣customed Prudence fail'd her on this occasion, for she did all that could be expected from one of her Character, to preserve her Authority; and the Conde, who got the better of the day, was not a little oblig'd for his Success to his good Fortune: For at first News of what was doing at Alcantara, the Queen plac'd a Guard at the Passage from the City to that place, called her Confidents about her, and assembl'd the Coun∣cil,
giving out Orders at the same time, that none should go near the King, 'till they had been first with her: And she was so well obey'd, that the Fortune of the Day was for some time in Ballance; and it was towards Evening, when the Conde found his Design had taken so little effect, that he was thinking to secure the King and himself in St. Julian's Castle: For notwithstand∣ing his sending out the Summons with such an Air of Authority, there were no more than two Noblemen of the Secret, and it grew late before a Man besides them appear'd at Alcantara. But this was not known at Lisbon, nor had the ad∣verse Party so much time to recollect themselves, as to consult one another's Sentiments, or be in∣form'd how People stood affected; it was hard for them to think such Summons could have been sent, unless some under-hand Assurance had been given, that they would be obey'd; and no Man could know, how far others were engaged, or might comply; but every one might be assured, that his own Fortunes were spoil'd, should he be found among the last that came in. While things were thus in suspence at the Court, and at Alcantara, two Persons gave the Turn to the King's side; the one was Antonio de Sousa de Ma∣cedo, a faithful Servant of the King, and a true Friend of the Conde's, of whom I shall after∣wards have occasion to speak; but he being not so considerable for his Birth or Quality, his Ex∣ample was the less likely to draw others after him. The other was a great Lord, who pro∣ved afterwards the most bitter Enemy the King had in the World; but at this time, contrary to his Intentions, did him a most important piece of Service: This was the Marquess of Cascaes,
would needs be going to Alcantara, contrary to the Queen's Order, that he might see what they were doing there, and return to give Her Maje∣sty an account: But other People could not see upon what Design he went; so that he having thus broke the Ice, several followed his Example, who drew many after 'em that were not sent for, as well as of those that were. The King's Party growing apparently the stronger, the Highway to Alcantara was fill'd with Herds of such as think the strongest must surely be in the right, all Men striving to get foremost, to assure his Majesty of the great Zeal, which they, for their parts, al∣ways had for his Service. 'Tis not my Business to give the Particulars of this Revolution: In short, the Queen, after fome struggle, found her self obliged to make a formal Surrender of the Government into the King's Hands, the follow∣ing Friday. The Conde having thus gotten possession of the Government, tho' he had discovered much of the Young Man in the Attempt; yet, in the Management of Affairs, he proceeded with all the Flegm and Prudence of an old experienc'd States-man. It's true, that in the beginning he found it necessary for the King's Safety, and his own, to use some Rigor, in making great Alterations at Court. The leading Men of the Queen's Party, as they had more or less incurr'd the King's Di∣spleasure, were either banish'd into remote Parts of the Kingdom, removed from their Places, for∣bid the Court, or excused their Attendance; but notwithstanding the Murmurs of the interessed Persons, and their Dependants, he managed things so well, that in a short time he became ex∣ceeding
popular: He found the State at the Brink of Ruin, being in all appearance reduced to the last Extremity, by a War of Two and twenty Years standing. The Spaniards, after they had made Peace with the French, falling in upon Por∣tugal, with the choice of their Forces drawn from all parts of their Dominions; and Don John of Austria was about that very time in the Bowels of the Kingdom, and expected every Day at Lisbon, at the Head of a more numerous Army than had been on foot since the beginning of the War: But, upon the Conde's coming to the Govern∣ment, a sudden Check was given to the Enemy, and Victory declared it self so frequently in fa∣vour of the Portugueses, that this King, notwith∣standing his Deposition, is still, and perhaps ever will be, distinguish'd by the Title of, Alfonso the Victorious. The People were much eas'd of their Taxes, and the Soldiers better paid than before; Pretenders at Court, who us'd to be put off with Delays, had all reasonable Satisfaction given them, and many worthy Persons preferr'd to Employments; in a word, the Conde's Ad∣ministration during the five Years of his Govern∣ment, gave so general a Satisfaction, that such as converse with the Portugueses, will find, that tho' they have all the Veneration for his present Majesty, that he justly deserves, yet they seldom speak of the Conde's Times, without regretting the want of him in the Ministry at present, they accounting him the only Person able to support the declining State. But of all other Alterations, none was more taken notice of than that which People saw, or thought at least they saw, in the King; as they did not look on him now with the same Eyes as
formerly, so without doubt his change of Con∣dition and Company, must have had a like effect upon him, as it has on all other Men. He was now attended and respected by his Nobility, and had Men of Sense and Honour about him, whose Business it was to inform, and help him out, up∣on Occasions, and to raise him in the Peoples E∣steem; and so he must needs make a very diffe∣rent Figure, from what he did in that vile Com∣pany he before conversed with, and while he was kept under and discouraged by his Mother, whose Creatures holding their Places by the Opi∣nion People had of the King's Incapacity, were ready enough, we may be sure, to catch at any thing that might serve to expose his Weakness. But it was observ'd, that such of these as still kept in at Court, and were us'd to be the most ready to cry out upon him, for want of Common Sense, were generally the most forward to ad∣mire the vast Improvements he had made in so short a time, which were such, that they could hardly take him for the same Person; at least, they could think nothing less, than that he was alter'd to a Miracle; they now thought he spoke Sentences like one inspir'd, and they were sel∣dom without some of his Sayings in their Mouths: And that which astonish'd them the most, was, how it should enter into their Thoughts, that this Prince was unfit to govern Portugal; for now they discover'd him to be of so exalted a Genius, as qualified him for the greatest Empire in the Universe. And I make no question, but they that talk'd at this rate, were the first to trample upon that poor Prince at his Fall. But there were still about the Court some ill-natur'd People, that had been unhappily engag'd in the
same Party, who could never be brought over by the Turn of the Times to change their Senti∣ments, but affected rather the contrary Extream to these fawning Parasites, as thinking it per∣haps scandalous, to be so much as in the Right, with such Company. They had so often talk'd of the King's Lameness in his Right-side, that notwithstanding all Demonstrations to the con∣trary, they were resolv'd to believe it still, and to hold, that it must have weaken'd him to that degree, as to make him unfit for Government: they agreed with the Compliers so far, that in case the King of himself did, or said, any of those Fine Things that were told of him, it must needs have been by virtue of some very miraculous Change indeed; but they could not be perswaded that he acted of his own Head: They thought indeed, that he was inspired; but that it was by the Conde, and his Creatures, whom they make the Authors of every thing that was well said, or done by him. And the Reason was, that tho' he began a Discourse well enough, and spoke to the purpose, when any address'd themselves to him, in case he was inform'd of their Business before-hand; yet if they answer'd him again, these Malecon∣tents pretended, that he was at a loss for a Re∣ply, or faultered, or grew mute. When In∣stances were given of his discreet Behaviour on Occasions, when he could have no Instructions given him, they would say, He might perhaps have his lucid Intervals: Or they would put it off with a cold Jest, then current among them, That they allow'd one half of the King to be still hale and sound; and when he spoke a good thing, they us'd to say, it came from his Majesty's Left-side; but generally speaking, they thought
all that he did, or said, came from the Right. The Jesuit might think himself more witty, when having occasion some Years since to men∣tion Alfonso's Victories, he told the People in his Sermon, That one half of a Portuguese King, was able to beat the great Monarch of Spain. But as great as this Change in the King really was, it was no thorough Reformation: For tho' in the beginning he seem'd to take up and apply himself to the Business of State, being constantly present at Councils, Dispatches, Audiences, &c. yet he was under some Constraint all the while; and notwithstanding all that the Conde could do, he would have his Sallies, and sometimes break out into as great, or greater Extravagances than before: And that he might act with greater freedom, he long'd to have his Conti near him again. He had been advised, for Vindication of his Authority, to order this Man back from Brazil; but withal, to save his Credit with the People, by the Conde's Perswasion, he forbad him coming near the Court. His Inclinations towards his old Favourite, were soon discovered by the adverse Party; who ready to serve them∣selves of any Instruments, engag'd Conti in their Interest; and a Plot was laid to supplant the Conde, and restore the Queen; in order to which, Conti was to perswade the King, to re∣cal the Exiles. He had his Correspondents at Court, who waiting their opportunity when the Conde was out of the way, contriv'd it so, that the King had two Interviews with Conti, near Alcantara: But the Conde, who had his Spies abroad, soon div'd into the bottom of the Plot, and laid it open to the King; who was so in∣censed thereat, that Conti was banish'd to O Porto,
and the Conde had no further trouble with so un∣equal a Rival. One of those two Noblemen who had been of the Party at the Acclamation, (as it was call'd) of Alcantara, was found to be in the Conspiracy, and was banish'd likewise from Court: The other was dead, and had been in Disgrace some time before, upon pretence that he had drawn his Sword in the Palace, and given a Chal∣lenge, which is a Capital Crime by the Laws: These three, had, in the beginning of this Go∣vernment, constituted a kind of Triumvirate a∣mong themselves, tho' the Conde always bore the greatest Sway; but he is accus'd of having us'd those under Arts, that are so much practis'd at Courts, to work the other two out of Favour. And I have not heard what is said in his De∣fence, in regard to the former; but as for this whom he found tampering with Conti, I cannot see why he should be blam'd for disarming an Enemy, whom he caught contriving his own De∣struction. The Conde having now clear'd the Court of his Enemies, both publick, and secret, saw his Prediction fully accomplish'd, and himself with∣out a Rival, in a manner sole Governour of Por∣tugal; and he might have continued so, had he not unhappily laid a Train for his Master's Ruin and his own, in the way that he took more firm∣ly to establish the Throne of that unfortunate Prince. Alfonso had now no longer cause to ap∣prehend any Designs of his Mother, she had be∣fore been obliged to retire into a Monastery; and the Plot to restore her, by so contemptible an Instrument as Conti, seem'd to be the last Struggle of the Party. However, she died soon afterwards, and by the Conde's prudent Ma∣nagement,
and good Fortune, there seem'd to be such an Union between the Royal Brothers, that there was no cause to fear any thing from the In∣fante, the only Person that could give Umbrage to the King; so that had it not been for his un∣happy Marriage, he might have dy'd with his Scepter in his Hand. But no sooner was this fatal Marriage con∣tracted, than all things seem'd to go backward, and tend directly to the Ruin of them both; the Conde had been the Contriver of the Match, as the King, when in an ill Humour, us'd to re∣proach him, and he was the first that suffer'd by it. He had been perswaded, that there was no∣thing wanting to the King's Security, but his Marriage, which might possibly take him off from his wild Courses; but he thought it a sure way to silence a Report, concerning a cer∣tain Weakness in him; which was whisper'd a∣bout, in order to make People believe, that the Infante was alone capable of securing the Succes∣sion, the Conde being himself fully satisfy'd, that this Report was groundless; at least, he solemn∣ly protested, that he look'd upon it as an Impo∣sture, when ask'd about it by the Marquess De Sande, as he was going to France to conclude the Marriage, he assuring the Marquess, That he had a Natural Daughter of the King's, at that time in his own House. But the Match concluded on, he soon found cause to repent of his Diligence; for the Faction began to revive, and re-assume new Vigour, and to prosecute the same Designs under the Infante's Name, which they had before been carrying on in the Queen-Mothers. The Queen-Mother is reported by her Friends, as well as others, to have endeavoured what she
could, to set up this young Prince in his Bro∣ther's place: She had settled his Court, when he was but Fourteen Years old, in almost as great Splendor as the King's, who was Sixteen before he had so much as a separate Apartment in the Palace. This look'd as if she was providing a future Head for the Party, for their Encourage∣ment to stick the closer by her for the present: But after her Retreat, the Ministers with great Prudence and Success, endeavour'd to endear the two Brothers to each other, having them of∣ten together at the Palace, at Alcantara, and Salva terra, the Infante partaking with the King in all his ordinary Recreations, and sometimes in his less innocent Diversions. The Ministers did not a little value themselves on this, to the great Regret of their Adversaries, thinking that they had brought them to a perfect Agreement, and put an end to all those little Jealousies and Ani∣mosities that had been between them. But no sooner was the Princess d'Aumalle de∣sign'd for the King, but a Breach began that ne∣ver could be clos'd: The Infante's Refusal to ap∣prove of the Match that was made at the same time, by his own Consent, between him and Mademoiselle de Bouillon, reviv'd the King's Jea∣lousies; insomuch, that he began to accuse him of having still his Mother's Design in his Head, to make himself King, and threatned to clap him into a Tower; but all in vain, for the Infante persisted in his Refusal. I know not, but it may be about this time, that he was highly exaspera∣ted by an Expression the Infante had let fall, That he was sure, the King could have no Children by his Marriage.
When the new Queen's Arrival was expected, the Infante found himself destitute of Persons of Quality to attend him; the Queen-Mother, when she settled his Houshold, had plac'd about him several Lords of her Party, not much inferiour, either in Rank or Number, to those in the King's Service; but these being employ'd else∣where, he had others given him, that were in the King, and the Conde's Interest; and it fell out luckily, as it was then thought, for the Con∣de, that the Infante took such a liking to his Bro∣ther, Simon de Vasconcellos, that of his own accord he took him into his Service; and this Favourite seem'd to have no less share in his good Graces, than the Conde had in the King's: But the pre∣ference of Vasconcellos, so disoblig'd the rest, that they withdrew from the Infante's Service; they return'd indeed again, at the King's Request, but upon the Infante's making his Favourite Go∣vernour of his Houshold, they retired a Second time, and the King thought it too great a Con∣descension, to recal them. The Infante demand∣ed to have others in their room; the King gave him the Nomination of such he should think fit; he named those that were disagreeable to the King, who refus'd to confirm them, and offer'd to restore the old ones: But the Infante would not accept of them; and so he was fain to be at∣tended by the King's Servants, when he gave Audience to the Marquess de Rouvigni, who con∣ducted the Queen to Lisbon. After her arrival, he desir'd leave of the King to retire from Court, since he could not continue there in a State agree∣able to his Quality: The King told him, He might go if he pleas'd; but should have no Or∣der from him: Yet he thinking fit to stay 'till the
Queen had made her Publick Entry, the King would several times ask him in Raillery, Why he was not gone? But otherwise treating him with great Kindness. Upon which the Infante took occasion to declare, before Vasconcellos, That he perceived some malicious Persons had done him ill Offices with the King, and that the Conde de Castel∣melhor, was not free from suspicion; but in case he prov'd guilty, he would find a way to chastise him according to his Demerits. Vasconcellos offended to hear his Brother so ill treated, would stay no longer in the Infante's Service. The Conde find∣ing all the great Men that were disaffected at the Court, gathering about the Infante, and encou∣raging him in his Design to retire, did his utmost with the King, to perswade him to satisfie his Brother's Demands, but could not prevail: He waited himself upon the Infante, to signifie his readiness to serve him; but receiv'd from him a very harsh Answer. The Infante at last retires to a Country-House, about two Leagues from Lisbon, orders another to be provided for him against Winter, at Almada, on the other side of the Water: And it was given out, That he withdrew, because the Court could not hold him and the Conde together. During the Separation of the two Brothers, their common Enemies hoped they would become irreconcilable, and that all things tended to∣wards a Civil War. The Infante never came to Court, unless it were to wait on the Queen; and she being taken with a slight Indisposition, prevail'd with him to stay in Town during her Illness, to avoid the trouble of coming to visit her in the Night, and returning at undue Hours. The Ministers laid hold on this Opportunity to
make up the Business so, that the Infante should choose what Gentleman he pleas'd, those only excepted, whom he had before named. Yet this Difference was not so made up, but the two Brothers continued disgusted at each other, e∣specially the King; and he had so little Com∣mand of himself, that he took all Occasions to treat the Infante with the harshest Language, and to threaten him with worse Usage; he grew every Day in a worse Humour, as those about the Infante gave him Occasions to suspect they had Designs upon his Crown: As when de∣spairing to get him sworn Prince, as they once design'd, they advis'd him to request of the King, that he might Command the Armies with the Ti∣tle of Constable of the Kingdom; which, as the King was perswaded, was sought for only in or∣der to take the Sword, and by that means the Scepter out of his Hand. His Jealousie thus in∣creasing, his Anger against his Brother became more violent; and upon pretence of other Em∣ployments, he took Occasions to remove from about him, those he suspected to have put these Designs in his Head. While these things passed between the King, and the Infante, the Queen, on her part, was acting within the Court, in concert, as it were, with those without, in or∣der to bring about the Conde's Ruin. He soon perceiv'd by her Pretensions, that this must be her Design; and, that if her Demands were sa∣tisfy'd, his Power was not like to be long-liv'd; and therefore, he either found, or made them so very difficult to be comply'd with, that her Majesty grew highly dissatisfy'd, and resolv'd en∣tirely to break with him, taking a solemn Oath, That she would never speak to him more about
Business. And it was not long before she had occasion, to make known her Resentments to the whole Court and Kingdom. It happen'd that a certain French-Man was murder'd by a Carrier in the unfrequented Roads of Alemtejo. The Murderer had fled to a Church, and tho' he were forc'd from thence, yet before Justice could be done, it was first to be determi∣ned, Whether he had any Right to Sanctuary? For which Cause, and for want of sufficient Proof, the Trial was delay'd. About the same time a Difference arose between the High-Steward of the Queen's Houshold, a French-Man, and her Secretary, a Portuguese, about Matters relating to their several Places, and the Queen gave Orders to the Secretary of State, that this Business should be referr'd to two of the Judges; but the Secretary thought conve∣nient to lay it before all the Judges, and to communicate it likewise to the Council of State: He waiting upon the Queen, about other Busi∣siness, she took occasion to enquire, What had been done in these two Cases? The Secretary gave the Reason, why the Criminal was not yet try'd; and told her, That the other Business lay before the Council, and that it was necessary the Conde de Castelmelhor should be spoken to a∣bout it. The Queen, at naming of the Conde, flew into a violent Passion; and after having se∣verely reprimanded the Secretary of State, for not having done his Duty, by punctually obser∣ving her Orders; she told him, That she won∣der'd he should tell her of the Conde, since she had sworn, never to have more to do with him; who, by thwarting her in every thing, had reduced her to a State of Beggary; he al∣ways
wanting Power, when her Occasions re∣quir'd it, tho' at no time else: That for these eight Months, she had not so much as an Alms to give, by reason of his obstructing the Con∣signment of 20000 Crowns granted her by the King: That a great deal of Artifice was used in concealing Matters from her; as if she, next the King, was not the most concern'd in all Af∣fairs. And knowing how much she laid to Heart, the Duke of Cadaval's Return, they had not given her any Account of that Busi∣ness, notwithstanding her having so often in∣terceeded for him, as intercede she would, let them blame her for it as much as they pleas'd; that it was enough to set them against any Per∣son, to see her appear in his Favour, even when she had Reason for it; and when she desir'd any thing, were it never so feasible, it became impossible; and that for no other Rea∣son, but because she desir'd it That, it seems, they affected to let the World know, that she had no share in the Government; and for her part, she was glad of it, as having no share in the Blame. That she desired not to have Mat∣ters submitted to her Determination; however, she thought it was but Manners in them, to make her acquainted with what they did: But they had no regard to Decency. And some People took a Pleasure in crossing her, and were so proud, that, it seems, they thought she came to Portugal, not to be their Queen, but their Slave. These, and other passionate Expressions of her Majesty, put the poor Secretary into a Passion too; he, after having excused himself about the man∣ner of his executing her Orders, in Answer to
her Complaints, told her: That the Conde, and his Friends, had made it their Business to serve, and please her Majesty. That it was none of his Fault, if she was in any Straits, that being no part of his Business. That her Majesty had her Revenues; and it was hoped, she would proportion her Expences according to them. That the Consignment of 20000 Crowns was a new thing, and not easily set∣tled. That she had been made acquainted with all Matters of Importance; and nothing of any Consequence had been kept from her Knowledge, that the Court was full of unrea∣sonable Pretenders; who, if favoured by her Majesty, might engage her in the prosecution of their unjust Demands. That he could give her no account concerning the Duke's Return to Court, the King having himself come to a Resolution in that matter, that for their parts, they did not know how to please her, since she was not satisfy'd, after they had done all they could to serve her, she having been treat∣ed with so much Respect, that no Queen ever had so great an Authority. But coming to that part of her Complaint, wherein she said, she had been treated like a Slave, he chang'd his Note, and in Portuguese (for he had spoken French before), he boldly told her, That her Majesty was abus'd by some about her, who deserv'd to be chastis'd; had no Reason to complain of the Portugueses, since the Respect they paid her, came little short of Adoration. The Queen, after a warm Reply, wherein she said, She knew how to distinguish between the good and the bad Portugueses: There being not above three or four that she complain'd of; and
signifying what she would do to those that had enrich'd themselves with the Rents belonging to the Queens of Portugal; commanded the Secre∣tary not to speak so loud. He told her, That if he spake loud, it was, that all the World might hear what he said. The Queen bad him hold his Peace, and be gone. He not departing pre∣sently, she rose from her Seat, and was going away; the Secretary imprudently laid his Hand upon her Gown, either to kiss it, according to Custom, at her departure, to signifie his Desire, that she would hear him out; but seeing her re∣solv'd to be gone, he cry'd out to the Noblemen and Ladies present, That he was unworthily us'd, no King having ever treated a Vassal in this man∣ner. The Person who had this Dispute with her Ma∣jesty, was Antonio de Souza de Macedo, before mention'd, as one of the first that came in to the King at Alcantara: I cannot tell what he was by Birth; but in himself he was a Person of No∣ble Qualities, as appear'd afterwards by his Con∣stancy in the Service of his Master, and his Friend; he was a Man of Letters, and a Doctor in the Laws. After the Revolt from the Spaniards, he had written with great Zeal and Eloquence in defence of his Country's Cause, and went Se∣cretary to the solemn Embassy, which King John sent to our King Charles the First, to acquaint him, of his having assum'd the Crown of Portugal, and, upon King Charles's Demand, to know on what Right his Master's Claim was founded; he drew up a Paper, which entirely satisfy'd his Majesty. In England he continued Resident for several Years, and was very serviceable to the King, in the time of his Troubles. From hence
he went Ambassador to Holland, and in a very difficult Negotiation, he acquitted himself much to his Master's Satisfaction, and his own Credit; and at his Return, he was highly esteem'd at Court: And the Conde could not do a more grate∣ful thing to the Nobility, than prefer him, as he did, to the place of Secretary of State, tho' per∣haps he might have some regard to himself, as well as to the Publick, in advancing this Man: The Conde was young, and Antonio de Sousa well practis'd in Business, and by his Counsels may have been of as great use to the Conde, as the Conde was to the King. It is certain, that he drew up Instructions for him to observe, in the Administration of the Government; and as the Conde was to be destroy'd, before the King could be depos'd, so it is very probable, that this Quar∣rel was pick'd on purpose with Antonio de Sousa, in order to make way for the Conde's Ruin. The King coming to understand what had passed between the Queen and him, did his en∣deavour to pacifie her Majesty, promising, that the Secretary should be severely punish'd; but the Queen would not be appeas'd. It unluckily fell out, that this Broil happen'd at the time of Bull-feast: The first Day was over, and her Ma∣jesty could not be prevail'd upon to appear the second Day: So that to conceal the Matter from the People, the Bull-running was put off for that Day, upon pretence, that the King was indi∣spos'd; and she continuing out of Humour still, the King was fain to be indispos'd the next, and the following Days; and by that time things were brought to such a pass, that an end was put to all Sports and Pastimes for this King's Reign. The Queen took so little care to conceal her Anger, that the People soon came to know
the Cause, why the Bull-running was put off, and began to murmur loudly against the Court, that their new Queen should be so much abus'd; and, perhaps, their Disappointment did not a little serve to raise their Clamours. The Queen would be satisfy'd with nothing less, than the Se∣cretary's being turn'd out of his Place, and ba∣nish'd from the Court; which the Conde was ve∣ry unwilling to consent to, as thinking, that should he give way to her in this Case, he was like to be the next Man that should fall a Sacrifice to her Resentments; however, the Court perceiving a Storm ready to break upon them from another Quarter, it was resolv'd in Council, that the Se∣cretary should absent himself from Court for ten or twelve Days; and that the King should communicate this Order to the Queen, and ac∣quaint her, That it was made only to content her Majesty; and that it was hoped, she would engage her self no more in such Matters for the future, to prevent the ill Consequences that might ensue to the State. Pursuant to this Order, the Secretary, to please the Queen, departs from Court; but the King forbore to communicate the Order to her, for fear of exasperating her further, at a time when he had his Hands full of another more troublesome Business. While these things were done above-board, a secret Plot was carrying on, among the Heads of the discontented Party, to seize upon the Conde, and carry him off in the same manner, as Conti had been serv'd before. The Conde having In∣formation of their Design, may be supposed to have made the more hast to satisfie the Queen's Complaints: For the very next Day, he order∣ed the Guards about the Palace to be doubled,
the Cavalry to be mounted, and the Centinels plac'd at the Avenues; and, as 'tis said, Com∣mand was given to the Soldiers, to fall upon certain Noblemen, in case they endeavoured to get into the Court, it being suppos'd that they were coming to execute the Design. Hereupon several Messages past between the Infante, and the Court; the Infante complaining, That the Conde, by arming the Palace, had insi∣nuated, as if he was designing to violate it; for which he requires Reparation of Honour; accu∣sing the Conde withal, of attempting upon his Life by Poison; and therefore desires, that he might be removed from about the King's Person, in order to his Punishment. The King takes upon himself the doubling of the Guards, and offers to send the Conde to throw himself at the Infante's Feet: The Infante refuses to take this for Satisfaction, and insists upon the Conde's re∣moval. The King offers to do him all Justice, and desires him to name the Conde's Accusers, in order to his Tryal: But this the Infante would not yield to, unless the Conde left the Court first; threatning, that if he continued there, he him∣self would depart the Kingdom. The King or∣ders the Case to be drawn up, and laid before a Consult of the Counsellors of State, the Chancel∣lor, Judges, &c. and it was concluded among them, by the Majority of Votes, That the In∣fante not being a Sovereign Prince, his bare Af∣firmation was not to be taken for Proof; that the Suspension and Removal of the Conde, was in it self a Punishment, as it reflected Dishonour up∣on him and his Family; but that he ought not to be punish'd, 'till some Proof was made of his Crime. The Infante would not yield, that the
Case had been fairly stated, or the Votes free; and signifies the same in a Letter to the King, wherein he expresses his Resentments of the whole Proceeding with some heat. While the Business was thus agitated by way of Letters and Messages, each side was seeking by other ways to make his Party good, the Infante had written to the Courts of Justice, the Cham∣ber and Council of Lisbon, to acquaint them with his Case, sending them Copies of his Letters to the King. He afterwards called together at his Palace, the Counsellors of State, and the Nobi∣lity, to inform them of what had past; among whom, besides those that had been all along de∣voted to the Cause, the Conde had gain'd him∣self many new Enemies, by his Advancement, and his over-haughty Carriage, (as it seem'd to them) in the time of his Greatness: And the Party was so strong against him, that 'twas now evident his Ruin was at hand: For many of those fawning Wretches, on whom, by a Fault com∣mon, as 'tis said, to great Men, he had mis∣plac'd his Favours, having rais'd them by his Bounty, were now not only ready to abandon him, but they would needs be employ'd in aven∣ging the Infante's Quarrel upon their Benefa∣ctor. The Infante, at the beginning of this Broil, was made to remonstrate in his Letters, That if the King refus'd to do him Justice, he should be forc'd to leave the Kingdom, and end his Days in a foreign Country. But was now put upon ano∣ther Resolution, which was to retire to the Pro∣vince Tras Os Montes, and join that part of the Army, which was commanded by the Conde de St. John, one of his principal Confidents, many
of the disaffected Nobility proffering themselves to follow him, and share in his Fortunes. The Conde, upon the Infante's first Complaint, petition'd the King for leave to retire; but it appearing, that the Contrivers of all this Bustle, aim'd not so much at the Conde's removal from the Government, as the King's, who was not like to stand long after the Fall of his Minister, he was oblig, d to continue at Court; and they were not wanting about the King, that were put∣ting him upon vigorous Resolutions, which might, if followed, have recovered his expiring Authority: Some advised him to go in Person to Corte Real (the Infante's Palace) attended with his Counsellors of State, the Nobility and Officers of the Army, and Arrest the Infante, together with the Camarists (those he had na∣med for Gentlemen of his Bed-Chamber, suppo∣sed to be the Managers of all this Disturbance); but this Counsel never took effect; some think, because it was delay'd so long, that the Infante being inform'd of the Design, had time enough to put himself in a posture of Defence; it is certain, that he immediately after declared, He would run the same Fortune with his Gentlemen, and never suffer them to be Arrested. It is re∣ported of a certain Person, and, as I remember, I have been shewn the Man, that he came and offered to the King, and Conde, That with his Majesty's Leave, he would go to Corte Real, and give a good Account of the Camarists; but this Proposal was rejected, as it well deserved to be. The great Courage the King us'd to shew on other Occasions, to the loss of his Credit, now fail'd him when he had so much need of it, his
Authority and his Honour lying as they did, at stake. He seems to have been so much sunk at this time, as to become incapable of conceiving, or entertaining a Resolution befitting a King in his Circumstances. The Conde, when he saw that he cou'd do no good any other way, wou'd have had him retire to Alemtejo, and there put himself at the Head of his Army, there being reason to believe, that the main Body would prove faithful to him, af∣ter having gain'd so many signal Victories under his short Reign. Both sides were endeavouring about this time, to make a Party among the Sol∣diery; the Infante had wholly gaind the Conde de St. John; but he had receiv'd Orders from Court, that neither himself, nor any Person under his Command, shou'd stir out of his Province 'till further order; and it could not be in his power to do any great harm, supposing the rest conti∣nued in their Duty. The Commanders had been made acquainted with the Differences at Court by the King's Order, who had signified to them his Resolution to protect the Conde, represent∣ing the Infante's Complaints as groundless. The Fleet likewise, which had been cruising on the Coasts, was commanded into the River, and Or∣der given, that none belonging to it should come ashore without leave. It does not appear, that they who were for setting up the Infante, durst as yet openly soli∣cit the Army. It's true, the Queen had a very strong Party in it, as appears by the strict Guard that was kept on the Frontiers this Year, to pre∣vent the coming of any Overtures of Peace from Castille; which the French Faction, that was head∣ed by the Queen, labour'd all they could to hin∣der;
but it was not as yet pretended, that the King and Queen had separate Interests. How∣ever, her Majesty was working under-hand to promote the Grand Design, sounding the Incli∣nations of those in Command, against the time when it should be ripe for Execution. Count Schomberg, who was General of the Strangers, and had, in effect, at this time, the Direction of the whole Army, was oblig'd by Orders from France, to hold Correspondence with the Queen, and to support her Interest. The Queen took occasion to acquaint him, by Letters, how that all things were like to run to Ruin through Al∣fonso's Extravagances, should he continue in the Government, desiring to know of the Count, What Reckoning might be made of the Officers in the Army, in case the Differences at Court came to an open Rupture? It is not probable, for Reasons to be mention'd anon, that the Count gave her any great Encouragement to proceed in the Design; however, he did as he was order'd, and inform'd her Majesty, how the principal Commanders stood affected, and what might be expected from each of them severally in rhe Case propos'd; he was so very particular in his Account, that it took up about four Sheets of Paper; and this Pacquet had like to have pre∣serv'd the King, and ruin'd the adverse Party; for it narrowly escap'd falling into his Majesty's Hands: Had he been Master of it, it might not only have given him great Light into the Plot, but directed him whom to secure, and whom he might trust in: The Story is very remarkable, even in its minutest Circumstances, which shew how all things conspired to the Destruction of this unhappy Prince; and it will be no Digressi∣on
from our Subject to tell it; which I shall the rather do, because I am assured, that the Sub∣stance of what follows, came from the late Duke Schomberg's own Mouth. It being somewhat late when this Pacquet was convey'd to the Queen, her Majesty ordered those that attended to retire, after having set up a Light at her Bed's-Head, for that she had some particular Devotions to perform that Night. She took the Papers with her to Bed, and there they remain'd, when she fell asleep. The next Morning before the Queen was up, News came, that the King was gone to Chapel; and it being the Custom for them both to hear Mass, in the Tribunal together, the Queen was oblig'd to get ready in all haste, and her haste was so great, that she never minded her Papers; yet she could not get so soon into the Chapel, but the Eleva∣tion, which is the essential part of the Mass, was over before she came; so she was fain to stay for another Mass, the King retiring when the first was ended. When the King was gone, the Queen bethought her self of her Papers, and sent de Ville, the Jesuit, her Confessor, (who was in the Secret, and is suppos'd to have instigated her Majesty to what she was acting against her Husband) to secure them: de Ville coming to the Chamber-door, found that the King was got there before him, and he having no Priviledge to enter, while the Queen was absent, stood there for some time, and heard the King walking about the Room, and talking aloud, as if he were in some heat, to the Condeça de Castelmel∣hor, the Conde's Mother, and chief Lady of the Bed-Chamber to the Queen: With these dole∣ful Tidings, the Jesuit returns to the Queen.
Her Majesty upon this, sends one of her Ladies to see, whether there were any hopes of retrie∣ving the Papers. The Lady, upon her coming, found that the King had thrown himself upon the Bed. This being told her Majesty, she found it absolutely necessary for her to go her self; but Mass was not near done: And what Pre∣tence could she have to leave it? Or how should she hinder People from enquiring into the Cause of this sudden Motion? De Ville was at her El∣bow; he suggested to her, that she should be suddenly taken with a Fainting-fit: His Counsel was put in Practice, her Majesty swooning away immediately; and in this Condition she was car∣ried from the Tribunal into her Chamber. The King surpriz'd, and concern'd at his Queen's Illness, would have had the Bed set in order for her to be put into it; had he been obey'd, her Majesty might have had a Fit in earnest; for the Papers lay under some Cloaths that were upon the Bed: The Fright brought her Majesty to her self so far, as that she desired them without more ado, to lay her upon the Bed immediately; this done, she felt about for the Papers, found they were safe; and, in a little time, all was well again. But whatever were the Contents of these Pa∣pers, it seems, the Queen did not think it advi∣sable for the Infante to put himself upon the Ar∣my: For, in truth, those that she had greatest Reason to depend upon, who were the French, were like to give him but a cold Reception; it was not for their Interest, at that time, to have the Portugueses embroil'd in a Civil War, while they should be finding Work for the Spaniards, in order to facilitate the French King's Conquests
in Flanders. As for the English, who together with the French, made a good part of the Army, they had been sent into Portugal to serve King Alfonso; and it was not to be thought, that they wou'd, upon any account, draw their Swords a∣gainst him; nor is it credible, but the Conde, who had the disposal of all Places for above five years together, must have bad Friends enough among the Portugueses themselves, to make the King's Party good; so that of the two, it was doubtless the best way for the King to betake himself to the Army: The Conde, who was the best Judge in the Case, thought, that as things stood, it was the safest, if not the only Course he cou'd take, to secure himself; and he had once brought in the Mind to follow this Advice, which was when he was just upon leaving the Court himself; it being then resolv'd, that the King should pass into Alemtejo in Disguise, at∣tended by the Conde: But when this Project was to be put in Execution, the King fell off, and all the Conde's Remonstrances cou'd not prevail with him to move from Lisbon. His Enemies say, That he was so much in love with his Divertise∣ments, that he cou'd not bear the Thoughts of discontinuing them: And, in order to keep his Brother at home too, he wrote him a most lo∣ving Letter, inviting him to Court, and disswa∣ding him from his Resolution to retire, telling him, That he shou'd choose rather to come to him, who was ready to receive him with open Arms, and with all the Love that was due to a Friend, a Bro∣ther, a Son, and (should he fail of Issue) the Suc∣cessor to his Kingdoms. But as these kind Words were not believ'd to come from his Heart, they rendred him the more contemptible to his Ene∣mies.
While these things were transacting, the Rab∣ble of Lisbon was up, and in a Fury against those that should occasion the Infante's Departure; but resolv'd withal to put a stop to his Journey, for fear of seeing themselves involv'd in a Civil War: For the poor People had been strangely con∣founded at a certain Prophecy, which was then buzzed among them: That a Day was coming on, when the Rua Nova (the chief Street in Lisbon) was to be overflown with Humane Blood, so that the Horses should be bemired in Gore. And they were under terrible Apprehensions, that their Eyes were now to see the sad Day. But howe∣ver, the Infante's Party had made so much Noise of his retiring, that he could not handsomely draw back, without giving up the Cause; for now all that could be done against the Court, next to offering downright Violence, had been done already; and all would have been to no purpose, should this Design be laid aside: For the Court, when let alone, might in a little time recover its Authority. On the other side, should they persist to send away the Infante, the Rage of the Multitude might have been turn'd upon them∣selves, (for the Court had been tampring with the Ringleaders); and in case they got safe to the Army, they were like, for the Reasons now mentioned, to find but little Welcome. And now it was high time for the Queen to appear again: Her Majesty therefore sends De Ville to the Infante, to know, whether her Me∣diation might be acceptable to him? and if so, to desire he would defer his Journey, while she endeavoured to make up the Business. No sooner was the Queen nam'd, but the Infante, accord∣ing
to the Portuguese Gallantry, was ready to prostrate himself at her Feet, and commit his Cause and all to her disposal. It does not appear by what means the King was brought to agree to this Arbitration; but agree to it he did, tho' the Conde's Removal, without any mention made of his Return, was a kind of preliminary Article; whereas the In∣fante had all along desir'd no more, than that he should be suspended from his Charges for a limit∣ed time. While the Treaty was on foot, the Conde was urgent with the King to betake himself to his Army; but not prevailing, he de∣sir'd of the Queen, that his Life and Honour might be secured to him under the Infante's Hand: And this being presently granted, he, at the head of the King's Horse-Guards, retired to the Arabida, a Convent of Capucins, Seven Leagues from Lisbon, leaving the Court prepared for Ruin, which he had hitherto supported, and might, as 'twas thought, have preserv'd still, had his Counsels prevail'd. 'Tis reported, that coming from the King, after his last Conference, his Indignation burst forth so far, that he should say: He was going off; but it was for want of a King to stand by him. This Storm was scarce blown over, the King being yet disabled by it, when the Queen, with∣out giving him time to recollect himself, rais'd another more violent upon him, by which he was overwhelm'd at last; his Majesty now want∣ing one on whose Counsels he might rely on in so difficult a Juncture, resolv'd to call Antonio de Sousa de Macedo, to Court again, the time of his Banishment being out, and made it his Request to the Queen, That by her Favour he might have
leave to return; but tho' he frequently renewed his Intreaties, she would not hear him; and when he began to grow importunate, she flatly told him, That he might restore him by his Absolute Power, if he thought fit; but for her part, he should never have her Consent. The King, in hopes to prevail, by shewing that he desired nothing but what was reasonable, sent her a Copy of the forementioned Order of Council; but this, in∣stead of satisfying her, put her Majesty into such a Passion, that after having express'd her Anger in a very strange manner, by Letter to the King, she lock'd her self up, and would speak to no Body. The King no less offended at her Carri∣age, is said to have expressed his Sentiments of it in very blunt Terms: Upon this the Secretary, who is suppos'd to have lain conceal'd at Court all the while, appear'd there publickly again, but came withal well armed, and well atten∣ded, to defend himself from any Assault that should be made upon his Person; yet he was not like to stand out long against them that had de∣stroyed his Patron. He was soon made a more dangerous Person about the King, than the Conde himself had been; and the People were not a little confirm'd in this Opinion of him, by Ru∣mors spread among them, That the King was at last determined to leave the Court, at the Head of his Guards, and to summon the Fidal∣go's about the Infante, to attend him; and if they refus'd, to enter the City with his Troops, and put all Things to Fire and Sword; and that a List was making of such whose Heads were to be chop'd off on this occasion. The truth is, Antonio de Sousa, upon his co∣ming into the Ministry (for he was designed to
supply the Conde's Place) had given the Alarm to the Camarists. By his Advice care was taken to keep the three Regiments that were about the City well affected to the King, and an Officer was appointed to Command them, that should be ready on occasion to execute the King's Or∣ders: It was observed likewise, that this Officer, together with the three Colonels, were some∣times call'd for to Court; and 'tis said, as they were made acquainted with a Design, that de Sousa was putting the King upon, which was to seize upon the leading Men of the Faction; and that they did not only approve of it, but engag'd themselves by a solemn Promise, to put it in exe∣cution: But 'tis said withal, that this Project, as well as another, to secure the General of the Army, then attending at Court, to serve the Infante, as 'twas thought, rather than the King, came to nothing; the King being unwilling to come to a Resolution, 'till he had imparted the Matter to the Conde de Val de Reys, who being a timerous Man himself, was all for using fair means. However, the appearance of those Of∣ficers about the Court, put the Cabal into a Fright; they easily perswaded themselves, that no Good was meant towards them, and therefore they thought themselves concern'd, as they va∣lued their own Safety, to get this evil Counsel∣lor, Antonio de Sousa, remov'd out of the way. In order to bring this about, it was first thought convenient to render him odious to the People; and to effect that, was no hard matter, he being a Person of such a Character, that his Enemies could not wish for a fitter Man to set the Mob upon. He was indeed a Man of nice Honour, and unbiass'd Integrity, a passionate Lover of
his Country, and for his Insight into Affairs, and Capacity for Business, throughly qualified for the Post he was in; and at his return into his Country, had been esteem'd accordingly by such as were in a higher Sphere, that had Opportu∣nities to know the Man: But his Merit was not like to gain him the Good-will of his Equals, it must almost necessarily have enraged them a∣gainst him, considering how unpardonable a Crime it appears to most Peoples Eyes, for one that hath been of their Rank, to advance himself above their Level. It is certain, that all his good Qualifications were not of themselves suffi∣cient to make him Popular; on the contrary, they were attended in him, as they sometimes may be, with certain little Weaknesses, that rendred him disagreeable to the Many; these were obvious to the common View, whereas it was not every one that could understand his Worth; there was something in his Carriage, that made him appear morose, sour, and pee∣vish, whereby he became uneasie to such as had Business with him, especially those of the meaner sort, who are always the most apt to interpret every seeming Neglect, for a sign of Contempt; and here all manner of People are continually addressing themselves to the Secretary of State, so that it is almost impossible for any Person in that Place, to avoid disgusting great Numbers of Pretenders, especially in such turbulent and factious Times as these were, when the Fate of the Great Ones depends upon the good pleasure of the People, and they expect to be caress'd and courted accordingly. But Antonio de Sousa, whe∣ther it was, that having his Head fill'd with other Business, he cou'd the less bear with the many
Impertinences that one in his Station must be per∣petually plagued with; or that being strictly honest himself, he could have no Complaisance for such Ill-meaning and Ill-designing Persons of all sorts, as he must have had to deal with; either had not, or he did not make much use of the Art of Managing a Multitude. He was so unhappy in this respect, that even when he yield∣ed to the Demands of those that applied them∣selves to him, he did it with so ill a Grace, that he could hardly please them. This rough Beha∣viour was no doubt the worse taken in him, for that the People had been accustom'd to other Usage, and that by the Conde de Castelmelhor, whose greater Quality might have made the same thing seem tolerable in him, which wou'd have appear'd unsufferable in Antonio de Sousa. But the Conde us'd to carry himself after quite another manner; for having the advantage of a more Court-like Education, he had such easie and en∣gaging Ways with him, that he cou'd dismiss a disappointed Pretender not dissatisfied. It is the Observation of a Gentleman, that was a Publick Minister at Lisbon about this time, and who in other respects gives de Sousa his just Character: That People would sometimes go away much better satisfied with the Conde's graceful Denial, than the untoward Grant of Antonio de Sousa. One so little in Favour with the People alrea∣dy, might easily be traduc'd to them, and made to pass for as ill a Man as Enemies were pleas'd to make him: Accordingly, those dismal Sto∣ries, concerning his murderous Intentions a∣gainst the Nobility, and good People of the City that wished well to the Infante, were greedily swallow'd by the prepossest Multitude.
And besides the Havock he was to make amongst them, it was found, that he, and his Servants, had their Pistols, and their Carbines with them in the Secretary's Office, which was call'd forti∣fying the Palace; and that cou'd be done with no other intent, but to kill the Infante, tho' he now seldom or never came there, and to destroy all that should come to take his part. These Discoveries wrought so effectually in the Peoples Heads, that they dispos'd them for another Mu∣tiny, and brought 'em flocking to Corte Real, fully resolv'd to stand by the Infante, against all the wicked Plots of Antonio de Sousa. Things being thus in a readiness, the Infante was carried to the Palace, attended by a confus'd Multitude of disaffected Nobility and Rabble, and all to demand Justice against the Secretary of State; and that, not so much for his Cut∣throat Designs, for those may be suppos'd to have been contriv'd only to bring the People to∣gether, as for his want of Respect to the Queen, and the horrid Outrage committed by him on her Majesty's Person, when he laid his Hand up∣on her Gown. This was on the Fifth of October in the Morning, while the King was yet in his Chamber; the Infante staid at the Door for some of the Counsellors of State to go in with him; when they entred the Chamber, the King was so surpriz'd at their appearance, that while the Infante was telling his Story, he in a great Rage call'd for his Sword. The Infante presenting him with the Guard of his own, said, as 'tis reported: Sir, If you want a Sword against me, make use of mine; if against any other, this shall defend you. The Noise brought the Queen into the Chamber; who presently fell a beseeching
his Majesty, not to be in such a Passion. The King wou'd hearken to none of them, being per∣swaded, as he said; that they had murdered the Secretary amongst them. They assured him, that he was alive: But the King wou'd not believe them 'till he saw him; whereupon the Duke of Cadaval went and fetch'd him from a private Room, where the poor Man had lock'd himself up, promising him Life if he wou'd go with him; and he very honourably kept his Word, tho' it was not without some difficulty; for the Passage was crowded with Rabble, whose Fingers itch'd to be at the Secretary; and had certainly fall'n upon him, and torn him in pieces, had not the Duke turn'd about, and with an Air of Autho∣rity said, Antonio de Sousa goes along with me. The King was somewhat satisfied at the sight of him, but not appeas'd; hereupon the Queen re∣tired, and the Infante after her, into the Anti-Chamber. The Secretary being left alone with the King, gave him such Advice as preserv'd him for that time, and defeated the Design of some that were Ringleaders in the Tumult. Had the Violence of the King's Passion continu∣ed, it had in all likelihood provoked the Rabble to some further Outrage; but he became calm and easie, and thereby still'd the Fury of the People, who when their first Heat was over, on a sudden began to relent. While the King and the Secretary were yet together, a Voice was heard crying, All's well, All's well; which whe∣ther it began in the King's Chamber, or was rais'd by some Friend of his in the Crowd, the People fell a repeating. The Queen was re∣tired into her Apartment, but the Noise brought her out again; possibly she was surpriz'd, and
not well pleas'd with it. The King coming out, found her and the Infante together, in the Anti-Chamber; and, by the Secretary's Advice, took them with him to one of the Windows that looks into the Terreiro do Paco, a large Square before the Palace, shewing himself in their Company to the People below; who seeing them all three to∣gether, thought that all Quarrels were now at an end, and saluted the King with their loud Vi∣va's, as the King was retiring, either himself, or some about him cry'd out, The King pardons every Body; the Mob took the Cry again. A certain Lord, vex'd perhaps that the great Bustle they had been making, was like to end in this, call'd one to the King, and with an Heroical Boldness, as those engag'd in the same Cause term it; the Indifferent perhaps will give it a∣nother Name, told him, That they wou'd have none of his Pardon, but Thanks. The poor King answered, That he gave them his Pardon and his Thanks too. The surly Man reply'd, They wou'd have nothing but Thanks. But some were still for deposing the King out of hand: One near the Infante crying out, Let's e'en clap him up at once, and make an end of the Business: Which shews what they had been aiming at all the while; but the Infante turning quick upon the Person that spoke this, put him to Silence with so stern a Look, as shew'd that he himself had been abus'd by them, as well as the King his Brother; and 'tis reported, that some of the King's Party should confess, That the King had let fall the Crown this Day, which the Infante took up, and put again upon his Head.
But the Faction had engag'd that Prince so far, that it was now too late to think of a Retreat, and something was to be done at this time, or all they had been acting hitherto, was like to end in their own ruine. The King had still his trusty Officers, with the Three Regiments, at Command, who were they to receive Orders from Antonio de Sousa, might after all, enable him to call them to account. As for the Mob, this Day's Transaction shew'd, that they were not much to be depended on, their Rage dying away as it did, when the Business came just to a Crisis, even whilst all those horrid Stories that had been spread amongst them, with so much Indrustry, were fresh upon their Minds; and shou'd they now disperse, when nothing had been done, the same Artifice was not like to serve again; they might Cool and come to themselves, and possi∣bly, in time, be entirely disabus'd, and then it wou'd be a hard matter to bring them toge∣ther, when there shou'd be further occasion for them. Such, and the like considerations, went, no doubt, a great way to fix them in the Resolution they then took; which was, to keep Possession of the Palace, 'till they had gain'd the Point that had been the Pretence of their com∣ing thither, which was the Removal of Antonio de Sousa; this they knew the King wou'd never content to: He was by this time sensible of his Error, in parting so easily as he did, with the Conde, and fully resolv'd to keep Antonio de Sousa near him, who was now the only support he had left. He had shewn in the Morning, how great a Value he had for the Man; when think∣ing he was kill'd, he cou'd not forbear to repeat his Meanaces to the Company that came to him
in his Chamber, as well attended as they were, that he wou'd see them severely punish'd who∣ever they shou'd be that had a hand in the Mur∣der; And while he was passing to and fro through the Rabble, he wou'd always have him by his side, and not suffer him to be out of his sight; as if he thought, that whatever Mischief was done to the Secretary, was much the same as if it had befall'n his own Person. But the Faction, on the other side, were satisfi'd, that they cou'd never be safe whilst this Man was suffer'd to be at Court; and therefore, it was concluded amongst them, to keep the Infante in the Palace 'till the Secretary was gone; they making him declare, that now he was there, he wou'd never stir 'till he had effected the Business he come about; and Orders were given, that Necessaries shou'd be got ready for his Lodging. The Secretary being given to understand, that in case he remain'd there that Night, he was like to sleep his last. This was the best Course they could take, to hinder the Rabble from dispersing; who either in expectation of some great Mischief to ensue, or for fear lest the Infante's Person should be in danger, would be sure to keep about the Palace. In effect, this Resolution did their Business, and ruin'd the King: For the Secreta∣ry, tho' he was not to be frightned with either Threats or Dangers, while there was any hopes left of his being serviceable to his distressed Ma∣ster, as he shew'd by his embarking himself in an almost desperate Cause; yet seeing now, that should he persist any longer, all he could do was to get himself murdered; which probably would but make the Faction the more desperate, and hasten their Design upon the King; he promis'd
to be gone as soon as 'twas dark, it not being safe for him to appear in the Street before; and two Persons of Quality undertaking, that he should keep his Word, the Infante return'd in Triumph to his own Palace, attended as be∣fore. The next Morning the King finding the Se∣cretary gone, as also Manoel Antunes, who had made the same Conditions for himself, sends all about to look for them, ordering all the Con∣vents to be search'd. Antunes was found in A∣lemtejo; but the Infante took care he should come no more to Court. The Infante, before this Business, had been very seldom at Court, ever since the Conde's de∣parture; the Queen, as it is like, afraid of a Reconciliation between the two Brothers, which would defeat her Designs, sending him word, That it would be dangerous for him to appear there; and now when all were gone, that they had any Pretence of Complaint against, he had the same Messages sent to him as before, which kept him still at a distance from the King; who, as I have been assured by one that had good Rea∣son to know, how things pass'd at Court in those Days, had, during all these Broils, some Remains of Love or Tenderness rather for his Brother; believing, that the young Prince was only made the Instrument of other Peoples Ma∣lice. This, I confess, seem'd to me somewhat unlikely, considering what had past between them, 'till the same Person told me; That Al∣fonso, afterwards, when a Prisoner, hearing the Noise of the Guns, and Ringing of Bells, for the Infante's Marriage with the Queen, when he was told the Cause of this Joy, instead of expressing
his Resentments of his own hard Usage, fell a la∣menting the Misfortunes of his poor Brother Pe∣dro; Who, as he said, would, in a short time, have enough of the French-Woman, and as much cause as himself to repent, that he ever had any thing to do with her. But to return: Alfonso having now none near him that he could advise with, being himself young, and un∣acquainted with Business, was for the short time that remain'd of his Reign, on all occasions, at a loss how to comport himself; the Conde, for some time after his removal, us'd to be ever and anon sending him Instructions, but he had now none with him to carry on the Correspon∣dence, and therefore was wholly to seek what Measures he should take; sometimes he would refuse to be present at the Council, as when he was there, to confirm their Decrees. The Cham∣ber of Lisbon was set on to Petition him for call∣ing the Cortes, and he being sensible that this was in order to lay him aside, sometimes would refuse to hear them; or when they were admit∣ted, to return them any Answer: Some there were, and those perhaps none of his greatest Enemies, for having him to allow the Queen, and the Infante, a Joint-share with him in the Government; but he would hear no Talk of it: The Council, at last, after many Denials, ob∣tain'd his Consent for calling the Cortes; but when they had got the Writs ready, they could not prevail with him to sign them. Whether he shew'd so much Irresolution and Inconstancy out of Weakness or Design, is uncertain; his Ene∣mies would have the World believe, it pro∣ceeded from the former, and had the Barbarity to publish several weak things, which they report
him to have said, during the time of these Broils; when, perhaps, a wiser Man in his Circumstan∣ces, might have found himself at his Wit's-end. But it appear'd, that he was preparing for an Escape into Alemtejo, and that his Horses, as al∣so several Barks, to transport them over the Ri∣ver, had been getting ready for that purpose; so 'tis not unlikely, but that he behav'd himself in the manner he did, to keep his Enemies in suspence, and from coming to a Resolution, 'till he could get out of their Hands, and be at li∣berty to call his Friends about him; but they that were then strongest, prevented this De∣sign. While things were thus at a stand, the Queen, who us'd frequently to visit the Nunneries, especi∣ally that of the Esperança, (of the Franciscan Order, where several Ladies of Honour were profest) took occasion, Nov. 21st, in the Evening, to go thither in her Coach with her usual Attendance; as soon as she was within the Nunnery, she sent a Letter to the King to this purpose, That she had left her Country, her Relations, and Friends, and sold her Estate, to come and accompany his Majesty, in hopes that what she did, might be to his Satisfa∣ction; and was inconsolable, that she had not been able to attain to what she so much desired; that, as obliged in Conscience, she was now resolv'd to return into France, in the Ships that were then in the River, for which end she desired his Majesty's Consent; and hoped, that he would order her Dower to be return'd her, since his Majesty knew very well that she was none of his Wife, &c. The King, when this Letter was brought him, was making ready to ride out into the Fields; but he no sooner understood the Contents of it, than enraged at this the most sensi∣ble
Affront he had ever yet receiv'd, he put him∣self immediately into his Coach, and with great Fury drove to the Esperança, resolving to force the Nunnery; and for that end, assoon as he got thither, was calling for Axes to hew down the Doors, when the Infante came to the place so well attended, that he oblig'd him to return to the Palace. The next Day the Queen sent for the Infante, and afterwards for the Counsellors of State, and the Nobility about the Court. The Business that she had in common with the one and the others, was to acquaint them of her Resolution to re∣turn into France, and to desire that they would assist her in it. And much about the same time, she dispatch'd away for France, Monsieur Verjus, who serv'd her Majesty in place of a Secretary, but bore the Character of Agent for the House of Vendome; and his Business was to procure a Di∣spensation, for her to marry with the Infante. The Queen gave Commission likewise to the Infante, to signifie to the King, in a more formal manner, her Delcaration concerning the Nullity of their Marriage, and to desire his Permission, for her Re∣turn into her own Country. When the Infante delivered his Message, the King, in answer to the first part of it, pretended to refute the Charge, and that, as his Enemies say, in very broad Terms: To the rest he return'd him but a slight Reply. However, he gave others that were about him to understand, that as sensibly touch'd as he was at this, above all the Misfor∣tunes that had befall'n him, his Trouble did not proceed from his Regret for the loss of the Queen's Person; he was so far from having any great Fondness for her Majesty, that he declar'd, That
instead of putting a stop to her Journey, he was rea∣dy, on Condition she wou'd but be gone, to present her with a much better Ship than that she came upon, and to double the Money that she had brought along with her into the Bargain. The Queen the same Day having made the Duke of Cadaval her Proctor, sent a Letter to the Chapter of Lisbon, to acquaint the Canons, That she had withdrawn her self from the King's Company, the Marriage they had agreed upon, not having taken effect; and because the Scruples of her Conscience, would not suffer her to endure any longer, what her Love to the Portuguese Nation had hither∣to made her dissemble; she hoped the King, who was a better Witness in her Cause, would declare the same, that she might not be hindred from returning into France as soon as possible: And for the Cha∣pter of the Holy See of this City, to whom it be∣longed to judge of the Cause by their Ministers, she earnestly desir'd them to take order, that it may be dispatch'd with all speed; and to allow all just Fa∣vour to a Stranger, afflicted with the Misfortune of not being able to live in a Country, which she had come from a far to seek, with so much pleasure; and they might assure themselves, that wheresoever she was, she should gratefully acknowledge the Kindness they did her. The Chapter, which consists most of young Gentlemen that never were in Orders, and sel∣dom design it, return'd Answer to her Majesty, That they had read her Letter, and were grieved at her Resolution of abandoning Portugal; telling her withal, that what Justice allow'd to particular Per∣sons, could never be denied to her Majesty; but there being many Circumstances in the Case that required deliberation, they desired her Majesty to allow them convenient time to consider of it.
The King, as much concern'd as he was in what the Queen was doing, had something else to do than to sollicit his Cause with the Chapter; for the same Day that she brought her Case be∣fore them, it was resolv'd upon, that he should be Depos'd without more ado; in order to which, the Magistrates of Lisbon went to petition the Infante, That they might, the Day following, wait upon him to the Palace, and that he would then take the Government into his own Hands: and that, if this could not be done by fair means, they might use Violence. The Infante ordered them to be ready on the Morrow, to accompany him, if it should be thought convenient; and it was agreed, that the Council of State should, before they proceeded any further, endeavour to prevail with the King, to resign up the Crown. Early the next Morning, the Marquess of Cas∣caes got to the Palace before the other Counsel∣lors, and coming into the King's Anti-Chamber, told those that waited, That he had a Mind to speak with the King. They answering, That he was yet a Bed. He knock'd at the Door with so much Noise, that he wakened him, and coming to his Bed-side, told his Majesty, That this was not a time for him to sleep; that if he did not awake, and shake off the Lethargy in which he had lived, he must in a few Hours be deprived of the Kingdom, which he had already ruin'd; and since he was unfit to Govern, and useless in Marriage, he advised him to do that freely, and in a way consistent with his Honour, which otherwise he must be forc'd to do with Disgrace; that is, to send for the Infante, his Brother, and deliver up the Government to him; for by that means he might secure his Crown, and preserve his Kingdom.
The Council came afterwards in a Body, and endeavoured to perswade the King to resign; but neither Menaces, nor Arguments, could bring him to comply. He continuing resolute, the Duke of Cadaval was sent to give the Infante an Account how things stood; and nothing was further done till towards the Evening, which, as it is pretended, was to give the King time to change his mind; but, as 'tis more likely, to perswade the Infante to finish what they had be∣gun; He, at last, Night drawing on, accompa∣nied by the Magistrates of Lisbon, the No∣bility of the Party, and a great Concourse of the People, went to the Palace, where he was received by the Council of State; and at the Head of this Company, went and lock'd up the King in his Chamber, securing all the Passages through which he might escape. A Form of Resignation was then drawn up, read and appro∣ved of by the Council, which before they broke up, was sent to the King for him to Sign, and accordingly it was brought back sign'd by him; but it is not known by what Means he was pre∣vailed upon to do it: The Prince takes up his Lodgings that Night in the Palace; he had no sooner thrown himself upon the Bed, it being very late, but a Message came to him from Al∣fonso, to desire that John the Dog-Keeper might be sent to keep him Company; the Message drew Tears from the Prince's Eyes, 'tis pretend∣ed, that he wept in commiseration of his Bro∣thers weakness, and little sense of his Condition; tho' 'tis not improbable, but the Dethroned King took this way to make his Brother sensible of the ill Usage he had met with, perhaps from
their hands, that had been sent to make him Sign the Resignation, which, but the same Morn∣ing, as hath been shown, the most Brutal Mena∣ces could not extort from him. The King being thus Deposed, the Prince Signs the Writs that had been prepared for Sum∣moning the Cortes, before they assembled, it was debated, Whether it might be convenient for him to take the Title of King, but it pass'd in the Negative in a Committee of Judges, and other Ministers, to whom the Matter was refer∣red, and it was carried, that he should content himself with the Title he then used, viz. that of Curator of the King's Person, and Governor of the Kingdom; The same Question was afterwards long debated in the Cortes, which met on the 27th of January, 1668, but in the end it was concluded, That he should have the Kingly Pow∣er, with the Title of Prince Regent. In the mean time, the Queen having com∣menc'd her Process against Alfonso the day be∣fore he was deposed, upon his Confinement was at liberty to prosecute the same with the utmost vigour. There being no Bishops at this time in Portugal, the Cause, as hath been said, was brought before the Chapter of Lisbon: I shall, for many reasons, forbear giving a particular ac∣count of the Proceedings, tho' there be no want of Materials; but in short, Alfonso after a few Days Confinement, was, as 'tis pretended, brought to sign an Acknowledgment of what the Queen had declared, concerning the Nullity of their Marriage, contrary to what he had asserted to the Infante, when he signify'd her Declaration to him the Day after her Retreat, while he was yet at liberty.
It fell out happily for the Queen, as she thought at least, that her Uncle the Duke of Vendome, lately made a Cardinal-Deacon, was at this very time commissioned by the Pope, to represent the Person of his Holiness, as Godfather to the Dauphin, then seven Years old, at that Formality of a Christning, which is used for the Children of France: For this end the Cardinal-Duke had the Title and Patent given him of Legat a Latere. To him, as invested with the Plenitude of the Pope's Power, Monsieur Verjus, (who was sent as hath been said, into France, upon the Queen's first leaving her Husband) applied himself for a Dispensation, that the Queen might marry with the Infante. The Cardinal was, no doubt, willing enough to oblige his Niece, and to do for her whatever was in his Power; but then he question'd much, whether it was in his Power to help her out in this Case; as well he might: For who cou'd think, that a Proxy to be Godfather to a Child in France, should enable him to make it lawful for a Woman in Portugal to marry with her living Husband's Brother? But Monsieur Verjus having satisfied the French King about what the Queen of Portugal had been doing, the Dispensation was obtain'd without much difficul∣ty; for he and Monsieur de Lionne reading the Cardinal's Bull of Legate, found out that it con∣tain'd some Clauses, that did, as it were, point to the very Case in Hand, and to give the Car∣dinal as ample Powers as they could wish; and so the Dispensation was granted without more a-do: And in truth, they in France were a lit∣tle too hasty in this Business, for the Dispensation was obtain'd there, before they were ready for it in Portugal, it bears Date the 17 Calends of A∣pril,
i. e. the 16th Day of March, and in it 'tis supposed and affirmed, that the former Marri∣age had been declared null by Course of Law. But the Chapter of Lisbon were not so very ha∣sty, for they did not pronounce Sentence 'till the 24th of March, tho' considering how long Cau∣ses of Divorce between Royal Persons used to depend, which we in England have good Cause to remember, none will accuse them of dilatory Proceedings. They at last by their Delegates appointed to examine and determine the Mat∣ter, pronounc'd the former Marriage to be null, by reason of Alfonso's incurable Inability to con∣summate it, occasion'd by his Sickness during the time of his Childhood; of which Inability, as 'tis affirm'd in the Sentence, there was more than sufficient Proof, and at least a Moral Certainty; so that as they said, there was no need of Inspection of Trial for 3 Years, or any other limited time. The Queen was now talking of nothing but returning into France by the Fleet that lay in the River, to carry off the French Troops that had been in the Portuguese Service; with this Design she made the three Estates of the Kingdom ac∣quainted, desiring, that the Portion which she had brought with her, might be return'd her. The doleful News of her intended Departure, (saith the Writer, employ'd to give the World an account of these Transactions) was with great Grief heard by the States, and they entring into politick Considerations in the midst of their Af∣fliction, find that this Princess, on account of all the Conveniencies of State, all the Endowments of Mind, and all the Perfections of Nature, was the most ready, most convenient, most worthy, and most lovely Spouse that a Prince could wish
for; went all in a Body to the Nunnery, (saith another Writer of the same Stamp) to supplicate her Majesty with Tears in their Eyes, That she would not abandon them, but stay and marry with the Prince, because they were neither able nor willing to return her Portion. But the Queen would give them no positive Answer; then they went in a Body to the Prince, begging of him to save the Kingdom, by marrying the Queen; protesting, they would never suffer him to marry any Body else, (for there was a Match about the same time propos'd between him and the Princess of Austria, with great Advantages to the State); the Prince told them, That he for his part was willing, provided they could but gain the Queen's Consent. Then they return'd again in a Body to the Queen, and with repeated Entreaties beseeched her to Consent: Her Majesty at last preferring the Welfare of the Kingdom (saith my Author) to her own Satis∣faction, put off her Return to her own Country, and by a heavenly Inspiration gave Consent, that they should treat of the Marriage. The Match was soon made up; for the Sentence of Divorce pass'd but on Saturday the Eve of Palm-Sunday, and on Wednesday in the Passion-Week, the Duke of Cadaval, her Proxy, was married in a private Oratory of the Palace to the Marquess of Marralva, who represented the Prince. On Easter-Monday, the Prince, with a numerous Attendance fetched the Bride from the Nunne∣ry, and carried her to Alcantara, where the Mar∣riage was consummated: Poor Alfonso sending his Complements upon it, to wish Joy, as 'tis said, to the new-married Couple. They will have it likewise, that he acquiesced all along to the Proceedings in the Cause of his Divorce; and
that by the Advice of two Dominicans, and a Je∣suit, he confess'd the Inability objected to him by the Queen, and at last submitted to the Sen∣tence, declaring, that he would not appeal: But he was a Prisoner all the while. This dethroned Prince, after he had been confined some time in the Palace, was sent to the Terceira Island, one of the Azores; but having been kept there for some Years, he was for greater Security brought back to Portugal, and shut up in the Castle of Cintra, formerly a Royal Palace, where he ended his Days the 12th of December 1683. After Consummation of this Marriage between the Infante and the Queen, the Pope was applied to to dispense with it; which he did by a Breve, dated the 10th of December, 1668, directed to the chief Inquisitor, and others, impowring them in case they found the Allegations of the Petitio∣ners true, to annul the former Marriage, and con∣firm the Second; which was done accordingly the 18th of Feb. following. This Bull hath some very extraordinary Clau∣ses in it, inserted, I suppose, Ex abundanti cau∣telâ; which yet it will not be amiss to mention here, if for no other Reason, than to see how far the Plenitude of the Pope's Power reaches in such Cases. By it the Commissioners are im∣powred and commanded, to cancel, dissolve, and annul Alphonso's Marriage, even without his Con∣sent; or in case the said Marriage did appear, or should be found to have been valid; and commands them to dispense with the Second Marriage, not∣withstanding the Impediment, Publicae honestatis, or any other Impediment of what nature soever, that may arise or appear; decreeing, That altho' the said King Alfonso, or any other Persons con∣cern'd,
have neither given their consent, appear'd, been cited, or heard; and altho' the Causes for which these Letters were granted, be neither suf∣ficiently proved nor justified; that all this, not∣withstanding the said Letters, and the Contents of the same, shall never be call'd in question, re∣tracted, or violated for any lawful Cause, or any de∣fect, how great or substantial soever; that no Person shall obtain Relief against them, upon any Plea of Right, Fact, or Favour; and in case Relief be ob∣tain'd, it shall be of no benefit, tho' granted de mo∣tu proprio, with full Power and Apostolical Autho∣rity; but that they shall be for ever valid, in all re∣spects, without limitation to the said Prince, &c. So that the Pope had a great deal of reason to tell the Prince, as he did afterwards in his Letter, That in this Cause he had certainly shewn him all the Favour that the sacred Canons would permit, Of this Marriage was born within the first Year, the late Infanta, of whom I shall speak a∣non, but never any other Child, tho' the Queen liv'd with the Prince for above 15 Years. She departed this Life the 17th Day of Decem, 1683, after having languish'd in great Misery, for the space of six Months together, under the Distem∣per that occasion'd her Death. After having mention'd so many Particulars, which seem to bear hard upon the Memory of this Princess, common Equity requires, that I should enlarge a little upon what is said in her Commendation: She was much celebrated for her great Understanding and Insight into Affairs, of which I think there can be no better Proof than this; the Prince her Husband (for he had not the Title of King 'till a little before she died) had so high an Opinion of her Judgment, as to
consult her upon all occasions of moment, and never came to a Resolution in any Business of Importance, before he had first taken her Advice; which may perhaps be one Reason, why he re∣gretted her loss so much, as that he remain'd inconsolable for some time; and, as it's said, could not be perswaded to think of a Second Marriage, 'till Pope Innocent XI. by his Paternal Admonitions, in a manner, oblig'd him to it: They are not wanting, who make large Encomi∣ums upon her other Vertues; I have two Ser∣mons now before me, preach'd in her Commen∣dation, by two of the most famous for Eloquence in Portugal, the one a little after her Second Marriage, and the other upon her Death; and I have consulted both these, in order to give her Character to the best advantage. The former speaks in general Terms of many wonderful Things that might be said in her Praise; but when he comes to Particulars, he falls a trifling: He highly magnifies her Noble Birth, chiefly be∣cause she was descended from a Bastard-Son of Henry IV. and reckons up the Titles that were related to the Family, and among others, the Prin∣palities of Anet, and Martignes, the Duchies of Pontievre, and Tampis, the Marquisats of San∣sorlem, and Sasors. He tells her Majesty, (for he preached before her), That she was a ve∣ry great Beauty; and he hoped, would be as handsome when she came to be 90 Years old, as she was at 20. He thinks it was discreetly done of her Parents, to Christen her with three Names, since one was not enough to express her Merit: For Astrologers call the finest Star in the Firma∣ment Venus, Lucifer, and Vesper. Speaking of her forsaking her Husband, which he calls lea∣ving
a Crown, to keep her Conscience unblemish∣ed; he profanely compares it to Moses's refusing to be call'd the Son of Pharaoh's Daughter, chusing rather to suffer Affliction with the People of God, than to enjoy the Pleasures of Sin for a Season. And hence he infers, That this Princess ought to be except∣ed from that general Maxim of Tacitus, which represents the Female Sex, as ambitious and gree∣dy of Power. The other is no less copious in her Praises, but speaks a little more to the purpose, he highly extols her great Prudence, speaks much in com∣mendation of her Magnanimity and Patience, in bearing the Disgrace when the Match was bro∣ken off between the Infanta, her Daughter, and the Duke of Savoy, which she had set her Heart very much upon; and for her other Vertues, he would have her pass for no less than a Saint; but he intimates, that her Piety was best known to her Confessor, and compares it to the Sanctum Sanctorum, which was visible only to the High-Priest; and, indeed, I do not find, that it was much known to the People, it being very little talk'd of amongst them: Certainly, if it was so very great as this Orator represents it, her Ma∣jesty's Confessor had a great deal of reason when he us'd to tell those he convers'd with, That the Portugueses did not know how good a Queen God had sent them.
Of the late QƲEEN. MAria Sophia Elizabeth, Daughter of Philip William late Duke of Nicubourg, and Ele∣ctor Palatine of the Rhine by Elizabeth Amelia, Daughter of George Lantgrave of Hesse d'Arm∣stadt, was born the 6th of August 1666, and Married to Dom Pedro the II. King of Portugal, the 11th of August 1687, the day of her Arri∣val at Lisbon, to which place she was conducted by a Squadron of English Men of War, under the Command of the late Duke of Grafton. This Princess was of a middle Stature, exceed∣ing Fair, and a graceful Person. I do not know whether they that are Judges in these Matters, will allow her to have been a Perfect Beauty; but no doubt, all Strangers will agree, that she appeared with great advantage among her Ladies, one cause of this, perhaps may be, her neglect of those Arts which they have recourse to to set themselves off, for the Portuguese Women of all Ranks, do so discolour their Faces with Red Paint, that it renders them a very disagreeable Specta∣cle in the Eyes of Strangers. It was observed, That her Majesty did seldom or never concern her self with the Affairs of State, contrary to the Practice of the former Queen. It is said, that her Confessor, Father Leopold Fuess, a Jesuit, who came along with her from Germany, advis'd her not to meddle with the Government. They tell indeed, of one De∣sign
of hers, which I may speak of in another place, which she was put upon by the same Je∣suit, her Confessor, it being a Matter, wherein, as 'tis said, the whole Society have concern'd themselves for some time, and that was to bring the Conde de Castelmelhor into the Ministry again; but if her Majesty ever had any such Design, it is certain that nothing came of it, for the Conde keeps from Court still, and the Duke of Cadaval is since more firmly establish'd there than before. But the Principal Parts of her Majesties Chara∣cter, are her great Piety, and singular Devotion, according to the Religion in which she had been educated; she was a constant Hearer of the Fa∣thers of the Cratory, an Order of Men, who some Years ago were famous for Preaching of true Christian Morality, whereby they became, and were it not for some very mean Complian∣ces their prevailing Adversaries have extorted from them, they had continued still the Glory of the Roman Church; nor are they yet so far degenerated, but People still take notice, that their Sermons are the least stuft with those Fooleries wherewith Preachers of other Orders affect to raise Mirth in the Audience. It is, I suppose, for this cause, that notwithstanding the large Share the Jesuits have in her Majesties Fa∣vour, she honour'd them so often with her Pre∣sence; and that the Street where their Church stands, was every Sunday in Lent, crowded with Coaches, for her Majesties Example seems to have had a mighty Influence over the whole Court, especially among those of her own Sex. It is a usual thing to see Ladys of Quality with their Prayer-Books open in their hands, as they
are carried along the Streets in their Litters, and I have observed some of the younger sort as they were going to a Wedding of one of their Com∣panious, very hard at their Devotion in the midst all their Gayety. I need not, I suppose, tell that her Majesty is zealously addicted to what is now so commonly called the Catholick Religion; it is enough to make the Reader sensible of that, to say, she is of the House of Nicubourg, The Princes of that Family, by the very extraordinary Methods they take to promote their Religion, have made their Zeal sufficiently remarkable to the World. But as well instructed in Catholicism as she was in Ger∣many, her Majesty seemed to be much improved since her coming into Portugal, especially in those smaller Devotions, as the French call them, of which good Catholicks are so very shy in Coun∣trys where Hereticks are in sight, and so mighti∣ly addicted to, where they are at their own Li∣berty. But it would be very difficult for one that is of another Religion, to give an account of these Matters, without being suspected of Mis∣representation, or in the present case of disre∣gard to Majesty. I shall therefore give but one Instance of the Queens Devotion; and concern∣ing that I shall say nothing but what I have from the Jesuits, who were her Majesties Directors, and are at this day reckon'd among the most refin'd Courtiers in Europe, and therefore may be sup∣posed to understand best what is most fit for the World to know. From these good Fathers then, I learn, that above all the Saints in the Roman Calendar, the Queen had a singular and most devout Affection
for the famous St. Francis Xavier, I need not, I suppose, at this time, tell who this Saint is, since his Life has been written by the elegant Pen of Pere Bouhours, and translated into English by our famous Laureat, or 'tis enough to let the ordinary Reader know that he was one of the first Set of Jesuits that appear'd in the World; and that he is frequently address'd to by such as want Heirs to their Familys, and is believed by his Devotes fre∣quently to procure Relief in such cases. The first occasion taken notice of by my Au∣thors, of the great Friendship between this Saint and her Majesty, was this; Soon after her Mar∣riage, the Viceroy that came from Goa, brought along with him a certain Cap, that had former∣ly belong'd to Xavier, The greatest Treasure (saith the Famous Jesuit Vieira) that ever came from the Indies, since the Arm of the same Saint, that's now at Rome, was brought from thence: This Cap her Majesty, possibly prevail'd upon to comply with the Bigotry of those about her, put upon her Head on the 21st of Nevember 1687, which in the Roman Calendar is the day of the Presentati∣on of the Virgin, and she happening to be with Child soon afterwards, they would needs have it that she received great Benefit by the Cap; but the Jesuits have made strange work of the Matter, On which day (saith the Jesuit Duarte) Her Majesty amidst the sweetest transports of her Heart, received for the first time the Sacred Cap upon her Royal Head, when suddenly (saith Vieira another Jesuit) the Tears flowed from her eyes in a copious manner, her Countenance being all of a flame, and changed to that degree, that her Con∣fessor (a third Jesuit) being present, was astoni∣shed
at the sight; and he afterwards asking the cause of this alteration; the Queen, (as he pre∣tended) reveal'd to him, how that she was cer∣tified at the very Instant, that the Saint would obtain a Son for her, of which she hoped, through the Saint's Intercession, she should never make the least doubt. The Confessor's Words (saith Vieira) are, Ʋt nihil amplius haesitaret de impe∣trando quod petebat. The Jesuits, after this, brought the Saint's Image from their Church at St. Roque, upon a Visit to the Queen at the Palace; and tell the World, That her Majesty had learn'd so much Portuguese, as to say, Meu santo daime hum Filho se Deos quizer. My Saint, give me a Son, if God pleases. Her Request was granted, (saith Vieira); and he very profanely applies these words, Visi∣tavit Dominus Annam & concepit, to this Visit that the Image made to her Majesty. After this, she was made to believe, as the Jesuit's pretend at least, that the Child she had conceived would infallibly prove a Son. Vieira proves, that it must necessarily be a Son by this Instance: A certain Indian, upon the Coasts of Comorin, pray∣ed to St. Francis Xavier, That he would please to bestow upon him a Son: And not many Days after, the Wife came to understand, that the Saint had heard her Husband's Prayers; howe∣ver, it was yet doubtful, what the Saint was sending her; but when the time of her Reckon∣ing was up, behold she was brought to Bed of a Girl. The Father seeing it was a Girl, in a rage takes the little Creature, and away he goes with it to the Saint's Altar, and there laying it before him, Here, says he, my Saint, here's what you gave me; but it is not what I asked for: Had it
been a Boy, I intended it should have been mine; but since it is a Girl, e'en take it for your self. The Great Miracle-worker (saith Vieira) was now much in the same Case, with a poor Trades-man, that hath his Work turn'd upon his Hands: And what, saith he, should the Saint do in the Case? As for the Indian, he was resolv'd never to own the Girl, but to carry her away presently to the Hospital: But he going to take her off the Altar, he saw, to his Astonishment, that she was become a Boy, a Boy! Upon this the People came thronging about the Altar, to be Witness to the Miracle, and the Church was presently fill'd with a confus'd Noise of Thanks and Praise to the Saint, and Much Joy to the Indian; so that, saith the Padre, if the Indian was Father of the Girl, the Saint was Father of the Boy. From this Story he infers, (how well I shall not ex∣amine) that the Queen, since she had conceiv'd through the Intercession of St. Xavier, must needs bring forth a Son. But to secure her Hopes, and return the Saint's Civility, she entred, they say, into a new Course of Devotion, which was to visit the Saint at the Jesuits Church, ten Fri∣days in the Year. The Confessor kept a kind of Journal of the Accidents befalling the Queen, during her Big-belly; and pretends, that in all Dangers she had so much Confidence in her Saint, who had given her this Son, that she was sure of a safe Delivery; as in effect, she was delivered much about the time of their Reckoning of a Prince, who dy'd about seventeen Days after his Birth. But they pretend, that this was not the only Child that her Majesty was indebted to St. Xavier for; they will have it, that all her Children have Francis, or Xavier, among their
Names, because she thought her self oblig'd for them all to the Saint; and that among other Marks of her Gratitude, she wore the Saint's Colours for some time; and in Token of her Affection, sent him a new Suit of Cloaths for his Body at Goa; of which they believe, (if we'll be∣lieve them) the Saint was not a little Proud, but made his Braggs in the Court of Heaven of her Majesty's Favours. They that have been in Countries where pure Popery in still practis'd; that is, such as hath not been blended with Heretical Doctrines, as 'tis in France and Germany, would not perhaps think strange at all this, or any thing of the like sort, had my Authors to deal only with the Peo∣ple: For where-ever genuine Popery is retain'd, it is a common thing for the Priests to amuse the gaping Herd with such Stuff, as my Authors tell of their Saint; but it may deserve one's Won∣der, to see Men so securely impudent, as to a∣buse their Sovereigns at this rate; as if they thought it not enough to have them at their De∣votion, but out of meer Wantonness they must needs let the World see, how they can divert themselves at the Expence of Crown'd Heads: and certainly, if there be any thing of Truth in their Reports, it must move any Man's Indigna∣tion, to see what use they make of the pious In∣clinations of a well-dispos'd, but misguided Prin∣cess. But by this time, I fear, the Reader may suspect me of misrepresenting them as much, as, 'tis to be hoped, they have their Queen; where∣fore to vindicate my Credit, I shall here tran∣slate some Parts of an Address made to the Queen by Padre Balthesar Duarte, Procurator-General at the Court of Lisbon, for the Jesuits of Brazil,
when he presented her Majesty with the Life of Xavier, compos'd at her Request, by the famous Jesuit, Antonio Vieira, one of the greatest Men, by the Confession of all, that ever the Society produc'd in Portugal. Such of the foregoing Par∣ticulars as are not mentioned in this Address, were taken from the Writings of Vieira him∣self. MAY it please your Majesty then to accept of your Xavier, always wholly Yours, because your Majesty is always wholly His; by such a new and admirable Transmigration of Xavier's Soul into your Majesty, and your Majesty's Soul into Xavier, that your very Names are confounded; insomuch, that at the Name of Xavier, People are in doubt, who is meant, whether it be the Apostle of the East, or the Queen of Portugal; this is certain, that the same Species do mutually excite the Memory of both Names with such a never-failing Connexion, that none can think of your Majesty, but must remember Xavier: Hence it was, that some Months ago, a Publick No∣tary being to write the most August Name of your Majesty, by a happy and pleasing Mistake, instead of Isabel, put Xavier. The Credit of that Publick In∣strument, would certainly be called in question in After-Ages, were not all the World acquainted of your Majesty's amorous Transmigration into Xavier, which at all times will put it out of doubt, that Ma∣ria Sophia Isabel, and Maria Sophia Xavier, stand for one and the same Person: And so your Majesty was pleas'd to have the Name settled upon you by a Publick Deed, which you were before possess'd of, and lawfully entitled to by Right of Prescription, and that not without Consent of its former Owner.
But your Majesty contents not your self with the Glory of so illustrious a Name, you equal it by the Resemblance and Condignity of your Actions; wit∣ness the Image of Xavier, which among the rest (all Sacred ones) like the Sun among the Planets, guilds and enamels your Bracelets; for not satisfied to have him engraven in your Heart, in imitation of a Spouse, you have his Impression in your Arm, where it is as a Signature, or Love-mark, or as an indelible Cha∣racter, whence is deriv'd a Coelestial and Superiour Force into all your Majesty's Actions. What shall I say to the great variety and multi∣plicity of Honours, that your Majesty bestows on Xa∣vier? Your Love never shews it self so ingenious, as in contriving for him some new Methods of Venera∣tion. The vast distance of Sea and Land, will not permit that you present your self as a Royal Pilgrim at his Sepulcher, tho' your Heart is so much set upon it, that you would do it, if 'twere possible, were it with the Peril of your Life. But your Royal Bounty has reach'd where your Person cannot come, your Ma∣jesty having sent your Xavier, as a Token of your Love, a most costly Suit of Sacerdotal Vestments; wherewith, he being still alive after Death, may cloath himself in such a glorious manner, as becomes one that triumphs over Mortality; Sacerdotal Vestments, I say, as to one, that is free from Corruption, white, as to a Confessor, embroidered with Red, as to a Mar∣tyr of Love; and that there should not want Symbols of your Fervour, and pure Affection, shining with the Fire of Gold, and Snow of Pearls; I believe, Xavier, on that Day when dress'd up in all his Finery, shew'd himself to the whole Court of Heaven, telling every Saint with a holy Vanity: His me vestibus Cliens mea Lusitaniae Regina contexit. Nor were you content to cloath your Saint in divers Colours, but
you wore your self the Colours of your Saint: For we know that you made a Vow, That for the space of a Year you would wear no Silks of any other Colour, but that wherewith the Sun of the East, (Xavier) while he suffer'd the Eclipse of a mortal Body, mortified and conceal'd the Rays of his Vertue, to accommodate him∣self to the Miseries of this Life; only you would ad∣mit a mixture of While, as a Signal of the Virginal Soul of Xavier, and your Majesty. Let Lisbon reckon up, if it can, the holy Pilgri∣mages, by which your Majesty, in the Course, and Re∣turn of the Year, humbly and devoutly venerates the Temples and Altars of your Saint; to adorn whose Image you consorate all your Jewels, offering the best Eastern Spoils, to the Apostle of the East, the Jewels themselves having the advantage to be plac'd and di∣spos'd by the Hands of your Royal Majesty: I pass by the ten Fridays which your Majesty's Devotion de∣dicates every Year to Xavier. And what shall I say of that most tender and most amorous Affection which all discover in your Majesty, every time you speak of Xavier? All know, that have the Sovereign Favour to be admitted to your more intimate Conversation, how often, and with what sweetness and dexterity you have hook'd in the Discourse of your Xavier; at the naming of Him, not only your Tongue by your Speech, but your Face by the Colour in your Cheeks, your Eyes by their Sparkling, your Breast by its Commotion, your Heart by its Leaping, speak with so much warmth, that they seem to lay your Majesty open to the Eyes, as well as to the Ears of them that hear; whom, by an admirable Simpathy, and reciprocal Communica∣tion of Affections, you often melt into copious Tears. At one of those Conferences, wherein two Religious bore a part, Xavier being of course the Subject, your Majesty just having done Reading the prodigious Cure
that a few Years ago was wrought in a moment, by the Hand of this Wonder-worker of the East, upon Anna Maria Zambrina, a Roman Matron, your Majesty full of interiour Delight and Consolation, being desirous to communicate the Matter, began the Story again, and read it over from beginning to end, tho' it took up a full Hour; and that not only with∣out being cloy'd and tired, but without so much as pausing, unless it was when your Majesty from time to time was interrupted by your amorous Sighs; and by these you enkindled the like Flame in your Hearers, insomuch, that they could scarce refrain from Weep∣ing. I believe that this was the first time, that the Humble Xavier was pleas'd with his own Praises; and that he was pleas'd with them now, because they came from the Mouth of your Majesty. Your Majesty, like a most pious Mother, hath by the imposition of so beloved a Name, instilled the same Love into each of your Sons, our most Serene Princes, who both of them imitate you so happily therein, that scarce any Voice came from them be∣fore they could Lisp out their Mothers Saint, mean∣ing Xavier, and even then they could distinguish his Image from among the rest, accustoming themselves to the Veneration of it by a thousand innocent Kisses. I pass by the Concern of the rest of your House and Family, who find that their Emulation and Imita∣tioc of this your Royal Piety, is the only way to please their Mistress, and gain her Favour; and indeed, it is commonly reported about the Court and City, that in order to succeed in any Business with Your Maje∣sty, there is no Intercessor like Xavier. A love so great could not well be contained in one City: It has already pass'd the Tagus, your Ma∣jesty having chosen Beja for the Theatre of your Li∣berality, where mov'd partly by your Zeal, partly by
the pious desires of the Inhabitants, you have rais'd a magnificent House to the Honour of your Saint, built and endow'd at your own Charges. But why should I say, that one City is too narrow for your Love to Xavier, when it cannot be confin'd within the limits of a whole Kingdom? What Court is there among the greatest of Christendom, wherein your Majesty (I speak your own Words) hath not in∣troduc'd the sweet and powerful Patronage of this lovely Saint? Witness Vienna in Austria, Madrid in Spain, Warsaw in Poland, Parma in Italy; and lastly, all Germany, a Country that's proud that it can boast of your Majesty's Cradle, and is en∣rich'd with the numerous Offspring of your most Se∣rene House; in all which places your Majesty hath enkindled the Love of Xavier, into such a Flame, that few Letters come from thence but are full of his En∣comiums, written by such as gratefully recount the Favours received from his beneficent Hand. Your Majesty is the first, by your own Confession, that is able and bound after repeated Tryals, to bear witness that Xavier's Love for your Majesty is no less than your Majesties Love for Xavier; and if Benefits are a sure proof of love, Xavier hath conferred so many upon You, that to reckon them all, would take up a Volume; but your Majesty, no less grateful than devout, will not permit me to pass them all over in silence, especially since it is for the glory of Xavier to have it known, that he shews himself to be the Bene∣factor of them that serve him, and recompences the Regards they have for him with reciprocal Kindnesses. It is then, through the kindness of Xavier that your Majesty has most happily brought forth Three Sons one after another: This is acknowledg'd, not by me only, and the whole Kingdom, but by your Majesty likewise. For you remember mighty well, what your
Prophetick Mind foresaw, when full of Faith, amidst the sweetest Joys of your heart, you first receiv'd upon your Royal Head the Sacred Cap of Xavier, brought a little before from Goa; for according to the ex∣actest Reckoning, just Nine Months after your Ma∣sty brought to light the first and wish'd for Heir of the Crown, the Infallibility of the Success confirming the truth of the Prediction. Its true, Heav'n did of right take to it self the First Fruit of your Majesties Royal Blood, but it was in order to recompence that tender Plant, cut off in the Flower, with new Fruits. So it was; there succeeded a Second Son given by Xavier, there followed a Third, whom you owe like∣wise to Xavier, upon several accounts; A Saying of your Majesty makes us believe that your Saint had made you a Promise of him, and had given you his Word upon it in Private; for a great while before, you had affirmed without the least sign of Doubt, that e'er the Ten Weeks were ended, the Fridays whereof you had consecrated to Xavier, you should conceive a Son the Third time, the Event prov'd the Truth of this Prediction likewise. But the Reader, I suppose, may by this time, be as weary as my self, of this High-flown Cour∣tier, I shall therefore pass over a great many of his Compliments, and come to his Conclusion. To conclude, for it is now time, I shall end where I began. May your Majesty receive your Xavier, wholly yours, because as your Majesty has entirely devoted your self to the service of Xavier, so he makes it his whole business to become serviceable to your Maje∣sty. There is an amorous Combat between Xavier and your Majesty. Your Majesty strives to overcome him by your Obsequiousness, and he fights with your Maje∣sty by his Kindnesses; But the Event is always to the advantage both of the one and the other Party; the con∣quering
as well as the conquered; for Love is al∣ways triumphant on both sides. That Laureat Com∣batant doth foment the War in such sort, and alter∣nate the Battels between Xavier and your Majesty, that he fastens your Majesty to Xavier, and Xa∣vier to your Majesty, like fortunate Prisoners by in∣dissoluble Bonds in the Centre of Divine Love. I think I have translated this Period right, and so it is the Reader's business to make sense of it. This Panegyrick ends with a small Request, as the Orator calls it, That her Majesty would please to continue her Favours to the Jesuits of the Province of Brazil, and take them into her Maternal Care and Protection, for the obtaining of which Request he thinks no solicitation can prove so effectual as that of the same Xavier. The World hath been so much prejudic'd in Favour of the Jesuits, on account of the great Parts and Learning for which some Leading Men among them have always been eminent since the Foundation of the Society, that People will hardly be perswaded, that all these Fooleries can come Naturally and Innocently from them. Yet it may be said in their Favour on the other side, that they are not observ'd to smile in one ano∣thers Faces when they meet in the Streets; were all this design'd for meer Banter, one wou'd think it were impossible for them to hold their Countenances: But were we to judge of them by their Looks, which are the most demure that I ever saw, they must be thought to be in Earnest. But whatever it be that puts them up∣on treating their Queen in so extravagant a manner, whether it be their Folly or their Kna∣very,
or perhaps a Mixture of both; for these two go frequently in Conjunction; this is cer∣tain, that their Libels have fail'd of the effect which they might have had in regard to any other Person; for the great Esteem which this Princess had gain'd by her many signal Vertues, is so deeply rooted in Peoples Minds, that it is not in the power of any Jesuit to lessen it. This appear'd by the great Consternation her Subjects were in upon her Sickness, and the general La∣mentation that was every where heard among them at her Death. And these Testimonies of the Great Value that all had for her, were no where so remarkable as in the Palace where her Majesty was best known. Letters come lately from Lisbon say, That one of her Ladies died in two or three days after her for meer Grief; That the Queen Dowager of England was incon∣solable; That the King never went to Bed du∣ring the time of her Sickness, but lay on a Piece of Cork in the same Chamber; That his Maje∣sty, while the Corps was carried away, expres∣sed his Passion in such a manner, as is not to be described, it being so violent, that neither the Nuncio, nor any other Person could pacific him. It is said likewise, That the Cardinal Archbi∣shop did many Penances in her Majesties behalf, but none surely so severe as those perform'd by the King himself: The Publick hath had an ac∣count already, how that his Majesty went one Night Bare-foot quite up to Nossra Senhora da Graça, which stands upon a steep Hill at the furthest end of the Town; but these Letters add, That he went in the same manner no less than Nine times to the Cathedral Church, that is at a considerable Distance from the Pa∣lace,
and some part of the way very Rugged; and that all the little Princes were carried in a Coach, without their Shoes and Stockins to St. Roques the Jesuits Church where Xavier stands, and when they came near the Church, went a little way upon their bare Feet; and having said their Prayers for their Mother, return'd upon their bare Feet to the Coach again. Some of these Passages may perhaps, seem a little odd to such as are unacquainted with the Portuguese Customs; but then all must acknow∣ledge that they set forth the Praises of the de∣ceased Princess, in a manner, by much, more af∣fecting and lively than the Jesuites could have done by all their forced strains of Eloquence, supposing they had set themselves in earnest to make her Panegyrick; for this so great and uni∣versal a Concern for her, so variously express'd, as it was, demonstrates how well she had acquit∣ted her self towards all People, according to the several relations she had to them; it shews how good a Queen, a Friend and Mistress she was, and proves her to have been a most Endearing Wife, and a Tender Mother.
Of the Queen Dowager of England. HER Majesty being now, to the great Re∣gret of our Nation, become a most consi∣derable Part of the Portuguese Court, this Ac∣count wou'd appear but lame, and be more de∣fective than it is, should I forbear to mention her: I have great Reason to believe, that my Country-men wou'd think the Omission unpar∣donable, finding them so very inquisitive as they are, concerning her; the first Question they put to such as come from Portugal, and to which Satisfaction is most earnestly desired, being commonly concerning their Queen-Dowager. But her Majesty's Character is so well known to the World already, that I shall not attempt it here. To tell of her most exem∣plary Piety, wou'd be no News in any part of Europe, much less in England; and it is needless to say, that it is now the most distinguishing part of her Character: For it was so, while she Reign'd in one of the first Courts of Christen∣dom; and none will suppose her Majesty to be alter'd in this respect now, in the time of her Retirement. It did then, as it does still, give forth so bright a Lustre, as to out-shine, by far, all the rest of her great Perfections; which yet, as those who are competent Judges, and have the Honour to be near her Person, affirm, are such as would be highly admired in any other Person.
But tho' her Majesty be her self the same, her outward Circumstances are somewhat al∣ter'd, since her leaving England; her Court is lessen'd almost to a private Family, those few Persons that waited on her from hence, be∣ing, for the most part, either dismiss'd with their Salaries continued to them, or excus'd their Attendance; there is now no Noise, nor Ostentation of Grandeur about her House, but all things are quiet and still, except it be on Days of Ceremony, when Persons of Quality Will be coming to express the great Veneration they have for her; then, indeed, her Court is as great, and full, as the Nobility of the Coun∣try can make it. At all other times she convinces the World, that the Formalities of Pomp and State are not inseparable from Majesty; and that true Great∣ness, instead of being set off by such Helps, appears to the best Advantage without them. But the Queen had, doubtless, a Nobler End still, in getting Rid of those Incumbrances; there being great cause to believe, that it has been all along the chief Desire of her Heart, to be at Ease and Liberty, that nothing might di∣vert her from enjoying her self, as she now does, at her Devotions. Some speak of it as a considerable Alteration about her Majesty, that the Jesuits are become her Directors; whereas before, she conferr'd that Trust on those of the Franciscan Order: But her Majesty is not of a Character to be used by those Fathers, as others may have been. 'Tis said, indeed, that they have tasted of her Liberality in a most plentiful manner; but as great as their Profits are, the Credit they have
got, by being favour'd by so discerning a Prin∣cess, is certainly much greater, since she can∣not be suppos'd to have any Worldly Designs to employ them in: For my part, I take this Honour to be the greatest that ever was con∣ferr'd on the Society; and that by this mention of it, I have more than made Amends for any thing I have said, or may say, to their Disad∣vantage.
Of the Late INFANTA. DOna Isabel Luisa, Infanta of Portugal, was born the Sixth of January, 1669; sworn Princess, or Heiress to the Crown, in 1680; died the Twenty-first of October, 1690. This Princess was accounted one of the most Beautiful and Accomplish'd Persons, of her Sex and Rank, in Christendom; and that not only by the Portu∣gueses, who admired her almost to Adoration, but by more impartial Strangers, such especially as bore a Publick Character, who had frequent Opportunities to satisfie themselves, that the fa∣vourable Esteem the World had for her, was not without ground: For which Reason, and for the Prospect there was of her succeeding to the Crown ('till after the King's Second Marriage) she was sought for in Marriage by most of the Princes, and among the rest, by some of the most considerable Monarchs in Europe; as indeed there is none so great, but might have accounted it a very advantageous Match. The first that pretended to this Princess, at least with any success, was Victor Amedee, the present Duke of Savoy, Cousin-German to the In∣fanta Madame Royale his Mother; Marie Jeane Baptist de Savoie, Princess of Nemours, being Si∣ster to the Queen of Portugal: His Pretensions succeeded so well, that in the Year 1680, a Mar∣riage was treated, and soon agreed upon, and nothing seem'd wanting to the final Conclusion,
but the coming of the Duke to Lisbon, according to Agreement. It will not be amiss to give what Account I can of this Match, as how it came on, and was unexpectedly broke off, it being no inconside∣rable Part of the History of this Age. It may easily be supposed, that it was at first contrived between the two Mothers; for howso∣ever it might have proved to others, it afford∣ed a very advantageous Prospect to each of them. Madame Royale had been left sole Regent of Savoy, during her Son's Minority, by her Hus∣band Charles Emanuel, at his Death in 1675: But the young Duke entring at this time upon his 15th Year, had a little before been declared Major; and therefore, should he have taken up∣on himself the Government, her Authority was like to suffer no small diminution; nor was there any so likely an Expedient to continue the Power in her Hands, as the Duke's being sent away in∣to Portugal; the Desire of Rule, together with the Ambition of becoming Mother of a King, might make this Princess give a listning Ear to her Sister's Proposals. The Queen of Portugal, for her part, as she had a great hand in the set∣ting up of his present Majesty, so she had a great share with him in the Government; but her Power was not like to continue so great, should a strange Prince be admitted into Court, especi∣ally in case any thing should befal the King; but by this Marriage between her Nephew and her Daughter, she secured her Authority, and took the best Measures to establish it, both for the pre∣sent, and against the time to come.
These may be supposed to have been sufficient Inducements on both sides, for the two Prin∣cesses to desire a Match between their Children; and considering the great Power that each of them were possess'd of in their respective Do∣minions, one would think there was no need of the Intervention of any others to bring the same about: But some will needs bring the French in upon the Stage; for in this latter Age, there must nothing of moment be done in any Court of Christendom, but what they have a hand in. The Match, indeed, was for the Interest of France, and that seems to be a great Argument why they should not be wholly unconcern'd in the Matter. 'Tis pretended, that it was concerted by the Cardinal d'Estrees, who passed the Mountains that Year, on pretence of accommodating Differences between the Courts of Rome and France; but in reality, to negotiate the Affairs of his King with the Italian Princes, having a particular Command to call at Turin, in order, as'tis said, to propose this Marriage, he being thought the fittest Per∣son to serve his Master in this Affair, as he was a Relation to the Parties, and highly esteem'd by the Duchess of Savoy, and obliged for the Purple to the Queen of Portugal; so that whatever came from him, might be look'd upon as design'd only for the Good of the Family. To make the Pro∣posal more acceptable to the Duchess, 'tis said he was Commissioned, to assure her of the Prote∣ction of France, to maintain her in the Re∣gency. 'Tis pretended, that the French had before la∣boured all they could, to get the Infanta for the Dauphin; the Crown of Portugal, which they
expected with her, being considerable in it self, and might be a means to promote their further Designs; for ever since their King's Marriage, they have all along had an Eye to the now so∣much talk'd of, Succession of Spain; but being frustrated of their first Design, by the prevailing Interests of other Princes, that were concern'd to obstruct them in it, thair next Business was to defeat the hopes which the Spaniards might enter∣tain in favour of their King, or the Pretensions of any other Prince, in dependance on that Crown: To bring this about, they thought it the best way to set up one, that should either be dependant on themselves, or whom they might easily deal with as they pleased; and none was found so fit for their purpose, as his Royal High∣ness of Savoy. It is said likewise, that there was a further Reason for their setting up the Duke, he having Pretensions next to the German Branch, to the Succession of Spain, both as being descended from Donna Catharina, Daughter to Philip the Second; and also, by Virtue of Philip the Fourth's last Will. If the Duke were once settled in Portugal, they thought they might serve themselves of him, to hinder the Crown of Spain from falling to the Austrians, hoping to get him preferred before them, partly by their Intrigues at Madrid, and partly by Force of Arms; and the Duke, on this Condition, might easily be brought to put France again in possession of Na∣varre; and, perhaps, be outed of Spain it self, whenever King Louis should please to dispossess him; or, at least, be obliged by some Treaty, to yield up Savoy and Piedmont.
But these Designs seem to have been some∣what remote; there are others ascrib'd to the French on this occasion, that had a nearer regard to their present Interest. It was thought, that the sending away of the Duke would cause such Discontent among his Subjects, that the Duchess-Regent must necessa∣rily seek Protection from France, and consequent∣ly her Country lie exposed to their Discretion. The French, during the preceding War, had found it much to their Prejudice, that none of their Artifices could prevail with her to declare for their Party; or in any point to recede from that exact Neutrality, which from her first co∣ming to the Government she had firmly resolv'd to observe; by this means the Duke's Domini∣ons became a kind of Barrier to the State of Mi∣lan, which otherwise had lain continually expo∣sed to their Insults; and that which nettled them the more, was, the Princess-Regent was born their Subject, and as they had flattered themselves, was French, as well by Inclination as Birth; but notwithstanding all this, by her constant adhe∣rence to the true Interests of the Duke her Son, and by the admirable Dexterity and Conduct of the Duke of Giovinazzo, the Spanish Ambassador, residing at Turin, they found all their Attempts to be vain, and their Measures broken. But the Difficulties they had met with, seem'd to ani∣mate them more in the Prosecution of their De∣sign; wherefore at the Conclusion of the Peace, they were resolved at any rate, to secure to them∣selves an Inroad into Italy, against the next War, to get, if it were possible, the possession of Casai, and bring Savoy into their dependency. How they succeeded in the former Attempt, it is not
my Business to enquire; but it seems, they found at last the true Forible of the Parties they had to deal with; the Love of Money being that poor Prince, the Duke of Mantua's reigning Passion, as Desire of Rule was Madame Royale's. For af∣ter all other Attempts had proved ineffectual, the Continuance of her Regency seem'd an irre∣sistable Temptation; tho' at the same time, there was little likelihood of her being able to main∣tain her self therein, without the Protection of France; and it is supposed, that both these were offer'd her, when Cardinal d'Estrees came to pro∣pose to her the Marriage. But whosoever were the Contrivers of this Match, or whatsoever were the Motives it was made on, it was once in that great forwardness, that none doubted of its taking effect; great Pre∣parations were made at Lisbon and Turin, against the time when it was to be celebrated, and all things were in readiness; the Cortes of Portugal were called, to acknowledge the Infanta Heiress of the Crown, and to dispense with the Laws of Lamego in her favour; these Laws are the Fun∣damental Constitutions of the Government, and have the same force in Portugal, as the pretend∣ed Salique Laws have in France; by one of them a Daughter of Portugal is deprived of all Right of succeeding to the Crown, in case she marries with a Foreigner. The Duke had sent his Equi∣page to Lisbon, to be ready for him against his Arrival; where a Squadron of Men of War were equipp'd out, on purpose to fetch his Royal Highness; the Ships were the most finely rigg'd, and adorn'd, of any perhaps that have appear'd in the Ocean for some Ages: The Admiral, on which his Royal Highness was to imbark, besides the immense Treasures that were laid out on the
in-side, was, above Water, all over doubly guilt on the out-side, and from thence had the Name given her of the Monte de Ouro. I am afraid to tell how vast a Sum was said to have been ex∣pended in the bare Guilding; but I know, that after the Ship had lain rotting in the River for many Years, a certain Chymist had the Assurance to engage himself to the Court, to make a very considerable quantity of Gold of the very out-side Scrapings; and the Court was perswaded to employ him when the Ship was broken up; for she never made but that one Voyage. The Por∣tuguese Nobility were, or seem'd at least to be, so over-joy'd at the Match, and impatient to be making their Court to their new Prince, that most of them would needs be of the Voyage. The Duke of Cadaval, at their Head, was de∣clared Admiral of the Fleet, all of them striving who should be most profuse in enriching the se∣veral Ships they went upon; insomuch, that as I have heard, some have scarce recovered their Estates to this Day. While these Preparations were making at Lis∣bon, and the Fleet ready to set Sail, things be∣gan to have another Face at Turin: For the No∣bility of Savoy, and Piedmont, were not so well satisfied as those of Portugal; they saw, or thought at least they saw more clearly into the French Designs: For presently upon Declaration of the Marriage, there arose a vehement Presumption among them, that this sending away of the Duke out of the Country, accompany'd, as he was to be, by his principal Ministers, was meerly a Con∣trivance of France; partly, to impoverish them, by the vast Expences they should be at on this occasion; but chiefly to take their Advantage
from the Absence of the Prince and his Council, in order to get his Dominions into their Power. Upon this they began to Cabal among them∣selves, and give the Duchess to understand, how prejudicial they thought this Marriage, made without their Knowledge, might prove to their Prince, and the State; the Duke, as they pre∣tended, being to be convey'd away on Design only, that they should be expos'd to the Mercy of the French. The Duchess was a Princess of that Penetration, that she foresaw well enough, that this would in some measure be the conse∣quence of the Match; but then should it be bro∣ken off, her Reign was in all likelihood drawing towards an end; and this melancholy Considera∣tion, made her give a listning Ear to the French Offers of Assistance; for they seem'd to be no less alarm'd than her Highness, at this Commo∣tion of the Nobility; whereupon their Troops were set a marching towards the Frontiers; the Duchess in the mean time getting together what Forces she could, on pretence of preventing any Design they might have upon Casal; for the Duke of Mantua had by this time, strook up an under-hand Bargain, tho' it was some time after, that the French were put in possession. But at Lisbon all things went smoothly on, where a Publick Procession was made about the City, by way of Thanksgiving, for the Conclu∣sion of the Marriage, and to obtain a good Voy∣age of the Fleet: But an unlucky Accident fell out at this Procession, that put some of the wiser Heads a considering, for they did not well know what to think on't, In these Festival Solemni∣ties, our English St. George makes a very consi∣derable Figure, being a fat burly Image, dress'd
up, as I take it, in the Habit worn by the En∣glish at the time of the Saint's first coming into the Country. He was brought into Request here, as some think, by John of Gaunt; others are of Opinion, that Edmund de Langley, then Earl of Cambridge, brought him in a little before; but about their time it was, that the Portuguese be∣gan to call upon St. George in their Battles, instead of St. Jago; and ever since he has been the Pa∣tron of the Kingdom, and hath had his place in the Processions accordingly; wherein He, whilst other Saints are carried upon Pageants, rides on a Horse that is kept on purpose for him, a Boy for his Page following on another Horse to car∣ry his Lance: As the Procession was entring the Rocio, the largest Square in the City, St. George's Horse chanc'd to stumble, and down fell the Saint in the Presence of all the People; a Disaster, which as the Inquisitive into these Matters have since found, had never happened before that Day. Upon the Fall of the Saint, an observing Person made this Remark, and for it stands re∣corded by a very grave and learned Author: This Procession is no Procession, but a Funeral Pomp rather; the mistaken Portugueses, with Festivity and Dancings, going to bury the Male-Line of our Native Kings. And when our Fleet (says my Author) so bedaub'd with Gold without, and loaden with Diamonds and Jewels within, was ready to Sail, the same Person declared, That tho' it went so rich over the Bar of Lisbon, it would come home richer at its return: And being ask'd the Reason, he reply'd, Because it will never bring hither what it goes to fetch. It has been since de∣monstrated likewise from certain Prophecies, which I may speak something of in their due place,
that 'twas impossible this Marriage should ever take effect. But these were then the private Sen∣timents of contemplative Persons, who were not much heeded at that time, when nothing else was minded but Publick Rejoicings, and Preparations for the Bridegroom's Reception, and Congratu∣latory Complements to the Bride. But at Turin, a little before the Portuguese Fleet arrived at Nizza, the Savoyard Nobility, instead of being frighted into a Compliance by the Motions of the French Troops on the Fron∣tiers, were but made thereby more sensible of their Danger, and therefore they impatiently waited for an Opportunity to impart their Minds to the Duke himself; and this, by good For∣tune, the Duchess gave 'em, by her retiring to a Country-House near the Town; they taking the advantage of her Absence, represent to his Royal Highness, how much it imported him to consider, That he was little better than a Priso∣ner, whilst his Dominions were surrounded with the French Troops on every side: That the Duchess had so concerted Matters with King Louis, that his Highness's best places were to be put in that King's Hands, as soon as he should embark for Portugal: That she was sending him to Lisbon, not that he might Reign there, but that she might Reign in Savoy: That he must not think to act as a Sovereign in Portugal, whilst the Prince and the Queen liv'd; and consequent∣ly, it was not for his Interest, to be kept in Sub∣jection there, when he might stay at Home and Command them, as his most Dutiful Subjects: That the Portugueses bore a mortal Hatred to Strangers, and had not consented to this Mar∣riage but by Compulsion; and would shew them∣selves
to be of another Mind, at the Death of the Prince-Regent, and might serve him as they had done the King of Spain; that is, deprive him of the Crown; in which Case he was like to be turn'd out of all: For the French, during his Absence, would be sure to make themselves Masters of Savoy; and it would be a hard Matter to get them into the Humour to re∣store it. This Language we may be sure sounded very harsh in the Ears of the young Duke, who had hitherto been bred up among the Women, whose Grand Concern it was, to take care that nothing should put him out of Humour. When his Fright was a little over, he began to ask them, What Help there was to prevent all these Mischiefs? They told him roundly, That there was no other Reme∣dy, but to sign an Order to Arrest his Mother. This Proposal went to the very Heart of him; but they assuring him, that he must resolve upon it, and that presently, if he ever hoped to live hap∣pily, or prevent his own Ruin; he at last, tho' with Tears in his Eyes, sign'd the Order they desired. While they were getting all things ready for putting the same in execution, the Duchess, who as yet had heard nothing of the Matter, returns from the Country; but it was not long before she discovered the whole In∣trigue: For as soon as she alighted from her Coach, she went directly to the Duke's Apart∣ment, where she found the poor Prince pensive and melancholy, and scarce able to look his Mother in the Face; she, surpriz'd at this altera∣tion, began to caress the Child, and enquire what the Matter was: He, for some time, in∣stead of answering her, fell a crying; but she,
resolv'd to know the Business, caressed him so long, 'till she got it out of him; so, at last, he told her all, both what he had done, and who they were that had put him upon it. The Duch∣ess, tho' in no small Astonishment at this News, had yet her Wits about her, and with an extra∣ordinary Presence of Mind, ordered the Guards about the Court to be doubled, got the principal of them that had plotted her Imprisonment to be Arrested, and to bring over the People on her side, gave out, That the Prisoners, and their Accomplices, had conspired to seize upon the Duke's Person, in order to deliver him up to the Spaniards. In the mean while, the Portuguese Fleet, under Command of the Duke of Cadaval, arrives at Nizza; but it seems, the Duchess, tho' she had provided for her present Security, began to ga∣ther from this Mutiny of the Nobility, that she was like to have but an uneasie Government of it; and that she should be forced to a greater Dependance upon France, and be more at their Discretion, than she had at first imagined; which might render her Authority much more precarious, than if the Duke her Son remain'd in the Country; wherefore she found it necessa∣ry, that his Highness should be very much in∣dispos'd, during the stay of the Portugueses, and not in a Condition to go on Board: So that the Duke of Cadaval, with the rest of the Fidalgo's, were forced to return as they came; how well pleas'd at their Disappointment, let the Reader imagine. Presently upon their Departure, the Duke recovered of his Indisposition, and the Pri∣soners were never prosecuted for their pretend∣ed Plot; which makes some People to be of Opi∣nion, that this Commotion of the Nobility was
from the very beginning contriv'd by the Duch∣ess her self, who presently after the Conclusion of the Match, might begin to consider the ill Consequences likely to ensue upon it, which may have made her resolve to break it; but wanting a plausible Excuse to stop the Mouths of the Por∣tugueses, and French, by her secret Intrigues caus'd all this Bustle, in order only to cast Dust in their Eyes. But howsoever this was, the Portugueses, when they came to themselves, especially after their King's Second Marriage, were as well satis∣fied with the breaking off of the Match, as the Savoyards could be, so that in Conclusion the French remain'd the only Duppes, who thought to have imposed upon them both. This is the most tolerable Account that is given of this my∣sterious Affair; for such it is still confess'd to be, by those that have penetrated the deepest into it. The World, tho' most of the foregoing Parti∣culars were publickly discoursed of at the time, continuing still to wonder, how it came to pass, that the court of Savoy should thus unexpected∣ly depart from a most solemn Engagement; for his Royal Highness was then so very young, that he did nothing of his own Head, he was meerly passive all the while; indeed had this Affair been of a later Date, and transacted some Years after the Duke came of Age, and had appear'd upon the Publick Stage to act for himself, the Won∣der in all probability would not have been so great. 2dly, Louis the Fourteenth, King of France, his Pretensions to the Infanta, were the Publick Talk, and not without some Grounds, after the Death of his Queen, Donna Maria Theresa de
Austria, who departed this Life in 1683. This Match must have been very advantageous to that King, if for no other Reason than that it would give him Footing in Portugal; by which means it would be more easie for him to seize upon the rest of Spain, upon the Catholick King's De∣cease; and 'tis not doubted, but there were some Overtures made by the French Ministers at Lis∣bon, tho' not in so vigorous a manner as to give occasion to the Report that went current a∣mongst the Portugueses, it being commonly be∣liev'd by that People, that his Most Christian Majesty had so violent a Passion for their Infanta, that he was coming to fetch her away by force of Arms: For, on the contrary, it was observed at the Court of Lisbon, that the French were not so warm in this Negotiation, as to oblige them to come to a Resolution, or give any positive Answer; which perhaps proceeded from that King's prudent Consideration, that this was an Affair wherein he was like to be oppos'd, either openly or under-hand, by all Princes in Europe, and perhaps most of all by the Portugueses them∣selves, who do not seem over-desirous to come under the French Government; this might make him loth to run the hazard of being deny'd: For which Reason perhaps it was, that his Mini∣sters and Partisans at Lisbon, seem'd to do little more than feel the Pulse of that Court, without directly putting the Question; or if they went so far, they suffered themselves to be put off with very slender Excuses; if it be true, as 'tis report∣ed, that the Court of Portugal desired time to consider, 'till France had fully concluded the Peace with Germany and Spain, and deferr'd gi∣ving their Answer, on account of the Death of
King of Alfonso, hapning about the same time: But the Death of that poor Prisoner, made little or no alteration in the Publick Affairs, especial∣ly in what related to the Infanta; so that these Excuses only shew'd, that the Court of Portugal was wholly averse to the Match, and the Nego∣tiation, as it was but coldly carried on, so in a short time it came to nothing. 3dly, The Prince of Tuscany was another Pre∣tender, and the Match with him seem'd once to be in great forwardness; but it was broke off at last, as it is said, by the Grand Duke's insisting, That in case his Eldest Son had Issue by the In∣fanta of Portugal, the Children of this Mar∣riage should succeeed only to that Crown, and his Estates in Italy should be settled upon his Se∣cond Son, Prince John Gaston; but this the Por∣tuguese Court could not be brought to agree to. 4thly, Charles the Second King of Spain; pre∣sently after that King became a Widdower, the Princess of Portugal had a great Party in his Council, who were for having her to supply the place of the deceased Queen; and for some time there appeared but one Rival in competition with her, viz. the Princess of Tuscany, against whom she carried it clearly: For Spain could propose to it self no greater Advantage from the Marriage of that Princess, than a small Sum of Money; small, I mean, in respect to the Ne∣cessities of that Crown; which are such, that all the Great Duke, Rich as he is, could give with his Daughter, would go but a little way to sup∣ply them: Whereas the Infanta of Portugal, be∣sides
the hopes that a Marriage with her might prove an Engagement upon the King her Father to enter into the Alliance, that was then form∣ing against the French, was like to bring along with her a further Prospect of Re-uniting Portu∣gal to the Spanish Monarchy: For tho' the King her Father was now married again, and the Queen big with Child a Second-time; yet it was the general Opinion then, that none of King Peter's future Issue would be long-liv'd. But the great Concern at Madrid, being to procure for his Catholick Majesty, a Princess that might se∣cure the Succession, and so prevent the Dissipa∣tion of the whole Monarchy; and there being none in Europe so promising in that respect, as the House of Nieuburg, the Princess Mariana was for that Reason preferred to the Infanta of Por∣tugal. 5thly, The Electoral Prince Palatine of the Rhine, who succeeded so well in his Pretensions, that a Marriage was in a manner concluded on; inso∣much, that it was once thought, the same Fleet which carried his Sister to Spain, would return with his intended Spouse. But this Match like∣wise was broken off on a sudden, I know not how; but the Blame is laid wholly on the Por∣tuguese Ministers: And such as pretend to be well acquainted with the Affairs of this Court, reckon the Miscarriage among the greatest Bevues they are charged with. 6thly, The Dauphin of France: This Prince is said to have been the first that was proposed to the Infanta; and that France did its utmost in his behalf, before either his Marriage with the
Princess of Bavaria, or the Infanta's with the Duke of Savoy was ever thought on; that is to say, before the Infanta was yet marriageable: So that it seems, they resolv'd to secure her, if possi∣ble, to themselves, she being at that time look'd upon by all, as the undoubted Heiress of the Crown, her Mother being then living, and in no hopes of any other Issue: But for the same reason, there was such opposition made to all O∣vertures in the Dauphin's behalf, that it was im∣possible their Pretensions should take effect; but howsoever this was, 'tis agreed, that he was the last Pretender; and as his Pretensions were pro∣secuted with more warmth, so they were more readily hearken'd to than the King his Father's: For now the Case was altered in Portugal, as well as in France; the Portugueses began to con∣ceive great hopes of the King's Issue by his Se∣cond Marriage, as knowing perhaps the sinister Opinion of the World in that respect to be with∣out ground. Nor was the Dauphin's having three Sons at this time, any Exception against him, for he was still an advantageous Match for an Infanta of Portugal, that was now losing all hopes of suc∣ceeding in the Throne, and much to be preferr'd to an Elector of the Empire, especially one outed of his Dominions, and reduced to so low an E∣state as the Palatine was at that time; where∣fore this Match was said to be in as great a for∣wardness as any of the former. I have been cre∣dibly inform'd, that the King us'd to console the Infanta, during her Illness, with the Hopes of its happy Conclusion. But it was then too late, this Princess having been so often frustrated in her Expectations, was not, as we may well sup∣pose, over forward to entertain hopes of this
kind; this Match could not be more sincerely design'd than some of the former had been, and therefore was as liable to be broken off as the rest were; but what the Success of it would have been is uncertain, Death preventing the Infanta's being ever disappointed again. She departed this Life October the 21st, 1690, just a Year after the Birth of Prince John, the surviving eldest Son of the late Queen; the promising hopes of whose Life, together with the Queen's being great of another, put an end to her Expectati∣ons of ever ascending to the Portuguese Throne; and consequently, she who had for several Years been the Idol of that Nation, must of course have had the Mortification to see their Zeal cool'd on a sudden, and their Devotion directed another way, and her self, no doubt, forc'd to go along with the Stream, and bear a part in the Publick Rejoicings, and Congratulations, for the cause of her Exclusion. Portugal, which from her very In∣fancy she had been taught to call her own, being now become another's, was but an uneasie place for her; and the rather, because she began to think herself confin'd to it, and to lose all hopes of Reigning elsewhere, there being now scarce one Throne left vacant for her, who had been so much contended for by almost all the unmar∣ried Sovereigns in Christendom; so that at last she began to think of taking up with a Cell, expres∣sing her Apprehensions to those that freely con∣vers'd with her, of her being like to end her Days in a Monastery, thinking, perhaps, that after so many Miscarriages, the Treaty then on foot was not much to be depended on. These things may be supposed to have gone to the Heart of this Princess, so as to add to that
Grief and Melancholy, which, as 'tis believed, contributed to the hastning of her end. There were malicious Reports spread throughout Eu∣rope, soon after her Death, which would needs have it, that she was hurried out of the World in a more violent manner. I shall not relate them, being well satisfy'd of their Untruth, after the exactest Enquiry I could make concerning them, they are supposed to have been first rais'd by the Partisans of France, who are not wanting in their turn, to lay hold on all Occasions to blacken their Enemies: It was for the Austrian Interest, say they, that the Succession should be secured to the King's Children by his Second Marriage; and therefore, as they will needs have it, some extraordinary Means must have been used to remove the Infanta out of the way; as if the Sister could upon any pretence dispute the Succession with her Brother: But fearing be∣like, that this was not Ground sufficient to sup∣port their Calumny, they have themselves endea∣vour'd to give a mortal Wound to the Honour of the deceased Princess, and thereby far exceeded the Cruelty they suppose to have been shewn her by others. But it is a sufficient Answer to all their Slanders, that such impartial Persons as are well acquainted at the Court of Lisbon, do af∣firm, That they never heard any call the Vertue of that Princess in question; that his Majesty had ever shewn himself a most tender Father, but more especially as she drew towards the latter End; that the Extreme Unction was admini∣stred to her on the Day of her Death, in the presence of Cardinal Dom Verissimo de Alemcastro, one had in great Veneration by the Portugueses, for his great Probity and Innocency of Life,
by that Great and Noble Prelate, Dom Lewis de Sousa (now Cardinal), Arch-Bishop of Lisbon. The hardest thing that had any probability in it, was reported by the French People, that had been in the Service of her Mother; who pretended, that a Coffin was brought into her Chamber, some Days before she expired: Which, supposing the thing to be true, might be done only to put the Princess in mind of her approaching Death, and therefore well design'd, among People that are Religious in good earnest. As for the Conde de Atouguia, whose Death, perhaps, was the cause why these Reports were entertain'd in the World, he was advanc'd in Years, and was a married Man, and so that formal Story of a Marriage, of Con∣science, must necessarily be false. It is not de∣ny'd, but that he was found dead one Morning in the Court of the Palace; but the Government did not think fit to make any strict Enquiry by what Hand, or for what Reason this Nobleman fell, and therefore it becomes not private Persons to take that Liberty.
Of the KING's Issue, by his Se∣cond Marriage. DOM JOHN, &c. I have not seen a List of the rest of his Names, if he had any more than one: But Father Leopold Fuess, the Queen's Confessor, in a Letter to Padre Vieira, assured this later, that her Majesty, while she was big of him, promis'd to give this Son of hers, (she not doubting but it would be a Son) the Sur-name of Xavier. He was born in the Year 1688, on the 30th Day of August; whence Vieira proves him to be the Gift of Xavier: For counting backwards from the Day of his Birth, he finds, that he must have been conceiv'd upon the Eve, or the Day of St. Francis Xavier, which is the First or Second of December; so that it seems there was a double Reckoning among the Jesuits: For Padre Balthesar Duarte, counts from the Twenty-first of November, which was the Day when her Majesty first made use of Xavier's Cap. One would think, that so short-liv'd a Prince (for he liv'd not above Seventeen Days) should give no further Trouble to a Writer, than bare∣ly to tell of his coming into the World, and go∣ing out again; and doubtless we should have heard no more of him, had not the great Vieira design'd him for the Universal Empire, and re∣solv'd that he might not lose the many good things he had written on that Subject, to conti∣nue
him in the Government in spite of Death it self. But as the Case stands, whiles that Father shall have Credit with Posterity, as if any regard be to be had to the Judgment of the present Age, his Authority will go on increasing, while Por∣tugal is a Nation, this Prince will have a fair Chance, to make a greater Figure in the Chroni∣cles than any of his Predecessors. If I should un∣dertake his History, according to the Account this Father gives of him, I must be forced to go back for 500 Years; and to continue his Reign, I must look I know not how many Ages forward. I should not give my self that trouble, were this the Rêvery of one single Writer; but he grounds his Doctrine upon a certain Revelation, that for this last Age hath been receiv'd almost for Go∣spel, by the whole Nation, but more especially among the Learned; there having been scarce a Writer, whether Historian or Divine, that hath appear'd of late Years, but hath either spoken of it at large, or referr'd to it as an unquestio∣nable Truth; and since it contains a Prediction that must, if ever, be accomplish'd in our time, some Account of it is necessary to them that would be acquainted with the present State of Portugal. This Revelation is pretended to have been made to Alfonso Henriquez, the first King, the Evening before he receiv'd that Title, upon the Vigil of St. James, in the Year 1139; this Prince being then encamped in the Plains of Ourique, at the Head of a handful of Portugueses, against five Kings, commanding an Army of 400000 Mores, according to them that speak modestly, most Writers make the Number to be much greater;
as he was musing on the Business of the next Day, when the Battle was to be given, he chan∣ced to fall into a Slumber, and dreamed he saw an Old Man coming to him, and bidding him, Be of good Courage, for that he should obtain an entire Victory over the Infidels. And while he was yet in his Dream, one awakening him, told him, That there was an Old Man without the Tent to speak with him: Who being introduc'd, was known by the Prince for the same he had just before seen in his Sleep; and proved to be a Hermit that liv'd in a Cell hard by. The Hermit gave him the same Encouragement as before; but told him withal, That God had fixed the Eyes of his Mercy upon Him, and his Seed, until the Sixteenth Generation, wherein his Off-spring should be diminished, (in quâ attenuabitur Proles tua); but when it was so dimi∣nished, he would have regard and see to it, (in quâ attenuatâ ipse respiciet & videbit). Ordered him, when he heard the Hermitage-Bell that Night, to come without the Camp, and Alone. Alfonso do∣ing as he was bid, saw a shining Ray towards the East, increasing more and more; and while he was attentively looking on it, he saw within it a Cross more resplendent than the Sun, with our Saviour upon it, attended by a multitude of young Men in white, whom he took to be An∣gels. Alfonso expostulated with our Lord, for appearing to him rather than to the Infidels, as if he came to increase the Faith of one that be∣liev'd already. Christ told him, That he did not come to increase his Faith, but to encourage him against the Battle; commanding him, to accept the Title of King, which his People should give him next Day: And continued, For I am He that build up, and scatter Empires and Kingdoms; and
I will establish to my self an Empire in thee, and thy Seed after thee, that my Name may be made known to Nations that are afar off, &c. This Account, tho' more at large, and with other Particulars in it, that are not to our pre∣sent purpose, is contain'd in a Paper with Alfonso Henriquez's Name to it, and those of several Lords and Prelates for Witnesses: It is said to have been sworn to by Alfonso, thirteen Years after he had seen the Vision; but it lay hid, and no mention was made of it for above 400 Years, tho' it hath since been pretended, that some ob∣scure Intimations of the Story are to be found in old Writers, particularly the famous Poet Ca∣moens; who indeed hath something like it, with almost the very Words of Alfonso's Expostulati∣on; and it seems, that he either took it from the Paper, or the Composer of the Paper took it from him. It was found out at last in the Year 1596, in the Cartorium of the famous Monastery of Alcobaça, founded by this King, and a Copy of it was sent to the Court at Madrid; for Philip the Second was then possess'd of Portugal. It was received by the Spaniards with great Satisfaction, for in truth it seem'd to give them a Divine Right to the Crown of Portugal: For who could think otherwise, but that Philip was the Person design'd in the Promise, that it was he who had been pitch'd upon by Providence so many Ages before, to supply the Default of Alfonso Henriquez's Off-spring, which in his time had suffered so great a Diminution, that Sebastian the 16th was the last of the Male-Line; he was surviv'd indeed, and succeeded by his old decrepid great Uncle, Henry the Cardinal, who was the 16th King,
excluding Alfonso Henriquez; but he did nothing else in his short Reign, than secure the Crown to Philip. And this diminution of the Royal Fa∣mily was the more remarkable, for that of the nine Sons of King Emanuel, whereof six lived to be Men, there was no lawful Issue of the Male-Line remaining at Henry's Death: So that this Paper made so much for Philip's Purpose, that none question'd its Authority among the Spani∣ards, their Writers, whereof a considerable Number might be cited, look'd upon it as un∣questionable, and great use was made of it, in the great Controversie about Precedency be∣tween the Catholick and the French Kings; in∣somuch, that Valdes, who by Command from the former, wrote the Treatise, De Dignitate Regum, which was presented to the Pope, lays a mighty stress upon his Master's being King of Portugal, which in his Opinion ought to give him the Right of Precedency, since that Kingdom was, as he asserts, of a Divine Foundation; pro∣ving his Assertion from the Authority of this Paper, whereof he produces a Copy. But when the Portugueses, in the Year 1640, revolted from the Spaniards, and began to turn the Prediction against them, finding that John Duke of Bragan∣ça was the Person design'd by it, they then chan∣ged their Note, and question'd the Authority of the Piece; yet having so often allowed of its An∣tiquity, they did not flatly deny, but it might be as ancient as the Date; but thought it was a Device of Alfonso Henriquez, upon whose bare Word, or Oath, the Credit of the Vision re∣lies, (for it is not pretended that any saw it but himself,) and that this Prince might feign the Story to establish his Authority, and make him∣self more reverenc'd by the People.
Should I pursue this Matter ae far as it would go, it would engage me in a long History of the Sebastianists, and Fifth Monarchists of Portu∣gal, for which I have now neither time nor room. But my present Business is with the great Vieira. Upon the Revolution in 1640, the Portugueses, almost to a Man, the Sebastianists excepted, saw clearly, that the Duke of Bragança was the Per∣son, in whom the new Empire should have its Rise: For tho' Sebastian was the 16th King, yet this Duke was of the 16th Generation, and there∣fore his Pretensions were more agreeable to the Letter of the Prediction; but yet to make him of the 16th Generation, they were fain to include Alfonso Henriquez for one; which the Spaniards thought a very material Objection. However, Vieira shews, how that it was ordain'd by Provi∣dence, that the Dukes of Bragança should supply the defect of the Male Line: For he proves, that a like Method was follow'd in the Kingdom of Judah, the only Kingdom of Divine Foundation besides that of Portugal; his Argument is drawn from these Words of Jacob, Non auferetur Sce∣ptrum de Judah, & Dux de femore ejus, donec ve∣niat qui mittendus est. Here he would have us mark well, that the word Sceptrum signifies Kings, and the word Dux Dukes, and so the Text declares, that there should be no Failure of Kings and Dukes of the Descendants of Judah; and accordingly, after the Kings had fail'd in the time of the Captivity, the Dukes succeeded; such were Zerubbabel, and the Maccabees: And in the same manner, when the direct Line of Portugal fail'd, the Kingdom was to be supply'd by the Dukes, viz. the Dukes of Bragança. But
he thinks, that what was said concerning the Di∣minution, or Attenuation of the Royal Off-spring, was to be accomplish'd in the Sons of John the Fourth. As First, By the Death of Dom Theodosio the Eldest, and next in Alfonso; and that partly by the Sickness he had in his Child∣hood, (for the Father had been a great Stickler for the Party, which held Alfonso to be lame and maim'd all over his Right-side; and was one of the first that were banished at that Prince's taking upon him the Government, being suspected to have drawn up the Remonstrance read to him by the Secretaty of State) and yet he tells his Audi∣tors by the way, That one half of a Portuguese King, should be able to beat the greatest Mo∣narch in the World. But the Diminution was compleated at Alfonso's Death, for then the Royal Family was reduced to one single Male, viz. his present Majesty, Dom Pedro, whom he makes to be the Proles attenuata, of the 16th Generation, upon whom the words, Ipse respiciet & videbit, were to be fulfilled. Now he asserts, that Re∣spicere & videre, in the Prediction, signifies to give a Son; because Hannah saith, 1 Reg. 1 Cap. Si respicieNs videris afflictionem famulae tuae dederisque sexum virilem: Adding, that it is not to give one, but many Male-Children: For we read in the same Chapter, Donec sterilis peperit plurimos. But during the time of the King's Marriage with his first Queen, this Prophecy was like to come to nothing, since in all that time he had but one Daughter; whereas Respicere & videre, plainly signifies, to give a great many Sons; and the King's want of Male-Issue, could not be sup∣ply'd by the Infanta's Marriage with the Duke of Savoy: For the King being the Off-spring of
the 16th Generation, was himself the 17th Ge∣neration, and the Infanta the 18th; so that the Promise could not reach to her Issue: And if the Crown had been settled, as 'twas intended, upon her, the Prophecy could never be fulfilled. Hence, as the Father thinks it was, that the Match with Savoy was broken off in so surpri∣zing a manner; and that his Majesty's first Queen died to make way for his Second Marriage, by which he had this Son, to whom we are now to return: Upon the Birth of this Child, the Father mounts the Chair, and takes for his Text these words, Respexit & vidit, proves by Arguments not worth repeating, That Xavier was the shi∣ning Ray that was seen by Alfonso Henriquez, be∣fore the Crucifix appear'd to him, shews how Xavier procured the Kingdom for John the Fourth, and this Son for the present King. He demonstrates, that since King Peter is the di∣minish'd Off-spring of the 16th Generation, This must be the Child promised by Ipse re∣spiciet & videbit. He then goes on to shew, how that the Child was to be an Emperor; because the Crucifix, in the beginning of his Discourse, spoke only of a Kingdom, and the Title of a King; but after mention made of the 16th Ge∣neration, he changes his Language, and speaks of Empires, Ego enim aeidficator sum Regnorum & Imperiorum; and Volo in Te & in semine tuo Impe∣rium mihi stabilire. Now this Empire, he says, is not to be the Empire of Germany, but one greater than any that hath been before, and Uni∣versal, over all the World; that is to say, it must be the Fifth Monarchy. That there shall be
such an Universal Monarchy, he brings the Com∣mon-place Proofs: He allows that this Fifth Mo∣narchy is to be the Kingdom of Christ; but shews, that it shall be this young Prince's nevertheless: For it is said, I will establish to my self an Em∣pire in Thee, and in thy Seed, Volo enim in Te & in semine Tuo Imperium Mihi stabilire: So that the Empire was to belong to Christ, and the Prince of Portugal, at the same time. He thinks this Promise is much alike to that made to St. Peter, Tu es Petrus & super hanc Petrum aedificabo Eccle∣siam meam: And that as the Universal Church, tho' it be Christ's, is yet St. Peter's too; and by being St. Peter's, is nevertheless the Church of Christ: In the like manner this Empire shall be of Christ, and of the Prince of Portugal at the same time; and in effect, the Jesuit had so or∣dered it, that this young Prince was to be Christ's Vicar, and have a Sovereign Power over the whole World, in Temporals, in the same man∣ner as the Pope, Christ's Vicar in Spirituals, hath an Universal Jurisdiction over the Church; this Monarch being the Person spoken of in that place of Daniel, Ecce quasi filius hominis veniebat & ad Antiquum dierum pervenit, & dedit ei potestatem & honorem & regnum, & omnes populi, Tribus, & Linguae, ipsi servient: For since Christ is called, Filius hominis, this Quasi filius hominis, must be Quasi Christus, i. e. Christ's Vicar, his Vicar in Temporals, as the Pope is in Spirituals. That this Emperor must be a King of Portugal, is plain, because Hannah concludes her Song with these words, Dominus judicabit fines terrae, & dabit Im∣perium Regi suo, i. e. to the King of Portugal: For tho' all Kings may in some sense be said to be from God, yet other Kings are made by Men,
whereas He of Portugal is made immediately by God himself, and so is more properly called His King, Et dabit Imperium Regi suo; and he makes it plain, that his Imperial Majesty must be the New-born Infant; for that he was given to the diminish'd Off-spring of the 16th Generation from Alfonso Henriquez. When the Father had thus provided for the young Prince, he soon after received an Account of his Death, which doubtless would have put any other Teller of Fortunes into no small Con∣fusion; but it had no such effect upon Padre Vieira, for he was a Jesuit, and was so little ap∣prehensive of the Raillery of his Auditors, that he published his Sermon, joyning thereto an A∣pology; wherein he proves, after his manner, that this Quasi filius hominis, or Christ's Vicar in Temporals, was to die, as the Prince did, in or∣der to take possession of the Universal Monar∣chy, which he could not do any where else but in Heaven: For doth not the Text expresly say, Ecce cum nubibus Coeli quasi filius hominis veniebat, & usque ad Antiquum dierum pervenit, & in con∣spectu ejus obtulerunt eum, & dedit ei Potestatem & Honorem, &c. He supposes, that Christ's first Vicar in Temporals, should go to Heaven, in order to take Possession of his Government over the Earth, for the same Reason that the first Vi∣car in Spirituals had the Keys of Heaven deli∣vered to him here on Earth: For when St. Peter had the Keys of the Church given him on Earth, Christ was himself then on Earth; but he being now in Heaven, it was convenient that his Vicar in Temporals should go to Heaven, in order to be instated in the Government of the Earth, and this after the Example of Vice-Roys, and Go∣vernors,
who when they pay Homage for the Kingdoms and Provinces, where they are to ex∣ercise the Power, and represent the Person of the King, do not perform this Ceremony within the Kingdoms and Provinces committed to their Charge, but in the place where the King then is, whether he be at Court, or whether he be ab∣sent from it: Now Heaven is Christ's Court, and because he was in the World, and absent from Court, when his first Vicar did Homage for the first Universal Empire, which is that of his Church. It was done on Earth in like manner, when this his second Vicar was to pay Homage for the second Empire, which is that of the World, he was to do it in Heaven, because Christ is now at his Court in Heaven: And this he concludes to be the Reason, why the Prince was to die so soon after he was born. But since the Prince is gone to Heaven to take Possession of the Universal Empire, who shall have the Administration of the Government here on Earth? Shall the Prince, who hath taken his leave of us with so much haste, return again to take it upon himself? No, he hath taken Pos∣session, and the Prince that is to be born after him, shall have the Benefit of Primogeniture, and succeed him in the Empire; insomuch, that the same Empire shall be common to both the Bro∣thers; the Eldest, that is dead, is gone to take Possession of it in Heaven; and the Second, who is to live, shall administer it on Earth. I con∣fess, saith the Father, this looks new and admi∣rable, to make one only Heir of two Brothers; that the first Brother shall take Possession, and the other come after him, and be the Possessor: But to him, altho' it was wonderful, yet it was
no novelty; he thinks he hath a like Instance at the Birth of Pharez and Zarah, Sons of Judah, the Father and Founder of the Royal Tribe: Zarah put forth his Arm, and when he had a Purple Thread tied thereto, he drew it in again, and let Pharez be born before him, and so yield∣ed to him the Right of Primogeniture; by which means Zarah took Possession of the Purple, that Pharez afterwards put on and enjoy'd. Thus, saith the Father, was the Succession to the King∣dom of Judah founded, and thus was the first Foundation laid of the Empire of Portugal: The Prince that was born, and presently after with∣drew into Heaven, was like Zarah, who only took Possession of the Purple, and then drew back his Arm; the Prince that is to be born, shall be like Pharez, and succeeding in the Place yielded to him by his Brother, shall enjoy the same Possession, cloath himself with the same Royal Purple, and stretch forth his Arm to grasp the Scepter. He bestows some other Thoughts upon the Parallel, to make it more exact, which I do not think convenient to Tran∣slate. Dom Joaon Francisco Antonio Bento Bernardo, the King's eldest Son living, born the 22d of October, 1689; and sworn Heir to the Crown by the Three Estates of the Kingdom, assembled in Cortes held at Lishon, Decemb. 1. 1697; a Prince, as they who frequent the Court report, of a sweet and mild Disposition, and likely to inhe∣rit the King his Father's Vertues, as well as his Throne.
Dom Francisco—, born the 25th of May, 1691; a Prince of great Vivacity and Spirit, as appears by many pretty Stories of him, which the Portugueses entertain themselves withal. He is designed for a Knight of Malta, at least to hold the Grand Priory of Crato, the richest Com∣menda in Portugal, or perhaps in all Spain, of which he is at present in Possession. Dom Antonio—, born the 15th of March, 1695: He was cloath'd in a Je∣suit's Habit upon his first coming into the World, which he still wears, or did, at least, not long ago; her Majesty having devoted him to her St. Xavier; and, if the Jesuits are to be believ'd, he is design'd to be of their Order. Dona Theresa Francisca Josepha, born the 24th of Feb. 1696. Dom Emanuel—, born the of 1697. Another Princess, born in the beginning of this Year 1699. If I remember a-right, her Name is Dona Maria Xavier Josepha. Besides these, his Majesty hath acknowledg'd one Natural Daughter, whose Mother is reported to have been imploy'd about the Palace, to sweep the lower Rooms. This young Lady hath been bred up in a Monastery, 'till the Year 1695, when the King bestow'd her in Marriage, upon the El∣dest Son of the Duke of Cadaval, to the great Dissatisfaction of the Nobility; insomuch, that few or none of them would appear at the Publick
Reception of the Bride. I never heard that their Discontent proceeded from an Opinion, that this Marriage of the principal Person among them, was a Disgrace to the Fidalguia: In other Countries, perhaps, and in former Times, so Illustrious a Body might think their Blood deba∣sed by such a Match: But their Dissatisfaction was said to proceed from another Cause, they thought the Honour was too great for any Sub∣ject, the Duke of Cadaval not excepted; and that he was raised thereby too much above their Level; tho' it be confess'd by all at the same time, that next his Majesty, his Excellency hath the greatest Authority, and the greatest Estate, and is of the Noblest Blood in the Kingdom. Yet he is not of equal Quality, to them on whom the French King hath bestowed his Bastards; for they to whom his Most Christian Majesty hath done so very great an Honour, are such Princes as are the nearest to his Blood, much nearer than the Duke is to the King of Portugal; no wonder then, if so great a Value is put upon the like Honour in smaller Courts; the Autho∣rity of the French being, in this Age, sufficient to alter, if not the Nature, at least the Appear∣ance of Things, and make Things look glorious in our Days, which in former Times had ano∣ther Aspect. In one Particular the Portuguese Court seems to have out-done the French on this occasion; that is, in the Title given to this La∣dy, upon her being first own'd: For as I was inform'd, at the time it was ordered, that she shou'd be treated with Altesa Real; whereas, I do not find, that the French King's Natural Chil∣dren, have, as yet, got above Altesse Serenissime; and this may possibly be the Reason, why Mon∣sieur
L'Abbe d'Estrees, the French Ambassador, forbore to visit her, 'till he had express Orders for it from France. For his Master having been for some time used to prescribe Rules for the Ceremonial, he might, perhaps, think it a kind of Usurpation, for any others to take upon them to alter it: But the Portugueses did not altoge∣ther innovate on this occasion, for they had a Precedent at the Court of Madrid, where the late Don John of Austria took Royal Highness upon him; which, perhaps, may have been the cause why the Court of Portugal, which is resolved, in all things, to swell up to the Grandeur of Spain, gave the same Title to this Lady. It is now commonly said in Portugal, that the King's Natural Children have a Right to suc∣ceed him in the Throne, in default of his lawful Issue: But I believe this Opinion to be as ill grounded, as 'tis derogatory to the Honour of that Nation. Had Royal Bastards a Right to the Succession, John the Second, who ruled with a more Absolute Power than any King of this Na∣tion, either before, or since, would doubtless have left the Crown to his Natural Son, Dom Jorge, Duke of Coimbra, Progenitor of the Dukes of Aveiro, (now in Spain) he having laboured all he could, to obtain the Succession for him; but all in vain: For he was forc'd, before his Death, to acknowledge for his Successor, Dom Emanuel, then Duke of Beja, whose Brother that King had slain with his own Hands. When Dom Antonio pretended to the Crown, after the Death of Henry the Cardinal, he had put an end to the great Controversie at that time on foot, about the Succession, had Bastards a Right thereto: But he himself was far from thinking they had,
and therefore he grounded his Claim upon a sup∣posed Marriage between Dom Luis, Son of E∣manuel, with his Mother: It was a Prejudice to him indeed, that some suspected Judaism to lie lurking in his Mother's Blood: However, the Judges constituted by Henry to determine this Controversie, alledged his Illegitimacy as a suffi∣cient, and the only Cause of his Exclusion. The only Bastard that ever Reign'd in this Kingdom, was John the First; yet he never pre∣tended a Right of Succession to the Crown, but came in by Election of the Estates assembled in Cortes, at a time when the Throne was declared vacant, the other Pretenders being at that time Prisoners in Castille; and what is more, declared Illegitimate by the Cortes, (whether justly, or not, is another Question), so that Bastard for Bastard, it was thought fit in this Case of Necessity, to Elect Dom John before any other.
Of the MINISTRY. ALL Publick Affairs of Importance, and such as immediately concern the King, are here managed by a Sett of Ministers, as many, or as few as the King pleases to appoint, who to∣gether are called the Council of State; and as Members of this Body, they are all treated with Excellency: The Reason, I suppose, is, because that Title is given to the Counsellors of State at Madrid; tho' another Reason was given by one of their Number, who said, It was their due, because they had all of them been Ambassadors. To this Council the King refers all Matters of Moment, seldom, or never, resolving upon any thing before the Affair has been considered and debated among them. 'Tis said, the Reason why the King pays so great a Deference to this Coun∣cil, is, partly because it consists of those who had a great hand in advancing him to his Bro∣ther's Throne; He, for this Cause, thinking it but reasonable, that they should share in the Power they had given him; partly moved thereto, by the frequent Remonstrances of the Jesuits, who are in great Credit with his Majesty, and as some ill-natur'd People give out, are set on by the Ministers, to be ever and anon sug∣gesting to him, that he is oblig'd in Conscience to take this Course. But most People are so well satisfied of his Majesty's Prudence, and Justice, as to think that Things would go much better
than they do, if he would take a greater part of the Government upon himself. This Council, as it imitates that of Madrid in other things, so it is seldom guilty of any great Precipitation in its Proceedings; but People complain rather of its Slowness, and want of Dispatch; and some, who love to make the worst of things, say, That when a Business is brought before Them, they shall sit upon it four or five Times, each Session lasting five or six Hours, and after all, the Matter be often∣times more perplex'd and intricate than before; and the King, who loses all this time, waiting for their Resolution, be as much to seek as ever. But such as talk after this rate, seem to have that Opinion of the Chapter, which is very different from what the World has entertain'd of the Ca∣nons; as will appear from the Characters of some of those excellent Persons that compose this Council: As first of, Dom Manoel Telles de Silva, Conde de Villar Mayor, & Marchese de Alegrete. I name him first, not because of his Quality, (for tho' he be most Nobly descended, yet he gives place to others, whom I shall mention afterwards), but because He is in effect the Prime Minister of State, Af∣fairs of the greatest Concern being chiefly in∣trusted to his Management. This Lord having born Arms, for some time, in his Youth, ap∣ply'd himself afterwards with extraordinary Di∣ligence to the Study of Letters, and made a ve∣ry considerable Progress therein; insomuch, that he is esteem'd for one of the most Learned Men in the Nation. It is said, that he was much admir'd in Germany, for his Readiness in speak∣ing
Latin; and, I suppose, it was to exercise himself in the same Tongue, that in the time of his Embassy into that Country, he set himself to write in elegant Latin, the Life of John the Se∣cond, Sir-nam'd, The Perfect Prince, which hath been publish'd since. In this Piece, the Noble Author hath attempted to follow the Stile and Method of the Ancients: How far he hath at∣tain'd to either, I will not pretend to judge; but, I believe, most candid Readers will think, he hath succeeded to admiration, considering at how low an Ebb Learning hath been in Portugal for this last Age; But by this Application to his Studies, he qualify'd himself for much Greater, and more Honourable Employments, than that of an Author. At Twenty-four Years of Age, he was made one of the Infante's Camarists, and is supposed to have had a great hand in the last Revolution, and he hath been ever since one of the nearest to the Person of that Prince. After some Overtures had been made of a Mar∣riage between the King his Master, and the Princess of Nieubourg, this Lord was pitch'd upon as the fittest Person to carry on so important a Negotiation; which he brought to a happy Conclusion, and conducted the Royal Bride with him into Portugal. Nor was that the only Ser∣vice the Conde did on this occasion, he gain'd an Honour for his Master, which (the Emperor ex∣cepted) no Crown'd Head in Christendom had ever attain'd to before: For before he made his Publick Entry into Heidelberg, he so adjusted Matters in a Preliminary Treaty, that he was to have the Precedency of the Elector, and the Place of Ho∣nour on all Occasions. This, say the Portugueses, had never before been granted by an Elector,
the Ambassador Extraordinary of any King, tho' some of the greatest had been seeking it with much Earnestness. But the Reputation of his Ma∣jesty's Grandeur, say they, so worthily represented by this Great Minister, together with his Excellency's great Prudence and Dexterity, gain'd for this Crown that singular Prerogative. When his Excellency made his Publick Entry, the two Princes, Frede∣rick and Philip, waited to receive him in the Court of the Castle, and the Elector himself went down some of the Steps that are open to the Court, to meet the Ambassador, as he came out of his Coach; his Electoral Highness desiring his Excellency to be covered, gave him the Right∣hand, let his Excellency go before him through every Door; and when he had conducted him to the Place of Audience, gave him the most Honourable Seat. This was so very great an Honour, that it had been deny'd, not only to Ambassadors, but to a King in Person: For when Henry, Elect of Poland, afterwards the Third of that Name in France, call'd at Heidelberg, in his way to his new Kingdom, there was not a Man to be seen in this very Court, where the Conde de Villar Mayor, had Princes to wait upon him at his Por∣tiere; and the poor King was so out of Counte∣nance, that he was fain to step aside, on pretence of making Water, 'till some Body might come to shew him up Stairs; at last, the Rhinegrave, ac∣companied with two Gentlemen that had escaped from the Butchery of Saint Barthlemi, met him half way on the Steps, excusing the Elector his Father, Frederick the Third, that he came not to do this Office, by reason of a certain Pain that he had in his Leg; but the old Elector invited
King Henry, the next Morning, to take a Walk with him, and by no less than Thirty Turns in his Great Hall, like that at Westminster; he so breath'd the young King, as fully to convince him, that what his Son had said, was but a meer Excuse. But Henry came then just reeking from shedding the Blood of Innocents; and the old Ele∣ctor, who otherwise entertain'd him like a Royal Guest, had a mind to let the young King see how much a Prince falls from his Dignity, by becom∣ing guilty of such Barbarities. So that, I con∣fess, this Precedent ought not to be much in∣sisted upon, in the Case of our Ambassador Ex∣traordinary. As for the late Elector, Philip William, he, it seems, was resolv'd not to stand upon Ceremo∣nies with his Excellency; he not only gave him the Upper-hand at his first Reception, but like∣wise at Meals: The Lord Ambassador always wash'd first, sat in the best Place, was serv'd first; nay, the very Electoress her self, and the Prin∣cesses her Daughters, would needs have his Ex∣cellency take the Precedency of them too; but he was more a Gentleman than to insist upon his Punctilio's with Ladies: And so it was contriv'd, that at Conferences with them, there should be no Canopy in the Room, and consequently no Distinction between the Right, and the Left-hand; and that of two Rows of Chairs, opposite to each other, the Ambassador should take the uppermost on the one side, and the Electoress on the other, with the Princesses her Daughters after her in their Order; his Excellency satisfying himself with this Equality with her Highness, thinking that he had gain'd his Point, while he kept the Elector below him. The old Elector, for his
part, contented himself with having got a good Match for his Daughter, while the Portugueses had all the Advantage in the Ceremonial on their side, and were not a little elevated with the Honour their Ambassador gain'd to the Crown, though it was no more than was lost by the Father of their Queen. Nor need we wonder, that this Court should be so highly pleas'd with his Excellency's Dexterity and Success herein, since the Ceremonial is become the Grand Con∣cern of Europe, and the Subject of the most im∣portant Negotiations now on foot: For what is there that doth perplex, and embroil most Courts in Christendom, so much as the additional Sound of two or three Syllables in some Princes Titles? Have we not lately seen the Force of Blood it self suspended in the most endearing Relations? And is not Infallibility it self at a stand, and all for want of one to determine the several Degrees that are between an Arm'd Chair, and a Folding Stool? This Nobleman, at his Return, had the Title of Marquess de Alegrete bestow'd upon him, as a Mark of Honour, in Reward for his Service. But his Dexterity in Negotiations of this sort, make but a small part of his Character: He is re∣presented by all that pretend to know him, as a most accomplish'd States-man, even by those who are so ill-natur'd as to allow that Title to no other Minister about the Court. He is sup∣pos'd to be well acquainted with the present Po∣sture of Affairs in Europe, and throughly to un∣derstand his Master's Interest; and above all, is accounted a Person of unbiass'd Integrity; his Country-men generally esteem him a true Portu∣guese, disinteressed in his Counsels, and espousing
no Party; as having no other Designs in view, but such as he thinks may make for his Master's Service, and his Country's Good. This is the Character that's commonly given of the Mar∣quess; the worst that is said of him, that I could ever hear, is, that his Tenderness for a nume∣rous Family, and Care in providing for them, may have a little slackned his Vigor, in opposing the Counsels of such as are thought to have some∣thing else in view, than the Good of the State. He is said to be very zealously addicted to the Religion of his Country: He ascribed the happy Issue of his Negotiation at Heidelberg, to the Pray∣ers of two Sisters, and a Daughter of his, that are Nuns in the Convent of Madre de Deos, a lit∣tle without the City: At least the King was of this Opinion, when Cardinal de Alemcastro was commending him for his prudent Management, his Majesty reply'd, That this Lord had no part in the Success, but that all was done to his Hand by the Madre de Deos. I have been told of another remarkable Instance of his Lordship's Devotion, but know not what Credit it deserves, having no other ground for it than the common Talk of the People, among whom it was reported, That when St. Antoninho, (a small diminutive Image of St. Antonio, that hath been in great Credit for these three last Years at Lisbon) was hired out to go Sargente Mor, to the Fleet that went last Year (98), with the Vice-Roy to the East-Indies, among other Perquisites promis'd to the Saint, over and above his Standing-Wages of 10 Millr. per Month, the Marquess de Algrete bargain'd to give him a fine new Chappel, in case he conduct∣ed a Relation of his Lordship's safe home from Goa.
Dom Nuno Alvarez Pereira, Duke of Cadaval, Marquess of Ferreira, Earl of Tentugal, &c. men∣tioned on several Occasions before, descended of the House of Bragança, from Ferdinand the Se∣cond Duke of that Title, and consequently the King's Kinsman. This Noble Person, notwith∣standing his high Birth, and vast Riches, hath qualify'd himself for all manner of Employments, having commanded both by Sea and Land, and all along made a most considerable Figure in the State, wherein he has at present the greatest Power and Authority next the King, having a hand in all Affairs relating to his Majesty, his Domestick Concerns not excepted. If any part of the Publick Business be more than other his peculiar Province, I take it to be the Revenue of the Crown, whereof he is a great Farmer, as the Foreign Affairs seems to be that of the Marquess de Alegrete. It is agreed, that the Authority of the Council of State, doth in a manner wholly reside in these two Great Men. It is said, they have been formerly in competition about the King's Ear, and Favour; wherein the Marquess was upheld by the Opinion his Majesty hath of his Prudence and Integrity. The King, no doubt, hath a like Opinion concerning the Duke too; but he, they say, by the Pleasantness of his Conversation, contributes likewise to his Maje∣sty's Diversion, the Marquess consulting only his Country's Good, and his Master's Service; the Duke, as 'tis suppos'd, doth not wholly neg∣lect his own Interest. Some will have it, that he is biass'd in favour of France; but, perhaps, the only Reason may be, because both his Wives have been French-Women, the present Duchess
being Daughter of the Marquess of Harcourt. The Duke being, as I have said, the greatest Subject in the Kingdom, takes a particular Me∣thod to make People sensible of his Grandeur; he is not of Opinion, that he stands in any need of a pompous Equipage, or a numerous Atten∣dance, to make himself appear considerable; but like those famous States-men, that have made the greatest Figures in the Modern, as well as the Ancient Common-Wealths, thinks the Au∣thority of his Person sufficient to Command those Respects that are due to his Quality. When his Excellency appears abroad in his Litter, which certainly is not made for show, he is followed only by a Trooper; and by him, because he is General of the Cavalry. Dukes in Portugal had formerly their Guards allowed them; but I have not heard, that his Excellency chuses to be at∣tended by a Soldier, to keep up his Pretensions to that Priviledge. He is a Familiar of the Inqui∣sition, as, I suppose, all other Noble-men are, it being a Mark of Honour in this County; but at an Auto da Fe, other Noblemen serve as Guards to those poor Wretches that come out to hear their Sentence, whereas his Excellency supplies the Place of a Door-keeper. Many other things are told of his Excellency, by such as pretend to give his Character; but they are Matters which the Publick is not con∣cern'd to know. Dom Luis (now Cardinal) de Sousa, Arch-Bishop of Lisbon, and Capellaon Mor to the King; which, I suppose, I may translate, Dean of his Majesties Chappel; a Prelate, who as he is of a Noble Extraction, seems to have a Mind suitable
to his Birth and Quality, and a Capacity suffici∣ent to carry on his Designs, which have been al∣ways great, and always successful at long run, notwithstanding the mighty Opposition he hath met with; he having been heard to say, soon af∣ter his having receiv'd the Cap from Rome, That he never set his Heart upon any thing, but in the End he found ways to accomplish his Desire: And in effect, he hath rais'd himself to the highest Dignities that either Portugal or Rome cou'd be∣stow upon him; for his being a National Cardi∣nal, excludes him from all Pretensions to the Pontificate. In Alphonso's Reign he became suspected to the Court, by his associating himself with the disaf∣fected Party, and was therefore order'd by the King to his Residence at O Porto, of which place he was Dean: When Bishops were restored to Portugal, he was advanc'd to that See; and from thence he was afterwards translated to the Arch-Bishoprick of Lisbon; and at last, viz. in 97, received the Cardinal's Cap from Rome. Tho' the two fore-mention'd Ministers have the principal Management of State-Affairs, yet they say, this great Prelate will take care, that his Vote shall have its due Weight in the Coun∣cil, especially when he hath occasion to promote the Grandeur of his Brother's House. I cannot pretend to tell how far he is concern'd in Foreign Affairs; but we may suppose, considering his Profession, that those relating to Rome, may, if any, be his Province: But notwithstanding the great Favours he has received from thence, his Publick Conduct hath not made him suspected of any mean Compliance with that Court; on the contrary, he has endeavoured, so far as the
Genius of his Country will permit, to reform many of those Abuses it hath introduced; parti∣cularly, he hath on several Occasions shewn him∣self a great Enemy to Exemptions, by which that Court hath establish'd its Tyranny in the World, and ruin'd the Discipline of the Church. He hath had many Clashings with the Nuncio's, whose Legantine Courts, he thinks, incroach too much upon his Episcopal Jurisdiction. In short, he seems to have much of the same Spirit and Cha∣racter with the late Arch-Bishop Harlai of Paris; nor has he, any more than that other great Pre∣late, escaped the Lash of malicious Tongues. I have never heard, that he hath shewn so little Complaisance to the Court of Rome, in order to gain the Purple, tho' as all agree, he hath been aiming at it for these many Years, and considering the servile Temper of those at Rome, no way seems more likely to succeed; but Dom Verissimo de Alemcastro, the late Inquisitor-Ge∣neral, had put more signal Affronts upon the Holy See, than ever the Arch-Bishop either did, or could; and was (possibly for that Reason) promoted before him: When the Pope attempt∣ed, as several of his Predecessors had done be∣fore him, to break the present Constitution of the Holy Office, whereof the Holy See bears all the Scandal, and reaps none of the Profit: The Inquisitor, supported, I suppose, by the Court, (whose Creature the Inquisition was) set them of Rome at Defiance, stood all the Fire of the Vati∣can, and remain'd unmov'd at their Censures, tho' they proceeded so far as to interdict him, Ab ingressu Ecclesiae; insomuch, that his Holiness was oblig'd at last, upon a slight Composition, to desist from the Enterprize; and at the next Pro∣motion,
the Rebel-Inquisitor was rewarded with the Cap; the same Cap, which as the Arch-Bi∣shop pretended, had been promised to himself. Had this been under any other Pontificate than that of Innocent the Eleventh, the World would not have been to seek for the Reason of the In∣quisitor's Promotion; but there being something more generous in this Pope's Nature, than in theirs that usually fill the Holy Chair, 'tis not unlikely, but he had some regard to the Merit of the Man; for all give Dom Verissimo the Chara∣cter of an extraordinary good Man; tho' they say withal, that he was none of the wisest; and he may therefore be supposed to have been but an Instrument in the hands of others, when that vigorous Opposition was made to the Pope's Design of reforming the Inquisition. It is said, that this Promotion of the Inquisitor did not a little disgust the Arch-Bishop; and that he spared not to make most grievous Com∣plaints against those that had deceived him; and that it was not on the Court of Rome only that he laid the Blame of his Disappointment. By this Promotion, the Court of Rome gain'd some very considerable Advantages; for there∣by they took off one great Adversary, gain'd him over to their side, and by his Means disarm'd another, putting it out of his Power to do them any great harm: For after this, the Cardinal, and the Arch-Bishop were never in good Terms toge∣ther; and the Nuncio's found the Cardinal the fittest Man on all Occasions to make head against the other, whensoever he was about to give them any Trouble: For tho' there was no Com∣parison between the Abilities of the one and the other, yet the Cardinal was so highly esteem'd
for his Innocence and Probity, by the King, Nobility, and People, that as weak as he was, he was able to make his Party good against the Arch-Bishop; who is far from being so much, or so generally beloved. But the Nuncio's have not been wanting on o∣ther Occasions, to raise up Enemies against this Adversary of theirs, Monsignor Nicolini was so happy in the time of his Residence, as to set the main Body of the Fidalgo's upon him: The man∣ner in which he effected it, does not indeed make much for the Honour of the Holy See; however, he did not a little gratifie a certain Passion, which they of Rome are no less ready to indulge, when a fair Opportunity offers, than they are to Court an Enemy that's too mighty for them. The Fi∣dalgo's were much set upon it, to have leave for a Company of Spanish Strolers to Act in the Town, and were as much opposed by the Arch-Bishop; who, perhaps, might think, that the Licensing of a Publick Stage, was, in effect, to Authorize the Corruption of Manners, that it is apt to cause: Not that his Lordship was appre∣hensive, least the Players should expose Religion, or turn it into Ridicule, to make Sport for the hair-brain'd unthinking Youth of the Town: For, possibly, there may not be two Nations in the World, where the Audience it self, to say nothing of the Government, wou'd be very pa∣tient at so horrible an Abuse; should any thing like it be seen upon the Stage at Lisbon by these very Fidalgo's, who were so earnest for a Play-House, their Religion would put 'em upon chasti∣sing the Offenders upon the Spot, in such a man∣ner as ours will not justifie. It is not long since they gave a terrible Instance of their Zeal upon a
Servant of the French Ambassadors, who being but a French Papist, could not be perswaded to pay the like Reverence as others did, to an Image brought upon the Stage; which made the People fall upon him with so much Fury, that he was carried off the place for Dead. And there is this to be said in behalf of the Spanish Poets, that their Plays have very little of that Leudness in them, which abounds in so scandalous a manner in those of another Country. But though Crimes of this sort are not taught in the Play-House there, yet it is much suspected, that they are practised amongst them, the Women that tread the Stage, having no better Character there than in other Places. And this, I pre∣sume, might be the Reason why their Admit∣tance into Lisbon was so vigorously opposed by the Arch-Bishop, who to put a stop to all Im∣portunities in their behalf, published an Excom∣munication against the Players, in case they should Act, and against all that went to see them. It was in vain for the Fidalgo's to desire his Lordship to recall the Sentence; but at last they apply'd themselves to Nicolini, the Nuncio, who had now a fair Opportunity presented him to engage a powerful Party against the Arch-Bi∣shop; nor did he let slip his Advantage: It is true, Religion and Vertue were like to suffer by what he was about; but those of Rome think these are things to be minded, when they prove subservient to their Designs; he, therefore, without more ado, takes off the Excommunica∣tion by Virtue of his Legantine Power. The Play-House hereupon opens, and fills; the Fi∣dalgo's flocking to it like so many School-Boys, let loose from under the Discipline of their Ma∣ster;
and, perhaps, the more eagerly, that they might a little mortifie the rigid Arch-Bishop. His Lordship withdraws for a time to his Coun∣try-House, that he might not be a Witness to so great a Slur put upon him, and to suppress his just Indignation against the Nuncio. But this was only a short Mortification, which consider∣ing the Occasion, must doubtless have turn'd to his Lordship's Credit, even among those that were pleas'd with it at that time. The Court of Rome hath since thought convenient to present him with a Cap, viz. in the Year 1697, at a Promotion wherein his Lordship, and Monsignor Cornaro, the then Nuncio at Lisbon, were the only Persons advanced to the Purple. Dom Anrique de Sousa de Tavares da Silva, Conde de Miranda, & Marquis de Aronches, Brother to the Arch-Bishop, and acting in concert with him; a Minister of great Sufficiency, but too much, as 'tis thought, addicted to his Pleasures: He hath served in several Embassies, as to England, Spain, Holland, and remains well affected to the People among whom he has resided: Insomuch, that during the late War, such as would needs have the Ministers of State to take Parties, have always given the Marquess of Aronches, together with his Family, to the Allies; and we may sup∣pose them to be much in the right, if we judge how the Noble Families stand affected to other Nations, from the Alliances they contract with Foreigners: This Lord having given his Daugh∣ter to the Prince of Ligne, a Fleming, Subject of Spain, and Prince of the Empire, who succeeds him in his Estate and Title; the same Person, who, by Procurement of the Family, was sent
Ambassador Extraordinary from his Portuguese Majesty to the Emperor, and made that splendid Entry into Vienna; of which the Publick had so large an Account in the Gazettes, &c. If I do not mention the rest that are of this Honourable Body, it is because I am not so well instructed, as to be able to give a particular Account of them: But I must not omit to men∣tion the Secretary of State; who, tho' he hath neither a Deliberative, nor a Decisive Voice in any of the Councils, is yet, as some term him, the Primum Mobile of the whole Kingdom: His Of∣fice is compounded of that of Clerk of the Coun∣cil, and another long since abolished, but revi∣ved for a small time by the Conde de Castelmelhor; he that executed it, was called the Escrivam de Puridade: Puridade, in old Portuguese, signifies Secrecy, or Privacy; but is now out of use in that Sense: The Office seems to have been much the same as that of Privado in Spain, or Prime Minister in France; but nothing remains of it, now, at least in the Secretary of State, but what is purely Ministerial. The Office of Secretary, at present, as 'tis a Place of Great Trust, so it is in a manner a Place of infinite Business; he gives an Account to the King, of whatsoever is done in the Council of State; he is address'd to by all sorts of People that have any thing to do at Court, of what Nature soever their Business is, he proposes the Matter to the King, and returns his Answer; and is apyly'd to by Foreign Mini∣sters on all occasions. This Place is at present executed by Mendo Foyos Pereira, one rais'd by the House of Aronches, and, as some say, great∣ly devoted to the Family: He is a Person not so
considerable for his Birth, as for his indefatiga∣ble Diligence in his Employment; of which he acquits himself so well, that it seems to be with∣out Reason, that some represent him of a nar∣row Capacity. Foreign Ministers find it to be much for their Convenience, to Manage the Se∣cretary, and hold a good Understanding with him, if they desire to have quick Dispatches; or when Matters relating to the Ceremonial are in Question: For if he be ill us'd, they may chance to meet with more Rubs in their way, than they look'd for. The Nuncio's that have been on ill Terms with him, have not been insensible of his Resentments: However, it is thought advisable by those that have to deal with this Minister, that in the Measures they keep with him, they beware, lest he perceives they are in any Awe of him; since an over-great Complaisance, may be of worse Consequence, than a Conduct that is quite contrary. FINIS.
Books Printed for Tho. Bennet. FOLIO. THucydides, Greek and Latin, Collated with five entire Manuscript Copies, and all the Editions extant: Also illustrated with Maps, large Annotations and Indexes. By J. Hudson, M. A. and Fellow of Ʋniversity-College, Oxon. To which is added, an exact Chronology, by the Learned Henry Dodwell; never before Publish'd. Printed at the Theater, Oxon. Athenae Oxoniensis: Or, an exact History of all the Writers and Bishops, who have had their Education in the University of Oxford, from 1480, to the end of the Year 1690; giving an Account of the Birth, Fortune, Preferment, and Death of all those Authors and Prelates; the great Acci∣dents of their Lives, with the Fate and Character of their Writings. The Work so compleat, that no Writer of Note of this Nation, for Two hun∣dred Years, is omitted. In Two Volumes. A new Historical Relation of the Kingdom of Siam. By Monsieur de la Loubiere, Envoy Extra∣ordinary from the French King to the King of Si∣am, in 1687, and 1688; wherein a full and ex∣act Account is given of their Natural History; as also of their Musick, Arithmetick, and other Mathematick Learning: Illustrated with Scul∣ptures. Done out of French by Dr. P. Fellow of the Royal Society. Father Malbranch's Treatise concerning the Search after Truth. The whole Work compleat; to which is added, his Treatise of Nature and Grace, being a Consequence of the Author's Prin∣ciples
contained in the Search; together with F. Malbranch's Defence against Mr. de la Ville, and several other Adversaries. All English'd by J. Taylor, M. A. of Magdalen-College, Oxon, and Printed there. The Second Edition, with some Additions, communicated by the Author. QƲARTO. A Critical History of the Texts and Versions of the New Testament. In two Parts. By Father Simon, of the Oratory. A Discourse sent to the late King James, to perswade him to embrace the Protestant Reli∣gion. By Sam. Parker, late Bishop of Oxon. To which are prefixed two Letters, the first from Sir Lionel Jenkins, on the same Subject; the se∣cond from the Bishop, sent with the Discourse. All Printed from the Original Manuscripts. A short Defence of the Orders of the Church of England. By Mr. Milbourn. Sermons and Discourses upon several Occasions. In Three Vol. By Robert South, D. D. Sermons and Discourses upon several Occasions. By G. Strading, D. D. and late Dean of Chi∣chester. Sermons and Discourses upon several Occasi∣ons. By R. Meggot, D. D. Of the Reverence due to God in his Publick Worship. In a Sermon before the King and Queen, at White-Hall. By the Right Reverend Father in God, Nicholas, Lord Bishop of Chester. Three Sermons upon several Occasions. By the Right Reverend Father in God, William, Lord Bishop of Oxford.
Two Sermons, one before the House of Com∣mons, the other before the Queen. By W. Jane, D. D. and Dean of Gloucester. Three Sermons before the Queen. By Nath. Resbury, D. D. Five Sermons upon several Occasions. By Mr. Francis Atterbury. Two Visitation-Sermons, and one before the Societies for the Reformation of Manners. By Mr. William Whitfield. The Certainty and Necessity of Religion in General, or the first Grounds and Principles of Humane Duty Established. In Eight Sermons, Preached at St. Martins in the Field. At the Le∣cture for the Year 1697. Founded by the Ho∣nourable Robert Boyl, Esq; The Certainty of the Christian Revelation, and the Necessity of Believing it, establish'd in oppo∣sition to all the Cavils, and Insinuations, of such as pretend to allow Natural Religion, and reject the Gospel. Both by Francis Gastril, B. D. Preacher to the Honourable Society of Lincolns-Inn. A Conference with a Theist. In Four Parts compleat. By W. Nichols, D. D. Mr. Luzancy, against the Socinians. In Two Parts. A Discourse of Religious Assemblies, for the Use of the Members of the Church of England. By G. Burghorpe, Rector of Little Gaddesden, in Hertford-shire. A Discourse of Schism, address'd to those Dis∣senters who conform'd before the Toleration, and have since withdrawn themselves from the Com∣munion of the Church of England. By R. Bur∣scough, M. A.
The Inspiration of the New Testament, Asserted and Explained; in Answer to Mr. Le Clerc, and other Modern Writers. By G. Lamothe. The Lives of all the Princes of Orange, from William the Great, Founder of the Commonwealth of the United Pro∣vinces. Translated from the French, by Mr. Tho. Brown. Monsieur Bossu's Treatise of the Epick Poem, containing many curious Reflections, very useful and necessary for the right understanding of the Excellency of Homer and Virgil. The Meditations of Marcus Aurelius Antoninus, the Ro∣man Emperor, concerning himself; treating of a Natural Man's Happiness, wherein it consisteth, and of the Means to attain it. Translated out of the Original Greek, with Notes, by M. Casabon, D. D. To which is added, The Life of Antoninus, with some select Reflections upon the Whole. By Monsieur and Madam Daceir. Never before in English. The Art of Glass: Shewing how to make all sorts of Glass, Crystal, and Enamel; likewise the making of Pearls, Precious Stones, China, and Looking Glasses. To which is added, The Method of Painting on Glass and Enamel∣ing; also how to extract the Colours from Minerals, Me∣tals, Herbs, and Flowers. A Work containing many Se∣crets and Curiosities never before discovered: Illustrated with Sculptures. Written originally in French, by Mr. H. Blancourt; and now translated into English: With an Ap∣pendix, contaning Exact Instructions for making Glass Eyes of all Colours. Jacobi Patriarchae de Shiloh Vaticinium, a depravatione Johannis Clerici, in Pentateuchum Commentatoris, Assertum Opera & Studio Sebastini Edzardi. Accedit Ejudem Disserta∣tio de nomine Elohim, Aurocti Judicii de R. Simonii Histo∣ria V. Test. Critica opposita. An Essay concerning Self, Murther: Wherein is endea∣vour'd to prove, That it is unlawful, according to Natu∣ral Principles. With some Considerations upon what is pretended from the said Principles, by the Author of a Treatise, intituled, Biathaenatos; and others. By J. Adams, Rector of St. Alban's Wood street, and Chaplain in Ordi∣nary to his Majesty. The Pretensions of the several Candidates for the Crown of Spain, discuss'd; and the Necessity of the King of Por∣tugal's being declared Successor to his Catholick Majesty, prov'd: In a Letter from a Spanish Nobleman to a Coun∣sellor of State at Madrid.
OF THE INTERESTS OF PORTUGAL, With Relation to other SOVEREIGNS: CONTAINING, An Account of the most Considerable Transactions that have pass'd of late between that Court, and those of Rome, Spain, France, Vienna, England, &c. PART. II. Of the Interests of Portugal, with Relation to Rome. OF all the Courts with which this of Por∣tugal hath any Intercourse, that of Rome challenges the Pre-eminence, and not without Reason, considering what great Interest and Power the Pope has within the King∣dom; for however, He may be slighted in other
Countries, accounted Catholick, he hath hitherto made shift to maintain his Authority in this, by virtue of the extraordinary Devotion of the Portu∣guese Kings towards the Holy See, which his pre∣sent Majesty has inherited from his Ancestors, to∣gether with the Title of The most Obedient Son of the Church. It is well known what Power Popes have had in former Ages in other parts of Christendom, and by what means they procured and maintained it; notwithstanding the Opposition they almost every where met with, from Princes who were perpetu∣ally strugling to preserve or recover their Liberty. But the Case of Portugal seems peculiar in this re∣spect; That as it hath brought its self into a greater subjection to the See of Rome, than any other Kingdom, so it can plead the Merit of a voluntary Obedience. Other Nations have shown that they were in a State of Violence, while the Soveraign Pontiffs were exercising the Plenitude of their Power over them, since all of them have in some measure, more or less, eased themselves of the Oppression; while the Portugueses, who doubtless might have gone as far as any towards the recovery of their Liberty, do to this day bear the Yoke: It is indeed with some Impatience, for they are not insensible of its weight and smart, and see plainly that its like to lie heavier upon them still. Alfonso Henriquez, their first King, refused to accept of the Crown till it was made Tributary to his Holiness; John the 2d. who in other Cases, knew as well as ever any Prince did, how to as∣sert the Royal Authority, exceeded his first Prede∣cessor in his Respect and Deference to the Holy See; for he gave the Pope an uncontroulable kind of Soveraignty within his Dominions, granting that
his Bulls should be Publish'd for the future, with∣out being examin'd by the Chancellor, or any o∣ther of the King's Ministers, which was the former practice of this, and is still observed with great exactness in other Kingdoms, to prevent incroach∣ments upon the Civil Power. When that Magna∣nimous Prince, John the 3d. had been treated with the utmost Indignities by those of Rome, and they conscious to themselves of their Offences, were apprehensive of his Resentments; Inigo Loyola Founder of the Jesuits could assure them, that he knew the King of Portugal to be so good a Catho∣lick, that he would suffer his very Beard to be trampled under feet by his Holiness, without show∣ing the least sign of Disobedience. The Brave Se∣bastian, when the Pope to flatter his desire of Glory, bid him choose what Title he pleased, answered, That he was ambitious of no other, but that which his Ancestors had so well deserved, viz. That of The most obedient Son of the Church. This great Devotion of the Portuguese Kings to∣ward the Romish See, hath given the Pope the advantage to establish an Absolute Dominion with∣in their Kingdom. Its true, his Holiness hath the Title of Soveraign only in Spirituals, but he so manages the matter, that Temporals fall in of course in Ordine ad Spiritualia; he is not indeed at the trouble nor the charge of maintaining the Civil Government, but then he has the Power and the Emoluments of a Temporal Soveraignty. He has his Nuncio always residing at Lisbon with a Legantine Power, and wanting only the Title of Vice-Roy, exercising his Jurisdiction in his own Courts, whence there is no appeal but to Rome, over the whole Body of the Clergy, who with their Dependents may well be reckon'd one half of
the Kingdom. They are commonly supposed to have much above two thirds of the Wealth; the secular Clergy who are more exempt than the rest from his Dominion, are yet his Tributarys, great summs are extorted from them for Collations, to Benefices and Bulls for Bishops: There goes to Rome, as I have been informed, no less than 90 Thousand Crowns before an Archbishop of Evora can be set∣led in his Chair, and all the rest may be supposed to pay in their Proportion. As for the Regulars, they are his more immediate Vassals or Soldiers ra∣ther, its true they are not in his Pay, for they live upon free Quarter, and keep the Country under Contribution, and his Holiness comes in for a share of the Spoils, by continually draining them of what they scrape from the People, every Monastery ha∣ving always some Business or other depending be∣fore the Nuncio; or their Agents at Rome to pro∣cure Privileges or Indulgencies, or Composition for unsaid Masses that have been paid for, (of which they will sometimes be behind hand for many thou∣sands, but upon Composition made at Rome, one high Mass said at a privileged Altar will serve for all) or to make the Ministers of that Court ac∣quainted with their Squabbles among themselves. And on all these occasions, the Money of the King∣dom is carried to Rome, to be dispos'd of there by underhand Conveyances, as well as open Pra∣ctices; for when a Fryar is to pass the Mountains, he is furnished with Bills for Secret, as well as Pub∣lick Service, and it is not impossible that the Holy See, may by this means undergo greater Scandal than it deserves, for the Fryars Account is allowed of upon his own word; so that should he convert a considerable summ to his own use, he cannot be discovered unless it be by a very rare Accident in∣deed,
and yet it is no unheard of thing at Lisbon, for one to be found out in reckoning some Thou∣sands of Crowns for Bribes, which never were ex∣pended in the Service. But these are not the only ways by which the Riches of Portugal are drawn to Rome; his Holi∣ness hath his Apostolical Collectors (for so they are called) to raise Tribute from the King's Sub∣jects as well as his own, and to receive his share of the Taxes which the King levys in his own Do∣minions by his Holiness's Permission. Dispensati∣ons for Marriages, must necessarily bring him in a very considerable and constant Revenue, the for∣bidden Degrees being so very many in the Roman Church, whether upon the account of Consangui∣nity, or Spiritual Relation, that one would think there could scarce be a Wedding among Neighbours or People, that have for any time been acquainted, without a Dispensation, and it rarely, if ever hap∣pens, that a Match is broken off for want of one, supposing the Parties will come up to the price of it; if they apprehend any difficulty in it, it is but beginning the Marriage at the wrong End, and then the Dispensation is granted of course; and the Price being rais'd according to the Quality of the Per∣sons, and nearness of the Relation, great summs are continually drawn from Families of the better sort, who commonly marry within themselves, and some of them intrench so far upon the Laws of Nature, that the House of Austria in the last Age, was not more confounded by the various Relations of its several Branches to each other, than some Noble Families in Portugal are at this day. In fine, Portugal is so beneficial a Province to his Ho∣liness, that could a just Computation be made, there is no doubt but his Revenues from thence
would be found to exceed the Kings by far, the ne∣cessary Charges of the Government deducted. They are so great, that if some sudden stop be not put to them, the Kingdom is like to be exhausted in a very short time, which gives thinking People here a sad prospect of the approaching Ruin of their Country; This may appear strange to the rest of Europe, considering the vast advantages that must necessarily have accrued to this Kingdom, from an undisturbed Peace of above Thirty Years continu∣ance, during which time, all other parts of Chri∣stendom have been more than once engaged in Ex∣pensive Wars; one would think that during the last War at least, which among many other ad∣vantages, brought hither so great and gainful a Trade with England, as took off all the Commo∣dities the Country could vent, and that too, at prodigious Rates: I believe, I may safely say, a∣bove double to what they formerly sold for; one would think, I say, by this time that Riches and Plenty should have abounded every where. But they that have travelled the Country of late, be∣held another Face of Things, and at the late As∣sembly of the Cortes, the Mouths of the Deputies were full of complaints of an Universal Desolati∣on and Poverty, and I have been told, that some of them were sensible enough of the cause of their Misery, but I have not heard that any Motion was made in their Publick Meetings for a Redress to this their greatest Grievance. Having given some Account of the State of Por∣tugal, with respect to Rome, it may be expected that I should say something of the reciprocal Be∣nefits, derived from the Holy See, upon a People that hath done, and suffers so much for its sake, or at least, of that Fatherly Tenderness which the Pope
must needs have for a King of Portugal, who pur∣chases the favour of his Holiness by so constant and meritorious an Obedience. His Holiness must by some very distinguishing marks of Affection, put a Difference between this his Benjamin, from whom he hath received so much comfort, and those other Sons of his, who by their untoward Beha∣viour, have been always a crossing and tormenting him, He that hath been so often worried by the head-strong Emperors in former Ages, braved in Italy by the Spaniards in the last Age, and more than once in his own Capital by the French in our Days, and received so many Mortifications from the Italian Princes, from whom he might ex∣pect, that they should upon the Account of their Natural, as well as their Spiritual Relation, behave themselves more as becomes the Children of the Holy See, He one would think should have reserved the greatest and best of his Blessings for this his most Obedient Son. But the Holy Father seems to be affected with quite contrary Passions to other Men, to have cast away his most endearing Favours where the utmost Rigour should be expected, and where a Blessing was most lookt for to have entail'd his Curse. The Royal House of Portugal hath cer∣tainly had great cause for Complaints of this kind, as often as it hath been in distress, and stood in need of his Protection. When Philip the 2d. while the Question concerning the Succession to Henry the Cardinal was depending, was preparing by force of Arms, to deprive the true Heiress of her Birthright; Pope Gregory the 13th. did his utmost indeed to di∣vert him from the enterprize, but it was to the end, that he might seize upon the Crown for his own use, as a Chattel of the Cardinals, alledging that his Spoils (among which he reckon'd the Kingdom) were
forfeitable to the Holy See; and least this ridicu∣lous Claim should be thought insufficient, he added another; Alphonso Henriquez, the first King as hath been said, would needs make his Kingdom Tributa∣ry to St. Peter, and charged with the annual Pay∣ment of four Ounces of Gold, and this was made a pretence by Pope Gregory, for depriving the Po∣sterity of that King of their Inheritance, he pre∣tending that Portugal was by this means become a Feif to St. Peter's Chair, and as such, by default of the Male-line, was devolved to himself; but his pretensions meeting with that contempt they deserved, he still resolved to deprive the right Heiress at any rate, and of all the Pretenders made Interest for him that had the worst Title, that is, for Dom Antonio the Bastard, as if he had a mind to embroil a Kingdom that had deserved so well at his hands in perpetual Wars. But it was for his convenience that King Philip should be diverted from troubling him in Italy, and convenience at Rome is a just Excuse for the worst Actions. How∣ever, when Philip by force of Arms had baffled his Holiness, as well as all the other Pretenders, and had reduced the Kingdom to his Obedience, the Pope made no scruple to acknowledge his Title, and treat him as rightful King of Portugal. Nor did he in this deviate from the practice of those that went before him, the Popes having on many occasions found it Turn to account to approve the Titles of the most Illegal Usurpers, ever since the extraordinary complaisance of Boniface the 3d. to the Emperour Phocas, which gave Rise to the pre∣sent Grandeur of the Holy See. But John the 4th. the present King's Father, who had an undoubted Right to the Crown, met with other usage at Rome, of which I shall here give a
short Account, it being a most signal proof of the Portuguese Devotion to the Holy See; but withal it has so far opened the eyes of this Court, that the Ministers seem to be convinced at last of this truth, that none are so hardly used by those of Rome, as they that deserve best at their hands: This is certain, that the Memory of it is still fresh in their minds, as the Nuncio's to their great Re∣gret are frequently given to understand, and is sup∣posed to be in a great measure the cause why their Conduct in regard to Rome, begins to vary so much as it does from that of their Predecessors. After King John had been settled in the Throne of his Ancestors, by the Universal Acclamation of his Peo∣ple, and was possessed of all the Dominions belong∣ing to the Crown, the little Town of Ceuta ex∣cepted, he began to think of sending a Solemn Embassy to pay his Obedience to the Pope, which is a custom observ'd by all Princes of that Communi∣on, and was thought necessary by this King, as well to satisfie his own Devotion, as to establish his Au∣thority among the People; and he thought he had great reason to expect, that this Embassy would be very kindly received; for to say nothing of the merits of his Ancestors, he relied much upon the Pope's great Partiality to the French, who out of enmity to the Spaniards, had espoused the Portu∣guese Interest, and solicited their cause at Rome. To render this Embassy the more acceptable, he made choice of a Person that was of the first Quality, and withal a Bishop Dom Miguel de Por∣tugal, Brother to the Conde de Vimioso. But this Ambassador arriving at Rome, found that he had been sent upon a fruitless Errand. For the Pope as little as he cared for the Spaniards on all other occasions, had so much respect for them at
this time, that for fear of displeasing them, he was content to put the greatest Indignity in the World upon a King of Portugal. This was Urban the 8th. from whom better things might been expected than from those that usually fill the Holy Chair. But his Holiness without having the least regard to the Am∣bassador's Character or Quality, or the obliging Message he came upon, refused to admit him into his Presence, or suffer his Ministers to acknowledge him for an Ambassador, so that after a whole years Solicitation for Audience, he was fain to return as he came. This the Portugueses thought to be an Indignity that could not have been put upon the Representative of any Idolatrous or Mahometan Prince, without violating the Laws of Nations. All the Favour that could be obtain'd at that time, was, That a Congregation should be appoinned on pretence of consulting what was fit to be done in the Case. The Congregation consisted of the two Barbarini Cayetan, and Pamphilio; Cardinal Fran∣cisco, the elder of the Barbarini was made Chair∣man, to take care that the result should be accor∣ding to his Uncle's mind. He obliged the Secre∣tary of the Embassy to give him an account of the King his Master's Title, and when nothing could be objected against that, he began to pick Quarrels upon pretence that the Ecclesiastical Immunities had been violated in Portugal, and some very great affront given to the Apostolical Collector; and when Reparation was offered to these Grievances, his Eminence gave the Secretary to understand, that he grew troublesome: But Pamphilio, who it seems, was not of the secret, was clearly of Opinion, that that the Ambassadors of King John ought to be ad∣mitted, at least after he had been four years in Pos∣session (supposing him to be an Usurper) and to
justifie his Opinion, he wrote, as 'tis said, a large and learned Discourse, but when Cardinal Pamphi∣lio came to be Pope Innocent the 10th. he was quite of another mind, and would not be persuaded that fourteen years Possession were sufficient to qualifie this King, to send an Ambassador to Rome. Upon the Exaltation of this Cardinal to the Papa∣cy, King John resolves to make another Tender of his Obedience to the Holy See, but for fear of meeting with the like affront as before, he signifi'd his intenti∣on by the French Minister then residing at Rome, and received for answer, That his Ambassador, in case he sent any thither, should not be suffered to come with∣in the Gates of the City. However, his Holiness ei∣ther prick'd with remorse for his barbarous Usage of this Prince, or perhaps willing to make his Injustice known to the World, in order to inhance his me∣rit with the Spaniards, appointed another Congre∣gation to consider of the matter. In this Congre∣gation the case was again Examined and Debated, and it plainly appear'd, that according to the Civil and Canon-Laws, the Portuguese Ambassador ought to be admitted, even supposing his Master's Title were disputable, so that it were granted with the Reserve, sine Praejudicio Tertij. This Result, as little favourable as it was, to one whom they at Rome could not but know to be a Rightful King, instead of being notified to the Party most concern'd, was sent to Madrid to be communicated by the Nuncio, there to the Ministers of that Court, his Holiness not having the Courage to do any thing that had the least appearance of Justice, without leave first had from them. It was indeed for his Interest to keep in if it were possible with both Parties, but if that could not be done, the weaker was to be Sacrifi'd to him that could do his Holi∣ness
most mischief. However, before so beneficial a Province as Portugal was utterly abandon'd, the Nuncio at a Conference with the Spanish Ministers, made use of all his Cunning to draw them in to consent, that his Master might act in this Case ac∣cording as Justice, and what is more as his Interest obliged him, and to make the thing go down the more easie with them, he avoided as much as was possible coming to the merits of the Cause, or gi∣ving the least intimation that his Master approved of the King of Portugal's Right to the Crown. He allowed that Prince to deserve all the ill names that the Spaniards were pleas'd to give him, and after all, show'd that his Master thought himself obliged in Conscience to admit of his Ambassador, stating the Case in these most obliging Terms: That the Pope as Christ's Vicar is under an indispensable Obligation, to use all means for preserving the Purity of the Catholick Faith throughout the World; the first foundati∣on whereof is Obedience paid by a publick Act to the Apostolick See, and sworn by Princes in their own, and their Subjects behalf; and since the Habit of Faith is consistent with sinful Acts in the same Subject, the Pope might, and was bound to receive from a Robber and a perjur'd Person, a solemn promise of Perseverance in the Catho∣lick Faith; so that though the Castillians held the Duke of Bragança for a Robber that had usurped the Crown of Portugal, and for a per∣jur'd Person that had violated his Oath of Fealty to King Philip, yet the Vicar of Christ was ne∣vertheless under an indispensable obligation to receive him as a faithful Son of the Church, by that Solmn Act which his Ambassador should perform in his Name, at the feet of his Holiness.
The Spanish Ministers, who by their frequent practice with those of Rome, were as ready at their Quirks, as the Nuncio himself answered him in his own way: That his Holiness might as in duty bound, receive the Duke of Braganza as a private Person, but it would be a manifest Justice to admit of him as King of Portugal; besides, it had never been customary for those Dukes to send publick Embassys to the Soveraign Pontiffs, nor did they ever in that manner pay their Obedience to the Apostolick See. This being a Duty in∣cumbent only upon true and lawful Kings, and Obedience having been already paid by King Philip, as rightful King of Portugal, no Embas∣sy could be received from the Duke of Bragan∣ça. That a Robbery, as the Law teaches, did not deprive the Owner of the Possession of a thing stolen; for though in fact he be no longer in Pos∣session, yet he retains it still in his mind, and for that reason, all Contracts made with the Thief are invalid for want of a lawful Possession, from whence it follow'd that the Duke of Bragança, ha∣ving no lawful Possession, could not do any Act that supposes it. The Nuncio replies, That a Person may be said to be Master of a thing two ways, First, by Possession, Secondly, by Detention, that allowing the Duke of Bragança had not the Possession of Portugal, King Philip still possessing it in his mind, as his own by right, yet it could not be denied, but that the Duke of Bragança did de∣tain the Kingdom, by reason of which Detenti∣on, the Pope was obliged, not only to receive, but encourage his Devotion to the Apostolick See, least during this Detention, the respect due to the Holy See might be lost, and a whole King∣dom
be in danger of wavering in the Faith: The Castilians return, That these were Metaphy∣sical Speculations, that the Law saith, an unjust Pretension cannot be a ground for any Act of Ju∣stice, especially in this case when the acceptance of Obedience in the Form proposed, was to the end, that the Pope should give all Princes to un∣derstand, that a wrongful Detention was lawful Possession of a Kingdom that had been so unjust∣ly seiz'd upon; since the publick Actions of the Popes were taken for Authentick and drawn into Precedent. Wherefore his Holiness should take care, least by this Action he authoriz'd Injustice, and made Contumacy and Rebellion a pattern of Christian Virtue. The Nuncio would by no means admit that these Inconveniencies were to be charged upon the most holy mind of the Pope; for, First, the Clause, sine praejudicio Tertij, left all claims of right good and valid; Secondly, his Holiness was ready to receive the Obedience of Philip himself as King of Portugal, whenever he should be in actual Possession; whereby his Ho∣liness would manifest to the World, that he in∣tended only Edification in Spirituals, and not the Destruction of Temporals. But the Castillians told him, That the Pope might as he was bound, both edify in Spirituals, and preserve the King∣dom of Portugal to its lawful Soveraign at the same time. That in the present state of things, there were three sorts of People of the Portu∣guese Nation, and that the receiving of an Am∣bassador from Portugal, would manifestly turn to the prejudice of them all; First, the Rebellious and Obstinate, who would believe him to be their lawful King, whom Christ's Vicar should declare
for such, and thereby be confirm'd in their Re∣bellion; Secondly, the Timorous and Wavering, who would go over to their sentiments, whom before they took for Rebels, arguing that a King receiv'd and approv'd of by the Pope, ought not to be rejected by any Christian; Thirdly, the Constant and Loyal that were now at King Phi∣lip's Court, who either drawn by their Love to their Country, or wearied out by the inconveni∣cies they were under, might come to some despe∣rate Resolution, so that by this Action of his Holiness, the Kingdom of Portugal might be put out of a possibility of being conquered by King Philip; wherefore to obviate these Inconvenien∣cies, they thought it to be the duty of his Holi∣ness, to thunder out his censures against the Duke of Bragança, to the end that the Rebels might be reclaim'd, the Timorous take courage, and the good Subjects confirm'd in their duty. The Nuncio thought, That Censures in this case would do no good, but turn to the prejudice both of the Pope and the King of Spain; of the Pope, be∣cause his Apostolical Authority might be slighted, for the Duke of Bregança took himself to be ei∣ther the lawful King, or the Usurper of Portu∣gal; if the former, he could never value an un∣just Excommunication, for what he had justify'd to his own Conscience, and it would have less effect upon him in case he took himself for an Usurper, it being plain that he would never re∣nounce the Kingdom to the loss of his Life, and the ruin of his Family. Than an Excommunica∣tion would be of no benefit to the King of Spain, for if the Duke, and the People of Portugal should despise and take no notice of it, as it was likely they would, the probable and almost ne∣cessary
consequence, would be the introduction of Calvinism, or of some other Heresie, by reason of the Neighbourhood and Correspondence of that Kingdom with the Northern Nations, in which case the conquest of Portugal would be∣come the most difficult, for all Sectaries being to be chastised not with ordinary Punishments, but according to the Rigor of the Canons, the Portu∣tugueses seeing themselves branded with a perpe∣tual mark of Ignominy, would grow desperate, and choose rather to die than in any case put themselves into the Power of King Philip. But here the Spanish Ministers took him up short, and told him, that these were Sophistical Subtilities, and not fair Arguments, without vouchsafeing them any further answer. The Nuncio seeing that this way of arguing would not serve the turn, betook himself to ano∣ther, quoting Precedents from the proceedings of former Popes in the Cases of Princes, whose Titles were disputable, and thereby demonstrated it to have been constant practice of the Holy See, to ac∣knowledge such as were Kings de facto without any regard to right; alledging to this purpose a saying of Pope Pius the 2d. Moris est sedis Apo∣stolicae eum Regem appellare qui Regnum tenet, and the practice of the same Pope, both in the Case of Matthias Corvinus, and the Emperor Frederick the 3d. contending about the Kingdom of Hungary, and of Ferdinand and Renè, about the Kingdom of Si∣cily, to which Renè pretending while Ferdinand was in Possession, was put off by the Pope with this An∣swer; Siquid juris competit ablatum est Ferdinando Regni Principes, Duces Comites, & Populares om∣nes obediunt, eumque sibi Regem constitui expetive∣runt. But the Nuncio not content with one Ex∣ample,
brings in that of Pope Zachary, who being consulted what account was to be made of the Kings of France (the later Kings of the Merovig∣nian Race) they having the Name and Dignity, but others (the Mayres of the Palace) the Power; determined the Question with this Answer; That he ought to be stiled King, and held for such who was found Reigning, and who as King had the su∣preme Authority of the Common-wealth in his hands. Of John the 22d. who received the Ambassadors of Robert Bruce, he being in Possession of the King∣dom of Scotland. Of Innocent the 8th. who receiv∣ed in publick Consistory the Ambassadors of Rich∣ard the 3d. of England, as he did likewise those of Henry the 7th. when they came to pay Obedience to the Holy See; He show'd likewise that the same thing had been done, for Alfonso Henriquez and John the 1st. Kings of Portugal, notwithstanding the great Opposition and Power of the Kings of Leon and Castille, for Henry of Castille the Murtherer of his King and Brother Don Pedro, against the consent and right of Constança Pedro's Daughter, and for Ferdinand and Isabella to the Prejudice of D. Joanna the only Daughter of Henry the 4th. These Instances were all home to the Point, sup∣posing the King of Portugal's Title to be as bad as his Enemies would have it; for let him be a Tray∣tor, Usurper, Tyrant, or what the Spaniards plea∣sed, there had been as bad or worse acknowledged for lawful Kings, and highly caressed by the Holy See. But the Spaniards had another way to deal with the Nuncio than disputing; they offered indeed at something of an answer to all these In∣stances, affirming without the least grounds, that the greatest part of the Princes now mentioned, sent their Ambassadors, not to pay their Obedience,
but to plead their Cause, and justify their Preten∣sions, and in that case granted it to be lawful for the Popes to receive them. But to admit of an Ambassador from Dom John, as King of Portugal, after that the Kings of Castille have been in Posses∣sion of that Kingdom for the space of 60 Years, and sworn to as lawful Sovereigns was, they said, a manifest injury to their cause. They thought that there was no account to be made of any thing done or said by Pius the 2d. because that Pope was guided only by his Interest, and varied in his Sentiments e∣very day; and as for the Kings of France that were acknowledged by Pope Zachary, they must needs, say the Spaniards have been Rightful and Lawful Kings, since the Oracle of the Holy See had pronoun∣ced them for such, for otherwise this grand Absurdi∣ty would follow, that Popes were no better than In∣cendiaries, Instigators of Rebellion and Usurpati∣on, and instead of promoting Equity and Virtue, gave encouragment to the most abominable Practises; and in conclusion, they told the Nuncio that the Pope had best consider well what was just and con∣venient, for otherwise they should take such Resoluti∣ons as might not be well pleasing to his Holiness, but to sweeten the menace a little; they added that however, they should always retain that most hum∣ble Devotion, which the Catholick Kings above all other Princes have ever born in mind, and testify'd by their Actions towards the Apostolical See. Their meaning was understood well enough at Rome, and this Intimation of what they should do, gave a strange force to their Arguments, and so confirm'd the wavering Pope, that he remained e∣ver after steady to their Interest. The Portugueses had apparently all the Right on their side, but the Spaniards were Masters of Milan, Naples and Si∣cily.
From this time forward Pope Innocent turned a deaf Ear to all that could be said in Favour of King John of Portugal, and could never be brought to grant him that which was never deny'd to an Usur∣per. That Prince had his Agents continually soli∣citing for him at Rome, in his own Name, and in behalf of the Clergy, and of the three Estates of the Kingdom, but all to no purpose: The French made the most pressing Instances in his behalf, but the Pope did not mind them at that time; for France being embroil'd with intestine Dissentions, He was sure they could do him no harm. Great Court and Ap∣plication was made to Donna Olympia, as we are told by the Conde da Ericeyra, who observes that she sel∣dom used to fail in any Temporal Business that she undertook, alluding I suppose to a Saying to that pur∣pose, which was current at that time in the Courts of Popish Princes, where upon any Disappointment of their Affairs at Rome, the Nuncio's were sure to be told, That, if the Business had been solicited by Donna Olympia, it had never miscarried: But on this occasion, Donna Olympia her self could do no good, for either she did not heartily espouse the King of Portugal's cause, or if she did, all her Ar∣tifices were ineffectual upon the obdurate Pontiff. All the answer that could be got from this and the former Pope, besides those frivolous Complaints before mention'd, (for which satisfaction was still offered) was, that the Pope as the com∣mon Father of Christendom, thought himself bound to carry it equally between Castille and Portugal, and not acknowledge or oblige one Son when it could not be done without offence to the other; but the Portugueses could not perswade themselves that in this case, He in any sort acted the part of a com∣mon Father, whilst to gratify the unreasonable Am∣bition
of the one, he did not stick wholly to cast off the other, and to use him in a more barbarous manner than he could have done an Infidel. But in short the Spaniards were very rugged in their Threats, and that stood them in stead of Right and Merit; the Portugueses valuing themselves upon their blind Obedience to the Holy See kept within the terms of Respect, which instead of gaining ought upon those of Rome, gave encouragement to their Insolence. Had King John but follow'd the Spaniards Ex∣ample, or come to any vigorous Resolution, he had doubtless soon brought his Holiness to a compli∣ance, or he might have had a fair opportunity to vindicate his Country's Liberty, in a yet more glo∣rious manner, than he had done already by shaking off the Spanish Yoke. For we must know, that all these Applications to the Court of Rome, were not made to the end only that his Title might be ac∣knowledged there, but in order to have the vacant Sees in his Dominions supplied with Bishops; for in a few years after the Revolution, there was but one Bishop remaining in Portugal, and he not Re∣sident upon his Diocess, being obliged to attend the Court, and there was a like want of them in the East and West-Indies, in the Madera and Cap Verde Islands, and upon the Coasts of Africa; the Portugueses therefore laboured all they could to make his Holiness sensible of the miserable state of their Churches thus destitute of Pastors, petition∣ing for a supply, the King according to the Pra∣ctice of his Ancestors, proposing the Persons for that end, and to remove all Objections, he agreed that his Nomination of the Bishops should be ad∣mitted with the Clause, sine Praejudicio Tertij; notwithstanding its being a clear Maxim in the Ro∣ta,
and confirmed by the practice of the Roman Church, That the simple possession of an Inheri∣tance, City or Territory, that has Jus Patronatus annext to it, gives the right of Presentation to the Possessor; but neither the reason of the thing, nor the desolate condition of the Orphan Churches, could have any weight upon the obstinate Pope: He was more apprehensive of the Spanish Threats, than the loss of Millions of Souls, all that could be got from him was, that He would appoint Bishops for Portugal, on condition, that he might name them de motu proprio; he offered indeed another very strange Concession, which was, that the Bishops he chose of his own mere motion, should be the very same Persons that the King had named. But the Portugueses could not agree to this Proposal, for this among other Reasons, that the Popes might make it a Precedent, for assuming to themselves a Right of nominating Bishops in after times, which would prove a great grievance to the Nation, since the Benefices that were already at his Disposal, were generally the worst supply'd. Things being thus at a stand, the Gallicane Church undertook the cause of her Sister of Por∣tugal, and took the liberty to mind the Holy Fa∣ther of his Duty in a Letter, written by the Pre∣lates assembled in a Synod, which was presented in their Name by Cardinal Francisco Barbarini, but the Pope at that time had as little regard to the French Church, as he had to the French Coutt: The Clergy of that Kingdom sent their Agent to Rome, to take care of the concerns of the Portu∣guese Church as well as their own; the Bishops whom King John had nominated, sent their hum∣ble Petition to his Holiness, that they might be ad∣mitted to the Exercise of their Charge, and their
Petition was rejected with scorn; the Cardinals of the French Faction did all the good Offices they could, but to no purpose: Este signalized himself in a very particular manner on this occasion, the Pope taking notice that he loytered about the City more than became him, ordered him one day to his Diocess, saying, That it went against his Consci∣ence to see him absent from it so long, the Cardi∣nal who was Young and Resolute answered, That his Holiness had a great deal of reason to be thus scrupulous, but being so much concerned as he was for one single Church, he ought not wholly to neglect so many as there were in Portugal unprovided of Bi∣shops, and therefore he conjur'd him before God, and in the Name of the King of France, from whom he had Commission so to do, that he would speedily grant Bishops to that Kingdom. The Pope not a little surpriz'd at so brisk an Attack, was going away without making any other reply than, saying, I shall pluck the Cap from off that Boy's Head; Este turns to him again, and crys, If you do, I shall put on another of Iron, and thereupon retires to his House, fills it with Armed Men, plants Guns at the Win∣dows. But this being the Act of a young Man, was of no Consequence. But had the Portugueses been so resolute in their own cause, there is no doubt but they had soon put an end to this trouble; nor did they want being set in a way to free themselves from all fear of ever having the like again. For seeing themselves cast off by the Pope in so unworthy a manner, they had recourse (as 'tis affirm'd in a Letter, or Remon∣strance of the three Estates to the Pope) to the most celebrated Universities and Doctors in Europe, to know their Opinions concerning that course which was fittest for them to take in this Case, the
answers they received as they are set down in that Letter, are as follow. Some were of Opinion, that the best way to bring the Pope to Reason, was to take care that no Mo∣ney should go out of the Kingdom to Rome upon any account whatsoever, whether for Matrimonial Dispensations, or Renunciations of Benefices; that all beneficed Portugueses abroad, should be called home upon pain of having their Profits sequestred; that no Pensions be paid to any Persons residing at Rome, whether Subjects or Strangers, with other things which the Estates out of their great Respect to the Holy See conceal. Of this Advice, as they say, were some belonging to the Court of Rome it self. Others would have had the King call a National Council, wherein the Clergy might elect a Patri∣arch, who should govern the Kingdom in Spiritu∣als, with the Power to Institute and Consecrate Bishops, which belonged to Patriarchs according to the Ancient Canons. Others thought that the Bishops nominated by the King, and proposed to the Pope, who had not rejected them by any express Act of denial, might immediately enter upon their Charge, and exercise the same, since the Pope neglected to con∣firm them in the ordinary way, and yet had no ob∣jection against them, for he had offered to confirm them de motu proprio. A fourth was the opinion of a learned Fryar, who thought that in this case of necessity, they were o∣bliged to have recourse to the way of choosing Bi∣shops anciently practised and approved of by the Canons, and used in the Church as he asserted for a much longer time than any other Method, viz. For the Chapter of each Diocess to choose their
own Bishop, and that the Elect being approved of by the Clergy, People and King, and consecrated by other Bishops, the most ancient of the Order, in case of want supplying the place of a Metropo∣litan, might immediately enter upon his Charge without waiting for the Pope's confirmation, which in this case was not necessary, it being, saith the Author of this Advice, the truest and most certain Opinion, and follow'd by most Authors, that Bi∣shops upon their Consecration receive their Autho∣rity immediately from God. This he affirm'd to be grounded upon the words of St. Paul in the 1st. Gal. where the Apostle saith, that he had receiv'd his Apostleship from God alone, and not from the o∣ther Apostles, no not from St. Peter the chief of them: Paulus Apostolus non ab hominibus neque per hominem, sed per Jesum Christum, and in the 2 Chap. Mihi nihil contulerunt unt aliquid esse, nihil i. e. nul∣lam Jurisdictionem, nullam Dignitatem, nullam Po∣testatem. They that were of this Opinion said fur∣ther, That it is clearly proved from Christ's words to the Apostles, sicut me misit Pater in mundum & Ego vos mitto in illum; whence say they, St. Cypri∣an and St. Cyril, gather that our Lord gave as much Power and Authority to his Apostles, when he sent them into the World to Preach, as he did to St. Peter when he said, Quodcunque ligaveris super Terram erit ligatum & in caelis, & quodcunque sol∣veris super Terram erit solutum & in caelis (it should be ligaveritis & solveritis, the words being spoken to all the Apostles in the Plural  & , Mat. 18. 18.) the reason is because the words are absolute, and will admit of no interpretation: from whence it was infer'd, that Bishops succeed∣ing the Apostles in their ordinary Office, succeed them likewise in the ordinary Jurisdiction annext
to that Office; and since it cannot be denied, but that the Apostles received their Authority immedi∣ately from Christ, it must be acknowledged that Bishops upon their Consecration do so receive it likewise, and therefore have no need that any other should invest them with the Authority they are possess'd of already. Two other Opinions were Printed and sent into Portugal upon this occasion, both concurring in one conclusion, though different ways were taken to it; that which both agreed in was, that Portugal might and was in duty bound, to proceed to the Conse∣cration of the Bishops nominated by the King. One of the Authors of this Conclusion asserted, that ac∣cording to the Divine appointment, the Right of Election was in the Clergy and People, after the same manner as it was practised in the Primitive Church, and a long time after; which Right, he said, was afterwards transferred to the Emperors and Princes, who had Authority in Ecclesiastical Affairs, in order to the good Government of the Common-wealth, Ecclesiastical and Civil matters, having that mutual Dependence upon each other, that they are inseparable: That the Popes have ac∣quired the Right of naming Bishops, by the Tacit consent and liberality of Princes, and this was per∣mitted the rather, because, Ecclesiastical Discipline was much slack'ned, partly by the remisness of Se∣culars, partly by their being taken up in Military Affairs. But in case the Pope should become guilty of the like failure, the same Right devolved again to the Princes, as given up and abandoned by the Pope. It was affirm'd likewise, that this Right had actually been put in practice on some occasi∣ons, even in these later times, particularly in Ca∣stille, where in the Year 1399. Bishops were chosen
and Consecrated without any Confirmation from the Pope; King Henry the 3d. during the great Schism, having renounced the Authority of Bene∣dict the 13th. and committed the Administration of Ecclesiastical Affairs to the Archbishops and Bi∣shops, willing them to make the same Provisions as had been used to come from the Pope. Others who were for the same things in effect, asserted, That according to the ancient Canons, it belonged to the Prelates of each Kingdom to in∣stitute and consecrate Bishops, before the Popes had reserv'd that Power to themselves, and undertook to prove that the same thing ought de Jure Divino, to be done in the present Case: To have Bishops in the Church was, they said, de Jure Divino & Naturali, since they are Shepherds of the Souls which cannot all be taken care of by the Pope, but their being to be confirm'd by the Pope before their Consecration, is only de Jure Humano, the Obligation whereof ceases, not only in cases of extreme necessity, but in that which is called Gra∣vissima. That it could not be denied, but the Ne∣cessity of the Churches of Portugal for Bishops at that time was Gravissima, and that of the Domi∣nions thereof in other parts of the World Ex∣treme. This grand Arcanum of the Papal Empire, that Bishops may be made out of Rome, and without the Pope's concurrence, being thus happily disco∣vered, the Portugueses were now put in a fair way to restore the Ancient Discipline to their Church, and with it prosperity to their Nation, it being e∣vident that the Miseries they labour under, as well as the horrible Corruptions in their Religion, are no other than the necessary Effects of the Papal Usurpation and Tyranny; and it appears that King
John did for some time, approve of the good Ad∣vice that had been given him, at least that he would have it thought so at Rome, for he ordered his Agent there, to get a Remonstrance to be put into the Pope's hands, wherein among other things he declares; That he had been assured by very learn∣ed Men, that when access and recourse to the Holy See could not be had, it belonged to the Chapters to choose their Bishops upon his Nomination, according as it had formerly been practised in Spain, and was still observed in some places, that his Holiness had no reason to be dissatisfi'd, if he took up with this Resolution, after he had suffered himself to be so much slighted, while he had the Remedy in his own hands; that if his Holiness were finally resolved to prefer the Interests of Castille to his just Rights, he for his part would justifie himself before all Christi∣an Princes, so that the blame of what followed should never be laid on him. Had the King proceeded so far as to convince the Pope that he was in earnest, he had brought him no doubt to his own terms, or else might have done that, for which his Posterity and Country would have the greatest cause to bless his Memory, that is, have shaken off that intolerable Yoke, under which they are now sinking. The very mention of having Bishops chosen by the Chapters upon the King's Nomination, put Innocent into a terrible Fright; he had nothing to say against the practice, or the necessity of it in the present case. But here the Inquisition of Portugal interpos'd its Authority, and delivered the Pope from the Agony he was in, by condemning the two last Opinions, and that for a reason which comprehends the rest; they decla∣ring the Pope as Universal Head of the Roman Church, to have all Monarchical Power, and to be the
Fountain of all Spiritual Jurisdiction, which cannot be derived to Ecclesiastical Ministers without his ex∣press Concession and Will. This peremptory sen∣tence of the Inquisition, put a stop to all further Proceedings in this Affair: The Pope reassumed new Courage, and continued as Insolent as ever, after the King's Declaration had brought him to his Wits-end; for as the Conde da Ericeyra in his Portugal Restaurado tells the World, his Holiness did not stick to declare, That the Holy Office had delivered him out of the greatest Perplexity, by cut∣ting a knot, which of himself he durst not meddle with: The same noble Author tell us, That the King desisted from his Resolution, for no other reason, but because the Inquisition did not approve of it, while there were, as he saith, a great num∣ber of learned Men, both within and without the Kingdom, ready to justifie and maintain it; so that according to the Conde, it is to the Inquisitors, that the Portugueses owe the continuance of their Bon∣dage, and there is no question, but they did their utmost to obstruct the King's Design (supposing that he had a real intention to shake off the Roman Yoke;) for should the Church of Portugal reco∣ver her Liberty, and have her Bishops restored to their just Authority, the Holy Office must fall of course, were the design of that Office no other than is pre∣tended, it is at best but an encroachment upon the Episcopal Jurisdiction; for to the Bishops it belongs of right to give Judgment in matters of Religion, and superintend the Discipline of the Church, and they all along exercised this Jurisdiction which they derive through the Apostles from Christ with that Gentleness, Tenderness and Charity, as became the true Fathers of the Church, till the Popes began to usurp the whole Power to themselves, or impart
it to Creatures of their own; and among the rest, to these Wolves of Inquisitors, whom in the heighth of their Tyranny, they let loose upon the Church to dispossess the Shepherds and ravage the Flock; but should an end be put to the Papal Usurpations, there would be no further occasion for Inquisitors, and therefore it had been no wonder, if of their own heads they made this desperate Effort to preserve their Master and themselves. But in Truth, had King John been fully bent to break with Rome, it is much to be question'd, whether all the Power of the Inquisition, as great as it is suppos'd to be, could have frustrated his design; for in reality, this Tri∣bunal since its last establishment in Portugal, hath had its chief support from the Kings, who on se∣veral occasions have maintain'd it in spight of the Court of Rome it self. Had the King withdrawn his Protection, it is not unlikely but the Bishops of themselves, might have made their Party good: For the People doubtless would prefer their Govern∣ment to that of the Inquisitors, as chusing rather to be under the Discipline of a Father, than in the hands of those barbarous Executioners. Besides it was an easie matter for the King to hinder the In∣quisitors from giving him any trouble, some of the chief of them ow'd their lives to his Mercy; the Inquisitor General for one, who stood convicted as a Principal of the most horrible Treason that ever Traitor was charg'd with, it was for no less a Crime, than a design to murther the King, fire the City, and betray his Country to the Spa∣niards. It is said, that in order to the Execu∣tion of this Treason, the Holy House had been fill'd with Arms, and that which made the Plot the more remarkable, the undermanagers of it were some of the leading Men among the New Christians, against
whom the Inquisition was erected, and upon whom the Inquisitors for the most part exercise their Bar∣barities, and thereby gain what favour they have with the People; for the rest of the Portuguses bear a mortal hatred against those among them that go by the Name of New Christians, whom these Impostors represent as Jews in their hearts, pre∣tending that their Jewish blood makes them such whether they will or no. But on this occasion it was observed, That the Inquisition and the Syna∣gogue were of accord together to destroy their Coun∣try, and it is very likely that the King, had he pleased, might have rendered the one as odious to the people as the other was. But he took other measures, and though several Noble Men of the first Quality were Executed for this Plot, yet the In∣quisitor General was spared for fear of violating the Ecclesiastical Immunities; yet it was as much as His Majesty could do to preserve him, and some others of the Conspirators from being torn to pieces by the Rabble. For these reasons I am perswaded; that some o∣ther considerations might concur with the authority of the Inquisition, to with hold the King from with drawing his Obedience from the Pope, what they were I shall not pretend to guess at. It is certain that this Prince was so ill advised, that ne∣glecting the Counsels of Wise and Learned Men, he would never make use of any other remedy but Supplications, and most humble submissions to his Holiness, and he was ever after despised and slight∣ed at Rome accordingly. For this great Deference of his to the Holy See, made those he had to deal with there, presume the more upon his Patience, and reject with the greater contempt all the Peti∣tions that were offered up in his behalf.
The Portugueses do not use to grow tame under Indignities, one would think therefore that Nati∣on should begin to resent this barbarous Usage, of their King and themselves: And its true, they shew'd themselves to be not altogether insensible on this occasion; for in the Year 1653. six years after the King's Remonstrance had been given to the Pope, the three Estates of the Realm publish a kind of Manifest, Entituled, The Bleatings [Bali∣dos] of the Churches of Portugal, after the Sove∣reign Pastor the Pope; wherein they give a most lamentable account of their Grievances, and how rigorously the Holy Father had dealt with them, and to make their Patience appear the more meri∣torious, they let his Holiness understand, that they might have remedied themselves if they had a mind to it, setting forth at large the opinions of the Learned on their Case, and the reasons they were grounded on, which yet instead of making a right use of them, they set themselves after their man∣ner to confute, and afterwards enter'd a solemn Protest, which since it contains the substance of their answers to the advice their Friends had given them; I shall here set down, that the World may see, upon what solid grounds the three Estates of a Kingdom thought fit to intail the most intolerable Yoke of Bondage upon themselves and their Poste∣rity. They declare, That they hold it for an infallible Truth, that the Pope as he is Christ's Vicar on Earth, Universal Pastor of the Church, and the lawful Suc∣cessor of St. Peter, is the Sovereign Monarch of the Church; all the Authority and Power of other Mini∣sters being derived wholly from him, which he may suspend and limit in what form and manner he thinks convenient, it being unlawful for any other Poten∣tate
to intermeddle with his Government, secular Princes having nothing to do in the Affairs belong∣ing to the Church, any further than contributing to her Defence and Prosperity. That though various methods have been used for the Election and Confirmation of Bishops, yet it is an undoubted Truth, that it hath always been with the express, or at least the Tacit Approbation of the Pope, who has appointed and consented to those several ways, according to the different circumstances of the Times, nor hath it been ever proved, say they, that there were Bishops at any time without this confirma∣tion. Particularly they confess, and hold for certain, that in the Primitive Church, after the Apostles times, this Power returned to and remained in the Pope: That if Bishops were afterwards chosen by the Clergy and People, it was by the Pope's Permission; if secular Princes in those times intermeddled in these Elections, either by concession from the Pope, or by their own Authority with an Usurpative Right; yet they had never any true Right of their own to do it, and for this reason, the Apostles in the very be∣ginning of the Church, forbad them to concern them∣selves in these matters, and if any Princes pretend∣ed to it, the Popes severely censured and checked them for it, and they coming to understand from whence they had this Right, were brought at last to lay it aside, and by this means it came to pass that no Respect was had to Princes, or the consent of the People, but the Power of Elections remained by the Pope's Authority in the Clergy and Fryars of the Dio∣cess, and at last in the Chapters alone: And thus it continued to the Pontificate of Boniface the 8th. and Clement the 5th. who began to reserve the Power of instituting Bishops to themselves in some Cases, and after that, Innocent the 4th. by a Rule in Chan∣cery
reserved it wholly to the Apostolical See. So that, say they, This Prerogative and Right to create Bishops was always in the Pope as 'tis at pre∣sent; they acknowledge indeed that even after the Rule in Chancery came to be in force, many Princes continued to nominate Bishops for their own King∣doms and Dominions; but this was by Concession from the Pope, or upon Presumption of a Privilege arising by Custom approv'd of by the Apostolical See. But that it was in the Pope's breast to receive or reject their Nomination, which did no more than capacitate the Person named to procure the Pope's Confirmation, and sue out the Apostolical Bulls. It is likewise, say they, An undoubted Truth, that the Power of Election which hath formerly been in the Chapter, is now wholly extinguished by means of the Reservation made by the Rule in Chancery; so that at this time, the Pope's Creation or Institution of Bishops, cannot properly be called a Confirmation, because Confirmation supposeth a preceding Election, but Elections are now wholly abolished, by reason and virtue of the aforesaid Rule in Chancery; and lastly, they hold for certain, that notwithstanding there was a time when Patriarchs, Metropolitans, and Nati∣onal Councils had power to confirm Bishops, they have now no such Power, nor can they exercise it in any case, since they enjoy'd it only by the Pope's permission, and while there was place for Confirma∣tion, before Elections were abolished, when the Power to appoint Bishops had not been yet reserved by the Pope to himself, viz. by the aforesaid Rule in Chan∣cery. Had an Agent from Rome, or an Inquisitor ar∣gued after this manner, it had been no wonder, since daily experience shows how far Interest and Passion will blind a Man's Reason, and what silly
Arguments shall serve the turn for want of better, when one is prepossest with hopes of some vast Ad∣vantage by gaining the cause; but for the three E∣states of a Nation, after what had been demon∣strated to them from Scripture and Fathers, from the constant Tradition and uniform practice of the Catholick Church, thus to renounce their Sense and Reason, in order only to enslave themselves when Liberty was offer'd them, is such a Prodigy, that I believe no History can furnish us with a like In∣stance. Here we have People exposing their Church and Nation to ruin, because a Negative was never proved, it having never been demonstrated to them, that Popes did not Tacitly consent to the Election of Bishops, in which for so many Ages together, they had nothing at all to do, no more than a King of France has to do in the choice of a King of Po∣land; and would the Poles think we be content to abandon their Country to the mischiefs of an Inter∣regnum, and submit their Necks to the Yoke of a Foreign Tyrant, because it can never be made out, that their Kings have not been made by his Tacit Consent, but when I see People laying so much stress upon the Tacit Consent of the Popes, for my part, I do not at all wonder that they ascribe so much virtue to a Rule in the Pope's Chancery, that it shall be able to destroy the whole Hierarchy, and turn into an Arbitrary lawless Tyranny, that most Regular and Beautiful frame of Government, which hath obtain'd in the Church ever since the Apostles days. However, these Reasons, such as they were, satisfi'd the three Estates of Portugal, so that instead of helping themselves as they might and ought, they took up with a Resolution to throw themselves wholly at the Holy Father's Mer∣cy, and in conclusion of their Bleatings, declar'd,
That they would wrestle with Christ's Vicar, the Roman Angel, the Figure of God on Earth, exer∣ting all the vigour that their love and necessity in∣spired them with, till they got from him his Blessing, and would never let go their hold till his Apostolical Hand was upon them, and till he offer∣ed his most Holy Feet to their Mouths. The Pope finding them to be thus resolv'd, thought he was sure enough of them, and therefore let 'em Bleat and Bray too as they pleased for him; for his part he would trouble his Head no more about them, all his concern was how to oblige and humour the boisterous Spaniards, who by their rugged be∣haviour, were ever and anon, threatning him into a Compliance, with their unjust and unreasonable Pretensions, He knew not what mischief they might do him. While the Portugueses took care to satis∣fie Him that he had nothing to fear from them, and I do not find, but that they sent in their Money in the usual course, so that he lost but little excep∣ting what was to be got by the Bishop's Bulls, which yet as the Spaniards would perswade him, was like to come speedily in all in a lump, they feeding him all along with hopes, that they should make a quick dispatch of the War. In this state did the Affairs of Portugal at Rome, continue for part of Urban the 8th's Pontificat, all Innocent the 10th's, and Alexander the 7th's, and till the latter end of Clement the 9th's, and during the whole Reigns of this King's Father and Brother; but up∣on Dom Pedro's coming to the Government, the Spaniards having made Peace with Portugal, and acknowledg'd the King's Title, left his Holiness at Liberty to do so likewise. And now Portugal having no such need as before of the Pope's Protection or Favour, and being more
at Liberty to make Returns of the ill usage it had receiv'd; the Blessings of Rome began to shour down upon that favourite Kingdom without mea∣sure. Clement the 9th. had a happy Opportunity before he died, to signalize his Fatherly Tenderness, or rather indulgence towards his present Majesty, and make full amends for all the Rigour used by former Popes towards his Father and Brother; for a little before the conclusion of the Peace, Alfonso was deposed in the manner as hath been related, and Dom Pedro possest of his Throne, and a little after of his Bed, by marrying the Queen, the King his Brother still living, and here was a large Field for the Apostolical Graces: For now it was not only the King's Title that was to be acknowledged, but the Prince his Right to his Brother's Wife and King∣dom, and his Highness found in the Pope all the easiness he could desire. This Prince did but men∣tion in a Letter written on another occasion, his de∣sign of sending an Ambassador to pay his Obedience, and his Holiness returns answer, That his Ambassa∣dor upon his coming to Rome, should as he thought, but just meet with a kind and honourable Reception; no scruple was made about the Prince's Right of sending one, no enquiry into the manner of his taking upon him the Government, nor so much as mention made of the Clause, sine Praejudicio Tertij: How different was this usage from what his Father met with? King John had an undoubted Right to the Crown, and the same was manifest to the World; yet his Ministers were called to account at Rome, to show the grounds of their Master's Title, whereas the Reasons for deposing King Al∣fonso, and placing Dom Pedro in the Throne, what∣ever they were, were not as yet well known to the Publick; and yet after all, King John was treated
like a Traitor and a Robber, and it was but just, that Dom Pedro's Ambassador upon the first inti∣mation of his coming, should meet with a kind and honourable Reception at Rome. The World is not to be informed now, what work they used to make at Rome, in Causes of Divorce, especially, between Royal Parties; and one would think his Holiness might have taken some time to consider of it, be∣fore he gave way to a Marriage, which I believe never had a Precedent in the Christian World. But here we have an instance of a Queens casting off her Husband without the least Difficulty, and both that, and her Marriage, with her living Husband's Bro∣ther, confirm'd by his Holiness, with as much Fa∣cility, as if these were things done every day of course; so that it cannot be denied, but the sub∣missive Compliance of this Pope, with the Will and Pleasure of the Portuguese Court now in the time of its Prosperity, did equal at least, if not ex∣ceed the insolence of his Predecessors towards that Nation in its distress. It is certain, that Clement did not a little value himself upon his having thus far stretch'd the plenitude of his Power in Dom Pe∣dro's Favour, he thought he had done enough to atone for all Offences, and to inspire this Prince with as great Devotion towards the Holy See, as any of his Predecessors have had before him, Cer∣tainly (saith he to him in his Letter on this occasi∣on) Certainly we have labour'd to do you all the Favour in the present Cause that the sacred Canons will permit, and we receive the greatest content up∣on finding You so well pleased with this Pontificial Kindness. But in Truth, the thanks you give with so much Piety and Affection, are no more than are due, the thing it self consider'd; so that we with Justice, require that you acknowledge your self in∣debted
for it to the Goodness of the Holy See, and you will perfectly comply with this Obligation, if you go on to show (as truly you do) on all occasions a greater concern and affection for whatsoever hath Re∣lation to the Holy See, and the Catholick Religion, imitating herein the Ancient Devotion of the Portu∣guese Princes, who placed their Glory in their Obe∣dience to the same See. But Clement the 9th's Pontificate lasted not long enough to give him time to bestow all the Favors that were designed for Portugal, the Confirmation of the Bishops being reserved for his Successor Cle∣ment the 10th. for that was not done till 1670. In 1671. to oblige the new Princess (before Queen) of Portugal, the Purple was bestowed upon the Bi∣shop of Laon her Kinsman, better known since by the Title of Cardinal d'Estrees, He being advanced at the Nomination of the Crown of Portugal, and to enhance the Favour by making it particular; the Great Sobieski had the like denied him, when he interceded for the Bishop of Marseilles, though he pretended to the disposal of a Cap, as a Right en∣joyed by his Predecessors upon their coming to the Crown, but he was denied upon pretence, that the Person named was none of his Subject, so that Car∣dinal d'Estrees owed his Promotion purely to his being a Kinsman to the Princess of Portugal. In∣nocent the 11th. Successor to Clement the 10th. af∣ter having been baffled in the Business of the Inqui∣sition, at his grand Promotion could not forget the Merits of the Portuguese Court, and a Cap was be∣stowed upon Dom Verissimo de Alemcastro, the Per∣son that had been set on by the Court to put his Holiness at Defiance; and after that Cardinal's Death, another was sent by Innocent the 12th. to the Archbishop of Lisbon, in consideration, I sup∣pose,
of the many Contrasts he hath had with the Nuncio's; so that his Portuguese Majesty seems now to be in Possession of a Right to dispose of a Cap, as well as his Catholick or his most Christian Majesty, and the Ministers here having resented it, that the Nunciature at this Court hath not been an imme∣diate step to the Cardinalat, as it is in those of France and Spain; his present Holiness has equal'd the King of Portugal to them in this particular, likewise by advancing the late Nuncio Cornaro to the Purple at the same time, as he did the Archbi∣shop at the Promotion which was made for them two only. So that by this time the Court of Portugal seems to have discovered the secret of gaining Favours at Rome, and indeed they appear to be somewhat sen∣sible, that it must be a quite different method from that formerly used, that will procure the Holy Fa∣thers Esteem, and work him into a Compliance: They begin to tast and relish much the French Max∣ims, thinking belike that there can be no better Pat∣tern for the most Obedient Son of the Church to fol∣low, than that of his Eldest Brother; insomuch, that I find it in a Memoir said to have been drawn up for the Instruction of a Nuncio, laid down as not the least necessary, if not one of the hardest parts of his Task to beat out of the Ministers heads, their fond admiration of the French King, and the opinion they have taken up of his infallible Max∣ims with respect to Rome. But the Ministers at present do not content them∣selves with admiring that Great Monarch, they have made several attempts to copy after him; its true, they follow him as yet at a very great Di∣stance, but they may mend their Pace in time. I have not heard that they have formally annulled
the grant of John the 2d. by which the Pope's Bulls are free from a Revision in Portugal, and which seems to be the very Basis of his absolute Power in the Kingdom, yet by what the Marquess of Alegrete saith in his History of that King, it ap∣pears that they are not wanting who call in Que∣stion the validity of the Grant, though his Lord∣ship speaking there in Quality of an Historian, leaves the matter to be disputed by the Lawyers; but as a Minister of State, he does that which in effect amounts almost to as much, for upon a Nuncio's arrival, his Patent of Legat is call'd for in order to be Examined by the King's Council, and it hath been detain'd for above six Weeks to gether, and at the restoring of it, the Nuncio hath been told with an Air of Authority, That the King is not well pleased with the Ample Powers contained in that Patent, and expects that the Nuncio do not exercise it to the full, but keep himself within Bounds, and the Nuncio's under this Reign have had the Discretion not to exert the utmost of their Authority, but it mortifies them that the Court would have it thought, that they oblige them to this Moderation, whereas they would fain seem to use it of themselves. But there is one thing in difference between the two Courts, which his Holiness lays much to Heart, and by his Good-will is never like to de∣sist from his Pretentions, it being an affair which, as all the World agrees by this time, is of the last Importance at Rome, for in truth it is a Money Business: His Majesty hath at several times thought fit to raise the value of the Coin, so that the same Pieces are now reckon'd at a third, more than they were at the beginning of his Reign. Now his Holiness thinks it but reasonable,
that the summs payable to his Bankers at Lisbon, should be augmented in the same Proportion, but the Ministers of this Court are of another Opinion, and seem resolved never to be convinced of their Error; the Nuncio's for some years have been la∣bouring with all their might to undeceive them. Cardinal Cornaro when he was just upon his de∣parture, press'd the matter home to them, but all to no purpose; he left them as obstinate to Con∣viction as he found them, and it seems they will not be brought to understand otherwise, but that the same Piece that before went but for two Te∣stons, is now worth three in the Payments made to his Holiness. Now since it is not imaginable, that the Court of Rome can be easily brought to desist from a pretension of this kind, this Business may its feared sometime or other, disconcert the good Harmony that is between the two Courts. But there are other instances to show, that the Portuguese Ministers do not make it their Business to manage his Holiness; they are grown so hardy of late years, that they will not stick upon occasi∣on to break in upon the Ecclesiastical Immunities, insomuch, that in this Reign, a Convent is not near so safe a shelter for Villains as it was former∣ly; the Civil Powers assuming to themselves a li∣berty to judge what Crimes have the benefit of Sanctuary, and in case they think the Crimes to be very heinous indeed, the King's Officers shall make nothing to break into a Monastery and fetch the Criminal out by force, in order to the Execu∣tion of Justice. I confess they are still somewhat tender in this Point, and if it shall be made ap∣pear, that they are mistaken in the nature of the offence, the Offender shall be returned again. Be∣ing once at a certain place that hath the Privilege
of an Asylum, one of my acquaintance there coming home told me, that he had been to wait on the late Cardinal de Alemcastro, to engage him as Pro∣tector of the Society, to solicit the restoring of a Person whom the Officers had violently taken out of the House, I asked what the Man's Crime was, and he told me, it was only for killing his Wife, and upon further enquiry, I was informed that he had not done it out of Jealousy, for in that case he had been acquitted of course; but having married an old Woman, he grew weary of her, and enticing her one day to a Country House, he took occasi∣on to cut her Throat, and going about his Business, he heard a Servant, who by chance found the Wo∣man weltring in her Blood, crying out that her Mistress was a dying, he hearing that she was on∣ly a dying, whom he had left for dead, return'd and dispatcht her out-right, and then betook him∣self to Sanctuary, and it was found upon second thoughts, that his Crime was not of so deep a dye, as to deprive him of the benefit thereof, and so he was return'd again, and after some time, he sued out his Carta de Seguro. But the violation of their Sanctuary is not the only Grievance that the Fryars, and consequently the Nuncio have to complain of, their Immunities have been attempted in a yet more sensible part, it being pretended that their Estates shall be liable to the King's Duties; several advances have been made towards bringing this about, and great vio∣lence used as 'tis pretended in the now mention'd Memoir, where I find this reckon'd among other things, wherein the Court is resolved to Copy af∣ter his most Christian Majesty. This change of Conduct has as experience de∣monstrates, contributed not a little to raise the cre∣dit
of Portugal with the Court of Rome; but the Treasure of the Nation is still flowing thither in so many Currents, that it will be soon exhausted, if a speedy stop be not put thereto, so that the King must of necessity come to a more vigorous Resolu∣tion, than has been yet taken; there is no doubt but that whensoever he shall attempt to save his Country, he will meet with all the opposition that Rome and its Creatures can raise against him. But he may turn a deaf Ear to their Clamours, the Na∣tion by this time is sufficiently sensible of its ap∣proaching Ruin, and begins to see from what Quar∣ter it is coming upon them, and there is all reason to hope that His Majesty, if he be not wanting to himself may carry his Point, and in the end, see himself as much respected and rever'd at Rome, as any Crown'd Head in Christendom.
OF THE INTERESTS OF PORTUGAL, With Relation to SPAIN. NExt to the Court of Rome, that of Madrid seems at present to be in greatest considera∣tion at Lisbon, on account both of the near Neigh∣bourhood of the two Kingdoms, and of his Portu∣guese Majesty's Pretentions to the Succession of Spain. All former Animosities seem now to be ut∣terly forgotten, and a sincere Friendship and close Correspondence is maintain'd between the two Courts, which as we may well suppose, the Sister Queens have not been wanting to preserve and cul∣tivate; the King of Portugal no doubt leaves no∣thing unattempted on his part, to procure the good-will of the Spanish Court, considering the melan∣choly Prospect he hath before him in the mani∣fest Ruin of his numerous Family, should the Suc∣cession
be dispos'd of to his disadvantage, and pos∣sibly there may not be wanting among the Spanish Grandees, who think is to be for their Countrys Interests and their own that his Pretensions should succeed. But the good Correspondence that is now between the two Courts, seems to be of a latter date than the conclusion of the Peace in 1668. they who then laboured all they could to hinder them from coming to an Agreement, have not been wanting in their Endeavours to embroil them since; and it was certainly none of their fault, that these two Kings have never come to a Rupture, their Artifices having so far prevail'd, that in the year 1681. a day was fixed on the Portuguese side for the Declaration of a War, the Difference arose up∣on this Occasion. The Governour of the Rio de Janeiro in Brazil, had in the year 1680. Peopled and Fortified a Co∣lony of Portugueses on the North-side of the Rio da Prata, over against the Isle of St. Gabriel, sup∣posing it to be within the bounds of the Portuguese Dominions, according to the famous Repartition of the whole World made by Pope Alexander the 6th. and his Successors between the two Crowns; but the Governour of Buenos Aires not liking the Neighbourhood of the Portugueses, and pretend∣ing that both sides of the River, with the Isles therein, and parts adjacent, had fall'n to the share of the Spanish Crown; got together a body of In∣dians, as well as Spaniards, and upon the 6th. of August the same year, fell upon the new Planters, killing several of them, and taking Prisoners the Governour with all that were in Arms, seizing likewise upon the Artillery, Ammunitions, &c. When the news of this Action came to Europe, they whose Interest it was to have the two Nations
go together by the ears, made their advantage of it, and blew the Coals into such a flame, that the Prince Regent of Portugal ordered home his Am∣bassador from Madrid, commanding him to make this Protest at his Departure; That if within the space of twenty days reckoning, that for one on which the Protest was made, the Spaniards did not make full Reparation for this Insult, it should be under∣stood that a War was declared, without any other Formality. Such Language as this having been un∣usual till of late years between Crown'd Heads, and not heard of even in our times, but from one single Court, we may well guess from whence it came, and that the Prince Regent did not of him∣self put it into his Ambassador's Mouth; for Por∣tugal being at that time as little perhaps in a con∣dition to bear the Expences of a War as Spain its self, it is not likely that the Prince would talk at that rate, unless he were made believe that he had some other Power besides his own to back his Threats withal. They at Madrid at least seem'd to be of this Opinion, for they presently took the Alarm, insomuch, that in stead of losing time in Consultation, according to their ordinary Custom, they with all the hast imaginable, sent the Duke of Giovinazzo away post to Lisbon, with full power to give the Regent satisfaction. But had they spent never so much time in deli∣beration, they could not have pitch'd upon a fitter Person, either for spoiling a French Design, or managing the Portuguese Court, for matters of this sort had been the Dukes business for many years; he had served the Crown of Spain with great Dexterity, and success in affairs of the great∣est Importance, while he was Ambassador Resident at Turin, where he broke all the measures the
French had taken to engage Madam Royal then Regent of Savoy in their Interests, and by his se∣cret Practices so countermined their designs upon Casal; that he kept the Place from being delivered up to them for some years, after the bargain had been made with the Duke of Mantua, the preser∣vation of which place was so entirely ascribed to him, that when he left Turin, it became the com∣mon talk of Europe, that Casal was infallibly lost: His Conduct at Turin made him esteem'd at Ma∣drid for the ablest Person to deal with the French Ministers, and for that reason he was in the begin∣ning of the year 1680. sent Ambassador into France, but for the same Reason, King Louis thought him the most improper for that Court; his Ministers had it seems such a dread of the Man, that they put their Master upon an Action that will not be reckon'd among the Glories of his Reign; for after the Duke had arrived at Paris, and continued there for five Months, he was obliged to return as he came, with∣out having been admitted to Audience, the King declaring, That if he did not leave the Kingdom, he would force him away by Violence, an Indig∣nity never before put upon the Representative of a Crown'd Head; yet such as Spain in its low con∣dition was forced to digest, but the Duke had now a fair opportunity to mortify the French in his turn, by defeating their defign upon Spain and Portugal. Upon his Arrival at Lisbon, Prince Peter more generous than to insult over an yielding Adversary, show'd by his Proceedings, that his own inclinati∣ons had not prompted him to make his advantage of his Neighbour's weakness; for instead of pre∣scribing Laws to the Spaniards, who 'tis thought would at this juncture have submitted to any terms
of Accommodation, he was content to treat with them upon the Square, and appointed the Duke of Cadaval, and other Commissioners, to confer with the Duke of Giovinazzo, who soon brought them to his own terms by an Address peculiar to himself, which was by turning things into Ridicule and Ral∣lying them into an Agreement; the Prince though sufficiently sensible that what they had concluded upon was much to his disadvantage, yet suffer'd himself to be perswaded by the Duke to confirm the Treaty; it may be supposed that he began by this time to Relent, and that he show'd himself more easy to make some amends to the Spaniards for their hard usage. It is said indeed that the Duke had a particular Talent to accommodate himself to the Humours of those he had to deal with, and by that means to gain upon the affecti∣ons of this Prince, who was not to be imposed up∣on as his Ministers were, for the Duke's Jests were not like to take with him, and therefore in his ad∣dresses to his Highness, he gave another turn to his Discourse, Haranguing him on all occasions upon his admirable Prudence, and greatness of Mind, and Praises, having this common with Reproaches, that they seldom fail of their effect when there is ground for them; the Prince Regent is reported to have told those about him, after an Audience given to the Duke, That he knew very well that the fine things this Man had said, tended only to deceive him, who however had got the secret to please him, and therefore he did know how to deny him any thing. The Agreement made at this time, had the Title of a Provisional Treaty, because it did not deter∣mine the Right on either side, for that was to be done at a more convenient Season. It was so con∣triv'd,
that by the Articles one would think it was design'd, to give the Portugueses some satisfaction in appearance, and all the real advantage to the Spaniards. It was agreed, that by Order from the King of Spain, the Governour of Buenos Aires should be punished according as the manner of his Proceedings had deserved; which Order the Duke of Giovinazzo delivered afterwards to the Prince Regent, who sent it to his Minister at Madrid, with a Command to intercede in his Name with the Catholick King, that the Execution of it might be suspended. All Arms, Artillery, &c. with what∣ever else had been taken from the Colony were to be restor'd, and the Planters suffer'd to return, and if any were wanting, as many others to settle there in their room. But then they were not to fortifie themselves, nor so much as build Houses of any durable Matter, nor were they to be supplied with fresh Men, though in never so small a Number, nor have any sort of Intercourse or Commerce with the Indians, under Obedience to the Spaniards. Where∣as the Spaniards were to have the same use of the River, the Isles thereof, and Territories adjacent as they had before, so that had this Provisional Trea∣ty continued in force, the Portuguese Colony must necessarily in a very short time have fall'n away to nothing, and the Spaniards remain confirm'd in the Possession of a Country, to which their Title was at best but Dubious. It was indeed agreed at the same time, that Commissioners on both sides should meet finally to determine this Affair, and that in case Matters could not be adjusted by them, it should be referr'd to the Pope's Arbitration; but considering how seldom Conferences of this kind come to any Issue, and how easy it is for the Spa∣niards to make proceedings at Rome to go heavily
on, one would think they had small cause to fear that any thing in this Article should deprive them of the Advantage they had got by the rest; and if things succeeded not afterwards to their minds, it was perhaps, because, they could not have a Duke of Giovinazzo always at Lisbon. The Composure of this Difference made way for a more solid and lasting Friendship then hath been usual between these, or perhaps any other border∣ing Nations; that hostile Disposition which in for∣mer Ages, was always observ'd in these towards each other, and had been exasperated by a late War of 27 years continuance, seem'd now to be worn a∣way on a suddain, and they began to familiarise themselves with each other; for the Duke of Gio∣vinazzo, while he so happily acquitted himself to his Master's satisfaction in a Negotiation, that was thought to be attended with insuperable Difficulties, manag'd Matters, so that he was no less pleasing to the Portuguese Court, then to that of Madrid, ren∣dring himself acceptable to all, and gaining the U∣niversal Esteem of the Prince, Nobility and People; and as he was highly carress'd during his stay at Lisbon, he was as much regretted at his Departure. There is no doubt but the Marriage of the Q. of Portugal's Sister to the King of Spain, contributed not a little to perfect the Harmony that is at present between the two Crowns, and perhaps her want of Children much more, for it being now apparent to the World, that King Peter hath enter'd his Name a∣mong the Candidates for the Spanish Crown, it is natural to suppose that his endeavours are not wan∣ting to keep up the good Correspondence; yet were we to judge of the inclinations of the Spanish Court, from the most obliging Carriage of the Marquis de Castel dos Rios, their late Minister at
Lisbon, one would think that Spain expected to reap all the advantage from the good amity; lit∣tle would one guess from the Conduct of this Mi∣nister, that the King of Portugal was not many years ago lookt upon as his Master's Rebel, there being scarce a Gentleman in Portugal more intent than he in making his Court, or more careful to render himself acceptable. He to gain their Maje∣sties Favour, hath during the whole time of his Residence, that is, for about seven years together on every Birth-night of the Eldest Prince, entertain∣ed the Nobility and Foreign Ministers with a new Opera of his own Composure, and acted by his own Family, and all to Celebrate the future Glorys of his Highness. It would perhaps seem trifling in any other times but ours, to draw Consequences from any thing of this kind, but in our Age, Per∣sons of his Excellencies Character do every thing by Prescription, and the lightest matters of Ceremony are exactly weighed. It does not yet appear what advances the King of Portugal hath made at Madrid, towards the making good his Pretensions to the Succession, the publick Relations of the Proceedings at that Court, do as yet give but a slender Account of his Success; however, the frequent Couriers that pass, and re∣pass, between the two Courts upon every alarm of the King of Spain's Indisposition, show that his A∣gents there are busy in carrying on his Interests, and his late Levies raised and maintained at an ex∣pence which his Kingdom is so little in a condition to bear, are an Argument that he is resolved to make One among the Competitors, as indeed it con∣cerns him much to be, considering the apparent dan∣ger of his own Crown, in case he miscarries in his design upon that of Spain; for whether a Prince of
the House of Austria, or of France, shall inherit that Crown, he'll be Heir at the same time to Phi∣lip the 2d's Title to Portugal, which as unjust as it was, was strengthen'd by sixty years Possession, and the Approbation of several Popes; and who∣soever reflects upon the Conduct of the House of Austria in the last Age, or of the French King in this, will find that very slender Pretences have ser∣ved the turn, when either of them hath had a fair opportunity to invade his Neighbour, and see cause enough to be afraid; for the House of Bragança, should it ever have the misfortune to ly at their Mercy, as it almost infallibly will do, when either of them shall be in quiet Possession of the Spanish Monarchy; for Spain upon any change of Govern∣ment, will almost necessarily recover so much of its ancient Vigor, as to be overmatch for Portugal. This small Kingdom may perhaps have some cause to hope, that its destruction will come on more slowly, in case it hath to deal with an Austrian Prince, but whether it will be therefore the less, sure is a question soon decided, when we consider what a close Union there hath always been between the two Branches of that House, each espousing the Interest and Quarrels of the other, and making them its own; how great a part the Spaniards had in the German Usurpations, in the business of the Palatinate, and the Catholick League; and how far the German Line interessed it self in behalf of the Spaniards upon the Revolt of Portugal; when to revenge their Quarrel, the Imperialists contrary to all Faith, and Honour, the Right of Nations, and the Laws of Hospitality seiz'd upon Prince Duarte, the King of Portugal's Brother, and made him end his days in a Prison. Now when a Prince of the same House, less Religious than his present Impe∣rial
Majesty (and one of his Character does not a∣rise in every Age) shall come to have Portugal in his power, can we think it likely, that he will so far forget the Maxims of his Ancestors, as to che∣rish a Race, that hath occasion'd so many disgraces to a Family? But if the King of Portugal hath lit∣tle cause to expect security from that House, he would have less reason to think himself safe, should he fall under the Power of France; 'tis true indeed, if words of Friendship could insure him, he would be freest from danger, while the French are putting themselves in a Condition to destroy him, who till they are ready to give the Blow, are always lavish of their kind Promises, which such as have trusted in them, have found to be the fore∣runners or the means rather of their Ruin. Should a French Prince become possess'd of the Spanish Mo∣narchy, if Philip the 2d's Title will not do, there are a great many others now dormant, that will quickly be started up, the Kingdom of Portugal will soon be found to have been a Dependance of Castille, and it is but erecting a Chamber of Re-u∣nion to annex it thereto again, or a Right of Devo∣lution may be pretended by the forfeitures which the Kings have incurr'd, they having been formerly Feudatorys to those of Leon, or the Great Mo∣narch may think it will be for his Glory or his Convenience, to order his Generals to take Possession of this small Kingdom, and that, as appears from some Presidents, may be thought right suffi∣cient. It is not to be imagined, that the Court of Por∣tugal is at this time of the Day insensible of the Dangers they are threatned with, the Agonies that the Ministers were in not long ago during his Ca∣tholick Majesty's Sickness, could scarce be thought
to proceed from any other Cause, and a Paper lately published in English, shows that they have been setting their Wits at Work to find out means for their Preservation, that is, to make good their Master's Claim to the Succession (which as they seem to be perswaded, is) the only visible way to secure themselves at this Juncture. The Author of that Paper seems to have left nothing unsaid that may make for his Master's Cause, and he hath gone a great way to prove him to have a much better Right than any other Pretender, if it be true, as he intimates, that there is such a Fundamental Law in Spain, as excludes Forreigners from the Succession, and I believe there can be no Instance given of any such, that have succeeded in a regular Way, ex∣cept it be Charles the 5th, who was yet Son to the immmediate Heiress, and possess'd of the Crown in his Mother's life-time: As for his Son Philip the 2d. and the rest that came after him, they were all natural born Spaniards, which Privilege must be granted to the Kings of Portugal, while Portugal is allowed to be a part of Spain, and it is certain that they are descended from Donna Maria, Daughter to Ferdinand and Isabella, and Sister to her who brought the Crown into the Austrian Family; so that if there be any such Law, as the aforesaid Author hints at, the King of Portugal may have a very fair Title, the Dauphin as 'tis asserted by his Competitors, being excluded by virtue of the Renunciation which was the necessary Condition of his Mothers Marriage, and the German line with the House of Savoy for their being Forreigners. This appears to be the best Title the King of Por∣tugal can pretend to by Descent; 'tis true, the forementioned Writer sets up another, which he saith, His Master derives from his Predecessor
Dom Ferdinand King of Portugal, but upon what Grounds I shall not examine. It were much to be wished for the sake, both of the common Repose of Europe, and the Preservation of the Spanish Mo∣narchy in particular; that his Majesty's Right was unquestionable since Spain by the Re-union of Por∣tugal, might be enabled even at present to do some∣thing towards its own Defence, and in time gather strength, so as to subsist of it self, and ease its Allys of the great Charge and Trouble they are at, in keeping it from falling into Ruin. There is one Advantage on the King of Portugal's side, that must not be omitted, which is, That it will be very difficult for any other Prince to gain this Crown without his Consent, he being ready upon the place to oppose any other Pretender; his Forces indeed are but very small, when compared to those of other Princes, yet they are such, as with a little assistance from his Allies, may be able to make head against an Invader, and perhaps prove more numerous than any Army that can march in∣to the heart of Spain, though furnish'd out by the great Monarch himself: Spain having this advan∣tage from her present Desolation and Misery, that though she can make little Resistance against any powerful Enemies, yet she'll go near starve them, if they come upon her in any considerable Num∣bers. An Army that passes the Pirenees, must not look for such Entertainment as is to be met with in other parts of Europe; it was no difficult matter for the French King, possess'd as he was of the strong Holds on both sides him, to maintain his hundreds of thousands in the fruitful Countrys of Flanders, and on the Banks of the Rhine, but he may find it a harder task to subsist a third part of that Number in Spain, than it was for him to do the same in
Piedmont during the last War. A Traveller that passes through such Parts of this Country, as Na∣ture hath been most indulgent to, is like to fare but ill, unless he carries Provision with him, and that for Beast as well as Man; but whether an Ar∣my like any of those that have been on foot of late Years, can come thus provided for so long a March as 'tis over the Pirenees into the midst of Spain, let others more skillful in these matters judge, but if it brings not along with it all things neces∣sary for life, it is like to be ill suppli'd, and that not only in those bare and cragged Mountains, o∣ver which it must climb, but in the flat Country likewise; ill water'd for the most part, dispeopled, and uncultivated, and so parcht up, that scarce a∣ny thing Green appears in the Season, when Armies usually take the Field. In effect, the impossibility for a more numerous Army than their own to sub∣sist in Spain, is generally what the Portugueses an∣swer, when they are told of the great Forces which his Most Christian Majesty hath in readiness, and it is very probable, that in case they be assisted with a competent number of well disciplin'd Troops from abroad, their being beforehand with him up∣on the Place, and having their Magazins on the Frontiers, will give them a great Advantage, espe∣cially if they can but bring the Spaniards heartily to join with them in defence of their common Li∣berty; and one would think they should readily accept the Party, at least in opposition to the French, whose Government they must necessarily have in greater abhorrence, than the Portugueses themselves, considering the Antipathy that hath been always between them and the French, which has been kept alive by the continual Wars they have had with them, and of late Years seems to have been heigh∣tened
to the utmost Extremity of Hatred by the many intolerable and ungenerous insults they have received from them, with which the French have on all occasions been very careful to refresh their Memories; so that there is all reason to believe, they will be much sooner inclin'd to forget their former Animosities with their Portuguese Neigh∣bours. Their Enmity to these never was so great as to make them banish all thoughts of uniting under one head, a thing often declar'd impractica∣ble in regard to the French, in several Publick and Solemn Treaties; whereas in the very heat of the last War with Portugal, there was a Negotiation carrying on, and some advances made on both sides, to have a Portuguese Prince plac'd on the Throne of Spain. For in the Year 1650. when Philip the 4th. ha∣ving no other Child to inherit his Crown but the Infanta Donna Teresa Maria, the great Men in Spain were all for having that Princess married within the Kingdom, it being a common saying a∣mong them at that time, That it was a very hard thing that they could never have a King with Black Whiskers; upon this, the King of Portugal was encouraged by the secret Intelligence he had at that Court, to think of a Marriage between the Infanta and his Eldest Son Dom Theodosio, and thereupon sent Antonio Vieira the Jesuit to Rome upon other Pretences, but with Instructions and Powers to pro∣pose the Match to the Spanish Ministers there, and he pretends that he wrought so effectually with some of the Principal Persons of that Nation and Faction, that he brought them to a great liking of his Proposal, insomuch that they seem'd desirous it should take effect, though the Match could not be
approv'd of by the Court of Madrid. The Argu∣ments by which Vieira prevail'd with the Ministers at Rome, were drawn from the high Birth of the Prince, his being descended from the same Ance∣stors with the Infanta, and his Extraordinary Qua∣lifications, all which were such that had things continued in the same state they had been in before the War; there was no question but that Dom The∣odosio would have been the only Person pitcht up∣on, but the Jesuit urged, that as the case then stood, there were much stronger Arguments in his Favour; he being to bring along with him the King∣dom of Portugal, with all the Dominions belong∣ing thereto in the one half of the World; that Portugal it self was a part and member of Spain, and by its Re-union would make the Monarchy en∣tire again, which would thereby become more Pow∣erful and Flourishing, than before the Separation: for the several Armies which at that time were employed on both sides upon the Frontiers, might then be all united together in one Body under the same Head, and Spain be so strengthened thereby, as to be able to give Protection to their Friends, be rever'd by Neutrals, and become a Terror to their Enemies. These Arguments if we can believe Vieira, were well tasted by those of the Spanish Party at Rome, at a time when the Enmity between the two Nations was at the highest; but now all Animosi∣ties being laid aside, perhaps the same, or others of a like nature may be hearkned to at Madrid, and incline those of that Court to distinguish the King of Portugal from among the rest that are Can∣didates for the Succession. There was one Scruple that the Portugueses made themselves at that time, they were unwilling to consent to a Re-union, un∣less
Lisbon was to be the Capital of the Spanish Monarchy; but certainly the Spaniards, if they knew their own Interests, in case they agreed in o∣ther things, would readily gratify them in this Point. Lisbon by its Scituation so near the Sea, and upon the noblest River in the World, seems designed by Nature for the great Emporium of Eu∣rope, and were it in the hands of a People that knew how to improve their Advantage, it would go near to draw to it self the Trade and Riches of the World. Philip the 2d. was sensible of this, and therefore when he came to take Possession of the Kingdom, he promised, and as it was thought, designed, that instead of keeping his Court at Ma∣drid, a 100 Leagues within the Land, Lisbon should be thence forward the place of his Residence, and in order thereto, he began the Structure of a most magnificent Palace, but it was well for Christen∣dom that he continued not in this Resolution, and that his Son Philip the 3d. took it not up after him, for perhaps nothing could have contributed more to bring about the design they had laid of an Univer∣sal Monarchy. I shall conclude this Chapter with this one Re∣mark, that it seems fatal to the Spanish Monarchy to owe her Preservation from utter Ruin, to those who have brought her to a Condition, in which she is unable to help her self; they were the Eng∣lish that first humbled the Spaniards, when in the very heighth of their Pride, and from them do they now expect Relief in this their Extremity. By that expensive War in the Low Countrys, carried on suc∣cessively by the three Philips, this Monarchy was brought into a languishing State, and the Dutch have since stood in the gap between it and destru∣ction;
the Portugueses at last gave that Monarchy its mortal. Wound, since which it hath never been able to hold up its Head; the French indeed had endeavour'd to do the the same in that long War which preceded the Peace of the Pirenees, but did not effect it, for the Spaniards stood upon the le∣vel with them at that Treaty; it is true, some thought their Ruin might have been then com∣pleated, had that War according to Mr. Turenne's Advice been continued a little longer, and Don Luis de Haro, if it be true what is reported of him, was much of the same Opinion, but Car∣dinal Mazarin was ambitious to have that Spa∣nish Minister, and all the World sensible of the Superiority of his Genius, and so interrupted the course of Turenne's Victories, and would needs meet Don Luis on the Frontiers, that they might have a publick Tryal of each others Politicks; Don Luis met the Cardinal, and gave his Emi∣nence occasion to make as great a flourish as he pleased of all his rare Talents, but when the Peace came to be Sign'd, he could hold out no longer, nor forbear crying to his Friends, Spain was lost, but is now safe. So that the French left to their abandon'd Friends of Portugal, the Ho∣nour of working out the destruction of the Spa∣nish Monarchy, which by the help of their Al∣lies, they did effectually, at the two decisive Battles of Ameixial and Montesclaros, the Spani∣ards having never after been able to stand upon their own legs, but as they were crutch'd up by the English and Dutch, who ever since have had them lying on their hands, as a Punishment for what they did towards bringing them into this deplorable Condition; and now it seems that the
Portuguses have their turn come, to contribute on their parts to the Relief of this distressed Na∣tion, and who knows but the Spanish Monarchy may at last receive its Cure from the Hand that gave it the last and deepest Wound, and re∣cover new Life and Vigour by means of the Portugueses, who have been the immediate occa∣sion of its fall.
OF THE INTERESTS OF PORTUGAL, With Relation to FRANCE. SInce the Revolt of Portugal from the Spaniards, there hath been till now of late, an Appear∣ance of a very close Union between This and the Crown of France, which seemed to be so well ce∣mented, as if nothing were able to separate them; and indeed, were the common Opinion of the World true, concerning the Obligations of the Portuguese Nation to the French, it would be no wonder if their Friendship was in Effect so great as it ap∣peared. For they would then stand engaged to each other by the most endearing Tyes in the World, France would have cause to account of Portugal as a Creature of its own raising, and the House of Bra∣gança would owe its establishment upon the Throne to his most Christian Majesty. What greater Te∣stimony
of a sincere and cordial Affection can there be expected from one Ally to another, than that which France gave to Portugal in the Preamble to the 60th. Article in the Pirenean Treaty, that very Article whereby Portugal was abandoned to the mercy of the Spaniards, for therein his most Chri∣stian Majesty declares himself to be so passionately concerned for the good of this Kingdom, that on condition he could but procure for it the Benefits of Peace, he was willing among other things to yield up all the Conquests he had gain'd in the course of a tedious War of twenty five years continuance, and all this out of pure Generosity. He being as 'tis there declared, under no other sort of Engagement, than that of his own Good-will. But upon a Review of the Transactions that have pass'd between the two Crowns, it will perhaps be found that the obligations of Portugal to France, have not been so very great as the World is apt to imagine. It cannot be denied, but that the French have all along exceeded other People by far in their Professions of Kindness to this Nation, but it will appear that those Professions, have not always been accompanied with suitable Effects, and it must have been some other means besides real Acts of Friendship, whereby they have supported their In∣terest and Party in this Kingdom. I shall in con∣clusion of this Chapter, show as well as I am able what those means were. When the Portuguses had shaken off the Spanish Yoke, they found the French ingaged in a War a∣gainst the same Nation, and they look'd for mighty assistance from them, considering the Diversion they were like to give to the common Enemy, and in effect, the Ambassadors sent by King John to that Court, were received by Cardinal Richelieu, with
all the Demonstrations of kindness imaginable, his Promises out running all that they could desire or wish for, insomuch, that the Messineses in our days did not think themselves more happy in the French Friendship at the first Engagement, than the Portu∣gueses did at that time. A perpetual Peace was pre∣sently concluded between the two Crowns, each obliging himself to distress the Common Enemy by all possible means; to this end, the King of France was to send twenty Men of War to join so many of the King of Portugals. But I do not find that any great matter came of this Agreement, unless it were the taking of Port Longone for the French in 1646. when they perswaded the Portugueses to join them with a Squadron of their Ships, for it does not appear, that the Portugueses, for the space of almost twenty years, received the least assistance from France, but they were left to shift for them∣selves unexperienced as they were, and unprovided of all Military Preparations. They were all that time exposed to the first fury of the Spaniards at their own home, while in all other Parts of their Dominions, the French were possessing themselves of their Frontier Towns: 'Tis true, the Portugueses were encouraged all along with very large Promi∣ses of intended succours, but these Promises were turn'd into Excuses, as often as they had occasion to make tryal of what their Friends would do for them; when they desired a supply of Money to∣wards the Charges of the War, the French were in want themselves; when they asked for Auxiliary Troops, the French on their Part would have Mo∣ney for them, and required such excessive Summs, that the Portugueses, though they were brought in their necessity to bid high, could never come up to their Price. Once indeed, Mazarin was for send∣ing
them a far greater supply of Men than they desired, for when the treaty of Munster was on foot, while the French were thinking of making their Peace, the Cardinal was very desirous to have the War transferred into Portugal, and to dis∣charge into that Kingdom the Soldiery that might prove burthensom to France. But the Portugueses had no mind to have more French among them, than they knew how to deal with, and gave his Eminence to understand, that they were afraid in case they should accept his offer, of being more oppres∣sed by their Friends, than they were already by their Enemies; so that after almost twenty years spent in Negotiations, I do not find that there was so much as one Company of French Soldiers in the Portuguese Service. Being thus left to themselves to bear the Brunt of the War, they were still encouraged with hopes, that their Allies whensoever they made Peace, would not fail to procure very advantage∣ous Terms for them, who contributed so much as they did to divert and weaken the Enemy. At their first making an Alliance with France, they found the Ministers of that Court so extreamly o∣bliging, and ready to do more for them than they demanded, that they did not then think it necessary to press them upon this Point. But coming afterwards to perceive their Error, they obtained a Promise of Louis the 13th. to make with them a League offen∣sive and Defensive; and in order thereto, a Treaty was entered upon with Richelieu, but when they were in a fair way to bring it to a Conclusion, that Cardinal died to their great Misfortune. For he being of a far more generous Temper than his Suc∣cessor, they had doubtless received better Usage from him, than they afterwards met with at the
French Court. Mazarin indeed who succeded him in the Ministry, was used on all occasions to go be∣yond him in fair Promises, but to come very short in Performances: He when the Portugueses propo∣sed the League to him, finding them already em∣barkt so far, that there was no drawing back for them, would by no means hearken to their Propo∣sal, telling them, that the Alliance already made was sufficient; to enter into new Engagements, would argue a Distrust between the two Kings, whereas his most Christian Majesty had so tender a concern for his Friends, that nothing should be wanting on his part for their Preservation; howe∣ver, he did not put them out of Hopes, but that such a League as they desired, should be conclud∣ed some time or other, but when they afterwards grew urgent with him, he fed them still with Promises, or put them off with Delays, and some∣times he would keep them in Play, by amusing them with all the Formalities of a Treaty which went forwards, or was broken off according to the several occasions he had for them. While there was any Prospect of concluding a Peace or Truce be∣tween the French and Spaniards at Munster, the Cardinal was thinking to dispose the French Troops in the manner now mentioned, for which, and o∣ther Reasons, he judged it convenient to have Por∣tugal excluded out of the Peace. But the Portu∣gueses at the same time were the more importunate with him to get themselves comprehended, and to that end solicited with greater earnestness than ever the Ratification of the so long promised League, and they pressed so very hard upon him, that his Eminence was at a loss how to put by their impor∣tunities; his Excuses were now spent, or by being often used had lost their force, and he was reduced
to his last shifts for a new one. The King of Por∣tugal at last furnished him with one, it was indeed such a one as a Body would think was very remote and odd, however it served the Cardinal's Turn for that time. There stands at Villa Viçosa the ancient seat of the Dukes of Bragança, an old Lady of the Con∣ception, the most ancient of all the Ladies bearing that Title throughout Spain; to whom the Dukes have all along had a most singular Devotion, and as they thought not without Reason, she having serv'd them in place of a Lar to the Family. For as I remember, I have been told by one that had reason to know the concerns of that House, there have no considerable Alterations happened in the Family, but this Image, as it hath been believed since, hath some way or other given them notice of it before hand. King John after he had been pretty well settled in the Throne, began to remem∣ber his old Penates, and thought he could do no less in gratitude for the Favours received from this Lady, than devote himself and all his Dominions to the Immaculate Conception; declaring the Lady of that Appellation Protectress and Guardian of the Kingdom, obliging himself and his Successors to pay her at her House at Villa Viçosa, the annual Tribute of fifty Crowns of Gold, as an acknow∣ledgment of their Homage; and withal according to the Custom of ancient Chivalry, he made a solemn. Vow to defend her Immaculate Conception with his Arms. Not content to do this himself, he obliged the three Estates of the Kingdom assembled in Cor∣tes to enter into an Association to the same purpose, every Member engaging himself by Oath to hold and maintain that Important Article. At the same time it was Declared and Enacted by his Majesty,
That whosoever should attempt any thing against it in case he were a Subject, he should be unnatura∣lized, and cast out of the Kingdom; if he were a King, he desired that God's Curse and his own might light upon him, that he might not be reckon∣ed among his Descendents, hoping through the Di∣vine Favour, that he would be thrown down from the Throne and dispoiled of the Royal Dignity. This Act passed the 5th. of March in the year 1646. Hitherto all things went smoothly on, there being nothing in the Association, but what the generality of the Portugueses were willing to assent to, and maintain with their Lives and Fortunes. But the King would needs have the Dominican Fryars swear to it, Men that are Thomists upon Oath, and whose Order had all along asserted a contrary Doctrine to that which the King would now force upon them. This Business was in Agitation while the Portu∣gueses were adjusting all things in order to con∣clude the League with France. But Mazarin had now what he look'd for, a Pretext to break off the Treaty; for his Eminence sent the King word, that he thought it a very strange thing for him to put such a hardship upon the Dominicans. But the King continued in his Resolution, which the Car∣dinal took very ill at his hands; but the King in this case made no Account of his Anger, for as the Conde da Ericeyra saith, his Devotion to our La∣dy was such, that no Politick Consideration could make him desist from his Purpose, and doubtless the Cardinal foresaw as much, or else he had put his Invention to the rack to find out some other oc∣casion for a Quarrel. But the Congress at Munster being upon the point to break up, and things remaining in the same state as before between France and Spain; the
Cardinal was for bringing on again the Treaty of a League with Portugal, but still he insisted upon unreasonable Conditions, and among others would have cautionary Towns put into the French hands, with two Harbours that were capable of the great∣est Fleets. He was encouraged to make this De∣mand by the famous Jesuit Antonio Vieira, who had been sent to Paris to assist at the Conferences with the French Ministers, with Power to make what Proposals he in his own Discretion thought fit, and the Father was so very forward in making large Promises, that the Cardinal thought he could not be too exorbitant in his Demands, and they made such a bargin of it between them, that the Ambas∣sador was fain to interpose and put a stop to their Proceedings, by declaring that he would sooner have his hands cut off, than sign what the Jesuit was agreeing to. After this manner did his Eminence play fast and loose with his Friends till the year 1655. when the Spaniards had like to have done their Enemies of Portugal a kindness, which they found it impossible to do for themselves; for if the Portugueses had made use of the advantage which the Spaniards had put into their hands, they might have managed the Cardinal as they pleased, and brought him to Terms of their own prescribing. The Spaniards in order to make mischief in Portugal, and incense the People against the Court, gave out that they had made an offer of Peace to the King, and found him of himself willing enough to hearken thereto, but that he was imposed upon by his Ministers, who for their own Interests were still putting him upon continuing the War. This Report coming to the Cardinal's Ears gave him the Alarm, and raised a suspicion in him, that there might be some under-hand
Negotiation carrying on between Spain and Portugal, which, if such a thing there was, might spoil all his designs: He therefore dispatches away the Chevalier de Sainte Foy, to adjust the League, on Condition, that the King of Portugal would engage himself to a vigorous Prosecution of the War, to which end he should be furnished with Money for the Expense of the next Campagne, but withall the Envoy was ordered to complain how little Portugal minded the Interests of France, and of the several infractions of the Capitulations al∣ready made between the two Crowns; and to let fall some hints of the King's being suspected of having an Understanding with the common Enemy. The good King took care to vindicate himself from this unjust Aspersion, which the Castillians by their Calumnies had cast upon him, and clear'd himself so well, that St. Foy began to perceive that there was no occasion for a League, and so found out Pretences to defer the Conclusion of it. Hereupon King John dispatches away an Irish Fryar with the Character of his Envoy, I suppose to satisfie the Court of France of his Innocence, but with express orders to hasten the Conclusion of the League; and it seems the Irish Polititian acquitted himself of the first part of his Commission so much to the Car∣dinal's satisfaction, that his Eminence would hear no talk of what he had to say further, and so Frey Domingos do Rosario (for that was his Fryars name, I think his true one was O Dally) was sent back a∣gain, and ordered to tell his Master, that he should make his Peace with Spain himself if he would, and think no more of a League with France. This was the last Negotiation between France and Por∣tugal, in the Reign of King John the 4th. the first King of the House of Bragança, and let the Reader
judge how far he was obliged to France for his E∣stablimment upon the Throne. After his death, there was little entercourse be∣tween the two Courts, the French leaving the Wid∣dow and the Orphan to shift for themselves, till the Treaty of the Pirenees was drawing on, and then the Cardinal had a further occasion for Portu∣gal. During the course of this long War, Spain had lost several important places to the French, which they expected to have restored to them at the Peace, or some Compensation for them at least: For the Spaniards had not yet been accustomed to make Peace on such Terms as they have since been used to; they stood likewise obliged by Treaty made with the Prince of Conde at his first putting himself into their service, never to lay down their Arms till he was restored to all the Places and Go∣vernments possest by him in France, when he first came over to them. The French on the other side were as unwilling to part with the places in Que∣stion, as the Spaniards were to yield them up; and as for the Prince of Conde, neither the King, nor the Cardinal could be prevailed with to put him in a condition to give them the like trouble again, as he had done formerly; for they were not without some jealousy, that he had a mind to be playing over his old Game again; and should he come off so well after all the Bustle he had made in the King∣dom, others might in after times be tempted to fol∣low his Example: So that unless some Expedient could be found out to satisfy both Parties, here were insuperable Difficulties to obstruct the Peace, and a Peace the Cardinal was resolved to have as well for his own private Conveniencies, as to settle the state of the Nation, that was then as he thought or pretended, breaking out into new Disorders.
The Spaniards on their side were as willing to end the War as the French could be, so as it might be done with their Honour safe; they were sensible enough of their own feeble Condition; they saw that two or three Campagnes more were like to prove the total Ruin of their Monarchy. Besides, they were impatiently eager to be turning the whole force of their Arms against Portugal, which they made sure of over running with ease, could they be once at liberty from the French, and they were the more hasty to come to an Accomodation with them, for that the Pope began to be troublesome. The Ears of Alexander the 7th. were a little more open than those of his Predecessors to the Bleatings of Portugal, and he gave notice to the Cardinals of the Spanish Faction, that something must be done to end the Dispute, or he should be forc'd to acknowledge that King, who succeeding a Father that had reign'd sixteen years, could not be made to pass with the World for an Usurper. Thus were the minds of both Parties disposed for a Peace, but how should they come by it? Who could re∣move the Obstacles that lay in the way, and satis∣fy those irreconcileable Pretensions, from which nei∣ther Party would recede? To bring all this about, the Cardinal had his Wits at work; he now began on a sudden to be mighty Zealous for the poor King of Portugal, whose Ruin was thought infallible, should the French forsake him, and therefore his Eminence would seem for some time to be as earnest for his Preservation as the Spaniards were bent upon his Destruction; both Parties agreeing in this, that should Portugal be excluded from the Peace, it would of course fall into the Hands of the Spaniards, so that in effect this Orphan Prince, and all that be∣long'd
to him seem'd to be now wholly at the Car∣dinal's Disposal, since to exclude them from the Peace, was then thought to be the same thing in effect, as to give them up to the Spaniards, and these he had to set against the Prince of Conde, and the places demanded by the Spaniards, and he made his Advantage of them: For in all the Negotiations in Order to a Peace, when the Spaniards thought much of yielding up their Towns and Provinces, the French sometimes would mind them of a whole Kingdom, and the Dominions thereunto belonging, which they were ready to give in Exchange for their Conquests. When the Spaniards interceded for the Prince of Conde, the French when other Arguments fail'd, would speak for the King of Portugal: But there was this Difference between them, the Spani∣ards always began with the Prince of Conde, the French answered Portugal in their own Defence, the Spaniards got conditions for the Prince, not such as they pretended to, but very Honourable, consider∣ing how ill the Prince had deserv'd at the hands of his King. The Cardinal engaged his Master's Word, his Faith, and his Honour that Portugal should be utterly abandon'd for him. The Spani∣ards to the very last were passionately Urgent to get something more still for their Friend, the French surrendred us theirs at the first Overtures of a Trea∣ty; the Spaniards were in earnest, the French had only a Turn of their own to serve. The first Advance that appears to have been made to any purpose on either side towards a Peace, was in 1658. when the Marquis de Lionne was sent to Madrid, to treat with the Ministers of that Court; what Monsieur de Lionne's Instructions were, Ma∣zarin best knew, who in a Letter to the Pope con∣cerning this Affair, told his Holiness, That if Spain
by his Authority could be brought to abate of their Pretensions in favour of the Prince of Conde, the Peace was upon concluding; since all other points were adjusted, Monsieur de Lionne having orders to abandon Portugal, in case Spain would not be so obstinate in behalf of the Prince: but Spain could not not be prevail'd upon, and so that Treaty was broke off. I have seen no particular account how this Business was manag'd at the Treaty of Madrid, perhaps it was then that the Offer was made by the French to restore their Conquests, and re-esta∣blish the Prince in his Governments, on Condition that the King of Portugal should remain in peace∣able Possession of his Dominions, for that such an Offer was made some time or other we must believe, because it is so affirm'd in the 60th. Article of the Pirenean Treaty; but whenever it was made, the French were assur'd it would not be accepted, as I believe I shall presently make appear. The Treaty of Madrid broken off by the Spani∣ards, persisting to Espouse the Prince of Conde's Interests, the French on their side were for sticking close to their Allies, and gave out that they were resolved never to abandon them. For the Marquis de Lionne, a little after declar'd publickly at the Diet of Francfort, that the King of France neither could nor would make any Peace without the Inter∣vention of his Allies, viz. of England, Portugal, Savoy, and Modena, and in effect, they were about renewing their League with the Rump Parliament of England, then restored to their Seats after Crom∣well's Death. They were likewise treating about a Match between their King and Madam Margaret Prince  and seem'd to be so much in ear∣nest, an interview between the two Cou the King appeared to be so
much taken with the Lady, that many thought a Marriage was like to ensue. About the same time the Count de Cominges Ambassador Extraordinary from France, at Lisbon was Negotiating another Match between the same King, and the Infanta of Portugal, and that was likewise in such great for∣wardness, that Preparations were making for the Wedding, and several things got ready, which served afterwards when that Princess was Married into another Country; and all this to bring on a third Match between the same King and the Infan∣ta of Spain, which had been in. Treaty ever since the first Overtures of Peace were made, and both these Treaties with Spain, viz. of Marriage and Peace, had such a mutual Dependance on each o∣ther, that they were necessarily to proceed or break off together. The Advances that the French made towards a conclusion of the Match with Savoy, startled the Court of Madrid, for should they go on, there could be no hopes of a Peace; and France in all probability would in that case enter into new Engagements with Portugal, wherefore Don Anto∣nio Pimentel was sent Post to Lions, whose pre∣sence there presently broke off all other Treaties, and revived those with Spain. The Spaniards yielding at last to the necessity of their Affairs, and accepting of the French Proposals in relation to the Prince of Conde, which were, that he should be permitted to return into France, and be restor'd to the King's Favour, but remain depriv'd of his Go∣vernments: The Court hereupon removing to Pa∣ris, the principal Articles were there adjusted, that were afterwards confirm'd by the two great Mini∣sters at the Pirenees. But the Allies of France seem to have been quite forgot at this Treaty of Paris, as it was called, at least no mention made
of Portugal, unless it were in that Article whereby the French oblig'd themselves to abandon it; but that Article had then none of the fine Preamble be∣fore it, which now sets it off so much to advantage, in the printed Copys of the Pirenean Treaty. While these things were transacted, the Conde de Soure was coming Ambassador extraordinary from Portugal, with such Instructions as show'd, that the Queen Regent was intirely satisfied of the sincere Affection of her intended Son-in-law, for he was ordered to demand no less then 4000 Foot, form'd into six Regiments and 1000 Horse, and all to be paid by his most Christian Majesty, even while they were in the Portuguese service; or if France could not spare so much Money, he was at least to raise the Men in that Kingdom. He was likewise to choose out two General Officers, and engage them in his Master's service, Cardinal Mazarin under∣taking for their Fidelity and Ability; he was also to put the last hand to the League that had been so long in Agitation, there being little Cause to doubt but that it would now be soon brought to happy Conclusion. But the Ambassador upon his arrival at Havre de Grace was surprized with the News, that a Truce had been Proclaim'd between the Crowns of France and Spain, and a day fixt for a Conferences between the Cardinal, and Don Luis de Haro, in order to conclude the Peace. When he was got to Roan, he receiv'd a Message from the Portuguese Agent, more mortifying than what he had heard before; for the Agent having acquainted the Cardinal of the Am∣bassador's arrival, was bid to advise him to come Incognito to Paris, his Eminence doubting whether it was convenient to receive a Publick Embassy from Portugal, whose Interests France was obliged
to abandon by the Peace to be made with Spain. Upon his coming to Paris, the Cardinal entirely disabus'd him, and put an end to all the hopes they had hitherto been feeding themselves with in Por∣tugal; for now there was no more talk of the League with France, nor of any conditions to be made with Spain, but such as the Cardinal might be assured that the Portugueses would never be brought to accept of; so far was the Ambassador from ob∣taining the 5000 Men he came to Demand, that he could not prevail to have two General Officers of that Nation: The Cardinal having so much Honour left as to tell the Ambassador, that should he re∣commend French Men to him, in case the Peace with Spain ensued, the Portugueses might well que∣stion their Fidelity, and the Spaniards his Sincerity. However, he named to him two that were of other Nations, whom he advis'd him to Treat with, they being Persons of known Valour and Conduct, and in all respects qualified to Command in the Posts they were design'd for. The Ambassador took his advise af∣ter having consulted with Marsh. Turenne, who knew the Men, and highly approv'd of the choice; the first, That the Ambassador treated with, was the Earl of Inchiquin, who presently embark'd for Por∣tugal, but had the misfortune to be taken in his Passage by the Algerines, and after having regain'd his Liberty, he had been but a little while at Lis∣bon, when the News came of King Charles his Re∣storation, which occasion'd his Return home. He was design'd afterwards to Command the Forces which that King sent to the assistance of Portugal, but he did not continue long there. The other was the Famous Count, afterwards Marshal and late Duke of Schonberg, who when he came to have the Command of Men that were worthy of such a
Leader, soon chang'd the face of things in Portu∣gal, and restored the most desperate Affairs of that Nation to such a state, that the Spaniards who now made sure of over running it, were glad to sue for a Peace, and the French who at this time were casting off the Portugueses with so much con∣tempt, thought fit to court their Alliance: but those by whom the Count effected all this, were not French men, and the Cardinal was no Prophet. At present he had so little consideration for Portugal, that when he was presented with a Memorial con∣taining twenty seven Reasons why France ought not to make Peace with Spain without including Portu∣gal, his Eminence having now gain'd his ends could not find so much as one Reason among all the seven and twenty that was conclusive, though the Portu∣gueses pretended to a Promise under the Hand and Seal of King Louis 13th. After this came on the Conferences between the Cardinal and Don Luis de Haro, at the Pirenees; there indeed the Cardinal would sometimes put in a word for the King of Portugal, but it was only in order to keep Don Luis quiet, when he had nothing else to defend him∣self withal from the Persecutions of that Minister, who notwithstanding what had been agreed upon at Paris, and consented to in Spain, could not help making some motion or other in almost every Con∣ference for the Prince of Conde; and sometimes he would do it with so much Vehemence, that the Treaty was several times like to be broken off pure∣ly on this Account, even when all other Matters were adjusted. For Don Luis was so very tender of his Master's Honour, which seem'd to him to ly at stake on this single point, that he thought he could never do enough to retrieve it; one would think were we to judge of the Conduct of these
two great Men, as 'tis represented in Mazarin's Letters, that on this occasion he had changed Cha∣racters with the Cardinal; Don Luis is represented at other times, as having all the distinguishing qua∣lities of a Spaniard, and the Cardinal on all other occasions complains of him for being stiff, slow, and cold, but when he makes him Pleading for the Prince of Conde, he represents him as transform'd into another Man. He would then become supple on a sudden, using all the most Insinuating and En∣gaging ways of Address, to gain upon the Cardinal, he would Caress, Court and Flatter him, enduring his Repulses without the least Resentment, as long as he thought it possible to bring him to a Compli∣ance, and as he found all would not do, he would then begin to take Fire, grow Impatient, and break out into the most passionate Complaints, as unable to bear the Reproach that his Master must be forc'd to abandon his Allie. The Cardinal did not show himself so very passionate for the honour of his Master, or the safety of his Allie, had the Affair of Portugal gone as much to his Heart, it is not un∣likely but the Italian would have fawn'd and cring∣ed as much, and winded himself into as many shapes to gain his ends as the Spaniard. They that know any thing of Cardinal Mazarin's former Con∣duct, would surely have expected a great deal more of this from him, than from a Person of Don Luis de Haro's Character and Quality. Its true, his E∣minence was at this time at the very heighth of his Greatness and Glory, and might think it beneath him to be playing over his old tricks, he would now be thought to have put off the Italian, and pretended much to the Promptitude and Vivacity of a Frenchman; but then had he any concern for his Allie, he would surely have receiv'd some
warmth from all that heat He observed in Don Luis, at least that natural Vanity of his, which was at this time encreased to as great a height, as the station he was in could raise it, should have put him upon doing something for a Prince, who had no other Dependence but upon him; and what could there have been more Glorious for this proud Great Man, who had a Crown'd Head for his Cli∣ent, being so sensible as he was, that the Eyes of all Christendom were upon him, Princes and Nations expecting their Fate in the Issue of his Proceedings, than instead of wrangling and squabbling about the exchange of every little Bicocque, to be pleading the Cause of a Distressed and Orphan King? But alas! he did not lay the Cause of Portugal to heart at all, nor concern himself for its Preservation. He had used that People before so basely, that he seem'd to desire their Destruction no less than the Spaniards themselves; He contented himself some∣times to repell the most lively instances of Don Lu∣is for the Prince of Conde, by telling with all the Coldness and Phleme imaginable, That his Master was so desirous of Peace, that he had no such Consi∣derations for the King of Portugal, as he expressed for the Prince, and that his Master might in Ju∣stice use the Prince of Conde in the same manner as the Spaniards intended to serve the King of Portu∣gal. Its true, that in one of the first Conferences, when he had no other way to put by the Impor∣tunities of Don Luis, he told him, (knowing very well as he saith himself in his Letter to Mr. Le Tel∣lier, that he should not be taken at his Word) that since he was so very Passionate for the Interests of the Prince, he himself had one Proposal to make, and would desire the King his Master's Consent, which should be more advantageous to the Prince,
than any thing Don Luis had yet desired: The Spaniard over joy'd at this News, was impatient to know what the Proposal might be; the Cardi∣nal told him, He would desire the King of France to restore the Prince and his Son the Duke of An∣guien, to all their Charges and Governments, on Condition that the Catholick King would leave Por∣tugal in the state it was then in. The Offer was rejected with all the Indignation that the Cardinal look'd for, and had he not thought as much, it never had been made; for as his Eminence saith to Mr. Le Tellier, when he made this bold or hardy Proposal, as he calls it, he knew it would not be ac∣cepted. Now if the French did not think it worth their while to rescue the Kingdom of Portugal from apparent Ruin at so small an Expence, as gi∣ving the Prince of Conde his Employments again, it is more unlikely still that they should be wil∣ing both to do that, and yield up the many strong Towns and some entire Provinces, that they had possess'd themselves of in a five and twenty years War; and this it is that tempts me to believe, that the Proposal mention'd in the 60th. Article of this Treaty, was never made in earnest; the Cardinal in the same Letter gives a little more light into this Mystery; he saith there, That he made these offers to let Don Luis see what vast Advances his Ma∣ster had made towards a Peace, and of what conse∣quence his yielding in the point of Portugal was; since rather than do that, he would be content to re∣store the Prince to his Governments, and give up all his Conquests, and it is a great Ease to me, continues he, that when Don Luis is reckoning up the great Advantages the King gets by this Peace, counting the Places and Provinces that remain to his Majesty, that I can answer him again, that all he said was no∣thing
in Comparison to the Concession we make in the Article of Portugal, though he gives a hint to Mr. Le Tellier by the by, that for certain Reasons un∣known to the Spaniards, all this was no such great matter neither, as he endeavour'd to make them be∣lieve. I do not find by his Letters that he made this Hardy Proposal as he calls it, any more during the whole time of the Treaty, but I find him af∣terwards directing Mr. De Lionne to word the Pre∣amble of the Article in the same manner as it now stands; the Body it seems was adjusted before at the Treaties of Madrid and Paris, so that possibly the Preamble had no better grounds for it than the occasional Discourse of which I have now given an account, let the Reader then judge what we are to make of this formal Declaration, (vid. the 60th. Article of the Treaty of the Pirenees.) That his most Christian Majesty desiring with an extreme Passion, to see the Kingdom of Portugal enjoy the same Repose that other Christian States acquire by this present Treaty, had to that end pro∣pos'd a good number of Ways and Expedients, which he thought might be to the satisfaction of his Catholick Majesty, among which notwithstanding, as hath been said, that he is under no sort of En∣gagement in this affair, he hath gone so far as to be willing to deprive himself of the Principal Fruit of that happy Success which his Arms have had during the course of a long War, offering besides the Places which he restores by this present Treaty to his Ca∣tholick Majesty, to surrender up all the Conquests in general that his said Arms have made in this War, and to re-establish entirely Monsieur the Prince of Con∣de, provided and on condition that the Affairs of the Kingdom of Portugal might be left in the state they are in at present, &c.
I cannot pretend to tell what the many Ways and Expedients here mention'd were, finding little or nothing said of them in the Accounts of the Treaty that are yet extant, or in the Cardinal's Letters, who seems to have given an account of all the most material Passages, and yet he mentions but one expedient as propos'd by himself, and he saith too, that he offered that rather to divert Don Luis from pressing him, in behalf of the Prince than out of hopes that it would be accepted. He made it on this occasion: Don Luis had been very urgent with him, that since the Prince could not be resto∣red to his Charges and Governments in France, he might be allow'd to accept of a Compensation else∣where, and that the Catholick King might bestow upon him either the two Calabrias, with the King∣dom of Sardinia, or the Government of the Low Countries, with the same Authorithy and Emolu∣ments as it was possess'd by the Cardinal Infante, and some places for himself on the Frontiers; but the Cardinal would consent to nothing of all this, saying, That the Prince must resolve to be wholly French or wholly Spanish, that is, have no depen∣dence upon the King of Spain, or have nothing to do in France: Yet since the King of Spain was so willing to part with these Countries, he desired that the Kingdom of Sardinia might be given to the King of Portugal, and he would desire his Master to agree to it, so as that the Portugueses should have cause to be satisfy'd. This saith he to Don Luis, is the finest Expedient in the World, both to content the King, and let the World see that my Master seeks to get a handsome Retreat for his Ally; for if the King of Portugal shall embrace this Expedient, the Catho∣lick King will be put in Possession of several King∣doms, the least of which is more considerable than
that of Sardinia. I do not find that the Cardinal propos'd any other Expedient besides this, and this is enough to show what an extream Passion he had to serve his Master's Ally; he would have him sur∣render up all his Dominions for that poor and little Kingdom of Sardinia, which the Spaniards on se∣veral such occasions have offered to give away, but could never get any one to accept of it, and yet it seems the Cardinal thought this was too much for the King of Portugal, for he propos'd it as he saith himself, without any hopes of succeeding. There was indeed another Expedient offer'd at, but it came from Don Luis, which was, That on condition the Prince might have some Place of sure∣ty given him, such as Havre de Grace, the Duke of Bragança should have Olivença bestow'd on him, be re-establish'd in his Estate and Honour, and have over and above the Office of Constable of Castille. But this Expedient was laught at by the Cardinal, he thought that what Don Luis offer'd, was too dear at the price of Havre de Grace, and therefore he would bid nothing at all: When he was brought to consent at last, that the Prince of Conde should have the Government of Burgundy with the Castle of Dijon, and the Duke of Anguien his Son, the Place of Grand Maitre, he did not so much as pre∣tend to an Equivalent for his Ally of Portugal, but screw'd from the Spaniards avesness for his Master, and the Restitution of Juliers for the Duke of Nieubourg. As for the King of Portugal, he was to surrender up all his Kingdoms and Dominions, and content himself with his Paternal Estate, and a Pardon for what was past, which as the Article saith, was all that his most Christian Majesty by his powerful Offices could procure for him; but in case that he did not accept of the same within three
Months after the Ratification of the present Trea∣ty, his said Majesty promis'd, engag'd, and oblig'd himself upon his Honour, in the Faith and Word of a King, for himself and his Successors, not to give to the said Kingdom of Portugal in common, or to any Person or Persons therein in particular, of what Dignity, Estate, Quality or Condition soever, any Aid or Assistance, Publick or Secret, Directly or In∣directly of Men, Arms, Ammunitions, Provisions, Ships or Money, nor any thing else either by Land or by Sea, or in any other Manner; and that he would not suffer Levies to be made in any parts of his King∣doms or Estates, nor grant Passage to such as might come from other States to the Assistance of the said Kingdom of Portugal, so that hitherto the House of Bragança hath not been very much obliged to France. But before I proceed further, I find my self o∣bliged to justify the Cardinal's Memory from a most horrible crime, which the French men them∣selves do not stick to charge him with; for they a∣mong others pretend, that at the making of this Solemn Promise, he had already resolv'd to violate his Faith, and that he was intending to send those succors into Portugal, which afterwards arriv'd there from France, at the very time when he was obliging his Master, who was then but a young Man and under his Direction, to swear the contra∣ry; but I think there is Cause to believe, that so de∣testable a Perfidy had not as yet enter'd into his thoughts. Its true, what he saith to Mr. Le Tel∣lier, That for some reasons unknown to the Spani∣ards, his yielding in the point of Portugal, was not so advantageous to them as he made them believe; would look very suspicious, were it not a usual thing with him on all other occasions to affect be∣ing
thought a greater Fourbe than he really was; for we find him bragging in most of his Letters, how he cheated the Spaniards, in making them think more highly of almost every one of his Con∣cessions than they deserved, whereas they took his Eminence for the Duppe all the while. But I do not in the least Question, but that he really did de∣sign to abandon Portugal to the Spaniards at this time, according as he was now obliged by all that is Sacred among Men; I will not urge for a Rea∣son that he all along most solemnly protested to Don Luis, that in case the Portugueses submitted not to the conditions offer'd them by this Peace, he would perswade his Master to hold them for his Enemies, for I believe few will give much heed to Protestations made by his Eminence on these occa∣sions; but he spoke his mind without doubt in ano∣ther Letter, sent by him to Mr. Le Tillier, to be communicated to the King, wherein he represents the affairs of Portugal to be in so deplorable a State, That the Queen Regent was neither in a condition to defend her self, nor in any terms of accommodation with the Spaniards, so that as things stood, both she and her Son, were in great danger, not only of their Crown, but of their Persons. But notwithstanding all this, he doth not advise the King, that the Troops should be ready for a Voyage to Portugal, against the signing of the Treaty, in order to pre∣serve that Crown, and save the Persons of the di∣stressed Queen and her Children, had he any such design in his head at that time, we should in all probability find him giving some hints of it in these Letters. But to put this matter out of doubt, he talks of sending to that Princess, to let her know, That he thought it most expedient for her to submit her self to the King of Spain, from whom he was
perswaded she might obtain an Equivalent to advan∣tage elsewhere, for what Estate she and her Son were possess'd of in Portugal, since he had been often told by Don Luis, that his Master in order to compleat the Peace, would not stick to bestow on her Son the Charge of Constable of Castille with other such like Honours. This surely is not the Language of one who was designing to send Forces to her assistance, to animate her to carry on the War, so that it seems to be an unjust Aspersion upon his Memory, to say that he made this Peace with a purpose to violate it as soon as it was Sign'd; there is indeed cause enough to suspect that he was not so passio∣nately concern'd for the Well-fare of his Master's Allie, as is pretended in the Article, or rather he may be justly accused of the greatest Inhumanity to say no worse; who when he thought this Fa∣mily was in so deplorable a Condition, as he de∣scribes, and the Castillians so disposed to an Ac∣commodation, procured no better terms for them, as he certainly might have done while the Treaty lasted, and the business of the Prince of Conde was in agitation. But still he clears himself of that which would have rendered him more infamous to Posterity; of engaging his Master in so black a Crime, as is a premeditated willful Perjury. But by whose fault soever it was, this is certain, That the Peace was no sooner ratified on both sides, confirm'd by the Marriage between the French King, and the Infanta of Spain, and sworn to at the high Altar before the Sacrament, which was exposed on this occasion; but while the People were every where making publick Demonstrations of their Joy, for so happy a Conclusion of a long and calamitous War, great Numbers of the most expert Officers in the Kingdom, Gentlemen, Soldiers, Engineers,
Miners were marching towards Havre de Grace, in order to Embark for Portugal: These were after∣wards follow'd by the choice of the King's Troops, till at last the French Auxiliaries in Portugal amoun∣ted to near 6000 effective Men. But this was none of the Cardinal's doing, for as little as he kept his faith with the Portugueses, he dealt more sincerely with the Spaniards, for he sent the Mar∣quis de Choup upon the Message mention'd in his Letters, to perswade the Queen Regent to surren∣der up the Kingdom, in hopes that the Dukes of Brogança should hereafter be made perpetual Go∣vernors, or Vice Roys of Portugal; and these were all the Instructions he gave the Marquis, as the Marquis declar'd when he arrived at Lisbon, where he met with such a cold Reception as his Message deserv'd; so far was he from giving any underhand encouragement to the Portugueses to carry on the War, as some Writers affirm he did with great In∣justice to the Cardinal. Its true, that while his E∣minence was disabusing the Portuguese Ambassador, as to all his former Promises, he entertain'd him in hopes that ways might be found out for the French Troops to pass into Portugal, after the Peace was made with Spain; but when the Count de Har∣court offer'd the same Ambassador, to put himself with two Regiments into the Portuguese service, in case he could but have the Tacit Consent of France, he was not only denied by the Cardinal, but told that if he persisted in the Design, he should forfeit the place of Grand Ecuyer, which had been granted to his Son, the Count d' Armagnac; so that the Cardinal seems to be pretty clear of this so great and direct a Violation of the new made Treaty. Nor is it to be thought that his Master could have any hand in it; for his most Christian Majesty
to manifest to the World, how disposed he was to observe the Oath he had so Religiously taken, when it appeared that the Portuguese Ambassador was listing Men in France, sent him repeated Orders to depart the Kingdom, and some time afterwards commanded the Agent of the same Nation to be turn'd out likewise, and publish'd his Edicts to re∣cal home such Officers and Soldiers as were in the Portuguese service, confiscating the Estates of the Disobedient. 'Tis true, the Ambassador after he had been order'd to be gone, continued sometime at Havre de Grace, with no less then 600 Officers, Gentlemen, &c. about him, that he had raised for the service, and they did not lie concealed all the while, for the Inhabitants of the Town rose in a Mutiny against them, for eating up their Provisi∣ons; and when they and others after them arrived in Portugal, they were under Military Discipline, so that should they offer to obey their King's Edicts, Count Schonberg who was their Leader, might have hang'd them for Desertion; and the Count for his part when he return'd into France, was rewarded with a Marshals Bâton: Levies were afterwards publickly made indeed for the same service, but then it was done in Marshal Turenne's Name, who took the Portuguese Affairs upon his account; and when the Spaniards made loud complaints of it, as a manifest infraction of the Treaty, their Ambas∣sador was put off with a cold and contemptuous Answer, that it was but the Act of a private Per∣son, and that the Court did not concern it self in the Business. The same thing its true was at last done openly, and without Disguise, but it does not appear where the fault lay then. As the French succors arrived in Portugal, the affairs of that Kingdom began to change face, for
if they were before, as the Cardinal supposed them to be, in a bad state, they now fell from bad to worse: The Portugueses while they were left to stand on their own Leggs, had as meanly as the Cardinal thought of their condition, bravely de∣fended themselves, and gain'd several very consi∣derable Advantages over their Enemies, particular∣ly at the two famous Battles of Montijo in 1644. and Elvas in 1658. This last Victory was the more considerable, for that it gave a check to the fury of the Spaniards when spur'd on by the Pope, who pretended he must be forc'd to acknowledge that King's Title, they made their utmost efforts to quiet his Holiness, and destroy them out of hand; and had the year before taken Olivença, the most im∣portant Place for strength next to Elvas, that the Portugueses had; and that year Don Luis de Haro, himself at the head of all the Forces he could mu∣ster together, had obliged them to rise from the Siege of Badajoz, at the very time when the place was reduc'd to Extremity, but at the last they en∣tirely routed Don Luis, when he laid Siege to El∣vas, which defeat so disheartned the Spaniards, that for the two following Years, they gave the Portugueses little trouble; it seems they thought fit to defer their Revenge till the Peace was made with the French, and then they took it to some pur∣pose, on the Portugueses and the French together. For in the Years 1661 and 62. Don John of Austria, at the head of a small Army, in all not amounting to 20000, but consisting of Veteran Troops drawn from Italy and Flanders, entred Portugal, Ravaging, Spoiling and Burning all before him; 'tis true, he never gain'd any set Battle, for by all the Havock he made, he never could provoke the Enemy to fight, though he several times sent them the De∣fiance,
and insulted them in their very Trenches, so he contented himself with taking a vast number of their Towns, many of them Rich, Populous and Strong. The first year he took Arronches and Al∣conchel, and fortified and put Garrisons into both places, in the former near 5000 men; the next year he was early in the Field, and in the heart of Por∣tugal, putting all things to Fire and Sword; and Lisbon it self was in such a horrible Consternation, that had he marched directly thither, 'tis thought he might have taken the City without Resistance. But continuing to destroy the Country, he sent a Detatchment to take Villa Boim, a strong and rich Place, but presently surrendered by a French Govern∣our. After this, he braved the Portuguese Army in their Camp, under the Walls of Estremos, but in vain, for it was impossible to draw them to a Battle; he then took Borba, a place of small strength indeed, but desperately Defended, for it had a Portuguese Governor. Next he laid Siege to Geromenha, a place strongly Situated and Fortified after the modern way, with a Garrison of 3000 Men, and provided with all things necessary for a stout Defense, but surrendered in a Months time af∣ter the Portuguese Army had in vain attempted to relieve it; this done, Don John would have fought the Portugueses, but found they had alter'd their mind, and having strongly intrench'd themselves near Villa Viçosa, patiently beheld him Ravaging the Country round about them, he seeing he could do no good upon them, took Veyros and blew up the Castle, enter'd Monforte, and put a Garrison in it; destroy'd Alter-Chaon, Cabeça de Vide, and Alter Poderoso, and all the Country round about. He then took Crato, and in it the Portugueses stores and Provisions, ordering the Governor to be shot to
Death for making Resistance, upon that, Assumar was presently surrendered to him; he would have taken Possession likewise of Alegrete, but that place, as it must be acknowledg'd, was preserv'd by a French Governor. For when Don John sent him a menacing Summons, he was answer'd with a Pre∣sent of two Bottles of Wine, the Governor desiring his Highness to tast what excellent Liquor the place afforded, sending him word with all, that he was resolv'd to defend the Town to the last Drop. The jest took, and Don John without giving the Man any further trouble, continued his march, and en∣tered Ouguella without Resistance, a small place but of great Importance; and having left two Regiments in it the Summer heats coming on, re∣tired into Quarters. The Next year he took the Field again with an Army much stronger and better provided then be∣fore. He had no sooner past the Frontiers, but he was expected at Lisbon; however, he thought fit to make himself Master first of Evora, the second City of Portugal, as he did after nine days Siege; the Garrison which was numerous, being made Pri∣soners of War for that Summer, and sent away in∣to Castille; by this success Don John became in a manner Master of all Alemtejo, or the Country on the other side of the Tagus. He sent a Detach∣ment of 3000 Horse and 2000 Foot down as far as Alcacere do Sal, a Town situated upon the Ri∣ver Sado; not far from Setuval, the most considera∣ble Sea-port Town next to Lisbon, and but at a small distance from it. This was done with design to encrease the Consternation at Lisbon, in order to Don John's marching thither, to put an end to the War. The People of that City when they heard of his laying Siege to Evora, expecting that
their turn should be next, were all in an Uproar; but when the News came that Evora was taken, such a fury possess'd the City, that the better sort through rage and dispair joyn'd the Rabble, and all in a common Mob, fell a committing such Outrages, that they seem'd resolv'd to prevent the Spaniards, and finish their own Ruin themselves. Their vio∣lence was not a little increas'd by Antonio de Sousa, a Man never good at dealing with a Multitude. He thinking to amuse them and divert their Fury upon the common Enemy, would needs have a line drawn a cross the Terreiro do Paço, causing it to be published, that all those brave Men that would pass the Line, and come over to the side next the Palace, should be chosen out to help the Army in defence of their Countrys Liberty. The Novelty of the thing drew an innumerable concourse of Peo∣ple together, who when their Passions were up, for∣got the Enemy, and leaving the Terreiro do Paço, fell foul upon the Houses of the Ministers of State, such more especially, as had manag'd the Military Affairs, and after they had been Ransacking, Plun∣dring and Burning, whatever came to hand they return'd again, and it may have been through wea∣riness, rather then want of will, that they spared the Palace it self. These terrible Convulsions seizing upon the King∣dom, at a time when the Enemy was raging in its Bowels with so much Violence, look'd like the symptoms of an approaching end; but the English were now arriv'd and ready for Action, and they by the quick and happy Turn, which they gave to the Portuguese Affairs, recovered the expiring State to Life again, and enabled that People to expel the Enemy, and follow him into his own Country, and to humble him to the Condition in which he hath re∣mained
ever since; but of this in its due place. As soon as the Affairs of Portugal were by the help of these their Friends brought (to a flourishing condition) they could be in their circumstances con∣sidered, and the War in all appearance drawing to∣wards a happy conclusion on their side, his most Christian Majesty began to have a particular Esteem for the King of Portugal, and to own him publick∣ly for his Allie; and his Affection for that Prince was now so very great, that notwithstanding the Engagements he was under to Spain, not to con∣cern himself with him: He was now resolved to stand by him, and take his part against all Opposers, the Spaniards more especially; and to become (as his Majesty was pleased himself to express it) his Companion in Arms; He telling the Portuguse Am∣bassador at a secret Audience in 1666. that he was ready, not only to bear a share with him in the Expen∣ces of the War, but likewise to accompany him in∣to the Field; offering withal, of his own accord, to enter into the League which the Portugueses had for so many years together implored in vain, during the time of their Distress; and more than that, was very urgent in pressing their consent to it. Its true, indeed the Portugueses had never less occasi∣on for his Assistance, then at the time when he was so earnest with them to accept of it, but his most Christian Majesty had great occasion for theirs. For that King being then in his full Vigour, and the very flour of his Age, he out of his extreme thirst after Glory, was meditating a suddain Irrup∣tion into the Spanish Netherlands, several of which Countries lying convenient for France; he laid claim to them in his Queen's Right, who being a Child of the first Venter, ought as 'twas said, ac∣cording to the Laws of those Countries, to have
inherited them from her Father, who died the last year, in Exclusion to the Male Issue by a second Marriage. 'Tis true, that Princess had at her Mar∣riage made a formal Renunciation of any Right or Title that might accrue to her, to her Father's Do∣minions, either in whole or in part: But in all o∣ther respects, the French King found himself in a condition to make good his Claim; his Armies af∣ter a long breathing time had now recovered new Vigour. His Brother-in-law the King of Spain was then but an Infant under Government of his Mother, and the Widow and the Orphan were like to make but a feeble Resistance; for their best Troops had been drawn from Flanders, and consumed in this fatal War with Portugal; but however, for fear lest the Spaniards were not yet humbled enough to be securely trampled upon, or if there were none else to fall upon them at the same time, might make some dying Efforts to repell so unjust an assailant as they no doubt would take his most Christian Ma∣jesty to be. It was judged convenient, that while he was engaging himself in this hazardous Enter∣prize, the Portugueses should be set on to keep the Spaniards in Play, and animated to follow those deadly Blows they had already given them, with a more vigorous prosecution of the War. And there∣fore it was, that France proposed the League Offen∣sive and Defensive to this Court. But to perswade the Portugueses to imbrace the Proposal, was thought and with a great deal of Reason, to be no easy matter; for as much pleas'd and elevated with their Victories as they were, they had as great cause as ever to wish for a Peace. That poor People had been in Arms for these five and twenty years, and were now harass'd out, and al∣most spent in defending their Country; a small
Country indeed, yet but thinly Peopled and stretch∣ed out in length, with a Frontier of a hundred Leagues, which must be continually guarded or lie exposed to the Enemies incursions. In this long War their Youth had been destroyed, their Lands laid wast, their Stocks consumed, and their Moneys brought to an end; so that should the War continue, let their Victories be never so many, it must neces∣sarily in a short time compleat their Ruin. To a People in such a case, all talk of prolonging the War must sound so harsh, that it could not be i∣magin'd they should hear of it with any Patience; and that which gave the French greater cause still to despair of gaining their ends on the Portugueses, these had now for some time been flattering them∣selves with hopes, that they should see a speedy end of their Miseries. The stomachs of the Spani∣ards were by this time come down, and they desired a Peace as much as the Portugueses; Sir Richard Fan∣shaw the English Ambassador at Madrid, had wrought so effectually upon them, that the Articles were drawing up, and all things making ready for a Treaty; Sir Richard's Secretary had been in Portu∣gal to give notice to that Court of what he was do∣ing for them at Madrid, and he had signified by Letters, that he was preparing for his Journey to Lisbon, in order to set the last hand to the Treaty. These Tidings had been received in Portugal with the welcome they deserv'd, and the blessed Mes∣senger of Peace, as Sir Richard was then call'd, was look'd for with impatience: They thought their Condition upon his coming would be a kind of Heaven, to what it then was, He being, as one of the great Ministers express'd it, to let them in to the Beatifick Vision.
The Portugueses being thus disposed, the French saw plainly that it would be to no purpose to make any direct motion to them, for carrying on the War; so that in order to bring the Design about, it was thought convenient to take a Compass, and all their Talk was of Peace while they were preparing themselves and inciting their Friends to War; or if War was mention'd, it was only by the bye, and as a last reserve in order to procure for Portugal a more firm, lasting, and honourable Peace. But to secure this, 'twas pretended that a League with France was absolutely necessary for Portugal, France being alone able, as they said, to procure good Conditions from the Spaniards, and to see they should be well observ'd. To this purpose had Mes∣sieurs, Turenne and Colbert been several times dis∣coursing with the Portuguese Minister at Paris. And that the Portugueses might be sensible that no∣thing but their Good was aimed at, the French Ambassador at Madrid, who was there making the most solemn Protestations that the Pirenean Trea∣ty should be kept inviolable, had Orders likewise to interpose his Master's good Offices, and make a tender of his Mediation to compose all Diffe∣rences with Portugal, and put an end to the War: This offer being hearkned to as 'twas pretended, the Marquess de Sande (then at Paris adjusting King Alfonso's Marriage, and having the Character of an Ambassador for that business only) was sent for to the secret Audience before mention'd, and told that the Queen Regent of Spain had accepted of the Mediation, and that in case such Proposals were made by that Court as were fit to be accepted, the French Ambassador there had Orders to make a Journey to Lisbon and conclude the Peace; or if any thing should detain him, he was to communicate the
Proposals to the Abbè de S. Romain at Lisbon, who should impart them to the Portuguese Ministers; there being no doubt but that the Peace would be soon adjusted, considering to what a miserable con∣dition the Portugueses had reduced the Spanish Monarchy. But then his Majesty did not think it adviseable for them to take up with any doubtful or fallacious Truce, and in conclusion, bid the Mar∣quess assure the King of Portugal, that in case a Peace ensued, He himself would be the Guarant; if a War, he would both bear a share in the Ex∣pences, and become the King of Portugal's Compa∣nion in the Field. Monsieur de S. Romain had the good fortune to arrive in Portugal, and got Audience at the Court which was then at Salva Terra, before Sir Richard Fanshaw came there, and he displayed all his Elo∣quence, in setting forth that the King his Master had so sincere an Affection for Portugal, that un∣derstanding the Spaniards were coming to an Ac∣commodation, he was very desirous to see the Peace adjusted, on condition that the Proposals made by Spain were Advantageous and Honourable; but in case they should prove otherwise, he was ready to assist the Portugueses with his Troops, Fleets and Money at their choice, and as their Occasions should require. These fine Words as they were not wholly lost, yet had not that effect upon the Court, as to dispose them for a League with France; they were wishing still for Sir Richard Fanshaw's coming, and testified their satisfaction at his Arri∣val, by giving him the most splendid Reception that was possible at that distance from Lisbon, but all the hopes conceiv'd on both sides from this Trea∣ty soon vanish'd; for Sir Richard had so order'd matters, that the Treaty was to be enter'd upon as
between Kingdom and Kingdom, by which means the Spaniards would have been excus'd from making any formal acknowledgment of the King of Por∣tugal's Title. This so disgusted the Portugueses, whose spirits had been mightily rais'd by their late Successes, and perhaps not a little by these large Promises from France, that they return'd back the Proposals without looking further then the Inscrip∣tion, with a short Answer, that they never would have Peace with Spain, unless it were made between King and King. The English Ambassador returning to Madrid, found the Spaniards become as High on their side, and utterly averse from renewing the Treaty; those fears which had been a great motive to them in ad∣vancing so far as they had gone already, were over for the present. They had been all along guessing at the true Design of those great Levies that the French were making, which notwithstanding all the French Protestations and Offers of Mediation, had given them terrible Apprehensions, and there∣fore that they might put themselves into some posture of Defence against so powerful an A∣gressor, they had been prevail'd with to enter up∣on a Treaty with Portugal. But now they were of another mind, for a War was broken out of a sud∣dain between England and France, which secured them for that time from any attempt of the French upon Flanders; and should this War continue, the English having the Dutch and French to deal with at the same time, might not be in a condition to send supplies to Portugal, and in case that King∣dom were once abandon'd by them, there might be hopes of reducing it again to the same state in which the English found it. But notwithstanding this Backwardness of the Spaniards, and the Occa∣sion
of it, the Portugueses could not yet be brought to consent to the French League; for as great as their Danger was from the Enemy, they thought it seems they should run a greater risk by this Engage∣ment with their pretended Friends. All Monsieur de S Romain's Rhetorick could not prevail with them to sign it this Year, though the French Inte∣rest had been much increased by the King of Por∣tugal's Marriage, and the Arrival of fresh supplies from France; and their Fortune in the War instead of making any Progress, seem'd to be at a stand, or rather had receiv'd some very considerable checks this Year. But then they were unprovided with Moneys to bear the expenses of the next Campagne, and at a loss where to seek for a supply; the French indeed continued to make their large offers, but their kindness was look'd upon as the last Re∣medy, and to be accepted of only in a desperate Case; and when they thought that they must at last have recourse to it, yet to show that they would try all expedients first before they would come to an agreement with Mr. de S. Romain, they made their application for Money to the Court of England, as little in a condition, as they knew that Court to be, to furnish them after an expensive War with two most powerful Nations, and such great Cala∣mities as befel us at home this and the foregoing Year, but no Money coming from England, they at last, viz. in the beginning of the Year 1667. yield∣ed to the French Importunities, and agreed to the League. The principal Conditions of this League were, ;That both Parties should have the same Friends and the same Enemies, England only excepted. That France should find as many Men as were necessary to carry on an Offensive War against
Spain, and all Sea-port Towns taken from the Spaniards, were to be delivered up to the French. France was to contribute by way of Loan one half of the pay due to the Auxiliary Troops, and give withal, by way of Loan likewise, the summ of 300000 Crowns per Annum. Neither Party was to treat of a Peace or a Truce without the con∣sent of the other. And it was agreed that this League should last for the Term of ten Years. Had this League continued in force, it would have been to little purpose that the Portugueses with∣drew their necks from the Spanish Yoak, and so bravely defended their Liberty as they had done in so long and tedious a War; for they had now in a manner chang'd Masters, and from being Subjects to Spain, had surrendered themselves up to the Di∣scretion of the French, instead of seeing an end of their Miseries; they had now in all appearance ten Years of War behind still, and that not only a∣against the Spaniards, but almost all the World be∣sides, that is, all the Enemies that France should make, whose designs upon the Universal Monarchy, were then breaking out, and had they been suffer'd to go on, England would not have been long ex∣cepted out of the Number. It may justly deserve ones Wonder, that so able and clear sighted a Mi∣nister, as all Parties allow the Conde de Castelmel∣hor to have been, should upon any account what∣soever be prevail'd with, thus to sacrifice the Re∣pose of his Country to the Ambition of Strangers; Possibly Monsieur de S. Romain might make his ad∣vantage of the Disorders that the Court was in at that time, and the Conde see that the Faction which had been formerly against him, was grown to such a head, that the fury of the People when diverted from a Foreign Enemy, was like to turn upon himself
and his Master, and might therefore think of secu∣ring to himself a place of Retreat, when the Storm that was a gathering should break upon his Head. But if these were his thoughts he found himself af∣terwards much out in his measures, for whatsoever promises France might have made him when in Pow∣er, yet after his Fall, tho' he betook himself to that Kingdom, he staid not long there, but found him∣self oblig'd to seek for Refuge in another Country; and so far was he from securing himself at home by this unhappy League, that 'tis thought it did but hasten his Master's Ruin and his own, by increasing the Peoples murmurs against them. This is certain, his Enemies pretended that it was made in an un∣due manner, without either the Advice or Consent of the Council, or the three Estates, to the Viola∣tion, as they said, of the Rights and Liberties of the Kingdom. The French King having thus found Work for the Spaniards at home, while his Ambassador was as∣suring the Court of Madrid, that if there were any Faith in his Master, the Pirenean Treaty should be kept inviolable, began the so much celebrated Ex∣peditions into Flanders, and the Franche Compte conquering all before him. The Success of his Arms was so astonishing to those that did not con∣sider how he had laid his Designs, that the English and Dutch who were but lately come out of the de∣structive War, that they had been prosecuting a∣gainst each other, took the Alarm, and together with the Swede, made the famous Triple Alliance, in order to oblige his most Christian Majesty to lay down his Arms. This made that King begin to show some Deference to Pope Clement the 9th's. So∣licitation for a Peace, and it was agreed upon by the Parties concern'd, that a Congress of their Ministers
should be held in order to adjust all Differences; of this Agreement the French King gives notice to his Ally the Prince Regent of Portugal, to the end that he should send thither his Plenipotentiary to act in concert with the French Minister. And now to all appearance were the Portugueses in much the same condition as they had been at the Pirenean Treaty, having no other hopes of a Peae but what the French should procure for them; and what reason could they have to think otherwise, but that they should be sacrificed in the same man∣ner as they were then, and sold for some of the controverted Places in Flanders? Philipville and Marienburg were their Price then, as such of their Writers that are most partial to France have declar'd to the World, possibly the Spaniards might bid higher for them now; and how could the Por∣tugueses be sure that they would not be taken at their Word? They had the French Faith indeed for their security, and that engaged to them by the late League in a more solemn manner then formerly, but not in so solemn a manner as it had been given be∣fore to the Spaniards, when it was sworn in the manner before related, That France would wholly Cast them off, and not afford them the least Suc∣cors. They were promis'd its true, that if they would but put themselves wholly upon the French, and leave them to make their Peace, they should have such Conditions got for them, as were both advantagious and honourable; but then if France should think her self oblig'd to have greater regard to her own Interest and Conveniency, then to all other Engagements, (and that such a thing was pos∣sible some former Transactions had sufficiently pro∣ved.) In that case, why might the little King∣dom of Sardinia be once more thought to be a pretty
convenient Retreat for a King of Portugal, or the Office of Constable of Castille an honourable Em∣ployment for a Duke of Bragança? But in case France should think it convenient, to continue her self, or keep Portugal embroil'd in the War; then all that the Spaniards could give, or the Portugueses ask, might not be thought to be either honourable or safe, it was not thought so upon Tryal as shall be made appear anon. But however, the Portugueses had now their Hands tied up, and could do nothing towards their own Relief. To the French they had given themselves, and for any thing they saw, to the French they must Trust. The Prince was consulting about the choice of a Minister, whom he should send as his Pleni∣potentiary to Aix la Chapelle, when on a sudden they receiv'd an unexpected Deliverance from these their pretended Friends, brought them by the same Hand that had rescued them, from their Victorious, though perhaps less Dangerous Enemies; but this likewise must be spoken of in another Chapter. These are the most memorable Transactions that have passed between the two Crowns since that of Portugal hath been in the House of Bragança, and they afford us one Single instance of the so much talkt of French Friendship, viz. the sending of their Troops into that Kingdom upon conclusion of the Pirenean Treaty; an action which the French or all People in the World should be the last to re∣member; they were ashamed as they had a great deal of reason, to own it at the Time, and the suc∣cess that attended their Auxiliaries, hath given them little cause to glory in it since; but this kind∣ness, if it was meant for such, has been more than out balanc'd by the hard usage which the Por∣tugueses have met with at their hands, for cer∣tainly
never were People so trick'd, abus'd and tri∣fled withal, as the Portugueses were during the whole course of Mazarin's Ministry; never were Allies so dishonourably sacrific'd, as they were to an enrag'd Enemy at the Pirenean Treaty, for I think I have made it plain, that they were then design'd to be utterly abandon'd; and as for this last Business of the League and Treaty of Peace, the French could have no other regard to Portugal, than to make that Kingdom to its own great Pre∣judice subservient to all their designs. So that it must have been by other means than Offices of true Friendship, that the French have all along supported their Interest in Portugal, and ma∣ny are of Opinion, that their Money hath had as free a course into this Kingdom, as into any other part of Europe. But other Instruments are like∣wise made use of, and those of two very different kinds from each other; but considering the Genius of the Portuguese Nation, it is very hard to deter∣mine which of them are the most likely to succeed. These are 1st. the Ladies that are continually sent hither to marry with Persons of Quality, who when they match out of their own Families, do usually supply themselves with Wives from France; and to say the truth, they have been furnish'd out of some of the best Houses in that Kingdom, and 'tis reported, that the French King, to encourage these Alliances between the two Courts, allows every Lady a Portion, which perhaps contributes not a little to render them acceptable to the Portu∣guese Nobility, who for the most part are not very easy in their Fortunes, and when they marry among themselves, have seldom any Money with their Wives, for in Portugal Blood serves instead of a Portion. It is hard to give a particular account,
what services these Ladies do for the Crown of France, but the Portuguese Writer that sets forth his King's Pretensions to Spain, gives a broad hint of what may be expected from them; for he says, that of the several methods used by the French, to gain their ends upon those they have to deal with, that of sending French Wives to govern them is the most infallible, and that they have found this a surer way to succeed, than all inveigling Perswasi∣ons or specious appearances of Advantage, and that it excels the force even of secret Bribes; for as he saith, they in Consequence of their having married French Women, shall be so bewitched, that seeing and knowing they shall seek their own Ruin, as if led thereto by a fatal kind of Necessity. It is true, this Portuguese speaks in the Person of a Spanish Noble Man, and lays the Scene in that Court, where I believe there are as yet but very few if any such Marriages, so that there is cause to suspect, that he speaks so feelingly from the Experience of his own Country. However by his leave, one that looks upon things at some distance, may be temp∣ted to question whether the force of these Syren's Charms be altogether so irresistible as he makes it; for Portugal it self where they are more numerous than in any other Country, stands yet undestroyed since their first coming in, which is now more than thrice ten Years; and indeed should we suppose the Sex to have never so ardent a Zeal for the Grandeur of their Monarch, one would think it should be not a little cool'd in such as are thus sacrific'd to his In∣terests, and sent in perpetual Banishment to so hide∣ous a Country as Portugal must needs appear to them that have been accustomed to the Gallantrys of a French Court. But granting that the great Monarch by procuring Husbands for these Ladies,
doth most strongly engage them to his Service, he by the same means disobliges a great many others, and renders them highly disaffected to His Majesty, viz. the Ladies of the Country, who as 'tis said, do not spare to make most bitter Complaints of the wrong done them, by this intrusion of Foreigners; and Jealousie, together with those other Passions that usually accompany it, have no doubt as great an Influence upon them, as Loyalty and Gratitude have upon the others: And the Portuguese Women, if they do not belie their Character, are as subtle and intriguing, as the French can be: Should they in revenge once take to Politicks, why may they not Cabal together, and form their Faction too? Did they once set about it, there is no doubt but they have power enough left, to make a Party of their own amongst the Fidalgo's that shall be able to make head against that of their Rivals. Together with the Ladies the Jesuits are reckon'd most zealous Promoters of the French Cause; these Fathers as the World knows very well, have been always Men of Intrigue, since their very first ap∣pearance, and the greatest Monarchs have thought fit to make use of them, in carrying on their De∣sins. In the last Age, the Spaniards had them wholly at their Devotion, and Philip the 2d. was much obliged to the Society on many accounts, and more particularly for their clearing his way to the Throne of Portugal; had it not been for them, it is thought that K. Henry the Cardinal had according to Justice and his own Inclinations, settled the Crown in the House of Bragança, but King Philip was then more in Favour with the Society, and there∣fore was the Crown reserved for him. But as the whole Order hath sometimes since chang'd Sides, and come over to the French, these in Portugal have
not been behind the rest, and are now supposed to serve that Party in this Court, with as much Zeal as any of their Order do elsewhere; some may per∣haps be apt to accuse the Society of Inconstancy on this occasion, but if any do so, it is certainly with∣out Reason, for these Fathers are still what they were from the very Beginning. The Fortunes of Spain and France are alter'd, but not the Jesuits, they continue firm to their Principles; it was for the Interests of the Society in the last Age, as it is in this, to gain the Favour of such as had the greatest Power, the Spaniards had it then, and the French have it now; and therefore Louis the 14th. is to them what Philip the 2d. was. Since the Spanish Mo∣narchy hath been falling to Ruin, it was time for them to make their Court elsewhere, for it is not to be thought that they have less Sagacity than those Animals who are ready to quit a decay'd Building when its fall is at hand. But that which is most to be admired in the Con∣duct of these Fathers is, that notwithstanding their being look'd upon as little better than Spys to those as∣piring Princes that have bid fairest for the Universal Monarchy, they have yet manag'd their Affairs with that Dexterity, as to maintain their Ground as long as they thought convenient in all other Courts, even those not excepted that were like to suffer first, when ever the Design should take effect; several instances might be given of this admirable Address of theirs in keeping in with all Parties, both in the last and the present Age, were I not to confine my self to Portugal. In this Court, they have enjoyed an unin∣terrupted Reign from the time of Simon Rodriguez, one of the first Companions of Loyola, and the first Jesuit that enter'd Portugal. He getting into Fa∣vour with John the 3d. laid the Foundations of
their greatness in this Kingdom; in Sebastian's time the Jesuits govern'd all, and the Blame is laid at their doors I know not how justly, of the lamen∣table Destruction wherein that ill advis'd Prince in∣volv'd both himself and his Kingdom; yet not∣withstanding this, King Henry the Cardinal was wholly at their Devotion. When the Spaniards got possession of this Crown, none were more zea∣lous in their Cause than the Jesuits: Yet when For∣tune began to frown upon them, and the present King's Father regain'd his Right, the Jesuits were ready immediately to assert his Title, and that not only to this Crown, but to all the World besides (by way of Prophecy I mean, for in Effect they are doing what they can to procure their so much talk'd of Fifth Monarchy for another Prince) and in all the Revolutions and Turns of State that have happened since, it was sure to be their Side, which soever it was, that chanc'd to come uppermost. In the present Court, their Power is certainly ve∣ry great, they having all along had the Direction of the Kings and both the Queens Consciences, so that considering how religiously disposed his Portu∣guese Majesty is, and his misfortune in having been so Educated, that his improvements in Knowledge have not kept pace with his other great Accom∣plishments, their Advice must necessarily go a great way with him, I find in a Memoire written by one, who seems well acquainted with the Secrets of this Court, that the Jesuits have a great Influ∣ence, not only over His Majesty, but over the Mi∣nisters likewise, who are said to be obliged to these Fathers for the great share they have in the Go∣vernment, and that one who hath the Address to get into Favour with their Reverences, which is done by enlarging on the Praises of the Society,
may makc a very good use of them in any Business depending at Court, provided that it doth not clash with the Interest of France; for it seems they have always an eye to that which is now the grand con∣cern of the Society. My Author gives one signal Instance of their Zeal and Affection to the French Party, which shows them to be capable of any thing in order to promote that, even to the sacrifi∣cing of all other Interests, it being of a Design, which had it taken effect, must have outed the present Ministers from Court, or at least abated much of their Power; for it was to bring the Conde de Castel∣melhor into Business again, and that because they know him, saith my Author, to be well affected to France. I cannot tell upon what grounds the Con∣de is thought to be so inclin'd, he was indeed a kind of a Martyr for the French Cause; for the League before mention'd is thought to have been in part the occasion of his Fall. But his being obliged after all that he had suffer'd for them to take San∣ctuary in England, where he was honourably en∣tertain'd, and had a noble Pension assign'd him, should as one would think have inclin'd him ano∣ther way; its true, his eldest Son the Conde de Cal∣beta hath married a French Lady, but that was since the Design I am speaking of was set on foot. But however this be, the Jesuits no doubt hop'd for some extraordinary advantage from his re-admissi∣on into Court, since they durst venture to offend the Conde's great Rival the Duke of Cavadal, from whom they were to look for a most Powerful Op∣position. But as the Attempt was great, the way they took to effect it, was somewhat surprizing, for the Queen by the advice of Father Fuess her Con∣fessor, was to use her endeavours with the King to bring it about. It is no wonder that Father Fuess,
being a Jesuit, though a German, should desire the advancement of one engag'd in the French Interest; yet it is somewhat strange, that a Daughter of the Palatine Family should so far forget her Father's House, as to concern her self in such a Cause. But they that are acquainted with the Intrigues of the Society, will not wonder to see those carrying on their designs, who in appearance should have the greatest reason to oppose them. My Author who seems to be a very intelligent Person, and who as I had it from a good hand, was both a Coun∣tryman and a Servant to her Majesty, saith, that the Business was brought so far to a head, that the Queen waited only for the time, when her Confes∣sor should think it proper for her to break it to the King. How it came to miscarry I know not, but it seems to be now wholly laid aside, for the Con∣de has not yet appear'd at Court, and it was about 1691. that this Business was in Agitation, since which time the Duke of Cadaval hath by the Marriage of his Son, to the King's natural Daughter, establish'd himself at Court more firmly than ever. The French then having such Powerful Agents at the Court of Portugal as are the Ladies and the Jesuits, tho' their Interest there be very considera∣able, yet it is some wonder that it is not much greater, as without doubt it would be, were there not so wise a Prince on the Throne, as his present Majesty. It cannot be denied, but that the French Artifices in representing the late War, as rais'd and carried on upon a religious account, have pre∣vail'd much, and that not only among the com∣mon People, but with them likewise that are in a much higher Station, and have had in a great mea∣sure their design'd effect, in byassing Peoples minds to the prejudice of the Allies. It is reported of a
certain very great Lady, that when the News came to Lisbon of a great Disaster likely to befal some of the Allies upon the Coasts of Portugal, she could not forbear expressing her satisfaction in a most unusual manner, That the Hereticks were confounded. But there are not wanting among them some so much wiser than the rest, as to see through the French Artifices, and perceive that all this trouble that they give World, hath some other end in it, than the advancement of their Religion, and there are those that will not stick to give our King his just Titles, of Europes Deliverer, and the Restorer of Liberty to Mankind. As for the King himself, he is certainly not insensible of his own true Interest, I have good grounds to believe that the Levies he was making in 1693. were design'd to help forward the common Cause, and had actu∣ally march'd towards Catalonia, had he not been assur'd from his Ministers abroad, that the French were earnestly soliciting for a Peace, and that the Fortune of the War had not turned so much to the disadvantage of the Allies, as to make them want his Assistance. And few I believe doubt, but that the Forces now on foot have been rais'd, upon a like design, should there be occasion for them; this Court being by this convinc'd what little ac∣count is to be made of French Protestations of Friendship, and where they are like to end, of these they have had as great or a greater share than any other People, and they find themselves now to be first mark'd out for Destruction, for while they are caress'd by the French Ministers at Versailles and Lisbon, those of the same Nation are again making a Sacrifice of them at Madrid, at least if the Author of the Paper concerning the King's Pre∣tensions
to Spain, supposed to have been written by order of this Court be rightly inform'd; for there we find among other Conditions offer'd to the Spaniards in behalf of the Duke of Anjou, the Re-union of Portugal to the Crown of Spain, proposed for one; so that the Portugueses find it high time for them to look to themselves, and in all appearance, they will leave nothing unattemp∣ted to bring about that Re-union, though in a dif∣ferent manner than is propos'd by France.
OF THE INTERESTS OF PORTUGAL, With Relation to the Emperor, Holland, the Northern Crowns, &c. TIll of late Years there hath been little or no intercourse between Portugal and the Court of Vienna; the reason of this strangeness was the cruel Treatment of Dom Duarte, Prince of Bragan∣ca, and Uncle to the present King: This Prince at the Acclamation of his Brother King John the 4th. had been eight Years in the Emperor's Service, and was in the Post of a Major General, under Piccolo∣meni, and as it is said, he had signaliz'd himself with great Courage, in the War against the Swedes; but he having no notice given him of his Brother's design, the Spanish Ministers at Vienna assoon as the news of the Revolt came thither, procured a secret Order from the Emperor Ferdinand the 3d.
to have him arrested by way of Reprizal, for what his Brother had taken from them, and to please them, this innocent Prince was by a manifest vio∣lation of the Liberties of the Empire, and the Ho∣nour of the German Nation, kept Prisoner for some∣time at Grats, and afterwards sold to the Spaniards for the summ of Forty Thousand Crowns, and was by them carried away to the Castle of Milan, where he was shut up for the remainder of his life, he ending his days there after eight years of Con∣finement. This dishonourable Act of the Emperor begat such a coldness between the two Courts of Vienna and Lisbon, that there had been no Com∣munication between them till of late Years; the first advance towards a Correspondence by all that I can learn, was not made till the Year 1683. when at the Pope's instance, King Peter contributed a large supply of Money towards the Expences of the War against the Turks. But his Marriage af∣terwards with one so nearly Related to the House of Austria, as her late Majesty was, laid the Foun∣dation of a solid Friendship, and it was generally expected, that this Match would have brought the King wholly over to the Austrian Interest; it was thought that there was something of a Negotiati∣on on foot, to engage him on that side in the be∣ginning of the last War, viz. in 1689. when the Count de Mansfield employed in the Business of the King of Spain's second Marriage, took Lisbon in his way from Madrid to Nieubourg, and the French Ambassador seem'd to have smelt out some such thing, and thereupon by way of Revenge, found means to mortify both the King and the Count. For the King having ordered one of his Ships to be got ready for the Count to Embark upon, the Am∣bassador took occasion to acquaint His Majesty,
that the Count de Mansfield, being a Minister of the Emperor, and one of his Generals, there was cause to fear that the Ship which carried him would be attack'd by French Men of War, which might occasion some distast between his most Christian and his Portuguese Majesty; the King was fain to hearken to the Admonition, and digest the Menace rather than expose himself to a greater Insult, per∣ceiving I suppose, that the Ambassador saw plain enough that he was not in a condition to resent it. wherefore the Count was left to provide a Ship for himself, however the King order'd two of his Frigats to convoy him to the mouth of the Chan∣nel. As the War was drawing towards a conclusion, the King sent a most splendid Embassy to Vienna, at the same time when he sent another to the French Court, as it was thought to interpose his good Of∣fices towards the drawing on of the Peace. Nor did the disgrace which befel the Portuguese Ambassa∣dor to his Imperial Majesty, break off the Corres∣pondence between the two Courts, the Emperor seeming now resolved to have his Ministers constant∣ly Resident at Lisbon, having never before had any such since the House of Bragança was possess'd of the Crown; it is much for the Interest of both Parties to have a good understanding together, whilst the cause of the Succession of Spain is depending, for though in regard to that affair, they have different ends in view, yet they are both alike concern'd to act in concert, till the greatest and most difficult point be gain'd which is the Exclusion of France. With the Dutch this Court hath had a fair and amicable Correspondence ever since the Year 1669. when all differences were made up that had broken ut since the Peace with that Nation in 1662. of
which I shall say nothing here, since it would o∣blige me to give an account of the preceding War, which would take up more room then can be now spared. There seems to be little or no Communication between this and the two Northern Crowns; the great distance between them being the cause that they have seldom any thing to do with one another, all the Business the Danes and Swedes have here, being about the Trade for Salt, which they load yearly at Setubal, but this is easily managed by the Consuls. The deserved Esteem this King had for the great Sobieski, and the Marriage of Prince James his Son with the Queen's Sister, afforded matter for some Reciprocal Compliments between them; but there was a difficulty in the Ceremonial which would not permit them to have this little Intercourse to∣gether. The King of Poland in his Letter, named himself first, which this Court could not bear, and therefore refused to receive the Letter, because that King is only the Head of a Republick, whereas his Majesty of Portugal is an Absolute Sovereign. The present King of Poland's Envoy, when he came to Lisbon to notify his Master's advancement to that Crown, could not be received nor admitted to Audience for the same Reason, and not as some thought, for that this King refus'd to acknowledge his Master or disapprov'd of his Election. The Princes of Germany and Italy can have very little to do here, and therefore little notice is taken of them; the Elector Palatine himself having no Minister residing at Court. The Elector of Bran∣denbourg indeed hath his Resident, but that is more for the Honour and Security of the Person, than on account of any Business, he being a considerable
French Merchant of the Religion. I have not heard that since the Business of the Infanta's Marriage, any thing hath past between this Court and those of Savoy and Florence. The Duke of Parma hath had his Envoy here upon Offices of Ceremony, I suppose upon account of his Relation to the Royal Family, he being descended from a Daughter of Dom Emanuel, that was eldest Sister to her, in whose right the House of Bragança lays claim to the Crown, and consequently he would have an undoubted Right thereto, were he not excluded by the Laws of Lamego
OF THE INTERESTS OF PORTUGAL, With Relation to ENGLAND. I Believe there are no People in the World that have valued themselves less upon their Friend∣ship to the Portugueses, or deserved more at their Hands then the English, I should have placed them first, had I rank'd the rest according as they merit in the Esteem of this Nation; for they well de∣serve to be reckon'd, and that in the chief place a∣mong the Founders, the Protectors, and the Restorers of the Kingdom. They have certainly been the surest and most dis-interess'd Friends to it, almost from the time when Portugal first became a Nati∣on, to the Establishment of the now Reigning Fa∣mily upon the Throne. And in truth, the ancient Portugueses have shown so much Gratitude, that there remain in this Country several Memorials
of the English Generosity and Valour, that have been forgotten by our selves, and are over look'd by our own Writers; but of late we have not had the like reason to commend their Justice, though our Nation in the present Age, as great as the Me∣rits of our Ancestors were, hath deserv'd no less at their Hands. Their Ancient Writers set forth at large, how great a share the English had in the first raising of their Kingdom, and how they have since more then once rescued it from Destructi∣on, and there are those yet alive among them, that know very well how their Deliverance from utter Ruin, and that Liberty and Peace which they now enjoy, is owing to the Bravery of our Soldi∣ers, and the Prudence of our Ministers; but their late Writers have not been so Ingenuous as to deli∣ver what they knew to Posterity. It will not be expected that in so short a space as is left me, I should give a particular Account of these Transactions; however, I shall briefly touch upon some of those that have pass'd in for∣mer Ages, as they are related by the Portuguese Historians, hoping that it will not be altogether ungrateful to the English Reader, to hear News from Foreigners, as old as it is concerning his own Country Men: And some mention must be made of what the English have done of late Years for Portugal, and that both in Justice to those, who by their Wisdom or their Courage, have contribu∣ted its present Establishment; and to excite such as are more able, or may have better Opportunities to do it, to retrieve the Memory of many signal Acti∣ons perform'd here by our Country Men, which as great and important as they were; they that enjoy the Benefit of them, seem now resolv'd to Bury in silence.
It is agreed by the Portuguese Writers, the Mo∣dern as well as the Ancient, that the English had a great hand in the Conquest of Lisbon from the Mores, whereby Portugal came to deserve the name of a Kingdom. They say indeed, that Al∣fonso Henriquez chang'd his Title of Count or Prince for that of King, immediately after the Vision of Ourique before mention'd, but possibly the story of that Vision may not be true; and this is certain, that the three Estates of the Kingdom in their Re∣monstrance to Innocent the 10th. affirm from their Chronicles, that this Prince would not accept of the Crown, till it was made Tributary to the See of Rome, which was not done till many Years af∣ter the taking of Lisbon, viz. not before 1179. when Pope Alexander the 3d. by his Bull still ex∣tant, conferr'd upon him the Title and Dignity of King. In their Account of the Conquest of this City, the Portuguese Authors tell us, that in the Year 1147. a great Fleet from England, compos'd of several Nations, and bound for the Holy Land, under the Command of William Longspè, passing by the Rock of Sintra. Alfonso Henriquez so dealt with the Leaders, that they agreed to stand in to the Tagus, and joyn with him in laying Siege to Lisbon, on condition that one half of the City when gain'd, should be given up to them: Accordingly the City was taken after a Siege of five Months, and the slaughter of 200000 Mores. Alfonso of∣fer'd to make good the Agreement, and put them in Possession of their part of the City, and to make an equal Division with them of all that was taken, both within and without it, which they generously refus'd to accept of; since as they said, they had not left their Country to get Riches, but were en∣gaged in a more glorious Design, and withall they
did not think it becoming them to enjoy a Sove∣reignty within another Prince's Dominions; and so having accepted of a small share of the Spoils, they proceeded on in their Voyage. I will not under∣take for the several Circumstances of this Story, for I believe some of them are not true; I believe there will be no Account found among those that have written of the Holy War of any such Expe∣dition made this Year, and the famous Earl of Sa∣lisbury, if he be the Person meant by Guilbelme de longa Espada was not yet Born; and for many rea∣sons we cannot allow the Account of the slain, one is, because Lisbon was then scarce big enough to hold so many. The present Inhabitants cannot be suppos'd to exceed much that Number, but the Walls that are now standing, and were not built till 1375. though they contain but a part of the City, are of a much larger compass then those that stood at the time of the Siege. The Strangers had then their Camp upon the Hill, where the Mona∣stry of St. Francesco, and the Church of the Mar∣tyrs stand, which are now in the very heart of the City, and the Portuguese Camp on the other side was, where the Church of San Vincente is now, which is within the present Walls, though it hath still the Name of San Vincente de Fora, because it was formerly without the City. In effect, the ancient City of Lisbon was not of a much larger compass then that of the Hill on which the Castle of St. George now stands, so that they that know any thing of the Place, will never think that 200000 People could be killed at the taking of it, supposing every Soul to have been put to the Sword. How∣ever, that Lisbon was taken this Year, and that by the Assistance of the English and other Strangers, is agreed upon by the Spanish, as well as the Portu∣guese
Historians; I suppose they were Soldiers of Fortune, as Mariana seems to intimate, whom Al∣fonso Henriquez had invited thither with hopes of Booty and a share of the Conqusts. And it is not likely that they refused the Reward promis'd them whatever it was, on account of their being engag'd in the Holy War, for there remain'd so many of them in the Country, that the want of them would doubtless have broke that Voyage; for those that stayed had the Towns of Almada, Povos, Villa Fran∣ca, Villa Verde, Azambuja, Arruda Lourinham, and several other Places assign'd them, which accor∣ding to the Portuguese Historians were all Peopled by these strangers. Almada which is a small Town with a Castle on a Hill, formerly very strong, situ∣ated on the other side of the River over against Lis∣bon, took its Name as these Authors will have it, from an English Expression which they write Vi∣mad-el qu. We made [Ye] all: But if the word must needs be of an English Original, one should rather think it came from a more modest Expressi∣on, viz. we are All made. They tell likewise, that the Lords of the Place who took their Name from thence, pretended always to be of English Extracti∣on; and that for this reason, those of the Family have on several Occasions receiv'd great Honours in that Kingdom. Povos which is a Town Situated upon the River about four Leagues above Lisbon, was as they say, anciently called Cornovalha, from its being Peopled by Cornish Men, and afterwards corruptly Cornaga, by which last name, I find the Place called above 200 Years afterwards, possibly the reason of its being left off, may be the great ab∣horrence which the Portugueses have for the first Syllable of it, which a well bred Man amongst them will never pronounce upon any account. The
Name it hath now is the common Word for Vil∣lages. In fine, it seems to be almost as usual in Portugal, for such as would become of better Fa∣milies then ordinary, to derive their Pedigree from these Strangers that were at the taking of Lisbon, as it is with us to have our Ancestors come in with William the Conqueror. Such of them as continu∣ed at Lisbon, had very great Priviledges and Im∣munities allowed them, as well they might, if one half of the City was their own by Compact, and the best part of the Kingdom, as the Termo of Lis∣bon certainly is, was owning to their Valour. The Licentiate Duarte Nunes de Liam, who was a Judge, and consequently must be suppos'd to understand the Constitutions of his Country, Reports that these Privileges were continued, not only to the Descen∣dants, from the first Conquerors, but to the Per∣sons and Merchandizes of such of their Country Men, as should resort thither; and he saith like∣wise, that the succeeding Kings confirm'd and ob∣serv'd them to his time, he wrote in the Year 1600. I have seen a large Collection of Priviledges gran∣ted by the several Kings of Portugal to the Eng∣lish, beyond those enjoy'd by the Portuguese Subjects, I know not whether I may call them Charters. These were copied from the Archives of the Kingdom, in the Torre de Tumbo, but the most ancient was of King Ferdinand, whose Reign be∣gan not till 1367. There are several of John the 1st. his Successor, some of which refer to others granted by his Predecessors. By this it appears that the English had a great hand in setting up the Kingdom of Portugal, and if the Historians of this Country deceive us not, they had as great a share in Protecting and Secu∣ring it, as often as it hath been brought into Dan∣ger
by a Foreign Enemy. Twice it was like to be wholly over-run by the Castillians, who had pos∣sed themselves of the greatest part of the King∣dom, and gain'd a numerous Party of the Nobility over to their side, and had been very near taking Lisbon it self; the first time in the Reign of Ferdi∣nand, the last of the lawful Descendants from Al∣fonso Henriquez, the other time while John the 1st. from whom all that have succeeded him derived their Titles, was strugling for the Crown; and they have been as often reliev'd by the English, and en∣abled to carry the War into the Enemies Country, our Princes of the Blood condescending to go in Person to their Assistance; first Edmund de Langley then Earl of Cambridge, and afterwards John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster. And if after the seve∣ral flourishing Reigns that succeeded, they were at last reduc'd under the Spanish Yoke, it was because they were wanting to themselves, the English ha∣ving sent out a Gallant Fleet, and Army to their Rescue, under Dom Antonio, whom they had made their King, but they would not accept Deliverance, and so they remain'd under the Power of their Ene∣mies. In the last War after the French had given them up, or assisted them in such a manner as they should not own without Confusion, when all Europe look∣ed upon their Ruin as inevitable, some of the most considerable Persons in the Kingdom, being so far of the same Opinion, that they thought it now high time for them to save themselves, and make their Peace with the Spaniards, as the Duke of Aveiro and their Ambassador in Holland who went over to them; Cardinal Mazarin making himself merry with our Locker at the Folly of all the rest, for not doing the same, and for thinking it possible for
them to hold out longer; Don Luis de Haro, who was not accounted Sanguin, making nothing of the little Expedition that his Master was about against the Duke of Bragança, for after this rate he is reported to have talk'd to King Charles the 2d. at the Pirences: Those small Forces sent by King Charles after his Restoration, by their unparallel'd Valour, soon put an end to the Quarrel, and the Victories obtain'd by their Means, being seconded as they were by the Vigilence Dexterity and Con∣duct of the same King's Ministers, recover'd Por∣tugal and restor'd it to the condition in which it now remains. These Forces consisted of about 3000 Men, for∣med into three Regiments, two of Foot which made near 2400, and one of Horse of about 800. They were at first Commanded by the Earl of In∣chiquin, but his Lordship returning to England be∣fore they took the Field, they were by Commission from the King of England, put under the Conduct of Count Schomberg, who had himself the imme∣diate Command of one of the foot Regiments. They arriv'd in Portugal soon after Don John had made an end of that successful Campagne, before mention'd in 1662. and were dispos'd of into Quar∣ters till the following Spring, when they joyn'd the Portuguese Army in order to relieve Evora, but in their March towards that City, they were met with the News of its being surrender'd without Resistance in a manner, and upon very Dishonour∣able Terms, though it had in it a Garrison of 7000 Foot and 700 Horse, and was provided with all things necessary for a stout Defense, till such time as the Army should come up and attempt to raise the Siege. The News of this loss so struck the Com∣manders of the Army, that 'tis no wonder it should
put the People into that consternation before describ∣ed. The Conde de Villa Flor the Gen. was so discourag∣ed, that his concern appear'd to the very Soldiers in his Looks, which our Men who had been used to see their Commanders so Dejected observ'd with Indignation. A Council of War being called, it appear'd that the Army was in no condition to fight the Enemy, and it was resolv'd not to attempt it as bad as their Case was. Something might have been done had Evora held out, they relying upon the Garrisons, fallying at the same time, when they should attack the Besiegers: But the Garrison was now made Prisoners of War, so it was resolv'd that they should encamp themselves at a Place call'd Landroal, which lay so between the Enemies Fron∣tier Places, that they might cut off any convoys of Provisions coming from thence. Don John in the mean while having possess'd himself of so Great and Populous a City in the very heart of Alemtejo, be∣came thereby Master in a manner of the whole Pro∣vince, and was providing for his Army at his Ene∣mies Cost, by putting all the Country under Contribu∣tion, for which end and to gave the greater Alarm to Lisbon, whereby to increase the Tumult there, he sent that large Detachment before mention'd, as far as Alcacere do Sal. The Court at this time appre∣hending no less Danger from the Multitude then the Enemy, and seeing the Affairs of Portugal to be in all respects desperate, was continually sending Orders to the Commanders to fight at any rate; the Army at last being reinforc'd with what Troops other parts of the Kingdom could send, or the Gar∣risons spare, march'd towards the Spaniards, hoping to find them divided, but not being able to hinder their Detachments from joyning the main Body, they were for retiring again. Don John follow'd
at their Heels to give them Battle, but they had pass'd a small River, call'd Degebe, before he came up with them, and they had posted themselves so advantageously, that there were but two Passes through which he could come to Attack them. That where the Portugueses thought the greatest Danger was, it being in its self the easiest to be forc'd, was defended by one of the English Regi∣ments. Don John made his greatest Efforts to gain it, and there ensued a very hot Dispute, for at se∣veral times he sent in fresh Troops to renew the Charge, which were as often repulsed with loss, so that he was oblig'd at last to desist from the At∣tempt, Don John found now that he had other Enemies to deal with then those he had hitherto been used to. Being frustrated of his Design, he put a Garrison into Evora, and began to march towards the Frontiers, where he expected to be re-inforced with fresh Supplies, in order to return and both se∣cure and enlarge his Conquests. The Portugueses began now to take Courage, and perceiving Don John's design, being press'd withal by repeated Or∣ders from Court to Fight, directed their March the same way in order to wheel about and get before him, which they might easily do, having secur'd their heavy Baggage at Estremos, whereas the Spa∣nish Army was much incumber'd with Carriages. However, the March of the Portuguese Army was so hasty, that as the Conde da Ericeyra saith, the English bore both, that and the heat of the Sun with Impatience. Its true, the Toil which our Country Men under went at that time was very great, but least any should gather from that Expression, that they show'd any great Backwardness in the service, I shall tell the occasi∣on of it, which his Lordship is pleas'd to omit.
The two Armies were at a small distance over a∣gainst each other, both making what hast they could to pass a River (Tera) before the Night that preceded the Battle of Amexial. The Eng∣lish being in the Rear of the Portuguese Army, I suppose, because that was to become the Front when they got before the Enemy; as Evening drew on, the Alarm was taken in the Front, that the E∣nemy was at hand, but then the English were at a great distance from that part where the Action was like to be, and without them it seems nothing was to be done; Orders were thereupon given for them to Advance with all speed, which they did as fast as 'twas possible for them to run throughout the whole length of the Army. Their eagerness to en∣gage with the Enemy, and their Pride no doubt to see so many thousands of Armed Men look upon them as their Guardians, spurring them on beyond their strength, insomuch that several of them thro' Heat and want of Breath, fell by the Way and some were lost; but by that time they came up, the A∣larm ceas'd, and there was nothing for them to do, as 'twas well there was not, for as some of the Of∣ficers have assur'd me, the Men were so Faint, and Weary, as to become altogether unfit for Action; such was the occasion of the Impatience taken No∣tice of by the Noble Author in his Account of this days March. The next day the Spaniards by reason of their slow March occasion'd by their heavy Luggage, put it in the Power of the Portugueses to oblige them to Fight. As the Armies came in sight of each other, the English Horse with a Party of Portugueses were commanded to dislodge several Battallions of the Enemy, that had possessed themselves of a rising Ground, which the Portugueses thought necessary
for them, in case they should come to a Battle. They did not only do as they were Ordered, by driving those Batallions from the Hill, but they followed them into the Plain on the other side, and found themselves insensibly ingag'd in a hot Skir∣mish with the whole Body of the Spanish Cavalry, that was conducting the Carriages towards another Hill a League off, where their Foot had already posted themselves; but they were so surprised and disorder'd by this sudden Attack, that had our Men been seconded as 'twas expected they should be from the Army, 'twas thought they might have put them intirely to the Rout. Count Schomberg saw what Advantage was to be made of the Con∣fusion he perceived them in, and was marching towards them in all hast with such of the Ca∣valry as were near at hand; but giving notice of what he was doing to the Conde de Villa Flor, He in all hast sent positive Orders to command him back, possibly for no other Reason but to keep up the Custom of Thwarting the Count, who had hi∣therto been opposed in almost every Motion he made. The Portuguese Commanders seeming resolv'd to spare the Enemy, or give him any Advantage over them, rather then suffer the Count to know more of their Trade then themselves, which without Que∣stion was one Reason of their former Losses, as the Deference they paid him afterwards was of the Success that follow'd. The Count obey'd the Ge∣neral's Orders, though with some Reluctancy, but it was not long before he took the liberty to act more of his own Head, and thereby saved Portugal. The Portugueses possessed themselves of the ri∣sing Ground, from whence the Spaniards had been beaten; they on the other side retir'd to two oppo∣site Hills, drawing up the Horse in a large Plain,
at the bottom of that on the right Hand, and their Foot on the tops of both, planting a Battery of four Guns on each. Till three a Clock in the Af∣ternoon, they spent the time on both sides in Cano∣nading each other, and some light Skirmishes, with∣out doing any considerable Dammage on either side; but by this time it was observ'd, that the Spani∣ards fired more slowly then before, and played but four Guns of Eight that they began with, which made the Portugueses suspect them to be designing (as they were) to draw off and continue their March; hereupon it was debated in a Council of War, what was to be done in the Case: They had positive Orders from the King and the Conde de Castlemelhor, to Fight upon the first occasion, which they had great cause to dispair of ever being able to do, should Don John give them the slip at this time, and be re-inforc'd with the Troops that were ready for him on the Frontiers. On the other side, the Spaniards had so placed themselves, that there was no Fighting with them, but at great Disad∣vantage; their Horse which were double in Num∣ber to the Portuguese, being six thousand to three, had a large Plain before them, and in regard to the Foot, their Advantage was much greater, yet not on account of their Number indeed, for the Portugueses had Eleven Thousand to Ten of theirs. But they had so Fortified themselves upon one of the Hills, or rather Nature had done it for them, that Don John thought he could not have found a better, or more secure Place of Arms, as he told the King his Father, in a Letter after the Battle, in which he compar'd it to the Castle of Milan, add∣ing, that he thought himself so safe there, that he was almost asham'd of his over great Precaution, and that the Enemy in mounting it, came scram∣bling
up like so many Cats [Como Gateando.] But the truth is, his Highness did a little exaggerate the matter, as two of the Officers who command∣ed the Party that did this Feat, most ingenuously acknowledg'd, and thereby undeceiv'd me of an Error, who could think little otherwise of it then as a direct Precipice. Each of them severally af∣firming, that neither they nor their Men, made use of their Hands in mounting it; they said indeed, that it was very steep, but according to their Dis∣cription, it could not be near so inaccessible as the Spaniards themselves have made it. However, these Difficulties weighed so much with the Por∣tuguese Commanders, that the Council broke up without coming to any Resolution; But for all this Count Schomberg was never the less attentive in observing the Countenance and Motions of the Enemy, and carefully seeking about, where and how he might be attacked, when those that had been for Fighting in the Council, came about him, Simon Vasconcellos, more especially, who urged to him the repeated Orders of the King and his Bro∣ther the Conde de Castelmelbor, and it was agreed at last amongst them, even in the absence of the General (one of them undertaking for him) to bring it to a Battle; and as they were ranging the Cavalry in order, the Count took occasion to ac∣quaint the General of what they resolv'd on, who now seem'd well enough satisfied, declaring that he for his part had been always for it. The Fight began between the Horse on both sides, the Portuguese Left charging the Spaniards Right Wing; I cannot give any exact Account of the part which the English Horse had in this Action, not having had the opportunity to speak with any Eye-witnesses of their Conduct. However, those
Officers from whom I received my Information con∣cerning the Foot, have assured me, that the Horse on this occasion behaved themselves with the like Gal∣lantry, as their Country men did in the other part of the Battle, to be spoken of presently: Though they had not the like success, they were commanded to be∣gin the Charge, and renew it several times toge∣ther, which they did with their accustomed Bra∣very, though they were oblig'd every time to leap a wide Ditch, wherein several of their Horses stuck, and the French who were to have sustained them, fired their Pistols at a distance, and then marched off and sheltered themselves under a Wall. But it seems our Horse met with their Match at this time, having to deal with a Body of Old German Troops, who had learnt the Trade as well as them∣selves; for as 'tis said, they kept their Bullets till the English came close up to them, and were not to be easily broken by so small a Number. While the Horse on both sides were engag'd in a fierce, and for sometime doubtful Fight, our Foot were facing the foremention'd inaccessible Hill, as the Spaniards thought it; the Portugueses firing their Muskets at the Enemy, who was at so great a distance, that it was impossible to do any Executi∣on. The Spaniards in the mean time playing with their Battery from the Hill, which did some Dam∣age to the English, who were to the Left of the whole Army, killing four or five Men among their Pikes. Count Schomberg who as being the Author of this Battle, had a more than ordinary concern upon him for its success, was now every where gi∣ving Orders and Encouragement to the Officers and Soldiers; he coming to the Left to animate his Country men, as he then called the English, to be∣have themselves as became them, found that not∣withstanding
their Yesterdays Fatigue, the sight of the Enemy had made them Wanton, a thing as it must be confess'd usually observed in our Soldiers and Sea-men, when they are in hopes of an Engage∣ment. These were become Proud before hand of their Buff-coats, which as they thought they saw on the Backs of the Spaniards, Don John's Guards being cloathed in Yellow. The Count hearing some of them Bragging how fine they should be, gave them a gentle Reproof, by telling them, that the time to Boast was when the Armour was put off; but seeing that the Enemies Cannon was like to prove troublesome to them where they stood, he ordered Lieutenant Colonel Hunt, who commanded them at that time to advance nearer the Hill to certain broken Houses, by which means the great Guns might shoot over them, and the Houses be a shelter to them from the small shot. When the Count left them, they marched as they were directed, the Ene∣my as they advanced nearer, firing most furiously upon them, though they received but little hurt, even after they were come within reach of the small Shot; the Officers suppos'd that the reason was, because the Spaniards firing so fast as they did, neglected to ram their Muskets, and that the Bul∣lets tumbled out as they were aiming downwards, before they could give Fire; they were confirm'd in this Opinion, when they observ'd afterwards, that such as were wounded, had been shot in their upper Parts. When they came up to the Houses, it was found that they did not afford Covert for half their Men, and here the Soldiers began to grow impatient indeed; the Place seem'd hot, and the Enemy was near, and they thought it hard that they must stand there to be Pelted at, whilst they might be in Action, wherefore they were all for
having their Commander lead them on, and show'd so much egarness to be up with the Enemy, that he resolv'd to gratify them, though he had no Or∣ders for it; and so forward they marched through all the Fire and Smoak, that the Spaniards on the Hill could make. The Lieutenant Colonel com∣manding upon pain of Death, that none of his Men should fire till he gave the Word; when they were got up to the Brink, the three foremost Ranks were ordered to give fire at once, the first kneeling, the second stooping: The Soldiers took their aim so well, that this discharge was answered with a dismal hideous Groan from the dying Spaniards, but being seconded by another, the Rear half-files presently advancing and firing in the same manner, the Enemy began to give way in disorder, our Men perceiving their Business to be in a manner done, gave as load a Shout as 'twas possible for them to make, and then fell in with the But-ends of their Muskets, and presently put them into Confusion, and in a short time entirely routed them beyond all possibility of Rallying, continuing the Pursuit for about a Mile, having made themselves Masters of the four pieces of Cannon, Don John's Tent and rich Baggage, and many of our Men look'd upon their Work as so far done, that they thought it high time to go to Dinner; for among other things, they had seiz'd upon Don John's Provisions, which they found just ready Dressed, and were falling to, but Count Schomberg soon found employment for them elsewhere. This resolute Action of the English Foot occasi∣on'd the famous Victory of Amexial, Canal or Evo¦ra, for the Battle goes by all three of those Names; but the Author of the second Part of Portugal, Re¦staurado now lately publish'd, so orders the mat∣ter,
as to communicate the Honour of it to his own Country men, and not content with that, he will scarce suffer the English to have any the least share in it. In his account of this Battle, he without taking notice of any preceding Action among the Foot, sets Himself and another General Officer at the Head of four Regiments, in order to march up the Hill, one of these he allows indeed to be Eng∣lish, commanded by Lieutenant Colonel Thomas Hunt, but then he takes care to drop them by the way. Before they begin their March, the Conde de Villa Flor is brought in to make a florid Speech, which works so much upon them, that at the last Words they are in Motion; but the English being to the Left of all, and nearest the Plain where the Cavalry on both sides were ingag'd, are attack'd by four hundred Horse with great Bravery. But they forming themselves into a close Body, the Fire∣locks keeping within the Pikes, make such Resi∣stance by their repeated Discharges, that the Three Regiments led on by the two Commanders, con∣tinue their March unmolested. In ascending the Hill they think fit that they might make sure work of it, to send a single Officer to see whether the Enemy might not have some Horse there to op∣pose them. The Officer does as he is ordered, ma∣king his way through Clouds of Bullets, as the Au∣thor expresses it, takes a full view of the Place, and sees no Horse there; with this Answer he en∣courages them to make up to the Top, and then the Three Regiments act over again the very same things which (as it hath hitherto been believ'd) the Eng∣lish had done before. This Account Publish'd, as it is, under the Name of Dom Luis de Menezes, who was himself in the Battle as General of the Artillery, and doubtless ac∣quitted
himself therein with Honour, and afterwards had the Title Conde da Ericeyra, must at first sight in∣fallibly shake the Credit of the foregoing Relation, if not intirely destroy it; and so put our Country men out of Possession of an Honour, which till the latter end of last Year, they had enjoy'd as their undoubted Right. However, there are some fur∣ther Passages to be told relating to this Battle, which may possibly keep the former Account from being thought altogether incredible. But before any thing be said in Defence of the one, or Answer to the other, there are certain Re∣ports that have been current about Lisbon for some Years, which the Publick ought to be inform'd of, and that in consideration of the respect due to one of the Conde's Quality. These Reports are such, as if there be any Grounds for them, may make one suspect that the Conde hath been much injur'd in the Edition of his Works. It was the common talk in Portugal for several Years after the Publication of the first Volumn, that some other Person besides his Lordship, had a hand in Composing and Dige∣sting his Papers; but then its true, that People dif∣fer'd much in their Opinions concerning the Person suppos'd to be thus Employ'd, some would have it, that it was a Person of Quality indeed, but one of the other Sex: Others were for a certain Priest whom the Conde, as they pretend, kept in his House for that purpose. I will not undertake for the Credit of either the one, or the other of these Reports, as being altogether ignorant on what gounds they were rais'd; but the Truth is, there is great cause why they that wish well to the Conde's Memory, should be glad they were believ'd, and some Passages in the Book it self makes one think that there may be something in them; the Language bestow'd by
the Author on those he calls Hereticks. Our King Charles the First for one, when he reflects on the Behaviour of that Blessed Martyr in his last Ago∣ny, is not common among Men of the Conde's Rank, but seems to come rather from the indiscreet Zeal of a Bigotted Lady, which is the only excuse its capable of. And as for the Account now un∣der consideration, the Reader will soon perceive, that it savours strongly of something that I shall not name, but of which above all Men in the World, one would soonest suspect a Romish Priest. But to our Purpose. King Charles the Second being informed of the wonderful Bravery of his Soldiers shown at this Battle of Amexial, was pleased out of his pure Liberality, to order Forty Thousand Crowns-to be distributed amongst them. All that know any thing of the Character of that Prince, know that he was not to be easily imposed upon by sham Relations of this kind, and it was as appa∣rent to the World, that his Exchequer did not o∣verflow with Money, and consequently it must be some very important Action, that his Majesty thought fit to Reward with so large Donative. But was it possible for so understanding a Prince as King Charles, to think it an extraordinary thing for above 2000 Foot to make Resistance against a Body of 400 Horse? Yet this is all the part that our Author allows them in the Victory, only in conclusion he saith, that between Horse and Foot they Iost about 50 Men, and that they and the French together behav'd themselves Valiantly. Our Horse lost many more, the greatest part of them being cut to pieces by their renewing the Charge so often as they did, while they were abandon'd by the French.
But if the English Foot did any thing to deserve the Notice of their King, it was on the Hill, against which they were at first Posted, and upon which the main Business of the Battle was transacted; for there by confession of all, the Spaniards were strongest and were first routed, and unless it were up thither, our Foot scarce moved from their first Sta∣tion. That they did something worthy of Admi∣ration, and upon this Place we may appeal to the Memories of all People of any Curiosity in Portu∣gal; for the fighting over of this and some other of their Battles, was observed to be the main subject of Conversation amongst them for many Years af∣terwards, and their own Officers in the Army did not stick to acknowledge that the Crown of Por∣tugal was preserv'd by what the English did in this; but I am writing in England, and shall content my self with such Evidence as is at hand. There are two Gentlemen in London, who commanded in this very Action, from whence the Author of Por∣tugal Restaurado hath excluded our Country men; the one hath a Command in my Lord of Oxford's Regiment, the other is one of the Old Gentlemen in the Charter-house, who are so far from magnifying the Performance, that they contradict some circum∣stances in the Publick Accounts, that made it ap∣pear more hazardous and daring then it really was. They know very well that they were not only en∣gaged on the foremention'd Hill, but that till the Action was over, there were none besides them; the former of these gives a very demonstrative Proof, that they could have no Assistants to accom∣pany them at the beginning; for where they as∣cended the Hill, the nature of the Ground was such, that it would not admit of the whole Regiment (the Party consisted but of one) for which reason,
two Companies that were to the Left, were forc'd to return and joyn the other English Regiment that was drawn up in the second Line, and was com∣manded by Colonel Person. Its true, the Three Regiments might get up afterwards by other ways, but that they gave the English time enough to do their Business for them, will appear from what fol∣lows. The Conde Villa Flor General of the Portuguese Army, when the English were first in Motion, was standing on the rising Ground, which he had pos∣sessed himself of in the Morning, that was oppo∣site to, and a League distant from the Hill, we are speaking of. He seeing the English making up to the Enemy, and observing that contrary to the cu∣stom of the Portugueses, they did not so much as once fire all the way, was perswaded that they were running over to the Enemy, and instead of making Speeches, to animate his own Soldiers to follow them, was most bitterly exclaiming against the He∣reticks, declaring, That he wash'd his Hands from having any thing to do in the Destruction of Por∣tugal, or giving this occasion to the Hereticks to betray them; he was so fully satisfied, that this and no other was their Design, that all they did whilst in sight confirm'd him in his Opinion. Mr. John Cargill who was Chaplain to the Regiment, which the Gen. was crying out against, being near him at that time, and understanding what he meant, but not having Portuguese enough to speak to him, enquired for some body that could speak Latin, and having found one, desired him to acquaint his Excellency, that the English instead of being guilty of so vile a Trea∣chery, as he was laying to their Charge, were do∣ing him a most Important piece of Service; but the Gen. was not to be perswaded out of his Senses, his
Eyes and his Ears convincing him, that the Here∣ticks were a doing that which, as he said, he had all along expected from them. He had seen them running up to the Enemy, till they come so near, that they might shake Hands, without doing the least act of Hostility; he presently afterwards heard a Shout too loud, as he thought for so small a Company to give, and he could think no otherwise, but that they, and the Spaniards were Congratulating each other upon their Conjunction; as for their general Discharge it could be nothing else but a Salvo, they doubtless shooting their Bullets into the Air. Such were the Speeches that the Conde de Villa Flor made while our Soldiers were beating the Spaniards for him; he chang'd his Note indeed when he came afterwards to understand the matter, if it be true as 'tis reported, that he said, Aquelles Herejes sam mel hores que os nossos Santos; these Hereticks are better to us then our own Saints. But for that time, all the Chaplain could do in order to his Conviction, was to prevail, that a Messenger should be sent along with him, to see what the English were adoing upon the Hill: In their way they met Count Schomberg, whom Mr. Cargill acquainted with the Consternation in which he had left the General. The Count upon hearing this, Gallop'd towards the General, and as we may suppose, dis∣abus'd him of his Error. The Count was then just come down from the Hill, for he having the Con∣cern of the whole Battle upon him, found occasi∣ons for his Presence in every Part, and thought it necessary at this time among the English, lest their heat should carry them on too far in the Pursuit, whilst their Service was requir'd elsewhere. He had got up with them by that time they had fol∣low'd the Enemy about a Mile; and though he
discovered by his Words, and much more in his Coun∣tenance, how well pleas'd a Man of his Character must be with so Gallant an Action; yet they were his own Regiment, and he check'd them for their too great Eagerness, telling them that the Enemies Horse were making towards their Country men be∣low, and commanding the Officers to Rally their Men that were then all in Disorder in the Pursuit and Plunder. While his Orders were putting in Execution, he return'd to the Plain, and when he heard Mr. Cargil's Story, he rode up to quiet the General. After the Conference between the Count and the General, we suppose it was that the Three Portu∣guese Regiments, headed by the two Commanders, had the Speech made to them, and were ordered to march up the Hill, for it was just at this time that the Enemies Horse attack'd an English Regiment in the manner describ'd by our Author, only he gives a wrong Name to it, for it was Colonel Persons; and this was just as Lieutenant Colonel Hunt's Men, who had nothing to do with any Horse, at all, were leaving the Hill: For they having spent some time in getting into Rank and File, were ma∣king what hast they could to joyn their Country men, seeing four Squadrons of Cuirassiers charging them, who were so warmly receiv'd, that they soon wheel'd off, leaving behind them several of their Men and Horses upon the Ground. That the Portugueses did not ascend this Hill before our Men had been there and done their work for them, will appear likewise from hence: The Author, saith that they began their March at the same time when seven other Regiments of Foot on the Right, assisted by five Squadrons of Horse, went to Attack the Spaniards on the other Hill,
whom after some Resistance they routed, taking at the same time the other four Pieces of Cannon; but this was not attempted till after the English had been upon the steep Hill, and as a great Officer declared presently after, had not been done at all, were it not that the Portugueses were provok'd to it by what the English had done before. However, while these seven Regiments assisted as they were with five Squadrons, notwithstanding the Advantage they had in Number and in the Place, by much more accessible then the other, as appears by their making use of Horse, were for some time put to it by the dispirited Spaniards. Our Author assirms, that the three Regiments knowing nothing of what the English had been doing (for he men∣tions not a word of it, and has done his utmost to keep the Reader from suspecting any such thing) mounted the most inaccessible Hill; two of them directly Fronting it, the third wheeling about to the Right, all keeping their Fire as the English had done, till they gain'd the Top, which they all did at the same time when they make a general Dis∣charge, and presently put the Spaniards into disor∣der, take their Guns which Dom Luis de Menezes turns upon them at the same instant, and put them intirely to the Rout. But where these things to do then, the Conde de Villa Flor must have been more in his Wits then to make such an unequal Division of his Forces, at least he would have dispos'd of them in another manner; he would have order'd the seven Regiments to wheel about, in order to get up to this Place, where the Enemies chief strength lay, and had sent the Three where there was less Danger. Count Scomberg as least, who as brave a Soldier as he was, was so Prudent a Gene∣ral as to be always for making sure Work; when
he came up to the English, would never have taken them off from the Pursuit, could he have suspected that there would so sudden an occasion for doing over again all that they had done already. But the Truth is, there is so great an Agreement in some of the most material Passages in this Account, with what the English had been doing before, as 'tis related by our Officers, who never saw or heard of the 2d. Volum of Portugal Restaurado, that they all seem to speak of one and the same Action, so that there is cause to suspect that the Conde had given an Account of the Part, which our Country men had in the Battle, and that the Revisors of his Papers, or which is more probable, the In∣quisitors when the Book passed through their Hands, out of their great kindness to the Hereticks, re∣solv'd to make a Portuguese Action of it, by chang∣ing the Names and Time: There are more Reasons for this Conjecture, then are necessary to be told at present. It is not denied but that the Portugueses might come upon the Place where the Action was perform'd, but it appears from what hath been said, that it could not be till the Business was in a man∣ner done, and till the English were about leaving it, so that they might have spared the Officers pains whom they sent to view it, there being neither Horse nor Foot in any condition to withstand them. All the work that they had to do was, that usu∣ally done, a broken scatter'd and confounded Ene∣my, and which a Brave Man will never by his Good-will set his Hand to, which is down-right killing. The English being drawn off upon a Business that became them better, had not been long there after the Enemies Horse were repuls'd, but a Gen∣tleman came Riding up to them from Count Schom∣berg
with Orders to Halt, adding that the Portu∣gueses on the Right had attack'd and put to the Rout the Spaniards on the other Hill; sometime afterwards Count Schomberg himself came to them, and order'd them to joyn the Army that was going to incamp, it them growing Duskish. The Count staid with them part of the Night, telling the Of∣ficers many diverting Passages, and we may guess at whose Expence he diverted himself. Were that Great Man alive now, he had no doubt before this time receiv'd from Portugal a further occasion for his Mirth. It is very likely that a Person unskill'd in Mili∣tary Affairs must be guilty of many Errors in his manner of Relating this Transaction, but as to the substance of what hath told, he hath deliver'd it with that assurance which is Natural to one who himself believes what he saith, he having receiv'd the most material Passages from several Competent Witnesses, at several places and times, all agreeing with each other, and with what our Author him∣selves relates, where he does not plainly do that which 'twould be a great indecency to Name. However, since many cannot have the like oppor∣tunities to inform themselves, he shall insist only upon this notorious Truth: That at the Battle of Amexial, part of the English Foot without the Assi∣stance of Portugueses or others, attack'd a great Body of Spaniards, posted upon a Hill by themselves thought inaccessible, Defeated and Routed them, ta∣king their great Guns, their General's Tent and Baggage, and by this means occasion'd the Victory, which preserv'd Portugal from imminent Destructi∣on. This he believes to be so evident a Truth, that there's scarce a Person of any considerable Rank in the several Nations, that were concern'd in the
Transaction, but either is or may be convinc'd of it by Eye-Witnesses, those that have convers'd with them, Letters from Publick Ministers, or the like. And since on account of the suppos'd Author's Quality, the History of Portugal Restaurado is likely to be communicated to those that are in the Highest Sta∣tions, they who have prefix'd to it the Name of Dom Luis de Menezes, have done a great discre∣dit to their Cause, and a most irreparable injury to the Memory of that great Man. For while such as have a true sense of Honour, shall think that Lord could be Author of a Peace, wherein so lit∣tle Gratitude is express'd to the Savers of his Coun∣try, so much Artifice used to Defraud them of the Honour got while they were exposing their Lives, to rescue a distress'd People from Destruction, and all for no other apparent Reason, but our difference in Opinions: for there appears throughout the Work as great Partiality in favour of the French, as Prejudice against the English; How vile a thing must they take this ancient Popery to be, and how mischievous amongst the People, that can have so Maligant an Influence upon a Noble Mind! Cer∣tainty should Dom Luis de Menezes prove guilty of so disingenuous a Work. The General of the Artillery did not gain more Honour by his Sword, when he fought at the Battle of Amexial, then the Conde de Ericeyra, forfeited by his Pen when he Discribed it. In this Battle, the Spaniards, as 'tis said, of 16 Thousand, had 4000 kill'd, and 6000 taken Prisoners, among whom were 2500 Wounded. The loss on the Victors side was inconsiderable; for a∣mong all the 8 Companies that were ingag'd on the Hill, there were but 16 private Soldiers, and an En∣sign kill'd. The Portugueses indeed while they were
killing the Spanish Foot; and fighting with the Horse, lost a thousand of their Men, and had 500 Wounded. The King of Portugal being very sen∣sible of the great services done him by our Men, resolv'd to bestow a Largess upon them as a mark of his Esteem. His Gift was very Extraordinary in its kind: for it was three Pounds of Snuff to each Company; and not despicable for its Value, consi∣dering into how low a state Portugal had been re∣duced. But our Foot Soldiers had not such consi∣deration in them; for when the Present was made in his Majesty's Name, they took it and toss'd it up into the Air out of Contempt and Disdain, and as they grew Angry, they began to remember, not their own services, but the loss of their Valiant Coun∣try men of the Horse Regiment, and to vent their Indignation that such Men that had been so often commanded on to the Slaughter, should be so base∣ly abandon'd as they were. However, their Passions cool'd, and they came to themselves again upon the first occasion for Action; and though they were to fight for Portugueses, yet they behav'd them∣selves like English Men still, insomuch that the remainder of the present Campagne, and the two that follow'd, seem'd just the Reverse of those made by Don John the two foregoing Years, and the beginning of this. Soon after the Battle Evora was besieged and taken, and the next Year Valença in Estremadura, at both which Sieges the English sig∣naliz'd themselves in their usual manner, of which several remarkable Instances might be given. In 1665. the Spaniards made shift to bring another Army into Portugal, under the Marquess de Cara∣cena, to be serv'd at Montes-claros, in the same manner as Don John's had been at Amexial. In this Battle while a whole Regiment of French fair∣ly
ran away, some particular Persons excepted, who came and Fought by our Country men, the English, as 'tis said, contributed no less to the Vi∣ctory then they did in the former. But an Account of these and some other very considerable Transactions would come with a much better Grace, from a Portuguese then an English Hand; to commemorate Benefits, being an Office properly belonging to the Receivers, wherefore it is to be hoped that some Person of that Generous Nation will save us the trouble. If any such shall undertake to write a Supplement to Portugal Re∣staurado, the Portuguese Mercury of July 1664. will furnish him with a Precedent in one particular In∣stance, that's not unworthy of his imitation, which since it proves the Portugueses to be not altogether insensible of kindnesses done them, and shows that they may be ready to make amends for such Omis∣sions as we now complain of, I shall here set down, after having given a short Account of the occasion of it. At the Siege of Valença, when the Portuguese Bat∣teries had made a Breach in the Wall, wide enough for an Assault as 'twas judg'd by the general Offi∣cers. The Governor of the Place refusing to Ca∣pitulate, but on such Conditions, as the Besiegers thought unreasonable, it was resolv'd to attempt the Town by Storm; accordingly the two English Regiments were order'd to be in a readiness to mount the Breach, they being to begin the Assault at the firing of 6 Guns all at once. At the same time false Attacks were to be made in other Places, to divert the Besieged, and two hundred French with Scaling Ladders, were to endeavour to enter the Town where they found least Resistance. When the English were upon beginning the Assault, amidst
vast quantities of Artificial Fires, which the Besieg∣ed who were upon their Guard poured down up∣on them: These Fires happen'd to put the Fascines that were in the Besiegers Works below into a Flame, which the Marquess de Merialva then General, thought none so fit to extinguish as those that were to make the Diversion, and therefore gave Command that the 200 French should lay aside their scaling Ladders, and together with the rest that were to make the false Attacks, be employed in quenching the Fire. This being done, there was no body to renew their former Orders; the Marquess indeed had call'd them off from what they were about, but 'twas pretended that to command them on again, was none of his Business, but Count Scomberg's, a∣gainst whom the Marquess at that time had a great Pegue; the Count was then taken up in giving necessary Directions for the Assault; in the mean time the Signal was given, the English mounted the Breach with great Resolution, as many of them as could stand in it, maintaining a very unequal Combat against the whole Force of the Town, while those that were below to support them, were gall'd by the Enemies shot on all sides, insomuch that when they retired at last, it was with the loss of about three hundred of their Companions. The place Capitu∣lating soon after the next News-book gave an Ac∣count of the Siege, and just made mention of this Action, but in such a manner as to make People believe, that about Ten or a Dozen English men, and two Portugueses had through their own Rash∣ness got themselves knock'd on the Head; for it was said that the information which had been given concerning the Breach, proved a Mistake, and so only the foresaid Number went very bravely up and were Kill'd, and that many were Wounded
although they did not come near the Breach. This Account coming out while the Army was in Quarters, there being some of our Officers at that time at Lisbon, they resolved to wait upon the Se∣cretary of State to demand Reparation for this Slurr put upon them, and the Memory of their deceased Friends. They had all along observ'd the Portu∣gueses to be free indeed of their Verbal Acknow∣ledgements, but very backward in trusting them to Writing, and they were now at last so far incensed, that some of them did not spare to give Antonio de Sousa the Secretary very heard Names, even when they came within his Hearing. The Secretary to their surprize told them in their own Language, that some of them spoke broad English; however they insisting in their Demand of satisfaction for the Wrong that had been done them, he promised them they should have it; accordingly in the next Mercury appear'd this additional Account, which though it wants much of supplying the Defects of the former, yet as it must be acknowledg'd, a∣bounds with very Honourable Testimonies of Gra∣titude. If Mercury were a Spaniard, he would make Re∣lations of things that never were done, but being Portuguese, he does not mention those that were, un∣less it be upon exact Information. Since the last was Printed, he hath receiv'd Advice of certain Acti∣ons, worthy to be remembred, perform'd on our Side at the Enterprize of Valença, and it is but just that they should be related, that they be not deprived of that glorious Precomum which consecrates them to Eternity; and to such Honourable Guests as the English are, the first Place in this Relation is due. Four Regiments were commanded to the Breach, two Portuguese and two English, one of these was
Count Schombergs, the General of the Strangers, Commanded by his Lieutenant Colonel Thomas Hunt, the other was Colonel Henry Persons. They went to the Assanlt with the greatest Valour, twenty with an Ensign that carried the Coulors mounting the Breach, there not being room for more (but some of the Gentlemen under Named will tell that they had much more Company.) For as 'twas said in the last, the Breach was not yet compleated, it being a mistaken Information that was given concerning it. The Twenty seeing themselves unaccompanied, were not discouraged, but they all fought till they Died, the Combat was so furious, that the Coulors were burnt within the Breach. The two Regiments disparing now of being able to enter, might have made their Retreat, but their great Courage would not suffer them; so they drew up at the foot of the Wall, and though they stood with their Breasts ex∣posed, yet they fought to Admiration with those with∣in, as if they had been on the Level in open Field; so 150 of them were kill'd, falling in the same order in which they stood. Among these were the said Lieutenant Colonel Hunt, and his Major John Whit∣more, and John Fitz Patrick one of his Captains. Of Colonel Person's Regiment, William More, Gre∣gory Noland and H. Traverse, Captains; there were killed besides these three Lieutenants, four Ensigns, and seven Sergeants, all worthy to live eternally in our Memory and our Gratitude, who with so much, constancy expos'd their Lives for us. There were 300 Wounded, among these were Captain Francis Stanly, and Captain Nathaniel Hill of the foresaid first Regiment, and Captain Thomas Bonser, and Captain John Roch of the other, and without doubt they had all died, for they had no Covert, were it not that the General commanded them to Retreat, which
they did in so gallant a manner, as rais'd a Noble E∣mulation in the whole Army. And since they that were neither Kill'd nor Wounded deserved no less Honour, by what they did, 'tis fit it should be known who they were. Of the first Regiment were Captains Francis More, William Love, Henry Boad and Andrew Maynard; af the second besides, Colonel Person were Lieutenant Colonel John Bellasise, Ma∣jor John Rumsey, and Captains Richard Heafield, and Charles Langley. Certainly the English have behaved themselves with extraordinary Valour, and to great satisfaction since their coming to assist us in this War, and that which they are particularly e∣steem'd for, is their orderly carriage towards the Portuguese Peasants in their Quarters. On the se∣cond of this instant July, enter'd the Port of Lisbon 150 foot Soldiers arrived from England, which may in some measure repaire the Number of those that died in Valença, but not satisfie our Regret for the loss of such Companions. While the King of Englands Soldiers were fight∣ing the Battles of Portugal, his Ministers were no less busy in securing the Effects of their Victories, by Negotiating the happy Peace, which that Na∣tion now enjoys. King Charles had so great Com∣miseration for the Portugueses when in their most deplorable Condition, that Sir Richard Fanshaw his Ambassador at Lisbon, had Instructions from him in the beginning of the Year 1663. to interpose his good Offices, and use all possible means in order to make their Peace with the Spaniard; but the Spa∣niard was then Triumphant, and could think of nothing but making a quick dispatch of the War. When the Condition of Portugal began to mend, Sir Richard was sent upon the same Errand to Ma∣drid, where 'tis true, he did not meet with that suc∣cess
as was expected in his Embassy; for though upon Notice of his Arrival, such Preparations were made for his Reception, that the like had scarce ever been done for any Ambassador at that Court, yet upon his coming near Madrid, he found the Mini∣sters mightily alter'd all of a sudden, insomuch that it was six Weeks before he made his Publick Entry; and the Court prov'd so untractable and unwill∣ing to accommodate their Minds to their Fortunes, that it was two Years before he could gain any thing upon them, and when he had brought them to consent to a Treaty at last, his Negotiations did not keep Pace with the Victories obtain'd in Portu∣gal, as appeared by the great disappointment he met with at Salvaterra, in the beginning of the Year 1666. About the same time when our Ambassador was preparing for his Journey from Madrid to Portugal, Sir Robert Southwel was sent as Envoy from King Charles to this latter Court, to assist at the adjust∣ing of the Peace between the two Crowns. Upon his Arrival in Portugal, he heard that Mr. de S. Romain had just got before him, which made him hasten to Salvaterra, where the Court then was. His Instructions were of a fresher Date then the Ambassadors, and consequently more accommo∣dated to the state of the Portuguese Affairs at that time; but the Ambassador being not yet come, he found the Ministers unwilling to enter upon any Bu∣siness before his Arrival, they expecting from him such Conditions as should give them intire satis∣faction. The Ambassador not answering their Ex∣pectation, but on the contrary highly disgusting them with the Title of his Project of Peace, while Mr. de S. Romain was most profuse in his Promises of the mighty things that his Master would do for
them, the Treaty was wholly broke off for that time. However, Sir Robert Southwell applying himself to the Conde de Castelmelhor, the next Morning after the Council had sent that hasty Answer formerly mention'd, though he found him in a very great Heat, yet had the Address to pacifie him, and were it not that the Case was soon alter'd at Madrid, he might have brought the Treaty on again. The Conde expressed himself highly dissatisfied, that it should be thought that they would ever Treat with Spain, but upon equal terms, saying, That the Spa∣niards might perhaps conquer Portugal, but should never conquer the Portugueses, who for their parts would first leap into the Sea before they would come to any Accommodation, unless it were made between King and King. But the Envoy soon brought him to a Temper, by representing that what the Ambassador had offer'd, was only the first and rude Draught, or the Embrio as it were of a Treaty, so that there was little reason for him to be offended at the Inscription, which was a thing of no Consequence, it signifying nothing what Name or Title was given it now, since No body e∣ver Christen'd a Child before it was Born. The Con∣de as he was pleased with the conceit, so he would not deny but that it was apposite to the case in hand, and the Envoy having assur'd him, that his Instructions were ample enough to procure for Por∣tugal all reasonable satisfaction; it was agreed that a new Project of a Treaty should be drawn up, which was done accordingly, by the Ambassador and the Envoy together. It contain'd the very same Arti∣cles which with some small alterations are now in force, between the Crowns of Spain and Portugal. With this they both took a journey to Madrid, but the War newly broke out between England and
France, made that Court believe there was no such necessity as before of a Peace with Portugal, and so nothing could be done then for that Year. By the beginning of the next Year, the Portu∣gueses had concluded and sign'd their League with France. Its true, the Conde de Castelmelhor the sup∣posed Author of that League on the Portuguese side, was the same Year removed from the Mini∣stry and the Court, but this together with the o∣ther Changes that succeeded, was brought about by the Queen and her Party, who were more strongly ingaged in the Interests of France; the Queen was so ingag'd both by Birth and Inclination, and per∣haps much more strongly, yet as she hoped to be countenanc'd by the French Court in what she had done, and was doing against her Husband, and in her further design of marrying with the Prince; so that the French Faction became now more predomi∣nent at Court then ever, and they seem'd there not only averse to all thoughts of a Peace, but afraid least any Overtures should come from Castille, to put the People in mind of it, wherefore the Fron∣tiers were strictly guarded to hinder all Communi∣cation between the Subjects on both Kingdoms. The precaution perhaps was needless, for the Spa∣niads whether it was that their thoughts were who∣ly taken up with the War they had then with France, or that they hoped when a Peace was made with that Crown by the Intervention of other Princes, that they should be able after all to deal with Portugal, made no Advances towards a Trea∣ty. This backwardness of the Parties concern'd was enough to make a Mediator out of love with his Office, and might have given any other Person then the Gentleman that then executed it, just cause to despair of doing any good upon them. How∣ever,
the English Envoy was not Idle, to bring two Nations to a Peace, and make them Happy though against their Wills, after they had been destroying one another for seven and twenty Years together, was an Enterprize so glorious for a young Minister to effect, that one of Sir Robert South∣well's Character was not to be deter'd from the At∣tempt by any Difficulties; but in order to accom∣plish his Design, he was forc'd to go a great way about, it was in vain to think of succeeding by any direct Application to either Court, he was there∣fore fain to choose other Instruments to work with, and his choice was so good, and he manag'd them so well, that he wrought out his ends by them, by disposing both Courts for that Peace which was concluded in the beginning of the Year 1668. to the unspeakable satisfaction of the two Nations. At the Battles of Amexial and Montescloros, se∣veral great Persons of the most Illustrious Houses in Spain were taken Prisoners, in the former Don Gaspar de Haro Marquess de Eliche, five times Grande of Spain, and Heir to the two great Favou∣rites, the Conde Duque de Olivares and Don Luis de Haro, he being Son to the Latter. Don Anielo de Gusman, eldest Son of the Duke de Medina de las Torres, and Don Juan Henriques Conde de Es∣calante; at Montescleros, Don Diego Correa General of the Cavallery, and several other Persons of the first Quality. These Noblemen had ever since their Misfortune been confined to the Castle of Lisbon, where they were frequently visited by the English Envoy. They had all along express'd a great E∣steem for our Nation, and would sometimes Treat our Officers amongst them, acknowledging them for their Conquerors, for they would by no means allow that Title to the Portugueses. The Envoy
having contracted a more particular Acquaintance and Familiarity with them, thought they might be of great use to him in prevailing upon the Court of Madrid to renew the Treaty; he saw that their Prison was very uneasie to them, and that they were impatient to be at Liberty, of which they could have little hopes till the Peace was made, and the knew their nearest Relations to be Men of the greatest Power in Spain, who might by their Solicitation be prevail'd upon to think of a Peace. Coming once amongst them, he began to upbraid them in a familiar way, for their Remisness in not endeavouring to free themselves from their wretched Confinement, telling them that they seem'd to have a worse Opinion of their own Condition, then some of the Fathers had concerning the state of those in Hell; from whence as they thought there was some Redemption. But he found them desparing of be∣ing ever able to regain their Liberty; so far were they from entertaining any hopes of it, that they told him, if Origen had been a Spaniard, he had ne∣ver been so favourable in his Opinion; however, the Envoy to show that he did not advise them to Impossibilities, undertook to overcome the greatest Difficulty, and make way for a free intercourse be∣tween them and their Friends. This offer incou∣rag'd them to write their Minds to their Relations in Spain, in order to set them at Work to bring on the Treaty of Peace again. They delivered their Letters to the Envoy, who so manag'd the matter, that the Governour of Elvas, one of his particular Acquaintance, though wholly ignorant of the De∣sign, conveyed the Pacquet to a Servant of one of these Noblemen, who was employed on the Fron∣tiers to provide him with Necessaries. But to get Answers to their Letters, which they could not well
expect by the same way, the Envoy took another Course. He had at that time an English Frigat watching for him in the River, but he finding his Negotiations to be now in a fair way towards a happy Conclusion, instead of imbarking for Eng∣land, order'd the Captain to make a Voyage to Cadiz, sending on board him a Servant of his, who had been frequently employed in Messages of a like Nature, with another Pacquet from the Spanish Noblemen, who arriving at Cadiz rode Post to Ma∣drid, where the Letters he brought with him soon produc'd their desired Effect. Whilst the English Envoy was thus contriving ways to bring the Court of Spain to sue for a Peace, he had a harder Game to play still, which was to dispose that of Portugal to a Compliance, it was to no purpose for him to motion the matter to that Court, at a time when it was become wholly French. As for the Nobility that were then upper∣most, they were either ingaged in the Queen's Par∣ty, or had Commands in the Army, which made it to be for their Interest to have the War con∣tinue. But then there was at the same time in Portugal a Power superior to both these, and he thought fit in this case of necessity to serve himself of that, for the common Good of all. The People ever since the Revolt from Spain, had been in Possession of an absolute kind of Sovereign∣ty, and had on several occasions exercised the same over those in Authority without Exception; as all the late Turns and Changes in the State had been brought about by their means, they pulling down and setting up as they pleased, so they kept those they placed in the Government in subjection to their Wills. Their Power was never more uncontroula∣ble, then whilst they were deposing King Alfonso,
and placing Prince Pedero in his room, but had not yet fixt him in the Government. They were at that time in a great Ferment, and according as their Motions were directed by such as had the Art to manage them, they were like to bear down all before them: Now while the greatest Men in the Kingdom were tampering with them, that by their means they might destroy one another, the Envoy did not think it beneath him to be dealing with them too, in order to preserve the whole Na∣tion; to this end he thought the fittest Instrment he could make use of, was the Juis do Povo, and therefore he took Acquaintance with him, and to keep him well affected, gave Orders that the Juis should have such Work as there was occasion for in the House, that was proper for one of his Call∣ing, and he would sometimes condescend him∣self to Discourse the Man, incouraging him to contribute on his part by that great Authority which belong'd to his Office towards settling the Nation, by an Advantagious and Honourable Peace. The Juis do Povo is accounted the chief Magistrate of Lisbon, his Office somewhat resembling that of a Mayor; he is not indeed of equal Dignity with my Lord Mayor of London, which perhaps may be the reason why he hath a much greater Power; for he must be of one of the meanest Hardicraft Trades, whereby he is more fitly qualified to be∣come the Peoples Head, and he does not think himself too good to become the Ring-leader in Po∣pular Commotions, acting as it were the part of a Massaniello by Law. Great things are told con∣cerning those that bore this Office during the War; King John the 4th. being observed to be a little re∣miss in the Affairs of Government, and too intent.
upon his Sports; 'tis reported that he once going to ride out into the Country to Hunt, the Juis do Povo laid hands on the Reigns of his Horses Bri∣dle, and oblig'd his Majesty to stay at home and mind his Business; nor will this seem strange if his Power were so great as they say it is to this Day, that he could at a Words speaking raise the whole Posse of the Commonalty. The Envoy found the Person that was then in Place to be an honest well meaning Man, and ready to concurr with him in his Design, on which, as one of a mo∣derate Capacity might easily be made to under∣stand, the Happiness of his Country depended; and this Man showed himself so very Zealous and In∣dustrious to promote it, that his Picture is to be seen at this Day amongst theirs who were more immediately concern'd in making the Peace. The Envoy took care likewise to have his Party amongst the Peoples Representatives in Cortes, which were assembled some time after Alfonso had been Depo∣sed; his Table was open for the Members, and he had his Cabals with them, the Effects whereof ap∣pear'd as soon as the Business came under Debate. The Letters of the Spanish Noblemen were an∣swer'd with Powers from the Queen Regent to the Marquess de Eliche, to enter upon a Treaty with the Prince of Portugal, to the intire satisfaction of that Kingdom. Letters to this purpose were no sooner come, but care was taken to have the Con∣tents of them publish'd every where both in City and Country; the News was welcomed by the People, who now hoped to see a speedy end of their Miseries, with such Publick Demonstrations of Joys as it deserv'd, which the Court in vain laboured to suppress.
Mr. de S. Romain had now great occasion to bestir himself, but he found the People so pre∣possessed already, that all his Artifices were like to have no effect upon them; he therefore sets forth a Memorial directed to the Prince, the Ministers, and the Cortesoens, or Members of Cortes, wherein he Declares: That the Prince could not break the League with France, and consequently not make Peace with Spain both, because in taking the Government into his hands, he took upon himself the Obligations of the Crown to maintain the Treaty made be∣tween his Brother and the King of Spain, and in consideration of the great Benefits confer'd on Portugal, by His Most Christian Majesty, who had given innumerable Demonstrations of his Friendship to that Kingdom, having spent his Treasures and the Blood of his Subjects in its Defenec; and likewise because it was impossible for an advantageous Peace with Spain, to be made with security in the form Proposed, since the Intervention of the King of France was wanting, wherein alone consisted the certainty, that the Promises and Conditions of the Trea∣ty should be kept; That the Castillians whilst they dreaded the Armies of France and Por∣tugal, would indeed to free themselves from the Danger they were in, submit to any Terms that the Prince as a Conqueror should impose. But a few days of Delay could be no loss in this Conjuncture, and since France was not far off, he advised the Prince to send thither a Copy of the Spanish Proposals, and when he had received an Answer from thence, he might then consult what was most conducive to his
Subject's Good. As for the Spaniards, they minded nothing but their own Interests, and as they had shown upon several Occasions, would never stand to the Treaty, but while they were under an Impossibility to carry on the War. That their Ancient and inbred Hatred was now mightily increased by the Miseries which the Valient Portugueses had brought upon them, and therefore they in all future Ages, would be indeavouring either by Force, or Art, or Alliances, to reunite the Crown of Portu∣gal to Castille, and all this in order to take their Revenge in so cruel a manner, as to de∣story the very Memory of the Nobility, by scat∣tering over the face of the Earth, such of them as should escape their Tortures and Poisons, and to impoverish the People to that Degree, that they should have nothing left to enable them any more, to shake off their heavy and Tyrannical Yoke. The Marquess de Eliche who had his Agents a∣broad, was one of the first that got a sight of this Memorial, and he immediately drew up an An∣swer to it, which he took care to have dispers'd throughout the Kingdom. In it he sets forth, That the French Artifices to augment their own Power by weakning their Neighbours were Notorious to the World, of which there was no need to go far for a Proof, none doubt∣ing but that they had succour'd Portugal in this last War, to the end only that by other Mens Hands they might beat down the for∣midable Power of Castille, in order to become themselves too strong for both Parties. That this and no other was their Design, was de∣monstrated
by their Proceedings after the Peace made at the Pirenees, where the King of France in Person gave his Word to King Philip the 4th. and confirm'd the same in the Capitulations of Marriage between him and that King's Daugh∣ter, that he would give no Succours to Por∣tugal against Castille, and at the same time as∣sisted that Kingdom with Money, Generals, Officers and Soldiers; that having obtain'd an Advantagious Match with the Princess of Spain under an Obligation, containing the most bind∣ing Clauses the Law could afford, and con∣firm'd with the most dreadful Oaths, that neither he nor his Successors would make any claim of Inheritance to the Kingdoms or Domi∣nions of Castille, he was now contrary to his Promise, and the Treaty making War a∣gainst that Monarchy. That he laboured to ob∣struct the Peace with Portugal, in order to di∣vide the Forces of Spain, that he might the more easily seize upon that Crown, in case the Succession should fail; That he might with the same injustice attempt the Conquest of Portugal, under the same Pretext that he u∣sed in breaking with Spain, viz. its not be∣ing in his Power to Defraude his Successors of their Right. That though he now oppos'd King Philip's Right to that Crown, he would doubtless make use of it hereafter as a Colour for his unjust Invasion. That the Prince did not make the League with France, which as 'twas Notorious, was clapt up upon some se∣cret Designs without the Peoples consent. That if the King of France could make War upon Castille, on pretence of his want of Power to
deprive his Heirs of the Succession belonging to them, with how much greater Reason was the Prince oblig'd not to deny his People the Blessings of an Advantageous and Honourable Peace, after a cruel War of Seven and Twen∣ty Years, which had hitherto been carried on for that end only? That if Self-defence made the War be hitherto accounted Just, yet when it could be continued upon no other Pretence, then the Conquest of other Kingdoms, to which neither Portugal nor France had any Right, it would become unjust, displeasing to God, and consequently unprosperous. In Conclusion, he declared that his Powers were restrained to a limited time, for that Spring coming on, the Queen Regent was about disposing of her Forces as she should judge convenient, where∣fore he desired that the Prince would appoint Persons to confer with him, about the Treaty of Peace, or else he should look upon himself as disingag'd from his Commission, leaving up∣on the Prince's Conscience, all the Mischiefs of the War, with the Damages and Incon∣veniencies sustain'd by the Prisoners, who fill∣ed the Gaols at that time. In this Paper Combat the Spaniards had all the Advantage they could desire, unless it were among such as either out of Interest or for some secret Reasons, were for having the War continue. The Officers of the Army would fain have had it prosecuted with Vigour, that Portugal by the Conquest of the Neighbouring Kingdoms, might re-imbourse it self for the dam∣ages it had sustained in the Sixty Years of the Spanish Usurpation. The Ecclesiasticks, the Cor∣tesoens,
and the People were more Loud and Clamourous for a Peace, as thinking the War would become Unjust if it continued any long∣er, it being the common Voice to be heard at that time, from the Pulpits, and in the Streets, that Castille might have some Pretensions upon Portugal, but Portugal could have none upon Ca∣stille. But the Court held out still, as being or seeming at least to be, utterly against the Peace, and that possibly because the Prince thought him∣self oblig'd by the French League; perhaps the Queen might be afraid to disoblige France by consenting to the Peace, while the Cause of her Divorce and of her intended second Marriage was depending before that Court; for should that Court be dissatisfied with her Conduct, who could tell, but that Monsieur de Lionne might never have found out the Clause in the Pope's Bull, which at last inabled Cardinal Vendome to grant the Dispensation? This Business was hotly debated on both sides, when the Earl of Sandwich unexpectedly arrived at Lisbon from Madrid, with full Power from the King of England, and the Queen Regent of Spain to conclude the Peace. His Excellency by his Presence and Authority, soon put an end to the Dispute, for by this time, they that were for the Treaty, had made their Party so strong, that nothing could withstand them; the Cortes plyed the Prince with three several Addresses for a Peace, and upon his demurring, to give his Answer. The Juis do Povo came and pe∣remptorily demanded his Consent. The Juis wait∣ed likewise on the Earl, and upon his Knees assured his Excellency of the Favour and Pro∣tection
of the People, in all his Proceedings, and as 'tis said, he went to the French Ambassador likewise, to assure him, that in case he did any thing to obstruct the Peace, he must expect to have his House pulled down about his Ears. In short, the Earl of Sandwich by his prudent Management, so order'd the Matter, that in a very few daies all things were adjusted; for his Powers given him at Madrid, bear Date the Fifth of January, 1668. and the Peace was Con∣cluded and Sign'd the Thirteenth of February following, to the unspeakable Joy of the Par∣ties concern'd. By this Peace the Portugueses became an Independant People, and were resto∣red to the same Condition with respect to Spain, as they had been in under the most flourishing Reigns of their former Kings; at the same time when their Deliverance from the Spanish Yoke was compleated, they were set at liberty likewise from the French League, which might have pro∣ved the more intolerable Bondage of the two, and all this without being brought under any Engagements to their Deliverers, the obligations of Gratitude excepted: Those indeed are the strongest of all other Tyes upon generous Minds, but then they are often complied with by a bare Acknowledgment of the Benefits receiv'd. Having mention'd the Benefits conferr'd on the Portuguese Nation by ours, it may be expected that an Account should be given of those re∣ceiv'd from them. It must be acknowledg'd to their Honour, that on several occasions they show'd a generous concern for our Kings Charles the First and Second in their Distress, doing them many good Offices by their Ministers, both
in England and elsewhere, and that they gave a Hospitable Reception to the Princes Robert and Maurice in their Port of Lisbon, though they were like to suffer no small Damage thereby them∣selves; the Remembrance of which things proved no doubt a great Motive to King Charles the Se∣cond, to take them into his Protection. But as to Returns in Kind, thanks be to God, our Na∣tion was never in a condition to need them, and the Forces of Portugal are so limited, that lit∣tle can be expected from thence, upon any the most urgent Occasion. Their Concurrence indeed might have serv'd to a good purpose, in the Leagues that have been made of late against the common Enemy, if on no other account, but the conveniency of their Habours, which in a War by Sea, must have been of a mighty Advantage to the side they adhered to: But they thought it was for their Interest all along to continue Neu∣ters, and our Princes have not thought fit to o∣blige them to Declare, though in Defence of the common Liberty, in which they had as great a concern as others. We suffered them to enjoy the Benefit of Trade, which we lost our selves, while we were engaged in their Defence; we did not make the least offer to compel them to take Party while they were wholly at our Dis∣cretion, we being Lords of all the Seas a∣bout them, the Ocean and the Mediterranean, as well as our own Channel. Such a com∣pulsion would have been to destroy our own Gift, and take from them that Independency we had maintain'd them in. It is the Property of another Monarch to treat as his Vassals such Sovereigns as he takes into his his Protection;
to get them into his Power, by assisting them, and then to serve himself of them in working out the Ruin of their Neighbours, and their own among the rest, whereas our Princes have taken another Course, and far from making their Benefits uneasy to the Receivers, or snares to entrap them withal, have treated them as Sovereigns whom they raised to their own Le∣vel; and therefore notwithstanding their advan∣tage of so much greater Power, they have ab∣stain'd from every thing that carried the least appearance of Constraint, as thinking it beneath themselves to require such a Submission even to their just demands, as might lessen the Majesty of a Crown'd Head. Such a generous Proceeding must needs have wrought very much upon a Prince of so great a Soul, as his Portuguese Majesty is known to have, and laid stronger Obligations upon him than all o∣ther Considerations could have done; and conse∣quently if the English have not met with a suita∣ble Treatment in his Kingdom, the Fault ought to be laid wholly on his Ministers and Inferior Of∣ficers. If the Priviledges of our Countrymen re∣siding in Portugal, granted and confirmed by so many of his Royal Ancestors, and ratified by So∣lemn Treaties, have of late Years been either ma∣nifestly violated, or eluded by all the little Arts of Chicane, if during the last War his Maritime Towns that were almost the only Ports in Christendom left free and exempt from our Dominion, became Nests for French privateers, and Irish Pyrates, if by Reason of our Religious observation of the Peace with Portugal, these Corsairs found a safer retreat at Lisbon, O Porto, and Faro, than at Merseilles,
St. Maloes, or Dunkirk, and our Merchant Fleets were more infested upon the Portuguese Coasts than those of France, or in the Straights, if our Ships taken under their Castles, and in their Ri∣vers, were carried up and dispos'd of in sight of the King's Palace; whereas by an express Article in our Capitulations, all English Ships by whom∣soever taken, when brought into any of the Por∣tuguese Dominions, were to be restored to the right Owners, and lastly, if on these and all o∣ther occasions, a greater regard was had to the French Menaces, when they could do nothing else but threaten, than to our Complaints, while we had the Remedy in our own hands; if any of these things were so, the Blame ought surely to be laid wholly upon the Ministers, to whom the King as hath been said, defers so much in the ma∣nagement of Affairs, a Prince of his Portuguese Majesties Honour, Justice and Prudence, cannot be supposed to have had any part in such unac∣countable Proceedings; but whether any of these things were so, it belongs to the Persons more nearly concern'd to make out. In matters which fall more immediately under the common observation our English Traders residing in that Kingdom, have great cause to be satisfy'd with the Portuguese Nation, where they are treated with all the Respect and Civility they can look for, by a People who cannot be insensible of the great Advantage that our Trade brings to their Conntry; for we furnish them with Necessaries of Life, in exchange for Supplies to our Luxury: We Cloath them with our Woollen Manufactures, and Feed them in a great Measure with our Fish from Newfoundland, and in Exchange for these Commo∣dities,
we rid the Country of their Wines (and that at excessive Rates) which all of the wiser and better sort among them think much better parted with at any rate, than kept at home, Na∣ture having provided them a more wholsome and agreeable Liquor. But it is not only the Benefit of Trade that recommends our Countrymen to the Portugueses, their fair and generous Dealing in their Commerce, used to gain them such Credit, that Palavra de bum Ingrez, the Word of an English Man hath been taken for the best Security; its true, that in the Inland Parts, the horrid Ideas the People had of Hereticks, as they take us to be, made them look upon our Countrymen as a strange sort of Monsters, insomuch that when our little Army first march'd into the Country, the Peasants instead of blessing them as their Delive∣rers, would watch for opportunities to do a mis∣chief to the Straglers; but the first Campagne end∣ed, they found them to be quite another sort of Creatures than they had imagined, and began not only to take them for Men, but for something more, finding them to be as Peaceable and Gentle in their Quarters, as they had been Fierce in the Field; for instead of Domineering over their Land∣lords, and playing the Tyrants as the French men did, our Soldiers spent their time in serving the People they were quarter'd upon, and doing any Work that was needful in the Family; such an obliging Carriage in Men, whose Bravery they had so much cause to admire, so alter'd their Sentiments concerning these Hereticks, that should an English man travel in the most unfrequented Parts of the Country, where the English Name hath been scarce heard of, either before or since the War, he shall
be received and caress'd with all the welcome the poor People can make, when a French man shall run the Risque of being knock'd o'the Head. I have mention'd this matter the rather, because the Manners of our Countrymen seem to be so much changed of late Years, that perhaps it will be as great News to them, as any thing I have related, for possibly the People of Ireland and Flanders may differ much from the Portugueses in their Opinion concerning our English Soldiery. The common People about the City are not ob∣served to be guilty of any Rudeness towards the English, on account of their Religion; such as have had cause to think themselves most exposed to af∣fronts on this occasion, having never met with any, which in my Opinion, ought in Justice to be as∣cribed to the Humanity of the Portuguese Nation, after they have been a little conversant with us, as well as to the Prudence of the Government. It is true, that opprobrious Language to Strangers is so severely prohibited, that upon complaint made against any that shall call an English man Heretick, no punishment short of Death, or the Galleys, will be thought too great for the Offence. We had like to have seen the last Year an example of the King's Justice upon an Offender of this sort; a certain Lawyer in his Pleadings, was pleased to bestow upon the English, the Titles of Hereticks, Lutherans, Schismaticks, Excommunicated Persons, &c. Complaint hereof being made to His Majesty, he gave command that the Lawyer should be Im∣prisoned, in order to his further Chastisement; the Man took Sanctuary in the Church, but it was re∣solved in Council, that his Crime was of that Na∣ture, that the Church could not protect him, and
an Order was given out to force him thence, but the Criminal as I have been told since died soon af∣ter, and so put a stop to further Proceedings. And this makes me almost astonished at the Hardiness of the Inquisitors, who in the preceding Year, viz. 1697. took an occasion to publish an Edict in all Churches, which is to be seen at this day on most of the Church Doors. (I am sure it was not long ago, and is like to remain for many Years as other Orders of the Inquisition that stand by it have done, it being Excommunication to take them down) wherein the English in general are Stigma∣tized, not only for Hereticks, but for Usurpers likewise; but this is an Offence of too heinous a Nature for a private Person to animadvert upon, and therefore I shall content my self with having only mention'd it. FINIS.
