D333 12330172 59631
POEM, TO THE KING'S MOST Sacred Majesty. BY Sr WILLIAM D'AVENANT. LONDON, Printed for Henry Herringman, at the Anchor in the Lower Walk of the New Exchange. 1663.
POEM, TO THE KING'S Most Sacred Majesty. THough Poets (Mighty King) such Priests have bin As figur'd Virtue and disfigur'd Sin; Did in so fair a shape Religion draw As might, like Beauty, both allure and awe:
Did rigid Rules in cheerful Songs disperse; Whilst all were Lai'ty but who dealt in Verse: Yet now of Priesthood they retain no more Than frequent cause Compassion to implore: For if there any shadow'd strokes appear, By which to Priests they can resemblance bear▪ It onely may be said that both agree In willing or unwilling Povertie. Though Poets with the Poor now reckon'd are, (Whom all expose to God's peculiar care) Yet as the Poor by want great Gainers be, When Want leads them to God for Remedie; So Poets, when their Days are over-cast, And from their Noon they to their Evening haste, When Age, which is their longest Winter, stays T' increase their shame by shewing their decays;
When that long Winter grows at last so keen That even their Bays cannot continue Green, Yet against Frosty Age they may be arm'd: Poets by double Influ'ence have bin warm'd, And therefore may expect a Second Spring: We had our Phoebus, and have now our King: Whose Palace to th' Afflicted is as free As Temples where they God's Domesticks be. How happy is Affliction which may come Where God allows not Merit any room? Kings fit their Gifts to those who them receive, And to Affliction so much favour give, As may not well to Merit be allow'd, Lest those they would encourage should grow proud. Kings, wisely jealous, watch how Merit grows, That they may know it ere it self it knows.
Auspicious Monarch! here I lose my way! Yet as those Sea-men luckily did stray, Who with Columbus were by Tempests blown, Till they from Wand'rers were Discov'rers grown, And found rich Nature's last Reserve, a new Great World; so I by Storms am brought to you: By Storms of Grief, which in my barren Breast, Like Winds in Desarts, with themselves contest. Yet 'tis not abject Grief, such as does mourn For want of Wealth the Body to adorn; But rather Sorrow of a noble kind, Which does complain for maint'nance of the Mind; For want of that dexterity of Thought, Which in a moment has to Fancy brought All scatter'd Forms collected till she spie A single Map of all Diversity;
As at an instant to the rising Sun All Objects are compris'd and made but one. That heat is spent which did maintain my Bays; Spent early in your God-like Father's praise; Who left the world more than it ever knew Before so great and good, his Fame and You. By many Wonders you were hither brought; Which, strangely too, by their concurrence wrought Our whole Redemption in so short a space As did the sloath of human aids disgrace. Those who did hold Success the Cast of Chance, And Providence the Dream of Ignorance, Might in these Miracles Design discern, And from wild Fortune's looks Religion learn. Yet when we shall contemplate God, from whom Your Crown did through a Clowd of Terrors come:
When all those cares to which it must submit, And ceremonious forms which wait on it Are fully summ'd (Cares which to Age belong, And forms which tire, with tedious length, the Young) Then, like the Law which Moses had from Heaven, It seems to be impos'd as well as given. You now are destin'd to more watchful care Then Spies of Faction or the Scouts of War; To Care which higher and more swiftly flows Than that which from design of Conquest grows; Such as may seem to other Monarchs new; Care to reform those whom you might subdue. Conquest of Realms compar'd to that of Minds, Shews but like mischief of outragious Winds; Making no use of force but to deface, Or tear the rooted from their native place.
Who by distress at last are valiant made, And take their turn Invaders to invade. From Woods they march victorious back agen To Cities, the Wall'd-Parks of Hearded-men. Victors by conqu'ring Realms are not secure; Nor seem of any thing, but hatred, sure. A King who conquers Minds does so improve The Conquer'd that they still the Victor love. How can You rest where Pow'r is still alarm'd: Each Crowd a Faction, and each Faction arm'd? Who fashions of Opinion love to change, And think their own the best for being strange. Their own if it were lasting they would hate; Yet call it Conscience when 'tis obstinate. When weary of a Scepter here, they flie To seek new fashions of Authority
In forein States, then bring Rebellion home, And take just Punishment for Martyrdom. The Saints of old, not strugling for defence, Did satisfie themselves with innocence: In Death's stern Court did gracefully appear, And civil to their worst Tormentors were. But these so sullen are, as if they thought Saints could not Death defie unless they fought: As if their Church should spring not from the seed Of their own blood, but that which others bleed. Though Conscience is in others secret shame Of doing ill, yet they in publick claim Not onely freedom for the ills they do, But call for liberty to preach them too. They seek out God in cruel Camps, and boast They God have found, when they have Nature lost;
Nature, the publick Light which is held out To all dimm Minds who do of God-head doubt. She openly to all does God-head shew; Faith brings him, like a Secret, but to few. Sects, who would God by private Opticks reach, Invent those Books by which themselves they teach; And whilst with Heaven they too familiar grow, They to the Gods on earth disdain to bow. You safe amongst these diff'rent Sects remain, Where all would rule, and each a while did reign: And, having reign'd, are apt to reckon it Worse than Idolatry when they submit. And though these Sects in Doctrine diff'rent be, Yet in the uses of it they agree, Which first they for the novelty approve, And after for the gainful mischief love.
What confidence but yours durst undertake To give them Laws who dare Religion make? Whose private Conscience checks the publick Laws, Whilst many Modern Sects have one old Cause. That Feaver, Zeal (the Peoples desp'rate fit) You cool, and, without bleeding, master it: Dissembled Zeal (Ambition's old disguise) The Vizard in which Fools out-face the Wise. You keep with prudent arts of watchful care Divided Sects from a conjunctive War; And when unfriendly Zeal from Zeal dissents, Look on it like the War of Elements; And, God-like, an harmonious World create Out of the various discords of your State. Kings safer are when Zealots furious grow Then when their malice will no passion show:
For Thrones should ever fear to be surpris'd; Not dreading Arms display'd but Foes disguis'd: Sects, which through zealous brav'rie not submit, Deal plainly but when tame they counterfeit. When swelling Subjects are victorious grown, They leave, like Nile, where it has overflown, Monsters from fatness of corruption sprung, Which as they grow up soon so last not long. A Monsters hasty birth makes that ill shape From which, as soon as seen, men strive to scape. With sodain strangeness it does Strangers fright; And they as quickly chace it from their sight. So Sects, with monstrous impudence, may scare A while those who their boldness soon out-dare. These, when by Justice of the Laws subdu'd, Call their unwilling Suff'rings Fortitude,
Or Conscience, though they nothing use to bear But from the basest cause of Conscience, fear. Through hideous Monsters, by Religion bred, And by the choice of human slaughters fed, You move so boldly that they rather seem To strive to scape from You than You from them. The truth of Resurrection is by You Confirm'd to all, and made apparent too; Apparent in the Church, the world's best part; For of the world's whole Body 'tis the Heart. The Church You have reviv'd: for well we may Confess it more than rescu'd from decay, Since having lost, by Martyrdom, the Head, The Limbs had all the signs of being dead. But though, when it does flourish, Sects deride The Churches Ornaments as Papal pride;
Yet why with Sects (whose Congregations are But Men well disciplin'd for civil War, Not meek Assemblies but a sullen Crowd, Who out of haughty pride disdain the Proud) Should Calvin's civil Sect be rudely bent, Like zealous Goths, against all Ornament? Why do they verbal Ornaments esteem In Pulpits where they garnish out their Theme; And are in doctrine to their spir'tual Guests Long as in Graces which but cool their Feasts? With Flow'rs of Rhet'rick they intice the Ear, As if they and their Audience Poets were. If they in curious Tropes and Figures preach (Which were the Ethnick Ornaments of Speech) And to our Ears provocatives allow, Why should our Eyes th'allurements want of Show?
All these You have forgiv'n; so much forgiv'n That such an Act ne'r pass'd unless in Heav'n. Their crimes are so much banish'd from your Mind, As if You had forgot what Act You sign'd. Yet who dares say You not remember it? Since You as much of Courage, Faith, and Wit, Have shewn in keeping still that Act in force, As when it first was sign'd You shew'd remorse. Thus thorowly to pardon does comprise The utmost goodness that in Greatness lies. If we consider what in God does seem To be that goodness which we most esteem; And which should Temples fill with his applause; It is, that all his Messages and Laws And, of his Works, all that to us are known Are fashion'd for our int'rest not his own.
So, by example of his goodness, You An int'rest diff'rent from your own pursue. For such your mercy is that even your Foes Gain by their crimes what You by virtue lose. But though this does appear the utmost height That mercy e're did reach at her first flight; Yet yours at last so high a pitch may fly That even the Tempters of your constancy (Who did the force of human reason bring Against your heav'nly strength of pardoning, And what was done did labour to undoe) You, as your hardest task, will pardon too. To royal Faith (preserv'd inviolate By native honour, not design of State) Conspicuous blessings, as rewards, are due, Which we receive, and owe them all to You.
For after Twenty years in rapines spent (Th' illegal Acts of Lawless Parliament) In Fields we Harvests find, in Cities Wealth, And after Warr, the Sire of Sickness, Health. If Nations by the plenty they obtain, When youthfull Monarchs have begun their reign, May prophesie degrees of future Store, No Prince e're brought so much, or promist more. To You, who still are easie of access, Suitors can need no Guide but their distress. And though Distress long in complaint appears, That length no measure with your patience bears. You can indure a tedious narrative, And suffer the Afflicted to believe His Case is not as others cases are, But intricate, and very Singular;
And that it never yet at best appear'd Because he never has bin fully heard; And it would find redress could it be known To any comprehension but his own. Some Princes, that they may the rumour gain Of minding bus'ness, mighty bus'ness feign; And are lockt up, to have it then suppos'd They are more thoughtfull when they are inclos'd; But they from Concourse privately remove Only to shun what they pretend to love. Pow'r which it self does so reserv'dly keep, As if the being seen would make it cheap, Should use the proper Seasons for retreat: For though decrepid Age may think it meet To hide stale Objects from the Peoples sight; Yet in a Thrones new glory all delight:
All love young Princes in their flourishing, As all, with joy, walk out to see the Spring. Your Countries Genius and your own agree To make you rule as Sov'raign of the Sea. Nature has nothing made more unconfin'd Than your great Island and your greater Mind. You love the Sea, which the unpractis'd fear; 'Tis your own Element and proper Sphear. Their fear does from their thoughtless ign'rance grow, Your love does from your Study'd knowledge flow. So knowing Minds to God affection bear, Whom th' Ignorant are only apt to fear▪ Since You are prone by Nature to discern All that by Naval Art men strive to learn, You, with peculiar Glory, will obtain That Neptune's pow'r which Poets did but feign.
The Neighb'ring Monarch (wealthy and at ease) Will build a City all of Palaces: A work which does the Founders wealth express, And that he weary is of that excess: Why should he else his solid Treasure waste To make the shadow of his Mem'ry last? Since by that strength which he from Quarries brings, To make his Name out-wear all other things, He but provides his purpose to prevent; His name may perish e're the Monument For many a City built for future fame Has long out-liv'd the vanisht Founders name. By that tall Pyramid (which does appear The strongest Pile that Art did ever rear) Egyptians now themselves like strangers pass, And, but in vain, ask who the Artist was?
Ev'n of the Learn'd but few so curious seem As to desire to know the name of him For whom t'was built: and both their aims have lost, One in his Art, the other in his Cost. Great Monsters, Cities, over-grown with Pow'r, Do Neighb'ring Towns by hungry Trade devour. You Cities build which not destructive be; Ships grown to Fleets are Cities of the Sea. And Ships by trade each other still improve More fruitfully than Sexes do by Love. Ships, which to farthest distances are sent, Are so concern'd their number to augment, That they by nought but Number can dispence The vital heat of Trade, Intelligence. By pow'r of Number they themselves disperse For a Collection, through the Universe,
Of all the Freights which ev'ry Country yields From work of Cities or from growth of Fields. They grow to be a Squadron, then they meet In a free Road, and make a friendly Fleet; Where Patience, as her hardest trial, finds How much they can indure who wait on Winds. From thence (suppli'd at length with sev'ral Gales) Each to her proper Course does spread her Sails. Sea-men, in loudest Storms, are not dismay'd When they are even oblig'd to be afraid: For of what use can high confusion seem (When Winds and Waves strive which shall be supreme, And Nature does a frightfull Vizard wear) Unless it be, to teach the World to fear? Bold Pyrats, with a Frantick courage, dare Maintain against the World continual War;
No Traveller is from those Robbers free On Nature's own High-way, the common Sea: But though they dare all other Tempests meet, Yet still they fear the Thunder of your Fleet. What Monarch would make Levies and provide To exercise his Valour, or his Pride, Against some little peremptory Town, Whose Bullwarks and Redouts so high are grown, That it does rather seem but basely hid By Rebels fears than proudly Fortify'd? When he a Town has so by Sluces drown'd, That 'tis by nought but Tops of Steeples found, He may march home, and, poor with triumph, boast That what he gain'd he cheaper might have lost: Whilst other Kings, in taking Towns, displease Their Subjects, You, for yours, take all the Seas.
You to divert your cares (those ill-bred Guests Which most unruly grow in Princes Breasts Where they are oft'nest lodg'd) can lend your Eye To Ornament, your Ear to Harmony: So Nature, when she Fruit designs, thinks fit With beautious Blossoms to proceed to it: And whilst she does accomplish all the Spring, Birds to her secret operations sing. Kings, to the stretch of thought for ever bent, Have chang'd his Image whom they represent: Who in Creation wrought not hard nor long: His work is still as easie as 'tis strong: As all was by his sodain Fiat wrought, So 'tis preserv'd without his pains of thought. From cruel bondage You the Muses free, And yet restrain the Poet's liberty;
But so restrain him that he now does find 'Tis but the evil Spirit which you bind. The Muse is now, by her conversion, taught Gladly to lose that freedom which she sought: How wild her flights have been untill restrain'd? And, by your pow'r, how greatly has she gain'd? By bad Idaeas she did Heroe's paint; But now, You of a Muse have form'd a Saint. Men knew not what they took, or Monarchs gave, When they did liberty of Subjects crave: Even Poets would, like other Subjects, be Licentious Writers▪ had they liberty; And study all the madness of freewill, Which is, old English freedom to do ill. The Theatre (the Poets Magick-Glass In which the Dead in vision by us pass;
Where what the Great have done we do again, But with less loss of time and lesser pain) Is in the Scene so various now become, That the Dramatick Plots of Greece, and Rome, Compar'd to ours, do from their height decline, And shrink in all the compass of design. Where Poets did large Palaces intend, The spacious purpose narrowly did end In Houses, where great Monarchs had no more Removes than Two low Rooms upon a Floor: Whose thorow lights were so transparent made, That Expectation (which should be delai'd And kept a while from being satisfi'd) Saw, on a sodain, all that Art should hide; Whilst at the plain contrivance all did grieve; For it was there no trespass to deceive.
If we the antient Drama have refin'd, Yet no intrigues, like Lab'rinths, are design'd, In Counterturns so subtle as but few, When entred, can get forth without a Clue: Where Expectation may intangled be, But not so long, as never to get free: Where Love throughout the Character does last; And such unblemish'd love as all the chaste May still endure with publick confidence, And not at vanquish'd Beauty take offence; Where Valour we so possible express, That we should wrong the Great to make it less. If to reform the publick Mirrour (where The Dead, to teach their living Race, appear) May to the People useful prove, even this (Which but the object of your leisure is
To respite Care, and which successivelie Three of our last wise Monarchs wish'd to see, And in a Century could not be wrought) You, in Three years, have to perfection brought. If 'tis to height of Art and Virtue grown, The form and matter is as much your own As is your Tribute with your Image coin'd: You made the Art, the Virtue You enjoyn'd. But now me-thinks, I hear my Pinnace hal'd! Which boldly in a Mist too far has sail'd; And I discover, through the Glass of Fear, That the whole world's High-Admiral is near. Too long my wither'd Lawrel I have worn; The Poet's Flag, by Grief's foul weather torn: Grief which is taught by Reason to complain, That I, when all are better'd by your Reign,
Should seem unworthy, in my faded Bays, To carry Fame a Present of your Praise. Whoever is more happily design'd To bear a Present of this noble kind (Which Empress Fame to all the world will show, And which examin'd will more valu'd grow) Must from the Muses his Credentials take; Who both the Embassy and Present make. And, as he knows from whom he comes, so he Should not to Sov'raign-Fame a Stranger be; For Fame (whose custome is to have a care Onely of those who her Familiars are) Does with a proud neglect o're Strangers flie, As if unworthy of her Voice or Eye, She Seldom is acquainted with the Young, And weary is of those who live too long.
When the wise world, by correspondence, shall To gen'ral Council ev'ry Poet call For prudent choice of this Ambassadour, Then all that Session it will soon abhor: Those who in concord there and glory came, Shall part from thence in discord and in shame. The young will not agree who is too young, Nor th'old determine who has liv'd too long. And as in free Assemblies each may prize His single worth to gen'ral prejudice; And, in the votes of chusing, every voice May stop some progress in the publick choice; So now (where none their own defects will see, And each would for the whole elected be) Th'Election likely is to end in vain; All losing that which each presum'd to gain.
The Muses proud Ambassadour may stay His journey ere he does begin his way; And keep his great Poetick Present too: Which may prove well for Poets, Fame, and You. Poets are truly poor, but onely then When each a Hero' lacks for his own Pen. They pine when mighty Arguments are scant; And not when they that trifle, Treasure, want. As at such dearth they languish, so they seem To swell when they have got a plentious Theme, For rashly then the Muses take their flight: Yet as a man, o're-joy'd at sodain sight▪ Of Treasure found, grows jealous, and, through care Lest others in his Prize should claim a share, Bears hastily from that which he did find Much less away than what he leaves behind:
So, whilst thus rashly I convey to Fame Your Virtues, I so few of them proclame That many more are left behind unprais'd, Than those which on this Poem's Wings are rais'd. How glad will all discreeter Poets be, Because (whilst in their choice they disagree) They this imperfect Present shall prevent, Which darkens You to whom it lustre meant; Or rather it does quite extinguish me; Who looking up to You, do onely see I by a fainting Taper lose my aim, And, lifting it too high, put out the flame. Fame may rejoyce when any Image, wrought Thus ill, is never to her Temple brought: She should examine what she does receive, And Poets watch the worth of what they give.
Kings rais'd to Heaven, by an unskilful Pen, Scarce look, when made ill Gods, so well as Men. The Painter whose Spectators were at strife Which the resemblance was, and which the life, Deserv'd high praise when he a Face did draw; The Face, which all suppose he often saw; But when we mention Homer's high renown, Apelies then may lay his Pencil down: For Heav'n ne'r made but one, who, being blind, Was fit to be a Painter of the Mind. As justly Poets may with Fame rejoyce, That Songs of Worthies set below her voice, (Where Numbers rise not to Heroique height) Are hinder'd from accompany'ng her flight; So You, your self, may be content to see, That though all Poets in your praise agree,
Yet all, with joynt submission, think not one Can, at the rate your virtue has begun, So follow you with offer'd Wreaths, as you Do other Hero's for their Wreaths pursue. Behind your Chariot Poets lag with shame, As if the Num'rous-Feet of Verse were lame. But then 'tis time to cast my Anchor here: Who dares beat Sail where none are fit to steer? Or how dare Poets venture at your praise? For though so great a Trophie none can raise But Poets, yet the weight of it they fear, As wanting strength to move what they should rear. All Painters strait would lay their Pencils by, Were they enjoyn'd to paint the Deity. Hereafter of what use will Numbers prove, If in that Theme we fail which most we love?
But though this kind of Trophy needs excuse, Yet even a Poem is of greater use Than any other work by which your name We would to all succeeding Times proclame: And, since your name should be perpetual made, You must vouchsafe t'accept a Poet's aid. Poets did make the mighty Hero's known, And drew in full proportions their Renown; Which Fame can onely, by the pow'r of Verse, Ever preserve, and ev'ry where disperse. FINIS.
