e3578 r36206 15618599 104177
AN EXACT ACCOUNT OF THE PROCEEDINGS At Guild-Hall. Upon the Election of the Right Honourable Sir WILLIAM PRICHARD, The present Lord Mayor of the City of LONDON. UPon Friday the 29. of September last, (being the Anniversary day for the Election of a Lord Mayor for the City of London) all the Aldermen below the Chair were put in nomination, for the choice of two Persons out of that number to be presented to the L. Mayor and Court of Aldermen. The Election was declared upon the View, to fall to Sir William Prichard, and Sir Thomas Gold. But a Poll was then demanded by Mr. Jenks and others for Sir Henry Tulse and Mr. Alderman Cor∣nish. Whereupon the Sheriffs and Common Serjeant, with the Masters and Wardens of several Companies went into the Mayors Court, and reported it to the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen; and the Lord Mayor upon that Re∣port granted a Poll, and adjourned till Three Afternoon; when the Poll being continued until the Evening, it was adjourned by his Lordships Order to Nine of the Clock the Munday morning following; (the 2. of October, Saturday being the day appointed for presenting of the new elected Sheriffs to the Barons of the Exchequer.) The Poll continued all Monday in very good Order, and with great Calm∣ness, to the satisfaction of all Parties concerned. It was taken in six Books, and a Supervisor (as well on the behalf of Sir William Prichard and Sir Henry Tulse, as for Sir Thomas Gold and Mr. Alderman Cornish) to every Book. From Monday the Lord Mayor adjourned the Poll again till Two the next day; and that Even∣ing the Books were closed. But before the closing of them, Mr. Jenks and others demanded a Scrutiny upon the Poll. The Lord Mayor told him that he had nothing to object against it; but however, that as he had not hitherto done any thing without the Advice and Concurrence of his Brethren, so he would take their Opinion along with him also in this particular. Mr. Jenks, &c. de∣sired the same thing again the next Morning: at which time the Books were cast up. Whereupon the Common Serjeant reported the Numbers to be thus, Sir William Prichard 2233. Sir Henry Tulse 236. Sir Thomas Gold 2289. Mr. Alder∣man Cornish 2258. The Lord Mayor after this, granted the Scrutiny, and appointed that those who had insected the Poll on each side should make the same; who were Sir William Dodson, Sir Edmond Wiseman, Captain Griffith, Captain Genue, Mr. John Craddock, and Mr. Thomas Amy for Sir William Prichard: and Sir Tho∣mas Player Mr. John Ellis, Mr. Gilbert Nelson, Mr.  Jacomb, Mr. Francis Jenks, Mr. Jo. Hayes, and Mr. Len. Robinson (as an Assistant to Sir Thomas Player) were for Sir Thomas Gold and Mr. Alderman Cornish. The Lord Mayor, upon the appointing of this Inspection, issued out a Pre∣cept to the Masters and Wardens of the several Companies, commanding them to return Alphabetical Lists of their respective Liveries. Upon Friday October 6. The Sheriffs, Common Serjeant, and Inspectors met at Guild-hall in the Orphans Court, where they agreed to take Transcripts of the several Names in the Poll-Books to be posted under the Heads of the several Companies; which was finished accordingly upon the Tuesday following. The Books and Papers being sealed up every night, and put into a Box, during the time of the Scrutiny, by consent of both Parties. On Thursday morning October 12. The Sheriffs gave the Inspectors of each side the Transcript-Lists of the Poll, and likewise ordered them Copies of the Alphabetical-Lists of the Companies, that they might be in readiness to bring in all their Objections upon the Tuesday following: After which time, no further Objections were to be admitted. On Tuesday (the 17.) The Sheriffs, Common Serjeant, and Inspectors met in
the Irish Chamber, and so from day to day, till the Monday following; which time they spent in examining the several Exceptions, and clearing them so far as they could agree upon the matter among themselves; proceeding hitherto upon fair and amicable terms on both sides. But upon Monday in the Evening there arose some heats about Capacities and Qualifications; and the Examiners for Sir Thomas Gold and Mr. Alderman Cornish desired the Sheriffs to deliver their Opinion upon the Points in question: But the Sheriffs excused themselves as not competent Judges of the matter, as they had formerly done upon the first starting those Objections: And also telling them that the Common Serjeant would the next morning pray the Judgment of the Court upon the Particulars wherein they disagreed; which they did not onely with some vehemence op∣pose, but insisted upon it, that my Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen had nothing at all to do with it. The next morning upon the sitting of the Court, the Sheriffs, Common Ser∣jeant, and Inspectors on both sides came in, and the Common Serjeant acquainted his Lordship that the Inspectors had proceeded upon the Examination of the Poll according to his Lordships direction: But that there occurred several Dif∣ficulties, wherein he humbly desired the Judgment of his Lordship and that Court, as the proper Judges of the Points in difference: viz. 1. That whereas by the ancient Constitutions of the Company of Merchant-Tailors, and by their Ordinances signed in the time of K. James, by the Lord Keeper Egerton, the Lord Chief Justice, and Sir Edward Coke, Lord Chief Justice of the Com∣mon Pleas, in pursuance of the Statute of the 19 Hen. 7. there was an Oath required to be taken upon coming on the said Livery, there were several persons of the Mer∣chant-Tailors Company that had polled as Livery men on both sides, and had not taken that Oath. The first Quaery was, Whether these Persons were in a capacity to poll? 2. Whether those of the Glovers, who also had not taken an Oath enjoined in like manner, were duly qualified? 3. Whether those that were Freemen of one Company, and brought on the Livery in another, without being duly translated, according to the custom of the City of Lon∣don, were to be reputed as Livery men capable to poll? 4. Whether the Musicians are a Livery? 5, Whether the Farriers are a Livery? Hereupon Mr. Jenks delivered in a Paper, signed by the Inspectors for Sir Th. Gold and Alderman Cornish, and in their Name, praying that it might be read, and that the Livery men of the Merchant-Tailors and Glovers Company might be heard by their Council: which was granted them, and Mr. Trindar and Mr. Thomp∣son, as Counsel for the said Livery men, were heard at large. After this, The Sheriffs and the Inspectors were called in, and the Court told them, that they were come to a Resolution upon the several Points in question; and that they should have it in writing under the Town-Clerks hand. The Com∣mon Serjeant hereupon acquainted the Court that he should be ready to make his Report the next morning. And upon this my Lord Mayor ordered a Sum∣mons for a Common Hall. The Sheriffs having received the Judgment of the Court, appointed a meeting at 4 of the Clock, and the Inspectors on both sides being met in the Old Council Chamber, it was read to them by the Common Serj. And the Sheriffs proposing to them that they should now adjust the Poll, Mr. Jenks declared that they could proceed no further with the Inspectors for Sir W. Prichard in that matter, for they did not think that the L. Mayor and the Court of Aldermen had any thing to do to meddle in it. The Sheriffs still persuading them, at least to sit by, and see the cast∣ing up of the Poll, though they were resolved not to act any farther in it. But they utterly refused, and so withdrew; onely M. Jacomb was pleased to acknow∣ledge the fairness of the Proceedings, and expresly to give the Sheriffs thanks for their great Civility. Upon this the Sheriffs and the others that staid, cast up the Poll, and it appea∣red that 95 had unduly polled for Sir W. Prichard, and 165 for Sir Tho. Gold and 165 for Ald. Cornish. Which Numbers being deducted from the Total of their Poll-Books, the account stands thus, 2138 for Sir W. Prichard, 2124 for Sir T. Gold, and 2093 for Ald. Cornish. So that Sir W. Prichard had 14 more than Sir T. Gold, and 45 more than Ald. Cornish. And so the choice fell upon Sir W. Prichard and Sir T. Gold. This being Reported by the Com. Serj. to my L. Mayor, with the usual Forma∣lities, his Lordship and the Court proceeded forthwith to the choice of One by Scrutiny, and the Election fell upon Sir William Prichard, Nemine contradicente. London, Printed for Benj. Tooke at the Ship in S. Pauls Church-yard. 1682.
