F1107 11994399 52061
FIVE IMPORTANT QUERIES Humbly Propounded To all true Lovers of the Peace and Safety OF THE CHURCH AND STATE. By a sincere Well-wisher to the Old Protestant Religion. Volutus Lapis nunquam capit Muscum. Often Changes presume Death at hand. LONDON: Printed by Nathaniel Thompson next Dore to the Cross Keys in Fetter-Lane, MDCLXXXI.
FIVE IMPORTANT QUERIES Humbly Propounded To all true Lovers of the Peace and Safety of the CHURCH and STATE. I. WHether it be necessary to endeavour any Altera∣tion in the Church, in this Juncture of Affairs, considering, 1. There is nothing practis'd in it contrary to any known Commandments of God: 2. Nor can its bitterest Adversaries affirm, that its Communion hinders the salvation of mens souls: 3. Nor doth its continuance cross the Laws of the Land (as the practice of all other Sects do) since 'tis established by the Law: 4. Nor is there any evil at present, or greater danger, then hath been for some years last past, from the parties of either side, to hasten such alteration: 5. But such alteration may soon move Asperities of either side, great enough to endanger the State. II. Whether it be profitable to endeavour such Alteration, considering, 1. The parties are of both sides as much engaged against the Papists at present, as ever they will be in their Union. 2. The fiercest and rigidest of the Sects can never unite, but by utter destruction of the Church: For the Qua∣kers deny all Sacraments, and can't mix with them that are for them, since they are matter of daily and personal practice. The Anabaptists cannot close, for then England must be all un-Churched and un-Christianed; or they must forsake their principles. Nor can the Independents; for they profess none can be a Church of Christ, but what are gathered by their own consent, and make an explicite Covenant, and exercise all jurisdiction in a single Congregation, which is inconsistent
with the Constitution of this Church. 3. The Presbyterians, as they are few in number, (if any) so can they not assure the Law-alterers, to bring any of their people to our Communi∣on, after all pretended alterations made. 1. Because they are bred up in a perfect aversion from Liturgies. 2. Because they are too proud to held themselves with the vulgar. 3. They love to seem more Religious than their Neighbours. 4. They hold Gods people to be a little Flock separated from the world; and conclude they must have a world to rail at, and distinguish themselves from, tho' it be from Christians baptized, and professing the true Faith; and that they cannot go with the multitude of believers, but to do evil; and must contend with Magistracy, that through many tribulations they may enter into the Kingdom of God; and so ungovernable, that their own Teachers affirm they can't rule them. So that it were prudence in Law-makers to take a List of their Names, subscribed by themselves, that would unite upon such abate∣ments, lest they should toyl all day and get nothing. 4. 'Tis certain when Presbytery was nigh establishing in 1645 with∣out Ceremonies or Liturgies, the Dissenters swarmed, and ar∣med against them as fast as now, and found occasions enough of disputing and separating. Nor is there at present any Litur∣gy or Ceremony in the Church of Scotland, but the Field-Conventiclers, and the Regular Clergy, pray and preach without distinction, in the same method; yet is the separation strenuously kept up upon other grounds, when Liturgy and Ceremonies were taken away. So that the profit of alteration is not like to quit the cost; besides the offence it may give to the serious Conformist, who should not be valued the less for being tender of disobedience to Authority. And 5. 'Tis most unreasonable to hope, when the Law is relaxed to male-con∣tents, that conquest over the Laws should make them more humble or peaceable, for it will seem to them a victory over King, Lords and Commons, to make them more insolent. III. Whether it be expedient at this time to attempt such Alteration, considering, 'twas but 18 years since the Churches
last Settlement, and the same men for the most part are still in the Legislation, who either acted then with mature considera∣tion, or not: if they did, what accident since should make them attempt a change? Are there more Sectaries than at that time? or fewer Conformists? or is the Liturgy and Ceremonies grown worse than they were? Or the Dissenters more peacea∣ble and humble? or is there greater danger in continuing, than there was in first settling the Church? But if not done with due conscience and regard, it is a sad reproach to the Le∣gislators, nor can they secure us that greater care will be taken now, since they implicitly confess they prevaricated before: besides the dishonour will reflect on the King of Levity and Inconstancy in the great Affairs of Religion, to alter its Modes faster than Fashions. 2. Such Alterations will cast a blur on the Reformation, and disturb the ashes of our pious Martyrs, as men that settled a Religion and sealed it with their bloud, which a good conscience could not comply withal. 3. It will ju∣stifie the Papists in their sufferings, and condemn our whole Laws and National Justice; that we should punish them so ma∣ny years for not coming to Church, and complying with a Religion that now our selves think fit to be exploded; and the parties to be gratified, declare, that no man with a good con∣science can comply withal; a greater wound than which can∣not be given to the whole English Nation, nor a fairer palm of victory to the Papists, (thus made) Martyrs or Confessors at the least. IV. It will be of very ill consequence to all sorts: For 1. when Scruplers shall find they can master Laws, and get their wills over Authority, it will encourage and increase scru∣pling, yea even to the ruine of them that are now to be gra∣tified, for others by their example will hope to rise by the same evil Arts. 2. And for the common people, it will take off their reverence to Religion, by seeing it represented so trifling, light and changeable; and so will tempt them to believe there is no God, by reason of the Tricks and Experiments the State makes with his worship; nor will they much value at any time what
they see kickt about like a Foot-ball, and win think any Set∣tlement will be in fashion but for a few years, and thence reckoned evil and ridiculous. 3. Yea, the wisest and best of men will stumble, when they see the way of Religion, in which they have for many years comfortably worshipt God, now at last in a hurry hissed out of the world by prevailing Faction. 5. The Roman Factors make all the profit; for that mighty Argument that hath perverted thousands already will now be stronger, That there is no Settlement, union or peace any where but in the Roman Church, nor any steady Religion else to place themselves under, seeing us toss and tumble our Worship from one mode to another, as the Tumble alters his postures; thus we take pains to drive Fish into the Popes Net. Besides which, it will wonderfully harden and encourage the Papists, when they shall see us not only to reject their Errors, Novelties and Superstitions, but even the grave usages of the Primitive Church: so that they will conclude we walk by no Rule but our own wills, and are Nonconformists not only to their Church, but to all since Christianity begun in the world. Yea, when our people shall see Parliaments so apt to change the shapes of our Worship, they will suspect that when occa∣sion serves, they will bring up the old Roman mode, as they did in the first year of Queen Mary, which may tempt the people to prepare themselves for it against the time. IV. Whether it be lawful for Parliaments so often, and without being called on by the Church Representatives, to at∣tempt those Alterations, considering, 1. The Laws of God condemn such as are given to change, and all that are busie-bodies in other mens Matters, and require submission in all lawful things, with meekness and lowliness of mind, the Spirit directing Christians to give themselves up to the Lord, and then to the guidance of the Church, 2 Cor. 8.5. by the will of God, whose faith the Saints were bound to follow, Heb. 13.7. and not to meddle with doubtful disputations, Rom. 14.1. and much less to attempt perpetual Alterations. 2. The Law of Nature made all the Ceremonies of Religion unalterable▪
unless on very great occasion, as may be seen in all Mythodo∣gists. 3. Right Reason assures us that what we do without just cause, we have some unjust cause for it, as prejudice, partiality passion, or the like. 4. The Law of the Land forbids it, while the great Charter secures the Church all its priviledges, one of which was to be first and chief in all Matters of Religion; and what alterations were made, did owe their rise to them, the secular Power followed their Decrees with the civil Sanction. 5. It looks very odd, that at every Election of a new Parliament, we should put our Bodies and Souls, Religi∣on and Worship, as well as Liberty and Property, into the hands of our Representatives, whom we choose on the Kings Writ, to be as Arbitrators for us in those things, that the King at that time hath to propound; England rather takes Parlia∣ments for a Civil then Spiritual Court. How would a good Conscience tremble when a Parliament sits down, to think that now the Worship of God is in danger to be blasted by a major Vote? The Ark of God would totter at every such Assembly. V. Lastly, Whether it be fair dealing to attempt such Al∣terations, considering, 1. That the Body of the people of all ranks and degrees, chearfully complyed with the Settlement, in hope to live peaceably all their days under it, and to be no longer distracted with endless divisions, but to rest themselves here as in the true Ark of God: But such Alterations thrust them into the Flouds again, and charge them as men of no Conscience, for embracing that way of Worship, that is now thought fit for nothing but the dunghil; and send them to seek some new Assemblies to march along with to Heaven, in the midst of infinite distractions, and exposes them to the scorn of Dissenters, that will deride their Christian humility for base and cowardly complyance, &c. a sad requital for their holy and humble demeanour. 2. The Clergy whose Confor∣mity will seem their scandal, and their many Declarations and Subscriptions, be accounted but as so many unconscionable ownings of a way of Worship, not fit to be endured by Chri∣stians.
And the most stubborn and rebellious Schismatick be judged the better man, yea, their meekness, obedience, and peaceable behaviour, will be reckoned base complyances with false ways of Worship, while the pride and stubbornness of the Sectary will pass for Christian fortitude, the injustice of which will haply be equall'd by nothing but the sentence of Pilate upon our Saviour. Now for a Conclusion, we may Query, Whether it would not turn much more to the advantage of Piety and Peace, that each Bishop be urged to reside at his Cathedral, and at∣tend his Consistory, that all Causes may be decided with grea∣ter justice, and the Censures of Christ be managed with just and holy hands: And in case of necessary absence, that the Dean, and 4 or 3 at least of the gravest Prebends, as Co-asses∣sors, supply his place, that Righteousness may run down like water, and Judgment like a mighty stream, to refresh the Church of God, and bring it to its due and true Reverence; which being a way of Christs Institution, is more likely to re∣cover straying Sheep, then all annihilation of Laws to unite them in I know not what ill-tempered Syncretism. Nor can such Bishop want judicious and acceptable Presbyters, to send amongst the Dissenters, to convert them from their Errors, and to convince them of the dangerous estate of Schism, in which they stand, if industriously prosecuted. By this means chiefly the ancient Schisms were demolished, and Peace and Unity restored to the Church; but never by cassating the Laws, to make the Malefactors behaviour not illegal, whilst he continues in his stubbornness without repentance or amend∣ment, the secular arm still inflicting some small penalty, that men may not sin out of wantonness. This is written plainly to all Capacities, and sincerely, de∣signing to prevent those horrid Mischiefs, that will attend these designed Alterations, whenever they are made. God grant such a judgment to be made of it by our Rulers, as the Matter deserves. FINIS.
