F2381 12142656 54864
The Turtle-dove (an emblem of the new Creature) her properties described. THe Turtle-dove truely resemble can Of any thing, in nature, the New-man, In heart and whole affections constant, pure, Does loyall only to her choise endure: Most searching, piercing storms and darkest night, In presence of her Lover, she doth slight: But thoughts of separation be so sad, Created comforts cannot make her glad: Whiles vexing grief from self-suspition grows, That his removall from her motion flows: This Animall the Rationall so exceeds, She for preferment of affection pleads. They born again this case can only state, Prevail and far exceed in the debate; For they refram'd, refin'd, revived be, By that anointing makes them hear and see Himself, who so elects, allures and loves, His Dove redeem'd, reproves, proves, and approves, Most blessed they thus taught, thus fram'd, thus gain'd To God by grace, and from the world wean'd. CANT. 2.12, 14. The voice of the Turtle is heard in our Land. 14. O my Dove, that art in the clefts of the Rocks, in the secret places of the Stairs, let me see thy countenance, let me hear thy voices for sweet is thy voice, and thy countenance is comely. PSAL. 68.13. Though ye have lien among the pots, yet shall ye be as the wings of a Dove, covered with Silver, and her feathers with yellow Gold.
THE TURTLE-DOVE, UNDER THE ABSENCE & PRESENCE OF HER ONLY CHOISE: OR, DESERTION & DELIVERANCE REVIVED. 1. Ushered with the NICODEMIAN PARADOX explained in a Comparison betwixt the First and Second BIRTH; and closed with the Characters of the Old and New Man. 2. And seconded with a SURVEY of the First and Second DEATH: which inclosed with a Sepa∣tion-kisse betwixt two most intimate Friends, the Soul and Body of Man. 3. And a Glimring of the First and Second Resurre∣ction and Generall Judgement: closing with a Song of Degrees, from what we were to what we are, and from thence toward what we shall be. By a Lover of the Celestiall Muses. IOHN 3.8▪ The wind bloweth where it is, &c. EDINBƲRGh, Printed by Andrew Anderson, Printer to the CITTY and COLLEDGE. Anno DOM. 1664.
The Presentation of the Turtle-Dove, to the Lady VISCOUNTESS of KENMOOR. RIght Noble Madam, Please your Honour now, Accept this present of a Turtle Dove, Which in the Ark reserv'd, secure hath been, And both the worlds, new and old hes seen; The Nations of the old, deaths captives living, The natives of the new, in death reviving, She sees preserv'd from fear, from pit, from snare, Where wretched worldlings wamble in despair: Those old ascendent shining and shut out, These born anew with Songs of safety shout: Eternall purposes reveal'd she weighs, And timous precious promises applyes, Timely performances she truly proves, And feels how fervently her Lover loves: Now when you have consideratly seen Her Songs, and found them clear and Christ-all-clean, Then let her sweetly by your licence flie, Amongst true mourners with her melody; These discords well compos'd abounding there In concords move a sweet soul-melting air: Ladies and Lovers, Lidia-like advert, Till sp'ritual motions mollifie your heart: That moulded new, in love true and divine, Then in your Lovers likenesse you may shine.
An ACROSTICK upon the NAME of the Right Honourable LADY, JEAN CAMPBEL, VISCOUNTESS of Kenmoor, L LOve-bred designs from deep divine desires, A A Sp'rit inspires, transcending humane skill, D Dilating still the will with heavenly fires, I Inflam'd wherewith▪ admires her Lover still. E Elected Ladie elevated Lover, J Injoy the object of thy Love sublime, A Adore the dictats of thy Divine Mover: N Now training thee to treasures after time. E Eternall troubles, inward tryals strong C Come out to make thee famous in thy fight, A And manag'd be the mysteries among M Make up thy life-translation unto light. P Presse through the straits, the precious prize perceive, B Bounty bestows, and blessed souls receive: E Eternall triumphs, glorie infinite, L Loves Darling comes thy comforts to compleat. The Minion of the Muses here, Great Mistris of this gracious Quire, Whose study unto self-denial Had suffered to shine, the trial, Should made the Muses homage do Her Pen and Person both unto.
An ACROSTICK upon the name of that very Religious and Famous GENTLE-WOMAN, MARION McKNAICHT. M More happy then imagined can be, A And blessed are such as with heart sincere, R Resolve to cleave to Christ to live and die, I In Him, with Him, and for Him to appear, O O What transcedent glorie grows from grace! N None but, no not the soul refined shall Mc Make to appear, that Light, that Life, that peace, K Known only to the pure Possessors all. N Now▪ thou by grace art unto glory gone, A And gain'd the Garland of eternall blesse, I In seeing Him, who on the glorious Throne, C Created, uncreated, glory is: H Heavens Quire did sing at thy conversion sweet, T Time posts thy finall comforts to compleat. Those names among the living worthily Preserved be, that true Belivers be. And such they be that truely do believe, Who living, learn to die, dying, to live.
TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE, Noble, and Religious LADY, JEAN, VISCOUNTESS of KENMOOR. Right Honourable, BEing past controversie, and uni∣versally acknowledged, that bit∣ter Experience is the best Teacher and School-master of fools: a∣mongst which rank I do esteem my self to be inferior to very few; And there∣fore must be educate under such exercises and di∣scipline, as the only wise Parent (who knows well the frame, disposition and inclination of every one of his children) sees meet, for instru∣cting, rectifying, and reclaiming of the blind-born
ignorant, prone to all maner of perversity, out of that naturall darknesse, by the illumina∣tion of the holy Ghost, unto the life of grace whereby God makes himself known to the Elect, and themselves to themselves, and whereby they be moved to hate and abhore themselves, to love and believe Him, so clearly manifested to them▪ that the Devil or his instruments, from with∣out or from within, cannot gain ground so far, against the work of his begun grace, as to raze it. Neverthelesse the subtile Hunter, cruell and vi∣olent Persecutor of such as are thrusting through the strait gate, ceaseth not to prepare and set ma∣ny snares privily in our way: partly by entang∣ling our minds with too much worldly affairs and other vain inventions: and partly by presenting well-polished idols, for our humors, as means of diversion, whereby we be marred in our growth, and come slowly unto maturity. But our only good God, and gracious Father, who, out of his infinite goodnesse, hath begun, knows also how to accomplish his work in every one of his own. For proof whereof, I have made bold to let your Ladyship know, that, after many mul∣tiplied
compassions, unchangeable love, and long-sufferings, wherewith my Lord hath been driving me nearer to Himself: now at length to lead me apart, as it were, out of the world, by a singular and unexpected providence, unto the wildernesse, not to be tempted by the Devil, as my dear Saviour was before me, who alone was able to endure and overcome: but to be allured and enlarged (by freedome from outward, and supply against inward intanglement) to recent the variety of most observable Dispensations wherewith I have been exercised these 70. years, and to read over the Endictment of provocations, upon the travels and troubles that I have been tossed with in that time allotted me: hereto be∣ing sustained under, and rescued from the distra∣ctions of all the trials and temptations that I have tasted of, unto this day: But specially, since the time that, by grace, I have had, in any mea∣sure, my senses exercised, to discern the benefite of his presence and Providence, ordinary and ex∣traordinary: and the burden and bitternesse of his absence, the deepest and darkest hell that the child of God meets with; and therefore carries the
name of Desertion, (albeit not properly) being partiall) and, blessed be the Lord) but tempo∣rall, and not according to the measure. But I forbear, knowing that the exercises of Gods chil∣dren are various and all wonderfull, both in ma∣ner and measure. And seing I have found that the most sad, tart, distractive or destructive whereof I have tasted, whether upon the mind, conscience, name, means, body, or friends, have been prescribed by such wisedome, inflicted by such favour, qualified by such compassion, timed by such prescience, and sweetned by such delive∣rance: and thereby produced such inward conso∣lation, that I have been overcome in admiring and adoring that depth of excellency that hath therein appeared: and thereby become desirous to impart some part thereof unto others, that the Christian Believers, who have been sustained un∣der the like trials, feasted upon the like furniture, and delighted with the like deliverances, may take occasion to renew their songs of thanksgiving and praise to their Royal Provisor, and Captain of their Salvation. And likewise, that such who scar at the Pro∣fession,
and keep at distance by reason of the Crosse and contumelies that cleave unto the Pro∣fessor, unto whom nothing is certain but what is seen and present: whereas, unto the Believer, things future and unseen for the time, be most certain: and yet will, out of curiosity, glance at every thing, as if they were making use of all things; May know that it is for want of spiritu∣all discerning and senses, so exercised, to taste and smell the sweet fruits of a sanctified Crosse, that keeps them from closing with, and coming under the Colours of the Captain of Salvation, who leads through, and feeds with such freedom and furniture, as should make them sing under all their sufferings. The project and end of all being, to induce and perswade unto the ardent study of this secret and saving way of God upon the soul, unto convincing and converting, whereby the faith of His eternall Love being increased, all the desires and delights of the heart may be fixed upon, and fervently intended for a Communion with Him, who is altogether delectable and only desirable. The matter, manner and circumstances being
consonant to Scripture-verity, Scripture-presi∣dent, and the experience of the most sound and sincere, the figures and metaphors familiar and significant, the composing and personating there∣of to the life, whereby the matter may be the more perspicuous, and leave the better impression, I trust shall not offend any. And now, most Noble and truely Religious Lady, although your Ladyship hes been honoured with the patro∣nage of the most exquisite exercise of practicall Divinity that hes seen the light in our dayes, yet I trust your L. shall not esteem it inconsistent with that well deserved reputation enjoyed by you, that your L. name is here most deservedly pre∣fixt as sole Lady and Mistris of this Quire; being so well versed in exercises of this nature, being al∣so of a continued standing in the way of Christia∣nity from your infancy, untainted and undanted by temptation or tribulation, from within or from without, how plausible or how perillous soever they have appeared: constantly keeping the path that is called holy, by the line of Truth and Righteousnesse, as the fruits of that saving faith once given to the Saints (without rever∣sion)
which workes by love clear and sufficient evidence hereof, removing all grounds of suspi∣ion of private respects or vulgar ends; and who can discern aright the vertue, or attain unto the utility of such supplies of His gracious presence and providence but such as have seen and felt, ta∣sted and feasted upon the sweet and soul-ravish∣ing fruits of eternall, infinite and unchangeable love, wisdome, mercy, power and faithfulnesse of God in them? The sensible fruition, where∣of at some times unto the Saints, is like sweet oyntment powred out, and gives such fragrant smells, as sets the Virgins upon a Love-ardour and extasie in enquiring after Him when He seems ab∣sent, whom they have found altogether Lovely and only desirable, when in His Garden of Grace He hes been letting down the Dew of Heaven up∣on the spices of His own planting. Here your Ladyship hes been nourisht, cherisht and refresht amongst your associats, flourisht and been fruitfull, and instrumentall to the com∣fort and encouragement of others, under the di∣versity of severall cases incident to these of your fellowship.
I have likewise, after your Ladyship, re∣membered the name of that famous and memo∣rable Matron, Marion Macknaught, whose me∣mory hes left a sweet smell behind her; and whose soul is now so over-joyed in Saviour-love, that she rests superexceedingly satisfied, atten∣ding the finall consummating of all things, subject to alteration, and the glory that is to be revealed: through which she hes been well guided and guar∣ded, and after whom, and others that be gone be∣fore, Your Ladyship is advancing through the windings and mazes of this labyrinth, the task and tryall of a Christian Believer, where is to be ob∣tained the greatest victories imaginable, and also, to be gained the richest treasures of all desirable excellencies attainable, only by the guiding of the holy Ghost, in holding fast the well twisted threed of sacred truth, whereby we make a sweet entry, a sure progresse, and a victorious retreat: whereas in letting this grip slip, we fall amongst Rocks & Robbers: and being bemisted amongst soul-murderers, head-notions, and heart-moti∣ons, perverting both wit and will unto unevit∣able and unrecoverable ruine, wirh the multi∣tude
who, slumbering in their sensualities, are swallowed up in the groundlesse gulf of endlesse oblivion, unlesse it please the Lord in an extraor∣dinary way to interpose, and wonderfully worke our rescue, thereby witnessing His unsearchable soveraignity in saving some (while others are suffered to sink in their own devices) who seeing themselves self-lost and so saved; they are bred unto self-denial, simple submission unto, and sole dependance upon their guide: with songs of joyfull deliverance from dangers past, with con∣fidence and courage for future supply. All which, for recreation in spare houres, is of∣fered unto your Ladyship, not being prejudiciall to your more solemn and serious exercise, where∣in being daily sprinkled with the dew of grace, and throughly purified by the bloud of sprinkling, and so prepared for the places that be prepared for you: when corruption and all things corruptible being dissolved, glory and immortality put on, and you admitted (amongst others that stand by) to feast upon the superexcellencies of joyes that are in the King's face, and pleasures that be enjoyed at His right Hand for evermore, who
out of His eternall Love, in an incomprehensibl way of infinite wisdome hes purchased this peace, this grace, this glory to all the members of the body mysticall, whereof He the glorious Head, i the fulnesse of Him who filleth all in all: And unto whose grace and faithfulness, your Ladyship is fervently recommended, by, Noble Madam, Your Ladyships most affectionate and humble Servant, JOHN FULLARTOUN of Careltoun. Edinburgh, Feb. 8. 1664.
THE EPISTLE TO THE Weak and wrestling Believer. DAughters of Jerusalem, This weak, and wearied Pilgrim, now comming your way, who, being long detained in the house of bondage, hath been (amongst others) called out and guid∣ed through the Red-sea by a more miraculous deli∣verance, and guarded by a greater and better Guide than Moses to Israel: from the pursuit of more nu∣merous enemies, and oftner at the brink of despair untill peremptor Providences of powerfull preserva∣on appearing, have caused the raging Seas of most dreadfull trials to recoyl for our passage, unto the utter ruine of unreconcileable enemies: and yet must take journey through a waste and wearisom wildernesse, where we are broght low, and kept under by troubles and trials unexpressible: and all for our good, till we have fulfilled our course.
And now at the length this Passenger, being ar∣rived at the borders of the Holy-land, and having tasted of the first fruits thereof: and thereby being incouraged to attend the appointed time, when he shall be called to passe on after those that are gone before him through Jordan: so long as the Priests feet stand firm in the midst of the River, with the Ark of the Covenant upon their shoulders; And in the mean time doth take occasion to recent the most notable evidences of his supply and support, under greatest crosses, conflicts, dangers, and deliveran∣ces, by mediate and immediate helps of His Pre∣sence and Providence, who hath been his God and his Guide, his Sun and his Shield unto this day: and therefore conceives it to be his duty, to convey some Clusters of the Grapes, as the first Fruits of that Country (for incouragement) to such as are upon their journey through the waters of Mara, through fiery serpents swarming in the wildernesse: and must endure what Balak, with the advice and device of Balaam, can do, that they may be the lesse afraid of these fierce assaults that they be to conflict with. And the sense wherof puts him upon this singing
strain, and extracts (rom him these solemn Song of singular deliverance from all these furious, as∣saults and slavish fears that has infested his faith or fostered his dejections: specially unto the convi∣ction of carnall Professors of this generation, who under the frequency of Gospel-ordinances, having attained unto the theory of Theological Truths swim∣ing in the brain, are satisfied, and set down under a carnall security, not affected with the preciousnesse of the adorable Divinity that is in them: So as by sucking them in, they may sink down to the heart, and therefrom elevate the soul to presse foreward for the prize, with such wakening and warming zeal to the glory of such multiplied mercies, in the Gospel-ministry, as might produce the sweet smel∣ling fruits of righteousnesse, peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost, the proper result of true, living and saving faith, which works by love in these that, being born again, do walk in the Spirit, and discern aright in things that differ. The Course and Method taken, is by a Survey of four severall Subjects.
1. The first, Ʋpon the First and Second BIRTH, by way of Comparison betwixt the Generation, and Growth of MAN in Nature: and the Re∣generation and Growth of the NEVV MAN in Grace; And closing with the Portraict of the New and Old Man, under the Names of Ver∣tue and Vice. 2. The second, Ʋpon the Exercises of the weak Believing CHRISTIAN, under Desertion and Deliverance: And closing with an Objection of the Carnall Man, answered with a Rationall Advice to the Party. 3. The third, Upon the First and Second DEATH; And closing with a SEPARATION-KISSE be∣twixt two intimate Friends, the Soul and Body. 4. The fourth, Upon the First and Second RE∣SURRECTIONS and GENERAL JUDGMENT: And closing with a SONG of DEGREES. The first of them being a Rationall Discourse, most tending to inform and convince the Naturall Man. The second Practicall, and for Spiritual Appli∣cation.
The third for Deliberation. The fourth for Consolation. Which being so ordered, have been laid aside for these six years and above: Not intending that they should have seen the light, untill I had come to the possession of a greater light than is accessible under mortality. But now, in all probability, drawing near to the close of my time in the body: And by providence being in this place, where I have the offer of service assistant for that effect: and conceiving it doubtfull which of us shall see the one, or other light, first, that where grace, or this where glory shines, I have now resolved to let them out, to make a Visite among the Daughters of Jerusalem; With whom a profes∣sed Pilgrim may have much assurance of hearty wel∣com, for discourses: and so much the more, that he hath been admitted unto intimacy, and honoured with a kisse of the hand of so truly Noble, Religious, and Vertuous a LADY, under whose Patrociny he makes his appearance: but specially will be in re∣quest with such as have undertaken, or do intend to undertake the like travels: Not for the holy Grave, but for the grace of Holinesse, wherein to make our
approaches: Not to see the place where our Lord was laid, but where he lives, and prepares for us to live with him: Not to carry with us, as a mo∣nument, some of that earth wherein our Saviour was interred for a time, but to receive the promised Comforter, who is only able to conduct, and protect, through all the passages of our Pilgrimage, to the end of our journey. And it will be granted, that experiences are most able to make the best report for difficulties or dangers by Sea or by Land, of poling by Robbers, or splitting on Rocks, and may be most able to guard, and give incouragement against the sons of Anak: And so much the more, as we may gather grounds of certain victory after a short Conflict: and a never-ending triumph after some trnsitory trials, wherein we are sustained by Him, in whom we be more then Conquerours. And that you may believe, and be established, shall be the fervent desire of Your Fellow-pilgrim, and Servant in Christ Jesus, J. F.
THE OCCASION AND CONTENTS OF THE ENSUING DISCOURSE▪ AMongst many other innumerable testimonies of Gods unspeakable goodnesse (when contrary to all appearance or probability of expectation) there was by a gracious dispensation offered unto me, the liberty, free∣dom and benefite of a long wished for retirememt, I took the opportunity of the time, to take notice of the most observable passages of 72. years time passed me: Wherein for the space of 36. years from my birth, being carried by the swey of mine own naturall and native inclination the concourse of the like company and the current of time and place. 1. First, in my minority I have had much fearfull proof of what impiety the blind-born, fu-born, wrath-born, brutish atheist is naturally poysoned with, and proe unto. 2. And secondly, after the years of discretion, and the benefite of breeding a more fearfull proof of the vanity and deceit of self-confidence, upon the ground of civile carriage and commerce.
3. Thirdly, and most dreadfull of all, the conviction of that villany of hypocrisie, under a formality of profession. After all, it being the good pleasure of my God, in a time of love, by the Ministry of the Word, and convoy of the Spirit, to clear mine eyes, and open mine ears, unto a right uptaking of mine own by-past madnesse and mise∣ry, and of His marvelous long-sufferings and mercy, so as (by grace) might have both humbled me, and help∣ed me. And now again, for the space of other 36. years, be∣ing under the name of a standing (but more properly stammering) Professor, I have found by better (althogh bitter) experience, that the way of Gods Children through the wildernesse is strawed with innumerable piercing thorns of divers afflictions and variety of tempta∣tions: And that the most searching tryals and sharpest afflictions are so unseparably conjoined, as fire and heat, under the exercise of desertion, being unto the spirituall man and renewed party a present (but temporary) hell, and yet carrying a heaven in the heart of it: Whereas the Fools paradice of sinfull pleasures produces in a short time an everlasting hell. And finding that out of the most terrifying and tormenting troubles, songs of joyful delive∣rance were injoyed, like sweet out of the strong, and meat out of the eater, although it should seem to the naturall man a Paradox: Yet I shall speak a word to such as are inclining to better clearnesse then as yet they have attained unto. That they would make it their study to know that the Child of God after regeneration, in whom the seed of Grace is graciously infused, by the effectuall operation of the Holy Ghost, in the ministry of the word,
whereby the new Creature is formed in the soul, where the old man of the flesh or corrupt nature, formerly car∣ried sway without controle, that these two parties now in one person, being of as different qualities as fire and water; dispositions, designs, desires & delights, as God, the Author of the one, and Belial of the other: the one being a young and new Intrant, & the other an old possessor strongly for∣tified: they enter an intestine war with as great hostility, as is betwixt Michael and the Dragon: Where the new man endures daily incursions by the violence and subtile wranglings of the adversary, the advantage of the one proving the prejudice of the other: Which conflict be∣ing continued in the Beliver, there is prepared for beat∣ing down the old works of the Devil, and purging out the pollutions of the flesh, potions and antidots answe∣rable to all the poyson vented upon our nature by the old serpent, and whereby we are naturally infected, untill the vice, vanity and villany of the first generation be fully mortified, and the work of grace, vertue and verity be implanted, and promoved unto maturity and perfection: And in the evidence whereof the soul is inwardly overjoy∣ed under all the outward and temporary annoyances that she suffers, humbly submitting unto all such dispensations, finding them prove her sensible advantages, and the means of her advancement unto present growth in Grace, and hope of glory. But this being the secret work of God in His own Children, unseen and not discernable by the carnall man, in whose eyes they be but abject and despica∣ble persons who can pretend such principles, or presume upon so unsensible grounds, not able to conceive, far lesse to give credit that such daily seen and sad sufferings, as the Believer is subject unto, could produce such sweet
soul-satisfying fruit, as can make them sing for joy, and shout for gladnesse of heart, whence flowes the most of mistakes. And by this perpetuall repugnancy and constant opposi∣tion betwixt the spirituality of the new, and the carna∣lity of the old man: being throughly pondered, it shall easily be agreed upon, that what is affirmednent the bea∣titude of the Believer, and grounds of incouragement they have under all their most grievous afflictions, is confirm∣ed: For it may be asserted (being generally acknowled∣ged by all the Children of God) that the least spunk of confidence, preserved by grace in the heart of the Believer, under the conflict of faith powerfully working, produceth incomparably more real ground of true inward and spiri∣tuall comfort, then all the splendor, pomp and externall glory that the invention or imagination of man and Angel with the accession of all the cretures of the universe con∣centered in one, and flowing out upon the best capacitat and apprehensive person, habilitute to swim without sink∣ing, or swelling in that Ocean of all carnall and temporary delights, without the least disturbance or annoyance unto the largest extent of time, that any of the sons of Adam hes attained unto; And that (although there were no more, albeit in the second place) by reason of the brevity of all these carnall, transitory and perishing pleasures, ex∣tinguishing in present stink, and closing in perpetuall tor∣ment: And the duration, accomplishment and perfection of the other in eternall glory, above all conceiving, sense or believing: Which finding, and still the more looking and delighting to see, and dive in the Majesty of that wisdom, knowledge and providence that appears in the progress of that work of His grace in His chosen, called and
faithfull Children, inferior to none of the wonders of the Lord: Excepting, first, that great and unsearchable mystery of godlinesse. 2 Tim. 3.16. 2. And secondly, that secret and unseen way of in∣fusing the seed of saving grace in the soul, for forming of the new Creature, John 3.3. to the 9. Out of which considerations▪ from the experience attained, and insight of the breeding, formes and dispositions both of Court, Country, School and Citty, the best by breeding, and the worst by birth that can be expected of many; I have set about, composed and personate the purpose and pro∣ject in this order, maner, invention and verse, under Scripture-figures and metaphors, succinct, significant, and sententious, for taking best impression upon mind, me∣mory and affections: Not by art or humane learning, wherein I am little versed, but by the Rudiments of Christianity, and experienced observations, most mate∣riall and applicable to the purpose. I. And first, in the generall and whole complex of this discourse, there is held out the most blessed condition, freedom and felicity of the Church, the Spouse of Christ, and of every chosen Child of God, and Member of the Body mysticall, after Regeneration: Neverthelesse, of all the tryals, troubles and temptations they are to meet with in the strait way. II. Secondly, in particular there is represented, the sad condition and sharp affliction of the Child of God under desertion, made appear in a threefold consideration. 1. First, More felt then real. Debated from Page 8. to 23. Where it is made evident, that the Child of God, after Regeneration, may be wrapt under fearfull clouds of darknesse and discourage∣ment,
and impossible to be comforted, till there come a reviving from the inward Comforter: And this is most properly Love sicknesse, being for tryal and prevention, Psa. 42. Psa. 30.7, 8, 9, 10. 2. Secondly, Real and felt. And this is debated from Page 23. to 49. Wherein there is notice taken of the severall most prevailing tenta∣tions, upon several ranks of persons. viz. The Court-bred, the School-bred, the Countrie-bred and the Citty-bred, the Civilian also, and the most savage of conversation. Neverthelesse, the party deserted, not able to discern the speciall cause of the affliction, untill the means be san∣ctified by inward supply: And this is for chastisement and correction, tending to humiliation, Psal. 51. 1 Sam. 1.16. 3. Thirdly, More real then felt. Debated from p. 49. to 76. Where it is made appear, that the believer may be lying under much guilt, unsensible unill a timous wakning come: and when it is come, under much perplexity, untill a word of peace be pronounced: And this is for tryall and wakening, Isa. 39.12. 2 Sam. 24.10, 11, 12, 13. III. Thridly, After all this serious debate, unto small purpose, the smoaking flax being long smoothered, and now breathed upon, it kindleth swiftly, and breaks out sweetly in an excessive flame of spirituall fervour: And whereby then, and not till then, the party being pre∣vailed with, there appears a correspondent alteration of affections in the whole strain, and uniforme expressions of the whole Society. 1. First; The perplexed person under absence is now upon renewed sense, elevated unto a most sublime, soul-ravishing rapture, in a SONG, p. 76. and the continuation thereof, p. 77, 78.
2. Secondly, The Associates sympathising therewith in extasie, SONG 2. p. 79. 3. Thirdly, The continuation of the Sympathy in ex∣tasie, SONG 3. pag. 80, 81. 4. Fourthly, The Soul-rapture, upon renewed sense, again renewed, SONG 4. pag. 82, 83. 5. Fifthly, Solide grounds of spirituall security, by way of Echo, p. 84. 6. Sixthly, A timous warning to guard against carnall security, with comforts and incouragements unto chear∣fulnesse against trials and troubles, till he end his journy, p. 85. to 96. 7. Seventhly, The grounds of Gospel-ordinances pre∣sented under the name of the Pallace-garden: from p. 96. to 107. wherein there are nine severall MAZES making up the Garden, viz. First, A Border of Restriction, p. 98. Secondly, A Beam of Instruction, 99. Thirdly, Cordials for Incouragement, 100. Fourthly, Loves Mystery, 101. Fifthly, The Fountain unexhaustible, 102. Sixthly, Loves Labyrinth, 103. Seventhly, Loves Mirrour, 104. Eighthly, Loves Emblem, 105. Ninthly, Loves Union, 106. 8. Eightly, The Jewel of Jewels, a Vade-mecum for heart impression and preservation p. 110. to 114. 9. Ninthly, The Symphonicall desires and delights of the Redeemed, in their retirements, closing with that Song, Rev. 15.3, 4. p. 114. to 121. 10. Tenthly, A harmonious Consort, and a Song of praise, p. 121. to 126.
11. Eleventhly, Reviving Recollections and Sollilo∣quies, closing with the Song of all Saints, Rev. 7.12 p. 127 to 14 12. Twelfthly, An Objection by the mere natural man answered, and the party advised. p. 134. to 142 In all which there is represented sure grounds of oud comfort, under all the trials incident to the Child of Go after regeneration, from his birth, in his life and death and after death his soul injoyments, boes rest and resur∣rection, soul and bodies second conjunction, small absolu∣tion and endlesse beatitude, carrying, also, through the whole discourse from infallible truth▪ the terrours of the Law, against all that be under the Law, all eding to  serious study of keeping a Communion with God in the Spirit, with a spiritual and chearfull conversation unde all dispensations, crosse or comfortable, in that humble∣nesse and singlenesse of heart, the fruits of saving faith which workes by love, to the praise of the Author, and our own peace. And as to the additions of a preparatory Paradox. ex∣plained in a comparison betwixt the first and second birth going before, & a subsequent survey of the first and second death, resurrection▪ and generall judgement, they b hereto annexed for making compleat the intended de∣signe of delineating the pedigree of the new Creature from the right stock of his portraict from his true Parent and Procreation, his crosses, conflicts, comforts and confi∣dences from the right Fountain, in life and in death, his restauration from death and darknesse unto immortall life and light of glory, from the all-glorious and ever blessed Author of his being, and this his most blessed well-being.
TO THE OBSERVANT READER, UPON THE ENSUING POEM. YOu who desire to know the plain (tho strait) Path-way, to new Jerusalems high gate, Whose pav'ment bright (emboss'd with Gems, be far, More rich and fine then the most glistring Star) In glore excells the boundlesse saphire bounds Of lights vast Curtain, these pure Christall-ounds, Whose azure Canopy, and pleasant fields, Great ground of soul-amazing wonder yeelds: If any in designs so high aspires, As to resolve through waters and through fires Of tort'ring trouble, to climb the steep yee-rocks 'Twixt Heaven and earth, in spight of Satan's strocks; And will rest satisfi'd with nothing lesse Then Heav'n, yea, God Himself, eternall blesse, Resolving to endure all grief, all pain, All losse, this great prize, All in all, to gain. Lo, here's a Pilgrim, who (being guided by Truths sacred threed, and Gods directing eye) Is now come near his journies end (not stayed By fained fraud or vain hopes not dismayed
By force, frowns, hate or groundlesse fears) expecting Gods call to enter Jordan, and neglecting Fond vanities: he's looking from the top Of Pisgah, by the eye of faith and hope, Toward the Promis'd Land, which to enjoy, Through's time, he mainly did himself imploy: But while God spares, soul-wasting idlenesse He loaths, and therefore, on the Wildernesse, Through which he's come, and all that did befall Him in his way there-through, and in his call Thereto, reflecting; all he well observes, And unto others carefully preserves; Lo, therefore, here held forth, thou'lt clearly see, Of Christian cases the diversity▪ Sometimes rapt to the third heav'ns by loves wings, They see their strange soul-ravishing sights, and things Ʋnutterably glorious, whence doth spring Amazing joy, true peace, which makes them sing: Here neither reason, faith, nor hope, but love, And sense cause the soul-chariot-wheels to move. Sometimes these soul-transporting objects be Vail'd, whence flow darknesse, great perplexity, Afflicting trouble, tort'ring grief of mind, By which they are consum'd, in which they're pyn'd: Then reason's corrupt, faith's weak, sense is gone, Hope fails, love still remaining's left alone, Which surely, though unsensibly, unites The soul to Christ, Christ to the soul invites. Lo, likewise, here thou'lt see the ground, on which Some Christians are so toss'd, some not so much, With their procuring causes and occasions, Grave warnings, suting all such dispensations;
Lest when they be advanc'd they swell in pride, And turn secure, then sadly fall, or slide With heartlesse frettings, When they cannot have All things, at all times, their vain hearts do crave: In all which things, his words he fitly squares, With sound experience its norm, and dares With open face avow, all here declar'd, To have been clearly known, found, seen and heard: Come therefore, read, and with all care peruse His words; for love to thee did cause him chuse To publish them: Thy good he did intend, Next to Gods glory, and if this great end Be reach'd, he's recompenc'd for all his pain: Give praise to God, thank him, for thine's the gains W. G. To my highly Honoured, and very obliging FRIEND, upon his rare and sutable Choise in the ensuing POEM. MƲch honoured Sir, the stately peerlesse worth Of your high soaring spirit, is held forth In slighting things terrene, divine desiring, With most undanted boldnesse, high aspyring, To know, see, yea, injoy him, whose perfections Cannot be reach'd by most inlarg'd conceptions Of most capacious sp'rits, and deeply dyves In these hid hings, which knowing souls in lives:
Your progresse since ingag'd in this abstruse Deep art (being helped by the heavenly muse) Appears in these well fram'd lines, which contain A Christians present toyle, but future gain. O but your warnings wise, and counsells, be Wholsome: convey'd with moving gravity▪ Your skilfull, well tun'd Songs shew that you're taught In heavenly Poesie, and fully fraught With free Urania's gifts; your lofty strain Holds forth a heav'n sprung, high Poetick vein; Surely such soul-transporting Songs, could not By any (not transported) be begot; How hes your soul been fill'd with rapting joyes? O how enlarg'd by the melodious noise Of these celestiall hosts, and glorious throngs? How elevated by their pleasant Songs? When such sweet parallels were by your pen Convey'd (of so great use) to blind-born men? Great Sir, well done, ye have not basely spent Your noble and broody spirit (forc'd to vent It self on somewhat) in devising vain Ʋtopian stories, which Romanticks fain, Who busk Chymerick notions, which are not Else where, but in the fanciers brain begot: And with high-flown deckt words, great things portend, Which try'd, into a noysome nothing end. Your gravity would not permit you choise Such theams; you fancy not a birthlesse noise; Your subject's grave, your drift's not transient pleasure, But solide joy, true peace, these lasting treasures. W. G.
TO THE JUDICIOUS READER, Upon the excellency and sutable∣nesse of the AUTHOR, his Choise and Subject of the Turtle-dove in the ensuing POEM. HO, curious Sp'rits, who love to spend your time, In reading strange new things, in Prose or Rime: Come here, a Creature rare describ'd you'll see. No Monster, yet more strange then Monsters be. She's stil'd a Turtle-dove, hereby's held forth Her Clement Nature, Properties and Worth: But if ye'll mark her with a searching eye, Ye'll find her wonderfull, made wondrously: She is begot, she's born, and yet (O strange!) Created, nay, renew'd: Ne're such a change Was heard of by Philosophers: Yet more, By that same act by which she's made (adore!) She is espous'd, yea match'd: Her Maker is Her Lover, yea her Mate, and she's made his: His milk's her food, her Collactaneus Mother Sucks the same breasts, their Nurse is als their B, Yet, both his members are▪ He's soul and head, They Feasters, He's the Table and the Bread. He's Prophet, Sacrifice, Priest, Judge and King, They Judges, Priests and Kings with him shall reign: And though these seem to be moe when alone, Yet, Husband, Mother, Spouse, Nurse, makes but one. WILLIAM GORDOUN.
The POEM with the accomplishmenes Epitomized. BEauty and Valour many Volums prove, To be the Object of most ardent Love, And subject, where the most profound confine Their deepest thoughts, both morall and Divine: The Streams of Truth unto the Fountain leads, Where Vertue true from verity proceeds: Unfading Beauty does in Vertue shine, And Valour strong triumphs in Truth Divine: Vertue Truth still victorious doth grace, And Truth in Vertue Beauty fair imbrace: What foes fair Vertue to deface contend, Truth overturns, and doth her cause defend▪ From Truth what Rivall Vertue would allure, Vertue disdains, and does his death procure: Fair Vertue does a constant Conflict keen, From foes within and foes without sustain: But by the Truth her Standart-bearer stands Against the malice of these mighty bands: Most happy they, and right Heroick sure, Can faithfull hearts unto this fight procure: But all these conflicts, and these battels be Spirituall, and discerned sp'ritually: Yet carnall minds for substance shadows take: But who for substance shadows does forsake: True Valour, Vertue, Beauty, Love (come see) The Subject of these Songs ensuing be; Where shining in this Portraict shall appear, The lineaments of a lively Christian clear, Delineat from his birth and breeding glorious, raught with the Trophees of triumphs victorious.
THE NICODEMIAN PARADOX, EXPLAINED By a COMPARISON betwixt the Natural Generation of MAN, and the Spirituall Regeneration of the NEW CREATURE: CLOSING With the CHARACTERS of the OLD and NEW MAN. THE PARADOX. 1. Except a Man be born again, he cannot see the King∣dome of GOD. 2. That, before we can come to GOD, we must know our selves captives and slaves to Satan. 3. That, before we enter the way to Heaven, we must see our selves in the way to hell. 4. That the most sad Crosse produceth the most sweet fruit of most kindly comfort. 5. That the Believer keeps a daily Feast, and also a daily Fast. 6. That there is no true contentment attainable in any thing present.
7. That the Believer enjoyes joyes unspeakable in things unseen. 8. That the poor, that have nothing, possesse all things, and make many rich. THese, and the like of these, are unto every man in the state of nature, clear contra∣dictions: for no Creature is able to surpasse its own Sphere. The Vegetative attains not unto Sense. The Animal attains not unto Reason. The Rational can as little apprehend the things of God, which are only discernable by the Spi∣rit of God. The most able of men, for judgment, under∣standing or other parts naturall, or by learning and industry acquired, or extraordinarly given by revelation, are but common gifts of the Spi∣rit: as proper to the Believer in grace, so to the unbeliever in nature, and by the man wholly in nature, naturally received and naturally practised. As also, the very devils are known to have more light (by the many advantages and occasi∣ons they have of knowledge, both by experience and revelation) then all the sons of men: and al∣though they be of a spirituall nature, yet know not, neither can they put any thing in practice, but naturally. Yet herein further consists the unhappinesse of
man, that he cannot conceive, nor will he be taught to understand, that there is any more ex∣cellent happinesse attainable, than that whereun∣to they have attained, or may naturally come by: Whereas the Believer, after many calls, wakenings, warnings, purposes, promises, shifts and debates, being, in the peremptory time of Gods appointment, (the time of love) effectu∣ally wrought upon, by the Spirit, and word of grace and truth, unto a gracious wakning, quic∣kened and illuminate to see themselves under darknesse, and spiritually dead without God in the world, and posting on in the way of destru∣ction: and so deservedly, wondring that he is not long ago swallowed up in the gulf of irreco∣verable wrath; Seeing also the Vail rent, and the entry made by the New and Living Way, for a gracious relief: and hereby beholding, as in a glasse, the glory of the Lord, is translated from that naturall darknesse to his marvelous light; And lanching forth into this Ocean of eternall & unconceivable love, where the deluge of unsearch∣able and self-destroying misery meets with the incomprehensible deeps of infinite mercy: where plunged as in the extreams of contrary Tides, swelling to such heights, being heaved (as it were) to the Region of the Air, and hurled, as if they should be instantly sunk in these death-destroying
surges of despair; And yet so strengthened, that they see the wonders of the Lord, who, before they be aware, commands peace to appear: ma∣keth all quiet, and, by the breathing of a sweet and soft gale, brings safe to the shoar. And now reflecting upon the by-past and naturall lost con∣dition: first in the guilt of the most base and ir∣rationall revolt of Originall defection, and then in the stain and stintlesse superfluities of naughti∣nesse, daily sprouting out in actuall provocati∣ons, grieving Gods Spirit, and now vexing the New Man. Observing also, and recenting the long-suffe∣ring patience, rich mercy, free grace, eternall and unchangeable love that hes followed them in that miserable condition, melted and made them up in a new mould, so as the old things are past, and all things are become new to them. They are set upon a two-fold task, 1. Of self∣detestation, as self-destroyers: and 2. Of Savi∣our-admiration in their deliverance, hating, de∣nying and forsaking themselves, loving, imbra∣cing and relying upon him in a continued fast of abstinence, from all that hes been offensive to His good Spirit, and studious to know, and deligh∣ting to do whatsoever may be well-pleasing unto Him, who hes been doing all things well for us, when we were disdaining his divine bounty: and
this being the vast difference betwixt the man in his naturall estate, and in the state of grace, and that no man hes ground of boasting, of any thing, in themselves more then another, and that there is no warrant to any man to despair, but for con∣fidence, in following the means appointed, sin∣cerely; And the matter being of greatest conse∣quence, I have been taking the more particular notice, by way of comparison, betwixt the first and second BIRTH, and growth in a most fami∣liar way, how any under the least degree of grace, may most easily discern what progresse they have made: And have annexed hereto the portraict, both of the new and old man, the better to in∣flame the affections to the love of the one, and loathing of the other: Not that it is possible by any comparison ima∣ginable, whether real or supposed, to decipher the unsearchable mysterious way of the spirit in the soul of the elect, in the Ordinances of conversion, or that either Ordinances or instruments can make effectuall the work of God, begetting and bring∣ing forth the new creature unto life, without the enliving power of the spirit, of the new life, in the Ordinances: Nevertheless, seeing the Lord hes appointed, and blessed means, wherein he will shine, and whereby he dispenseth His grace; very reason is convinc'd that the means are to be followed.
And this comparison is no further to be streach∣ed, then in a rationall way, to incite the reaso∣nable party to a reverent attending, with atten∣tivenesse to the Ordinances, and a confident de∣pendance upon the truth and tendernesse of the Author; obedience to whose authority is ever well taken, and never any forsaken that have been sincere seekers of Him, according to the perfect rule of Scripture-truth.
THE COMPARISON. AS the mater of the body of man, by the su∣preme Ordinance of God, in the ordinary ct of generation is conceived, brought into form and capacitate to receive the spirit of life, and the oul being created and infused in the body, doth operate unto the perfecting of the body, and so by the Lord's singular and gracious preordinati∣on, they do become one compound creature for the discharging of the offices of an intelligible spi∣rit, joyned with the Organs of a bodily substance, whereby to conceive, and by words and actions to expresse, according as they shall be by means ordinar, or extraordinar, naturall, or supernaturall taught, as the first Mover shall see meet: Even so, the word of the Gospel, containing the seeds of the New Man, by the Ordinance of Preaching, and the ordinar act of hearing, impressions are left upon the understanding and will, for conceiving and bringing it into form, quality and capacity, to receive the spirit of spiritual life, which creats and infuseth grace in the soul; whereby every
Elect Child of God, according to God's grac¦ous preordination in this new creature, by t efficacious operation of the Holy Ghost, is in¦grafted in the Head Jesus Christ, and by th Union inabled unto the performance of all Chri¦stian duties, incumbent to the New Man; an that by degrees, according to our growth and in¦crease in knowledge and experience, either unto doing or suffering, according as they be moved o called thereunto. But as in the naturall generation, after the In¦fant hes received form, life, senses and faculties but not come out unto the light, and so withou the object and exercise of them, but lying unde darknesse in this weak condition, the brittle em∣brio is in hourly hazard of imminent destruction from causes seen and unseen, innumerable; and of∣ten proves abortive, by an over-slow or over sud∣den birth. Even so the life of grace, by the Spi∣rit, and Word of the Gospel, being conceived, yet is the New Man overclouded with much na∣turall darknesse: the Devil taking advantage of the time, sets to work all his machinations, mu∣sters up all his legions, lies in ambush with swarms of temptations, assaulting from all airts unces∣santly: from corruption, from carnall reason, from suggestions naturall and unnaturall, weary∣ing the poor youngling with fearfull wrestlings;
ut faithfully guarded against this malice by the uthor of his reviving. Only the yoke of ondage, from the undeniable endictment and itnesse in his own guilty conscience, dragging im back to the justice seat of a sin revenging od, to receive the righteous doom of his own righteousnesse; he is under dreadfull confusi∣ns and hesitations, in hazard of miscarriage, and ady to give over, untill it please the Lord to re∣eal Himself more clearly, and thereby making o the work of faith with power, brings out the risoner of hope, unto the open air of the Go∣el, to lay hold upon the Prince of life; and by eholding Him, the Captain of our Salvation,  giving His Life to the death for penitent and elieving sinners, hes destroyed death, spoiled  of the sting and the law of its strength, quie∣ng the conscience in satisfying justice, and so eeing the fearfull soul from the rigorous exacti∣s of a fierce and fiery law unto a further growth f grace, and the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ: But being by much weaknesse, almost vercome in these wrestlings, and like an unwise n, having stayed long in the breaking forth of ildren; by gracious assistance, having gained me better ground of confidence, I break out in is contest with my self.
Ho! hellish heath, dost thou not tire to toile Thy self, alongst this stinking Stigian Lake? What canst thou like in this forsaken Soile, Where all that drove of damned devils quake: Ah, dost thou look for Limbos Patrum here, For Purgatory, or poor Infants pain? No, the eternall wrath of God severe Doth ever burn, none doth return again. Ho! lo these swelling sulph'rous floods that roar, Gaze no more on these griefly ghosts forlorn, Wambling in wofull endlesse torments sore, Blaspheming God that ever they were born. Return, withdraw now, do ye danger dread, Despair attends, and can ye overturn: Thou hadst dropt down, if not upheld indeed, Where all these ever-dying damned mourn: He that upholds thee bids thee turn in haste, To taste and feast upon this fervent Love: Return, my soul, therefore unto thy rest, Prepare thy heart His mercies force to prove: How canst thou be so base, as misbelieve Him, who hes shed His blood, to set thee free? Wilt thou, by incredulity, deprive Thy self of peace, so purchased for thee? Thy guilty Conscience, and the Law exact He silenc'd hes, that ye can say no more: And now, thou may, this day, come see and take His truth, His grace, Himself thee to restore: Is it not now so naturall to thee. Him to believe, since thou art born again, As once it was His truth to vilifie, When thou in nat'rall darknesse did remain?
Thy bands, thy bondage, all thy tort'ring terrors, From infidelity, unpurg'd, do spring: May not this ransom now remove thy errours, When death and hell hereby hes lost the sting? The Law like the Law-maker doth remain, Righteous and holy, sp'rituall and just: So doth thy Conscience here bear witnesse plain Of what thou dost amisse, for that it must: But none of these can hinder thee to hold The grip that thou hast got of God, by grace: No, they do let thee see that thou art sold, By sin, a slave to satan, and do chase Thee now, with speed, timous supplie to take, And wonder that thou art prevented so, Before the Law thy conscience did awake: For then remedilesse had been thy woe. Thy reason cannot thy relief receive, Thy guilt will ever keep thee under grief: Then shalt thou so thine own poor soul deceive, And it bereave of offered relief. Arise therefore, and mourn the more for sin, That now, thou seest, it hes procur'd Gods ire: Again to see slain Christ for thee begin, Whose blood doth quench that fear'd infernall fire. Doubtlesse I would be fred of this wanrest, Wherein I wrestle as a wretch forlorn, Under the weight of guilt and wrath supprest, And with the torment of these terrours torn: But now I see I must for life believe On Him, who freely loves and freely gives: Not that for my believing I may live, That I may live, He gives me to believe,
And firmly now to fix upon His Love His Mercy, Truth and power infinite, And by the motions of His Grace to move, As He shall give assistance by His Sp'rit. And yet, as the naturall man, before he com to the years of discretion, by education and ex∣perience, is exposed unto many dangerous trial and troubles, wherein he is often in danger o ruine, being like an untamed Colt, or a wild Asse in the Wildernesse, snuffing up the wind brutishly exposing himself unto the perill of peri∣shing, every day, in his riot and insolency. Right so, the new Man, albeit come out of the womb of Regeneration, wrestled through the straits and travels of new Birth, escaped the powe of the Law, bondage and darknesse where unde he was kept: and that for the time, corruptio hes been kept far under, that it could not get up the head, having tasted how good the Lord is and doth grow up by sucking in the sincere Mil of the Word. Yet, the old and bold Serpent, that vigilant, subtill and restlesse enemie of our Salvatio sleepes not, but lyes at all advantage, by all means, to make use of every time, under all cases, for undoing all that God hes done in us so far as lyes in his power.
Who seeing us so satisfied with what we have received, lets us swell a little, and then like an Angell of Light lifts us up, and leads us ou of the humble and holy way of self denyal and sincere dependence, for daily and immediate support, un∣to self-confidence and carnall contentment, abu∣sing the rich mercy, and turning the free grace, received, unto wantonnesse: so that, before I was aware, was left in the dark, pestered with meny piercing temptations, and much foiled un∣der some fearfull devices; Which perceiving and after some serious pause, turning to my strong hold, and putting on the armour of proof, en∣tered the fight of faith, under his Banner who overcame for me: Confident that He would also overcome in me, to the praise of the glory of His Grace, I break out in this passion. Thou damned Devil, go to the hells and die That never dying death, thy portion just: Infernall Feind, fall down, and scoarchingly For ever. Why? It is thy doom, thou must Down, downly, die, and there thy power restrain; The Lord reprove thy pride and malice vain. This passion thou puts me to perforce, ecause thou dost perplex and vex me still: Who, by thy wiles, would me from God divorce, nd dragg me after thy pernicious will: In plots profound thy wits thou dost imploy, By treacherous trains, poor souls for to destroy;
Thou, like a Syren, canst thy song enchant, Untill the carnall part thereto incline: When in resemblance thou dost seem a Saint, This cruell craft is found in thee and thine: The world & worldlings at thy wish thou hast, And mine own flesh to keep me in unrest: My facile mind thou also much dost mar, With many foolish fantasies confuse, And to my judgment erors also dare Present, maintain with lies, and bid me chuse The rules of reason and of carnall sense: So to destroy my faith, on this pretence, Thou lets my sins forsaken me before, And shews, my sorrow is below my sin, And that to quench the wrath of God the more, I must to mourn again for sin, begin: So friend-like teaching me how to remeed My own undoing, by thy treacherous deed: And wouldst have me believe, that by repenting I must redeem my self, or lost remain: And so ensnare me by thy wise inventing, And wast my substance in this subtile train; For better wouldst thou never seek of me, Then in these fetters perishing to see. As if my Lord, who hath me freely loved, Did not revive me when my life were spent▪ As if, again, this Love I had not proved, Which mov'd my heart sincerely to repent: So as alone He hath done all for me, That by His death I may victorious be. Hereby again, thou dost advantage take, Carelesse to make, and carnally secure,
Both sluggishly and senslesly to slack In duties, whereto Love doth me allure: As if His Love were not of force to guide Me through the straits, wherein I may be tri'd. And when my Lord (better to let me see My self, whereof I daily stand in need) The influence of his grace restrains from me, Then butcher-like thou follows me with speed, And dost surmise, that I do beat the air, And notions print, to presse me to despair: And when thou canst not, by thy wit, prevail, Because I do, by faith, thy darts resist, Then, lion-like, thou dost in arms assail, And, by thy wicked instruments, insist To persecute, in body, state and name, Thereby to bring me unto publike shame. Thus didst thou first begin with lying lewd, And therein counterfeited▪ as thou can: And then thy flatt'ry did convert to feud, Burning in malice, to betray the man. The Syrene first, and then the serpent grim, Now from thy lurking hole, the Lions limb. But now thy fury to thy face shall turn, And vex thee in quotidian extasie Of endlesse woe, for evermore to burn In pain, when I am from thy spight set free: For all thy trains shal both increase thy charge, And for triumphs victorious us enlarge. For certainly, what thou hast done or can, Yet ever do: in time to come, I know, Shall do but heap hape on the hopefull man, And, in the end, turn to thy overthrow;
For, as he is in battell try'd, the more Into his rest, shall he enjoy of glore. And this I do not glosse upon in pride; For weaknesse, with the weakest, I confesse: And when my Lord doth leave me to be try'd, Then dwining do I ly in deep distresse: But then, ev'n then, whole hell cannot bereave Me of this faith, I know whom I believe. Thus, Satan old, thou seest not how I soar Above thy sight, upon the Eagles wing: EMANUELS might protects me evermore, And, in thy spight, shall me to safety bring. So, go: for lo, I leave thee here to ly, And, with thy mates, eternally to die. And now again, as the naturall man, being brought to the light, and through the trials and travels incident to him, in his infancy, and un∣der age, unto the years of discretion and experi∣ence, is to be exercised in serious and important affairs concerning himself, his Country, and concernment: and thereby is to give proof of his gifts and endowments, grounded upon justice, temperance, prudence, and fortitude, with all other subordinate requisites: and yet meeting with so many difficulties in the progresse of his best intended and most approvable actions, is sub∣ject to much haulting, and deviation, in many things turning to his reproach. The New Man, in like manner, being come
through these, and many such assaults, and come up to some growth in light and experience, is to be exercised as a Professor of Christianity, and to exercise himself therein, both in his generall and particular calling, being strengthened by the gifts and grace received, both to do and endure, as it shall please the Giver to give the calling: And for this end, that he be indued with these requests. 1. So much knowledge of himself, as may produce sincere self-denial. 2. So much of GOD, as may make up a sole de∣pendency upon a Providence. 3. Faith, whereby to sacrifice his Isaac, his dearest darling, to the service of God, upon a known call. 4. A fixed confidence, that if he should slay thee, thou wilt trust in him. 5. Love above comparison, so far as God is above the creature. 6. Zeal, like Phineas, impartiall in the execution of justice, in the Cause of God and our Country. 7. Submission, in what he takes as in what he gives. 8. Patience, in resting quiet and confident in all he doth. 9. Humility, tending to the increase of grace, thankfulnesse under the crosse, as under comfort. 10. Chearfulnesse, so shall the joy of the LORD be thy strength.
These be the approven grounds, whereby to walk with approbation: but how short every man comes in the practice, it is too well seen, whether from the world, when it flattereth or frowns, affecting or repining. And in the unre∣generate part, what a filthy fume flows daily out of that stinking pudle, where the dregs and spawn of all the devilry of hell is engrossed: and but in part purged, or rather born down and kept un∣der from out-breaking in palpable enormities: And yet the Devil knows well what coal to blow at, and how to quicken more damnable and dead∣ly Vipers, to suck out our spirituall life▪ unseen or adverted unto, as, spirituall pride, carnall security under the exercise of our best actions, taking growth with our gifts: whereby Gods Spirit is grieved, desertion procured, crosses, afflictions and corrections inflicted, for humbling, reclaiming, keeping under, and in order, the light and facile heart, which would miscarry un∣to ruine, if not prevented. But, for this mi∣sery of self-deceiving deceit, and desperate wic∣kednesse of the heart, the many inventions it finds out (being prompted thereunto by the old Serpent) to undo it self: and how far the rem∣nants of this corruption may prevail, even in the Regenerate, it is better seen then guarded against by too many, as much fearfull and bitter experi∣ence can witnesse.
But thus it becometh every one, that knows so much as that God knows the heart, to make search, till they attain to know the plague of their own heart, that they may be confounded in them∣selves, not lifting up their face for shame, seing God is pacified towards them for all that they have done, because of the stability of His Cove∣nant, Ezek. 16.62, 63. But naturally every man being so conceited of himself, scarce any man will believe, that such things, as both Scripture and experience make clear to be in the heart of man, can be in his heart, but will be ready to say, Am I a dog, that I should be tempted to do such things? Till under the triall we become taught, by wofull proof, the folly of our faithlesnesse in our defections. And having been much toyled in pruning and suppressing these sproutings, and superfluities of naughtinesse that are alwayes taking life in the body of death: So Hydra-like, that as one head is stricken off, another more monstrous and menstruous springs up to be conflicted with, from that fruitfull Scorpion of corruption which mul∣tiplies the conception, and make the burden so unsuperable, that the delivery workes her own destruction, but, by the grace of God, crushed, suppressed and partly purged out, the life of grace is preserved in the Believer.
And yet neverthelesse, there remains an itching dreg in the heart, that it will needs have some la∣titude (if no other wayes attainable) yet under pretence of lawfull liberty, for recreation or pre∣servation of the outward man, and under the co∣lours, and in the shadow whereof, some well smel∣ling Aple, or amiable Idol, may steal in and pre∣sent it self in such glistrings, as dazels the eye o spiritual discerning: So, as the judging part is blunted and benumbed under the prevalency of this well masked and bewitching darling, or Da∣lilah, doated on unto destruction; and herewith being not only toyled, but often foyled, I have been driven to fall under this conception, that suppose a man, even a Child of grace, while he is under mortality, carrying the remanents of cor∣ruption within him, were ravished to heaven and got a blink of the blesse that is to be enjoyed there, and again plunged into hell to behold these ter∣rible torments, prepared for impenitent sinners, and thereafter, set up for a season to act a part up∣on the stage of this world, although it should not fail to seem to himself and others, that henceforth he should live like a Saint upon the earth, yet let him be left a little to himself, and the devil permitted to try him with a bait agreeable to his humor, or an idol well trimmed to his fancy, un∣der such deceivable pretext, pretence, or other∣wise,
as the subtile serpent can well insinuate: It might be too justly feared that he should be in so great perill as ever our first Parents were in Pa∣radice, so as to conceive a possibility of standing, but by immediate grace sustaining, it were most palpable presumption: and that the only way to preserve and increase grace, is by conversing in Heaven, keeping a Communion with God, and the frequent use of Ordinances, to lead us out of our selves, unto a sincere dependence upon God, and out of the world, so as to use it, as if we used it not, in a humble and chearfull sub∣mission unto all His gracious dispensations, whe∣ther bitter or sweet to the naturall part; which (I suppose) very hardly any man who is too con∣versant in the things of the world, and active a∣bout them (further then a pressing calling calls him to) can attain: the world being but the Pandor, or Cater to furnish fewell for the Old Man, to feed the affections, and inflame the fiery lusts of the flesh, the eye, and the pride of life: But it is possible with God to carry the cable through the eye of the needle, suppose the strait way must be thrust through, and the kingdome of grace and of glory taken with violence. But, reflecting upon this Old Man, and the troubles and trials that the soul is put to under his jurisdiction, which cannot consent unto tha
lawlesse law that he would maintain in the mem∣bers: and to dismantle, unmask, and ripe him up in some specials; I have here tinkled a little at the description thereof under the name of Vice. And because all things directly contrar, and op∣posite one to another, together presented, are most lively, and best discerned: I have there∣fore also herewith delineate the New Man, under the name of Vertue: so as the one and the other may allure, and procure the heart, unto the af∣fections of desire and detestation.
THE PORTRAICT AND CHARACTER OF VERTUE: OR, The New Man shining in Vertue, DESCRIBED. COme ye, whose curiosity Rare, precious, pleasant things would see: And you who can discern aright Fair Vertue in ber beauties bright, Her post and gesture well perceive, Holy, humble, sweet and grave, So rarely mixt, so fairly shine, So lovely, in their luster fine; Each in its Orb so ord'red see, That nothing can so pleasant be▪ Behold her flourishing fore-head, Where Generosity doth spread, Her brow's a Stage, where, joining hands▪ Both Statelinesse and meeknesse stands;
Look in her eyes, for there is seen That she is prudent, chast and clean▪ The comely portraict of her nose A searching wit doth well disclose; Her sweetest cheeks, full of delight, All love, but loyall, banish quite; Both strength and resolution deck The fairnesse of her fairest neck: Her breasts so beautifull appear, Both liberall and frugall clear: Her heart and hands do well agree, In clemency and charity: A midst this frame of beauty fair, A tongue wel taught and tamed, where Expressions proper, sweet and plain, Witnesse where wisdom doth remain: Her noble parts her health preserves, With nutriture the spirits serves: Out of that store the sellers keep, Of heavens, earth, seas their hight, their deep▪ In all wherein contain'd she dives, True good extracts to goodness cleaves: And doth bring out of projects ill, The means to save was made to kill: When stormy winds of trouble blow, Doth firmly stand and fairly grow; Out of afflictions she can find, Both patience and peace of mind: And in the midst of sorrows see, Where best refreshments furnisht be: Contempt and malice she doth prise As manure rich, to make her rise:
From care, disdain, distrust and grief, Envy, despair, of mischiefs chief, She sees and knows, and can compose, By all things gain, by nothing lose: Time never can her beauty stain, Nor tyrannie approach her gain: Her riches are beyond the reach Of all that policy can stretch: Old Sathan when he comes to spoil, At all incounters gets the foil: Fond lust and all that carnall crew, Her feet below she doth subdue: Be slav'd by none, she serves her Maker, And all her strength unto Him facer: Deep in the Well of Life she drinks, And feeds upon the River brinks: Where that Ambrosia sweet distills, From Sacred Truth the soul full fills: She searches all Gods wayes, and sees Divine and heav'nly mysteries: Converts her food in courage strong, And by sincerity along, As by the nerves for new supply, Doth act her part most chearfully? ointly conjoin'd by sinews sure, Of strongest truths which do endure, Till all her foes she does outface, That would her fairest grace disgrace. Objection But pause a little, answer here, How may this matter so appear▪
What fairer, rarer excellencie Had Adam in his innoncencie? How now can his rebellious race This beauty and this blesse imbrace? For of a man what can you crave, If he be holy, humble, grave, Modest, meek, generous, prudent, Chast, courteous, lovely, sapient, Strong, temperat, full of charity, Circumspection, courage, clemency, Resolute, liberall, frugall, able, Patient, active, prompt and stable, Possest with truth, delight and peace, And still sincere, this grace to grace? Where is the man hereof may boast, Gods Image seing he hes lost? Answer. Now justly left, (it's true indeed) None of this poysoned, perverse seed Can to true happinesse attain, But doats on durelesse shadows vain: And naturall gifts now never can Accomplish or compleat a man: But thou art carnall that objects, And doth discover thy defects: A little ponder, understand, Shall that All-wise, All-working hand, All-just, All-good, All-holy King Misse in that most intended thing His Eyes were on, when He gave being To all things subject unto seeing?
Did He this spacious Globe erect, And by their sourse the seas collect▪ Becircled by the firmament, Illustrious and so excellent: With plenteous store to entertain Poor wretched men, that lost have been: No, from eternity He knew, All what was past, what should ensue: And in a Second Adam sweet, Made man again with God to meet: Who for the Elect Surety stood, And them restor'd by His own Blood: Their flesh assumed for that end▪ And doth His Sp'rit unto them send: Which Holy Sp'rit their sp'rit inspires, With sp'rit-renewing sacred fires, Quickning, purging and perfuming, Grace increasing, vice consuming, Eyes, and heart, and minds inlarging, With His Image supercharging, Such searching souls as do imbrace The splendor of his pleasing face: Rapt, and made apt, with open eyes, To dyve in these excellencies: And in that sourse of sweet delight, To feast upon his beauty bright: Whereby he doth our souls decore, And to his Image us restore: On whom by faith firm fixed solely, The whole affections are made holy, And humble, by a self-reflect Upon thy self, for self neglect,
So modesty shines in the face, And gravity, that Christian grace: That generous Spirit that doth acer Her self, to serve her Saving Maker: That Sapience that far, far sees, To compose content from contraries: That chastitie, that can contain Affections all in order clean: That love, that vertue doth allure. And all licentious lusts can cure: That liberall mind, that lively spreads, And frugally preserves the seeds: That charity, that chearfully Knows when, how, where to give supply: That temperance, that can subdue, Proud passions, as they do renew; That courtesie, that neatly can Carry the master, like a man: That clemencie, that can declare The colours clear of vertue fair: That patience, that prudence leads, That peace, which pious Spirits feeds, That fortitude that fairly founded, With resolutions firmly grounded On truth, with strong stability, Expressed with alacrity, Courage and circumspection, so That never storm can overthrow That single heart sincere and sweet, Where comfort and delight do meet? That sp'rit of contemplation piercing, And heavens holy myst'ries searching,
Longing, thronging, thirsting, till The fruit of faith the Soul full fill: Then God, beholding the effects That by his beams, on Saincts reflects, And looking on that beauty rare, Accounts and cals them sweet and fair, For grace, in vertue, so doth shine, That vertue doth become divine, This is the vertue, I avouch'd, The vertue that I would have touch'd, The vertue true, that clarifies And qualifies the qualities: That doth illustrate and ingrain, And turns in substance shadows vain: That giveth smell and taste unto All that we think, or speak, or do. This vertue well accomplish can And compleat the Christian man: Gain this vertue, and thou shall Inherit Heav'n, and Earth, and all: More solide solace sweet possesse, Then heart can think, or pen express: Limb out her lineaments, conceive Such riches where thou can receive; Try her parts, taste every place, Such sweet thou can no where embrace; Drink her in with all desire, Untill she set thy heart on fire; Her beams, they will thy breast inflame, Her streams will qualifie the same: Choise of choises, chief content Of all beneath the firmament,
Search her, for she waits to see, Who for her love will fervent be; And if thou joine, thou shalt enjoy That bliss, which nothing can annoy: For then thou shalt into his Image grow, From whom this vertue fair doth freely flow. The Portraict and Character o the Old Man, Under the name of Vice, described. COme you, who wonders curious are to see, Or monsters, such as most detested be, And you, who can indeed discern aright (This Brat begot in hell) by heav'nly light: Vice here behold, stript naked to the skin, Look on her outside, see her well within: Her port, and gesture, here how vile behold, Vain, proud, implacable, presumptuous, bold, Disorderly, by satans order placed, As basely in the heart they be embraced: Each ruling in his sphere, rounding the brain, And heart, with humors perverse and profane: Where generositie should bud and flourish, Debate, deceit, there doth she neatly nourish; There, where the truth sincerely should be stated, Faithlesse hypocrisie is firmly seated:
Malice, envy, and horrid hatred there, Where love should move, is in her breast made bare; Under the shew of chastity most clean, Closs, impudent, incontinencie is seen: Ambition, avarice, wrath and cruelty, Watch, as they may most serviceable be: Within a cloud of Christian clemency And humane gentlenesse, dissimulately She sets her subtil snares, for to entyse The weak, for she in wickednesse is wise: Her sottish slaves who serve her, she doth lead Their souls, on sensual lusts to live and feed: Or otherwise to pry, how to surprize Their nearest, dearest friends, that they may rise To treasure, state or store, honour or ease, As they may their beloved Idol please. And for those ends, do study to devise, By all the means that be below the skies, Without controle, directly to content That humor, in its fixed element. Objection. Can all that you have heretofore asserted Be held for truth? Is poor man so deserted, And by that dev'lish villany possest, Which here you have so peremptory prest? Is man, who is the creature rational, Below the brute so fallen by his fall? You see, most men do something civile live, Vice misregard▪ and unto vertue cleave: It seems, that he doth some true light retain▪ Suppose it suffered hath a fearfull stain,
And if it were as you affirm, then he Not only should below the brutish be, But might be ranked in degree with devils, The Author of these specified evils. What find we more in that apostate sp'rit, Finall impenitency to compleat, Then you of man, each man forlorn hath said, Is it not for His wrack that he was made? Answer. Our Glorious King, Eternall, only Wise, Almighty Mover, moved by advice Of uncreated wisdome, that he can No lesse have done, then well in making man: Man was made holy, righteous and good, But he did stumble when he should have stood Before the tryals of the tempter slie, And slew himself and all his progeny, By misbelieving Him by whom he lived, Is left to live to him whom he believed: And being left of God, he is possest Of all the devilry that is here exprest. Man unregenerate is below most sure, The vildest bruit on earth, and most impure▪ What Lyon, Tygre or destroying Boa, So fervent, fierce or cruell to devour? What can with that vild murtherer compare, Who, for to feast his idol, will not spare His nearest friends, brothers or native seed, And will imbrew his hands in parricide: And in his own hot blood, for to fulfill His humor, give the fatall stroak and kill?
What Crocodil, what scorching Scorpion can Obscurely watch, to catch the prey, as man? The beast, whose colour ev'ry object changes, And that Hienna through the desert ranges, And with the voice of man, man to insnare, With mans hypocrisie cannot compare: Who can pretend for Truth and Piety, Yet tramp on Truth to raise himself, you see. Who of the bruitare so degenerate, As with the other kind to generate, Or sex, (O horrible!) but only he, Who was appointed most for purity? In sp'rit-defilements, which no beast do know Man tempted is, and thereby beasts below▪ Malice and envy in the brutish brood Was never seen, as in our poyson'd blood: And man in light the liar is below, For God he knows, and trembling stands in aw; But man forsaken, now no better sees, Being by the liar led to follow lies: And look what e're the devil hes to doe, But man he finds an instrument thereto. How should the beast such levies with him lead, If man did not for him in armes proceed? How could man for his acts apologie, If satan taught him not to subtilize? When the old serpent in the chair him sets, Pride and disdain, the lying tongues he gets: The world the avaricious gets for hyre, And the ambitious honour at desire: Some unto satan offer service will, That they by him may gain that hellish skill,
Themselves to help, and in malicious slight Others destroy, out of revengefull spight; Some do conceive themselves profoundly wise, Satan to serve them as they do devise; And if some curious spirits be more strange, Incontinent, directly he can change The bait, and lead them on the stars to gaze, Put them by natures products in a maze, By demonaicall demonstrations feeding The fancie, till he fix them for proceeding; For he to all their doatings doth apply, Gaining his gain this cruell craft hereby: Apples and idols trimm'd he hes for all Humours, that under finity can fall: So is he serv'd, then doth he smile to see, Some others wallow in their vice, and die: For what remains of all mans naturall light, Tends still unto his more conviction right: But that there is some sort of order civil In some, and that in all men ev'ry evil Doth not appear alike, yet certainly The seed of vice in every one doth ly: In some, by providence, vice is restrain'd, Some be, by breeding, unto vertue train'd: Some be bound up, by bit and bridle so, That what they would, they cannot come to do▪ And some there be beyond the common line, By study do to goodnesse much incline: But they not knowing right their glorious Maker, Do not their doings to his glory sacre: But vainly glory in themselves, to gain A name and fame, which is their idol vain;
So vile an idol never yet was nam'd, Whereby most men have most been blam'd and sham'd, As is vile man himself, more meet be placed With devils, then with divine worship graced: And yet the strong man in his strength wil glore, The wordling in his wisdome glory more, The rich man in his treasure put his trust, And doat upon himself in gathering dust: The man to contemplation addicted, Though he, of any, least can be convicted, Yet can an aerial Image fancie feign, And idolize the vapours of his brain: And who is he who is not prepossest, With some heart-darling, hardly dispossest? Even by such as presse to purge the will Of all that holy sp'rituall motions kill; No, too much spirituall pride finds place, Even where are sown the seeds of saving grace; How then can such, as do no better see▪ Some darling want doating whereon to be? So that even those who have aspyred highest, Have fallen short and sunken as thou seest: Scripture indites, and conscience gives the doom, All flesh is justly damn'd, untill he come, Who justice satisfies for them elected By God, from all eternity respected; And now in time true members do remain, Been born of water, and of blood again▪ Thus as his justice glorious is clear, So doth his merite glorious appear: For then, when all concluded were in sin And under wrath, his mercy did begin
So as without all shadow of excuse, Twice damn'd they be that this free grace refuse; So, never think it strange that man in sin, And vice, ly rotting, till he die therein: For he is poysoned with the spawn of hell And seed of satan, since he did rebell: But wonder! O! this wonder strange behold, Above what ever can with tongue be told, That we, in this contagion dyed so deep, Should cleared be, pure colours white to keep; But set thy self thy self before in sin, And to detest thy sinfull self begin: Study thy self, thy Saviour then shall see And shall preveen thy soul-perplexity Most timously, who knows to save alone, And will advert unto thy hopefull moan; Open thine ears to hear, thine heart to hold, The marvels of those mercies manifold, Held ut so much, with such incitements sweet, As lost man may his comforts yet compleat: So shalt thou find, and by experience prove, Thy Maker is thy God, that man doth love. But if thou dost reject his voice alluing, Thy heart in induration obduring▪ Thy conscience wakened shal be witnesse sure, Destruction to thy self thou dost procure.
THE TURTLE-DOVE▪ UNDER ABSENCE & PRESENCE OF HER ONLY CHOISE: OR, DESERTION & DELIVERANCE REVIVED. WHEREIN By way of DIALOGUE, in a POEM, under severall significant Figures and Allegories, the most ordinary exercises of the Child of God after Regeneration, untill, by many most searching tryals, he become strong and able to discern aright in doing and indu∣ring, as he shall be called to i, in his way and war∣fare through the wildernesse to his journis end, is shadowed out. WITH A necessary WARNING against Security, in most secure times. AND Closing with a Word for wakening of the naturall Man. .7. Lord by thy favour thou hast made my mountain to stand strong▪ Thou didst hide thy face, and I was troubled
ERRATA. Page 4. Line 12. read, his Royal. p. 8. l. 1. r. With cun∣ning. p. 10. l. 20. r. but helplesse. p. 12. l. 8. r. thy Lover. Ibid. l. 25. r. world new. p. 26. l. ult. r. unknown fire. p. 38. l. 12. r. And re-deliv'ry. p 52. l. 14. r. lifes reviving. p. 55. l. 22. r. in the blood, p. 60. l. 13. r. the stony. p. 66. l. 13. r. with his pernicious tares. p. 71. l. 11. r. then left. p. 85. l. 9. r. Thy Sp'rits. p. 87. l. 7. r. These wak'nings. p. 94. l. ult. begins the next Speaker (Helen.) p. 122. l. 9. r. man's most deep conceiving. p. 128. l. 29. r. are not weighing.
The NAMES of the SPEAKERS in this Dialogue, and what they represent. The Signi∣fication of the NAMES. SAMUEL, a learned, judicious and experienced Christian. Placed of God. JEANNA, a Honourable and Re∣ligious Lady of much experi∣ence. Gracious. HELENA, a Christian afflicted in spirit under desertion, and comforted upon deliverance. Pittifull. MARIONA, a Christian conver∣sant in Heaven. Sweet perfume. GRISSELLA, a School-bred Christian. Grave Lady. MARIA, a Court-bred Christian. Exalted. ANNA, a City-bred Christian. Mercifull. ELIZA, a Country-bred Christian. God save. THOMA, a Civilian Justici∣ary converted. A Twin. ANDREA, a licentious Savage converted, and become a zea∣lous monitor. Manly. The Echo, Isa. 30.21.  
THE ARGUMENT. A Noble Lady notice takes, And many other worthies makes Acquainted with a Christian, moved By absence of her best Beloved. They to her present case advert, And do speak kindly to her heart: Questions they do propone, explain, Naturall, sp'rituall for her gain; But under absence of her Lover No comfort can her heart recover: Yet they insist, that she may see Of her mistakes the mystery; They represent the happinesse Of her condition, not the lesse: Of present darknesse then debating The mater, many questions stating, Clearing, discussing and revolving, She is convinc'd at the resolving; And then so mov'd at the discourse, By comfort coming from the sourse, She plainly doth her self expresse, Whereby their endeavours increase So fervently in this pursuit, That seasonably they reap the fruit: O'rejoyed join, Loves Songs solemnly sing To their compassionate Comforter and King.
THE DIALOGUE. Jeana, Samuel, Helena. Jea. Much graced Sir, who prudently doth spare This time for recreation and repair, Whereby we may timous occasion take You with our cases to acquainted make: Your doctrine sound, sincere, and sober living, Full confirmations be of firm believing. For such as present things so little prize, Must have more permanent before their eyes. And what can that man of this world make, When it doth him, and he doth it forsake? Now what we have for to impart, concerns Another World than this vain world discerns, Sam. Most noble and religious Lady, sure You are of what my service can procure. There hes a world of Believers been, Dispersed through this world, and unseen: ut hated so, that whosoever profest incere believing, them did this world detest. For as the Head, so must the Members be, repar'd by sufferings, ere they be set free;
But, as our sufferings do abound, so sure Our Captain comforts doth for us procure, Which qualifies, and swallows up the sore, That, by our troubles, we triumph the more▪ For in this transient march, through worlds of woes▪ Our heaven within-begun makes us rejoyce: While all our furious Persecutors fell, Their present pleasures but preceed their hell. This, I suppose, you partly know: therefore Propose your purpose, we shall parley more. Jea. We know, there's nothing can preferred be Unto that peace and true tranquillitie, Procured by our Prince of peace and grace, To true Believers, that do him imbrace: And that, albeit we be the only Butt, At whom both devils and men their arrows shoot, Maliciously to murther by their might, Yet are we ever conquerours in fight: And while the wicked make their cup to flow Of wrath, our comforts in our crosses grow, With pleasures present, far above the pain, Which doth but for some minuts short remain. Much more that store, which, by believing, is Confirm'd to them of everlasting blesse. But we who for Professors do appear▪ And make acquaintance with them most sincere, Follow the means, and meetings on the Mountain, Flock to the Streams of the Life-giving Fountain: Fed with that Milk and Honey Heav'n distills, Which every fainting, panting heart full fills. Yet when again our King doth call us out, And to some speciall charge we go about,
Then, ere we be aware, we are surpris'd By subtile slights, against us that's devis'd: So as we cannot change so many places, But trials more we meet of diverse cases. And for an instance clear, we do present An Israelite contrite, in mourning spent, Well known to be in duties diligent, Grave, humble, gracious, to devotion bent: Chearfull, and choysing, for her greatest gain▪ Others unto the Well of Life to train. But now you see, what sadnesse doth possesse Her soul, and how her sighing doth increase: And still, the more by us she is exhorted, She doth the more refuse to be comforted, And often answers us, Who can but grieve, When he is gone, that should my grief relieve: And that her Life, her Light, and her Delight, In deaths dark shads, doth shut her out of sight: Consuming daily under slavish fears, Become benumb, beneath untimely tears. Sa. The seed of Grace is, with such sweetnesse, shed Into the soul, where the new birth is bred: And she, delighted in these feelings sweet, Cannot, with patience, pains of child-birth meet: And, till the New-man formed be again, From fainting cannot make the heart refrain: So as a pleasant life we have, untill We come to act, and there our cause we spill. For when on duties we delight to dwell, And are assisted, we are apt to swell: And when we find not accesse, as we think, Then under sadnesse we are like to sink;
But if, in sense, we were our selves denying, And, under absence, on His grace relying: And made our life witness our true believing, And on believing ground our upright living▪ We should attain unto some progresse then, And so enjoy the lot of loved men. For now Believers are by faith to act, As if themselves most happy they could make: And clearly yet to see themselves self-lost, That of their actings they can nothing boast. Like little children to the parent cleaving, Possesse the Patent of this Royal giving: And yet, by force of faith, through Bulwarks break, And with all violence, the Kingdom take: For its by grace, through faith, His gift, that we Are safe preserved and victorious be: Nor may we think our daily trials strange, Nor that to divers crosses we do change. Till this old man of flesh be fully slain, He's looking back to the flesh-pots again: Made up he is of many naughty notions, Imaginations and superfluous motions: Must be by many strange restraints restrained, Before he be from vice to vertue gained. But the Believer only wonder can, A self-lost, blind-born brute, a saved man Become: and such to Satan slaves have been▪ Adopted Sons to God, and washed clean! To see the poyson, in our Nature spewed By Satan, to be purged, and subdued! To see this viperous brood in us supprest, And there a work of grace again encreast!
The mistery great of Godlinesse doth here, God manifested in the flesh, appear! The work misterious of Gods Sp'rit divine, In our Regeneration doth shine: The work of faith, whereby Believers feed And fruitfull grow, by joining to their Head, A mistery deep; for as we do imploy Him, in his faithfulnesse, we do enjoy, In every triall when we tempted be; But often do mistake most fearfullie, Whereby we do procure our own tormentings, And call our faith in question, and repentings. This the Believer only knows and proves, Discerns, observes, and his Preserver loves; For the Believer is the subject, where God doth his glorious wonders most declare, The portraict vile of the old man defacing, And the new man with his own Image gracing. There be, for the Believer, wonders wrought, Above the apprehensions of our thought: Wonders in the Believer daily move, Rounded in the unbounded Orb of love: Wonders are by Believers brought about, That cruell tyrants cannot cancell out: And by Believers to be enjoyed are Joyes wonderfull, above conceiving far. But we shall spare: for more exactly those Matters we must debate before we close. Now to the purpose, and the Person precious▪ Whom I have seen, and still esteemed gracious, Notable in the Assemblies of the Saints And solemn Meetings, where Believers haunt.
I know the case, and truly see it clear, Fraught with the fruits of faith, of love and fear▪ But she is not in that condition now, So to confesse, far lesse this to avow; But in this sentence most succinct, I'le shew The matter, and the meaning shall pursue▪ And this it is, "Heavens child of hope, doth faint for want of sight, "Resolv'd to grope through darkest deeps for light: And this assertion sure for to explain, Take notice now, and answer you again. You see Celestiall from terrestriall things Exhaling vapours, that much darkness brings. Eclipses do our naturall Sun surprise, Which yet we see most royally arise. The worlds first birth, from Gods most pure intention, Eternall purpose, and divine invention, Was made to be, by no materials Existent▪ pre-existent Seminals; In darknesse swadled up, untill the bright▪ Creating word in time commanded light; And when this light aright composed stood, Night to preceed day-light, God saith is good. Jea. This dispensation sad, you take, I see, To flow from causes one or more of three: The first from provocation, I conceive, The second, what for triall we receive, The third, to Soveraignity ascends, The Cause supreme, where causes all depends. You know, suppose that naturall things be used, And to illustrate sp'rituall matters chused▪
Spirituall things are not demonstrate clearly By naturall, that worke by nature merely: The one by the prefixed Rule doth run, The other Arbitrary, how and when. And yet suppose these generals should contain Much to this purpose, when by searching seen, Yet ye must nearer come, her case to clear From such effects as may be seen appear; For if she be bemisted, left alone In this confus'd condition, she is gone. Sam. Will ye not condescend that all things be Good in their time appointed certainly: And that our only wise and holy King Profoundly hath contrived every thing, Spirituall, naturall, morall, arbitrary, Contingent, voluntar, and necessary, And ordered so, this contrary to that, Man may with dread and reverence stand thereat. Jea. We trust your charity hes so conceived That Scripture-truths are all by us believed: Albeit that under trials severall may, By strong assaults, much weaknesse oft bewray: We know He's the supream and only good, And all things to his glory do conclude: And that suppose rejected we should be, It were our place his grace to magnifie; His wisdom, justice, truth, and holinesse We question not, but our untowardnesse In not adverting to his counsels grave, Which only could and should from swerving save: And yet our tender Lover hath appointed, And with spirituall unction hath anointed,
With coming some, and cordialls stor'd that be, Soveraign for Soul-diseases seasonablie. Mongst whom ye be of speciall esteem, In binding up the wounds that desperat seem. I pray you speak in proper speeches plain, As this perplexed party best may gain: And lead us in these mysteries divine, Untill the Sun begin again to shine. Sam. I know it worthy of our pains shall prove, To dyve in this deep mystery of love: Therefore▪ I shall not spare to condescend, Some of our precious time herein to spend. This mourning Bride (sure) has propined been With precious, sweet sp'rit-consolations clean, Whereby the King of Kings doth recreate, Replenish, purifie, and elevate The soul that to espouse he is, whereby She in his absence sick of love doth ly. Jea. Be pleas'd more specially us to acquaint With these so precious presents, and how sent, And how received, that so effectuall prove, As to procure such firm and fervent love. Sam. He cleared hes her blear'd and blinded eyes, Inflam'd her heart, so as she feels and sees. Her Comforter convey himself with kissings, And breath into her soul supernall blessings▪ The beauty of whose visage her invites To trace him out when he doth make retreats; For in her heart so hes he shed that seed, Which her affections after him doth lead: And at a word, created now anew, She bids the whole Creation adiew,
And in this Sphere of Love celestial soare, Not stooping to terrestriall triffles more, Untill her Lover come, and do relieve Her weighted sp'rit, and heart contrite revive. Jea. Why doth she not in patience possesse Her soul, and so attend his timousnesse? Sam. Basenesse of mind such patience she esteems, Which would suspend her of these warming beams, By influence whereof she alone doth live, And therefore closely unto him doth cleave. Jea. But is her project lawfull? let me know. Sam. True love was never limited by law. Jea. But earthly minds in mounting high do burn. Sam. The Spirit by habit heavenly doth turn. Jea. Doth she the body then the more disdain? Sam. No, but doth tune it to a sprituall strain: For it's the organ ordained for to sing The praises of her Lovely Prince and King. Jea. How doth she then so sadly ly and still? Sam. She doth attend his presence and his will, Preparing straight his praises to expresse, But, till his coming, lurks in heavinesse, Jea. But where is then the hold of Faith and Hope Fast held, but pressing nearer hard to grope, Desiring still the Marriage-day to see, When in His Robes she may arrayed be. And joyning then his sweet soul-feeding face, Her firm affections fervent may imbrace. Hele. Poor Pilgrim I, in dole and deep unrest, For want of Faith, with hellish fears supprest, Here wandring as a woefull wretch alone, So void of sense, can do no more but moan.
Unworthy of respect, regard, or view, Much lesse your face, my spirits to renew: It is my wonder that your worth should stay, So to respect this crocked clog of clay, So hardned, that affections cannot melt To mold a new, by any motions felt: Yet happy you, you Blessings do procure, Who would conduct, and doth instruct the poor: But from the wayes of wisdome I have gone So far astray, that I may mourn alone, And groan for grief, now when I cannot mend, But all my dayes in dole and dolor spend: And for to understand your friendly speech, Or meaning thereof, hardly can I reach. But true it is, sometimes I have exprest Some secrets that should not have been confess, Of feelings sweet, above expression far, Which for the time but seeming shadows are: For now deserted, like a desart owle, I hopelesse ly, and can but hopelesse howle, Bewailing oft that ever I was born, For all is gone and I am left forlorn. Sam. Dear friends, conveened here for this intent▪ With misteries of Love to be acquaint: Let us unweary, willingly attend, For all her griefs shall sure in gladnesse end. Jea. Our true desire and most delight shall be, We may more clear this Divine science see, And with the whole affections of our heart, To learn the Heavenly Methods of this Art. I know the heart contrite and broken sprit Is for our King a Receptacle meet▪
I know with timous comforts he doth turn Unto the pure in sp'rit who for him mourn. I know, the thirsting soul, and hungry heart, In His sweet face, have fulness for their part. I know, that pleasures in eternitie Attend their souls that fleshly follies flee. I know, the penny-earn'st of Peace and Bless, Received by the meek and lowly is, And wisely witnessed here may we see, The might of truth, and height of mercy free, The strength of Faith, shining through filial fear, The wing of Love, weak ones to hide and bear. Hele. I wonder much that you so wise and grave, Such groundlesse expectations can conceive! For shew'd you are so far of this my case, That I presumed should have made you cease: But presuppone that these your strange conceits Were true of me, which unto me relates, But nothing unto me I think belong, Yet were it fearfully free Love to wrong, And should bewray ingratitude, so far, As justly might me from his grace debar: For, sure I am, I had not been cashiered, If to offend my King my heart had feared: But gading I, so far astray have stept, And in confusions such my self have wrapt, That now mine eyes are dimm'd, my tongue bedumb'd, Mine ears are deafned, and my heart benumb'd, That what I hear I do not apprehend, But sure I see my well you do intend. Jea. Yet with permission, and submission now, My friend, let me obtain this sute of you.
This is a day of grace, and it may prove, If you improve it well, a time of love. Unto this timous counsell grave advert, Gainstand these griefs, that do disturb thy heart. Think on what light, life, liberty and peace, Thou lately tasted hes by special grace, The earnest of these Treasures rich procured, For thee, and by the Lover sweet secured; But under cloud eclipsed thou must be, By proof to find thine own infirmitie. In Patience, Faith, Dependency, Submission. Importunately presse, thou hes commission: Then look, and long, and to this promise cleave, And when thou art rebuked, yet believe. He. Madam, your counsell gracious, grave, and good, Does all desir'd felicities include: But I have forfault all these offers fair, And of these Blessings now am stripped bare: And when I hear of former happinesse, Grief, horrour and despair, the more increase. Once was I light, and now in darknesse ly, Once was I life, now in deaths jawes I dye, Once had I freedome, now in bondage bound▪ Once had I peace, now in vexation stound, You speak of pleasures, in a word anew, But dolefully may I bid them adiew. For I an earn'st of wrath endure I think, Might all the sinfull sons of Adam sink: The evil spirit, when he does depart, Returning, enters in the empty heart: And every devil, of whatsoever deceit, May in this soul receive a several seat.
And I will tell you more. Jea. No more; Refrain, There is too much of this untimely strain. O fearfull but it be, for to let slip, Of Sacred Truths, by Faith, the saving grip! And O! how bitter are the agonies Of absence in soul-searching secrecies? O horrour, terrour, dread, what dreadfull height Is absence totall, in eternal night! When timely tastes do so the godly tare, Where shall the godlesse go beneath despair? But I forbear, Sir, speak to her so plain, That she may be brought to her self again. Sam. This darknesse does th'approach of day presage: And us the more unto the means ingage. Thou harden dost thy self in thy mistakes, And of our tendernesse advantage makes: Thou dost expose thy self a present prey, Syrene deceits of Sathan to obey: Misled with carnal wit, by quaint convoyance, So subtilly to worke thy souls annoyance. Wilt thou prescribe his coming, or confine His counsels to these finit thoughts of thine? Dare thou his faithfulnesse draw in debate, Because he doth not on thy humours wait▪ Doth he his influence dispense for hyre? Dar'st thou a reason of his rules require? But these demands in time and place recall: Examine, and answers receive we shall. And now in patience yet we shall persist, And with convincing arguments insist: Think on, when we from darknesse unto light Translated were, and did receive our right
Unto His Royal Court, and House of Wine, Where loves bright banner over thee did shine: Then didst thou see in darknesse thou hadst been, Clos'd, Embrion-like, into the womb unseen; Untill thy Lover, Mover in this place, The fruits of His free love made thee imbrace: Then didst thou clearly see, that gracious He Indur'd to be obscur'd, for gracelesse thee: And that He might thy glorious dayes begin, Assum'd thy flesh, and suffered for thy sin: Purg'd and perfumed thee His Bride to be, And did present himself Bridegroom to thee, Thy King, thy Captain, and thy Husband now: And to engadge thee more him to avow, His Princely Robes thou saw him lay aside, Enter the lists, and in his armour bide, Till all thy foes he had defyed in fight, And from their malice fred thee by his might, And led thee here among these sweet contents, Where only children of the King frequents. But that thou may'st convinced be the more, I shall this Countrie set thy face before: For as it seems, thou dost so sullen ly, Thou art surprysed with a lethargie: Or for a proof, art left a little space To try what love thy Lover can displace. Thou knowst the Citty of our Royall King▪ Where He to breed and woo his Bride doth bring: What glorie and excellencie, alone Believers, shining see about the Throne? Thou seest Him righteous Judgements dayly read: Give doome unto thy foes, thy causes plead.
When from His Ivorie pallaces he comes Thee to imbrace, the smell of His perfumes Affect the Virgin-bowels for to move, Frames and inflames the quickned heart to love: For certainly unto Beleevers true, That be renew'd, all things becometh new; And in this World of wicked workers, we A World enjoy of sweet felicitie, Consisting in a Righteousnesse procured For us, with sp'ritual joy and peace secured. And this new heav'n, and earth, and citty fair, Whether the Elect chosen called are, Above comparison, you know, excells The rarest, fairest, richest parallels. The River that out-through the Citty slides For every severall Cittizen divides Unto refreshment: and the fruitfull tree, That renders various fruits abundantly For every season, unto all affections, And soveraign physick, health for all complexions. Our everlasting light, without declining, Advancing gloriously, and brightly shining: Curse from the Crosse, force from affliction shed, The sting from death, from fear and bondage fred: Where we may dayly sing among the branches, And swime among the streams, our thirst that quenches And bath us in that River, sweetly flowing, And feed upon the Spices, neatly growing About the banks of these delicious fields, That hony, milk and wine so pleasant yeeld▪ Where we no task are set, but for to sing The praises of our Liberal Royal King:
And to adore him in our nature now; Mov'd by his spirit, his name for to avow, As Members of His Body mystical, And dyving still in Divine Myst'ries all: In Oracles and Ordinances seeing Him, and Him in His dispensations eyeing. He. These Metaphors I know not what they mean, Nor to discern your plainest speech attain: The one enfolding deepest mysteries, The other not discern'd with carnall eyes. Sam. Thou dost not only in the Faith bewray Thy weaknesse, but doth wilfully betray Thy self, in contradicting sweetest feelings▪ Experimented sensible revealings, Flowing and falling timous tides of love, Which did thy-then lively affections move. Thou know'st what every word we speak doth mean, And that it is thy Lovers language clean, Appointing for our weaknesse figures frail, The splendor of spiritual things to vail, As wine and milk, aples and hony sweet, Under his shadow feasting we delight: Lest in His light we should be rapted so, That souls should suddenly abortive go. Can'st thou the body of the Sun behold, And not be dazled, if thou wert so bold? Whose light and operations yet thou may Enjoy, and not thy weaknesse so bewray: Amongst the shadows thou may'st feed securely Upon the substance that doth then allure thee: Where dyving dayly in this depth by seeing, From glory unto glory formed being,
We come to true tranquillity at length, And there enjoy our Lovers joy, our strength So as we may, with peace, a space suspend That Glories breaking up, that doth attend To be imparted, for eternitie, When we by grace matured for it be. Eyes, ears and hearts, see, hear not, nor conceives Now, what the true Believer then receives: Farlesse, who can our King conceive aright, Untill we be admitted to his sight, Who, in such Glory inaccessible, Enjoyes Himself, to us impenitrable? But by the grace of faith, so apprehended, As, for our comfort, He hath condescended: So as we must be bred, led, fost'red here, For sights unseen, by such as do appear. This is the life, ye know. Believers live, To whom both grace and glory He doth give. Up then, my heart, take heart among thy mates, Ly not so sad, thy Wel-beloved wait To see thee stir: for He will thee sustain, Suppose both weak and wanting thou hast been. Up, up, come, come, go, go with us. Hel. No, no, What thou hast said, I do believe; But lo, I am but blind, although to see I seem, And what I seem'd to see, falls out a dream Or vision, vanish'd by the way it came, Nor know I how I do, or what I am. Sam. This is not unto death, I thee assure, But shall His honour, and thy health procure: What thou hast seen and felt, do not deny, But His unchanged love believe, apply.
Hele. How can the blind, the deaf, the dumb confesse, Believe, apply, faith, or felt-love professe? Doubtlesse I have His fervent love again Provoked, and forsaken am. Sam. Refrain, Thy sense is gone, it seems: but where's thy reason? For thou art bourding with a birth of treason. Because through weaknesse thou canst him provoke, Must he his constant counsell then revoke? When in thy birth and blood thou lay, in bands And hands of death, did he not give commands, Death to be gone, and thee ordain'd to live, What merite for this mercy didst thou give? Knows he not well, that thou no good canst do▪ Without his presence, and supply thereto? And shall he now reputed be a changer? Hele. No: but to me he makes himself a stranger. Sa. Strange! when thou hast thy self from him estran∣ged, Thy reason should conclude that he is changed: Or that he hath estrang'd himself so far, While such love-tokens resting with thee are. Hast thou not, biding still beside thee here, A Mirror full of beauty, passing clear: Wherein thou dost his portraict true possesse, Full means to keep thy heart from heaviness? He woo'd thee in a time of fervent love, That thou shouldst constant, faithfull, loyall prove: Preparing, trimming, purifying, till The Nuptiall-rites he should compleat fulfill. Do not what he hath done for thee deny, Extoll his acte, and on his truth rely. Hele. What thou hast said, that surely have I seen Acted by him, for me hath truly been,
I am convinc'd, and more than any speach, Or largest heart-conceptions can reach. But true it is, when I to admiration. His deeds had found, surpassing declaration: And then far, far, far over and above, Had felt his sweetnesse in a time of love: My melting heart within his heart relenting, That almost warms affections in recenting. But in that sweetnesse then I fell asleep, Surprised with such sopor sad and deep: That when I did awake, my only One Was gone, and now poor I, do die alone; For in his absence. I'm become a block. A wretched, fruitlesse, and a withered stock. Sa. Dost thou conceive, these blinks, these smiles, these smells, These melting motions, whereof now thou tells, Were tendred out, thy fancy for to feed? No: but to strengthen faith, for fruit and feed. Hele. Then shall I no more look to see my Love. Sam. Sense follows such, as do most faithfull prove, And feelings flee, when they are followed most: But when we stand by faith, there's nothing lost. Hele. Oh! lost? What losse can be compar'd to this, To lose the only (Author) of my blisse? Sam. Thy Blesse? Conceive me, and resolve me this: If thou hadst thy desire unto thy wish, Shouldst thou in this poor dusty, rusty shrine, Indure that splendor, by these beams should shine Upon thy sp'rits? Thou know'st how soon they failed, When with a little blink thou wast assailed. Look up, make bold, take hold, hold fast by hoping: And till thine eyes anointed be, be groping
Amongst thy Mates, where I have seen thee there, Presse forward with thy pith, do not despair. He. I know not what, nor yet whereof ye mean. Sam. I witnesse will, as yet, what I have seen. When first thy Princely Lover, to this place Translated thee, could'st thou then sleep or cease? But with Associats of the Citty using, Uncessantly in deepest mysteries musing. A frequent waiter at solemnities, Much mov'd in minding our immunities, About the River spying out thy spots, And washing in the Streams away thy blots: Upon the Mountains, where Heav'ns dew distills. And Fountain, that with all refreshments fills. Thou art so fram'd, and to a habite new, Inflam'd with firm affections, pure and true: Exactly set, uncessantly to sing The praises of thy ever-glorious King: The rarest Aires and sweetest musick matching, And unto new inventions nightly watching; Adorned with such ornaments ingrain, That most infective tempests never stain. What hes indured been by men of mights, For to defend our priviledged rights, Thou hast observ'd, and deeply pondered then, Composed to be wondred at by men. These things deny thou canst not, witnesse clear The Cittizens thine own Associats here: Witnesse thy vestures new, these shining Robes, From mourning more refrain, restrain thy sobs. This world new no dolor such admits, Felt-love, believe, forbear these faithlesse fits.
Hele. That world of yours no falshood doth admit, Faithlesse profession is a feigned fit: You in the faithfull witnesse do believe, And by believing faithfully do live: You grafted in the lively Olive grow, Where substance sweet doth from that fatness flow. I formerly have in these courses gone, With others, as you instantly have shown, But I have stept aside in following lies, Upon the mount of many vanities: What could it make, suppose I should explain The folly and the figments of my brain, The levitie of my affections vile? Some seeming goodnesse under secret guile. You by your importunacy do presse Me more particularly to expresse: If better more, then prejudice it could, Or pertinent it were, I surely should. Sa. Whence comes this conscience of those heart-con∣ceits? Whence flow these conflicts of these soul-debates? Corruption 'gainst corruption doth not side, Satan against himself doth not divide. Weaknesse and wandring do in us remain, And yet our Lover doth us not disdain, He fails us not, as we do (doating) deem, But that he absent to our sense doth seem: That we may see what of our selves we may Expect, if he should our supply delay: And what can make us more our selves forsake, Then hell-black us, milk-white for Heaven to make? Such sweetnesse from the breasts thou hast been sucking, That weaned now, thou dost but fall a drouping:
Thou hast been dandled on thy keepers knees, And fed with suggar'd soul-festivities: But now for to obtain the Royall prize, Thou must to work, and run, and fight; arise. Hele. It's easie Sailing in a gentle Gale, But grievous when the tempest strieks the Sail: It's easie fighting with your fleeing foes, But dreadfull when it turnes to bloody blows: It's easie speaking to a wounded heart, But not so easie to retreat the dart: And searching tryals light to some may be, Which work to others much perplexity. I pray you therefore leave me now alone, You, may I hurt, help can you make me none Sa. In darkest dayes, and sharpest stormes that blow, Our Pilot, how to land us safe, doth know: And we within the vail, our Anchor sure Do cast, and so can ride it out secure. Our Captain stands victorious in the field, He never lost a man that did not yeeld. Our sweet Physician, full of science, sees Our wounds, diseases, and their remedies, And doth with cordials unto us addresse, When dwining we do dream of nothing lesse; And it is good thou dost not us regard, Lest at thy hands we should expect reward. But till you take a breathing, we shall walk, Beside thee here, and to the matter talk. Now ye my friends devote, and Ladies dear, Who this discourse (of ours) do over-hear, Speak your opinion from experience plain, And we shall to our purpose turn again;
For in her griefs, if we cannot be grieved, We shall be griev'd when she shall be relieved: But of her burdens who doth take a part, Her comfort shall reflect upon their heart. Maria, Anna, Grissilla, Eliza. Thomas. Maria. IT seems it shall not easy be to find The bands that do her in this bondage bind: But let us now recite our speciall failings, Their causes and effects, and our prevailings▪ And to avoid contest, I shall break in, And as you bid, be bold for to begin: Court-breeding leading us to high aspirings, Swelling in such ambitious desirings, We can for self-promotion, formall prove In every project where we minde to move: And can (Chamelion-like) all colours take, As for the gaining of our point may make: And from what airt we see the air to swirle, For that same course quickly our sails can hurle. But when we of our selves do get a sight, We guard against this Idol with our might, Most deeply humbled at the heart, that we Are wasted in this frothy vanity: For then it pleas'd my King to clear mine eies, Divinely to discern deep mysteries,
And take a Pardon in that time of love, Which made my frozen heart in melting move. Yet after this, anone I must you tell, A fearfull tryall unto me befell: Even after tasting many comforts sweet, Intent some meditations to repeat, Of most concernment, preasing to procure, In supernatrall truths, my standing sure; Such as of souls the immortality, Whose being in and out of bodies be: The resurrection, and immortalizing Of bodies mortall, naturall, spiritualizing: And minding thence, some higher to ascend, So far as finite thoughts might comprehend Of God, his goodnesse, wisdome and his might, Pre-ordinating all in order right: By His eternall counsel, pleasure, will, Who all things works, moving, unmoved still: But instantly, a voice, both pure and plain, My musing mov'd unto another strain. So friend-like and so friendly muttering then, Must thou be found the only fool of men: What businesse is this thou goes about? What strange chymaeraes shall we see come out? We guided be by reason, and by sence, Where be thy groundlesse grounds? on what pretence Dost thou intangle, and perturb thy mind In courious quiks, whereto thou art inclin'd? Art thou so senslesse, as thus to conceive, Dust turn'd to dust, turn ghostlesse from the grave: Or that thy vanisht spirits shall return, These ashes to inspire, spent in that urne?
Some giddie-headed people wonders tell, Of God, of Heaven, satan, sin and hell: But these be foolries, fitted to deceive Some facile Sp'rits, that fancies do conceive▪ Canst thou defraud thy self of all thy blesse, By framing to thy self a hell like this? While as thou might in many pleasures flouri And nature in her native notions nourish. But even then, when I (perplexed) though What could it be that this diversion wrought: Unto my sence, there was reply so clear Return'd in my behalf, which made appear The devil, his drift, and his deluding lure, Discourse of me by flatt'rie to procure: But my firm faithfull Watch-man and my Love Seeing the malice of this murthering mover, Preveens this cruel plot, and interposes His subtilty, and sophistry discloses: Objections more then now I can recent▪ Which none but very devils could invent, Confuted and refuted were so clear, By him alone, who did for me appear. But then, said I, (in this confusion vext) Since it is so, how am I thus perplext? Then instantly, my great deliverance wrought, Was wondrously by my Redeemer brought: When to grosse Atheism, the tempter, he Had cast his baits for to have hooked me: And if the inward Teacher had not taught Me, how to answer these his reasons, fraught With subtilties, so mystick, that again I had been tortur'd in that fearfull train.
But sad and bitter were the sore rebukes Of my dear Lover, and the frowning looks That I endur'd, for daring to adventure With this deceiver in the lists to enter: Moreover, fears not only me affright, But, also, I must with afflictions fight: With many terrors, and with troubles toyled, And by infirmity am often foyled: But yet I find it for my best to be Prest and distress'd in this perplexitie: For on the rode I read, in letters fair, Love unconceivable, and wisdome there: And ever since, when I such whisperings hear Flow from that buzing snake, I stop mine ear. ANNA. We of the Citty, sumptuously do live, And to maintain our wealth do mainly strive. So avaritious and luxurious grow, As we in wealth and worldly honours flow▪ But when our Lover doth remove the vail, We see the rotten ship wherein we sail, And fecklesse wares, whereon our souls we waste▪ Then to the death we do our selves detest: But being bred in such societies, As do advert unto varieties Of outward formes, must civile be and neat, According to our rank, degree and state. I have been shew'd by one that's most sincere, That many dangers 'mongst them do appear: And that her self was fearfully afraid, Lest unknown fear her weakness had bewrai'd▪
And if I warned had not been before, I might have splitted on this deadly shore: But after deeper search, I did perceive My self was nothing, but a living grave, Where noysome serpents in the members crawl, The faculties infecting of the soul: The soul again, vain, arrogant and proud, For all her wak'nings walking under cloud. Then after this I had a fearfull blink, Which under desperation made me shrink: But then even at the twinkling of an eye, My Saver, present set me fully free: So as unto his praise, I must record, A self-lost soul was saved by the Lord. Thus my Redeemer so did me Redeem. My danger and deliverance seen did seem So near, and I so filled with conceiving, Sense led me from the way of firm believing: But in that sweetnesse, when I fell asleep, I swell'd up in a deadly fever deep: And moving miss'd the Author of my joy, So then my nearest friends I did imploy, Who helps prescrib'd, and potions did prepare To swage my swelling, and my health repair. But then there did such fears my soul assail, Which through my weakness often did prevail, To bring in question, how to persevere Before the straits and tryals that appear. I was brought very low, but never heal'd, Untill compassion with my Prince prevail'd Me to restore, and make me surely see, A stedfast faith was firm stability.
So when I look'd unto my Lovers might, All faithlesse fears evanisht out of sight. GRISSILLA. We in the Academie that be nourish'd, And fruitfull grow, when we have early flourish'd: Physick▪ Laws, Metaphysicks we debate, What serves for mans soul, body, or estate: And by our science and inventions then, Reduce to order for the use of men: But swell in pride, and in disdain, when we Others so far below us we espy: And often our too curious spirits swerving, Do over-turn our selves by our deserving; For by deep speculation, we do see Wonders, that by none other seen can be; Produc'd by natures force, and render'd then In rare effects, to be admir'd of men. The stars in severall places we espy, In constellations, as they ordered be: Desing'd for signs in ev'ry Variation, Ascent, descent, degrees and inclination: Severall effects on every severall thing, That from the earth, from air and oceans spring. Gold, Pearles, Stones precious in the earth secured, Deep steeping closely, till they be matured: Where by the stars, they do procure their strength, Of bodies short continuance, and their length: Of Animals, Herbs, Flowers, their vertues all, Their birth and growth, their durance and their fall▪ Which as in this clear prospect we do see, By proof, their operations learn'd have we.
And I one day these marvels so admiring, Their causes and effects too much desiring, To search by natures light: And not adoring The God of nature, but by nature poring, In this deep study I was sorely stained With infidelity, and then arraigned, And left forlorn, a little, as I shewed, Untill that by contrition renewed, I accesse had, and granted was to see That my dear Lover, and Life-giver, He Was natures Author, and that her effects Were done directly, still as he directs. Afflictions, fears and too much carnall care, Temptations be, which lead unto despair: Again by grace, resisting and repelling, A devillish drift doth lift the heart to swelling, And herein I much weaknesse have bewrayed, But happily therewith hath been essayed, For of his goodness I again do gain, To guard against these vile debourdings vain. ELIZA. We who into the Country bred have been, And little of the Court or Citty seen, But in the Wildernesse alone were living, Our bleitting droves unto the fountains driving. Alongst the quickning springs and cooling streams, Sheltr'd with sweetest sprigs from scorching beams, Delighted in our silent Cipresse Bowers, Adorned with the fairest rarest flowers: And satisfied herewith as with silk, Preferring to their sharpest spice, our milk:
But under all this smooth sobriety, Ingenuous care, and frugall industry, We live and die in ignorance indured, And ly in gross profanity obdured, And cannot see, untill by speciall grace. A brighter light do shine upon our face: But after I was call'd, and causd to see, And made asham'd of my profanity: Thereby affected with my Lovers love, That nothing else near to my heart could move: The Devil then, under a glist'ring vail, My weaknesse (unawares) did so assail, That I had drunk the poyson'd cup so deep, My senses by the venom were asleep; For he some instruments had so deceiv'd, And to most impious principles beslav'd: Under pretext of love to Christ alone, Exalting him up to his Royall Throne, With all that unto him do truly cleave: That they by doctrines were not now to live, That they are clean, and cannot be defil'd: Illuminate, and cannot be beguil'd: That all are theirs, and all things common be Unto that love-bred, love-fed Family: With others such-like hatcht-patcht proofs so specious▪ And drest with speeches, seeming very gracious: My carnall heart did presently affect To bring a present heaven in respect: But when the way so pleasant did appear To flesh and blood, I did begin to fear, And took me to consult with truth divine: So as the Majesty therein did shine
Of Holinesse, and Righteousnesse so clear, The filthinesse, and folly did appear, Wherein they swell, perverting truth so far, That they obdur'd unto conviction are: And hereby found I also out again, That I unstable, facil was, and vain: And so alas! have blasted been, and broken With all these blustrings, whereof you have spoken: Have seen my self, self-lost, self-damn'd, and saved, And yet so senslesse, and so self-depraved, So far corrupt, so foolish, and so frail, Conceits impure so much with me prevail: And yet with mercy and compassion clear Am compassed, more than I can admire; For I to wrath my self do still expose, But my Redeemer still doth interpose: And when I would my self in darknesse cast, I rescu'd am, for he doth hold me fast: And when despar'dly I would make retreat From this new City, and these pleasures sweet, And searches every postern gate, and lirk, My own destruction cruelly to worke, By separating, yet I am surrounded In so wise windings, wherein I am bounded: And breath'd upon, even when the breath is failing, And helped up by everlasting healing: Whereby my safety doth proceed, I prove▪ From infinite, and from unchanged love; For as I am confounded and ashamed, To see my self in such convictions blamed, So am I more comforted, to repose Upon my Prince, and in his peace rejoice:
And now I grant, that by His grace I gain In watchfulnesse, and also do refrain, To taste, or touch, or to aproach too near, Where perill of infection doth appear. TH0MAS. O deep profound! O! what a deepnesse is he wisdome, knowledge and eternall blesse, f this, who is the glorious King of Saints? d graciously among his children haunts? d O! How many are our miseries? d O! How rescued by such mysteries? re I by providence above perceiving, ght lessons once receive, above conceiving any, but by these are taught aright see themselves, and to abhore that fight. we this while a main Professor been, use I hated vice, and sin obscene, eigh'd against it, and did vertue love, vicious hate, and verteous did approve: in this gracious fellowship have seen, t hitherto I have but blinded been: do I see Believers and their rights, ir world new and their renewed lights: tryals and the straits they did endure, ork for their well, and they preserved sure: As also, I have seen these lad assailings Of satan, and your speciall prevailings, Whereof I never knew, nor lesse nor more, For they were mysteries great to me before. We in the wilderness that have been bred, Amongst the brute, on brutish lust were fed:
Your breeding been in School, in Court, and Citty, Delicious, curious, delicate and witty: But not exeem'd from tryals more then we, Expos'd to many that most dreadfull be. You do by curious speculations give Place to the serpent, darts at you to drive: But as he hes into his fang so fast, Such windings He for us needs not fore-cast: For this I do confesse, albeit I could My heav'n upon this love to vertue hold, Yet Satan of hypocrisie a spice, Hes in the heart shed, where it sliely lyes: For seeing you with others, who assemble At solemn meetings, I would them resemble, Dissemble what within my bosom grew, And learn to prattle things I never knew: Likewise, I find too great a tryall here At meetings, when both Sexes do appear, And ordered so, that oppositely airted The venome of much vanity is darted Out from the poyson of infective eyes, At civill and sacred festivities. Now these and many such enormities, Naughty, profane, vain superfluities, We civill men do see, and do forbear To mortifie, when they do most appear▪ But you the flesh who do subdue so far, That fairly springing up afresh you are, Like fruitfull branches, and like garden-flowers, That wat'red be by sweet Celestial showers, Preserve your peace, when we our selves consume, In making up Inditement for our doom.
Andrea, Grissilla, Anna. And. GReat, good, grave Ladies, wise and Virgins pure▪ Ye know ye could not well our sight endure: For we, what folly in the flesh remains, By much experience, tasting have with pains, Do make it now our trade for to travers Through all the corners of this Univers: Unvailing vice, and bearing witnesse good Against that venom, which infects our blood: And ev'ry one of you, in all your places With this sweet fellowship of gracious faces, Cannot deny, but ye had warning all, Against these slights, which might procure your fall. Now are we glad to hear you so confesse Your weaknesse, and your Lovers lovingnesse. Anna. The most sincere, and self-deny'd agrees Upon these sacred sweet solemnities, Which we frequent: for there, by cords of love, After our Lover, we are mov'd, and move: In all sincere devotion avowed, And unto new obedience are bowed. Nor doth our lib'rall Lord us quite deprive Of recreations▪ whilst we warily live. And. True, this the mind of many is indeed, But may no us discourage to proceed. The kindnesse of our King doth us constrain To seek his glory, and your sp'rituall gain.
Daily and dolefull proof doth witnesse well Our weaknesse, and we may much folly feel Possesse our hearts: for, when we tempted be, Surpris'd we are, and can it not foresee. Many affected seem, and make a show To follow us, that back again do go. The cunning Serpent sleeps not, but by flight, Knows how to enter our corruption right: Can give it life, and then a bait most sweet, Prepared for our pleasure, we shall meet, Colour'd with recreations, in the name Of lawfull liberties, to save the blame. This I may say, and can it now avow, We doing are, our selves for to undo, All that we can; But, when we are intent The sacred Mysteries for to frequent, Advancing still in faith, our selves forsaking, Tending our King, and his sweet Crosse up-taking: (And who is he that doth aright detest Himself, and on his Lovers favour feast▪ And is not this poor ignorance engrain, When recreations we prefer profane, Which profite not, nor pleasure, but do perish, Before the fruit appear from-out the flourish? Whereas, if we (ev'n here in our traversings) Had with our King constant and clean conversings) Then should our tasting, smelling, hearing, seeing, Render a relish, unto all admiring. When in the galies he himself were shewing▪ Feed on his face, enliv'ning grace renewing: And when he doth himself again retreat, We have his Word and Works for to repeat,
Where from the least, most common that is nam'd, Most wondrous wayes of wisdom are proclaim'd. And if these marvels we did rightly see, Then recreated should we fully be, Above what all created comforts can Confer upon the sp'rituall-graced man. Ye know, tho we translated be to light, Yet all of us our nat'rall temper right Retain, so as a stronger potion will Some person save, which would another kill: So with the gracious we do still consent, In sowing seeds of sp'rituall nourishment: But then the sturdy ground must break and bruise, So as the season may the seed infuse. An. We know your meaning unto us is good, And better seen it is then understood: Out of zeal in every thing you are, From self-experience bidding us beware: And in this present purpose to proceed, It seems that this discourse may be apply'd: For we of severall ranks, degrees, professions Presented have our case and our confessions: And as there be of sev'rall persons here, So do our tryals diversly appear: And doubtlesse, what would helpfull be to some▪ Should most untimous to another come. You see it so, not one of us doth find What bands in bondage doth this dam'sell bind: So sure there doth concur, as seems to me, Some other grounds of this varietie Of exercise, unto us incident, Who all are sprung from one root and discent,
Such as to our effectuall calling may Refer, or to the maner, time or way. Gris. Certain, if we exactly ponder would All that upon our nature and this mould Had influence, it verily should prove▪ Our feeble, frail conceptions far above: We in the generall jointly do confesse, Stars, constellations, signs celestiall hes Much operation in our bodies all, Their generation, standing and their fall; Bodies of Elements compounded been Of humors, some more grosse, and some more clean, In some more equall, some lesse equalling: Whence strength and weakness, health and sickness spring: Hence dispositions and affections move, Which in some lesse, in some more vicious prove: Our distance also from the temp'rat Zone, The frigid and the hot, the Horizon, Climat, our customs and our education, Our frequent fellowship and conversation: All these, and many more have force upon Our facile minds, and fond affection. By this connexion of so many things, Distinguishable by so many signs: So many various thoughts impression have, That poyson'd inclinations do receive: Hence is it that some sole-commanding thing Bears rule in every one as Soveraign King: Which in the fervor of a strong respect, Follow the Aples that they most affect: And in the frenzie of these carnall fires, Dote on the idol of their chief desires:
And from that folly never can refrain, Untill the sting of death revive their pain: So when the soul physician comes to cure, Our sicknesse (sees) and what we can endure: And unto our infection he applyes, For all contagions, severall remedies, Corrections, crosses, that we may relent; Comforting cordials, lest our heart should faint. And when we have been gained and allured, And of his favour faithfully assured, By real feeling of our lost condition, And delivry by our Lords tutition: Yet not the lesse, we must be humble held, So as the devils darts may be repell'd: He did in Paradice with our Parents plead. And prosecutes his splen against their Seed Nor is the old man yet so fully slain, But that he can recover life again: If we be left a little to be try'd By light temptations, we shall step aside, Unlesse we be prevented or restrain'd, And so by free immediate grace maintain'd. Now these strong reasons and right grounds may be Of Christian cases the varietie: Nor do I doubt, but that the Christ'an-call, Maner and time be not alike in all: Some saved are with fear, some love constrains, Some hurled from the fire with harder pains: Much difference of exercise can make, Which also may the name of tryall take. And. Enough, dear friend, now have you made us see Our own experience more perspicuouslie:
For we be of our birth and breeding wilde, As likewise of all people most defil'd: But as by times some of us hes been tam'd, Then of our selves we have been much asham'd: Made it our study vice for to detect. Destroy, and to draw vertue to respect: We censur'd be by many that are good▪ To be too rigide, being people rude: Who to be too far curbed do disdain, And plead for recreations too profane, But since it pleas'd our King us to recall To this His Paradice spirituall: And since we did with you assemble here▪ We have been set to get the heart sincere: And what by speculation we take, Make it impressions unto practice make: And with much order do our selves addresse, To shew to men their nat'rall naughtinesse, And that ev'n in the best there doth remain Some of the life of death, as yet, unslain: But as for us, we have been so ingrain'd In that corruption, which all flesh hath stain'd, It so habituall unto us became▪ That we converted were unto the same: And when our eyes at first to see were clear'd, Our miserie and mercy most admir'd, The causes and the wrath so vively seen, His everlasting armes to interveen: There did concur force, fear, love infinite, Our full reclaiming thereby to compleat: And now our crosses and corrections we Find for the death of sin in us to be:
Even such, by which, heav'ns wisdome does reform us, And to our King and Comforter conform us. An. This grave and graced person in his speech, If ponder'd well it were, might many teach: For this we know, that of one propagation, Countrie and clime, and of one education Are all that tribe, and surely such as here Arrived be, most zealous do appear. And as for us who came from every airt, Of severall qualities partake apart: As also, some more early, some more late Have called been unto this happy state, Some, by our Soveraign King his ointments sweet, By love came running, when he did invite: Some, from the sense of wrath when they did cry, Such mercy felt, that they did melt thereby. Thus we by conf'rence find, that there must be Strong reasons' for this strange diversity Of exercise, and that it is to train Us to the truth, from triffles false and vain. And this we know, though we be civill bred, And in the plat-form fair of vertue led, And have not been brought under publike blame, That could have brought us unto open shame, That yet the seed of ev'ry vice remains In us, as others only grace restrains: And as we more or lesse infected are, Our antidotes stronger or weaker were. And more particular or plain to be, You pardon will, to save our modesty: For our dear Lover, who by grace hath lov'd us, Above the grace bestow'd, hath never prov'd us:
And when our Sex to suffer for their love Is call'd, they constant do and loyall prove. Tho. We as these Ladies congregated are From every airt, where shines the morning star, Diff'rent by birth, humors and education, By sight, society and conversation: Some in their youth have hither been translated, Some in their age here happily been stated. Some sav'd by fear, and some by force constrain'd To come, but all by Love and mercy gain'd, So that with us strange diff'rences must be: But far more strange is this strange harmonie, Where contrare inclinations do incline All to one end: O endlesse depth divine! And that the rod upon our folly lies, More happinesse it is then we can prize. Chastis'd we be as children for our good, When through the fire, or the most furious flood Of sore afflictions, we be safely led, Who in the barren wilderness are bred. The purest white drinks in the blewest dye: And if you do take pains for to apply Some red, some green, according to the grain: But unto white shall never turn again: Right so, though we be stain'd, we can receive, By industry and education grave, Civility and righteous colours sweet: But the first tincture never shall delete, Untill by blood and water both our blots Be purged out, for cleanging all our spots. This is the myst'ry deep that we should mind▪ How we may be unto our King combin'd,
By bands of love, in sucking in His blood, Which doth our consolations all include: While we perceive the spawn of our proud foes Remain unpurg'd, wherein can we rejoice? We suffer not, it is but this old man, And we should beat him down in what we can: Delight to see him totally destroyed, And all devices for that end imployed: That we unto the image of our King May once appear, and so his praises sing▪ Mariona, Grissella. Ma. WE do not deem that this distressed Maid Is tainted with the things that we have said: Or that such guilt, so grosse, could find a place For to obscure such gravity and grace; But we by bitter proof have truly proved Matter in us remaining, unremoved, Which can such motions bring unto respect, When on these painted Portraicts we reflect, That are suggested by the serpent slie, Or by the sense sent to the phantasie; But though we cannot shun, we see the craft, And Arrows keen he doth against us shaft; Armour of proof we stand in, and resist The sharpest dart he at our heart can thrust, The fairest Idol that he can invent, The sweetest Apple that he can present:
And when we sleeping be, surpriz'd and foyl'd, And ere we be aware, betray'd and spoyl'd: Our Captain sees, and cannot long refrain Us to relieve, and set us right again, So as to him we do more closely cleave, And watchfull walk for all the time we live: This subtile hunter he is ever spying Where we be weakest, and is ever trying By all means set, to make us swell or swither, The spunk of life by spouts of hell to smother. This impure sp'rit, prince of the air, doth carry Into the brain many vain vapours aery, Which the affections surely should infect, If timously we did them not detect: But if this airt the carnall part incline To blink asquint when he doth Saint-like shine, Then are we over-clouded, and we know Our Jealous Lover must us then reprove: For he corrivall never could indure▪ But sealed for himself will have us sure: Since all that we can wish conjoyn'd in one Of blesse, combined is in him alone: And we convinced be abundantly, Of love-obligements unto loyalty, And when he sees us truly humbled much Under these trials which the heart doth touch, Then in his tendernesse to us doth turn With comforts, as we in his absence mourn. Thus when we stand, or fight, or faint, or fall, He is so near that we are saved all: This love, above all finite reach ascending, Unalterable, and so condescending.
That even when we are secluded sore, We oblidg'd be for to believe the more; For if we were not so rebuked, then Carelesse we should become, like carnall men. These are the flames, this is that force of love, Floods cannot quench, might, slight cannot remove. This is our King, our Sunne, our Shield, our Friend, Who by his blood hes us to him combin'd: Whose splendent rayes, full fraught with vertue, shall From this grosse drosse affections pure exhale, And fix within that element of love, Where our delights alone on him may move. Gris. Much graced Matron, your discourse devote, Much verity and charity doth note. Ye who above us do so far resort, Can best discern these Arrows to retort, That from the prince of darknesse darted still Within the dark for to infest the will. Your charity (grave Matron) most agrees With rich experience and with cleared eyes. The mystery of mercy you have seen Melted in love, and moulded have you been, So as no evill you can think or wrest To worst, but all interprete to the best: But many novices come to this place, Who tasted have and do belong to grace, Are often on extreams, as they abound In feelings, or are under absence drown'd: And in their haly on dayes will not allow Esteem, to any that be them below, As little for themselves do they preserve, When under darknesse drouping they do starve.
And we be ever checking those mistakes, But self-conceit obdurate many makes: Till they be tortur'd under many tryals, And taught to live by faith, in self-denyals: But for the number wherewith we must meet, Not possible it is for to repeat. Some hes been spoken to by our dear friends, Both from intention, purpose good. and ends, And suffer me as yet to signifie, Of these our travels the necessitie. As by this simile we'll better see, If we dissect our own Anatomie. The matter, composition and the Art Of Heav'n, admirable in ev'ry part, Flesh, blood, bones, nerves, veins, arteries sustaining. Humours, hot, cold, moist, dry, and mixt containing; Seat and assistance, offices and ends, Each other serving, none another offends; And all disperst through all this fabrick rare, By instruments above a thousand pair: From top to toe by searching we may see No lesse then wonders in variety. The very head a magazin is made Of marvells, most magnificent and dread. And whoso should down to the foot descend, And on the parts therein contained spend Some space, in every place they should perceive Hundreds, which wonders were for to conceive: And every one that charge for to fulfill, Appointed by the glorious Makers will: As by pre-ordination God doth give These souls immortall, whereby we do live:
Ye likewise see that all these parts and pow'rs, Composed in this little world of ours, And animated by this living breath, Lyes dwining now under the sting of death, And that through this defiled body spreads These soul-preserving, now life-poys'ning threeds; For as the body doth in part defect, Then can the soul thereby work no effect. Ye likewise see, the soul cannot be seen, Which in the body hath infused been: That both might be an instrument to raise The Authors greatnesse, and his goodnesse praise. And for this end, endow'd above conceiving With large capacities, fit for receiving All that our Maker shall reveal, to make Us see him, and his service undertake: So as her gifts in such excellencies, In number, worth and great varieties, Exceeds what e're be said of bodies may, As doth the breath of God excell this clay: Not only ample, simple, pure, capacious, But also subtile, pregnant and sagacious: To dyve, to search, to soar and never cease, Untill she do her Author once imbrace, In whom she shall (far, far above desiring) Be fed with wonders unto all admiring; But now in all her parts so far depraved, By listing to her lust, and so beslaved, That when she's taught, and rescu'd, yet again Constant she cannot in her course remain: But steps aside, and doth her self deprive Of these revivings that should her enlive.
And as it is most strange, aright to see These contraries corporeall to agree, This structure of the body to maintain, Untill it must turn to the dust again: Albeit some interruptions often make The soul in all her agitations slack; But how much more incomparable ye know Were it to keep in frame? These fancies move In our light minds, imaginations vain, From which the carnall part cannot refrain, Which most doth mar that special consolation We should enjoy by sp'rituall contemplation, By dyving in these mysteries divine, Wherein the glory of our King doth shine: And whereby we are by his light delighted, Untill by this his grace we be perfected. But when his Spirit, to prevent our swelling, Or from the vapors of that venom dwelling In us, obstructed is, who then, oh! who So over-clouded can but sadly go? For he's the soul by which the soul doth live; Ev'n as the soul the body keeps alive: Then never think it strange to see us grieve When he is gone, who should our heart relieve: Nor strange to see him forc'd for to retire, But rather wonder that he should appear, And through the latters lend a friendly blink, When he perceives the fainting heart to shrink: And rather think it strange that so remisse We prove, in searching what the quarrel is Of such desertions as the heart do vex, And with dejection do the sp'rit perplex.
I do confesse believing were the best, In quietnesse and confidence to rest: But saving faith to holinesse adheres, And guarded is with many filiall fears, And out of love is ever sorely moved, When evidences are of love removed. Though you conversant are, and so inured In heav'nly matters, and so well secured, Can stand before the gates of hell and make Your progresse, yet the weak may stumbling take For in this case much grace we take to be, Hopefull, sincere, in heart humilitie. And studying to make out a true disjunction, From every motion can obstruct that unction, Whereby we be conjoyn'd in that communion With our dear Lover, in a sp'rituall union. So as by grace, grafted in him we grow Up, by that influence that from him doth flow, Untill we be into his image formed, And most devotly to his will conformed: But you appear so prudent, that therefore We leave to be consider'd lesse and more. These our essayes at your command pursued, To be by you corrected and renewed: And as ye do think meet in time and place, Compos'd and right applyed to the case.
Samuel, Helena. Sam. MOst precious people, saved and secured, By force of felt and fervent love allured: Your conferences free I have been hearing, And do approve, and for your better clearing Do certify, that your most Princely Love These actings in his children doth approve. We who be named gracious, be it known, No grace, but what is giv'n, have of our own, And by that grace immediatly maintained, Converted, call'd, as you, and so sustained. The diff'rence only doth consist in this, The King his pleasure good was us to blesse; ince from the womb we came to humane sight, To sanctify us by his heav'nly light; And separate we be for this effect, To do and suffer as he does direct: ot specially his elect Flock to feed, And them unto the living Fountain lead. You have been over-hearing what was said, n reference to this distressed Maid: You have been carefull hereby to conceive The myst'ry of her case, I do perceive: You have been searching out for second causes, Which cautioned would be with certain clauses. ut you are sober, and are satisfi'd▪ om solide grounds of reason certifi'd.
And this is right; for never one as yet, Of soundest and profoundest searching wit In natures secrets, by the Physicks poring, Or winged with the Metaphysicks soaring, Exactly could, the causes and effects, Matter and form, with all their due respects, Produc'd by natures infinite variety, On severall objects, marvelous rariety, Conceiv'd by science, or by all their Art Ever demonstrate to the thousand part: Our princ'ples are with much experience fraught▪ So by our practice we are daily taught: And new essays are set on work, again More light by new discoveries to attain. Our King, the God of Nature, only knows The nature, matter, form, effects and cause Of all things: for by Him they are, and shall Bring forth his glory and our gladnesse all. This Microcosme (Man) a world contains Of various parts, his Maker all maintains: And this great world, in all its sev'rall acts, Subservient unto mans up-making makes; Bodies celestiall, in their sev'rall Spheres, And all that to the Firmament adheres, In all their various courses, contribute, To our continuance, comfortable fruit. What herb, fruit, flow'r, beast, fowl or fish there is, But bend their best concurrence to our blesse? The weak, the strong, the bitter, sowre and sweet, The hot, the cold, in their degrees compleat, In all their concords and their sympathies, Discords, divisions and antipathies,
Find mater for their master (Man) to make Him see, they do his service undertake. And who can doubt but man immortal might Have stood, if not deprived of that light (Deservedly) which in his soul did shine, And did all knowledge necessar confine, His present being to preserve, if he Preserved had his prime integrity? They stand in force, but we, now fallen blind Judicially, death and destruction find Amidst the means of life: but yet our King Doth us to light and life from darkness bring, So as that now we may most clearly see, That ev'ry case we come through doth agree With our condition present, presuppose We should much weaknesse under wrath disclose. And as, amongst the sons of men, we find That many are, in many things, inclin'd Alike, none of all Adam's race have been, That in all things to sympathize were seen; For as we diff'rent in our faces be, So in our gifts is great diversity. But as all Simples, from the earth that grow, Or from th' elementary Ocean flow, By skilfull composition refin'd, Wonders do work when they are well combin'd: Ev'n so with men, in all their sev'rall motions, Deeds, dispositions, and their various notions, There doth result, by heavens high decree, To our great King, a heav'nly harmonie. Let it our study deep be, to devise The Author of these wonders how to prize▪
How we are wonderfully made to be From nothing, and maintained wonderously. How wonderfully have we wandred far? How wonderfully we reclaimed are? Wonder upon that glorious Majesty That shines on all his works so wondrously! Wonder upon his condescentions sweet, Whereby these wonders with our weaknesse meet! Him, him, who perfect is and infinite, Simple, eternall, essentially compleat, Surpassing wonder, sacredly adore, And in adoring humbly wonder more! Wonder upon his wisdomes deep contriving! By death to bring thy death-bound lifes relivieng▪ That his eternall Son thy flesh assum'd, To ransom thee that unto death was doom'd: That he eternally did so delight T'obscure his glory, to procure thy light: That by th'eternal Sp'rit he us inspires, With grace divine, faith and devote desires: To know, believe himself, his truth and love, And thereinto most loyally to move. These be the contemplations best, that can Beseem and do become the love-bred man. These thoughts sublime can elevate alone The heart, soul-savory fruit to feast upon: To seal an union and communion sweet, In all transcendent love, divine, compleat: With him in heav'n, who hath mans nature plac'd, And by his spirit us on earth so grac'd. Let us suppose, that all the worlds of men Stood up on life that ever lived, then
That every man a different world were, Of all things that hath been, shall be, or are, And variously these all were animated, With all indowments that have been created; These all were, also, into one compacted, And all were in one quintessence extracted. Those spirits pure, most peircing sure should prove, And yet be dazled at this depth of love. In darkest clouds this love finds out a cleft, To send a death-bound soul a quickning lift; And when our Sun seems be eclipsed far, Faith playes her course by the least twinkling star. The Wran may flighter on this oceans brim, The Dolphine dyve, the Elephant may swim. For loves sweet sympathies consist in looks, Blinks, smiles and smells, whereby the Lover hooks The loved, and the loved thence again, From passion strong cannot it self refrain. Let this suffice, and ere we do remove, We'll consolate this Lady sick of love: Her Lover shall, ere it be long, be sure, Shine on her soul, and so her peace procure: For she in child-birth of fair grace doth ly, Let us some cordials for her pangs apply. And now speak damesell, and let us hear What fruit from our endeavours doth appear, Hele. Now am I so o'recome, constrain'd to note Your travels for my well have been devote: For ev'ry parcell of your free confessions Renews the sense to me of like transgressions: But now in speciall, you have specified Some errors, that I would were rectified▪
And all that ye have said, I must confesse, For every word my grief may well increase. When I look up, what my most Princely Love, Before he brought me here, made me to prove; And likewise, also, since he brought me here, What kingly bounty daily doth appear, Freely bestow'd upon a fondling poor, Whose worth could never thing, but wrath procure? And now I am convinc'd, for I have prov'd. That with such fervent love he hath me lov'd: That for my frailties, and infirmnesse great, His grace and mercy he would not retreat: Or that his bowels, which for me were moved, By this my stumbling should have been removed; But this rich bounty, and this love divine I lost, and am, deserv'dly, left to dwine And pine away, in sp'rituall poverty, For pride of sp'rit, unseen takes root in me: Which now I find the cause of all my anguish, Wherein I do consume away and languish: Nor should I yet have seen this vain conceit, But by the fruit of that vile root of late: For I did suffer my fond heart to think That I was setled, so I could not sink: And that by grace receiv'd I could sustain, Till from this tent translated I had been: I doated on his gifts, did not adore Himself, of whom I did enjoy that store▪ The idol of the heart was set in place Above the Author of my grace and peace: And now, therefore, of force confesse I must, His judgements are both righteous and just:
For grace abus'd, thus gracelesse here to ly▪ In place of peace, in deep perplexity. Sam. And art thou past recov'ry, can'st thou say? Is there no ground of hope whereon to stay? Or art thou so vain-gloriously affected, Ev'n when that seed of Satan is dissected? Hele. No, but I am therewith infected sore, That seperate I cannot any more Therefrom, then from my self, for it's become Deaf to rebuke, and to defence but dumb. Sam. Dost thou not know, for this is still confes, Remnants in us remain undispossest: Of much perversity, which all our life To purge, will keep us in continuall strife? Hele. And I immunity do not, indeed, From provocation, or correction plead▪ But this a sprig so privily doth sprout, And with the root and fruit of grace break out So sp'ritually, and so commixt convoy'd, Untill it get the life of grace destroy'd. Ev'n as these sp'rits, whereby we be enliv'd, By veins and arteries, the blood deriv'd Out from the heart the body to maintain, Unknown contains therewith the bodies bain; For what I do, or what I do endure, Progresse in grace to make, or growth procure▪ In mortifying self, self to reform, This venom unawars doth all deform: I cannot speak a word by rule of reason, Nor think nor act religiously in season: But this vile poyson of spirituall pride, Doth sliely in the heart deceitfull slide.
This is the thing our King could not endure In Angels, for by pride they fell impure: What may I then (base wretch impure) expect, Who on some drams of grace receiv'd reflect? I am as if of grace a treasure sure In store I could at my command procure, Whereas my conscience shewes that I am stain'd With all that justly may make me disdain'd: And that which might this mighty monster check, His subtilty perverse, detect and break: But with this tincture now I am so tainted, And throughly as I were therein indented: Which when I see, and am ashamed sore, Haughty hereof I do become the more. Sam. And what but grace, in this most fearfull sight, Could thee sustain against the Serpents slight? Whereby thou formerly hes still prevailed 'Gainst all the policie he hes assailed. Hele. The flesh and sp'rit defil'd with thoughts impure▪ Which carnall hearts do unto lusts allure: I see and do gainstand by grace, but this Bred up with grace, grace to displace it is; And cannot pitch but on the print of grace, Sincerity of grace for to deface. Sam. How then is this thou can so moved be, Since grace thou does confesse remains in thee: Whereon this witch doth fix and keep thee waking, And cast thee over in this fever quaking? Consider, when a King provok'd hes been By his own Son, by many pranks obscene, Should give commands in bands to make him ly In prison dark, to humble him thereby:
And yet indulgently again relent, To try if he his folly would repent, Give orders for his further liberty, Out of the prison dark to set him free: And yet this ranting child should still remain So sensless as to think he could retain This life of freedom, and abused light, By his own industry or naturall right: Were it not then convenient for to cast Him in the darkest pit in fetters fast, Till he by pain and pinching hunger there, Were taught of vain conceits for to despair? Doth this comparison thy pallat please? Can'st thou apply it to thy own disease? And if thou can, then shall it truely prove The strong effects of a Parentall love. Hele. Nothing in nature can decipher more The case and cause of my distractions sore: But naturall causes have a naturall cure, Yet who a wounded spirit can endure? How far the heavens above the earth doth bend, Spirituall things our naturall thoughts transcend. My Princely Parent penetrats the sp'rit, And loves the single humble heart contrite: He, He alone, with searching piercing eyes, This privy pride and arrogancie sees: And cannot passe't, for it doth derogate Most from His dispensations intimate. Hereby in bondage I indure these stounds, These hellish torments and these deadly wounds Of conscience, wherein I to death am bleeding, Forc't by the folly of this fancie feeding▪
Sam. I would have thought thou shouldst preferred far Thy Lovers wisdom, and affections were All similies before could be devis'd By any finite creature, or advis'd: Thou by his secret censures sees, he sees The deepest of these damned subtilties: And throws thee under bondage, till thou be Taught how to guard against this devilry. Now then consider him who sees so brightly, And in such wisdom makes the wound so rightly: Physick appoints the poyson for to drain From the infected soul, and flesh to strain: Which by experience many children knows Is tended with the like tormenting throws: But wants He skill or will, who is our King, Both health and heav'n out of this hell to bring? Albeit this tumor must retain a tent, The remnant of the humour for to vent, Faith in thy Lover hath this strong perfume, Which can this poyson pestilent consume. Hele. This devilrie so close to me doth cleave, Which man and angel from my King doth drive, That I am tott'ring much on this turmoile, And tortured so, most like to take the foile. Sam. Come, come, we ly too long aloof, I see, Towards the shoar now let us tackling be. Mistakes, misapplications most miscarries The minds of many, when their judgements varies: Bemisted in the want of faith, whereby They should distinctly see, weigh and apply. We have been speaking of much fervent love, Which in thy Lover doth His beloved move;
But now, Oh thou, much loved once, admire, What most transcendent love doth here appear, When He redeem'd thee thou wast lost, and yet Thou wilt thy self destroy, if He permit. That grace thy Lovers gift (thy glory) should Thy bain become, imagine this who could? Or could thou have imagin'd that thy flourish A cancar-worm into the bud could nourish? Or that when thou was satisfied with singing, Thou was unto thy idoll incense bringing? This cockatrice to kill in secret lyes, But being seen, she by her venom dies. Grace from the Author, as from the fountain water, When cut, becometh putrified mater, Like blood, which from the heart, through all the veins In circular motion by the nerves retains Strength in the members, and returns again, To pay the tribute and more vigour drain. But being obstructed, it corrupt becomes, The member wanting nourishment benums, Or as our curling brooks and silver streams, Which from the fountain to the river foames, By secret cranies, through the ground, the same Sweet current turns unto from whence she came. Right so our Lover and our Princely King, The ocean unexhausted and the spring, Of whom we have, from whom do derive All that we do enjoy, in whom we live. While from this sourse we daily vigour drive, Life to preserve, and let it passage have, Uninterrupted to the font amain, Then it's increast, and we refresht again:
But when these gifts of grace we do seclude From this right course, we do our selves denude Of all our comfort, whence doth swiftly grow, (If not foreseen) our sudden overthrow: Loves darling then, dost thou not thence conclude, Thy ardent Lover hath thee dearly lov'd: Who for a little space his grace restrains, That thou may seek himself, where grace remains. This love transcendent might a heart of steel Melt, when affections do such fervour feel. Hele. My heart is rather like a heart of flint, Which cannot melt, but doth endure the dint. Sam. Loves force to flesh thy stony heart converts▪ Hele. Love unto pride my fleshly heart perverts. Sam. A fleshly heart is vices willing slave, A heart of flesh impressions doth receive Of grace and vertue, whereby vice it sees, Resists, subdues, rejoyce in victories. Hele. Oh now! was any ever sunk so far In deaths dark shade, and yet delivered were. Sam. Believe me, for I do assure thee, this Of many children the condition is: And ne're an abject did as yet bemoan This ground of grief where-under thou dost groan: But so it is, that till experience teach, We do not to the rule of practice reach. Hele. Happy, thrice happy should I such esteem, Who by experience so well taught had been, To keep that order in his princely sight, As His sweet company continue might. Sam. It's true we are new born again indeed, And planted here upon heav'ns dew to feed:
But our Bride-groom, with whom there is no change, Most faithfull bides, in all our failings strange: Yet will permit to tempt us, for our triall, As we may best be bred to self-deniall: The gravell also of this poys'ned flesh Seeds do ingross, that would spring up afresh, Unlesse by crosses and corrections meet They were supprest, and we more purifi'd. But this in gen'rall we may all conclude, That ev'ry stripe we get is for our good: Though bitter, biting, sad and fretting sore, Sweet fruit unto thy taste shal come the more: And when by proof we find the sweet effects Produc'd in ev'ry one our King elects; As purging potions life and health preserving, Preventing us from sinking in our swerving: The old man and his notions so subduing, The new man and his motions so renewing, That we in our infirmnesse do rejoice, And under all our suff'rings do repose In such submission as sweet peace doth bring, Whence, out of sorrow, heav'n on earth doth spring: Whereof if we did not our selves deprive By fond mistakes, we should delightfull live. Then for to condescend of force we must, That no affliction springeth from the dust, Nor yet temptation doth from fortune flow, But do by Providence directly grow, And by heav'ns wisdom unto us apply'd, That we may be perfected when we're try'd. Hel. In evry thing this day that can be nam'd, find my self most worthy to be blam'd;
As in this solitar reserv'd design, Which certainly much detriment doth bring To many, and if that the force of love, Which in this famous fellowship doth move, Me to attend, so for my help inclin'd, Far contrar to my self-conceited mind, I should have been in this confusion longer, Weak'ned my self, and made my bands the stronger; For, till these free discourses do appear, In this society assembled here, And by this timous and this tender treating, Wherein your Grace hath been with me debating, I never could have thought a soul could live, To which so much contagion should cleave: At least a person, in this land of grace, That could the tract of such vain idols trace. But now more perfectly I do perceive, That he who freely sought us out, must save, And by immediate grace must still preserve: For daily we to be disgrac'd deserve. Now to believe, O but I do desire! But senslesse prove when I would most aspire. Sam. Thou shew'st thy self most sensible of hearing: Consent therefore, thou shalt come unto clearing. Hel. Some of Gods sons, as they have heard have seen. Some, that they might endure, have suff'red been To take a blink of Him cannot be seen. Sam. Now may we clearly see what thou dost mean: Thou senslesse prov'st, indeed, in thy desirings, Which properly in thee are proud aspirings: Its strange thou shouldst be satisfi'd so slightly, Not vap'ring for high visions more brightly,
Or looking to be rapt above heav'ns arches, About the borders of the divine marches. Must thou be steward of the Royal treasure? Will no less serve thy sense than Moses measure? Hast thou for such a charge so strong a back? Should not thy brains below the burden break? Job, faithfull in incomparable trialls, In darkest dayes, gave dev'ls and men defyalls: And never got a blink of light, untill He fell submissive to his Makers will. Thou knows we live by faith, and not by sight, By faith we suffer, and prevail in fight. Where is the fruit of all that sense receiv'd By thee before: and what if all that's crav'd, Were streamed out upon thy strong desires, Shouldst thou not spend them on thy carnall fires? And when these sparkles of thy heart were spent, So much the more thy sorrow should augment, The child of light, through fearfull darknesse groping, Takes faster grip and firmer hold, by hoping. Thou canst not deem, and nothing now thou knows, Who at the coals of this corruption blows: Nor see how sliely Lucifer can slide, At twi-light time, a plant of privy pride: Ev'n when we do in all our strength resist, Then can he at the part best fenced thrust, And cunningly cause us ly open there, Whereat the poyson'd dart he doth prepare. This venom all of us do clearly see, This child of grace her great vexation be: And when she armed best against it is, How Satan can infest her with a kisse.
Advert with wonder, heav'nly, earthly hosts, Wonder, all glorious, glorified ghosts: Wonders are seen which make you all adore, Renewed marvels make you wonder more. Pure spirits, fill the souls of your desirings, Extend your minds unto these deep admirings, The quintessence of heav'ns counsell glorious, Man murder'd, on his murderer victorious, In suff'ring Satan sift, and so surprize, And with such depth of subtilty devise Uncessantly, and in such wyndings lurking Ev'n in our duties, our destruction working. But here the myst'ry of salvation is Crown'd with the cape-stone of eternal bless Of preservation, by our glorious King, Who our deliv'rance by his death doth bring: An instance clear hereof, before our eyes, All the beholders evidently sees: A chosen, called, faithfull child of grace, Who for the prize most fervently doth prease, Too much neglecting what she had before, And strongly stretching to increase the more. One much enrich'd with light, and lively motions▪ Experience deep, and many sp'rituall notions, In darknesse for deliverance debating, Her poor condition and her case relating, Sincerely set, our counsell to receive, But sylour'd, can her self not undeceive; For at her best attainment now you see, How Satan snatches opportunity: He sees the cup she doth delight to drink, And in the liquor doth the poyson sink.
Let us infer, from what we have been hearing, And from this pregnant instance here appearing: Since all the children of the first Creation Deservedly are under condemnation, And that the cause ev'n to the Elect cleaves So close, as unto any one that lives: And that we ev'ry one are severally, According to our humors diversly, To some deceit or other more propense, Then can appear by search unto our sense, Which would unto infinitnesse amount Above what finite we could make acompt: And that so many legions of lights, Malicious devils and spirituall mights, Our natures, cases, places, erudition, Daily attend our changes and condition; And every one with every severall bait, For every posture on us all await. For this proud wretch doth desp'ratly disdain, That we should be restor'd by grace again: Or that our nature now should be renewed, Or venom purged out, that he had spued Therein, whereby we in his Image stood, Till it be blotted out by divine blood; Yet we, even we that most enlightned be, Too carelesse live, before this cruelty▪ Much more, and most for to be blam'd we prove, Not studying still this boundlesse depth of love, Which in our Lover moves him feed and keep His straying, sterving and restored sheep; Yet all that we can do, doth but increase Our debt, but more his mercy doth expresse.
This love we clearly cannot look to see, Untill this body clarified be, At least, untill it be dissolv'd, that so The soul her Lover to enjoy may go. But how is this that we cannot submit Unto this wisdome, and our selves acquit By firm believing, as the duty chief, Whereby from bondage we receive relief? We see not that our drouping and dejections His faithfulnesse dishonours, by reflections, The growth of grace and inward peace obstructs, The seeds of weeds into the heart conducts, Th'envyous man with all his snares and cares, The serpent slie with all his slights and snares, Canst thou before the fiery tryall stand, When men and devils do against thee band? Such are in store, and more, thee to befall, If fond conceits thy folly foster shall: Ambition such were much to be commended, Which with sobriety might be defended: But ye who by confiding quiet may Repose, beware presumption to bewray. The Lark, the Princely Eagle ne're envyes, Suppose she see him skifting through the skies: Ten thousand stage above her highest higher, The suns resplendant beams and beauty nigher. I am too tedious, but to be excused, Such disputs to anticipate are used. Dear daughter, once disdain for to repine At dispensations that are so divine: Restrain the rising of such grosse deceits: Refrain devising of such crosse debates.
A little faith finds out a fair relief. Say, I believe, Lord help my unbelief, And once resolve submission sincere, Like to the pupill in the fathers fear, Till which thou cannot put thy faith in act, To comfort thee, though thou thy brains should crack: Come then, threap kindnesse yet upon thy King, Tell him that in the prison thou wilt sing His praises, and ne're cease untill thou see His face in grace, and then imbraced be. This counsell, daughter, for to practice strive, For it shall prove the way to make thee thrive; He either shall the cloud of mist remove, Or thee remove the clouds and mist above, Where thou's be feasted in a minuts space, With all the fruits of thy believing grace: And from that instant, in eternity Thy King enjoying shall rejoycing be. Hele. O fearfull cloud of separation sad, What heart can hear and not for fear fall mad? Oh, wonderfull! that ye so wise can move Me to unmoved stand, who must remove, Where death bound ghosts down go, depriv'd of light, And suffer so in an eternall night. Sam. How art thou now come up at words to carpe? Perverting sense, and using censures sharp, And wherein thou convinced art before, Would lead us unto repetitions more: But lend a blink unto our travels past, And thou thy self wilt censure for thy haste, For we are leading thee into believing, While thou unto thy facile sense art cleaving.
Hele. Oh, to believe 'twere possible for me, But till I can, excuse, I cannot lie: And well I know it is Gods love constrains You to this more then ordinary pains: And I shall let you see I do not slight Your travels, but do still recent them right: For I confesse, your presence all before, There's not a word hath past you less or more, In reference to my condition duely, But found so plain, I do apply it truely: And I shall not deny but I have tasted The Heav'nly Manna, and thereon have feasted: And at the fountain have refreshed been, Therein revived and returned clean. And that when (slumbring) I began to swell, I have been left in darknesse for to dwell, Untill it pleas'd my King, who knows my pain, For my relief me to revive again. I likewise do confesse what ye have said, In ref'rence unto provocations made, Which have recited been by severall here, And pertinently made for to appear From sound experience, much diversity, And nearest numberlesse variety, That with the like I have been led astray▪ And drawn upon my self a cloudy day: The crosse did with corruption so increase, I forc'd have been my folly to confesse, For I might read in every severall rod Real offences against a righteous God, Who yet from wretched me did not remove His tender mercy, faithfulnesse and love:
For in his coming I might daily see His goings were for wak'nings unto me. Again, I shall not take unto denyals, But that I have acquainted been with tryals From all the Fiends and their infernall states, Where I have often felt and dealt debates. His brood within his instruments without, Inviron and invest me round about, And yet from all their cruelty and spight Have been preserv'd from that malicious might, And where they had permission to perplex, Turn'd to my good, and them the more may vex: And as this is by you my friends affirmed, Is likewise now by me again confirmed. But not the lesse, lace, that I can say, I have no benefite thereby this day: You have been arguing long and I replying, Contending much, and many things denying, Wherein convinc'd that ye the right maintain, Yet know ye not what sorrows I sustain, For I had never darknesse known aright, If once I had not seen the shining light, Nor what it were to be beslav'd with devils, If of their seed I had not seen the evils, Nor what deliv'rance or defence could mean, If fearfull danger were not something seen, But while so many eminent I see, For light and life, inlargement, liberty, Forsaken, and before the tryall fail, How can I then presume for to prevail, Who now so long, so fearfully do ly, Without relief or hope of remedy?
If ye my dolours knew, ye would deplore That wofull anguish and vexation sore That I am wrangled with and wrapped in, When terrours of the second death begin, Of outward suffering I make no acount, Although they do (ye know) too much amount: A raging devil in the wicked reeling, Venting their venom with villanous reviling. Professed friends do privily supplant The most engaged in their ranting taunt: And being held in fetters, raging roar, Because they cannot reach for to devour My person, means, profession and my name. To burie in the dust of death they dream. But when the prince of darknesse doth begin, This dark and dozned heart again within, To raise his works, and to enlive his brood, What can I (men) lesse then lost wretch conclude? And more, this tyrant hath attain'd the leading Of my affections, ev'n while I am pleading Against his faunings and his flatt'ring baits, Whereby I dragged am in dang'rous straits, And cannot stint, because I have no strength, Nor hope to be relieved at the length; For this I sigh, for this I weep and mourn, For this my bowels in my belly turn, For this I seperate my self alone, For this my blood and moisture both are gone. Because the Comforter, that can relieve My heart, no answer for my grief doth give: But in this desp'rate case, at distance keep, While all these serpents do about me sweep
With open jaws, sharp claws and cruell sting, Trusting to sink, and swallow quick, they sing▪ Sam. Well I perceive, you have at length been plain, Yet all doth turn unto one thing again, Except some aggravation of the space, The measure and ingredients in the case: This closse eclipse, with storms of flying fire, Darknesse and thundring bolts of dreadfull ire From devils and from every instrument They could devise, to work they detriment, And then least for thy self to stand and fight, So far above thy cunning and thy might: Partly, because that thou hes known them fall, Compar'd with thee a shrub, were cedars tall; But yet look over thine accounts, and cast, Thou may come to a reckoning right at last. These persons eminent at first did yeeld, They never try'd the fight upon thee field: And look again aright, and thou shalt see Such as thy self triumph in victory: Who in the fight by slight have oft been foil'd, And yet by strength renew'd, the spoiler spoild: Consider also, if thou couldst have stood Before old Belial and his brutish brood: If they were not by chains of strength restrain'd, And thou to use thy armes aright were train'd. The measure and the space which most doth move thee, Is the appointment of thy Prince to prove thee: That thou may taste His power in preserving, Under thy want and weaknesse of deserving. Do no more plague thy self with this debate, Against this blessed and believing state.
A fixed faith all slavish fear removes, And in its orbe unto the Author moves: For measure, time and means, simplie surrender Thy self to Him, He is wise, kind and tender, Whereof much rich experience thou abuses, And for tranquillity this torment chuses: Wherein be sure thou shalt be tortured, till Thou do submit sincerly to His will. Hele. Now do I well perceive by your discourse, I have not soundly looked to the sourse Of dispensations, as I might have seen, A secret providence did me sustain, Ev'n in these darkest dayes and dangers dread, Which all my torture and my torment breed: For if I had, then had I never thought These fiery-brands, that my vexation wrought, Had loosed been, but were in fetters ty'd, And suff'red but to bark till I were try'd. I likewise see (as you have said) that such, Who in a flourish hes professed much, The field did never by confession face▪ But turn'd in searching tryals with disgrace. And for the measure and the space, I know It's good for me so to be keped low: I suffered was many essayes to take, Which weigh'd aright, might many humble make, And upon me there lyes, unto believing, More real bands then upon any living: And now, that I should limit him, doth wound Me most, to whom I am so deeply bound: And that I have so wilfully resisted The sp'rit, whereby you have with me insisted;
For I have doing been what in me lay My soul unto the murderer to betray: But now my Saviour worthily shall have His will, for He, I see, will me but save: And here I do acknowledge my mistakes, And that my diffidence the dottage makes: Bemisted in the mud so have I been, And so gainsaid what I have felt and seen: The truth of all that ye have now exprest Is clear to me, and so by me confest; For He my Lover, is not only wise, And strong and fair, and lovely in mine eyes, But He is wisdom, beauty, might and love, Where all delihgts most eminently move, His countenance the Suns bright rayes obscures, His love the adamantine heart allures, His wisdom all His works in order dresses, His might maintains His right, and pride suppresses: And I am bound His bountie to believe, Which changes not, but shall my sp'rit relieve, In His good time, on whom I do rely, And studie shall my self how to deny. Sam. Now art thou happy, and my heart is glad To see thy faithfull heart from fainting fred: Hold fast and follow hard with firm desires, Faith quenches not, but kindles sacred fires. Hele. It doth become me well to wait, I see; But, Oh again, that He would smile on me: How shall I find Him out? and where, I pray? Sam. Hold straight, believe me, thou art in the way: Deck up thy self, approach, He sees thee come, And with His comforts shall thee overcome.
The Royal King a Princely Garden plants With curious flowres, and thither daily haunts, Feeding among the Lillies, smelling Roses, Nuts, Spices and perfums, composing Poses. A sweet Loves feast for thee He doth prepare Down in the fruitfull flow'ry valleys there; And from the valley shall convey thee thence, Where thy try'd faith in that long long'd for sence Is swallowed up, there, where the marriage loves Exceeding all conceiv'd desires thou proves: There, where He shall thy faith bred soul imbrace Within the consolations of His face: Wherein the splendor of that brightnesse poring, And in the glory of that glore adoring, Renewed rayes, immortall life restoring, Admiring, magnifying, and sweetly soaring High up amongst these holy, heavenly hosts Of glorious and glorified ghosts, With golden harps about the throne who sing New songs of their redemption to their King. Hele. O but these sweet expressions relish well, My frozen heart begins to melt I feel▪ These words unto my wearied soul I think, Like precious oyl so savingly do sink, Slides down, like my Beloveds wine so sweetly, Wakens from sleep, my tongue to speak compleatly. O that once for Himself He would me seal! What can be nam'd that may with love prevail: Insist therefore, For I do gladly hear, And till the tongue be loos'd shall lend the ear. Sam. The weakest means have force enough to move Affections, when they be surpriz'd with love.
He cals and sees thee come from mountains steep, Which Leopards and cruel Lyons keep, Leaning on thy Beloved, who doth love His truth and strength at length to see thee prove. Observe with me this brief gradation now, And I shall cease a space and hearken you. For help to our capacity, compare The outward splendor of this fabrick, where By nature from the caverns of the womb, Out of which dungeon to the world thou came: Again compare the difference aright Betwixt this Paradice and that dark night Of nature, which the other so transcends, As over bodies lively sp'rits ascends, And there the diff'rence vast again conceive, Betwixt the life of sense we shall receive, And this of faith, wherein we forward thrust, Untill we be refined in the dust. When interruptions all shall be removed, And we inlarg'd to love as we be loved, In knowing and injoying him who is The Author of our everlasting blesse. In this gradation we may something see, But under what it is infinitley.
SONG I. Light out of Darknesse. Hel. INfinitely, most certainly, for feeble we Conceive aright cannot these mysteries: The spot upon our blotted eyes rejecting These rayes, which yet with splendor bright reflecting Upon the then capacitated sp'rits, Which warming beams affections invites: But so transcendent, that our present case Such super-excellency cannot imbrace; For dazled with these glistring gleams, What we receive seems be but dreams, When we let slip, by our secure neglectings, The grip of faith, glaming at these reflectings: Spare therefore to compare, our deepest apprehensions Do but impair his praise, whose love's above dimensions; He is more fragrant, when he's most remote, Then nearest, dearest loves whereon we doat. Conjecture then, when he appears so near, That thou may'st touch, and taste, and smell, and hear. Tell, if thou can, this other man, And so we shall recall our long debate, And treat of love for all; For mine he is, and I am his, And who could wish so high a blesse,
As to be treas'ring up a stock of praise, While we are hurling through these whirling dayes. Sam. Now, my dear friends, it seems to me ye shrink, And I may well conjecture what ye think: I shew'd you first, that you should surely see Matters to make you much a musing be. Eliza. This sudden change makes me indeed admire, And yet the reason must of thee enquire: And that she may be prayed to proceed, That on her fulnesse we may further feed. Song I. continued. Hel. God, in his Saints ador'd, admir'd, My soul exalts, this day desir'd, Of his free grace, he hath appointed, Among this fellowship anointed, With ghostly graces for my grieves, So as my life a new revives: Surpriz'd with sense of love so far, That flaming my affections are, And for the time can do no more, But th' Author of this love adore, And gladly would be set to sing The praises of my Spouse and King: And to record his noble acts, Who passeth by my fond mistakes, And smiles upon my face again, That I may faithfull hence remain. Now all you sweetest saints that uses To haunt these shads, you sacred Muses And Graces, that with me did groan In my distracted, mourning moan:
Earth, rivers, all below, above, Come sympathize in songs of love, Of love, above all parallell, so far As stars above the earthly glob that are. You Groves and Downs, where erst I deadly lay, I'le rise, and dance about your doors this day. Eliza. Oh now! for stirring spirits, that could move Amongst the flames of this heart-forcing love: Amongst the wonders of this world, most strange, What can compare with this sweet sudden change? This day of gladnesse, let us now agree To solemnize this glorious victory; I reverence do the Providence Divine, Which in this meeting doth so clearly shine: But for to sing or say, confused here, I cannot speak, or do, but still admire. Sam. Come, I will take thee by the hand, we'll go With her, alongst these Downs and Groves also, Where she hath wandred in her weighty dayes, And cease their sorrow with a song of praise: Then South begin, and blow upon our Myrtle trees, And North proceed to show thy strength, to eternize This glory in each airt, a crosse the continent, The whole Creation may with our Love-songs consent. Now, rocks, begin to roar, for ye's the Treble take: And trees. attend your lowre, for ye's the Tenor make: My self the Base shall be: Muses, be ye the Meen, So we shall seriously sing, Solace we have seen.
SONG II. Life out of Death. Sam. SAy on, say on, solaced sweetly surely we have been. Jea. Play on, play on, sense-moving mater surely we have seen. Rocks. We's roar and cry, Trees. Our strength we's try, Our roots lay by, With startling on our stumps. Seas. Huge Oceans we, Mounts. Main Mountains high, Hills. We Hills that be, resound shal your transumpts. Our solace is in thee, who loves the heart contrite, And is a sanctuary unto the broken sp'rit: Great joyes to thine thou dost propine, By love divine, up with thy self eternall: When all thy foes, with the godlesse goes In endlesse woes, down to the pit infernall. Thus all the joy of mind, And solace we have seen, Is his sweet face, inclin'd, In love still springing green: So glory we, in knowing Thee, our King to be, our Life, our Love, our Light:
Who bought us dear, and keeps us here, till we appear, by grace in glory bright. Jea. Sweet maid, thou dost to melody incline, Our minds to move in mysteries divine: Rapt up, in most Seraphick-love, to sing The praises of our high exalted King. SONG III. Liberty out of Bondage. Sam. NOw thou, who dyving is in this abysse of blesse▪ Conveyed through all these wonders▪ To be enjoyed by so many numbers, Who were by Adam old depraved, And by the second Adam saved: Thou having then seen what thou can In that great mystery, of Divine Majesty, GOD-MAN. And doth aspire, with all desire, to pry, and to admire These excellencies, the quintessences Of all felicity, in their simplicity: Yet think these things to be more high, Then can conceived be, under mortalitie, More then the child unborn, by its sagacity, Hes of capacity, for to conceive aright
Of this large Universe, where we converse, untill it come to light; So should it be with thee in heav'nly places, Amongst these faces, made so fair, By the splendor shining there, That thou should'st disdain, And mourn to turn again Unto these earthly treasures, And all created pleasures: And shouldst admire so much, and more, As if thou wert design'd Alive to be enshrin'd in that live-tomb Of the mothers womb, for evermore; Yet think again, what shall become of some who never dreams of these sad theams, Till they be hurl'd in everlasting flames, without remission, or relenting, When time is past of pardon by repenting. Hel. Oh now, my soul! shall these thee now exceed In Songs, alongst these streams whilst they thee lead? Thou dazles, doating where thy guides do go: But prostrate be, and here in excesse show, With joy of heart, that none can equalize A soul thus ravish'd, who shall eternize The praises of her Love with such content, Who freed her from so fearfull detriment: Who feeds her now with so delicious fare, And doth propine her with such riches rare: And leads her to the Land, where she may see His face, by grace, where joy and glory be.
Now, that I may your sweetest songs excell, I'le on my Lovers face adoring dwell: And as I see, and do receive, I shall Report, unto your mutuall comfort all: Be elevate with full consent again, To prosecute this Evangelick strain. SONG IV. The Joy of the LORD. Hel. OUr glorious, our victorious King doth reign, The hosts of heav'n do sing about his Throne, Where he is gone in all delights to live, Whence we derive our light and life alone. Know him who would, make bold, treat for a smile: He never did beguile a true Believer; He is a River, full of divine delights: None like Him in the depths, nor in the heights. For He was dead, and is alive again: He did sustain hells pain, when he was slain: Our freedom to procure, he did endure What we deserved, and never swerved: And of these stounds he bears the wounds. Thus shalt thou know him, for he is non-such, And thou shalt say, too much cannot be said of such a One
Whom man and angel, heav'n and earth, alone Have their dependency eternally upon: So shalt thou need no more, One blink shall heal thy sore, And thou shalt thirst no more: For He a Fountain is of blesse supernall, And this eternall is: For on his eyes, indeed, With soul-festivities they feed, so sweet, so sure, They cannot more indure to gade▪ And when He hides His face, sad, sad they be: Bt groping still, and hoping, till He smile again, Or do translate them to his heav'nly Train, Where all the Members mysticall delighted, Triumph in him, in whom they are perfected. Sam. I do rejoice in this thy heart-content. Hel. And I rejoice that thou wast hither sent. Jea. And I rejoice here with you both to be. Hel. And I rejoice, and praise my King for thee. Sam. Now I must go unto my charge again. Hel. I pray thee do not so, but stay. Sam. Refrain. Hel. Then one word by thine Echo bid me speak. Echo. Speak. Hel. Now, need I any more, but to believe? E. Live. Hel. And any more to do, but live exact? E. Act.
Hel. What if I tempted be, shall I endure? Echo. Dure. Hel. In suff'ring what will free me from disgrace? E. Grace. Hel. Shall I promove, and constantly persevere? E. Ever. Hel. And will my dear Love go from me, or no? E. No. Hel. Then shall I sure believe, and live, and act, Endure by grace, and perseverance make.
The Warning. Jea. OUr dearest friend unto his charge again Is gone, and I no longer may remain: But ere we part, sweet girle, I must thee give Some warnings, that thou may more warily live. Thou hast been weighted in this absence short, But sees not what the journey may import, Now thou art glistering fair upon the mountain, Extracting life from the life-giving fountain, They Sp'rits sp'rituallized are, and poring, Thy clearer apprehensions highly soaring, Both bred and fed by divine excellencies, And breathings of the sweetest influences, And so delighted art to shine by grace, And holinesse before thy Lovers face: But yet remember when thou sadly lay In bondage, under absence, then this day Of so clear seeing, if thou couldst conceive Right, so bethink, if now thou canst believe, That ever such a thing should thee befall, As may again thy liberty enthrall: But in the bodie while thou art, beware, For we are tempted, and in danger are To be insnar'd, for the old man is prone To snatch at every bait before us thrown: For this, I wish thee wisely to uptake The case of every child of God, and make
The diffrence right 'twixt the rebellious man And the obedient, new-born Christian; The last a weakling, but a willing child. The first both wicked, false, perverse and wild, Upon whose back the crosse, the rod must ly: The serpents brood may be born down thereby Which both so numerous and so nimble be, As atoms in the air before thine eye: Or vapours-like from brooks corrupt that rise And do the shining of the Sun surprise: Such is the sinning sin, such is the seed Of Sathan in the soul, such is the breed Whereby the new-born Christian is annoy'd, Till by the grace of Christ they be destroy'd. Worldly desires, delights, cares, fears to daun. The weeds of carnall lust how to supplant, So as the seed of grace may sweetly spring, Which successe makes us under sadnesse sing; Believing certainly the truth of this, That all these troubles shall encrease thy bless. And presuppose, by dispensations yet, Thou wert rapt up into an higher fit, Whereby in Paradise thou could'st behold Above what either should or could be told: Couldst thou, who doest in this flesh temple dwell, Indure these rayes, and neither rust nor swell? No, under cloud again thou must retreat, And with the messenger of Satan meet: Enter the lists therefore▪ by faith defend Thy Crown, by perseverance to the end; For if thou carnally become secure, Thy fall shall all thy comlinesse obscure.
When under sad desertion thou wanders, And knowst not what thou dost, nor where thou danders, But doest what all thy dayes makes thee asham'd, When thou art smittenand by grace reclaim'd. These dreadfull, dolefull these disastrous dayes, When on our souls the subtill Serpent prayers: These weaknings, warnings, warmings dipt in love, These smels from heaven, which affections move, Are meas'red out according to the need Of every member, by the carefull Head: And if to do, or to endure thou be Appointed, then anointed thou shalt be With grace sufficient unto stedfastnesse, And get a blink to comfort in distresse: So as a Christian, in thy sufferings all Christ's glorifi'd, wherein thou glory shall: And argue may thou art in Him compleat, When Head and members in affliction meet. But thou must be upon thy guard, and watch, Against the Serpent▪ at thy soul doth snatch: He will uncessantly against thee fight By stratagems, renew'd by day and night, With snares, and nets, and grins laid in the way, To hold thee fast, when thou dost slide or stray; And where he finds thee weak or wandring, will Enter thy breach, and break thee by his skill. Corruption from within makes open doors, To what temptations from without occurres. And sometime Syren-like he will assail With flatt'ries, but if he do not prevail, He will affright thee with a thousands fears, Which on thy sp'rit that evil spirit rears.
There is no course God for our help doth take, To keep us humble or our comfort make▪ But he doth thereunto himself apply, To make us doat or else despair thereby. By mediat means when he doth not prevail, Then by his fiercest darts he will assail, And levell at thy faith, the fruit of grace, Thy hope and love, the new man to deface. He will suggest, inject vile monst'rous notions Into distrust, of Atheisme the motions, And seek no better party then our reason, To parly with him on the points of treason: Capitulation-proof, he knows to be Means to o'recome, experimentallie. Now then the sp'rituall armour timous take, And to the fight of faith with fervour make, Under the Royall standard of thy love Advance, and by his martiall motions move. Thou know'st Gods secret ones to circumveen, No hellish plots have unattempted been; And what cannot the devil yet contrive, According as his malice doth him drive? And what is it he can contrive, but sure, A man to act it out, he shall procure? For unto such an instrument he can Masked materials furnish for the man: And wicked men have still an open ear, The serpent's subtile whisperings to hear: And at a wink can change his voice and sight, Shining Saint-like in much angelick light: To gaine his point how far he shall prevail By fained friendship, fawning shall assail.
In such commixtion, and so deep devise, Here to supplant, and there for to surprise: But when this craft doth crosse his closse design, Then in a spleen he sharps his cruell sting, And in his fury kindles fiery tryals For all that dare give his commands denyals. And never think it strange that man forsaken Of God, hath now of Satan service taken: Since Law, nor Gospel, Instance, Word or Rod Will waken, or reclaim lost man to God: But they in wicked obduration, will Persist, their fathers lusts for to fulfill. Or that the devil rationall man can make, Sometime the colours of a Saint to take: Another time in tyrrany to boyle, By cruelty the blood of Saints to spoyle: For he of every man the Idol knows, And at his feet his full contentment throws, And lets him see this is the way alone To rise, to stand, to settle in his throne: And cannot this deceiver, thus deceive, In making him vain-vile-man to conceive, That when he hath receiv'd the world in hyre To his ambitious carnall hearts desire: That as a Saint he hath it to possesse, And for his followers as their propernesse. So as they may by any slight or might People suppresse, for to maintain that right. Is not this truth whereon we fix our standing Clear, that the devil hath man at his commanding. Prophets, Apostles false, false Christs, also We warned are to guard against, ye know.
Who when like rav'ning Wolves they be within, Cloathed like sheep, can so present their skin. Since Cain first his brothers blood did spill, The first-born man, the second man did kill: Unto this day men-murd'rers are lurking, And as they moved be do fall a working. But lest man should, when he is settled, think Upon his wicked course, and then forethink His villany, the devil leads him fair Upon exploits and deep devices rare: To make him famous and his fancie feed, So as his thoughts no further may proceed. And see ye not some worldly Monarchs great, For to maintain and to increase their stare, Are only set their neighbours to disthrone, That they may reign and only rule alone: And therefore guard against this strong temptation, This trying flame of cruell tribulation: But be not moved, for they cannot smite, But as God for his glory doth permit; And in the tryall of his Saints he will Them humble, but thereby their joyes fulfill. For thy triumphant King, and Captain just, These mights, their slights down at his feet shall thrust. The shining Cherub from his brightnesse shall Together with the fairest Cedar fall. The Beast, the Prophet and the Whore flagitious, With all their pomp, their spleen and pride pernicious, Whose terrour troubled men while they did live, The fiery lake the fatall stroak shall give. Then be not mov'd, the change may glad thy heart, When from their heav'n they to their hell depart.
Thou from thy hell at heaven shall arrive, While they in bail, in blesse thou's ever live: For when the devil, by his instruments, With the blood of Saints doth mix the Elements. Shall not these suff'rings, then so much the more, Shorten their journey and increase their glore: And are they not o'rejoyed when they see Their blood include the Church felicitie. But for thy further tryall, yet again, What if the Lord the influence should restrain Of light, and life, and liberty, even when Thou art the butt of hell and hellish men? This▪ this is it should make the tryall sad, For if his face upon thy soul thou had Shining, thou should'st disdain that dreadfull crew Of devils and all the darts they could renew: But in this exigent he is so near, That when thou least expects he shall appear: And when thou hast thine own frail faintings felt, Immediate love and mercy shall thee melt: And yet what if that thy good God advise A deeper draught, thy folly to surprise. We are so prone to fix on proofs, we prove Both naturall in our faith, our hope, our love: What then when in the light thou seems to live, And in much lively liberty revive, And with much confidence thou dost conceive That all that thou hast sought, thou shalt receive▪ And yet thou art not only quite denyed, But the response is contrary replyed: Well this is sharp, but certainly it's sweet, That divine checks should with our idol meet.
That when vain we would our own morcels carve, We should be left in hazard for to starve: Himself, Himself alone, and nothing else, But what of him, and of His vertue smels. He, and not we, knows what is for our good, And never will His own thereof denude; Both how and when to help, for he doth hear Our sp'rituall supplications, all sincere: Which qualified according to His will, He fails not for our well, but shall fulfill. What if again, poor weakling, yet alace, Thou shouldst ly groaning at the Throne of grace, And knowst not how to seek, or what to say, Far lesse can presse or pertinently pray? Yet this is good, God sees thy strong desires, And flames the sacrifice with sacred fires: And to His praise, doth make our peace appear, Out of the odours of our sighs sincere: So that, as yet, we may convinced be, That all His gifts are grace and mercy free: For tho the way be strait and full of snares, And we infirm, possest with fears and cares: Our fault it is, we do not soar above What tempests all the gates of hell can move. We should an heaven upon earth enjoy, If thus we did believe, thus him imploy, On him repose, him love, in him delight: Who is th'ingraven-form, and glory bright Of the eternall God, in whom we have Accesse by grace, to come, seek and receive All that is for our good, who so doth give Above what we can ask, seek or believe.
Hele. Enough, enough, there needs no more, My Lover doth my life restore: n him alone I move, I live, And bound I am him to believe: Affections cannot have the force From his dear love me to divorce. The flatteries, frowns, the hooked baits, Whereby the cunning hunter waits To snatch me unawars, my eyes Anointed are, and clearly sees The lying Serpent sliely lurking, And in his brood most boldly working Both from within and from without. But my most Royal Captain stout Hath crusht the Serpents cruell head, And pleads my cause against his seed, And daily helps me to subdue The old man and his notions new, To purge the heart and make it clean, And in temptation doth sustain My fainting, and my failings crave Both food and physick, these I have. And when I suffer with my Love, Such comforts as come from above, And on my sp'rit conferred be, By His good Sp'rit, spiritually: That if the Devil knew, he would Restrain his malice if he could. So what can interrupt my peace In this free, full, unchanged grace: Untill through times and trials we Make entry in eternity.
Jea. Enough, enough, I do confesse indeed With this, which is, in watchfulnesse proceed, Guard well against security, and sure Thou shalt from swerving be the more secure. These wak'nings, and these warmings of affections, As antidotes unto thy dull dejections▪ Out of the cisterns of salvation spring, Whence we, in sucking consolation, sing: And if we hereby do our strength renew, For stormy tempests that be to ensue, Then happy we, when we have rightly used These mercies rich; But when they be abused, By fond conceiving that they shall endure, We fall asleep, and carnally secure: And sure, before we be aware, we shall In slipp'ry places slide, or catch a fall: And in that slumber be surpris'd again, And with disgrace shall our Profession stain. Most bitter proof and sad experience dear Hes made this truth in ages all appear: That many sons go groaning to the grave, For grieving him, so graciously does save: By whose immediate mercifull supply They be sustain'd that still dependent be: There is no reason for our standing, but Eternall love that chois'd us, changed not. Infinite mercie seen can also move The finite thing, infinite love to love. Thus living dyving in this sweet abysse▪ I leave thee, in a most transcendent blesse: And to my charge again shall now apply, And thou by sure experience shalt try
The precious fruit of precious time so spent, That these thy pains thou never shalt repent. But as of my infirmnesse thou wast tender, My Lord to thee shall recompences render Abundantly▪ above what finite we Can seek, believe, or think, infinitely. Gris. I likewise go, farewell, my friends most dear, Who witness were unto these wonders here. Our King, how comely in his comings be, And in his goings, for our goods is He? You see what sadnesse in his absence is, And in his presence what a heav'n of blesse: And that through godly sorrow from within, Our sp'rituall comforts rise▪ and do begin. Now seek His Name, for therein ye shall see His mercy meeting with your misery: And that His grace and His unchanged love s greatly our ingratitude above: And that His Name, as precious ointments sweet Of fragrant smell, the Virgins pure invite; For in these ornaments he doth appear Amongst us in the Pallace-garden here, Where, by his breathings, mixt with warming showres, eds out in flourishes our sweetest flowres, nd spices, that he doth delight to see, mell, taste, defend, and cause to fructifie. here shall we find our friends frequent that place, ceiving and communicating grace, o know our King, as he doth visits give; there the dwyning soul he doth revive: e blind, the deaf, the dumb, the lame also, o see, and hear, and speak, and come, and go,
And for the stately pallace royall, fair, He purifies the comers and prepare. Come, let us come, for here his glorious Name Of all the Students is the only theam: And all these curious Mazes and Meanders Delightfull be unto the understanders: Attending still till they translated be Into the mansions of eternity. THE INTRODUCTION TO The Pallace Garden. THe first Man Adam, of the earth earthly, made a living Soul, forfeited to himself▪ and all his posterity, the greatest natural happinesse imaginable by the naturall Creature: and that after possession received thereof in Paradise, that Garden of all pleasures and preferments tha the whole Universe, and all therein containe could afford; and being crowned with the height of that beatitude, a communion with God, in the manner, and measure of manifestation, whereby the creature could be most capable of the Creator▪
But this folly of the mutable creature could not frustrate the eternall design of the only wise, and wonderfull God, whose wisedom in the last ADAM, a quickening Spirit, the Lord from heaven, took delight to be conversant with the children of men: and out of these lost generations, hath revived, and brought forth from the Womb of Regeneration, a fair Family of Believers: and by the Gospel-or∣dinances, gathered them into his Garden of grace, by the New and Living Way, where the Fountain and Well of Life is opened, free for all that will come to smell the Flowers, and feast upon the Fruits of eternall and unchangeable Bounty, infi∣nitely preferable to all their losses: where he, con∣versing with them, prepares them for the Pallace-Royall, the Place of his Habitation, where Man∣sions are appointed for them, that they may be where He is, that they may see His Glory, and re∣oice in Him for evermore: And that, as they have born the image of the earthly, so we may ear the Image of the Heavenly. And here is the prime and most precious Sub∣ect of Christian Contemplation, where the Belie∣ver may expatiate, and ingratiate himself, in the weetest Recreations and Consolations: by attain∣ing unto, and entertaining of, an unseparable com∣munion with God in Christ, by the Holy Ghost, nseparably One, and only adorable.
MAZE 1. for restriction, Job 37.33, 34 HEnce, carnall minds, that apprehend Erroniously, The Incomprehensible to comprehend most impiously: Lights glorious Center, inaccessible, who can behold? Lifes-life eternall, unexpressible, who can unfold? How then shall men come to conceive Of this rare Blesse some do receive, By Gods preordinate appointing, who be renew'd, And by the Holy Ghosts anointing, who be indowed, Brightly to see that Majesty Of God-Man, that great Mystery, Of love unto the Elect-seed, Whence admiration doth proceed, May come and see, and so confesse, Professe His Name, and praise expresse? And you, who humbled in the sense of wants, And search to know the priviledge of Saints, May come in faith, with reverence and fear: See that without this frame you do forbear.
MAZE 2. for instruction, 1 John 3.2 IN all these Mazes where we move, The ground we walk upon is love: And where we make approachings near, Let's come in reverence and fear Before His glorious Name, who is A Beam supream of boundlesse blesse: But so resplendent and transcendent, To make appear, convincing clear. Behold this naturall Sun, whose gleams doth apprehend us, And whose illuminating beams doth comprehend us: And thence infer, how far The supream Author of this all excels this Star. In this all comprehensive name I AM, so condescending, Eternall, simple, still the same, all comprehending: And in Emanuell sweetly seen, In this fair Garden ever green, Where daily with celestial showrs Be nourished His rarest flowrs, Untill He glorifie His grace, In such as here do Him imbrace.
MAZE 3. For incouragement, Isa. 55 John 1.27 HEre Soveraignity doth shine, In condescensions so divine, That ye whose lights are now anointed, And for these glorious sights appointed, On whom the Holy Ghost alone Hes left impressions upon: Look in loves Christ-all mirrour clear, Where loves sweet mystery does appear Firmly fixed till acquainted, Thou be (by faith) therein indented This is the Mountain of our rest, This sweetest Fountain, only best: Come drink salvation at this cup, And on these consolations sup: Where pleasures, joy and peace abounds, And glory to His Grace redounds: Who (Wonderfull) will not conceal His Excellence, but does reveal Himself so clear, that we may read Him in His Name, and on Him feed. This Food who tasts shall thirst no more, For fading gain or earthly glore: But longing still to be translated, Where they may be for ever stated.
MAZE 4. Loves mysterie, 1 Tim. 3.1 YE all, who find your selves secure, By lively saving faith, and sure: Who hes smell'd, and who hes tasted, Who hes felt, and who hes feasted, On these Love-dazling Mysteries divine, Which on our cleared eyes do shine, Of Man in God, and God in Man, Who sp'ritually, destinctly scan Humanity, still unconfounded With Deity, and conjunctly bounded: And do before The Unity in Trinity adore, Advance that most admired Grace, And feed upon that fairest Face: For there alone, and no where else, That Love is found of love that smels, That can be feasted on, and felt, The heart of Adamant can melt: It's life alone to be resolv'd: In this, this love to be disolv'd: Tract it still, and be allur'd, So shall ye surely be secur'd. O for these breathings of this Love, That would the whole affections move!
MAZE 5. The fountain inexhaustible. I AM THAT I AM GOD All Glorious I am that pure, immense Ens, entium Ens. Am I not wisdome infinite, and love, That omnipotent, omnipresent, whence I in my justice and my mercy move? Am I not that sublime profound Abysse, God, Trinity in Unity compleat: All truth, all light, all life, eternall blesse, Glorious, & holy Father, Son & Sp'rit. GOD Holy Ghost, eternall and infinite, All Light, all Life, all Vertue pure compleat, Irradiant being, by whom all beings be, Most blessfull breathings of the Ʋnity: Sublime, all-piercing and all-searching Spirit, God▪ Holy Ghost, Eternall and Infinite. E Expressed Splendor of the Deity, M Might, Majesty admir'd in Man Divine: M Mercy rejoyc'd with Justice to agree, A And Justice seen with joy in Mercy shine, N Nerve of substantial Truth, Illustrious, fair, Ʋ Wisdome and Well of Life where beauty springs, E Eternall God of God, God to declare, L Lights Center, where all Saints enlightned sings.
MAZE 6. Loves Labyrinth, Eph. 5.23. THe race of man, sprung from th'apostate reins deplorable! And bitter root that all the branches stains restorable. The mystery of man's defecting ponder, The mind of God in mans perfecting wonder: Perfected man, degenerate by defection: Defected man, regenerate to perfection. Adam by nature damn'd, when he defected, Damn'd Adam now refram'd, by grace perfected. O happy they! may now we say, Are such as sees, with sp'ritual eyes aright, these mysteries, And do with reverence adore This Glorious Majesty before, Fixed by faith till they prevail, By pregnant prying through the vail. The root of man elected, leads this round, And with the fruit of this great mist'ry's crown'd: Come then and see the King, as ye would live, And by believing herein deeply dyve: His power and his promise both believe, So shalt thou see, delight, and love, and live; And with Heav'ns Quiristers adore and sing High Hallelujahs to this Glorious King.
MAZE 7. Loves mirrour, Isa. 45.22 LOve-dazled eyes, look up and see, Where purest spirits prying be, And with seraphick love inflam'd, You shall by fixing prove refram'd: Gods only Son, Gods rebell-wrath indure, O love alluring! Gods Sonship to Gods rebels to procure, O large procuring! We lay in darknesse till His glory shin'd, And now He hes our souls in His combin'd: Ingrav'd upon His Heart and Hands we be, Ingrafted in His God-Man-Flesh be we: Members & more, made Mates for Marriage loves To Him, for whom the whole Creation moves: In heaven, and earth, and hel, whose scepter sweyes, And dazles humane eyes with divine Rayes: This Love all limits far exceeds, Of length, and depth, and heighth, and breadth, Past comprehension by perusing, A tractat for eternall musing. Oh, that our whole affections were Fixed upon this glorious Star: Which lightens all the Stars above, And on poor welps lets out this love.
MAZE 8 Types and emblems, Rev. 5.6, 9, 10 HEre does the Rose in Sharon lively grow, The faces of the comers colouring: Here living waters from the fountain flow, And graces be abundant bullering: Here feeds the Pelican, her fainting brood Dying, but being revived by her blood: The Phenix tasting death, death to subdue, Life to restore, and nature to renew. Captives to rescue here the Lyon dread, see and adore! The Lamb in suffering death a ransome made, man to restore. Thy faith-bred thoghts unto these theams confine Where these transcendent mysteries do shine: For every minut in eternity, New marvels in this mirrour thou shalt see. Join with heavens holy host in heavenly hymnes▪ Sing hallelujahs with the Seraphims: Amongst these pregnant Spirits ever poring, In this abysse of blesse and joy adoring: Adoring God, whose wisdome, bountie bright, Doth shine so fair in this dark cloudy night: Infer, confer, when thou com'st out to see These mysteries clear, what shall that glory be?
MAZE 9. Loves union, Joh. 17.22, 23 NOw Happy Holy Ones, who sees The Myst'ry sweet of Mysteries: How from that Myst'ry myst'ries flow, And from that Wonder wonders grow, Fitting for souls eternall thinking, When the Redeem'd are ever drinking At the Cisterns of salvation, In the cups of consolation: Life from the ever-living Fountain, Moving on the unmoved Mountain. In that celestial Communion, Sublime and unconceived Union; Where never then incensing stain, Unto rebuke shall us arraign: Nor possible again seclude From this felicity so good: Of joyes transcending and exceeding All that on his face are feeding: Past separation quite, which is The Crown of our eternall blesse: That blesse, all finite thoughts above, Feasting upon eternall love: Where from the splendor of illustrious beams, Grace in immortall glory ever streams.
THE FIRST STEP TO THE JEWEL. NOw in this Garden, where we have been using, And in these Mazes moved unto musing, And be returning to our Cypresse bowres, To take a breathing for some silent hours: Let us beware, for we in danger be To sleep away our sweet tranquillity. We members of the Body mysticall, Which Militant we ordinarly call, Are to regard the universall cases Of all the parties, in their sev'rall places, Common desires, delights, designs devoted, As this State-int'rest best may be promoted. So when in person most remote we are, We may in sp'rit be best imployed far. Now let us try this course in our retirings, Fervent and faithfull be in all desirings, And dutifull endeavours for our King, And for His cause so shall we daily sing: And let us ever in the faith be eyeing Him, in His glorious actings, as by seeing,
We may the more by grace enlarged be, His glorious Name for to exalt on hie: And in our secret Soliloquies then, How God hath granted grace for gracelesse men, Recent, resume, and so the sp'rit compose, As you in sp'rit may sp'ritually rejoice. But O! what drousinesse, and what decay, Infirmity, and failing we bewray, When from the Garden we debarred be For any space, untill for new supply, The Silver Trumpet, sounding in our streets, For fainting souls▪ a new approach invites: For help this precious Jewel, as the Root Of all the Garden, spices▪ flowers and fruit, For spirit feeding, feasting, smelling, healing, Apply'd to thy affections for prevailing, Effectuall prove: for in these Gemmes imbosed, All vertue efficacious is inclosed. With fixed eyes, and warm affections ponder, And as thou dost revive, rejoice and wonder. The second Step to the JEWEL. THis Microcosme (Man) of wonders full, By God made wonderfully wonderfull: And in his lively image made to live, By breathing in this life that he doth give: A compend of the whole Creation bright, In whom the Divine Nature took delight
There to converse: as in a mansion meet, Doth join with lifelesse dust a living sp'rit▪ This soul doth all, in all the parts remain Of all the body, for the bodies gain, Relief, and preservation in all cases, Her self unmov'd, whose action never ceases: So and infinitely above what can Imagin'd be by any soul of man: The glorious Creator doth possesse His blessed Self in all this Universe: Containing all things, uncontain'd, unmoving, His glory in all motions promoving: Which shining in His Name and nature, prove No change to be in His eternall Love, As by his operations appear, That Majesty to man and angel, clear: By dyving wherein there is true delight, Untill through darknesse we arrive at light.
The JEWEL of Jewels The LORD our GOD, who's only PURE, In TRUTH and GOODNESSE doth endure: PERFECTION, JUST, OMNIPOTENT, OMNISCIENT, and OMNIPRESENT, INFINITE, ONE, & WONDERFUL All these rich Gemmes in this fair Jewel seen, All in all, All alls involves: In our believing all resolves. Believing, knowing, presupposing, Fervent love, and full rejoicing, In these most sweet enliving Beams, True living, & reviving Streams. frō this one All, who shining is In Bounty, Beauty, boundlesse This Pearle rare transparent doth contain. ETERNALL, BLESS, and MERCIFUL, EMMANUEL, and high COUNSELLER, LOVE, LIFE, and only COMFORTER, UNCHANGEABLE, and WISDOM bright, LONG SUFF'RING, sweet & GRACIOUS LIGHT.
The use of the JEWEL. THis firmament of starry constellations, Planets, Signs, Poles in sep'rate scituations! Which from the Sun, the Prince of Stars, receive Inliving vigour, to the life they have. On this Terrestial Glob from every Airt Their influence on bodies all impart; To every sev'rall kinde by sweet infusion, Diffused variously without confusion: Wherein infinite multiplicity, Each one may plead these heav'ns were made for me. Like Iron and Adamant alike affecting, And all things else, except themselves neglecting. Since then the God of nature hath impos'd This naturall necessity, compos'd, Dead Elements to quicken and revive, Procreate, preserve, restore and to enlive The vegetives, and sensitives, what then Can be the glory he for elect men Reserv'd hath in himself, to let them prove The force of servent, free and fountain love? In moving to discern with open eyes Aright, a sight of divine mysteries. This Garden treasure, JEVVEL, every jem Spring from that sweet, sublime, eternall stem▪ In Gospel Ordinances so resplendent, Industrious divinely condescendent:
And every one in every one so vive▪ That every one doth every one revive. Whence flow these various flowers that do affect Spirituall senses to a sweet reflect: Cordials of comforts here ingrafted grow, And soveraign balm from precious spices flow: That by the influence of refreshing beams, And constant current of spiritual streams Upon the proper object, so effecting, Directed duely by divine directing, And straightly darted out from every point, Curing, securing every severall joynt. From that One-All unmov'd eternall, pure, Where infinit perfection doth endure. That Omnipotent, Omnipresent is, And Omniscient savingly to blesse: In Him the Son of righteousnesse, by name Emmanuel high, that only glorious beam, Where wisdom, full of wonder, shines so bright In ord'ring all these works of wonder right, That goodnesse may be seen exceeding good: It shines in glory on ingratitude: That mercy may in God admired be, He makes an object of our misery. Justice ador'd shines bright in Jesus bleeding, By merits, mercy for our persons pleading. Eternall love shines clear in timous grace, Gaining the elect of the rebell-race. Counsell and comfort for the heart contrite, Long suff'ring, to convince the haughty sp'rit: That life and light by which we see and live, That sp'rit of truth whereby we do believe,
By whom alone these glorious rayes transcendent Become so bountifully condescendent: And from the grounds of these ingredients green Sov'raign preservatives to save are seen: For feeding, breeding, feasting, framing right, The Babe of Grace, translated unto light: A sp'rituall sympathy of inclination 'Twixt Head and Members, by a new creation: As naturall grafts well grafted in the root, Come timely to their known and kindly fruit, By shedding out, and sucking substance sweetly, Incorp'rate and corroborate compleatly: This practicall Divinity could make, Which of the Divine Nature doth partake; For through the vail admitted, by believing, We instantly receive above conceiving. To see our selves blind-born sin-born▪ and more, Death-born, wrath-born, forlorn for evemore: And in that minut then immediatly, Light, life, relief and true tranquillity: By looking up, and in this JEWEL dyving, Presented for perpetuall reviving: As on the heart it doth impression take, And kindly motions to the Mover make: So as with longings we enlarg'd may be, This glory to enjoy triumphantly: From this One-all, One-uncreated Blesse, Who glorious in the whole Creation is: Till face to face we (Called) come to see, And chang'd from glory unto glory be▪
The Symphonicall Desires and de∣lights of all Saints in their Retirements. SONG I. DArknesse depart, do not our eyes deprive Of this bright Star of day, that doth appear To usher in the Sun, that can revive Our fainting hearts, and clouded spirits clear. The Rose of Sharon, all our banks and bowers Perfumes with odours of all ointment sweet: Our fields be sending forth the fairest flowres, The singing birds our slownesse do invite. The Turtle mourning for her Mate doth moan, Because his comming he so long delayes: And we, affected with her griefs, do groan, And tune our Lutes unto her mourning layes. Most glorious Sun of righteousnesse, consent To hear, to see, to cause thy face to shine: The clouds dispell, make clear the firmament, And for thy coming move us to incline. Oh, that we could Thee know, believe, and love! Then could we not but for thy coming long; Wonder, importunate we do not prove, Untill our sighs be turned to a song.
Most glorious King out through the continent, The glorious Gospel gloriously convey: Make all the Nations come with one consent▪ To kisse the Son, and on his statutes stay. The Devil, that by delusion doth deceive The world lost, roaring in fiery rage, Of whom the Beast, and Prophet false, receive Babel and Balaam's ruine for their wage: Endite, condemn, discover, give them doom, With these the Whoor flagitious detect: The Serpent, and the Man of Sin consume, From all their drifts redeem thy dear Elect. Triumphant Monarch, for thy Truth appear▪ And with thy brazen legs these tyrants turn Out of the way, with eyes of flaming fire, These fiends pursue, and in thy fury burn. When shall thy garments stain'd with blood be seen▪ Of these proud foes, that do thy grace disdain? The glory of these wonders doth pertain To thee, this might and malice to restrain. How this wild Lion through the earth doth reel, And prey upon poor blind-born Adams race, Whirling the worldly minded, like a wheel, Up by his gins, thy Image to deface. Thou sees, O Thou, who pow'r hes to prevent This vile, invet'rate, and invective spleen: And for destroying Satans works was sent, Our evil deserts let not thy help detain.
Dread King, who question dare thy just decrees, Mysterious, holy, righteous and profound? For, out of all apparent contraries, Glory and might, right doth to thee redound. Let all the hosts in heav'n and earth be still, And with submission simple thee adore, The Projects of thy wise, eternall will To see fulfill'd, rejoice for evermore. All revolutions strange our King aright Doth by a change of providence direct: By death and darkness, making life and light Brightly appear for all his dear Elect. Heav'ns King, our sp'rits more sp'ritually dispose, And shine upon the seed of saving grace: That faithfully, and fruitfully repose We may, and all the swey of flesh displace. The time, that thou art glorious to appear, Hasten, impediments out of the way Remove, that seeing eyes clear'd to admire The magnified in thy members may. The wicked world, that doth in lies delight, The voice of truth and wisdom doth disdain, And will not see, till everlasting night Close up their fight in soul-tormenting pain. Longing we be when we himself may see Shining in glory, on his glorious Throne:
Where feasting in his glorious face we'll be, When immortality we have put on. Welcome, great King, let now the glorious Day Begin to dawn, of thy eternall reign: In righteousnesse thy Royall Scepter swey, Of mercy and of judgement we may sing, Time mend thy pace, unto thy period post, Stir up thy strength, do not retard nor slide: All shall be done anone, be gone thou must, Eternity to sink thee down doth glyde. Let us our sp'rits a little time compose, And fix upon the starry Firmament, And all the Stars that are, let us suppose, Full as the Sun did shine, so excellent; And that this glob of earth transparent were, And ev'ry star, out from his glorious Sphere, Darting his rayes and influence so far, As all dimensions of the world appear: oor worms we never could a blink endure Of this created glory we conceive: ut in the beauty of this brightnesse, sure, Be raz'd, because we could it not receive. gain, by faith, in contemplation ponder What places for the Elect are prepared: o far surpassing all the Stars in number, nd to the glory of the Sun compared. immortality when we're arrayed, nd for these places pure spiritualized, ransparent in this splendor there displayed, nd yet humane remain, so subtillized.
Yet our great King those changes, we perceive, From naturall darknesse to this light of grace Exceeds more fully then we can conceive, Till we receive that fulnesse in His face, Where that all-glorious, increated light Remains, whence we our light and life derive, And shall enjoy joyes in His joyfull sight Unseen, unheard, till there we do arrive. Who see these marvels but they must admire: Who see, admire, but doubtlesse they do long; Who see, admire, and long, but do aspire Seated to be these miracles among. But rather how is it we do not weigh The wisdome of our King, and condescend Simply unto His dispensations high, Who our desires unruly doth suspend, Untill by tryals strong through truth sustained Our lost condition, and His love we see; And by His grace be from the world weaned, And fitted for this Life of Glory be? Our glorious King, eternall, only wise, Incomprehensible all things contains; Who never doth the heart contrite despise, But by His Sp'rit the broken sp'rit maintains. By worlds of men thy will fulfilled be Through all the earth, and let thy glory shine Jehovah high in Heav'n eternally, And all the Elect to thy praise incline.
SONG II. A Song of triumph, Rev. 15.3, 4. Great And Marvelous Are Thy Works Lord God Almighty, Just And True Are Thy Wayes Thou King Of Saints. Who Shall Not Fear Thee
O Lord? And Glorify Thy Name, For Thou Only Art Holy, For All Nations Shall Come And Worship Before Thee For Thy judgements Are Made manifest GReat greatness doth unto our God belong, And Majesty to be ador'd alone: Marvelous and admir'd, thy Saints among, Are thy decrees eternall every one. Thy works within thy Sanctuary are seen, Works full of wonder thou to light hast broght; Lord, Lord, thy purposes are pure and clean, God, only God, that thou in us hast wrought. Almighty might, all finite light transcending: Just justice uncontroll'd, in wisdome right, And righteousnesse in all thy acts extending: True God of truth conjoin'd with glorious might. Are not the Hosts of heav'n, our heav'nly King, Thy Mercy, Justice, Statutes, truth desiring, Wayes, Wisdome, works to see, and seeing sing, Thou King of Saints, thy Majesty admiring. King, King of Kings, before whose glorious face Of glory Kings created Crowns cast down: Saints seperate and sanctified by grace, Who thee imbrace thy praises shall resound. Shall not the Nations thy great Name regard? Not thee, by whom their beings only be? Fear thee, who for thy people hast prepar'd The consolations of eternity?
O thou who doth so far our faith exceed! Lord lead us to thy truth, thereto to cleave, And firmly fix our eyes on thee to feed; Glorify thy Name in us: us Lord, revive. Thy name is like to oyntments only sweet: Name, O ye Nations! His dread Name with fear, For He in all perfections is compleat, Thou seest Him past comparison appear. Only thy self, Self-soveraignity, Art thou incomprehensible alone: Holy, immense, adored Majesty, For thou art glorious, Heavens and earth upon. All, only All, in all thy Name is seen: Nations in thy Salvation shall rejoyce: Shall not the captives that deliver'd been Come, and upon thy grace and peace repose? And who will not unto thy greatnesse still Worship, and homage do, with heart sincere, Before the Throne, in ardency of will, The Saints among, when there they shall appear? For now the wisdom of thy wise decrees, Thy judgments deep, and so divine, so cleared Are to the sense of every eye that sees, Made manifest, and ever are admired.
A Harmonious Consort in a Song of Praise. SONG III. Part. 3. THrones and dominions now adore This deep profound abysse before, Of Wisdome, and of knowledge high, Shining in just mercy free, Flowing from that fountain love, That both the head and members move, And made the dying head to live, And all the members dead revive. The mights, and slights did him defy, Below His feet down thrown do ly: They bruis'd His heel, but from His hand, Now must they feel an iron brand, Which breaks the necks of all His foes, And makes the Hosts of Heaven rejoice. For now our Glorious Head doth render To God the Kingdome, and doth tender Himself unto His Spouse redeemed, And members so by Him esteemed; That so His long desires, that day, For evermore enjoy He may: And they refyned and inflamed With sacred fires and so reframed:
Which the most glorious Head inspires, And Members glorified admires: The Universall Heavens filled With all this influence instilled, By our victorious King alone, Christ mysticall, God-Man in One, Whose generations account, Who can? which doth so far surmount All rationall mens conceiving, Believing, all poor sp'rits perceiving: But O! admired doth invite Finite unite, with infinite! And in their stations sp'ritualized, And gradation authorized, Cordially, with all consents, Above the Orbs and Elements: The Region of the fire and air, Adoring be. Echo. Beware: Now spare, Till there you do approach, and then Let Angels, and immortall Men Like Stars resplendent shining sing Praise to their Author, Spouse, and King. Do not, I pray thee, so inhibite? For we cannot be prohibite, To conceal that grace, that glory That in this very middle story We do enjoy by faith and hope, Which giveth latitude and scope; With much alacrity to sing: And when we be eclips'd to bring Unto the Altar timous tears, And bemoan our faithlesse fears:
For He is firm who us affects, And cannot fail who us protects: And there shall in the darkest night Arise for us a glorious light: And in the deepest, deadly hell, The Balme of Paradise shall smell▪ Which shall increase of grace procure, And shall our souls in peace secure: Then do us not discharge to sing Praise to our Royall Spouse and King. Sing on, but in sobriety, Beware of soaring too too high, Flight'ring above the lofty line, Where Love resides, and doth refine Affections to incline aright To live by faith, untill we come to sight. The second Part of the third SONG. THen by this liberty to sing Of our most Royall Spouse and King, whose Love doth us allure: His Deity in glory we, Tri-unity adoring be, our comforts to secure: There unapproachable He is, In all eternity of blesse, above our feelings far:
For at the word of His command All things appeared where they stand, from nothing, as they are: We do these wonders all believe, And that He hes come to relieve us, who did so disdain To do His wil and hear His voice, But wilfully made wofull choise to sin, which hes us slain. Here is the Text, here is the Theam, Here is the Fountain, here the Stream whence all our comforts spring: Here all the Angels ever dive, Hence all the Saints their life derive, here doth our glory sing. His power experimentally, By working in us mightily, we know do, and believe: For we in ignorance were born, And in the bands of death forlorn, till He did us receive. Who can His wisdome but adore, And providence so much the more, as we are ever seeing, From wonderfull varieties. And seeming contrarieties, harmonious agreeing. Him in His truth we worship must, He being only worthy trust, as we do daily try: Far, far above our weak believing, In every strait He is relieving,
as we His word apply. His knowledge, whose all-seeing eye All things that are, were, or shal be, are ever straight before: All persons, places, cases right Divinely ordered in His sight, which Angels do adore. And O! how righteously our King Doth to the rule of justice bring, and equally compose, Above our weak capacity, Unmov'd by partiality, alike to friends and foes. His pittying mercy we admire, Whereby He doth our miseries clear, and leads us to be cur'd: Who in our blood were lying blind, That we our light and life may find, by Him, for us procur'd: In these excellencies our King Does shine, we Him injoy, and sing: but O! how far above All finite apprehensions, And unconceiv'd dimensions is His unchanged love! Essentiall Simplicity, Only sublime Infinity, Supream, transcendent Blesse: Eternities unreachable Perfections unsearchable are absolutely His. This is our King, He doth us claim▪
And takes EMMANUEL for His Name, us for his Spouse redeem'd: Who unto sin and satan slav'd, He sanctified hes and sav'd, adopted Sons esteem'd: Who is it then condemne that can The faithfull fruitfull Christian, to Him that doth advert? Where is that tribulation, Affliction or tentation, that can procure thy smart? In this life, Christian, canst thou crave Better then did thy King receive, since He so well allows Full freedom from these felt annoys, And feelings of eternall joyes, for all that Him avows? Should we not chearfully with fear His dying in our bodie bear, with Him who are to live? Whose life shall be made manifest In such as purely have profest His Truth, and thereto cleave. Take courage then, let come what can, Christ and his crosse, O Christian, doth now the Crown preceed. Delight to see the old man slain, The New man form'd in thee again, now by the divine seed.
Reviving Recollections and Soli∣loquies, closing with the song of all Saints, Rev. 7.12. SONG IV. O What sore troubles we endure By listning to the lyars lure! What rescues rare do we injoy From dangers, that should us annoy? Bemisted under shadows here, See not the perils that appear: Till after trials we do track Them to the spring by looking back, Darts of destruction daily flees From devils swift, like swarms of bees: The noysome Pestilence by night, Maliciously pursues with might. On Scorpions and on Serpents dread, And on the Cockatrice we tread: But sheltered be and and well preserv'd When they upon their spleen are starv'd: And when we any pain abide, Is it not when we step aside? That on this stage we may fulfill Our task by time the truth untill: And we by these characters spell, The power that hes no parallel:
And by observance due do see That He hes an all-searching eye: His retributive justice here, And mercy precious doth appear. Here doth the Well of Wisdome spring Knowledge and truth, whereof we sing: For in all generations, Regions, respective Nations, In all imaginable places, And in all conceived cases; To all, all times, and every one, All things are done by Him alone, And done so well and wondrously, That all men may admiring be, And as they do admire, adore His Royall Attributes before: Whereby in time we timely taste, And after time shall ever feast Upon that fulnesse, when we shall Himself enjoy, in and for all. But Oh! How is't that we can move In this infinity of love? In this sublime simplicity, Perfections and purity: Immutable and all things moving▪ Eternall, Omnipotent proving. O! What infirmity it is To slumber under so high blesse? But, Oh! How is't we are not dying? Th' excellencies that passes seeing Hearing, knowledge, or conceiving, Till they come out above our craving.
When the Members all shall meet, Incorp'rate in the Head compleat; And as they have preserved been Unsearchably, as they are seen, Till one by one they be prepar'd, And in appointed time declar'd, All members moved by the mind Of him, to whom they are inclin'd: As by the weak resemblance here Of flesh and spirit may appear, A fabrick wonderfully fram'd, And strangly from the fountain stream'd, Compos'd, commixt, conjoin'd, divisive, Wov'n var'ously, visive, invisive: Hundreds above in numerous places, Which from their office never ceases, So naturally by nature led▪ And by the vitall spirits fed: Which by the soul her influence pure, Unseen, is set in order sure, And seated in the brain, doth move Each member for the mans behove: And every instant, at her will, All powers do their part fulfill: And she is every where perfecting, Preparing, dressing, and directing: As may make for the common right, Wherein she daily doth delight. How much more may we then believe Above what here we can conceive Of Him our Head, who hes received More spirit then can be conceived:
And measures out abundantly, To every member mightily, All sp'ritual graces, and anoints us, As in His wisdome He appoints us: Into our stations as seems meet To Him, in whom we are compleat: Anone, alone, that glorious day, His Saints He shall so sweetly swey: When we in regions ordered are, Shining above the brightest Star: Or as in constellations standing, Minding only His commanding, Who only minds the glorious blesse Of God, who Universall is. O happy day of all delights! Wherewith compar'd are nought but nights, The best of by-past dayes alone, Compact and quintessenc'd in one: One glimpse of which desired day, Shall all afflictions past, defray: All anguish and perplexities, Digested in festivities, Of sp'rituall joyes, for ever springing In His face, to give us singing: Renewing every minut store, To raise our notes for evermore: When all the mysteries manifold, In Heavenly Pallaces inrold; To admiration be revealed, And nothing can be known concealed. Which wondring still then shall we move, Wrapt, and rapt up in very love,
When many mighty men shall mourn, And unto dens of darknesse turn, Who desp'ratly did grace despise, And mercy offered could not prise: God to offend would not refrain, And wisdomes warning did disdain: Are now forsaken, and in anguish Left eternally to languish, And before felt-wrath shall flee, Like lightnings sclenting through the skie. Under the doom of torments chief, Dying ever, never relief. Where Saints the righteous judgment reads, That from their righteous Judge proceeds: And all about the Throne, the more Him in his mercy shall adore. Then judgment just and mercy free The Dapason sweet shall be Of all that Harmony compleat, From members seeming infinite, Ordered through these vast dimensions Extending over apprehensions: And comprehended only be By the infinite Deity. About the Throne of Glory then, These millions of Elect men, Through all that blessed, boundlesse bounds, With various, and with vocall sounds, With Angels pure, pure Seraphims, Exalt their King, with holy Hymns. For as the soul is full refin'd, When glory thereupon hath shin'd:
So shall the body be made meet, For to possesse the Holy Sp'rit: By whom these curious Organs may, Well managed, His praise display, In soul and body, both to bring All Glory to our Glorious King.
SONG V. Of all Saints, Rev. 7.12. Amen, Blessing And Glory And Wisdome And Thanks-giving And Honour And Power And Might Be Ʋnto Our God For Ever And Ever Amen.   AMEN, AMEN, for evermore, Blessing to God whom we adore: And to His Name, which Glorious is, Glory ascend in Glorious blesse. And to the adored Deity. Wisdome in all excellency: And unto Him free Grace doth give, Thanks-giving be by all that live, And to His all-honoured Name, Honour duely do proclaime: And to Him who us preserves, Power ascribe, who power deserves▪ And to the King Almighty high, Might and eternall Majesty Be, by all the Elect moving Unto God, in Jesus loving. Our God, alone, One Holy Sp'rit, God ever blest, Trin One compleat. For evermore our songs shall be Ever renew'd uncessantly: And His praises to expresse, Ever shall our selves addresse. AMEN: O Lord, so let it be, So be it in Eternity.
THE NATURAL MAN Debated with. HOw come, say some, such sacred flames can boil So sweet perfumes out of this sullen soyl? This curious question'st with carnall eyes Bemisted, sees not in these mysteries: How singing doth from sighing flow, And gladnesse, how from sadnesse grow: How mourning, melting motions move, In frozen hearts hot flames of love: From bitterness how sweetness springs, Refreshment what felt-ruine brings: How from the groans of inward grief, Clear freedom rises and relief▪ In deepest darknesse sure direction, In dreadfull danger safe protection. Result, and what can be the root That renders this admired fruit. For Answer, this. BY Grace we see our selves with shame Under abominable blame; And not the lesse so freely loved, Affections feelingly are moved,
And overflow like Nilus River In the heart of the believer. Whence grief, and gladnesse, love, and he at Reside as in the proper seat, Whence bitter mourning, grief and wo, For grieving such a Lover so: Who surfetted hes been with grief, From grief to purchase our relief. Whom seeing vively through the vail, Love and delight thereby prevail: So that as by approaching near Unto that splendor in its sphere, Be in Combustion dazled so, Within these gleams we undergo, And in this current strong contesting, Securely in his shadow resting: Zeal, the birth of love and hate, Daily abates this love-debate, Wherewith no concord can compare, One end discussing all their care: Being to be made pure and clean, This fervent love to entertain: Grace 'gainst corruption doth begin A furious fight the soul within: So that in one poor person here, Betwixt two parties doth appear A hot contest, with fatall blows, Tending to others overthrows. Whence grows this bitter-sweet debate In this grace-griev'd divided state: Hence flow these tides, contrary turning, Mourning to mirth, mirth unto mourning:
The old man being pincht repines, The new man sweetly sings and shines: The old man dwyning in his living, The new man rising, and reviving: What dolour the old man endures, Delight to the new man procures. When grace is most o'resway'd, it swigs Corruption under foot, and sings: For on a mountain of increasement, And at a fountain of refreshment, Bullering up eternall love, With sp'ritual breathings from above, Reviv'd by all these blessefull beams, Shining through our cristal streams, We in these glist'rings flight'ring be, Untill we take our flight on hie, These be the Northern gales that blow, And breathings from the South that flow Upon the Spices sweet, and Flowres, Seasoned with Celestiall showres: And in this Garden do agree Spouses to feast deliciously, Upon these fruits and spices sweet, Where all their comforts are compleat: Who do discern aright to rise, These mercies rich rightly to prize: But the Believer only sees That Majesty in these mysteries, And substance through the shadows more Of glory, then he can adore. But that the rationall man yet we may lead Some length, let us by nat'rall reason plead,
Seeing this naturall Sun we daily see On nat'rall bodies worke effectually: Vapours exhaling out of earthy things, Which rarifi'd, and clarified, brings (Repell'd by colder air) our early showres, Enamelling the earth with fruits and flowres. Shall not the Sun of Righteousnesse far more, Natures Creator, whom we do adore, By his almighty Influence divine, Which on the long-benighted soul does shine, Affect, attract, and elevating, move Affections for the element of love: Which purify'd, prepared and matur'd, Are for the service of their Lord allur'd. And further yet, by naturall things to learn Spirituall mysteries best to discern, This supposition make, Conceive the bounds Of this vast Ocean, that the earth surrounds, If all the Floods therein were the extracts, And quintessence that best ingredients makes, And daily that some of these cristall drops Melt from such sweet, and sun-refined sops, And in this Ocean be ingulfed, shall They not be then transchanged in the fall? Our reason shews us, that this strong perfume Should soon the drosse of this sweet drop consume. Consider then, when this immortall sp'rit, By these divine irradiations sweet, Here in the Region of grace matur'd, For glory, and the love thereof allur'd, Doth from this cloud come out imbrac'd to be In that incomprehensible excellency,
At the first blink transchanged be so far, As heat from cold, and light from darkness are, And though the rising of our bodies be, From death to life again, a mysterie: Yet when we do behold how nature brings About, life to restore to lifelesse things: The earth renewing daily flowers and fruits, From dozen'd dead, corrupt and rotten roots: The vapour that's exhaled from the brim, Where sholes of herring leave their spawn to swim, Congealed in a cloud again shall powre Of herrings on the ground a swiming shower. Oh, wofull, wretched, wreaked naturallist, That naturally doth see, and not insist, To see aright, believe, love and know more Who natures Author is, and him adore: For in His time, thou with thy very eyes, Disclos'd, shall see these divine mysteries: Our body from the Elements arise, And sp'rited be, to meet Him in the skies: And at the peep of first appearance passe To pain or pleasure, as the Inditement was Recorded clearly, on the conscience gravd, Rend'ring response respective, damned, sav'd: And all these revolutions orderly Accomplisht in the twinkling of an eye: For this the period peremptor is, Eternally determinat for this. That Glorious Right'ous Justice shining clear And glorious, righteous mercy may appear: Where all the damn'd, convinc'd, in anguish ly, The saved on their Saviour do rely.
And yet, poor naturall atheist, that inquires, Where is this blesse, and where these burning fes? Conceive of God aright, who comprehends All things (incomprehended) and extends His glory, in His dispensations free Of mercy and of justice righteously: Wherein such Majesty ador'd does shine, As moves to admiration divine. Through all these vast dimensions created, Where all the rationall creatures are stated, Sin-poyson'd persons, wheresoever they be, Unpurg'd are, under wrath perpetuallie: Likeas the Saints are, wheresoever plac'd, Within the glorious love of God imbrac'd. This is the hell beneath, and heaven above, Here flames of wrath abide, there beams of love: Justice effects producing so contrarious, Upon the Objects so directly various. This naturall Sun by nature putrifies, Some matter, and some matter purifies: Some matter harden, and some soften more, Some strike to death, and some to life restore; In Summer shining with so fervent heat, And on the vild defyled puddle beat: The filth therein doth such a fume disclose, As doth in darknesse all the dung inclose. Ingend'ring serpents vile, and cruell frogs Crawling and sprewling in their poysoned drogs. Right so the Sun of Righteousnesse shines pure▪ While such the poyson of their pest indure▪ or all the perturbation, torment, anguish Is of themselves, wherein they liveing languish.
Thus may the naturall man, by natures light, Convinced be, but never see aright, Till by the Holy Ghost he be renewed, And in the heart by speciall grace indued: And led unto the new and living way, Where closing with his Saviour, he may Discern from whence these waters spring that flow, And make the barren, fruitfull ground to grow. Come then incline, divine assistance can From nature, thee renew a spritual man, Aright to see His condescensions Applying by firm apprehensions, Him shining clear in His Anointed, Who is for thy approach appointed; For He unmov'd, all motions moves, Which minutly His praises proves, Extracting from most clear distractions A cluster sweet of solide actions. For all that is, was, or shall be, Is His eternall, wise, decree. Whose high designs ador'd as His duration, Admits no parallel or alteration, Whom we in Christ our Saviour sweet must see, Imbrace, enjoy, or die eternally. But come, and do not in your dreg remain, Take up the Book and read, and read again: A serious Survey of this journey take, This Child of Grace through all his tryals tract. Here shalt thou see an unseen strength sustain The weakest, that hath at the battel been: And wisdome shining in the most unwise, Might make affections in a rapt to rise:
Which in the Babe new born again doth grow, Whereby he doth in Songs of Praises flow, A Garden here with arbors for reposing, A Jewel clear, the ground of all rejoycing; A Fountain, whence waters of life do spring; A Mountain, thence thou may'st with safety sing; A Spirit here, perceive, our sp'rits inspires, With sighs, and groans, and answers such desires: Come then in faith, and as thou seeks, receive Light, life, relief from darknesse, grief and grave. In brief, behold these whole assertions here, By proof, from truth believed, made appear, And He above believing shall convoy Thee with Himself, Himself for to enjoy: Himself who is thy Potent Prince, Victorious, Light, Life, Delight, and Lover, only Glorious: Come then, attend His call, and humbly say, Come Lord, thy servant hears and shall obey,
A SURVEY Of the FIRST and SECOND DEATH; Closing with a SEPARATION-KISSE Betwixt two intimate FRIENDS, The SOƲL and BODY. By way of DIALOGUE betwixt NATURE and GRACE, Under the Names of FLESH and SPIRIT. Heb. 9.27. And as it is appointed unto men once to die, but after this the judgement. Ephes. 2.1. And you hath he quickned, who were dead in sins and trespasses. 1. THE body of man is of the earth, natu∣rall, earthy.
2. The soul of man is of a spirituall nature, spirituall. 3. The two joyned together in the time of life, make up a person. 4. The separation of the soul from the body, is the naturall death of the person. 5. The separation of Gods favourable Pre∣sence by His Spirit from the soul, is the spiritu∣all death of the person. 6. All the Off-spring of the first man, by his apostasie and disobedience, are deservedly de∣prived of Gods favourable Presence by his spirit, & so come to the world dead in sins and trespasses. 7. All these the naturall Off-spring of the first man, that be left in this forlorn condition, living and dying in this darknesse and ignorance of God, and do never attain unto the first resurrection, do ly under the first, and be lyable unto the second death at the last day. 8. The Elect and Chosen of God be, by His free grace, in a time of love, called, and by the effectuall working of His Spirit, moved to be∣lieve His word, and to joine with Jesus Christ for Salvation. By whom (neverthelesse that they be spiritu∣ally dead in sins and trespasses) they are by His Spirit quickned to see and serve the living God, dying unto sin, and living unto righteousness, and
thereby made partakers of the first resurrection: Against whom the second death, at the generall resurrection, shall have no place. 9. To be spiritually-dead, the mere naturall man knows not, nor (by reason of his atheism) can know, till the second death sieze upon him: first, at the seperation of the soul and body: and secondly, again, at the resurrection and judgment. 10. The Believer knows by woefull proof, what it is to be spiritually dead, by the dead works wherein they have walked, before they knew themselves under darknesse. 11. The Believer knows likewise what the second death means, by being (sometimes from provocation, and sometimes from tryall) deser∣ted, and often kept at distance, and of such con∣tinuance, as hath been both a hell of torments, and hes bred fearfull anxiety: and knows also and believes the Scripture-descriptions of the eternall torments, never dying death and dolour that the wicked atheist must endure, and perish under, everlastingly: As also, by being condemned in themselves, and saved by the Lord, they know what it is to be absolved from that dreadfull con∣demnation. 12. As to the dissolution of the body, albeit it be a beginning of the second death to the wicked, as it is a preparation to the second resurrection of
the Godly, whose souls are then feasting upon their Saviour His Face in Paradice: It may be more properly named a Sleep, as it is often in Scripture, especially, seeing the soul hes had her night of partiall separation in the body, suppose but short in comparison of time, yet under many sufferings; whereas the bodies night in its element is free of trouble: and for the length of time, it is to rest there under darknesse: It is not considerable, in respect of the splendor of that day of eternal glory which is at the out-breaking. And seeing it is with this temporall death of the bodie that the Believer hes only adoe, let us look a little more particularly upon it, and specially as it concerns the Believer. It is appointed for all men to die, naturall death being the separation of the soul from the body, is rightly named unto mere naturall man, the King of terrours: A metaphor from a King or Tyrant, who is unre∣sistable for power, unsatiable and unexorable for cruelty, undefatigable for persistence, furnisht with all manner of forces, for execution, in all places, at all times, through all the Continent, where any of the sons of men takes life: atten∣ding them constantly, till every one of them fall under the fatall and finall stroak. And there is nothing created in this Universe, whether from within us, or from without us, from the fur∣thest
remote of the Stars, to the least pile of grasse or pickle of dust, which were all created for our good, but hath been, or may be the occasion of this dissolution. As also, by what means amongst so many, and at what time, so uncertain unto any, that it is a wonder that the rationall crea∣tures, who knows themselves subject to it, can think of it without terrour: and most terrible, that the most of men are over-turned before they think seriously of it: But here appears the greatest wonder that ever any (of the blind-born, deser∣vedly forsaken, and self-lost generation of apo∣state man) should come to know any more here∣of then any other: but this being the preroga∣tive of the regenerate by grace, to see themselves by nature lost, and saved by the Lord; This death is nothing terrible nor troublesome to them, but pleasant and comfortable, in what colours, by what knife, at what time, or in what place they commit their souls to the Father of spirits, and sur∣render their bodies to the Elements, whereof they were, and are to be preserved unto the day that all things be restored; for they see and know that this dissolution of the body is but the laying off, or suffering the old spotted and defiled garments to be rent from us till they be refined: and not that we may be uncloathed, but cloathed upon with glory and immortality, untill we receive
again these naturall, mortall, corruptible bodies, immortall, incorruptible receptacles, habilitate and fitted to imbrace and enjoy without interru∣ption the glory that a glorified soul is admitted unto: So that unto the Believer, this naturall death is swallowed up of life, being no more death unto them then the pinching of the body of the Infant in coming through these straits of ordi∣nary Child-birth, should be to the Child, if it were capacitate to know the present case and place of its imprisonment, and the light and liberty it were to come to. But here nature, even pure nature, doth pro∣pose some most sensible and searching tryals for impugning my arguments and resolutions, viz. Seeing this World was created for me, and I created immortall without separation by death, if I had stood in my integrity, then should I never have had any further desire but of things present. Now, presup∣pone that the offer were made me, of the allowance of all created contentments, perpetually to my de∣sire, with the blessing upon them, and the blessed use of them, with that peace which should make up a continued feast: should not we then rather be con∣tent to remain in the body, then desirous to seperate from it? 1. For answer: The case is so far altered, that the difference is very vast, we not being by crea∣tion,
nor should have been by generation, in the estate of innocency, capable of any greater blesse then that wherein the first man was created, which was to enjoy the allowed use of the creature, and to converse with the Creator, at such times, by such means, and in what measure, as the divine Majesty should think meet. 2. Whereas by regeneration, the Believer at∣tains unto, and is made capable of, a more sub∣lime and supernaturall blesse, by being made a member of Christ mysticall, to see and enjoy God in Him, by grace, and to be translated unto glory after death, which makes it desirable. It is Objected, Suppose the offer were made of a healthfull and lively body, with the liberty and allowance of all outward contents, with the speci∣all blessing of inward peace in the use of them, and freedom from all disturbance, which might allay that relish in the fruition of them, untill the end of time, and the coming of the Lord to the gene∣ral Judgement: Should I not then rather make choise to remain in the body unto that day, then to separate from it, that it may be consumed in the dust, for that time? For answer: Let the supposition be strengthe∣ned with all the Arguments that may warranta∣bly be alledged, they cannot weaken the resolu∣tion of a Believer, nor ballance his disposition of
an instant and sincere desire to be dissolved (with submission to the good pleasure of Gods will, both for the time, place and maner of his remo∣vall) that, mortality being swallowed up of life, we may put on, and be cloathed with immortality, life and glory, freed of all ground of provoking God, or grieving Gods Spirit, and admitted unto His Presence, in whose Face is the fulnesse of joy, and at whose right hand are all true, com∣pleat and incomprehensible pleasures for evermore: the body never being sensible of any losse, and the soul being over-joyed in the continued sense of unconceivable advantage. Hereby the Believer, according to the growth of his faith and affection, is looking and longing for that day, when he may take possession in that house, which is from heaven, and is eternall in heaven. And these Truths are so convincingly verified unto us by God himself, by Jesus Christ our Lord, and by the holy Spirit of God and of Christ, speaking in his Prophets and Apostles, and justified by instances of raising up the dead to life again: as, being past controversie, all objection is removed, except it be by the obsti∣nate atheist, giving thereby undeniable signs of utter and irrecoverable rejection. And how is it then that the Believer can be any
thing moved at the approach of that happiest of his dayes, unlesse it were unto an excesse of joy, from the sense of so joyfull a separation from a dy∣ing body lying under darknesse, unto a living Head, stated in all light and delight? Shall the pangs of death restrain our desires, or abate our resolutions, in making through that strait entry, unto such certain and eternall feli∣cities? Would the Child in the mothers womb (if it were capable of sense and reason) make choise to remain everlastingly in that dark Cell, rather then to hazard upon what pains there may be in pressing out unto the light? Would not the Prisoner, fettered in the Gal∣lies, and there held under most cruell slavery (if he should be called out of that bondage) not on∣ly unto liberty, but also, in stead of his rags, Princely Robes presented to him: and of bands, the enjoyments of all desirable delights that the most flourishing Nation under the Sun could render, crowned with many dayes and years in the society of Princes and all Princely pleasures: would not the change be most joyfully imbraced by any that were not more then brutish? Now then, how far above comparison is this change, that the believing Christian is called unto, from so many sorrows and sufferings as our sin hath
brought, and keeps us under, while we are in the body, unto a Crown of glory and immorta∣lity, to be cloathed upon with the Robes of our Redeemer his Righteousnesse, and feasted with the joyes that flourish in the Face of our Media∣tor: being the fruits of that Land, where there is no lesse then everlasting life, light, love, de∣light, resulting in superexcellent hymns and songs of eternall praise, in exalting the King and Sa∣viour of Saints? Is it not from the weaknesse of our faith, and not keeping our spirituall senses in action, but sluggishly suffering our affections to frieze: that we are not still attending when we shall be cal∣led, to come out of the body, to enjoy this be∣atitude? And why should we be so anxious of the maner, time or place of laying down our old cloaths? It becomes us well to intrust all to Him, of whom we are, and for whom we are, without whom nothing can befall us: who is goodnesse it self, and of whom we had such reall proof, that He makes all things work together for our good. And shall we distrust Him for our Conduct through death unto that Life and Kingdom that He hath purchast for us at so dear a price? Or shall we not rather desire to endure what we can
be able, for him, and to be with him who hath in∣dured for us so much, to have us with him, from under the power, and out of the reach of the sting of death: which is now a vanquished enemy, and not to be feared: but become a friend, to be espe∣cially loved. And albeit the carnal part would keep us in exercise, under the apprehension of a swift and sudden death, which were dreadfull: is not the spiritual part to be the more studious to make our calling and election sure: and to be the more vigilant, with the wise Virgins, for the com∣ing of the Bride-groom. And if a lingring disease be apprehended, it may prove a precious time for better preparation. If violent, and extreamly painfull, it is the more speedily past; If inflicted by the Persecutor of the Profession, in whatso∣ever maner, then it is accompanied with the high∣est degree of blessednesse: for the Spirit of God, and of glory, rests upon you: and, great is their re∣ward in heaven who suffer for righteousnesse. And if by (that which the natural man calls) accident: seeing all things, in his eyes, fall out alike to the good and to the evil: Yet the Believer knows, that nothing falls out but by a well-ordered pro∣vidence; not so much as a hair of their head, to their hurt, much lesse shall they be forsaken, when they have most ado with present and imme∣diate supplie.
And whereas some of Gods Children, who have been of a long continuance in the Profession, singular in their conversation, and zealous in du∣ties, have been at a very low ebb, for mater of comfort, in the time of their departure. And others also kept under much wrestling and con∣viction, when as some, of lesse note and esteem, have had all their sails filled with the sense of that soul-saving sweetnesse that meets them from the Mediator, at the time of their removall. As also, some very weak men have been won∣derfully born out, under most fearfull torments inflicted upon them by the Persecuter: and others of far greater expectation have fainted and fallen off, when the peril appeared: and yet have been reclaimed by repentance, and found mercy. Some also we see, that have lived very civilly all their dayes, have died under much darknesse, and without any signs of a gracious wakening: while as others, that have been most abominable in their lives, have made a glorious end. And now, in contemplation of all these vari∣ous dispensations, may we not, and must we not see, and adore the glory of the Lord, both in Soveraignty and Wisdom? And is not every Believer, unto their own felt and sensible expe∣rience, in every passage of their severall exerci∣ses, exceedingly benefited, unto their increase
of their inward and spirituall consolation? And the beholders, that are as yet making on to the way, helped unto incouragement and confirma∣tion. Hereby also may all flesh be taught to fi∣nish their salvation in fear: to beware of swel∣ling under sense, and of sinking under absence: of prescribing Providence, or ascribing any thing to our selves: but subscribing, and submitting absolutely, in all things, to the holy and good pleasure of His will, with whom we have to do: denying our selves, relying and depending upon Him, like little children: making our entry in∣to the kingdom of heaven by what way He will have us to go, who is the Author of our vocati∣on, preservation, perseverance and perfecting: resting in quietnesse and confidence, till we see the great salvation of God.
THE CLOSE, IN A SEPARATION-KISSE Betwixt two most intimate FRIENDS, The SOƲL and BODY. By way of DIALOGUE betwixt NATURE and GRACE, Under the Names of FLESH and SPIRIT. Spirit. DEar Saviour, now, my soul receive, Flesh, blood and bones, slide to your grave, And separate sleep from grief and pain, Till gloriously we meet again. Flesh. Shall now these tearms, so oft repeated, Be instantly, for all, compleated? And must I now in dreadfull night, Deprived be of Life and Light?
Oh, had it not far better been, This life that I had never seen? Sweet Ghost, is there no remedy But thou must go, and I must die? For of a meeting, who can think, When sinfull I in slime must sink? Spirit. It's true, no man by nature sees, Nor can perceive these mysteries, That by believing we conceive, And do the earn'st thereof receive, When our affections have been feasted Upon the fruits that we have tasted, We part a space our grace to try, Thou'rt not annihilat more then I: And thou redeemed art from death, As I, and from eternall wrath. Flesh. I do confesse, and call to mind, At former warnings of this kind, By force of these truths truly tende'rd, Sometimes my soul have freely render'd: But now it seems that too too slightly I have past by, not ponder'd rightly, How I to thee, or thou to me Shall come, or when, I cannot see. Were we not first immortall made, And but by accident do fade? Canst thou not now who grace hes found, Find also how we two be bound? So fast incorporat may remain Untill our Saviour come again▪
Spirit. Dear Flesh, resist these carnall notions, So marring and untimely motions: Thou know'st it was our vile revolt, That Paradice did on us bolt: But now no losse incurres thereby, Our Head exalted lifts us hie, 'Bove by creation what we were, Then earth's below the highest star. When I was sent thee to assume, Could'st thou then know that I should come? That seed whereof thou was congeal'd, Thy Parents from their food did yeeld, Digested, which from fish, flesh, grain, And fruits they had receiv'd again: These grosse ingredients whence were they, But from worms, water, grasse and clay? Do not therefore, dear mate, repine, But to thine element incline: Till the refreshing time returne, And turne thee up out of thine urne. When all the Elements shall sweat, Purging their drosse with fervent heat, And tendering out our substance true: Like drops refin'd of Cristal-dew, While every soul shall be attending Their bodies fitted for ascending. In that dread revolution glorious, Dreadlesse thou shalt ascend victorious, When all this world, these wordly frame Shall be burnt up in fiery flames:
When all the Heavens shall be roll'd, And at an instant roundly scroll'd: Sun, Moon, Stars, Signs and Planets seen No more, then if they had not been: The glory of the Lord obscuring All sights and lights were most alluring: He, He alone, then only being The sweetest Object of our seeing: Nor shall there in this swirle be seen Confusions, but conclusions clean Appear from these purpos'd decrees, Establisht from eternities: Perform'd peremptorly in time, Now at the tinkling of this Chyme. Like as our Horologe, in part, Keeping the method of the airt, Unto the stinted time doth carry, Not wearying nor seen to vary: But at the period of the hours, When she is most to shew her powers, What strange combustion does it make, As if in shivers it should shake: And when that revolution's spent, The second to essay is bent: But when the time prefixt is run, Must be renew'd before begun: Right so our hourly changes are, Which seem to us irregular, They be by divine art compos'd, And wisely done, as well propos'd: So that this last of time shall crown All that is past, with high renown▪
Believe, believe, this shalt thou see, With these thine eyes most certainly: Were there not thousands in thy case, When I was sent thee to imbrace Into the womb: and can God misse, Now in accomplishing thy blesse, Me to direct again aright, To fetch thee up unto his sight? And I, so long who was conversant With thee, and with thy case acquaint, Shall I not know thee, love thee, move thee, And thou delighted be to prove me: So now confirmed in the faith to meet, This be a kisse of separation sweet. FLESH. Dear soul, I dow not let thee go, Nor dare I, sweet soul, say thee no: Shall I refuse thee, thee my life? Shall I consent? O fearfull strife! I must agree my life to give, Or grieve him, dying, by whom I live. I am convinc'd I ought to yield, Creation only wields the shield: But death by sin doth beat it down: Now new Creation is my crown: It moves me likewise, dearest Lover, Who art alone my nearest Mover, To see thee thus so long detain'd With me, where we be daily stain'd. The Galley-slave in fetters ty'd, With sad affliction daily try'd,
Can have no more desire to be Deliver'd hence, then thou of me: And reason more, for he's but fred Of grief, but thou with glorie clad. I from this life have thee deferr'd Too long, now let me be interr'd: Suppose with losse of life I be Divorc'd from thy society. So as thou may more blesse enjoy, Then can compare with my annoy: Sprent out, spring up at thy desirings, Possesse the prise of thy aspyrings: For here I do consent, and say, Angels conduct thee in the way: And I am moved to believe, That thou wilt come me to relieve, In that day of refreshing clear, Which we confide shall soon appear. Spirit. Enough, enough, it's all I crave, Sincere submission to have: For that I entered this debate, Lest out account should come too late. Now shall I further let thee see, Thou shalt me fail, or I fail thee: And would thou have me with thee hence, When thou denuded art of sense: Thee to enjoy was my delight, Albeit it was my drowsie night, As thou a time must be absented▪ Yet are we so by faith indented▪
And sure ingrafted in our Head, Living we be, when seeming dead: Let us, while we do live, believe, And so we shall, by dying, live. Hence carnall thoughts, hence natures night, Welcome now sweet celestiall light, Light, light, light, light, light, light so bright, What we have seen sets out of sight, And makes us to conceive of seeing, Above the bounds of this our being. Hence incredulity, vile ghuest, That faithlesse fears does still suggest; O happy choise, by closely cleaving Unto our Life, by firm believing, Thy glory, by degrees begun, Now fred of suff'ring, and of sin: And I shall still attending be, Again to be possest of thee. The fathers of the former ages, The greatest, and the gravest sages, The clearest Saints that e're were seen, Our meeting there shall not preveen: Where We our Husband, Head, and King Enjoying, shall his praises sing, In glory unconceivable, where we Shall God, for evermore, adoring be.
The FIRST and SECOND RESURRECTION, AND THE GENERAL JUDGMENT; Closing with a SONG of DEGREES, Ascending from what we were, to what we are: and from thence, to what we shall be after time: AS AN INTRODUCTION TO That New SONG of endless PRAISE, ot be taught in and entered unto, when there shall be no more time. Matth. 25.31. to the end. When the Son of Man shall come in His glory, &c. 1 Cor. 15.12. to the end. Now if Christ be preached, &c. THe Resurrection of the body, and the Ge∣nerall Judgement, is universally acknow∣ledged
where Christianity is known, except a∣mongst the brutishly ignorant, or the profest A∣theist. But if it were so known and believed, as it is condescended unto, it would put Believers to a more serious study to try their condition, then they be at as yet; for, who could indure to know believingly, that, living and dying in their naturall estate, (without the interposition of a Mediator, and Saviour for their restauration) they being raised up to join with their soul again, should then be cast down in utter darknesse final∣ly, and rejected of God totally, deprived of all further expectation of grace: the gnawing worm of conscience wakened, the wrath of a sin-reven∣ging God upon the guilty person, where, in these everlasting burnings, amongst innumerable legi∣ons of devils, and numberless multitudes of con∣demned men, they be to indure eternal torment: Can it be imagined (say I) that any person, so believing, and that there were a possibility of re∣covery, could be in rest, untill they had (un∣to their utmost endeavour) used all imaginable means: not thinking any pains too great, if it were in compassing the Continent and the coasts of the sea, for timous relief. If we, seeing one of our neighbours in the ex∣tremity of a Gout, a Gravel-stone or Gangren: And that we were certainly perswaded, that with∣in
such a short space we should be in the very like condition, unlesse we did apply our selves to such a Person, who could assuredly prevent this so fearfull, terrible and horrible torment: would there be any delay made, or difficulty impede us in our journey, for finding out the Physitian? Much more, if he were at hand, making offer of our relief, and the removall of all our fears, could we make the refusall? Again, Is it not evident, that the most part of men do intangle themselves in most dangerous travels and troubles, for gaining of a little un∣certain treasure, pleasure or preferment, where∣unto few attain? And where attained, is past before it be well possest. Is it possible then, that if the Resurrection of the body, and the General Judgment were be∣lieved, and the blessed condition of those that have accepted of the offer of grace in time: and the utter ruine and eternall perdition of all such as have contemned this Great-salvation, to sieze upon them, in that day when they shall call to the mountains to fall upon them, and cover them from that fierce wrath, which undoubtedly they must underly for evermore? No certainly, it is nei∣ther probable nor possible, but, if these Truths were believed, there would be little rest amongst the Believers▪ untill they attained to that assu∣rance
of relief that might give them solide rest: And yet every man is so convinced, that none (that is worthy to have the name of a man) dar be so shamlesse as to deny such unquestionable truths: seeing, that thereby, they should be found to deny the Scriptures of God, dyted by His own Spirit, and the power of God, seen in the creation, and conservation of all things, the Son of God and the Saviour of the World, who in our own flesh hath died and risen again; who hath testified all these truths, and recorded them in His Testament to us, according as He had Himself experimentally tryed the unutterable joyes of the one, and the unsuperable dolors of the other to have been wrestled with, sustained and fred of; but by Himself alone, who was God to sustain, as He was man to suffer. And yet for all this conviction and formall pro∣fession, what is the greatest part of all ranks do∣ing, but deceiving themselves, satisfied with a brain-light, without any heart-change; a lip-re∣ligion, without any life-reformation? So rea∣sonlesse is the rationall creature become, as to de∣ny Him reasonable service, who is the Author of their reason in believing Him, and acquain∣ting themselves with Him for their good. But to proceed: According to the difference betwixt the Believer and the unbeliever in life and death,
so is it after death when the Righteous Judge of all men shall give the finall sentence: Then shall the carnall man, who refused that great Salvati∣on, which is now obtained by believing in the only Son of God, for the remission of sin, being laid down in the grave, bathed in the abominati∣ons of His apostasie, and impenitencie, be raised up again at the Latter-day, soul and body joyn∣ing to receive the irrecoverable sentence of eter∣nall condemnation, and rejection from the graci∣ous presence of God, unto the place appointed for them: And for the further manifestation hereof, the Lord hath been pleased to suffer some, being spiritually dead, and refusing to come to the Physitian of souls for life: and being thereby self-condemned, to ly under desperation and tor∣ment of conscience, even in this life: So that both word and example may joyn to the convi∣ction of such as will not be converted. Whereas the true Believer, who in their life had been dying unto sin, and attained unto the first Resurrection in living unto righteousnesse, laid down the body under hope, shal at the second Resurrection, both soul and body being joyned again in that spiritual and incorruptible constitu∣tion, agreeable unto immortality, lift up the head with joy in coming before the Judge▪ knowing that all judgment is committed to the Son of God,
who is their Kins-man, Mediator and Redeemer, who knows well for whose transgressions He hes made Himself an offering, for satisfying the justice of God, that He may see His seed, the travell of His Soul, and be satisfied: That the pleasure of the Lord, in justifying many, does prosper in His Hand, and in congregating, and uniting to Himself, who is the glorious Head, and making up all the Members in one Body, to become the fulnesse of Him who fills all in all, that the Marri∣age-day may be solemnized, and the marriage ful∣ly accomplished before God and all the Hie∣rarchy of Angels, Arch-Angels, Throns, Do∣minions, Powers, Seraphims and Cherubins, with Hosannas and Hallelujahs, shouting for joy and sympathising in all cordiall harmony, the praises of their King, the Author and Finisher of their Salvation, with songs sutable and acceptable to that all-glorious Auditory, and the glorified associats and assistants in that unlimited circumference, whereof the All-blessed and infinite Essence of God is the incomprehensi∣ble Center, and that from minutly renewed and revealed matter, without intermission for ever∣more. And for the further establishment of which truth, some of Gods Children, even in this life, have attained the fore-tastes of the first Fruits of these
eternall Consolations, that they are to feast upon after this life everlastingly. And seeing it is so, and known to be so by the Believer, where should the furthest extent of his deepest apprehensions and greatest fervencie of his affections be fixed, but upon Him alone, by whom he shall injoy all this blesse, salvation and consolation. And to this end, that as they know, they may commend, and as they prove, they may love and praise Him, according as they can attain to see and conceive Him, by the mirror wherein He shines, making Himself and His excellencies the matter of our songs, in the house of our pilgri∣mage, untill we come up to see Him as He is, and enjoy Him in the fulnesse of that blesse, by the earnest whereof we are sustained under Hope. And for this end, let our study be to take Him up more particularly. 1. First, what He is in Himself. 2. And secondly, what He is to us. 1. He is in Himself, 1. The mighty God, the everlasting Father, wonderfull Counseller, the Prince of Peace, Isaiah 9.6. 2. He is the second Person of the all-adored Trinity.
3. His delight hes been from all eternity to be conversant with the sons of men, And for that end, and that the fulnesse of the God-head might dwell in him bodily, hes (by the operation of the Holy Ghost) assumed unto Himself the nature of man, from the seed of the woman, in the womb of the Virgin, whereby He becometh the kins-man, flesh of our flesh, and bone of our bone, subject to all our infirmi∣ties (sin except) that He might be a mercifull and a compassionate high Priest, and a propitia∣tory sacrifice of a sweet smelling savour unto God, in giving full satisfaction unto justice for the sins of the Elect, in cancelling the hand-writing that spoke against them, and nailing it unto the tree of the crosse, when after the agony of His Soul, He gave His Body to be crucified, and His Blood to be shed for the Redemption of His beloved inheritance, whom He hes thereby ju∣stified, and will sanctifie and espouse to Himself: delighted to see the increase of His grace in the Believer, as the fruit and off-spring of the travel of His Soul, and to whom He hes made Him∣self known to be the only Messias. 1. First, As Christ anointed Priest, Altar and Sacrifice, to satisfie, and intercede for, and reconceal us to God: Prophet, to instruct us in al truth, and reveal the Fathers will to us: and
King, to renew and defend His ransomed flock. 2. Jesus, a Saviour, able to save to the ut∣most, and cleanse them from all their sins. 3. The Word incarnat, from whom all our spi∣rituall life comes. 4. The Fountain opened, from whence flowes all our consolation. 5. The true Vine, and prime branch, whence influence ascends to all the members. 6. The morning Star, and Sun of righteous∣nesse, by whom we are illuminate and revived. 7. The Rock invincible, and Corner-stone, whereon our Salvation is built. 8. The Mediator, to procure acceptance to our persons, and grants to our petitions. 9. The Captain, who is only able to conduct us through the wildernesse with safety. 10. The bountifull Provisor for us, in the midst of all our malicious enemies. 11. The faithfull Witnesse, who for all our failings and faithlesnesse, will not deny Himself, who changes not. 12. This is our Emanuel, our strong and mighty God, who being with us, what is it to us who be against us; He hes trod the wine-presse of Gods wrath alone, and none with Him. He hes bruised the head of the old serpent, that was lifted up against us.
He hes given the deadly stroak to all our ene∣mies, led them captive, and cast them under chaines of darknesse, unto the condemnation of the great day: and were there ever man or Angel, could have imagined of such things to have been done for them? And is it possible for us, out of the deepest of our conceivings, to think seriously of these won∣ders that the Lord hes eternally designed for us, and in time done for us, and not be ravished with the admiration of them, and over-joyed in be∣lief of them? And yet, what lesse could He have done for us? seeing it was His holy and eternall determi∣nation to espouse us to Himself; and for that end, to sprinkle us with His bloud, that we may be imbraced, and put beauty upon us that we may be loved by Him who is all love, and admitted to His Bed-Chamber, and Breasts of consolation, where feasting upon that all-fulnesse and uncon∣ceivable sweetnesse that is in Him, we may say and sing. As we have heard, so have we seen In the City of our God and of our King.
A SONG OF DEGREES, Ascending from what we were in Nature, to what we are in Grace, and thence to what we shall be by believing. NOw Saviour dear, my soul receive, Flesh, blood and bones slides to the grave Grace hath procur'd, by argument Of Nature, now, a full consent, That the body shall remain Asleep till I return again; And that I shall approach and prove, Sweet Saviour, now, thy saving Love, Amongst these mansions shining bright, Where souls are feasting on thy sight▪ And at what instant thou dost call, The body then assume I shall; That thence restor'd for evermore, We in thy face may God adore: That seeing there as we are seen, Where never cloud doth interveen, Nor subtile serpent shall appear, With syren songs to tempt the ear,
Nor interrupt our Songs of love, So set our present thoughts above; As is the Heaven of heavens so far From thoughts infirm, that finite are: But yet because the Glory there Transcends believing, let us spare, And set our Songs in order right, According to our present Light Of faith, which fraught with wonders clear, By pond'ring makes grac'd-men admire. His Love and beauty still increasing, While we His praises be expressing: Let us make His Glorious Name Our deepest thoughts, our chiefest theam: So as we may with singing move, In joyfull Songs of Praise and Love. His Name, His Name most highest high, Essentiall God in Majesty; Who with the Father and the Sp'rit, As Counseller, did take delight In this most Glorious Universe, And here with men for to converse, By wisdome viewing all the wonders That now appear, surpassing numbers; In these magnificent degrees, And statutes of eternities: All things by Omnipotency, From nothing, op'ning instantly. Omniscience, all things observing, His providence all things preserving, In all their comings, goings, courses, Places, cases, and recourses,
According to their inclination, Set by supream preordination, Of that eternall counsell standing, And unsearchably commanding: Seen and unseen varieties, Diversities, rarieties, From that Infinity proceeding, Transcending this dimm twi-light reading: Even in these clear excellencies, That obvious be unto our eyes; Far lesse find out Him infinite, In His perfections full compleat: Incomprehensible and pure, Uncheangable, that does indure: But let our faithfull thoughts be fixt Upon that new creation next, Wherein we deeply be concern'd To dive, and be divinely learn'd: Not by the line of humane learning, But by the spirit of discerning; To know how that most fatall fall The race of Adam damned all, Deserv'dly left (and so forlorn) In bands of death and darknesse born: Till in that Counsell now admired, That wisdom wonderfull umpired, Mercy and justice entering band, In upright righteousnesse to stand, To ransome from that rotten stock, And so redeem a saved flock; By sep'rating a second Root, That should produce a precious fruit.
And by a sappie substance firme, Regenerat, renew, confirme: Whereby the power of His Sp'rit, The marvell of all marvels meet, When Members mysticall implanted Be in the divine nature fainted; As being in the Head divine, Where God doth in His fulnesse shine: For by this mysterie adored, Christ mystical's from death restored. Here Soveraignity does shine, And Love anterior to time, Unto the Elect does appear Illustrious, and shining clear, Omniscience, observing all. And every one about this ball, In every one, and all their cases, That by His pleasure He imbraces: Omnipotency, such preserving, As be convinc'd of no deserving: His providences likewise prove The firmnesse of His faithfull Love; The travell of His Soul reviving, In that all-wonderfull contriving, And fully satisfi'd therein: Because the fruit should purge our sin, Whereby we ly in bands of wrath, Untill we do apply His death: Opening our eyes to see, with grief, Our selves, and Him a sure relief: Firmly fixing in our thought The wondrous wayes, whereby he brought▪
From nothing us to nature, then, From reasonlesse to rationall men: From reason render'd reasonlesse, Not standing in our steadfastnesse; But prostitute to sinfull lust, Were under death and darknesse thrust: Again, this true, eternall Love, Mov'd by His Sp'rit, again to move Upon that then confused masse, More marr'd then the first Chaos was. When this good Sp'rit to order wrought That glorious work from nothing brought: Whereby we may our weaknesse see, The more observant hence to be: Impressions pressing on the heart, From which he never will depart, Untill His Image be repair'd, And we for glorie be prepar'd, But guides us all the way we go: And when we wander warns us so, That through a world we are led Of snares, that be before us spred: Where swarms of devils are devising Daily, our darkned souls surprizing; And what a fray of lusts unclean, Are from the spawn of satan seen; Kindled, and cannot quenched be, Untill corruption crushed be. O wonder now! and wondering sing▪ The praises of this wondrous King: God His own Son, Gods sole delight, The life of man, the worlds light;
Man to redeem mans nature taking, That he might die for mans up-making: Obscur'd, be put to grief and brusing, And all with chiefest pleasure chusing, In time prefixt, His Seed to see, EMANUEL marvelous will be: And now, as then, divinely seeing, Imbraces in this glorious being: Every minut under time, Souls redeem'd from every clime, Where this glorious Gospel's sounding, Alairts and parts this globe surrounding; Swarming up in severall Legions, Received in celestiall regions: And ordered in prepared places, According to their gifted graces. This is our glorious King of Hosts, Sing to His praise, you blessed ghosts: For at His feet you foes do fall, While He conveens, combines you all: Because your high and glorious Head, His fulnesse you and Members made: His pains your gains, His glory now Made Him delight to be with you. Angels in these wonders using, Minds apted rapted be in musing: And ministring their service still, Adoring do His glorious will; And Souls redeem'd their songs begin, This glory as they enter in: And we in contemplation now, Delight to sympathize with you:
In your triumphant state adoring Your King, and in His glory soaring: Swiming in Oceans of delights, And visions of transcendent sights. These glorious objects of your seeing, The subject of your singing being, When His comfortable reflectings Shines upon your crosse neglectings, And your putting Him to grief Meets with this Royal Grace-relief: Seeing now as you are seen, And knowing that you might have been Amongst the damn'd, by your deserving, Under utter darknesse starving: Where millions every minut rumble, And in endlesse torments tumble: While you upon His face do feed, And the righteous reasons read Of all His judgements, just and high, That holy and unchanged be. When all the Generations Of men, since the creations, And Angels, come, both good and bad, To hear their sentence sweet and sad: When at the twinkling of an eye, The wicked shall rejected be, And will endure eternall pain, Rather then see that face again, In righteous judgement justly burning, For their grievous guilty spurning: When the Faithfull father'd aright, Remain rejoicing in His sight:
Who be of His rich grace the seed, And now incorporate in the head: Wherein of God all fulnesse growes, And on the Members overflowes; Here men and Angels clearly see The Counsells of eternity, Wherein the Son of God rejoyced Eternally to see proposed This state of Sonship to the Saints, With whom espoused now He haunts In heavens of blesse so far above, As is the heavens we see to move This earth above, and passe accounts, As infinite finite surmounts, From ev'ry severall soul, whose cases, Differs further then their faces: But when in these infinities We enter, and eternities, And in the pleasures thereof placed, And glory there by grace imbraced; According to the great design Of God, our Lord doth then resign Power, Kingdome and authority To God alone, who sets him free Of all his foes, who be brought down, When he receives the Royall Cown Of triumph, now Christ mysticall, Fully compleat who filleth all: Now in Hi Bride redeem'd rejoycing, And she with joy on Him reposing, In these vast dimensions bright, Where He alone is all her light.
Life, diet and delight alone, The subjects of their Songs each one: Nor could created-heavens contain These glorious Songs, there heard and seen, Sounding out from every airt, And every soul a severall part: And in such order sweet compos'd, As all the heavens shall be rejoyc'd In the uncessant consolation Of this redeemed corporation, When the King of Kings, the Head, A King hes every Member made, And Priest, to offer praises due, And constantly their Songs renew. But as we said, so let us cease, Towards these mysteries to prease: Eye hes not seen, ear cannot hear, Nor heart conceive, till we appear, What for the Chosen was prepar'd, And then it duely be declar'd: Only by believing this, Shall be above believing blesse: And blessednesse, which might allay All our wrestlings in the way, And under hope the soul sustain, Untill we may the fruit obtain; When we shall joine, and be victorious, In that triumphant state so glorious; And springing through the Skies, shall sing All joyfull praises to our King. FINIS.
