F428 12130993 54711
The Portugues Asia: OR, THE HISTORY OF THE Discovery and Conquest OF INDIA BY THE PORTUGUES; CONTAINING All their Discoveries from the Coast of Africk, to the farthest Parts of China and Iapan; all their Battels by Sea and Land, Sieges and other Memorable Actions; a Description of those Countries, and many Particulars of the Religion, Government and Customs of the Natives, &c. In Three Tomes. Written in Spanish by Manuel de Faria y Sousa, of the Order of Christ. Translated into English by Cap. Iohn Stevens. Tome the First. LONDON, Printed for C. Brome, at the Sign of the Gun, at the West-End of St. Pauls. 1695.
TO HER Most Sacred Majesty CATHARINE, Queen Dowager OF ENGLAND, &c. Madam, IT is not the sense of the mighty Favours I stand in∣debted for, that moves me to presume to dedicate this Work to Your Majesty; for Debts to Sovereigns are above all acknowledgement. Nor is it
Protection I sue for under so August a Patroness; the Subject carries its own Security and De∣fence along with it, though per∣haps the Stile be not proportio∣nable to such Glorious Matter. It is Justice that leads me to lay this most Wonderful History at Your Majesties Royal Feet. To whom could I tender the unpa∣rallel'd Undertaking of Your Kingly Progenitors, but to You their inimitable Offspring? To whom could I offer up the Most Heroick Atchievements of Your Forefathers Subjects, but to You the Most Glorious of their Line? In fine, to whom could I yield up the more than Human Con∣quests of Your Country, but to You the Most Admired of the Portugues Race? These are the Motives, these the Inducements that prevail with me, not only
to hope, but even to assure my self of a Gracious Acceptance of this, though seemingly Presum∣ptuous, yet in reality most sub∣missive Tender of my First Un∣dertaking in this Nature. A Sub∣ject so Glorious does not need the Ornament of Retorick. The Sacred History, than which none can be more surprizing or won∣derful, is delivered to us in the plainest of Language. Great Actions are still Great, though exprest in the meanest Words: But mean Undertakings require a florid Stile to gain them some∣thing of Reputation. The Sub∣ject is worthy Your Majesties acceptance, though the Style may not appear equal; that will make amends for this, and the low∣ness of the later will be hid by the grandeur of the former. I would not confess a Guilt by
begging Pardon; a wilful Of∣fence against so much Good∣ness would deserve no Mercy. God himself whose Great At∣tribute is Mercy, does not hear our Cries, if we persist to pro∣voke his Wrath. Why then should I expect Forgiveness, if I knowingly Transgressed? Yet being sensible of my own de∣merit, I must cast my self up∣on Your Majesties unlimited Goodness, thence to expect my Doom; which cannot fail be∣ing happy, having its depen∣dence on so Horoick and Tru∣ly Royal a Spirit. In fine, Madam, I will neither be my own Accuser, nor pretend to justifie or make good my Cause; the decision of it I can leave to no more Tender or Favourable Judge than Your Majesty, in whom my Failings
may be assured to find Com∣passion, from whom my Zeal may hope to reap Honour, and to whom all Increase of Glory and Happiness is wished by, Madam, Your Majesties most dutiful and most obedient Subject and Servant, John Stevens.
THE TRANSLATOR TO THE READER. I Will not tire the Reader with a long Harangue in commendation of this History; it will, I hope, speak for it self. Nor will I go about to vindicate the Translation; let it take its Chance and stand or fall by the Vote of the Ingenious. My design is first, to inform the Reader, that I have reduced this Work to a much lesser compass than the Original Spanish; yet at the same time nothing of the Historical Part is diminished, perhaps some of the Ornament. I have not omitted the most inconsiderable passage, nor lessned any ma∣terial circumstances; all that has been cut off is only long Speeches, for the most part
never thought of by those they are father∣ed upon, only added by the Author to set out his Work; tedious Lists of Officers and Gentlemens Names who were present at any Considerable Actions, which Names are of no use to us; those of the Com∣manders in Chief, and such as particularly signalized themselves, being sufficient for History; and some flights and reflections of the Author, which only serve to make up the bulk of a Volume. And thus much said may suffice as to the bringing this Book into so small a compass. The next thing I have to offer is, that though ma∣ny of the Actions this History contains may at first sight appear incredible, yet we must not therefore immediately conclude it to be fabulous; for upon second thoughts we shall not only find those very things possible but very practicable. It is hard to persuade such small numbers of Portu∣gueses could defeat such vast Armies, and take Towns fortified and strongly Garri∣soned; but all wonder must cease when we consider the Portuguses were Europeans, always much superior to the Asiaticks for valour; that those were men enured to continual Wars with the Moors, and con∣sequently well train'd and disciplin'd, these raw and confused Multitudes; that though
the Indians had Fire Arms, they were far inferiour to the Portugueses in the handling of them; that the Portugueses overcame as much by Policyas by Strength, sowing divisi∣ons among those Princes, and dividing their own Subjects from them; that the Natives weary of their subjection to the Moors, were inclinable to change Masters, and try whe∣ther the Portugues Yoke were lighter than that till then they had born. To be short, every judicious Person will find reasons enough to convince the possibility of those Actions, since it is allowed Alexander the the Great and many others overcame in∣numerable Multitudes with handfuls of Men. Besides, though the Author sets down the number of Portugueses, I believe he does not always mention the Natives that assisted them, because the Glory of the Conquest belonged to the former. Yet if there be any so hard of belief as still to doubt, I will not be so positive or zealous in the behalf of my Author, as not to grant he may have strained some points, thereby to add to the Honour of his Na∣tion; not so but in the main the Action is real as is demonstrable by their Possessi∣ons in Asia, but so as the Circumstances might be somewhat heightned, the more to raise the admiration of those Undertakings.
Let none upon this score pretend to con∣demn him as Romantick; for should we examine our own, and all the Histories of the World, we should not find one which hatred or affection has not added to or diminished. I will not be tedious, and shall therefore say no more in relation to the Author; and but one word as to the Translation, which is, that if the Iudici∣ous or Learned shall find any fault with it, by any such I shall be glad to be in∣formed of its defects, that they may be amended in the second and third Tomes which will soon follow this, that is my first in this Nature, after several years spent in far different Imployments.
THE PREFACE. THE narrow Bounds of the Kingdom of Portugal could now no longer contain the greatness of its Natives Hearts. There∣fore carried on by a Glorious Boldness, they so far extended those limits, that they infinitely exceeded the measure of the first Matter. Great undertakings are subject to the dangers of great dis∣appointments. But Fortune, whose on∣ly care it then seemed to be, not to expose them to the Eyes of the World with any disgrace, having measured their strength and capacity, found it necessa∣ry to encrease their Dominions by adding to them at one time great part of Mau∣ritania; then a greater of Ethiopia; at
another time that vast extent of Asia, and lastly that not inconsiderable Re∣gion of America, called Brazil or New Lusitania. Having conquered the West, they passed to the South, and having subdued this they went on to the East. All they attempted with their Arms, they perfected with their Fortune, who seemed to be listed in their Service. Such was their Conduct in the most difficult Enterprizes, whereby they en∣larged themselves so as to have room to breath the greatness of their Spirits, that what in other Nations by reason of its immoderate greatness would have threatned ruin, in this seems a most admirable Ornament of most various matter wherewith the Temple of the Christian Fame is illustrated and adorn∣ed. At length these Great Spirits spread themselves over all the Land and Seas, and to make the whole circumference of them their bounds, overrunning that vast distance that is from the Coasts of Spain to those of China, and filling both the Hemispheres with the Glory of their Name. They followed the Sun from his Setting to his Rising, and equalled his Course. The Exploits per∣formed in this wonderful Course in
the space of 233 Years are the subject of this Second Work, which I now take in Hand, pursuant to what I promised in the first of our Europe; the general applause that has met with, calls on me for the performance of this. Here will be seen Actions, by how much the more admirable, the less Credible, and indeed more truly real, than in ap∣pearance probable. For though true, it does not seem likely, that sometimes 100 Men indifferently Armed, should encounter great Armies much better provided. These are the Actions which may justly entitle the Performers to be stiled Heroes; a Name since given gra∣tis to whom it was not due. For a great number to overcome a lesser, though equal in Arms and Courage, is rather the effect of Number than Valour, and seems to carry more of Cowardise than Virtue. Hence it is that those who are so overcome, though they lose the Field do not lose the Glory; but if duly weighed, merit the greater Esteem, for that they dared encounter at so great a disadvantage. We may therefore with reason affirm, that the Portugueses on these occasions merited admiration, ei∣ther as Conquerors or Conquered; as
Conquerors, for having overcome; as Conquered, for having dared much. This had been before their Fate in Eu∣rope against the Roman and African Mul∣titudes that overrun all Spain. Let us see whether the same Fortune attends them in Asia. Without doubt it does. Soon shall we see innumerable Multi∣tudes flying from their small Numbers, and looking back with amazement to see who pursues and destroys them. We shall see them drove by the terror of the Looks, not the Number of those who press them. We shall see Battels fought with such resolution, that nei∣ther the Victor shall rejoice, nor the Overcome lament. In Sieges, such bar∣barous obstinacy, that despairing of Victory, they will burn themselves with all they hold precious, that their Ene∣mies may reap no other Fruit of their Conquest but the dismal spectacles of the Flames. We shall see not only Va∣lour, but Rage and Despair overcome. The toil of coming at the Enemies will be greater sometimes than that of de∣feating them. We may be sometimes overpowered by Number, not overcome by Valour; for though upon some occa∣sions Fortune forsook all, yet few were
forsaken of their Courage. These Gene∣rous Spirits looked upon the hardships of the Campagne, no otherwise than if they had been the conveniences of their Houses, and upon doubtful Battels, as sure Victories. With the first they began to raise, I will not say Forts, but Draughts of those they afterwards erect∣ed. To these, and chiefly to the Ca∣pitol of Goa shall be brought by force, or come through fear, many Princes in Chains, and many by their Embassadors. Nothing will appear in that Noble City but Triumphs. Nothing less in the Triumphs, than the People and Riches of all Asia; these in the Hands of the Conquerors, and those in the Chains of their Captivity. But there is nothing in them we look upon with more de∣light, than the Elephants loaded with Castles, and the Carriages with Guns, which not long before were our Terror; these for their Greatness and Number, those for their Number and Rarity. Re∣ligion, which we value above all, and which was the chief ground of all these Undertakings, will be more exalted, trampling upon Idolatry, for at each stroke of the Evangelical Sword fell a thousand Idols of the Pagods; and a
thousand Pagods in the Theaters of Battle. It will appear that many Fami∣lies held themselves in greater account for being overcome by us, and in con∣sequence thereof the Conquerors and Conquered joined and united in the Sa∣cred Bonds of frequent Marriages; and many overcoming those by whom they had before been defeated, under our Ensigns; and that the Monuments of our Victories are not now Broken-arms and Warlike Engines hanging on Trees upon Mountains, but Cities, Islands and Kingdoms, first groaning under our Feet, and then worshipping our Government. Some warned with the Example of others Ruins, shall prevent their own, by ac∣cepting of our Proposals. For in the beginning we invited all to embrace our Amity; esteeming it a greater happiness to gain voluntary Friends, than to make forced Slaves. By express Order from our Kings, we endeavoured to heap great Riches, extend our Dominions, and ac∣quire Glory rather with Politick Reason, than Odious Violence. We modestly courted those, we could invade forcibly. In fine, we shall see the Portugues Arms not content with the West, piercing through and spreading over the East;
sailing unknown Seas, trampling Provin∣ces and incredible Difficulties; discover∣ing sundry Nations, planting among them firm Fortresses and other Build∣ings: And lastly, giving Honour to their Country, and Light to the World with their Discoveries and Conquests in so remote Regions. Thus taming various and obstinate Spirits and Humours, with Persuasions when they prevailed, and with Valour when they refused to hearken to us, we shall of sundry Ele∣ments compose a Body worthy those Noble Spirits that sailed thither, worthy the Zeal of those Kings who sent, and the Magnificence of the Captains that Commanded them. All the Actions shall be such as deserve not only to be equalized with the most Heroick of An∣tiquity, but even that these should be forgot to celebrate those, were not Man∣kind subject to give more applause to what he hears, than what he sees. What is past is celebrated with Memory and Admiration, the present is treated with Oblivion and Envy. We are persuaded the one lessens, the other instructs us; and even in the present there are Exam∣ples as proper for our instructions, as the most famous in decayed Antiquity.
This Book without doubt will prove it. I will answer it. As the Power of Man is by so much the weaker, by how much God declares himself more offend∣ed at them; so it is the more power∣ful, by how much he is the more pro∣pitious. His Omnipotence seemed now to be pleased with these his Conquerors, (for indeed they were his) so that in∣deed it will always be doubtful which was most to be admired, whether their Conquering so much, being so few, or the daring Attempt, it being no greater a Number. Such was the success where∣with they gained every thing, it looked as if the World had chose them to be the Universal Lords. Nor did they seem to be sent as Souldiers, with Arms to wage War, but as Legrs, with power to give Laws. Who then will admire that the whole circumference of the Earth should submit to so small a number of such Heroick Spirits, they being rather led by Auspicious Fates, than Valiant Generals? Never had they fallen from this height, had not their own oversights and distractions been the cause of their fall, that Divine Good∣ness that had so much exalted being no longer able to bear with them. This
will oblige me to relate some things, which it were more proper for the Ho∣nour of my Country should be buried in oblivion than published; but the since∣rity of History requires nakedness, and gives as good an Example to Posterity, condemning vicious and base Actions, as commending the Just and Virtuous. Fortune having been lavishly liberal to us, we had no less than reason to suspect she could not be very durable. For Hu∣man Affairs having no fixt point, it is plain that those who arrive at the height, must again fall as low as the various ac∣cidents of volubility it self can carry them. As great as the Exploits, were the Riches obtained by them, and as great as these the Vices they ushered in. The cause of these great Evils is, that there are Men, who not content to pos∣sess what they only could have wished, would obtain what even in wishes ought not to be sought after. We shall see some, who coming poor into the wealthy Indies, left them poor that they might come out most wealthy. This is grie∣vous, but much more to be lamented it is, that the Example of many who came from thence without Fortunes when in its splendor, was of no force to curb
others from making vast Estates when groaning under its Calamities. The be∣ginnings will not be very bulky, for the greatest things never had great begin∣nings. All things in their Original are small and almost contemptible. The greatest Exploit and most glorious Vi∣ctory had its beginning in the Stable of Bethlehem.
THE CONTENTS. TOM. I. PART. I. CHAP. I. DIscoveries under Prince Henry, from the Year 1412. till the Year 1448. Page 1 CHAP. II. Discoveries under King Alfonso the Fifth, from the Year 1448. to the Year 1471. 19 CHAP. III. Discoveries and Conquests under King John the Second, from the Year 1481. till the Year 1495. 22
CHAP. IV. Discoveries under King Emanuel, from the Year 1497, when he sent out Vas∣co de Gama, till the Year 1500. 36 CHAP. V. Conquests under King Emanuel, from the Year 1500 till the Year 1502. 53 CHAP. VI. Conquests under King Emanuel, from the Year 1501, to the Year 1503. 63 CHAP. VII. Conquests under King Emanuel, from the Year 1503, till the Year 1505. 70 CHAP. VIII. Conquests under King Emanuel, from the Year 1505, and beginning of the Go∣vernment of Don Francisco de Almey∣da, first Governour and Viceroy of In∣dia, till the Year 1509. 82 CHAP. IX. Conquests under King Emanuel in the Year 1506, and Government of the Viceroy Don Francisco de Almeyda. 93
CHAP. X. A Continuation of the Conquests the same Year 1506. and the Government of the same Viceroy Don Francisco de Al∣meyda. 104 TOM. I. PART II. CHAP. I. COnquests in India under King Emanuel, from the Year 1506, till the Year 1508, the Viceroy Don Francisco still Governing, and entring upon the Glori∣ous Exploits of the Great Alfonso de Albuquerque, and the Famous Tristan de Cuna. 111 CHP. II. Conquests under ng Emanuel, the Year 1508. during the Government of the Viceroy Don Francisco de Almeyda, and continuing the Exploits of Alfonso de Albuquerque. 126
CHAP. III. Conquests under King Emanuel the Year 1508 and 1509. A continuation of the Government of the Viceroy Don Fran∣cisco de Ameyda, and Exploits of Al∣fonso de Albuquerque. 139 CHAP. IV. Conquests under King Emanuel, the Year 1510, Alfonso de Albuquerque now Governing India, who held it from the Year 1509, till the Year 1515. 154 CHAP. V. A continuation of the Conquest of the same Year 1510, Albuquerque Governing, and King Emanuel Reigning. 163 CHAP. VI. A Continuation of the Conquests under King Emanuel, the Year 1511, and the Go∣vernment of Alfonso de Albuquerque. 175 CHAP. VII. Conquests in India under King Emanuel, from the Year 1511, till the Year 1513, Alfonso de Albuquerque still Govern∣ing. 184
CHAP. VIII. A Continuation of the Conquests of the Year 1513, the Reign of King Emanuel, and Government of Alfonso de Albuquerque. 190 CHAP. IX. A Continuation of the Conquests, the Year 1513, till the Year 1514, the same King Reigning in Portugal, and the same Governour Ruling India. 194 CHAP. X. From the Year 1514, till the Year 1515, concluding with the Government and Life of the Great Alfonso de Albuquer∣que. 201 TOM. I. PART. III. CHAP. I. COnquests under King Emanuel, from the Year 1515, to the Year 1518. Lope Soarez de Albergaria, being Go∣vernour. 209
CHAP. II. A Continuation of what was done in India the same Year 1517, during the Govern∣ment of the same Lope Soarez de Al∣bergaria. 217 CHAP. III. From the Year 1518, till the Year 1520, ending the Government of Lope Soarez de Albergaria, and beginning that of James Lopez de Sequeira, King Ema∣nuel still reigning. 224 CHAP. IV. A Continuation of the Government of James Lopez de Sequeira, from the Year 1520, till the Year 1521, and Reign of King Emanuel. 233 CHAP. V. A Continuation of the Government of James Lopez de Sequeira, the Year 1521, and Reign of King Emanuel. 241 CHAP. VI. Continues still the Government of James Lopez de Sequeira, and Reign of King Emanuel. 253
CHAP. VII. The Government of D. Duarte de Meneses, in the Year 1522, when began the Reign of King John III. 262 CHAP. VIII. Continues the Government of D. Duarte de Meneses, from the Year 1522, till the Year 1524. King John then Reigning 272 CHAP. IX. The Government of the Viceroy D. Vasco de Gama, and of the Governour D. En∣rique de Meneses, till the Year 1524, that of 25, in the Reign of King John the Third. 279 CHAP. X. Concludes the Government of D. Enrique de Meneses in the Year 1526, King John the Third Reigning. 289
TOM. I. PART IV. CHAP. I. THE Government of Lope Vaz de Sampayo, from the Year 1526, to the Year 1527, and Reign of King John the Third. 296 CHAP. II. Continues the Government of Lope Vaz de Sampayo, from the Year 1527, till the Year 1529, King John the Third Reign∣ing. 310 CHAP. III. The Government of Nuno de Cuna, from the Year 1529, to the Year 1538, in the Reign of King John the Third. 326 CHAP. IV. Continues the Government of Nuno de Cu∣na, from the Year 1529, in the Reign of King John the Third. 336 CHAP. V. Continues the Government of Nuno de Cu∣na, and Reign of King John the Third. 361
CHAP. VI. Continues the Government of Nuno de Cu∣na, from the Year 1534, in the Reign of King John the Third. 371 CHAP. VII. Continues the Government of Nuno de Cu∣na, the same Year 1536, in the Reign of King John the Third. 388 CHAP. VIII. Still Continues the Government of Nuno de Cuna, from the Year 1537, till the Year 1538, in the Reign of King John the Third. 402 CHAP. IX. Continues still the Government of Nuno de Cuna, the same Year 1538, in the Reign of King John the Third. 415 CHAP. X. Which ends the Government of Nuno de Cuna, this same Year 1538, in the Reign of King John the Third, and con∣cludes the First Tome. 433
THE Portugues ASIA. TOM. I. PART I. CHAP. I. Discoveries under Prince Henry, from the Year 1412. till the Year 1448. 1. LIKE an Impetuous Torrent did the Mahometans spread themselves over the Lesser Asia, after the Catholick Arms had expelled them our Provinces. The Christian Princes busied in destroying each other, looked on their Progress, without attempt∣ing to put any stop to the Current; when the Kings of Portugal, as the first who had
shaken off themselves the Burthen of those Barbarians, and the first who passed over to crush them in Africk (obeying the Decrees of Heaven which required it) undertook to be the first who should stop their pro∣ceedings in Asia. 2. Prince Henry, fifth Son of King Iohn the First, accompanied his Father in the glorious taking of Ceuta, which was Anno 1415. and had a considerable share in the honour of this Victory, as well in regard of his Courage as Conduct, it being doubtful which was most predominant in him, and therefore the more to be admired, for that at this time he was but in the 21th year of his Age. At his return from thence, he brought so great an inclination (being al∣ready most skilful in the Mathematicks) to discover New Lands and Seas, that he spent above 40 years in this study, and vast Sums of Mony in bringing Masters from all parts, and Discoverers, and sending Vessels to his Discoveries. Being very well read in Geo∣graphy, and having examined many who had travelled much of the World (chiefly the Moors of Fez and Morocco) he got some information of the Arabs who border on the Desarts of Africk, and of the Aza∣nagi and Kingdom of Ialof, near the bor∣der of Guinea. That he might more wholly apply himself to these affairs, he chose for his abode the Town of Ternacabal in the Kingdom of Algarve, on Cape Sagres, whence the prospect of the Ocean stirred up his Hopes and Endeavours. Going to
Bed one night, with his thoughts fixt on these Designs; in the morning (as if he had received some heavenly assurance of success) he with all haste gave Orders for fitting out two Ships, which, and some other, passed not beyond Cape Bojador, 60 1412. Leagues beyond Cape Nam, then the Bounds of the Spanish Navigation. This Cape was 1415. so called by Gilianes, who first passed it, be∣cause it stretches it self out so far, viz. al∣most 40 Leagues to the Westward, which in Spanish is called Bojar, and thence the Cape Bojador. Its running so far Westward was also the cause that none passed it be∣fore; as also that off of it for about 6 Leagues, runs a strong Current, which breaking upon the Sands, rises high and makes a great Sea. This terrified all, not considering, that keeping off at Sea they might turn the Point. The Prince encoun∣tring the greatest difficulty, sent Iohn Gon∣zales Zarco and Tristan Vaz in a small Ship, with Orders to coast along the Barbary shore, till they had passed that formidable Cape, discovering all the Land, which according to the Opinions of Learned Men and Infor∣mation of Arabs, was concluded to run on till under the Equinoctial. Before they 1418. reached the Coast of Africk, they met with such violent Storms, they doubted not be∣ing swallowed by the Waves. The Weather obliged them not to follow their Orders, and without knowing where they were, fell in with the Island, which they called Puerto Santo, or Holy Haven, for such it appeared
to them after the Storm. This is a little Island, not far to the Northward of the Madera. The Inhabitants they found nei∣ther well Civiliz'd nor quite Barbarous, but the Soil very fertile. The Prince joyful with this News and the hopes the Discoverers gave him, sent them again, and with them Bartholomew Perestrello, with three Ships, with Seeds to sow, and Cattle to stock the Place. They put in two Rabbets, which increased in such manner in two years space, that the Corn and Plants being destroyed by them, it was found more convenient to unpeople, than inhabit the Island. 3. Perestrello returned home. Iohn Gon∣zales 1419. and Tristan Vaz, making another Voy∣age, discovered afar off something like a Cloud, and directing their Course to it, found an Island covered with all manner of Trees, whence they gave it the name Ma∣dera, which in Spanish is Wood. This Island for Extent, pleasant Air and Plenty is the chief in that Western Ocean. Each Discoverer entred a different part of the Island, and each had a Grant of that Part from the Prince, with the Title of Captain. Tristan gave his name to that Point where he landed, and Iohn Gonzales took to him∣self the Title of Camara de Lobos, or Den of Wolves, because of a Cave he found at landing, which seemed to be the habitation of those Beasts. The Prince gave the Island of Puerto Santo to Perestrello to people, which proved in vain by reason of the vast multi∣tude of Rabbets. The Discoverers of Ma∣dera
began to settle their Plantation, by firing part of that Wood that filled the Island; and the Flame took such possession, that it burnt seven years continually, and was seen far off in Smoak and Sparks like Mount Aetna; so that afterwards the Island being plentiful of Grain, the greatest want the Inhabitants suffered was of Wood, there having been nothing else in it before. There were Churches built, and now there is a Cathedral. King Duarte, Brother to the Prince, gave him the Island, and after∣wards the Spiritualities thereof to the Mili∣tary Order of Christ. 4. The Prince had spent twelve years en∣deavouring the discovery of Guinea, and was now much encouraged by the discove∣ry of these two Islands, though many con∣demned his undertakings, objecting, That the Land he looked for, was only Deserts, like those of Libia; that if any reached those Parts, they would turn black; that King Iohn, his Father, had invited Stran∣gers to plant in Portugal, so far from send∣ing out people, of which the Country was in want; that God had appointed those Countries for the habitation of Wild Beasts, which might appear by that they were ex∣pelled that new Island by the Rabbets. All this time the Prince's undertakings were not only censured, but almost fruitless, till he sent Galianez in a Barque, who passed that, till then, Invincible Cape Boxador, which action was then in the common Opinion looked upon not inferior to the labours of Hercules.
5. Gilianes returned in his Barque with 1434. Alonso Gonzales Balday, in a bigger Vessel than the former, and passed 30 Leagues be∣yond the Cape, where landing, they saw a great track of Men and Camels. Without any further knowledge they returned home, giving the name of Angra de Ruyvos to that Bay, (in English, Bay of Gurnets) because they found there great quantity of that Fish. The next year the Design was conti∣nued 1435. and they passed twelve Leagues far∣ther. Here putting ashore two Men on Horseback, who going on till the Afternoon, saw nineteen Men with Javelins, who fled and were pursued, and some wounded, and one of the Portugueses; the first Blood spilt in those Parts. Baldaya having notice there∣of, went ashore, but in vain, for the Moors fled; in the Cave where the Moors had been were found some things of inconsiderable value, but esteemed as an Omen of greater advantages. They run on twelve Leagues farther, where at the Mouth of a River they saw so many Sea-Wolves, they judged them to be 5000; they killed many, and brought the Skins, which being a novelty, were then had in esteem. Going farther in∣to the Land, they found Fishing Nets dry∣ing, but no People, and their Provisions being spent, they were obliged to return to their Prince without any further pro∣gress. 6. Antony Gonzales was sent back to the 1440. place of the Sea-Wolves, with orders to load his Vessel with their Skins. One night
he went up the Country eight Leagues with ten Men, and spying a naked Man with two Darts in his hand driving a Camel, he came up and took him, the Man with the fright neither defending himself, nor endea∣vouring to escape. In his return he met a company of forty Moors, and one Woman, whom they also took in their sight with∣out resistance; these were the first taken on that Coast. Returning aboard they found another Ship was arrived there from Portu∣gal under Command of Nunno Tristan; with this addition of strength they went ashore again, and met people at night, and being so close that they lost the use of their Wea∣pons, clasped each other in Arms, and knew not whom they held, but by being naked and cloathed, and the strangeness of the Language; they killed three and re∣turned to their Ships with ten Prisoners. This Place they called Puerto del Cavallero, or the Knights Port, Antony Gonzales being there knighted by Nunno Tristan. An Arab that was on board understood these Moors; him and the Woman they put ashore to per∣swade the Inhabitants to redeem the Priso∣ners. Next day appeared about 150, some on Camels, some on Horseback, provoking our Men to Land, but finding they did not, discharged a Volley of Stones at them and went off. Antony Gonzales returned to Por∣tugal with some Slaves. Tristan having first careen'd, coasted on as far as Cabo Blanco, or White Cape, where though he saw the track of People, meeting none, he returned home.
7. Antony Gonzales returns, carrying with 1442. him the chief of the Moors he had brought, he promising to give seven Guinea Slaves for his ransom, but once ashore forgot his promise, yet giving notice in the Country, others came to redeem the two Young Men that were Prisoners, giving for them ten Blacks of several Countries, and a conside∣rable quantity of Gold Dust, which was the first brought from those parts. There∣fore a Rivulet that runs up about six Leagues was called Rio del Oro, or River of Gold. This and a Shield of Buck-skin and some Ostriches Eggs they brought home, all men admiring the colour of the Slaves. The Gold stirred up covetous desires, and en∣couraged 1443. Nunno Tristan to undertake again the Voyage, and passing farther, discovered the Island Adeget, one of those of Arguim, and saw twenty Almadies or Boats passing over from the Continent, four men in each, sitting in such manner that they rowed with their Legs. Tristan launching his Boat with seven men, chased them and brought fourteen aboard, and going back for the rest, they had reached the Island. Hence they went over to another Island, which they called De las Garcas, or Island of Hauks, because of the vast numbers they saw there, and took some. 8. The Profit encreasing, the desire of it also encreased. Some came from several 1444. parts to Portugal to admire those Rarities the Natives brought. Lancelot the Prince's Servant, Galianes who first passed Cape Bo∣jador,
Stephen Alonso, Roderick Alvarez and Iohn Diaz erected a Company in the Town of Lagos, paying an acknowledgment to the Prince, they asked leave to pursue these dis∣coveries, and set out with six Caravels, whereof the first was Commander in chief; arriving at the Island, de las Garzas, Martin Vincent and Giles Vasquez with each fourteen Souldiers in their Boats, went over to the Island Nar, where falling upon a Town, they killed many and brought away 155 Prisoners, all Moors. The Captain Lancelot desiring to do the like, attacked Tider and other Islands, where he took above forty Prisoners, which he presented to the Prince, and was well rewarded. 9. Gonzalo de Cintra set out with one Ship, and coming to the Island Arguim, run up 1445. a Creek at night, intending to go ashore, but the Tide ebbing he stuck, and in the morning 200 Moors coming upon him, he was killed with seven of his company. These were the first Portugueses killed in these Attempts, and from the Captain that place took name, being called Angra de Gonçalo de Cintra, fourteen Leagues beyond Rio del Oro. Antony Gonzales, Iames Alonso and Gomez Perez set out in three Caravels 1446. bound for that River, with orders to treat of the conversion of these Barbarians, of Peace and Trade. The Proposals were not received, and they returned, bringing back one of the People of the Continent who came voluntarily to see our Country; and one of ours, called Iohn Fernandez remain∣ed
there with the same design. Next Nunno Tristan made another Voyage, and brought twenty Slaves from a neighbouring Village, Dinis Fernandez in another Vessel passing the Mouth of the River Sanaga, which divides the Azanagi from Ialof, took four Blacks who were fishing in an Almadie or Boat. Sailing forward, he discovered the famous Cabo Verde, and returned satisfied with this exploit, and having killed a great many Goats in an Island. 10. Antony Gonzales, Garcia Mendez and Iames Alonso, though separated by a Storm, 1447. met again in the Islands of Arguim: Falling upon a Village they took 25 Moors, they flying, he that ran best took most, as Lau∣rence Diaz who took seven, whilst others took but one, and some none. They called this Point, Cabo del Resoate, or Cape of Ransom, because some Blacks were ransomed there. The joy was the more for that they found Iohn Fernandez, who was left there the last Voyage, he was fat and in health, though rough like the Inhabitants. He told them, that the Country being all plane and open they often lost their way, and therefore were guided, as at Sea, by the Stars, the Winds, and by Birds. That the Inhabitants lived miserably, feeding on a certain Grain which the Earth produces without tilling, on some Herbs, Lizards and Locusts, all scorched in the Sun, which is predominant, that place lying under the Tropick of Cancer. That they used much Milk, not only as Meat, but Drink, by reason of the scarcity
of Water; and therefore when they eat any Meat they never kill the Female, because of the Milk; those near the Sea eat some Fish. When they were acquainted with our People, and they gave them Corn, they eat it whole. The Land is Barren being all Sand, bears a few Palm and Wild Fig-trees, they have no Houses but Tents, their Cloaths are Skins, and the better and neater sort wear Alhaiques, which is not unlike our Crape, and the best, some better sort of Cloath, but none good; their Employ∣ment is the care of Cattle, their Language and Writings the same with those of the Coasts of Barbary, with only about as much difference as is between the Castillians and those of Gallicia; they have no King, and live by Hords or Companies. Returning home with this Account of Iohn Fernandez, at Cabo Blanco they killed some Moors and took 55. 11. Dinisianez da Gram, Alvaro Gil and Mafaldo de Setubal, with each a Caravel, landed in the Island Arguim, where they took seven Moors, and by the help of them forty seven afterwards. They ran along the Coast of the Continent eighty Leagues, and at several times took fifty Slaves, losing seven Portugueses, whose Boat being left dry by the Ebb in the Island de las Garzas, they were all killed. Lancelot, who once be∣fore had commanded a small Fleet, sailed from Lagos again towards Arguim as Ad∣miral of fourteen Vessels. At the same time set out from Madera, Alvaro and Dinis
Fernandez and Iohn de Castilla and others, who all together with the former fourteen, made up twenty seven Sail: Nine of the fourteen of Lagos came to Arguim, where Dinisianez was, who persuaded them to de∣stroy the Island in revenge of the seven that had been killed, but the Moors under∣standing the danger, fled; so that only twelve were found, whereof only four could be ta∣ken, the rest killed, as also one of our men. Alvaro de Freytas returned with his three Ships. Lancelot with his sailed to the Island Tider, landed, and finding no People, return∣ed aboard, where seeing some Moors from the Shoar jearing our men, because they could not find them, two of our men were so provoked that they leaped into the Wa∣ter with their Arms, and swam to shoar to the Moors, who ran down to receive them. Others of our men seeing the danger those two were in, leaped after them, and on the shoar was a sharp skirmish; many of the Moors were killed and sixty taken. This done Suero da Costa and three more return∣ed home. In a Village at Cape Blanco they took nine Moors, among them a Woman, who, promising a great Ransom, deceived Suero, for at the Island Tider the bold Wo∣man who could swim very well, leaped over-board and gained her liberty by swim∣ming ashoar. Lancelot and others unwilling to return without some Loading, as light as they came out, designed to sail to Zahara of the Azanagi and Guinea, but after some small attempts resolved for the Island of
Palma. They touched at Gomera and were received by two Commanders Piste and Bru∣cho in acknowledgment of some kindness they had received from Prince Henry. They discovered to them the design, and taking them along landed in Palma, all they got was seventeen Prisoners, but among them was a very large Morish Woman, who was said to be Queen of part of that Island. They returned to Gomera, and Iohn de Castilla dissatisfied with the small Prize, base and ingratefully carried away Captives about twenty Islanders who were his Friends and had assisted him. Which wrong the Prince amended by sending them back well cloathed. 12. Gomera and Palma are of the num∣ber of the Canary Islands. The Canaries were discovered for King Henry the Third of Spain by Iohn de Betancour a Frenchman; among them he conquered those called Lancarote, Fuerteventura and Ferro. In them he left Masiot de Betancour his Nephew who conquered Gomera, and exchanging them with Prince Henry for some Land in Made∣ra, he went and lived there. And because the Islands being twelve in number, there remained eight not conquered, viz. Gran Canaria, Palma, Graciosa Infierno, Alegranca Santa Clara, Roche and Lobos; the Prince sent a Fleet in which were 2500 Foot and 120 Lances, commanded by Don Fernando de Castro, who landing there, converted ma∣ny Infidels. But there being complaints made from Spain to whom that Conquest appertain∣ed
it was given over. Afterwards King Henry the Fourth of Portugal gave them to D. Mar∣tin de Ataide Count of Atonguia. And lastly, in the Treaty between Alfonso of Portugal, and Ferdinand of Castile it was agreed they belonged to Castile. The Inhabitants of these Islands were governed by a certain number of Persons, they varied in their Worship, in Fight they used no Weapons but Sticks and Stones, their Cloathing up∣wards was Skins, the lower part a covering made of Palm-leaves of divers Colours; they took off their Beard with sharp Stones, their Governours had the Maidenheads of all Women that married, they feasted their Guests with them at their visits, the Chil∣dren sucked Goats, their common food Wheat and Barley, Milk, Herbs, Mice, Li∣zards and Snakes. 13. Lancelot being homeward bound, dis∣covered the River Ovedec, which he called Sanaga, because a Black of that name was released there. It was then believed to be one of the Branches of Nile, because they were informed it ran far to the Eastward. Stephen Alonso in a small Boat went up the River, and took two Blacks with considera∣ble opposition made by their Father. Ro∣derick Anez and Dinis Diaz were here sepa∣rated from the rest by a great Storm and arrived in Portugal. Lancelot steering to∣ward Cape Verde, went ashore upon an Island, where he found nothing but Goats, and these words cut on the Bark of a Tree, TALENT DE BIEN FAIRE.
This was Prince Henric's Motto, whereby he expressed his designs, and gave Lancelot to understand the Portugueses had been there before; - it was Alvaro Fernandez of Madera that was there. He stood along the Shoar, whilst Gomez Perez going up close in a Boat, threw a Looking-Glass and a Sheet of Paper with a Crucifix on it upon the Land to some Blacks that were there, who breaking and tearing them to pieces, poured in a Volley of Arrows, for which our men design'd to be revenged next day; but a great Storm which dispersed all our Ships prevented the execution. Laurence Diaz got home first, Gomez Perez put in at Rio del Oro, whence he brought one Slave, and many Skins of Sea-Wolves, and found the people there somewhat tractable. Al∣varo Freytas and Vincent Diaz in the Island Tider took fifty nine Slaves. Diniz Fernan∣dez and Palacano at Cape St. Ann, took nine more; twelve of our men swimming ashore for them. With these and such like small successes, they all returned home, having lost one small Vessel, but the men saved. 14. Nunno Tristan run 60 Leagues beyond Cape Verde, and anchoring at the Mouth of Rio Grande, or the Great River, he run up in his Boat, and soon discovered eighty Blacks in thirteen Almadies or Boats, who surrounded him, and poured in their poi∣soned Arrows in such manner that they killed most of his men before they could get aboard, where he also died, none esca∣ping without a Wound. Only four men
were left in the Ship brought her home, after two months wandring in the Sea with∣out knowing which way to steer. Alvaro Fernandez prosecuted the same Voyage, and went 40 Leagues beyond Tristan, killing with his own hand the Lord of a Village whereby was put to flight a multitude that oppressed him. At their return to the Ship they took two Women. He came to the River Tabite, where he was wounded, being attacked by the Blacks in five Almadies. Gilianes and others set out with ten Caravels, carrying with them the Prisoners unjustly seized by Iohn de Castilla. They put in at Cape Verde, where they were beaten and lost five men. They throve better among the Moors, and therefore returned to Ar∣guim where they made forty eight Slaves, and at their return in Palma, two Women which had cost them dear, had not Iames Gonzales with a Cross-bow killed seven of the Islanders, and among them their King, who lead them with a Palm in his hand in token of his Soveraignty, and our Victory. 15. Gomez Perez deceived by some Moors of Rio del Oro, who had promised a great ransom, was revenged by bringing away eighty Slaves the same year. Next year set out Iames Giles Homen with orders from 1448. the Prince to settle a Trade with the Moors of Meca or Messa, 12 Leagues beyond Cape Gue, where he got fifty Blacks for eighteen he carried with him, and returned being drove away by a storm. Here was left be∣hind against his will Iohn Fernandez, he
who voluntarily staid before among the Azanagi. They brought a Lion, which was then much looked upon in Lisbon. The Fame of these Attempts flew so, that it brought from the King of Denmarks Court a Gentleman called Ballarte; a person ca∣pable and desirous of great Designs. He was well recommended by his King to the Prince, who at his Suit sent him with Fer∣dinand Alonso who then went Embassador to the King of Cape Verde. They were rea∣dy to receive him in hostile manner, but were appealed when two Blacks, who were the Interpreters, told them our design, the chief points whereof were the shewing them the Light of the Gospel, and teaching them a more civilized way of living. Their Farim or Governour, being informed here∣of came down to the Shoar, and sent an account of our arrival to his King. Mean while they began peaceably to trade. Some Elephants Teeth stirred up a desire in Bal∣larte to see one alive. A Black offered to shew him one, and treacherously slew him and some of our men, which obliged us not to stay the coming of that King. 16. King Duarte reigned but a short time. His Son Alonso the Fifth succeeded him, being but six years of Age; at seventeen he took upon him the Government; Prince Peter, Brother of the Discoverer, having ruled for him those eleven years. Because from this time the Discoveries were mana∣ged upon the King's account; we will conclude with a description of this great
Undertaker. Prince Henry, the Beginner and Author of the South and Eastern disco∣veries, was of a proportionable bigness, his Limbs gross and strong, his Skin white and fair, his Hair strong and rough, his Coun∣tenance was terrible to such as were not acquainted; for in the greatest heats he was more governed by Meekness than Passion; he had a grave and graceful Gate; he was very circumspect and cautious in his words; plain in his Person, as far as suitable with his Quality; patient in Troubles, valiant in Danger, skilled in Learning, the best Ma∣thematician of his Age, very liberal, ex∣tream zealous for Religion; he was not known to be given to any Vice; he never married, nor was it heard that he sinned against Continency; his Memory and Pru∣dence were equal to his Authority: He died at Sagres in the year 1463. and the 67th of his Age; he lies with his Father in the most noble Church of Batalla.
CHAP. II. Discoveries under King Alfonso the Fifth, from the Year 1448. to the Year 1471. 1. KING Alfonso the Fifth took upon him the Government, and prosecu∣ted as his Uncle had done, those discove∣ries. The first step he gave was a grant 1448. to the Prince, that none without his leave should pass Cape Bojador; and also the fifth and tenth of all things brought from thence. The differences between the King and his Uncle Prince Peter, were a great stop to these affairs. Leave was granted the Prince to plant the Islands Azores, disco∣vered 1449. by Gonzalo Vello; they are seven in number, their Names St. Michael, St. Mary, Iesus or Tercera, Graciosa, Pico, Fayall, Flores and Cuervo, which lies farthest to the West∣ward, as does the first to the Eastward. They differ not much in Latitude, being about the same with Lisbon. The reason why they were so called, is from a great number of Hauks, which they call Azores, that were seen there when first discovered. In the last was found the Statue of a Man on Horseback, with a Cloak, but no Hat, his Left Hand on the Horses Main, the Right pointing to the West; there were some Let∣ters carved on the lower Rock, but not un∣derstood. It seemed to point out America. Because in the Islands of Argm there was
trading for Gold and Blacks; the King or∣dered a Fort to be built in one of the Islands, and called by the same name; it was erected by Suero Mendez, who was Com∣mander of it. At this time also were disco∣vered the Islands of Cape Verde by Antony Nole a Genoese, sent by that Republick to Portugal. He also discovered the Island 1460. called Mayo, or May, because he arrived there the first day of that Month. Next day he saw the other two, which he named St. Philip and St. Iacob. The names of those not yet mentioned, are Fuego, Brava, Boavista Sal, St. Nicholas, St. Lucy, St. Vin∣cent, St. Antony, in all ten. They are com∣monly called of Cape Verde, for that they lie 100 Leagues to the Westward of it. Pedro de Cintra, and Suero de Costa went as far as Sierra Leona. 2. So great were the hopes of the Guinea Trade, and the returns stirred up covetous∣ness, so that the King farmed this Trade to Fernando Gomez for 500 Ducats, a small sum in comparison of their present great∣ness. He was obliged to continue the disco∣veries 1471. 500 Leagues farther in five years. He fortunately discovered the Trade of Oro de la Mina, or the Gold of the Mine by Iohn de Santaren and Peter de Escobar. They went as far as Cape St. Catharine 37 Leagues beyond Cape Lope Gonzales in two Degrees and half of South Latitude. For this discovery was added to him the Sirname of Mina, and he was made Noble. Ferdinand Po discovered the Island which he called Hermosa, or
Beautiful, which name it changed for the Discoverers. The last discovery during the reign of King Alonso, was that of Cape St. Catharine, so called because discovered on her day. There were other discoveries before this, as the Coast from whence was brought the first Cochinilla, which the Itali∣ans (knowing the Value, but not the Name) call Grana del Paraiso, or Scarlet of Paradise, they had it from the Moors of this part of Guinea, who crossing the Country Mandin∣ga and Deserts of Libia, brought it to the Port Mundibarca in the Mediterranean. Now were found the Islands St. Thomas, Anno Bueno, and Principe, all neglected, the King being wholy bent upon Africk. How little these places were minded, may appear by this, that a Spanish Fleet commanded by Gar∣cia de Loaysa, Knight of Malta, arriving at the Maluco Islands the year 1525. he found there were Portugueses there before it was known in Portugal, and found in two degrees of South Latitude, the Island of St. Mathew not inhabited, but with footsteps of the Portu∣gues, several Fruit-trees, and tame Cattle, carved on the Bark of a Tree, that our men had been there 87 years before, and the French Motto of Prince Henry, Talent de bien Faire. It was the custom of those Sailers to leave this Motto in all places where they landed.
CHAP. III. Discoveries and Conquests under King John the Second, from the Tear 1481. till the Tear 1495. 1. KING Iohn the Second, who suc∣ceeded his Father Alonso, consider∣ing the Riches of the Countries discovered encreased his Revenue, and finding the Na∣tives inclined to receive the Faith, ordered a Fort to be raised in that part where was the Trade of Gold called Mina. To this end he fitted out twelve Vessels laden with all Materials for the Work, from the Stones of the Foundation to the Tiles, with Pro∣visions for 600 Men, 500 of them Souldiers, the rest Workmen. The Commander was Iames de Azambuja. At his arrival he con∣firmed the Peace some time before conclu∣ded with that People. He acquainted the Prince of it (called Camaransa) with his arrival and intention. He landed to take possession, and set up the Portugal Colours upon a Tree; at the Foot of it he made an Altar, and caused to be celebrated the first Mass that had been in those parts. He prepared himself to receive the Black King, who came attended with many of his Sub∣jects naked, save that from their Waste downward, hung Monkies Skins or cover∣ing made of Palm-leaves: All armed, some with Shields and Javelins, others Bows and
Arrows; some had Skins for Helmets, in such manner they appeared more ridiculous than terrible. The Prince's Legs and Arms were covered with plates of Gold; on his Neck a Chain, with many small Bells, and Tags to his Beard. Before him went a great number of Instruments, more noisie than harmonious; all that were known were Tabors, Horns and Bells. He met the Cap∣tain with a grave and pleasing Countenance; the Captain received him with Gravity and Magnificence. The Black took his hand in token of Peace, the same the chief Men about him: After the Ceremonies (different in the Nations, but all vain and imperti∣nent) Azambuja laid open his Kings design, which was first to instruct him in the Chri∣stian Faith, and conceal our Covetousness, asking leave to build a House for our Men to live in, which was to be a Fort to offend them upon occasion. I do not pretend to persuade the World, our only design was to Preach, on condition it be believed it was not only to Trade. 2. The Portuges Captain was heard with wonderful attention, and the proposal of Religion admitted, but that of the House or Fort rejected; for they are Barbarians in our conceit, but not for their own Interests. Azambuja pressed, and Caramansa yielded and retired. The Workmen began to break a Rock for the Work, and the Blacks who adored it (taking that as an Affront) drove them away. Azambuja took the wisest course, and running to them, pacified them
with many Gifts, not of value, but such as pleased. The Fort finished was called St. George, for the particular devotion the King had to that Saint. As it encreased it gained the name and priviledge of a City. Azam∣buja remained there with 60 men, and sent back the Fleet laden with Gold. He held that Government three years, he gave it up with Honour (a thing rare among the Por∣tugueses) and was honourably rewarded. 3. The King began to take the Title of Lord of Guinea. The Custom till now had been to set up Wooden Crosses in all the new Discoveries; the King ordered for the future to carry them of Stone with the Kings and Captains Names, the Time when, by whom, and by whose Order erected. The first of 1484. these was Iames Cam, who passing Cape Catharine (the last of King Alonso's disco∣veries) came to the River Congo in the King∣dom of the same Name, by the Inhabitants called Zagre. He went up the River, and saw on both sides Blacks, but were not un∣derstood by those he carried with him. By signs he found they had a King, and that he resided far off. He sent him Presents (the most powerful Arguments of Embassadors) but finding the Men that carried them stay long, he set sail, bringing some Blacks home with him. King Iohn was well pleased to see them, and dispatched again the same Iames Cam, sending back with him the Blacks joyful, with many Presents he gave them, but above all with the recovery of their Liberty. The first part of his In∣structions
was the Conversion of those Infi∣dels. At his arrival he restored those Blacks to their Prince, and received the Men he left behind, with mutual admiration. Fol∣lowing on the Discovery, he ran 20 Leagues farther, setting up the Cross he called St. Augustin, in 13 degrees of South Latitude, and another in 22. At his return to Congo, having seen the King, he found in him such an affection to our People and Religion, that he sent with him to Portugal some Sons of his Chief Men, desiring they should be baptized, and being made Christians return∣ed, and with them Ministers to instruct them in the Faith. They were baptized at Beja, where the King and Queen were God∣father and Godmother to the chief of them, and he called D. Iohn, his Heathen Name being Zacuta; the same was done by the Nobility, with the others, whose Names and Sirnames they took. Betwixt the Fort of St. George and Congo, is the Kingdom of Benin. The King hereof covetous of the advantages he saw others reap by our Trade, feigned he would be converted, and desired Priests for his instruction; but they being sent, the design was discovered, and so the effect ceased, but not the covetousness; for those Heathens bought Christned Slaves, and we with the same avarice sold them, after be∣ing baptized, knowing their new Masters would again make them fall into Idolatry. This lasted till the Religious King, Iohn the Third, forbid it, though to his great loss; but God who gives an hundred for
one, to requite him ordered that another Gold Mine should be discovered below that of St. George, whence much more was gather∣ed without a Crime, than had been before by that so scandalous a Trafick. 4. King Iohn was informed by the Benin Embassador, who came to desire the Priests should be sent them, that 250 Leagues be∣yond them was the most powerful Prince of all those Countries, called Ogane, by whom the Kings of Benin for their security were confirmed, receiving of him a Staff with a Head and a Cross like that of Malta, all of Brass curiously wrought. An Embas∣sador went with Rich Presents to solicit these Ensigns of Royalty, who never saw Ogane, because he speaks from behind Cur∣tains, but at their departure shews a Foot, in token that he grants their Request. Our King imagined this Prince might be he that is vulgarly called Prester Iohn, by compa∣ring these Formalities with what he had heard reported of him. He fitted out three Ships, commanded by Bartholomew Dias; he set up a Cross in 24 degrees of South Lati∣tude, 120 Leagues beyond the other Dis∣coverers in Sierra Parda. He sailed in sight of the Bay they called de los Vaqueros, or of Herdsmen, because of the many Cows they saw there; beyond this they touched at the small Island Santa Cruz, or Holy Cross, so called from one he set up: 25 Leagues far∣ther they came into the mouth of a River which they called del Infante, the Sirname of the second Captain, who was the first
that saw it. Being about returning they dis∣covered that so many Ages unknown Pro∣montory, which they called Tormentoso, or Stormy, because of a great Tempest they met with there; but our King gave it the name of Cabo de Buena Esperança, or Cape of Good Hope, for the great hopes it gave of discovering the Indies. There was set up the Cross St. Philip. The two first Ships coasting along met the third with only three men aboard, having lost it nine Months be∣fore with nine Men in it then. With meer joy of seeing the others (a strange, but not unheard of death) one of the three died, the other six had been killed by the Blacks. With various fortune observing the discover∣ed Country they arrived in their own, the extent of Land till then found out, being 750 Leagues. 5. Whilst these Discoverers conquered the difficulties of the Seas; Peter de Covillam and Alfonso de Payva travelled by Land, who came first to Naples, then to Rodes, to Alex∣andria, Grand Cair, then with a Caravan of Moors to Toro on the Coasts of Arabia. Here they parted, Payva towards India and Covillam for Aethiopia, having appointed a time when to meet again at Grand Cair. Co∣villam went to Cananor, Calecut and Goa (fa∣mous Cities in the East) passed thence to Zofala in Aethiopia, then to Aden at the Mouth of the Red Sea on the side of Arabia, and at last to Grand Cair, where he found his Companion had died. After these had been sent out two Jews, Rabbi Abraham of
Beja, and Ioseph of Lamego. Covillam sent back the latter to inform the King of his success, with the other he embarqued for Ormuz, where having observed what was most remarkable, he left the Jew to follow the Caravans of Aleppo, and returning to the Red Sea came to discover the Court of Prester Iohn, who detained him there as a Spie. But while he was detained, travel∣led from Rome, Luke Mark, an Aethiopian Priest, sent by Prester Iohn to our King. This Priest's information revived the Kings hopes and desires, and he was sent back with an Account of what means had been used to settle a Correspondence, and Pro∣jects for the perfecting of it. 6. Before Luke Mark parted from Portugal, was arrived Bemoi Prince of Ialof. He came with State, and was received accord∣ingly, being conducted to Court by Don Francisco Coutinno Count of Marialva. His strangeness did not cause so much admirati∣on, as he conceived of the Majesty and Grandeur with which the King received him under his Royal Canopy. This was the cause of his coming. Biran who reigned in Ialof, giving himself up to all manner of Vice, resigned the Kingdom to his Brother Bemoi, with the reputation of delivering it to a Person in all respects worthy of the Royal-dignity. But Cibitah the elder Bro∣ther, envious of Bemoi's happiness, kills Bi∣ran, and seizing the Government, makes War upon Bemoi, who with the assistance of Gonzalo Coello, sent by King Iohn, made
some resistance. This relief was sent him by reason of the hopes he gave of receiving the Faith. But it being suspected he only designed to make use of the Portugues as∣sistance, the Captain was ordered to leave him, which was a great grief to Bemoi. He gave such excuses for not being presently baptized as seemed sufficient, and losing soon after a Battle, he went to Portugal to seek a more favourable turn of Fortune. 7. It was no small part of his Fortune to 1489. be received by so great a Prince, but above all to the hopes of Eternal Happiness, being soon after baptized by the name of Iohn, which he took from the King who was Godfather. Next day he gave him Arms, Purpure a Cross Or within an Orle of Por∣tugal. He in return did homage to the King for all the Lands he should be posses∣sed of. Twenty four Gentlemen of his Re∣tinue were baptized with him. There was great rejoycing, our People shewing their grandeur in such divertisements as were most in use then; and Bemoi with his Re∣tinue giving a view of their Activity in Ri∣ding, Alighting, and Mounting upon a Speed, standing upright on the Saddle Gal∣loping, and some in their Career took up Stones off the Ground, and much more, worthy admiration. The King furnished him with twenty Caravels well manned and armed, as well to forward his Restoration as to build a Fort on the River Zanaga. 8. The Province of Ialof lies between the two famous Rivers Gambea, or rather Rio
Grande and Zanaga, so called by the Portu∣gueses from a Prince of that Name, whom they spoke with when they discovered it; it has other names in the several Countries it runs through, and makes many Islands, most as being uncooth, inhabited only by Wild Beasts. It is navigable 150 Leagues up, where a ridge of perpendicular Rocks crosses it in such manner, that the Water falling down, forms an Arch, under which Travellers pass dry, and pleasant to behold, but makes a hideous noise with the fall. The Gambea, or Rio Grande, runs 180 Leagues, and carries more Water; it is not all Navi∣gable, but runs with less noise, though fill∣ed with many Rivers that water the Coun∣try Mandinga. Both these Rivers flow out of the famous Niger, and may as well be esteemed but so many Mouths thereof. There is great variety of Fish in these Ri∣vers, and several other Creatures along them, as Horses, Crocodiles and Serpents with Wings; the other Beasts that abound are Elephants, Ounces, Wild Boars, and a many more. Great are the numbers of them, and wonderful their variety and different forms. The Waters of the two Rivers mixt cause Vomiting, yet each asunder does not. In this part is that great Cape called Cabo Verde, by Ptolome C. Assinarium, in about 14 degrees of North Latitude. The Country runs 170 Leagues Eastward, is most fruitful, and has many populous Cities. To Tombotu the Mart of Mandingo Gold, resort the Merchants of Grand Cair, Tunez, Oran, Tremisen, Fez, Moroc∣co,
and other places. This trade moved King Iohn to build the Fort on the River Zanaga. The 20 Caravels were commanded by Peter Vaz de Cunna, who landing with D. Iohn Bemoi the King, and beginning to raise the Fort in the place assigned, either suspecting that he deceived him, or fearing to die in that Country, basely killed the King, en∣deavouring with that Foul Crime to hide another not so hainous, which was to return without finishing the Work, and in fine he came back without any effect. 9. The Congo Embassador being well in∣structed 1490. in the Faith, was sent home with three Ships. Sono was the first Land they made, and arrived safe at Congo. They were joyfully received by an Old Lord called Manisono, Uncle to that King, who desired to be baptized. An Altar was erected in 1491. the Field, and he was admitted to this Sa∣crament by the name of Manuel, and his Son by that of Antony, in the presence of 25000 of their People, this being the first time that Sacrament was there administred. The King of Congo, Nephew to this Lord, hearing what he had done, added to his Estate, and caused all the Idols within his Dominions to be destroyed. The King made his residence at Ambasse Congo 50 Leagues distant, where he received Ruy de Sousa the Portugal Commander, on an Ivo∣ry Chair, placed on a Lofty Throne. From the Waste upwards he was naked, the lower part wrapt in Sky-colour Damask, on the Left Arm a Bracelet of Brass; from his
Shoulder hung a curious Horse-tail, a Royal Badge among them; on his Head a thing like a Miter, of a delicate Webb, made of Palm, which resembles wrought Velvet. Af∣ter the Ceremonies, he desired to see the Holy Vestments: He viewed them with de∣liberation and respect, in presence of his Queen, Children and the Chief of the Court. Then he gave leave to build a Church, which was done in few days, of the invoca∣tion of the Holy Cross, because begun the day of that Feast in May. In this Church was baptized the King, and some of his Peo∣ple, there being above 100000 present, as well for that they flocked to see the Novel∣ty, as because they were preparing for a Neighbouring War. The King was called Iohn, and the Queen Ellenor, in honour of our Sovereigns. Afterwards were baptized the greatest part of those had flocked thi∣ther. The New Christian King went to meet his Enemy, relying more on his Con∣version, and the Cross in the Colours he had received from Ruy de Sousa, than in 80000 men he had in Arms, nor were his hopes vain, he returned with Victory, and Ruy de Sousa to Portugal with the honour of having compleated one of the most famous under∣takings of this Crown, leaving in that King∣dom People capable to labour the New Vineyard. 10. Afterwards was baptized the Prince, who had been absent in the Wars, and call∣ed Alfonso. Panso Aquitimo, the King's Se∣cond Son, would not receive the Faith, and
the Father falling off, because as a Christian he could be allowed but one Wife, resolved to leave the Crown to the Heathen Aquitimo, in wrong of the Prince who continued con∣stant in the Faith. Alfonso was abroad in banishment when his Father died, but re∣turning to Court was received as King. Aquitimo having recourse to the Sword, fell upon him when he had but thirty seven Christians, as well-Portugueses as Blacks; yet under the Banner of the Cross Alfonso overcame a vast multitude of Infidels, Aqui∣timo being taken and then slain. A Gentle∣man that accompanied Aquitimo desired to be baptized immediately, declaring they had been overcome by a Glorious Army that was lead by a Cross, and not by the thirty seven Christians. Alfonso established in peace, destroyed all Idols, and propaga∣ted the Faith with great zeal. He sent his Sons, Grandsons and Nephews to Portugal to study. Two of them were worthily af∣terwards Bishops in those parts. In memory of that Victory, and of the first Colours sent this King, as also that the Faith was first planted on the day of the invention of the Cross; he took for his Arms, Gules, a Cross Fleury Argent between two Crosses Pattee, charged with the Arms of Portu∣gal. 11. The beginning of the Year 1493, 1493. came into the River of Lisbon, Christopher Columbus, who brought from an Island (guessed to be that of Sipango) some Men, Gold, and great tokens of Riches. This
Great Man some time before had offered his service to King Iohn, who having slighted him then, looked on him now with some regret, and he provoked him with some extravagant words in revenge of the small regard made of him. There were some who offered to kill him, as well to pu∣nish his Boldness, as to conceal from Spain his Discoveries. But the King sent him away with honour: Columbus was a Genoese, and learned Navigation in Portugal; he was employed by the King of Spain, and he had sent him to the Discovery he now came from. King Iohn did not envy the For∣tune of Spain, but feared that Discovery was part of what the Portugueses had been so long in quest of. This caused him to fit out a Fleet commanded by D. Francisco de Almeyda in order to oppose those proceed∣ings, judging he had right on his side, but it proved not so. Several Embassies passed on both sides to agree the business, and at last came to a conclusion. 12. Though Prince Bemoi was dead, the hopes of making a farther progress in that Country about Zanaga died not with him. They who went in that Fleet had not per∣formed what they were sent for, but dis∣covered more Land, and gained the good will of the Natives. The Trade was after∣wards continued, and a good correspon∣dence between our King and those Princes. Peter de Evora and Goncalo Anez went to those of Turucol and Tombotu. Roderick Re∣belo, Peter Reynel, and Iohn Colaco and others
carried Presents to Mandimansa and Temala of the Fouli, the most warlike of all those People. The King had also correspondence with him of the Moses, very famous in that Age; and with Mahomet Ben Manzugul, Grandson of Muza, and King of Songo (a populous City of Mandinga) who receiving a full account of our King said, That none of 444 from whom he was descended, had any knowledge of more powerful Kings than four, which were those of Alimaen, Baldac, Grand Cayre and Tucurol. At this same time the King laboured to settle a Factory in the City Huadem, 70 Leagues to the Eastward of Arguim, as well for the Trade of Gold, as to have some intelligence of Prester Iohn, which he solicited by all means. Many were sent to these Discove∣ries by Land. But Death put a stop to King Iohn's farther progress in these affairs; but cannot obscure the Glory due to him for propagating the Christian Faith in so remote parts, building the Forts of Arguim and St. George de la Mina, which fixed the Sove∣reignty of Portugal in Guinea that abounds in Gold, Ivory and all other Riches and Plen∣ty, and the Gate that opened a way to the most Heroick Actions afterwards performed by the Portugues Arms.
CHAP. IV. Discoveries under King Emanuel, from the Year 1497, when he sent out Vas∣co de Gama, till the Year 1500. 1. KING Emanuel inherited not only 1497. his Predecessors Kingdom, but his earnest desire of finding a shorter passage by Sea to the East Indies. This attempt was generally condemned by the greater num∣ber, but carried by the more prevalent Judg∣ments. The King being in the Town of Estremoz, when he appointed Vasco de Gama to Command the Fleet he designed to send. This was a Gentleman of sufficient Quality, Ability and Spirit for such a difficult En∣terprise. The King honour'd him expres∣sing the great confidence he had in him, and delivered the Colours he was to carry, on which was the Cross of the Military Order of Christ, and on which this worthy Hero took the Oath of Fidelity. 2. Having received Letters for the Princes of the East, among others Prester Iohn, and Zamori or the King of Calicut; he sailed from Lisbon upon Saturday the 8th of Iuly with only three small Ships and 160 men. The Names of the Ships, St. Gabriel, St. Ra∣phael and Berrio; the Captains Paul de Gama, Brother to Vasco, and Nicolas Nunnez; there went also a Barque laden with Provisions,
Commanded by Goncalo Nunnez. Having passed the Seas already known to Portugues Sailers, they discovered others, and after five Months sail, landed on the Sands of a Bay, now called Angra de Santa Elena, be∣cause first seen on that Saints day. Here they took one of two Blacks who were busie gathering Hony in the Mountain, little thinking how far human Boldness carries men. This man pleased with some Glasses and small Bells, brought some others from a Village, in hopes of getting some of those things, and these being furnished brought many more. 3. Fernando Veloso, a daring Young Man, asked leave to go see the habitation of the Blacks; but he returned with more speed than he went, being pursued to the shore, and a Shower of Arrows following as he got into the Boat. Vasco de Gama endeavouring to appease them, was wounded in the Leg, and because they would not hearken to him, he revenged himself with Cross-bows from aboard. The third day being the twentieth of November, he weighed and passed the Great Cape of Good Hope. On St. Catharines day they touched at Angra de San Blas, which is near the Island, where are found the Birds called Soliticairos made like a Goose, but with Wings like Batts; this is 60 Leagues beyond the Cape. Here they ex∣changed some Merchandise, and observed the People garding their Cattle, some Wo∣men riding on Oxen, and some dancing to Pipes that made no contemptible Musick.
But because as they coasted in order to find some Port, they found the Blacks appeared in greater numbers and warlike manner, he terrified them with firing some Guns. He took all the Provisions out of the Barque and burnt it. On St. Lucies day hapned a Storm, the more terrible because it was the 1498. first. On Christmas-day they saw the Land, which for that reason they called Terra de Natal, or Christmas-land, as also the River they named de los Reyes, or of the Kings, for being first seen on the day of Epiphany. Here Gama left two Men to inform them∣selves of the Country, and give him an ac∣count at his return. To this purpose he carried some Malefactors, their punishment being changed for these dangers. After dealing for some Ivory and Provisions, so much to the satisfaction of the Blacks, that their King came aboard, he went on as far as Cabo de Corrientes, and without seeing the Town of Zofala, passed 50 Leagues farther, and went up a River where were several Boats with Sails made of Palm. It was an encouragement to our Men to see these Peo∣ple, for that they understood something of sailing, a thing they had not seen in all those Coasts, and because they were not so black as the others, and understood the Ara∣bick Letter. They concluded them more ci∣vilized by their Habit of several Colours, and divers sorts of Stuffs both Cotten and Silk. They said that to the Eastward lived White People, who sailed in Vessels like . This River Gama called de Bons Sinays,
or of good Signs, for the information he got of what he looked for; though he lost some Men, and many sickned, their Gums swelling out of their Mouths, and there was no cure but cutting, which proceeded from the badness of the Provisions. Sailing hence they again cast Anchor among the Islands of St. George, opposite to Mozambique, whence came several Zambucos or Boats in jovial manner, the Musick of several Instruments sounding in them. As they came near were seen some Black others almost White, all had Persian Veils, and were cloathed with Cotton of sundry Colours. They asked our Men boldly who they were, and what they wanted. Gama answered to the first part, and said he would answer to the rest when he knew whose that Town was. They said the Lord of it was Zacoeja, to whom all Vessels sent notice of their Arrival. Then Gama replied, that his Voyage was to India, and wanted a Pilot to conduct him to Ca∣licut, that this was what he desired of the Xeque or Lord. He sent him some Presents, though not of great value, valuable for their rarity. 4. A Moor who carried the advice, re∣turned with many thanks for the Presents with some fresh Meats, making excuses that the great distance was what hindred the Lord from visiting him. These Lucky be∣ginnings moved Gama to attempt entring the Harbour, but meeting some danger he Anchored above the Town, which lies in 14 Degrees and half of South Latitude, and is
encompassed by the Sea; the Land about it is low and unhealthy, the Houses of Hurdles, that of the Lord and the Mosque of Mud Walls; the Inhabitants were Stran∣gers and Moors: this being between Quiloa, which lies above, and the Mine of Zofala below it. This place was ever much ac∣counted of by our Seamen, being a most secure place to Winter in. The Natives of the Continent are Black. Here came aboard Gama three Ethiopians, who as soon as they spied St. Gabriel painted on the Poop, sell on their Knees, as those who had always preserved Christianity, which was preached among thm in the Primitive times, though now with some corruption. Vasco de Gama sent other Presents to the Lord, and they concluded a Peace, which was confirmed on our part by erecting a Cross there by the name of S George. But the Barbarians having delly concluded this Agree∣ment, our Men going for Wood, fourteen Boats fell upon them, pouring in abundance of Arrows, but being answered by our Cross-Bows and Guns, they never offered to mo∣lest us a second time. They sailed hence the 11th of March with one Morish Pilot; he had hired two, but the other fled. Bad Weather obliged him to come to an Anchor again at St. Georges Island. He took in Wa∣ter by force of Arms, the Blacks opposing it. And they encreasing to 2000, he fired some Cannon, which killing some, the other with the fright fled to the Continent, lea∣ving many in our hands.
5. The Xeque or Governour at first re∣fused a Pilot, he they had being fled, but fearing it might be revenged, sent another so wicked, that he run the Ships among some Islands, which were called del Acotado, because the Pilot was there severely whipped for this fault. This punishment instead of amendment, provoked him to another fraud. He persuaded Gama to take the Port of Quiloa, by telling him there were Christians there; but believing our Ships might be de∣stroyed. The Currents drove the Ships off, and they came to an Anchor at the City Mon∣baza, which is an Island made by a River that falls into the Sea by two Mouths: The Buildings like those of Spain; the Inhabi∣tants all Moors, without any mixture of Christians, as the Pilot affirmed. Our Com∣mander sent a Present to the King, and he deceitfully offered a kind reception. This inclined Gama to enter the Port, but it be∣ing God's Will to deliver him, the Ships fell off, and our Seamen making some extraordinary cry to bring them about, some Moors, who were aboard, thought they were discovered, taking this for a sig∣nal of Battle, they all leaped overboard, which undeceived the Commander, who sailing on, and chasing two Boats, he took one with 13 Moors. By them he was in∣formed that not far off was the City Me∣linde, and there several Vessels from India. 6. Melinde is seated on the plainest of a Rocky Coast, encompassed with Orchards, Palm-trees, and Woods of Fruit-trees; the
Buildings great and sightly; the Country as well stored with Cattle as Fruit; the Na∣tives Pagans, of Colour Swarthy, of Body Strong; the Women are counted beautiful; from the Waste downwards they wear Silks and Cottons; on the Head, Veils with Gold-Laces. Most of the Merchants who trade here are of Guzarat, who in return of their Spice, carry Gold, Ivory, Amber and Wax. The King is a Mahometan, and is served with State and Splendor. Gama gave him an account of his Voyage by a Souldier, and how he stood in need of a Pilot. Some Presents and Complements having passed between them, they met on the Sea, where the King was pleased above all with th gift of the 13 Moors not long before taken. The Portugues feared the Moors kindness was deceitful; but it proved otherwise, for the effect of this interview was a lasting Peace faithfully observed by the Portugueses and Moors. Here Gama discoursed with some Merchants of Cambaya, who aboard his Ship were seen to worship an Image of our Lady; which shewed there were yet among them some foot-steps of the Preaching of St. Thomas the Apostle. He carried with him Melemo Cana of Guzarat, finding him so expert in Navigation, that being shewn an Astrolabe, he took little notice of it, as one who was used to more considerable Instru∣ments. With this Able Pilot Gama set for∣wards, having first erected a Cross, which he called of the Holy Ghost; and cros∣sing that great Gulph of 700 Leagues, in
twenty two days anchored 2 Leagues below Calecut. 7. Whilst our Discoverers rejoice at their arrival in India, let us give a general des∣cription of it, referring the particulars to the arrival of our Ships in those parts. The Region properly called India, is that which lies between the two noble Rivers, Indus or▪ the West, and Ganges on the East. Of the first it takes Name, as does the most Anci∣ent Kingdom of Delhi, the best and most powerful of this Country. Hence the Per∣sians call it Indostan. On the South it is all girt by the vast Ocean. Encompassed by those Rivers it makes a sort of Peninsula, almost in the form of a Lozenge, or Rhom∣bus of equal Sides, but not equal Angles. The two most distant opposite Angles lie North and South; the latter is made by Cape Comori, the other towards the Fountains of the Rivers, which though distant in the Mountains, called by Ptolomy Imao, yet run∣ning down the Rivers come almost to meet. The distance between these Angles in a streight Line is about 400 Leagues. The other two opposite Angles, which lie East and West, and are distant 300 Leagues, are formed by the Mouths of the Rivers. They encompass as much Land on their two sides, as does the Ocean on the other two. Though all this Country be inhabited by Heathens and Mahometans, yet they differ in their Opinions and Customs, as they are divided into several Kingdoms, as Multan, Delli, Cospetir, Bengala, Orixa, Mando, Chitor,
and Guzarat, commonly called Cambaya The Kingdom of Decan is divided into ma∣ny Sovereignties, with Character of Kings, with that of Pale divided between both. That of Bisnagat, to whom are subject ma∣ny Petty Princes; and all the Province of Malabar divided into small Territories, some absolute, some subject to those already named. Had not Nature set Bounds to Hu∣man Ambition, separating these Countries with vast Rivers, Mountains, Lakes, Woods and Deserts, inhabited by sundry and in∣numerable Wild Beasts, they had all doubt∣less been under the Command of one Lord. The most remarkable Bounder of this vast Continent, is a long Ridge of Hills, which the Natives call Gate, that is, Mountains; they run about 200 Leagues from North to South: on both sides between the Sea and the Hill run two long, but narrow Plains for about 80 Leagues, that on the West is called Malabar, on the shoar whereof is seated the City Calicut. It was then inha∣bited by Pagans, and resorted to by Maho∣metan Merchants. Their Kings were al∣ways of the Family of the Bramenes, among them esteemed most Religious and Learned, and great Observers of the Doctrine of Py∣thagoras. The People is divided into two Degrees, the Commons, whom they call Poleas; and the Nobles called Nayres, who are valiant and skil'd in the Arms they use, and always wear Sword and Buckler; so proud, that if but touched by a Commo∣ner, they hold it as a great misfortune, and
cleanse themselves by washing. This King of Calicut is the most powerful of all the Coast, and therefore for distinction called Zamori, as much as Emperor. The King∣dom took its name from the Metropolis, in which are many Stately Buildings of the Natives, for the Merchants do not mind it. It has no shelter for Ships, which are forced to Ride it out at Anchor in the Road. This is the place where we left the Disco∣verers. 8. Gama arrived here on the 20th of May; he gave advice to the King, who was not then in the City, but sent him a Pilot to bring the Ships to a safer place. During this interval came acquainted with the Por∣tugueses a Moor called Monzayde, who lived there, and told them in Spanish he had known them in Oran, and would be service∣able to them there. So it proved, for from that time he passed between Vasco de Gama and Zamori, upon all occasions with great fidelity, and at last died a Christian in Por∣tugal. The third day our Commander went ashore with twelve others, a Catual, or Go∣vernour coming from the King to conduct him; they were carried on Mens Backs with such ease, that the motion, though swift, is hardly to be perceived. Thus they were carried, many flocking about them, to a Pagod or Temple, equal, including all its Offices, to the greatest of our Monasteries. On the top of the Front were five Bells, and opposite to it a high Pillar of Brass, with a Cock on the top. Within the Gate at∣tended
four Bramens, covered from the Waste to the Knees with Cotten Cloaths; and for a Badge of their Profession each had three Threads cross his Shoulders, hank∣ing like a Shoulder Belt. They sprinkled them with Water, and gave Powder of Sandal to put on their Foreheads, all with great Cere∣mony, and no less Reverence than is used among us in taking the Holy Water in Church. About the Walls were painted se∣veral horrid Figures of Monsters and Wild Beasts. In the middle was a round Chappel of good Structure with Brass Gates; within it was the Statue of a Woman, which by reason of the darkness could not be per∣fectly discovered. The Portugueses looking upon it, and asking what it was, the Mala∣bars answered aloud, and with a joyful Reve∣rence, Mary, Mary, Mary, and prostrated themselves on the ground. Our Men did the same, judging that to be the Image of our Lady, nor were they deceived, for it could be no other, those People many Ages before having professed Christianity. The throng of the People grew so great, they stopped the way, and with the eager desire of seeing the new Guests, almost stifled them. Having gone thus 5 Leagues, they came to the Palace, where they saw the King on a Rich Bed set out with Silk and Gold, his Looks full of Majesty, Cloathed with White Cotton strewed with Branches and Roses of Beaten Gold; on his Head a thing like a Mitre set with many Pearls, his Arms and Legs naked, but on them Bracelets
and Rings of Gold set with Rich Jewels. A Grave Person by his side held a Gold Plate with some Leaves of Betele, an Herb comfortable to the Stomach, which the Eastern Princes much use, chewing and swal∣lowing the Juice of it. The eldest Bramen, who was next the Bed, and whose Age, Grey Hairs and Garb were Venerable, arose, and taking Vasco de Gama by the Hand pre∣sented him to that Great Emperor, who looked upon him friendly, but saluted him so scantly, that the motion of his Head could scarce be perceived, and made signs to the Bramen to make him sit down on the Steps of the Ascent whereon the Bed stood. He heard him, and answered in general Terms; then took the Letter sent by King Emanuel, which was writ in Portugues and Arabick, keeping it to consult with his Ministers about the Answer, promising it should be speedy. The substance was only to settle a friendly correspondence between the two Crowns in order to a Free Trade, which might be to the advantage of both. Gama was entertained in the House of a Ca∣tual, or Governour, where the next day he endeavoured to gain him and the other Ministers with Presents, but they being in∣feriour to their Avarice, he found next time he spoke with them, that he had not won them; but the King seemed more pleased than the first time, whence may ap∣pear the Good Will of a Prince is bought at a cheaper rate, than those who would go∣vern them when raised to their Favour. In
fine, he was content that a free Commerce should be setled between the two King∣doms. 9. The Moors understanding this Agree∣ment, envious of our success, and fearing the damage must ensue to their Trade, made many Objections against our admittance, as∣suring, that we who came now suing, would settle our selves forcibly in time to come. They bribed the Catual or Governour, and he perswaded the King, our Men were Pi∣rats and not Embassadors. It was wonder∣ful that the King, not knowing how to proceed, because there was none could sa∣tisfie him of the truth of this Business, he resolved to rely upon the Faith of him whom his Ministers accused; for, as if he had known how odious a Lie, though to their advantage, was to the Portugueses, he sent for Vasco de Gama, declaring to him at large how he was informed his Embassie was feigned, and that he was some banish∣ed or fugitive Person, making him great offers of a kind reception in case it were so, and promising to rely upon his information for the credit of the whole matter. Gama heard the King with a great deal of firm∣ness in his Countenance, and declared him∣self highly sensible of the great confidence the King reposed in him, in a most learned Speech, with powerful Arguments answered to all that had been laid to his Charge, and concluded with the same gravity and staid∣ness he had kept through his long discourse. The King who had kept his Eyes fixed
upon him all the time his harangue lasted, hoping by exteriour signs to discover the truth of his assertions, drew a conclusion from the security of his Looks, the elegancy of his Words and gravity of his Person, that there could no deceit be couched under such fair appearances, that the Moors pro∣ceeded malitiously, and his Ministers were imposed upon. Then very frankly bid him return to his Ships to land what Merchan∣dise he brought, if any, and while that was disposed of, he would prepare such an Answer for the King, as should be to his satis∣faction. 10. Vasco de Gama providing to return to his Ships, was detained by Order of the Go∣vernour, and finding himself Prisoner, left seven of the twelve he had brought as Hosta∣ges. He complained, but to no effect, the faithful Moor Moncayde solliciting for him with all possible diligence. Gama being abroad and finding no fair means could pre∣vail to have his men restored, having called a Council, it was resolved to apply force; accordingly he sent out after some Fishermen and took twenty of them: Immediately he let fly his Sails, making shew of departing, that they might send to stay him. And ac∣cordingly it succeeded, for the King in∣formed of the reason why his Subjects were taken, ordered the seven Portugueses to be exchanged for them, and sent the Answer for our King, and excused the treachery of his People. The fortunate Gama steers home∣ward, the Moor Moncayde came voluntarily
with him, and some of the Prisoners by force, who were not restor'd, it being thought convenient to bring some to shew, promi∣sing them they should return. 11. As he was leaving the Sea of Calicut, sixty Vessels, full of Armed Men, set upon and pressed him, but the Cannon being well played, they went off. Sailing along in sight of Land, he set up the Cross of St. Mary in an Island between Baranor and Ba∣ticale, which thence took name, with ad∣miration of the Inhabitants. This was the sixth and last he set up this Voyage, they were St. Raphael, in the River Bons Sinays; St. George, at Mozambique; St. Stephen, at Melinde; and St. Gabriel, at Calicut. Whilst he was erecting the last Cross, he writ a Letter to the Zamori or King of Calicut, by the hand of Moncayde, and sent it by a Fisherman of that place: In this Letter he excuses himself for carrying away those Pri∣soners, which he did not in satisfaction of the Merchandise taken from him, but as an earnest that he would return with them, when he had shewed them to his Prince, and they informed him of the state of their Country; and that in recompence he would bring a perfect account of Spain. In this Voyage he discovered 1200 Leagues, draw∣ing a strait Line from the River del Infante, found by Bartholomew Diaz, to the Port of Calicut; for in sailing it is much more. Here he found the Island, the People of Ca∣nara call Anchediva, near the Continent, it is small, well shaded with Trees, of a whol∣som
Air, and has good Water. Anche or Ange singnifies Five, and Diva, Islands; there being so many, but the Chief has car∣ried the Name. He was here careening his Ships, taking water, and some respite, when a Pirat attacked him with eight small Ves∣sels, so linked and covered with Boughs, that they looked like a small floating Island. He was somewhat surprized at first sight, but perceiving the danger that approached under those Leaves, he attacked it, and ha∣ving put to flight seven, took one Vessel. The Name of this Pirat was Timoja, we shall hear of him hereafter. The Prince of Goa, by means of a Jew, endeavoured to draw Gama to his ruin; the Jew from shoar making signs with a Cross, who being ta∣ken aboard, and put upon the Wrack, con∣fessed he was sent with an ill design, and repenting, was baptized, and called Gaspar de Gama. Some of the men died whilst they were sailing acros the Great Gulph between India and the Coast of Melinde. He An∣chored in sight of the Town of Magadoxa, which stands on an open Coast, but is beau∣tiful and strong. Not far from thence came out against him eight Boats well manned, but were soon repulsed. He came to Me∣linde, and was received by that King as a Friend. Being again under sail, the Ship St. Raphael struck and was lost, leaving that Name to those Sands. The men were sa∣ved by the other two Ships, and they parted by a Storm near Cabo Verde. Nicholas Cello arrived at Lisbon, believing his Commander
was there before him, but he was burying his Brother, Paul de Gama, in the Island Tercera. Soon after he came up the Tagus, having been out two Years, and almost two Months. He carried out 160 men, and returned only with 55. They were all re∣warded by the King. Vasco de Gama had the priviledge of being called Don, annexed to his Family; to his Arms was added part of the Kings; he had the Title of Admiral of the Eastern Seas, 3000 Ducats yearly, and afterwards the Title of Count Vidigueyra. Nicholas Coello was made a Fidalgo, which is Noble, and had a 100 Ducats a year. 12. Prince Henry, the First Author of thefe Discoveries, had built a Chappel on the Banks of the River a League below Lisbon, for the conveniency of Sailers. In the same place now did King Emanuel erect a stately Church to the same intent, and with the same name it had before, to wit, Our Lady of Bethlehem, placing the Statue of the Prince over the Great Gate, his own and the Queens over the lesser. This is a Monastery of the Order of St. Hierom, and for its security was built in the Water a strong Tower called St. Vincent, not great, but sightly.
CHAP. V. Conquests under King Emanuel, from the Year 1500 till the Year 1502. 1. THere were Publick Thansgivings through the Kingdom for the good success of this Voyage; to these succeeded Feasts and Joyful Entertainments. And all mens expectation being raised with the glo∣ry of the Action and hope of ensuing Pro∣fit, it was consulted how to prosecute what was begun, and resolved, that accord∣ing to the disposition they had found in the People of those Countries there was more need of Force than Intreaty, in or∣der whereunto thirteen Vesses of several sizes were fitted, and Peter Alvarez Cabral was named Admiral. On the 8th of March the King delivered with his own hand to the Admiral the Flag of the Cross. The Shoar was covered with People, who flock∣ed to see the Fleet sail. It contained 1200 Men, 8 Franciscan Friers, 8 Chaplains, and a Chaplain Major. The substance of their Instructions was, to begin by Preaching, and if that failed, to proceed to the decision of the Sword. 2. Twelve days the Fleet sailed with a fair Gale, but at Cape Verde a Storm arose, and one of the Vessels returned to Lisbon. In 10 degrees of South Latitude they saw a
Tawny People with lank Hair and flat Faces: They fled from our Men, till halt∣ing all together upon n eminence, they were spoke to in several Languages and by Signs, but all in vain. The Fleet passed on, and Anchored upon Easter Eve in a Port they called Seguro, or Safe, because it pro∣ved so to them. The People being affable, our Men landed and set up an Altar under a Tree, where there was Mass said and a Sermon preached, to which those Heathens were present with wonderful at∣tention. The Admiral sent a Vessel to ad∣vertise the King of this discovery, and erected a Cross on a great Tree, calling the Country Santa Cruz, or Holy Cross. He also left there two Portugueses to enquire into the Customs, Language and Product of the Country. This is that large Province of America, called Brazill, for the abun∣dance of that Wood which it produces, and hither had he been drove by Storms. Ha∣ving left this Port, on the 12th of May he saw a Comet stretching its Tail to the Cape of Good Hope, which vanished in eight days, and was the forerunner of a terrible Storm, insomuch that the day growing dark, they could not see each other or hear, with the horrid noise of the Winds; 20 days this Tempest lasted, and swallowed four Ships. The Admiral arrived with only six Ships of all his Fleet upon the 16th of Iuly on the Coast of Zofala. He chased two Ships, the one was stranded, the other ta∣ken, they belonged to Moors, and came
from the Mine of Zofala, commanded by Xeque Foteyma. The Admiral treated him courteously, restoring all that was taken, because he was Uncle to the King of Me∣linde, who deserved well of the Portugueses for the kind Offices Vasco de Gama had re∣ceived of him in time of need. Having quitted the Moor, he arrived at Mozambique on the 20th of Iuly, where he refitted and held on his Voyage. 3. Coasting along, he came to an Anchor before the antient and noble City Quiloa. Abraham, a Man renowed among his Peo∣ple, and rich with the Trade of Zofala, then reigned there. The Admiral sent him word, he had important Affairs to commu∣nicate to him from our King. The Answer was, that he should come ashoar and he would hear him. He replied, That ac∣cording to his Instructions it was not per∣mitted him to land, unless to fight such as refused the Friendship of Portugal; but that in respect to such a Prince, he would meet him in a Boat in the middle of that Bay. This Answer was surprising, and Fear wrought more than Kindness. Several Boats were set out on both sides, richly adorned and filled with Musick. Our Commander proposed Amity, Trade and Religion. The Moor gave good words, but disguised ill designs. This known, a Councel was held, the Resolution was to go on, leaving the Revenge for a fitter opportunity, and thus they arrived at Melinde the second of Au∣gust, where they were received with all
kindness, not only upon account of the Friendship established with Vasco de Gama, but also for the Generosity wherewith Xeque Foteyma had been treated. They visited and presented each other. Ours which was con∣siderable, was carried by the Factor Ayres Correa, together with a Letter from our King, writ in Arabick, which was so highly prised by that King, that to the end he might keep the Bearer ashoar that night, he sent the Admiral the Ring whereon was his Seal, the greatest security of those Kings. He told how much he was infested by the King of Monbaça for having admitted our Friendship, renewed and confirmed it with words and actions. Soon after our Ships sailed, having taken in two Guzarat Pilots, and set ashoar two Men in order to disco∣ver Prester Iohn's Country, the antient de∣sire of our Princes. 4. On St. Bartholomew Eve they reached Anchediva. The Vessels were wash'd and tallow'd, they watered and dealt with the People by signs, and left them satisfied. Then they stood over for Calicut, and dis∣covered it the 17th of September. The Na∣tives beheld us with Pleasure and Admira∣tion; our Cannon was fired for joy, but struck a terror into the People on the Shoar, who fled. Ayres Correa, who had this em∣ployment at Melinde, went to advertise the King Zamori. He setled the manner how the King and Admiral should meet, which was done with much circumspection. There were given as Hostages for the safety of
the Admiral, and such as should land with him, six of the Kings principal Ministers of the Family of the Bramenes, whose Names he brought from Portugal by the advice of Moncayde. The Prisoners that Vasco de Ga∣ma took, were also returned in performance of what he had writ to Zamori, and that they might give an account of what they had seen in Portugal. 5. The Embassie was delivered with much state, it tending only to the settling Peace and Commerce. After much delay pro∣ceeding from Jealousie, Peace was conclud∣ed and sworn to, and a House in the Town, with much difficulty, granted for the con∣veniency of Trade. Ayres Correa took pos∣sion of it with sixty able Men. The Mer∣chants of Meca obstructed our getting la∣ding, complaint was made to the King, but no redress. 6. The cause of it was the enmity be∣tween two Moorish Governours, one of the Sea, the other of the Land Affairs, the first called Coje Bequi, the other Coje Cemireci. This last was offended that our Factor had made greater application to the other than to him, and contrived to be revenged, as follows. He was informed there sailed from Cochin, a City distant about 30 Leagues, a very great Ship of Ceylon, bound for Cam∣baya with Elephants, who must pass before us. He therefore told the Factor, that the King having desired one of those Beasts, was refused it by the Owners; that if our Men would take the Ship they would ob∣lige
the King, forward their own business, and possess themselves of a great quantity of Spice which the Merchants of Meca had there. His design was, that we should re∣ceive damage in the attempt, that Ship be∣ing of great bulk; and to this purpose gave notice to the Owners, that they might be the better provided; and in case that did not succeed, at least hereby we should dis∣oblige the Merchants of Cochin. The Ad∣miral sent after the Ship, Peter de Ataide in the St. Peter, who gave her chase, she made no account of our Vessel till some of our Balls reaching her, she bore upon us pour∣ing in her shot, then made away, and was pursued and taken out of the Bay of Cananor. There were aboard seven Elephants, where∣of one was killed by a Cannon Ball, and eaten by our men. This contrivance was of advantage to discover the Author, to terrifie the King, seeing such a Vessel taken by one that was not above the sixth part of her bulk, and to gain the Friendship of the King of Cochin; for the Admiral discover∣ing the fraud, restored the Ship to the Owners, making satisfaction for the dam∣age. Here it was that Duarte Pacheco Pereyra gave the first marks of that Heroick Va∣lour, which after made him renowned in all the World. 7. This evil design turned to our advan∣tage, but not the next; for the Ships having been there three Months, there were but two laden, and at a dear rate; and the Factor suspecting that the Ships of Meca
laded by night, which hindred ours, com∣plained to the King, who ordered him to make Prize of such Boats. They entred and found nothing, for it was a contrivance of the Moors to incense the People against the Portugueses, and so it fell out, for the attempt being divulged, the Rabble rises in search of the Factor and his Company, whereof they suddenly slew forty; the others with five Franciscan Fryers escaped that Storm. The Admiral before the blood of those slain was cool, in a rage burnt fifteen great Vessels in the Port, and battered the Town two days from the Ships, doing great damage, and killing above 500 men. 8. Then sailed to Cochin the Metropolis of the Kingdom, of the same Name, ha∣ving by the way burnt two Ships they met belonging to Calicut. The King lived out of Town. The Admiral sent to advertise him of his coming by a Bramen, a Religi∣ous Malabar, one of those who wander na∣ked, girt with Chains and daubed with Filth, who, if Heathens, are called Iogues, and if Moors, Calandars; this man was afterwards baptized and called Michael. The King re∣turned a favourable answer, and permit∣ted us to lade Spice. It was done slowly, but without interruption. At Cranganor were found some Christians of St. Thomas, under Armenian Bishops. Two were brought to Portugal, one died and the other returned. Zamori of Calicut had gained the ill will of the Neighbouring Princes by his ill manner of proceeding with our men. Those of
Cochin and Cananor desiring an opportunity of breaking with him, strove to draw the Portugues Fleet to their Ports. The Go∣vernours of Coulan, on the South of Cochin, sent to this effect to the Admiral, he return∣ed thanks, though the Offer was not ac∣cepted, having already sufficient lading. He left Goncalo Gil Barbosa as Factor at Co∣chin with others, to provide lading for the next Ships should come. 9. He had promised to take in some Gin∣ger at Cananor, he went thither to perform his word, and shew he was not afraid to appear before Calicut; he found that King well affected towards us, who sent with him an Embassador (he of Cochin sent two) to King Emanuel with Presents, and offer of a Free Trade. About the middle of Ianuary the Admiral set out in order to return home. On the Coast of Melinde, one of the Ships was drove by bad Weather upon a Bank, the men saved. At Mozambique the rest were refitted, and one sent to set∣tle a Trade at the Mine of Zofala. At Cabo Verde they found Peter Diaz, and his Vessel, which had been parted from them; he had escaped many dangers by Sea and Land, chiefly in Port Magadoxa near Cape Guardafu. After the Admiral arrived also in Portugal, Peter de Ataide, who had been parted, and the other sent to the discovery of Zofala, with an account of it. 10. In March before this Fleet returned, sailed out of Lisbon four Ships with 400 men, commanded by Iohn de Nova, an
able Seaman. In eight Degrees of South La∣titude he found the Island he called of the Conception. Beyond the Cape of Good Hope, at the place called Agoado de St. Bras, they found in a Shoe a Letter writ by Pe∣ter de Ataide, who Anchored there after the Storm before spoken of; it gave an account of the Voyage of Peter Alvarez Cabrall. In August they arrived at Mozambique, then at Quiloa, having found an Island, which from the Commander was called of Iohn de Nova. Short of Melinde they gave chase to two great Ships, one was taken, light∣ned and then burnt. At length they arri∣ved at Cananor; and that King desirous they should stay there, to oblige them dis∣covered that the King of Calicut was send∣ing against him forty great Ships. This which he thought would detain them, hast∣ned their departure; for Iohn de Nova, lest the King should think he staid for fear, sailed on towards Cochin, leaving ashoar four Factors, to prepare Goods against his return. In the Road of Calicut they found the Fleet ready, and falling on it lost ne∣ver a Shot, pouring it in all that day and night, and part of the next; there were sunk five great Vessels and nine Paraos, which are small ones, the rest fled to the City with the news. At Cochin, Nova took in his lading with speed, it being provi∣ded by the Officers Cabrall had left there to that purpose. He returned to Cananor and took the rest of his lading; at his entrance into that Port he took a Ship of Calicut,
plundered and burnt it; the same hapned to another as he came out. In his return having passed the Cape of Good Hope, he found the Island of St. Helena not inhabi∣ted; it has proved since a most advanta∣gious place to all that use the India Trade, being provided with most excellent Wa∣ter. It lies in 15 Degrees of South Lati∣tude, distant from Goa 1549 Leagues, from Mozambique 1100, from the Cape of Good Hope 520, from Angola 370, from St. George de la Mina 375, from Brazil 540. from Lisbon 1100.
CHAP. VI. Conquests under King Emanuel, from the Tear 1501, to the Tear 1503. 1. THE Account Peter Alvarez Cabral brought, shewed it was requisite either to attempt making a great For∣tune with a great Force, or else to quit the attempt. Some were of Opinion to desist, but the credit of so great an Action prevailed; and though many were lost, the gain of those who returned was so great, that it outweighed the consideration of the damage. The King was inspired with the hope of carrying on what the Apostle St. Thomas had begun, and planting the Chri∣stian Religion in those Countries, and en∣larging his Royal Titles by adding to them, as he did, those of Lord of the Navi∣gation Conquests and Trade of Aethiopia, Arabia, Persia, and India, which were con∣firmed by the Pope. 2. The King was sensible, that to obtain a Great Name among so many, so pow∣erful and so distant Nations, it was requi∣site to shew great Power; therefore in 1502. March he set out Three Squadrons; the first of ten Ships, commanded by Vasco de Gama, now on his Second Voyage. The second of five Ships under Vincent Sodre, which was to scour the Coast of Cochin and
Cananor, and hinder the Trade of the Ships of Meca, watching the Mouth of the Red Sea. The third was under Stephen de Gama, but all subordinate to Vasco de Gama. The whole consisted of twenty Ships, and were gone before Iohn de Nova arrived. The King delivered to Vasco de Gama the Flag with great Honour in the Cathedral Church, giving him the Title of Admiral of the Eastern Seas. With him returned the Embassadors of Cochin and Cananor, much honoured by our King. They met off Cabo Verde a Caravel bound for Lisbon, with much Gold from the Mine. Don Vasco shewed some to the Embassadors, and they surprized, said it did not agree with the account the Venetian Embassador in Portu∣gal had given them, that the Portugueses without the help of Venice could scarce put Ships to Sea. This was envy, because they were like to lose their Trade with Grand Cayre. 3. The Admiral arrived the 12th of Iu∣ly at Quiloa, having lost two Ships in bad Weather. He entred furiously, firing all his Canon, and battering the Town in re∣venge of the ill usage others had received from that King. But he to prevent his to∣tal ruin, came in a Boat to appease the Admiral, offering to be subject, and pay Tribute to King Emanuel. Thus the Storm was converted into Joy. Sailing thence he was put by the Port of Melinde, and forced to anchor 8 Leagues below it in a Bay, whence spreading▪ his Fleet that no Ship might
escape him, he took several, but was most severe with those of Calicut. A Ship of great bulk called Meri, belonging to the Sultan of Cayre, most richly laden, and full of many Moors of Quality, who went Pil∣grims to Meca, fell so unexpectedly into our hands, that she was taken without the least resistance, and all the Goods shifted into our Ships. But when 260 Moors perceived we were going to force the Vessel, in which, besides them, were above 50 Women and Children, laying hold of what Weapons were at hand, they beat the Boats from the sides; a Ship coming to her assistance was almost taken, till another relieved it, and the Admiral coming up, the Enemies Vessel was boarded, and after a couragious resistance taken and burnt with all that were in her, except twenty Children who were afterwards baptized. 4. The Admiral sailed to Cananor, and had a meeting with the King upon the Shoar, and Persons were appointed to confer a∣bout the business of Trade. Then he sent a Letter to the King of Calicut, signifying to him, that the 260 Moors burnt in the Ship, were upon account for the Portugueses killed by his People; and the twenty Chil∣dren made Christians, for one Portugues turned Mahometan. That this was but the earnest of revenge he would soon take up∣on his City. Mean while they differed at Cananor about the Price of Spice, and at last some few men were left there to agree the matter, and many Threats sent the
King for this usage. Then he set forward to perform what he had promised at Ca∣licut. 5. As he coasted along, there met him a Boat, and in it four Noblemen sent by Za∣mori with offers extorted by fear. Don Vasco thought they might be advantagious; but resenting that the Proposal was to rest con∣tent with the dustruction of almost 300 Moors and a rich Ship, in satisfaction for the loss of the Portugueses, he returned answer, that at his arrival he would burn and destroy the City. The Fleet spread, and took one Ship at anchor, and some Boats. The King prepared himself, but to no purpose; for the Cannon playing, there was great distraction and confusion. He hanged thirty Moors at the Yard Arms; then cutting off their Heads Hands and Feet, threw them into the Sea to be cast upon the Shoar by the Tide, warning them it was but a merciful death to what he de∣signed for the Murderers of the Portugueses. Next, the Ship taken was fired, and then he sailed, leaving that Prince and City in a Consternation. 6. The King of Cananor, through fear, granted all he had denied to Entreaties. And the Admiral arriving at Cochin, and having seen the King, perceived it was true (as he had been informed) that those three Kings had combined to make him winter there by fraud, hoping thereby to destroy him, finding a Fleet of 200 Sail they had fitted out for that purpose was utterly lost
by Storms. At length Peace and Amity was concluded with the King of Cochin, which proved not only advantagious then, but afterwards durable. Don Vasco among other Presents, gave him a Crown of Gold; and he besides many other things of value, sent the King a Stone of great worth, as being a Sovereign Antidote against all Poy∣son. This Stone of the bigness of a Hazle Nut, is found in the Head of that Creature the Indians call Bulgodalf. The King of Ca∣nanor understanding the good Correspon∣dence there was between Vasco de Gama and him of Cochin, and fearing our Fleet would not return to his Port, declared he was as ready to comply with the Admiral as the other, and received a satisfactory answer. Here Don Vasco received Embassadors, who said they came from some Christian Inhabi∣tants of that Neighbouring Country, the Metropolis whereof was Cranganor, and they to the number of 30000: That St. Thomas had preached to their Forefathers; that they were subject to the Patriarch of Arme∣nia; that they were infested by the Pagans; that they knew he was an Officer of the most Catholick King of Europe, to whom they submitted themselves, delivering into his hands the Rod of Justice. This Rod was Red, about the length of a Scepter, the ends tipt with Silver, with three Bells at the top. They were dispatched with hopes of a pow∣erful assistance.
7. Whilst the Ships were lading at Cochin, a Bramen of Note, with his Son and Ne∣phew, offered himself to Don Vasco, signi∣fying a desire of coming to Portugal to be instructed in the Faith, and proposing me∣thods of reconciliation with the King of Calicut. He found credit, because his Son and Nephew were to remain as Hostages; and the Admiral sailed for Calicut in a great Ship, accompanied by only one Caravel, hoping to meet Vincent Sodre, who was gon to set the Embassadors ashore. But he be∣ing attacked by the Moors, though he worst∣ed them, was gone to Cananor. The Bre∣men was landed, and carrying several Mes∣sages back and forward, gave time for fit∣ting 100 Paros or great Boats, which sud∣denly one morning hemmed in the Admiral so boldly, that many offered to board him with Fireworks to burn the Ship. It began to take fire, when cutting the Cable she put off the Fireship, and the Boats to avoid it were discovered, but much more by our Cannon, which being at good distance took effect. Sodre receiving advice by the Cara∣vel the Admiral had sent, when first he mis∣sed him, came in good season, and all toge∣ther charged the Enemy in such manner, they were put to flight with great loss. The Hostages were hanged at the Yard Arms in sight of the City, and then put into a Boat with a Letter for the King, desiring him to accept of that Present in return for his Mes∣sengers contrivance. The Admiral returned to Cochin, and being dispatched, left there
in a wooden House built for that purpose with the King's leave, a Factor and 32 Por∣tugueses. Then sailed with his ten Ships for Cananor; not far from Pandarane there met him twenty nine of the King of Calicut. He sent out three Vessels to engage the two foremost of the Enemies, which was per∣formed with such vigour, that when the Admiral came up, the two were taken, the rest fled, 300 Moors killed. The Booty was considerable, the chief thing an Idol of Gold, weighing 30 pound, of monstrous shape, his Eyes were two Emrauds, on his Breast was a very large Ruby, and part of him covered with a Cloak of Gold set with Jewels. Sodre was left there to guard the Coast and Factories; the Admiral continued his Voyage. He arrived at Lisbon with nine Ships richly laden, and with publick pomp carried the Tribute he with much honour had received of Quiloa, whereof the King ordered to be made a Custodium of Gold for the Church of our Lady of Bethlehem, and gave all his share of such Prizes as should be taken, to the use of that Structure.
CHAP. VII. Conquests under King Emanuel, from the Year 1503, till the Year 1505. 1. THE King of Calicut envying the ad∣vantage he of Cochin made of our Trade, got together 50000 men at Patane 16 Leagues from Cochin, with other prepa∣rations for War. The People of Cochin fear∣ing that Power, were for delivering up the Portugueses to him of Calicut, who demand∣ed nothing more. But Triumpara, King of Cochin, refused, and went out with three Nephews, and small force to meet the Ene∣my. At the first charge he was forsaken by some of his Nobles, yet assisted by the Portugueses, valiantly maintained a Pass, till his Nephews being killed, whereof one was General, he was forced to fly and se∣cure himself in the Island Vaipi, near to and more tenable than Cochin, which was burnt; and he persisted in not delivering up the Portugueses; a notable example of Fi∣delity in a Heathen, scarce to be parallel'd among Christians. 2. Whilst the People of Cochin were be∣seiged in the Island, there sailed from Lis∣bon nine Ships under three distinct Com∣manders. The first was Alfonso de Albur∣querque, the second Francis de Alburquerque, and the third Antony de Saldanna. The three
last were to cruise in the Mouth of the Red Sea against the Ships of Meca; the others to return with their lading. Francis de Al∣burquerque arrived first with more Ships than he brought out, having met with those of Vincent Sodre, who was cruising upon the In∣dian Coast and distressed by Storm; as also a Vessel that had been separated from D. Vasco de Gama. Sodre had taken four Ships of Calicut, which he carried to Cananor, and burnt several small Vessels; but this hapned before the invasion of Cochin, to whose King he had offered his assistance, but was not admitted; and sailing thence touched at Zo∣cotora and Guardafu, and on the Coast of Arabia took some Vessels of Cambaya and Calicut. Winter coming on he took shelter in a Bay near the Islands Curiamuria, and found the Moors of that Coast called Baduiis, who live by their Cattle, were tractable; and after two Months they advised Sodre to seek a better Harbour, because about that time there arose such Storms in that place that he would be lost. He would not cre∣dit them, believing they said it only to be rid of him, but sound they spoke truth, be∣ing lost with his Brother, and all the men in a sudden Tempest, the other Vessels with great danger, and suffering much through hunger and thirst escaped, met Francis de Alburquerque, and arrived with him at Co∣chin. The Commander sent the King a Present into the Island, part whereof was 10000 Ducats in Mony. Then going ashoar the King ran and embraced him, crying,
Portugal, Portugal; and all the People with great cries repeat Portugal, Portugal; and the Portugueses to return the civility, cried Cochin, Cochin. The Commander comfort∣ed the King, giving him assured hopes in the assistance of his Ships and the others he expected. Not to lose time, he fell upon those who held the Island of Cochin for the King of Calicut, and killing many expelled the remainder; then passed to Vaipi, resto∣ring that Country to its lawful Prince. The Lord of Repelim his Lands were wasted with Fire and Sword, and only four Portugueses lost in this action. The joy Triumpara con∣ceived in being restored by our assistance, moved him to grant us leave to build a Fort in Cochin. The work was begun when Al∣fonso de Albuquerque arrived, and it was call∣ed the Fort of St. Iames, and a Church then built, dedicated to St. Bartholomew. 500 men were put aboard some Vessels ta∣ken from the Enemy, who burnt Repelim after a stout defence made by 2000 Nayres. Alfonso de Albuquerque ambitious of perform∣ing some notable Exploit by himself, advan∣ced against a Town, when a multitude of expert Heathens issuing, brought him into great danger, and the more by the assi∣stance of thirty three Vessels of Calicut; but Francis his Brother coming up, they were put to flight, and many killed, as were 700 in the Island Cabalam, where they thought to secure themselves. Duarte Pacheco de∣stroyed another Town, killing many of the Inhabitants. As our men sailed (though
victorious) spent with fatigue, fifty Ships of Calicut met them, the number surprized them, but our Cannon being well played, the Enemy fled. Antonio do Campo carried the news of this success to Portugal. 3. Pepper was bought with some expence of blood. The Queen of Coulam offered la∣ding for two Ships, Alburquerque went thi∣ther, and setled a Trade as in Cochin; and to manage it left there a Factor and twenty six men. The King of Calicut perceiving our success, desired Peace, it was granted upon our Conditions, some being put in ex∣ecution, he put a stop to the rest. He lo∣ved the Conveniency, but hated the Means, and again prosecuted the War. The King of Cochin representing how just he had been to us, desired some able Commander might be left there with a number of men to his assistance. The demand was reasonable, it was therefore resolved that Duarte Pacheco with his Ship and two Caravels, and 100 men should be left there. Alfonso and Francis de Alburquerque returned towards home. The first arrived safe, and among other things brought the King forty pound of Pearls, and four hundred of the small; a Diamond of wonderful bigness, and two Horses, one a Persian the other an Arab, which were held in great esteem, being the first that were brought to the Kingdom. Francis de Alburquerque, and the Ships under his Command were never more heard of Peter de Ataide, who followed them, having escaped a Storm, was found with his men at Melinde.
4. Antony de Saldanna, the last of the three Commanders, and who was sent to cruise in the Mouth of the Red Sea, having lost Diego Fernandez Petea came to an An∣chor at St. Thomas. Short of the Cape of Good Hope was made famous a place by the name of Aguada del Saldanna, or Saldannas watering place, not for any Water he took, but the Blood of his Men shed there, en∣deavouring to land. At this time a Storm had parted from him Ruy Lorenço, driving him up to Mozambique, whence he held his course to Quiloa, where he took some small Prizes. An ambition of doing something more remarkable, carried him to the Island Zanzibar, 20 Leagues short of Monbaça, where he took twenty small Vessels. Then he appeared before the Town of that name. The King of it designed to take the Ship with a number of Paraos, or Boats; but our Long Boat going out with thirty men, killed several, and took four Paraos. The King appeared on the Shoar with 4000 men com∣manded by his Son, who was killed with some others by the first Volley. Their loss produced our safety, for one of them run∣ning from their Croud, with Colours bearing the Arms of Portugal, Peace was concluded, that King agreeing to pay 100 Meticales of Gold yearly, as tributary to Portugal. Thence he visited Melinde, whose King was oppressed by him of Monbaça, for his friendship to us. This obliged Ruy Lorenço to stand in; by the way he took two Ships and three Zam∣bucos, small Vessels, and in them twelve
Magistrates of the City Brava, who, as such, submitted that City to Portugal, with the yearly Tribute of 500 Meticales. The two Kings came to a Battle, and parted upon equal Terms. Now came Antony de Sal∣danna, whereupon he of Monbaça came to an agreement. Beyond Cape Guardafu, and in the Islands Canacani they worsted some Moors who would hinder their watering: On the upper Coast of Arabia they burnt a Ship laden with Frankincense, and forced ashoar another that carried Pilgrims to Meca. But whilst they sail to India, let us see what is doing at Cochin. 5. Zamori of Calicut called gether the Kings and Lords of Malabar, and there re∣sorted to him those of Tanor, Bespur, Cotu∣gan and Corin, and ten Lords of equal Power, besides the Lesser. They drew to∣gether 50000 men, as well for Land as Sea; for the Sea were 4000 men in 280 Paraos, Caturs, and Tonees, Vessels of several sorts, with 382 Cannons to batter the new Fort; all the rest was for the Land to attack the Ford of a River that passed to the Island; these were commanded by Naubea Dring, Nephew and Heir to him of Calicut, and by Elancol, Lord of Repelim. The King of Cochin was in fear, seeing many of his Sub∣jects desert, but Duarto Pacheco, who com∣manded the Portugueses, encouraged him. Pacheco put himself into a posture of De∣fence. Into the Ship he put 25 men, into the Fort 39, into the Caravel 26, into a Boat 23, he was in another with 22; be∣sides
these, 300 Malabars attended him; the King with his Forces was to guard the City. Thus he went to meet Zamori, and finding him quartered in a Village, attacked it, and did much harm. There hapned three fierce ingagement about gaining the Pass; in the first the Enemy lost 20 Paraos sunk by the Cannon, and 180 Persons of Note, above 1000 private men. In the second 19 Pa∣raos and 360 men. In the third 622 Paraos, and 60 fled, and 15000 men by Land, and among them Zamori; Pacheco pursuing, burnt four Towns. 6. The Moors that were with the King of Cochin ve intelligence to the Enemy. The King gave Pacheco leave to punish them. He took five, secured them, and gave out they were hanged, which the King and all his People reseed. Zamori returns and attempts another Ford. Iames Perez and Peter Raphael with two Caravels and some Boats were posted, where the Lord of Repe∣lim was to attack with 3000 men, sustained by the Prince Naubeadarim with his men. At this time 300 Moors deserted Pacheco; he wanted Powder, and the Prince of Cochin, to whom he sent for it, did not relieve him, for the Messenger treacherously forbore de∣livering the message. But Pacheco overcom∣ing all difficulties, killed 650 of Zamori's men, who retired to a Grove of Palm-trees, where nine of his men were killed so near him by a Cannon Ball, that he was sprink∣led with their Blood. After this he lost 6000 men by the Plague.
7. Great were the preparations the King of Calicut made, and the mean time fa∣tigued Pacheco with several stratagems and treacheries. The Bramen Conjurers propo∣sed the making a Powder, which being thrown in our mens Eyes, would blind them, and so they would be easily overcome; be∣sides they had a new invention of Castles that were to destroy them; and the Moors of Cochin were underhand bribed to poyson the water of the Island. The Powder was looked upon as ridiculous, but great care was taken by Pacheco to prevent the Poy∣son. The Castles began to appear, and were eight in number, fifteen foot high, and placed upon two Boats each, and carried many men. Pacheco had a 160 men divided into four parts, the Foord, the Fort, the Caravels and the Ship, and herein consisted the principal strength of the Kingdom of Cochin; for of the 30000 men the King had at first, there were now but 8000 left, ma∣ny of the Principal Men having deserted. Zamori had brought 80000 men, and lost 20000. Whilst the Towers were preparing Pacheco was attacked by a number of Paraos, in one attack he killed some men, and took five Boats; in another eight with thirteen Cannons. Six bold Nayres offered to kill him, and in order thereto came over as De∣serters, but he having intelligence, appre∣hended and sent them to the King. Zamori gave out that the Portugueses at Cochin were all killed, to the intent those who resided at Cananor and Coulam should be destroyed;
they were in great danger, one or two kil∣led, and many wounded. The King of Co∣chin, though he saw the great danger that threatned him, was resolved to endure the utmost miseries, rather than abandon the Portugueses, but feared those few must at last be overpowred by the multitude of the Enemy, and the danger of those brave men grieved him more than his own; he there∣fore most earnestly entreated Pacheco to quit that enterprize, and save himself and men for some opportunity wherein he might do his Prince greater service. But Pacheco bid the King be of good courage, and not dis∣hearten his Subjects with any signs of fear, but exhort them to stand firm, and thereby they should overcome all difficulties. And fearing lest some Portugueses, by his exam∣ple, might faulter in his resolution of dying or conquering, he went aboad the Ship, and made to them a most learned, copious and resolute Speech, which gave new vigour to them all; but much more his speedy Orders, and Couragious Activity shewn at that very time; for scarce was the Speech ended, when the Enemy came to assail him; the Enemies design was to burn our Ships, and therefore those Castles were drove towards them, all the Front flaming. But Pacheco who perceived their intent, threw over long Beams, one end whereof resting against the Ship, the other hindred the approach of those burning Castles. 8. The Enemy appeared with 290 small Vessels, well stored with Men and Artillery,
and eight Castles, one carrying 40 men, two 35 each, and every one of the other five 30 men, before all came the Fireworks. The Shoar was covered by 30000 men, with good Artillery; at the Head of them the Lord of Repelim, with a vast number of Pio∣neers. The Fight began, the odds being al∣most 300 Vessels to three. At first the Ar∣tillery wrought no effect, but being conti∣nued tore those Towers, and the Smoak be∣ing somewhat allayed, the Sea appeared covered with broken Boats, Arms, dead Bodies, and others strugling with Death; the Fight was renewed with great loss to the Enemy, and not one Portugues killed. Next day Zamori returned, and was beaten off with greater damage, having lost 18000 men in the space of five Months that this service lasted. The King by the advice of his Bramens, retired to do Pennance, and by consent of his Councel desired a Peace, which the King of Cochin granted. At this time Pacheco received a Message from the Factor at Coulam, desiring he would come to assist him against five Ships of Moors who obstructed his Market of Pepper. Pacheco went with all speed, and they submitting, he took the Pepper at their own rate, without doing them any harm. He hindred others from coming into that Harbour, and return∣ed to Cochin with the Glory of having struck a general terror through all that Coast. 9. King Emanuel being informed by D. Vasco de Gama, how necessary it was to ap∣pear with a greater Force in India, fitted out
a Fleet of 13 Ships, the biggest had yet been built in Portugal, and gave the Com∣mand of them to Lope Soarez, and in them 1200 men. The first Land of India he touched at was Anchediva, where Antony de Saldanna and Ruy Lorenco were refitting, in order to cruise on the Coast of Cambaya up∣on the Moors of Meca. But Lope Soarez took them along with him to Cananor, where he staid to give the necessary Orders, and then appearing before Calicut, had some Prisoners, who were taken in the late War, delivered to him; but because they did not give up all, he battered the City two days, wherein he ruined great part of it, and kil∣led 300 Inhabitants, and then sailed to Co∣chin at the time that Pacheco was upon his return from Coulam. The King informed him of the damage he received from Cran∣ganor, a Town but 4 Leagues distant, and fortified by Zamori. 10. Lope Soarez with great secrecy provi∣ded 20 Vessels, and sailed with them up the River, where he found 5 Ships and 80 Pa∣raos well manned; which two Ships of ours who had the Vanguard, burnt after a sharp engagement. Then he sailed on, the Prince of Cochin was to join him, but came late. A multitude of Indians and Moors covered the Shoar, who with Showers of Arrows en∣deavoured to hinder our landing, but our Musquetiers made way, and having reach∣ed the Town, it was burnt down to the ground, and the Prince of Calicut who was to have guarded it, fled. This Victory and
another obtained by the King of Tanor against that Prince, wherein Lope Soarez was to assist him, though the Succour came late, produced a friendly Peace with that King. 11. Lope Soarez left Manuel Tellez Barreto with four Sail to secure the Fort of Cochin, and set sail in order to return home, with design first to fall upon Banane, a Town subject to Calicut. He was met by twenty Paraos, who freely bestowed their Shot, drawing him into a Bay, where were seven∣teen great Ships well-stored with Cannon, and with 4000 men. The Ships were all burnt with their lading, which was very rich, and 700 Turks drowned, besides what perished by Fire and Sword; this Victory cost twenty three men. It was the begin∣ning of Ianuary, when Lope Soarez sailed 1506. hence, and he arrived at Lisbon on the 22d of Iuly with thirteen Victorious Ships laden with Riches; three were of the foregoing years Fleet; of his own he lost Peter Men∣doza, who being stnded 14 Leagues from Aguada de S. Bras was never more heard of. One of the other three was that of Diego Fernandez Peteyra, who after taking seve∣ral Prizes, on the Coast of Melinde, dis∣covered the Island Zocotora. The King placed Duarte Pacheco (who had so bravely defended Cochin) by his side under a Cano∣py, and went with him in that manner to Church, to honour his great Valour. But soon after imprisoned, and suffered him to die miserably: A terrible example of the un∣certainty
of Royal Favours, and the little regard that is had to True Merit. CHAP. VIII. Conquests under King Emanuel, from the Year 1505, and beginning of the Go∣vernment of Don Francisco de Almey∣da, first Governour and Viceroy of In∣dia, till the Year 1509. 1. BEfore these Discoveries, the Spice was brought to Europe with vast trouble and charge. The Clove of Malucco, the Nutmeg and Mace of Banda, the Sandal of Timor, the Camfir of Borneo, the Gold and Silver of Luconia, and all the other Riches, Spices, Gums, Perfumes, and Curiosities of China, Iava, Siam, and other Kingdoms were carried to the Market of the City Ma∣laca, seated in the Golden Chersonesus, whence the Inhabitants of all the Western Countries as far as the Red Sea, brought them, dealing by way of barter; for no Mo∣ny was used, Silver and Gold being of less value there, than with them that traded thither. This Trade it was enriched the Cities of Calicut, Cambaya, Ormuz and Aden adding to what they brought from Malaca, the Rubies of Pegu, the Stuffs of Bengala, the
Pearls of Calicare, the Diamonds of Nar∣singa, the Cinnamon and richer Rubies of Ceylon, the Pepper, Ginger and other Spice of the Coast of Malabar, and other places Nature had enriched therewith. From Or∣muz they were brought to Europe up the Per∣sian Gulph to Bacora at the Mouth of Eu∣phrates, and thence distributed in Caravans through Armenia, Trebisond, Tartary, Aleppo and Damascus, and then at the Port of Ba∣rut upon the Mediterranean, the Venetians, Genoese and Catalonians laded with them to their respective Countries. Such as came up the Red Sea were landed at Toro or Sues, Towns at the bottom of that Streight, thence went in Caravans to Grand Cayre, so down the Nile to Alexandria, and thence shipped off. Many Princes, and particular∣ly the Soldan of Cayre, being great losers by this new way found by the Portugueses, they endeavoured to drive them out of India. 2. The Soldan endeavoured to work his ends by a Wile, and therefore gave out, that he was going to destroy the Temple and Holy Places of Ierusalem. Father Maurus of Mount Sinai, fearing the execution, offered to go to Rome to the Pope to procure an accommodation. The Soldan, who desired nothing more, gave him a Letter to the Pope, signifying that his Reasons for destroying those Places, were in revenge of the damage done to his Trade. The Pope sent the same Father Maurus to Portugal. But the Purport of his Message being already known before his arrival, the King made such Preparations, that he re∣turned
with admiration, carrying more from Portugal to relate at Cayre, than he brought thence to recount here. However the King gave considerable Alms for the Convent, and answered the Pope, shewing that his Intentions in those Eastern Disco∣veries tended to the Propagation of the Faith, and extending the Jurisdiction of the See of Rome. 3. On the 25th of March sailed from Lis∣bon 1507. a Fleet of twenty two Ships, eleven of them were to return with Merchandise, and eleven to remain in India; they carried 1500 fighting men, and were commanded by Don Franciso de Almeyda, who went to govern in India with the Title of Viceroy, and gave great demonstrations of his Pru∣dence and Courage. The second of Iuly hapned a terrible Storm, which tearing to pieces the Sails of Diego Correas Ship, carried three men overboard; two were lost, the third cried from the Water they should have an Eye after him, for he would keep above water till the next morning, and the next morning the Storm ceasing, they took him up, his name was Fernando Lorenço. Don Francisco de Al∣meyda arrived at Quiloa with only eight Ves∣sels, the others were separated by stress of Weather, and one lost, but the men saved. He entred that Port and saluted as usual, but was not answered, whereupon he com∣plained to the King. He at first framed ex∣cuses, and avoided coming to a Conference, though Don Francisco attended in the place appointed, which set him upon studying re∣venge.
After a Council held, it was resol∣ved to erect a Fort in that place, as was de∣sired by King Emanuel. Having promised some description of all such places as we took possession of, it will be fit to insert here that of the Country, City and Fort of Quiloa. 4. From Cape Guardafu, the most We∣stern point of Africk, to Mocambique are 550 Leagues, a hollow Coast like a Bow when bent. From Cape Mozambique to Cape Corrientes 170 Leagues; thence to the Cape of Good Hope 340 Leagues; hence the Coast runs bowing to the Westward as far as the Borders of the Kingdom of Congo; but by reason of its great length, appears to the Eye to run strait to the Northward. Draw∣ing a Line from the Southern borders of Congo cross the Continent Eastward, there remains to the Southward that great porti∣on of Africk, to which the Barbarous Inhabi∣tants have given no name, but was called by the Persians Caffaria, and the Inhabi∣tants Cafres, which signifies a Rude People, without Law or Government; and our late Geographers call it Ethiopia Inferior. Above this on the East, runs for above 200 Leagues that Coast which we call. Zanguebar; but the Arabians and Persians give this name to all the Coast as far as the Cape of Good Hope. Above Zanguebar as far as Point Guardafu, and Mouth of the Red Sea, is that which the Arabs call Aiam, or Aiana, inhabited by the same Arabs, and the Inland by Hea∣then Blacks. Most of this Coast is very
low, and subject to inundations, covered with impenetrable Woods, which made it excessive hot and unhealthy. The Natives are black, of curled Hair, Idolaters, so gi∣given to Superstition, that upon frivolous motives they give over the most important Designs, as it hapned to the King of Quiloa at this time; who because a Black Cat cros∣sed him at his coming out, failed of meet∣ing Don Francisco de Almeyda. The Cattle, Fruit and Grain is answerable to the wild∣ness of the Country. The Moors who in∣habit the Coast and adjacent Islands, are little given to Tilling, and feed upon Wild Beasts, and some loathsom things; those who live in the Inland, and have commerce with the Barbarous Cafres, make use of some Milk. Nature has stored the Country with much Gold, that those People might inha∣bit it, and our Covetousness, though at such distance, find them out. It was Covetous∣ness that first drew thither the Arabs, call∣ed Emozaydii, that is, subjects of Zayde, who built two considerable Towns, only suffici∣ent to secure them against the Cafres. These continued so, till great numbers of other Arabs, who were Neighbourers of the City Laçab, 40 Leagues from the Island Baharem in the Persian Gulph, came over thither, whose first Plantation was Magadoxa, and after Brava; the former became the Metro∣polis. The first Arabs separated from these, and mixing with the Cafres, were called Ba∣duiis. The first that had the Trade of the Mine of Zofala, were those of Magadoxa,
who discovered it accidentally. Thence they spread themselves, but never durst pass Cape Corrientes, a Point opposite to the Westermost part of the Island Madagascar or St. Laurence, and takes its name from the violent Current of Water which often en∣dangers Ships there. But along these Coasts they possessed themselves of Quiloa, Mon∣baça, Melinde, the Isles of Pemba, Zanzibar, Monfia, Comoro, and others. Quiloa was the chief of all their Plantations, and thence many were spread, particularly on the Coast of Madagascar. The Sea by degrees wear∣ing away both sides, made Quiloa an Island. It bears many Palm and Thorn-trees, and divers Herbs and Plants; Cattle, Wild Beasts, and Birds, much after the same manner as Spain; the Buildings also after our manner, flat at the Top, with Gardens and Orchards behind. On one side is the Royal Palace, built in the manner of a Fort; the Gate to the Sea opposite to the Anchoring place, where ours at that time were. 5. Don Francisco de Almeyda, having resol∣ved to land, was the first that touched the Shoar with 500 men. He and his Son Lau∣rence at the same time attacked the City in two places. Our men had enough to do to cover themselves with their Shields from the showers of Arrows that flew, yet they advanced; but finding the greatest damage they received was from the tops of the Houses, they entred and gained some of them, and thereby so much advantage, that the King fled, and set up in the Field Por∣tugues
Colours, which stopt the Current of the Conquerors, till he had got over to the Continent with his Wives and Riches. The City was plundered, and not one man lost in this Action, though a considerable num∣ber of the Enemies was killed. 6. Mir Abraham now overcome, was but an Usurper, but the 44th Possessor of that Island, of which number many were Ty∣rants like him. A Kinsman of this Abra∣ham, called Mahomet Anconii had been very faithful and serviceable to the Portugueses; to requite him Don Francisco ordered when the City was plundered, that nothing ap∣pertaining to him should be touched. And after all was setled, sent for, and declared him King of that place, putting a Crown of Gold upon his Head with much Pomp and Ceremony. It was a wonderful act of Moderation in this Barbarian, that as soon as the Crown was on his Head, he declared, that had the lawful King Alfudail, murder∣ed by the late Usurper, been living, he would have resigned that Crown to him, but since he could not do it, he desired the Son of the said Alfudail might be sworn here∣ditary Prince, though he himself had Chil∣dren for whom he might covet that Inhe∣ritance. This Example in a Heathen might confound the inhuman insolence and barba∣rity in Christians (at least those who pre∣tend to the name) who wade through Seas of Blood, end the most Sacred Bonds of Consanguinity and Alliance; spoil Provin∣ces, oppress the Good, exalt the Wicked,
make Honesty, Treason; and Perjury, Duty; and Religion, a property to work their am∣bitious cursed ends, to wit, to snatch Scep∣ters and Crowns from the Hands and Heads where the Eternal Providence has most worthily placed them. 7. All things being again setled, Don Francisco in twenty days raised a Fort, the Gentlemen, Captains and he himself work∣ing at it. He put into it 550 men, and left a Caravel and a Brigantine to cruise there. The 8th of August he set sail for Mombaça, and arrived there with 13 Sail. The City Mombaça is seated in an Island, which is about 14 Leagues in circumference; it is beautiful and strong; before it is a large Bay capable of many Ships. Before he en∣tred, two Vessels were sent to sound the Bar, which is commanded by a Platform with eight Pieces of Cannon, which began to play upon them that were fadoming, but they repaid the Courtesie so fortunately, that a Ball falling among the Enemies Powder did great harm, and they quitted the Work. The like success was against two lesser Works, so that our Fleet entred without fur∣ther resistance. Don Francisco was told the King was prepared, and had hired 1500 Archers of the Cafres besides his own men. He sent a message to him, but was not hearkned to, and only answered, that the Moors of Mombaça were not to be frighted with the noise of Cannon, like those of Qui∣loa. Don Francisco enraged that some men had been wounded, attempting to burn the
Ships of Cambaya in the Port, without suc∣ceeding, landed his men and marched to the City. 8. He entred the Town the 15th of Au∣gust, and drove the Enemy out at the other end, and among them the King, whose Pallace he had possessed himself of, and planted thereon a Cross, and here received the News of the Victory at Sea, the Ships having been burnt as he ordered. In this Action were lost five Portugueses; of the Moors 1513 killed, and 1200 taken, where∣of he kept but 200, discharging the rest, the Ships being heavy with Plunder; after which the City was burnt to the ground. Some of the Ships which had been separated by the Storm, joyned the Fleet here. Don Francisco dispatched two before him to car∣ry the News of what he had done, and the necessary Orders till he came. He set out for India with 14 Ships, and anchored in the Bay called Angra de Santa Elena, where he found Iohn Homem, Captain of a Caravel, who having been distressed by Weather had discovered some Islands, and met some of the Ships that had lost the Fleet. Sailing thence, the first Port of India where he touched, was Anchediva. 9. Anchediva (as was said before) is the chiefest of five Islands, where the King had ordered a Fort to be built, which was now put in execution. Hither the King of Onor sent Embassadors to Don Francisco with Pre∣sents. Hither came to meet him Conside∣rable Men, though Merchants, assuring him
of the Good Affection of their Prince to the Portugueses. Hither the Neighbouring Moors of Cincatora brought Gifts to him. All was the effects of Fear, produced by the Fame of his Actions. He was informed there was not far from him a Fort, strong by Nature as well as Art, built by the Prince Sabago, and garrisoned with 800 men, being seated on the Banks of the River Aliga and Borders of Onor; he sent his Son Don Lo∣renço on pretence of a Friendly Visit to take a view of it, which he effected, remaining there some days. 10. The Fort being finished, he put a Captain and 80 men into it, leaving a Ga∣leon and two Brigantines to cruise there, and then sailed to the Port of Onor. He was ill received, and resolved to shew him∣self as terrible there as he had done at Mom∣baça and Quiloa. The Inhabitants percei∣ving it, amused him with excuses till they had secured their Wives, Children and Goods in a neighbouring Mountain, and then appeared with shouts and motions, en∣deavouring to terrifie rather than seem fearful. Don Francisco marched by land, and sent his Son with 150 men in Boats to burn some Ships; and though innumerable Arrows flew, and Don Francisco was wound∣ed with one, the Town and Ships were fired at the same time. The Wind being in our mens Faces, the Smoak of the Fire did them much harm; but Don Lorenço taking a com∣pass avoided it, and fell upon 1500 of the Enemy. The confusion was great on both
sides, but more on ours, our men beginning to give ground, till Don Francisco coming up, they took heart and drove the Enemy to the Mountain. Timoja Governour of the City, and Owner of some of the Ships that were burnt, and a man of Graceful Pre∣sence, with discreet words appeased Don Francisco, and stopt the ensuing ruin. He excused his King, and in his Name offered Vassalage to Portugal. This done Don Fran∣cisco sailed to Cananor.
CHAP. IX. Conquests under King Emanuel in the Year 1506, and Government of the Viceroy Don Francisco de Almeyda. 1. BEcause the Government of Don Fran∣cisco de Almeyda was the Foundation of our Security and Conquests in India, it will be necessary here to say some things of its Ports and Chief Places along the Sea Coasts. Asia is divided from Europe by the River Don or Tanais, and the Euxine or Black Sea, and Streights of the Dardanels. From Africk by the Red Sea, and a Line drawn from Suez, the utmost Port thereof, to the Mediterranean, cross that narrow Neck of Land which joyns these two parts of the World, and is 24 Leagues in length. The different Religions there practised, may be reduced to four principal ones, the Christi∣an, the Mahometan, the Pagan and the Jewish. That part of Asia which makes most to our purpose, may be divided into nine parts, as it runs along the Coast. The first beginning to the Westward, commences at the Mouth of the Red Sea in 12 d. 40 m. of North Latitude, and reaches to the Gulf of Persia. From the Mouth of the Red Sea to the City Aden is 44 Leagues, thence to Cape Fortaque in 14 d. 30 m. Latitude 100 Leagues, with these Towns Abian, Ax, Ca∣nacan,
Brun, Argel, Zehel the Metropolis, Herit, Cayem, Fartach. Hence to Curia Mu∣ria 70 Leagues, in which are the City Dol∣for, famous for Frankincense, and 20 Leagues beyond it, Norbate. From Curia Muria to Cape Ra Alegate in 22 d. 30 Latitude 120 Leagues, all barren and desert. Here begins the Kingdom of Ormus, and hence to Cape Mozandan are 90 Leagues, with these Cities Colagate, Curiate, Mascate, Soar, Calata, Orfacam, Doba and Lima, 8 Leagues from Monbazam, which Ptolomy calls Cape Assaborum, in 26 degrees of North Latitude. All this tract the Arabs call Ayaman, and we Arabia Felix, because the most fruitful and best inhabited of all Arabia. The se∣cond division contains 200 Leagues, from Cape Iaques to the Mouth of Indus is call∣ed Chirman, divided into the two King∣doms, Macran and Madel, with these Towns, Guadel, Calara, Tibique, Calamate, Goadel and Diul, this Coast is barren and much of it desert, because of the shoal Water. The third contains 150 Leagues, 38 from Diul to Cape Iaquete, thence to Dio in the King∣dom Guzarata 50, with these Towns, Co∣tinna, Mangalor, Chervar, Patan and Corinar; from Dio to Cambaya 50 Leagues, and these Towns, Madrafavat, Moha, Talica, Goda and Gundin. Between Cambaya and Iaquete is included a part of the Kingdom of Guzarata, and the Mountain Country of the Resboutos. The fourth contains 290 Leagues, and is the most pretious part of India, and most frequented by the Portu∣gueses.
This division is subdivided into three parts by two Rivers that run from East to West. The first separates the Kingdom of Decan from that of Guzarat, which lies North of it; the second parts Decan from Canara on the South. There are other Ri∣vers which all have their Springs in the Mountain Gate. The chief of all those Ri∣vers is called Ganga, or Guenga, and falls in∣to the Sea near the Mouth of Ganges, be∣tween the Cities Angali and Pisolta, in about 22 degrees of Latitude. The River Bate has his Springs in the Mount Gate, and falls into the Sea by Bombaim, parting the King∣doms of Guzarata and Decan. From the Ci∣ty Cambaya to the Mouth of this River are 70 Leagues. From Chaul South of it, to the River Aliga, the southern extent of Decan 75 Leagues, with these Towns, Bandor, Da∣bul, Debetele, Cintapori, Coropatan, Banda, Cha∣pora and Goa, our Metropolis and Archie∣piscopal See in India. The third district begins where Canara parts from Decan, and ends in Cape Comori, and contains above 140 Leagues. From this River to Mount Delli is about 46 Leagues, with these Towns, Onor, Baticale, Barcalor, Baranor, and others of the Province Canara, subject to the King of Bisnaga. Below this to Cape Comori are 93 Leagues, and is called Malabar, divided into three Kingdoms which own no Supe∣rior. The Kingdom of Cananor has 20 Leagues of the Coast, in which are these Towns, Cota, Coulam, Nilichilam, Marabia, olepatam, Cananor, the Metropolis, in the
Latitude of 12 degrees, Tremapatan, Cheba, Maim and Purepatan. Here begins the King∣dom of Calicut, and runs 27 Leagues, and has these Towns, Calicut the Metropolis in about 11 degrees 70 minutes of Latitude, Coulete, Chale, Parangale and Tanor, the head of a Kingdom, subject to the Zamori or Emperour of Calicut, and Chatua the last Bound of this Empire. Next is the little Kingdom of Cranganor, which borders on that of Cochin, then that of Coulan, and last∣ly Travancor, subject to Narsinga. Near Travancor is the Famous Cape Comori, the southermost Inland of this Province of Indostan or India, within Ganges, and 7 de∣grees and half of North Latitude, where ends the Coast of Malabar, and the fourth of the nine districts I now divide the Coast of Asia into. From Cape Comori in the West, to Cape Cincapura in the East, which is the Southermost Land of the Aurea Cherso∣nesus, or Malaca, are 400 Leagues; and within this interval is contained the great Bay of Bengala, called by some Sinus Gan∣geticus, because the River Ganges, after wa∣tering the Country of Bengala, falls into this Bay about the Latitude of 23 Degrees. This River is wonderful for the abundance of water it carries, and esteemed Holy by the Neighbouring People, who imagining it conduces to their Salvation when given over, are carried and die with their Feet in its water, which brings the King a great Revenue, for none must wash there with∣out paying a certain Duty. Though this
River has many Mouths, the two most re∣markable are called Satigan to the West, and Chatigan to the East, near 100 Leagues di∣stant from each other; and here will end the fifth of the nine Districts. This may be subdivided into three parts, The first the Kingdom of Bisnaga contains 200 Leagues, and these Towns, Tarancurii, Manapar, Vai∣par, Trechendur, Caligrande, Charcacale, Tu∣cucurii, Benbar, Calicare, Beadala, Manan∣cort and Cannameira, whence takes name that Cape that stretches out there in 10 de∣grees of North Latitude; then Negapatan, Hahor, Triminapatan, Tragambar, Trimenava, Colororam, Puducheira, Calapate, Connumeira, Sadrapatan and Meliapor, now called St. Tho∣mas, because that Apostles Body was found there. From St. Thomas to Palicata are 9 Leagues, then go on Chiricole, Aremogan, Caleturo, Caleciro, Pentipolii, where ends the Kingdom of Bisnagur, and begins that of Orixa, the second part of this District, and contains about 120 Leagues to Cape Palmei∣ras, with these Towns, Penacote, Calingan, Vizipatan, Bimilepatan, Narsingapatan, Pua∣catan, Caregare and others. Here begins the third part, which is the Kingdom of Ben∣gala, and extends above 100 Leagues. The sixth District of the nine begins at the East Mouth of Ganges or Chatigan, and ends at Cape Cincapura, in little more than one de∣gree of North Latitude. This Coast con∣tains about 380 Leagues to Cape Negraes, in the Latitude of 16 degrees 100 Leagues, and these Towns, Sore, Satatolu, Arracam,
Metropolis of the Kingdom so called, and Dunadiva upon the Point. Hence to Tavay in the Latitude of 13 Degrees 16 Leagues. This is the bounds of the Kingdom of Pegu. From Tavay to Cincapura 220, the chief Towns along this Coast are Martaban, Lu∣gor, Tanacerin, Lungar, Pedam, Queda, Solon∣gor and Malaca, Head of the Kingdom. At Cincapura begins the seventh District, and ends at the great River of Siam, which falls into the Sea in the Latitude of 14 Degrees, and has its rise in the Lake Chiammay, call∣ed by the Natives Menam, that is, source of waters; upon this Coast are the Towns Pam, Ponciam, Calantaon, Patane, Ligor, Cuii, Perperii, and Bamplacot on the Mouth of the River. The eighth District contains these Kingdoms, that of Cambodia, through which runs the River Mecon, whose Springs are in China; that of Champa or Tsiompa, whence comes the true Aloes; on this borders the Kingdom of Cochinchina; then that of China, divided into fifteen Provinces or Govern∣ments, each of which is a great Kingdom; those on the Sea are Quantung, Fokien, Chekiang, where ends the eighth District. The ninth begins with the Province Nan∣king and continues that of Xantung and Pe∣cheli, running to the farthest discovered Land of the Coast of Tartary. I shall speak of the Islands that lie along this tract as they are discovered, but the Names of the chief are these, the Maldivy Islands, Ceylon, Sumatra, Iava, Borneo, Banda, Timori, Ce∣lebes, the Moluccoes, Mindanao, Luconia and
Iapan. Thus much of the Coast of Asia; let us now see by whom inhabited, and what it produces. 2. Though there be many, and very dif∣ferent manners of Worship in Asia, as well as sundry Nations; the chief Religions there may be reduced to these four Heads, the Christian, Jewish, Mahometan and Gentile. The first two, for the most part, under the slavery of the latter. With the two latter the Portugues waged War; their Power is thus divided. All that tract from the River Cintacora, opposite to Anchediva towards the North and West, is subject to Mahometans, thence Eastward, to Pagans, except the Kingdom of Malaca, part of Sumatra, and some parts of Iava and the Molucco Islands, held by the Moors. In that tract which is governed by these, are the following Sove∣reign Princes. The Kings of Aden, Xael and Fartaque, who have many Ports of great Trade, and their Subjects, the Arabs, are couragious and warlike. Next the King of Ormuz, greater than the other three toge∣ther; and then he of Cambaya, equal to Xerxes, Darius, or Porus in grandeur and war∣like power. From Chaul to Cinatora be∣longed to Nizamaluco and Hidalcan, two powerful Princes, not inferiour to great Kings, who maintained great Armies com∣posed of sundry warlike Nations well arm∣ed. The Moors of Sumatra, Malaca, and the Moluccoes were well disciplin'd, and much better stor'd with Artillery than we that attacked them. The Heathens were
the Kings of Bisnagar, Orixa, Bengala, Pegu, Siam and China, all (but chiefly the last) so Powerful, it is not to be expressed, and if related scarce credible. Siam extends above 500 Leagues, and has seven King∣doms subject, which are Cambodia, Como, Lanchaam, Cheneray, Chencran, Chiamay, Cam∣burii and Chaypumo. The King has 30000 Elephants, whereof he carries out 3000 armed to War, and 50000 men only of the City Udia, Metropolis of his Empire. The King of China alone in extent exceeds them all, and all the Princes of Europe put together. China is above 700 Leagues in length, it has abundance of all sorts of Metals, and ex∣ceeds Europe in Manufactures; some of their Works seem beyond Human Wit; the Silks, Provisions and Pleasures wherewith it a∣bounds, are beyond computation. 3. All the Heathens of India, chiefly be∣tween Indus and Ganges, write upon Palm Leaves (without Ink) with Wooden or Steel Pens, which easily cut the Letters on the Leaf, whereof I have seen some in Rome curiously folded; what they design should be lasting, they carve on Stone or Copper; they begin on the left Hand; their Histories are fabulous. 600 years before the arrival of the Portugueses in India, there was a King so powerful in Malabar, that the People began their Era or Computation of Time from his Reign, as they did af∣terwards from our arrival. He was per∣suaded by the Moors that traded in his Ports, to turn Mahometan, and gave them leave
to build Calicut. Being old, he divided his Kingdoms among his Kindred. To the Chief he gave that of Coulan, where he placed the Head See of the Religion of the Bramens, and called him Cobritim, that is, the same as High Priest; to his Nephew he gave Calicut, with all the Temporal Domi∣nion, calling him Zamori, that is, the same with Emperour. This last Dignity conti∣nues in the same place, the other was trans∣lated to Cochin. Having disposed of his Do∣minions, he resolved to die at Meca, but was drowned by the way. Calicut is a plain Country, well watered, plentiful of Pepper and Ginger; all other Spice it has from its Neighbours. The People are very Supersti∣tious, and do not suffer those of one Trade or Profession to marry into another, or put their Children to Learn. The Nayres who are their Nobles, if they chance to touch any of the Commons, cleanse themselves by washing, as the Samaritans and Jews. The Women of the Nayres are common to them all, but chiefly the Bramens, therefore know no Father, nor is any bound to maintain them. They are most expert at their Wea∣pons, beginning to exercise them at the age of seven years. They use all the antient manners of Augury and Divination. 4. The Viceroy, Don Francisco de Almey∣da, had an interview ashoar with the King of Cananor, who brought with him 5000 men well armed. He acquainted him he came to reside some time in India, by rea∣son of some troubles that were so inflamed
with the Zamori King of Calicut. He asked leave to build a Fort in the Harbour, and it was granted. Having begun it, he left there Lorenço de Brito to command with 150 men, and two Vessels to cruise upon the Coast. Being arrived at Cochin, he received the News that the Factor of Coulan with all his men, were killed by the Moors. He sent his Son Don Lorenço with three Ships and three Caravels, with Orders to procure Lading, without taking notice of what had past, but in case of denial, to revenge the slaughter. The Messenger was answered by a Shower of Arrows, and twenty four Ships of Calicut and other places prepared to re∣ceive ours. Don Lorenço after pouring in his Shot liberally, burnt them all, only a few of the Moors were saved by swimming. Don Lorenço then went to load in another Port. 5. He returned to Cochin, where his Fa∣ther, according to his Instructions, was pre∣paring to Crown Triumpara, that King, in recompence of the Gallantry wherewith he had defended the Portugueses against their Enemies. But he being retired to follow a Religious Life, and his Nephew Nambeadra left Successor, it was thought fit to bestow the same Honour upon him. He was Crown∣ed with great Solemnity with a Crown of Gold set with Jewels, carried from Portugal for that purpose. This was a security for that Prince, and a terror to others; six Ships were now sent home richly laden.
6. King Emanuel, to secure the Trade of the Gold of Zofala, had caused a Fort to be built at Quiloa, another at Moçambique, and a Factory at Melinde. After Don Francisco he sent out Pedro de Annaya with six Ships to build a Fort at Zofala; three of the Ships were to go on to India, and return with lading, the other three to cruise on the Coast of Zofala. One of the Captains fell overboard, and was lost; another had 16 men killed in an Island where he landed. The others found Don Pedro de Annaya in the Port of Zofala. He obtained leave of that King, and raised a Fort, whereby the Trade was secured, which that King never intended, imagining that the Country being unhealthful, the Portugueses would be obli∣ged to quit it. Here Annaya found twenty Portugueses in a miserable condition, after travelling with great hardships from Cape Corientes, where they were forced to run their Ship ashoar, being no longer able to keep above water. Their Captain was Lope Sanchez, whom they would not obey ashoar, but dividing, travelled in several Companies through those unknown Countries. They were all lost except these twenty, and five found by Antony de Magallanes in the River Quiloame, who brought them to Zofala.
CHAP. X. A Continuation of the Conquests the same Year 1506. and the Government of the same Viceroy Don Francisco de Al∣meyda. 1. THE Kingdom of Zofala is a large tract of Land, of 750 Leagues cir∣cumference, subject to the Monomotapa, that is Emperour of that South Part of Africk, called by the same Name, or Ethiopia Infe∣rior; it is watered by these two Famous Ri∣vers, Rio del Espiritu Santo, and Cuama, the latter Navigable 250 Leagues. These, and many other Rivers that fall into them, have Golden Sands. Most part of the Land en∣joys a Temperate Air, pleasant, wholsom and fruitful. In part it bears great flocks of Sheep, of the Skins whereof the Natives are Cloathed, because of the cold South Winds. Along the Banks of Cuama, the Country is Mountanous, covered with Woods, and watered with many Rivers, which make it delightful, and therefore the best Peopled, and the common residence of the Monomo∣pata. It is abundantly stocked with Ele∣phants, and consequenty Ivory, and Mines of Gold encompassed 30 Leagues about, with Mountains, on the tops whereof the Air is serene and clear. They are called
the Mines of Manica 50 Leagues South-west of Zofala, there are others 150 Leagues di∣stant, none then much valued by their Owners. Here are some Buildings of won∣derful Structure, with Inscriptions of un∣known Characters, but the Natives know nothing of their Foundation. They believe in one God, under the Name of Mozima, and use no Idols. Witchcraft, Theft and Adultery are most severely punished by them. They have as many Wives as they can maintain; the Kings are above 1000, but the first commands the others, and her Children inherit. In their Funerals they are superstitious; their Cloathing Cotton, the better sort mixed with some Gold Threads; the Houses of Wood. The Kings Atten∣dance is more ceremonious than great; his Guard 200 Dogs, and is always followed by 500 Jesters. He is Sovereign over many Princes, and because they rebel, always keeps their Heirs about him. There are no Law Suits among them; they fight a foot; their Arms are Arrows, Javelins or Darts, Daggers and small sharp Hatchets. The Women are so much respected, that if the King's Son meets one, he gives her the way, and stops till she pass. 2. The Moors of Magadoxa were the first that possessed these Mines of Zofala; after them, those of Quiloa, whose Kings were possessed thereof, till Yçuf, one of their Go∣vernours rebelled, and usurped the Sove∣reignty to himself, with the Title of King, and was the same with whom Pedro de Annaya
now treated; and in this place he built the Fort so much desired by King Emanuel, strong though of Wood. The three tra∣ding Ships sailed toward India, under the Command of Peter Barreto. Francisco de Annaya was ordered by his Father to secure the Coast up to Cape Guardafu with two Ships; both Vessels were lost, and the Cap∣tains saved in their Boats. 3. Whilst the Sea swallowed the Guard of the Coast, the Moors studied the destru∣ction of Peter de Annaya at Zofala. The King's Son-in-law persuaded him to get rid of them, at such time as they were so weak, through Diseases contracted by the strange Air, that they joined six of them to bend a Cross-bow. The King laying hold of this opportunity, surrounds the place with 5000 Cafres, and fills the Ditch with Faggots, then gives the assault, darkning the Sun with Showers of Arrows; but our Cannon being well played made such havock, that they filled with their Carcases the part of the Ditch they had not levelled with Wood. Only 35 Portugueses, who were able to carry Arms, did all this execution. After∣wards Peter de Annaya sallied with 15 or 20 Moors and drove the Cafres first to a Wood of Palm-trees, and then to their Dwellings, with such consternation, that they cried, out, the King of Zofala bad called them to fight against God. Peter de Annaya with a few men attacks the Town by night, and entring the King's House, he stood behind the Door with a Cimiter, and as Annaya en∣tred,
wounded him in the Neck, but was soon killed with many more. Next day his Sons with all the Moors assaulted the Fort, but in vain, for the fright cured many of the sick, who joyning in the common de∣fence, the Enemy was repulsed. The two Brothers fell out about the Succession to the Crown, and Solyman gaining Annaya, was by him Crowned; and for his own security made a strong Alliance with, and support∣ed the Portugueses. 2. Whilst these things hapned at Zofala, in India, the Zamori of Calicut had stirred up the Soldan of Cayre, and hoped with his assistance to drive us out of these Seas; this was not so private but the King of Cochin had intelligence of it, and advertised the Viceroy Don Francisco, who sent his Son Laurence with 11 Sail to prevent or put a stop to the design. As he visited some Ports, news was brought him, that in the Road of Cananor was a Fleet of 260 Paraos, where∣of 60 exceeded our Ships in bulk. He directs his course towards them, and after a very sharp engagement they were put to flight, pursued, and some taken, but many sunk and obliged to run aground, with great loss to the Enemy, and of his own only five or six men; the chiefest part of the Booty was four Ships laden with Spice. Don Lorenço had scarce time to breath after this Victory, when he understood the Fort of Anchediva was beset by 60 Vessels of Moors and Gen∣tiles well armed and resolute, commanded by a Renegado. The besieged behaved
themselves gallantly, and no less the Besie∣gers; but having lost some Vessels tore by our Cannon, and hearing of the relief Don Lorenço was about to bring, they went off with all possible speed. 5. The Moors perceiving their Trade was cut off by the Portugueses, thought to shun them by keeping out at Sea in their Voya∣ges to Sumatra and Malaca where they went for Spice, striking through the Maldivy Islands, and bearing away South of Ceylon. The Viceroy sent his Son from Cochin with nine Ships to infest that Course. But the Pi∣lots wandring through unknown Seas, dis∣covered the Island Ceylon, formerly called Trapobana. They anchored at the Port Gale, where many Moors were lading Cin∣namon, and taking in Elephants for Cam∣baya. They fearful of Don Lorenço's anger, presented him in the name of the King with 400 Bahares of Cinnamon. He well understood the contrivance, but thought it at that time better to dissemble and content himself with the Present, and discovery of the Island, planting there a Cross, with an Inscription, signifying his arrival there. In his return to Cochin he fell upon the Town of Biramjam, which he burnt down, putting all to the Sword, in revenge for the Portu∣gueses killed at Coulan, because this Town belonged to that Crown. 6. Cide Barbudo and Peter Quaresma com∣ing with two Ships from Portugal, after ma∣ny misfortunes, arrived at Zofala, where they found Peter de Annay, and most of his
men wre dead, and the rest sick. Quarisma remained there to relieve the Fort, and Bar∣budo sailing towards India, found Quiloa in the same condition whereof he gave the Viceroy an account. He sent with all speed Nunno Vaz Pereyra to the relief of the Fort, who having repaired it, and given necessa∣ry Orders, went on to Zofala. Neverthe∣less the Fort of Quiloa was afterwards razed by the same hands that built it, after having cost many Lives, all the effect of the ill usage of the Portugueses towards the Natives, proceeding from their unlimited Pride and Boundless Avarice. End of the First Part of the First Tome.
THE Portugues ASIA. TOM. I. PART II. CHAP. I. Conquests in India under King Emanuel, from the Year 1506, till the Year 1508, the Viceroy Don Francisco still Governing, and entring upon the Glori∣ous Exploits of the Great Alfonso de Albuquerque, and the Famous Tristan de Cunna. 1. THE King had resolved to send Tristan de Cunna to Command the Trading Ships, and Alfonso de Albuquerque to cruize on the Coast of Arabia, when Iames Fernandez Piteyra dis∣coverer of the Island Zocotora in the Mouth
of the Red Sea arrived. Being by him in∣formed there were Christians there who were subject to the Moors, he ordered the two Commanders to direct their course thi∣ther, and endeavour to possess themselves of the Fort, to the intent our Fleets might afterwards winter there, and so the Navi∣gation of that Gulf might be secured. They carried with them a Wooden Fort to be set up there, in case that which was there were not found serviceable. On the 6th of March they sailed from Lisbon with 13 Vessels, and 1300 Fighting-men, whereof some (being infected, the Plague at that time raging in the City) died by the way. When they came under the Line the Sickness left them. They had a sight of Cape St. Augustin in Brasil, and in crossing the vast Ocean be∣tween that place and the Cape of Good Hope, Tristan de Cuma run so far to the Southward, that some of his men perished with Cold, and discovered the Islands still called by his Name; where being assaulted by a Storm, all the Ships were parted, each running a different course, till they met again at Mo∣zambique, except Alvaro Tellez, who at Cape Guardufu took 6 Ships so laden with all sorts of Goods, that from them to his own Ves∣sel he made a Bridge of Bails thrown into the Sea, over which the men passed as on dry land. Ruy Pereyra, who fell into Ma∣tatanna, a Port in the Island Madagascar; being informed it abounded in Spice, espe∣cially Ginger, invited thither Tristan de Cunna. He came and anchored in a Bay
which Nunno de Cunna his Son called de Do∣na Maria de Cunna, a Lady he courted; others named it of the Conception, so it retained the name of Mary, either Religious or Profanely. Some Blacks appeared upon the Coast; he sent a Moor to speak to them, but they hearing he spoke of Christians, had killed him, had not our Cannon from the Ships forced them to retire. Sailing three Leagues farther, they fell upon a Vil∣lage on the Bank of a River, where, among others, they took the Lord of it, whom they call Xeque. This man the next night carried our Commander to another Town in a close Bay, which receives the great River Lulangan. This was inhabited by Moors, somewhat civilized, who fearful of our Fleet, fled over to the firm Land in Boats so overladen, that many perished by the way. But our men encompassing the Island, took 500 Prisoners, whereof only 20 Men, the rest Women and Children, among them their Xeque or Lord, a man of Age and a respectful Aspect. The Morning discovered the Sea thronged with Boats with about 600 armed men, who came to release the Women and Children. The Portugues Commander notified his designs to them, and they with very discreet words persuaded him to restore their People. He was satisfied to understand the Island Madagascar was peopled by Cafres, most of them Black, and produced little Ginger, to the contrary of the account he had received. Afterwards he would have entred the Town they call
Zada, but it being an unseasonable hour, the People in a fury set fire to it, which ra∣ged so, that from the Sea it appeared as if the whole Mountain had burnt. 2. Hence he sent Alfonso de Albuquerque with 4 Sail to Moçambique, because he de∣signed against some places on the Coast of Melinde, whilst he with 3 Ships went round to Matatana, where was Clove, Ginger and Silver. One of Tristan's Ships was lost, the Pilot and only seven men saved, this forced him to Steer for Moçambique, but the Wind carryed him to the Island Angoxa. At night he discovered the Light of the Ship St. Iames, which he had left at Moçambique, whither they both returned, and soon after arrived Iohn de Nova, who had wintered in Angoxa, laden with Pepper. Hence he sail∣ed after meeting Alfonso de Albuquerque, and sending him before to Melinde. He met two other Ships at Quiloa, and went on to Melinde. The King obliged him to fall up∣on Oja, a City, that with the assistance of the King of Monbaça infested him. The Arabs inhabited this Country, where are seen some antient and wonderful Structures. Each City, and almost Village has a King whom they call eque; the Chief are Qui∣loa, Zanzibar and Monbaça; but he of Me∣linde pretends to be the antientest, deducing his Pedegree from those of Quita, a City 18 Leagues from him, though ruined, shews the footsteps of its former Grandeur, having been superiour to all its Neighbours, which are Luziva, Parimunda, Lamon, Iaca, Oja,
and others. The Country is watered by the River Gulimanja. George Alfonso going up this River in the term of five days, saw on the Banks impenetrable Woods, and in the water an infinite number of Sea-Horses. Tristan de Cunna (with seven Ships less than he brought from Portugal, whereof one lost, some were separated by Storm, and others sent away) appeared before the City Oja, 17 Leagues from Melinde, on an open Shoar, secured with a Wall, which hides it from the Cafres towards the Land. He sent word to the Xeque he had important affairs to com∣municate with him. Who answered, That he was a Subject of the Soldan of Cayre, head Calif of the House of Mahomet, and there∣fore could not treat with People that were so much his Enemies. Tristan considering the danger of delays, as soon as day appear∣ed, divided his men into two parts in Boats, one part commanded by Alfonso de Albu∣querque, the other by himself: And though the Sea seemed to favour the Moors, who stood on the Shoar to hinder our landing, they were forced to flie to the shelter of the Walls, and not trusting to them, entred at one Gate and run out at the other. Nunno de Cunna and Alfonso de Noronha finding the King fled with many of his men to a Wood of Palm-trees, pursued and killed him in the midst of them. George Silveyra perceiving a Grave Moor who led a Beautiful Young Woman through a Path in the Wood, made at him, and the Moor making signs to the Woman to flie whilst they fought, she fol∣lowed
him, signifying she had rather die or be taken with him, than escape alone; and Sylveyra seeing them strive who should give the greatest demonstrations of Love, let them both go away, saying God forbid my Sword should part so much love. The Town ta∣ken, was plundered, and then burnt with such precipitation, that some of our men perished in the flames. The City Lamo, 15 Leagues distant, knowing what had hapned to its Neighbour, submitted to the Portu∣gueses; and to make it the more acceptable, the Xeque came to make the submission, and offer a Tribute of 600 Meticales of Gold yearly, and paid the first year in hand; Me∣ticales are a Coin of about a Ducate value each. The Fleet went on to the City Bra∣va, a populous place, before conquered, but in rebellion, and vain-glorious now with 6000 armed men it exposed on the Shoar. But Cunna and Albuquerque next day landed in two Bodies, and in spight of Showers of Arrows, Darts and Stones, scaled the Walls and routed the Moors, after washing the Streets with their Blood, and killing so ma∣ny, their number was not known; of ours 42 were lost, not half by the Sword, but through Covetousness, for overloading a Boat with the Spoil, they were drowned with it. These were they, who blind with Avarice, barbarously cut off the Hands and Ears of Women to take off their Bracelets and Earings, to save time in taking them off.
3. The City Burnt and Plundered, Tristan de Cunna set sail, and met off of Cape Guar∣dafu, Alvaro Tellez, who had been in a Storm with the rich Booty before spoken of. Having discovered the Cape, he stood for Zocotora. Zocotora is an Island 20 Leagues in length, and 9 in breadth, it lies almost East and West, in the Latitude of 12 De∣grees 40 Minutes. It is the biggest about the Mouth of the Red Sea, but has no Ports fit for any great number of Ships to winter. Athwart the middle of it runs a ridge of Hills as high as the Clouds, yet not free from the Sand of the Shoar, which is carri∣ed up to the very top by the North Winds, and is therefore barren, not only of Plants but Trees, only some small Valleys that are under shelter of those Winds. It is distant from the Arabian Continent 50 Leagues, and 30 from Cape Guardafu. The Ports most used by us, are Zoco, inhabited by Moors; or Calancea to the Westward, and Beni to the Eastward. The Natives are unpolished. Those Valleys that are sheltred from the Sand, produce Apple and Palm∣trees, and the best Aloes, which for its ex∣cellency is called Zocotorinos. The Com∣mon Food is Maiz or Indian Wheat, Ta∣marins and Milk. They are all Jacobite Christians, as the Ethiopians; the Men use the Names of the Apostles, the Women chiefly that of Mary. They worship the Cross, which they wear on their Cloaths, and set up in their Churches, where they pray thrice aday in the Caldean Language
alternatively as in a Choir; they receive but one Wife, use Circumcision, Fasting and Tythes. The Men comly, the Women so manly, that they follow the War, and live like Amazons; some of them for Propaga∣tion making use of such Men as arrive there, and even bringing some by Witchcraft. Their Cloathing, some Cloath and Skins; their Habitation in Caves, their Weapons, Stones and Slings. They were subject to the Arabian King of Caxem. Cunna found here an indifferent sort, not ill manned or unprovided. He sent a Message to the Xeque, 1508. and his Answer provoked his Anger. He resolved (though it were dangerous) to land with Albuquerque, but the first who leaped ashoar, was his Nephew Don Alfonso de Noronha; who to prove himself worthy the choice the King had made of him to Command that Fort, if gained, advanced with a few, but brave men. The Xeque re∣ceived him with no great number, though much Gallantry, maintaining his ground, and threatning Cunna, who, through a shower of Bullets and Stones made his approach to the Fort, and was briskly repulsed by the Xeque, whom then Don Alfonso struck down with his Lance. There was a sharp skir∣mish, the Moors endeavouring to carry him off, and ours to hinder it, till he and eight more were slain. The Enemy fled to the Castle, which was scaled, and those who entred opening the Gate, gave entrance into a very large Court, presently possessed by our men. About the inward Fort was a
bloody Fight, the Moors fighting to the last man, so that of eighty there was but one left alive, besides a Blind Man who was found in a Well, and being asked how he could get in there; answered, that Blind Men saw only one thing, which is the way to li∣berty, and which even Blind Men covet. He had his liberty given him. We lost six men. The Natives who had kept off, hear∣ing of our success, came with their Wives and Children to thank our Commander for delivering them from the Heavy Yoke of those Infidels; and he, to their great satis∣faction received them under the protection of the King of Portugal. The Mosque was cleansed and made a Church of the Invo∣cation of our Lady of Victory, and many were there baptized; in which Pious Work the Labours of F. Antony of St. Francis were very remarkable. Cunna gave the Com∣mand of the Fort, now called St. Michael, to Don Alfonso de Noronha, who had well de∣served it by his Valour, though he had not been appointed for it by the King; he na∣med his other Officers, and gave him 100 men. After this he wintered, though with inconveniency, in those Ports, and then sail∣ed for India, and Albuquerque for the Coast of Arabia. 4. Whilst these things hapned at Zocotora, the King of Calicut was arming afresh against the Portugueses, relying on the promises of his Southsayers and Wizards, who find∣ing the arrival of Tristan de Cunna was de∣layed, assured him of success in that lucky
opportunity, and on account of a great change of Affairs, which they said must ne∣cessarily follow, as foretold by a great Earth∣quake and Eclipse of the Sun which hapned, and was so great, that the Stars appeared for a considerable time, which were inter∣preted as Omens of our destruction. But the Viceroy Don Francisco shewed him a greater Power than he imagined to defend the Trade of Malabar, composing a Squa∣dron of ten Ships, whereof he gave the Command to his Son Don Lorenço. There remained behind at Cananor, Gonzalo Vaz with his Vessel, taking in Water, who fol∣lowed, and meeting a Ship of Cananor with a Portugues Pass, he sunk it, and all the Moors sewed up in a Sail, that they might never be seen. A wicked action, for which he was broke, if that could be reckoned a sufficient puniment for so great a Crime, as violating the Publick Faith; such Enor∣mities producing the Calamities that after befel us in India. Don Lorenço lay before the Port of Chaul, when seven Ships arrived, which taking no notice that he saluted them, stood in without making any return. He followed them in his Boas, and the Moors leaped overboard to gain the Shoar, but he was so ready to receive them, that many perished by the way. The Ships were laden with Horses, and other Goods, in the sale whereof some of the Moors dealing deceitfully, Don Lorenço ordered them all to be burnt, to their great admiration, because Covetousness had not moved him
to save any part thereof. Imagining he should find the Fleet of Calicut at Dabul, he sailed thither, and anchored at the Mouth of the River, where discovering the Fleet, and the narrowness of the place to engage, it was carried in Council to desist, contra∣ry to the Opinion of Don Lorenço, who was inflamed with a desire of fighting. He pas∣sed on 4 Leagues, and a Brigantin and Parao that had the Van, saw a Ship sailing up the River. They pursued till it cast Anchor over against a Town, where were many other Vessels. Don Lorenço seeing the two Vessels follow the Ship, sent after them a Galley, and they three together began to clear the Shoar with their Shot, of many Moors who flocked thither. The noise of Cannon called upon Don Lorenço. He made haste, but before his coming up, the others had gained the Vessels in the Harbour, and ashoar burnt a House full of considerable Merchandise. All the Ships in the Har∣bour were burnt, except two they carried away laden with Riches from Ormuz. At his return to Cochin with Victory and Spoils, he expected to be received by his Father with joy, and applause; but he on the con∣trary designed to punish him severely for not fighting the Fleet of Calicut, and was ex∣cused only, because it appeared he was over∣swayed by the Votes of all the Captains, contrary to his own Opinion. The Vice∣roy immediately broke, and sent them all to Portugal. This severity much troubled his Son, and obliged him afterwards, endea∣vouring
to restore himself to his Fathers esteem, to lose his Life with as much Rash∣ness as Valour. 5. The King of Cananor desiring to break with the Portugueses, was encouraged by the Zamori, and grounded this Rupture up∣on finding on the Shoar the Body of a Ne∣phew of Mamale, a rich Merchant of Mala∣bar, which was one of those Gonçalo Vaz had thrown into the Sea sowed up in the Sail. This Action was not known there, and the blame was laid upon Laurence de Brito, Captain of the Fort, whose Pass that Ship carried. Brito having discovered the design, and finding himself weak, adverti∣sed the Viceroy. The Message was deliver∣ed him at Church, whilst he assisted at the Service of Maundy Thursday, and he imme∣diately left the Church, and went about ta∣king up from every one what Provisions they had, and shipped the men with such haste, that those who had lent their Arms to them who watched at the Sepulchre (as the custom is) went to the Church to dis∣arm them. Don Lorenço was Captain, and had Oders when he came to Cananor to obey Laurence de Brito. But Brito insisted, that the other, as Son of the Viceroy, and so Famous an Officer, should command; Don Lorenço was positive, he would obey Brito, as being Commander of the Fort, and in pursuance of his Fathers Orders. But finding Brito resolved to persist in that Cour∣tesie, and that it might prove dangerous, he left the Relief, and returned alone to
Cochin. The Besieged fortified and entren∣ched themselves, the same was done by the Besiegers, who were 20000 strong. Much Blood was spilt about the Water of a Well, but our men by the help of a Mine, made themselves Masters of it. The Moors after this loss retired to a Wood of Palm-trees, to prepare Engines to batter the Fort. Our Commander had intelligence of it by means of a Nephew of the King of Cananor, who endeavoured to gain our Friendship. He prepared to receive them, and when they gave the assault, succeeded so well, first with his Cannon, and then with the Sword, that he filled the Ditch with their Bodies, which they intended to have done with Faggots. They retired to the Wood, and Brito send∣ing out by Night 80 men, commanded by one Guadalajara a Spaniard, who was his Lieutenant, the Sally was so vigorously ex∣ecuted by the firing of some small Pieces first, in a cold rainy Night, that the Ene∣my in a consternation knew not where to save themselves, 300 were killed. But this Joy was abated by the Magazine of Provi∣sions taking fire, so that Hunger began to rage, and all Vermin was eaten. The Gar∣rison, part sick and part famished, was re∣duced to extremity; but the Sea being then rough, left abundance of Lobsters when it went off on the Point of Land where our Chappel was, which were the only re∣lief our men had. The Zamori sent a pow∣erful supply to the King of Cananor, who gave the last assault to the Fort by Sea and
Land, with above 50000 men, who were vigorously received and repulsed with great loss, not one of our men being killed in this action. But now arrives Tristan de Cunna and the King of Cananor terrified with his coming, and the defence made by Brito, sues for Peace, which was concluded with great honour to the Portugues Valour. 6. Tristan de Cunna was upon his return home with the Merchant Ships, and the Viceroy bore him company in order to fall upon Panane, a Town subject to Calicut, where our Enemies laded under the shelter of four Ships of the Zamori, Commanded by Cutiale a Couragious Moor. The Vice∣roy and Tristan anchored at the Bar, held a Councel, and then sent both their Sons in two Barques with several Boats, and they in a Gally followed them. They all went up the River through Showers of Balls sent from the Shoar, which is high. The Moors run into the Water to meet our Boats, and killed three men. But the dispute was now come to their Trenches, which some of ours mounted, and Peter Cam set upon them Don Lorenços Colours. The Colours were flying, when the Viceroy seeing his Son Don Lorenço climing with some difficulty, cried out Ah! Laurence, Laurence, what laziness is that; and he very readily answered, Sir, I give way to him that has gained the Ho∣nour. A large Moor encountred and wound∣ed Don Lorenço, and he gave him such a stroke, as clove his Head to his Breast. The Town being entred, all were put to the
Sword. Then all the Ships in the Haven and Docks were fired. We lost 18 Portu∣gueses, none of Note; of the Enemy above 500 perished. Though the Plunder was of great value, it was all burnt to Ashes, and only the Artillery saved. After this Victory they returned to Cananor to take in some lading, and Tristan de Cunna set sail for Por∣tugal. At Moçambique he met some Ships of 12 that came from Lisbon the year before. Seven were to return with lading, and five under the Command of Vasco Gomez de Abreu, to cruise on the Coast of Melinde, who was also to Command the Fort of Zo∣fala. There were also two Ships to joyn Albuquerque on the Coast of Arabia. Iohn Chanoca, with his Ship, was lost in the River Zanaga; Iohn Gomez, and his, in another; Vasco Gomez de Abreu was cast away with four Vessels going for Moçambique. Others, with great danger and Storms, were driven to several places. Misfortunes, terrible, even in the remembrance, but none sufficient to curb Human Avarice and Boldness.
CHAP. II. Conquests under King Emanuel, the Year 1508. during the Government of the Viceroy Don Francisco de Almeyda, and continuing the Exploits of Alfonso de Albuquerque. 1. AFter the taking of Zocotora, on the 20th of August, Cunna and Albu∣querque parted, the former for India, the lat∣ter for the Coast of Arabia and Persia, in pursuance of the Orders they had from the King. Albuquerque had with him 7 Sail; and 460 Fighting-men. The first place where he touched in the Kingdom of Or∣muz, was Calayate, a Town once more Po∣pulous, still Beautiful and strong, the Build∣ings after the manner of Spain. He sent a Message to the Governour, who offered him Refreshment, and established a Peace. He went on to Curiate, 10 Leagues farther, and was ill received, and storming the Town, met with a Vigorous Opposition, but entred with the death of 80 of the Enemy, and loss of three Portugueses; after the Plunder, the Place was burnt, and with it 14 Vessels that were in the Harbour. Hence he sailed 8 Leagues farther to Mascate, a place stronger than any of the others, and well manned with People, who resorted to it from all
Parts, hearing the destruction of Curiate. The Governour fearing the like disaster, made Peace, and sent great store of Provi∣sions, and our men went ashoar for Water; but on a sudden the Cannon of the Town began to do great execution upon our Ships, which drew off hastily, not knowing the cause of this turn, till some time after they understood 2000 men, sent by the King of Ormuz for the defence of the place, were newly arrived, and their Officers refused to stand to the Peace. Albuquerque had recei∣ved no small damage from the great Can∣non, which was plaid very smartly, but landing his men at break of day, he assault∣ed the Town so couragiously and fortunate∣ly, that as our men entred in at one Gate, the Moors ran out at another. The Place was plundered, all except the Governours House, saved because he received our men friendly, and gave them notice to retire when the Relief came, though he was kil∣led in the confusion, not being known. This done, he passed to Soar, all the Inha∣bitants whereof fled, except the Governour, and some of the Principal Moors, who of∣fered it up to Albuquerque, and received it back to hold of King Emanuel, paying the same Tribute he had given to him of Ormuz▪ 15 Leagues farther is Orfucam, where he found little to do, the Inhabitants having deserted it; he sent after them his Nephew Don Antonio, with 100 men, who having received almost equal damage to what he did, the Moors being numerous, and fight∣ing
for their Wives and Children, returned with 22 Prisoners. The Town was plun∣dered for the space of three days, during which time he prepared to enter into the Harbour of Ormuz, which was the Principal End of this Voyage, and to which these ex∣ploits were but a prelude, being small in his esteem, though to others they might appear considerable. 2. The City Ormuz is seated in a little Island, called Gerum, at the Mouth of the Persian Gulf, about 3 Leagues in compass, so barren, that it produces nothing but Salt and Sulphur. The Buildings of the City are sumptuous; it is the great Market of all Goods, brought thither from the East, West and North; which is the reason, that though it have nothing of its own, it abounds in all things, and is plentifully supplied from the Province Mgostam, and the Islands Quixome, Lareque and others. About the Year 1273, King Malec Caez possessed all the Land from the Island Gerum, to that of Baharem, and bordered upon the King of Gordunxa, of the Province of Mogastam; this King subtilly obtaining of Malec the Island of Gerum, as a place of no worth; after he was fortified therein, drove him out of all his Country. And translating the City Ormuz, where the King kept his Court be∣fore, to this Island, he grew so formidable, that the King of Persia, fearing he would refuse to pay the Tribute the other had done, prepared to invade him. But he of Gor∣dunxa prevented him, by imposing on him∣self
a yearly Tribute, and offering to do him Homage by his Embassadors every five years. In this Tyrant began the City and Kingdom of Ormuz, afterwards possessed by his Heirs and others▪ for the most part vio∣lently. When Albuquerque arrived there, Ceyfadim, a Youth of 12 years of age reign∣ed, and over him his Slave Coje Atar, a man subtil and couragious. Who hearing what had been done by Albuquerque, made prepa∣rations, laying an embargo upon all the Ships in the Harbour, and hiring Troops from the Neighbouring Provinces, Persians, Arabians and others, so that when Albu∣querque came, there were in the Town 30000 Fighting-men, among them 4000 Persians, most expert Archers, and in the Harbour 400 Vessels, 60 of considerable bulk, with 2500 men. 3. Albuquerque was not ignorant of the reception designed him; but to shew those People the greatness of his Resolution, he entred that Port about the end of Septem∣ber, and came to an Anchor between five of their greatest Ships. For the more terror he fired his Cannon, and the Shoar was soon covered with above 8000 men. Seeing no Message came from the King, he sent aboard the biggest of those Ships, which was of Cambaya, and seemed to ride Admiral, the Captain whereof presently cam to, and was received by him with Civility and State. He told him he had Orders from his King to take him of Ormuz into his Protection, and grant him leave to Trade in those Seas,
provided he paid a reasonable Tribute; but if he refused, his Orders were to make War. It was doubtless no small Presumption to of∣fer a King the liberty of his own Seas▪ and impose Conditions upon him, with that handful of 460 men against 33000, and se∣ven Ships to 400; but the success justified these proceedings, and verified those Acti∣ons, which to some have appeared fabulous. The Moor delivered this Message to the King and his Governour Coje Atar, and pre∣sently returned one Coje Beyrame, excusing their not having sent to know what we de∣manded in that Port, and promising the Go∣vernour would come next day to treat. He came not, but the Messages continued, only in order to gain time to sortifie the City, and receive further Supplies. Albuquerque saw into the drift, and told Beyrame, he need only return with the acceptation of Peace as offered, or the declaration of War. He brought answer, that City used not to pay, but receive Tribute. Night coming on, it appeared they prepared to fight by the noise of Warlike Instruments, and Shouts that was heard from the Walls and Ships. The Morning discovered the Walls, Shoar and Vessels covered with Armed Men; the Win∣dows and tops of the Houses filled with both Sexes and all Ages, as Spectators of what should ensue. Albuquerque having held a Council, and given necessary Orders, be∣gan to play his Cannon furiously, and was answered by the Enemy. They taking the advantage of the Smoak, which hindred the
sight, attacked our Ships with 130 Boats well manned, which did some damage with Showers of Arrows, but received more, ma∣ny being sunk, and the rest forced to retire by our Artillery. Yet they made a second onset, but were so received, that the Sea was coloured with Blood. By this time Al∣buquerque had sunk two of the great Ships, and taken a third, though with great op∣position, forcing the Moors to leap into th Sea. The mean time the other Captains had mastered other Ships, and perceiving themselves victorious, ran along the Shoar, and set fire to above 30 Ships, which cut∣ting their Cables, were drove flaming upon the Persian Coast, where they burnt others that lay aground. This struck so great a terror into all that multitude, that they fled to the shelter of the City, and Coje Atar sent to offer all that Albuquerque had de∣manded. He stopt further proceedings, but perceiving the deceitfulness of the Moor, threatned a greater effect of his Anger in case he persisted in his Wiles. And compa∣ring the damage, found, that with the loss of 10 men, most of the Enemies Vessels, with vast Riches, were either sunk, burnt or torn to pieces, and 1700 of them killed. The dead Bodies floating upon the Water, many were seen with Ornaments of beaten Gold, which our men fished for, and obser∣ved that many were wounded with their own Arrows, there being none used among the Portugueses.
4. Coje Atar, considering the damage re∣ceived, and what might ensue, called a Council, where it was agreed to submit to what was demanded by Albuquerque. The Articles were drawn, and sworn to by both Parties; their substance was, that the King of Ormuz did submit himself to King Ema∣nuel, with the Tribute of 15000 Xeraphines yearly (a Xeraphin is worth about half a Crown) and should assign the Portugueses place to build a Fort. The Fort was im∣diately begun, and much advanced in few days, but Coje Atar could not bear with it. He feigned Embassadors were come to re∣ceive the Tribute they used to pay the King of Persia, and therefore desired Albuquerque to give them an Answer, since his King was now subject to the Crown of Portugal. He guessed at the design, and bid Coje Atar send somebody to him who might carry the An∣swer; the Messengers being come, he put into their Hands Bullets and Spears, telling them that was the Coin the Tribute should be paid in. Coje Atar finding his Plot fail, endeavoured to corrupt our Men with Mo∣ny. He prevailed with five Seamen, one of them a Founder, who cast some Cannon there; and another who informed him, that our men were not compleat 460; whereby animated he studied to break the Peace, re∣fusing to deliver up those men, and pretend∣ing at the same time, it was Albuquerque that broke it. 5. Albuquerque began to revenge this af∣front, but with little success, because the Cap∣tains
employed, opposed it. Coje Atar per∣ceiving this, at Night fired a Boat we were building on the Shoar, and one of the Por∣tugues Deserters cried from the Wall, Al∣fonso de Albuquerque, defend the Boat with your 400 men, and you shall meet 700 Ar∣chers. Nor was it to be admired, those vile Wretches should offer these and other Reproaches, since some of the Captains gave intelligence to the Enemy, and per∣suaded those five to desert. Albuquerque burn∣ing with Rage, attempted to fire some Ships in the Arsenal, and failed. He re∣solved to besiege the City, and having ta∣ken some that carried in Provisions, cut off their Hands, Ears and Noses, and sent them in to the great terror of all. There was a hot dispute about filling up some Wells that supplied the Besieged, in so much that they were filled with Carcasses of Men and Horses, the Captain and Guard that main∣tained them being all slain. The King and Coje Atar came to second this Action, and Albuquerque was in great danger, his retreat being cut off, but a fortunate Cannon Ball opened a way, putting the Enemies Horse into confusion. Albuquerque in these Acti∣ons found his men ill disposed to obey; among the rest, three Captains resolving to leave him and sail for India, drew up a Pa∣per of Reasons, why he ought to desist from that Enterprize, which he gave to one of the Masons to lay under a Stone in the Work, saying, he had answered, and would be glad to see who durst remove the Stone
to read his Answer. None replied. But offended with this, and each fearing he should not have the Command of the Fort when built, the three put in execution their design of quitting him. This troubled Al∣buquerque; yet he resolved not to desist, though two Captains that staid with him opposed him, desirous to accompany the others; but he used them with such severity, that they were forced to obey him. From Baharem to Queixome sailed a Fleet with re∣lief of Men and Provisions. Albuquerque having pursued, and missing of it, fell upon a Country House of the Kings, guarded by 300 Foot and 60 Horse, and beat them out, killing 80 with the loss of one man. He returned to Queixome, and fell upon 500 Archers sent to the King of Ormuz by him of Lara, under the Command of his two Nephews, and slew them and most of their men, having but 80 with him, the Brothers he sent to Coje Atar as a Present. The Town was burnt, and there being taken among the Plunder a Carpet, so big, the Souldiers were about cutting it for conveni∣ency of carriage; Albuquerque bought, and sent it after to Santiago in Galicia. Finding he had but few men left wherewith to con∣tinue his enterprize, and those harrased, and Winter coming on, he resolved to go to Zo∣cotora, and gave leave to Iohn de Nova to sail for India. 6. Whilst this hapned at Ormuz, the Sol∣dan of Cayre set out a Fleet of 12 Sail, and 1500 men, Commanded by Mir Hozem, to
oppose the Portugueses in India. By the way he attacked Imbo, and killed the Xeque: the same he did at Ioda, and got great Plunder; then sailed to Diu, where Melique Az Com∣manded for the King of Cambaya, whom he was to joyn, and treat with, in order to oppose the Portugueses. The Timber where∣of these Ships were built, was cut in the Mountains of Dalmatia, by procurement of the Venetians, (as was said) because the Soldan and Turk were at variance. A Ne∣phew of the Soldan carried it in 25 Ships, with 800 Mamalukes besides Seamen. An∣drew de Amarall, a Portugues, commanded then the Galleys of Malta; he knowing that Timber was designed against us in India, at∣tacked the 25 Ships of the Enemy, with 600 men in four Galleys and six Ships; and after a sharp engagement that lasted three hours, took seven and sunk five, the rest fled to Alexandria, whence the Timber was car∣ried up the Nile to Cayr, and thence on Ca∣mels to Suez. 7. At this time the Viceroy, Don Fran∣cisco de Almeyda, was upon the Coast of Ma∣labar, and had sent his Son Don Lorenço to guard those of Cananor and Cochin, and ran as far as Chaul with 8 Ships. On his way he took some Ships of the Moors. Chaul is seated on the Bank of a River 2 Leagues from the Sea; one of the chief of that Coast for Greatness and Trade, subject to the Ni∣zamaluco, by whose Order Don Lorenço was well received. They had some intelligence of this Fleet of the Soldan, but gave no cre∣dit
to it, till it appeared in sight as Don Lo∣renço was diverting himself ashoar with his Officers. They hasted to the Ships, giving such Orders as the shortness of the time per∣mitted, and were scarce aboard when the Enemy entred the Harbour, with many de∣monstrations of Joy; for Mir Hozem thought himself secure of Victory by surprizing our Ships. He designed to board the Portugues Admiral, and t rest of his Ships to board the others. Ours were so placed, that the Enemy passed between them, and Mir Ho∣zem coming up with Don Lorenço, poured in Ball, Arrows, Granadoes, and other Fire∣works, but was so well answered, that he gave over the resolution of boarding, though the Portugues Vessel was much less than his. The others had the like success, and so pas∣sed on, and Night approaching, they pre∣pared themselves for the next Morning. 8. Day appearing, Don Lorenço gave the signal of Battle, and endeavoured to board Mir Hozem, the like was done by the others, but only two Galleys succeeded, which took two of the Enemy, having put all their men to the Sword. Mean while the Cannon was furiously plaid on both sides. Don Lo∣renzo seemed to have the upper-hand, when Melique Az, Lord of Diu, came with a great number of small Vessels well manned, to the assistance of Mir Hozem. Don Lorenço sent two Galleys and three Caravels to hinder the approach of that Relief. They execu∣ted it so effectually, they obliged him to fly to another place for shelter, and the Fight
continued till Night parted them, each stri∣ving to conceal his loss from the other. The Portugues Captains met in Council, the Re∣sult, that it was a rashness to persist in that enterprize, Melique Az being so near with that powerful assistance, that it was conve∣nient to take the open Sea, either in order to escape, or to fight with less disadvantage. Don Lorenço remembring the anger of his Father for not fighting the Fleet of Calicut in the River Dabul, and fearing his retreat might be termed a fearful flight, resolutely expected the Morning, only making some motion to save the Ships of Cochin that were in great danger. Melique Az imagining this motion was in order fly, lanched out from his retreat, not at all daunted to see many of his Vessels torn in pieces by our Cannon, and Charges briskly; then Don Lorenço's Ship running foul of some Stakes that were drove in the River, made so much water, there was no preventing her sinking, though Don Lorenço laboured indefatigably till a Ball broke his Thigh, and ordering himself to be set against the Main Mast, where he stood encouraging his men, till another Ball broke his Back. The Body was thrown under Deck, and followed down by Laurence Freyre Gato his Page, who bewailed him with Tears of Blood as well as Water, being shot through the Eye with an Arrow. After a vigorous resistance the Moors entred the Ship, and found the Page by his Masters Body, who ri∣sing to defend it, killed as many as covered it, and then died upon them. The Ship
sunk at last. Of above 100 men that were with Don Lorenço, only 19 escaped, in all the Ships were lost 140, of the Enemy 600. 9. The other Captains got to Cochin (where the Viceroy was) with the News of his Sons death, which he received with a wonderful resolution. The numbers of men slain and taken being yet doubtful; he en∣deavoured by all means to get some intelli∣gence, and at that time received a Letter from Melique Az. This Man, born in Sla∣very, and descended of the Heretick Chri∣stians of Roxia, rose by degrees to that height wherein he was then placed. The Principal Action that advanced him was, that a Kite flying over the King of Cambaya, dunged upon his Head, whereat in a Passion he said, I would give all I am worth that Bird were killed. Melique Az, who was a most expert Archer, no sooner heard this, but he let fly an Arrow, which brought down the Kite. The King rewarded this Action so bountifully, that Melique Az came to be made Lord of Diu, a most Famous City, which being seated on a triangular Peninsula, joyned to the Continent by a ve∣ry smal Istmus, is commonly reputed an Island. This man endeavoured politickly to secure himself at one time, both with the King of Cambaya, and the Portugueses, whose Power he feared, and hated for the damage they brought to the Trade of Din. And to this effect he assisted Mir Hozem, sent the 19 Prisoners to the King of Cambaya, and writ to the Viceroy, condoling the
death of his Son, extolling his Bravery, and offering to ransom the Prisoners. Thus he endeavoured to appease the Wrath he knew he had provoked by assisting Mir Hozem, which was the Cause of all our Loss. CHAP. III. Conquests under King Emanuel the Year 1508 and 1509. A continuation of the Government of the Viceroy Don Fran∣cisco de Ameyda, and Exploits of Al∣fonso de Albuquerque. 1. THIS same year 1508, about the be∣ginning of April, sailed from Lisbon 17 Ships, which being all separated by bad Weather, at length met at Mozambique, ex∣cept one that was cast away on the Islands of Tristan de Cunna; these Ships with those of the foregoing year, came together to In∣dia, and added Courage to our People to resist their Enemies. The King ordered that Don Francisco de Almeyda should resign the Government to Alfonso de Albuquerque, and return home in one of the Trading Ships. But he suspended the execution of this Order, because already engaged in ta∣king revenge of Mir Hozem. Albuquerque pressed him to obey the Order, Don Fran∣cisco
excused himself, saying the Ships were gone, and that he had in hand that enter∣prize upon the Rumes or Turks who had killed his Son. The other answered, there were more Ships ready to sail, and he would undertake to drive the Turks out of India▪ Almeyda replied, that he had taken up the Sword, and had never resigned it to ano∣ther to revenge his Wrongs. Albuquerque offended hereat, went to Cochin; and this was the beginning of some mens protracting the time of their Command, and others pres∣sing them to quit, wherein these two Illustri∣ous Men discovered much of Human Frailty. 2. Precedent to this were the Actions of Albuquerque at Ormuz and Zocotora, where he wintered and relieved the Portugues, who were there oppressed by Famine. To this effect he went himself with his Ship to Cape Guardafu, and sent Francis de Tavor towards Melinde, and two Vessels to Cape Fum, to make prize of some Ships for their Provisions; they all found what they sought, and so put a stop to the growing Evil. He then resolved for Ormuz, though too weak to effect what he intended, yet at least to sound the designs of that King and his Friend Coje Atar. By the way he resolved to be reven∣ged on Calayate for injuries done to some Portugueses. This Town is seated beyond Cape Siagro, called also Cape Rosalgate, at the Mouth of the Persian Gulf. On the Back of it is a Mountain, which has only some Passes, that open a Communication to the Neighbouring Country. One of these
Passes is just opposite to the Town, through which is managed most of the Trade of that Province of the Arabs call Ayaman, because (as they say) first inhabited by Name, which signifies Plenty or Abundance, a Son of Lot; and this Land is full of Populous Cities, Fruitful, and of great Trade. Al∣buquerque no sooner arrived, but he landed and entred the Town, some of the Inhabi∣tants flying to the Mountains, and others being slain in the Streets. Albuquerque staid there three Nights, upon one of which 1000 Moors entred the Town by surprize, and did much hurt; but our men gathering, kil∣led many, put the rest to flight, and burnt all the place. They got great quantity of Provisions, which was most of the Booty, and arrived at Ormuz the 13th of September. Al∣fonso de Albuquerque presently advertised the King and Coje Atar of his arrival, and they answered, that as for the Tribute of 15000 Xeraphins they were ready to pay it, but would not consent to build the Fort. He therefore resolved again to besiege the Island, and ordered Martin Coello, with his Ship, to guard the Point Turumbaca, where the Wells are; Iames de Melo he posted opposite to the Island Queixome, he and Francis de Ta∣vora lay before the City. Thence he view∣the growth of the Fort, for Coje Atar had fi∣nished it, making use of what the Portu∣gueses had began, the better to oppose them. The success was much the same as the other time, but he was in great danger himself, and Diego de Melo, with 8 private men, be∣ing
killed, he returned to India, having ta∣ken a Ship that carried much Pearl from Baharem, and Francis de Tavora took one of Meca. 3. The Viceroy having sent Albuquerque to Cochin, and dispatched the Trading Ships homeward-bound, under Fernando Soarez and Ruy de Cunna, who perished by the way, and ordered other lesser matters, he sailed on the 12th of December from Cananor to∣wards Diu in pursuit of Mir Hozem. He had with him 19 Vessels of several sizes, and in them 1600 Souldiers and Seamen, whereof 400 were Malabares. All India was alarmed at this motion of the Viceroy, but chiefly Zamori, and Melique Az, who had used all necessary precautions to secure himself against this danger. The Viceroy being landed with his Officers in the delight∣ful Island Anchediva, made to them a grave and learned Speech, touching upon the great Actions performed, and reflecting upon the damage received from the Turks; shewed how much they were obliged to God, their King and Country, to revenge that defect, and the death of his Son, with many more circumstances, and concluded, that the more to terrifie the Enemy it were convenient first to fall upon the City Dabul their Neigh∣bour. All that were present unanimously approved of his resolution. 4. The City Dabul is one of the most no∣ted of that Coast, by reason of its Situation, Greatness and Trade; seated on a Navigable River, 2 Leagues from the Mouth. The Build∣ings
were then stately, the Inhabitants Pagans and Moors. It is on the Boders of the King∣dom of Decan, subject to Sabayo the King, and was then held by a Governour of his, with a good Garrison, being in fear of our Power. Upon notice of our approach 6000 men were sent in, new Works raised, and much Artillery planted. The Viceroy appearing before it, the Inhabitants, though well pro∣vided, began to send away their Goods, the Governour forbid it upon pain of death; and the more to encourage the People brought into the Town his own Wife, who was in a Country House; this example was followed by many of the Principal Men, whose Wives were abroad in the Country. On the 30th of December our Fleet entred the Port. The Viceroy ordered Peter Bar∣reto to post himself among the Ships that were in the Harbour, and following close, endeavoured to be the first that landed; but every one being inflamed with the same de∣sire, it was all confusion, leaping over one another, so that all, or none was first; of the Viceroy's Boat, the first were Fernando Perez de Andrade, and Iohn Gomez. The Works being high, the Shot flew over our Men. Our Cannon plaid not on the Ene∣my because our Men were under it. The Portugueses having gained the Shoar, divi∣ded themselves in order at once to attack three Gates, which the Moors perceiving, made so brave a resistance at all three, that the dead Bodies caused a greater stop than the living Defendants, or their Works. The
Place was narrow, and the Confusion great' every one thronging for fear of being last. The Viceroy cleared all by sending Nunno Vaz Pereyra to gain entrance another way, who after a hot dispute, though the Moors came on in great numbers, put them to flight, some retiring to a Mosque, others flying to the Mountain. The Commander of the Enemies did all he could to hinder their flight, seeing only ten Portugueses pur∣sue a Multitude, who through hast falling over each other, retarded their own escape. The Fight lasted about five hours, in which time, with the loss of 16 Portugueses, were killed 1500 Enemies, all hand to hand, for the Cannon on neither side was plaid. The Viceroy remained that Night in the Mosque; he distributed his men about the Town with Orders to keep Guard. George de Melo and his Company, stood all Night at their Arms, expecting the Enemy that fled to the Mountain would return. Nor was he de∣ceived, for they by the favour of the Night, stole into the Town, hoping to recover their Wives, Children and Goods. Little was done till Morning, when the Viceroy gave leave to Plunder, which was hindred by the sudden firing of the Town, so that in few hours it was only a heap of Ashes, and therefore the Booty exceeded not 150000 Ducats. It was afterwards known that the Viceroy was the cause of that Conflagration, fearing the men, taken up with those Riches, might retard his other Design. The Ships in the Harbour had the same end, with no small
confusion among ours, scarce able to en∣dure the Flames so near them. The Vice∣roy had laid in no great store of Provisions, not doubting to get enough along that Coast; but very little was found here where most was expected, the furious Flames, per∣haps fiercer than expected, having devour∣ed all. He thought to remedy this by send∣ing to the Neighbouring Villages, but to no effect, because all was destroyed by multi∣tudes of Locusts, whereof they found ma∣ny kept in Pots, that were Food to the Na∣tives, which some Portugueses tasting found pleasing to the Pallate, not unlike our Shrimps, which made them conclude these were Shrimps of the Land, as the others of the Sea. So in some places, particularly the Vineyards about Rome are found Crabs, not unlike those of the Sea. So that if those Creatures came not so numerous as to de∣stroy the Harvest, they might be coveted as Food, not dreaded as a Plague. Such were the Locusts the Scripture mentions the Baptist fed on in the Desert. 5. The Viceroy parted from Dabul with∣out Provisions, hoping to get them along the Coast. Payo de Sousa run up a River in his Gally, having seen some Cattle upon the Shoar, and hoping to take some of it; the Owners opposed, and killed him and George Guedez. Iames Mendez succeeded in the Command of the Gally, and met ano∣ther passing from Diu to Dabul; this was well manned, and commanded by a Cou∣ragious and Expert Turk, who no sooner
discovered our Gally, but keeping his men close, so that only they that rowed were in sight, he drew on Iames Mendez to board him without suspecting any danger, when immediately the Turks that were hid, rush∣ing out had almost gained our Gally; but our men recovering themselves, gained their Gally with the death of all the Turks, with∣out losing one of ours. The Chief Prize was a Noble Beautiful Hungarian Young Woman, who was brought to the Viceroy, and by him given to Gaspar de la India, who gave her to Iames Pereyra of Cochin, and he married her for her Virtuous Qualities, so well suiting with her Birth and Beauty; Per∣fections seldom to be found together in the World. Farther on they took in the River of Bombaim, a Barque with 24 Moors of Guzarette, by whose means the Governour sent some Sheep and Rice, whilst Cattle was brought from other places. The same was done at the Fort of Maim; for the People terrified with what had hapned at Dabul, fled to the Mountains. The Viceroy arri∣ved the 2d of February at Diu, which ap∣pearing high at Sea, girt with Walls and Towers, beautiful and strong, populous and well governed, after the manner of ours in Spain, renewed in our men the memory of our Country, and that inflamed their Cou∣rage and Vigour. Melique Az, Lord of this City, was absent 20 Leagues off, with his Army against the Resbuti, but had still ad∣vice of the motions of our Fleet, which scarce anchored before the City, when with
wonderful celerity he flew thither. He had already used precuation, that Mir Hozem might not perceive how little he was in∣clin'd to assist him; and that he might not altogether exasperate the Viceroy, and both of them equally feared him. The Viceroy considered the strong situation of the Place, much improved by Art, the Courage and conduct of Melique Az, and Mir Hozem, and the number of above 200 Vessels well manned, and furnished with all things ne∣cessary. Having called a Council, it was re∣solved, that Nunno Vaz Pereira should be the Forlorn Hope with his Ship, in which were 120 Fighting-men, most Gentlemen, and of known Valour. He was to be seconded by George de Melo, with the like number, who was to be followed by Peter Bareto de Magallanes, and he by Francis de Tavora, then Garcia de Sousa, and so the other Vessels, car∣rying from 25 to 80 men each. The Night was spent particularly on our sides, in pre∣paring their Consciences and Arms, for the danger was to be encountred next Morn∣ing. 6. Between 9 and 10 in the Morning, when there was Flood enough for the Ships to swim, the Admiral gave the signal for en∣tring the Port. On a sudden all moved with loud Shouts, and sound of Warlike Instruments on both sides. Melique Az his Vessels ran to hinder the entrance of ours, Showring Bullets and Arrows, which im∣mediately slew 10 men in Iames Perez his Gally, that led the way to Nunno Vaz. Yet
Nunno pierces forward, and pouring his Shot among the Great Ships, sunk one to rights. He was in great danger between two of them, when George de Melo came up with such fury, that running foul of one of the two, he drove it upon that of Nunno Vaz, and thereby gave way to Sebastian de Miranda to board it, which he performed. Then George de Melo went on to another, in like manner the other Captains. The Viceroy in the midst of the Enemies Vessels, gave them a sufficient diversion, that they might not hinder what the others were acting; and tho' they did him some damage with their continual Shot, he destroyed them with his, till the Paraos of Calicut fled, spreading the News along the Shoar, that the Rumes or Turks were victorious. Mir Hozem being wounded, in despair slipt out of his Ship disguised into a Brigantine, and thence to Shoar, where taking Horse, he never stopt till he came before the King of Cambaya, no less fearful of our Fury, than the falshood of Melique Az, who had assisted him with his Vessels, but not with his Person. The absence of Mir Hozem did not discourage those in his Vessel; for being boarded, they never yielded, but were all slain. A great Ship belonging to Melique being attempted by some of ours, and not able to carry her, the Viceroy discharged all his Cannon upon, and sunk her. Antony de Campo took a Gale∣on. Ruy Soarez, one of the last in order of Battel, but not in Courage, running through all, placed himself before the City, and plying
most dexterously, took two Gallies, having forced the Defendants to quit them, in such manner, that the Viceroy seeing him at a distance, in a glorious emulation cried out, Who is that who so much excels the rest? O that I were he! The Victory being now no longer doubtful, because some harm was done us by the Artillery on the Shoar, the Viceroy made up to the Ships, where our Gallies and other lesser Vessels killed all that leaped into the Sea, so that the Water was turned to Blood. This Victory was not cheap, for we lost near 40 men. Of the Enemy above 1500 were killed. The Ships being plunder∣ed, there were great Riches found in them; and by the great variety of Books in several Languages, was judged, the men were of sundry Nations; among the Books were some Latin, Italian and Portugues. The Soldan and Mir Hozem's Colours were sent to Portugal. Of all the Vessels that were ta∣ken, the Viceroy ordered four Ships and two Gallies should be preserved, the rest were burned. The Victory had been more Glo∣rious, had not the Conquered been treated with such Barbarous Cruelty, that many, not without reason, judged the unhappy end of the Viceroy and other Gentlemen, to be a just punishment of that Crime. We shall soon see it. 7. Next Morning Melique Az pretending to be much pleased with the Viceroys Victo∣ry, sent Cide Ale, a Moor of Granada to wish him joy. There was a Report that the City was in a great Consternation, fear∣ing
the Conqueror would assault it, and that many were filled with this apprehension. Our men finding the Viceroy inclined to ad∣mit Melique Az his deceitful Congratulation, began to mutter, and complain that he stop∣ped the course of his Good Fortune, which the Enemies began now to fear. He calling to∣gether the Principal Men told them, that he ad no regard to Melique Az, but the King of Cambaya, who was our Friend, and whose City that was; that the Town was strong and they tired; that of 1200 men he Com∣manded, only 600 were able to bear Arms; that though the Town were taken, it could not be maintained; and that they might be revenged against Melique Az on his Trading Ships. All agreed there should be no more said of the Assault, nd should give ear to the Moor. The Viceroy received him cour∣teously, and told him, that two Motives chiefly brought him to that Port, the one to be revenged on the Rumes, the other to recover the Portugeses that were taken, and who were to him instead of a Son. The first Point he had obtained, and the second he must gain by having them delivered to him; that he should also deliver to him all the Artillery and Munitions belonging to the Rumes that were in the Ships haled in, and they burned, and sell him Provisions. All this seemed little to Melique Az, and was performed with such expedition and exact∣ness, that it setled a profitable Peace with the Viceroy, who left one of the Prisoners there to load two Ships with such things as were
wanting at Cochin and Cananor. He dispatch∣ed Don Antonio de Noronha with Provisions, and some of the Booty of the Ships, to re∣lieve his Brother, Don Alfonso, at Zocotora. Then the Viceroy sailed, and arriving at Chaul; that King terrified with the late Victory, became tributary. Passing by Ca∣nanor, he was there received with Honour, and at Cochin in Triumphant Manner; but before he had laid aside his Festal Orna∣ments, he was accosted by Alfonso de Albu∣querque, pressing to deliver up the Govern∣ment according to the King's Orders. The Answer was, he should give him leasure to put off that Heavy Robe, and there would be time afterwards. Albuquerque pressed and the Viceroy delayed. 8. Some Gentlemen persuaded the Vice∣roy not to resign the Government, whilst Albuquerque made instance to have it deli∣vered up, Evil Spirits fomenting these Feuds. The King of Cochin, urged by these Divisi∣ons, delayed the lading with Pepper, two Ships that were to return home, till Albu∣querque were possessed of the Government. In fine, the Viceroy sent Albuquerque Priso∣ner to Cananor, where he was courteously entertained by that Governour, who then was Laurence de Brito, to whom in few days the Viceroy writ, that he should treat his Prisoner as one who soon must Govern India. 9. King Emanuel being informed of the preparations made by the Soldan of Cayre at Suz, resolved to send a powerful Relief
to India. This consisted of 15 Sail, Com∣manded by Don Fernando Coutinno, who had an extraordinary Power given him, the King (as was thought) having some ink∣ling of the disagreement was like to be be∣tween the Viceroy and Albuquerque. No∣thing of note hapned him till he arrived at Cananor, whence he carried Alfonso de Al∣buquerque to Cobin, treating him as Gover∣nour of India. Though there passed some Acts of Civility between the Viceroy and Coutinno, the rest was not suitable; for a Ship he had prepared to pass to Portugal was denied him, and he obliged to take another he had no mind to. He sailed with two more on the 19th of November, and had fair Weather till passed the Cape of Good Hope, when he said, now (God be praised) the Witches of Cochin are Liars, who said we should not pass this Cape. Near there he put into the Bay of Saldanna to take Water; and some men going to ex∣change Goods with the Blacks, a Servant of the Viceroy treated two of them so ill, that they knocked out his Teeth, and sent him away bloody. Some Gentlemen looking upon this as an Affront, persuaded the Vice∣roy to go ashoar, when they ought to ad∣vise him to punish his Servant for abusing People where they sought Relief. This had been Justice. He yielded, but so much against his Will, that as he went into the Boat he said, Ah! whether, and to what end do they now carry the 60 years? Hereby declaring, that was an Action of Raw Heads.
There went with him 150, the Flower of the Ships. They went on to a mise∣rable Village, and returned with some Cat∣tle and Children, when 170 Blacks coming down from the Mountain, whither they had fled, attacked them in defence of their Children, casting Stakes with sharp Points, hardned at the Fire, so furiously, that in a little time they killed 50 Gentlemen, and among them the Viceroy, who died kneel∣ing on the Sand, with his Eyes lifted up to Heaven, struck through the Throat with one of these Stakes. George de Melo return∣ed with the wounded Men to the Ships, and when he thought the Blacks were withdrawn, went ashore and buried the Viceroy and the rest. This was a manifest judgment of God, that so few unarmed Bar∣barians should overcome those who had done such Noble Actions in India. George de Melo carried the News to Lisbon, where it was received with great Grief. The Vice∣roy, Don Francisco de Almeyda, was seventh Son of Don Lope de Almeyda, Count of Abrantes, and of Donna Beatriz de Sylva his Wife. He was married to Donna Ioan∣na Pereyra; he was Knight of the Order of St. Iames; He was of a Graceful Pre∣sence, Ripe Councel, and Obliging Carry∣age; he was very Continent, an Enemy of Avarice, very Liberal and Grateful. Don Francisco wore the Coat or upper Garment (which then was instead of the Cloak used now) Black, the Doublet of Crimson Sat∣tin, the Sleeves whereof appeared; the
Breeches also Black, which were Breeches and Stockins reaching from the Feet to the Waste, over them Boots, a Truncheon in the Right Hand, the Left upon his Sword, which hung almost before. He was the first Viceroy and Governour of India. CHAP. IV. Conquests under King Emanuel, the Year 1510, Alfonso de Albuquerque now Governing India, who held it from the Year 1509, till the Year 1515. 1. ALfonso de Albuquerque, now possessed of the Government, prepared to fall upon Calicut, with Don Fernando Coutinno. The Design was kept private, but Zamori provided, as did all the Princes of that Coast when the Portugues were in motion. They set out from Cochin with 30 Vessels and 1800 men, besides some Boats of Malabares, who followed in hopes of Plunder. They arri∣ved at Calicut the 2d of Ianuary, and weigh∣ing the difficulties of Landing, consulted about the manner; and Ordered that part of the Fleet which belonged to Albuquerque, should be committed to the care of his Ne∣phew Don Antonio de Noronha; and the part of Coutinno to Rodrigo Rabelo. Every one
strove to be so posted as to land first. Our Men were at Arms all Night, and so tired in the Morning, they had more mind to sleep than to land, though the desire of landing had kept them from sleep; but they soon recovered, the signal being given, and the Cannon Playing. Coutinno had 800 men, and some Field-pieces: Albuquerque had the same number, and besides them 600 Malabares. They marched with more Confusion than Order, each striving to be foremost; the first that attacked the Bul∣wark of Cerame were George de Cunna and Francis de Sousa; they found there 600 men, who made a vigorous resistance, till Albu∣querque coming up, they quitted it. Albu∣querque being fearful of the disorder of his men, gave notice to Coutinno, who running with all speed to his relief, and our Colours being already set up, judging it had rather been a contrivance of the Governour, than disorder of the Men, took the liberty to say unto him, What means this Sir? Was you ambitious the Rabble of Lisbon should report you were the first at taking Calicut, which you so extol to the King? But I shall go to Lisbon and tell the King I could have entred it with only this Cane in my Hand. And since I find no body to fight with, I will not be satisfied till I enter the Pallace of Zamori, and dine in one of his Rooms. This said, without expecting the Answer Albuquerque was about to make, he marched with his men towards that Pallace, where Zamori then was not. He was tired
when he reached it, being above 5 Leagues from the Shoar, the Road encumbred with Palm-trees, and having marched hard, and met with opposition by the way, he rested a while in a Plain before the Pallace. Which being then attacked, though well defended, was entred, the Moors flying to the Moun∣tains. Our men now possessed of the Pal∣lance, fell to plundering, without shame or sense of honour, and with as much disor∣der as if they had been on the Shoar, and their Enemy destroyed. The Enemy now reinforced, returned, and falling upon our disordered men, put all into great confu∣sion, killing many under their Burdens, and doing great harm, though Vasco de Sylveyra signalized himself, killing two of thier Chiefs, whom they call Caymales. In the mean time Albuquerque had entred the City, and fired it; and having nothing to divert him, marched to see what Coutinno had done. He found all about the Pallace thronged with Armed Men, and that Coutinno was within in eminent danger. Finding it best to hinder the Enemies from pressing upon him, he sent him word he waited his coming. Cou∣tinno answered not till the third Message, and then returned, that Albuquerque might march, and he would follow, being busie in gathering his men, who were dispersed about the House. Albuquerque marched, and the Enemy pressed him doing much damage, till News was brought, Coutinno's life was in great danger. He endeavoured to return to his relief, but was hindred by the mul∣titude
of the Enemy, who slew many of his men, and wounded him with a Dart in the Throat, and a Stone in the Head, and in such manner that he was carried sensless to the Shoar. By this time Coutinno and many more were slain in the Pallace, and several on the way, being oppressed by the multi∣tude, and spent with the labour and heat, and stifled with the great Dust. Doubtless they had all perished, if Iames Mendez Vas∣concellos, and Simon de Andrade, whom Al∣buquerque left in the City with 2000 men, had not stopt the fury of the Enemies, and obliged them to retire. There hapned as great a contest about being the last on Shoar, as had been about landing first, not consi∣dering all their misfortune had proceeded from that foolish dispute. At last they sail∣ed, having lost 80 men, among them many of Note, whereof Coutinno was one. Albu∣querque being come to himself, gave out se∣veral Orders at Sea, and dispatched the Trading Ships homeward-bound; and when arrived at Cochin, made preparations for a third attempt upon the Island Ormuz. While he is employed about this Business, we will give some account of what was done by two of the Captains spoken of in the beginning of the third Chapter, which could not con∣veniently be inserted before. 2. One of these two Captains was Duarte de Lemos, who, after a Storm, arrived at the place called Medones de Oro, thence he went to Madagascar, or the Island of St. Laurence, and thence to Mozambique, where the rest
of his Squadron joyned him. George de Aguiar being lost, he took upon him the Command of the Coast of Ethiopia and Ara∣bia, given him by the King, that Govern∣ment being then divided into three Parts. From Mozambique he sailed to Melinde; then set out to visit some Islands of that Coast that had neglected to pay the usual Tribute to Quiloa since it was taken. Monfia sub∣mitted immediately; Zanzibar made resi∣stance, but they were drove to the Moun∣tains, and the Town plundered. At Pemba hapned the same, the Inhabitants flying to Monbaza, leaving nothing in their Houses; but some little plunder was taken in a Fort whether the Xeque had conveyed such things as he had not time to secure otherwise. Lemos gave the necessary Orders at Melinde, par∣ticularly in relation to the Factory for the Trade of Zofala. Hence he set out with seven Sail for the Coast of Arabia; one Ves∣sel Commanded by Gregory de Quadra, in∣sensibly was separated from the rest in the Night on the Coast of Magadoxa, and car∣ried by the Current to the Mouth of the Red Sea, where the City Zeila is seated, and was there taken. Lemos resolved to take a view of Ormuz, and managed the Towns of that Coast more with cunning than force. The same at Ormuz, where he received of the King and Coje Atar the 15000 Xera∣phens, imposed on them as Tribute by Albu∣querque, and was well treated. Hence he sent to India, Vasco de Sylveyra, who was killed at Calicut. Then he sailed to Zocotora,
and gave the Command of that Fort to Pe∣ter Ferreira, sending to India, Don Antonio de Noronha, who took a Rich Ship of the Moors, which being manned by some Portugueses, was cast away in a Storm between Dabul and Goa, and the men made Prisoners: His own Ship was stranded in the Bay of Cam∣baya, where he and some others endeavour∣ing to escape in the Boat, were all lost; about 30 that remained in the Ship were taken by the Moors and sent to the King of Cambaya. Lemos, on his return to Me∣linde, took a Vessel richly laden. The Win∣ter being passed, he returned to Zocotora, and found there Francis Pantoja, who came from India with Provisions, and had taken a rich Ship of Cambaya, the great wealth whereof he shared with Lemos his men, saying they had right to it, as being taken in the Pre∣cincts of his Government. A rare example of Bounty. Lemos finding himself unprovi∣ded for other undertakings, sailed to India, and was received by Albuquerque with great Pomp and Civility. 3. The other of the two Captains menti∣oned was Iames Lopez de Siqueira, who was entrusted with the discovery of the Island of Madagascar and Malaca. In the Island St. Laurence he arrived in the Port of St. Se∣bastian. He run along the Coast, making use of a Portugues as Interpreter, who had been left there, and forced by necessity to learn the Language. He spoke with a King called Diaman. and was by him civilly treat∣ed, but had no intelligence of any Spice or
Silver, the great end of his Voyage. Ha∣ving had much trouble and no profit, he sailed to India. Don Francisco, then Viceroy, received him well, and to assist in the disco∣very of Malaca, gave him another Ship, Commanded by Garcia de Sousa. He passed by Pedir, and that King sent him some Pre∣sents, and made him great Offers. The same the King of Paçem; in both places he erected Crosses. At last he anchored in the Port of Malaca, and terrified the Coast with the thundring of his Cannon, so that all the People running to the Ships and Vessels in the Harbour, shewed the apprehension they had of their new Guest. A Boat came to Lopez his Ship to enquire who they were; he answered, there was an Embassador from the King of Portugal, who came to propose such things as might be advantagious to that City. There came back a Message from the King in doubtful language, such as is usual when the designs are pernicious; for some forreign Merchants, Enemies to the Portu∣gueses, had persuaded him and his Favou∣rite Bandara, with the Powerful Argument of Rich Presents, to destroy Iames Lopez. The third day Lopez sent Hierom Teixeyra with a handsome Retinue as Embassador, who was well received on the Shoar, and placed upon an Elephant, so carried to the King, from whom he returned well pleased. 4. All this was but a Bait to ensnare our People, and therefore the King gave out he would do Lopez the Honour to dine with him in Publick. He sent to invite him, and
the Invitation was accepted, till he was in∣formed by a Friend of Iao Utimutiraja, that the Invitation was to murder him. Then he gave credit to the advice sent him from a Persian Hostess by Duarte Fernandez after she had endeavoured to come aboard at Night, and was not admitted by Sequeyra, judging it some Love Intrigue, but it pro∣ved one means to save those Ships. Lopez excused himself by counterfitting an indispo∣sition. Another way was contrived to carry on the Treachery, which was by offering lading of Spice, saying it was requisite to send for it to three several places. This took so well, that 30 men were sent accord∣ing to agreement, whilst a Fleet of several Vessels was behind a Point of Land, ready to assault our Ships, at the same time the 30 were killed in the Town. Mean while a Son of Utimutiraja came to visit Lopez, and found him playing at Draughts. He per∣suaded Lopez to continue his Game, that he might the less observe him, who offered a thousand times with a Dagger to kill him, and only waited the sign from the Town, when a Seaman, who was Centinel upon one of the tops seeing a throng, and hear∣ing noise, cried out, Sir, Sir, Treachery, Treachery, they kill our men. Lopez threw away the Draught-board with such fury, that Utimutiraja's Son and those with him, in a consternation leaped into their Boats: All was done that could be expect∣ed upon a sudden, and having sunk ma∣ny of the Enemies Boats, and forced the
rest to retire, and left 60 of our men in sla∣very, and 8 killed, they sailed, and soon after took two Vessels bound for Malaca. Lopez arrived at Cape Comori, sent Teixeira and Sousa with their Ships to Cochin; resol∣ving, though ill provided, to return to Portu∣gal alone, being fearful of Albuquerque, be∣cause he had sided with the Viceroy. With great hazard he arrived at the Island Ter∣cera. 5. Albuquerque had now fixed every thing for his design upon Ormuz, dispatched the Trading Ships, and other affairs with great expedition. About the end of Ianuary he sailed from Cochin with 1700 men in 21 Vessels of several sorts and sizes. Albuquer∣que at the River Onor, sent for the Pirat Ti∣moja (before spoken of) who desirous of our Friendship, and being Powerful, came presently with much Provision. He being skilful in the affairs of Asia, Albuquerque communicated his design to him. But he dissuaded, shewing how much better it was to attempt Goa, that was unprovided, and would be more advantagious. This pleased Albuquerque, and hereupon calling his Cap∣tains to Council, it was proposed to them by the said Timoja, and the Design appro∣ved of and commended by all. Timoja furnished 12 Ships, giving out he would ac∣company the Portugueses to Ormuz, to the end that Goa might be less provided. Timoja had been dispossessed of his Fortune, and ill treated by his Kindred and Neighbours. The desire of revenge, and recovering what
he had lost, caused his Love to our People, that it may always appear, that private In∣terests are the ruin of the Country. On the 25th of February they came to an anchor in the Port of Goa. CHAP. V. A continuation of the Conquest of the same Year 1510, Albuquerque Governing, and King Emanuel Reigning. 1. TIcuari is an Island on the Coast of Canara, formed by two Mouths of the River Gacim, its length from East to West 3 Leagues, the breadth one. There is in it Hill and Plain, has good Water, very Fruit∣ful, Pleasant, Beautiful and Healthy. On the Northern part of it is seated the City Goa, which formerly was on the South. This now in being was built by Melique Ho∣zem, a Moor, 40 years before the arrival of the Portugueses. The Old is not known when founded; but some Authentick Wri∣tings have been found, wherein is mentio∣ned, that Mantrasat, King thereof, above 100 years before, confesses one only God, the Incarnation of his Son, and the Trini∣ty and Unity; whence appears they had knowledge of the true Faith; to which may
be added, that when the City was taken, there was found in a Wall a Copper Cruci∣fix. These might be the fruits of the Apo∣stle St. Thomas's Preaching. 2. About the year 1300 the Moors be∣gan to conquer India. The first that at∣tempted it with great Power was Xa Nosa∣radin, King of Delhi; with a Powerful Ar∣my he came down from the North, conque∣ring all the Gentiles as far as the Kingdom of Canara. Thence he returned to Delhi, leaving Habedxa to prosecute the Conquests, who by his Valour and Conduct became so great, that he coped with his Master, which beginning, his Nephew Madura prosecuting, possessed himself of the Kingdom of Canara, and casting off his Allegiance to the King, he called the Kingdom Decan, from the sun∣dry Nations wherewith he Conquered it, this Word signifying so much in that Lan∣guage. Too great an Empire always threa∣tens ruin. Mamudxa fearing this, used great industry to secure himself, which was ef∣fectual for some time; but at length seve∣ral Governours intrusted with Provinces of this Empire, erected them into Sovereignties. The greatest of these was he of Goa, about the time of our coming into India, called Sa∣bayo, deceased about the time of Albuquerque's design upon Goa; and Cufo, King of Hidalcan, had possessed himself of the City, and put it into the Hands of his Son Ismael. The other Princes were Nizamaluco, Mudremaluco Melic Verido, Coje Moçadan, Abexeiapado and Cotama∣luco, all great, some very great. Sabayo was
born at Saba, a City of Persia, of very mean extraction, but served the King of Decan so fortunately, that he gave him the City Cal∣berga. Thence he extended his Conquests of the Pagans of Bisnagar, and after over the Island of Goa, lately possessed by the Moors come from Onor, Melique Hozem be∣ing then Lord of it, who defended it with 1200 men, and was killed in the defence. Goa had several dependencies, and with these and others he gained Sabayo, became the most Powerful of those Princes, and consequently hated of them all. He main∣tained himself against all whilst he lived, sometimes by Policy, sometimes by Force; but his death produced great alteration. 3. We left the great Albuquerque at an∣chor before the Bar of Goa, let us see what he acted. It was necessary to sail up the River, on whose Bank the City is seated; therefore he sent his Nephew Don Antonio de Noronha and Timoja to sound it. A light Vessel leading the way, spied a Brigantine of the Moors, and giving it chase, found they drew under a Fort well stored with Artillery and 400 men, Command∣ed by Yaçu Gorgi, a valiant Turk, to se∣cure the entrance of the River. Don An∣tonio seeing the other in the chase, pressed after him; and though the attack of the Bulwark seemed difficult, they attacked, and after a stout resistance took it, the Com∣mander having almost lost a Hand, and not able to stop the flight of his men, retired to the City. Mean while Timoja, not to be
out-done, took another Bulwark on the Continent, defended by some Artillery and 30 men. Then they sounded the River. Next day as Albuquerque entred the River, he was met by Mirali, and other Chief Men of the City, who came to surrender it, upon condition their Lives, Liberties and Estates should be secured. The reason of this surrender was, that the Turk Yaçu had terrified them with the relation of what he had seen a few Portugueses do, and that a Iogue (these are Religious Men among those People, esteemed Saints and Prophets) not long before had declared, that place should soon be subject to Strangers. Albu∣querque accepted the offer, and anchoring before the City on the 17th of February, was received on the Shoar as if he had been their Natural Prince. He mounted on a Horse, they brought him, with Rich Fur∣niture, at the Gate received the Keys, and went on to the Pallace, built by Sabayo. He found there much Cannon, Arms, Tackle, and many Horses. Next he gave such Or∣ders as were to the satisfaction of all the City, then dispatched several Embassies to divers Kings, which produced no effect, on∣ly shewed the greatness of his Thought. 4. The Neighbouring Towns depending on Goa, came instantly to make their sub∣mission, and were kindly received. The Com∣mand of the Fort was given to Don Antonio de Noronna; the Government of the Infidels to Timoja, and so the other Posts to the ge∣neral satisfaction. Understanding that Ships
of Ormuz, and the oast of Arabia were la∣ding at Baticala, four Vessels were sent thi∣ther, which took and carried them to Co∣chin, sending plenty of Provision to Albu∣querque. Now our Fortune begins to frown. The Moors begin to exercise their Treache∣ry. Those whom Albuquerque most relied upon conspire, and after four Months revolt, notwithstanding the most faithful Timoja blamed his confidence. They had deliver∣ed themselves up so easily to shun their own ruin, and gain time till Ismael Hidalcam pre∣pared to come to their relief. So it fell out, and he came on with great Power, sending be∣fore his great General Camalcam, with 1500 Horse and 8000 Foot. Albuquerque disposed his men with great diligence and order to receive him. 5. The first step was to secure the Heads of the Conspiracy, and the chief being Mir Cazem, to whom he had given the Com∣mand of 400 Moors, and his Nephew, they were hewed to pieces by his Guards, others were hanged in publick places, and others kept Prisoners, there being 100 convicted. This discovery, with the punishment, terri∣fied the City. Camalcam attempted to pass over to the Island, having prepared Boats to that effect. Don Antonio opposed him, and took 12 Boats. Many of the Enemies were killed, many devoured by the Croco∣diles, wherewith that River abounds. Ne∣vertheless Camalcam landed in the Island, which was quitted by our men, and some Cannon had been lost, had not two Masons
maintained it, though our Gentry fled, till they were killed, and it brought off. After some resistance, all retired into the City. Camalcam encamped about it, playing his Cannon effectually; Albuquerque did what the Place permitted, and now comes up Hi∣dalcam with 60000 Men, whereof 5000 were Horse. Part of this Army passed the River, and the rest was divided into two parts, one Commanded by a Famous Offi∣cer, the other by his Mother and Women, who maintained their Souldiers by the gain of 4000 Common Women they had with them; so that the Women lived upon them, and they upon the Women. The siege was closed by the coming of the King, and no place left Albuquerque to act any thing con∣siderable. It is prudence sometimes to yield to necessity. It was resolved in a Council, before day to abandon the City. This was executed with great hazard, for the way to the Ships began to be stopped by Hidalcam, and Albuquerque had his Horse killed, yet got off without loss, after a siege of 20 days. 6. It was resolved to winter in that Sea, and to this effect drew into a Bay▪ though not commodious, the best thereabouts; and because the Fort of Pangi with much Ar∣tillery incommoded them, there was no re∣medy but gaining of it; 300 Portugueses were appointed for the attack. Don Antonio de Noronha, with a Party, was appointed as a reserve, to relieve where there was most need, and Albuquerque to guard the Shoar. At the same time they prepared by Night
to appear with the day before the Fort; there marched 500 men, sent by Hidalcam to reinforce it. They Joy of these People was so great, that those without, as well as those within being all drunk, they mistook our Men, one side thinking it was the Relief sent them, and the other believing it was the Garrison came out to receive them. They were undeceived by the execution done upon them, 340 being slain, the rest rouced, with the loss of one man acciden∣tally drowned. The same hapned at the Bulwark Timoja had before gained at Bardes. Hidalcam hearing of this, was so terrified, that he went from the City, and his fear was the more, because some Conjurer had told him he should be killed by a great Shot near some River. He sent some ceremoni∣ous Messages to Albuquerque, to discover what was doing aboard the Ships, and he answer∣ed, still adding to his fear. By this means he exchanged those Moors he had kept Pri∣soners, for the Portugueses that were left in the City at their abandoning of it. 7. Albuquerque had intelligence some Ves∣sels were preparing to burn his Ships, and he resolved to anticipate by firing them, and they being drove up the Harbour, Don Antonio de Noronha was killed in this action. This man used to moderate the Violent Passions of his Uncle Albuquerque, who im∣mediately after shewed the effect of his rigid Severity, by hanging a Souldier because he found him with one of the Slaves he called Daughters, that he used to give in Marriage.
And when some of the Officers asked him what Authority he had to put this in exe∣cution, putting them under Deck, he lifted his Sword over them, saying, That was his Commission against all that were disobedi∣ent, and then broke them all. They all suffered much hardship this Winter, especi∣ally Hunger. Sailing hence they discovered four Sail, which were judged to be Turks; but coming nearer, appeared to be some of the Fleet come from Portugal. 8. This year King Emanuel had dispatch∣ed two Squadrons for India, one of seven the other of four Ships; after them went out two Ships more, and a third to settle a Trade at Madagascar. The four Ships under Iames Mendez were those Albuquerque met at his setting out from Goa, and gave him the News of the other Ships that were on their way, which was a great satisfaction to him, being the better enabled to prosecute his great designs. Gonçalo Siqueira with the se∣ven Ships arrived at Cananor, soon after Al∣buquerque, who communicated the enter∣prize upon Goa, but was over-ruled by Si∣queira and went to Cochin. By the way he obtained a Victory over the Malabares of Calicut, who opposed our lading Pepper; then he dispatched Siqueira with the Tra∣ding Ships homeward-bound, and soon af∣ter Duarte de Lemos with four more, and then turned his view again to the affair of Goa. Iames Mendez, who commanded the four Ships, and was before inclinable to the design, now excused himself. Albuqu
finding this, commanded him and his Cap∣tains, upon the severest penalties, not to stir without his Orders. It troubled them be∣cause they feared losing the opportunity of going to Malaca, whither the King sent them; but they obeyed. Albuquerque set out from Cananor with 23 Sail, and therein 1500 Fighting-men. He passed by Onor to joyn Timoja, whom he found busied in his Wed∣ding, being to marry the Daughter of a Queen, and he desiring to be honoured with the Presence of Albuquerque, obliged him to land, which proved very dangerous, for a Storm rising kept them ashoar three days, and when he returned to his Ships, a Boat with 30 men was lost. Timoja sent with him three Ships, and promised to join him at Goa with 6000 men. 9. On the 22th of November Albuquerque anchored the second time before the Bar Calling to mind the dangers he had there escaped, and the discontent that was among some of his Officers, he thought fit to sooth the Principals with an obliging Harangue, and therewith won all their Inclinations. At break of day, on the Feast of St. Catha∣rine, the City was assaulted with great slaughter of the Enemy that maintained the Shoar, but (though it seem strange) not one Portugues killed. The Enemy fled to recover one of the Gates of the City, and our men to enter with them. Here the Fight was renewed, till many Portugueses forced their way in, doing great execution in the Streets. They cleared all to the
Pallace with great danger, and loss of five Men of Note; and there was a most furious Contest begun with equal Valour on both sides. Now Albuquerque having done what became him, came up, and Fortune appear∣ing wholly on our side, the Moors fled, and abandoned the City, endeavouring to get over to the Continent, but through hast and con∣fusion perished in the River. After the Victory it was found, that of 9000 Fight∣ing-men who defended the Town, 6000 had perished, and 50 Portugueses. Me∣deorao, who commanded the three Ships sent by Timoja, behaved himself well. Ti∣moja with 3000 men came too late, he was only Witness to the Slaughter. The booty of Horses, Artillery, Arms, Provisions and Ships was excessive, and such as was neces∣sary for the great designs Albuquerque had conceived. 10. Our Dead were honourably buried, those of the Enemy in the Bellies of the Cro∣codiles of that River, into which they were cast. Not one Moor was left alive in the Island. The Gentiles, who were Country∣men, were restored to their Farms, and the Government of them given to Timoja, and after to Melrao, a Nephew of the King of Onor. Whilst Albuquerque setled these Af∣fairs, he received many Embassadors with Congratulations of his success from several Princes of Malabar. Many of Hidalean's Officers, then, and afterwards made inroads as far as Goa, but always returned with loss. Iames Mendez and his two other Captains,
desirous to go to Malaca, stole away out of the Port by Night, contrary to Albuquerque's Orders. He sent after them, and being brought back Prisoners, he Ordered they should be sent to answer it in Portugal, and two Pilots condemned to be hanged at the Yard∣arms. Some were suspicious that Albuquerque detained Iames Mendez, lest he should take Malaca, which Action he designed for himself; others said, he kept him from the danger Siqueira met with there, that Enter∣prize requiring a greater Power. 11. Albuquerque providing for the safety of Goa, laid the Foundation of a Fort, which he called Emanuel, being the King's Name. He caused the Names of the Captains who were at the taking of it, to be carved upon a Stone; but because every one would be named before the others, he turned down the Stone, hiding the Names, and on what was visible put this Inscription, Lapidem quem reprobraverunt aedificantes; and thus they were all pleased; for the Portugueses had rather their own Praise should be for∣got, than that another should partake. He coined Mony, that of Gold he called Emanuels, that of Silver, Esperas, and half Esperas that of Copper. He married some Portugueses to Women of the Country, gi∣ing them in Portion, Lands, Houses, or Em∣loyments, the better to secure his Colony. One Night that some of these Weddings ere Celebrated, the Brides were so mixt nd confounded together among the People, at some of the Bridegrooms went to Bed
to those that belonged to others, and next Morning finding the mistake, they changed them, each taking his own, and all equal as to the point of Honour. This gave the more occasion to some Gentlemen to ridicule the care of Albuquerque. But he persisted with such Constancy, that he brought to pass what he intended, which was, to make Goa the Portugues Bulwark in India. King Emanuel was very desirous of, and recommended to Albuquerque, with much instance, the taking the City Aden, and raising a Fort there. He now possessed of Goa, thought time lo while he attempted not something; he therefore counterfeits the carrying on this Enterprize, and sent some Ships towards the Red Sea, when at the same time his design was upon Malaca. He went to Cochin, ha∣ving first secured and ordered all things at Goa: Where was left for the defence of it Rodrigo de Castello Branco with 400 Portu∣gueses and 5000 Gentiles, under Melrao to secure the Country and Revenue. He set out of Cochin for Malaca on the 2d of May with 19 Sail and 1400 Fighting-men, 800 of them Portugueses, the rest Malabares.
CHAP. VI. A Continuation of the Conquests under King Emanuel, the Year 1511, and the Go∣vernment of Alfonso de Albuquerque. 1. THE City Malaca, whither Albu∣querque now directed his Course, is seated on that part of Land, being a Penin∣sula, commonly called by the name of Aurea Chersonesus, and upon that Channel which parts the Island Sumatra from the Continent of Asia, about the middle of that Channel, in something more than two Degrees of North Latitude, stretched along the Shoar about a League, in the same manner as Lis∣bon. It is divided by a River, and the two parts joyned by a Bridge. The Buildings of Wood, except the Mosque and Pallace, which were of Stone. It afforded a plea∣sant Prospect to the Sea, and was well secu∣red with Fortifications. The Port was fil∣led with abundance of Ships, as being the great Market of all those Parts. It was first built by the Celates, a People for the most part imployed in Fishing, who joyned them∣selves to the Malayes, that before inhabited the Mountains. They were assisted by Pa∣risamora, submitting to him. This Man had been great in the Island of Iava, and ex∣pelled by a Tyrant who usurped his Lord∣ship, fled to Cincapura, where being well
entertained by that King, he rebelled against him, and was again cast out by the King of Siam, and so forced to wander about Mala∣ca; a just punishment for his ingratitude. He having increased the new Colony, gave it the name of his Fortune; for Malaca in that Language signifies a Banished Man. The first King of Malaca was Xaque Darxa, or as another Author says, Raal Sabu) Son of Paramisora, subject to him of Siam, from whom his Successors revolted. The Coun∣try of Malaca is subject to Inundations, full of thick Woods, stored with hurtful and dangerous Creatures, chiefly Tigers, which obliges many people to pass the Nights on the tops of high Trees, because they fetch them off the low ones with a leap. The Men are couragious, the Women wanton. The Trade of the East and West make Ma∣laca most Rich and Populous. Mahomet reigned at this time, against whom the King of Siam had sent an Army of 40000 men, most whereof perished by sundry ac∣cidents, and partly by the treachery of Ma∣homet, which he practised with Iames Lopez de Siqueira; but now came Albuquerque to revenge them all. Mohomet feared the re∣ward of his baseness, and therefore brought to his aid the King of Pam with a great Force, and had now 30000 men and 8000 pieces of Cannon, and yet his fear was greater than his preparations. 2. Albuquerque sailing from Cochin, by the way he took five Ships of the Moors bound for Malaca, off of Ceylon. The King
of Pedir, in the Island Sumatra, sent some Moors to visit him, and with Iohn de Viegas, one of the Portugueses left be∣hind by Siqueira, who, with others, flying from Slavery, arrived at Pedir. The same was done by the King of Paçem. Neboada Beeguea, of the Principals of the Treachery of Malaca, was fled from Pedir, and being beaten and taken at Sea by Ayres Pereyra, to the general astonishment of all that beheld him, he shed not one drop of Blood, though pierced with several mortal Wounds; but scarce had they taken off his Arm a Bracelet of Bone, when the Blood gushed out. The Indians discovered the Secret, saying it was the Bone of a Beast that breeds in Iava, which has that virtue; it was esteemed a great Prize, and brought to Albuquerque. Next they met a Vessel with 300 Moors, so resolute, Albuquerque was forced to come up himself to take it, not without some dan∣ger. In this Vessel was Geniall, the rightful King of Paçem, banished by the tyranny of the present Possessor. Three other Vessels were taken soon after, whereof one gave in∣telligence of the affairs of Malaca, in which Port our Fleet anchored on the 1st of Iuly with much noise of Warlike Instruments and Cannon, terrifying all the People that covered the Shoar; for the guilt of what they had before acted, made then sensible what this Fleet was designed for; there be∣ing no surer foreteller of their punishment to wicked men, than their own Consci∣ence.
3. Next day came a Gallant Moor, with a deceitful Message, from the King to Al∣buquerque. He received him with great state, the greatest was that of his Person and Venerable Beard, which had never been cut since he was at Ormuz, he saying it should never be cut till he sat to that pur∣pose upon the Back of Coje Atar; so it grew to such a length, that he knotted it to his Girdle. He treated the Moor courteously, whose Message contained, that if he came for Merchandize it was ready. The An∣swer was, That the Merchandize he sought for, were some Portugueses that were in the City ever since Siqueira went away; that having got them, he would let the King know what more he demanded of the King and City. The Moor at his return spread the terror of this Answer, and it was gene∣rally agreed to buy off that danger by re∣storing the Portugueses, and paying a sum of Mony. Prince Alodim and his Brother-in-law the King of Pam prevented the execu∣ting this, and made ready to defend them∣selves. Albuquerque began some military ex∣ecution, whereupon the King restored the Captives. Other Messages were sent by the King in order to appease Albuquerque, who answered, That he offered him Peace upon condition he permitted him instantly to raise a Fort there, and repayed the Charge of his and Siqueira coming to that Port, since his Falshood had been the cause of all the damage sustained; and that he must imme∣diately return an answer, whether he chose
Peace or War. The King desired an Ac∣commodation, but his Son and the King of Pam opposed it. At last they all made the necessary preparations to repel the danger. 4. On the Eve of St. Iames the Apostle, the Signal was given for landing, with great Shouts and noise of Guns; immediately the Portugueses leap ashoar, and mix with the Enemy. The hottest of the dispute was about gaining and maintaing the Bridge, which Albuquerque had undertaken himself, and was vigorously defended till the Ene∣mies pressed, leaped into the River, where many were killed, and many drowned. The Prince and King of Pam bravely with∣stood another party of ours that would make their way to the Bridge. King Maho∣met came out on a bulky Elephant, with two more carrying Castles on their Backs, whence flew a great number of Darts. Our men attacking the Beasts, so wounded them, that they fled, trampling their own men, and making way for ours to joyn those at the Bridge. Albuquerque then fortified him∣self there, and because much harm was done with poisoned Arrows from the tops of neighbouring Houses, he caused them to be burnt. Albuquerque bestowing great Praises on his Captains for their Valour, and per∣ceiving they were scorched with the heat, and faint for want of Meat, retired with them to the Ships about Night, where ten died of poisoned Arrows. The Enemies loss was not known. The King of Pam went away, on pretence of bringing a recruit, but returned not.
5. Whilst Albuquerque rested in his Ships re∣freshing his men, the King harrased his, un∣dermining the Streets to blow us up, and co∣vering them with poisoned Thorns that might gore us at coming in; he planted more Artillery in many places, and secured the Bridge. Albuquerque sent Antony de Abreu in a Vessel well manned, to gain it; from the Bridge flew Showers of Bullets, and Deniz Fernandez de Melo seeing him near killed, endeavoured to carry him off to the Ships to be dressed, but he with wonderful constancy said, Though I have neither strength to Fight, nor voice to Command, I have still life to keep my Post. Floats of Wildfire were drove along the River to burn the Vessel, and no remedy to prevent it, till Albuquer∣que effected it by gaining the Bridge; then the Vessel had liberty to act. Our Com∣mander enters the City through Showers of Bullets, Arrows and Darts. Understanding the danger of the Mines which were in a broad Street, he took another way and gain∣ed the Mosque; and at last with vast slaugh∣ter of the Enemy, took entire possession of the City, having with him in this Action only 800 Portugueses and 200 Malabares. 6. In nine days time all the Moors were killed, or driven out of that great Place. It was Peopled again by Strangers, and some Malayes, to whom leave was granted. Among them came that Powerful Native of Iava Utimutiraja, whose Son had like to kill Siqueira. The Souldiers had three days liberty to plunder. There were found 3000
Pieces of great Cannon; of 8000 that King Mahomet relied upon, being with the rest retired to Bintam, where with Prince Alo∣dim he fortified himself. This would be of dangerous consequence, therefore Albuquer∣que sent out 400 of his men, and with them went 400 of Utimutiraja, and 300 belong∣ing to the Merchants of Pegu, these put the Prince to flight, took seven Elephants with costly Trappings, and retired. The King now wandred the Woods, blaming the ob∣stinacy of his Son and the King of Pam; so the Father and Son fell out and parted, each shifting for himself. Albuquerque in∣stantly built the Fort, which he called Fa∣mosa for its beauty, and Church dedicated to the Visitation of our Lady. He Coined Mony (as had been done at Goa) of se∣veral Names and different Value, which was proclaimed about the Streets, and some scattered among the People. By these and other honourable Actions he gained the Hearts of the Strangers, and secured this most Important Place. 7. Albuquerque, though he saw into the Soul of Utimutiraja, knowing it sometimes convenient to trust an Enemy, gave him the Command of the Moors who remained in the City. But he kept private Correspon∣dence with Prince Alodim, on pretence to restore him, but in reality to the intent to set himself up. This was not so private but it was discovered, and he, his Son, and Son∣in-law were apprehended, and publickly (after Conviction) executed on the same
Scaffold they had erected for Siqueira. This was the first piece of Publick Justice execu∣ted by the Portugueses in India. One Fire is followed by another. Pate Quitir, a Na∣tive of Iava, to whom Alfonso gave that Government, took a sum of Mony of the Wife of Utimutiraja (whom he had suc∣ceeded) and a promise to give him her Daughter, upon condition he would revenge the death of her Husband on the Portu∣gueses, to whom she had offered 100000 Du∣cats for his Life. Pate accepted the Offer, with the same intention of seizing the City. The King of Campar also having this design, sent to Congratulate with Albuquerque, of∣fering his Service, and asking the Command of Pate Quitir. But this had no effect now, in its time it shall be related. Albuquerque received here several Embassies, particularly from the King of Siam, who rejoyced to see his Quarrel revenged, though by another hand. He also sent Embassadors to Siam, to Pegu; and two to discover the Islands of Maluco and Banda. They had all Orders to publish every where what had hapned at Malaca, and offer the Trade of that Place on better terms than it was before. All things being ordered, the best the time would per∣mit, he resolved to return to Cochin, leaving Ruy de Brito Patalim to Command in the Fort with above 300 men. The like num∣ber to guard the Sea, in ten Ships, under Fernando Perez de Andrade. Albuquerque car∣ried with himself four Sail.
8. Whilst this passed at Malaca, there broke out a Rebellion of many of the Na∣tives at Goa, and Pulate Cam, an Officer of Hidalcam, appeared before it with a good Body of Men; he passed over into the Island and besieged the City. One of the Principal Exploits was a Sally made by our Commander Rodrigo Rebelo, in which was done much execution. But soon after he was killed, and with him Manuel de Cunna, so that things were in a bad posture. To remedy this, by Publick Consent Iames Mendez de Vasconcellos was chose Com∣mander. 9. Pulate Cam gave some jealousie, that he designed to usurp this Territory, to pre∣vent which Hidalcam sent his Brother-in∣law Rotzmo Cam, who overcame him with the assistance of Iames Mendez, whom he drew to his Aid, and after would drive out of the City, finding himself with a power of 7000 men, there being then not above 1200 in the Town, whereof the third part only were Portugueses. He laid siege, and Hunger began to press within, and some of our men deserted, whereof part repenting, returned, which gave the first hopes to the Besieged 10. Next came Emanuel de la Cerda, left to cruize upon that Sea, and had wintered at Cochin; then Iames Fernandez de Beja, who had been demolishing the Fort at Zoco∣tora, and receiving the Tribute at Ormuz. The abundance of Provisions and Recruits of Men they brought, gave new life to the
almost dismayed besieged. After these arrived, Iohn Serram, who came from Portugal the year before with Payo de Sa, in order to settle some Trade in the Island Madagascar, where they made several attempts to no effect. Christopher de Brito, who was at Cananor with one great and four smaller Ships, hearing of the condition of Goa, went thither, car∣rying many Men and much Provision, and secured the Town which had suffered much that Winter. CHAP. VII. Conquests in India under King Emanuel, from the Year 1511, till the Year 1513, Alfonso de Albuquerque still Govern∣ing. 1. ALbuquerque sailing from Malaca to Cochin, off Cape Timia, of the Kingdom Aru, in the Island Sumatra, his Ship set upon a Rock, which so split it athwart the Keel, that those in the Poop could not come at them in the Forecastle, and the contrary; neither could the other Vessels, by reason of the darkness of the Night, come to relieve them. Till day ap∣pearing Albuquerque was seen holding in his Arms a Girl, Chance had conducted to him
in the Confusion; Peter de Alpoem coming up, though with much danger, saved him. The loss he most lamented was that Bone which hindred the wounded Moor from bleeding, and some Iron Lions of curious Work, which he had designed for Supporters to his Tomb. Some men were lost. Albuquer∣que went into Alpoem's Ship, and prosecuting his Voyage, took two Ships of Moors, which, though Rich, made not amends for his great loss. Immediately upon his arri∣val at Cochin, being informed of the distress of Goa, he dispatched thither eight Vessels with Men and Provisions, and a Promise of his speedy coming in Person. There were then in the Town 1000 men, and the Besiegers were 20000 strong. 2. Six Ships arrived in India from Portu∣gal, 1512. Commanded by Don Garcia de Noronha, who had a tedious Voyage, having spent a whole year without touching in any Port: And though the men were tired and sick, yet they relieved some places. The mean while sailed from Portugal to India a Fleet of 13 Ships, whereof one perished at the Islands of Angoxa. 3. This Fleet containing 1800 men, an∣chored at the Bar of Goa on the 15th of Au∣gust. They presently visited the Enemy in their Fort of Benastarim, and then Don Gar∣cia, and George de Melo with their Squadrons passed on, carrying with them Iohn Macha∣do and others newly delivered from the sla∣very of Cambaya. Albuquerque rejoyced more than at his Victories to see his Nephew
Don Garcia with that Command, the great succour he and Melo brought, the Captives released, and all things concurring to fur∣ther his designs. His satisfaction was in∣creased by the arrival of Antony de Sadanna with the Garrison of Quiloa, which Place being of small importance, they had quit∣ted. At the same time came an Embassa∣dor from the King of Persia, and one from him of Ormuz to go to Portugal. Albuquer∣que ordered the affairs of Cochin to pass to Goa, and by the way left George de Melo in the Fort of Cananor. 4. He was received at Goa as a publick Father, and being informed of the past as well as present posture of Affairs; he visited the Fortifications, and studied how to drive Rotzomo Cam from his Works. The sixth day from his arrival, being on an eminence with some Gentlemen viewing 4000 Moors and 200 Horse, who diverted themselves in the Field, it being Friday, which is their Sabbath, he could not hinder our men from rushing upon them, and driving them up to their Fortifications, where was a hot Skir∣mish, and our men victorious with some Booty, having killed above 100, and lost one Captain and another man, and some wounded. 5. Albuquerque resolving to take that For∣tress from the Enemy, gave the assault by Land and Sea, and thinking it was not vi∣gorously carried on by Sea, he leaped into a Boat, and came so near that a Cannon Ball killed a Canara that steered the Vessels, dash∣ing
his Brains and Blood on his Beard. This so inflamed him, that he promised a reward to any that should break that Cannon, and immediately one of our Gunners directed a Ball into the Mouth of it, wherewith it flew in pieces and killed the Canonier. This made way for our men to come up the Ri∣ver and lay the siege closer, when Zufolari appearing on the Continent with 7000 men coming to the relief of it, but finding no∣thing could be done, he retired with some loss sustained by our Cannon. Albuquerque set down before the place with 4000 men, whereof 3000 were Portugueses, in two Bo∣dies, one Commanded by himself, the other by his Nephew Don Garcia de Noronha. At first we received some damage, but afterwards did so much, that Rotzomo Cam surrendred upon condition to leave the Fort with all the Cannon and Ammunition, and deliver all the Slaves and Renegadoes, which last Albuquerque punished by cutting off their Noses, Ears, Right Hands, and Thumbs of the Left, and sending them so maimed to Portugal. One of these was Ferdinando Lopez, who to do Pennance for his Sins, voluntarily staid with a Black in the Island St. Helena, where he was afterward serviceable to some Ships, and began to sow that Island. Albuquerque endeavoured to bring Rotzo∣mo Cam over to the Portugues Service, but succeeded not. But this his Fortune terrified many Princes. The King of Calicut con∣cluded a Treaty with Don Garcia de Noronha, whom his Uncle had sent to Cochin to take
charge of Affairs there. Those of Nar∣singa and Bisa, Hidalcam and others sent Embassadors, to all which he answered, ex∣tolling the value of the Portugueses Amity, and the terror of their Arms; and being dispatched, sent after them Messengers of his own to inform those Princes, and gain intelligence of them. Now arrived at Goa, Mathew, Embassador from Prester Iohn, in order to go to Portugal; he brought with him a piece of the Holy Cross, and Letters from Queen Helena, who Governed that Kingdom during the minority of her Son David. The design of this Embassie was to settle Amity with our King, and ask Aid against the Moors, who ever infested that Empire. The Embassador said, that at his Masters Court there were then three Portugueses, one call∣ed Iohn, who stiled himself Embassador of the King of Portugal, and two who said they had been lately set ashoar at Cape Guardafu to discover the Country. These were Iohn Gomez and Iohn Sanchez, set ashoar there by Order of Albuquerque him∣self, with a Moor for that discovery. 7. Finding the Affairs of Goa in so good a posture, he resolved to put in execution an Enterprize he had been charged with by King Emanuel. This was the Conquest of the City Aden. He fitted 20 Ships, with∣out acquainting any body with the design When ready to sail he acquainted the Cap∣tains with his intentions. The number of the men was 1700 Portugueses, and 800 Canaras and Malabars. They set sail the
18th of February, and arrived safe at Aden. Miramirzan, Governour of the Town, sent to complement Albuquerque, and a Present of Provision. Several Messages passing, and no hopes of a surrender appearing, it was resolved to give the assault. 8. The City Aden is seated on the Coast of Arabia Felix, near the Mouth of the Red Sea, called by Ptolomy, Modocan. Over it appears the Mountain Arzira, all a barren Rock, in many Cliffs. The Town from the Sea looks beautiful and strong. It is rich and famous for the great resort thither of many Nations. The Soil so scarce of Wa∣ter, that it has only a few Wells and Cisterns. Even from the Clouds it is scarce watered above once in two or three years; whence it is void of all Trees, Plants and Orchards, the delight and pleasure of other Towns. 9. Albuquerque found the Enterprize was more difficult than it had been represented. On Easter-Eve in the Morning our men landed with Scaling Ladders, this being thought the proper method for gaining the place. It was doubtful who first mounted the Wall, but several being already upon it, the Ladders, overburdened with the multi∣tude that pressed to get up, broke several times, so that there was no hope of relie∣ving those who had gained the top, and stood in great danger, and Albuquerque was forced to order them down, making one out of the broken Ladders, some fighting while the others came off. After four hours engagement, they retired with great danger
and loss, more sustained by the accident than the Enemy. George Silveyra and five men were killed, some died after of their wounds, and some with the fall from the Wall. 10. Albuquerque complying with his ill fortune, and the persuasions of his Captains, and to save time, resolved to give over that attempt, and sail towards the Mouth of the Red Sea. But first they took a Bulwark that guarded the Port, where many Moors were killed, and 37 great pieces of Cannon found. The Ships were all first plundered, and then burnt. The fourth day after their ar∣rival they sailed out of this Port, and arri∣ved at the Mouth of the Red Sea, next the Coast of Arabia, which was much celebrated with great signs of Joy by Albuquerque, as being the first of our Nation that had entred those Seas. CHAP. VIII. A Continuation of the Conquests of the Year 1513, the Reign of King Emanuel, and Government of Alfonso de Albuquerque. 1. THE Form of the Red Sea is not un∣like to that of a Crocodile, the Mouth of it is the place answerable to the nar∣row Neck, and the Head is that Sea which lies out between Cape Guardafu and Cape Fartaque, and the Point of the Tail reaches
to the Town of Suez; it lies N. N. W. and S. S. E. The length of it 350 Leagues, the breadth where widest 40. The Channel is in the middle, and has Water enough to carry the greatest Ships; but the sides ar shoal, full of little Islands and Banks of Sand. No River of any note falls into it. By the Moors it is called Bahar Corzu, that is, closed in; by others the Sea of Meca; by us the Red Sea, from the Colour it takes of the Bottom, as was experienced by the Viceroy Don Iohn de Castro, who caused to be taken up in some places a matter Red, like Corral; in others, Green; and in others, White; and in each the Water seemed of that Colour, but the most is Red, and the Water taken up is as clear as any other. There are some fisheries of small Pearl in many parts of this Sea; it abounds not in Fish. The Mouth lies between 12 and 13 degrees of North Latitude, and is as it were locked up by seven small Islands, the greatest called Mehun, and Perantonomasiam Island. From the Mouth of the streight till Suez, along the Coast of Arabia, for the first 44 Leagues, are some Ports of small note, till we come to the Island Camaran, subject to King of Aden. Thence to Gezan, a great Town 60 Leagues, where are seven conside∣rable Ports. From Gezan to Imbo 130 Leagues, all the Dominion of Meca, wherein are good Towns and Ports; among which Ziden, a famous Town, then Ioda, much known, and Meca 15 Leagues up the Country; 60 Leagues from Imbo, is Toro, where it is said the Chil∣dren of Israel crossed the Red Sea, which is
here 3 Leagues over; hence to Suez 40 Leagues, and there ends the Coast of Arabia. Let us now return from Suez to the streight, where we began, running along the opposite Coast of Egypt and Ethiopia: 20 Leagues from Suez is Grand Cayr, the vast Metropolis of Egypt, but it lies upon the Nile, not the Red Sea; 45 Leagues from it to Alcozer; thence 135, in which space are many Ports to the City Zuanquem; 70 Leagues farther Mazua, in a small Island, as is the other, and opposite to it Arquico; hence 85 Leagues to the Mouth of the Sea. Behind a ridge of Mountains that runs along this Coast lies the Empire of Prester Iohn, which has always preserved Christianity after their manner, and has of late been much supported therein by the Portugues Arms. 2. Albuquerque sailing along this Sea, arri∣ved at the Island Camaran, abandoned by its Inhabitants for fear of his coming. Here he took four Ships richly laden, one belonging the Soldan of Cayr, two more he had taken by the way. From this Island he visited o∣thers, and now appeared in the Sky, visibly to all, a Red Crols very bright, seeming to be about a Fadom athwart, and of a proporti∣onable length. They all knelt, and Albu∣querque made a devout Prayer, and the Visi∣on was Celebrated with Joy and sound of Musick, and Cannon, till by degrees it was covered by a bright Cloud. He returned to Camaran, designing to winter there, the Wind having failed him to sail to Ioda, as he had designed.
3. Here they suffered extreamly by Fa∣mine, and after many died by sickness, cau∣sed by the ill Food. Albuquerque parted hence when the Weather would permit, which was in Iuly, resolving to appear again be∣fore Aden, He touched at the Island Mehun, at the Mouth of the Streight, and called it Vera Cruz, because he erected there a very high Cross on an Eminence. He dispatch∣ed two Ships to discover the City Zeyla, where they burnt two Vessels in the Har∣bour and joyned him again at Aden. 4. Albuquerque found this City newly for∣tified. The Cannon on both sides was plaid with almost equal damage. Nothing considerable was performed, but some Ships taken and burnt, and then sailed for India. 5. About the middle of August he ancho∣red off of Diu; the Lord of it Melique Az, more out of Fear than affection, sent him some Provisions, and a courteous Message. Albuquerque knowing him, dealt cautiously, and demanded leave to raise a Fort there; he excused himself with the King of Cam∣baya; at the same time advising him to deny it if asked. However it was agreed a Factor and some others should be left there to settle Trade; and at parting Melique treated Al∣buquerque with such civility and cunning, that he after said he had not seen a more perfect Courtier, or fitter to deceive, and at the same time please an understanding man. Afterwards leave was obtained of the King of Cambaya to raise a Fort at Diu, upon con∣dition he might build another at Malaca,
and other reasonable Proposals which were admitted. 6. Now arrived in India two Ships from Portugal, a third being cast away, but the men saved, and taken up by the others at Melinde; the Captain of her was after lost in a Boat. Albuquerque went to Goa, and sent his Nephew Noronha to dispatch these two, and three other Ships homewards. These Ships carried an Embassador from Zamori to King Emanuel, he being now in amity with us, and having permitted a Fort to be erected where it was desired. They car∣ried also the offers of several Princes, and many Captives taken in War, as Testimo∣nies of what he had acted. There went al∣so a Portugues Jew, an Inhabitant of Ieru∣salem, sent by the Guardian of the Francis∣cans there, to acquaint Albuquerque, that the Soldan of Cayr threatned the destruction of all the Holy Places. CHAP. IX. A Continuation of the Conquests, the Year 1513, till the Year 1514, the same King Reigning in Portugal, and the same Governour Ruling India. 1. THat Powerful Native of Iava, Pate Quitir, who had been honoured and preferred at Malaca by Albuquerque, and at the time of his departure was in Rebel∣lion,
improved his absence to carry on his Treason. One Night he killed a Captain of ours, and took some Cannon, and fortifi∣ed himself therewith and with what he had before, and 6000 Men and two Elephants. Ferdinando Perez and Alfonso Pessoa with 320 Men attacked him, one by Land, the other by Water; after a vigorous defence, many of his men being slain, he fled to the Woods. In his Fort was found much Artil∣lery, Ammunition and other Riches, and all that part where he lived was burnt to the ground. 2. Pate Quitir having received succour from Iava, and King Mahomet who lost Malaca, begins to raise another Fort in a convenien place, appearing Powerful by Sea and Land, in hopes to usurp the Domi∣nion of the City. Ferdinando Perez went again to oppose him, but though he fought with the same resolution, had not the same success as before, being forced to retire with loss of three Captains and four private men. Lacsamana, a Commander of King Mahomet, now enters the River with many Men and much Cannon in several Vessels. Ferdinando Perez goes to meet him with three Ships, the Fight lasted very furious the space of three hours, with much advantage on the Portugues side. Lacsamana with wonderful celerity that Night, threw up a notable For∣tification, whilst Perez guarded the River, fearing he should fly from him. It was thought a rashness in their condition to at∣tack him, so they retired to the City to
consult their own safety, but before they consulted their relief came unexpected. 3. Just then entred the Port three Ships from India with Ammunition and 150 Men. Whilst they considered how to put in execu∣tion the Orders sent by Albuquerque, Lacsama∣na took all the Vessels that carried Provisions to the Town. Hunger so pressed the Town that some fainted about the Streets, the same Plague attended Pate Quitir in his Quarters. The Weather being fit to sail, Ferdinando Pe∣rez set out with ten Ships and one Gally. As they sailed toward Cincapura, the Gally going before, discovered a Sail and kept it in play till the Fleet coming up took and found it stored with Provision and Ammu∣nition, designed for Pate Quitir. Perez brought the Captain and Principal Men over to his own Ship, who resolved to kill our Men, and began to execute it, running Pe∣rez into the Back with a Poniard; some of them were taken, others leaped into the Sea. Being put to the Rack, they confessed there was a Son of Pate Quitir among them, and that they were followed by three Vessels with the like lading, which were also taken, and all carried to the City. At the same time arrived Gomez de Cunna with his Ship laden with Provision; he came from Pegu, where he had been settling Peace with that King. The Famine being appeased, and Men recovered, Ferdinando Perez with his Fleet attacked Pate Quitir, and fortunately burnt his Fort, obliging him to fly to Iava. Lacsamana seeing this success, drew off.
But at Iava a great Fleet is preparing to fall upon Malaca. 4. Iava is an Island S. E. of Sumatra, they are divided by a Streight 15 Leagues over, it is long and narrow, the length lying from East to West, is almost 200 Leagues. All the length of it runs a Mountain (like the Apennine in Italy) which hinders the Commerce between those People: It has some Ports and good Cities. The Inhabi∣tants came from China. Afterwards Moors from Malaca possessed themselves of the Coast. Pate Unuz, who was after King of Zunda, was now Lord of the City Iapara. This Man now prepared a Fleet of 90 Sail to fall upon Malaca; among these, some equal in bigness to our Galeons, and that which he was to go in, greater than any of them. He had been seven years making this preparation, and kept private intelligence with the Natives of Iava that were in Ma∣iaca. He had 12000 men and much Can∣non. On a sudden they appeared before the Town. Ferdinando Perez with 17 Vessels, and in them 350 Portugueses and some Na∣tives, met them, had a sharp engagement, and did much execution. 5. The Night parted the Fleets, and was spent in consulting what should be done next Morning. Pate Unuz endeavoured to gain the River Muar. Perez pursues and pierces in∣to the middle of the Enemy, playing his Can∣non and Fire works with such success, that ma∣ny Ships were sunk and fired. The Fight was very furious, till Pate Unuz fled, and was pur∣sued
in in, for he never stopt till in Iava, where he preserved that vast Vessel as a me∣morial of his escape, and the grandeur of his Fleet, not without reason, for a Merchant of Malaca offered for it 10000 Ducats in case it were taken. This Victory cost some Lives and much Blood, few escaping with∣out some Wounds. Thus were those of Ia∣va for ever banished from Malaca. Ferdinan∣do Perez laden with Spice and Victory sailed to Cochin, in Company of Lope de Azevedo and Antony de Abreu, who came from the discovery of the Maluccoes with three Ships. After them arrived Antony de Miranda from Siam, to the great Joy of Albuquerque, seeing the good Fruits of his Labour and Care for Malaca, and happy return of those he had sent to other places. 6. King Mahomet who had lost Malaca, had not yet lost the hopes of being restord to it. He drew near, and having tried all ways by force, resolved to make use of a Stra∣tagem. He ordered that Tuam Maxeliz, a Favourite of his, should imitate the great Zopirus of Babylon. With his consent he did him some great injuries. He then fled to Malaca with some Companions, giving out he fled from the tyranny of his Prince. Ruy de Brito who commanded the Fort, gave credit to him, and by Presents and Policy he gained such freedom, that he had admit∣tance at all times, till he came prepared to kill Brito, the King at the same time being ready to second and bring him off; six men were suddenly slain by his followers: Brito
then opened his Eyes (for he was sleeping) and gathering his Men, drove the Traitor out at the very time that a Party of Maho∣mets came up to the Fort. The Comman∣der of the Party Tuam Calascar understand∣ing the miscarriage, with a ready wit coun∣terfeited he came to the assistance of Brito, and retired. Now arrived Peter de Faria from the Streight of Sabam, bringing with him Abdela, King of Campar, who no longer able to endure his Son-in-law Mahomet, came to live under the Portugueses in Malaca. This was in the Month of Iuly, and George de Albuquerque was come from Goa to Com∣mand in this City, with instructions what to do with the King of Campar, which in effect were to give him the charge of Bendara (that is, Governour of the Natives) till th possest by Ninachetu, on whom for his go  Services Albuquerque had before bestowed it, and now took it from him for some miscar∣riages. This Heathen so much resented it, that he resolved to give a wonderful demon∣stration of his Constancy and concernment. He was very rich, and ordered in a Market∣place a Scaffold to be erected, adorned with Rich Silks and Cloath of Gold; in the middle he placed a great heap of sweet Aromatick Wood, and strewed the Street from his House thither with sweet Herbs and Flowers, and hung it answerable to the scaffold. He invited his Friends, and clad himself and Fa∣mily richly. Then mounting upon the Scaf fold, whilst by his Order that Rich Pile was fired and kindled, he made a long Harangue,
protesting his Innocence and the Zeal where∣with he had served the Portugueses, and say∣ing he would fly up to Heaven in that Flame and Smoke, he cast himself into that Fire, to the great admiration of all the Beholders. 7. The King of Campar was gone home, designing to return and take upon him the charge of Bendara, but was hindred by the King of Bintam and Mahomet. They fitted out a Fleet of 70 Sail, and 2500 Men, un∣der the Command of the King of Linga; they besieged Campar, and 8 Portugues Ves∣sels set out to shut them up, with some Boats equipped by the Town. The King of Linga observing them somewhat careless, on a sudden fell upon George Botello the Com∣mander, with his Gally, all the Fleet fol∣wing him, but he was well received, his ally taken, the Fleet put to flight, and the King forced to leap overboard. They took in the King of Campar, and brought him to Malaca, where he exercised the Charge of Bendara so excellently, that in four Months time the City was visibly improved, many People resorting to it who had fled to Ma∣homet, offended at Ninachetu. Mahomet per∣ceiving the growth of the City caused by his Son-in-law Abdela, to put a stop to it made use of a Fraud peculiar to a Moor. He gave out in private, but so that it might be spread abroad, that his Son-inlaw was gone over to Malaca by common consent, and the same was done by such as seemed to fly from Bintam, with a design to seize upon the Fort the first opportunity, and deliver it to him
as lawful Prince. This secret (as Mahomet had designed it) was divulged at Malaca, and had the effect he pretended; for George de Albuquerque gave more credit to the Re∣port, than to the Honest proceeding of the Bendara, who was tried and condemned as a Traytor, and his Head cut off upon a pub∣lick Scaffold. The City escaped not the pu∣nishment of this Crime, being left almost desolate by the flight of the Inhabitants, and then oppressed by Famine. CHAP. X. From the Year 1514, till the Year 1515, concluding with the Government and Life of the Great Alfonso de Albuquer∣que. 1. WHilst what is before related hapned at Malaca, Albuquerque visited the 1514. Important Places of his Province, and gave the necessary Orders for their security. He dispatched Don Garcia de Noronha to Cochin, thence to encourage the work of the Fort that was building at Calicut, He appointed four Sail to cruize in the Mouth of the Red Sea, under the Command of his Nephew Peter de Albuquerque, with Orders to touch at Ormuz, and receive the Tribute when it became due, and then discover the Island of Baharem. He dispatched Embassadors well attended, to several Princes. Iames Fer∣nandez
de Beja went to the King of Cambaya to treat about the Fort of Diu, which he had consented to before, and now refused, induced thereto by Melique Az. The Em∣bassadour returned with Presents to Albu∣querque, among other things a Rhinoceros or Abada, which was afterwards lost in the Mediterranean, being sent by King Emanuel to the Pope, with other Rarities of India▪ Iohn Gonzalez de Castellobranco was sent to Hidalcan about the pretensions of Goa, to less effect than the other in the affairs of Diu. 2. In September arrived at Goa five Ships from Portugal, under the Command of Chri∣stopher de Brito, one was after lost, bound for Cambaya; care was taken to dispatch the la∣ding of the others. Albuquerque eased of these more Profitable than Honourable Cares, prepared to set forwards, yet un∣resolved, whether he should steer to Or∣muz or the Red Sea, the King having Order∣ed both. In order to fix a Resolution, he consulted with his Captains. It was agreed the Enterprize should be upon Ormuz, a suitable determination to Albuquerque's de∣sires. On the 20th of February he directed his Course thither. His Fleet consisted of 27 Sail, 1500 Portugueses and 600 Mala∣bares and Canaras. They anchored in the Port of Ormuz on the 26th of March. Im∣mediately came aboard a Visit and Presents from the King. But what best pleased Al∣buquerque was, that he found there Michael Ferreyra whom he had sent to Xeque Ismael of Persia, to procure Amity with him, where∣of he brought great hopes.
3. Raez Hamet was now possessed of the Favour of the King of Ormuz, as Coje Atar had been with his Predecesso, both these being dead. Among other things Albuquer∣que sent to demand of him the delivery of the Fort he had begun there, and that he should send some Principal Men with the Instrument of the Submission of that King∣dom made by King Ceyfadim. All was con∣sented to, because there was no power to resist. The Governour Raez Nordim came with his Nephew to ratifie all, to whom Albuquerque gave rich Presents, and by them sent the King a rich Coller of Gold, no less valuable for the Workmanship than the Met∣tal, and a Standard with the Portugues Arms, to declare the Union between both Nations. Publick demonstrations of Joy were made on both sides for this agreement, with sound of Warlike Instruments and noise of Can∣non. On Palm Sunday Albuquerque took pos∣session of the Fort before begun, which in few days did rise to a great height, and Al∣buquerque with some of his Captains went into the Houses neighbouring to it. 4. Albuquerque prepared to receive an Em∣bassador that came from the King of Persia with Michael Ferreyra with Presents, on a Scaffold near those Houses; this Audience was so long deferred to shew to those of Ormuz, that so powerful a Prince sought his Friendship. The King of Ormuz was at a Window to see this Reception. The Pre∣sent consisted of Ounces, Brocards, Precious Stones, and Jewels of Gold, and many Silks.
The Embassador was honourably received, and the Treaty concluded with mutual satis∣faction. 5. Raez Hamet was come from Persia with a design to secure Ormuz, and deliver it up to his King Ismael. He so far gained upon the King, that he absolutely governed him, and nothing was done but by his direction. The better to carry on the Enterpize, he underhand brought People into Ormuz, and was actually in readiness to kill the King, but deferred it till a more favourable oppor∣tunity. Albuquerque was informed of all these practices, and how much the King de∣sired to be delivered from that oppression; he studied, and Fortune offered him the oc∣casion of executing it. An interview was appointed between the King and Albuquerque. His Evil Conscience warned Raez Hamet to shun that danger. He proposed Albuquerque should come to the King, lest the King go∣ing should carry him. The other insisted that the King should come to him, and carried it, upon condition that neither Party should be Armed. Some of Raez Hamet's Men broke the Condition, carrying hidden Arms. He was armed himself, and entring the first with much rudeness, Albuquerque cried to his Captains, kill him, which was instantly obeyed. The King came, and the Confe∣rence began; but was interrupted by the noise of the People, supposing the King was killed. Raez Hamet's Men knowing it was he who was slain, ran and possessed them∣selves of, and fortified the King's House.
Albuquerque would presently have scaled it, but was hindred by the King, who with the assistance of his Governours, found other means to expel those Enemies the City. They were to the number of 700, who all went away to Persia. This disorder was succeeded by the Pomp wherewith Albu∣querque and all his Captains accompanied the King to his Pallace, to the great Joy of the whole City, seeing their Prince deliver∣ed from that Tyrany, and restored to the Majesty of a King. Then Albuquerque dis∣patched the King of Persia's Embassador, sending along with him Ferdinando Gomez, with a Present of double the value of that he had received. He was to give an account of what had been done at Ormuz. He was well received, and brought a favourable Answer. 6. It requires a larger History to give an account of the Affairs and Kings of Persia. Let it suffice to say, that the Valiant Prince Reigning at this time, was embroiled in War with the Turk, which was one cause of sending this Embassie, hoping to make an advantage of our Arms against his Ene∣my. 7. Whilst the Fort was building, or rather finishing, Albuquerque persuaded the King it was for the safety of the City to put all their Cannon into the Fort, pretending thereby to secure them against their Enemies, but in reality to disable them from offending him. Security is a Powerful Argument where there is Fear. The King and his Governours,
though with some reluctancy, consented to all was demanded. The Command of the Fort was given to Peter de Albuquerque. So was that Rich and Powerful Kingdom brought under the Portugues subjection, ra∣ther to the advantage than detriment of its Natural Kings; more oppressed before by the tyranny of their Ministers, than by the Tribute they afterwards paid. Besides the security it enjoyed, being protected by our Arms; but that Liberty is sweeter than all other Conveniencies. 8. These Affairs settled, Albuquerque ap∣plied himself to dispatch the Trading Ships homeward-bound. He sent to this purpose his Nephew Don Garcia de Noronha with most of the Fleet to Cochin, staying behind himself to conclude such affairs as required his Pre∣sence. Soon after he fell sick, and the Dis∣ease increasing, was persuaded for the re∣covery of his health, to go to India, which he consented to, to the great grief of the King, who looked upon him as a Father. By the way he met the News, that there were arrived in India 12 Ships from Portugal, who brought Orders for him to return home. Lope Soarez, who Commanded them, be∣ing appointed his Successor; hearing this, he cried out, Lope Soarez Governour of India; this is he, it could be no other. D Iames Mendez and Iames Pereyra, whom I sent Prisoners for hainous Crimes, return, the one Governour of Cochin, the other Se∣cretary? It is time for me to take Sanctuary in the Church, for I have incurred the
Kings displeasure for his Subjects sakes, and the Subjects anger for the King's sake. Old Man fly to the Church, it concerns your Honour you should die, and you never omitted any thing that concerned your Ho∣nour. Then lifting his Eyes and Hands to Heaven gave God thanks a Governour came so opportunely, not doubting he should die. He was seized with a profound Melancholy, and arrived at Dabul, almost in the Arms of Death, and there writ these last Lines to the King. This is, Sir, the last Letter which I write to your Highness, now under the Pangs of Death, of many that I writ full of Life, because mine was then free from the Confusion of the last Hour, and employed in your Service. I left in that Kingdom a Son, called Blas de Albuquerque, I beg your Highness will make him as great as my Service deserves. As to the Affairs of India, it will answer for it self and me. Upon the Bar of Goa (which he called his Land of Promise) he gave up the Ghost on the 16th of December, in the 63d year of his Age, in his Perfect Senses, and like a Good Christian. He was buried in a Chappel built by himself at the City Gate, and called Sennora de la Sierra, or Our Lady of the Mountain. He was Second Son to Gonçalo de Albuquerque, Lord of Villaverde, and of Donna Leonor de Meneses, Daughter of Alvaro Gonzales de Atayde, first Count of Atouguia. He had been Master of the Horse to King Iohn the Second. Of a moderate Stature, his Countenance pleasing, and ve∣nerable by the Beard which reached below
his Girdle, to which he wore it knotted; that and his Complexion very White; his Picture shews his Breeches, Double, Cloak, Cap and Coif all Black, with Gold Trim∣ming; the Wastcoat striped with Green Velvet, with small Spots like Studs. It was doubted whether he was a better Man or Officer. When Angry, his Looks somewhat Terrible; when Merry, Pleasant and Witty. He was twice before Ormuz, twice before Goa, and twice before Malaca, three Famous Islands and Kingdoms in Asia, whereof he gloriously Triumphed. 9. After a long resistance made by the People of Goa, his Bones were brought to Lisbon, and buried in the Church of Our Lady of Grace. He was the first had the Title of Governour of India, as Don Fran∣cisco de Almeyda the first of Viceroy. End of the Second Part of the First Tome.
THE PORTUGUES ASIA. TOM. II. PART III. CHAP. I. The Government of the Viceroy D. Anton. de Noronna from the Year 1564, till 1568, in the Reign of King Sebastian. 1. WE concluded the Second Part with the Arrival at 1564▪ Goa of the Viceroy D'An∣ton. de Noronna. His good Service in India preferred him to the command of Ormur, and his wise Conduct there to the Government of India. 2. With him went four Ships, and he was received with a general Satisfaction. He im∣mediately sent Relief to Cananor, which was Besieged, giving the Command of the Land to D. Antony de Noronna, and that of the Sa
to Gonçalo Pereyra Marramaque with a good Fleet. D. Francis Mascarenas, who was there with a Squadron before, deliver'd it to him, and went away to his Command of Moçam∣bique: This was occasion'd by that Morish Woman spoke of in the end of Iohn de Men∣doça his Government. 3. Peter de Silva and Meneses, had the command of seven Ships given him to secure the Boats that brought Provisions to Goa, whereof their was a scarcity. About the River Cannaroto he lost sight of three of his Ships by stress of Weather, and after found them encreased to six, for the three had met and taken as many of the Malabars, and were sailing after their Admiral. Returning to the Place where they were dispersed, between the Islands and the Continent, they met the More Murimuja with seventeen Paraos well provided to meet all dangers. He instantly made to our Ships, and after the discharge of Cannon on both sides, they boarded, and having received some damage, the Portu∣gueses sunk two and took five, one of them being Murimujas who was kill'd; the others flying, were pursued to the River Pudepatan, where three Paraos and above fifty Almadies or great Boats came to their Relief. Ou Cannon repulsed them, and they run up the River: Of the Enemy five hundred were kill∣ed, and three Portuguses. 4. The Viceroy being in care for Cananor, sent thither D. Paul de Lima Pereyra, with four Ships. Being at Anchor in the Bay of Bateala, the Malabar Pyrat Canatali came
upon him with seven Paraos loaded with Boo∣ty taken on the Northern Coast. Paul see∣ing him come, sets out to meet him. After the usual Salutes with their Cannon, Cana∣tale with three of his Ships lays D. Paul's Galliot on Board, the others did the like to the other three, whereof two shamefully fled, the third stood by it till he was sunk. Now all the Enemies force fell upon D. Paul, who, with fifty Men he had, did things behond be∣lief, killing above two hundred Mores, but with the loss of thirty Portugueses. D. Paul was so wounded, he was forc'd to sit down and gave order to make to the Enemy, who was drawn off. Canatale, who was preparing to fall on again, seeing the Galliot beyond Expectation make at him, stood away; D. Paul return'd to God, being in no condition to reach Cananor. 5. There our Men were much streightned by the number of the Enemies who were Ma∣sters of the Field. Andrew de Sousa made a good resistance, till he dying, and D. Antony de Noronna succeeding him, with the relief he carried, in several recounters they kill'd above Two thousand Mores, and cut down Forty thousand Palm-trees. This is the greatest harm can be done that People, be∣cause those Trees are their princil Suste∣nance. The City enrag'd hereat, ll'd to∣gether all the Neighbourhood to the num∣ber of Ninety Thousand, to take Revenge▪ They had the boldness to assault and scale th For with such confidence of carrying it, that they had before-hand divided the Booty.
Nicaripo a Nayre did us great Service, advising D. Payo de Noronna then command∣ing there, to put the Men and Riches of the Town, as not tenable, into the Fort. All was drawn in, except D. Antony de Noronn and his Men, who said he would live and die by those Walls, and staid accordingly. The Men all prepared themselves for Death, and stood at their Arms all the last night. 6. By break of day the Enemy attack'd the Works with great crys, and above Two thousand of them entred the City. In one place Emanuel Travas with Thirty Men did great Execution upon them. D. Antony ap∣pear'd in all Parts, Thomas de Sousa, Gasper de Brito, and the two Betancores, made great slaughter at their Posts. The Field was so cover'd, that never a Bullet was lost. The Enemy began to give back, when two Cazices brought them on again. The assault lasted till Sun-setting, then the Enemy retired to their Camp, with a resolution to protract the Siege. About Five thousand of them were kill'd. 7. At this time came Gonla Pereyra with his Fleet, and was a great encouragement to them all; and after him Alvaro Paez de  to succeed D. Payo. They both pro∣secuted the War, and utterly destroyed the City of Aderrajao who commanded at the Siege, and cut down a great Wood of Palm-trees with considerable slaughter to the Enemy, and without losing one Man. This was the end of that Siege.
CHAP. II. Continues the Government of D. Anton. de Noronna. 1. THE Tyrant Raju disturb'd the Peace of Ceylen, resolving to make himself Master of the whole Island: He gather'd a numerous Army, and the better to surprize the Portugueses in Columbo, gave out, his de∣sign was upon Cota. He encamped between the two Forts and alarming Cota, imagin'd they were unprovided at Columbo, and sud∣denly attacques it by Night, so that above Two thousand Men mounted the Walls, but were as soon thrown down by the Comman∣der Iames de Ataide and his Men. The As∣sault was renew'd, but at length the Enemy, having lost Five hundred Men, retired; Raju resolv'd to carry both places by Famine, since he could not by force. At Cota he at∣tempted to drain the Ditch by turning away the River, and had compassed it, had not Peter de Ataide with some Musqueteers ob∣lig'd his Workmen to give over, killing Three hundred of them. It is said, a Cloud miraculously hung between our Men and the Enemy, which conceal'd the former from the latter, but not them from us, so that they fired at a Mark without being seen. 2. But now Provisions began to fail in Cota, and they fed on things loathsom. A∣taide thinking to take some of the Enemies
Elephants that were in a Wood hard by, sallied out with Eighty Men, but being over∣power'd with a multitude was forc'd to retire, having lost two. Raju knowing how famine raged, had corrupted not only the Natives, but some Portugueses. Luis Carvallo, rather through Dispair than good Will, discover'd the Treason; and Ataide, without taking notice he knew it, gain'd the Hearts of the Conspirators, by favouring and cherishing them. The little Silver he had he coin'd and distributed among them. 3. George de Melo commanding in the Island Manr, easily perswaded the King of Candea, as being an Enemy to Raju, to invade his Country now he was absent, thinking by that means to draw him from the Siege. He sent Five thousand Men, and with them Thirty gueses commanded by Belchior de Sousa; they destroyed all as they went, and tterly faed the great City Chilao, yet Raju  stir'd. On the contrary he prepar'd  Assault Cota by Night. A Chingala Wo∣man appear'd at the foot of the Bastion Prea∣ desiring to be carried to our Captain▪  discover'd to him Raju's design, and  the saving of the City. Some believed  Woman was an Angel; the truth is, she was Mistress to one of our Souldiers, and ing her Lover's danger, made this disco∣. There is nothing so d, but at some∣ does good. 4. Pe de Ataide sent Antony de Silv to  to order Iames, as soon as he hear∣ Con  at Night, to sally with his
Men, and fall upon the back of Raju's Army, that would be then busie in the Assault. George de Melo was already come thither from Manar with One hundred Men, seeing the Project of Candea take no effect. In the dead of Night the Enemy attacks the City on all hands, and finds those of Cota ready to re∣ceive him: Yet killing some of the Defen∣dants, they enter the Works in one place, thither the King and Peter hast, and with in∣credible bravery drive them out again. Ste∣phen Gouzales, Captain of the Innamos, with Seven Men did the like upon the like occa∣sion. 5. At this time came from Columbo the o∣ther Ataide and Melo, who by reason of the darkness of the Night, could do no more but fire the Enemy's Camp, and return to their Fort, lest if he succeeded here, he should im∣mediately attack it. Raju in Person with the Flower of his Army attacks the Bastion of Preacota, where he found Fifty Soldiers, that seem'd to him to be Fifty thousand by the harm they did him. These Men afterwards declared, That they saw in the Air a beau∣tiful Woman, who with her Vail cover'd them and received therein the Enemies Bullets and Arrows, whereof many returned upon and kill'd them. By her side was a venerable old Man with a General's Staff in his hand. This was supposed to be the Blessed Virgin and St. Ioseph. Raju in the Morning seeing this great disappointment fled to Ceytavaca, leave∣ing above Two thousand Men dead.
6. Peter de Ataide fearing he might return, and being quite destitute of Provisions, cau∣sed Four hundred of the fattest Men that were killed to be salted, and a Mulato tasted them eating up a Liver. F. Simon of Nazareth urged the unlawfulness of this Food, and A∣taide pleaded necessity: But no use was made of it; for it being known that Raju was not in a Condition to return, Provision soon came from Columbo. Thus ended this Siege of four Months, the last forty Days whereof, there was scarce any thing to eat. The Portugueses alone obtained this Victory, for all the King's Men deserted. Those were not above Three hundred, some sick and old. 7. What Raju had design'd we now did our selves; for it being difficult and trouble∣some to maintain Cota, it was judged expe∣dient to demolish it, and remove the King to Columbo, where he was no less tormented with the Covetousness of the Portugues Com∣manders, than he had been before with the Tyranny of Raju. This was performed by Iames de Melo, who went to succeed Peter de Ataide in that Command. 8. Three thousand Mogol Horse appear'd ore the Fort of Damam, where Iohn de Sousa commanded, he sent advice to the Viceroy and the neighbouring Places, and began to fortifie. His greatest Confidence was in the Palisade made of the Plant Le∣obera (that is, Milk) which is not be assault∣ed, because when struck it casts out drops like Milk, (from whence it has the name)
which if they touch the Eyes infallibly blind. Trestan de Mendoa Commander of Chaul came with Two hundred Men. The Viceroy sent four Ships: They marched out to fight the Enemy, who was encamped three Leagues off, who fled at the first sight, leaving a rich Booty in their Camp. 9. The Bassa of Baora, during the Go∣vernment of the Count de Redondo, desiring the Turks might have a free Trade at Ormuz, had made some overtures of Peace, and the Count thinking it a Matter of too great Concern to be transacted without the great Turks Concurrence, sent Antony Teyxeyra a Gentleman sufficiently qualified Embassador to Constantinople. He entred the Pallace this Year, scattering gold Coin. The Grand Si∣gnior to receive him was seated on the ground sewing Caps, which his Grandees bought at excessive Rates. The Embassador told him, That the Bassa had proposed a Peace to the Viceroy, and a free Trade for the Subjects of the Turkish Empire. The Great Turk, without lifting up his head from stitching, answer'd, I ask Peace of no Body: If the King of Portugal desires it, let him send some Great Man of his Court, and he shall be heard. The Embassador brought a Let∣ter containing this Answer to Portugal, and it was thought fit not to reply to it, because they found the Turk did not speak like a Taylor. 10. D. Ferdinand de Monroy, a Spanish Gen∣tleman, was out with two Ships and four Galliots, to intercept the Fleet bound from
Achem to Meca; he lay in the Chanel of Cardu among the Maldivy Islands. Peter Lo∣pez Rabelo in his Ship met one of those they waited for of great force and value, and af∣ter a long fight they both took Fire, and were entirely consumed. The Captain and some Mores were saved in a Galliot that fol∣lowed him, and Iames Ferreyra de Padilla who commanded it, was very insolent with D. Ferdinand about the Distribution of the Mores. D. Iames Pereyra, who set out after∣wards upon the same design with five Gal∣leons, and six small Vessels, had yet worse Fortune. Being deceived by the Mores▪ at those same Islands he went to wait for the Fleet at the Mouth of the Red Sea: As he returned without doing any thing, a violent Storm that lasted eight days swallowed up two Galleons, whereof his was one; the others were dispersed, and put in where Chance guided them, almost Four hundred Men were lost. 11. At length the War of Cannanor end∣ed, for that King wearied out begged a Peace, which was concluded to our Advantage. The concluding Acts of this War were, the taking several Malabar Vessels by Gouzalo Pereyra Marramaque; the slaughter of many Mores that opposed Emanuel de Brito, who convey∣ed the Ships from Malaca, China, Molucos, Pegu, Bengala, and Coast of Coromandel tra∣ding to India, when he was taking Water at Mount Delii; and several other Rencoun∣ters in which we were successful, except in one, where D. Lope de Moura was killed. I
will conclude with a remarkable Accident. Calisto de Sequeyra a most expert Marksman, dug a hole in the Field, and lying close did not miss a shot; the Enemy a long time could not perceive whence that harm came, till another well skill'd in the same Art among them found it out, and placing himself in the same manner the other had done, they both aimed at one another so exactly, that both fell down dead. 12. Brama King of Pegu being told by A∣strologers he was to marry a Daughter of the King of Columbo, sent to demand her, and he had never a one; but his Chamberlain had one the King esteem'd as his own: They both agreed to put her upon him, as really the King's. And the Chamberlain the more to oblige the King of Pegu, seeking thereby to cast off the Portugues Yoke, feign'd he had that Tooth which was taken at Iafanapatan and burnt at Goa, and would give it in Dow∣ry with the Bride. The Embassadors easily crediting what they desired, took the Bride and the Tooth without acquainting the Por∣tugueses, and sent advice to Brama, who re∣ceived the Wife first, and then the Relick, with the greatest Pomp that ever has yet been heard of. Many Gallies were fitted out, but that which was for the Queen was covered with Plates of Gold, and rowed by beautiful young Women richly clad and brought up to this Exercise, so that they were more ex∣pert then Men. They were of those Wo∣men who there live without Men in separate Quarters by two and two like Man and Wife A new sort of Amazons.
13. The King of Candea understanding the deceit of this Marriage, and envying that great Fortune, acquainted Brama therewith, offer∣ing him a true Daughter and Tooth, and affirming, both that of Columbo and the o∣ther of D. Constantin were Counterfeit, and the true one was in his Hands. If the Daugh∣ter was not more real than the Tooth, he was even with the King of Columbo. Brama considering it was as bad for a Prince to own himself cheated as to be so, gave ear to the Embassadors, but not to their Infor∣mation. The King of Candea missed his aim, and discover'd his ill Affection. Two things are here worthy consideration, the one that the Portugues Commanders, through their Avarice, exposed that important place to evident danger of being lost, had not Brama being undeceived, grown cold; the other, that had D. Constantin sold the Tooth as he was advised, there had not now been two set up to be adored by so many People. 14. The Trade of India was this Year at a very low Ebb, by reason of the Desola∣tion of the Kingdom of Bisnagar, whose Riches are equal to its great extent, which is from the Borders of Bengala to those of Cinde. The Kings of Decan, Nizamaluco, Idalca, and Cutubixa, jealous of that Gran∣dure, entred into a League to suppress it. They took the Field with Fifty thousand Horse, and Three hundred thousand Foot: The King of Bisnagar met them with double that Power, and his Age was double, being Ninety six Years old. He had the better at
first, but Fortune turning to the other side, he lost his Head, and they remained Victo∣rious. They spent five Months in plunder∣ing Bisnagar, and yet they were not the rst, for the Natives in three days time had carri∣ed away One thousand five hundred and fifty Elephants loaded with Money and Jewels worth above One hundred Millions of Gold, and the Royal Chair for great Days that could not be valued. Notwithstanding all this, Idalxa found a Diamond as big as an ordi∣nary Egg, on which the late King's Horse's Feather used to be fixed; and another, tho' not so large, yet of an extraordinary size, besides other Jewels of incredible value. That Crown was divided between the Sons and Nephews of the deceased. CHAP. III. Continues the Government of D. Anton de Noronna, in the Reign of King Se∣bastian. 1. THE beginning of this Year Gonzalo Pereyra Marramaque sailed for Am∣boino 1567. with One thousand Men in Twelve Ships, Embassadors from that Island having represented in how great danger those were who had newly receiv'd the Faith. D. Emanuel de Noronna sailed for Banda, and was stabbed by the way by the Purser of his Gally, whom he
had affronted with a Cane. Great Men may command, but not abuse the lesser, for the small have Honour as well as the great. No Man, though never so little, owes any sub∣mission in Point of Honour to the greatest, and in point of Condition he owes no more than he pleases to impose upon himself. Al∣varo Paez de Sotomayor (the War of Cananor being ended) sails for the Coast of Malaba with twenty Sail: Iames Lopez de Mesquita with three for the Molucos; D. George de Me∣neses Barroche for the Red Sea with four Gal∣leons, one Gally, and four small Vessels; Lisuarte de Aragon for Ceylon with one Ship; D. Leonis Pereyra for Malaca with six; George de Moura for the North with the same num∣ber; D. Francis Mascarennas for Olala to suppress that Queen, who was about to re∣fuse her Tribute; for this use Twenty-seven Ships were allotted, and Iohn Peixot went before with eight of them. 2. The Viceroy was fitting a good Fleet in order to follow those that were gone be∣fore to Olala, designing to build a Fort at Mangalor, to curb Bucadevi Chantar the Queen. The Fleet consisted of seven Gallies, two Galleons, and five small Vessels, and carried about 3000 fighting Men. 3. The Viceroy anchor'd in the Bay of that City called Mangalor and Olala, seated on the Banks of a River that washes both sides of it not far distant from the Sea, whence was to be seen a Wall wherewith the Queen had fortified her self, within which and the o∣ther Works were Thirteen thousand Men
with sufficient Cannon. The Viceroy divi∣ded his Men into six Battalions, and landed on the 4th of Ianuary. At night the Por∣tugueses sitting to supper, and to play with many lights, and the same security as if they had been at Goa, the Enemy laying hold of the Opportunity sallied in a body of Five hundred, followed by Fifteen hundred, fell upon and put them into such a disorder, they scarce had time to take their Arms. D. Fran∣cis Mascarennas who had the advanced Post, fared worst; and though he fought well, lost several Men, most perhaps killed by our own Fire, for through the darkness and confusion no body knew what they aimed at. D. Luia de Almeyda relieved him with his Men, who all slipped away to nine, that behaved them∣selves with incredible Valour. 4. On the Eve of the Epiphany they gave the Assault, and being as desirous of Revenge as entring the City, soon forc'd their way and fired the Town, at the same time cutting down the Palm-trees. The Queen fled to a Moun∣tain. Of the Enemy Five hundred were slain, about Forty of the Portugueses. The Viceroy immediately laid the Foundations of the Fort, giving it the name of St. Sebastian, because the first stone was laid upon his day, and that day chose in Honour of our King then Reigning. By the middle of March the Work was finished with a Church and other Con∣veniencies. He gave the command of it to his Brother-in-Law Antony Pereyra with 300 Men, and Ammunition for six Months, and returned to Goa. Afterwards in the time of
D. Luis de Ataides Government, the Queen sued for a Peace, and purchased it by a new imposition of Tribute, and a summ of ready Money. 5. The King of Achem had now entred into a League with many Princes of the East, and the Turk, who desired to get footing in India, not doubting with this united Power of carrying Malaca: He Imbarqued with his Wife and Children as if he had gone to take Possession of, rather than to Besiege that City. On a sudden he appear'd before it with 450 Sail, 200 Brass Cannons, and 20000 Men. D. Leonis Pereyra was at that time on the Shore celebrating the Birth-day of King Se∣bastian, with a certain Exercise used among Portugueses on Horseback, and perceiving some of the Company were surprized at the sight of the Fleet, he ordered the Sport to continue, drawing down nearer to the Shore, that the Enemy might not imagin they could disturb his Pastime. 6. Afterwards he gave the necessary Or∣ders, and making a review, found he had Fifteen hundred Men, whereof only Two hundred were Portugueses. The King of A∣chem began with Complements, and shews of desiring accommodation, but all tended only to discover what was the Condition of the Town. D. Leonis who understood him was wary, and carried it on with dissimulation. At length the King perceiving no artifice succeeded, and that he advanc'd but slowly, resolved to put the whole Event upon on furious Assault. After the Discharge of th
Cannon, above two hundred scaling Ladders were laid to the Wall with great Shouts on both sides. D. Leonis had also distributed his Men in their several Posts. The Priests had undertaken to defend one, but no sooner did the Enemy attack, than they fled to the Church. 7. In the heat of the Action a Party of ours sallies out upon the Enemies Works, making a great slaughter; among the rest was killed the King of Aru. Our Men re∣tired with one Cannon, and loaded with Musquets, Cimiters, and Heads of all sorts of People that compos'd that Army, having lost but one Portugues and six Malayes. The Enemy encourag'd by the King who looked on, mounted our Works, and were as soon thrown down by the Defendants. The King in a rage stamp'd and blasphem'd, and seeing three days furious Assault had not gained a foot of Ground, he utterly despair'd of Suc∣cess; therefore with great Secrecy Shipping off all his Army and Train, except Four thousand Men that were killed, he set sail, firing the Ships that were to spare by the loss of those Men. This great Success cost us but three Portugueses. 8. The Commander, D. Leonis, bestow'd not only Praises, but Money and Jewels on all that had signaliz'd themselves, to the va∣lue of 15000 Crowns. The Viceroy re∣ceiving advice of the danger the City was in, sent to its relief Iohn de Silva Pereyra with Men and Ammunition in seven Ships, but he came when the Siege was raised. So the
King of Ujantana our Neighbour with sixty Sail, who visited our Captain in the Fort, and was received with Royal Magnificence, rejoycing at our Success not without trouble that he had no share in it. 9. The Viceroy offended at the Insolence of the Natives of the Island Salsete, who per∣secuted the new converted Christians, fitted out a Fleet against them without letting his design be known. When those of Salte least thought of it, he fell upon them, and destroyed 200 of their Idolatrous Temples. Because we have sometimes mentioned this Island, without speaking of an ancient and wonderful Structure that is in it, it will not be amiss to say something of it here. 10. In this Island is a high Mountain, wind∣ing about which are 3000 Cells with each of them a Cistern all cut out of the solid Rock. Under the same Mountain is a way cut through the same Rock, with such Cells on the sides, which is said to go as far as Cambaya, which, if so, must run under the Sea. F. Antony de Porto, a Franciscan, re∣solving to enquire into this Secret, got Com∣pany, Provision, Torches, and great quan∣tity of strong Packthread, and fastning an end at the Mouth of the way, travelled seven days through it. Then finding no end, and the Provision growing short, he returned by the help of the Thread, having as he be∣lieved travelled fifty Leagues to his great admiration, but not satisfied. The Gentils said, this was the Work of Bimilamansa, who  300 Years before was King of all that is
between Bengala and the Mogol's Country. Formerly a Learned Man of those Parts af∣firm'd, this and some others were the Works of the holy Prince Iosaphat. 11. The Affairs of the Molucos were not at all successful. We left Gonalo Pereyra Marramaque on his Voyage to Amboyna, he joined with the Kings of Bacham and , set out for the Island Cebu, where some Spa∣niards had settled under the Command of Michael Lopez de Lagaspa à Biscainer, and a Man so valiant and subtle, that he amuzed our Captain, till he got together his Men that were dispersed, and then expelled him the Island with shame, for that if attacked at first, the Spaniard had been utterly defeat∣ed. To add to this Misfortune, he lost al∣most Three hundred Men by a Sickness natu∣ral to that Country. 12. Hence he passed to Amboina or Ito, for it is called by both Names, a most beau∣tiful and pleasant Island, abounding in Fish, Flesh, and Fruit of all sorts and delicious taste. It is inhabited by two sorts of people, the Ulimas, who are native Mahometans, and have three Towns; the Ulensivas are Hea∣thens, and have four. Our Captain found the Natives assisted by Six hundred of the Islanders of Iava, and well fortified under the Command of Gemiro Governour of those Islands. He attacked them with such peril, and was so vigorously opposed, he seemed rather to fight for Life than Victory. 13. At length the Portugueses prevailing, were in danger of being overcome by their
great Disorder in plundering. The Captain rectified all by firing the Booty, and many of the Men were scorched, whose Covetous∣ness overcame the fear of the Flames. The Enemy retired to a Mountain, and there compounded only for Life, laying down their Arms. But the People of Amboina having been the first among those Islands who ad∣mitted the Portugueses offering Subjection to our Crown, Lands, and leave to erect a Pillar in their Metropolis with the Royal Arms of Portugal, and finally embracing our Religion, and contracting Marriages with us, it will be convenient to look a little back in order to proceed in the relation of these Affairs, and particularly of one wonderful Passage, that may serve as an Example to such as pretend to Plant Colonies. CHAP. IV. The End of the Government of the Viceroy D. Anton. de Noronna. 1. THEY who know with what kindness the People of Amboina at first re∣ceived us, will be earnest to understand the Cause why now they are become our mortal Enemies. The worst is, they had so just a Cause, which was thus. The People of Curon (I suppose this should be Ceram) became im∣placable Enemies to those of Amboina, on
no other account but that they received the Portugueses, admitted their Religion, and con∣tracted Marriages with them. Hereupon they resolved to expel not only the Portugueses, but even the Natives out of the Island, accord∣ingly on a sudden came uponthem with a great Power. Those of Amboina had been ruin'd, but that the Portugues stood by them, and to be short, utterly defeated their Enemies. 2. The People of Amboina, to shew their Gratitude to those who had defended them, invited them to a splendid Entertainment. The Wives of those who made the Feast came abroad to see the Portugueses enter∣tain'd. One of these (doubtless he was drunk) was so charmed with the Beauty of one of those Women, or so blinded with Lust, that leaping suddenly from his Seat he catched her in his Arms with such insolence, after being three times admonished without de∣sisting, that if Genulius, a Man of great Au∣thority, had not interposed, the Portugueses had there been all cut to pieces. And well they had deserved it; for it appears they did not hinder or obstruct so insolent and publick a lustful Extravagancy, which open∣ly in the sight of the World, durst force a Hand to those Parts, which even with con∣sent are not touched but in private, and with∣out Witnesses. 3. Those People burned with the desire of Revenge for the affront they had receiv'd, and look'd upon as most hainous. Nor could Genulius appease them, but by expelling the impudent Guests, which he desir'd as much
as any, looking upon himself equally con∣cerned in that Injury: and knowing it was a new offence every time the injured saw him that gave the wrong; he therefore reproach∣ing them with the hainousness of the Crime, and shewing how greatly they were favour'd in having their Lives spared, ordered them instantly to depart the Island, and never more presume to set their feet upon it. 4. The People overturning the Tables with furious Countenances, gave them to understand they would by force execute what Genulius had directed, if the Portugueses doubted doing of it by fair means. There was nothing to do but submit, so they went away to their Ships full of shame; their ge∣neral Confusion paying for the Impudence of one in which all had a share, because none reproved it. 5. Scarce had the Portugueses left the Shore, when those of Amboina prescribed the same Laws to the People of Atire and Tavire, that the Curons, or Cerams, had done to them before. That was, they threatned them with War if they received the Portu∣gueses into their Ports: But those People answer'd, That they were Christians, and as such would admit to their Ports and Houses the Portugueses, though it were with hazard of their Lives. 6. They of Amboina were so irritated with this Answer, that falling suddenly upon them, they routed and put to the Sword most of the Inhabitants of those two Places, bringing under their Subjection those Towns
that had submitted to the Crown of Portugal; such as refused were reduced by Fire, and Sword, and Slavery. They were not con∣tent to put to Death those who were con∣stant in the Faith, unless they did it with barbarous and cruel Tortures. One may serve as an Example of all their other Bar∣barities. 7. A little King of Elate was taken, who because he would not renounce the Christian Faith, was tied to a Stake, and Pans of Fire being set before him, they cut off pieces of his Flesh, broied and eat it in his sight: Some they made him eat, and asked whe∣ther he liked it? He with much patience answer'd he did, and was pleased to do that for Christ, who had suffer'd for him: That if after he was dead, they would put a piece of his Flesh into a new Pot, within twenty four hours they would find it converted into Oil, in testimony of the Truth of the Christian Doctrine, and, in fine, that the Portugueses would revenge his Death. 8. They continued the Torments till he died, and then to try what he had said, put a piece of his Flesh into a new Pot covering it, and the Twenty four hours being ex∣pired found it full of most sweet Oil. They were astonished, but did not repent; and soon after the Prophecy was fulfilled by their Ruine. 9. Gonçalo Pereyra (as was before said) coming thither defeated them and their Suc∣cors they had from Iava and other Places,
and reduced them, notwithstanding they for∣tified themselves in the Mountains. In this Action five Portugueses were lost, and Pereyra left D. Duartes de Meneses to command there. 10. At this time Iames Lopez de Msquita, a most wicked Man, commanded at Ternate. Aeyro King of that Island, who had been so unjustly treated by D. Duarte Deça, had al∣ways carried himself respectfully to the Por∣tugueses without any Merit of theirs, but was now at variance, because they killed his Nephew. He began to revenge it, killing three of them, because they refused to do him Justice. This difference was composed by some well meaning Persons, and the King and Mesquita solemnly swore to the Reconciliati∣on. But it being all deceit in the latter, before six days were expired he murder'd the King as he visited him. This was done at parting, he waited on him to the Door, and his Ne∣phew Martin Alfonso Pimentel stabbed him by the Unkle's Order. 11. When this King the last time Em∣braced that false Friendship, he took to witness of his sincerity the Scutcheon of the Portugueses Arms, which represent the Wounds of our Saviour. As he was stabb'd, he laid hold of a Cannon about the place where those same Arms were, saying, Ah Gentlemen, why do you thus kill the best Subject your King my Master has? Neither these words, nor the sacredness of the Place, it being hallowed Ground, asswaged their fury. There they strip'd and cut him in pieces,
which being salted and put into a Chest were cast into the Sea in sight of his Queen and Daughters, who begged only for leave to bury him. Such was then the Portugues Government, that these and other the like Cruelties and Villainies passed unpunished by them. But God did not so, who first with shame deprived them of those Dominions, and afterwards of a Prince of their own. Gui Chil Babu, Son to the deceased, succeed∣ed him in the Crown, and just desire of Re∣venge for such inhuman Oppression. He for∣tified himself, and entred into a League with all the Neighbouring Princes against us, be∣ginning the War with the slaughter of some Portugueses, and persecution of the new con∣verted Christians in all those Islands. But this happened later, we shall see it in its proper place. 12. The Viceroy order'd D. Luis de Al∣meyda in the Spring to Cruize in the Sea of Suratte, to examin what Ships sailed there without our Passes. He had six Ships with him, and was joined by fourteen more, they took three great Ships richly laden, and brought two of them to Damam, one having foundred at Sea. This was the last publick Action of the Viceroy. He embarqued to return home and died in the Voyage. It was ordered in his Will, that his right Arm should be cut off, and preserved, to be bu∣ried with his Unkle D. Nunno Alvarez at Ceuta, and that the Body should be cast into the Sea. It was accordingly performed, and some observed that the cutting off this Arm
was the Execution of the Sentence he had given against himself, when a Relation pre∣vailing upon him to sign an unjust Paper, he said, The hand that signs such a thing de∣serves to be cut off. Such is the force of Af∣fection, it makes a Man do the very thing he abhors. 13. D. Anton. de Noronna was a Man of a good Disposition, Judgment and Inclina∣tion. He was Viceroy the term of four Years the 11th of that number, and twenty-third of the Governours, the first of that Name, and third of the Sirname. 14. During the Government of D. Anton. the Ships that came from Lisbon to India were, in the Year 1565 four, in 1566 four more, and four in 1567. 15. This Year our great Poet Luis de Camo∣ens was at Zofala. Being very poor in India, where he served sixteen Years, Peter Barreto who was going to Command at Zofala pro∣mised him great things, and Camoens find∣ing nothing came of them, after waiting long he resolved to come for Portugal in a Ship that had touched there, in which was He∣ctor de Silveyra and other Gentlemen. Be∣ing about to depart, Peter Barreto who had made those Promises not to prefer him, but divert himself, demanded Two hundred Ducats he said he had spent upon him; and those Gentlemen paid the Money and brought him away. So it may be said, Luis de Camoens his Person, and Barretto his Honour, were at once sold for that Money. He arrived at Lisbon the Year 1569, when
the Plague raged in that City; so that fa∣mous Man always flying one Plague fell into another. CHAP. V. The Government of the Viceroy D. Luis de Ataide, Count de Atouguia; from the Year 1568, t 1571, in the Reign of King Sebastian. 1. To D. Anton. de Noronna succeeded with the same Title of Viceroy D. Luis de Ataide, Count de Atouguia, a Person meritorious of this Government, or of a greater, if ever any greater was committed by a Prince to one single Person. He was the first who carried Orders that a Gentleman should be bare when they spoke to the Go∣vernor, and be seated on a Chair without a Back. He was the first also sent by King Sebastian after he was out of his Minority. 2. With him went five Ships with a great number of Men, and great part of them of Note. He arrived at Goa in October, and was received in the City with a general Satis∣faction of all Men. Though he found the number of Shiping but small yet in few days he set out so many Sail, as caused admira∣tion; and good Squadrons were sent to se∣veral Expeditions. 3. Luis de Melo de Sylva went in February with thirteen Sail to relieve D. Leonis de 1569.
Pereyra at Malaca, the News of his Success not being yet come to Goa, Alfonso Pereyra de la Cerda sailed towards the North with six in November: And Martin Alfonso de Mi∣randa with thirty six to scour the Coast of Malabar, infested with Pyrats. The Natives were o with a considerable Strength, and lost five great Vessels, many Men and much Ammunition; but Martin being wounded with a Cannon Ball was carried to Cochin, and died there. D. George de Meneses set out with two Gallies and five small Vessels to seek the Pyrate Canatale, whom he found not; but discovering many Vessels in the River Carapatan he made to them, and came up himself with a Gally in which 180 Mores fought so desperately, that none being left alive but a Father and Son, the former killed the latter, and stabbing himself leap'd over-board. 4. Ayrez Tellez de Meneses set out with seven Sail, and D. Paul de Lima Pereyra with eight for the North. In the River Banda near Goa he found four Catures, or Barges of Malabares, who after losing many Men escaped. Then he held on his Voyage, which was to relieve Rostumecan, besieged by the Mogols in Baroche, which place he had Usurped, laying hold of the Confusions of Cambaya, since the Death of the King Badur in the Sea of Diu. Itimican now held that Government in his Hands by great Subtilty and Artifice, having perswaded the Guza∣rates, that a young Man his own Son was the last King's, and therefore he secured that Crown in him for himself.
5. Whilst Ayrez Tellez sailed, D. Peter de Almeyda Commander of Damam went to Su∣ratte, to call to an account Agaluchem Lord of that Town, by the same Title as Rostu∣mecan, for loading two great Ships without the Viceroy's leave, the Ships were taken, and valued above 100000 Duccats. As Al∣meyda had done, Tellez began to play his part, which was to force the Mogols from Baroche. He performed it effectually: But Rostumecan being out of danger, forgot his Promise to the Viceroy, which was to be∣come Tributary to us. So easie it is to make promises in danger, and to break them when delivered. 6. D. Iames de Meneses on the Coast of Malabar did such Execution, that Zamori was not in a condition to relieve Agaluchem, who sent from Zuratte to beg his assistance, being distressed by Nunno Vello Pereyra, who was come from Damam to clear the Bay of Cambaya of Enemies. He burnt two Villages and some Vessels, and brought away many Prisoners. Then with 400 Men he pursued a Body of Mogls who were fled to a Moun∣tain (called Parnel) almost impregnable by Art and Nature, and three Leagues distant from Damam. Nunno neither knew the strength of the place, nor number of the Enemies, who were above 800, and so be∣gan to Mount that difficult ascent, whence great Stones were rowled down to hider the Passage. But the Souldiers climing upon Hands and Feet, reached the first Intrench∣ment, which after a vigorous opposition
was entred. Then they assaulted the Fort, where both Parties fought desperately. In some places they came so near as to lay hold of one another's Weapons. Antony de Fo∣seca was lifted up by his Lance which some of the Mogols held, and he never quitted it but laughed. Being afterwards asked what he laughed at, he said, To think the Barbarians believed they could get the Lance out of my hands. At length they let him fall. Nunno Vello see∣ing he strove in vain, retired after losing seven Men, having killed above thirty of the Enemy, and taken much Provision, fifty Horses, some Camels and Oxen, with which he drew off not without danger, being pursu∣ed by 500 of the Enemy, whereof 100 where Horse. 7. He consulted this Affair with Alvar Perez de Tavora who had the Command of Damam; the result was, that Nunno march∣ed with 100 Portugues and 50 Morish Horse, 650 Foot, half Portugues, half Mores. They went up the Mountain with great Labour, through ways never before trod, carrying three pieces of Cannon. They met with considerable opposition, five Cannon playing upon them from the Fort, and some Horse breaking out of the Woods; so they lost eight Men, six killed and two taken. Three days were spent in climing the Mountain, be∣ing got to the top Nunno planted his Can∣non, and batter'd the Work with such fury, that the Enemy the sixth Night abandoned it. The Fort was razed.
8. The great importance of the impreg∣nable Fort of Azarim, moved the Kings of Coles and Sarcetas to attempt the gaining of it. They entred the Country of Bacaim, in which it is, and after doing great harm, set down before it; but Andrew de Villalob who commanded there, bravely defended it till the Viceroy sent Relief. Being then Eight hundred strong they fell upon the two Kings, and not only forced them from the Siege, but following into their Countries put all to Fire and Sword, and returned Victori∣ous. The Viceroy now sent out D. Rode∣rick de Sousa with six Ships from Cambaya; Peter Lopez Rabelo and Giles de Goes with two Ships and three Galleons for Aden; D. Iames de Meneses with twelve Gallies and thirty small Vessels for Malabar; Peter de Silva de Meneses with thirteen Sail for Bra∣çalor. Braçalor is a new Fort between Goa and Malabar, upon the Mouth of a River. The Viceroy offended at the King of Tolar designed to possess himself of it, and agreed with him that commanded to betray it. Pe∣ter de Silva going to take possession of it, by the way entred the River Sanguise, which runs through the Lands of Hidalen, where he burnt two Towns and some Vessels. The Commander of Braçalor according to promise delivered up the Fort by Night, and our Men falling upon the Town, killed and took above Two hundred of the Inha∣bitants. The Kings of Tolar and Cambolim came up that Night with 1500 Men, and the next with 5000, in a hot Engagement
they lost many Men, and we five. The place not being judged tenable, was quitted with Honour, bringing away twenty Cannon, and a great quantity of Ammunition and Arms. 9. Mem Lopez Carrasco sailing for Sunda with only one Ship, and only forty fighting Men in it, passed in sight of the Port of A∣chem at such time as that King in person was setting out against Malaca with 20 Gallies, as many Galleons, and 160 other Vessels. Car∣rasco finding it impossible to shun them, resol∣ved to sell his Life as dear as he could. The whole Fleet attacks them, and tears all their Rigging to pieces, Night parted, and Morn∣ing brings them together again, three Gal∣lies board them and are beaten off. The Fight lasted three days; the King having lost forty Vessels and many Men returned into his Harbor. As much of our Ship got to Malaca as was hid by the Water, all that was above being shattered to pieces; and thus for that time was Malaca delivered of that trouble. 10. Miran, a King between the Mogul and Cambaya, design'd to possess himself of the Crown of Cambaya, to which he thought he had the best Title, since it had been usurped from the lawful Heirs upon the Death of Badur. He treated about it with the Vice∣roy, offering him at present a sum of Mony, and afterwards some Towns, if he would assist him in gaining that Kingdom, and ex∣pelling the Tyrant Himican. The Viceroy admits the Proposals, sends an Embassador of his own with the Kings, and makes such
diligent▪ Preparations, that on a sudden the Sea of Goa was covered with 140 Sail. To amuze the Enemy he gave out the Design was against Malabar. Whilst an Answer could come from Miran, the Viceroy, to keep his Men out of Idleness, sailed towards the Rivers of Braçalor and Onor, whose Banks are peopled by Canara's, who at the Istigation of the Malabars, refused to pay the Acknowledgments due to the Portu∣gueses. CHAP. VI. Continues the Government of the Viceroy D. Luis de Ataide. 1. WHilst the Viceroy was busie in these Preparations, four Ships from Lisbon arriv'd opportunely at Goa. D. Paul de Lima with one Galleon and six Ships, and Martin Alfonso de Melo Commander of Baçaim meditating Revenge against the Kings of Cole and Sarcetas, got together One hun∣dred and thirty Horse, and Eight hundred Portugues Foot. The Enemy had Four hun∣dred of the former, and Two thousand of the latter, yet were put to flight, and even in the flight cut off Emanuel Pereyra and all his Men. So much is an Enemy to be fear'd even when he flies. The Cities of Darila and Varem were destroyed, and all the Coun∣tries
about them. D. Paul in his return took two Ships of the Enemy, though forsaken by some of his own Vessels, and those that left him had afterwards the Impudence to boast of the Victory. The Viceroy receiv'd D. Paul with much Honour; and one of those that had forsaken him coming to kiss (as was the Custom) the Viceroy's Cloak, he said to him, Keep off, go kiss your Mother's hand. 2. In November the Viceroy set out of Goa with above One hundred and thirty Sail, some of them were Tenders, and some Merchants: In the fighting Ships were Three thousand Portugueses besides Indians. He entred the River of Onor, and landed Two thousand three hundred Men, not without opposition. The place seem'd impregnable both by Art and Nature, yet our Men with great diffi∣culty beginning to ascend the Hill, notwith∣standing the Bullets that fell from above, soon discovered the People flying out of the City, and the Queen of Guarcopa retiring to the Inland, as despairing the Fort could hold out, though Garrison'd with Five hun∣dred resolute Men, and well stored with Ar∣tillery and Ammunition. 3. The City which was rich and beautiful was first Plundered, and then reduced to Ashes. Our Forces sat down before the Fort, and batter'd it without intermission four days, without the least molestation from a Body of the Natives who came to hinder their Progress: Which the Besieged perceiving, surrendred upon condition to march away
without Arms. The Booty was small, the most considerable part of it Cannon and Ammunition. The next day being St. Ca∣tharines, a place was cleansed to say Mass in. The Command of it was given to George de Moura with Four hundred Men, half of them Portugueses. 4. Here the Ingenier Simon de Ruan fought alone with thirty of the Enemy till he fell as was thought dead, but as they put him into a Shroud a small motion was perceived, and soon after, to the admiration of all Men, he recovered. In this Action we lost twenty Men. Next the Viceroy passed to Bracalor, which is much like the other in strength and situation. The Landing was somewhat more difficult, being obstructed by 11000 Men, but at length Two hundred of them being killed (with the loss of nine on our side) our Men possessed themselves of a Work which much dismay'd the Enemy. 5. Those in the Fort, before the Viceroy could besiege, abandon'd it. Soon after the Kings of Tolar and Cambolim attack the Fort on a very dark Night, but found Peter Lopez Rabelo who commanded it with Two hundred Men so ready to receive them, that they lost Three hundred, killing only five of his, and despairing of any Success, concluded a Peace with the imposition of a greater Tribute than they paid before. The Viceroy had an interview with those two Princes and the Queen of Cambolim, and they parted very good Friends. Above a Month was spent in building a new Fort in a convenient place,
which was the mid-way between the City and the Mouth of the River. The Com∣mand of it was given to Antony Botello, who spilt the first Blood in this Action. 6. The Viceroy was in great care, that he received no answer from Miran. But there is no security in humane Policies. Miran thought to tie the Mogol to his Interest, by marrying his Brother to the Mogol's Sister. But scarce did the Brother, assisted by his Father-in-law the Mogol, see Miran march towards Cambaya, when he enters his King∣dom with a great Power; and Miran having notice hereof, was forced to stay to secure a certainty of his own, rather than to go to a doubtful Purchase. The Viceroy was much concern'd at this News, and having no pre∣sent Imployment for so great a Fleet, divi∣ded it into several Squadrons, and sent them upon different Expeditions. D. Peter de Casto had one to secure the Ships trading to Goa; Ferdinand Tellez, who not not long before had taken some Ships of the Enemy, went with another to the North. Of his Squa∣dron were Ruy Diaz Cabral, and D. Henry de Meneses, who being separated from him, met fifty Sail of Malabars, and rashly fell up∣on them. Ruy Deaz and seventy Men they both commanded were all killed; D. Henry from among the dead was carried into slave∣ry, and after ransom'd. D. Emanuel Pereyra and Iohn de Silva Barreto came too late to prevent this Misfortune, but not to put the Enemy to flight after receiving and doing much harm.
7. The Viceroy resented this loss not so much for its greatness, as because it was the first time Fortune had frowned on him. He went to Mangalor, twelve Leagues to the Southward, to appease some Disturbance that lessened the King's Revenue, and was prejudicial to Trade. This proceeded from the Enmity between the King of Bangu and Queen of Ola; the Dominion of the latter lies to the South, and that of the o∣ther to the North of that Place. The Viceroy being better received at Mangalor than he expected, had a meeting with those two Princes, and agreed their Differences. In his return to Goa, he left with Antony Botello Commander of Braçalor for the Secu∣rity of that Place, six hundred fresh Men; and Antony Cabrall at Sea with three Vessels well provided. At Onor he added to George de Moura Five hundred Men, and left on that Sea Francis and Rocque de Miranda, Brothers, with six Ships, who with Fire and Sword destroyed some Towns and Ships, be∣cause they rebelled as soon as the Viceroy had turned his back. 8. At the end of this Year arrived at Goa five Ships from Portugal. The Queen of Guarcopa who was fled to the Mountain, ra∣ther for fear than good Will, came now to an Accommodation. 9. In those Seas were left D. Iames de Me∣neses with Forty two Sail; Luis de Melo de Silva with fifteen; Vincent de Saldana with eight; D. Iohn Coutinno with Four; and D. Francis de Almeyda with Two Galleons: The first
of these carried Fire and Sword all along the Coast of Malabar, to the Terror of all that Empire. The strong Towns of Coulete, Ti∣acole, Capocate, Padrarigale, Panane and Calicut felt this fury. Above 1000 Heathens were killed or made Prisoners, above Sixty Vessels taken, and many more sunk and burnt. We lost but four Men in all those Actions. 10. Zamori thought to put a stop to the Ruine of his Country by offering Proposals of Peace, but no Ear was given to them. The Weather effected what that did not, it being no longer practicable to lie upon that Coast. Luis de Melo disappointed the Arti∣fices of the Queen of Guarcopa, who treated of Peace, and prepared for War. He burnt many of her Towns, ravaged the Country and demolished her Fort of Sanguise. Vin∣cent Saldanna in the Sea of Mangalor did his Duty, securing our Ships that traded that way. D. Iohn Coutinno did the same about Cambaya, Cochim and Chaul. D. Francis de Almeyda disabled and put to flight at Diu six Malabar Galliots that attempted the en∣tring that ort to burn the Ships that were in it. 11. In the beginning of Winter the Vice∣roy fitted out two Squadrons to relieve Onor and Daman, fearing the Mogol design'd a∣gainst the last, and the Queen of Guarcopa against the other. His greatest care was for Onr, hearing the Enemy had attempted to desroy ou Men by Treachery, bribing some Caraes who were in it, to poison our Men
with the Fruit of the Herb Duuro, whose quality is such, it makes Men forget all things, and renders them wholly insensible, even of Wounds. The Treachery was dis∣covered, and the Conspirators hanged over the Walls in sight of them that employed them, who then betook themselves to open force, having failed in this private Practice. At that time entred the Port a Galley and three other Vessels with a Body of choice Men for the Relief of the Fort. 12. The Wickedness of the Portugueses in killing the King of Ternate, began to be pu∣nished: That King's Son and Heir had com∣menced his Revenge, as was said before, and now sent his Unkle Calacinco with twelve Gallies to Amboina. He was near taking our Fort, whilst the Commander of it D. Duarte de Meneses was consulting far off with Gonçalo Pereyra about the manner of maintain∣ing it, but Baltasar de Sousa who supplied his place defended it well. Baltasar Vieyra saved it, killing with a Musquet Shot a Caciz of Note, upon whose Death the Enemy with∣drew to the Island Varenula, and had they not retired, they had carried the Fort be∣fore Pereyra and Meneses could come to re∣lieve it. 13. They being come, Pereyra puts to Sea with six Sail. One of them commanded by Lawrence Furtado being hard set by the Ene∣mies Admiral, Furtado leaps into it and kills the old Commander, and the Galley was taken, two other were also taken, and the Enemy fled to other Islands, not thinking
themselves safe at Varenula. Above Nine thousand Men were killed in these Expedi∣tions. 14. Whilst this happened at Amboina, the Fort at Tornate was so close besieged, that our Men wished for Vermin to feed on, ha∣ving eaten all that could be found. The King perceiving the besieged did not treat of a Surrender, joined with the King of  dore, gave so furious an assault, that he  twenty Portugueses and entred the Trees. The next Night they had as good success. Luis de la Mo defended his Bastion with great Bravery, and Belchior Vieyra for this time delivered the Fort, killing Beneuoa General of Tidore, at which sight his Men fled. Pereyra hearing of this Posture of Affairs, left Sancho de Vasconcelos to command at Amboina, because D. Duarte was dead, and hasted to Ternate with three Vessels that row∣ed, and One hundred Men. At Bacham where the King was our friend, he encreased to fourteen Sail. 15. The Confederate Kings set out to meet Pereyra with fifty Coracoraes, which are great Gallies. Pereyra receives them, and they fought with much bravery: The King of Tidore attacks our Admiral Galley, but being almost killed, drew back with his Gal∣ley quite disabled. The Enemy gave way, and Pereyra came to the Fort, and brought fresh vigor with that Success. But those of Ternate were so intent upon Revenge, that they continued the Siege five Years, and our Men were forced to abandon the Fort.
The King of Tidore received those that would stay with him, the rest dispersed into several Countries. We shall see in time how they were expelled Tidore: And it is rather a won∣der they continued there so long, being guil∣ty of such Villainies, than that they were at last drove away. But great Storms threaten India now, and our Viceroy is preparing to meet them. CHAP. VII. The dangerous Sieges of Goa and Chaul; and first of the foremost, continuing the Government of D. Luis de Ataide, and Reign of King Sebastian. 1. ALL humane Grandure is subject to Envy. The Princes of Asia seeing 1570. the vast increase of the Portugues Power, re∣solved to give it one fatal Blow; and to this purpose entred into a League, which was five Years in forming and concluding, and carri∣ed on with wonderful secrecy. 2. These Princes were Hidalcan Alecdaxa, Nizamaluco Xaoxem, and Zamori. Their Design to extirpate the Portugueses in India. To this effect they raised powerful Armies, and made so sure of the success, that they had before hand divided their imagined Con∣quests. The first was to have Goa, Onor, and Braçalor; the second, Chaul, Damam,
and Baçaim; and the third, Cananor, Man∣galor, Cochim, and Chale. Hidalcan had as∣signed his principal Men Offices at Goa, and some Portugues Women that were cried up for Beauties. The King of Achem was at the same time to make an attempt upon Ma∣laca. In fine, those Princes broke out like impetuous Torrents, covering the Fields with multitudes o Men. Hidalcan marched to besiege Goa, Nizamaluco to Chaul, with∣out any respect to the Peace which had been no way infringed. 3. The Viceroy upon this occasion shew'd an undaunted Spirit. It was generally agreed Chaul should be abandoned, for the greater security of Goa, but the Viceroy resolved the Enemy should have nothing but what was dearly bought. He immediately sent D. Francis Mascarennas with 600 Men in four Gallies and five small Vessels to the Relief of Chaul. Among these went many Gentlemen of Note, to serve as private Souldiers. They set out about the end of September. 4. Next the Viceroy applied himself to provide for the defence of Goa. He posted Ferdinand de Sousa de Castellobrance, an old Souldier in Asia, in the Pass of Benastarim with 120 Men; D. Paul de Lima at Rachol with 60, and thus in other places he distri∣buted 1500 Natives of the Island. There were not compleat 700 Portugueses in it, these he reserved to relieve where ever the greatest danger threatned. The City he put into the Hands of the Dominicans, Fran∣ciscans and Clergy, who exceeded not 300,
assisted by 1000 Slaves. Captain Iohn de Sousa with 50 Horse was to be ready to ap∣pear where-ever there was occasion. D. George de Meneses, rnamed Barroche was to keep the River with 25 Sail. At the same time the Viceroy caused Ammunition and Provisions to be brought from all Parts, the Works to be repaired, and about the mid∣dle of December he took his Post upon the Bank of the River. No sooner was he there, than several Bo∣dies of Men appeared coming down the Mountain Gate, and encamping at Ponda, commanded by Norican, Hidalcan's General. About the end of December he advanced, and encamped over-against the Pass of Benasta∣rim, pitching his Master's Tents, who spent eight days in coming down the Mountain by reason of the greatness of his Army. At night he lighted so many Fires to dis∣cover the Paths of the Mountain, that at a great distance the multitude of his men could be seen. Being come to Ponda he covered those vast Plains with rich and costly Tents. 6. This Army consisted of 100000 fight∣ing Men, besides an infinite number of Fol∣lowers; 35000 Horse; 2140 warlike Ele∣phants; 350 pieces of Cannon, most of an extraordinary bigness, and some great Barques brought upon Mules, to be lanched for all occa∣sions upon the River. The chief Commanders of this multitude were, Norican called Hener Maluco, of such quality, that he never ap∣peared with his Prince but in the Field; Rumercan and Cogercan, who for their qua∣lity
had distant Quarters on the edge of the Water. The Army encamped in such man∣ner, it looked rather like a regular City than a Camp. Their order of Battle was thus: Hidalcan at Ponda with 4000 Horse, 6000 Musqueteers, 300 Elephants, 220 Can∣nons; Cogercan, Rumercan, and Mortazacan near the Mouth of the Channel Ganja with 3000 Horse, 130 Elephants; and nine Cannons. Norican opposite to the Island of Iohn Lopez with 7000 Horse, 180 Elephants, and eight great Cannons. Camilcan and Delirracan facing the Pass of Benastarim with 9000 Horse, 200 Elephants, and 32 batter∣ing Pieces. Solyman Aga on a height above Benastarim with 1500 Horse, and two Field Pieces. Anjozcan opposite to the Island of Iohn Bangl with 2500 Horse, 50 Elephants, and six Cannons. Xatiarviatan in sight of Sapal with 1500 Horse, 6 Elephants, and 6 Cannons. Danlatecan, Xatiatimanaique, Chitican, and Codemenacan facing the Pass of Agaçaim with 9000 Horse, 200 Elephants, and 26 Cannons. The rest of the Army covered the Mountains capable to strike a Terror into the boldest Spirits. 7. The Viceroy viewed all the Posts, of∣fering his Person to the greatest danger. The ranging of the Enemies Army caused him to alter his first method, being now reinforced with some men come from several Parts, he posted his men thus: The dry Pass which he had designed for himself, he committed to D. Peter de Almeyda, and D. George Deça with 120 men, and went him∣self
to that of Benastarim, where Ferdinand de Sousa de Castellobranco was with the like number, taking to himself the Command of one of the lesser Posts there, rather than remove that Officer. D. Michael de Castro not far from Madre de Dios with 150; Iames Barradas on the point of the dry Pass with 60; D. Peter de Castro towards Benastarim with 120 maintained at his own Charge; Iames de Azambuja hard-by with 50; Fran∣cis Pereyra a little farther with 20; Vincent Diaz Villalobos at Sapal with 60; next Gaspar Fernandez with 50; then D. Luis de Almey∣da, D. Ferdinand Monroy, and D. Martin de Castellobranco with each 60; Francis Marquez Botello with 50; Alvaro Mendoça between the Viceroy and Pass of Mercantor with 10; a little farther Simon de Mendoça with 120; Emanuel Rolim at St. Iohns Pass with 100; In the Pass of Marque the City placed 80; Iohn de Sousa with his 50 Horse went from Agacaim to the Bar, to receive and execute his Orders; Baltasar Lobo de Sousa at Pard with 50; Peter Alvarez de Faria near him with 80; Vasco Perez de Faria at Necra with a Company; Damian de Sousa at Bachol with the like Body; and Francis de Silveyra at Norva with 30. 8. Several Vessels with small Guns were to run along the River to relieve all these Posts. Thus the number of the Viceroy's Men was not above 1600, and he had but 30 Cannons in all those Posts. This was the force we had to oppose that great Power, the like was at Chaul.
9. For Nizamaluco set down before it at the same time, as Hidalcan did before Goa. They two being suspitious of each other, kept time in their Preparations, Setting out and Marches. But that we may not con∣found the Actions by mixing them, we will first relate those at Goa, and then proceed to Chaul. The Cannon began to play, the flashes whereof enlightned the Night and the smoak darkned the day. The Enemy spent their first Fury on the Fort and Works of Benastarim, and did great harm, but could not perceive it; for whatever they ruined by day was repaired by night. They pour∣ed in showers of Bullets, for only in Alvaro de Mendoça his Post 600 were found, some of them of two Spans diameter; we could not answer with the like number, but could see we did great execution. And our Vessels sailing nimbly about, plied their small Guns with good effect. Ferdinand de Sousa de Ca∣stellobranco one night by the help of a great number of Torches that went before spied an Officer of the Enemies crosing, a height opposite to him with young Women a dan∣cing before, Sousa desirous to untune their harmony, caused a Cannon to be so luckily levelled at them, that the Officer, some of those that lighted, and two couple of the young Women were seen to fly into the Air. 10. This was the time for the return-Ships to sail for Portugal, and every Body advised the Viceroy to stop them, because they would carry 400 Men that might be a great help in the present distress. But the Viceroy am∣bitious
of making his Glory the greater, by conquering the greater difficulties, answer'd, There was want of them in Portugal, and he trusted those that remained were sufficient for the work he had in hand. So the Ships set sail. 11. Hitherto the Portugueses did much more harm than they received, having killed many of the Enemy, and among them some of Note, and lost no number nor any person considerable, only some were dangerously wounded. D. Francis de Sylva being wound∣ed with a Cannon Ball so that his Guts hung out, continued encouraging his Men holding them up with his hand. Peter Homem de Silva losing much Blood at three Musket Shots he had received, and being perswaded to go off, said, It could be no matter of moment since he felt it not. Our Vessels did good Service; and the Enemies were not idle, carrying their men from one place to another. Our men had the boldness often to land and attack the Enemy in their Posts, and still brought away Prisoners, the heads of those they killed, Colours and Arms. D. George de Meneses Barroche in his Vessels, and D. Peter de Castro by Land with 200 Por∣tugueses made such a slaughter, that the Vice∣roy to animate the City, and show them what was done abroad, sent them two Carts loaded with Heads. Gaspar Diaz and his Brother Lancelot running up the Country one night a League and half with 80 men, burnt two Villages and many Farm Houses, and brought away many Prisoners, heads of the in, and of Cattle.
12 Another time these two Brothers with 130 men, attack the Quarters of Cogergan and Rumergan, and making a great havock, destroyed all they had provided in order to pass over into the Island of Iohn Lopez. In this Action Francis de Cunna Coutino, Ser∣vant to the Viceroy, going alone before the rest, came so close up to 500 Mores, that he threw two Granadoes among them, which did some execution, and retired without hurt. The Enemy admired the smallness of our number, and greatness of our Actions; but was more surprized when he heard, that in the heat of all this fury, the Viceroy had order'd D. Iames de Meneses who came from the Coast of Malabar with his Squadron, to return thither; and D. Ferdinand de Vascon∣celos to go with four Gallies and two small Vessels to destroy the City Dabul, to show Hidalcan, whose it was, how little account he made of all his Power. D. Ferdinand burnt there two great Ships of Meca, and many small Vessels; then landing fired some Villages, and had done the same to the City, had not his own Captains opposed it. 13. He returned to Goa, and attacking the Quarters of Angoscan, a principal Man among the Enemy, three Miles distant from the Viceroy, entred them with great slaugh∣ter. But his Men with the success falling into Disorder, the Enemy rallied and fell upon them, killing some, the rest fled leaving their Captain, who, weakned with loss of Blood, and tired with the weight of his Arms, could not get into a Boat, but fought
in the Water till he fell down dead. His Ensign Augustin Fernandez died honourably with his Colours in the left hand, which he bravely defended with the right. Forty were killed, their Heads with the Colours were carried to Hidalcan. The Viceroy immediately sent Barroche with 100 Men more to burn D. Ferdinand's Vessel taken by the Enemy, which he performed, bringing away the Cannon that was left in it by the Enemy, believing no Body durst come where it lay. CHAP. VIII. Continues the Siege of Goa, and Government of D. Luis de Ataide. 1. AT this time Zamori made Proposals of Peace to the Viceroy, either to amuse him while he went upon other designs pursuant to the Articles of the League, or else hoping to gain some advantage in that pressing Conjuncture. The Viceroy gave him to understand he would not yield the least point for fear, and continued firm in this resolution, notwithstanding Hidalcan had prevailed with the Queen of Guarcopa to declare War at Onor: That Prince was astonished to see him send relief thither, when he thought there was not force to supply Goa. The Viceroy at this time also
relieved Marramaque at the Malucos, and Francis Barreto at Mocambique. 2. The grand design of Hidalcan was to get over into the Island, in order to it his General Norican began to lay a Bridge over the River with a vast number of Workmen. The Viceroy falling upon them made a great havock. There was a Report that Hidalcan designed to pass over to the Island in Person, and carnestly desired a fine Horse the Vice∣roy had, for which he had before offered a great Sum of Mony. The Viceroy sent it him for a present, assuring nothing should be more pleasing than to see him come over to Goa. Hidalcan accepted of the Horse, and caused him to lie upon silk Quilts under Canopies of Cloath of Gold, to be covered with embroidered Dammask, and his Trap∣pings to be adorned with massy Gold, and his Provender was mixed with Preserves and other Dainties. The Horse enjoyed it not long, being killed by a Cannon-Ball. At this time such a violent Storm of Rain fell, that most Posts were abandoned; the Vice∣roy desired to take a Standard that was left in one; a French Gunner with only one Man went over in a Boat to fetch it, and were both killed. 3. It was now the beginning of March, and the Siege had lasted two Months, with∣out abating any thing of the Fury. Many of our Buildings were ruined by the Enemies Cannon, many of them killed by ours. An∣tony Cabral run up the River Chapora with four Vessels, and landing fifty Men, burnt four
Villages, and above fifty Sail, bringing away some Booty. D. Paul de Lima with forty Men did as much at Rachol. The Viceroy laying hold of a Rope at the Pass of Bena∣starim to draw a Cannon, others refusing for fear of the many Bullets that flew, one hit him upon the Arm, and only pierced the sleeve without doing him any harm. After∣wards being in the Church of Santiago, the Roof of it was beat down and hung over his head, Emanuel de Sousa Coutinno stepped up to save him, by receiving the Blow, but he acknowledging the Kindness reproved the Action. 4. The Viceroy used all possible means to have Intelligence from the Enemies Camp. He bribed some Renagado Portugueses that served there, but what is more, he corrupt∣ed Hidalcan's most beloved Wife, and by her means knew the King's secret Thoughts, which he could not conceal from her. 5. Hidalcan now began to consider the damage done by so few Men to so nume∣rous an Army, that now the Portugueses in∣creased in strength by the arrival of several Squadrons that had been abroad, among which Iames de Meneses returned victorious from Achem, and Luis de Melo de Silva from Malabar. He desired Peace, but was loath to propose it. The Viceroy who knew his Thoughts ordered it so, that a Treaty was in a manner set on foot, so that no body could discern who was the Author of it. Yet at length Hidalcan stooped to make the first Proposals. But still the Siege was carried
on, and April was began. Seven hundred Mores attack a Pass, Two hundred Portu∣gueses at first opposed them, but seeing they were relieved, fled in such Disorder, that neither their Officers nor the Viceroy could rally them. Their two Captains were kill∣ed. 6. The Action of D. Iames de Meneses relating to Zamori, shall be referred to the Chapter of Chaul; that of Luis de Melo is fit for this place. He set out with Fourteen Sail in search of the Fleet of Achem, and met it near that Port; it consisted of Sixty Sail well Manned and provided with Can∣non, commanded by the King's Son and Heir. Melo and he met first, and our first Shot killed him and several of his Men. The Fleets met and fought resolutely on both sides; but the Enemy was utterly destroyed, three Galleys and six small Vessels taken, all the rest sunk but one. We lost not one Man; of the Enemy Twelve hundred were killed, and Three hundred made Prisoners. Melo returned to Malaca with the Vessels and Cannon he had taken, and thence sent some Men to the Malucos, and came to Goa with Fifteen hundred, and Vasco Lorenço de Barbuda whom he found at Cochim prepa∣ring to bring some Relief. 7. These Commanders being come to Goa, took their Posts. Meneses executing his Office of Admiral was carried off wounded, at such time as Three thousand of the Ene∣my began to enter the Island of Iohn Lopez. Antony Fernandez de Cale with One hundred
and twenty Men met and put them to flight, killing a great number. 8. During this time, before Winter came on, several Attempts were made upon the Enemies Quarters and Inroads into the Country always with success. One Night One hundred and fifty Men beat the Enemy out of a Post at Benastarim and after another at Angoscan, ruining all the Works they had raised. They did the same at Xatiarao, Chatigan and Rachol, burning Villages demo∣lishing the Works, and killing very many. 9. Hidalcan, though almost in despair, began to plant Gardens, and other Works, as if he designed either to take Goa, or live in that Field: He resolved to enter the Island with Nine thousand Men at the Pass of Mercantor, which was not guarded, be∣cause the River is wide there. Our Men hearing a Drum, which never beats but when that Prince marches in Person, run thither, and saw him on the other side en∣couraging his. Advice being brought to the Viceroy, he sent several Parties and follow∣ed himself. In spight of all opposition Five thousand Men got over under the Command of the Turk Soliman Aga, Captain of the Guard. Fresh Men still flocked to the Vice∣roy, till he was Two thousand strong. All the Posts which extended two Leagues were in Action. 10. All the Thirteenth of April, from Morning till Night the attack lasted, and from the next Morning till the Day follow∣ing. Hidalcan all the while looking on,
cursing his Prophet Mahomet, and throwing his Turbant on the Ground. Of the Por∣tugueses scarce Twenty were killed, of the Enemy almost Four thousand, and among them Soliman Aga; Hidalcan's Brother-in-Law, and other Persons of Note, some Co∣lours, and Plunder were taken. 11. F. George de St. Lucia a Dominican and Bishop of Malaca, foretold this Success to the Viceroy. Hidalcan raged, and in publick vowed not to stir thence, but in private wished a conclusion, but used not the means. He proposed a Pence, and despair∣ed of concluding it upon the Terms he of∣fered; one of them was the Surrender of Goa, as if the Portugueses had all this while tought for any thing but to keep it. Our Viceroy treated with Norican about killing the King, offering him either the Crown of great Power in the Government. Norican admits the Proposals, and as the blow was ready to be given, the Treachery was disco∣vered, he secured, and so the other Conspi∣rators desisted. This was about the end of April. 12. The treaty of Peace failing, the Siege went on, but not with the vigour as before. The Enemies Cannon ruined our Buildings, ours their Men, and Parties of ours burnt all the Country. Sebastian de Resende with only four Men attempts a Post of the Ene∣mies, and killing some, would have brought away one alive, but he making much oppo∣sition, Resende was forc'd to kill him. Lan∣celot Picardo and others with forty Men did
great execution. Antony Fernandez with thirty falling upon Rumercan's Quarters where there was eighty, killed eighteen, and retired without any damage received. The Viceroy leaning one day on a Page, a Ball took away his Prop. Being at rest one night he heared a great Noise, and instant∣ly came abroad, and a Bullet hitting him on the Breast, fell at his feet without doing the least hurt. 13. Hidalcan to divide and weaken the Viceroy, again perswades the Queen of Guarcopa to attack Onor. She consents, and joining Three thousand Men of her own to Two thousand sent by him, besieges the Fort. It was the middle of Iuly, the dead of Winter there, when the Viceroy received Advice thereof. He sent instantly Antony Fernandez de Chale with two Galleys and eight Vessels, and what Men they could con∣tain: Antony in five days enters that Port, and joining with George de Moura command∣ing there, falls upon the Enemy and puts them to flight, killing many, and bringing all the Cannon into the Fort. About this time Zamori broke out in another place, but that requires a particular Chapter. 14. The Viceroy underhand endeavoured to stir up other Princes to invade Hidalcan's Dominions, by that means to draw him from the Siege. Both endeavoured to hide their desire of Peace. Hidalcan made appear as if he resolved not to stir, and the Vice∣roy as if he valued not his lying there. In fine, the whole Winter was spent, and to∣wards
the end of August, when Summer be∣gins, and the Enemy might better keep the Field, the number of Tents was seen to decrease, then the Men, and lastly the Can∣non vanished, without coming to any ac∣commodation, after a Siege of ten Months, wherein the Enemy lost Twelve thousand Men, Three hundred Elephants, Four thou∣sand Horses, and Six thousand Oxen, part by the Sword, and part by the Weather. Thus Goa was suddenly delivered. Let us now see what was done at Chaul by Nizama∣luco, the second Chief of this League. CHAP. IX. The Siege of Chaul. 1. NIzamaluco keeping time with Hidal∣can, set down before Chaul at the same time the other did before Goa. His General Faretecan invested the place with Eight thousand Horse and Twenty thousand Foot; and on the last day of November the Enemy broke ground with a horrid noise of warlike Instruments. 2. Luis Ferreyra de Andrade, a Man well deserving such a Post, commanded at Chaul, and laboured long under great Wants of all Necessaries, supplying those Defects with his and his Men's Valour, till D. Francis Mas∣carennas came to his assistance with Six hun∣dred
Men in four Gallies and five small Vessels, and some Barques loaded with Am∣munition and Provision. 3. The Fort of Chaul is seated in about 18 deg. of N. Lat. on the Bank of a River, not twelve Miles from the Mouth of it. There were in it but fifty Horse, and a small number of Foot. The first bold Action done here was by Sebastian Gonzales de Al∣velos, who passing over a small Creek alone, challenged any of that number of Enemies, and none durst answer him. Then Alexander de Sousa went over with fifteen Horse to discover the Enemy, and stayed so long till 5000 came upon them, among which they killed a considerable Officer. At this time Faretecan was marching down the Mountain Gate with 8000 Horse, a great number of Foot, and twenty Elephants; he sat down before Chaul, and began to plant Cannon. 4. Faretecan desiring to do somewhat be∣fore his Prince came, set the Castles upon the Elephants and tied Syths to their Trunks to give an Assault. All turned to his Loss, for he was repulsed by Sea and Land, and forced to retire as far as the Church de la Madre de Dios, or Mother of God, where his men rallied. 5. Here it is said some Miracles were seen, as that a Bullet hitting a Souldier on the hand, rebounded from it as a Ball struck with a Racket. The fight lasted three hours with great slaughter of Mores, and loss of three Portugueses.
6. The Enemy having lodged themselves about the Town, it was thought convenient to demolish all the Buildings that were any thing distant. Nothing remarkable happened till after December. Some Mores being then gathering Fruit in an Orchard, Nunno Vello went out with five Soldiers, and killing one of them, others came on still till they made up Six thousand, and ours encreased to two hundred; who behaved themselves with such bravery, they drove that multitude, killing One hundred and eighty, with the loss of two. 7. Nizamaluco came before Chaul in the beginning of Ianuary with the rest of his Army, which now together consisted of 34000 Horse, 100000 Foot, 16000 Pioniers, 4000 Smiths, Masons and other Trades of sundry Nations, as Turks, Coraçons, Persians and Ethiopians, 360 Elephants, an infinite number of Bufalos and Oxen, and forty pieces of Cannon most of a prodigious bigness, some carrying Balls of 100, some 200, and even 300 weight, and had Names answer∣able, as Cruel Butcher, Devourer, Orlando Fu∣rioso, and the like. Thus 150000 Men so well provided, planted themselves before a Town that had only a single Wall, a Fort like a House, and a handful of Men. Fare∣tecan lodged himself in the Vicar's House near the Chapel of the Mother of God with 7000 Horse and twenty Elephants. A∣galascan in the House of Iames Lopez with 6000 Horse; Ximirican between that and upper Chaul with 2000, so the City was
beset from Sea to Sea. At the same time 4000 Horse ravaged the Lands of Baçaim. The King took his Quarters at the farther end of the Town; thus the space of two Leagues was covered with Tents. 8. The Portuguess at first being but few, and the Works inconsiderable, had no par∣ticular Posts, but were wherever the danger threatned. Soon after the News of the dan∣ger of Chaul being spread abroad, many Gentlemen flocked thither with supplies of Men, so that in a little time there were 2000 Men in the Town. It was resolved to maintain the Monastery of St. Francis, and it was committed to Alexander de Sousa. Some Houses were also judged fit to be de∣fended. Nuno Alvarez Pereyra with forty Men had those on the Shore, those between the Misericordia and St. Dominick D. Gonçalo de Meneses, others near Nunno Vello Pereyra, and so in other Places. 9. Mean while it was generally voted at Goa, that Chaul ought to be abandoned, but the Viceroy resolutely opposed, and was seconded by Ferdinand de Sousa de Castello∣branco. He immediately sent thither D. Du∣arte de Lima and Ferdinand Tellez de Meneses with their two Gallies, and some Men in four other Vessels. Let us see what was done at Chaul whilst they are under Sail. 10. Nimirican had promised Nizamaluco he would be the first man should enter the Town, in order thereto he vigorously at∣tacks the Posts of Henry de Betancor and Fer∣dinand Pereyra de Miranda. They bravely
made good their Ground, and being reliev'd repulsed him, killing Three hundred of his Men, seven of ours were lost. The Enemy turn their Cannon upon the Monastery of St. Francis where we had some Pieces, and both sides striving to burst or dismount the op∣posite Guns; the Gunners were so dextrous, that Bullets were seen to meet by the way. On the Eve of St. Sebastian a Party of ours sallied upon some Houses where the Mores had fortified themselves, and killed a great number without losing one Man. 11. Nizamaluco enraged at the last re∣pulse desired Revenge, and that same night attacks the Fort of St. Francis with Five thousand Men. The Mores thought to sur∣prize ours, but were soon undeceived by the Execution done among them. The attack lasted very furious the space of five hours. The Portugueses suspected the Enemy work∣ed under the Wall, and could not see by reason of the darkness, but Christopher Curvo three several times put half his Body out of a Window, with a lighted Torch in one hand, and a Buckler in the other, to dis∣cover what was doing. The noise was very great, and those in the City fearing for those that were assaulted, sent them Relief though with great hazard. The Morning discovered the Fort stuck with Arrows, and under it above Three hundred Mores slain, without the loss of one Portugues. 12. Next day the Enemy repeated the Assault, and continued it five days with great resolution, with as great bravery were
they received by the Portugueses, who often fallying covered the Field with dead Bo∣dies and took several Colours. However it was at last judged expedient to quit that Fort, and withdraw the Men into the City, lest the losing of it should prove more pre∣judicial than the defending it could avail. Seventeen Men were killed in it. One of these being on a high place to give notice when the Enemy fired their Cannon, said to those that were below: If they should now fire Raspadillo (that was a Cannon eighteen Foot long so called) without doubt they would send me all in pieces to sup with Iesus Christ, to whom l commend my self, for the Gun points at me. Scarce had he spoke the words when he was torn in pieces by a Ball from that Cannon. 13. The Mores being possessed of the Fort and Monastery of St. Francis, fired a whole Street, but attempting to gain some Houses lost Four hundred Men. Three of them challenged a like number of ours, who thinking it a disparagement to answer them upon equal terms, only two went out, which were Gomez Freyre and Luis del Valle, who carried a great Hanger. The Mores refused the odds, and one of them with∣drew. Valle with the advantage of the Hanger overcame his Adversary, and then assisted Freyre to kill the other. So both sides might be said to be conquer'd, the Mores losing their Lives, and ours their Honour by taking the Advantage.
14. Chaul being now streightned, Ruy Gon∣çalez de Camara was sent to Goa for Relief; which he brought in two Galleys. At this time appeared here, and before Mangalor, the Malabar-Ships, sent by Zamori, pursuant to the Articles of the Consederacy. But our Method being to relate what each of the Confederates did separately, this shall be re∣ferred to another Chapter. Let us see one of the bravest Actions that has been heard of, performed by Stephen Perestrelo, Com∣mander of the weak Fort of Caranja. 15. It was said, above 5000 of Nizama∣luco's Horse marched into the Lands of Ba∣çaim. They resolved to attempt some of our Garrisons; and being beaten off at Aça∣rim and Damam, went and sate down before Caranja, where Stephen Perestrelo was, with only Forty Men, Caranja is a small, incon∣siderable Work, between Chaul and Damam, on the Edge of the Water, and is, in some measure, an Island, being encompassed by small Brooks. As the Enemy sate down be∣fore it, Emanuel de Melo came with Thirty Men. Being now Seventy strong, Perestrelo falls upon that great Number, with such Success, that after covering the little Island with dead Bodies, the rest fled, leaving their Cannon, and a considerable Quantity of Arms and Ammunition. 16. But to return to Chaul: The Moors furiously batter'd it with Seventy Pieces of large Cannon, for the space of a Month; the least that was spent every Day being 160 Balls. They made great havock among
the Houses, in which many were killed; one single Ball slew six Persons that were eating together; others fell into the Ships, and failed not o Execution there. This Batte∣ry began against the Bastion of the Cross, and ws carried on to the Place where Peter Ferreyra and Mem Dornelas were posted, le∣velling all with the Ground. The Besieged worked incessantly to cover themselves; but the Enemy's Gunners were so expert, they mounted their Balls so, that they fell among those that thought they were within Shelter. Augustine Nunez found an Expedient to a∣void this Danger, which, though thought difficult at first, was afterwards their only Security. 17. Our Commander seeing the Battery on the other side of St. Dominick never cea∣sed, thought fit to attack the Enemy's Quar∣ters opposite to it. Alexander de Sousa and Augustine Nunez undertook it with One Hundred and Twenty Men, and, though vi∣gorously opposed, drove the Enemy thence; killing many, and firing the Works. 18. Iohn Alvarez Suarez, an Officer of the Revenue, hearing the Danger of Chaul, fitted out a Vessel at his own Charge, and came thither with some Soldiers; where he behaved himself beyond what was expected of one, whose Business seemed to be only the Pen, though now he converted it to the Sword. 19. Coming now at the time of the At∣tack of those Works, he was one of the first that mounted. Ferdinand Casqueiro hear∣ing
the Moors play at Tables in an House, ran in, and killed two of them, driving the rest from the Sport. The Work was level∣led with the Ground, without any Loss on our Side. Among the Arms taken in this Action, was a Cymiter with this Inscription, IESUS SAVE ME. CHAP. X. Continues the Siege of Chaul. 1. THE Enemy attacked some consider∣able Houses, and were repulsed, with Loss of one Man of ours; but we having undermined that of Hector de Sampaio, to blow it up, they ran furiously, and set their Colours upon the Top of it. This incen∣sed our Men, and there followed an obsti∣nate Dispute in the House, till some Fire ac∣cidentally falling into the Powder, it blew up, killing Forty Two of our Soldiers: Some escaped so disfigured, that their own Friends mistaking them for Moors, ran out to kill them. 2. The Moors escaped here unhurt, and set their Colours upon the Ruins of the House, and upon that of Xira, which they took next. Ximirican assaults by Night the Bastion of the Cross, with Six Hundred Men; but Ferdinand Pereyra opposed them with Thirty; and Henry de Betancor second∣ing
him with some others, they beat them off, and took five Colours they had planted upon the Work. Betancor fought with the Left Hand only, having before lost the Right: And Dominick del Alma being lame, caused himself to be brought out in a Chair. 3. April was now begun, and the Enemy seemed resolved to continue there all the Winter, and were raising new Works. A∣lexander de Ssa and D. Goncalo de Meneses were appointed to sally upon them. Their Soldiers understanding it, ran out without Orders, to the Number of Two Hundred, and furiously drove the Enemy from their Works, which, their Captains coming up, they ruined. Above Fifty Moors were killed, and some few Portugueses. 4. Nizamaluco perplexed with so many Losses, gives a general Assault with his whole Army, at once attacking all our Poss. There was scarce any of our Works that the Moors did not enter, and plant their Colours; and with the same Vigour and Fury were repulsed, and drove out of them. In the Morning above Five Hundred Moors appeared slain, and Four or Five Portugueses. This was the Posture of Affairs, when some Supplies came from Goa, Diu and Bacaim, being above Two Hundred Men, and a suf∣ficient Quantity of Ammunition. 5. Two other Dangers now terrified the Besieged: The on a troublesome, though not mortal Diseae; being great Swellings all over their Bodies, which deprived them
of the Use of their Limbs. The other, that Nizamaluco sollicited the King of Sar∣çeta, and some Rebels of Camba, to fall upon the Portugueses in other Places; by that means to hinder Relief coming to them. But neither of them gave ear to him. This Prince seeing he must finish alone what e had undertaken alone, fell to battering  House of D. Nunno Alvarez Perera,  continued it for the Time of Forty Two Days. He assaults it wih Five Thou Men: The Defendants at first were but ∣ty; soon after, Twenty more came to their Assistance; and some others also after that. We lost but One Man, and killed above Fifty Moors. One being taken, and brough to the Captain, told him, above Five Thou∣sand had been killed during the Siege. 6. The House of Nunno Vello was battered and assaulted Thirty Days, with much the same Success; only this Difference, that we lost Ten Men. Only Thirty Soldiers sus∣tained these furious Assaults, till it being judged no longer needful to defend the House, it was agreed to blow it up. The Enemy hastily ran to possess themselves of it, setting up their Colours at such time as part of the Building flew into the Air, do∣ing good Execution though not so much  was expected. But what this fell short, was made up by another Mine, and by the Va∣lour of D. Francis Mascarennas; who falling upon those that escaped the Mine, put them to the Sword, and came off much hurt. In like manner, the House of Francis de Mel
was quitted, after they had been defended to Admiration. 7. The Summer was now almost spent: There were thrown into the City above Six Thousand Cannon-Balls, some of a prodi∣gious Bigness; and Nizamalco was making Preparations to lie there the Winter. A∣bove Two Hundred Portugueses, fearg the Ruin of the City, had deserted; but in∣stead of them, Three Hundred came from Goa, which put Chaul into somewhat a bet∣ter Posture. On  11th of April, Ruy Gonçalez de Camara ell upon Five Hundred Moors, in an Orchard, with such Success, that only Fifty of them escaped. He took Five Colours, and lost only Two Men, but had many wounded. 8. Fortune could not be always favour∣able to the Besieged, sometimes they must meet Disasters. The Moors enraged at that Loss, played their great Cannon incessant∣ly: A Chance-all from one of them, light∣ing upon one of the Galleys that brought the Relief, sunk her downright, with all that was in her, being rty Men, and Goods valued at Forty Thousand Ducats. The Moors did not lo rejoyce a this Ac∣cident; for Ferdina ez fallying the next Day with Four Hundred Men on the Side of St. Francis, obtained anothe , equal to that of Ruy Goncalez, and brought away some Ammunition, Arms, one Piece of Can∣non, and other Booty. Nizamaluco beheld this Action, and mounting on Horse-back, offered to come down in Person, with a
Lance in his Hand; then changing it to a Whip, in a Rage threatned his Men, and upbraided them as Cowards. 9. Our Men were now so accustomed to Danger, nothing could terrifie them; and they seemed to court Death, as if she had not been busie enough about them. Some of our Soldiers being employed, levelling the Enemy's Works we had driven them from about St. Francis, and being more han∣dy at the Sword than Spade, drew upon themselves a great Number of Enemies, whereof they killed above Two Hundred, not without Loss on our Side. 10. D. Iohn de Lima, Francis de Sá, and D. Nunno Alvarez went out to discover some Mines it was thought the Enemy was carry∣ing on. They executed their Command, entring those Quarters, where they put all that were in them to the Sword. In these two Actions we lost Six Private Soldiers, and D. Luis de Gastellobranco, who having lost one Leg, offered the other; D. Iohn de Li∣ma, who seeing a Moor miss several Shots he made at him, stood still till he was killed; performing his Promise made on his Brother D. Duarte's Grave, that he would soon fol∣low him; Anthony de Fonseca, he who hung by his Lance at Parnel, and laughed at the Enemy; Francis Barradas, and Ruy Pereyra de Sa, and Five other Gentlemen of note. 11. After the King had made it appear he designed to continue the Siege all the Winter, and all Things were on both Sides disposed in order thereto, Faretecan made
some Overtures of Peace, but without any visible Commission from his Prince, who caused him to be apprehended, not for act∣ing therein without Orders, for, doubtless, he had private Instructions; but upon suspi∣tion that he was corrupted. It was no won∣der if Nizamaluco desired a Peace, after ly∣ing before a Town Seven Months, without any Success, but losing as many Thousand Men. Nor was it strange the Portugueses should wish it, having already lost above Four Hundred of their own, besides Indians. But the Hopes of Peace being extinguished by the Imprisonment of Faretecan, George Pereyra Coutinno went out with his Ships, and, without any considerable Loss, burnt Three that belonged to Nizamaluco. 12. It was now the Beginning of Iune, and the Attacks and Batteries were carried on with such Vigour, as if they then be∣gan. The first Attempt was upon D. Nun∣no Alvarez his House, which was lost through Carelesness. Yet after it was taken, some Gentlemen attempting to recover it, lost at least Twenty Portugueses, without doing any considerable Execution. Next, the Enemy possessed themselves of the Monastery of St. Dominick, where great Slaughter was made. At D. Gonçalo de Meneses his House it was well fought, but to our great Loss. In all the other Quarters, the Cannon-Balls lew like Hail. Let us come to the last As∣sault. 13. The Batteries never ceased from the End of May, till the End of Iune; Niza∣maluco
resolving to make a Breach fit for his whole Army to try its Fortune. On the 28th the Elephants appeared loaded with Castles, and the Castles full of Men. A va∣liant Moor, well mounted, walked leisurely before all our Works, within Musquet-shot, and never altered his Pace; notwithstanding above Five Hundred Shot was made at him, and his Horse wounded, he went off un∣hurt. The whole Army expected the Sign to move, but it was not given because our Cannon killed an Officer of Note, which the King took as an ill Omen, and put off the Assault till next Day. Six of our Men ven∣turing out of the Works, drew a great Mul∣titude of the Enemy within reach of our Shot which was so well bestowed, that One Hundred and Eighteen fell down dead, and above Five Hundred were wounded, with out doing us the least hurt. 14. The next Day about Noon the King gave the Signal to fall on; and the whole Body of Men and Elephants advanced with horrible Cries, and Noise of Warlike Instru∣ments. Agalascan attacked Iames Suarez de Albergaria, Iohn de Silva Barreto, Roderick Homen de Silva, and Laurence de Brito, in their Posts. Faretecan and Sujatecan fell on the Quarter of the Misericordia. Misnarr, Captain of the Guards, on that of Ruy Gon∣çalez. D. Francis, our Commander in Chief, being to relieve where-ever the greatest Dan∣ger pressed, planted himself opposite to the King with part of his Men, having distribu∣ted the rest where there was need.
15. The Day was darken'd with Smoak, at Times lighted with Flames; the Slaugh∣ter and Confusion was great on all Sides. Some of the Enemy's Colours were planted on our Works, but soon taken, or cast down, with those who had boldly set them up. The Elephants, made drunk by the Nayres, that they might be the more fierce, being burnt and wounded, ran madly about the Field. One much valued by the King, being fired in the Flames, ran into the Wa∣ter, and swam over the Bar, where one of our Vessels killed him with a Cannon-Shot. In fine, The Assault ended with the Day, the Portugueses remaining Masters of all their Works, after killing above Three Thousand of the Enemies; among which, one was the Son of Agalascan, and many more of Note. 16. This Action cost us but a few private Soldiers, and Eight Gentlemen. D. Henry de Meneses being lame, having his Legs burnt, caused himself to be carried in a Chair. Laurence de Brito took a Colours. Gonçalo Rodriguez Caldera and Hierome Cur∣v would not leave their Posts, after receiv∣ing many dangerous Wounds. In fine, All did more than mortal Actions; it would be a Lessening of others to commend some, and we cannot particularize them all. 17. The Moors asked Leave to bury their Dead; which being granted, as they drew them off, they asked the Portugueses, What Woman it was that went before them in the Fight, and whether she was alive? One an∣swered,
Yes; for, doubtless, she was immortal. And they replied, Then certainly, it was the Lady Marian. So they call the Blessed Vir∣gin. Many said they saw her at Lawrence de Brito's Quarter, so bright, that she blind∣ed them. And some who went to see her Image in the Churches, were converted, and staid in Town. 18. Nizamaluco was desirous to treat of Peace, but was not willing to shew it: Our Commander wished as much as he, and was as backward in making it appear. At length both Sides abated, and a Treaty was set on foot: Faretecan and Azafacan were Com∣missioners for Nizamaluco: Peter de Silva, and Meneses, and Anthony de Teyve, for our Commander in Chief; and D. Francis Ma∣scarennas Baroche, for the Captain of the Ci∣ty. The Substance of the Accommodation was a League Offensive and Defensive be∣tween Nizamaluco and King Sebastian. This Agreement was celebrated with great Joy, and sending of rich Presents on both Sides. All this might have been done, without so much Effusion of Blood. Nizamaluco raised his Camp, and returned home.
CHAP. XI. The Proceedings of Zamori upon this Oc∣casion, and during the Government of D. Luis de Ataide. 1. ZAmori the third Chief of this League, who was to act by Sea as Sovereign thereof among those of India, performed his Part very coldly. After Goa and Chaul had been Besieged a Month, he instead of putting his Fleet to Sea, sent to treat of Peace with the Viceroy, either by this means to amuze him, or else to gain some Advantage upon his pressing Necessities. For few Princes follow the Dictates of Honour, when opposite to their Interest. This Af∣fair being proposed in Council at Goa, it was unanimously agreed to accept of a Peace though upon hard terms. But the Viceroy who had resolved to loose all or nothing, said, He would make no Peace unless upon such Terms, as he might expect in the most flourishing Condition. 2. Zamori seeing this Design fail, set out a Fleet about the end of February under the Command of Catiproca Marca. He soon ap∣peared before Chaul with twenty-one Sail, and a great number of Men, whereof above One thousand were Musqueteers, and passed by Night through all our Gallies and Gal∣leons that filled the Port without opposition. The Entrance was defended against only
two Paraos, whereof one got in, the other not. The Malabars with reason boasted of this Action, and Nizamaluco's Men rejoyced at the Success. 3. Nizamaluco was much pleased at the arrival of the Malabars, posted the 1000 Musqueteers, and then perswaded the Of∣ficers to attack our Ships, which were under the Command of Leonel de Sousa. A great number of Calemutes, which are small Vessels that King made use of, were crammed full of Men to accompany the twenty-one Ma∣labars, every one going as to a sure Victory. They set out with great eagerness, bearing down upon Lionel de Sousa, and fled with the same precipitation seeing him make at them. Yet for all their haste our Gallies did considerable execution among them. Nizamaluco, who from a height had been looking on, did all he could to perswade them to try their Fortune again, but to no purpose; for after twenty days they stole away by night out of that Harbour with the same good Fortune they came in. 4. The Queen of Mangalor thinking to make some Advantage of these Confusions, and hearing: that Catiproca was near with his Fleet, represented to him how easily our Fort might be surprized, and offered to defray the Charge. He accepted the Pro∣posal, thinking to regain the Credit lost at Chaul. Unexpectedly he applies scaling Ladders, and some of his Men mounted Some Servants of D. Antony Pereyra, who Commanded there, awaking, and seeing the
Enemy, threw out of a Window the first thing came to hand, which was a Chest of their Master's full of Silver, and with it beat down those that were upon the Ladder. Pereyra waking with the noise, threw down those that had mounted, the other fled carry∣ing away the Chest aboard the Ships. As they passed before Cananor, D. Iames with his Squadron fell upon and totally routed them. D. Iames follows them up the Ri∣ver of Tiracole, and not one Ship of them escaped, Cutiproca was killed, and his Ne∣phew Cutiale taken, as also D. Antony's Chest recovered. 5. Zamori did not fulfil the Articles of the League by sending this Fleet, for every one had promised to undertake something in Person; till now D. Iames de Meneses had obstructed him, scouring that Sea, burning many Towns and Ships, and taking many which he carried to Goa. Towards the end of Iune, when D. Iames was gone, and Hi∣dalcau and Nizamaluco were about drawing off, Zamori fate down before the Fort of Cbale with 100000 Men, most of them Musqueteers. This place is but two Leagues from Calicut, that Prince's Court, and was then held by D. George de Castro. The E∣nemy planted forty Pieces of Brass Cannon, and girting the place round thought they had shut out all hopes of Relief. Some was sent from Cochim under the Conduct of D. Antony de Noronna, who could not put it into the Place, for the furious Batteries of the Ene∣mies Cannon. Francis Pereyra de Sousa com∣ing
from Cananor with extravagant Bravery, conquered the difficulty, but the Relief was small because the Vessels were so. As soon as the Viceroy had advice, he sent D. Iames de Meneses with eighteen Sail to carry Supplies to the Fort. He with great difficulty got to Chale about the end of September, when the Besieged were reduced to the last Extre∣mities, there being at least Six hundred Per∣sons in the place, whereof not above Seventy that could bear Arms. 6. It seemed impracticable to attempt the putting in any Relief, for the mouth of the Harbour was very narrow, and all the Hills about it were planted with Cannon. But our Commander resolved to surmount all Difficulties: A great Vessel was filled with Provisions for two months, and fifty Soldiers put into it. Iames de Azambuja went be∣fore in his Gally, and Antony Fernandez and D. Luis de Meneses cover'd it with their Vessels. They pierced with incredible Cou∣rage through Showrs of Bullets, and Fer∣dinand de Mendoca, Nephew to D. Iames, run in all the Supplies, whilst Francis de Sousa with his Men killed above Five hun∣dred of the Enemy, who endeavour'd to ob∣struct it. This done, they retired through the same Dangers with loss of forty Men. As they were cutting off a Soldier's Leg he asked whether the Succour was got in, and hearing it was, Then, said he, let me die in God's Name, for I cannot die more honour∣ably.
7. Though it was not possible to bring the ss People out of the Fort, as was de∣sign'd, yet the putting in of Relief was an Action scarce to be parallell'd, for the great hazard and difficulty that attended, and vast Power that opposed it. 8. The King of Achem, the Fourth of these great Confederates, whose thoughts were always employed against Malaca, did not in point of time answer the Covenants of the League, but we shall see him at length in the Government of D. Antony de Noronna performing what he so long delayed. The Queen of Guarcopa and others, as has been related, made up what was wanting in him. 9. This was the end of that mighty League; this the Government, Valour and Fortune of our Viceroy; who opposing all the united Power of India, re-established the Portugues Reputation, so much decayed; For which he deserves an everlasting Fame. 10. D. Luis de Ataide Lord of Atouguia was of unquestioned Valour, had great Ex∣perience in Military Affairs, to which he had applied himself from his Youth, and of a Spirit so free from the Infection of Ava∣rice, that as others brought from Asia to Portugal heaps of Treasure, he brought four Jars of Water from the four famous Rivers, Indus, Ganges, Tigris and Euphrates, which were preserved many Years in his Castle of Penicbe. 11. After serving in Europe and Africk he went over to India, and served there, and at the Age of twenty-two, was Knighted at
Mount Sinai by the Governor D. Stephen  Gama. Returning to Portugal he went A bassador to the Emperor Charles V. and was in that Battle in which the Emperor defeat∣ed the Lutherans under the Landtgrave and Duke of Saxony; where he behaved himself so well, that Charles V. offered to Knight him, and he said, He had already received that Honour at Mount Sinai, and was there∣fore sorry he could not admit it then. The Emperor in the hearing of all answer'd, He more envyed that Honour, than he rejoyced in his Victory. 12. At his arrival at Lisbon King Sebastian caused him to be received under a Canopy, yet afterwards (like King Emanuel and Duarle Pacheco) very much slighted him. We shall see it when he is made the second time Viceroy, being the first that was so twice. D. Antony de Noronna succeeded him now: He was the Tenth that had this Title, and of Governours the Twenty-fourth: The First of the Name and Sirname, the Third Count that had that Post: He was of the larger size, had a good Meen, his Com∣plexion white.
CHAP. XII. The Government of the Viceroy D. Antony de Noronna, from the Year 1571 till 1573, in the Reign of King Sebastian. 1. KING Sebastian thinking the Govern∣ment of India, as it was then ex∣tended, too great a Burden for one Man, di∣vided it into three Parts: The first from Cape Guardafu to the Island Ceylon, which is that of India: The second from Cape Cor∣rientes to Guardufu, which is Monomotapa: The third from Pegu to China, which is that of Malaca. The first was given to D. Antony de Noronna, with the Title of Vice∣roy; the second to Francis Barreto, and the third to Antony Moniz Barreto, both stiled Governors. Though it may alter things as to point of time, I will speak of them in distinct Chapters, beginning with D. Antony de Noronna. 2. He set out from Lisbon with five Ships, and was followed by two more. They ar∣rived at Goa the beginning of September safe as to the number of Ships, for none was lost; but not so as to Men, 2000 dying at Sea of sickness of 4000 that set out. D. Antony came before Hidalcan had raised the Siege, and thereby obtained part of the Honour of obliging him to quit it. Hidalcan lest Com∣missioners to conclude the Peace with the new Viceroy. It was proclaimed with great
Joy on the 13th of December, and so the Year and the War ended together. 3. The first care of the new Viceroy was to send Relief to Chale in two Galleys, one Galleon and four Ships, and after them two Galleys and tee other Vessels. But these were soon applied to other uses; D. Iames de Meneses coming from Chale, he sent him back with 1500 Men, who came too late, the Fort being already delivered to Zamori upon Conditions. This surrender was made contrary to the plurality of Votes by the Commander D. George de Castro, overcome by the Prayers and Tears of his Wife and other Ladies that were there, without considering that he was Eighty Years of Age, and ought rather to chuse an honou∣rable Death, than a short term of infamous Life. Nor was this all his fault, for the Provision had lasted longer, had not he put it into his Wife's Hands, and she into those of her Slaves. Thus she was the first Eve among the Portugueses of India that tempted her Husband to a Crime of this na∣ture, this being the first place so delivered by them to the Enemy. And the Viceroy could not but lose more Honour by loss of Chale, than he could justly pretend to by the raising the Siege of Goa. 4. D. Iames gathering the People that came out of Chale, and were under the Prote∣ction of the King of Tanor, left them at Cochin, Then dividing his Fleet with Mathi de Al∣buquerque, they clear'd the Sea of Pyrats and secured the Coasts; next they took and de∣molished
a Fort built by a Nayque subject to Hidalcan, at the mouth of the River San∣guicer. Here was killed Antony Fernandez. Chale, a Malabar, who for his Valour and Conduct had often the Honour to Command many of the bravest Gentlemen that were in India at that time. He was of the Order of Christ, was carried to Goa, and there buried with greater State than any till that day, that had not been Governor of India. 5. When the Viceroy accepted this Com∣mand in Portugal, so much lessened by the Division of Governments, his great aim was to get an Estate, being poor, and having Children. He thought India might mend his broken Fortune, and that Antony Moniz Barrto would be satisfied with less than was ordered to fit him out for the Government of Malaca; he was deceived, for Moniz was not satisfied with what could be done, nor was India in a Condition to give what was promised him in order to go to Malaca, nor Malaca in a posture for a Man, who look'd upon his Reputation, to go thither with that Title without a considerable Force. The one would not go with what was given him, and the other could not give more. Diffi∣culties hard to be composed. 6. Moniz resolved not to go to Malaca, and writ to Portugal that the Reason was, be∣cause the Viceroy would not furnish him with what was requisite, as not desiring he should go. Malicious Whispers are gene∣rally grateful to Princes and great Men. Those who govern'd King Sebastia (un∣happy
Kingdom, whose King is a Child!) with∣out any other Information besides this Gen∣tleman's, which all tended to his own Ad∣vantage, committed the weakest Act that has been heard of: Moniz himself will shame them and himself, as shall appear in its pro∣per place. 7. The Vice-Roy, after fitting out several Squadrons as usual, and receiving four Ships from Portugal, two whereof were lost in their Return, was obliged to make ready a considerable Succour for Damam, threatned by the Mogol, on account that that Place and Baaim both belonged to the Kingdom of Cambaya, whereof he was now possessed; and by this Means Sultan Mamud, Heir to the late King of Cambaia, was left to the Tuition of three Great Men, Alucan, Itimi∣tican and Madremaluco. Each of these envy∣ing the others Fortune, strove to make him∣self Master of the young King: And he finding all their Aim was Power, fled from Madremaluco, where he thought himself in danger, to Itimitican, and totally lost him∣self. They were all three bad, but this was the worst of all. Therefore, considering the young King might flee from him, as he had done from the others, he resolved to lay aside all Shame, and betray him. Gelalde  Hecbar Taxa, King of the Mogols, was now in great Power; to him he offers to deliver the King; by which means, with a small Army, he might possess himself of that Kingdom, whereof he should be Vice∣roy, as a Reward of his Treachery. Hecbar
agreed, set forward with a good Army; and at the City Amadaba, the Traitor deli∣vered up his Prince to him; and so the Mo∣gol, without drawing Sword, was seated in the Throne of Cambaia. 8. Hecbar not satisfied with what he had got, resolved to recover the Lands and Towns of Baçaim and Damam. This Design being known, D. Luis de Almeyda, Com∣mander of Damam, gave Advice to the Vice∣roy; who immediately sent some Succours, and prepared to follow in Person. He set out from Goa the Latter End of December, with nine Galleys, five Gallions, eight Gal∣liots, and ninety other Vessels. 9. The Viceroy being come into the Ri∣ver of Damam, struck such a Terrour into the Enemy, who was encamped two Leagues off, that the King immediately sent an Am∣bassador to the Viceroy, to treat of Peace. The Viceroy received him in his Galley with great State, and firing all the Cannon of the Fleet; and having heard his Propo∣sals, sent back with him Anthony Cabrall, who concluded the Peace to the Content of both Parties. The Viceroy returned to Goa, and the Mogol setled himself in the Possession of the Kingdom of Cambaya, cutting off the Head of the Traitor Itimitican, a just Reward of his Villany. 10. The Inhabitants of  were of∣fended at the Fort lately buit by us there; they besieged it to the number of 6000. Ruy Gonçalez de Camara, who commanded there, gave Advice to the Viceroy, and provided
to make a good Defence. Five Sail came immediately to his Relief; then twelve more, under the Command of D. George de Meneses, who by the Way destroyed the Town of the Naique of Sanguiçer, with great Slaughter of the Enemy, and Loss of two Men. With∣out the Bay of Braçalor he took a Ship of Me∣ca; and entring, found all was safe, with the Succour of the first Ships. 11. D. Henry de Meneses sailing to the Northward with one Galley and seven other Vessels, near the Islands of Angerula, eight Leagues from Chaul, took two great Ships be∣longing to Hidalcan; but a Storm arising, they were all drove ashore, and taken by Mala∣bars, who carried them to Hidalcan; and he, because the Ships were taken after the late Conclusion of Peace, (though the Fault was theirs, for answering with their Cannon, when they were required to shew Portuguese. Passes, as had been agreed) caused D. Hen∣ry, and all the Portugueses then at his Court, to be put into the Castle of Bilgam; and it cost some trouble to release them, and ap∣pease that Prince. 12. It was the Middle of October when the King of Achem (though late, yet pursuant to the great League before spoke of) appeared before Malaca, with almost 100 Sail, 7000 Men, and a vast quantity of Ammunition. He landed the same Night of his Arrival, and suddenly set fire to the Town of Iller; which had been burnt to the Ground, had not as sudden and violent a Shower of Rain quenched it. Iohn Bandara, Captain of the
Horse, ran with more Zeal than Discretion to succour the Town, and was killed. 13. The Enemy attempted to burn our Ships; but failing in this, and other Designs, he sate down before the City, resolving to carry it by a regular Siege, having at first thought it would not cost him that Trouble. The City was in a miserable Condition, ve∣ry poor, without Men, unhealthy and out of heart, having suffered much by Ship∣wrecks, Sickness and Famine, not without deserving it; for Malaca was (I know not whether it is) the Portuguese Ninive in Asia. CHAP. XIII. The Siege of Malaca, with other Occur∣rences, and End of the Government of D. Anthony de Noronna. 1. MAlaca had, in a manner, no Hopes of Defence; the Enemy incessant∣ly battered the Walls, and cut off all Provi∣sion from coming to it: There was nothing within but Misery, and Calling upon God for Mercy, without deserving it by any other Action, but because they implored it. So case it is to appease the Divine Wrath. 2. So it happened; for in this Extremity, accidentally came into that Port Tristan Vaz de Vega, with one only Ship, in which he sailed for Sanda, to load with Spice. The Beged earnestly ntreated him to assist
them, and he could not but give ear to their Intreaty, though it seemed a Rashness to en∣gage a Fleet of an Hundred Sail with Ten, whereof Nine were almost rotten, and un∣rigged. Among these were distributed 300 Soldiers, as naked as hungry. The Captain, who might repose much Confidence in his own Valour, acknowledging, in such Cases there ought to be no Trust but in God, gave the Example, and caused all his Men to con∣fess, and prepare themselves for Death. 3. About the End of November he sailed, and discovered the Enemy's Fleet in the Ri∣ver . He gave the Command of his own Ship to Emanuel Ferreyra, and went himself into a Galliot with his Sword in his Hand, to encourage the Men, seeing him expose himself to the greatest Danger with them. The Signal being given, and the Cannon furiously discharged, our Captain lays the Enemy's Admiral on Board, makes great Havock among 200 Men that were in her, beats down her Flag, and she getting loose, shews him her Stern. 4. Mean while, Ferdinand Perez, with on∣ly thirteen Men, in a small Vessel, took a Galley. Ferdinand de Lemos runs his Ship with such force against another, that he over∣set and sunk her. Francis de Lima having ta∣ken another, burnt it, to be at leisure to re∣turn to the Fight, that still continued. Ema∣nuel Ferreyra, who was in Vega's Ship, sunk three Vessels, unrigged others, and killed many Men. To be short, Every one fought to admiration, the whole Enemies Fleet fled,
except four Galleys and seven small Vessels that were burnt or sunk; 700 of the Enemy were kill'd and taken, of ours only five were slain: Our Ships waited three days to see if the Enemy would return, and then carried this joyful News to Malaca, where it was scarce believed. 5. Let us see what was doing at the Ma∣lucos. Whilst Gonçalo Pereyra Marramaque, our Admiral in those Seas, carried Relief to Ternate from Amboina, this Fort was Besieg'd by the Fleet of Ternate, sent by the King ei∣ther to stop Pereyra from going to relieve our Men whom he held in great Distress, or if he were gone to possess themselves of those Islands. They being too late to stop him, besieged the People of Ulate in the Islands of Iliacer. They had been forty days shut up, when D. Duarte de Meneses with Sancho de Vasconcelos, who commanded at Sea, came to their Relief. They of Ulate encourag'd with this Succor, fell upon the Besiegers and put them to flight. They presented our Captain with Baskets of Heads, and he re∣turning to Amboina, found D. Duarte dead, and succeeded him in that Command. The Command of the Sea he gave to Simon de A∣breu, call'd Papabierro, that is Sword-swal∣lower, because, being concern'd in many Duels, he always disarm'd his Adversary. 6. Being abroad with his Squadron he met that of Ternate, and there began a furious Battle, but the other Vessels in the heat of the Action forsook him, and he overpower'd by the Multitude was killed, and 25 men
with him. Autony Lopz de Resende, who went not off with those Cowards, came to succour him, but it being too late; the Ene∣my offer'd him Quarter, and he refused it, saying, He bad rather die as his Commander had done. The Admiral of Ternate attacks, him, and he taking a Cannon upon his Shoulder (I suppose it was a little one) or∣der'd a Souldier to give fire to it, so succes∣fully, that it broke the Admiral's Leg. His Men thought him dead, and whilst they were busie about him Resende had time to make his escape, having lost four Men in this great Action. 7. The little King of Atua, a new Con∣vert, who had fought bravely, was betrayed to Reboanje, Commander of the Ternatenses, who offer'd him his Life if he would renounce the Faith, and threatned him with a new sort of Martyrdom if he refused: He con∣tinued firm; and being hung by a Rope be∣tween two Vessels, Reboanje's Galley run with all its force at, and tore him to pieces. 8. Iohn de Silva succeeded in the Com∣mand of the Sea. All our Men seeing so many misfortunes befal us in those Islands, were for quitting them: Only Sancho de Vas∣concelos protested he would not abandon the Christians of those Islands, affirming, if no Body would bear him Company he would stay alone and defend them with the Natives, They were all asham'd, and yielded to his Resolution. They quitted Ito, and fortified themselves upon the Point of Rosanive, where the Land makes a Bay of four Leagues in
Length, and three Leagues over at the mouth, and runs up still narrower like a Pyramid; on one side of the Point is the pleasant and plentiful Town of Rosanive, the Inhabitants thereof and the neighbouring Places were our Friends. There the new Fort was built, the Atives and Tavires labouring at it with great Fidelity to the Portugueses, by whom they were reduced to the Faith, which they firmly adhered to. Iohn de Silva went to Malaca for Succor, which was granted him by Francis de Costa commanding there, and was cast away in the Bay of Tapara, where the Men were made Slaves. 9. Though these were lost, yet some Sup∣plies came to Amboina, sent by the Viceroy. Our Enemies at Atua falling on a sudden up∣on the Portugueses, killed five and an Italian esuit. Mascarennas fled into the Woods, whence he was brought out at the end of eight days almost famished. Sancho gather∣ing our Friends, fell upon Atua, and killed not only the Children at their Mother's Breasts, but the very Beasts. In the Island , twelve Leagues distant, he did the same, some of the Natives retiring to a Moun∣tain. 10. At this time time arrived at Goa four Ships from Portugal, under the Command of D. Francis de Sousa, who as soon as he land∣ed, went to the Archbishop D. Gasper, and deliver'd to him a Letter from the King, and other Papers. Scarce had that ancient and learned Man seen them, when without any consideration, he committed a great weak∣ness,
putting those Orders in Execution; for there being several Circumstances that ought to be weighed by a Person of his Years and Profession, he instantly with great disorder called together several persons appointed for this extravagant Action into the Church▪ 11. The Orders were read by a Cryer; they contain'd, That D. Antony de Noronn should be deposed from the Viceroyship, and that Antony Moniz Barreto should imme∣diately succeed him with the Title of Go∣vernour. All Noronna's Crime, whereby he merited to be thus deposed, was, that he gave not to Moniz what was not in his power to give; and all the Merit of Moniz, that he promised that which afterwards he could not perform. D. Antony return'd to Portu∣gal, though slighted, not inglorious; for extravagant Injuries done by Superiors, are rather Honours than Affronts to the Person that receives them: Yet he not well consi∣dering it, died for Grief, as did his Wife and Brother-in-law; and that Minister  State who was the cause of their Death, by crediting so slightly the Information of An∣tony Moniz, being sensible of the wrong he had done, broke his Heart: And King Se∣bastian hearing of the Death of D. Antony, declared he was sorry it happen'd before  had made him reparation of his Hono D. Antony was a Man of great Honour, Si cerity and Prudence, and who, according to the Rules of the World, deserved his ill Fortune. His Visage long and disagreeable, his Body large and gross. In the number of
Viceroys he was the 11th, in that of Gover∣nors the 25th; the 1st of the Name, and 4th of the Sirname; he held the Government wo Years, and deserved to hold it many. CHAP. XIV. The Government of Antony Moniz Bar∣reto, from the Year 1573 till 1576, in the Reign of King Sebastian. 1. SCarce had the Bishop concluded that Act so misbecoming the Pastoral Staff, 1573▪ when he took out another Order, wherein Gonçalo Pereyra Marramaque was appointed to succeed Antony Moniz Barreto in the Go∣vernment of Malaca, and in default of him D. Leonis Pereyra was named. The latter suc∣ceeded, for the other died after relieving of Ternate. This done, that Pharisaical Caba broke up, and hasted to carry the News to he Viceroy, who received it with such un∣concernedness as might well put them all out of Countenance. 2. Advice is now brought, that Malaca s again in danger, the Kng of Achem being again before it, assisted by the Queen of Ia∣a. The new Governor orders D. Leonis Peryra to be gone to his Government to ccour that place; D. Leonis demands of im what he had before demanded of D. Atony, and he returns the same answer No∣a had given him, without remembring
what he had writ to the King, or consider∣ing he had now less reason to refuse D. L∣onis, than Noronna had to deny him, for then India was threatned by all the Power of the East, and was now deliver'd of that danger. D. Leonis, to take all manner of excuse from him, would have been satisfied with much less now, than Moniz demanded before: But even that was not given him, and he came away for Portugal; where that was his Justification for not taking upon him that Command, but was not esteemed an Offence to deprive Moniz of the Govern∣ment, as it was with less reason in the Case of D. Antony; whereby it appears, the Will of Ministers of State makes the Crimes or Merit of such as depend on them. 3. This Year passed without any thing remarkable, and about the end of it arriv'd six Ships from Portugal: They carried an Order for Trying and Executing D. George do Castro, for delivering up the Fort of  to Zamori. He was taken into Custody, and with him his Wife Donna Felipa, who, tho' really guilty of the Crime, was not liable to undergo the Punishment. He suffer'd for her, and all that were in fault, having his Head cut off upon a Scaffold in the Market Place of Goa; and it was observ'd, that others who were as much to blame as he, did not only escape unpunish'd, but were re∣warded; and it is yet more remarkable, that a Year after a Commission was sent from Portugal, for D. George de Castro to serve in another Post.
4. Scarce did India begin to breath, after so many Troubles, and particularly Malaca, when the Queen of Iapara sent to Besiege it, her General Quiaidaman with 15000 chosen Natives of Iava, in almost 80 great Galleons, and above 220 smaller Vessels. Tristan Vaz de Vega was come back thither from Sunda after the late Victory: By com∣mon Consent, and with much Justice, he was chose Commander of that Place, D. Francis Enriquez his Predecessor being dead. He gave Advice of the danger to the Governor Antony Moniz, and he to all the neighbour∣ing Places, promising to requite whatever they should do in order to relieve the Be∣sieged; whereby such Succours came into them on a sudden, as put them into a good posture of Defence. 5. Mean while Moniz demanded of the Chamber of Goa to lend him 20000 Pardaos to fit out a Fleet, and finding them back∣ward, offer'd his Son Duarte Moniz, a Boy of eight Years of age, as a Pledge; the Chamber gave the Money, and took the Pledge. 6. Whilst this Fleet was fitting out, the General of Iava began to act in the same manner the Ring of  had done, at∣tacking Iller; and D. Antony de Castro coming with only ten Men to defend it was killed, as Bandara had been the last Siege. The whole Army landed and lodged themselves ound the Town. Vega sent Iohn Pereyra and Martin Ferreyra with 150 men to beat the Enemy from a Post; they killed 70 of
them, levelled their Works, and brought off seven Pieces of Cannon. Pereyra afterwards burnt above 30 of their Galleons, and some great Engines they had framed to attack a Bastion. Ferdinand Perez de Andrade a d Bernardin de Silva burnt their Palisades. In all these Actions we lost 15 or 20 me. The River being thus cleared, Pereyra with our Vessels besieges the Besiegers, and at In takes the Provisions that were coming to them; whereupon in great Consternation they Imbarqued and went off by night. P∣reyra pursues and cuts off their Rear: Almost half the 15000 perished by Fire, Sword, and Sickness during the Siege, which lasted three months, and the pursuit of three hours. 7. The King of Achem and Queen of I∣para took it by turns, for when he left the 1575. Port she came in, and he now comes in  she goes out. He came now with 40 Gallies, some Ships, Galliots and other Vessels, to the number of 100, with a great Train of Artillery. Tristan Vaz order'd Iohn Perey in a Galley, Bernardin de Silv in a Caravel, and Ferdinand de Pallres in a Ship with each 40 Men to go out to guard the Provisions that were coming, and whereof the City was in great want; the Enemy falls upon them, and in an instant beat all three to pieces; 75 Men perish'd by Fire; Sword and Water, 40 were taken, and only five sav'd themselves by swimming, the three Captains fought to their last breath. Iohn Pereyra promised s to do, to one who seeing all lost offered hi a Boat in which he might have escaped.
Only 150 men remained in Malaca to de∣fend it, and of these 100 were sick and aged. Want of Men and Ammunition caused them to be very still in the City. The Enemy not knowing the Cause, imagined they had some cunning Stratagem in hand, and in a panick Fear raised the Siege, when they might have carried the Town, contenting themselves with their success against the three Captains. They came into the Port in the beginning of Ianuary, and went out about the latter end. 8. The Priests, Women and Children had cried loud with sighs and tears, implo∣ring the Mercy of God, which at length they obtain'd: Next to God the City was saved by Tristan Vaz de Vega's Courage, be∣ing ready upon all Occasions; and by his liberality having spent above 20000 Ducats, wherewith he has purchased a never-dying Honour. The Succours the Governour sent came too late. 9. D. Iohn de Costa, Admiral of the Ma∣labar Seas, cruized there victorious with two Gallies and 24 other Vessels. He fell upon the Town of Gaipar, near Braçalor, then in Rebellion, kill'd 1500 of the Inhabitants, burnt the Town, and cut down the Woods. Thus the King of Tolar, grown haughty, was humbled. In the River of Chale he de∣stroyed an Island belonging to Zamori. A∣bove that his City of Parapangulem could not escape its Ruin. The Heir of the Crown coming to the Relief of it, was killed with 200 Moors. At Capcate 300 were ain, with
the loss of two on our side. At Mount De∣lii, the Town of Nilachiram was consumed to Ashes. Between these Actions, several Vessels were taken, which supplied the Gal∣leys with Slaves, and the Fleet with Provi∣sions. 10. Let us now see our Dominion in the Molucos drawing to an end. New Comman∣ders were still sent to ruin all by their Ava∣rice, with strength to maintain the Fort: D. Alvaro de Ataide was now there, and Nanno Pereyra under Sail to succeed him. The King of Ternate continued the Seige, and the place was almost famished. It look∣ed as if God had undertaken the Re∣venge of his Father's Death, and assisted him to starve that Garrison; for no Succor was sent thither, but perished. Of all Marra∣maque his Squdron not the least Vessel re∣turn'd to Goa; four Ships that went with Antony de Valadares and Lacerda were cast away in several places, and he got thither a∣lone, and after him Francis de Lima with a Galliot. These were comforts to the Be∣sieged, but no perfect Cure. The King of Ujantana, our Friend, supplied the Enemy with Arms. Sancho de Vasconcelos coming from Amboina to succor the Besieged to small effect, found a Galleon of his loaded with them in the Port; and a Portugues Ship at Banda in danger of falling into the hands of those People: For, seeing the decay of ou Affairs on that side, every one strove to ha∣sten our Ruin. Belchior Botello going with one Galleon to relieve the Fort, was ca
away on the Sands Solocos, Another in which D. Alvaro was going, away, after resigning that Command to Nunno, was beat to pieces in the Harbor. The great Ship of Lionel de Brito came when there was no Fort therē, and was lost afterwards. Other Supplies, a great deal of Cannon, much Merchandise and Ammunition, and above 2000 Men de∣sign'd thither, perish'd all by lamentable dis∣asters. The Murderer of that innocent King was stabbed by the People of Iava, rather as Executioners of God's Justice, than Ene∣mies to the Portugueses. Gonçalo Pereyra Marramaque, who consented to the Murder, died for meer Grief of so many Misfortunes, as he sailed for Amboina, and was cast into the Sea. 11. In ine, our Dominion in that Island came to a dishonourable Period; for those who had so insolently treated the Ternatenses, were forced to beg their Lives of them, de∣livering up the Fort to the King, who treat∣ed them better than they deserved. 12. The King entring the Fort, protested before the Portugueses, he did not take pos∣session of it for himself, but in trust for the King of Portugal, and would deliver it to whoever he should appoint, as soon as the Murder of his Father was punish'd. I be∣lieve they never demanded the Fort, becaus they would not oblige themselves to do Ju∣stice. This was the second Place we lost after this manner in Asia. The loss of this Place was not punished as that of Chale, the Cime being the same, only with this
difference, that the Tears of the Women extorted the one, and the Perswasions of Je∣suits the other. The arrival of that Ship, with sufficient Supplies was a testimony of the Guilt. But both places being lost for want of Relief, they ought rather to have been Executed who did not relieve, than they that surrendred them. It was a good answer of the King of Persia to a Portugues Ambassador, when asking, How many Gover∣nours of India the King had beheaded? the Ambassador said, None: Then replied the King, The Dominion of the Portugueses in India will not last long. 13. Our Affairs at Amboina were not in much better a posture; for though Sancho de Vasconcelos did more than could be ex∣pected of his force, yet it was less than was requisite, it was but rising and falling. He defeated two Fleets of Ternate, killed their Commanders, and Cachil Tidore; the People of Amboina slew Maladam, and many more, and eat them; for they use to eat those they kill in the Church. By his Order Alexander de Mattos destroyed the Island Iamam, but at length the Natives kill∣ed him and all his Men; but afterwards D. Henry, Unkle to the King of Ti∣dore, coming with Two hundred and fifty Men, slew Two thousand of them. Two Natives of those Islands, as big as Giants, killed with their own hands, the one above Twenty, the other above Thirty Men. San ho returned again, and entred the same Town.
14. The People of Amboina designed pri∣vately to Murder Sancho de Vasconcelos. He suspecting that Ruy de Sousa, a new Con∣vert, and the principal Man of Rosanive, was the Author of that Conspiracy, sent friend∣ly for, and then secured him by the advice of some Portugueses, not without the help of the Jesuits, believing it was for the bet∣ter, and they ruined all: For Sousa escaping out of Prison, did what he never had de∣sign'd, joining our Enemy, and killing a good number of our Men, which put our Affairs into a desperate Posture. 15. This Year F. Peter de Alfaro with three Companions entred the City of Quan∣tung, and perceiving he did not profit much there, returned to Macao, where he built the Church. He was a Spaniard, and seem'd to foresce, that what belong'd now to the Portugueses only would soon belong to his Nation. A token of his Sanctity is, that perishing by Shipwrack, he was afterwards found on the Shore upon his Knees. 16. This Year concludes with the arrival of four Ships from Portugal. Since there is no Account to be found of what our Governor acted the next Year till D. Iames de Meneses succeeded him, let his Government end here, and I will go over to the Relation of what was done these very Years, in Monomotapa, by the Governour Francis Barreto, and his Suc∣cessour Vasco Fernandez Homem. Antony Moniz Barreto was a Man deserving of that Post he obtained, though he got it not fair∣ly,
and was one of the best Governors of India, the Twenty-sixth of that Number, and Second of the Name and Sirname. CHAP. XV. The Government of Francis Barreto in Mo∣nomotapa, beginning in the Year 1569, in the Reign of King Sebastian. 1. SInce, by reason of the Disagreement between Antony Moniz Barreto, and the Viceroy D. Antony de Norronna, and D. Leonis Pereyra, the Government of Ma∣laca, one of the three into which that Dominion was divided, took no effect, let us go over to the other of Monomotapa, which was erected, though it lasted not long. When Francis Barreto returned to Portugal, after having been Governor of In∣dia, he was appointed Admiral of the Gal∣lies: He exercised this Command at the time of that memorable Action of Pennon, by which he gain'd great Reputation. Being come back to Lisbon, and the King resolv'd to make that Division of Governments, he named him for Monomotapa, with the addi∣tional Title of Conqueror of the Mines there. The great inducement to this Con∣quest, was the Information and Experience of the vast quantity of Gold found, particu∣larly
at Manica in the Kingdom of Bocaranga. 2. The Doubt was, whether it were proper for a Man who had been Gover∣nour of all our Dominions in Asia, and this Southern Part of Africk to accept of this, which was the least considerable part into which it was divided, but the danger and difficulty of it made amends for the great∣ness. Three things prevailed with him to accept of it; the first, that he was poor; the second, that he thought it no lessening to take a less Command in Obedience to his Prince; and the third, that it was allowed him, in case the Viceroy and he met at Sea, their Power should be equal in all respects. 3. In fine, Francis Barreto submitted to his King's Command, and the Desires of his Country, and sailed from Lisbon in April, 1569, as Captain, General, and Governor of that Conquest, with three Ships. He carried One thousand Landmen, and might have had more, if the Vessels could have con∣tained them; for the noise of Gold drown∣ed the thoughts of danger, and nothing raises Men like the thoughts of gain. A∣mong these were many Gentlemen and old African Soldiers. Being come to Moçambique, he went to subdue the King of Pate, who was revolted from us. 4. Barreto had Orders not to undertake any thing without the Advice of Francis de Monclaros, a Jesuit, who was the cause of the ill Success of this Enterprize. So great an Error it is to subject a Soldier to a reli∣gious Man: So indiscreet a Presumption
for a religious Man to undertake what does not belong to his profession: There were two ways to the Mines, the one through Monomotapa, the other by Zofala, Barreto was for this, Monclaros for the other, and car∣ryed it, notwithstanding, all the Votes to the contrary, and so the first step they gave was to their ruin. 5. Now the Governor enters upon this Conquest, let us say somthing of its Climate, quality, and extent. The Coast from Cape Delgado to Mozambique, is in the form of a bow; it begins in 9 deg of S. lat. and ends in 14 d. 3 m. in which space are the Islands Pajaros, Mesa; one at the Mouth of the River Paudagi, Mocoloe, Matemo, Queriba, Cobra, near the River Menluane, Quisve, and Cabras, or Del Açotado. Then follow the Rivers, Mcutii, Mucululo, Situ, Habe, Xan∣ga, Samoco, Veloso, Pinda, Quizimaluco, Tin∣tagone. Between these last are the Bays of Xanga and Fuego, and the Sands of Pinda. From Mocambique to the Port of the Bay of Cauea, in 21 deg and half of S. lat. The Continent runs to the Westward, gathering the Waters, where appears the Parcel de Zfala, the dangerous Scylla, and Caribdis of those Seas, into which falls these Rivers, Moeugo, Bayones, Mge, Mojuncoale, San∣gage, Ambuzi, (here lie the three Islands of Angoxa,) Monca, Macolonga, (with three other Islands) Tondamaje, Corombeca, Que∣sungo, Loranga, Chimani, Mogundo, Mafusa, (between the last are the Ports of Quilimane, and Luabo, with the Island Chimgoma,) Ten∣dicalu,
Quiloe, Sabam, Bagoe, Miave, Zofala, (with the opposite Island called Inbansato) Quiloane, Mambony, Molimon, Quilamancohi. Between Cape Bsiqua in 32 deg. of S. lat. and Cape Correntes in 23, is the great Bay of Saua. Into this Bay falls the River In∣hambane, where is the Trade of Ivory. From these names I infer the Language of those People, cannot be harsh, being mostly com∣pounded of the soft Letters, L. and M. 6. The Empire of Monomotapa from the Mouth of Cuama in the East, runs 250 Leagues, is divided by the great River Zam∣bere, which falls into that of Chiri, running through the Country of Borero, where are many other large Rivers, and on their banks many King's, some absolute, some Subjects of Monomotapa; the greatest of the first is Mongas, bordering on Cama and Zambere, which falls into the Sea, between Mozam∣bique and Zofala, to the S. E. by four Mouths. The first that of Quilimane, 90 Leagues from Mozambique. The second Cuama, 25 to the Southward. The third Luabo, 5 Leagues lower, and the fourth Luaboel, 15 more to the South. Between them are fruitful and large Islands, whereof one is 60 Leagues in compass. The River is Navigable, the same number of Leagues up to the Town of Sena, inhabited by Portugueses, and as many more to Tete, a Colony of theirs also. The richest Mines are those of Musapa, called Anfur, the Ophir where the Queen of Saba had her Riches, when she went to Hierusa∣lem. In these Mines has been found a lum
of Gold worth 12000 Ducats, and another of the value of 400000. It is not only found among Stones, but grows up within the bark of several Trees to the top, where the branches spread. The Mines of Man∣cbica and Butica are not much inferior to these. There are many others not so considerable. There are three Fairs or Markets, whither our People Trade for this Gold, from the Castle of Tete on the River Zambeze, 120 ngues from the Sea; the first is Luane four Days journey up the inland. The se∣cond Buento farther distant, and Masapa the third, yet farther of. This Gold was pur∣chased for Cloth, glass-beads, and other things of no value among us. At Masapa re∣sides a Portugues Officer appointed by the Commander of Moçambique, by consent of the Emperor of Monomotapa, but upon con∣dition, not to go into the Country, without his leave upon pain of Death: He is Judge of the differences that arise there. There are Churches of the Dominicans at Massapa, Bo∣cuto, and Luanze. 7. The Original, number and time of the Reign of the Kings is not known; it is be∣lieved, there were several in the time of the Queen of Saba, and that they were subject to her, for thence she had her Gold. In the Mountain Afur, near Masapa, are seen the ruins of stately buildings, supposed to be Pallaces and Castles; in Process of time, the Empire was divided into three Kingdoms, Quiteve, Sabanda, and Chiganga, this last the most powerful, as possessing the Mines
of Manchica, Butua, and others; its believ∣ed, the Blacks of Butua of the Kingdom of Chicanga, are those that carry the Gold to Angola, because 'tis thought there are but 100 Leagues distance between those two pla∣ces; this Country bears Rice, and what we call Indian-wheat, has abundance of all sorts of Cattle, Fowl, and Gardening: Their chief care is Pastorage and Tillage; this Empire is divided into 25 Kingdoms, which are Mongas, Baroe, Manica, Boesa, Ma∣cingo, Remo, Chique, Chiria, Chidima, Boquizo, Inbanzo, Chiruvia, Condesaca, Daburia, Ma∣curumbe, Mungussi, Antiovaza, Cbove, Chun∣gue, Dvia, Romba, Rassini, Chirao, Mocaran∣ga, and Remo de Beza; there are many Lordships, that have not the Title of Kings. 8. The Emperor has a great Palace, though of Wood; the chief Apartments of it are three, one for himself, another for his Wife, and a third for his menial Servants; it has three Doors into a Court, one for the Queen, to go in and out at, another for him and the Servants that attend his Person, and are Sons of his Noblemen; the third for the Cooks, who are two great Men and his Relations; and the under-Cooks who are also Men of Quality. None of these must be above 20 Years of Age, for till that Age, they do not believe they have to do with Women, and if any do, they are severely punished; after that time, they are preferred to great imployments: Those within Doors, are governed by a Captain, and those with∣out
by another, as formerly in Spain, the Alcalde de los Donçeles. 9. The Principal Officers about the King are, Ningomoxa Governor of the Kingdoms, Mocomoaxa, Captain General, Ambuya great Steward; to him it belongs when the Ma∣zarira or the King's Principal Wife dies, to name another in her stead, but it must be one of the King's Sisters or nearest Rela∣tions; Inbantovo, the head Musitian, who has many under him, and is a great Lord; Nurucao, Captain of the Van-guard; Bucu∣rumo, which signifies the King's Right-hand; Magande, the chief Conjurer; Netambe, the Apothecary that keeps the Ointments and utencils for Sorcery; Nebono, chief Porter. All these Offices are executed by Lords; there is no delicacy in Cookery used; they only Eat boyl'd and roasted, they Eat the same as is usual among us, with the addition of mice, which they esteem as good as Par∣tridge or Rabbet. 10. The King has many Wives, only nine called great Queens, which are his Sisters, or near Relations; the others the Daugh∣ters of Nobles. The chiefest is called Ma∣zarira, and Mother of the Portugueses, who often present her, because she sollicites their business with the King; and he sends no Embassador to them without some Servant of hers; the second is Inahanda, that sol∣licites for the Moors; the third Nabuiza that lives in the same Apartment with him; the fourth Navemba; the fifth Nemangore; the sixth Nizingoapangi; the seventh Ne∣mongoro;
the eight Nessani; the ninth Neca∣runda, each of them lives apart, with as great state as the King, and have several Re∣venues and Kingdoms for their expence. As soon as one dies, another succeeds in place and name; they have power to reward and punish, as well as the King; sometimes he goes to them, sometimes they come to him; there are many Women waiting on them, of whom he makes use as he pleases. 11. The Principal People of Monomotapa, and whereof the Emperor is, are the Moca∣rangi, not warlike, nor furnished with any other Arms, but Bows, Arrows, and Jave∣lines; they have no Religion nor Idols, but acknowledge one only God, and believe there is a Devil, that he is wicked, and they call him Muzuco: They believe their Kings go to Heaven, and call them Muzimos, and call upon them in time of need, as we on the Saints. They speak of things past by tra∣dition, having no knowledge of Letters. They give Ear to the Doctrine of Christi∣anity; the lame and blind they call the King's Poor, because maintained by him with great Charity; and if they travel, the Towns they go through are obliged to maintain and fur∣nish them guides from one place to another. A good example for Christians. 12. Every Month has its Festival Days, and is divided into three Weeks, each of 10 Days; the first Day is that of the New-Moon, and the Festivals the fourth and fifth of each Week: On these Days they put on their best Apparel, the King gives publick
Audience to all, holding a Truncheon about three quarters of a Yard long in each hand, as it were leaning upon it; they who speak to him lye prostrate, this lasts from Morn∣ing till Evening: If he is indisposed, Ningo∣moxa stands in his place, no body can speak to him, or go to Court, on the 8th Day of the New-Moon, because it is held most un∣lucky. 13. On the Day the New-Moon appears, the King with two Javelins runs about in his House, as if he were Fighting, the great Men are present at this pastime, and it being ended, a pot full of Indian wheat, boyled whole, is brought, which he scatters about the Ground, bidding them Eat, because it is the growth of the Earth; they know how to flatter, for every one strives to gather most, knowing that pleases him, and they Eat it as savourly, as if it were the great∣est dainty. 14. Their greatest Holy-day, is the first Day of the Moon of May, they call it Chu∣avo: On this Day all the great Men, which are a vast number, resort to Court, and there with Javelins in their Hands run about repre∣senting a Fight; the sport lasts all Day, then the King withdraws, and is not seen in eight Days after, during which time, the Drums never cease beating. On the last Day he orders the Nobleman he has the least affecti∣on for to be killed; this is in the nature of a Sacrifice he offers to his Muzimos, or An∣cestors; this done, the Drums cease, and every Man goes home. The Mumbos Eat
Man's flesh, whereof there is a Publick Butchery. Let this suffice for the Customs of this Empire, for it would be endless to re∣late all. CHAP. XVI. Continues the Government of Francis Bar∣reto in Monomotapa. 1. SUch was the Country whether the Go∣vernour Francis Barreto was now going, he set out from Mozambique with more Ves∣sels than he brought and more Men, Tools, Camels, Horses, and other necessaries for War, and for the work of the Mines; hav∣ing Sailed Ninety Leagues, he went up the River Cuama, called by our first discoverer De las buenas sennales, he came to Sena, or Fort St. Marcalis, as F. Monclaros desired, and repaired the Town Inaparapala, which is near to another of the Moors, they being always professed Enemies to the Christians, began to undermine our designs, as they had formerly done in India; they attempted to poyson our Army, and some Men and Horses began to Die, and the cause being disco∣vered by one of them, they were all put to the Sword, and the Chief of them torn to pieces at the mouths of Guns, except one (called Mahomet Iame) who affirming the Blessed Virgin had appeared to him, and
commanded him to become a Christian, by the name of Lawrence; he had the favour to be strangled. The discoverer was par∣doned. 2. Barreto sent an Embassador to the Em∣peror, who for the more honour admitted him to his Presence, not as other Embassa∣dors were treated at this Court, which is to go without Arms, bare-footed, on their Knees, and when they come near, prostrating them∣selves on the ground. The effect of the Embassy was to desire leave to punish the King of Mongas who was in Rebellion, and go on to the Mines of Butua and Manchica: The first part was a piece of flattery, to obtain the second, because the Lands of Mongas lie between Sena and the Mines, and it was necessary to make way with the Sword. He consented to all, and offered One hun∣dred thousand Men; Bareto accepted not of them, because he would give him no share in the Honour gained in that War, and thinking thereby to oblige him the more. 3. He marched ten Days with Twenty three Horse, and Five hundred and sixty Musquetiers, (enduring much by Hunger and Thirst) for the most part along the River Zambeze, over whose most rapid stream hang pieces of the high Mountain Lupata, ninety Leagues distant from the Ethiopian Sea. At the end of this tedious march, they began to discover part of the Enemy, and soon after saw the-Mountains and Valleys covered with Arm'd Men, the Governor was not daunted, seeing it was
hard to discover the end of that multitude, he drew up, and gave the Van to Vasco Fer∣nando Homem, he had the Rear, and between the bodies was the baggage, and some Field pieces; when they came to charge, he re∣moved the Canon to the Front and Flanks, the two unequal bodies advanced, the Ene∣my in the sorm of a half-Moon; before they engaged, an old Woman advanced and scat∣tered some Powder towards our Men, having perswaded the Enemy (she was a notorious Witch) that that Powder alone would gain the Victory. 4. Barreto understanding the superstition, having seen te like in India, ordered a Gun∣ner to level a iece at her; which was so well performed, the old Woman was torn to pieces; the Cafres were astonished, be∣lieving her immortal. Barreto rewarded the Gunner with a Gold Chain; the Enemy ad∣vance without order, either through igno∣rance, or relying on their multitude, and clouds of Arrows and Darts begin to fly, but our Musquetiers killing them by Hun∣dreds, they turned their backs, many were killed in the pursuit, and then our Men or∣dered to halt; the Governor marches to the City Mongas, and meets another multitude like the former, which in like manner was put to flight, above Six thousand Cafres were slain, and two of our Men, and the Gover∣nor was sorced to alight and lead his Men; the City was entered without opposition, being abandoned, our Men entrench'd, and in the Morning discovered an Army as great
as both the former; the Cafres were again routed, and beg'd peace in the King's name. The Governor received the Messenger with such Majesty, that he was astonished, and could not speak; being come to himself, and having delivered his Message, Barreto promised he would see the King, and mat ters should be adjusted. 5. The next Day our Men marched and incamped in a convenient place where Em∣bassadors came from the King to treat of Peace. It happened one of our Camels broke loose and came so near the Gover∣nor, that he stoped him till they came up that were in pursuit of him; e Cafres hav∣ing never seen such a Beast, admired it stop∣ped at the Governor, thinking it some sub∣mission it made to him, and began to ask some questions. He making his advantage of their ignorance, told them, he had many of those Beasts that only fed upon Man's flesh, and having devoured all that were killed, that Beast came from the rest to desire he would not make Peace, because they would come to want Food; they astonished hereat, earnestly intreated him, he would desire the Camels to be satisfied with good Beef, and they would instantly bring them a great number. He granted their request, and marched on. He was in great distress for Pro∣vision when news came his presence was re∣quired at Mocambique. He gave the Com∣mand of the Forces to Vasco, and departed The cause was this,
6. Antony Pereyra Brandam, who at the Molucos had committed Crimes that deserved the severest punishment, in Portugal was con∣demned to banishment into Africk; he de∣sired the Governor he might be permitted to go with him to Monomotapa; he did it, and being come to Moçambique, gave him the Command of that Fort. Brandam, though Eighty Years of Age, and under such obli∣gations, resolved to secure himself in the Fort, and defame Francis Barreto with false informations sent to the King: the Original Papers fell into the Governor's Hands, who being come to Moçambique, showed them to him, and he falling down and kissing his Feet begg'd Pardon; Barreto lifted up and forgave him, then giving the Command of the Fort to Laurence Godino, returned to prosecute his design. 7. Our Governor being come to the Fort of Sena, F. Monclaros came out in a great rage to tell him, he should desist from that Conquest, with which he had imposed upon the King, that no more Men might be lost, for he should be answerable to God for what had, and should die. It was most certain, Barreto was not the promoter of that Con∣quest, and Monclaros was in fault for all the miscarriage that had been committed; Bar∣reto took this insolence so much to Heart, that he died within two Days without any other Sickness, breathing out his Soul in sighs. Doubtless the Jesuit had more to an∣swer for his death, than he, for the miscarri∣ages the Jesuit was guilty of.
8. King Sebastian much resented this loss, and particularly expressed it by the honou∣rable Reception he made to his Body when brought to Lisbon. So this great Man ha∣ving escaped so many Bullets among the In∣dians, so many Darts and Arrows among the Cafres, and the Malice of a Villain, fell by the Words of a religious Man. CHAP. XVII. The Government of Vasco Fernandez Ho∣mem in Monomotapa, in the Reign of King Sebastian. 1. THE Governor Francis Barreto being dead, an order of the King's found among his Papers was opened, by which Vasco Fernândez Homem his Major, was ap∣pointed to succeed him. The Perswasions of F. Monclaros, who now disliked the Conquest, so far prevailed with him, that forgetting his Duty he returned to Moçambique. There some understanding Persons, and chiefly Francis Pinto Pimentel his Kinsman, repre∣sented this Affair in such manner to him, that he returned to Monomotapa. Being now delivered of that religious Man, who went away to Portugal, he set out by the way of Zofala, as Francis Barreto would have done, that being the properest Road for the De∣sign in hand: He marched directly towards
the Mines of Manchica of the Kingdom Chi∣canga, bordering by the Inland with that of Quiteyve, the next in Power to Monomotapa. With him was the same number of Men, and sorts of Instruments his Predecessor had. To oblige the King of Quiteyve, he Com∣plemented and sent him Presents, and tho' these are the most efficacious means to make all things easie, that Prince grew so jealous of these Solicitations, that he received all very coldly. 2. The Governor not making much ac∣count of his Answer, marched into his King∣dom. Several Bodies of Cafres attempted to stop his Passage, but were routed with great slaughter. The King seeing he did not prevail by force of Arms, had recourse to Policy. He caused all the People and Provisions to be withdrawn from the Towns and Country, so that our Men suffered ex∣tream want till they came to Zimbaoe his Court, whence he was fled, and had forti∣fied himself in inaccessible Mountains. Vasco burnt the City, and marched on to Chicanga, the King whereof rather through fear than love, received him with exterior signs of Affection, and gave him free passage to the Mines. Our Men marched to them, many believing they should gather Gold by hand∣fuls; but seeing the Natives with much dif∣ficulty gather'd but little in a long time, and not being expert at that work, and that to make any thing of it, more Men and Ma∣terials were requisite, they return'd the
way they came, and parted Friends with that King. 3. Though they obtained not what was sought this way, yet the ease wherewith they came to the place designed, evinced how great an Error it was to impose F. Monclaros as Director to the late Governor, who, only to follow his own extravagant Humour, lead him a way so dangerous and tedious. Vasco returned to Quiteyve, and that King did now for fear what he refused before, permitting the Portugueses to march to the Mines of Maninnas, only upon con∣dition they should pay him Twenty Crowns yearly. Vasco passed thence to the Kingdom of Chicova, bordering upon Monomotapa to the Norward along the Inland. The cause of undertaking this March was, the Account he had of rich Silver Mines. Having en∣camped, he ask the Cafres for the Mines and they seeing it was in vain to resist, and fearing the discovery of the Mines would be their Ruine, scattering some Ore far enough from the Mines, shewed it, telling them, there they were. 4. By this means the Cafres got time to escape; for our Men giving credit to them let them go, perhaps not desiring they should see what Treasure they got. The Governor caused all round about to be dug, and after much labour it was no wonder he did not find what was not there. Provision growing scarce, and finding no Fruit of his Labour, he marched away, leaving Captain Antony Cardoso de Almeyda with Two hun∣dred
Men, and Necessaries to continue there some Days, to examine into the Truth of that so much coveted Corner of the Earth. 5. Vasco being gone, Cardoso suffered him∣self to be again deceived by the Cafres, who had before imposed upon him. They of∣fered, since he could not find a Vein there, they would show him a place where he might; and leading him the way of Death rather than that of the Mines, killed him and all his Men, after they had defended themselves with incredible Bravery. This may convince those who affirm, numbers of Cafres would fly from a Gun, as not having before seen them, since here Two hundred Men fighting with them for their lives, were all slain by their Darts and Arrows. 6. This was the end of that Govern∣ment, scarce begun sooner than ended, and possest by two Governors, who no sooner saw, but they lost it. The first killed by rash words, the second expelled by a pru∣dent, not barbarous, Stratagem. However the Peace and Trade with the Emperor of Monomatapa continued. These Actions of Francis Barreto and Vasco Fernandez Homem, were in the time of the Government of D. Luis de Ataide, D. Antony de Noronna, and Antony Moniz Barreto; but we could never exactly find when the first died, and the last desisted.
CHAP. XVIII. Of the Viceroy Ruy Lorenco de Tavora, and the Government of D. James de Meneses, from the Year 1576 till 1578, in the Reign of King Sebastian. 1. IN the beginning of this Year sailed 1575. from Lisbon Ruy Lorenço de Tavora, to succeed Antony Moniz Barreto, with the Title of Viceroy of India, and four Ships: He died at Moçambique, and was the first that came short, being appointed for that Government. The Ships arriving at Goa, the Royal Patents of Succession were open∣ed, and D. Iames de Meneses there present was the Person named in the first. So he was rather Successor to Antony Moniz, than Ruy Lorenço. However, since he was de∣signed for it, we will reckon Tavora the Twelfth of the Viceroy's, and Twenty∣seventh of Governors, and First of the Name and Sirname. 2. D. Iames de Meneses having held this Command near two Years, there is no doubt but there happened more remarkable Passages than I heer relate, but I could find no more, having used all possible endeavours to get some farther Memoirs of his Time. Certain it is there are some, but our Portu∣gues Gentlemen, though they make no use of, keep them as close as Misers do their
Treasure. The little I could gather is thus: 3. As soon as D. Iames took upon him the Government, he fitted out several Squa∣drons for the usual purposes. At that time some Captains were upon the Northern Coast upon their own account, as D. Hie∣rome Mascarennas, D. Iames and D. Antony de Silveyra Brothers, and Francis Pessoa. They anker'd in the River of Dabul, that City being then at Peace with us, and were re∣ceived by the Tanadar Melique Tocan with feigned kindness. He proferred to furnish them with what they wanted, and invited them home to dine with him, having Men ready to murder them in the height of their Merriment. All things succeeded as he de∣sired, for they put themselves into his Power unarmed, except Mascarennas, who forbo∣ding some Treachery stayed in the River. Those that accepted the invitation were killed, except a few who fled to the Shore, and the Murderers after them had like to have entred Mascarennas his Vessel, but that he and those few that were with him laying hold of Arms repulsed the bloody Assassins. Mascarennas carried the news of this Disaster to Goa. 5. Towards the end of this Year arrived 1577. the Ships that sailed from Lisbon the be∣ginning of it; they were six in number, two set out first under Mathias de Albuquerque, appointed to Command at Malaca, and four after.
5. As soon as the Governor was informed by D. Hierome de Mascarennas of the Villainy committed by the Tanadar of Dabul, he di∣spatched D. Peter de Meneses with a small Squa∣dron to Revenge that wrong, ordering him to lay wait for the Ships of Meca, and do all the Mischief he could on the Coast subject to Hidalcan. Meneses met two great Ships of Mca, and after a sharp dispute forced them a Shoar, where the Sea running high they beat to pieces. This was the posture of Affairs when in August arrived D. Luis de Ataide Count de Atouguia, to take upon him that Government the second time, which D. Iames de Meneses then quitted, having been the Twenty-eighth Governor, the Se∣cond of the Name, and Third of the Sir∣name.
CHAP. XIX. The Count D. Luis de Ataide is the Se∣cond time Viceroy of India; he set out in the Year 1577, and Governs till 1581, and is the last sent out by King Sebastian. 1. WHEN King Sebastian had resol∣ved (though he designed better) to bury the Glory of his Kingdom in the Sands of Africk, he appointed D. Luis de Ataide Count de Atouguia, General of his Forces: But soon after, not able to conform his Youthful Heat to the prudent Circum∣spection of the Count, that he might have a plausible Colour for removing him, he a∣gain constituted him Viceroy of India, pre∣tending there was need of such a Man there; as if he had not much more need of his Con∣duct himself. 2. The Count well understood the drift of this Change, but not willing to disgust the King, took no notice of it. He desired to have along with him Nunno Vello Pereyra, a Man more Expert than Fortunate in Military and Sea Affairs, as will appear hereafter, and Iohn Alvarez Suarez, a Man versed in the Revenue, and who had given good Proof of his Courage, as was related in the Siege of Chaul. D. Luis had a pro∣sperous Voyage, and was received at Goa with great Joy.
3. His arrival at Goa was about the end of August: The first thing he did after re∣ceiving the Sword, was the spreading the News that King Sabastian would infallibly that Year go over into Africk, where he was already killed when this was given out. The Viceroy foreseeing that disaster, and the ill Consequences might arise from it, fitted out such a mighty Fleet, as struck a Terror in∣to all the neighbouring Princes, who mea∣sure their own safety by our Power. The design of this Fleet he never revealed to any Man. 4. Amidst these greater Cares he forgot not the less, but sent Supplies to D. Peter de Meneses to enable him to act the more vi∣gorously against Melique the Tanadar of Dabul. The Viceroy in Person carried on the War against Hidalcan along the River of Goa, whether his Dominions extended; and he no longer able to endure it, proposed a Peace, promising the Traytor Melique should be for ever banished Dabul, and all his Dominions. The Peace was concluded, and our Forces withdrew. At that time ar∣rived at Goa three Ships from Portugal, and were the last sent sent by King Sebastian. When these came to India, two Caravels set out from Lisbon with the News of the King's Death, one bound for Goa, the other for Malaca. 5. Henry the Cardinal succeeded in the Throne, and from amidst those Ruines di∣spatched five Ships for India, fearing lest the loss of King Sebastian being known, new
Troubles might arise, if those Dominions were not timely supplied. 5. The Viceroy understanding that Me∣lique Tocan, contrary to the Articles of the Peace concluded the Year before, continued at Dabul publickly exercising his Office, and was ready to Launch a great Ship to Trade to Meca, he resolved to show how much he resented that wrong, and to that purpose sent thither D. Paul de Lima Pereyra with ten Sail. 7. D. Paul coming to the Mouth of the River found all the Shore fortified, and a great number of Cannon planted in all conve∣nient Places: He forces his way in through all the Batteries, and sees Six thousand Horse, and great number of Foot covering the Shore, and pouring showers of Bullets and Arrows upon him; nevertheless he at∣tempts to burn two Ships belonging to Hi∣dalcan, but finding it impossible to come at them for the number of the Enemy's Cannon, he runs up the River, and spent some days in burning all the Towns along the Coast. 8. The Enemy calls in to their Aid Car∣tale and Mandaviray, two Malabar Pyrats who were in the Sea of Chaul with five Gal∣liots: To these Melique joins other five Sail he had ready with Five hundred Turks, Per∣sians, and other resolute Men. The Shore was cover'd with People that came to see this Action. D. Paul prepared to receive them, and after the Discharge of the Can∣non they came up board and board, and hand to hand.
9. D. Paul boarded the first Galliot, they were ten to ten, though the Enemy had the advantage of the bigness of the Vessels and number of Men; but our Captains following the Example of their Admiral, behaved themselves so bravely, that only one of the Enemy's Galliots escaped, the rest were all taken. We lost but two or three Men in this Action, which was as fortunate as any we perform'd in Asia. 10. Having taken this Revenge of Melique for his Crime, and of Hidalcan for winking at it, D. Paul sailed out of the River through the same Dangers he came in, losing one Man. Being come to Goa with Nineteen Sail, whereas he went thence with only Ten; the Viceroy came out to receive him, and in the hearing of all that were present, said, What is it you mean, D. Paul, will you with such Acts of Bravery provoke my Envy to poison you? Thus Heroes praise great Men, and at the same time upbraid those who enviously Rail at noble Actions. 11. The Emperor of Ceylon had some time since by his Ambassadors desired King Iohn III. to send him some Religious Men of the Order of St. Francis, to instruct him in the Christian Religion: They being come to him he recanted. F. Iohn de Villa de Conde was this Year at his Court, and had several times confuted the Bramenes disputing of Religion. Yet they refusing to yield them∣selves overcome, he offer'd with a lively Faith, that he and one of them should be cast into a River full of great Crocodiles, or
into a great Fire, and that his Religion, who came out unhurt, should be allowed to be the true. They refused, and the Franciscan im∣mediately reaped the Fruit of this Victory, baptising D. Iohn Parea Pandar King of Cota, in the same Island. 12. The Kingdom of Angola is near Mo∣nomotapa, whereof we lately spoke, and therefore will relate what happened there this Year, because it is a remarkable Passage. Paul Diaz undertook to War with that King, who had treacherously kill'd a number of our Men: This Captain with only two Galleys did Wonders on the Banks of the River Co∣anza, till he fortified himself in an Island formed by this and the River Lucula. Then joining the King of Congo and other Princes with only 150 Portugueses he several times defeated the Enemy. But the most remark∣able is the Battle wherein that King had a Million of Men, which were put to flight in such Confusion they kill'd one another. 13. At the beginning of this Year, when the Ships sailed for India, our Kingdom, by the Death of the old Cardinal, King Henry, was under the Direction of five Governors, who dispatched them. They were four, whereof one was forc'd back to Lisbon, the last sent under a Portugues Government, and the last our Viceroy saw: For he having done no more than what is related, or if he did, having left no memory of it, died the beginning of the Year, having in some man∣ner foretold it For some time before leave being asked of him to bury his Cousin Antony
Rotello by his Brother D. Iohn de Ataide, he refused it, saying, He had long since designed that place for himself. 14. At the end of his first Government something was said of his Qualities and Merit, and I have referred it to this place to speak of his undaunted Courage, as a virtue most peculiar to him. Some Proof of it has been given in the former Part of his Life, I will now give another Instance. At the attack (as I think) of Onor he sailed in a Brigantine, sitting on a Chair, and a famous Musician by him playing upon a Harp. The Enemy's Cannon from the Fort reached the Vessels, and grated the Musicians Ear; D. Luis, who was pleased to hear the Musick, seeing him give over, as if he had not seen the Cause, asked him, why he left off; the Musician told him; and he stretching out his hand, said, I pray let nothing disturb thee, go on with that Tune, for it is a very good one. 15. One of the Gentlemen that were standing behind him, seeing this was too great a Contempt of Danger, said, Tell that Man, if he happens to be killed, all will be lost: And another answer'd, Do not tell him so; for if he be killed, here are Men enough fit to suc∣ceed him. 16. D. Luis this second time govern'd the Term of two Years and seven Months, and may be reckoned in the number of Viceroys the Thirteenth, in that of Governors the Twenty-ninth; the First of the Name and Sirname.
CHAP. XX. The Government of Ferdinand Tellez de Meneses, who was named by the Go∣vernors of Portugal, upon the Decease of the Cardinal King Henry, in the Year 1581. 1. THE Ships dispatched by the Gover∣nors of Portugal the last Year, car∣ried new Patents of Succession. In the first was named Ferdinand Tellez de Meneses. The Bishop of Malaca, D. Iohn Ribeyro Gayo, was President at this Ceremony, which was celebrated with such Demonstrations of Joy, as if there had been no Memory of their fresh Subjects of Tears. 2. Whilst the Affairs of Portugal were in this miserable Condition, those in the King∣dom of Visapor were no better, the Succes∣sion being uncertain upon the decease of Hidalcan, who died without Heirs in the 23d Year of his Reign, and 50th of his Age. He studied less to have Wives to get Chil∣dren, than young Men instead of Wives. A Youth of 18 Years of Age, who had more Honour than to consent to such Baseness, killed him as he was endeavouring to allure him to his brutal Appetite. Abraham, Son of Xatamas, one of two Brothers not long before slain by him, succeeded in the Throne. Quibalechan, a powerful Man, conspiring
with others, enters Visapor with Forces, and seizes that Prince. Not long after the E∣thiopians (who are the Guard of those Prin∣ces) did the same under three Heads, chose by themselves to this purpose, who were Acalachan, Armichan, and Delarnachan. This last secures the other two, and takes all the Power into his own hands. Our Governor kept a watchful Eye over all these Proceed∣ings, knowing the Happiness of our Af∣fairs, depended much upon the Event of those. 3. At this time were brought to India new Instructions from the Governors of Portugal, and Philip the Second then sworn King, and First of the Name there. The Governor was order'd to tender the Oath there. Fer∣dinand Tellez performed the Ceremony with great Solemnity in the Church of Goa on the third of September. 4. The Captains then commanding our Forts there were at Goa, D. Tristan de Meneses; at Zofala and Moçambique, D. Peter de Castro; at Ormuz, D. Gonzalo de Meneses; at Damam, Martin Alfonso de Melo; at Baçaim, D. Ema∣nuel de Almada; at Chaul, D. Ferdinand de Castro; at Cananor, George Toscano; at Cochim, D. George de Meneses Baroche; at Columbo, Emanuel de Sousa Coutinno; at Tidore, Iames de Azambuja; and at Malaca D. Iohn de Gama. 5. The Governor understanding that four Galliots of Malabar Pyrats were harboured in some of the Rivers about Goa, immedi∣ately
sent Mathias de Albuquerque with ten small Merchant Ships that were the readiest at hand, after them. He found them in the River Carapatan; three of our Vessels that were foremost falling violently upon them, forced the Malabars to leap into the Water, and by that time Albuquerque came up, each of them had taken one. 6. There were at Mazulopatan two Ships of the bigness of ours that Trade to India; one belonging to the King of Achem, loaded with Ammunition, design'd, as was believed, against Malaca; the other to the King of Pegu richly loaden. The Governor sent Gonçalo Vaz de Camoens with four Ships to seize upon them: The first of the two had notice of it, and went off, and Gonçalo Vaz being informed of the great Force of the other, by the consent of his Men left that Design, and went over to the Coast of Pegu, where the Malabar Pyrats took one of his Ships Commanded by Francis Serram, and a Galliot of Ferdinand de Lima. They came to the Mouth of the River Negraes, just at such time as the Ship they feared to En∣counter at Mazulapatan was entring. They could not in Honour avoid engaging her, though they were but two Galliots: After a desperate Fight, which lasted al∣most two days, the Ship was sunk, our Men having first rifled her with such covetous∣ness, that our Vessels had sunk, had not the Captain thrown many of the Goods over∣board.
7. The Galliots setting out again, were for some time carried about by the Wea∣ther, it being the beginning of Winter, till about the place where they sunk the Ship, they discover'd the Prince of Fegu with a Fleet of 1300 Sail, design'd for the Con∣quest of the Kingdom of Arracam. The Prince desired to meet with these Galliots, having advice they were thereabouts, and that his Father would be as much pleased with taking of them, as the Conquest of that Kingdom. Sixteen of the best Sailers ad∣vancing, began to play their Cannon, and were as well answer'd, till they came to Board. After a sharp Engagement, three of the Ene∣my's Ships were disabled, some entred, many Prisoners and 18 Pieces of Cannon taken; then our Men seeing all that Multitude was coming upon them, making all the Sail they could and plying their Oars, got into the Port of Arracam. The King rejoycing for the share he had in this Success, and well pleased that Gonçalo Vaz made him a present of some of his Subjects taken in the great Ships, gave liberty to some Portugueses he had long kept in Prison. 8. About this time three Turkish Gallies set out of the Port at Moca, sent by the Bassa Mirazenam to plunder Moscate, having Intelligence from Moors living there; that the Town was Rich, and unprovided of De∣fence. Alibec, a Turk, used to Robbing undertook this Design. Mirazenam was born at Otranto of Christian Parents, and was Go∣vernor
of all that Part of Arabia Felix and Pe∣trea, which the Natives call Ayaman, he resided in the City Cana, the Center of Arabia Felix. 60 Leagues North of Moca, and as many from Xael. Cana is built upon a Hill, encompas∣sed with a good Wall, and thought to be the Foundation of Cham the Son of Noah, and to have been the Court of the famous Queen of Saba. The Province is most fruit∣ful, called by the Ancients, Siria Mumifera, because it produces Frankincense, Myrrh, and Storax. 9. Alibec being before Mascate, landed his Men, ordering those that remained in the Galleys to enter the Port, and as soon as they were in to play their Cannon furiously, that so the Inhabitants being imployed on that side, he might come in upon their Backs. It succeeded as he desired; for most Men saved themselves by flight, but few their Goods, and he in an instant entred and plundred the Town. Iames Machado going out to bury some Treasure, was killed, and himself and Money deprived of Burial. 10. Let us in some manner describe the situation of this Town: Extend the right Hand with the Palm of it down, stretch out the Thumb from the fore-finger, and sepa∣rate that from the middle Finger, keep that close to the other two. The space be∣tween the middle and fore-fingers, is a Bay called Seabo, running up as the hand repre∣sents. The distance between the Thumb and Fore-finger is another Bay, not so deep, along the Shore whereof the Town is bailt,
shut in by two Mountains; one rises at the point of Seabo next that part where the three Fingers are together, it has only one Path that leads to Mascate so narrow, that two Men cannot pass it a-breast. This way Alibec come into the Town, no Body imagi∣ning he would attempt it, for four Men with one Cannon might maintain it against the Universe. 11. Let us not deny any Man the Honour that is due to him: They that fled from Ma∣scate to Mataro, a Town a League distant, not thinking themselves safe there went to Bru∣xel, a Fort four Leagues up the Inland, belonging to Catani, Head of a Hord of A∣rabs. This place at that time was com∣manded by an Officer of his, a Man so Just and Honourable, that hearing the Misfor∣tune of those People who came to him for Refuge, (for in great Dangers the lesser is a Refuge) he went out to receive, comfort, and entertain them. This was much, but what follows is more; His Men seeing the Portugueses come loaded with Riches, advi∣sed him to make use of that Opportunity, and not show too much Weakness or Pity. And he fearing, lest Covetousness should make them Disobedient, laboured with soft Expres∣sions and sweet Words, to disswade them from their wicked Design. 12. They all submitted themselves to their Officer's Reasons, and, with kind Usage, much comforted the Disconsolate Portu∣gueses, who continued there till Alibec be∣ing gone, they returned to Mascate, al∣ways
relating and admiring how honour∣ably that Moor treated them, without suf∣fering the least wrong to be offered to their Persons or Goods. 13. The News of the Ruine of Mascate being brought to Ormuz, The Commander, D. Gonçalo de Meneses caused the Gallies to be closely watched, and Ships to be fitted out immediately to follow them. He made Luis de Almeyda Commander in chief, gi∣ving him a Galleon, a Galley, and six other vessels, with Four hundred good Men. But he not observing the Orders of Meneses that were to follow the Galleys, fell into the Coast of the Naytaques, where they in∣tended to Surprize the beautiful and rich City Pesani. But Francis Machado having given the Alarm, by falling upon some Peo∣ple that were passing in two Boats, the In∣habitants all fled. 14. They plundered the City without Honour or Danger, and after burnt it and near Fifty Sail that were in the Bay. The very same Fate attended the City Guadel, not inferior to Pesani, and that of Teis of the Abindos, a barbarous and fierce Nation, the last of Gedrosia, on the Banks of the Ri∣ver Calamen, the People of it join with the Naytaques in their Piracies. 15. All these Things were begun, though not absolutely transacted, when D. Francis de Mascarennas arrived in India with the Title of Viceroy, being the first sent by our first King Philip, who was second of
Spain. Ferdinand Tellez left the Govern∣ment in a peaceable Condition, and the Sea of Goa well furnished with good Ships. He was the last Governor appointed by the Portugues Authority, in Number the Thir∣tieth, held it Six Months, the First of the Name, and Fourth of the Sirname. The End of the Third Part.
THE PORTUGUES ASIA. TOM. II. PART IV. CHAP. I. Of the Gods, Surpestitions and Opinions of the Asiaticks, particularly the Indians, and among them the Malabars. 1. I Have purposely omitted giving so particular an Account and Descrip∣tion of the People and Countries mentioned in this History, as will be expect∣ed from me, to avoid interrupting the series of Affairs, and connexion of Matter, reser∣ving it still for a more proper place. The grand Revolution of the Kingdom of Por∣tugal now brought under a foreign Prince, puts a Period to the Proceedings of our own, that we may begin again with what
was transacted under our new Sovereigns. Here then it will not be amiss to give the Curious the Satisfaction of some further In∣formation touching the Indians, Ethiopians, Chineses and Iapans, but still with my usual brevity, dividing among them this Fourth Part of this Second Volume. As Asia is di∣vided into several Empires, so it is inhabi∣ted by many very different sorts of People, and each People distinguished by very oppo∣site Customs. Yet those that are of one Be∣lief, agree in the essential Part, though they differ in Form. It is so in India, as well as any other considerable Portion of the World, and therefore the Malabars, one of the Na∣tions thereof, may inform us of the Religion and Government of all the rest. 2. As to the Frame of the World, they believe it had a beginning, and will have an end; but then begin again, and in that manner will be everlasting; that all things after having encreased, diminish; that in the beginning as One thousand and Animals were produced One thousand died, but now for One thousand produced One thousand and one die; that the reason why more die is, be∣cause the heat of the Sun increases; that in the end, a violent Wind shall dissolve all things; that nothing shall then remain but the Deity Ixoreta, as in the first Chaos; that he shall be reduced to the bigness of an Egg, and this to the quantity of a Dew drop, scarce discernable; that after it has sounded like a Cricket, it shall increase by the same mea∣sure it diminished, and shall produce within
it self the five Elements, (for they reckon the Heaven the fifth) that their increasing shall burst the Egg in the middle; that there shall appear in it seven shels put together like an Onion; that the Egg being divided into two unequal parts, the biggest will be the Heavens, and the lesser the Earth; that the Gods were and shall be so formed again. The Egg being open, the Deity will be placed in the upper part, on the Earth will appear a Mountain of Silver, on the top whereof will be seen the instruments of Generation (which they call the true Ixoreta or Deity, the true God and Causa Causarum) because all things in the World proceed from the Union of the instruments of Ge∣neration; therefore they particularly adore the noblest, that it is the Male, and place its Image in their Pagods, and on their ways. This they reign to have three Rines, from which proceed the three Gods, Bramá, Vist∣, and Givem, or Ixora. 4. Of the superior and inferior producti∣ons, this is their Opinion. Ixora with this instrument of Generation, which was of a prodigious bigness, plowed up the Earth for the space of Seven hundred thousand loxe∣nas, each of these when greatest, is four Leagues, and when least a League and a halfe; from the Furrows sprung seven Seas and seven Lands, the ridges were the Moun∣tains, the furrows, the Vales and Waters. Then from Ixoras back came the Woman called Cbati, (this has some resemblance with Eve's being made of Adams Rib,) and
was separated from it by virtue of some words, and they resolved to have copulation. The length of the Generating Instrument (called Linga) wherewith Ixora had plowed the Ground hindred; he cut it into eighteen pieces, whereof were made the Weapons they use, as the Spear, Sword, Bow, and Buckler. Then Ixora with his Finger opened the way of Generation in Chati, which shed much Blood; he received it in his Hands, and throwing it up into the Air, suddenly of it were produced, the Sun, Moon, Stars, Roses, Flowers, Sweet-herbs, and Snakes, which they use in their Ceremonies, both being then fit for Copulation, by them the World was Peopled, the Beasts and Devils produced, and Heaven filled with Spirits, which they say are Thirty three Millions. 5. The Heaven is fixt upon the Earth, not the Earth, the Center of it. The Sun and Moon move like the Fish in the Water, by Day from East to West, by Night they run about the Northward, not under the Earth, but along the edge of the Horrizon; they doubt whether the Earth be supported upon a Bulls-horns, or upon the Snake called Ananta; their Paradize is in some Mountain. The Snake Bassagui fighting with the Wind, would not let it pass, but Ixora command∣ing her to give it way, the Wind flying the more impetuous for having been detained, tore up a Mountain, which falling into the Sea, formed the Island Ceylon. Other Islands are encompassed with Seas they call of Sugar, Milk, Butter, and Sweet-Water. Happy the
Sailers that could find such pleasant Seas. 6. The Bases or Grounds of the Elements are of several matters, that of the Earth of Copper; that of the Water of Silver; that of the Fire of Gold; that of the Air of a Pretious Stone; that of Heaven of another Stone of more value: They are Gods and move, on the first waits the Bird Anam; on the second Guereram, on the third a Cart; on the fourth an Ox; on the fifth a Horse. 7. There are seven large Subterranean dwellings, called Padalas, where live People who have no other light but that of certain bright Stones, which Snakes have in their Foreheads. One Day of ours is a Year in Heaven, and one of our Years, Three hun∣dred and sixty five there. The Days of the Week (as among us) take their names from the Planets, and one of them is a Festival. They believe the transmigration of Souls. 8. The God Givem, or Ixora, is of the colour of Milk; besides the usual two, he has one Eye in the Forehead, which being of Fire, consumes all things; his Body of such a length, that Brama, though he endeavour∣ed it, could never find the beginning or end of it. The other Brother Vistnu, who is God of the Transmutations, converted him∣self into a Hog, and turned up the Earth with his snout, but could never find his Feet. He is so thick that the Snake that girts the World, cannot encompass one of his Arms, e has Sixteen Hands, all employed with Deer, Chairs, a Guitar, a Bell, a Bason, a Trident, a Rope, a Hook, an Ax, Fire, a
Drum, Beads, a Staff, a Wheel, a Snake; on his Forehead, a horned Moon; his Ap∣parel skins of Beasts, laid down with Snakes; he has two Wifes, the Goddess of the Wa∣ter, and Chati, who has already dyed One and twenty times; and because every time she dies, he puts one of her Bones upon his Neck, he now wears One and twenty Bones there. Having shared his Body with his Wife, and she hers with him, he is halfe Man halfe Wo∣man; his care is to finish all things, Bram to Create, and Vistnu's to govern them. 9. The God Ixora lives in Calaya, a most delicious Mountain for Woods, Gardens, Fountains, Birds and Nymphs, among them there is nothing but Harmony. The desert parts of it are inhabited by Riis, Hermits, much esteemed for sanctity, in a private and most pretious Tabernacle, is the Silver Rose with two Musical white Nymphs, and among them the Linga, or Eternal God, placed on a Lion of inestimable value, and invisible. 10. Brama and Vistnu envying Ixoras's great∣ness, set themselves against him; he said if they could find his beginning or end, they should be his Superiors. Vistnu looked for his Feet and Brama and for his Head; the first was deterred by a Snake, the second dis∣swaded by Roses; he brib'd them to testifie he had seen his Head, which they did. Vist∣nu sensible of the fraud, turn'd them into Beasts, and cut off one of his Heads, of his Blood sprang a Man with Five hundred Heads, and One thousand Hands. Ixora did penance for this crime, and travelling, came
to a place where they threw several Beasts at him, he catched, ead them, and cloath∣ed himself with their Skins; being over∣powered, Vistnu came to his Aid in the shape of a beautiful Maid, and his Enemies were astonished at her form: Ixora having to do with her, a Son was born, Ixora and Vistnu differed about whom it should belong too, and a Heavenly Spirit reconciled them, tak∣ing it to himself. He bred him an expert Archer, and kept him as his guard against Sagatracavaxem, the Giant of Five hundred Heads, and One thousand Hands, sprung from Bramas Head, cut off by Ixora. This pilgrimage of Ixora gave the Original to the Pilgrims, called Iogues, who wander about living upon Charity, wearing Peri∣wigs, and strewed with Ashes. 11. Ixora has four Children, the first has the Face of an Elephant; the second of a Monkey; the third is Superbenia, with six Faces and twelve Arms; the fourth a young Woman called Patracali. The Father and his Wife Chati converted into Elephants, begot a Son with an Elephant's Head and four Arms, he is wonderful big, and rides on a Mouse. The first fruits of all that is sowed are offered to him. 12. The Bramones who are the Masters of their Ceremonies, abstain from Fish, Flesh, Eggs, and Wine, of other things they Eat and Drink without measure, they celebrate the Aniversaries of their Dead with great Banquets; they are so much afraid of the Moon on the fourth Day after the full, that
they shun seeing even the reflection of her in the Water. 13. Chati washing her self in the time of her courses, produced a Man. Her Husband cut of his Head, which rowling to the foot of his Mountain Calaya, brought forth the Tree on which grow the Coco's, which therefore have the resemblance of Eyes, Nose and Mouth. But the Wife complain∣ing Ixora cut of an Elephants Head and put it to the Body, which remained Man and Elephant. Then both converting themselves into Monkeys, begot one, but she ashamed to bring it forth, desired the Wind to tran∣slate it to another Womb, and it was re∣moved to that of the Wife of the Heaven∣ly Spirits. She was delivered of, and Ixora gave him great power, calling him Anuman. This is the Reason the Indians adore Mon∣keys. 14. Patracali Ixoras's Daughter is black, she has eight Faces, and sixteen Arms, great round Eyes, Hogs Teeth, two Elephants for pendants, she is cloathed with Snakes, her Hair like the Peacocks Tails, has seve∣ral things in her hands, particularly Arms, the Devil Medala waits on her; she seeing her Father could not overcome the Giant Daridabaxada, Conquered him by Policy. Ixora to deliver her from Enemies, sent her to live invisible among Men. At Sea she overcame some Fishermen, and landed at Coulam, and marryed the Prince of Coulett, who being falsly accused of stealing the Queen of Pande's Bracelets, was impaled.
Patracali brought him to Life, caused Sacri∣fice to he offered to him, and thus freed from the bands of wedlock, remained a Virgin. 15. Ixora in a passion threw his Wig on the ground, which became an Armed fierce Man, who cut off the Head of Lecxaprazava King of the Peringales, and the Hand of the God of Fire, and the Sun's Teeth. Ixora put on a Goats-head upon Lecxaprazava's Shouldiers instead of his own. CHAP. II. The Metamorphoses or, Transforma∣tions. 1. THE God Vistnu is black, he has four Hands, and always lies sleeping on his back in the Sea of Milk; yet so he go∣verns the whole World; his Bed is the Snake Ananta, which has five Heads; on four he lays his Hands, on the other his Head; the Snake asked him, in case she had more Heads, what he would lay on them. Then One thousand Heads sprung out from her, and as many Hands from him to lay on them. He has two Wives, Laexemi and Pumedevi, the first scraches his Head, the other his Feet. 2. Vistnu was born or transformed nine times, into a Fish, a Tortoise, a Hog, half∣a
Man, half a Lion, a Bramen, Siriparexi Rama, Siri Rama, Belapader, and Siri Chri∣stna, and is to be born the Tenth time. In the first shape he overcame Breniacxem in the bottom of the Sea, taking from him the Law he had stole from the heavenly Spirits. In the second he reconciled the Difference between the celestial and infernal Spirits, about parting the Ambrosia from Poison, and giving this to the latter, and that to the former. With Ambrosia he cured King Devaindra, who being Cursed by Rixi for lying with his Wife, was cover'd all over with Privy-Members, which were converted into Eyes. 3. The Sea is salt, because the great Raxi Agssia having drunk it all up, at the re∣quest of Vistnu pissed it out. That there might be no Thieves in the World, he ap∣pointed Guards; these were Indra, King of the higher Spirits; Vani, God of Fire; Pidarpati, King of the Devils; Varuna, God of the Water; Maril, God of the Wind; Cabera, God of Riches, and other Persons of Note. The Malabars, in their Poems, make a Jest of this, because they are all Theives. 4. Mave, Lord of the World, kept Mankind in such plenty, that none remem∣bred God. Vistnu in one of his Changes remedied this, and then from the Water which washed one of his Feet came the River Ganga, which therefore is the Purgatory of such as when they die are washed therein. Venus endeavouring to hinder the Reforma∣tion of Mankind, lost an Eye.
5. The Bramenes are the Masters of the Indian Religion, and proceed from Fisher∣men; because the Malabar Churches were delivered to Fishermen, upon condition they should always wear some mark of their Trade. This is the cause they wear abou their Necks some threads of their Nets. This is the Original of those Threads they wear, never before mentioned by another Writer. 6. Vistnu turned himself into Siri Rama, and his Snake Ananta, Chocra and Buzio in∣to Men. Siri Rama killed Tarbga Wife to Rjada, that was a Man-eater, and had the Face of a Lioness, and wore two Ele∣phants as Pendants, her Cloathing Snakes, her Weapon a Trident; she lived in a Moun∣tain of Bones of the People she had eaten. Siri married the Daughter of King Genega, and went to do Penance for killing Tarega. His Wife went with him, and he obtained of Rixi Anisoya, that he should be always Victorious, and his Wife appear Beautiful to him. They went to Ceylon, where Chur∣pnaga Sister to Ravena King of that Island being a Widow, asked Siri Rama to get her a Husband, he bid her chuse among the Heavenly Gods, and she liked none of them, but Lacxena Brother to Siri Rama, who despised and cut off one of her Breasts, of the Blood whereof sprung the Leeches. 7. Her Brother Ravena for Revenge ole Siri Rama's Wife Sida. The manner of looking for, finding, and recovering her is so tedious, preposterous, and foolish, as
well as the foregoing part, it is not worth the strickest Curiosity to read it. What follows is little better, but something of this monstrous Medley is fit to be related, to show the prodigious stupidity of these Opinions. 8. Siri Rama having found his Wife, and seeing she was very Beautiful said she had wronged him, and lain with his Enemy. He threatned to kill her, and she offered to Purge her self by Fire; and kindled one so fierce, the heavenly Spirits could not en∣dure it, she stripped her self naked, and walked seven times round it, then turning to the East, said, When Ravena stole and would have taken me by the hand, I doubt whe∣ther his Shadow touched me. Afterwards in the Island Ceylon seti e under the Tree Axogani, he fell at my feet to overcome me, and I doubt whether the Crown he had on his head touched them. There was nothing more that I know of between me and him. Then she threw her self into the Fire, and could not be seen for some time; then the God of Fire came out, and bidding Siri Rama hold out his Hands, dropt Sida upon them, as∣suring him her Honour was unstained. 9. This done, Siri Rama placed Bixivem on the Throne of Ceylon, and went himself to possess that of Aioddia, after he had spent Fourteen Years in these Affairs. The Prin∣ces, People, Celestial Spirits, and Dancing Women received him. The Queens pre∣vailed with Sida to show them the Figure of Ravena, she drew him with Chalk on a
Board, which shook as Siri Rama sate on it; not knowing his Enemy's Picture was there∣on. The Queens told him, Sida had paint∣ed him, and he again jealous, though she was with Child, ordered Lecxena to carry her to a Mountain, and there kill her. He carried, but left her there alive. She was delivered of two Sons very like Siri Rama, who seeing them, and knowing she was not dead was satisfied. He went to fetch her, but could not; for Pumi Goddess of the Earth opened it and swallowed her up. His Sons succeeded him in the Crown of A∣jodda. CHAP. III. Other Metamorphoses, and the Consequences of them, of the God Brama, and the Foundation of Pagods; an Account of the famousest of them. 1. VIstnu turned himself into his younger Brother Siri Christna, who was born very beautiful. At the hour of his Birth the Palace was filled with Brightness, though it was Mid-night; the Doors flew open, and the Fetters fell off that held Bassudever. He arose and took the Child to carry it to Amparhi, and by the way the Waters of two Rivers divided themselves, that he might pass dry. Camusem consulting Diviners a∣bout
the Birth of this Child, which was the first Quarter of the Moon, on a Thursday in August, the Sun being in Leo, and the Moon in Taurus, in the time of Minabixam, they answer'd, Siri Christna would govern the whole World, and would kill him in the Sixteenth Year of his Age. They ad∣vised him to send a Woman that had veno∣mous Milk, that sucking her might be his Death; but the Child, instead of her Milk, sucked out her Soul, and she died to the astonishment of his Mother Axoda, who was present. Thus he escaped other Dangers from his Enemies, and at Seven Years of Age, was skilled in all Sciences, and among other Extravagancies defloured the Maids he played with. 2. His Mother whipped, and causing him to open his Mouth to discover whether he smelt of some Butter 'twas said he had eaten, she saw within Heaven and Earth and her self. She frighted, bid him shut his Mouth, but he would not till she promised him Figs or Sugar, and other things, and that she would carry him to the River to make Pipes to play upon. He, to be revenged on the Women, watched a Bath where they came, and enjoyed them all. 3. He went afterwards to fight the Snake Caliga that was Nine Leagues long, had Eyes like two Suns, and lived in a Lake made of the Venom she cast out of her mouth. The Snake finding she could not overcome him, perceived he was the God Vistnu, and begged his pardon. Camused
caused a Woman turned into a Snake to swal∣low him, and he swelled till he burst her. In fine, Camused was killed, and Siri Chri∣stna's Parents placed on the Throne of the Kingdom of Madure. This done, Vistnu turned into Siri Christna, married 16108 Women, and lying with them all in one day got as many Sons. This is counted the greatest Action of this God. 4. Betele is a Plant, the Leaves whereof pouder'd with Lime and Areca the Indians chew and suck to preserve the Teeth, streng∣then the Stomack, and provoke Lust. It is so like our Ivy, that an Ambassador of Hidalcan in Lisbon made use of it instead of Betele, mixing it instead of Areca with Cipress Apples, and said the Virtue was the same. Argionem being upon a Tree Degastri, one of the Wives of the Celestial Spirits came and carried him up in her Chariot, where he found this Plant, and stole a Stock of it which he planted on Earth. This is the reason the Indians be∣lieve this Plant came from Heaven, and that it cannot thrive unless he that Plants steal it. 5. The time of Siri Christna's Death draw∣ing on, he gave signs to know it by, which was, that when he expired the World should be inverted from what it ought to be, and is the time of Culi, which now is. Their Writings say, all will come to Confusion. But Vistnu coming to the World again, shall kill all for their Wickedness, except two Kings, who till then shall be doing Penance
for the love of Vistnu. These are Mara of the Sun's Charge, and Divappi of the Moon's. 6. Darmaputrem, one of the hundred Bro∣thers, descended into Hell, where he saw one encompassed with great Treasures, and perishing with hunger: He asked the reason, and the other answer'd, That it was because he had not given Alms while he lived in the World; but that once he shewed a poor Man the House where the Rice was kept that was given for Charity, pointing at it with his Finger. Then Darmaputrem bid him put that Finger with which he had pointed into his Mouth, which he doing thought he tasted all the Dainties in the World. Darmaputrem and others returning into the World gave great Alms, whereby after Death they purchased Paradice. This proves the Malabars believed Heaven and Hell, and a Reward and Punishment for good and bad Works. 7. Brama is the antientest God of the three, he resides in the Rose that springs from Vistnu's Navel, though he lies in the milky Sea. He descends through the hollow stalk of the Rose to Vistnu's Belly, where are the Ideas of all things, and where he produces these by looking on those. He has four Heads, which are the Original of four Laws; and because Ixora cut off the fifth Head for the Lye he told, he lost the fifth Law, which is that of God, and therefore the Bramenes want it. He dies and comes to Life very often; an artificial Day of his contains 120000 Years of the Celestial Spirits. He
has two Wives, but never had Children by them. 8. Among the Malabars are four sorts of Nobility, Bramene, Exastri, Baestri, Chadra. The first they say proceed from Brama's Face; the second (being Kings called Coilas) from his Arms; the third from his Thighs, which Race they say is extinct; the fourth from the Feet, called Nayres. The Bramenes have the name, because descended from the Face, and are much honoured by the Kings who are not Bramenes, and may sit down be∣fore them. 9. Though they attribute the Production of all things to Brama, he acts only in the most perfect, giving others the lesser power. Sometimes he grants so great Power to o∣thers, that he is in great danger of them, and forced to fly. Vistnu converted into a Nymph, delivered Brama from one of those Dangers. Ixora seeing that beautiful Form of his got him with Child. He was delivered of two Children, the one at the Mouth, the other at the Thigh. One was called Chartava; the other Ayapem, who lost his Birthright by drinking too much Wine, and it being put to his choice, whether he would be the Low∣est among Angels, or Chief among Devils, he chose the latter, and was constituted such. Ixora gave him Privilege to converse with Men and be serviceable to them, and he came in the Shape of a Nayre to the Court of the King of Pande. He lived in Malabar and turning Physitian, in which he was suc∣cessful, had Temples dedicated to him
His chief offering is Whelps, because he is a Hunter. So ancient a Custom it is for Doctors and Whelps to go together. They say in this Age of Brama all Men have Mon∣key Faces, and in the next they will be Horse Faces. The contrary is seen among us; for outwardly we appear Men, and inwardly are Brutes. CHAP. IV. A Continuation of the same Matter. 1. BEfore they build a Pagod they sow the Ground with Kidney-beans, when they are green they turn in a greyish Cow to seed on them, and where she Dungs, they believe is the place for the Pagod, placing on the very spot a Pillar, and on the top of it the Idol, to whom it is dedicated: Then they build the Walls, which are never of great extent, but rich, as being black Mar∣ble well carved, covered with Copper-plates, with Globes of Gold, or gilt. The inside is set thick with monstrous Images with ma∣ny Heads and Arms, and girt with Serpents. Then they build a square Wall about it, on each side of it is an entrance with a sumptu∣ous Portal, with Histories of their Gods carved about them. They are covered in the same nature as the Temples. Under∣neath are Heads of Elephants, Bears, Lions,
Tigers, and other wild Beasts with terrible Eyes and Teeth. It is thought these things are to terrifie those that resort thither, and move them to give Alms; though their Poet Palcanar laughs at it. Those who go to visit the Idol enter the inclosure, but not the Temple. The Inhabitants of Pande, Sub∣jects of Bisnagar, are singular in these Works. 2. The most famous Pagods are, that of Rettora built by Cheram Perimal living at Cranganor, who placed in it the Statue of a Man ten Cubits in length, lying on a Snake with five Heads in the Sea of Milk. The Temple was covered with Plates of massy Gold, but because they were subject to be stole he put them into the Treasure of the Pagod, and instead of them placed others of Copper. The Idol is still covered with pure bright Gold that shines like Fire; his Crown is of an inestimable value, and has many precious Stones, in the Forehead three Rubies that exceed all price, on his Feet Buskins valued 200000 Ducats. 3. In the Treasure, besides the covering Plates there laid up, there are nine Boats of Gold set with rich Stones, each big enough to contain three Men; the same number of Kettles of the same Matter, each deep enough to hide the Bramene with the Idol upon his Head, many Pots, Peacocks and Cocks of Gold and Silver, and an infinite quantity of Co. These are useless Vessels, those that are of use and the same Metal are kept more at hand. At the entrance of the Pagod hangs a Gold Candlestick so big, no Man can
lift it from the ground, and with the conti∣nual smoak looks like Ebony. Several Idols and Candlesticks that stand before the prin∣cipal Idol are of the same Metal. In fine, the Treasure is unmeasurable, if we may believe a Bramene who turned Christian, and had many good Qualities that show he merited Credit. 4. The Revenues of this Pagod are incre∣dible, and very many live on them. The enclosure is of Marble six Yards high, and above one in thickness; it is about half a League from the Shore, a beautiful Way leading to it. At each of the wonderful Gates can enter at once four Elephants with all their Furniture. It is guarded by 1000 armed Men: The Coast is dangerous, which secures many great Men who keep their Treasures there. 5. The Pagod called Comori, from which that famous Point of Land takes name, is also remarkable. Comori Pagod, signifies, The Church of the Virgin. It is like the other in Structure, but not in Riches, because they trust them not there, since our Fleets Sail upon those Coasts. The Pagod is dedi∣cated to a Virgin Daughter to a Shepherdess, that was changed for a Son of Davagni Sister to the Giant Maveli, who killed all her Chil∣dren, because he was told one of them would be his Death. He thought to kill this Virgin, and she giving him a kick flew through the Air into the Desert to the place where the Pagod now stands on the Shore, having been formerly 60 Leagues from the Sea. She after
flew a great Giant by the help of the God Vistnu, and set his Head on a Rock that now appears in the Sea, and is above 400 Fathom round. In the very place where the Virgin sate after this Victory, was erected the Pa∣god. 6. The Pagod of Trivate is more ancient than that of Rettora, but poor, having been plundred by the Nayque of Madure. It is not much frequented. This Temple was insti∣tuted in memory of the Giant Naragecoguer∣poli, who by destroying the World provo∣ked the God Vistnu; and still came to Life again, though overcome and killed by him. Vistnu, to end the dispute, laid him on the ground and sate down upon him. This is what is represented in the Pagod. 7. That of upper Cranganor has an Idol on whose Head one of the Bramenes gives se∣veral strokes of a hammer every day. For they think if this were not done, he would by this time touch the Stars with his head. In the Frontispiece are several Images in the Portugues Habit, whence is concluded either that Work was finished after their arrival, or such a Habit was formerly used there. 8. That of Canari in the Island Salsete, is bigger than all the others, and exceeds them in sumptuousness of building. It seems to have taken the name from some Builder of that Country, or from Canara King of Bis∣nagar, the grandure of the Work requiring so great a Founder. It is dug out of a Moun∣tain that looks like one solid Stone, and is black Marble. The Body is very high, the
Isles low, but altogether of a vast bigness, somewhat dark, as dug out of the middle of a Mountain. Among at least 3000 Habita∣tions that are cut out about it with each a Cistern by the Door, there are some large Rooms, and one of an extraordinary big∣ness, in which 'tis said are read Lectures of all Sciences. We have already spoke in the Second Chapter of the Second Part of this Tome, of the Way cut under this Mountain said to run as far as Cambaya, of the Fran∣ciscan that attempted to discover that Secret, and the Princes that are believed to have made it. 9. The Pagod of Maliassa is in the same Island. At the foot of a Mountain is a Portal of a moderate bigness: The two Pillars that support it are in the Shape of Giants well carved. There are other Figures like those of Angels among Christians. This leads into a large Porch, and on the left hand is the Gate of the Pagod through which the Water runs: Then follows a great A∣partment, after that other little ones, and then a strait way, all dug out of the solid Mountain. 10. The Pagod called of the Elephant, because the Figure of one stands upon a Rock at the entrance of it, is in one of the many Islands of the River Bombaim between Bacaim and Chaul. It is like the others, in that it is cut out of a Mountain, but exceeds them much in curious work. The first entrance is into a spacious Room supported by vast Pillars in the form of Giants curiously carved.
It has three Isles: The Pillars are all compo∣sed of Figures of the same height as the Tem∣ple: On one of them is the Giant Briareus with his hundred Hands; on another the God they call Mahamurte, who has three Faces to one Body, on his Head a Pontifical Mtre, though of Marble, wrought to ad∣miration. In a Chapel is the Angel turning our first Parents out of Paradice. Paipbae and the Bull are there also: On one of the Walls is a sort of Altar, and over it are car∣ved many wild Beasts, the most remarkable one with seven Heads. Some Soldiers attem∣pted to enter an Apartment that is very dark, and being fearful took Lights, but were drove out by a multitude of Bats that were frighted at the Light▪ There are Galleries with rich carved Work of Men and Women, most of them in very immodest Actions and Postures. This (they say) was the Choire of their Ceremonies. Their are o∣ther Buildings to be admired for their Great∣ness and Structure, and two remarkable Se∣pulchres. 11. To conclude, the Pagod dedicated to the Monkey is so great, that only the Cloi∣ster in which they shut up the Cattle designed for Sacrifices, has 700 Columes of Marble nothing inferior to those of the Roman Pan∣theon.
CHAP. V. Of the Officers, Rites, Ceremonies, Burials, and other things. 1. EVery Pagod has a Cook who dresses the Rice that is offer'd for himself, for the Idol, and for those who offer. The last divide their share with their Neighbors, who esteem it as a Holy thing. A great Poet of theirs laughs at them for offering more Food to the statue, seeing it has not Eaten the last, and they answer, though he does not Eat, he smels it. 2. The Kings and Nobles every Day use a ceremony (called Tevaram, that is Divine Ceremony,) which is with many Prayers to offer Rice, Coco, and Butter, all burnt in honour of their golden Idols, of which they have a number answerable to their Estate; so that some have above 1000; this sacrifice is to obtain Riches for themselves, revenge and destruction of their Enemies: Many have in their Houses familiar Devils, which they call Cutichates, every Day they offer some∣thing to them, they get by them; and some have 300 of them. They make them enter into the bodies of those they would be revenged of, whereof they make great advantage, for many pay to be delivered from them. By the help of them converted into the shapes of Beasts, they hurt People and infest whole Towns: There are those living, who have seen the
Town of Cranganor burnt by this means. At Pudiangale near Calicut, a Woman had one of these, and saw it in the shape of a Cock, a Monkey, and a little black Boy with a Truncheon in his Hand: these are not punished in Malabar, but their Kings make use of them in danger: The very Heathens observe that all those who follow that course live and die miserably. 3. In sickness they consult Wizards, not Doctors; they say a Devil causes the Disease, and bringing him into the Sick Man, make him tell the Reason of molesting him; then they promise him something to go out again, and he does it. They think the Small-pox is Cured with an offering to Patracale, who they affirm causes them. The Gout they believe is caused by ive she Devils like Sows, tothem they offer Food fit for such Beasts, that they may transfer the Disease to their Ene∣mies. 4. They adore and offer Sacrifice to vene∣mous Snakes, that they may not hurt with their Poyson. The Lawyers on the first Day of September do the same to their Books. 5. Their Baths are used rather to cleanse the Soul than the Body; they know the ten Commandments, but think not themselves bound by them. It is a great Sin if a No∣bleman is touched by one that is not such, though he be never so great by learning, by the Sword, or by Virtue: And even Riches there cannot prevail to gain this point. The King of Travanco being resolved to become a Bramene, though not of that descent, was
told, he must first be bore of a Cow; be made one of Gold so big, that going into it, he was born out of it; he offered it to the Bramenes with a great Snm of Gold, and obtained the dignity, but not Hereditary. 6. They purge themselves from venial Sins, by putting their Heads under Water, one of these is a Nobleman touching a Ple∣bean, and to prevent it, the latter cries as he goes, Po, po, po, that is, have a care; another is, touchng the Dead or their Friends within fifteen Days; another, to touch Meat with the right Hand when they Eat; ano∣ther, to touch them so touched, or their Houses or Wells; to touch another with the right and whilst Eating; to touch a grain of Rice fallen as it is taken up; to touch a drop of Water disturbed by one not so noble Mortal Sins are not forgiven, so he who com∣mits them▪ remains subject to Death, and the Lord of the Earth as long as he lives. The mortal are these, To use Pots touched by Men deled; to Eat Rice before Purifica∣tion, to Eat it boyled by a Man of base race; to have to do with a Woman of that sort; to Eat Rice into which is fallen the least grain out of another Man's plate. 7. Their bathing is thus, They believe the stone of the bath is the God Brama; the lips of it Vistnu, and all together Ixora. When they go in, their nakedness is covered with a rag or leafe; in the Water they write Om with one Finger, and throw Wa∣ter over it with three, believing the three Gods bathed there. Then dividing the Wa∣ter,
dip their Heads, and after cast up some towards eight parts of the World, offering Water to the eight Guardians thereof. They call upon Siri Pagod, and wash their Faces three times; they also cast Water up to∣wards Heaven, offering it to the Sun, then wash their Hands and Feet: On the Palm of their left Hand they put Ashes of Cows∣dung and sprinkle it, and believe the left Hand is the Earth, the right Heaven, and and the Palm the place of Generation; laying one Hand upon the other and shutting them close, they say, Let the end of the World come. 8. This they do in imitation of Ixoras's Egg, and think the upper Hand when open∣ed, represents Heaven, the lower the Earth; with the right Thumb they write upon the Ashes, Iara, that is the Fight that was in the Egg between Fire and Water. Then that all their limbs may be sanctified, they touch with their Hand the principal parts of the Body, from the privy parts to the crown of the Head, and the Ears, Elbows, Knees, and great Toes: They hold their hands as if they gave something to two Spirits (who they say attend on us writing our good works on the right Hand, and the bad on the left,) the same they do to the eight Guards of the World, turning about. The last ceremony is to rub the Forehead, Shoulders and Breast with Ashes taken with two Fingers and the Thumb of the right Hand, in honour of the three Gods.
9. The bathing called Titan, performed in the Sea, is very solemn; before it they perform a ceremony, in which they offer , (a sort of flowers) prostrating them∣selves three times on the ground▪ once in re∣verence to the Pagod, once to the Sun, and once to the Sea. The chief places they re∣sort to for this bathing, are three on the Coast of Travancor, (viz.) Baçora, Rettor, and ; the Days appointed are the first of each Moon, chiefly those of Iuly and Ia∣nuary, but if the New-Moon fall on a Wed∣nesday, it adds so much to this devotion, that the Mountains and Valleys can scarce contain the multitude of Pilgrims that resort from above Five hundred Leagues distance, of all Sexes, Ages, and conditions, and all a foot. Above all others, the Ganga of Bengala, is held in veneration for this wash∣ing. 10. Ashes of Cows dung is their chief Purgation, powdering their Forehead, Shoulders and Breast with it; the more of it their Iogues, or Religious Men, have upon them, the more Holy they are reputed; they carry it in purses to recompence the Alms that are given them: The Reason they esteem this Powder is this, Ixora was sanctified by the Ashes of Gevelinga, Vistnu desiring to partake of this blessing, and impart it to Mankind, carryed a Cow to , where she got a mouthful of that dust; Vistnu took her dung in which was that Ashes she had Eaten, and burning it made more Ashes, which he shared with Man.
11. They also dissolve the same dung and sprinkle their Houses and Highways with it, to purify them; with this is the way dayly sprinkled through which Zamri goes from his Pallace to the Pagod, and his Table cloth, and a Gold dish, on which the Meat is brought. As soon as they see a Cow piss, they run and catch it in their hands, drink part, and sprinkle themselves with the rest, and believe themselves most pure; besides the Law that forbids killing a Cow, 'tis so great a Sin, that it requires much Alms and other good acts to expiate it. Oxen are not so much valued, though many Princes think themselves descended from a Bull, be∣cause all Men being destroyed, and only Women left, one of them had carnal Copu∣lation with a Bull, and brought forth a Boy, who was the restorer of Men. 12. Their manner of swearing is laying a Hand upon a Sons head, if the swearer has one, or else upon a Cows; to clear themselves when accused of any crime, the party puts his Hand into boiling Butter, or Oyl, then 'tis wrapt and sealed up in a cloth; if on the third Day after it appears found, he is cleared, if otherwise, found guilty, the accuser, if the party be cleared, makes satisfaction with a Sum of Money. They make another Tryal in the River that runs from Cochin to Cranganor, where is the Pagod of the Crocodil. The Bramees by their sorceries bring one of them to the shoar, the person accused leaps upon his back, if he is carryed over safe, they account him
innocent, if devoured, guilty. Both these Experiments have been made use of in pre∣sence of our People of late Years. 13. They have yet another manner of Tryal, which is by putting the Hand into a pot full of Adders, to fetch out a Ring, thereby the more to provoke them. If they sting, the party is guilty, if not, clear. This is used in Cranganor, Mangalor, and other parts of Canara. A King of theirs coveting a most plentiful Wood of Coco's that belonged to a Poor Woman, took it from her by force, and ever after it bore none but hollow empty Coco's; there are some living who are Eye witnesses of this wonder. 14. They have several Fasts, one called Egadezi, which is kept the eleventh Day of every Moon, on this Fast they Eat nothing but Fruit: That called Giveraseri begins by Night in February, and they neither Eat, Dink, nor Sleep, in Twenty four Hours. They walk round the Pagod rehearsing sto∣ries out of their Scripture: If any happen to shut his Eyes, overcome with sleep, he washes himself as oft as it happens, and con∣tinues his former exercise. In the morning they offer some Money to the Idol: The Fast Tirivadira belongs only to the Women. That for the Dead, which the kindred of the Deceased keep, lasts a Year, during which time they do not Eat, Fish, Flesh, Eggs, drink Wine, or chew Betele. 15. The Fast Masa Upasa is the most reli∣gious of them all, and few account them∣selves
so happy as to observe it. He that does, begins the last Day of October, he wash∣es himself, puts on clean cloaths, and visits te Pagod of Vistnu. On the first of Novem∣ber he goes round it One hundred and one times, (the devoutest One thousand and one) at each turn in the nature of a Prayer, re∣peating the name of Vistnu, One hundred and one times: This must be done every Day of November, and the ten first of De∣cember. He must Eat only Eggs and Milk, not look upon Women, he must think on nothing but that name, and praises of it. Next Year he must do the same, beginning the first of December, and ending the tenth of Ianuary, so he must go on every Year till twelve be over; and then begins again the first of November, and fasts the forty Days; after this he is canonized sor a Saint, in such a manner, that only the sight of him is forgiveness of Sins. CHAP. VI. Continues the same Subject. 1. IN matters of Matrimony they have se∣veral customs. The Bramenes may have as many Wifes as they can main∣tain, though they be not of their Race; but the Bramene Women can have but one Hus∣band, and must not mix with the Nayres,
on pain of losing their quality. They con∣sult Foretune-tellers about a happy time to Marry; they choose a Husband of their own race born under the same Planet, and the same Day of the Moon, as themselves, to which purpose the times of Nativities are punctually observed. The Bramen that does the duty of Priest, is called Odicon, or Cu∣rical; he for four Days sacrifices in a Den Rice, Butter, Cows, and such like things; he lights a lamp, and sets aside a portion of Rice for Garapatii, and for the Epicurean Elephant, that he may not disturb the Feast. The Bridegroom ties about the Brides neck, a thread on which hang three little pieces of Gold, in honour of the three Gods; this is called Tale, and is the mark of a Marryed Woman. Hence among the Ma∣labars Matrimony is called Quo Fa, which signifies binding; if the Husband dies first, the Woman throws away the thread, or Tale, in token of liberty. 2. The Priest takes the couple by the Hands and says some Prayers, then they go to feast; they do not lie together till some happy Planetary Conjunction, when that hap∣pens, they go to the door of the Room which is half put too, and therewith the Priest say some Prayers, and withdraw; the next Day they go to a Cauldron of Water, in which are live Fish, and each holding the end of a cloth, draw it through like a Net, the Fish taken they lay respectfully on their Heads, with the right Hand; if many be taken, they believe they shall have many Children, and the contrary.
3. If any dies a Maid, they cause some poor Man of the family, (an unheard of beastliness) to deflour her though very young; him they pay well for so doing, and as soon as done, throw stones at him till he runs out of reach. Those of the family Ex∣astri, and the Kings that are not Bramenes, make no Royal Marriages, so their Wifes are not Queens, but Concubines, called Na∣tiaras, and all of them may have Gallants. Therefore the Sons do not inherit, but the Nephews born of Sisters. Of their manner of Marrying we have spoke before. 4. The Tale among the meaner sort of Women, serves to tie them to one Husband, and among Ladies, to turn them loose to all lasciviousness. Only the Bramenes have liber∣ty to lie with all sorts of Women, from the meanest to the Queen. The others if they have to do with inferiors are killed, if Wo∣men, sould. The Nayres differ not from the others, in the manner of their Weddings. Among the meaner sort as Tradesmen, one of them puts the Tale upon the Young Wo∣man, who is thereby capacitated to follow whom she pleases, or be taken up by who∣ever likes her. Among Silver-smiths, Black-smiths and Founders, four Brothers, or as many as there are, keep one Wife between them, and have particular Days assigned for each, that the inheritance may not be con∣founded. Till a Maid is licensed by the Tale, she may be abroad among Men, and one dare presume to meddle with her.
5. The Bramenss of the North do not on∣ly celebrate their own Weddings, but those of Beasts and the Elements. In our Age there was a great Man of that Family, who spent above 15000 Ducats at the Wedding of a Bull and a Heifer. There was also a Baneane who making a Well in the Village Calegam for the use of Passengers, and resolv∣ing to Marry this Water with some other, despised all that was near, and Marryed it to the River of Suratt, above 30 Leagues distant, and spent above 5000 Crowns in the Wedding. 6. The Chatines Marry as the Bramenes, but their Widdows cannot throw off the Tale, because they must not Marry again, nor keep a Gallant: When they want Heirs, they adopt one, by drinking to the adopt∣ed, who pledges in Coco-milk dyed with Sa∣fran. If he is a Man they give him one of the names of the Sun, if a Woman, of the names of Gods Wife. 7. The cause the families do not mix, is because the Bramenes descended from the God Bramasface, those of Chatrier (that is Kings) from the right Hand, those of Vaix∣er from the Belly; those of Chadrer, (they are the Nayres) from the Foot. At first they used to mix, but afterwards the Bra∣menes obtained a priviledge of King Chera∣man Perimal to the conrrary; hence they are so much superior to others, that they are polluted by coming near as well as touch∣ing them; they must not Eat with those of a lower race, nor any thing drest by them,
nor out of any Vessel of theirs; if any of them Marries, or has to do with inferiors, they burn on his Forehead a mark like a daws soot, and his kindred making a statue like him of straw, and the Herb Dorpe, burn it with ceremonies, as if it were a dead Man. The Bramenos loose their birthright of their Family, by Eating Fish, Flesh, or Eggs; and by Drinking Sura or Orraca, by stealing or killing another Bramen, pro∣vided it is not in War among the other Families, there are divers customs about being defiled. 8. Saniade or Saniassi is a dignity greater then a King, of which only the Bramenes are capable, the elect is installed by another Saniassi in this manner. The Image of the elect is made in Straw and burnt, to show he is dead to the World; then the Master leads him to a Bath, cuts of his Corombi, and dips him 72 times, then takes off his piece of Net, the mark of a Bramene, cloaths him in red, and he can never after wear white, only on his back a Fota. He delivers him a rod with a piece of the same cloath, and a straw Hat; for three or four Days he is un∣der the Masters tuition, must not Eat Fish, Flesh, chew Betle, nor so much as look upon a Woman, and if accidently he meets one, he puts his Hat over his Eyes, and goes on till she is out of sight. He is to take what is given him without complaining, lives in or near the Pagod, succeeds and is Heir to his Master. He bows only to the Idol, and even the King and Bramenes do to him, all his
defence is in curses, so much dreaded, that every one endeavours to appease him; he is not to handle Money; none can carry his Hat when he goes a foot: If he does any thing contrary to his institution, the Bra∣menes accuse him before the King; if con∣victed, they stain him with Safran and de∣pose him, but he buys it off with bribes. 9. They use no ceremony with those that die under the Age of 7 Years; those that are above this Age, are burnt towards the South from their Houses, where lives Iemen King of the Devils, that he may the sooner carry away the Soul. For mourning they shave their Heads and Beards, which they do not cut for a whole Year after, nor have to do with Women: Lye 15 Days on a mat, and enter not into the Pagods; the 15 Days ex∣pired, they cast the Ashes into the Sea, if near, if not into some bye place, and plant a Fig-tree where the funeral pile was; then they wash and put on clean cloaths, cast out all Earthen Vessels, and one comes to purify the House, sprinkling it with Cows piss and Milk. 10. Every Day of the Fast, he that pu∣rifies the House puts a little Rice upon a Fig leafe, which the Rooks Eat, or if they fail, which is looked upon as a great misfor∣tune, 'tis cast into the Water for the Fish. The Anniversary is a Feast at which there must be no Poor. On the Coast of Coromandel, Goa, and Cambaya the Women burn them∣selves with their Husbands, unless such as have sucking Children. I any refuse, the
relations hold it as an affront to them, and force her. 300 burnt themselves with the Nai∣que of Madure. The manner of it is thus, The Woman is carryed on Mens shoulders to the Pagod, in her best attire▪ and anointed with Sandal, after praying to the Idol, she dances all the way to the place; where her Husband was burnt, and casts her self into the Fire; the relations standing round with forks to keep her in, and making a noise with several iustruments that her cryes may not be heard and move compassion. 11. The Original of this Custom was from King Pandues Wife, who voluntarily burnt her self with him, and it is upheld to secure the lives of the Husbands; it having been observed, that more died by means of the Wifes, then by Sickness. The Saniade or Saniassi is not burnt, but buryed whole in the Pagod where he serves; they make a hole and seat him in it upon the bench he used before he is quite Dead, with a little Rice, and some without for the Idol, then cover him with Clay without any farther ceremo∣nies, believing he is suddenly gone to Hea∣ven.
CHAP. VII. Of the Empire of Aethiopia, and first of the Kingdoms and Provinces into which it is divided; of the Progress of Chri∣stianity therein, and of the Product of the Land. 1. EThiopia was the Second of our Three great Discoveries (which were India, Ethiopia, and China) and therefore shall be the Second described. The Reader may be assured of its Truth, as being delivered by an unbiassed and learned Person, that spent a considerable time there, travelling and exa∣mining into the Truth of things, and being an Eye witness of the greatest part. 2. The City Danoas was the Metropolis of this Empire, seated on the top of a Moun∣tain: The Country about it is divided into Districts, some mountainous, but all fruit∣ful. Three Miles to the Northward is O∣gara so fertile, that the green and ripe Fruit hangs at once upon the Trees. Westward is Dambia, not inferior to the other; then Amfras, where our Patriarch resided, and had Lands. Next follows Dara and others, till you come to the Nile. 3. In all these Divisions are many Mona∣steries and Churches, with Priests and Friars. Ethiopia knw not the Sacrament of Con∣firmation. The Country Tacussa was best disposed to receive Christianity, because
many Portugueses lived there, and that of Gorgorro by the Labours of the Jesuits who had a Church there. So the Heathen Agos gave ear to our Doctrine; these are a war∣like People, and possess a plentiful Country. The Damotes, though more polite, received not the Gospel so well, till being overcome in a Battle by their Prince, they submitted and entertained the Religious Men, and there are now theremany Churches and Mo∣asteries. 4. The Kingdom of Gojao was the first that admitted the Observation of Lent, and kept the Catholick Holy-days. It contains a great number of Monasteries, among them those of Gonge and Salalo are famous. The Je∣suits had three Residences here, Colelá, Sarcá, and Nebsse. The first two have good Churches finished, the third one very mag∣nificent begun. The Stone they are built of is blew, so light it is more like Wood, but yet hard. The Kingdom of Bagamidri re∣ceived some Catholick Fathers, and there are still Christians there. 5. The Kingdom Amora began to incline to Christianity at the time the Emperor re∣jected our Doctrine. The Viceroy da Christos and many of the People continued firm. The Faith was not spread into the Kingdoms of Narea and Zemen, or Provinces of Abargale, Borá, Saloá, Casta, Bugua, Ore∣jate, Sarte, Anubas, Sera and others. 6. It took most root in the Kingdom of Tigre, which being the chiefest of Ethiopia, the Description of it will serve to illustrate
what relates to all the others. The King∣dom of Tigre is almost round, its extent One hundred Leagues North and South from the Borders of the Amaceus to those of En∣derate, with the same distance East and West from Dangali at the mouth of the red Sea to the River Tacasse near Semen. It is divided into several Governments, called Xumetes, and the Governors Xumos, some of them in some cases not subject to the Viceroy, but immediate to the Emperor. In Sire, Ende∣rata, Agamea, Serave and some others, the Xumos must be Natives of the Province, and of certain Families to which those Commands are peculiar. Their Law-suits are like ours in Europe, there lies an Appeal from the Judge to the Viceroy, and from him to the Emperor, except in some Cases, in which the Judge finally determines. 7. The Governments are sold, and he that bids most carries them. A Governor is declared, by putting on him the Cabya, ty∣ing a red Ribband about his Head, and he walking about the Ctama, or Court, a Cryer proclaims; We have made this our Slave Go∣vernor of the Province of Bugna (or any other.) Then he returns to Court, and takes his leave of the Emperor, having first laid aside the Ornaments used at this act, for the same serve all upon that Occasion. Then he sends a Servant with such a Riband, to make it known in the Town where the Governors reside. The Viceroy of Tigre for his Place pays Three hundred Oqueas yearly, which is about Two thousand Ducats. The Bar∣nog
(corruptly Barnaga) which signifies King of the Sea; for Bar is the Sea, and Nogus a King, pays Two hundred. The Xu∣mos or Governors according to the value of their Commands, there being no set Rates, but all pay. 8. Along the Coast of Mossa Northwards is the Country of the Dobeytas, subject to the Turks; Southward lie the Xios; up to∣ward the nland near Enderata and Ojerate the Dobs, all Mahometans subject to the Em∣peror. Next those are the Dorbeytas, Chri∣stians only in name, Rebels to the Empire, defended by their inaccessible Mountains. The Mampss follow their Example, and have been often attacked without success. Along the same Coast are these Provinces; Cantiba the Upper and Lower, Seraoe, Sa∣licit, Sama, Tedexerez, Torates and Galas: Westward is Siré, and its Desart on th Banks of the famous River Tacasse bordering on the Cafres; then Nader and Addit. From the West Southward Tamben, Gralta, Sart, Ojerate, Enderata, the Bugnas, Dobas, and Sera a plentiful Country peculiar to the Queens. Turning again to the West Senafe, both Mambarata's, Agamea, Ambacenete, B the greater and lesser, Galá, and many other Governments. The Center of all is Tremona between the famous Church of Açum, where the Emmperors are Crowned, and the Fa∣mous Monastery of Abb Guarima. In each of these Divisions there is a Fair every week, and several Custom Towns, as Barava, Ser, Sir, that yield a considerable Revenue.
9. There are two Winters, the first of the Sea, and reaches about two days Jour∣ney up the Inland, beginning at Massua, and ending beyond the Monastery of Brizan. It begins in December and ends in March. From that place forward towards the Inland it is Summer. The second Winter begins near the famous Church Asmara near Bizan, where the first Winter ended, and reaches over all Ethiopia. The Commencement of it is in Iune, as in India and Coast of Arabia, but not so severe. It Rains the Afternoons only with Thunder and Lightning before, which gives notice to Travellers and Shep∣herds to get to shelter; for soon after fall flashes of Fire, and such Hail as kills all it meets. 10. There are also two Summers, the first temperate, the other insupportable, for the burning Wind, which they call Urur, strikes down People, and sometimes they rise no more. In some Places, as Marebo, Tacasse, Nor and others, as soon as Winter expires, pestilent Fevers Rage, proceeding from Vapors the Sun exhales from Bogs. Though the Roads are full of Woods, mountainy and lonesom, they are not so much infested with Highway-men as in Europe. 11. There never was the Plague in this Kingdom, and when it happens in the other Provinces, it kills not many, because there are no great Towns. Such as are Infected, or fearful, go from the Towns into Cottages about the Mountains, and if any dies, he is burnt together with the Cottage, no Body
daring to bury him. The People are long lived, and know not what the Pleurisie or Stone is: They have abundance of good and wholsom Springs. From them and what the Country about most produces the Provinces take name. There are also hot Springs doubt∣less Medicinal, if they knew the use of them. The Cattle drinks of them, and thereby be∣comes larger and fatter. They have other Springs and Rivers esteemed miraculous. 12. As there are two Winters and Sum∣mers, so the Product of the Earth is two∣fold: They have abundance of Wheat and Barley, Pease, Lentils, Beans, Kidney-beans, Indian-wheat of several Sorts, Hemp, where∣of they make no use, Nuga, an Herb with yellow Flowers whereof they make Oil, Zufo for the same use, and serves to die Cloath of a Saffron colour; Aja, a Grain between Wheat and Rye, but has a scattering Ear, a particular sort of Grain whereof they make Sava answerable to our Beer, though not so clear, yet serves to make them drunk. 13. They have white Rose-trees, white and red Liles very beautiful, Jasmin won∣derful for smell and greatness, Hony-suckles, a certain odoriferous Flower that dies by day, and recovers at night. Their Hills, Valleys, Meddows, and Shores are cover'd with variety of Flowers of of all Colours. All sorts of Herbs are there abundantly pro∣duced, and some but little Ginger. 14. For Fruit-trees they have the Tama∣rine, Peach, Pomgranate, Ancoy a sort of Pear, Fig, Orca like the Fig▪ the e of
bigger bulk, but the Leaves less; another sort of Fig-tree, called Muss, which grows like a Body of a Tree covered with Leaves so big, that a Man may wrap himself in one of them; out of the top shoots one only Branch on which are the Figs, on each of them, whatever way cut, appears a Cross, for which reason it is concluded to be the Fruit forbidden our First Father Adam, and the cause of his Fall. There are wild Ta∣marins, the Fruit whereof is not eaten. Vineyards there are none, but some wall Vines whereof they make no Wine, but Reasins. There are Lemmon-trees sweet and sowre, Cedars and Ebony-Trees. They have also Cotten, whereof are made course Clothes for the common Sort, and is used as all o∣ther things instead of Mony, of which i this Country there is none. 15. They Plow their Ground only super∣ficially, not cutting deep, and their Plows in many places are drawn by Men and Wo∣men, most of the Plow-shares are of Wood. Their chief Stocks consist in Cattle, and some Men possess from two to 10000 Head of great Cattle. Some of them divide their Herds by the Colours, and those that have Horns from those that have none, for there are naturally many here without them; none of the Bulls are fierce. There are many Goats, and it is reckoned a shame to drink their Milk; no less quantity of Sheep, some of such large Tails, as are equal to one of the Quarters; they make course Cloath of the Wool for the Poor. They have all
other sorts of Beasts and Fowl in abun∣dance. 16. The Conntry abounds in Butter and Honey, the best of the last is that of Ende∣rat and Agamea. The Bees, for fear of Theives, are kept within Doors, with holes through the Walls for them to go out. There are wild Bees, and of their Liquor is made the Wine most in esteem; both Men and Women glory in being drunk with it. Where these swarm, there resorts a little Bird that loves Honey, and fearing the Bees, goes out to meet Passengers, and attracts them with his Note, and leaping from Tree to Tree to the place where the Honey is; the People knowing this, follow him, take the Honey, and he remains satisfied with what is left. 17. It is certain there are gold Mines here, but not made use of, lest they should provoke the Turks and other Nations to covet the Country. They lie Eastward, and on the right hand of the way from Maigoga to Ta∣movem. On the top of a neighbouring Moun∣tain is to be seen a Wall, believed to have been a Fort to defend the Mines; though they are stopped up, some Gold is taken a∣bout the Skirts of them. There are other in other places, but none known of Silver in this Kingdom, in that of Semen there, are, and those so rich, that two Parts in three of the Oar are pure Metal, they are also stopped up. In Tigre there are Mines of Lead, and many of so good Iron, that they make thereof all sorts of Wepons without Steel, whereof they have none In
Senafe there is abundance of pure Sulphur, and as much Salt-peter at Gralta. 18. Between Baraoa and Massua, there is abundance of a sort of bright Stone which opens in Leaves like Izinglass, and being burnt turns to a white Pouder like Ceruse used by Painters, but not with Oil, for that turns it black. Between Dangali and Senafe is a great Mine of Salt of great value, be∣cause there is no other there but what is made with Sea-water between Massua and Defalo. The Salt dug out of the Mine is cut into Bars about a Span in length, and between two and three Fingers broad and thick, which serve for Money in other Parts. Not far from it in a Mountain is a sort of Salt that is a Cure for some Diseases. 19. The Empire of Ethiopia has never a good Sea-port Town, because it reaches not to the Sea, only some little Part of the King∣dom of Tigre. The Port Baclur, the first within the mouth of the Red Sea belongs to the King of Dangali a Mahometan, and is not considerable, being incapable of great Ships. The Port Defalo between that and Arquico where the Turks have a Fort is yet worse. The best Port on the Coast is Ar∣quico, where the Turks have raised another Fort: Between it and Defalo are two large Bays, where any Ships may ride.
CHAP. VIII. Of the Laws Customs and Religion of the Empire of Ethiopia. 1. IN Ethiopia there are no written Laws, but ancient Prescription is preserved by Memory, and often proclaimed at the Courts of Kings and Governors. There are no Prisons. When a Man is accused, they fasten a Chain to his right hand, and to the left of the Accuser, or one of his Servants, and so they continue till Sentence is given, so that it is as dangerous to accuse as be ac∣cused. When a Man is condemned to death, they deliver him over to the Party ag∣greived, to kill him as he pleases, without allowing the least time for preparation. 2. The Witnesses may be accepted against, and such as are allowed give their Evidence Viva voce, for nothing is writ. They have a sort of Judges called Umbares, which they hold to be descended from those sent by Sa∣lomon with the Queen of Saba, and her Son David, when she returned from Hierusalem. 3. The rich wear Shirts of Boeta lined with the same, or another sort of Linne, they reach to the Ankles, the Sleeves long and close to the Arm with abundance of ga∣thers, the Neck high and stitched, with silver and silk Buttons of several Colours, and Loops of the same instead of Button∣holes. Others wear them blew, and all gir
themselves with silk or Linnen Scarses; they use no Belts, but such as are fastned to their Swords, which they seldom wear; their Breeches as long as the Shirt and narrow; from the mid-thigh downward of Velvet, Damask or Sattin, upward of Linnen, be∣cause of the heat. Over all they wear Ca∣bayas, which are like Sheets (called also Fo∣tetes) thrown over their Shoulders, to do Reverence to any Body they open these, for they wear nothing on their Heads; but if they do Reverence to the Queen or Prince, they let fall the Fotete to the waste. If any wear Veils on their Heads they do not take them off. 4. They wear Periwigs, which they call Gatonas, made of sundry shapes, some like the brims of a Hat one over another, some round, others like Horns, and so other sorts. It is a Trade to make them, and they spend a whole day in ordering one; they are oint∣ed with Butter whereon the Dust settling makes them look monstrous. 5. Some over their Cloaths hang carelesly certain Skins like Sables with little Bells of Gold or Silver; about their Necks gold Chains with Crosses, Bracelets of the same Metal, and Silver Rings. The poorer sort cloath much in the same Nature, but with Apparel of less value. For the most part they go barefooted; or if they wear any thing, it is only a sort of Buskins so streight the Foot never goes to the bottom, and so they drag them. The meanest sort of all wear Cow. Hides either with or without the
Hair, dressed as soft as any Cloath. 6. The Women of great Quality, as the Oisoros, that are of the Blood-Royal, and others wear Shifts of Silk, or rich Indian Linnen, they cover the whole Body, very close at the Wrist, but the rest of the sleeve so wide it hangs down to the ground. They use Bracelets of Gold and Silver, Necklaces of Glass of several Colours, from the Shoul∣ders downwards they are covered with silk Veils of several Colours, or white as the Men, and they let them fall like them when they make Reverence; they put nothing on their Heads, their Hair hanging in many breadths, or loose and divided, fastned to the Skin ointed with Butter, the ends are knotted. Men and Women to avoid discom∣posing this so tedious dress, when they sleep rest their Neck upon sticks so framed, that the Head lies hollow: They always carry Bodkins of Ivory, Ebony, or other things well wrought to scratch themselves with, and are always stuck in the Hair. 7. Round their Eyes and Lips they lay Colour, makes them rather blew than black. The Brides on the Marriage-day die their Hands blacker than they are naturally; for as among us whiteness is beauty, so black∣ness among them: They wear Rings on their fingers, on the little one they let the Nail grow so long, it exceeds all the ther fin∣gers, in their Ears great Rings of Gold or Silver. 8. Their Weapons are Firelocks, which they have from the Turks, Darts of several
sorts, Maces, Slings, Swords, Hangers, Poi∣niards, and for the defensive Coats of Mail, Helmets, and Bucklers of Bufalo and Sea-Horses Skins. The warlike Instruments, Trumpets and Kettle-drums, the Musical Ta∣bors, great and lesser Guitars, the first of five, the others of three strings. 9. They love Feasting, and make more account of the Wine than the Meat; the Tables round; for Table-cloaths Cakes of Bread of several sorts of Grain, generally three cover the Table, and sometimes one. Their Food much the same as ours. When they wash their hands, every one wipes on the Cloath he wears, and when they eat on a piece of Bread. The greatest Dainty, without which the Feast is not compleat, is Beef just killed and eaten raw, and for the more delicacy, instead of Mustard, dipped in the Excrement of a certain Gut of the same Beast. The Desert is parched Pease and other Grain. Whilst they eat they drink little or nothing, but as soon as dinner is done they go to another place to drink, in which they spend more time than in the former. The drink is Sava, or Beer, and that Liquor of Honey before-mentioned: They drink and talk, till being hot-headed they go out brandishing their Swords, and promising to kill all the Master of the Feast's Enemies. The Feast is esteemed most splen∣did, whence most come out drunk. The Women go to Feasts with their Husbands, and the Oisoros without them if they please.
10. The Sons of Women of the Blood-Royal, that is those Oisoros, can never inhe∣rit the Crown, nor they marry with Men of the Family, though removed a hundred De∣grees. In this they agree with the Chineses. All Men descended from the Male-Line can pretend to the Crown, and he that is de∣scended from a King that Reigned 200 Years ago, has as good a Claim as the Son of the last. The Oisoros Women pay no Reverence to any Body, not to their own Husbands. In this particular we have many Oisoros among us. 11. There can be no fix'd Callendar of their Festivals, for they are many according to every Man's Fancy; those universally re∣ceived are Saturday and Sunday in every week, six days of every month, one of the most holy Trinity, another of our Saviour, one of Our Blessed Lady, one of St. Michael, one of the Apostles, and one of a Saint they call Guebramanisascodust. Easter they keep fifteen days; all the Festivals of the Year they observe according to the old Stile, on the Feast of the Epiphany they also cele∣brate the Baptism of Christ, and Men and Women repeat their Baptism in some River or Pool. 12. They add more Days to the Lent than we do to make up the forty, because the Saturdays as well as Sundays are kept holy. Their way of Fasting is only to eat after Sun setting till the rising. Throughout the Year they fast Wednesdays and Fridays. They dres their Herbs with Oil of Nuga, having
none of Olives, and have little Fish, which must be such as has Scales, for in most things they retain somewhat of the Jewish Cu∣stoms. 13. The Weddings are celebrated with Trumpets, Tabors and Dancing. Some live together upon promise of Marriage, if they have any Children. The Women are com∣mon to the Husband's Brothers and Rela∣tions, and the nearer of kin the more free to this beastliness. If the Wife knows the Husband has to do with another Woman, she recovers of her forty of every Creature she has upon the ground, as Forty Cows, Sheep, Goats, or any other thing; and if she will, the Husband is fined for her use many Cloaths which are delivered to her, for the Wives have their Goods apart. Adul∣tery is not punished with death. 14. In their Funerals they use the same Musick and Dancing as in the Weddings, to signifie it is the same thing to die as to be born. All the difference is the People that follow the Corps wear white Ribbands tied about their Foreheads, and go without Priest or Cross. Instead thereof they carry the dead Man's richest Goods before him. It is a great token of Grief to shave their Heads (at the Death of their Kings all men are obliged to it) but yet a greater to accompany the Corps naked from the Wast upwards. 15. Their Mourning is a black Cloath died in a certain sort of mud, for they have no other dying. If a Man be found dead and the Murderer not known, the Country
is fined to make satisfaction to the Relations. The same if any Cattle be lost; the Coun∣try People are obliged to maintain the Vice∣roys and other People when they travel. When two meet after a long absence, their salutation is kissing commonly the Mouth, sometimes the Cheek, or Shoulder. The Women neither spin nor soe, the Husbands mend the Cloaths; the Poorest Woman would be ashamed to wash her own Cloaths, the Men do it, and the Women bring the Water. 16. They have many Churches, I will say somewhat of the chiefest, that of Acçum is the principal of all Ethiopia for its antiqui∣ty, and because the Emperors must be Crown∣ed in it and no other. It stands in the mid∣dle of one of their greatest Towns. Near Acçum are the Caves where the Holy King Cabeb and his Son did pennance. They are buried in the Church of St. Pantalion, which stands on the top of a high Mountain; Pan∣talion was one of the 9 Saints, they say went from Rome to Preach the Gospel in that Country. 17. The famous Monasteries of Abbaga∣rima and Aleluya and the Church of Acçum stand in the form of a Triangle, a Days journey distant from each other. In the Center is Tremona; Abbagarima took name from its founder, who was one of the 9 Saints, and Son of a King of Rome, called Isaac, as the Son also was; but the Ethiopians called him Abbagarima, which signifies, a Man pro∣digious for Miracles; they feign that there was a way under ground from this Saints
Cave to Rome, and that he used to travel it. 18. The Monastery of Aleluya sormerly the habitation of many religious Men, ow of very few was founded by Abba Samuel Disciple to one that was so to Abba Arra∣gavi, one of those 9 Roman Saints and Preach∣ers. The religious of these Monasteries are of two sorts, those of Abba Tula Aymanot and those of Abba Stateus the founders. They live not in community, but every one where he pleases with Servants; they observe no noviceship, nor make any vow, such as will Marry and have 2 or three Wives; most of them have Mistresses, and think it no sin. Such as do profess Chastityare much esteem'd, all their business is to gather Riches, and get Governments. Their Habit is white Shirts, or striped with several colours, over them, a black Scapulary before, a narrow round hood of the same colour; they never take it of, not even when they consecrate, Cloaks or Mantles as every one can afford, the Poorest or most observant wear Cow hides, like the meanest of the People. All carry crosses in their Hands; the Masters who are not Marryed bigger then the others; but they want not for Women even of those they call Nuns. 19. The Nuns make no Vow, live where they will, and wear hoods like the Fryars sometimes they retire into Deserts, where they say the religious Men follow them. The Men are well read in Scripture, the Clergy lead much the same life, but must not Marry
twice, if they do, they are excluded the Church. The Abugnas who give the Holy Orders scarce do it gratis. They use no ceremonies, nor examine those who are to be ordained; they pay more respect to the Altar stone on which they lay the blessed Sa∣crament, then to the the Sacrament it self; their Chalices are made of Tin, or Copper, very large, that they may hold much Wine for the People to whom it is given in little spoons. The Priest to say Mass puts nothing over his cloaths, but as it were a piece of a Casula which hangs behind and covers his back. The Thuribels have bells to make a noise, they use no Mass book, but say the Mass by Heart; they assist at it with a confused noise their Chalice cloaths are black and dirty, so rags for other uses, their bells of stone. 20. In the Country of Barnagassa towards Arquico is the famous Monastery of Birau, corruptly called Vizan or Vision. It is of 200 Years standing, had once 500 Fryers, now not above 40. There is a great Church with 3 Isles. sustained upon 12 Pillars, built and dedicated, as they say to the Blessed Virgin before her birth; about half a League from it, is the Church of St. George, possess'd by the last Patriarch; near this Church is a large Cave cut out of the Rock, where are kept with great veneration, and even Heathen Sacrifices, some dead bodies they call Saints, and not dead Men, for they say, they rest there, and if any offer to lift the cloaths that cover them, to see what is un∣der
they hinder them saying, Do it not for they will wake. 21. There are many other ancient remarka∣ble Churches; those most admirable which are curiously cut out of Rocks; those lately built are, that of Dancas, those of Nebesse and Tre∣mona, of Gorgorra, Colena, and Sarca; most of the Antient ones are round; Men and Women go not to the same Church, but each Sex to their own apart. 22. Their errors in Faith are many, the chief, that they baptize without saying any thing, or if they do, use not the words in∣stituted by the Church: In confession they use no form of absolution, others absolve without hearing the sins, giving unreasona∣ble Pennances. They say God is like a Man, that the Divinity was born of the Blesied Virgin, that there is but one nature in Christ, that the Holy Ghost proceeds not from the Son, that there is no Purgatory, that the Souls are given by the Parents, not by Hea∣ven, that till the Day of Judgment none goes to Heaven or Hell, even the Blessed Virgin. They Eat not Swines Flesh, Hare, Rabbet, or Eel; Saturday they keep better then Sunday, no Woman in the time of her courses enters the Church; nor 40 Days after she is deli∣vered of a Son, and 80 of a Daughter, nor those who have had carnal Copulation the Day they had it. If any one enters the Church when they are communicating, he must receive without confessing, though he be loaded with sin, they had no knowledge of the Sacrament of confirmation, nor extream unction. There is no punishment for errors in matters of Religion.
CHAP IX. Of the Nature of the Country of Ethiopia, of its Towns and the Kings it has had, and of the entrance and expulsion of our Doctrine. 1. ALL this Country is divided by vast Mountains, so high, that they ap∣pear as if they had been heaped one upon ano∣ther, of strange figures on which they build impregnable Castles; some are difficult of ascent, some almost, and others quite im∣possible to be ascended; they are beautified with variety of Trees, and inhabited by a rebellious People, that have much of the nature of their habitation. 2. Their Cities and Towns are small, but the ruins of great ones are to be seen. In Accum they appear to have been very sump∣tuous, for there are Obeliscks of black stone, some ruined, some standing, two whereof are above 40 Yards high. It is believed the Court of their Kings was there kept for some Ages after the famous Queen Saba. I will here give a particular account of the City Adem, though on the Coast of Arabia, be∣cause it was in a manner, and is the inlet into Ethiopia. 3. About 30 Leagues from the mouth of the red Sea, a point of the Continent runs into the Sea, making a small Peninsula cover∣ed
with vast Hills and Rocks that do not pro∣duce the least Plant; on the top of one is a square Fort with Towers; thence runs down towards the Bar a wall with Bastions, the last of them at the foot of the Mountain. Hence the wall turns along the foot of the Hill, till it joins the lower Fort, making a sort of Circle. This work though it ap∣pears formidable at Sea, can do no great harm to the Ships, byreason of its great height, to remedy which fault, there is a Plat-form raised near the Water. In all the works there are about 12 large, and 20 lesser pieces of Canon, and 600 Soldiers armed with good Firelocks, Swords without shells, Cimitars, and Tucks. 4. In a bottom at the foot of the wall and Mountain, lies the City, not the third part of what it has been, girt with a wall and Towers at convenient distances; it is divid∣ed rather into lanes than streets, there are wells the Water whereof is brackish, but us∣ed when Rain Water fails, the inhabitants are Arabs and strangers, Moors descended from those who were once masters of it, and Jews who are in all parts of the World and here live meanly. 5. Provisions are brought from the inland on Camels; their Money pieces of Eight, and another of the same value called Cabres or Xamies. There are no Thieves, and there∣fore no Locks to the Doors; their weapons Swords, Semiters, Poniards and Bucklers hang∣ing by straps about their Necks. Their cloath ing black, the better sort wear a thing like a
like a shirt down to the Ancles; the Poor a clout tyed about the waste, reaching half way down the thigh; the Gallants add a Fota or loose cloak hanging down, or under the Arm, only the Xarises wear Veils on their Heads. The Women use the same sort of shirt or cassack as the Men, except that be∣fore it reaches only to their Knees, and be∣hind sweeps the Streets with a train a Yard long. The best sort wear a kind of silk Petticoat of several colours, they cover themselves to the Knees with a kind of Veil, and have only one Eye uncovered in the street. The Arabs easily took this Town from the Turks, and it might as easily be taken from them, if any would attempt it by way of sur∣prise. A Portugues Gentleman, after being pos∣sessed of it, shamefully quitted it. 7. The Emperors of Ethiopia since the Queen Saba (or Maqueda for she was so called) are these, her Son Solomon, Amna, Sahacam, Baremgabo, Sabacio, Thoasca, Adona, Ausayo, Omacio, Cboa, Luvo, Antata, Bahaca, Sava∣ds, Adina, Gotolea, Sasalea, Elgabul, Bau∣taul, Bavares the first, Bavares the second, Mahase, Nalque, Baisol, in whose time Christ was born; Chempas Gado, Bhur Sagad, Grima, Ca∣sar, Sarado, Cucii Bacheon, Sargay, Zeray, Sona Aogad, Gheona, Gaya; Macugna, Safa∣da, Agdar, Abraha, and Cabaha, who Reigned together, in whose time went thi∣ther a Patriarch called Minatas and Pantale∣, who we said Preached the Gospel there. Hpba, Asid, Anci, Arada, Asadadora,
Amamid, in whose time two Christian Kings sailing through the red Sea, landed with some religious Men, and Reign'd there, and then the descendants of the former were restored, and were Saba, Thazena, Caleb, Gabra, Ma∣sael, Constantine, Bgar, Zansagad, Frey, Se∣nay, Adoraza, Aidar, Madai, Calaudamo, Grima Affar, Zergaza, Digna, Micael, Bud Gaza, Arma, Asbanani, Digna, Zana, Am∣busao, Demo, Delnaad, hitherto the line of Saba; those that follow are of another branch, Himnamale, Agba, Acheon, Bhar, Sagad, Hesta, Sarad, Cama, Asgad, Vda Arad, Anda Cheon, Caifa Arad, Vd Doma, David, Theadros, Isac, Andreas, Astbinavi, Anda Iesus, Bad Linavi, Iarai, Acob, Beda Mriad, or Zeriaco, Hescander, or Alexander he that Peter de Covillam saw when Vasco de Gama was discovering the Indian Sea, An∣dacheon or Nant, David, Oena Saged, whom D. Christopher de Gama went to assist; Clau∣dius or Athana Saged, to whom went the first Embassador from Portugal. In all 86 Emperors from Queen Saba, till the Year 600, or thereabouts. 8. We have already, at the time it happen'd, spoke of the introduction of a Catholick Pa∣triarch into this Country, and shall in its proper place, in the third Tome, speak of the banishment of them. It is very remarkable that this Emperor, who so joyfully received an Apostical Prelate, and submitted to the Holy See, should after be so cruel an Ene∣my to it; and that these People who called themselves Christians, were the backwardest
in receiving the true Catholick Doctrine; the chief cause hereof, is their great incli∣nation to Judaism, as descended from Solo∣mon's Son. Therefore they so rigarously ad∣here to Circumcision, that not only the Men but Women are Circumcised; they observe strictly the Saturday; they take the liberty of being divorced only for their pleasure, and have several Wives, without regarding whether they have been their own Father's Brother's, or other Mens. This obstinacy is not a little helped by the Pontifical Power usurped by their Emperor; and by a Pro∣phecy they have, that the Franguis or Eu∣ropeans shall become Masters of their Coun∣try, and they fear the Preaching the Faith may be an Introduction to it. They have also another Prophecy, that they, assisted by the Franguis, shall destroy the House of Meca, which they desire as much as any o∣ther Christians. But let this suffice for E∣thiopia. CHAP. X. Of the Islands of Japan. 1. WE have already in the Eleventh Chapter of the First Part of this Tome spoke of the Situation, Extent, Names, and some other particulars of these Islands, which will be needless to repeat, and shall therefore proceed to what has not yet been related. 2. The Country, though not void of large
Plains, is very mountainous, some so high they are much above the Clouds. Two are most remarkable; that of Fiyenoyama four Leagues from Miaco, and that of Letchu which continually casts out terrible Flames, and among them sometimes the Devil comes out to perswade the People to cast them∣selves in there, affirming, it is the shortest cut to Heaven. About this Mountain are many Silver Mines: The Fields are water'd with many Rivers, which together with the Summer Rains and Winter Snow make them Fruitful, if the continual Wars did not hin∣der all Tillage, which is the Reason that Land is undeservedly accounted barren. It bears Rice and Wheat, of which they do not make Bread, but use it after their own manner, all sorts of Fruit usual among us, and many others, abundance of Wood both on the Hills and Plains. It is plentiful of all sorts of Cattle, and abundantly fur∣nished with Fish. Their Water is thin, the Air wholesom; the Natives are generally long-liv'd, and vigorous to the last; they apply themselves to the use of Arms at 15 Years of Age, and give it not over till sixty. 3. Their Countenance is agreeable, well∣shaped, generally large, and they value the greatest Bodies, very strong, and inured to Labour and Hardship: As soon as born they dip the Children in the Water to make them hardy, and as soon as grown to any strength the Boys hunt wild Beasts in the Woods. They are more ready at Handy-crafts than the Europeans, and their County People
more polished; this makes them the more tenacious of the Christian Faith, because they admit it not till sufficiently convinced. 4. Honour is no less Worshipped among them than their Idols, and they will endure any thing rather than abate in any point of it; this makes them very courteous, they show the same civility to Friends and Ene∣mies, they never swear, Princes punish Sub∣jects and Masters Servants in such manner, as neither has cause to complain, all Dif∣ferences, though between near Relations, are composed by a third hand to avoid A∣nimosities. To speak ill of the absent, is a Crime to them unknown; so is Play and Theft, and no less begging or borrowing. Poverty, nor any other Misfortune that de∣pends not of the Will, is not looked upon as disgraceful, for they will no way allow Honour to depend upon Fortune. 5. Withal there is no Faith among them, even between Father and Son, but it is a Disgrace for a Man to be open-hearted. Hence it proceeds they commonly Murder one another in their Embraces, Subjects do the same to their Princes, and Servants to Masters. Thus Rebels are caressed by their Sovereigns, for all their study is con∣veniency; Mothers instead of suckling stran∣gle their Children; some kill themselves to save receiving an Affront; and the Sick have no Relief, for all fly from them, and when dead throw them like Beasts on a Dunghill. They are not only given to Women, but much more to Sodomy.
6. If two happen to lie together, each lays his Head at the other's Feet. Neither Men nor Women wear any thing on their Heads, only the great Men when they travel go under an Umbrello; they mount on Horse∣back on our off-side. Instead of bowing when they meet, they draw back their Foot out of the slipper more or less; when the Inferior sees a Superior he sits down. They, value pretious Stones no more than Straws; any piece of Antiquity they esteem at extrava∣gant Rates of what sort soever. The King of Bango gave 13000 Crowns for a Vessel among us not worth a Groat. They have the same value for any draught of a famous Master, or for a Blade of a Sword or Hanger. 7. Their Mourning is white, and their festival Apparel black, the same is used by the Chineses. The Men varnish their teeth, the Women their hair. Our Musick to them is ungrateful; they delight in those Instru∣ments that make most noise: Their Fish they eat raw, and hate Milk or any thing made of it, calling it unconcocted Blood. Beef or Mut∣ton is never eaten but in the utmost Extre∣mities, as loathsom Vermin among us; the Wheat they make like the Italians into Ver∣micheli, or Macaroli, and drink Water boil'd with the Herb Cha hot, sipping it; this I believe is our Tea. The Service of their Tables differs from ours; the Vessels are all of Gold or Porcelane, for the Silver is all coined into Money. Our sweetest Perfumes are loathsom to them. What would make
us sick is the Diet of their Sick, as Fish salt and raw, Limons and other acids. Bleed∣ing is not used, for they say 'tis a madness to lavish the Treasure of Life, so they call the Blood. Their Purges are sweet and pleasant, the others, they say, and with reason, do but heap misery on the Patient. 8. Though there are many Kingdoms, the Language is the same; but so various, it sounds like many; for they have great variety of Words upon all Occasions: those that are used in serious Discourse serve not to jest, those that are for great Men are not for the meaner, those for the old are not for the young, the same are not for Men as for Women. In Writing they have fourteen different sorts of Characters, all varying not only in form but signification. The Gentry learn to read and write till twelve Years of Age in the Monasteries of the Bonços. There is one sort of Character to write to Princes, ano∣ther to Nobles, another to the meaner sort, and another for Books, of which they have great plenty in Prose and Rhime very ele∣gant and ingenious: Every Character is a Word. Some of our People that understand the Language of Iapan and Latin, avouch the former to be much more copious, beau∣tiful, soft, and compleat in all particulars. 9. All their Buildings, because of the Earthquakes the Island is subject to, are of Wood, but of such Structure, they are no way inferior to the finest in the World. They are whitened with a Plaster made of shells of Fish, which preserves the Wood
from the Weather, and makes the Cities appear most beautiful at a distance. The Tiling is black and of such a nature it will last Five hundred Years. The Curio∣sity within it not to be parallelled. Hang∣ings are not used, but all the Walls curiously painted with Landskips or Histories of their Ancestors. The floors are covered with fine Mats, and such as go on them wash their Feet first. There are no Chairs nor Bed∣steads. On the Beds there are few Cloaths but what they wear by day, but some have coverings of the same Straw as the Mats wrought with Gold. 10. The Poor eat as they can, but always with decency; the Rich with such state of Servants, Musick, Plays, and variety of Dishes, that a whole night is spent in a Sup∣per. They use as many Tables as Dishes, about a span and half high, because they sit on the ground, each Table about half a yard square curiously wrought of Cedar inlaid with Gold and several Colours. There are no Napkins nor Table-cloaths, because they never touch any thing, but feed themselves with little Cipress sticks so artificially that never any thing drops. The Meat is heap∣ed in the Dishes like Pyramids strewed with Gold, the Fowl whole, the Beaks and Talos gilt. Their Entertainment is generous and friendly, but so ceremonious, it were better to endure hunger than their Complements. 11. All the cloathing is Silk, thin in Sum∣mer, more substantial in Winter, and a set time for all People to alter their Dress.
They take many Wives, and are easily di∣vorced, yet Adultery is a capital Crime, and the Woman's Relations resent it as hai∣nously as the Husband. The Children are bred as has been said, and at Fifteen have their Sword put on by the Bonzos with much Ceremony. Every Man is so absolute over his Children and Servants, he may punish and kill them without being liable to any penalty for it. CHAP. XI. A further Account of Japan. 1. TILL the Year One thousand there was but one Monarch over all Iapan, he was called Huo, or Dayri. He had two Cucabo's, or Generals of his Army. At that time one of these killed the other, and re∣belled against his Prince. Civil Wars en∣suing, several Kingdoms were erected. E∣very Lord of a Province called himself Ia∣ta, that is King. They have four sorts of People, as among us, the Bonço's or Clergy, the Nobility, Gentry and Commonalty, these two last pay great respect to the Nobles, who are called Tonos, and, as among us, have the Distinctions of Dukes, Marqueses, Earls, &c. The chief Trade is Silver and China Silks. In Mechanicks they are excel∣lent. Their Cutlaces are so temper'd, they cut through our Armour as if it were Wood.
Their Lances are longer and lighter, their Musquets and other Arms perfectly good, as is their Powder, their Horse Furniture curious beyond expression. Printing among them, as well as the Chineses, is very an∣cient. All the Land is the King's, and he gives Parcels of it to Noblemen and Gen∣tlemen to serve him in War and Peace, and they give Portions of it to their Servants. 2. The King has power to recall his Grants, and take back his Lands at pleasure, and hereupon it is not counted infamous in the Subject to forsake his Prince, and go over to his Enemy for Profit: So it often happens that Kings are dethroned, and pri∣vate Men set up. But this does not only hap∣pen in Iapan. 3. No Prince is more difficult of access than those of Iapan; all Business is done by way of Petition. The People when they see the King, rather adore than reverence him. There is no Prison or juridical pro∣ceeding against Criminals, every King, T, or Master of a Family punishes without any of our Forms. The Punishment is common∣ly inflicted by Surprize, for none will re∣ceive it without resisting. When the King punishes a great Man, he causes his House to be beset with armed Men, and as an Ho∣nor gives him leave to kill or defend himself. If he defends himself, there is a Battle be∣tween those that are to execute him and his Family; if he kills himself, he makes a cross Wound with a Dagger, and throws it into the Air, to shew he fears neither Heaven
nor Earth. When they are grown in Years, and have Sons of the Age of Eighteen, they give their Estates to them, reserving only some small thing to live upon, and this they do not for love, but to prevent being turn∣ed out and dispossessed by them. There is nothing among them but what is purchased and maintained by force of Arms, and so dividing them into five parts, not above the th dies a natural Death, the other four by the Sword. 4. In the Reign of Dayri sole Monarch of the Island, there rose a Bonço with the name of a Prophet, and introduced Sodomy a∣mong them, since which time they have never been free from Rebellions, which are the Destruction of Iapan, to prove God could better endure Idolaters than Sodo∣mites. Of their several sorts of Opinions in Religion enough was said in the Eleventh Chapter of the First Part of this Tome, and somewhat shall be hinted out of a Hebrew Canon in the last Chapter of this same Tome, touching the Preaching of St. Thomas the Apostle in this Island. Bonço is a com∣mon name for all the Ministers deputed to the Service of their Gods, as well Camies as Foques. Though these differ in Condition and Profession, they agree in three Parti∣culars; the first, a counterfeit Chastity, for it is not lawful for them to Marry; the se∣cond, Abstinence from all sorts of Fish and Flesh; and the third, Shaving their Head and Beard, in token they contemn the World.
5. Some live in Towns, and have the Charge of the Varela's or Temples of the Idols, others in great Monasteries. There are also Monasteries of Women, whom they call Biconies, who also profess Chastity, and observe it as ill as the Men. It is wonderful that though both of them be extravagantly Debauched, Proud, Covetous and Cruel, yet on account of their Profession they are held in great Veneration. They had once an infinite number of stately Temples, and even at the time St. Francis Xaverius went thither, he found Five hundred that had escaped the Fury of their Wars. In one of these is that prodigious Altar on which stand Fifteen hundred Idols of the common Sta∣ture of a Man, all gilt and orderly placed in nine rows round a principal one, to whom they seem to make their Court. Every one of these has three Heads and above forty Arms, which the Bonços say represent the Power of their Deities. The Silver and Gold Lamps and other rich Gifts presented by Kings and Lords when they go to War, are innumerable. All the City Hara is full of Temples; in one of them is the Idol Xac of gilt Metal, and so big, that a Pigeon standing upon its head, can scarce be seen by those who stand at its feet. 6. In these Buildings there are wonderful Columns of Cedar: In one of them there are Ninety-eight of a vast height, and near twenty-three foot in compass, so wrought that none of them could cost less than Five thousand Ducats. The Porches are Forty
Foot high, and twenty-five in breadth, on sides of them are Statues of a monstrous hig∣ness with Maces in their Hands, threatning the Devil who lies at their Feet, as St. Mi∣el the Archangel is painted among us. A is kept extraordinary clean: In the City Miaco all things more Majestick. The Gar∣dens belonging to these Houses are surpri∣sing, adorned with variety of Flowers, ma∣ny whereof seem rather the work of Art than Nature. The Parks, Ponds, Foun∣tains, Birds of several Colours, and variety of wild Beasts not to be molested, are im∣possible to be described. The Sons of the principal Men put themselves into these Convents. The Colour of their Habits dif∣fers according to their several Sects. They wear Beads, and keep Choir, where they sing in the manner of our Psalms; Matis at midnight, other hours at break of Day, and others at Sun rising. They are call∣ed together by Bells, whereof they have great number, and of extraordinary gran∣dure. They are rung at certain hours of the day for the People to pray, and they do it in the Evening as we Vespers. 7. Their Galleries before their Cells, their Refectories and other Offices are very large and orderly. The funeral Ceremonies are very stately. They grant Indulgences for the Living and Dead, and for the latter Ha∣bits which they say carry them directly to Heaven. There is a commemoration of the Souls departed in the great Feast of their amies and Ftoques. They Preach in large
Pulpits, and the People is called with a Bell. The Preacher is cloathed in maje∣stick Garments with a gold Fan in his Hand, and moves the Audience with an affected Gravity and Modesty, takes his Text out of their Scripture, and discourses thereon so effi∣caciously, that the Hearers burst into Tears, calling upon Amida and Xaa, and leaving very consideral Alms, the chief aim of the Bonzos passionate Discourse▪ They study in several Colledges founded by their Kings. 8. They have also a military order, which they call Negoros, consisting of two sorts of Bonzos. One (the fewest in number) keep a Choir, and have charge of Idols and Temples; the other follow the Wars, serve any Prince for pay, to the number of Thirty thousand, and are absolute in their own Conquests. Some of them have Estates of Sixty thousand Ducats a Year. Every day they carry five Arrows to the publick Magazine of Arms. They profess Chastity, and admit no Women into their Towns, but make no scruple of committing Sodomy. 9. Over all these Religious Professions is a head Bonzo called Zaco, who (in the same nature as the Pope) has the disposal of all their Church Dignities, orders all Matters of Religion, and grants Dispensations. The Monasteries chuse their Superiors. The Cities have Tundos, answerable to our Bi∣shops, to them all the Bonzos are subject, and they grant Power to the Superiors of them to dispence in lesser Matters. The Pontifical Chair is at Mico, is vastly rich
in Revenues, and is in continual War with the Laity about the Succession. 10. Besides those spoke of, there are some remarkable Buildings in Iapan, but I will only touch upon one Fort. Six Leagues from Cagoxima in the Kingdom of Sme, there is a vast high mountain all of one solid Rock. On the top of it is artificially cut out a Castle with all Apartments equal to any great Palace, defended by ten Bastions, and they encompassed by a large deep Ditch, the whole of one entire piece, as be∣ing cut out of the very Rock, in the same manner, as if it had been formed of Clay or Wax. We have already and shall again in its place speak of some such Works in India. Let us now go over to China.
CHAP. XII. Of the Great Empire of China, and first of its Situation, Division into Provinces, of its Product, Arts and Commerce. 1. THE Island Hainan, the Southermost part of this Empire, is in 19 deg▪ of North Lat. and the Tartar Wall the ut∣most Northern bound, in some places ex∣ceeds 41 deg. The extent from East to West no less, so that it is not much inferior to all Europe in greatness. On the South Coast are abundance of small Islands so near the Continent, they seem to be all one Body. 2. This vast Empire is divided into Fif∣teen Provinces, each of them formerly a large Kingdom. Most of the Nine they call the Southern Provinces are watered with such large Rivers, that in some of them the opposite Shore is out of sight; they are all Navigable, and such multitudes of Vessels upon them, as seems incredible even to those that are Eye-witnesses. A Passenger in less than an hour counted above Three hundred in only an arm of the River Mm∣quim. They are curiously built, for round the outside are Galleries for the Sean to Sail them, without incumbring the middle, so that they are more like Plasure-houses than Boats, and that also in respect of their Painting, Gilding, and the Spaciousness of
their several upper and lower Apartments. Those of Hang  all the others. 2. The 6 No  being nearer to our Latitude▪  of the me , th are  others▪ and more healthy; yet  are lly long liv'd in all of them, d there are many vi∣gorous old Men; it is so well Peopled, that not only small Towns, but Cities are in sight one of another, and where the Rivers are much frequented,  a continued Town. They have greater and lesser Cities, Towns, and Castles, which they call Fu, Che, , , the Villages are innumerable; they are all guarded throughout the Kingdom by ight, as if they were upon a Frontiere; the streets are watched with great diligence. 4. The multitude of People is unexpressa∣ble; it is difficult going in the Towns by reason of the concourse, and the Roads are as usually among vs, upon▪ Fairs. Accord∣ing to their general lists there are near 60 Millions o Men whh  uchs, Wo∣men and Children a erable. The common buildings  o ghtly, and lasting as ours, but , and clean. They  a Cram with great Art in their structures; Caram is a sort of var that distils from certain Trees, it mixes with all colours, and is most beautiful as may be en in many things brought from thence. They build no upper oors, looking upon the low to be more convenient; all neat People have Gardens with Flowers and small Trees; in the North
they use such as bear Fruit, if they have much ground, they plant great Trees, raise Mounts, on which are kept Fowl, as Cran and Swans, and Beasts; as Deer and others. They also make Ponds in which are black and red Fishes with gilded Scales. 5. They first frame the Roof of the Ho, then set it upon Pillars, each of them of only one piece of Timber, varnished with  for the most part black; then they build the Walls of brick, and a sort of pla∣ste like lime which is very hard; they say that formerly they built after our manner, and have still rules of Architecture only ob∣served in publick buildings, as Pallaces and the like; they have many Towers of seve∣ral forms, all beautiful, from 5 to 9 stories high, with winding stairs and others, and galleries without; their Houshold stuff is various, curious, and very cheap. 6. This Kingdom being of so great an extent and consequently lying under so many se∣veral Climates, produces all sorts of Fruit that the whole Earth affords. Their com∣mon sustenance i ce, and Wheat, whereof they have such ply, that a Pico of either of them, is sold for 5 Royals, and when dearest for 7. A Pico is a Hundred and a quarter weight of ours. The Northern Pro∣vinces make most use of Wheat and Barley, the Southern of Rice; all other sorts of Grain is plentiful, the Poor use it for Wheat▪ and it serves to feed Cattle. The comm∣nalty feed on Herbs all the Year, and no other Medicines ae found in the Apothecaries Shops.
7. Every Village affords abundance of Meat, the commonest is Pork, Beef is sold with∣out bones, wild Foul and Beasts not so usual, they have of all sorts except Rabbets; they have Nightingls that sing like ours, but are much bigger; and ano ort very beau∣tiful and of delicious ▪ they have lso all those sorts of birds we see painted on their works; they breed infinite quantities of tame Foul, the Geese so nume▪ they are in vast stocks about the Fields. What is  of their hatching Eggs by art is true,  it is done only in Summer. 8. As for savage beasts they have many, as Tigers, Wolves, &c. but not hurt▪ Elephants are brought from abroad; of tame Cattle they have all the same sorts as among us, and use not Oxen for plowing as in India, but Bufalos. Horses are plentiful but not good; they formerly used Coaches, now Chairs. Their way of Travelling is in Litters, on Mules, or in Chairs carryed by 4, 6, or 8 Men, according to every ones ability; they are bigger than ours. In the Cities of Peking and Nanking, Horses stand in the Streets bridled and addl'd, to be hired to go about the Town. 9. Fish is not so plentiful in the Northern Provinces, because there are not many Rivers, but much comes from the South salted, and otherwise preserved: Their best fruit is in the Southern Provinces, the best Oranges those of Quantung; in Xeni there are most Grapes, whereof they make Reasins, but no Wine. In the North they make Drink of
,  e South of Rice only, it is pant to the sight, smell, and taste, and among them Drunkenness is accounted no shame. There are two pleasant and strange fruits, the Suçu, a red Apple like an Orange of excellent taste, and is preserved hung up. The Lequias of the bigness of an ordinary Pear, shaped like a Heart, in colour like a Strawberry, the inside Pearl colour, in the middle a core very pleasant, but not to be kept. 10. They have all sorts of Flowers, many unknown to us, and keep them all the Year, some grow in the dead of Winter, when the leaves are fallen off the Plants: these are called Lamui, and are more agreeable to the smell than sight, being yellow like wax. 11. Their Apparel, Beds, and other fur∣niture, is made of Wollen, Linnen, Silk, and Cotton, of which they have abundance, and work it curiously; China supplies stran∣gers with the richest commodities of the East, as Gold in thread, beaten, an in bars, Rubies, Zasires, Pearl, Musk, Silk raw, and wrought; Porcelane, Quick-silver, Copper, Tinn, Tortoise-shell, Vermillion, Salt Peter, and Sulphur, Sugar and other things of less value. Their gilding either for use or cu∣riosity is well known; the vilest things are not lost among them. The Kingdom is rich, but not private Persons; there are not so many rich Men as in Europe, nor so many Poor; few possess very much, many have plenty, and scarce any want.
12. Money is scarce as may appear by the price of all things, Servants wages, hire of Work-men, and allowances to Ministers of State. A pound of Mutton is worth a half penny, a Pidgeon not a farthing, a Man's wages not above a Crown a Year; some things alter the Prizes but all are rea∣sonable, and much about these rates. CHAP. XIII. Of the Provinces into which China is divided. 1. THis vast Empire is divided into two parts, the Northern, and the Sou∣thern, and they into 15 Provinces. To the Southern part belong 9, which are Quantung, Quansi, Yunnan, Fokien, Kiangsi, Suchuen, Huquang, Chekiang, and Nanking. Quantung is the most Southerly, and lies between 20 and 25 deg. of lat. it is large and Rich, and abounds in Wheat and Rice, of the lat∣ter, though differing in kind, the Earth gives two crops a Year. Here is much Sugar, Iron, Copper, and Ti, all which are wrought with great perfection, as also the works of Charam and gildings brought to us. The People are very ingenious at handicrafts, easily imitate what they see, but are not good at invention. Our Merchants repair twice a Year to the Capital City Quangcheu,
75 Leagues distant from Macao, and Macao is 18 from the Islands, and is about 5 Leagues in circumference. This is the most frequent∣ed Port of the whole Kingdom. The Por∣tugues alone export hence Yearly, 53000 Chests of Silks, 22000 bars of Gold, each weighing 12 Ounces, 7 Picos of Musk, which is 8 Hundred and three quarters. Pearl, Sugar, Porcelane, China wood, Reu∣barb. and other lesser commodities in vast quantity. The Island Haynan belongs to this Province, about it is a great Fishery of Pearl, it is well Peopled on the Northern Coast, on the Southern is a Town that owns no sub∣jection to any body. It produces several sorts of precious Wood. 2. On the N. E. side of Quantung lies the Province of Quang, between 23 and 27 deg. of lat. it differs not from the other in any thing considerable. That of Yunnan to the Eastward in the same lat. is the farthest from the Center of China, 'tis large but not rich, its principal Commodity being Amber for Beads, and such uses. Here contrary to the custom of all the rest of the Kingdom, the Women go abroad to buy and sell. On the other side of Quantung to the E. N. E. is the Province of Fokien between 24 and 28 deg. of lat, it is for the most part Mounta∣nous; the Natives contrary to the general Law, travel and trade abroad: It yields Gold, Sugar, Hemp, and Paper of several sots; the goodness, plenty, and cheapness of it very remarkable. Printing here is very eap, and as Ancient as shal be mentioned
hereafter, it is not done with loose letters as among us, but cut in Wood, so that the Original remains; there are an infinite num∣ber of Printing Houses, every one may Print what he pleases without a Licence, and not∣withstanding this liberty, they never publish any scandalous or immodest Book. This Province lies on the Sea, and thence are ex∣ported infinite quantities of Merchandize for Manila, Iapan, and the Island Formosa, which is in sight; the Dutch trade here. 3. The Province of Kiangsi lies North of Quantung, between 25 and 30 deg. of lat. It is hemm'd in with great Mountains, from which fall two Rivers, one running to the Southward, all the way Navigable; another to the Northward, which after running through great part of this Province, receives another great one coming from the Province of Huquang, and is the famous Kiang. The feet of these Mountains are adorn'd with good Cities at convenient distances for tra∣vellers, and carrying of goods, which are generally on Men's backs, and the concourse is incredible; the Innkeepers give an account of all that comes in to their Houses, and are obliged to give two Meals to all such Passen∣gers, having other ways to be payed; every Man carries his own Bed, for the lodgings find nothing but bedsteads. In the Custom∣house, which is here very great, they do not visit the goods, but take everyMans word, and the Duties are very easy; a traveller that is no Merchant, is Custom-free; the stran∣gers that come to Macao, pay according to
the Tunnage of their Vessels without search∣ing. 4. This Province is so populous they mis∣cal it Laocha, that is little Mice, because they spread all over the Kingdom, serving all sorts of Trades, particularly Taylors; they are very Poor; the Province has abundance of Rice and Fish; it is famous for large Soles, but more for Porcelane. The Clay 'tis made of, is only found in one Village, and in ano∣ther place the Water to work it, for if they use any other, it proves not so good. In this work there is none of the mystery gene∣rally represented to us, it is meer Clay, but of a most rare quality; it is wrought after the same manner, as ours, in the same time, and of all colours. This Province Fokien and Quantung meet in an Angle formed of many Mountains, among which is a small Kingdom, the King whereof owes no obe∣dience to him of China; they allow the use of Phisitians in sickness, but of no Lawyers in their suits. If any scarcity happen, they go a Robbing in the nature of open War. 5. The Province of Suchuen is much in the same Latitude, and has nothing singular; that of Huquang is in the same lat. more plentiful of Rice than any; has much Oyl, and Fish in its great Rivers, and Lakes like Seas. The Province Chekiang lies between 27 and 32 deg. upon the Sea, is plain and fruitful, and watered with many Rivers, some whereof run through the Towns; it is much Richer than the others, particularly in Silk, which is exported only from thence. Hang∣cheu
is the Metropolis, the most populous of China, so delicious and pleasant, that it is a Proverb, Glory in Heaven, and Hangcheu on Earth. Three things make it most fa∣mous, the Lake called the rarest in the World, about two Leagues in compass, be∣set round with curious Pallaces, and they with delightful Hills, the Water runs in at one end, and out at the other, across it are set Dogs of Stone for People to go over upon, many Vessels ply about it, some very large, being built for pleasure and feasting, with Kitchins fore and aft, in the Midship rooms with Tables, above floors for Women, the windows covered with close nets, that they may not be seen, all painted and gild∣ed; the abundance of Meat in them is won∣derful, in these many spend what they have. The second thing famous, is the Silk, and man ner of working it; the third, the worship of their Idols, and magnificence of their Tem∣ples. 6. The last of these 9 Southern Provinces is Nanking, between 29 and 36 deg. of lat. the best in the whole Kingdom. It permits no Foreign Trade, the Merchants, to enhance the value of their goods, say, they are of Nanking; in only the Town of Xanham, 'tis said, there are 200000 loomes for Cotton, which yearly yield the King 450000 Ducats. The Court long resided here, and all the tribunals and priviledges of a Court still re∣main in the capital City called (as my Au∣thor will have it,) Ymthienfu, but I find it is
by all others named Kiangning. This City is the best in the Kingdom for sumptuous build∣ings, spacious streets, trade, and abundance of all things; it has twelve stately Gates well defended with Canon, without the walls runs another, at a great distance much ruined; the outward circumference will take up a Horseman two Days journey, travelling a good pace, the inward is 6 Leagues; between the two walls are buildings and tillage, the crop whereof is appropriate to the Souldiery that reside within, to the number of 40000 In one quarter of the Town is a Mount and thereon a sphear of a vast bigness, of curi∣ous workmanship, but stands not on a frame; there is also a rare Tower 7 stories high with all appurtenances made of Porcelane, a most wonderful work. The River runs by the foot of it, called according to my Author Yamcuquiam, by all others I find it named Kiang; but Yamcuquiam signifies Son of the Sea, because it is one of the greatest in the World, and may perhaps for brevity generally be called Quiam or Kiang; it has great store of Fish. 7. The Northern Provinces are 6, their names Honan, Xensi, Xansi, Xantung, Peking, and Leavung. The first lies between 33 and 37 deg. of lat. and produces the most delicious fruit, which is prodigiously cheap, so that One hundred of Apricocks is worth about half a Farthing. A Prince lives here in as great state as the King.
8. The Province Xensi lies to the East∣ward of the last in near the same Lati∣tude; it is large but dry, as the three next to it; bears little Rice, much Barley, com∣mon and Indian Wheat. Their Sheep are shorn three times a Year, Spring, Summer and Autum, but the first shearing is the best. The Wool serves for Hats and such like work, but is not fit to spin. The Goat's Hair is spun, and of it they weave Stuffs richer than of Silk, but it is only of a sort of Down that grows next the Skin under the long Hair. This Province yields Musk, which grows in the Navel of a Beast like a little Deer, the Flesh whereof is eaten. The Purses brought hither are not all the same in which it grows, because the Musk mixed with other Drugs is too much to be contained by them only, and so Purses are made for it of the Skin. Scarce any Musk comes over pure. Here is also some Gold gathered, but in Ri∣vers, for the Mines of it and Silver are not open. Most of the Rhubarb in the World seems to come from hence; for that which is brought from Persia cannot be of the Pro∣dct of that Country, because none that have travelled there relate they ever saw this Herb grow there. It grows high and bears Leaves bigger than those of Cabbage, re∣quires much care, and grows not wild, as some would have it. 9. This is a Province of great Trade, for the numerous Caravans, some of above One thousand Men, which repair to its two We∣stern Cities, Socheu and Xancheu. In them
come Ambassadors from the Mahometan Princes to the King of China, every three Years is an ordinary Embassy, and every fifth one extraordinary, they always bring Pre∣sents. The Princes are, the Turk, the A∣rabs, Camul, Samaran, and Tarsan, but none of them, except the last, know any thing of these Embassies or Presents, the Merchants do it at their own cost for the more security of their Trade. The Present consists of a quantity of precious Stones, Three hundred and forty Horses, Three hundred small Sparks of Diamonds, some sine Blew, Six hundred Knives, and as many Files. The King returns for each Horse two pieces of Cloath of Gold; Thirty of yellow Silk, Thirty Pounds of Cha, Ten of Musk, Fifty of a Medicine called Tienyo, and Fifty of Silver. 10. Cha (which I suppose to be our Tea) is the Leaf of a Tree like Myrtle, in some places bigger than others, they dry it in Iron Pots over the Fire, and so it runs up together. There is of it from a Ducat the Pound to less than a Halfpenny, such is its variety. It is their common drink steeped in hot Water, with it they treat Strangers, and relate many Virtues of it. 11. The Province of Xansi lies between 36 and 42 deg. of Lat. the many Mountains make it barren, therefore bears little Wheat, less Rice, and most of Indian Wheat; it supplies the Kingdom with Resins. Here are Wells of Fire for the use of Houses, like those of Water in other Parts. They
make small Mouths, and over them boil any thing. They have Coal-Pits as in En∣gland. The Province of Xantung lies be∣tween 35 and 38 deg. of Lat. it is poor, subject to Locusts, and often to Famine. It bears a sort of Apples which is carried over most of the Kingdom. 12. The Province of Peking between 36 and 42 degrees of Latitude, is now ho∣noured with the Court in the City of the same name, but more properly Xuntienfu, or Xuntien; the Moors call it Cambalud. The People (as all those of the North) are not so ingenious, but more laborious and warlike. The Land dry and healthy, but barren; yields Indian Corn, but little Rice or Wheat. The Rice used at Court comes from Nanking, it is pleasant only boiled in Water without any other Addition. The King keeps One thousand Sail that trade to the South for Provisions. This Province sends abroad no Commodities but Pensils and Persumes. The City is not so large as Nan∣king, but far exceeds it in populousness: The Walls are so thick, twelve Horsemen ride abreast on them; they are guarded with as much care in Peace as War. At the Gates are Officers to receive the Duty of all things brought in, and that belongs to the Queen. 13. The Magistrates of this City have but very little State in their Persons and Houses, only the chief of them can go in Chairs, the others on Horseback. All Peo∣ple have their Faces covered along the
Streets to avoid the Dust, but more to save the Ceremonies to Mandarines. The Cold is more violent here than could be expect∣ed in that Latitude. The River and Lakes are froze over, so that they bear. They use a sort of Stoves that conveys the heat underneath which serve in their Gardens, and anticipate the Spring. 14. The last Northern Province is Leao∣tung, famous for a precious Medicinal Root it produces, which adds strength and vi∣gour to such as are in Health, and gives great comfort to the Sick. This being the Tartar Frontier, is much ruined, and in part possessed by them. Along it runs that so famous Wall for the space of Three hun∣dred Leagues, of great Renown, but little use; for notwithstanding it the Enemy breaks in at pleasure. In all these Provinces there are Four hundred forty four Cities, and Eleven hundred and fifty Towns of Note; the others are not to be numbred. Thus much of the Soil, Product and Division of China.
CHAP. XIV. Of the People of China, their Customs, In∣clinations and Studies. 1. THE People of China are white, the more Northward the whiter; both Men and Women suffer their Hair to grow to its full length; it is generally black, and they therefore called by some Nations, The black haired People. Their Eyes are com∣monly black and small, their Noses little, they look upon ours as deformed, their Beards thin, the black esteemed most beau∣tiful; it is never cut, but they had rather it should all fall off than one hair of the head. They take great pains in dressing it, and have many Barbers who never cut but only serve to order it. 2. They are handsomest whilst very young, particularly in the South. The Women of  are counted the most beautiful, thence the great Men have their Concu∣bines. The Men, as they grow above twen∣ty-five Years of Age loose their Colour, but not so much of their Features, yet grow ugly; they are well made, strong, and in∣clined to Labour. In Tillage they are very industrious, sometimes plowing with a Plow of three Coulters that makes as many Fur∣rows, and on it carry a Tray with a hole, through which Kidneys-Beans drop, and the Ground is sowed at once; other Grain
is sowed after Plowing. Often he that drives a Beast loaded carries a burden. 3. Nothing that can be of use is lost. There are often seen many Vessels loaden with only ws for Candles taken out of the heart of a Rush. Others that carry no∣thing but Paper for Privies, which must have no Letter upon it, esteeming it a Sacriledge to put any such to that use. They are na∣turally Merchants. About the Street is fold by Retail, whatever is by Wholesail in Shops. Children sell small things that no Age may be idle. In matters of trust they are most faithful, but in selling the cunning∣est of Cheats. They will dig out the Flesh of a Fowl, make it up again, and fell the Skin and Bones as an entire Bird; they coun∣terfeit Gammons of Bacon, so that it is hard to discover the Fraud. In fatning, co∣louring and patching up of old, lame and unsound Horses, none equal them. 4. They are much addicted to Chimistry, and believe he that finds the way to make Silver, has a sure Receipt for to live long. Old Men they think have found out this Receipt, and therefore some will maintain them only in hopes to learn it, and others make themselves gray only to get a mainte∣nance that way. 5. They are affable and courteous, treat Strangers with Civility, give them the up∣per-hand, lend them Money upon Pawns, but without Use, though they exact it from their own Kindred and Friends, even in Pri∣sons; where the Scum of Nations is, they
shew Compassion towards them. All that are condemned to Death are beheaded, or strangled, any other Death is accounted Cruel; when many are condemned, only four or five die, the rest remain in Prison. Humility and Chastity are Virtues held in great account. They raise triumphant Ar∣ches in Honour of Chast Women, and be∣stow publick Encomiums on them. 6 Where they use Ceremony it is end∣less, but among Friends and Kindred none is used. They are so grave and staid, that no Accident whatsoever can discompose Men of Quality; so that mortal Enemies meet at Feasts without altering their Countenance. They lessen themselves to extol Foreigners, and commend all the Works of Europe, even to undervaluing their own. Their cu∣rious Workmanship may be seen by what comes from thence, which is never the best or curiousest. They are incomparable at working of Ivory, Ebony, Coral, and Amber, and most exquisite in Gold and Sil∣ver. A gold Chain of their making has been seen that had Three hundred Links, and did not weigh seven Ounces, their Gold thread is not so fine as ours. No Vessels of Sive are used, but only porcelane; they have learned to make Clocks to stand on Tables. 7. They are of most ready Wits, where∣of I will give one Instance. A Visitor Ge∣neral being long in a Province without exe∣cuting his Employ, a Friend of his enquiring into the Reason, found he had lost the Seal,
without which no Business could be dispatch∣ed; and, knowing the Governor was his Enemy, he advised him to set Fire to his own Palace at Night, and when the Go∣vernor came, as of course he must, to see it put out, then to deliver to him the Box in which the Seal is kept, saying, He could in that danger only trust him with the Royal Seal: That if it was the Governor who had caused the Seal to be stole, he would cer∣tainly restore it, because of the trust reposed in him, which if he did not, the World would believe it was lost in his Custody; this was put in Execution, and next day the Governor restored the Box with the Seal in it. 8. Their Cloaths, as was before said, are made of Woollen, Linnen, Silk, or Cotton. Two hundred Years before Christ they wore short Sleeves (as the Iapans descended from them still do) and the fashion lasted while the famous Family of Honan, for Four hun∣dred Years, then it was altered to what is used to this Day, is the same throughout the Kingdom, and cannot be changed without the King's leave. The Habit reaches from the Neck to the feet open before, even to the inward Garments without Buttons; but folding over, the Sleeves large and open like those of a Monk's Cool. For a Band they wear a piece of white Taffety a handful broad, which the better sort as soon as soiled throw away. Young Folks wear all Colours, the Commonalty and all Servants black, old Men grave Colours, such as are or have been
Governors on Festivals the finest red. The ich change Apparel four times a Year, the poor sort twice. 9. Till seventeen Years of Age they wear the short Hailoose, the rest knotted on the top of the Head. After that Age it is put into a Net of Horsehair with a Cap over it; that of the Lawyers square, the others round; it is made either of Silk or Horse∣hair, but in Winter of Felt. Much Cere∣mony is used at the time they first put on the Net. The Rich wear Shoes of Silk, the Poor of Cotton, differing from ours in fa∣shion and costly; Leather is only used for Boots, which are rare. In the same manner the Rich wear Stockins of Damask, or o∣ther soft Silk, the meaner Sort of Cotton, but all white. Breeches are common to Men and Women. The latter dress their Hair with Flowers, natural or artificial, except the common Women, who are not allowed to use them, nor to live within the Walls. 10. The Apparel of Men and Women is the same in all other Points; but these have Feet less than can be imagined, and to make them so, they swath them hard from their Infancy. The Custom was taken from a Queen, who having deformed Feet en∣deavoured by that means to bring them into shape. 11. The Women are very retired, none of any Age is seen in the Street, no Men visit them in their Houses, nor presume to enter into their Apartments. Servants have admittance only whilst very young, Brother
or Father-in-law on no account. The ordi∣nariest. Women go abroad in Chairs. If they happen to go a foot on account of any Pilgrimage, they cover their Faces: If they travel in Boats, they pass by each other, without speaking one word. Yet in some parts of this great Empire, Women go a∣broad, but such as are of Quality always after this manner. 12. The Language is thought to be one of the 72 of Babel; by their Books it appears to be of Four thousand Years stand∣ing. It is called Quenhra, or the Language of Mandarines, because as they spread their Command they introduced it, and it is used through all the Empire, as Latin in Europe. It is very barren, and as it has more Letters far than any other, so it has fewer Words, for there are not above 326 that absolutely differ, and of those that only vary in accent and aspiration 1228; most end in Vowels, the rest in M and N: They are all Mona∣syllables, all indeclinable, as well Verbs as Nouns; so contrived, that often a Noun serves for a Verb, and the contrary, and sometimes for an Adverb. Thus it is easier to be learned than Latin. It is most com∣pendious, and therefore the most grateful to the Chineses. It is rather sweet than harsh, and spoke as they do at Nanking pleasing to the Ear, very full of respectful Terms. To bid one take a thing in his hand, among us we repeat the Verb take, which they do not, each word signifies the Verb and Manner, Nien, is to take with two Fingers; Tço, to
take with them all; Chua, with the whole hand downwards; Tcie, with it opened up∣wards. So in other Verbs: A Man's Foot they call Kio; a Birds, Chua; a Beasts, Thi. 13. They use a different Stile in Writing and Speaking; the Letters are as ancient as the Language. They all know them, but not all by the same Name. The Author of them (they say) was Fohi, one of their first Kings; at first they were fewer in number, plainer, and in some measure like what they expressed: There are now four sorts of Let∣ters. The ancient still used in Books and by Lawyers, but only for Titles and Seals instead or ts. The second called Chicum, the most generally used. The third Taipie, little practised but on Fans, in Letters and Pro∣logues. The fourth, a sort of short hand. 14. There are Sixty thousand Letters; But they use Abbreviations, so that 'tis e∣nough to know Ten thousand to write, read and be learned. If they meet any that is not known, they turn to a Book like our Dictionary, and find it: Only nine strokes serves to form all this multitude of Letters, but several Letters and perfect Figures are joined to signifie different things. This stroke —stands for one, crossed with another stroke it stands for ten, another stroke be∣ing drawn under the lower point it signifies the Earth; with another at the top, a King; adding a prick on the left hand between the two first points, a precious Stone; with Dashes before, a Pearl; and all Letters that
signifie precious Stones, must have this last mark; all that signifie Trees must have the Letter that is for Wood adjoined, and so of other things. 15. Good Writing is valued above the best Painting. All written Paper is looked upon as Sacred; if it lies on the Ground they take it up carefully. The manner of Wri∣ting is downwards from the top to the bot∣tom, and from the Right towards the Left∣hand, as the Hebrews and all the People of the East. If a word of Respect, as your Lordship, or the like, fall in the middle of a Line, they write not forward, but begin the next Line, because it is not esteemed Manners to join any word to those; if they write the Name of God, it is set above the rest of the Line. 16. They once writ on the Rine of the Barks of Trees, with Iron points, as also on Plates of Metal, which now are highly esteemed. Paper has been invented among them Two thousand Years, and is of so many sorts, and so plentiful, that there is as much in China as all the World besides, for good∣ness none to compare to it. The most usual in Printing, and plentifullest, is made of a Tree (called by them Cho, by the Indians Bombo) made in the same manner as ours, but the best is of Cotton Rags. Instead of Pens they use Pensils of several sorts of Hair, but the Hares is best: There are no Ink∣horns but Stones on which the Ink is ground, as Colours among us; it is also sold in Rags in the nature as we have Spanish Wool, but
the best is Lamp-black, and they that make it are not accounted Mechanicks. 17. Printing has been used by them Six∣teen hundred Years, we said before it was all carved on Wood. The Author writes his Book in the size it must be published, and every Leaf is pasted on a Board, and graved exactly as he writ it, therefore they write and print only upon one side of the Paper, so that every Leaf consists of two, for the Books are sewed along the edges of the Pa∣per, not the middle as we do, the Blanks remain within, and the two Leaves pass as one; the best Wood for this use is Pear-tree. When they would have the Paper black and Letters white, they are carved in Stone, because in the Stone the Letters are cut into the Superficies, and in Wood they make the Superficies. That manner of Printing is only used for Epitaphs, Paintings, Trees, Mountains, and such like things, which are preserved with respect, and are lasting Me∣morials.
CHAP. XV. A Continuation of the same Subject. 1. FRom their Childhood they apply them∣selves to study, the first Books they read are Morals, then the classick Authors which are entirely learned by Heart, next the Masters exposition, who looks not on the Book when he teaches. The Coppies for writing are laid under the Paper, and the learner draws by it, the Paper being tran∣sparent. From letters they proceed to com∣position, such as are approved of are Print∣ed every 3 Years, and learners study them. There are no Universities, every Master reaches all that is requisite for a man to know, as well in learning, as manners and behavi∣our. The Disciples of quality never go any where without the Master; there are many Schools for the common sort, but no Master can take more Schollars than he can teach himself, for he is not to trust to another. Their Days of recreation are the first 15 in the Year; and some others, but few in the 5th and 7th Moon. The Masters that serve in great Houses Eat at their patrons Table. 2. They have large and stately Halls, rich∣ly adorned, where they examine students, whereof there are great numbers in every City and Town, but chiefly in the Metro∣polis
of Provinces, where they take their Degrees. These buildings for the most part are all of the same form, some bigger than others, but all large; the greatest of our Pallaces is not equal to the least of them, in every one is an infinite number of little rooms, where such as are to be examined, compose each by himself, with a Soldier to attend him, that the more learned may not help the ignorant. The Hall of Quantung which is the least, has 6000 of these Cels and the number of students is greater. 3. There attend all the time of the exa∣mination, Prefidents, Magistrates, Exami∣ners, Clerks, and all sorts of Trades, and all that are there are maintained ind yet and lodging the whole time upon the publick charge. The Order and disposition of all things is much to be admired, formerly Gen∣tlemen were not admitted to take any de∣gree, because not imployed in the Govern∣ment, but they perceiving that only the learned rose, obtained though with difficul∣ty, to be admitted to both; such as are any way infamous, cannot take a degree: The degrees are 3 answerable to o of Bat∣chelor, Master of Arts, and Doctor; the Chancellor goes about the Town d Cities to examine the first, the second is done in the Metropolis of each Province, once in 3 Years, in each of these Acts there are above 7000 students, and above 1500 take the degree of Master of Arts. The Doctors are only made at Court, on a sud∣den
a Bricklayer or Taylor is set up in state, the marks of this dignity are given them and are a Cap, Gown, Tassels, and Boots, all put on with much Ceremony. The King defrays the whole charge, and every one that takes this degree, stands him in 1000 Ducats. 4. Of those that go to the Court to take their degree, 350 are admitted to that of Doctors; the marks of that honour (ex∣cept the Boots which are the same in all) differ very much in the value, besides those mentioned, they have a girdle, they wear them all in the employments they get, and the last is still richer, as they e preferred. There is another examination at which the King used to be present, now a Colao sup∣plies his place; after it they go to salute the King, who is on his Throne, and gives with his own hand, a premium to each of the three first presented; the first of the 3 is superior over all the others, and has a particular name, as has the second and third; this is so great an honour, that soon after the whole Kingdom knows them by those names, and their degree of honour is equal to our Dukes. Out of the 350 are chosen 25, who have Pallaces assigned them, and are subject to the Colao that is president of the great College, of him they learn the speculative part of Government. Hence they are preferred to employments supe∣rior to Viceroy ships, only such as are of that College, are admitted to the supream dignity
of Colao: when one of these 25 Doctors is made a Mandarin, (especially if he be one of the three presented by the King) there is erected to him in his own Country a trium∣phal Arch all of Marble, and very stately, with his name on the front. 5. Nothing can be said distinctly of their Sciences, because in reality they know no distinction. Three of their Kings were the masters of the oral and Speculative learn∣ing, under myical numbers and Symbols, they were also the Legislators. Above 1000 Years before Christ, two other Kings com∣posed the book called Yequim, being a com∣ment upon those Symbols; then followed Phi∣losophers, like the Stoicks. The most fa∣mous Confucius composed 9 Books, which are esteem'd (chiefly 5 of them) like our Holy writ, many Doctors comment upon them; he flourished 500 Years before Christ, and aimed at the Reformation of Mankind; and is held in veneration as the universal Master, and a Saint, with Temples dedi∣cated to him. The Government of the Ci∣ty where he was born, remains in his Fami∣ly; the immediate successor has the title, revenue, and state of a Duke; they are all as soon as born held in great veneration. 6. The 5 principal Books are, Yequim that treats of natural Philosophy, fate and pre∣dictions; the second, Xoquim of Chronology; the third, Xiquim Poetically discourses of the Nature of things and Human Affections; the fourth, Liquin of Divine Worship; the fifth, Chunicu, Examples of good and bad
Kings. There are 4 other Books of the same Author, and another called Mencu, that treat of Physicks and Morals; out of these is taken a subject for the compositions of such as are examined; there are also 9 Books of Comments upon those, but only one of them is established by Law. 7. They consider 3 principal objects in the World, Heaven, Earth, and Man, and accordingly their learning is divided into 3 Sciences; that of Heaven treats of the Ori∣ginal of all things; that of the Earth, of its position, product and variety; that of Man, of his manners and affections, to whom they ascribe 5 Moral Virtues, Piety, Justice, Policy, Prudence, and Felicity, respecting 5 Orders of Persons in the Common-wealth, Father, and Son, Husband and Wife, King and Subject, elder and younger Brother, and friends among themselves. 8. They have rules of Grammar, under∣stand Rhetorick, are well skilled in Arith∣metick, and have knowledge of Geometry, but know nothing of Dialectica, and Alge∣bra; Astronomy is a profession only allowed to two Persons to study, one in each Court, and they leave it hereditary to their Sons; they reckon 5 Elements, Water, Metal, Fire, Wood, and Earth, and appropiate to them as many Planets, Mercury, Venus, Mars, Iu∣piter, Saturn. The Zodiack they divide into 24 Signs, the Year into 12 Moons, and 354 Days, making a Bissextile every three Years of 13 Moons and 383 Days; it begins with the next Moon to the 5th of February. Their
Musick consists all of one sound, the Bonzes sing after the manner of our plain Song, their Instruments are of several sorts, for the most part noisy, and some like ours, such as are played upon strings, have them of Silk. 9. Poetry was always much esteemed in China; all that was published of this sort, used to be sent to the King, they never write any thing reflecting, or immodest, nor have any letter to express the private parts, so that they are never mentioned in any writing, their Verses are in Rhime. Their Painting was without Oyl, or shadows, till they knew and imitated us, and draw well by the life. Their skill in Phisick is the greatest, they have ancient Authors that treat of it, ours are there unknown; bleeding, Cupping, Sirrups, Glisters, Issues, nor Potions, are not used there, but only Pills. All the Me∣dicines are simples, as Herbs, Roots, Fruit and Seeds, all dry, and therefore their Apo∣thecaries have no pots; the Doctors write no receipts, but bring along with them a case with all Medicines in good order, and compound them before the Patient; their judgment in the Pulse is singular, they ask no questions of the Sick, but give themselves an account of the Disease, and apply the Remedy; their Cures are singular, not but that there are some ignorant among them. 10. In ceremonies they are impertinent, the manner is to bow the Head to the ground, if to a greater Person, they kneel and bow in like manner, in some cases they rise again and repeat it at least 3 times, commonly 4,
to the King 9. Particular garments are used for visiting, unless among familiar friends; if they meet, and one has the garment on, and the other not, he immedi∣ately puts it on, for a servant carries it; it is generally black, Doctors, Magistrates, and Gentlemen that wear the habit of Doctors, are excused from wearing of it. 11. The King when he does reverence to his Idols or Mother, holds before his Face a piece of Ivory, a span and half long, and about 4 Fingers broad, all that speak to him use the same ceremony. If two Manda∣rines in the street cannot avoid meeting without stopping their Chairs, they joyn their hands, and carry them leisurly to their Heads bowing them, which is done as soon as they see one another, and repeated till they be passed by; if one be inferior to the other, he stops the Chair, or in case he be on Horseback, alights and makes a profound reverence; if they are not Mandarines, they make the usual compliments, if common People they joyn hands, carry them to the Forehead shaking. Servants in great Houses do not bow to their Lords, but at the new Year, or when he has been absent, their sign of respect is to stand upright with their Arms hanging down; Mandarines servants speak to them on their knees, to give or receive any thing with one hand is not courteous betwixt equals, and very rude from inferors to superiors. 12. In their visits they use the Thie, which is a long piece of Paper made like a Fan, the
breadth is proportionable to the quality of the Person from one to 16 sheets, the Colaos use the least; only one line is writ upon it, and contains 9 letters between friends, among others 6, or 7, the purport of them to this effect, Your great friend and perpetual Disciple of your Doctrine, (here enters the name) kisses your hand, and comes to do you reverence. This Paper is in a purse of the same, and that in another made close and curious. 13. The visiter himself carries this Paper and gives it the Porter, who delivers it to his Master; if he receives the visit and not the Thie, he is not obliged to pay it, but if it is left only with the Porter, he pays the visit. Great Men, as Colaos, Mandarines, and Viceroys seldome visit y body, but as they pass by the Doors, leave their Thies; when they will not receive visits, they set up a Paper over the Door specifying, they are not in Town; all visits are made in the morning, and they always treat with Sweet∣meats or Fruit, or at least Drink that is Cha. 14. When any one is to absent himself for a time, all friends visit and present him, and he is bound at his return to send presents to all that sent him any; they never visit the Sick, but inquire at the Door of their Health; the Person visited sets the Chairs himself, and wipes them with his sleeve, all the vi∣siters do the same with his. If there be no distinction of superiority, they take their places according to Age, the Person visited the last; as soon as seated, the Cha is brought
and they all Drink. When one speaks of himself, it is with great humility, if they speak of the Son to the Father, they do not say your Son, but the Noble Son; if of the Daughter, the pretious Love; if they inquire about the Sick, they say, How goes the illustrious Sickness; speaking of them∣selves they do not say, I, but the Schollar, the Disciple, and Persons of mean profession, as a Carryer, they call The great Rod; the Person visited waits upon the visiter to the street, and they part with impertinent Ce∣remonies, then send Messages to and fro, as if they had not seen one another. 15. They often send presents of Shooes, Stockins, Linnen, Porcelane, Ink, Pencils, and Eatable things of the best. With the present goes a Thie, being a list of the things sent; it is no ill manners to send back all or part; some only send the list of things they design to present, naming very many, as knowing all will not be accepted, and he it is sent to, marks down what he will accept of, others send all the things which are on∣ly hired, and so restore what is sent back and pay for the rest; he that receives is obliged to return a present. 16. They use many banquets, which are very costly and last long. There are neither Napkins nor Knives on the Tables, because they Eat as was said of the Iaponeses, but sitting on Chairs and at high Tables and round them hang cloths in the manner of Pulpit cloths, Dinner is at 7 in the morn∣ing, Supper at Evening or Night; upon
these occasions the Rooms are adorned as our Churches on Holidays; all the time of Eating, there is Musick and Plays acted, some will go to four or more Feasts in one Day; they seem to be of the Opinion of let us Eat and let us Drink, for to morrow we shall Die. CHAP. XVI. Of the Marriages, Burials, Ceremonies, Sacrifices, and belief of the Chineses. 1. THE Chineses have used an indissolu∣ble form of Marriage, by joyning of hands for above 3000 Years; they also allow of Concubines, which are taken after another manner, and commonly bought. They may part when they please, but till they have Children, are servants to the Wife, their Children call Mother; and do not put on Mourning for them. When the Man dies, the Wife and Children re∣tain the command of the House, and if she di the Concubine succeeds; Widdows may marry again, but are more esteem'd if they do not. In choosing Wives they have res∣pect to good qualities, but for Concubines, beauty or good humour. 2. They cannot marry into the Fathers kindred, though many degrees removed, nor with any of the sirname, for fear of
kindred, but may with the Mothers, if not near related. Maids seldom marry with Widdowers; there are Matchmakers: The Bridegroom sees not the Bride till she is brought home to him, nor knows her name till made sure; Portions are not used, nor does the Husband buy the Wife, as has been falsly reported of them. On the Wedding Day the Brides goods are carryed in pro∣cession, and she at the end of it in a Chair, lock'd up, and the key sent before to the Bridegrooms Mother, for he goes on Horse∣back well attended to fetch her, if by Night, they carry many Lantherns on long Poles, the Inheritance is divided between the Male issue without respect to those by the lawful Wife above the others, yet there are some noble Families where the eldest inherits. 3. The Funerals of the Chineses are very costly, they bury all in Coffins, according to every ones ability in value, some cost 1000 Ducats, the Coffins are made of thick planks, varnished with Charam, and adorn∣ed with gilding, unless some that are made of pretious Wood; most of them keep their Coffins by them in the House. 4. No body is buryed within the Cities; without there are sumptuous Templ for their use, with Country Houses about them in places appointed by their Astrologers, the Tombs are covered with polished Stones, and Beasts carved before them, especially the noble ones, as Elephants and Lions, and elegant Epitaphs upon them. Where ever a Man dies, he must be carryed to his own
place of burial: When one is given over, they carry him into an outward room to die on a pallet Bed, but some that are of great quality die in their Alcoves. The Son as raving with grief, pulls down the curtains upon the Dead body, then it is put into the Coffin with the robes of his dignity, and so closed, that no ill smell can come out. It is laid in a great room hung with Mourn∣ing and a Picture of the Dead Man, the Children sit round upon the straw and in Mourning, the Women are weeping behind Curtains, many Ceremonies are used while the Corps lies there. 5. The Coffin lies sometimes 2 Years in the House for want of Money; the Fune∣ral Pomp is thus, First, there are carryed great statues of Men and Beasts made of painted Pastboard, Pyramids, and other things in triumphal Chariots, adorned and curiously wrought with Silk; if it be a Person of Quality, all those things are burnt when the Coffin is interred, but the common sort only hire them; after this sol∣low Bonzos singing and playing on Musick, then other Bonzos who never cut Hair nor beard, and live single in communities; these also play on several sorts of Instruments, next another sect of Bonzos, who cut their Hair, praying; after them the friends and relations, then Sons and Grandsons in deep Mourning, and barefooted, with little Trun∣cheons about half a yard long in their hands, on which they lean so, that their Heads hang down near the ground; next them
comes the Coffin on a thing so big, it is carryed by 50 Men, with a curious Pall over it, and about it many Lanthorns on Poles; the last is a multitude of Women in Chairs, who are heard to cry. 6. The Mourning is of such course Hemp, it makes the Men look monstrous, Sons for their Fathers wear it 3 Years, and in all that time sit not on Chairs, but little wooden stools, nor dine on a Table, touch Flesh, drink Wine, lie on Bedsteads, go to Feasts, go abroad unless in a close Chair, go to exa∣minations, nor can officiate any publick Em∣ploy, and finally (they say) they abstain from Women; Mourning for a Wife lasts a Year, there are for relations of 5 and of 3 Months, and for friends of 3 Days. Eve∣ry Town has a publick place of buryal for the Poor, some save the trouble, burning the Dead and burying the Ashes; these in the Province of Suchue are put into pots close stopped and thrown into Rivers. 7. The Funeral of the Queen Mother in the Year 1614, was very magnificent; to omit the Mourning and lesser circumstances. The King with his own hand strewed on the body, Pearls to the value of 70000 Crowns, and laid on the sides of it 50 bars of Gold, and 50 of Silver; all Persons of quality of both Sexes came to worship her; all Ma∣gistrates were ordered to their Tribunals, and to fast 3 Days; the Officers of the Re∣venue to provide wax perfumes, Images and and other necessaries to be burnt, the ex∣pence in only these small things amounted to
30000 Ducats; the Royal Golledge was com∣manded to write Poems fit for that occasion, 1000 Men were posted at each of the nine Gates of the City, thence to the place of buryal, which was 12 miles, a lane of Sol∣diers to be made, 3000 men carryed the Coffin, 1000 accompanyed it, 40000 guard∣ed the buryal place, while the Ceremony lasted, the ways were repaired and railed in, that no body might cross them; at every 20 paces was laid a basket of yellow Earth to be spread about when the Coffin went by; many Tents were set up to rest by the way, and provisions for all that attendance that, amounted to 80000. 8. After many Ceremonies, the Coffin was placed on a Triumphal Chariot with many lights and perfumes; the King accom∣panyed it to the 8th Gate of the Pallace, great was the order and silence observed, the journey was so Ceremonious, it lasted 3 Days. At last the Coffin was removed to a more costly Chariot, they sacrificed a Bull, Aromatick Wine, Perfumes, and many Gar∣ments to the Earth, imploring its tutelar Spirits to receive the dead body graciously. The Ceremonies lasted long, the King fa∣voured all that assisted at them, eased the Kingdom of Taxes, set open the prisons, all as an Oblation of filial Love. 9. The Chineses follow 3 sects which they endeavour to reconcile; the 2 first natural, the third Idolatrous. The first of the 2 fol∣lowed by the Lawyers is Antient, adores no Idols, ownes a superior Power, that can pu∣nish
and reward, but allows it no Temples, Sacrifice, Prayers, or Ministers, speak ho∣nourably of it as of a Divine Being, attri∣bute nothing indecent to it, but being blind in their Faith, worship Heaven, Earth, and Man. Only in the two Coorts, there are Temples dedicated to Heaven and Earth, where the King in Person sacrifices, and in his absence the Masters of the Rites; in all Cities there are Temples of the tutelar Spi∣rits, where the Mandarines sacrifice, as they do to the Spirits of Rivers, Mountains, and 4 parts of the World. There are also Tem∣ples of famous Men, and publick benefa∣ctors in which are their Images; they ask nothing for the next life, but happiness in this, in fine, all tends to the Government, Concord Plenty, and Exercise of Virtue. 10. The second Sect is of the Tauçus, the Author of it Lautu, a Philosopher who they say was 80 Years in his Mothers Womb, and lived in the time of Comfufius; this Sect has many followers, who live together, do not marry, let their Hair grow, wear ordinary Cloaths, only instead of a Cap they wear a small Crown which holds the knot of their Hair at the top. They own one great God, and others lesser but all Corporeal, allow of Heaven and Hell, the Felicity with the body, and even in this World; they feign, that through certain ex∣cercises, Men become young again; they say and believe any thing that comes into their fancy, they have Musick and good In∣struments, and are therefore called to Fune∣rals
and Sacrifices; they pretend to Sorce∣ry, and promise Rain, which always fails to their shame. 11. They also pretend to lay Devils that haunt Houses, and are as successful as in the other; their chief study is a quiet and long Life, but more for the long, which they en∣deavour to purchase at any rate. 12. The third Sect, (as its Author) is called Xaca, he is said to be son of Maga, and a dream, for that she dreamed she con∣ceived looking upon a white Elephant, was delivered of him through her side, and died immediatly. Xaca did pennance for this misfortune on the snowy Mountain, and had there in 12 Years 4 Masters, became learn∣ed in the Science of the first causes, and had many Disciples who spread his Sect through all Asia. This Doctrine was brought into China about the Year of Grace 63, at the instance of the Emperor Hamin; the followers of this Opinion once amount∣ed to three Millions, now they are but few. 13. Their Priests wear neither Hair nor beard, adore Idols; believe there is Reward and punishment in the next Life, and live in community 500 together; they are called to Sacrifices and Burials, and wear a sort of Copes, Eat no Flesh, Fish, Eggs, nor drink Wine, have large inclosures in Villages, and live under a superior; others live in Caves, Dens, and on Rocks, some do most rigid pennance. Some lock themselves in nar∣row Houses, or rather boxes of Wood
full of spikes, the points inward, and live in these a Month without being able to lean for the spikes, or Eating; only Drinking Cha. But others affirm, they go in provided with lumps of Beef hard baked, which they dissolve in that hot liquor, there is another sort called Vagabonds, that are generally villanous fellows, guilty of all crimes espe∣cially Robberies. There are also Nuns of these Orders, their Heads shorn, they are but few, and not enclosed. 14. They believe the transmigration of Souls, that they descend and pass through nine Hells, then return to be Men at best, or else beasts like Men, or, what is worst of all Birds. The wisest of them direct all their study toward the Prima causa; after the last death, they believe there is neither reward nor punishment. 15. Of Transmigration, they believe if a Man was courteous, he becomes Man again, if subject to passion, a Lion; if cruel a Ti∣ger; if unchast, a Hog; and if given to steal∣ing, a Bird of Prey. From these proceed many other Sects; it is a Proverb of these three Sects, that the Lawyers govern the Kingdom, the Taucus, the Body, and the Bonzot the Heart. 16. In their Sacrifices are offered a beast like a Goat, Swine, Oxen, Cocks and Hens, all sorts of Fish, chiefly the Barble, Rice, Grain, and Wine. If the King sacrifice, the offering is divided among Mandarines, if great Men, among their Relations, if or∣dinary People, they Eat it among them.
All other things offered are burnt, as Silk, leaves of Gold and Silver, cut Paper, Can∣dles, Perfumes, &c. there are no Priests ap∣pointed for this, every one does it for him∣self. 17. The Chineses are great admirers of virtue, and have a sort of Commandments written in their Houses, much of the same nature as ours. There are strangers in China, who differ in point of belief, but not con∣siderable. We have already mentioned those barbarous Inhabitants of a part of the Island Hainan, and others in the Mountains of Quantung, Hucheu, and Quiangsi, these fol∣low the Opinions of the rest of the Kingdom. In the Province of Yunnan there is a large tract of Land inhabited by a People differ∣ing in language and customs, having a King of their own, but tributary to China; In some parts there are Mahometans who have their Mosques, but ill observe their law. Tney marry their Sons ro Chinese Women, but the Daughters only marry among them∣selves, because Women follow the opinion of the Husbands, and these never change. Their first coming into China was about 800 Years since being called in by a King to assist him in his Wars, and having served well, such as would, were allowed to le there. There are Jews in the Province of Honan, and in the Metropolis of it, Caifumfu; they have a neat Synagogue, which shall be de∣scribed hereafter. For want of Priests they are become very ignorant In their law, and many be Mahometans and Pagans.
CHAP. XVII. Of the Original of the Kingdom of China, the Pallace and Government of it. 1. THere is no certain account of the Ori∣ginal of this Kingdom, though their Histories begin at the Universal flood. The first three Kings are esteemed Saints; since that time the succession has been in 22 fa∣milies; this now reigning, has continued 300 Years; the first of it did all that was possible to secure his line; he abolished all Royalties, forbid under severe Penalties, any of the blood Royal to have any hand in Go∣vernment, and gave all the power to Law∣yers who were to attain it by learning and virtue; the Monarchy continues as he left it. 2. They reckon Years from the beginning of the last Reign, the first actions of it are coining of Money, Crowning of the Queen, giving her and the Concubines names, offer∣ing great Sacrifices, giving Alms, treating Magistrates, setting open Prisons, turning the Ladies out of the Court, taking in new ones; all the states acknowledging the King, giving him a new name. He is stiled Em∣peror, the Courtiers call him Son of Hea∣ven, and pay him a respect more than Hu∣man. 3. The reason the Ladies are turned out of Court is because many are old, and
the deceased may have had to do with the young, and therefore the successor must not venture coming where he has been; beau∣tiful Maids are sought for this purpose all over the Kingdom, and the Fathers strive to marry them off, that they may not be carryed to Court. 4. The Women turned out, are all sold at the Pallace Ga to the best bidders, who take them for ; none but mean People buy them, their Faces and hands are cover∣ed, and the buyer sees them not till he car∣ries them home, and takes them for better for worse. 5. There are about 3000 of these Women, who live in four Pallaces; one King tired with choosing, was drawn in a Chariot by Goats, and wherever they stopped, he took up, another chose by the Pictures of the beautifullest. 6. Formerly the Kings were more familiar with their subjects, and visited the King∣dom, giving publick Audience; this custom decayed by degrees, and the common way of doing business is by petition, but still the King gives some publick Audiences Month∣ly, and at the four seasons of the Year goes to sacrifice in a Temple without the Ci∣ty. 7. The first that introduced this retirement was Vamlie Grand-father to him now reign∣ing, he did it because he was very gross, and would not lessen the Royal Majesty, since his time they are not so often seen as former∣ly. The Temple the King goes to at Peking,
is round, all of Marble, and a beautiful structure; that of Nanking is long, and has five Isles, born up by many columns, all plain except the Pedestals to show the rarity of them, for that being many in numbers, very high and thick, and all exactly alike, each is made of one Tree. To these Temples there are many Gates adorned with gilded Iron, in them many Altars with Images of the Sun, Moon, Planets, Spirits, Mountains, Rivers, and other things, to signify he, to whom they sacrifice there, is Lord of all. All the rest of the Year besides the times of these sacrifices and audiences, the King con∣tinues in his Pallace, and is seen by none but particular persons. 8. Some will judge the Kings of China live a confined Life, but their Pallace is a City consisting of many Pallaces, Orchards, and Gardens inclosed within a wall of a vast circumference; there is one Pallace for the King, Queen, and small Children, another for the Queen-Mother, another for the Sons that are marryed, another for the Queens, four for the Ladies, another called the cold Pallace for the old Men; Apartments for Eunuchs, Servants, Mathematicians, and Priests, an infinite number of Courts, or Cloisters, and lesser Apartments for all that live within, which are above 17000. 9. The structure of the Pallace is sump∣tuous, much after our manner adorned with curious Carving, Painting, and Gilding. A River runs through the Gardens which are adorned with artificial Mounts, and they
covered with delightful variety of birds and beasts. All is encompassed by two walls distant from each other, the circumference is about 4 Miles, that of Nanking about five; there are 4 Gates that look to the four quarters of the World, and have strong guards of Elephants and Soldiers, of these 3000 always do duty in one of the Courts. 10. Next to the Empress, are six Queens, who upon publick occasions, sit on as many Chairs somewhat below the two Imperial Thrones, then there are 30 that have parti∣cular honours allowed them; the last in de∣gree are the Ladies. If the Empress has a Son, he takes place of all others, if not the eldest of any of these Women; there are 12000 Eunuchs, with their proper Officers. The President who answers our Secretary of State, may come to the King without asking leave, another who is supream Judge of the Eunuchs, is also Captain of the guard of 3000 Horse and 6000 Foot, the Eunuchs have all the best Employments, and are for the most part marryed. 11. In the Court most go on Horseback, few in Chairs, except the great Eunuchs. The Father of the King now reigning, had a most insolent favourite Eunuch, upon the Kings death he kill'd himself, but was drag'd and torn to pieces by the rabble, and the King seized his vast Treasure. Many Fa∣thers geld their Sons to make them capable of this sort of preferment. 12. No Criminal can escape Justice in this vast Empire; their submission to the King
is worthy Admiration; every Body speaks to him on their Knees with the Ivory (al∣ready mentioned) before their Mouths. The King's Garments differ not from those of the Subjects in form, but in the costliness, and being embroidered with Dragons which none can wear but he, his Wives, and the Royal Family. It is not easie to know the real value of the King's Revenue, but it is reckoned above One hundred and fifty Mil∣lions of Ducats yearly; Fifty-five are for the King's Expence, the Ninety-five for his Ministers, Examinations, Works and Presents. CHAP. XVIII. Of the Royal Marriages, Nobility, Coun∣sels, and Government of China in Peace and War. 1. WHEN there were many Kings in China, they married into those Royal Families. Now there is but one, and he is forbid by Law marrying out of the Kingdom; he must of necessity marry a Sub∣ject. The Great Men will not give the King their Daughters, because they must be first searched, even in those Parts none but a Husband may see, and if not liked they are sent back. Therefore in the Choice, they have no regard to Birth, but Youth,
Beauty, good Inclinations and Parts. 2 Such a one being found, two old Wo∣men strip her stark naked, and axamine as well inward as outwardly the Parts not to be named, then put her into a heat to discover whether her Sweat be offensive. All things answering expectation, she is carried to Court in State, and there instructed in such manner as she may deserve to be called Mo∣ther of the Kingdom; for that is the Stile they give their Queens. Some of them have proved incomparable. 3. No such care is taken in marrying the Princes. The Pincesses chuse one of Twelve Young Men o Eighteen Years of Age, placed so as they may be seen with∣out seeing the Princesses: But the Husbands are treated o impertinently by the Prin∣cesses, that th Nobility avoid them; so that commonly their Husbands are no better born than the Kings Wives. 4. The Nobility were of another Nature when there were Titles and Lordships. Now all depends upon Learning, which makes any Mechanick a Gentleman; the want of it renders a Gentleman base. This is the reason their Nobility is not of long standing; for the Sons of Learned Men be∣ing left rich, do not study, and consequent∣ly have no Employments, and the Family pe∣rishes. Yet they have five sorts of Nobility. First, the Blood-royal thus preserved, the Prince inherits the Crown, the other Sons live in other Cities with Titles, but must not stir thence. Their eldest Sons succeed them,
the others marry the best they can, and so their Children as long as the Family lasts. The Daughters (not looked upon in case of Inheritance) marry with Gentlemen. The second sort consist of those who have Titles, but no Dominions, and are inferior to some Magistrates. The third, the Magistrates. The fourth, the Students, who aim at De∣grees. The fifth, those who live upon their Estates, or Merchandice, who if not very rich, are looked upon no better than the Commonalty. 5. The Government is in the Hands of six Councils, so highly respected, it is scarce credible. Each of them has a President and two Assessors, this is the next Dignity to that of the Colaos. So that a Viceroy of a Province is happy, if after his Government expires, he reaches to be one of those As∣sessors. Many more Officers belong to each of these Courts; the first is answerable to our Counsel of State, the second to that of War, the third is of Ceremonies, the fourth of the Revenue, the fifth of the publick Works, the sixth of Criminal Causes. There are also nine other Courts; the first like our Chancery, the second the high Stewards, the third the Master of the Horses, the fourth the Master of the Ceremonies of the Court; the fifth, of particular Rites; the sixth, of the Petitions given the King; the other three of lesser Matters. Every City has its own particular Council, each Metro∣polis of a Province five distinct Tribunals. Each Town has a private Court.
6. The great Mandarines are carried about Town in Chairs adorned with Ebony and Gold by four Men, with others by to re∣lieve them; before the Chiefest go Men by Pairs with long Staves, always crying out, two others follow these with Tables, on which is writ the quality of the Person car∣ried, after these go six scattering Bamboes, with which they use to bastinade Offenders and others with Fetters and Chains. Near the Chair a Man with a sil Umbrello three times as big as those we use, two just before the Chair carry a small Box with the Royal Seal, on one side a great Fan that shades all the Chair, behind go the Pages and other Attendance on Foot and Horseback. 7. When one of these goes by, all things are taken from the Windows, the Images of Funerals are lowred, the People stop on the sides of the Streets, there is no noise, and he passes without moving his Eyes. When he goes to any City, the ancient Men re∣ceive him at the Gate on their Knees. The King bestows Honour on Magistrates Mo∣thers as they rise; and when they die, bu∣ries them with Pomp, and assigns them state∣ly Pallaces while living. 8. The Prisons are large, and commonly near to the Palaces of the Mandarines thy belong to; they have no Grates to the Street; the Dungeons are terrible; the o∣ther Part is in Rows sustained by Pillars with Planks along for Beds, where every one lies with Fetters on his Hands and his Feet, as
it were in the Stocks; over them all run long Chains, so that they cannot turn. The lesser Criminals are more favourably dealt with, but all fare hard; for the Prisons serve to punish as well as to secure Men. The Prisoners have much to do at their Entrance with the Keepers about their Fees, for they pay none at going out. 9. Their Punishments differ not much from ours, but whipping is used before all other Penalties; the Lashes are given on the bare Buttocks and Thighs, as well to Wo∣men as Men, and that before the Tribunal, or in the Street when the Crime is done there; no Body values the Shame, but only the Smart. They also have several ways of Racking. 10. Military Science is very ancient among the Chineses. They had tedious Wars with their Neighbours, conquered the Island Ceylon, and subdued One hundred and Four∣teen Kings. They always entertain a vast number of Souldiers; in Nanking there are Forty thousand, in Peking Eighty thousand, all over the Kingdom above a Million, but they are all Cowards. Yet of late Years they beat the Iaponeses out of Corea, and the Tartars out of the Province of Peking. They use foolish Reviews, in which, like our Boys, they represent Tartars and Chineses, and the former are always beaten. 11. Gun-Powder is of most ancient stand∣ing among them; of it they make curious and costly Fire-works; they have some Can∣non,
but no Skill in the use of it, only shoot at random. Their most usual Arms are Lances, Arrows and Cutlaces. There is a sort of Back and Breast Pieces Proof against Arrows. Their Civil Government is very just, because bad Ministers are severely pu∣nished, and the King hears Complaints against them. Thus much may suffice for the Af∣fairs of China. CHAP. XIX. The Division of the Dominions the Portu∣gueses do, or have possessed in those Parts, commonly comprehended under the general Name of India: Some Re∣marks on the Customs and Religion of those People, with some Account of the Christians of St. Thomas, and of the Island of Ceylon. 1. THE Portugues Dominions generally comprehended under the Name of India, though dispersed along the Coasts of Asia. and Africk may well be divided into five Parts. The first containing the Islands of that vast Ocean, as those of Maldivia, the King whereof, being a Christian, with his Wife and Family resided at Cochim; that of Ceylon, in which we have the Town of
Columbo, and a Right to the Kingdoms of Iafanapatan, Cota and Candea by Donation from their natural Kings; the Island of Ma∣nar, with its Fort and Fishery of Pearl; East∣ward, the Sovereignty of all that Archipe∣lago, the Moluco Islands, and that of Macao on the Coast of China. 2. The Second Part lies from Cape Cor∣rientes to the Mouth of the Red Sea, Peo∣pled by Moors along the Coast, and the In∣land by Idolatrous and Brutal Cafres. 3. The Third is divided from Persia by the Persian Golph, inhabited by Moors of dif∣ferent Opinions. 4. The Fourth contains the Kingdom of Ormuz, and neighbouring Parts that Trade thither, especially Baharem, so famed for the Fishery of Pearl, that draws all Mankind thither. 5. The Fifth is called India within and without Ganges. All that lies between Indus and Ganges which is above 550 Leagues along the Coast, is inhabited by two Na∣tions, Pagans and Mahometans, who for above three Ages have been possessed of that Tract called Indostan. 6. In this Fifth Part is included the prin∣cipal Part of the Portugues Patrimony. It begins at Diu, a City not inferior to many famous in Europe, and was once the Metro∣polis of Cambaya. Almost opposite to it is Damam, both which almost shut up the Mouth of the Bay of Cambaya, and extend their Command Twenty-four Leagues, in
which space are many Villages that yield a considerable Revenue. 7. From the River of Agacaim to that of Bombaim, are Eight Leagues, and in that space the City  th its Forts and Villages, as , Agaçaim, Ban∣dora, Tana, Ca, and opposite to it, the Island Salsete, whose wonderful Structures prove it to have been the Metropolis of that Country and Court of Princes. The Do∣minions of Cambaya once extended thither. The next is Chaul, a Place of Importance. Then the Capital of our Empire, that is the Island Goemae, which sigfies, Happy Land, corruptly called Goa; and Trissuari (signi∣fying Thirty Villages, for so many it con∣tains) which on the Continent commands the Lands of Salsete and Bardes. There follow on the Coast of Camaran towards Cape Comori, the Towns of Onor,  and Mangalor; then in Malahar, Cananor, Cranganor, Coulam, and the chief Port of our Fleets Cochim. Turning the Cape, ap∣pears the Pearl Fishery, and above it the Cities Negapatan, St. Thomas and other Towns if not Subject to, at least Inhabited and de∣fended by Portugueses. 8. The Exterior India begins at the Ri∣ver Ganges, and reaches to China and C∣bodia, and is terminated by the River Me∣com. It is inhabited by Heathens worse, if possible, than the others. Here the Portu∣gueses have the rich City of Malaca, Metro∣polis of that Kingdom, and the greatest
Place of Trade of all those Eastern Pro∣vinces. 9. Something has been already said of the Manners of all these People, we will add somewhat in general of India, whereof much relates to the greatest Part of Asia. Those Heathens have a Book they believe in, and esteem as we do the Holy Scripture. It is writ in Verse, (as they say that understand it) pleasing and ingenious, but it seems strange to us there should be any Harmony in Verses composed of Seventy-five Syllables, for so many an Author say they contain. 10. They believe in one God Creator of all Things, yet allow other increated Gods; that there is Heaven and Hell, and that the Souls of such as die in Sin go into Beasts, and stay there till being purged, they go to Eternal Rest. They esteem Cows as pro∣perest for this Transmigration. When one is dying, they bring one to him, and put the Tail into his Hand, that when his Soul departs, it may be near the Door it is to en∣ter at. 11. They allow no Free Will; and some are of Opinion, That the Souls return from Hell into other Bodies till they merit Hea∣ven; and that there is an indifferent Place without Reward or Punishment for such as live indifferently. The Sins they esteem most hainous, are Murder, Theft, Drink∣ing of Wine, taking away another Man's Wife. The First is wiped off with Pilgri∣mages; the second with Alms; the third
with Fasting; and the fourth with Sacrifices; some are of Men, the greatest of Cows. Some will lie down under the Wheels of the heavy Carts of their Idols, which crush them to peices. Others wear irons with Spikes that run into them. Others hang them∣selves on a Hook, and there sing Verses to their Idols. 12. They maintain Hospitals, where they look after sick Birds and Beasts, and send Men abroad to bring them in, but have no Comassion for Men, saying, Those Affli∣ctions are sent them for their Sins. There are Men employed to buy Birds or other Creatures, only to restore them to their Liberty. They believe God has five Re∣gents that govern the World, and every one of them a Wife, those are called Xa∣daxivam, Rudra, Maescura, Visnu, and Bra∣bema; the Wives, Humani, Parvadi, Mae∣nomadi, Lacami, and Exarasvadi. The first governs the first Heaven, where are all the Planets; the second, the Fire; the third, the Air; the fourth, the Water; the fifth, the Earth. Brahema, Visnu and Rudra are the Chief, and form a Body with three Heads, called Mahamurte, signifying, the three Chiefs. Hence it is inferred, the In∣dians had some knowledge, though imper∣fect, of the Blessed Trinity. 13. They are much addicted to Witch∣craft and Superstition, and believe there are Fourteen Worlds, and that this we live in is an Image of that in Heaven. Their se∣veral
Families touch not one another, not eat together. Tradesmen cannot marry out of their own Trade. The most renowned Families among them are the Raja's, an inge∣nuous People that rather lose their Lives than their Arms in Battle. The Bramenes, who con∣tend for Precedence with the Raja's. The Chatines, which are the richest Merchants. The Blalas, or Country People, held in such esteem, that Kings marry their Daugh∣ters to them, saying, They are the Publick Substance. From these four Roots pring One hundred ninety-six Branches divided in∣to Valangas, that is, of the Right-hand, and Elanges of the Left, but none of these are honoured as the other four. 14. Let us say somewhat of the Christi∣ans of St. Thomas. Four Leagues from Co∣chim, on the Malabar Coast, is the City Cran∣ganor, almost encompassed by a River, in∣habited by Christians, Gentiles, Mahometans and Iews. The whole Kingdom takes Name from the City; it has a great Trade, is frequented by Merchants from Siria, Egypt, Persia and Arabia, by reason of the plenty of Pepper brought thither. At the arrival of the Portugueses in India, it was governed in the form of a Commonwealth, but sub∣ject to Zamori, whom they cast off, seeing him weakned by our Arms. 15. Their Heathen Rites are the same with those of the other Malabars. The Chri∣stians called of St. Thomas, who inhabit from this Cty to Coromandel and Meliapor, the
place, where that Apostle was buried, have Churches like ours in Europe; on the Altars and Walls Crosses painted, but no other Images; no Bells; the People meet on Sun∣days to hear Sermons, and other Service Their head Bishop resides in Chaldea, has twelve Cardinals, two Patriarchs, Archbi∣shops, Bishops and other Prelates and Fa∣thers. 16. The Priests are shorn in the form of a Cross, they consecrate leavened Bread, and Wine made of Rasins for want of other, Baptize after Forty Days, unless there be danger of Death; instead of extream Un∣ction the Priests bless the Sick, use Holy Water, bury after our manner; the Rela∣tions and Friends eat together eight Days while the Ceremonies last. If there be no Will the next of Kin inherits; the Widows recover their Portion, but forfeit it if they Marry within a Year. 17. They have all our Holy Scripture in Hebrew and Caldaick with Expositions, which they Read in Schools; their Divines interpret it well, chiefly the Prophets, which they study most. They observe the same Lent and Advent as we do. O the Eve of the Resurrection they neither eat nor drink, and keep that Day with great Solemnity; as also the Sunday of Pastor Bonus, in remem∣brance that on that Day St. Thomas felt our Saviour's side; they observe our very Festi∣vals, as Sundays, the Feasts of our Lord, Lady and Apostles, and have the same Bissextile or
Leap Year as the Latines. Both they and the Gentiles keep the Feast of the Apostle on the first Day of Iune. There are Mona∣steries of Monks and Nuns cloathed in black, and religiously observe their Rules. The Priests observe conjugal Chastity, and marry not a second time. There is no Divorce allowed beween Man and Wife. 18. In the Year 1544 came to Cochim, Iacob a Caldean Bishop of Cranganor, where being dangerously sick, he sent for the Trea∣surer Peter de Sequeyra, and told him, Ne∣cessity had obliged him to pawn two Copper-Plates with Characters engraven on them, which were Original Grants and Privileges bestowed on the Apostle St. Thomas by the Sovereigns of those Countries, when he Preached there; that he desired him to release them, least they should be lost if he died, for if he lived he would take them out himself. This Prelate found the only way to lose them, in trusting the Portugueses; for Sequeyra paid the Two hun∣dred Royals they were pawned for, put them into the Treasury, and they were ne∣ver more heard of. 19. The Governor Martin Alfonso de Sou∣sa, after long search for some Body that could understand them, had found a retired Jew on the Mountain, who said they were writ in the Caldean, Malabar and Arabian Languages, and the Substance of them was, That the Prince then Reigning of his free Gift granted to Thomas at Cranganor, such a Parcel of Ground to build a Church; for
the Maintenance whereof he assigned the Fifths of Merchandize. 20. Very much might be said of the Island Ceylon, but I will only add a little to what is already said. About five hundred Years before Christ, a Heathen was King of Tena∣çrii, and lorded it over a great part of the East. He banished his Son and Heir Vigia Raja for his depraved wicked Life. The young Man took Ship with 700 Men like himself, and put into the Port of Preature, be∣tween Triquilimale & Iafanapatan in the Island Ceylon, then not inhabited, but abounding in delightful Rivers, Springs, Woods, Fruit∣trees, and sightly Birds and Beads; whence the new Planters gave it the name of Lan∣cao, which signifies Paradise, and is still held the delight of all the East. 21. The first Town they built was Mon∣tta opposite to Manar, whence they traded with Cholca Raja, the nearest King on the Continent; he knowing who this Prince was, gave him his Daughter to Wife, and Wo∣men for his Companions, with them he sent Labourers and Workmen to forward that Plantation; the Prince when he saw his Pow∣er increase, stiled himself Emperor of the Island▪ Strangers call these People Galas, that is banished Men, because their Original was such. 22. Vigia Raja dying without Children, left the Crown to his Brother, in whose line it continued 900 Years, the fruitfulness of the Island and fame of its excellent Cinna∣mon,
drew thither the Chineses, who mar∣rying with the Galas, brought another rac which to this day are called Chingalas, grown very powerful, and most fit for Courtiers, being most subtle and false. 23. The first line being extinct, the King∣dom fell to Dambadine Pandar Pracura Ma∣bago, who was treacherously taken by the Chineses, after restored, and then slain by Alagexere, who in his absence had usurped the Crown; this usurper held it 10 Years, and dying without Issue, and two Sons of Dambadine, who were fled for fear of the Tyrant, being found the eldest succeeded, his Name was Maha Pracura Mahago, he gave to his Brother the Dominion of the four Corlas, and settled his Court at Cota, which he built to that effect, by a Daughter marryed to Chol∣ca Raja of the antient blood Royal, he had a Grandson who succeeded him. Afterwards the line failing, Queta Prmal King of Iafa∣napatan, inherited and called himself Bone∣gaboa, that is, King by force of Arms, for that he had overcome his Brother, King of the Corlas. 24. His Son Caypura Pandar succeeded him, and the King of the Corlas having killed him, possessed himself of the Crown, and took the name of Iavira, Procura Magabo; these two Brothers were of the blood Royal, and the King Maha Procura had given them those two Crowns; after the Tyrant, Reign∣ed his Son Drama Procura Magabo then living when Vasco de Gama discovered India; af∣terwards
about the Year 1500, that Empire was divided between three Brothers, into so many Kingdoms. Boenegababo Pandar had Cota; Reigam Pandar had Reigam; and Ma∣duze Pandar had Ceitavaca. 25. In the Country of Dinavaca which is the Center of this Island rises that vast high Mountain called Pico de Adam, because some believed our first Father lived there, and that the print of a foot still seen upon a stone on the top of it, is his; the Natives call it Amala Saripadi, that is the Mountain of the footstep. Some Springs running down it, at the bottom  a Rivulet, where Pilgrims wash, and believe it purifies them. The stone on the top is like a Tomb∣stone, the print of the foot seems not arti∣ficial, but as if it had been made in the same nature as when one treads in Clay, which makes it be looked upon as miraculous. 26. The Pilgrims of all sorts who come from as far as Persia and China, being washed, go up to the top, near which hangs a bell which they strike and take the sounding of it as a sign of their being purified, as if any bell being struck, would not sound. The opinion of the Natives is, that Drama Raja Son of an ancient King of that Island, do∣ing Pennance in that Mountain with many Disciples, when he was about to depart at their instance, left that print there as a Me∣morial; therefore they respect it as a relict of a Saint, and generally call him Budam, that is Wiseman.
27. Some believe this Saint was Iosaphat, but it is more likely it was St. Thomas, who has left many Memorials in the East, and in the West, in Brasil and in Paraguay. The natural Woods in this Island are like the cu∣rious Orchards and Gardens in Europe, and produce Citrons, Lemmons, and sundry sorts of delicious fruits; it abounds in Cinnamon, Ginger, Cordamom, Sugar, Canes, Honey, and Hemp; of Metals, Iron, whereof they make the best Firelocks of all the East; of precious Stones, Rubies, Zafires, Cats-eyes, Topaces, Chrisolites, Amethists, and Beri∣lus; of valuable beasts, Civet-Cats, and the noblest of the Elephants of all the East; there are excellent Rivers abounding with variety of Fish. All round it are Ports fit for the largest Ships, 28. In all parts of India there are Pro∣digious Wizards. When Vasco de Gama sail∣ed upon that discovery, some of them at Calicut, showed other People in basons of Water, the three Ships he had with him. When D. Francis de Almeyda the first Vice∣roy of India, was coming for Portugal; some Witches at Coehim told him, he should not pass the Cape of Good Hope, and there he was buryed. At Mascate there are such Sorcerors, that they Eat a thing inwardly, only fixing their Eyes upon it; with their sight draw the entrails of any Human body, and so kill many. One of these fixing his Eyes on a Bateca, or Water-Mellon, sucked out all the inside, it being cut open to try
the experiment, was found hollow, and he the more to satisfy the beholders, vomitted it up. 29. To conclude the description of these parts of Asia, let us say something of the most exquisite production of Nature it af∣fords; doubtless the most wonderful thing in the World is, a Tree there growing, of which alone are built Ships and Houses, the one loaded, the other stored with all things necessary for Human Life, and on it alone, Men may feed and cloath themselves; hav∣ing seen no particular account hereof, I will be the more plain in describing it. The Tree is about 50 foot high, on the top grow the leaves like that of a Palm or Date-tree in shape, but more large and beautiful, it bears about 50 of them, and among them about 12 clusters, each containing about 50 of those we call Cocos, as big as good Pumpkins, so that one Tree sometimes pro∣duces 600, never less than 400 of them. 30. First on the outside is a thick tough shell or rhine, as is over the Walnut-shell, though not of that nature, then a hard shell, and within it a sweet kernel; that outward rhine is spun, and of it all manner of tackle and cordage is made, of the inward shell Porrengers, Salts, Flasks, Spoons, and other curiosities, besides being burnt, it is a plea∣sant sort of Cole, to this shell sticks the kernel which is hollow, white as Snow, about an inch thick, juycy and sweet as Almonds, it serves to season several things, as Milk
and Sugar with us, and Eaten alone, is plea∣sant, strengthening, but hard of digestion; within that hollow is about half a pint of most pleasant Water, which at certain times congeals and forms a substance like an Apple, (called by the Indians Pango) of a delight∣ful taste, as is the conserve of Sugar, of the same Tree, and this same is the seed that produces the Tree. 31. To make Wine, Sugar, Vinegar, and other things of this Coco, they suffer not the cluster to grow, but bind the branch hard, when green, with cords made of the same Tree, cut the end of the branch, and put it into a Vessel, into which it bleeds like a Vine. This liquor is called Sura and a great quantity of it is gathered; to make Wine they distil it, some is stronger, some weaker, as our Brandy, the hottest they call Orraca (and we corruptly Rack) to sweeten and colour it, they put in Raisins, and it is a plentiful and pretious Commodity in all that part of Asia; Vinegar is made only by leaving that liquor some Days in Earthen Vessels; Sugar by boyling it to a consistence, with this Su∣gar they make good preserves, one of the kernel of the same Coco grated. 32. Oyl is made of the Coco's prepared and ground; it serves not only to burn, but to Eat, dress Wounds, cure Colds, and purge, it is a considerable commodity; that mass of Coco which has been so pressed or ground, is excellent food for Cattle; so that of the Wood, Leaves and Shells of this Tree
is made the Ship, Sails and Rigging, with∣out any other material, and of the Fruit, Liquors and Preserves are made to load it: Of the Leaves are also made Brooms and Baskets; of the Wood, Darts and Lances not much inferior to Iron; it also bears a a sort of Down that serves instead of Tin∣der. When any of these Trees is cut down, they take off the Head, called Palmito, which is of an excellent taste, like to that of our Cardoons. It is therefore not to be admi∣red, that the Indians take much pains to raise a Wood of these Trees, and are so much troubled to have them destroyed in time of War. CHAP. XX. Of the Memory there is of the Preaching the Gospel of Christ in all Asia and its Islands, particularly by the Apostle Saint Thomas in those Parts mentioned in this History, and of the Extirpation and Re∣paration of the same. 1. FOR the better understanding of what follows, it is necessary to run over the Position of these Countries. Off from the Island Zocotora appears on the Coast of Africk the Empire of Ethiopia, divided on the East from Asia by the Red Sea, begin∣ning
on the North at the City Suanquem, and ending on the South almost at the Mouth of the Red Sea. Between that Sea and the Persian Golph lies that part of Arabia, which is most Fruitful and best Peopled. Ten Leagues from this Shore, and three from that of Persia, just within the Mouth of the Gulph, is the Island Gerum, and in it the City Ormuz, a Kingdom more famous for its Trade than extent. From thence runs along the Coast of Caramania subject to Per∣sia for the space of Two hundred Leagues, to the City Diul seated on the Westernmost Mouth of Indus, which River makes one of the sides of that Continent which is pro∣perly called India, and is in the form of a Lozenge. 2. Of its most distant Angles, the one lies North between the Fountains of Indus and Ganges on Mount Imaus; the other South, and is the famous Cape Comori, the distance between these two Angles is Four hundred Leagues. The other two Angles which lie East and West, at Three hundred Leagues in∣terval reach the Mouths of the same two Rivers. This vast Continent, called by the Natives Indostan, is divided into several Kingdoms and Dominions, as are (to begin at the Mouth of Indus where we left off) the Kingdoms of Gurzarate or Cambaya, De∣can, Bisnagar; those of Malabar, viz. Canor, Calicut, Cranganor, Cochim, Porcà, Coulam and Travancor, reaching to the Point of the Cape in 7 deg. 40 min. of N. Lat. From
the Cape, the Coast runs again toward the North till the Mouth of Ganges, where taking a great round it makes the Bay of Bengala, and runs again towards the South, to the other famous Cape of Cingapura, the South∣ernmost of all the Eastern Continent. Op∣posite to Cape Comori is the Island Ceylon, that of Sumatra to Cingapura: But begin∣ning at Cape Comori, Two hundred Leagues of the Coast belong to the Kingdom of Nar∣singa, or Bisnagar, the rest to those of Orixa, Bengala, Pegu and Siam. Beyond Cingapura are those of Cambodia, Tsiompa, Cochinchina, and the Great China. 3. The Islands of this great Archipelago are innumerable: But not to mention those opposite to Indostan, there are Iava, Timor, Borneo, Banda, the Molucos, Celebes, Maza∣car, Sunda, Lequia, and those of Iapan, without speaking of many more of Note. It is certain the Gospel was in the time of the Apostles Preached in many of these Pro∣vinces, if not in all. For the Ethiopians value themselves upon receiving it from a Servant of Queen Candace baptized by Saint Philip, and from the Evangelist St. Matthew. There is no doubt but Arabia and Persia flourished with many Saints and Martyrs, and the People of Bazora, where Tigris and Euphrates fall into the Sea, have a Tradition that the beloved Disciple preached to them. But the most singular Apostle of those Parts of Asia was St. Thomas, the memory of whom is still preserved in Cranganor, Coulam, and
Meliapor, with evident Testimonies that he travelled over all those Countries, even as far as China, whence he returned to the King∣dom of Coromandell, where he ended his Preaching with his Life. 4. Christianity being now utterly corrupt in some Parts of Asia, and quite lost in o∣thers, the Portugues Arms, accompanied by Apostolical Ministers, went thither to restore it. The first who Baptized in that Part of Asia was F. Peter de Cubillones of the Holy Order of the Blessed Trinity, and Confessor to the first Discoverer, Vasco de Gama. 5. The most successful Labourers after him were in India the Vicar Michael Vaz, and Iames de Borba, and other Religious of the Order of St. Francis. In the Moluco Islands, Captain Francis de Castro, who con∣verted five Kings in the Island Mazacar. Captain Antony de Payva, who in the same Island Baptized two Kings and their Courts in one Day. Others are named in their proper Places in this History, and will doubt∣less be Recorded in the Book of Life. 6. This was the Estate of Christianity in Asia, when its new Apostle St. Francis Xa∣verius, of the Society of Jesus came thither. He travelled more than is credible, and did more than human Works. He was born of a Noble Family at Pamplona in Navarre in the Year 1497, studied and taught Philo∣sophy and Divinity at Paris, whence he went Companion to St. Ignatius Loyola, fol∣lowed
his Rule, and received Holy Orders at Venice. 7. He came to Portugal in order to pass into India in the Year 1540, and the Reign of King Iohn the Third, who sent for him and a Companion from Rome. He had the Dignity of Apostolical Nuncio in the East; and during the Voyage, and in India, was called Holy Father. He Preached in the Island Zocotora, at Goa and Travancor, where he was persecuted. It cost him no less Pains to reclaim the Portugueses, debauched with the Riches of Asia, than to convert Infidels. In the Island Ceylon he Converted the King of Candea, went thence to the Moluco's, and gained many Souls. After several times traversing the Islands, India, and other Parts, he went to Iapan, and, with the Prince's leave, Preached at Cangoxima, and suffered many Afflictions, then went to Fi∣rando, Yamanguchi and Miaco, where with great pains he planted the Faith. Then he returned to Malaca, after converting the King of Bungo, who soon after died a Chri∣stian, being called Francis in Baptism. 8. Next he prepared to go into China, and died at the Entrance of it in the Island Sancham, in the Fifty-fifth Year of his Age, and the Eleventh of his Preaching, having first foretold the Day of his Death, which was the second of December about midnight: His Body the Year following was translated to Goa. He had the Gift of Languages and Prophecy, and was Canonized by Pope Gre∣gory
the 15th, in the Year 1622. He had many Disciples and Companions, who wrought and endured much, and were held in opinion of sanctity. 9. We have already spoke of the first en∣trance of Christianity into Ethiopia, India, Iapan, Persia, and Arabia, and of its restau∣ration by the Portugueses; now we will say somewhat relating to the same in China; there are still undeniable testimonies that St. Tho∣mas spread the Evangelical Doctrine there, and though no footsteps of it appeared, the same had happened in all India, had not Thomas called Cananeus an Armenian Christi∣an, about the Year 800 come to Mogodover or Patana, who renewing the Apostles Churches, and building others, resettled the Christian Religion, and gave occasion to the mistake (because both had the same name) in believ∣ing they were all the work of the sormer. The same happened in China, as shall be made appear; the time Christianity was forgot in both places, differs not much, for as it appears, Thomas-Cananeus re-establish∣ed it in India about the Year Eight hun∣dred, so it is plain by what shall be said, that about the Year Seven hundred it began again to take footing in China. 10. Let us first speak of the antient and then of the modern testimonies. In the Cal∣daick Books of the Indian Christians still re∣maining at Cranganor, and particularly in a breviary, there is a lesson to this purpose; By St. Thomas the Errors of the Idolatry
of India were abolished; by St. Thomas the Chineses and Ethiopians were convert∣ed to the Truth; by St. Thomas &c. by St. Thomas were spread in all India, the rays of the Doctrine of Life; by St. Tho∣mas flew to the Chineses the Kingdom of Heaven. And again in an Antiphon, the Indians, Chineses, the Persians and Islan∣ders, those of Siria, Armenia, Grecia, and Romania, in commemoration of St. Thomas, offer adoration to thy Holy Name. A∣mong the Islanders may well be reckoned the Iaponeses; in the summary of the Synodical Constitutions, and Chapter of those that are Canonical, there is a Canon of the Pa∣triarch Theodosius, in which are these words, So also the Bishops of the great Province, as are most of the Metropolitans of China. When the Portugueses entered India, the Governor of the Malabar Mountains, called Iacoh, stiled himself, Metropolitan of India and China; Paulus Venetus a true Historian in all points, that can now be proved, assures in his time, there were in China many Christians who had sumptuous Churches, and names the Cities in which they were. The Fa∣thers of the Society of Jesus had an account of People who worshipped the Cross. The cause why the Christians and their Churches were quite extinct, and no footsteps of them remains, is that they having favoured the Tartar when he invaded China about Three hundred Years since, he being overcome by the Chineses, many of them were killed,
the rest fled, and all that had been theirs was totally extirpated. 11. In the Year 1625, digging for a foundation near Siganfu, Metropolis of the Province of Xensi, there was found a flat stone above 9 spans in length, 4 in breadth, and one in thickness; one end of it goes off sharp like a Pyramid, on it is cut a Cross, the ends of it adorned with Flower de luces like that found in the Tomb of St. Thomas the Apostle, about it are Clouds, and at the foot of it three lines, each containing three Chinese Letters, all the superficies of the stone is full of those Characters, and the edges, only that on these are some Sirian Characters, containing the names of the Bishops then in being. The Governor of the Town set it up there, under an Arch within the inclosure of a Temple. The three first lines have these words, A Mo∣nument in Praise and Eternal Memory, of the propogating the law of light; and Truth come from Iudea into China. Then over the rest of the writing is this Title; the Prologue made by the Priest of the Kingdom of Iudea called Qui∣mein. 12. The Substance of the Inscription is this: That the most Spiritual, Incom∣prehensible and Eternal is without be∣ginning or end; That the beginning is three and one without having a begin∣ning. Lord Olooyu; That he formed the four Parts of the World in the figure of
a Cross; That he framed all Creatures and Man; That Man perverted from his Innocence, fell into the Snares of Satan; That hence sprang Three hnndred sixty five Sects; That some assigned Divinity to Creatures, and others believed all was a meer nothing; That all was full of Errors and Confusion; That then the Messiah, concealing his Majesty by be∣coming Man, appeared to the World; That an Angel coming to declare the My∣stery to a Virgin, she brought forth the Holy; That a Star appeared, denoting his Birth, and those of the Kingdom of Pozu went to offer him Tribute, all sui∣table to what the Twenty-four Saints had said; That he proposed to the World the most pure Law, and filled it with Light and Virtues, opening the way to Life, and shutting that of Death; That he overcame the dark Seat, and the Devil was destroyed, and Man made capable of ascending to the bright Seats; That at noon Day he ascended into Heaven, and there remained Twenty-seven Books of the Holy Scriptures; That he opened the Gate of Conversion by the Water that purifies; That his Ministers used the Holy Cross, and stayed not in one Coun∣try, nor had Servants, nor looked for Riches; That they seven times offered Sacrifice of sweet Odor, wherewith they helped the living and dead; That every seven Days they offered and purified the
Heart to receive the Holy Innocence; That no proper Name could be given to the true Law, and for want of another they called it, The Law of Light; That in the Year of Chinquon Kieiça, there came from Iudea a Man of great Virtue, called Olo∣puem, with the true Doctrine; That this was received throughout all the Kingdom, and Churches erected; that afterwards some change of Affairs happening, it grew weak, but in the Time of the Great Tam, the Holy Gospel returned to China; That in the Year of Ximbie, the Priests Iohn and Paul redressed all, and new Churches were erected; That in the Reign of the Great Tam, the second Year Kienchum, on the seventh day of the Month of Autumn, this Stone was set up, Kinçin Governor of the Church of China being Bishop. 13. By this venerable Piece of Antiquity it appears, that the Christian Faith was planted in China about the Year Six hun∣dred thirty-one. From it also may be inferr'd, that St. Thomas first Preached there, but that Christianity being almost forgot, those Priests of Iudea and Kings of China restored it, as has been shown it happened in India. So that what the Portugueses, assisted by other European Religious Men now perform, is a second Re-establishment of the Faith. 14. About the Year 1543, Fernan Men∣dez Pinto had this following Information in China. He was Travelling from the City
Mindoo to that of Peking, and seeing by the way the Ruins of another, was informed, that about Two hundred Years before it was a most flourishing Place. That a Holy Man coming thither raised some dead to life, and Preach∣ed of Jesus Christ, and his Vicar upon Earth; that the Heathen Priests designing to burn him, he quenched the fire, making the sign of the Cross over it; that they stoned him to Death, and being thrown into a River, the Stream stood still five days, the holy Bo∣dy being born upon the Superficies all the time; that this occasioned the Conversion of many People, of which there was a great number in that Province. Further upon a Mountain was a Stone Cross, which this Writer saw some People Worship, pro∣nouncing these Words: Christ Iesus; Mary conceived him being a Virgin, brought him forth a Virgin, and remained a Virgin. These were Disciples descended from a Weaver, called Iohn, in whose House that Holy Mar∣tyr was entertained. They preserve a Book of his Life, which says his Name was Mat∣thew Escandel, by Birth an Hungarian, and had been an Heremite on Mount Sinai. That History related, that he being taken out of the River and buried nine days after, the City was swallowed up with Four thousand Bonzos, who only durst stay in it, the People having abandoned it, by reason of the Earth∣quakes that happened before. 15. At the same time the same Writer found in the Cities Sampitay and Quiangsi
of China, many Christians who had been converted Twenty-five Years before, which was Sixty Years before the Jesuits entered China, which is now One hundred and four∣teen Years since. And this is the Reason those Fathers found some Monuments of Christianity, but so obscure that little could be made out by them. 16. The same Feruand Mendez relates, That in the City Timplan, the Court of the Emperor of Caminam, a Borderer on Chi∣na, he found most ancient Monuments of the Christian Faith, and some account of the Holy Scripture. Those People said, That the Creation of the World was the work of the Will of the Creator; That he was not visible, nor to be felt; That there were Eighty-two thousand Moons since the Earth was separated from the Water; That on Earth God had crea∣ted a most delightful Garden, and pla∣ced therein the first Man called Adda, and his Wife Baragom: That he forbid them the Fruit of the Tree Hisaforam, and they transgressing this Command, all Men became liable to the Punishment of that Guilt: That the Man broke the Precept, being deceived by the Woman, and she by the Serpent Lupantoo: That for this Disobedience they were cast out of that delightful Place: That by reason of the Sinfulness of Man, God had drown∣ed the World; That only one just Man with his Family escaped in a Wooden
House, and by them Mankind was resto∣red: That God would punish the Wicked, and reward the Good: That one Iohn, a Disciple of Thomas Modeliar, (a Servant of God, whom the Citizens of Digun killed, because he preached that God be∣came Man, and suffered Death for the Sins of Men) had Preached the same in that Country, and lost his Life for so doing. Thomas Modeliar is the Apostle St. Thomas. The People of Calaminam own the Blessed Trinity; when they Sneeze they say some Words that declare it, and they make the sign of the Cross. 17. The last Testimony was discovered in the Year 1635, but the thing in it self is at least as antient as the Stone already spo∣ken of. Some Heathens passing through a Street in a Village near the City Civenche of the Province of Fokien, by Night saw Lights on some Stones that lay there, and turning them up, found on that part which had lain next the Ground Crosses carved. A Jesuit examining into it, caused the Stone on which the greatest Light appeared to be fixed in a decent place, as a Monument of the Miracle, and of our Religion in those Parts. 18. We shall speak of what was done by the Religious of the Society of Jesus in order to the Reparation of Christianity in this Empire in the proper place, and Third Tome of this our Asia. They entred upon this undertaking in the Year 1579, which
was the the last under our Portugues Princes who yet expired not without this Glory. In the Year 1583, they Founded the first Church at Xauking. The rest of their Pro∣ceedings we refer to the Third Tome, be∣ginning under the Spanish Monarchs, as this has ended with the Portugueses. The End of the Second Tome.
The Portugues Asia: OR, THE HISTORY OF THE Discovery and Conquest OF INDIA BY THE PORTUGUES; CONTAINING All their Discoveries from the Coast of Africk, to the farthest Parts of China and Iapan; all their Battels by Sea and Land, Sieges and other Memorable Actions; a Description of those Countries, and many Particulars of the Religion, Government and Customs of the Natives, &c. In Three Tomes. Written in Spanish by Manuel de Faria y Sousa, Knight. Of the Order of Christ. Translated into English by Capt. Iohn Stevens. Tome the Second. LONDON, Printed for C. Brome, at the Sign of the Gun, at the West-End of St. Pauls. 1695.
DEDICATED TO HER MOST SACRED MAJESTY, CATHERINE, QUEEN DOWAGER OF ENGLAND, &c.
THE PREFACE. WHen Almighty GOD, the only Founder of Empires, is so pleased with a Peo∣ple, as to possess them of a New one, He generally Endows the first Founders with a wonderful proportion of Heroick Virtues, as Sincerity, Magnanimity, Valour, Majesty, and an almost more than Mortal Staidness: The solid Foun∣dations to support the greatest Monarchies. Such Founders rare∣ly exceeded Three in Number. Let the Learned (by the help of
this not yet Vulgar Remark) seek Foreign Examples; it shall be my Care only to shew those of my own Country. The King∣dom of Portugal was founded by Three Heroes, (HENRY, ALFONSO, and SANCHO) most visibly adorned with a those Virtues which merit to erect Imperial Thrones, and from them to Command many Kings, many Princes, and many Nations. Their Successors began to decline. The Dominion, the same Distributer of Power was pleased to give them in Asia, was also founded on Three, as appears in the beginning of this Work: They were DUARIE PACHECO, D. FRANCISCO DE ALMEYDA, and ALFONSO DE ALBUQUER∣QUE. Scarce had they one Suc∣cessor who did not manifestly de∣cline, or at least had a mixture of
Valour and Timerousness, of Mode∣ration and Covetousness, with that unhappy distinction, that still the Timerousness and Avarice were most predominant. No Living Crea∣ture puts away his Young Ones, till they can shift for themselves: So Almighty GOD, when He erects Monarchies, cherishes them with particular Care, till they gather strength, and then (tho' He does not wholly abandon) puts them into the hands of Men, that they may perceive the dif∣ference between the Divine and Human Care. Let an unbiassed Judgment here reflect upon the Exploits of the Portugueses in gaining this Asiatick Crown, and it will appear that only PACHE∣CO could have forged it with that fiery Heart, which melted the Arms and Riches of the obstinate Zamori; That only
ALMEYDA could have filed and polished it, by applying his own and his Son's Sword, which brought it into form by hum∣bling the Turkish Pride; And that only the Great ALBUQUERQUE, giving the finishing stroaks, could have set in it the most Precious Jewels of Goa, Malaca and Ormuz. For they so far removed from their Country, that they had not only lost sight, but even the hopes and memory of it, entring with a few indifferent Vessels and a most inconsiderable number of Men, where scarce a Tree offered them a secure shade, amidst Nu∣merous and well Armed Squa∣drons and Castles, and through showers of heavy Ball and poi∣soned Arrows; by the force of their Swords opened deep Tren∣ches, raised high Walls, and secu∣red to themselves famous Cities
and large Countries. Let those who have since acted less, having so good a ground to perform much more, not take it ill if we say, That the Bounds of our Domi∣nions in India, are almost reduced to what they were in the Beginning. It is true, some of the Successors (a few among so many) added some∣thing to the Foundation; but it was an inconsiderable Copy of the Great Original. It is also true, others valiantly desended that dation, but it was an indis∣pensable Duty. Let not time∣rous Spirits call this a Rash Iudg∣ment, which the Brave will only style Unbiassed; or say, We endea∣vour to lessen the Merits of Hero's; our only Design, is to shew the Ways and Means the Giver of Crowns takes to frame and de∣liver them to Mortals; and how far less capable they are to Main∣tain,
than He to Form them. The Divine Providence gave a sufficient Demonstration hereof in the erecting this Empire, and they no less in diminishing of it. Hereof we have seen much al∣ready, and shall see yet more; yet not without singular Acts of Valour: That it may be manifest the Cause of our Ruin is, That the Souls are not always the same; for the Hearts always are.
THE CONTENTS. TOM. I. PART I. CHAP. I. THE Government of the Vice-Roy D. Garcia de Noronha, from the Year 1538, till the Year 1540, in the Reign-of King John the Third, Page 1 CHAP. II. Continues the Government of the Vice-Roy, D. Garcia de Noronha, p. 8 CHAP. III. The Government of D. Stephen de Gama, from the Year 1540, till the Year 1542, in the Reign of King John the Third, p. 6
CHAP. IV. Goes on with the Government of D. Ste∣phen de Gama, p. 24 CHAP. V. Sundry Exploits of Captain Antony Faria, from the Year 1540, till that of 1542, during the Government of D. Stephen de Gama, p. 31 CHAP. VI. Continues the Exploits of Antony de Fa∣ria, p. 37 CHAP. VII. Continues still the Exploits of Antony de Faria, in the Government of D. Stephen de Gama, and the Year 1642, p. 44 CHAP. VIII. Concludes with the Actions of Antony de Faria, p. 47 CHAP. IX. Continues the Government of D. Stephen de Gama, and contains the Actions of his Brother D. Christopher in Ethiopia, p. 54
CHAP. X. The End of the Government of D. Stephen de Gama, p. 63 CHAP. XI. The Government of Martin Alfonso de Sousa, from the Year 1542, till the Year 1545, in the Reign of King John the Third, p. 67 CHAP. XII. Continues the Government of Martin Al∣fonso de Sousa, p. 76 CHAP. XIII. Continues the Government of Martin Al∣fonsa de Sousa, p. 81 CHAP. XIV. The End of the Government of Martin Alfonso de Sousa, and of the First Part of this Tome, p. 86
TOM. II. PART II. CHAP. I. THE Government of D. John de Castro, from the Year 1545, till the Year 1548, in the Reign of King John the Third, p. 95 CHAP. II. Continues the Government of D. John de Castro, and Siege of Diu, p. 103 CHAP. III. Continues the Siege of Diu, the Governour D. John de Castro comes in Person to its Relief, p. 109 CHAP. IV. Continues the Government of D. John de Castro, and Reign of King John the Third, p. 117 CHAP. V. The End of the Government D. John de Castro, p. 125
CHAP. VI. The Government of Garcia de Sá, from the Year 1548, till the Year 1549, in the Reign of King John the Third, p. 132 CHAP. VII. The Government of George Cabral, from the Year 1549, till the Year 1550, in the Reign of King John the Third, p. 140 CHAP. VIII. Continues the Government of George Ca∣bral, p. 143 CHAP. IX. The Government of the Vice-Roy D. Alfonso de Noronha, from the Year 1550, till 1553, in the Reign of King John the Third, p. 150 CHAP. X. Continues the Government of the Vice-Roy, D. Alfonso de Noronha, p. 563 CHAP. XI. The Government of the Vice-Roy D. Peter de Mascarenhas, from the Year 1554, till 1555, King John the Third still Reigning, p. 174
CHAP. XII. The Government of Francis Barreto, from the Year 1555, till 1558, in the Reign of King John the Third, p. 178 CHAP. XIII. The End of the Government of Francis Barreto, p. 186 CHAP. XIV. The Government of the Vice-Roy D. Con∣stantin de Braganza, from the Year 1558, till 1561, in the Reign of King Sebastian, p. 190 CHAP. XV. Continues the Government of the Vice-Roy D. Constantin, in the Reign of King Sebastian, p. 198 CHAP. XVI. The End of the Government of the Vice-Roy D. Constantin, p. 207 CHAP. XVII. The Government of the Vice-Roy D. Fran∣cis Coutinho, Count de Redondo, from the Year 1561, till 1564, in the Reign of King Sebastian, p. 215
CHAP. XVIII. The Government of John de Mendoza, for six Months of the Year 156, in the Reign of King Sebastian, p. 222 TOM. II. PART III. CHAP. I. THE Government of the Vice-Roy D. Anton. de Noronha, from the Year 1564, till 1568, in the Reign of King Sebastian, p. 241 CHAP. II. Continues the Government of D. Anton. de Noronha, 245 CHAP. III. Continues the Government of D. Anton. de Noronha, in the Reign of King Seba∣stian, p. 253 CHAP. IV. The End of the Government of the Vice-Roy D. Anton. de Noronha, p. 260
CHAP. V. The Government of the Vice-Roy D. Luis de Ataide, Count de Atouguia; from the Year 1568, till 1571, in the Reign of King Sebastian, p. 267 CHAP. VI. Continues the Government of the Vice-Roy D. Luis de Ataide, p. 273 CHAP. VII. The dangerous Sieges of Goa and Chaul; and first of the foremost, continuing the Government of D. Luis de Ataide, and Reign of King Sebastian, p, 281 CHAP. VIII. Continues the Siege of Goa, and Govern∣ment of D. Luis de Ataide, p. 289 CHAP. IX. The Siege of Chaul, p. 296 CHAP. X. Continues the Siege of Chaul, p. 304
CHAP. XI. The Proceedings f Zamori upon this Oc∣casion, and during the Government of D. Luis de Ataide, p. 313 CHAP. XII. The Government of the Vice-Roy D. Antony de Noronha, from the Year 1571 till 1573, in the Reign of King Sebastian, p. 319 CHAP. XIII. The Siege of Malaca, with other Occur∣rences, and End of the Government of D. Antony de Noronha, p. 325 CHAP. XIV. The Government of Antony Moniz Bar∣reto, from the Year 1573 till 1576, in the Reign of King Sebastian, p. 3 CHAP. XV. The Government of Francis Barreto in Monomotapa, beginning in the Year 1569, in the Reign of King Sebastian, p. 34 CHAP. XVI. Continues the Government of Francis Bar∣reto, in Monomotapa, p. 349
CHAP. XVII. The Government of Vasco Fernandez Ho∣mem in Monomotapa, in the Reign of King Sebastian, p. 354 CHAP. XVIII. Of the Vice-Roy Ruy Lorenzo de Tavors, and the Government of D. James de Me∣neses, from the Year 1576 till 1578, in the Reign of King Sebastian, p. 358 CHAP. XIX. The Count D. Luis de Ataide is the second time Vice-Roy of India; he set out in the Year 1577, and Governs till 1581, and is the last sent out by King Sebastian, p. 361 CHAP. XX. The Government of Ferdinand Tellez de Meneses, who was named by the Gover∣nours of Portugal, upon the Decease of the Cardinal King Henry, in the Year 1581, p. 367
TOM. II. PART IV. CHAP. I. OF the Gods, Superstitions and Opini∣ons of the Asiaticks, particularly the Indians, and among them the Mala∣bars, 5 CHAP. II. The Metamorphoses, or Transformations, p. 383 CHAP. III. Other Metamorphoses, and the Consequences of them; of the God Brama, and the Foundation of Pagods; an Account of the famousest of them, p. 387 CHAP IV. A Continuation of the same Matter, p. 392 CHAP. V. Of the Offices, , Ceremoies, Brials, and other things, p. 398 CHAP. VI. Continues the same Sct, p. 405
CHAP. VII. Of the Empire of Aethiopia, and first of the Kingdoms and Provinces into which it is divided; of the progress of Chri∣stianity therein, and of the Product of the Land, p. 42 CHAP. VIII. Of he Laws, Customs and Religion of the Empire of Ethiopia, p. 421 CHAP. IX. Of he Nature of the Country of Ethiopia, of its Towns and Kings it has had, and of the entrance and expulsion of our Doctrine, p. 431 CHAP. X. The Islands of Japan, p. 435 CHAP. XI. A further Account of Japan, 441 CHAP. XII. Of the Great Empire of China, and first of its Situation, division into Provinces, of its Product, Ars nd Commerce, p. 448
CHAP. XIII. Of the Provinces into which China is di∣vided, p. 453 CHAP. XIV. Of the People of China, their Cstoms, Inclinations and Studies, p. 463 CHAP. XV. A Continuation of the same Subject, p. 472 CHAP. XVI. Of the Marriages, Burials, Ceremonies, Sa∣crifices, and Belief of the Chineses, p. 481 CHAP. XVII. Of the Original of the Kingdom of China, the Palace and Government of it, p. 490 CHAP. XVIII. Of the Royal Marriages, Nobility, Counsels, and Government of China in Peace and War, p. 494 CHAP. XIX. The Division of the Dominions the Portu∣gueses do, or have possessed in those Parts, commonly comprehended under
the General Name of India: Some Re∣marks on the Customs and Religion of those People, with some Account of the Christians of St. Thomas, and of the Island of Ceylon, p. 499 CHAP. XX. Of the Memory there is of the Preaching the Gospel of Christ in all Asia, and its Islands, particularly by the Apostle Saint Thomas in those Parts mentioned in this History, and of the Extirpation and Re∣paration of the same, p. 513
THE Portugues ASIA. TOM, II. PART I. CHAP. I. The Government of the Vice-Roy D. Garcia de Noronha, from the Year 1538, till the Year 1540, in the Reign of King John the Third. 1. IN the Month of November D. Gar∣cia de Noronha the Vice-Roy began 1538. to take upon him the Administra∣tion of Affairs in India. He had set out of Lisbon with 12 Sail, and Arrived with 11, and in them three Thousand fighting Men; many of Note. One of the Ships was never heard of, which was esteemed a Judgment; because it was full of Malefactors taken out of Gaols.
whose Punishment was changed into Trans∣portation. 2. Though this Fleet was fitted out chiefly to oppose the Turks, who now oppressed India; yet the Vice-Roy suffered them to batter Diu, without relieving it farther, than with the hopes of Relief. Antony de Sylva Meneses was the second that was sent thither with 24 small Vessels, and came late; yet contended with the Great Antony de Sil∣veyra for the Honour of that Victory: So much he valued, having been only a Witness of it. The Vice-Roy was ready to Sail for Diu with a Fleet of 160 Sail of several sorts, and in them five Thousand fighting Men and a 1000 Pieces of Cannon, when the Advice came that the Turks had raised the Siege. He was overjoy'd (it is not known for what) and discharging the Merchant-Ships that were ready to attend him retained Ninety. With these he set out for Diu, but sailed so slowly, that it appeared as if some ill Omen threatned his ruin there, since he avoided not only seeing of it in danger, but even now in Peace. Its quiet was di∣sturbed by Lurcan and Coje Zofar, who ranged about with Fire and Sword. The Vice-Roy heard of this at Dabul, and sent against them Martin Alfonso de Melo with his Galley, and the Vessels that went with An∣tony de Sylva. He went; but being hard set by the Enemy, was forced to take shelter under the Fort. The Vice-Roy at the same slow rate removed to Bacaim, nothing moved with the News he received from Diu.
It was murmured, he either consulted his Safety or his private Interest. But when least expected, he Steered thither on the first of Ianuary; when a Storm rising, which lasted eight days, dispersed the Fleet into several Ports; two Gallies, and some other Vessels, perished. 3. The first thing the Vice-Roy attended to, was to hear D. Gonzalo Vaz Confino, who came with five small Vessels from Onor, whither he had been sent by the late Go∣vernor Nuno de Cuna upon this occasion. One of Solyman's Gallies, that had been at Diu, was forcod into that Port; and 'twas thought that Queen (then a Widow) violated the Peace concluded with us by protecting it. Gonçalo Vaz calling her to account, she An∣swered, The Gally was there against her Will she not being in a condition to binder it; but should be glad it were taken by our Vessels. The Captain attempted it, and after a sharp Engagement was forced to desist, having lost 15 Men, and among them his Son Iames. He sus∣pected the Queen had assisted the Enemy, and refusing some Refreshment she sent for the wounded Men, returned some rash Words mixed with Threats. The Queen cleared her self, and again offered Peace, which was concluded, and some Portugueses left in that Port, to observe what the Queen did towards expelling the Turks. 4. We will conclude this Year with the memory of the Arrival of six Ships at Lis∣bon from India, rather for the Bones than the Riches they carried. In one of them
was the Body of the Great D. Vasco de Gama, which the King caused to be laid in his Tomb, with the greatest Magnificence that has been seen in this Kingdom. 5. This Year Peter de Faria the second time was made Commander of the famous Fort 1539. of Malaca. Immediately resorted to him Embassadors from the Neighbouring Kings, to congratulate and confirm Peace with us. The first was of the Bataas in Sumatra, up∣on the Ocean where the Island of Gold was imagined to be, and which we earnestly desired to discover; but that Design being later, we will then speak of this Embassy. The second was of Aaru in Sumatra; both demanded Assistance against him of Achem. Faria had not yet taken possession of the Command, which still D. Stephen de Gama held for a few Weeks. One excused himself, because his Power was expiring; the other, because he had not yet commenced. Whereas both ought to joyn in relieving that King, as well because his Fidelity me∣rited it, as because his Kingdom lay between Malaca and Achem, and served us for a Bulwark. Gama was most in fault, being in possession, and much pressed by Faria to grant it. But we shall soon see him more blameable, refusing then what he now urged should be granted. Such the Inconstancy of Man. 6. Afterwards Peter de Faria sent that King some Relief; but it was inconsidera∣ble and came late. The King of Achem sent against him his Brother-in-Law Heredim
Mahomet with 160 Vessels, all of Oars, and 12000 Fighting Men. He from the Mouth of the River Puneticam battered Aaru's For∣tifications, but to no effect; so he Landed and entred the Works: But was again beaten out, with loss of Men and Canon. The Be∣siegers persisting some days, lose 3000 Men. They bribe an Officer of the Besieged, who treacherously led the King to a dangerous place, where he was killed by a Musquet-Ball. The Enemy enters the Works, and putting all (even the Sick) to the Sword, flew 2000. The Body of the dead King was carried to Him of Achem, who caused it to be cut in pieces and boiled in Oil. 7. The Queen of Aaru, who was in a Wood, hearing the Death of her Husband, would have burnt her self alive; but being hindred, with about 300 Men fell upon the Achems, who were plundering the City, and slew 200. Being too weak to proceed, she returned to the Woods, and from thence made Excursions; but not able to hold out, went over to Malaca with about 600 per∣sons in her Retinue, in 16 Vessels. Peter de Faria sent his Son Alvaro, who had the Command of the Sea, to receive her upon the River with pomp and grandeur. 8. Faria treated her with much Respect; but kept her four Months with only Pro∣mises of Succour, till she Despairing, pub∣lickly reproached him for this Neglect, and he without any regard gave no other An∣swer, than Turning his Back. Private In∣terest drew away the Commander from
the performance of what he owed to a Royal Matron, who for her Husbands sake deserved our Aid, for her Misfortunes our Pity, and for her Merit. Respect. 9. The afflicted Widow went to the King of Ujantana, then at Bintam, who scandalized at Peter de Faria's Proceedings, offered Assistance, and Married her, to have the better Title to pretend to the Kingdom of Aaru. He sent his Embassador to Achem, to demand that Crown as his Right by Mar∣riage. The Tyrant would not hear the Embassador, nor receive the Present he brought, which is the greatest Affront a∣mong those Princes; but sent a Letter full of Reproaches, saying among other things, His Letter had been writ upon the Wedding-Table. 10. The King of Ujantana provoked by this Affront, immediately set out 200 Sail under the Command of his Admiral Lac∣xemena, who Anchored before the Fort of Puneticam, and carried it at the first Assault, killing 1400 Achems, and their Commander Morat Arraez a Turk. 11. By this time Heredim Mahomet was Sailing that way with such another Fleet, and in it 12000 Fighting Men. The two Fleets met, and after a sharp Engagement, Heredim being killed by a Canon-Ball, his Men dismayed, and most of the Fleet was taken by Lacxemena, most of the Achems slain, and only 14 Vessels got off.
12. The King of Achem caused the 14 Captains to be Beheaded, because they fled, and the Souldiers Beards to be cut off, and that upon pain of being sawed alive they should ever wear Womens Habit, with a sort of Tabor in their Hands; and when∣ever they affirmed any thing upon Oath, they should say, As I hope to see my Husband safe; or else, As I hope to see the Children I have bore prosper. This was put in Execution, and let it not seem strange; for in the time of King Sebastian, two Gentlemen for Cow∣ardise were Condemned either to be Be∣headed, or walk the City of Lisbon with a Spinning-Rock at their Girdle, and one of them chose this last. 13. But above 20 years after this, in 1564, 1564. the King of Ujantana possessing Aaru with∣out apprehension, he of Achem furiously fell upon and took Him and his Women, and put them all to death with barbarous Torments. The Kingdom of Aaru he gave to his eldest Son, who after died before Malaca, as shall appear in its place.
CHAP. II. Continues the Government of the Vice Roy, D. Garcia de Noronha. 1. LEt us return to our Vice-Roy, whom we left at Sea. After the danger and loss above related, he entred the Port of Diu with 50 Sail. He applauded, as was due the Bravery of Antony de Silveyra, re∣paired the Fort, and delivered it to Iames Lopez de Sousa, to whom the Command was given by the King. Let it suffice once for all to note, That these Commands are al∣ways given by the King, and so many Suc∣cessors named, that many of them are in their Graves before they succeed in the Post. A Treaty of Peace was set on foot, and concluded little to our advantage; which the Common Vogue (I know not whether Infallible) attributed to Covetous∣ness. 2. Ruy Lorenço de Tavora, Commander of Bazaim, was close shut up in his Fort by the Forces of the King of Cambaia, who were Masters of the Field, after having done all that could be expected from him. The Vice-Roy sent to his Relief Tristan de Ataide, late Commander of Malaca, with a Galeon and 3 Barques well Manned. The two being joyned, repulsed the Enemy with very con∣siderable loss of Men, Baggage and Repu∣tation.
Mean while the Vice-Roy prose∣cuted the Works at Diu, and sent Martin Alfonso de Melo to Command at Ormuz, Peter de Faria to Malaca the second time, and Michael Ferreyra a Gentleman of Worth, 70 years of Age, with 12 small Vessels and 400 Men, to assist the King of Cota in Cey∣lon against his Brother Madune Pandar, King of Ceitavaca, who distressed him. Ferreira did great damage in several Towns, aban∣doned by the Inhabitants. In the Port of Putulam he surprized Pate Marcar's Fleet, consisting of 16 Paraos, and easily gained them; and with the same Success carried the Works and Cannon ashoar, though de∣fended by 2000 Men. He Anchored in the Bay of Columbo with the Ships, Cannon and other Booty. Then he marched to Cota; thence towards Ceitavaca at the head of the Army of the King he Relieved, de∣stroying all before him; and seeking Ma∣dune, who had 6000 Men, saw them fly to the shelter of the Woods. Thence he sent to beg Peace, which was granted upon Condi∣tion he should send the Heads of some Morish Officers, especially Patè and Cunale Marcar. He opposed this Condition as much as he could, but there being no other Medium to appease his Adversary, consented, and killing them two and others, sent 9 Heads upon as many Spears, a Present so accepta∣ble to Ferreyra, that he presently made Peace between him and Cota, and went off himself with Honour.
3. The same time the Vice-Roy sent Fer∣dinand de Morales with a great Galeon, laden on the Kings account, to Trade at Pegu. As soon as arrived at that Port, the King won him with Promises and Favours, to aid him against the King of Brama, who invaded that Country with such a Power, that the two Armies consistssed of two Mil∣lions of Men and 10000 Elephants. Mo∣rales went into a Galliot, and Commanding the Fleet of Pegu, made great havock among the Enemies Ships. Brama came on by Land like a Torrent, carrying all before him, and his Fleet covering the River, though as great as Ganges. With this Power he easily gained the City and Kingdom of Pegu. Ferdinand Morales met the Fleet with his, in respect of the other scarce visible, at the Point Ginamarreca, where was a furious, bloody and desperate Fight. But the Pegu's overpowred by the Brama's deserted Morales, who alone in his Galeot maintained himself against the Enemies, performing Wonders with vast slaughter of them, till oppressed by the Multitude he was killed. But the memory of his Bravery still lives among those People. 4. The cause of this Revolt of Brama, who was Tributary to Pegu, was this: Above 30000 Brama's laboured in the King of Pegu's Works, this being one Condition of their Vassalage. The King used to Visit them with his Women, because they de∣lighted to see Foreigners and the notable Works, and never carried any other Com∣pany.
The Labourers (what Wickedness would not they in Idleness invent, who thought so much in their Labour) resolved to rob the Queens or Concubins, and sud∣denly murdered the King, stripped them and fled to their Country. Dacha Rupi, Heirto the deceased, was not only deprived of Means of Revenging this Villany, but even of maintaining himself, for many of his Subjects rebelled. Parà Mandarà, King of the Brama's, desiring to enlarge his Em∣pire, and seeing that his Pickaxes and Sho∣vels had opened a Way to his Cimiters and Standards, rushes out with that Violence, and over-runs the Kingdoms of the Lanjoes, Laos, Iangoma's, and others, that like his were Tributaries to Pegu. Thus this Ty∣rant possessed himself of his ancient King∣dom of Ava, that extends two Months Tra∣vel at ordinary Journeys, and contains 62 Cities. On the N. E. a Months Jour∣ney, is that of the Turks, containing as many Cities, which the King of Pegu had taken from him of Cathay. The Kingdom of Bimir lies West of Ava, of the same extent, and has 27 populous Cities. North of this that of Lanjam, of equal greatness, has 38 Cities, and great store of Gold and Silver. On the East is that of Mamprom, as great, but has only 8 Cities; on the East it borders on Cochinchina, on the South with Siam, afterwards conquered by Brama; and East of this is the great Kingdom of Cam∣bodia. All the Inhabitants of these Kingdoms are Pagans, and the most Superstitious of all
the East. They believe in one only God; but in time of need have recourse to many Idols. Of these they have some dedicated to the secret acts and necessities of Nature, in the same form they are performed. They hold the Immortality of the Soul; are zealous in giving Alms, and bear great Re∣verence to their Religious Men. These are very numerous, follow a Rule, and keep a Choir much like ours; they live upon what is given them that day, without keeping any thing for the next; they eat neither Fish nor Flesh, because they kill nothing that has Life; their Cloaths are yellow Cassocks and Cloaks, with Hats of oiled Paper; they observe Lent and Easter after the Christian manner. Whence may be inferred, That these are some Remains of the Doctrine of St. Thomas the Apostle, though mixed with many Errors. The People are all white, the Women very beautiful. Their Bodies are all wrought Blue with hot Irons down to the Knees. In general, they are not only not Civilized, but very Brutal. 5. The Vice-Roy being at Goa, D. Iohn de Albuquerque, a Spaniard, presented him King Iohn's Patent, by which all the Con∣quests from the Cape of Good Hope, to India, were made subject to his Diocess, with liberty to erect the Church of St. Catherine of that City into a Cathedral. The Patent was obeyed, and thus a Spaniard was the first Prelate of the Conquests; as if Spain had now taken the Power in Spirituals, it
was afterwards to possess in Temporals. At this time the Guzaratas streightned Ruy Lorenco de Tavora in Baçaim. He sallies with 350 Men, and put them to the rout. Coje Zofar comes on with his Men, and puts him into a dangerous condition. George de Lima, Commander of Chaul, having Notice hereof, sent 100 Men with speed, with which assistance the Enemy was repulsed, and time given to repair the damage re∣ceived. 6. Four Ships arrived in India from Por∣tugal, to return with Merchandize. In one of them the Great Antony de Sylveyra im∣barqued. The Flag-Ship perished in her Return, and was never heard of; but Sil∣veyra arrived safe at Lisbon, and had scarce Anchored, when the Great Men of the Court came aboard to Conduct him to the King and Princes, who with Joy waited to see and honour him: And no wonder, since all the Christian Princes visited him by their Embassadors, led by the admiration of his Glorious Exploits. The French Em∣bassador had his Picture drawn, which was hung up in the Gallery of Fame among the other Hero's. He was of a middle Stature, strong built; of a clear Judgment, ready Wit, a great Heart, and very Liberal. His Liberality did as much at Diu, as his Valour; for it is vain for a Miser ever to expect to purchase Glorious Victories: Yet this Virtue was prejudicial to him in Portugal; for the King having appointed him Governour of India, was disswaded by some, who said,
That Empire was too little for his Boun∣ty. 7. The late success of our Arms, chiefly in Cambaya, terrified all the Eastern Princes, our Enemies; so that Nizamaluco and Hidalcam immediately sent their Embassa∣dors to confirm the last Peace concluded with them. Zamori, to obtain the more favourable Reception with the Vice-Roy, took Emanuel de Brito, Commander of the Fort of Chale, for his Mediator. Brito pro∣mised his Interest, and accompanied the Embassador China Cutiale, who came to Goa with a splendid Retinue. The Vice-Roy received him with Courtesie and Grandeur. The Peace was Concluded much to our Credit. Had not the Vice-Roy fallen sick, he designed to go to Calicut, to perform the Ceremony of Swearing to the observation of the Articles; but sent his Son D. Alvaro to this purpose, under the Direction of dis∣creet Men, because he was young. They came to Panane with a numerous Fleet, where that Prince expected them, accom∣panied by the Kings of Chale and Tanor. They met with great demonstrations of Joy; the Peace was sworn, and lasted 30 years, which was one of the greatest Blessings we enjoyed in India. 8. About the beginning of Ianuary this Treaty was Concluded, and the Vice-Roy sent towards Cambaya, D. Peter de Castello∣branco, with 14 Sail, who returned to God without any Action of Note. Iohn de Se∣pulveda coming from Ormuz, and hearing
that Ruy Lorenço de Tavora was streightned by the Enemy in Baçaim, relieved him with diligence; and they forced the Enemy to leave the Field. Antony Carvallo, with 8 small Vessels, went to seek some Pirates that coursed between Baticala and Anchediva. They fled; but being overtaken, were de∣stroyed, their Ships burnt, and the Coun∣try laid waste. Carvallo returned with Ho∣nour to Goa, where the Vice-Roy growing so weak, he could not attend the Govern∣ment, he proposed a Worthy Person might be chose to supply his place, and then said, It should be no other than his Son D. Alvaro. This surprized all Men, being a violation of the Publick Liberty of Choice: And might have proved of dangerous Conse∣quence, had not his Death prevented it; for sometimes it is expedient One should dye for the good of the People. 9. The Vice-Roy being dead, the first Patent of Succession was opened, and Martin Alfonso de Sousa was therein named, who not long before was gone to Portugal. The second being opened, named D. Steven de Gama, who lived Indisposed without the City. All rejoyced at the Election, as few were grieved at the Death of the Prede∣cessor, who nevertheless was honourably Interr'd. His Picture represents him in the ancient Habit of Portugal, all Black lined in Crimson. He was the Third Vice-Roy, and Eleventh Governor, but first of the Name, and held it a Year and seven Months. His Son D. Alvaro came to Portugal, and
brought with him two Embassadors of the King of Cota. He desired of King Iohn, That in case he had no Son, his Grand-Child might be sworn King. To this effect the Embassadors brought his Image in Gold, which held in its Hand a Crown set with Jewels, for the King to Crown the Statue with. The King did it publickly, with much solemnity, and the Embassadors re∣turned well pleased, as dispatched to their Prince's satisfaction. CHAP. III. The Government of D. Stepen de Gama, from the Year 1540, till the Year 1542, in the Reign of King JOHN the Third. 1. DOn Stephen entred upon the Govern∣ment the beginning of April; he was Son of D. Vasco de Gama. The first thing he did, was to cause all he had to be publickly Valued, that it might not be thought afterwards he had got his Estate by that Government; at the end whereof it was found considerably diminished. The first Act was hard to be imitated; so the second, which was, That he advanced a great Sum to the Publick, seeing the Trea∣sury
exhausted. Next, he refitted the Fleet, which was laid up. The care of Temporals did not lessen his attention to Spirituals; so he founded the Colledge of St. Faith, for the Heathen Youths that are Converted: This was the second Colledge erected in that Empire, and the first at Goa; and the first Rector of it was that singular person the Vicar Gene∣ral Michael Vaz. He sent his Brother D. Christopher, young in years, but not in abi∣lity, to attend the Repairing the Ships at Cochin. He sent Advice to several Com∣manders, in order to be in a readiness to oppose the Rumes, who, it was said, were Sailing towards our Coasts. D. Christopher set out with 600 Men against the King of Porca and a Caymal of his, because they had robbed Sebastian de Sousa coming from Mal∣divia, and refused to make Restitution. He marched up the Country, slew many of the Enemy, and routed the rest; Beheaded the Caymal, and laid the Country waste; which produced an advantagious Peace, and an Agreement between this King and him of Pimienta. 2. Being advertized, That the Rumes could not set out this Year, he attended other Affairs. Emanuel de Vasconcelos was sent with 20 Sail to the Coast of Malabar; and Antony de Castelobranco with 30 to Cam∣baya. Scarce were they gone, when 4 Ships arrived from Portugal. They carried new Orders from the King, as dangerous as they were new; for whoever deprives Men of the hopes of Advancement, takes away
their Courage. Such were these, being the sullen thoughts of Ministers, who thinking all too little for themselves, think every thing too much for others. The Ships being sent to Cochin, to load and return home; D. Stephen prepared to set out for the Red Sea, in order to burn the Turkish Gallies at Zues; but first he sent some Commanders to the Post assigned them. 3. When Badur, King of Cambaya, made over the Lands of Baçaim to the Portu∣gueses, he took them from Bramaluco, a brave Man, to whom he had before given them. He thought the death of the Vice-Roy D. Garcia, furnished him a convenient opportunity to regain them by surprize. He set out of Damam, in the dead of Winter, with 300 Horse and 5000 Foot. Ruy Lorenço de Tavora, Commander of that Fort, considering if the Enemy once took footing, it would be hard to remove them; sets out with 650 Portugueses, the later number were Horse and Men of known Valour. The Foot he divided into four Battalions, and reserved to himself the 50 Horse and about 400 Blacks. Hearing the Enemy was lodged in the Village Bay∣lam, two Leagues up the Country, he resolved to surprize him at Noon, when they use to Bathe. Half a League from the place he halted to Rest the Men; and the Enemy having Intelligence thereof, came on with such diligence and secrecy, that they had put them to the Sword, had not Ferdinand de Silva, who led the Van with
much Bravery, given a check to their Fury. Antony de Sotomayor relieved him, already wounded in the Leg, was himself wounded and lost some Men; but did great Execution. This gave Tavora time to make ready, whose furious coming up made great havock. Our Men turning Back to Back, and facing the Enemy round, did Wonders. Ruy Lorenço, with his Horse ranging about, did them great harm, till falling on their Flank many were slain, the rest fled without hopes. 4. Next, he resolved to take a Great Ship of Bramaluco's, that was newly finished in the Dock of Agaçaim. He marched thither by Land, and D. Luis de Ataide went by Water. The latter by force of Arms made his way to the City, at such time as the other was reducing it to Ruins; break∣ing through a Multitude of Enemies, who endeavoured to stop his Fury, each of them lost six Men. D. Luis Landed, and both together cleared the Field, un∣peopled the City, and then set Fire to it. The Ship was carried to the Port of Baçaim, and for many years Traded to Lisbon. Bramaluco sued for Peace, and he being a suspected Subject of Cambaya, our Governour treated with that King, and by this means secured the former Peace, and obtained a Grant of half the Customs, whereof only the Third part was offered before.
5. Let us now return to the Fleet, in which the Governour was to sail. His great Liberality brought him more Men than he desired, whereof he chose the best. The Fleet consisted of 80 Sail of sundry sorts and sizes, and carried two Thousand Men. 6. While this Fleet was fitting, the King of Achem falling upon the King of the Bataas unexpectedly, made a great slaugh∣ter of his People, killing among the rest three Sons he rather adored than loved The King desirous of Revenge, sent his Brother-in-Law Embassadour to Peter de Faria, then Commanding at Malaca. The Embassy was to confirm the Peace before concluded, and desire assistance of Arms and Ammunition; and the better to obtain it, sent him a rich Present, and offered a free Trade in his Dominions, which abound in Gold, Pepper, Benjamin and Camphir. Faria, who was intent upon Profit, as well as his King's Service, plentifully supplied him with Arms and Ammunition, offering his utmost assistance, and entertaining the Embassadour with splendour. The King of Bataa attacked his Enemy with Reso∣lution; but was beaten after having almost gained the Victory, and retired with great Grief to his City Panaaju. Here he dis∣patched Pinto, sent thither by Faria to Trade, who narrowly escaped being lost in the River Parles of the Kingdom of Queda, by reason of the Revolution had then hapned in the City of that Name, the Court of
that Prince, who had murdered his Father and married his own Mother. The first he denyed, and pretended he had done the latter in Honour to her, having refused many considerable Matches. Pinto brought News of the Island del Oro, or of Gold, the great motive of his Voyage. 7. But now our Governour enters the Red Sea with his Fleet. He found most of the Islands and Cities abandoned, the Peo∣ple having had notice of his coming. The chief Island was Maçua▪ The principal City Suanquem, in about 19 Degrees of North Latitude, well built and rich. The King, who was fled a League up the Coun∣try, entertained the Governour with shews of Peace, that he might not destroy the Island. But the greatest damage was, that hereby he prevented the burning the Ships at Suez, gaining so much time as carried thither the News of this Design. The Governour in Revenge, marched with his Brother D. Christopher and 1000 Men, made a great slaughter, was Master of the Field, and took a great Booty: Then turning to the City, it was plundered, and private Men got four or five thousand Ducats each; then it was burnt to the ground. The Waters being shoal, the Governour resolved to go over to Alcoçer, and other places, with only sixteen Catures or Barges, the rest of the Fleet he sent to Maçua, under the Command of Lionel de Lima. There was a great dispute about who should go with D. Stephen, and he had much difficulty
to compose it. They set out of the Bay for this Reason called De los Agraviados, or Of the Offended. Many Gentlemen went in the Barges as private Souldiers, accepting any place so they were admitted; such was their desire to be in this Action. The number of Men was Two hundred and fifty. At Alconçer, which is in the Latitude of 25 Degrees, they did the same as had been done before at Suanquem. Crossing over to Tor or Toro, they took some Vessels of the Enemy. The Turks at first opposed the Landing, but some being slain, fled and abandoned the City, in which nothing of Value was found. The Governour would not burn it in reverence of St. Catharine, and a Monastery found there with Religious Men under her Invocation, which at their Instance he visited. To his great glory, he was the first European Commander that took that City, where he Knighted several, who held this Honour done them there in great esteem; and it was afterwards envied by the Great Emperour Charles the Fifth, as shall appear in its place. Our People, and those Religious testified great Regret at parting. They are of the Greek Church, and of the Order of St. Basil. The City is in the Latitude of 28 Degrees, and is thought by Learned Geographers, to be the ancient Elana.
8. The Governour went over to Suez, and after many brave Attempts made by several to sound and view the Harbour, which all failed, he resolved in Person and in open Day to discover the Gallies. He saw them, and desiring to do something considerable, Landed; the Enemies Shot flew from the Town, and 2000 Turkish Horse broke out of an Ambush; some few whereof were killed by our Canon; but our Men obliged to Retire, much grieved that this Voyage was disappointed. The Go∣vernour returned to his Fleet at Maçua, where he found the Severity of Emanuel de Gama had caused a Mutiny, which gave occasion to 80 Men to run away with a Ship, designing to go over to Ethiopia. They were met by a Captain of the King of Zeila, and after a vigorous Resistance, most of them killed. On a Gallows hung five, whom Gama had Executed, for concealing the design of the other 80; they at Execu∣tion summoned him to answer before the great Tribunal, and he within a Month run Mad, and died.
CHAP. IV. Goes on with the Government of D. Stephen de Gama. 1. AT this time Grada Hamed, King of the Country, called by some Geo∣graphers, Trogloditis, vulgarly Adel; having submitted himself to the Turk, to obtain Assistance of Men, casting off the Obedi∣ence he owed to the Emperour of Ethiopia, began furiously to over-run that Country with a Powerful Army. To excuse his Ambitious Designs, he laid hold of the Opportunity his Sovereigns tender years offered, and in a small time made himself Master of such part of Abassia, that the Emperour Atanad Sagad, or Claudius, was obliged to retire towards the Kingdom of Goiame, and his Mother Saban, or Elizabeth, with the Barnagais, got into the rugged Mountain Dama, a place naturally impreg∣nable, which rising to a prodigious height over a vast Plain, on its Top forms another almost Round and about a League over, in which is an indifferent Town, with Fruit and Cattel that maintains it. On one side only is a painful Ascent, till near the Top; from thence People are drawn up on Planks with Ropes, and in like manner let down.
2. The Queen reduced to this condition, hearing D. Stephen was in the Red-Sea, sent Barnagais Embassadour to him, to desire his Assistance against that Tyrant, who over-running her Kingdoms destroyed the ancient Churches, and carried away Slaves the Religious Men and Priests. The Em∣bassadour was heard, and received a favour∣able Answer. It was Resolved in Council to send Relief, and D. Christopher named Commander in Chief, of Four hundred Men it consisted of. He had with him eight Field-Pieces, many small Fire-Arms, and plenty of Ammunition. D. Iohn Ber∣mudez, the Patriarch, much desired by that Emperour to introduce the Roman Cere∣monies, accompanied them. The two Brothers D. Stephen and D. Christopher took leave on the shoar, never to meet again: Let us conduct the one into India, and then return to the other. 3. About Iuly the Governour was taken in such a violent Storm, that a Galliot sunk down right, a Barque was lost, and all the Fleet scattered. Many Religous Vows were made in the danger; but that of a private Souldier was pleasant, who Vowed he would marry D. Isabel de Sa, Daughter to D. Garcia de Sa, after Governour of India, and the applauded Beauty of all those parts, which afterwards gave pleasant matter of Dis∣course. At length the Governour arrived at Goa, and perceiving the Ships did not come from Portugal, and that he was exhausted with the charge of the last Fleets, he
loaded the Goods, provided for the Ships expected, on four Galeons, and sent them away. Peter de D. Castello Branco, late Governor of Ormuz, Commanded one of these Gal∣leons, and was taken by the French near the Islands Azores. 4. Nizamoxa desired to possess himself of the Forts of Sangaça and Carnala, held by two Subjects of Cambaya, on the Frontiers of that Kingdom, and formidable for their strength and situation. The Commanders Nicoda Amorgin, and Atridican being absent, he assaults and enters them. The Owners had recourse for the Recovery of them to D. Francis de Meneses, Commanding at Ba∣çaim, promising to hold them of us, if restored. He went in person with Three hundred Portugueses, a party of the Natives, and each of the Proprietors, Two hundred Men. They scaled the Fort Carnalia, and the Defendants in a pannick Fear aban∣doned it, some throwing themselves down the ocks, where they were beaten to pieces. Those of Sangaça, quitted it before it was demanded. D. Francis left the Moors in possession with Portugues Garrisons. Ni∣zamoxa in a Rage sent 5000 Men, who ruined all the Country about. The Own∣ers despairing of maintaining themselves against that Power, resigned their Title to those Forts to the Portugueses, and were received into Bacaim by D. Francis, who sent Supplies to the Forts, and resolved to maintain them.
5. Nizamoxa sends 6000 Men more, 1000 of them Musquetiers, and 800 Horse, well Armed. They beset Sangaça, and gave several Assaults that Day, wherein many of them were killed. The Portugueses stood all Day and Night at their Arms, and with much difficulty sent Advice to D. Francis at Bazaim, who came to their Relief with 160 Portugueses, 20 Horse and some Naiques, with 2000 Indians. Don Francis received a Letter from the Governour of Chaul, giving an account of the great Strength of the Enemy; and some of his Men coming to hear the Contents of it, he read quite the contrary to what really was in it, and marched on. A small Party of the Emy attacked the Van, to draw them into two Ambushes, each of which contained a Thousand Men. Some of the Portugueses fled. D. Francis with his twenty Horse resolved to keep a Pass, and he with some Gentlemen killed several. Those of the Ambush coming on, the Portugueses were forced to fight Back to Back. Those who at first fled fell into the second Ambush, and endeavouring to shun it returned to the first, with whom the others were engaged. The Moors thinking this had been a fresh Relief, fled; our Men took heart, and struck such Terrour into the Enemy, that running to Cangaça, they raised their Camp, leaving all the Ground about the Fort strowed with all sorts of Weapons and Ammunition. D. Francis returning from the Pursuit, found they had slain about 500,
and lost 20 Men. He stored the Forts, and went back to his Command. 6. I shall relate a thing scarce Credible, but most true: In this Action a Giant-like Portugues of prodigious Strength, called Trancoso, seeing a Moor well wrapped in a large Veil falling from his Head, laid hold of him thereby, as if he had been a Buckler, and so carried him before his Breast, re∣ceived upon him all the stroaks of the Ene∣mies Weapons, and thus continued, making him his Shield till the Fight was ended. 7. However, considering the keeping of those Forts was of greater Charge and Dan∣ger, than Advantage could be made of them; and because Nizamoxa, our Confe∣derate, offered for them 5000 Prdao's, besides the 2000 he paid before, the Go∣vernour resigned them up to him, to the great Regret of D. Francis de Meneses, who had gained and maintained them with so much Honour. The Garrisons marched out with all the usual Ceremonies. 8. When this hapned the Governour was at Chaul, in order to Visit the Nor∣thern Forts, he furnished them with all Necessaries. Being returned to Goa, he pro∣vided the Loading for the Ships that were detained at Moçambique, and received Em∣bassadors from Xeque Ismael of Persia, the Kings of Calicut and Cambaya, about impor∣tant Affairs, and were answered to their satisfaction.
9. Peter de Faria, who Commanded at Malaca, had received some Information of the Affairs and Seat of the Island del Oro, or of Gold, which was said to be in the Sea of the River Calandor, in five Degrees of South Latitude, 150 Leagues from the Point of Sumatra, encompassed with great Banks of Sand and strong Currents. He adver∣tized the King, who sent to that Discovery and Conquest Francis de Almeida, that died by the way. One Iames Cabral of Madera succeeded him, and the Governour Martin Alfonso de Sousa displaced him, to give that Charge to Hierom de Figueredo. He set out in the Year 1542, with 80 Men in three Ships, and laying aside the Enterprize, through Covetousness, went in search of some Ships of Meca on the Coast of Tanauçarim, took them, and in them a rich Booty; but re∣fusing them their shares, they tied his Hands and Feet and left him on the Sands at Gale, in the Island Ceylon. Thus for that time was the King disappointed of that Dis∣covery. 10. The King of Aaru, as well as he of the Bataas, was first Victorious against him of Achem, then beaten and killed. He had also received supplies of Arms and Am∣munition from Peter de Faria. This King of Achem's Design was to Conquer this Kingdom, which hindred his passage to Malaca by Land, being now convinced it was impossible to take it by Sea.
11. Some time after Faria sent his Fa∣ctor Pinto with a Present and Letter to the King of Patane, desiring him to procure the liberty of five Portugueses, then Slaves at Siam, to his Brother-in-Law. He was also to deliver Goods of the Value of Ten thousand Ducats to his Factor at Pam. They had made up Fifty thousand Crowns in Diamants, Pearls and Gold, and were ready to Sail next day, when a sudden Confusion hapning that Night, they lost all. There resided in that City an Embassadour from the King of Borneo, with his Wife. He catched the King of Pam lying with her, and killed him. The Death of the King being noised, the People ran about, not so much for Revenge, as to Rob. About Four thousand Men were presently butchered; the two Factors being robbed, and some of their Companions killed, esca∣ped and fled to Patane. They, and other Portugueses, asked leave of that King, to make Reprizal on three Vessels belonging to the Merchants of Pam, which came richly laden from China, and were then at Anchor 18 Leagues off in the River Calantam. He consented; they set out to the number of 80 in Three Ships, and after a sharp En∣gagement, took and brought the Vessels into Patane. The Prize was worth above Three hundred Thousand Ducats. The People of Patane pressed the King to take them from the Portugueses; but he urged the Fifty thousand Crowns ought to be made good. The Merchants accepted the Con∣dition,
paid the Mony, and continued their Voyage. CHAP. V. Sundry Exploits of Captain Antony Faria, from the Year 1540, till that of 1542, during the Government of D. Stephen de Gama. 1. WHile what is above-related hap∣pened the Three years last past, Antony de Faria and Sousa, did Actions de∣serving Eternal Fame; which I shall relate without affection to our Kindred, but with my usual sincerity. 2. Peter de Faria, Commander of Malaca, sent his Kinsman Antony de Faria and Sousa, to the King of Patane, to treat of impor∣tant Affairs, and preserve the Peace, which was very beneficial to that place. He car∣ried with him Goods to the Value of Twelve thousand Ducats, and finding no Sale for them there, sent them to the Port of Lugor, in the Kingdom of Siam, a place of great Trade, where he was informed they would go off to great advantage. He committed this Affair to Christopher Borallo, who being come to an Anchor in the
Mouth of that River, was surprized by Coja Hazem, a Moor of Guzarate, in a Vessel well stored with Artillery, and Manned with 80 Turks ad Moors. This Coja was a sworn Enemy to the Portugueses ever since Hector de Silveyra took a Ship of his in the Sea of Diu, killing his Father and two Brothers, and had kept his Oath, robbing and murthering all he met. 3. Borallo thought himself happy that he escaped falling into the Pyrats hands, lea∣ving his Vessel and swimming ashoar. He carried the News to Antony Faria at Patane, who Vowed, never to desist till he had destroyed that Moor. This was the Motive that led him to all those brave Actions. He fitted a small Vessel with 50 Men, and sailed from Patane on Saturday the 8th of May. 4. He steered North-East, towards the Kingdom of Champa, to examine that Coast, and saw the Island Pulo Condor, in the Latitude of 3 Degrees, 20 Minutes, then to the Eastward rounded one six Leagues from the Continent of Cambodia. Entring the Port of Bralapisam, he found there a Vessel of the Lequii, that had on board an Embassadour from the Prince of the Island Lossa, in the Latitude of 36 Degrees, to the King of Siam. As soon as this Vessel spied ours, they weighed Anchor and sailed. Faria sent after them a Chinese Pylot with a Civil Message, who brought back this remarkable Answer: We return Thanks; The time will come when our Nation shall have
commerce with that Captains in real Friendship, through the Law of the Supream God, whose Clemency is boundless, since by his death he gave life to all Mankind, and remains an everlasting Faith in the House of the Good: We confidently hold this will be when half the Times are past. He also brought a rich Ci∣miter in a Case of beaten Gold, the Hilt and Scabbord of the same set with some Pearls of value. The Captain would have made some Return, but the Vessel could not be overtaken. 5. Thence he Coasted to the River Pulo Cambier, which divides the Kingdoms of Cambodia and Tsiompa. At the Town Ca∣timpar, he was informed that great River had its beginning in the Lake Pinator (260 Leagues Westward in the Kingdom of Quitirvam) encompassed with high Moun∣tains, about which were 38 Towns, 13 of them considerable, one whereof was Xin∣caleu, where was a Gold Mine which yielded yearly 22 Millions of Crowns It belonged to four Lords, who had con∣tinual Wars about it. At Bauquerim, ano∣ther Mine of the best Diamonds. Treasures (according to the disposition of that Country) might be easily conquered by us. 6. Coasting along still, he Anchored in the Mouth of the River Toobasoy, fearing to go up it. Suddenly they spied a great Vessel, to which making signs of Peace, they received a rude Answer. Night com∣ing on, it was thought fit to expect the Day;
but in the Dark they discovered first one, then three Vessels, and Counterfeiting, they leapt 40 out of the first Vessel, boarded them, who were all slain, and their Vessel taken, the others burnt. A Black that was taken declared, He was a Christian and Slave to Gaspar de Melo, whom (with 26 Portugueses) that Pyrat had taken and dashed out their Brains, and that he had left another large Vessel richly laden in the Port with only a few Sea-men. This Pyrat was found to be Similau, and he (with the other Prisoners) were put to the same Death they delighted to give to others. As soon as Day appeared he took the other Vessel, and found the Booty in Silver only amounted to 60000 Ducats, besides other Goods. 7. Thus increased, he goes on to the River Tinacoreu, or Varela, where the Siam and Malaca Ships, Trading for China, bar∣ter their Goods for Gold, Calamba and Ivory, with which that Country abounds. He Anchored off of Tayquileu, a small Town; the Inhabitants called them the Bearded People; not but those People have Beards, but theirs are short and thin, ours then were at their full growth, and some reached to the Waste. By them the Cap∣tain was informed, that River was formerly called Tauralachim, that is, Great Stock, to express its Greatness; it is deep for Eighty Leagues up to Moncalor, then shallower and wide, where is a Country for Eight days Journey Unpeopled, by a multitude of Birds, 40 years before the great Kingdom
of the Chintaleuho's. In the middle of it is the great Lake Cunabetee, or Chiamay, whence spring four great Rivers. It is 180 Leagues in compass, beset with Mines of Silver, Copper, Tin and Lead. 8. Hence he directed his Course for the Island Hainan, passed in sight of Champiloo, in the Latitude of 13 Degrees, and at the entrance of the Bay of Cochinchina. Far∣ther on he discovered the Promontory Pu∣locampas, whence is seen the Point of Hai∣nan: Westward is a River, up which Bor∣rallo was sent in a small Vessel with 16 Men, who discovered at least Two thousand Sail, and a large Walled Town. On their Re∣turn they saw a large Vessel at Anchor. The Captain thinking it was Coja Hazem, fell upon and took it: But among the Pri∣soners he found an ancient Christian of Mount Sinai, who told him, it belonged to Quiay Tayjam a Pyrat, who had killed above a Hundred Portugueses, and now laid hid in the Fore-Castle with six or seven others, who were all killed there. In that Vessel were found 70000 Quintals or Hun∣dred weight of Pepper, much other Spice, Ivory, Tin, Wax and Powder, all valued at 60000 Crowns, besides good Cannon, Baggage and some Plate. In the Hold were nine Children, the biggest about nine years of Age, loaded with Irons and star∣ving with Hunger.
9. Coasting along the Island Hainan, he met some Fishers of Pear, whom he used courteously. They told him, the Island belonged to the King of China. Hence he went to the River Tanaquir, where two great Vessels suddenly fell upon Faria; both which, after a long Dispute, he took, having killed 80 of their Men, and lost 14, whereof one Portugues. After a while they heard lamentable Cries in the Hold of one of those Vessels; where they sound seven∣teen Prisoners, two of them Portugueses, One of which said, those Vessels belonged to Necoda Xicaulem, who after turning Chri∣stian at Malaca, and marrying a Portugues, had killed her and many more of her Country. His Body being found, was cut in pieces. The Booty was valued at 50000 Crowns. One of the Vessels was burnt, for want of Men to sail it; in both were seventeen Brass Guns, most of them with the Arms of Portugal. 10. He Anchored forty Leagues farther at C. Tilaumere, where came up with our four Vessels four others, in which was the Bride of a Noble young Man, who had promised to meet her there with a like number of Ships, and this mistake brought them to our Vessels. Three of them were taken, and in one of them the Bride. Some Seamen were chose, the rest set ashoar. They came to Mutipinam, and found it a most convenient place to sell their Prizes. The Governour of the City somewhat ob∣structed the Sale, so they were obliged to
hasten it; the Goods were paid for in Silver uncoyned, and amounted to Two hundred thousand Crowns. This was the beginning of the Year 1541. CHAP. VI. Continues the Exploits of Antony de Faria. 1. ANtony de Faria sailed on in search of the Port of Madel, in the Island Hainan, and by the way took some Prizes. Here he met Hinymilau, a bold Pyrat and a great Enemy to Christians, whom he delighted to put to cruel Deaths. They had a bloody Fight with, and at length took him. He gave a bold Relation of the Cruelties he had exercised against the Portugueses, and was therefore with four more immediately killed. The Prize was valued at 70000 Ducats. 2. This Action struck such a Terrour into many of those that were there in that River, that they sent a Message to Faria, offering him 30000 Crowns to take them into his Protection, calling him King of those Seas, and desiring of him Passes for their safe Trading therein. He received the Mony, and gave the Passes by only
Writing, of which in Twelve days time a Servant of his got 6000 Ducats. The Go∣vernour of the City offered to make him Admiral of those Seas for the King of China, with a Pension of 9000 Crowns, if he would serve. Such a Name had he already got in those parts. 3. They run all along this Coast with∣out any remarkable Occurrence, only saw many, though not large Towns, and a very fruitful Country; and were informed, there were there Mines of Silver, Tin, Salt-Peter, and Brimstone. The Souldiers now weary of looking after the Pyrat Coja Ha∣zem, demanded their shares of the Prizes, to be gone. They agreed, and directed their Course for the Kingdom of Siam. By a furious Storm they were wrecked upon the Island De los Ladrones, where of Five hun∣dred Men, only Eighty six got ashoar naked; of these Twenty eight were Portugueses. Here they were fifteen days almost without any thing to eat. A Bird flying over them with a Fish, dropt it, and afterwards they saw many others, that frighted at their Shouts, let fall their Prey; this, and a Deer they found killed by a Tyger, kept them awhile, but some died with Want. Being thus in despair, because the Island was not Inhabited, they discovered a small Vessel making to the shoar, where they cast An∣chor, and presently Thirty Men landed; some carried Wood and Water, and others diverted themselves. They were Chineses. Our Men agreeing together upon a sign,
run furiously, and possessed themselves of the Vessel, and with the same swiftness put to Sea. The Chineses were astonished at that unexpected Misfortune, and our Men overjoyed, finding in the Vessel good Provision and much Silk. In the Barque they found only an Old man and a Child, whose Father was left ashoar. 4. Sailing for Liampo in Port Xamoy, they took a Vessel of Chineses, and went to the Island Luxitay, where they stayed fifteen days, went over to the great Vessel, and Refitted the small one, and then went on. Upon the Coast of Lamau they discovered a great Vessel, which as it came near be∣gan to fire Fifteen great Guns it carried; but coming closer, they discovered Crosses and Portugues Habits on both sides; so they hailed each other, and the Vessel appeared to belong to Quiay Panjau, a Chinese, and great Friend to the Portugueses, whereof he had Thirty Souldiers aboard. He came to Farias's Vessel, and brought a present of Amber, Pearls, Gold and Silver, worth Two thousand Ducats. After other Dis∣course our Captain told him he was bound for Liampo, to furnish himself with Neces∣saries, in order to attempt the Mines of Quamjaparu, where he was told he might get a Treasure. Quiay Panjau offered to accompany him, demanding for himself only the Third part of what should be taken; which was agreed.
5. At the River Anay they Refitted, and came to Chincheo; where Faria hired 35 Portugueses he found there. Putting to Sea again, he found eight Portugueses naked and wounded in a Fisher-Boat. They told him, the Pyrat Coja Hazem had taken their Ship in the Port of the Island Cumbor, that it was worth Two hundred thousand Du∣cats, and that they with difficulty had escaped in that condition. Faria was over∣joyed to hear News of that Pyrat, and turned eight Leagues back to Layloo, to provide for the Fight. There he changed his Old Vessels for New, provided Arms, Ammunition and Men, paying generously for every thing. He had in his four Vessels Five hundred Men, whereof 95 Portu∣gueses, 40 Pieces of Cannon, 160 Mus∣quets, 6000 Darts, other Arms and much Ammunition. In a day and half he came to the Fisheries, where Coja Hazem had robbed those Portugueses, and was informed by Fishermen, that he was two Leagues off in the River Tinlau. To be sure, he sent one to discover him. 6. Before Day began a most furious Fight, and the Pyrats four Ships were reduced to great streights, when four small ones came to their relief. One of our Cannon was so well pointed, that it sank the first of them downright, and killed some Men in another. The Fight was renewed, and Coja encouraged his Men, till Faria board∣ing, gave him such a Cut over the Head as struck him down without sense, and
with another stroak Ham-strung him, that he could not rise. His Men gave our Cap∣tain three Wounds; but he being relieved, the Victory was compleat; it cost 43 Men, eight of them Portugueses. Of the Enemy almost 400 died, above half drowned, leap∣ing over to save themselves. 7. Faria Landed, and buried his dead. He found in a House 96 Men left there by Coja Hazem to be cured; these, though they cried for Mercy, he destroyed, firing the House. Here he performed a most Mag∣nanimous act, which was, That he restored the Portugues Ship to the Owners, and gave liberty to the Slaves, paying their Masters, as he had Vowed when he went on this Design. What booty remained to him was worth 100000 Crowns. 8. Sailing hence that Night, rose such a violent Storm, that Faria's Ship and another were cast away, and most of the Goods of the others was thrown Over-board, to the Value of Two hundred thousand Ducats. One hundred and eleven Men were lost, the Eleven Portugueses. Thirteen that esca∣ped drowning were carried Prisoners to Nauday, where Faria with the five remain∣ing Vessels came to an Anchor. He offered the Governour of the City Three thou∣sand Crowns for the Prisoners. The An∣swer was such, as obliged him to resolve to hazard all, to obtain by force what he could not effect with Courtesie and Mony Our Men were fearful of the greatness of the Enterprize; but he so encouraged them,
that they resolved to follow him. He had in all 470 Men, 60 of them Portugueses; out of the whole he chose 300 for this Action, which hapned the beginning of the Year 1542. 9. After sending another Civil Message, to which the Governour answered by hang∣ing the Messenger, he Landed; as they marched, Twelve thousand Foot and an hundred Horse came out of the City to meet them; our Musqueteers killed at least Three hundred of them, and pursued the rest to a Bridge that led into the City. The Governour was within on Horseback with Six hundred Men, maintaining the Pass till killed by a Shot; at that sight his Men fled; Faria pursues them with great slaughter till they run out at the other end of the Town. The City being plundered, he that got least was Rich; the remainder was consumed to Ashes. Our Victorious Captain returned, carrying the Prisoners he had recovered, and many beautiful Wo∣men. He lost eight Men, one a Portugues, and many wounded. Now he prosecutes his Voyage towards the Mines. 10. The Course was to Pulo Hindor, an Island not inhabited, where he designed to Winter and take some Rest; it was fifteen Leagues off. About the Islands of Commo∣lem he was attacked by two great Ships, in which were Two hundred Resolute Men, Commanded by the Pyrat Premata Gundel, a mortal Enemy to the Portugueses, to whom he had done great harm; but
thought now these had been Chinese Mer∣chants. One of the Pyrats boarding one of ours, Quiay Panjau came to his Relief with all his Sails abroad, and run so furi∣ously foul of the Pyrat, that they both sunk down right. Quiay and most of his Men were saved by the care of our Men. The Pyrat himself had boarded Faria, who was in danger of being lost; but at length was Victorious, killing 90 Moors that had en∣tred his Ship. Then he boarded the Ene∣mies, and put all to the Sword. This cost us 17 Men, five of them Portugueses, above forty were wounded, and Faria himself had two great Cuts and a hurt of a Spear. The Prize was valued at 120000 Ducats. They staid 20 Days in the Island Buncaleu, to cure the Wounded men. Thence they steered to the Gates of Liampo, which are two Islands three Leagues distant from the City of that Name, built by the Portu∣gueses, who there Governed in the nature of a Commonwealth.
CHAP. VII. Continues still the Exploits of Antony de Faria, in the Government of D. Stephen de Gama, and the Year 1942. 1. ANntony de Faria being Anchored at those Gates of Liampo, sent to ask leave of the Inhabitants to enter the Port: They returned a courteous Answer, praying him to defer it six days, till they had pre∣pared a House to entertain him. The term expired upon Sunday Morning, when he hoised Sail and went up accompanied with many Boats sent from the Town to receive him, with Three hundred Townsmen, who saluted and welcomed him, the River re∣sounding with the noise of Musical Instru∣ments. 2. About Two hundred Ships then in the Port were placed in two Lines, and made a Lane, through which as Faria passed, all the Cannon of the Vessels and ashoar were fired. Some Chineses seeing this great Re∣ception, asked Whether that was the King of Portugal's Brother, or near Kinsman; and were Answered, He was his Smiths Son; which so surprized them, they con∣cluded the Kingdom of Portugal to be the greatest in the World. From his Ship
Faria went into a Barge shaded with a Natural Chesnut Tree, the Fruit hanging on the Boughs, and was seated on a Silver Chair placed upon six Steps adorned with Gold. On the sides were six beautiful Maids richly clad, who sang and play'd sweetly; and thus he was carried to the Key. 3. Where was a richer Chair carried upon Mens shoulders, covered with a rich Canopy; about it 60 Halberdeers, and before it went 16 Men mounted on fine Horses, before these eight with Silver Maces, all in most rich Attire. Faria long refused to be thus carried, but was forced to subm, and in this manner came to a large Scaffold, covered with fine Tapistry. There he was placed on his Chair, and received the Complements of the Magi∣strates in the Name of the City, and of others for the Gentry. He received them standing, and returned their Courtesie with great Civility. 4. From the Key to the City, which was a considerable distance, was a Lane in nature of an Arbour of Chesnut, Pine and Laurel Trees, the Ground strewed with Flowers; at distances many Perfumes, se∣veral Companies of Dancers, and multi∣tudes of People all the way. At the En∣trance of the Town was a Castle built for this Occasion. On the Front of it, the Arms of the Faria's, which are Sanguin, a Tower Argent, in Base a Man torn to pieces. Faria being come hither, was received by
a Reverend Old man (attended by four Mace-Bearers) who after some Ceremonies made a long Speech in praise of his Family, and concluded extolling his own Actions, and welcoming him to that place. 5. The Speech ended, the old Orator in the Name of the City, offered him five Chests full of Silver Bars, to the Value of Twenty thousand pieces of Eight, which he could not be prevailed with to accept of; but returned his Thanks, and promised to endeavour in part to deserve the Honours they did him. Then he went on foot through many sightly Arches to our Ladies Church, where (under a Canopy) he heard Mass, and a Sermon of his own Praises. 6. Hence he was conducted by above a Thousand Portugueses, to a large place that was before the House, provided for his Entertainment. This place was shaded with variety of Trees set, as if they had grown there, the Ground strewed with Flowers and sweet Herbs. In the middle were three long Tables richly covered, and Side-boards. Faria being seated, all departed, but about 80 who were to Dine there, and 50 Souldiers. At a distance stood the Halberdeers to keep off the People. As soon as seated, the Musick began to play.
7. Presently eight beautiful Maids ap∣peared playing on Instruments and Danc∣ing, eight others stood by him singing. The Dishes were brought by fine Women, and set on by Men. The Plenty and Cost∣liness was great. After Dinner they went to another place, where there was a Bull-Feast, and some wild Horses among them; at the death of every one followed Danc∣ing, Musick, and other Divertisements. CHAP. VIII. Concludes with the Actions of Antony de Faria. 1. HEre Faria continued five Months always entertained with great splendour, and had Dogs and Horses to go a Hunting, that place being stored with all sorts of Game. The time being come to set out for the Mines of Quamgiparu, the Chinese Quiay Panjau, who was to accom∣pany him in that Voyage, was snatched away by a violent Sickness. All things were in forwardness when the Chinese, Similau, dissuaded Faria from that Enter∣prize, representing the great Difficulties, and proposing other Undertakings much more easie, and no less beneficial. Among
the rest he said Great things of the Island Calempluy, where were the ancient Monu∣ments of the Kings of China, and in them great Treasures. To this he soon gave Ear; for Covetousness is of great force to per∣swade, even in a Man so generous and un∣derstanding as he was. Happy if he had returned to India, satisfied with his past Vi∣ctories and Triumph. 2. About the middle of May he set Sail with Similau in two Galliots, in which were 146 Men, 52 of them Portugueses, and among them the Priest Iames Lobato. Next day they discovered the Islands of Nan∣guitur, and then entred Seas till then un∣known to Portugueses. Crossing a Gulph of 40 Leagues, they discovered the high Mountain Nangalaci, and held on their Course Northward. At the end of Ten days they Anchored in a River where they saw White People, like the Chineses, but differing in Language, and could never prevail to have any commerce with them. After Eight days sailing they entred the Streight of Silcapaquim, in which they spent five days in sight of many populous Towns. But this Course appearing dangerous, they steered another by the advice of Similau. This was up the River Humhepadam, which they entred, and to the West saw the Mountain Fangus, and thirteen days after the Bay Buxipalem, in the Latitude of 30 Degrees, which produces Fish, Serpents and Crocodils of wonderful sorts and greatness, and many Sea-Horses. Farther on they
came into the Bay of Calindam, girt with high Mountains covered with Trees, from them four great Rivers fall into the Sea. 3. Next they sailed under Botinasora, a Mountain abounding in Lions, Abada's, Tygers, Ounces, and other wild Beasts; then Gangitann, the habitation of the Giga∣hui, a wild Gigantick People, some ten, some eleven Spans high, of which they saw fourteen of both Sexes: They have good Complexions, being white and red; but ill Features. Faria gave them some Porcelane Dishes and Silk, for which they appeared thankful, but could not be understood, and brought some Cows and a Deer. At length they came into the Bay of Nanking, and within six days to the great City Pamor whose Bay was almost hid under Three thousand Vessels. Fearing Danger here, they stood off and came to Tanquilem, where Similau and Thirty six Chinese Sea∣men run away for fear; because our Cap∣tain weary of the Voyage, and finding he could give no good Account where they were, had threatned to kill him. He was not so ignorant; but terrified with the ill Usage of the Portugueses he knew not what he said, and they feared either he knew not the Coast, or designed to betray them. It was a great Error, to believe him at Liampo, and use him ill at Nanking, where they had most need of him. In fine, They gave themselves for lost, not know∣ing where they were, till some of the Na∣tives
informed them, they were but Ten Leagues from the Island Calempluy, which made them repent the wrong they had done Similau. 4. Turning Cape Guinaytarau (after a te∣dious Voyage of two Months and a half) they discovered in the middle of the River the Island. It is plain, and to appearance four Miles in compass. It was then Night: Next Morning Faria went about it with his Galliots, and saw it was enclosed with a Wall of Jasper Stone, which were joyned so close, it appeared all of a piece. It rose about 19 Foot above the superficies of the Water, and was terrassed within. The Top of the Wall was a massy Twist: Upon it were Brass Rails, and at distances little Columns, on which were the Statues of Women with Balls in their Hands, all of the same Metal. At some distance from these appeared several Figures of Iron of Monstrous shape, that seemed to give one another their Hands. Farther yet were several curious Arches of Stone of many Colours: Within was seen afterwards a de∣lightful variety of small Woods of Orange Trees; among which were 366 Chappels, dedicated to the Gods of the Year. On one side a great Building, not all of a piece, but divided into seven parts, all over glit∣tering with Gold.
5. In the Evening the Captain entred the Island at one of its eight Gates, with sixty Men, four of them Portugueses. En∣tring one of the Chappels, they saw an Old Man, in appearance an hundred years of Age, who with the fright of seeing them fell down; but recovering, and seeing the Souldiers take out the Bars of Silver out of the Tombs, he rebuked the Captain, giving him Advice to be saved. Faria courteously took his leave, having Information what was in the other Chappels, and resolving next day to plunder them all, he retired to his Ships with the Silver taken in this, which was a considerable quantity. 6. About Midnight there appeared Lights upon the Top of the Great Building, and Bells began to ring throughout the Island. Faria was advised to be gone, being they were discovered; but he returned to the Island with only six Men, and could see no more than what he had from his Vessels. Being returned aboard, all protested he ought to retire, and he no longer able to withstand the Mutiny; said, He was obliged in Honour to see what he fled from; and went ashoar again with the same six Men. He entred a Chappel and found two Old Men, whom he brought away with some Candlesticks and a Silver Idol he found, and immediately left that place. He understood by the Old Men, that the Alarum was given, and the Island would soon be relieved; that the first Hermit had given Notice. Then Faria found, how
much he had erred in not bringing him away, as he was Advised. 7. He went away in a Passion, that he should lose that Treasure through his own fault; and having sailed almost a Month, one Night, being the fifth of August, there arose such a terrible Storm; that his Galliot was swallowed up, as was guessed by those in the other by the miserable Cries; for they could not see it. A few days after the other also perished, only fourteen of them escaping. Thus ended that brave Com∣mander; doubtless a just Judgment for the Robbery he designed to commit. 8. No less Unfortunate was the End of the City Liampo, where this Captain had been so Nobly received, and was the effect of a base and insatiable Avarice. Lancelot Pereyra, a Judge of that City having lost a Thousand Ducats by the Chineses, went out with a Body to rob and plunder others, as if this might be done though they have been the Debtors. This barbarous, hellish Action, brought the Governour of that Pro∣vince with Threescore thousand Men upon that City, which in four hours time was burnt, with Eighty Ships that were in the Port; Twelve thousand Men killed, of them a Thousand Portugueses, and three Millions of Gold lost. Scarce any thing was left, but the bare Memory of Liampo; but it appeared that whatever the Portugueses gained by their Valour, they lost by their Covetousness. It was admirably said of one of those we call Baoarians, hearing
the Actions of the Portugueses in Asia cele∣brated: His Words were these; Let them go on; for whatever they gain as Couragious Soul∣diers, they will lose as Covetous Merchants: They now conquer Asia, Asia will soon conquer them. Who was most Barbarous; he that said this, or they who did what he said? 9. Liampo had above Three thousand Inhabitants, all Catholicks, and almost half Portugueses. Those who escaped that Storm, though quite discredited among the Chi∣neses, obtained leave with great Presents, in the Year 1547, to Settle in the Port of Chincheo; where there was a Village, which began to flourish with a rich Trade; but came to the same End as the other, as shall appear the Year 1549.
CHAP. IX. Continues the Government of D. Stephen de Gama, and contains the Actions of his Brother Don Christopher in Ethio∣pia. 1. WHilst this hapned in India and China, Don Christopher de Gama marched through Ethiopia, led by that Bar∣nagais, who came as Embassadour from the Queen Mother, to desire favour of the Go∣vernour D. Stephen. The Heat the Men en∣dured was excessive, though they lay by the Day, and marched by Night. A Week was spent in passing over a Rugged Moun∣tain, whence they descended into a most pleasant Plain Country, watered by many Rivulets. Through this they marched in two days to the City Barua, Metropolis of the Province Barnagasso; though damaged by the late Invasion, yet of sightly Buildings, divided by a great River, encompassed with good Villages and Country-houses. At the Gates they were received by several Reli∣gious Men singing a Litany, one of which made a Speech to Welcom them, and extol their Generosity in coming to their relief; after which our Men visited the Church, and Encamped.
2. Don Christopher sent Advice of his Ar∣rival to the Emperour, who was far off; and to the Queen Mother, who was near. He desired of her, to leave that Mountain and put her self under his guard. Barnagais was sent to Conduct her with two Companies of Portugueses. She came with a great Retinue of Women and Servants. Our Men were drawn out to receive her, and the Cannon fired. The Queen sat upon a Mule, whose Trappings reached the ground, and she was hid by Curtins fixed to the Saddle; her Cloathing was white, on her Shoulders a short black Mantle with gold Fringes; and from her white Head-Cloaths fell a Veil that covered her Face. Barnagais led the Mule, his Arm naked, and a Tygers Skin upon his Shoulders, (a Token of Re∣spect) a Lord on each side in the same Garb. She opened the Curtains to see the Portugueses, and lifted her Veil to be seen by D. Christopher. The Reception on both sides was Courteous. Afterwards D. Chri∣stopher went to Visit Her, and by Advice of the Ethiopians it was resolved to Winter there, and expect the Emperour's An∣swer. 3. The Answer came, expressing his Joy for the Arrival of the Portugueses, and desiring D. Christopher to march the begin∣ning of Summer. It was put in execution: Some Light Horse led the Van to discover; then followed the Artillery, next the Bag∣gage; after it the Queen, guarded by fifty Portugues Musqueteers. D. Christopher
brought up the Reer; Barnagais and his Officers made up the Flanks. In eight days they came to the Mountain Ganè, of most difficult ascent; on the Top of it was a City, and on the highest Cliff a Chappel, near which a House, hung round with Three hundred embalmed Bodies, sewed up in Hides, which being rent with Age shewed the Bodies white and uncorrupt. Some were of Opinion they were Roman Conquerors of that Country; others, and among them the Patriarch, supposed them to be Martyrs. At the sight of the Por∣tugueses, many of the People resorted to the Queen. 4. Don Christopher marched on to the Mountain Canete, well Watered and stored with Cattle, impregnable by Nature, and yet strengthned by Art. Formerly the Em∣perours were Crowned here; now it was held for the Tyrant by a Thousand Men, who at times came down to Ravage the Country. D. Christopher, contrary to the Advice of the Queen and her Counsel, resolved to assault that Den of Thieves. He divided his Men into three parts, and led the one himself, and boldly assaulted the Three Passes that led to it; but were forced this day to desist, by reason of the great Stones the Enemy rouled down upon them. Having heared Mass on Candlemass∣day, they returned to the Assault, playing their Cannon, and lost some Men by the Stones thrown down; yet they came to the first Gates and broke them open, making
their way with much slaughter and loss of three Men to the second Gates. Those who were within these and the third Gates, seeing so few of our Men, opened them, and the Portugueses as freely rushed in; where was a hot Dispute, till D. Christopher and the others coming up, pressed the Ene∣my so hard, that many of them threw themselves headlong down the Rocks. Many Women and Children were taken, and there was a considerable Plunder. The Queen and her Retinue went up with a general Admiration; the Ethiopians having always held that Fort to be impregnable. The Patriarch blessed a Mosque, dedicating it to our Lady, where Mass was cele∣brated with great Joy to both Peo∣ple. 5. The Mountain being provided, and garrisoned under the Command of an Ethiopian, the Army marched. As they entred the Country of the Rebel Iarse, he submitted himself to the Queen, and brought his Men to her Service, thinking nothing could withstand those who had conquered Nature; in such Esteem did they hold the taking the Mountain. The King of Zeila came on now, covering the Plains and Hills with his Numbers, and joyful to have to do with our Men. D. Christopher Encamped in good Order near a Mountain, both Armies in sight. Palm Sunday and Monday were spent in Skirmishing with equal Loss, only the Portugueses had so much the Advantage,
that the Enemy retired to their Works. D. Christopher was forced to move his Camp for want of some necessaries, chiefly Wa∣ter. The King of Zeila perceiving their motion from the higher Ground, came down to encompass our Men, who marched in good Order, pouring their Shot in upon the Enemy: Who pressing on, D. Christo∣pher ordered Emanuel de Cuna with his Men to face them, who performed it so suc∣cessfully, that he obliged a Body of Turks to retire, after losing many of their Men. They rallied, and coming on again had somewhat distressed him, till D. Christopher came in person to their Relief, fighting with such Resolution, that he felt not he was wounded in the Leg. The King him∣self came on, thinking to put an end to the days Action, and it turned to his loss; for our Cannon cut off many of his Men. D. Christopher was in danger of being slain, but still lost no Courage, and the Fight continued till the Tyrant was struck down by a shot which pierced his Thigh. His Men furled their Colours, and fled with him, as they thought dead, though he was alive. This Victory cost eleven Portu∣gueses, two of them Men of Note. The Queen her self with great alacrity tend∣ed Don Christopher and all the wounded Men. 6. After a Weeks respit, the Army marched towards the Enemy, who was Encamped at no great distance, and came to meet them, carrying their King in an
open Chair. It was Resolutely fought on both sides. A Turkish Captain with fifty Horse thinking to recover the Honour lost the other day, Charged in the midst of our Men, and was entirely cut off. D▪ Chri∣stopher mounting on Horseback, led his Men with such fury into the Heat of the Battle, that he obliged the Enemy with great slaughter to turn their Backs. The King had infallibly been taken, had there been more Horse to pursue him. Eight Portugueses were lost in this Action: The Victorious Army marching down to a plea∣sant River, found it possessed by the Enemy, who immediately quitted it, the King flying at the sight of our Men. 7. The King sent an Embassy to the Bassa of Zibit, acquainting him with his Distress: He mollified by Presents, sent him almost a Thousand Turkish Mus∣queteers. D. Christopher Wintered in the City Ofar, expecting the Emperour. Here a Jew proposed, That if he wanted Horses and Mules, he would shew him a Moun∣tain not far off inhabited by Jews, where there was store of both. The King of Zeyla had a Garrison of Four hundred Men there. D. Christopher having enquired into the truth of this Information, marched with two Companies of his own, and some Ethiopians, to the Foot of the Mountain, which is twelve Leagues about. In the Ascent some Moors, who guarded the Passes, were killed. On the Top met him the Captain with all his Men. D. Christopher
immediately rnnning at, struck him down dead with his Lance. Our Shot being poured in among the Moors, they soon quitted the place and fled, leaving many dead. Great quantity of Horses and Mules were found, and about eight Thousand Jews, who lived in six or seven Villages on that Mountain, were brought under Obe∣dience. There was a Tradition, That these Jews dispersed about Ethiopia and Nubia, are descended from some of the dispersion of the Ten Tribes. 8. The Jew, who led our Men, astonished at their Valour, was Converted and Baptized, and by common Consent appointed Go∣vernour of that Mountain, which being called before Caloa, was after known by the Name of the Iews Mountain. The second day after D. Christopher returned to the Army; the King of Zeila appeared now more bold with the increase of the Turkish Musqueteers. D. Christopher's Youth now transported him as well as his Valour: For whereas he ought to have retired to a Mountain till the Emperour joyned him, it being impossible to withstand so great a force, he never considered it till it was too late. On the 29th of August the Turks gave the Onset, and were repulsed by D. Christo∣pher, who lost four Men and went off wounded in the Leg: Emanuel de Cuna did the like Service, with loss of three Men. Francis de Abreu fighting like a Lion was killed, and his Brother Humphry going to fetch him off, fell down dead upon him.
D. Christopher returns like a furious Tyger, and performed Wonders, till a Musquet-Ball broke his Arm; a couragious Souldier carried him off. He was scarce drest, when he heard Fonseca and Vello were killed, and the Enemy entred the Works. He caused himself to be carried where the greatest Danger was: But the Tyrant being now undoubtedly Victorious, some of our Men fled, as did the Patriarch and the Queen on Fleet Mares, each taking a different Way, he for fear and she by choice. D. Christo∣pher sent after and obliged her to come back, because her absence brought utter Ruin. But at length seeing all lost, in de∣spair he grasped his Sword in the Left Hand and said, Let who will follow me, for I am going to dye amidst the Enemies. He was drawn from that Resolution by meer force, and carried out of the Field with only fourteen Men, and the Queen and Barna∣gais among them, seeking some place of Refuge. The Night being dark they lost the Way; but the Queen and Bar∣nagais hit it better, taking up a Moun∣tain. D. Christopher wandring with his Companions, fell into the hands of the Enemy, who carried him to the Tyrant, who coveted no greater Prize. The Victors cruelly run, hewing those that had any Life left them, which moved one to set fire to a quantity of Powder that was in one of the Queens Tents, and blew up all that were about it.
9. The King overjoyed that D. Christo∣pher was taken, caused him to be brought to his presence, and said, What would you have done with me, had I been defeated? He Answered: I would cut off your Head, and divide your Body, and the Limbs should be set up in Publick places for a Terrour to other Tyrants. The King caused him to be buf∣feted with his Slaves Buskins, his Body to be bathed in melted Wax, and his Beard wove with waxed Threads, which were fired, and he led through the Army. Being brought back, the King himself cut off his Head; his Body was quartered and set upon Poles. It is said, Where the Head fell there gushed out a Spring, the Water whereof drank cured many Diseases: The same hour, the Air being calm, a Tree was tore out by the Roots in the Garden of certain Religious Men; and afterwards the same Hour the Emperour having vanquished this Tyrant, caused his Head to be struck off; the Tree that was then dry, re-planted it self in the same place, and was covered with Leaves. 10. Most of the Portugueses that were taken, perished in Slavery or Dungeons. Alfonso Chaldeira, with Thirty, followed the Queen. Emanuel de Cuna, with Forty, got to Barnagasso, and was well received. Others followed the Patriarch; they made up in all One hundred and thirty: Whereof Ninety (because Cuna with his Forty Men were too far off) went to the Emperour, who then drew near, and very much la∣mented
the slaughter of that Body, and loss of such a Commander. What those Portugueses did in the Service of that Prince afterwards, does not belong to this place; because the Affairs of India, whence we have made a long digression call upon us. CHAP. X. The End of the Government of D. Ste∣phen de Gama. 1. THe Governour D. Stephen perceiving the Ships from Portugal stayed long, and guessing they were at Mozambique, re∣solved to make use of the Merchandize they brought. To this purpose he sent Luis de Mendez to Vasconcelos, in a Galley, to give Orders about it, and to Advertize him, Whether a Successor was sent him in those Ships. He guessed not ill; for Martin Al∣fonso de Sousa sent to succeed him with five Ships, was detained at Mozambique by the Weather, and a tedious Sickness. 2. This Fleet was happy, in that it brought over to India one of the first Fa∣thers of the Society of Iesus; as well in respect of Time, as that he was one of the Chief in Piety and Virtue. This was
the Famous St. Francis Xaverius, who la∣boured much, and was very successful in converting those Infidels. 3. St. Francis was the first that had in the East, the Dignity of Apostolick Legate in all Asia. But because we shall hereafter have occasion to touch upon his great Virtues, and wonderful Actions, let this suffice here as to the time of his coming. 4. Most of them that enter upon the Government of India, look upon it as no small happiness, if they can send off their Predecessor with Disgrace, and therefore endeavour to come upon them by way of surprize. Martin Alfonso desiring to com∣pass that, commanded Leuis Mendez not to acquaint D. Stephen, that he had found him at Mozambique. But Mendez, who was D. Stephens Kinsman, and resolved to do his Duty, sent a man to carry him Advice. Martin Alfonso heard of it, and imprisoned him. He met with bad Weather in his Way to Goa, and light upon Iames Suarez de Melo, called the Gallego, who flying a Sen∣tence of Death he had incurred, was passed to India, and with 120 Men in two Vessels, was become a Pyrat. Him Martin Alfonso received and pardoned, because he pretend∣ed he could say much against D. Stephen. Much he might have said that was honou∣rable, very little to his Discredit. What ought to have procured him severer Punish∣ment, was the cause of his favourable Re∣ception. Let us remember this Suarez, en∣deavouring to Rise more than was due to
him, by these hellish Contrivances; and we shall hereafter see him rise to the highest pitch, and then cast down to the depth of Misery. 5. Martin Alfonso de Sousa being come to an Anchor in the Port of Goa, sent Advice of his Arrival to D. Stephen at a very un∣seasonable Hour, being the dead of Night, and that in such manner, as well signified the Ill-will he bore him. Which obliged D. Stephen to send an Answer unworthy of them both, and to make him a very un∣easie Visit, when he resigned up the Go∣vernment to him. Martin Alfonso sound nothing to lay to the Charge of D. Stephen, as those desired, who set him upon it; for he being a Gentleman of much Honour, could never desire it of himself. 6. But whereas he ought to have check∣ed himself, finding nothing against him, he grew the more obstinate: For it is Natural to men in the wrong to persist, and believe they take Wing when they are deepest stuck in the Mire. He vented his Malice in allowing him the worst Conveniences for his Voyage, and D. Stephen was so disgusted at these Proceedings, that he never saw his Face after he resigned the Sword to him. At length he Arrived in Portugal; for his Enemies had no power on the Seas and Winds, and was received with general Joy of the Court, and with Favour by the King; who offering him a Wife, he refused her, and thereupon (as others for Accepting) was put out of Favour. He
obtained leave, and went to live at Venice; for Portugal was always ready to despise or banish Great Men. The Emperour Charles the Fifth persuaded him to return to his Country, assuring him of his Prince's Fa∣vour. He returned and found none; for Princes are more fixed in punishing a little omitted to please, than in rewarding much done to serve them. 7. This is what D. Stephen did in India; this the Reward he had for Governing it well. He was of a middle Stature, thick and strong, a thick Beard and black Hair, his Complexion ruddy. He was very Libe∣ral, and not a little Positive, but not with∣out cause: A great Horseman. In the number of Governours the Twelfth, first of the Name, second of the Sirname, and held it two years and a Month. He made an Inventory of what he was worth when he entred upon the Government, and so when he left it, and was found 40000 Crowns the worse, the full Value having been 200000. On his Tomb is only this Epitaph, HE THAT MADE KNIGHTS ON MOUNT SINAI ENDED HERE. So much did he value the Honour of that Action, and not without Reason.
CHAP. XI. The Government of Martin Alfonso de Sousa, from the Year 1542, till the Year 1545, in the Reign of King JOHN the Third. 1. THis Chapter must begin with what hapned in the time of both Go∣vernours, one ending and the other com∣mencing. Homaum Paxa, King of the Mogols prosecuting his Ambitious Designs of enlarging his Empire, undertook the Conquest of the Kingdom of Patane, then possessed by Xa Holan, whom Fortune had once much favoured, and now seemed to neglect. Nothing withstood the Mogol, till he came to the City Xamanea, before which he fat down. His Enemy encamped a League off on the other side of Ganges, and entertained him with continual Skir∣mishes, generally with equal Loss. Homaum still pressed, and Halon despairing of re∣moving him by open Force, had recourse to Stratagem, wherein he was singular. He endeavoured to protract the Time the best he could, till the Season that Ganges over∣flows, which generally drowns all the Plain for the space of eight Leagues. Mean while he dug vast Ponds to receive the
River, and then dammed it up; and as the Floods began to swell he broke the Damms, which caused the Waters to spread abroad with the greater violence. us all on a sudden, when the Mogol least thought of it, they gushed out upon his Army, and before he imagined it swallowed up 50000 of his Men, and an infinite quantity of Bag∣gage. 2. Homaum, by the help of a Carrier, escaped upon a Mule; and the Queen, who was with Child, on an Elephant. The Queen was delivered of a Daughter, and fearing her Husband should hate her be∣cause it was not a Son, she changed it for one the Wife of a Cornaca had then brought forth. Cornaca's are the Men that govern the Elephants. Some said the Child, thought to be changed, was got on the Queen by the Cornaca, there being a suspicion he had had to do with her upon the Elephant. There is no need of disputing the Possibility of the thing; for on the Elephants are Castles, those Castles loansom, and Solitude and Idleness produce wanton Thoughts. Queens are Women, and Women have ready Wits. However it was, Homaum esteemed the Son as his own, and he was called Gelaldim Hacbar. As to his person, he was more like the Cornaca, than Homaum; but the Endowments of his Mind were equal with the Greatest of Men. This Prince, when he came to the Crown, being offended at the Innundations of Ganges, prevented them by drawing it into several
Channels, and built there a Palace of such Wonderful structure, that Ten thousand Men spent Thirty years in the Work. Ho∣maum being come to the City Delhi, cloathed the Carryer in Royal Robes, entertaining him with a splendid Train, and made him sit three days in the Regal Throne; during which time he enjoyed the whole Revenue of the Crown, and had the full power of Government. From this time forward a Mule was stamped upon all his Coyn, that even the Beast might not pass un∣rewarded. 3. About the same time Antony de Mota, Francis Zeymoto, and Antony Peixoto, sailing for China, were thrown by a Storm among the Islands of Nipongi, or Nifon; by the Chineses called Gipon, and by us Iapan. In one of these they were well received, and had the Honour to be the first that dis∣covered them, though accidentally. They lye far Eastward of all India, opposite to China, between 30 and 40 Degrees of North Latitude. They are many; the Principal, Nipongi, or Iapan, in which is the City Meaco, the Imperial Court. According to the Natives, the Length of the Island is 366 Leagues, according to our computation One hundred less: It is divided into Fifty six Governments. The Chief Islands about it are Cikoko, Tokoesi, Sando, Sisime, Bacasa, Vuoqui, Taquixima and Firando. The Japans have the vain Pride to esteem themselves descended from the Gods. They say a great Giant made the World of a Cocks
Egg, and of the Earthly part a Woman, who engendring with a Crocodile brought forth a Man, from whom they descend. And the Family of the Conguis among them to this day wear Tails like those of Croco∣diles hanging at their Breeches in token, they are the immediate Line. The truth is, they are descended from a Chinese Prince, who being banished passed thither; but they are so vain, they would rather de∣scend from a Cock and a Crocodile, than from the Chineses. In Matters of Religion they have several Sects: That of the Xexuni, who deny the Immortality of the Soul, and is followed by the Nobility; it is not only in Iapan they follow it: That of the Foc∣cenxuni, who adore the Sun, and allow a Second Life: The Xodexuni, that adore the Idol which they think saves them, if they name it: That of Xocoxu, who believe there is a Reward for the Good, and Punishment for the Wicked, and is followed by the Country People: That of Xamabuxe, the Professors whereof adore the Devils, and converse with them so familiarly, that when one would be Revenged of another, he orders them to enter into him; they call them with a Horn. Their Priests are cal∣led Bonzes: But above all they adore an Idol called Seuto, who lives in Heaven, and is the beginning of all things. Parricide and Treason, they hold as sins that cannot be forgiven. Pity this Doctrin should not be held among those that pretend to be Chri∣stians.
4. Fernan Mendez Pinto, in his Travels, appropriates this Discovery to himself; Say∣ing, He came to the Island Tanixuma (which I suppose to be Taquixima, one of those about Iapan) with his two Companions Chri∣stopher Borallo and James Zeimoto; not by way of Shipwreck; but designedly, in the Ser∣vice of a Pyrat, who had taken them up when cast away. Both Relations mention three Names, one of them is the same in both, and both agree upon the same Year 1542. I will say something I find in that Author, because it is rare and worthy Admira∣tion. 5. Nautaquim was then Prince of that Island, and seeing the three Portugueses he stood amazed, and uttered these mysterious words: Let me dye, if these (meaning the Portugueses) be not the Chinchicogies our ancient Records speak of, who flying over the Waters, shall come to be Lords of the Lands where God placed the greatest Riches of the World; and it will be very fortunate for us, if they come as Friends. Let us return to In∣dia. 6. The first thing the Governour did, was lessening the Souldiers pay; for saving of Charges is a great means to gain the Favour of Princes: And Ministers never express their Zeal, by retrenching their own large Allowances; but by cutting off the small ones of the Poor. This caused great Discontent among the Commonalty. How∣ever Two thousand Men were raised, and imbarqued in Seventy Vessels of several
sorts, with which the Governour set out for Batecala, a City seated on the Banks of a Ri∣ver upon the Coast of Canara, well built and encompassed with a fruitful Country. The occasion of this Voyage, That the Queen refused to pay her Tribute, and entertained Pyrats in her Port to the detriment of the Publick. 7. The Fleet entred the Port, and the Queen seeing so great a force, and that the Governour demanded the Tribute, and delivery of the Pyrats Ships that had retired thither and fortified themselves; she de∣signed to hold him in hand till the time came he must go to Cochin. This Artifice was soon disappointed; for he Landed with Twelve hundred Men in two Battalions, the Command of one he gave to Ferdinand de Sousa and Tavora, and ordered Twenty light Vessels to go up the River and attack the City by Sea. The Governour marching through a Wood, was met by a Body of Musqueteers: Our Men made no halt, but drove them before to the Gates, and entred with them, not without great opposition, the Queen her self with much Bravery encouraging her Men. A Portu∣gues Souldier being beset by Two hundred of the Enemy bravely defended himself, till another envious of that Honour came up to him, and both Back to Back kept their Ground; at length a Party of our Men, fell upon the Enemy, and with great slaugh∣ter of them rescued the two.
8. It was Night when our Men possessed themselves of the City. In the Morning they not only plundered the Portugueses that were there; but falling out about the Booty had such a Battle among themselves, that all were hurt, and none enriched. The Enemy who perceived this from a Hill, pours in a shower of Arrows; the Gover∣nour Orders all to march to Revenge it; but those who are grieved by the lessening their Pay, Answer, That the Gentlemen who are Rich may march; for they only came to make up by Plunder what they are unjustly deprived of. Garcia de Sa went out with a sew Lances, and after some Retreats reci∣procally on both sides, almost all the Por∣tugueses were put to shameful flight, running to their Ships in such haste that some were drowned. 9. The Governour hearing this, run to them with Reproaches, crying out, He did not know them, and thought they were not the same he left two years before in India. This seemed a Reflection upon his Predecessor; but they with as loud Voices undeceived him, Answering, That the Men were the same, but the Governour was not; that this was the fruit of lessening their Pay, to give Gratuities to those who knew better how to beg, than deserve them. He retired to the Ships, and resolved the next day to burn the City, and destroy the Country. The City run with the Blood of all Living Creatures of both Sexes, and all Ages, before it was burnt; then the Country was laid waste, and all
the Woods cut down. This caused such a general Terrour, that whereas before throughout India, it was commonly said, Beware of Batecala; they afterwards chang∣ed it to Beware of Martin Alfonso. The Queen no longer able to resist, submitted, and purchased Peace with a heavier Sub∣jection; for generally they draw on them∣selves a greater burden, who proudly throw off that they have. 10. Martin Alfonso abhorred that so many Men quitting the Service, turned Merchants; to prevent this, and considering the vast Frauds of the Custom-House at Malaca, he sent new Orders thither. He lowered the Customs of Strangers to invite them to Trade there, and raised them to the Portugueses, to lessen their desire of Trading thither. The first succeeded well; for the Customs after that amounted to much more than before. The second took no effect. Much of the same nature was what he did at Ormuz, and therefore we will mention it in this place. That King was in Arrears for Tribute Five hundred thousand Ducats, which he refused not to pay, but was not able; for from Twelve thousand that Albuquerque at first imposed on him it was raised to almost One hun∣dred thousand; so that the King from a Tributary was become a Slave, not having a competent Maintenance left him. Martin Alfonso finding he was not able to pay the Debt, proposed to him to make over the Customs for payment: He to be rid of Op∣pression
submitted, and as before he was a King without a Revenue, now he had some he seemed no King; for the Custom-House is the support of that Crown. No doubt it was a Judgment for the Wickednesses of the Portugueses, in taking from that King what was his due, that the Persians, whose it had been, should take it from them. The oppressed King making Virtue of Ne∣cessity, resigned his Crown with Praises of him that took it from him; for the In∣strument began with these vain Preambles: I command all to obey this Supream Instru∣ment, that it may be understood that between me and my Lord (meaning King Iohn the Third) who in greatness reaches to Heaven, and has Power over all the circumference of the Earth, and in Grandeur is equal to the King of China, Great King of Iustice (as if any Ju∣stice were now done him▪) Greatest of all Kings in the World; Key of the Treasure that is on Earth, that is, Vertue and Nobility, of whom is learnt the Wisdom of Reigning, bright∣ness of the Sea of Kingdoms, &c. Could any man wronged flatter him, that injured him more? It is certain, He who gave the Praises, deserved them better than he that received them.
CHAP. XII. Continues the Government of Martin Al∣fonso de Sousa. 1. ABout the End of this Year arrived in India four Ships from Portugal; another came out with them, but was put back. At the same time D. George, Com∣mander of Ternate, was at Variance with the Spaniards, who under Ruy Lopez de Vil∣lalobos had invaded the Portugues Bounds. Villalobos was at Zagala, a Town of Camafo, inhabited by Renegado Christians, and from thence held Correspondence with the King of Gilolo. D. George protested against him, for intruding into what he had no right to, according to the late Capitulations. He sometimes Answered, He was forced thither by Storm: Otherwhiles, That he was within the Limits of Spain. D. George sent Iayme Lobo with 50 Men in two Galiots, believing this a sufficient Force, because the Spaniards were spent with Misfortunes. He had Or∣ders to assist Geliato de Gomo Conora, who besieged a Fort of his own that was in Rebellion. Iamye went to Momoya, where he gathered many of the Natives, then Christians, and passed over in Parao's, which Landing they took up and carried about half a League to a Lake, there
launched them again, an wasted over to the Fort Geliato, besieged. The Enemy seeing the Portugues Relief, offered to Ca∣pitulate; but the Portuguess, covetous of Plunder, refused. The Morning appearing, they could not Land but man by man, and that in several places; which the besieged perceiving, fell upon those who were ashoar, and with considerable damage forced them back to their Vessels. The Enemy had Hooks hanging at their Arms, one stuck in the Face of a Souldier, which drew him along till another came and with his Dagger cut it out. D. Gerge sent 30 Men to the Relief of these, who found near the Lake three Portugueses set upon Poles. Iayme returns to the Fort; which the besieged abandoned, and it was dismant∣led. 2. Being able to do nothing against the Spaniards, he returned to Ternate. Villa∣lobos went over to Gilolo, was well received by the King, fortified himself, and sent a Messenger to D. George, to tell him, He was within the Spanish Bounds, and demand resti∣tution of the Artillery he had taken, and the Spaniards that were with him. D. George granted the last, and sent Advice to Goa and Portugal. Villalobos dexterously began to draw near, and plant himself in Ti∣dore. 3. Iordan de Freitas set out from Goa in April, to succeed D. George in that Command, and take possession of the Island Amboyna, whereof he had a Grant from Tabarija King
of Ternate, wo had been unjustly sent Prisoner to Goa by Tristan de Atayde, was there Baptized, and now sent back by the Governour Martin Alfonso to be restored to his Crown. Freyas being come to Malaca, and considering that King would not be easily admitted by his Subjects, for having changed his Religion, left him there, de∣signing to take his Brother, which would make his Re inthronement the more easie. At Ternate, D. George delivered him the Fort; he Treated with Villalobos, and they agreed upon a Truce for eight Months, in which time they might consult their Superiours; and during this time there was to be no Correspondence between them. The Spa∣niards fell out among themselves in such manner, that many of them went over to the Portugueses at Ternate. F. Hierome of St. Stephen, Confessor to Villalobos, affirmed, He was Excommunicated for entring the Portugues Limits; but he remained obsti∣nate. 4. Freytas, sent along with D. George, who was going to Goa, Aeiro the present King, to make room for him he had left at Ma∣laca, not knowing he was since dead, and had made the King of Portugal his Heir. His Mother and Father-in-Law, who had been with him, went to Ternate with Fer∣dinand de Sousa, who carried Relie to that Fort. Freytas received them in Mourning, and then took possession of the Kingdom, the Government whereof he committed to the Father-in-Law and Mother, till other
Orders came from Portugal. Afterwards the Governour D. Iohn de Castro sent back Aeiro with the Title of KING, to prevent the Disorders that happen by many Heads. This last belongs to the Year 1545; but I insert it here, not to break the Series of these Affairs. 5. About this time in Ethiopia, the Em∣perour marched against the King of Adel, or Zeila. He was followed by the Portu∣gueses who escaped the former Defeat, except 40 who were with Emanuel de Cuna in Barnagasso, who being sent for could not come time enough. Those with the Em∣perour were Ninety, by whose Advice he marched towards the Enemy, giving them the Van of his Army, for the great Opinion he had of their Valour. In the Province Ambea, at the Foot of the Mountain Oena∣dias, they met Seven hundred Horse and Two thousand Foot, led by a Captain of Zeila, to joyn the King. Fifty Portugues Horse advanced to attack them, the formost Antony Cardosa, who killed the Enemies Captain the first stroak of his Lance; the others following his Example, slew many; when Barnagais first, and then the Emperour coming up Charged furiously, and killing Eight hundred put the rest to flight, who went rather to terrifie the Tyrant with this Relation, than Reinforce him. 6. He was a League off with his Army in Battalia; it consisted of two Bodies of Foot, Three thousand Men in each; he marched in the Front with Five hundred
Horse. The Emperour met him with the like Number, and in the same Order. The Portugueses, who were the Forlorn of this Body, Charged the Five hundred and slew many, losing two. The Emperour in per∣son behaved himself bravely, till the Ene∣mies Horse fled to the Wings of their Ar∣my. The King was wanting in nothing, shewing his Son, Ten years of Age, to stir up his Men to fight. The Fight was re∣newed, and the Emperour in great danger; but a Portugues shooting the King in the Belly killed him, and his Horse carried him about hanging, being tied to the Saddle. Only a few Turks chose rather to dye, than fly, and made a great slaughter of Ethiopians. Iohn Fernandez, Page to the Unfortunate D. Christopher, at two stroaks of his Lance killed the Turkish Com∣mander. In fine, Few of the Enemy esca∣ped by flight, the King's Head was cut off, and his Son made Prisoner. The Emperour acknowledging how great a share the Por∣tugueses had in this and the late Victories, did them great Favours. Cuna returned to Goa with 50 only; the rest stayed and married with Women of the Country, whose Progeny still continues there. 7. At Goa, the Governour heard the 1544. Complaints of the King of Ormuz, brought hither by D. Pedro de Castellobranco, by Or∣der of Martin Alfonso de Melo Iusarte, Com∣mander of that Fort. The Kings Com∣plaints against him were most just, having been used as the meanest of Madmen,
whereas his Madness was no other, than the Avarice of those would make him so. They endeavoured all they could to hinder his Restauration; but seeing him Re∣inthroned, they poysoned him, and what caused his Imprisonment and was the cause of his death was not punished. After this Injustice followed the Justice executed upon Hierome Diaz a Portugues Physician, of Jewish extraction; he was burnt for He∣resie. CHAP. XIII. Continues the Government of Martin Al∣fonso de Sousa. 1. ABout forty Leagues off, to the East∣ward of the Moluco Islands is that of Macaçar, rich and plentiful of Rice, Salt, Fish, Flesh, Fruit and Grain, and yields Sandal, Wax, Ivory and Gold. The People hardy and good Seamen: The Soil pleasant and well Watered, and has good Towns and Villages. Some Portugueses hearing the Cstristian Faith was received there, went thither, and among them Antony de Payva, that went as a Merchant, not a Preacher; but proved more Preacher than
Mercahnt. He had before had some Dis∣course with one of the Kings of the Island about Religion, who seemed well pleased therewith. Returning now, he arrived in the Kingdom of Supa, and had so much Discourse with that King, who was 70 years of Age, that he was very near being Con∣verted. 2. However, the King remained dubious, and Payva sailing thence went to the Port of Sian; the King whereof, on account of the grateful Conference they had before, received him with kindness. The Discourse of Religion was renewed, and Payva at large explained all Points to him, and at the same time urged the absurdness of the Adoration of Idols. 3. The Conference ended, the Sky till then being serene, there arose a Storm of Thunder, Lightning and Rain, which was esteemed as a Heavenly Confirmation of the Truth of what Payva had said; and he laying hold of that advantage, urged the King to embrace the Faith. He was incli∣nable; but his Subjects, and the Moors that Traded there, obstructed him. He de∣manded time to Consider. At this time arrives the King of Supa, and hearing he of Sian had desired time, said, A work so good ought rather to be put in execution, than delayed; that he was only sorry for the Time he had lost, but would attone by being the first, and desired to be immediately Baptized. All stood amazed, and there being no Priest, the Ancientest of the Portugueses performed the Function;
and he was Christened Luis. Then the Queen, and many that came with him, were Baptized, which was celebrated with the Guns and Warlike Instruments of both People. He of Sian moved by this Exam∣ple, was Baptized with his whole Fa∣mily. 4. Mean while the Governour fitted out a Fleet of 45 Sail, in which were Three thousand Seamen and Souldiers. The de∣sign was kept secret, and was to rob the Pagod of Tremele, which is twelve Miles up the Inland of St. Thomas Meliapor, in the Kingdom of Bisnagar: For which he had express Orders from King Iohn, upon pre∣tence India was wasted; as if any pretence could justifie such a Robbery. Nevertheless the Design was discovered, or (as others say) disappointed by contrary Weather; yet the Governour was persuaded to plunder other Pagods, where it was thought there was no less Treasure. 5. He took the Advice; and by the way sent to the King of Iasanapatan, in the Island Ceylon, either to submit and pay Tri∣bute to the King of Portugal, or provide to ppose that Fleet. The King was so un∣provided, he thought it a happiness the Governour was so content, and agreed to ay Four thousand Ducats yearly. The King called Grande, near Cape Comori, for ear, sent him a Present. He went on to he Pagod Tebelicate, near Calecoulam, not∣ithstanding we were at Peace with that ing, and entred it with a few of his Con∣fidents;
they brought two Casks so heavy, they loaded many Men: It was said they carried Water; such as were not easie of belief, affirmed it was pure Gold and Pre∣cious Stones. The truth was never known. Some Writings declare, there was only a Pot of Gold found, in which the Idol was bathed, valued Four thousand Crowns, which King Iohn Ordered to be restored, much admiring this Action of Martin Alfonso, as if it had been a greater Crime to rob at Tebilicarè without his Order, than at Tre∣melè with it. However it was, whilst the Portugueses marched to their Ships, the Pagod and Town flamed, and Two hun∣dred Nayres set out to Revenge this Loss, Commanded by the Keeper of the Pagod. They appeared on an Eminence over our Men, who marched through a Defileé, and poured their Shot and Arrows upon them, which killed Thirty. The Governour had been in danger, had he not dismounted Our Men being got into the open Field, put the Nayres to flight. 6. No danger terrifies Avarice. They went on to another Pagod. Out of it was taken a Chest, which was publickly open∣ed, and some Silver Mony that was in it distributed; but of so little value, that many believed thence proceeded the Libe∣rality. The Governour returned to Goa, where four Ships arrived from Portugal, soon after his departure, expected him. Five had set out from Lisbon, but one was forced back by a Storm.
7. The Governour had not returned so soon to Goa, if D. Garcia de Castro had not sent to hasten him upon a sudden emer∣gency; which was thus: Acedecam, Lord of the Lands about Goa, designing to depose Hidalcan, prevailed by dint of Presents and Promises with D. Garcia, to deliver up to him Meale Can, Brother to Hidalcan, pre∣tending he held the Kingdom wrongfully. This gave Hidalcan just cause of Complaint, and drew on no contemptible danger. The Governour heared both Parties, and ough both used equal Arguments, offering equal Advantages to the Crown of Portugal; the Governour inclined more to Acedacan, who offered the Kingdom of Concam, then pos∣sessed by Abraham, a good Man and our Friend, whose Revenue was above a Mil∣lion. It was the more valuable for being near Goa.
CHAP. XIV. The End of the Government of Martin Alfonso de Sousa, and of the First Part of this Tome. 1. THe Governour Armed in defence of Meale, and to possess him of the Crown Acedecan offered him. This was a notorious act of Injustice, and Martin Al∣fonso being led by Interest, and naturally so haughty that none durst Advise him, Peter de Faria resolved to do it, encouraged by his Quality, the great Offices he had born, and his great Age, being 80 years Old. Late at Night he repaired to the Governour's Tent, and having prepared him to hear, laid before him all the Motives that could persuade, to desist from so unjust an Under∣taking, with much submission, gravity and discretion. 2. Martin Alfonso submitted to Faria's Reasons. As soon as Day appeared, the Governour pretending other Causes, gave over the Design and returned to the City, securing Meale Can. At this time died Ace∣decan, the Promoter of this Discord; and Hidalcan came down the Mountain-Gate with a powerful Army, reducing his Rebels, and in few days recovered the Kingdom of Concam, which not long before we had
hoped to possess, if not dissuaded by the Experienced Faria, to whom Martin Alfonso confessed he owed his Life and Honour: For had he gone to Concham, it was much to be doubted whether ever he had Re∣turned. Hidalcan still fearing Meale Can, offered for him, if he were delivered to him, the Lands of Salsete and Bardez, valued at Fifty thousand Ducats a Year. It had been a breach of Trust, to deliverup a Man that had put himself into our protection. Therefore the Governour Answered; If what was offered were given, he would send him where he should not disturb Hidalcan. He admitted this Con∣dition, and performed on his part; but had not entire satisfaction from us; for Meale was carried from Goa to Cananor, and from Cananor to Goa, in the Eyes of Hidalcan, as the Politick said, To keep in Awe; but the State Criticks said, It was a Bait to draw Presents. Some were sent soon after. 3. Hidalcan had moreover granted to the Governour upon this Treaty, the vast Trea∣sure Acedecan had laid up when he Rebelled, and which at his Death fell into the hands of Cojecemazadim, and was worth Ten Millions of Ducats. He persuaded the Governour it was not above a Million, and delivered so much to him. One Record says, He sent almost half of it to Portugal in Bars of Gold: Another, That he applied Two hundred and fifty thousand Ducats to the Kings use in India; if we may not take into this Account, One hundred thousand given by Hidalcan upon the late Accommo∣dation.
But if these did make up the Sum, he afterwards discharged a good Con∣science, discharging the King of some Debts. 4. Hidalcan gave him Notice of the great Fraud used in delivering the Treasure, per∣suading him to recover the Remainder of Cojeçemazadim, who was at Cananor. He used Means to take him; but not succeeding, resolved to endeavour it in person. He fitted out Twenty four great Ships, and many Vessels to row, and without saying any thing what he intended, landed at Cochin. Putting to Sea again, he steered several Courses, and Anchored at Mount Delij. At Night, with∣out making it known to the Fleet, he went into a Barge with five or six Gentlemen, and ordering three of the lightest Vessels to follow, came with incredible speed to the Fort of Cananor, where Iames Alvarez Tellez Commanded. He spoke to him with∣out being known to any other, ordering him to endeavour to secure Cojeçemazadim, or Pocarale Aderrajam, who Governed him. Then he returned to the Fleet, and with it to Goa, all men admiring the Voyage and Preparations, without seeing the Design or Effect of them. Tellez could not take Ze∣mazadim, for he was upon his Guard; but he ordered Henry de Sousa, Commander in Chief of Malabar, to take Pocarale. He attempted it, and many coming in to his Relief, Pocarale and a Brother of his were both killed. This enflamed the King and People against the Fort, and though they
were appeased, yet the Hatred to the Por∣tugueses for this Action was not extin∣guished; but raised one of the greatest Storms we weathered in India. 5. The King of Xiraz caused some Disturbance at Ormuz, appearing in the Neighbourhood with a considerable Power; but he soon drew off, coming to Agree∣ment with that King. Sultan Mamud, King of Cambaya, aimed at the Recovery of Diu, not forgetting the Death of his Uncle Badur, and being troubled to have us so near Neighbours. One of the dis∣honourable Articles of Peace, which the Vice-Roy D. Garcia had admitted was, That the Kings Subjects might build a Wall be∣tween their Town and our Fort. The Wall was raising, and displeased Emanuel de Sousa and Sepulveda, who commanded there, be∣cause it looked like somewhat more than a bare Partition, which was the true intent of the Articles. He fortified himself, then beat off the Workmen, threw down the Wall, and made use of the Materials. The King was heinously offended, and at the instigation of his great Subject Coje Zofar, he began secretly to stir up that Great Part of the World, with Letters to the several Princes, to unite and expel the Portugues, not only Diu, but all Asia. 6. Let us see what hapned while this Storm was rising. Hidalcan pressed the Go∣vernour, either to restore what he had given him on that score, or else to send away Mealeacan. The Governour endeavoured
to please him with Artifice, rather than Performance, and to this effect sent Iohn Fernandez de Negreyros Embassadour to him. Him, and all the Portugueses that were in his Court, the King put in Prison, keeping them as Hostages for the performance of what was before agreed, and now demanded. This was a great Provocation to the hot Nature of Martin Alfonso; but submitting to Necessity, he began to appease Hidalcan, assuring him, That as soon as the Season would permit, Meale should be sent to Ma∣laca. Three Ships Arrived now from Por∣tugal of five that sailed thence; one was forced back, and another Cast-away on the Coast of Melinde, the Men saved. 7. This Year the Tartar entred China, and besieged Peking. A great part of his nu∣merous Army, which consisted of almost Millions of Men, Threescore thousand of them Horse, marched to the City Quamsi and plundered it, killing above Threescore thousand persons of all Sexes and Ages, and then went on towards Peking. By the way, the Fort Nixiancoo defended it self so brave∣ly, that the General Nanticor thought it impregnable, having lost Three thousand Men before it. Among the Prisoners taken at Quamsi were Nine Portugueses, one of them called George Mendez, offered, if he might have his and his Companions Liberty, to put him in a way to take the Fort. The General admitted the Proposal, and by this Man's Advice took it with the slaughter of above Two thousand Chineses and Mogols.
He went on to Peking, and in pursuance of his Promise obtained of his Prince the Portugueses Liberty, and did them great Honours, endeavouring with large Gifts to detain them in his Service. George Men∣dez stayed, and was afterwards allowed a Pension of Six thousand Ducats. These Accidents often cause the Portugueses in Asia, to forget their Country and some∣times their Religion. This was when they came to Tuymican, the Tartar's Court, whi∣ther he retired after the raising the Siege of Peking, which lasted almost seven Months, with the Loss of Four hundred and fifty Thousand Men, most destroyed by Pesti∣lence, besides Three hundred thousand that deserted to the Chineses. 8. Four small Vessels, with One hundred Portugueses in them, cruised upon the 1545. Coast of Tanauzarim, and were much dreaded, having (among other Prizes) taken three great Ships. The Maritim Towns complained to their Sovereign, the King of Siam; and he sent out against them Heredim Mahomet, a Turk, with a Royal Galley, four Galliots, and five other Vessels that Rowed, in which were Eight hundred Men, Three hundred of them Janizaries, the rest Turks, Greeks, Achems, Malabars and Mogols; all brave Men. A poor King of the Neighbouring Island, Pulohinor, who was newly Converted, gave our Men notice of the Danger. They left the Port and run up a Creek, both because it was more hid, and for that at the Mouth
of it were some Ruins, that might serve instead of a Fort, to defend themselves. The Turk missing them in the Port, thought they were fled to some of the Neighbouring Islands, and sent the Ships and Galliots in search of them, staying behind with only the Galley. They who were upon the Watch, fell upon the Galley at Night, and destroyed Three hundred Men that were in her, and the Admiral, with loss of only One Man. Of the other Nine Vessels, three were Cast-away and six were taken by our Men; with great slaughter of the Enemy, and only two killed on our side. 9. The Governour dispatched the home∣ward bound Trading Ships, whereof one was Cast-away at Zanzibar. Those from Portugal arrived in India, and brought him a Successor, which he so earnestly desired, that a few days before being at Mass with Iames Silveyra, who was coming for Por∣tugal; he said to him at the Elevation of the Host; Speak to the King, to send one to succeed me, for I dare not Govern India, be∣cause Men are so changed from Truth and Ho∣nour: Or else I swear by that Sacred Host, and by the true Body of Christ I behold in it with the Eyes of Faith, That I will open the Patents of Succession, and resign the Government to whoever is named therein; and desire his Highness, not to expose such a Subject as I am, to the danger of having his Head cut off. This was the Condition of India, almost past hope of Recovery: For if the Governour was tolerable, those that were governed were
intollerable; and the contrary. Martin Al∣fonso had served well in Brasile and India, in other Posts. He was Violent in his Under∣takings, a great discoverour of Mens Hu∣mours, and knew better than many to save what was superfluous, and spend what was necessary. He instituted those Officers of the King's Revenue, that are called Surveyors, in India. He was of a handsom and large Stature, his Complexion white, his Beard Chestnut-colour. He Governed three years and four Months; was the 13th had the Title of Governour, and first of the Name. The End of the First PART of the Second Tome.
THE Portugues ASIA. TOM. II. PART II. CHAP. I. The Government of D. John de Castro, from the Year 1545, till the Year 1548, in the Reign of King JOHN the Third. 1. ABOUT the latter end of August, or beginning of September, Arri∣ved 1545. at Goa six Ships from Portu∣gal, Commanded by Don Iohn de Castro, who went to Ease Martin Alfonso of the Government. Immediately (as is Customary in India) Complaints were car∣ried to the New Governour against the Old.
The chief, the Crying-down the Value of Money; which was immediately restored to its former Value. This gave occasion to Martin Alfonso to go away dissatisfied, and the other to remain so upon the manner of his Discontent, falling out after having very well agreed. These Governours, and their Governments, seem to resemble the Soul and Body, which never part without great struglings. 2. Don Iohn began his Government as is usual, sending Commanders and Officers to several Forts and Towns. Bernardin de Sousa went to succeed Iurdan de Freytas, at Ternate, carrying with him the King Aeiro, to hold that Crown till other Orders came from Portugal, it being left to our King by the deceased Tabarija, as was said before. Ferdinand de Sousa & Tavora, who was sent against the Spaniards, Commanded by Vil∣lalobos, reduced him to a necessity of sur∣rendring himself, and continuing at Ternate till the Season of sailing for India, where he and his Men might either remain in the Portugues Service, or return in their Ships to Europe. This Difficulty surmounted, Sousa resolved to take Revenge of Cata∣bruno, King of Gilolo, for the Injuries he did the Portugueses and New Converts since he Tyrannically usurped the Crown, killing his Lawful Sovereign. 3. Sousa consulted his own Men, and the new Guests, who approved of his Resolu∣tion, and Villalobos offered to bear him Company. They made up Four hundred
Spaniards and Portugueses, and Fifteen hundred Ternatenses. Coming to an An∣chor in the Port, they found the Tyrant ready to receive them, well fortified and provided with Cannon. The Christians began to batter them; but received more damage than they did. Sousa perceiving there was no way, but by giving an Assault, gave the first of the Attack to Iohn Galvan and Bernard de la Torre, the first a Portugues, the other a Spaniard, who sticking in the Thorns the Tyrant had designedly strewed about, and scarce able to move, stood as a Mark to the Enemies Bullets and Arrows. Catabruno Charges them with Three thou∣sand Men. Sousa comes to their Relief, and the Fight was desperate; for both Spaniards and Portugueses did Wonders. Night part∣ed, and Morning brought them together; the Dispute was hot, till Galvan being killed his Men were put in disorder; all our Body came to their Relief, and brought them off, forcing the Enemy to retire to their Works. Our Captain seeing no likelyhood of pre∣vailing, returned to Ternate; whence he went to India with the Spaniards, as had been Agreed, only Villalobos excepted, who died in the Fort. 4. Coje Zofar, at Cambaya, now his Princes Favourite, kept a fair Correspondence with the Portugueses; but with the natural Per∣fidiousness of a Moor. He persuaded the King a second time to endeavour the shaking off the Yoak of the Fort of Diu, and to this effect drew together a great
Number of Men; yet had more hopes to succeed by Policy, than strength. He agreed with an Infamous Portugues, called Ruy Frere, to poyson the Cistern, fire the Magazine, and upon a Sign given admit him into the Fort. An Ethiopian, a Turk and a Woman Slave, discovered the Trea∣chery. Coje Zofar was astonished to see his Design discovered, and began to Comple∣ment D. Iohn Mascarenhas, Commander of the Fort; pleading, That the Cause of breaking the Peace had been, because they obstructed building that Wall, which D. Gar∣cia de Noronha had so weakly allowed, and Emanuel de Sousa had couragiously beat down. Coje Zofar dissembled while he gathered a great Power, and D. Iohn perceiving the Dan∣ger that threatned him, prepared to meet it, and gave Advice thereof to the Governour and Neighbouring Commanders. 5. A considerable number of Men was already drawn together in the City Diu, and among them Five hundred Turks, sent from Mecha by the King of Zibit. D. Iohn assigned every Man his Post, and placed an Officer with 30 Men in each of the four Bastions; his Lieutenant over the Gate with Twenty, another with the like Number in a small Work; reserving Fifty for him∣self to be wherever the greatest Danger called. This was the Number of Men he had, and thus ordered, when Coje Zofar came on with all his Power, resolving to attack the Bastion of the Sea, with three Castles built upon a Ship of prodigious
bigness, well stored with Cannon to batter the Wall. Within the Castles were Two hundred Turks, who were to distract the Desendants by pouring in continually all sorts of Artificial Fire-works. This Design succeeded not, for our Commander having notice of it, sent Iacome Leite to burn that Ship. He took twenty Men in two Vessels, and though he set out by Night, was dis∣covered; yet did not desist, but coura∣giously went on and set fire to it; then re∣tiring, saw a great part of it fly into the Air, with most of the Turks, the Remainder casting such a Flame, as at a distance disco∣vered the Enemies Army running in Bata∣lions to quench the Fire. Iacome seeing them in Clusters, let fly his Cannon and killed many of them. In this Action he had seven Men wounded. He went on to the Mouth of the River, and took from the Enemy some Vessels of Provision, with which he returned to the Fort, much admired of all. 6. Coje Zofar began to build the Wall, that had been before beat down, which could not be hindred, though our Cannon killed many of the Workmen; but was brought to such perfection, that he planted hereon Sixty great Cannon, besides many small, and one of such extraordinary big∣ness, that it shook the whole Island, and made pieces of the Fort fly; it was managed by an expert French Renegado. At this time arrived D. Ferdinand de Castro, Son to the Governour, sent by him with some
Relief of Men. Mascarenhas wanted some Intelligence from the Enemies Camp. Iames de Anaya Coutino, a Gentleman of Note and Man of great strength, knowing of it, at Night putting a Helmet on his Head, with a Sword by his side and Spear in his Hand, let himself down the Wall, and lying close at some distance from the Fort, discovered two Moors, who being come up to him, he killed the one with the Spear, and taking up the other in his Arms run with him to the Gate of the Fort, and calling threw him in, to the great admiration of those that beheld it. This was much; but what follows is more: He had borrowed the Hel∣met he carried, and promised on the word of a Gentleman to restore it, or dye. In this Scuffle it fell off, and he mist it not till the Owner asked for it. He said nothing; but letting himself off the Wall again, went to look for, found and restored it. Nothing could be more brave; nothing more honou∣rable. 7. The King came from Champanel with Ten thousand Horse, to see (as Coje Zofar said) that place taken. This caused an ex∣traordinary Motion in the Army, and D. Iohn desired to know the cause of it. Six of our Men sallied out at Night and fell among sixty Moors, who were all asleep, whereof they killed some, and the rest waking at the Noise, as also some that were not far off, our Men were forced to retire, leaving two dead; the four brought a Pri∣soner with them, who informed our Com∣mander
of what he desired. This Action incensed the King and Coje Zofar, so that they renewed the fury of their Batteries, and did much harm. The Renegado Frenchman was struck dead by a chance Dart, and the Gunner who succeeded him being Igno∣rant, did more harm to his own Party, than to us, which was some Revenge. All the Neighbourhood resounded with the Noise of the Cannon and Cries of dying Men, when a Bullet of ours falling in the Kings Tent, sprinkled him with the Blood of one of his Favourites who was near him, and beaten to pieces. This so terrified the King, that he instantly fled, leaving the Command of the Horse to Iuzarcan, a Va∣liant Ethiopian. 8. Coje Zofar pressed the Besieged, and there was great slaughter and destruction on both sides; the more visible and dange∣rous in the Fort, by reason of its little Com∣pass, and the small number of Men. Mas∣carenas appeared wherever there was dan∣ger, as hoping to gain no less Honour than Antony de Silveyra had done there a few years before. He was no less Fortunate in couragous Women; for those that were in the Fort encouraged the Men; assisted and relieved them at the work. And when the Turks entred the Walls, one of them hearing they were got into a House, run in with a Spear and fought till Mascarenas came and put them all to the Sword.
9. Coje Zofar omitted nothing that could be devised to fill the Ditches, and lay open the Fort. All industry was used on our side to repair the Breaches. The prime Gentry did the Duties of private Souldiers and Masons, the Walls and Bastions were ruined at Night, and repaired by Morning. Coje Zofar was astonished to see all he destroy∣ed restored. Coming on in a Rage with fresh Men, a Cannon Ball took off his Head and right Hand, whereon he leaned it. Thus he fulfilled his Mothers Prediction, who being at Otranto, still persuaded him to be recon∣ciled to the Church, and perceiving she prevailed not, superscribed her Letters to him thus: To Coje Zofar my Son, at the Gates of Hell. His Son Rumecan succeeded him as well in Wickedness, as the ardent desire of taking that Fort. He took upon him his Father's Command, and inherited his For∣tune. Our Commander was obliged to send fresh Advice to the Governour at Goa, and the Captains of the Neighbouring places. A Priest was the Messenger, who run very great danger, the Sea at that time being scarce Navigable. But then Portugal had some Decij, and some Reguli: Now it has only the grief of wanting them.
CHAP. II. Continues the Government of D. John de Castro, and Siege of Diu. 1. RUmecan now gives a General Assault, he and Iuzarcan attack the Bastions of St. Iohn and St. Thomas, where they found a most vigorous Resistance, and so many were killed that the Defendants seemed rather a raging Plague, than Men. Yet at length, Valour was forced to give way to Numbers, and the Enemy mounted St. Tho∣mas's Bastion: But Despair administring Fury rather than Valour, the few Portugueses rush upon the multitude of Enemies, and making a wonderful slaughter, throw head∣long from the Wall such as had escaped the Sword, so that the Dead lay in heaps. 2. Rumecan thinking Mahomets displea∣sure was the cause of this Misfortune, spent this Night in Prayers and Processions. In the Morning, thinking he had attoned, he renewed the Assault: After mounting the two Bastions he was forced to retire, having lost almost Two thousand Men, and among them the Ethiopian Iuzarcan, General of the Horse: An Uncle of his of the same Name succeeded him. In this Action seven Portugueses were lost. Several other Assaults
were given with like Success. In one of these the Fire was so close and furious, that several who were clad in Cotton, which soon took flame, ran and dipt themselves in the Water, and so returned to their Posts. Those who wore Skins escaped better. Our Commander taking notice of this, caused some gilt Leather, wherewith his Rooms were hung, to be made into Coats for the Souldiers. Another time D. Iohn and D. Peter de Almeyda, with One hundred Men, sallied to destroy a Mount raised by the Enemy to over-look the Fort, and effected it, killing Three hundred Moors. Martin Botello another time went out with Ten Men, to take some Body to give Intelligence; and falling upon Eighteen put them to flight all, except a bold Nubij, who standing all the Eleven, wrestled with Botello; and he finding it hard to overcome him whilst he could touch the ground with his Feet, like another Hercules with Anseus, ran with him in his Arms to the Fort. 3. The Attacks were still renewed, the Defendants spent with Labour, and a∣bove all with Hunger, feeding even upon nauseous Vermin. A Crow taken upon the dead Bodies was a Dnty for the Sick and sold for five Crowns, the Ammunition was almost spent, and now the Enemy gives a hot Assault with fresh Men, Ten thousand having newly joyned them. They entred St. Iohn's Bastion, and retired. Scarce had they left it, when it blew up, and in it 73 of our Men, ten whereof came down
alive. Iames de Sotomayer fell into the Fort with a Spear in his hand; a Souldier in the same manner fell among the Enemies, and was killed by them. It was no Fable, that Armed Men were seen in the Air this bout. Our Captain Mascarenas foreseeing the dan∣ger, had ordered them to quit the Bastion; but one Reynoso protested, he would accuse them of Cowardize, if they did. The one Commanded prudently, the other Advised couragiously; yet was guilty of Disobedi∣ence. 4. Thirteen thousand of the Enemy at∣tack the Breach they had made; only five Souldiers withstood them till Mascarenas came with fifteen more. The Women assisted the Men, and ran even to brave Death. The Priest, who was returned from carrying the Advice to the Neigh∣bouring places, appeared encouraging all with a Crucifix lifted on high. The Acti∣ons done here were incredible; but Night coming on the Enemy retired, having lost Three hundred Men. Mascarenas spent all the Night in repairing the Damages re∣ceived. 5. The Enemy daily renewed their At∣tacks with the same success, and held out by means of their vast Numbers. Rumecan fell again to Mining, and pierced the very Rocks that stood in his way; but met not with such success as he had done the time before; for D. Iohn perceiving his Work, counter∣mined it, and it flew all back upon the Be∣siegers, killing many of them. D. Alvaro,
the Governours Son, sent with Supplies, seemed to sail in opposition to the Seas and Winds, through Storms almost incredible: Yet they all arrived at Baçaim, and Antony Moniz Barreto, with 8 Gentlemen, got first into Diu, who though so few, by their Bra∣very were no small comfort to the besieged. One of these, called Michael Darnide, a Man of prodigious Strength, Barreto refusing to take him into his Boat, leaped into the Water with his Musquet in his Mouth and swam after him, so he was obliged to take him up. 6. Next came Luis de Melo & Mendoça with nine Men; then D. George and D. Du∣arte de Meneses with seventeen; after them D. Antony de Ataide, and Francis Guillerme, with fifty each; and lastly, Ruy Freyre, Fa∣ctor of Chaul, with Twenty four. All toge∣ther fell upon the Enemy, then possessed of some of our Works, and among them the Bastion Santiago. The Dispute was hot; yet the Enemy set up their Colours on the Walls. Antony Moniz Barreto made good his Post with only two Souldiers, and was going to quench his Flames in the Water; but one of the two, who was in the same condition, detained him, and both did things worthy admiration. Antony Correa sallied out with Twenty Men to discover the Enemy, and saw Twelve Moors sitting about a Fire; he exhorted his Men to fall upon them, but they seeing him go on, fled; however he went on thinking to take one that might give Intelligence: He fell
on and behaved himself bravely; yet he was taken and carried to Rumecan, who Examined him about the posture the Fort was in, which being then very miserable, he represented so powerful, as drove him into despair, and moved him to cause the unfortunate Prisoner to be dragged through the Streets, and his Head cut off, which was set upon a Pole next day in sight of the Fort. 7. The Enemy had now lost Five thou∣sand Men; the Besieged Two hundred, and had not so many more left, and not above half them able to do Duty, when D. Alvaro arrives with the Supplies, which consisted of Four hundred Men, and a sufficient quantity of Ammunition, having by the way taken a Ship of Cambaya richly laden. The Joy of this Relief was soon allayed; for the Souldiers that came with D. Alvaro, fearing the Mines, proposed to meet the Enemy in open Field: But the Governour prudently refusing, they broke out into open Mutiny in contempt of all Military Discipline, scarce known, or at least not respected by the Portugues Nation. D. Iohn seeing himself in danger of perishing in the Fort by his own Men, chose rather to dye in the Field among the Enemies. He sal∣lied with almost Five hundred Men in three Bodies. At one heat they gained the Ene∣mies advanced Post, forcing them to retire to their Works. Those who insolently forced their Commander to this Extrava∣gancy, stood heartless at the Foot of the
Trenches, seeing others mount who had said less. D. Iohn seeing them in this posture, cried out, Whether it was thus they had promised to fight? Where was now that Boldness that obliged him to come into the Field? Where the Threats, that they would fight the Enemy without him? Behold your Commander you accused of Cow∣ardize, calls you to the danger: And who is there follows me of those that would have led me hither? Within the Walls you were fierce, and now in the Field timorous. Your Courage suits with your Tongues; for those who said much, always acted little. They ashamed to be thus justly upbraided, took Heart and mounted: The whole Army came down upon them, and the Portugueses having done wonders, were forced to retire in disorder. This was the time the Enemy had possessed himself of the Fort, had not Mas∣carenas with his Prudence and Valour pre∣vented Mojatecan, who with Five thousand attempted to enter, and was valiantly op∣posed by Luis de Sousa in St. Thomas's Bul∣wark. Threescore Men were lost in this Action: D. Alvaro de Castro was mortally Wounded in the Head. This was the fruit of that insolent Disobedience. 8. The Moors had taken the Cannon of the Bastion Santiago, when Vasco de Cuna and Luis de Almeyda brought a fresh Relief. The latter immediately went out with Payo Rodriguez and Peter Alfonso in three Caravels, and as soon returned with two great Ships of Meca and some other Vessels, whose Loading was worth
Fifty thousand Ducats. At the Yard-Arms hung many Moors, whose Heads were then cut off, as was the Captains, who was a Janizary and offered Three thousand Ducats for his Ransom. CHAP. III. Continues the Siege of Diu, the Governour D. John de Castro comes in Person to its Relief. 1. NOw begins the Month of November, and the Siege had lasted eight Months, when the Governour D. Iohn de Castro covers the Sea with a great Fleet of all sorts of Vessels for the Relief of Diu. All Goa admired the Constancy wherewith he received the News of the Death of his Son D. Fernando; for though he highly re∣sented it he dissembled his Grief, and dressing himself gayer than ordinary, went in Procession, to give God Thanks, That Diu was still in the possession of the Portu∣gueses; and then went to a publick Feast, which is an Imitation of a Fight, wherein they use Canes instead of Lances.
2. The Fleet consisted of above Ninety Sail, besides three of the Ships that then came from Portugal; and several Gentle∣men that came in them, went in other Vessels. 3. The Governour being come to Baçaim, waited the coming up of the Vessels that were scattered, and the mean while sent D. Emanuel de Lima to scour the Coast. On the Coast of Damam he took several Ships, and cutting the Moors that were in them in pieces, threw them into the Mouths of the Rivers, that the Tide carrying them up, they might strike a Terrour in all that Coast. Entring the River of Suratt, after a vigorous Resistance made, he destroyed all that belonged to the Town called, Of the Ethiopians. The same was done at the City Ansote, not far distant, without sparing Beauty, the finest Women of the Bramens and Baneans being slaughtered. So in other Neighbouring Towns; and then D. Emanuel withdrew, leaving an Universal Terrour all along that Shoar. 4. The Fleet appearing in the Sea of Diu, the Enemy stood amazed, though they had just then received a supply of Five thousand fresh Men sent by the King. The Gover∣nour went privately into the Fort, and afterwards Landed his Men. He proposed in Council, Whether it was fit presently to march out and fight the Enemy? The Question was debated, till the Experienced Garcia de Sa put an end to it, saying, They ught to fight. They marched in this order:
D. Iohn Mascarenas, Commander of the Fort, led the Van, consisting of Five hun∣dred Men: D. Alvaro led as many: Don Emanuel de Lima, the like number. The Governour led the rest, which were One thousand, and a Body of Indians. Among the Men were some Portugues Women in mens Cloaths, to assist the Wounded. In the Fort was left the Lieutenant with Three hundred Men. That Night they fixed their Arms, and next Morning prepared their Souls. The Governour appointed Rewards for those who first mounted the Enemies Works. 5. At Break of Day, on the 11th of No∣vember, this small Army marched out to attack the numerous Forces of the Enemies, who were well intrenched and provided with Cannon. Our Men gave the Onset with much Bravery, and some fell. Two Gentlemen, who had Challenged each other, now agreed he should be owned as Victo∣rious over the other, who first mounted the Enemies Works; both honourably strove for this Glory, and both died gloriously in the Attempt. At length our Men mounted the Works; such was each man's eagerness to be the first, that it could not be known who really was so. Payva having lost a Leg, fought on his Knees till he was killed. The Tanadar cut down a Turk, and stoop∣ing to make an end of him, was slain by another Turk. Francis de Azevedo was kil∣led, after having made a great slaughter.
6. The brave Mascarenas and D. Alvaro de Castro, having taken a Bulwark, make themselves room in the Field. The Go∣vernour comes up and enflames the fight. He orders his Ensign to fix the Colours on the Enemies Works, and is immediately obeyed by him. Twice was the Ensign thrown down, and twice he remounted. Our Men encouraged by the Governour, press forward, and the Enemy gives way. The Portugueses enter their Works pell-mell with them, and Rumecan comes on with the whole Body of his Army; but after a hot dispute retires, leaving his Enemies Masters of his Works. 7. Rumecan joyns Iuzarcan, who on the other side was worsted by Mascarenas. The Governour marches out of the Works to meet them, giving the Van to his Son D. Alvaro. The Portugueses were much di∣stressed, when F. Antony del Cazal appeared before them with a Crucifix on the Point of a Lance, encouraging them with godly Words. They take Courage, and covering the Field with dead and wounded Men, put Rumecan to flight; but he rallying, forced the Portugueses to retire in great disorder. The Governour exposing himself to admi∣ration, renewed the Fight, and restored good Order: At this time a Stone broke a Arm of the Crucifix, and the Priest calling upon the Men to revenge that Sacriledge, they fell on with such fury, that having done incredible Execution, they drove the Enemy to the City, who still gave way,
facing us. The first that entred the City with them was D. Iohn, then D. Alvaro, and D. Emanuel de Lima and the Governour, all several ways, making the Streets and Houses run with Blood. The Women escaped not the fate of the Men, and Children were slain at their Mothers Breasts, one stroak taking away two Lives. The first part of the Booty was Precious Stones, Pearls, Gold and Silver; other things, though of value, were slighted as cumbersom. 8. Rumecan▪ and his General Officers, rally their Men, and appear again in the Field with Eight thousand. The Gover∣nour and his Son, and D. Iohn Mascarenas encompass them, the Fight was bloody; in the heat of it Gabriel Teyxeyra killing the Bearer, took the Standard of Cambaya and dragged it about the Field, proclaiming Victory. George Nunez, from among the Dead, brought out Rumecans Head, and presented it to the Governour. Others took Iuzarcan, who was Wounded. Our Men were left absolute Masters of the Field. Of the Portugueses One hundred were kil∣led, others say only Thirty four; of the Enemy Five thousand, and among them Azedecan, Lucan and other Men of Note. Free Plunder was allowed, some were en∣riched; many got much, and all were satisfied. There were taken many Colours, forty Pieces of Cannon of an extraordinary bigness, which with the lesser made up Two hundred, and a vast quantity of Ammuni∣tion.
9. Many particularly signalized them∣selves in this Action. The Governour play∣ed the part of a Souldier, as well as a Ge∣neral. D. Iohn Mascarenas, after a Siege of eight Months, did more (with respect to such Merits) than all. D. Alvaro de Castro, of whom it is enough to say, He did like his Father. The Ensign Barbado, who being several times thrown down, as often mount∣ed the Works. F. Antony, who with the image of Life, banished the fear of Death. And many more, as well of those who were killed, as they that survived. The Enemy confessed, that one day during the Siege they saw over the Church of the Fort, a beautiful Woman cloathed in White, from whom proceeded such Rays that blinded them; and this Day, in the Field, some Men with Lances, who did them the greatest harm. The King in a Rage for this Loss, caused Twenty eight Portugueses he had in Custody, to be torn to pieces in his pre∣sence. 10. Whilst the Governour was employed in 1547. Repairing the damage received, D. Emanuel de Lima by his Order scowred the Coast of Cambaya with thirty Ships, extirpating all the Towns on that shoar. The City Goga, one of the Chief of that Kingdom, was taken without any resistance, the Inha∣bitants flying to the Mountains. It was plundered and burnt; then pursuing the In∣habitants, they were found at Night about a League off asleep, and all put to the Sword. All the Cattle in the Fields were
either killed or Ham-strung. The City Gandar had the very same fate. The same was done in several other Towns, and with many Ships along the Coast of Ba∣roche. 11. Great was the Joy at Goa, for the News of what had hapned at Diu, carried thither by Iames Rodriguez de Azevedo, by whom the Governour desired the City to lend him Twenty thousand Pardao's for the use of the Army, sending a Lock of his Whiskers in pawn for the Mony. The City returned the Pawn with Respect, and sent him more Mony than he demanded; and the Women their Pendants, Necklaces, Bracelets, and others Jewels. The Gover∣nour punctually restored all, as it was sent; being the day before supplied by a rich Ship of Cambaya, taken by Antony Moniz Barreto on the Coast of Mangalor. 12. The Fort being Repaired, and put into a better condition than it was before the Siege, and Five hundred Men into it, and D. George de Meneses with six Ships upon the Coast, and the City better inhabited through the good Usage of the Governour to the Moors, he sailed for Goa, and ar∣rived there on the 11th of April. He was received with loud Acclamations, and a splendid Triumph prepared by the City, in imitation of those of Rome. The City Gates and Streets were hung with Silk, the Win∣dows thronged with fine Women; all places resounded with Musick and noise of Can∣non, and the Sea was covered with Vessels
richly adorned. The Governour entred under a rich Canopy, where taking off his Cap, they put on his Head a Crown of Laurel, and a Branch of it in his hand. Before him went the Priest with the Cru∣cifix, as he carried it in the Fight, and next to him the Royal Standard. Then Iuzar∣can, his Eyes fixed on the Ground, perhaps that he might not see his Prince's Colours dragged and ours flying, and among them Six hundred Prisoners in Chains. In the Front the Cannon, and all other sorts of Arms in Carts, very delightful to behold. The Governour walked upon Leaves of Gold and Silver, and rich Silks. The Ladies from the Windows sprinckled him with sweet Water, and threw Flowers on him. Our Queen Catherine hearing the Relation of his Victory and Triumph, said, D. John had Overcome like a Christian, and Triumphed like a Heathen.
CHAP. IV. Continues the Government of D. John de Castro, and Reign of King JOHN the Third. 1. SCarce was the Triumph over, when the Governour sent Iames de Almeyda Freyre with One hundred and twenty Horse, Eight hundred Foot, and a Thousand In∣dians, to drive out of the Lands of Salsete and Bardes, some Troops sent to Hidalcan to possess themselves of them; because the Conditions upon which he delivered them were not performed. The Enemy appear∣ed at Cowlij to the number of Four thou∣sand, who fled at the News of our approach. So the Lands were recovered without draw∣ing Sword. Hidalcan sent the same Troops again, with Nine thousand more, and a Company of Renegado Portugueses, Com∣manded by Gonzalo Vaz Coutino, who flying the punishment of his Crimes, defended himself by committing greater. Iames de Almeyda marched again with the same Force as before; but being too weak, was forced to quit what before he had regained. The Governour marched in Person with Three thousand Men in five Batalions. Francis de Melo joyned them with about Fifteen hun∣dred. The Enemy hearing of it, though
so numerous, retired to the Fort of Ponda. Our Army followed, and D. Alvaro de Ca∣stro, who led the Van, took a Ford de∣fended by Two thousand Musqueteers. The other twelve or thirteen Thousand were drawn up in good Order about the Fort; but fled, after receiving our first Fire, leaving the Fort so clear, it appeared they had no design to maintain it. 2. The Victor never wants Friends. Cidoça, King of Canara, sent to Congratu∣late D. Iohn de Castro upon this Victory. He proposed a New League with Portugal; which was concluded upon Honourable Terms, as always happen to those who are sent to. This Kingdom of Charnataca, corruptly Canara, had no Sovereign Prince till the Year of Grace 1200. It began then in Boca a Shepherd, who stiled himself Rao, that is, Emperour, a Title that contiued in all his Successors. This King, as a Memo∣rial of the Defeat given to the King of Delij, built the famous City Visajanagar, corruptly also called Bisnagar. The Crown continued in his Line till usurped by Nar∣singa, from whom this Kingdom took that Name, as also that of Bisnagar, from the City. Afterwards King Melique sent also to ratifie and confirm the Peace with us, rather through Hatred to him was defeated, than Love to the Conquerours.
3. D. George de Meneses, who was left in the Sea of Cambaya with six Ships, was in∣formed that Madremaluco, Son-in-Law to Coje Zofar and Lord of Baroche, was gone from thence with all the Garrison. Baroche is a City seated in the highest part of those Plains, encompassed with a strong Wall, very populous and well built. Meneses marched by Night, and at Break of Day had entred the Houses, killing many asleep, and the others as they awaked. Such as escaped with the Fright, they knew not whither they ran, leaving Wives and Chil∣dren behind only to save their own Lives. The City could not be maintained, and therefore was plundered and burnt, and the Cannon that could not be carried Aboard, were burst. To D. George's Sirname was added that of Baroche. 4. The Governour was informed, the King of Cambaya would come upon Diu with a greater Power than before, and with all diligence prepared to relieve it. The City of Goa advanced Mony for this Enter∣prize, and the Women again sent him their Jewels by their little Daughters, complain∣ing he had not made use of them the last time, and desiring he would now: But he sent them back with Presents. The Fleet consisted of 160 Sail. 5. They sailed to Baçaim, and thence to Suratt, where D. Alvaro, who set out eight days before, had taken a Work, killed some Moors and got Cannon. Next, they entred the Port of Baroche, whence they disco∣vered
the King of Cambaya covering the Plain with 150000 Men, and 80 Cannon in the Front; the Army made a Semi∣circle and covered a League of Ground. D. Iohn boldly leaped ashoar, not only to shew he feared him not, but with design to fight him. The most Experienced Offi∣cers dissuaded him, representing it was a rashness for 3000 to attack 150000; that it was enough that he had Landed, and drawn off with as much leisure, as if Victo∣rious. He was forced against his Will, to submit to the Advice of his Elders. He went on to Diu, and giving the Command of that Fort to Luis Falcam, because D. Iohn Mascarenas was returning to Portugal, he run like an inundation along the Coast of Por and Mongalor. The beautiful and strong Cities of Pate and Patane were aban∣doned by the Inhabitants, and by us de∣stroyed, near Two hundred Vessels burnt in their Ports, and a rich Booty taken. The same hapned to Dabul, but with some opposition. This was done in revenge for Hidalcan's ravaging the Lands of Salsete and Bardes. 6. Calabatecan, his General, had lately possessed those Lands with Twenty thou∣sand Men. The Governour went to meet them with Fifteen hundred Horse and Four thousand Foot; but the Enemy scarce heard them, when they fled to the Moun∣tains of Cowlij, leaving their Tents and Baggage for haste. Our Army rested, and at Break of Day marched to give a good
Morrow to Calabatecan, who slept not, but came down with Two thousand Horse to maintain the Ford. But Almeyda passing with a few Horse, struck him down with his Lance; yet he rising nimbly had killed our Captain with his Cimiter, had not his Page again cast him down with a stroak of a Lance. He again rose, and was again beat down by Almeyda, and cut to pieces. His Arms, Horse and Furniture were of such value, that the share of George Madera, one of those that killed him (being the Cimiter, Dagger, Chain and Rings) were worth Eight thousand Crowns. The Moors and Christians fell to it desperately; but the former knowing their General was killed, soon fled, losing almost Three thou∣sand Men. 7. Soon after the Governour marched to the Coast, where he left neither Town, Wood, nor Flock or Herd of Cattle that could be seen, but what he destroyed with Fire and Sword. He was so pleased with this Success, that he entred Goa in manner of Triumph, giving the best share of it to his Son D. Alvaro. These were rather de∣monstrations of Joy, than Triumphs; if otherwise, the Triumphs were too many. 8. Sometime before F. Antony del Padron (the first Commissary of St. Francis in India) with some Companions had entred into the Island Ceylon, and Preaching had wrought no small effect along the Coast. F. Pascalis was so well received by the King Iavira
Pandar of Candea, that desiring to become a Christian, he was only deterred for fear of his Subjects rebelling, and therefore de∣sired assistance of the Governour in case of any Commotion. Antony Moniz Barreto was sent to this effect. Mean while the King of Cota persuades Iavira, That he should no sooner be a Christian, but the Portugueses would deprive him of his King∣dom. The King giving Credit to this wicked Device, resolved to kill all the Por∣tugueses sent to his assistance. But the better to execute it, feigned himself still of the same Mind. Barreto (it is not known how) had Intelligence of the Design, and finding more danger in Returning to the Ships, than going on to Ceitavaca, where that King was our Friend, he caused those One hundred and twenty Men he had Landed to burn all they had, except some little Provision, to let them know they were to save nothing, but their Lives. Three days they marched, fighting with Eight thousand Men so fortunately, that they arrived at Ceitavaca without losing one Man: To the great Honour of their Captain. 9. Our irreconcileable Enemy, the King of Achem, about this time sent against Ma∣laca a Fleet of sixty Sail, and in it Five thousand Land-men; among which were Five hundred Orobalones, commonly called, Of the Gold Bracelets; because they wear them, and are very brave; but his best Regiment was of Turks and Janizaries.
This Body was Commanded by a Valiant Moor, who had the style of Dr. King of Pedir. He Landed by Night at Malaca, and found nothing but some Geese, which he took to shew his Prince, as a Testimony of his Landing: But those Fowl alarming the City (as formerly the Capitol,) caused all to be in readiness, which was but lit∣tle, the Town being then very scarce of Men. 10. However, the Enemy was forced to retire and imbark, having burnt two Ships of ours that were ready to sail. Without they took seven Fishermen, and cutting off their Noses Ears, and Feet, sent them to the Commander Simon de Melo, with a Chal∣lenge writ with their Blood. The Chal∣lenge was made a Jest of, because there was no Force there to Answer it. But the Great St. Francis Xaverius, who was zealous for the King's Honour, as well as the Service of God, being there then, he disapproved the Jest, and advised to meet the Enemy at any rate. The Governour and others excused themselves, urging there were in the Port but eight small Vessels, which, as being rot∣ten and unfit for service, lay aground. This was true, but the Cause of it was the Neglect and Avarice of the Govern∣ment. 11. The Great Xaverius took so much pains, that he prevailed with some Mer∣chants to fit out those Vessels, prophetically promising two Galliots would come to their Aid. The time prefixed was near expired,
when they appeared sailing for Patane, and came into Malaca, though they had not designed it. The Saint went aboard, found they were Commanded by Iames Suarez de Melo, called the Gallego, and his Son Bal∣tasar; he persuaded them to have a part in that Action. These Ten poor Vessels being fitted and manned with Two hundred and thirty Men, sailed to find out the Enemy under the Command of D. Francis Deça. 12. Being about to return Home, after two Months spent in search of the Enemy, they found him in the River Parles, and Engaged upon a Sunday Morning. The Fight was desperate; our Men behaved themselves with incredible Bravery, and had a most compleat Victory, killing Four thousand of the Enemy, sinking several of their Ships, and taking most of the rest, whereof they carried away but Twenty five, for want of Men, and burnt the rest. Three hundred Pieces of Cannon were taken, and almost a Thousand Musquets. This Victory cost us but Twenty five Men, some say, only four. 13. At the time of this Fight St. Francis was Preaching at Malaca, and pausing, on a sudden related all the particulars of it to his Auditory, who were in great Care for those Ships, having had no News of them in two Months. His Prediction was verified a few days after by their Arrival.
14. In September arrived five Ships from Lisbon: Six set out, but the one was Cast∣away at Angoxa, the Men saved and distri∣buted amongst the other Ships. CHAP. V. The End of the Government of D. John de Castro. 1. THe Governour began this Year with the utter destruction of the Coast subject to Hidalcan. He had the same Fleet as before, and began in Ianuary at the River Charopa, two Leagues from Goa. He spared neither Living Creature, Vegetable, nor the very Stones; but burnt and slaughtered all as far as the City Dabul, which was reduced to Ashes, the Inhabitants being fled with the best of their Goods. Hence he ran in the same manner to the River Cifardam, which parts this Kingdom from that of Melique. 2. The King of Campar, who had taken the City Adem from the Turks, being threatned by them, had recourse to the Portugueses, submitting himself to our King; and to this effect D. Payo de Norona was sent to him with a Supply by the Com∣mander
of Ormuz. D. Payo behaved not himself as he ought to have done on this Occasion; for the King marching out to fight the Turks, by whom he was beaten and slain, and having left him to guard the City, he (over-fearful of Treachery) retired to his Ship, and returned not though he saw the Town Assaulted. Some Turkish Galleys came and besieged the place, and D. Payo having promised the Prince assistance left him, carrying away the few Portugueses he had brought. Emanuel Pereyra resolved to stay there, and Francis Vieyra, who was raising Men at Campar, made his way in. Both behaved themselves bravely; but the Turks entring by Treachery, the Prince and one of his Brothers were killed; the Portugueses with another retired to Campar, to expect the Succours were to come from India. 3. D. Alvaro went with Three hundred Men in Thirty Vessels, loaded with Ammu∣nition. The Governour was overjoyed with the News of the submission of Adem. But this Joy was soon allayed by a dangerous Fever, and a violent Mutiny raised for want of Bread. Emanuel de Sousa & Sepulveda prudently appeased it; and the Governour being recovered, caused his Hand to be cut off who Beat the Drum to Call the Peo∣ple, and two others of the Chief, to be im∣prisoned.
4. D. Iohn de Ataide, or Meneses, sent before by D. Alvaro to Adem, entring boldly as believing it to be in the possession of D. Payo, lost two Vessels and all the Men that were in them, who were either killed or made Slaves by the Turks. Noronha met D. Alvaro at Canequirim, and earnestly la∣boured to represent how great the Danger was that obliged him to quit that place. But the dead Kings Embassadour and his own Silence, when accused, were Witnesses against him. He came afterwards to Goa, and one of his Servants having taken a Hen from a Slave, the Slave was complaining at the Door they would not restore it: When a Portugues passing by told him; Leave off, for in that House they love Hens: If it were Adem they would soon part with it, but not a Hen. Now in Portugues by a Hen they signifie a Coward, as well as the Fowl; and the word Adem signifies a Duck, and was the name of the place he quitted. D. Alvaro finding the posture of Affairs so changed, desisted from the Enterprize. 5. He had Orders, as soon as he con∣cluded at Adem to go to Caxem, that first being laid aside, he went to the second. The King of Caxem impatiently expected his assistance against the Turks, who had taken his Castle of Xael. They assaulted it, and those within (being only Thirty) offered to surrender upon Honourable Terms. The Portugueses against the Incli∣nation of the King and D. Alvaro, refused to give any Conditions, and wrongfully de∣tained
them that came to Treat. Pride and Injustice seldom go unpunished. The Por∣tugueses attack the Fort, and the Besieged turning their Submission into Rage, died couragiously, killing Five hundred Portu∣gueses: The rest returned in Triumph to Goa, which was no ways grateful to the Governour; and 'tis thought the Cowardize at Adem, and Rashness at Xael, were two great Causes that carried him to his Grave, for all he endeavoured to dissemble it. 6. The News of the Victory at Diu being brought this Year to Lisbon, the King re∣solved to send a greater Fleet than usual to India, and to Honour D. Iohn with unusual Favours; for they were the first that any Governour of India received from his Prince, for good Service performed. The Fleet consisted of seventeen Sail. D. Iohn had the Government continued to him with the Title of Vice-Roy, a Present of Mony, and his Son D. Alvaro made Admiral of the In∣dian Seas. 7. D. Iohn was almost dead when these Bounties reached him, and he died of a Disease that nowadays kills no man, though it did formerly; for even Diseases dye. It was grief for the miserable estate India was reduced to, without any means of re∣dressing it; and the Actions of some Gentle∣men, among them that of his Son at Xael. He publickly begged pardon of many for Writing against them to the King, that it may appear, even Great Spirits purchase Favour by mean Whispers.
8. D. Iohn find ing himself unable to ma∣nage the Government, appointed a Council of select Persons to supply his place. And when he saw there was no hopes of Life, he called them before him, and some others, and said, Though he neither hoped nor desired to live, yet while he continued in that condi∣tion something must be spent: That he had nothing, and desired that they would order something out of the King's Revenue, that he might not dye for want. Then he ordered a Mass-Book to be brought, and laying his hand upon it, his Eyes lifted up to Heaven, swore, That he had no way made use of the Kings, or any other mans Mony: That he had not drove any Trade, to increase his own Stock; and desired that this Act of his might be Recorded. Soon after he gave up the Ghost in the Arms of St. Francis Xaverius, on the 6th of Iune, in the 48th year of his Age, having Governed two Years and eight Months. In his private Cabinet was found a Bloody Discipline, and three Royals, which was all his Treasure. 9. He was buried in the Church of Saint Francis. In the Year 1576 his Body was brought to Portugal, and laid in the Church of Bemfica of the Dominicans, on a Hill not far from Lisbon. He is painted Crowned with Palm-branches, and cloathed in Red. He was a great Latinist, and well skilled in Mathematicks. Being desirous to know why the Red-Sea appears of that Colour, he made Men Dive to the bottom and
bring up what they found, whereof he writ a Treatise. 10. D. Iohn Governed without suffering himself to be over-ruled by Pride, as others did before and after him. He asked no∣thing for himself as a Superiour; what the Necessities of the Government required, he asked as an Equal. He valued Men accord∣ing to Merit, not Fancy. He so much loved every one should look like what he was, that seeing a fine Suit of Cloaths as he passed by a Taylors, and being told it was his Sons, he cut it in pieces, saying, Bid that young man provide Arms. He was the 14th in the number of Governours, and may be accounted the 4th Vice-Roy, and first of the Name. 11. It is fit something should be said of this Great Man's descent and first Actions. He was born the Year 1500, and was Son of Alvaro de Castro, Governour of the Chancery, and of D. Leonor de Noronha, Daugh∣ter of D. Iohn de Almeyda, Count of A∣brantes. In his Youth he served in Tangier, and returning home had a Commendary, valued at 500 Ducats a year conferred on him, which was all a man of his Birth and Merits was ever worth. In those days the Revenues were small, and Men great; afterwards the Revenues grew great, and the Men little. A Great Soul then did much with a little; now they do nothing with a great deal. The Year 1505, when D. Francis de Almeyda went first Vice Roy of India, his Salary was but 15000 Royals a
year. D. Constantine fifty years after, because he was of the Blood Royal, had 40000. Now they have 100000. See who per∣formed the greatest Exploits in that Post. 12. He served afterwards under the Em∣perour CHARLES the Fifth, in the Expe∣dition of Tuniz, and refused his part of a Present in Mony that Prince made to the Portugues Officers, saying, He served the King of Portugal, and of him expected his Reward. After this he commanded a Fleet upon the Coast, and was sent with another to the Relief of Ceuta, which joyning with that of Spain; the Spaniard hearing the Moors were drawing near, would draw off to Consult concerning the manner of giving Battle; but D. Iohn refused to stir. The Moors not knowing the Fleets were parted, retired, and D. Iohn remained with the Ho∣nour of this Action. 13. When the Vice-Roy D. Garcia de No∣ronha went to India, D. Iohn was Captain of one of his Ships. Being ready to go aboard, the King sent him a Grant of the Com∣mand of Ormuz, and 1000 Ducats a year ll he was in possession of it. The last he ccepted, because he was poor; and refused e first, saying, He had not yet deserved it. e went to Suez with D. Stephen de Gama, nd up to Mount Sinai, where his Son . Alvaro was Knighted. Being returned to ortugal, he lived retired in a Country-ouse he built near Cintra, giving himself
altogether to his Studies. Thence he was called by the Advice of the Infante D. Luis, and sent Governour to India. CHAP. VI. The Government of Garcia de Sá, from the Year 1548 till the Year 1549, in the Reign of King JOHN the Third. 1. THE first Patent of Succession being opened, named D. Iohn Mascarenhas who after the long Siege of Diu was gone for Lisbon, to seek the Reward which now he missed in India. The second named D. George Tello, absent also. In the third was Garcia de Sá, a Person well versed in the Affairs of India. At his first Entrance upon the Government he gave sufficient Tokens of his Zeal for the Publick, and used some Liberality to gain the Hearts of the Soul∣diers, much dejected with the lessening their Pay. 2. He received an Embassadour from Hidalcan to Treat of Peace, which was concluded much to our Advantage. About the beginning of August came in eleven of the seventeen Ships sent from Portugal this year:
The other six were arrived before. In this Fleet were the first Fathers of the Order of St. Dominick, that went to build a Convent at Goa; they were six, and their Chief F. Iames Bernardez a Spaniard, and a Learned and Pious Man. 3. The Governour sent Martin Correa de Silva to Diu; hastned the departure of the Trading Ships, and sailed for Baçaim with some Men in thirty Vessels, designing to gain some advantage over the King of Cambaya. He was disappointed; but it was some satisfaction that he had Advice there, That the King of Tanor being Converted, desired succour against such as should rebel upon his change of Religion. Garcia de Sá, the Governours Nephew, was sent with Threescore Men of Note, who had good success, as shall appear in its place. 4. At this time the Governour splen∣didly received the Embassadours of Zamori, Canara, Nizamaluco, Cotumaluco, and other Princes, who came to confirm the former Peace. At last Sultan Mamud, King of Cambaya, made Overtures, tired with ill success, and the Peace was established to our Credit. 5. The Spiritual Conquest was now very successful. Xaverius erected Churches, and Converted many among the Patava's, and two Kings with a multitude of People in Malaca. Iohn Soarez, Vicar of the Fort of Chale, converted the King of Tanor, with his Queen and Children. He desiring to see the Offices of the Church solemnly per∣formed
at Goa, and be confirmed by the Bishop, came to the City, was nobly re∣ceived, and departed well satisfied, promi∣sing to make his Subjects follow his Exam∣ple. The Persuasions of Zamori wrought no effect upon him now; but afterwards it seems they prevailed, for we shall see him in Arms against those who received him with such Honour. 6. One Bislald, an Ethiopian and Favou∣rite of the King of Ormuz, rebelled against him at Manojam. The King sent against him a good Body of his Men, supported by 120 Portugueses, to which were afterwards added 1000 of the first, and 180 of the latter; but all to no purpose, for he still kept himself out of reach. D. Emanuel de Lima finding he could not do any thing by open force, resolved to reach him by Craft. He agreed with a Gallego, That he should counterfeit he fled from him, and getting into Baslala's Camp, kill him the first oppor∣tunity. The Gallego soon performed, and all was quiet. 7. This Year we shall see a bloody War between Pegu and Siam, for an Elephant. The King of Siam had a white Elephant, a Beast coveted by all the Princes of the East. The King of Pegu demanded it by way of Superiority; and he of Siam refused it, not so much for the value of the Beast, as for the manner of asking. He of Pegu entred his Dominions, and reduced him to desire a Peace upon any Terms, so the Ele∣phant were not comprehended. They
agreed the King of Pegu should have the Siam's Daughter and a Noble Woman every year, as an acknowledgment: But the latter not performing, the other returned with 1500000 Men, 4000 Elephants, and an incredible Train; with him came the Kings that depended on him, and Iames Soarez de Melo with 180 Portugueses. Above two Thousand Workmen went before, who every Night set up a stately Wooden Palace, richly painted and adorned with Gold. He made a prodigious Bridge of Boats over the rapid River Menam, a League over, to pass his Army. In his Way was a narrow Pass, where the Siamite had raised a strong Wall, guarded by 25000 Men. Iames Soarez was sent to gain it with 30000, which he performed with some loss to himself, but utter destruction of the Enemy. At length he sat down with his wonderful Army be∣fore the City Odia, the Court or the King of Siam, who was within with 60000 Men, and 4000 Cannon, some of a prodigious magnitude. Odia is eight Leagues in com∣pass, about it a strong Wall, and round that a wide and deep Water. 8. The Battery began. In the Town were 50 Portugueses, Commanded by Iames Pereyra, who behaved themselves to admi∣ration. The King of Pegu endeavoured to corrupt them with Bribes; but they re∣jected all his Offers. The King astonished, despaired of gaining by the Sword, what could not be bought with Gold, and removed to the City Camambee, where were
the Siamites Treasures; the Place strong, and defended by 20000 Men. After many Attempts this vast Power was forced to march off without doing any thing. 9. Xemindoo rebelled against the King of Pegu, who sent Iames Soarez with Two hundred Portugueses to suppress him. He followed him to the City Cevadi; and he slipping by, got into Pegu, because the City sided with him. The Queen fled to the Castle, where she was defended by twenty Portugueses, till the King came and put the Rebels to flight. The Army entred the City, and put to the Sword not only Men, Women and Children, but even the Beasts; nothing escaped, but what was within the li∣berty of Iames Soarez his House, which the King had ordered should be exempted; above Twelve thousand saved themselves therein. The Plunder was unaccountable, Iames Soarez alone got above three Millions. At his In∣tercession the King pardoned a Portugues, who had furnished Xemindoo with Ammu∣nition. 10. Though the King escaped the hands of Xemindoo, he could not the Villany of Ximi de Zatan, (Ximi is equivalent to a Duke, and he really was one of Satan's creating) who murdered him in the de∣lightful City Zatan. The Traytor was im∣mediately proclaimed King, and falling among the murdered Princes Men, killed three of those that belonged to Iames Soarez, who fled to the City Ovà, and afterwards at Pegu was reconciled to this
New King, till Xemindoo, who fled before, came on again with a powerful Army. Ximi commanded Iames Soarez, and his Por∣tugueses, to march with him against the Enemy; but before he came thither, the punishment of his great Insolencies reached him, as shall be seen hereafter. 11. Zatan was taken and Beheaded by Xemindoo, who gave out it was for the kil∣ling of Soarez, as if the murder of the King had not been a more justifiable Mo∣tive. Thus the first Rebel possessed himself of the Crown, till Mandaragri, the late Kings Brother-in-Law, claimed it in right of his Wife; and coming to a Battle, gave him such a total Defeat, that Xemindoo fled to the Mountains, where he married a poor Fellows Daughter. He discovered himself to her, and she revealed it to her Father, at such time as great Rewards were pro∣posed to such as should discover him. The Father-in-Law delivered him up to the King, who cut off his Head. 12. The King not throughly satisfied with the People of Pegu, built not far from it another great and strong City. Then he marched with an Army of 1600000 Men, and over-run many Neighbouring King∣doms. But another Rebellion breaking out at Pegu, the Queen was forced to fly to the Castle, chiefly relying upon 39 Portugueses, who defended her till the King came and vanquished the Rebels. Then the King sent an Officer to bring those Men, who had de∣fended the Queen, to his presence. He
brought him some Moors of Note; but the King knowing the Portugueses were the Men, said in Anger, I sent you for Men, and you bring me Cowards; Go, bring me Men. The Portugueses being brought, he bid them ask whatever Reward they would, and they with the Surprize doubting, the King loaded them with Riches, Praises and Honours. 13. Now were the Inhabitants of the City Chincheo, the second Portugues Colony in China, in a flourishing condition, and seemed to have forgot the sad Fate of Liampo, destroyed through their Wickedness and Avarice. Ayres Coello de Sousa came thither to be Judge of the Orphans, and Proveditor for the Dead; his Intention being to rob the Living and Dead, his Countrymen and Strangers. He committed many Villanies to lay hold of 12000 Du∣cats, belonging to an Armenian Christian, who died there, and 8000 more of some Chinese Merchants, upon pretence they be∣longed to the dead Man. These and other Insolencies provoked the Chineses to do, as they had done at Liampo; to wit, to raze the Town, and destroy all the Inhabitants. Only Thirty escaped of Five hundred Por∣tugueses that lived there. These, and some others they gathered, went over to the Island Lampazau; and afterwards, in the Year 1557, obtained of the Chineses that of Gaoxam, where they built the City now called Macao, as shall be seen in its place.
14. Our Governour studying some Means to relieve the great Wants of the Souldiers, was suddenly snatched away by Death, about the beginning of Iuly. He was much regretted for his Prudence, Affability and Integrity; for being Seventy years of Age, and having born considerable Offices, he was forced to give all he had to Match two Daughters, and yet the best part of their Portions was their Beauty, and that He was their Father. He had a graceful Presence; a comly Countenance, always Smiling, without lessening his Gravity: For it is not necessary to be like a Statue, to appear like a God. He was of the first Quality of his Country: His Beard very white and full, falling upon his Breast: Governed a Year and a Month, and was the 15th in that Rank; the second of the Name, and first of the Sirname.
CHAP. VII. The Government of George Cabral, from the Year 1549, till the Year 1550, in the Reign of King JOHN the Third. 1. THE Patents of Succession being opened, there was found in the first 1549. George Cabral, a Gentleman by Birth, and of known Worth, who not long before was gone to take possession of the Com∣mand of Baçaim. He received the News with small signs of Joy, an ill token for him that expected the Recompence of carrying it: But he being a generous Man, did not lessen the Reward. It was not want of desire to Govern that made him dissatisfied; but that he feared another coming soon from Portugal to succeed him, he should lose the great Advantages he might have made of the Command he was in, and which he was to hold four Years. With him was his Wife D. Lucretia Fiallo, who had double Pre∣tensions to be vain, as a Woman, and as a Beauty, and had now a third, in the News of being Wife to the Governour of India; so she laughed to see her Husband doubt, whe∣ther he should receive what was offered.
2. Cabral revolved a thousand Thoughts with himself, not knowing whether to ad∣mit or refuse the Government, and these Cares so disturbed him, that he could not Rest at Night. His Wife finding him so dubious, and fearing to be disappointed of the Pride of sitting, though never so short a time in the Throne of India, took him one Night to task, and using all Arts of an ambitious Womans Tongue, and the Allurements of that place, prevailed with him to lay aside all Doubt, and accept of the Honour offered, which he had seemed averse to, and which she so ardently desired. 3. He admired her efficacy in Persuading, no less powerful in the beauty of her Lan∣guage, than that of her Person. Though he always thought her a Woman of Sense; (for Beauty and Folly are not always inse∣parable) yet he could not but conclude, the desire of Greatness is a great matter of Elo∣quence. Who could resist a resolute Beauty? Had it been to draw on Mankind another Universal sin, he must have been an Adam to that Eve; much more to accept of a Command for which he was sufficiently qua∣lified. In fine, The New Governour sailed to Goa, in this only Governed by his Wife; for India might vie with her in the desire of seeing him possess that Throne many years: For Cabral deserved to have been long con∣tinued in that Post, and India was obliged to his Wife for the short time he held it. Wo∣men are not always hurtful: But in those
days there were some Beautiful and Gay without being quite Mad. 4. At our Governours coming from Co∣chin, there was not a right Understanding between that King and him, because he ordered Francis de Silva to attemp to Plun∣der the Pagod of Palurte, which was dis∣appointed, and he lost three Portugueses; and the Loss had been greater, but that the King was then absent. This was the Cause that three Ships set out for Portugal late, and ill Laden. Now came the News, That above 100 Sail were fitting out at Suez, to transport Turks into India. The Governour applied himself to provide for such a Storm, he acquainted the Chief of our Towns. Goa offered much, Chaul 30 Sail, Bazaim 20. Whilst these Preparations were making, F. Antony Criminal, an Italian Jesuit, preach∣ing at Cape Comori, received the Crown of Martyrdom at the hands of a multitude of the King of Bisnagar's Subjects, who assault∣ed him as he Preached. He was run through with three Lances, and then his Head cut off. King Iohn was so mightily delighted with this Exploit, that he immediately sent Advice to Baltasar de Faria his Embassadour at Rome, to communicate it to the Pope, who received it with due applause.
CHAP. VIII. Continues the Government of George Cabral. 1. ZAmori, and the King of Pimienta, were joyned in a League against him of Cochin, which threatned that State with dangerous consequences. The Go∣vernour set out to prevent them with a Fleet of 90 Sail; but returned to Goa with∣out doing any thing, because the Season was unfit. He only consulted with the King of Cochin about the manner of carrying on the War against those Confederates, since they could not be brought to a Peace. 2. The Weather being seasonable, the King of Pimienta took the Field at Bardela wth 10000 Nayres, the King of Cochin did the same with his Men, and 600 Portugueses, Commanded by the rash Francis de Sylva, Captain of that Fort. The Armies being drawn up in sight, the King of Pimienta, at the Request of Sylva, gave him a Meeting between them. Sylva pressed for an Ac∣commodation, which the King condescend∣ing to upon reasonable Terms, was broke off by our Captain; who having more natural Strength than natural Reason, acted more like a Brute than a Man. The Armies
charged each other Couragiously, and the King of Pimienta was carried off Wounded, and died before he knew the event of the Battle. His Men fled, and were pursued into their City with great slaughter; the Royal Palace was fired, which among them is the hainousest Affront; whereupon they Rallied, and fell upon the Victors with such Fury, that they obliged them to retire in great disorder. Sylva discharged some few that stood by him, and rushing into the thickest of the Enemies, was killed. Above fifty Portugueses were lost here, which abundantly countervailed for our Victo∣ry. 3. Five thousand Nayres, all sworn to Revenge the death of their King, or dye, entred the Country of Cochim, killing many, and forcing others to fly to the Fort. The Commander of the Fort, Henry de Sousa, marced out, and finding them engaged with the Indians, who fought desperately, killed Five hundred. Two strange and contrary Accidents hapned upon this occa∣sion: One was, a Man that lay dying arose, and taking a Lance did great Execution among the Enemies, and perfectly reco∣vered his health: The other, a Man in perfect health, who fell down dead with the Fright. 4. All the Joy of this Success vanished at the sight of Zamori, who came attended by the Princes of Malabar, with 140000 Men. He Encamped with 100000 at Chembe, ordering those Princes (who were
eighteen in number, and among them the King of Tanor, lately so fond of us and our Religion) with the other 40000, where∣of 5000 had devoted themselves to pass over into the Island Bardela. Our Gover∣nour, upon the first Advice, prepared to meet this Storm. He sent before Ema∣nuel de Sousa & Sepulveda with four Ships, and Orders, That having joyned those that were at Cochim, he should shut up those Princes in the Island till he came, being resolved to follow at his Heels. Sepulveda did his part, and the Governour his, for he sailed immediately; the Cities of Goa, Chaul, and Baçaim, furnishing what they had offered for the Expedition against the Turks, which came to nothing. The Fleet consisted of above 100 Sail, and almost 4000 Landmen. The first Execution was at Tiracole, where many Houses, Ships and Goods were burnt. Coulete suffered the same Fate, after a vigorous Resistance, which cost the Lives of many of them, and sixteen of ours. At Panane the same, and we lost eight. 5. Our Governour Landed at Cochim, and found that King with Forty thousand Men; he had himself Six thousand, Two thou∣sand having joyned him there. The Island being beset, and Signal given to fall on, those within began to waive a white Flag, for a Parley. It was concluded, those eighteen Princes should put themselves into the Governours hands, upon promise of Life. He finding they delayed, resolved to
fight them the next day, but was hindred by a great Flood; yet he concluded he might put his design in execution the day after. But what security is there in human Felicity? Cabral was almost in possession of one of the most glorious Actions that had been seen in India, when the sudden Arrival of the Vice-Roy D. Alfonso de No∣ronha ravished this Honour from him, no suffering him to proceed, nor concluding himself what was so well begun. On the contrary, he suffered all those Princes to escape with their whole Army. 6. St. Francis Xaverius seeing how many great Enterprizes were disappointed through the malice or Envy of the Governours, wrote a Letter to the King, acquainting him therewith, and advising to punish such Miscarriages with severity, whereby they might for the future be prevented. But Ministers serve as they please; Saints advise well, and Princes Eyes are never opened. Commonly, the want of due Punishment is the cause of publick Calamities. 7. Whilst George Cabral was at Cochim, waiting to embarque in the Ships that were bound to Portugal, one Night about the middle of February there was a Report, That Eight thousand sworn Nayres would enter the City. Cabral run to the Gates, with Emanuel de Sousa & Sepulveda, in order to march out and meet them at Break of Day; but was hindred by the Council of the City. He stayed with a competent Number of Men to guard the Town, and
sent Sepulveda with Fifteen hundred Portu∣gueses and the Natives. They found those desperate Men in a Neighbouring Town, acting all that Rage and Malice could sug∣gest. They Charged them; the Fight was very desperate, fifty Portugueses were slain, and above a Thousand of the Amouco's or devoted Nayres, the rest fled. 8. Let us see what was done during this time by the Captains, sent by the Governour to several parts. The King of Cota had asked Succour against his Brother Madune Pandar, King of Ceitavaca, who endea∣voured to expel him his Kingdom; he offered in requital for the Relief, to pay a greater Tribute than before. Caralea Pan∣dar, Prince of Candea (not following the Example of his Father, who was bent against the Religious Men, who made him a Christian) desired to be Baptized, and fled with the Priests to a Fort, from whence he sent to beg the Governour's assistance. Both these places being in the Island Ceylon, he sent thither D. George de Castro with six hundred Men. Madune scarce saw him, when he raised the Siege he had laid to Cota, where his Brother was. The King of Cota and D. George followed him; and he so fortified the Passes, they were forced in some places to fight their way through showers of Bullets, Stones and Arrows, with some loss of Men, and no small slaughter of the Enemy. Being come in sight of the City Madune met them, and there ensued a bloody Battle desperately fought on both
sides. At length Madune was obliged to y to the Mountains, and leave his Brother in possession of that great City, singularly adorned by a Pagod of wonderful magni∣ficence. The Plunder was very considerable. Madune implored his Brother's Mercy, who had little reason to shew him any; yet did, and left him possessed of his King∣dom. 9. D. George did not meet with the like success at Candea, whither he went after this Victory. The Enemy came unexpectedly upon him with Forty thousand Men in a narrow Pass, whence he could not escape, and killed Eight hundred of his Men, half of them Portugueses. He got away with more grief for this Loss, than honour by the late Victory. For it is certain, we are more sensibly grieved at Misfortunes, than pleased with Success. 10. Bernardin de Sousa, at the Maluco's, continued the War against the King of Gi∣lolo, and drew off with a rich Booty, after destroying some Towns on the Coast with Fire and Sword. At this time came Chri∣stopher de Sá to succeed him in that Com∣mand. 11. George Cabral imbarqued well pleased with his good success against the sworn nayres, and was well received in Portugal for his great Merit, contrary to the Custom of this Kingdom. He was generally e∣steemed one of the best Governours of India. He was the sixteenth of that num∣ber, and held it a year and four Months.
His Person was graceful, his Countenance pleasing, of a ruddy Complexion, his Beard a dark Chesnut. 12. This Year was born at Goa (the Father and Mother were Canara's) a hairy Monster like a Monky, with a round Head and only one Eye in the Forehead, over it grew Horns, and on the sides Ears like those of a Kid. As the Midwife received it into her Hands, it cried out with a loud Voice and stood upon its Feet. The Father locked it up in a Hen-Coop: It got out, and seiz∣ing upon the Mother, had like to tear off one of her Nipples. The Father catching it again, poured scalding Water upon the Head and killed it, and could scarce cut off the Head, it was so hard. He burnt it; and the thing being known he was punished for killing it, and the Body was exposed to pub∣lick view in the City.
CHAP. IX. The Government of the Vice-Roy D. Al∣fonso de Noronha, from the Year 1550, till 1553, in the Reign of King JOHN the Third. 1. DOn Alfonso de Noronha was taken from the Government of Ceuta, to be sen to that of India, and more Favours conferred on him than on any of his Pre∣decessors; as if this Post of it self were not as great a Favour for him, as for others. Thus we see Princes bestow the very same Places on some as Rewards, which they give to others as a step to Merit: The fault is not in the Gift, but in him that bestows it. But it seems, the King in part ballanced this Favour by assigning him a Council, by whom he must of necessity be Advised in India. 2. He had Orders to send back into Portugal all the New Christians, that is, Converted Jews, who had gone from hence with their whole Families; and it were better they had been banished both places. He was also to take cognizance of those Ancient Christians, who disturbed such as were con∣verted from Paganism.
3. Don Alfonso set out of Lisbon with four Ships; one had been sent before▪ to give Advice why the rest stayed, and D. Alvaro de Gama (Son to the Great Vasco) sailed so late, it was never expected he would get thither; yet he overtook the others, the Seas being favourable to all that descend from his Father; for it was never known any of them was Cast-away. The Vice-Roy was received at Goa with the usual de∣monstrations of Joy, proceeding rather from the hatred they bear him that lays down the Sword, than love to him that takes it up. 4. He immediately sent Advice of his Arrival to all Parts, and dispatched Com∣manders to several Forts, and for Sea. Luis Figueyra was sent to the Red Sea with five Vessels, where they met the Turk Cafar with five Galliots. Figueyra attacks Cafar's Galliot, and was slain, much admired by the Enemy for his Valour. The four sub∣ordinate Captains stood looking on and saw him killed, without coming to his Re∣lief. One of them, Gaspar Nunez, ashamed of what he had done, went away with all his Men into Ethiopia, and was never more heard of. Soveral, another of them, met one of those Galliots, fought, and they parted upon equal Terms. After he met the other two, and they all returned with disgrace to Goa.
5. The Arabs of Catifa delivered up to the Turks the Fort of that City, which highly offended the King of Ormuz. The Turks had also expelled his Kingdom the King of Baçora, who yet kept the Field with Thirty thousand Men, in hopes to recover his Kingdom with the assistance of the Portugueses. To this effect he sent an Embassy to the Vice-Roy, offering leave to build a Fort in his Harbour, and other Advantages to the Crown of Portugal. D. Antonio de Noronha, Nephew to the Vice-Roy, was sent to assist these two Kings, with Twelve hundred Men in nineteen Vessels. Being come to Ormuz, they marched with Three thousand of that Kings Men, and set down before the Fort of Catifa. Four hundred Turks that were in that Garrison behaved themselves bravely; but finding it in vain to resist, fled by Night, and being discovered were pursued and routed. The Fort was taken, and the Captain of Ormuz not daring to maintain it, it was thought fit to be razed. A Mine was made, which taking fire before the time, and blowing up, the Work buried 40 Portugueses. 6. After this Victory Noronha sailed to the Mouth of the River Euphrates, in order to relieve the King of Baçora. Here a cunning Bassa persuaded him, he was sent for to be delivered up to his Enemies; whereupon he returned Inglorious to Ormuz, where being come he understood the De∣ceit, but it was too late.
7. The Vice-Roy had sent D. Garcia de Meneses to Command at Ternate, at the Request of that King, who could not en∣dure Iordan de Freytas, that sent him Pri∣soner to Goa. The Affairs of Malaca hin∣dred Meneses from going thither. Bernar∣din de Sousa, who had scarce resigned that Post to Christopher de Sá, returned, with Orders to continue there, in case the Spa∣niards encroached upon those places. Sá refused to admit him, because the Spaniards were quiet, and his Order conditional; but Sousa pressed to be restored, because he had not made so much of that Command as he expected. At length Sá, to prevent Mis∣chief, submitted. Sousa immediately sets out with 180 Portugueses, and sails for Gilolo, to destroy the Fort was raising there. The King of Ternate, and Prince of Bacham, followed with 5000 Men. 8. The King of Gilolo couragiously ex∣pected the coming of his Enemy in the the Fort, with 1200 Men and many Pieces of Cannon. Baltasar Veloso led our Van; the Prince of Gilolo breaking out of an Ambush with Four hundred Men, fell upon and distressed him; but Veloso, though se∣venty years of Age, made such havock among the Enemies, they were forced to fly. Our Captain received some damage, continues his Battery, and sits down to be∣siege the place. He cut off their Water, which obliged them, after a Siege of three Months, to Capitulate, and Peace was con∣cluded upon these hard Terms, That the
King should lose this Title and be styled Governour, and pay Tribute. The Portu∣gueses entred the Fort in his presence, com∣mitting many barbarous Enormities, and laid it even with the ground. It is no small Credit to those of Gilolo, that they held out four days after all their Provision was spent. On our side Three hundred Men were killed, eighteen of them Portugueses; there were more wounded. Ferdinand Macha saying, He should be killed here, said the Office of the Dead for himself; and let it might be thought Cowardize, went Dan∣cing up to the Enemy; he died of his Wounds soon after the Surrender. The King also died for Grief, and his Son C∣chilguzarate succeeded him. Bernardin de Sousa being jealous of the Fort of Tidore, went over to it; and that King fearing greater damage, agreed it should be demo∣lished. 9. Sultan Halaudim, that King that Peter Mascarenas expelled Bantam, and D. Stephen de Gama from Ujantana, resolved now to try his Fortune against Malaca. He had a great Power at Sea, and was assisted by the Kings of Pera, Pam and Marruaz, and the Queen of Iapara in the Island of Iava. About the beginning of Iune the Fleet of these Confederates put to Sea, consisting of above Two hundred Sail. The King of Ujantana had sent an Embassadour to D. Pe∣dro de Silva, Commander of Malaca, whose chief business was to discover what Force was in Malaca. D. Pedro, on the other side,
was privately informed by Laximena, the Embassadour's Father, of the King's design, which was to surprize Malaca by giving ot, His Preparations were against Achem. He had like to compass his Ends, for the time was very short to provide. The King entred the Port, and burnt what Ships were in it, and at the same time possessed him∣self of the Suburbs. Then he intrenched, planted his Cannon, and began to batter the Fort furious and successfully, and at length reduced the Inhabitants to feed upon such things as are loathsom. 10. D. Garcia de Meneses sailing for the Maluco's, put into Malaca with his Caravel, where he had a hot Dispute with Lac∣xemena, the Kings Admiral, who had be∣trayed his Masters Counsels to the Portu∣gueses, and was then killed by them, with his Son, and his Ship sunk. But D. Garcia did not long survive this Honour; for at∣tempting to gain a Gun that did much da∣mage to the Town, he was killed, and with him above thirty Portugueses, brought by D. Pedro de Silva to rescue him. Mean while several Portugues Ships came into the Harbour from divers parts, the News of the danger Malaca was in had reached. The Enemy endeavoured to oppose them, and Gomes Barreto conducted them in with safety.
11. The Enemy resolved to Assault the City, and the Commander D. Pedro having Notice of it, provided to receive them. Scarce did they begin to mount their Lad∣ders, when there fell on them a Storm of great pieces of Timbers, Stones and Gra∣nado's, so that in an instant above Eight hundred of them lay dead under the Wall. This obliged them to retire to their Works, and they resolved to starve the City. Our Commander fearing the Consequence of this Resolution, was advised by an unknown Souldier, (who before at the Assault pro∣moted the throwing of Beams) to send abroad some Ships, and give out, They were going to put those King Countries to Fire and Sword. They believing it, left the Siege, which was prosecuted by the Queen of Iapara, with the Men of Iava, till Giles Fernandez de Carvallo coming unex∣pectedly with Two hundred Men, there ensued a bloody Fight; and at length the Enemies were put to a shameful flight, ha∣ving lost above Two thousand Men, many Ships, and all their Cannon and Ammu∣nition, whereof was a great quantity, and it was of great consequence to the City. What the Enemy could not execute by force when present, they did by perfidious∣ness after their flight. They poisoned a Well, whereof our Men drinking, above Two hundred died, to the great terrour of all, till the Cause was known.
12. The Affairs of Ceylon were now in a very turbulent posture; for Madune, con∣trary to the Agreement, distressed the King of Cota, who had recourse to Gaspar de Aze∣vedo, Commander of Columbo, and he (with the King's Men and 100 Portugueses) de∣feated the Enemy. But the King of Cota being killed by a Musquet-shot, he of Cey∣tavaca renewed his Pretensions. The suc∣cess was not answerable to his expectation; for the New Prince, assisted by the Portu∣gueses, gave him a total Rout. At the be∣ginning of September the Vice-Roy prepared to go in Person to remedy these Disorders. At the same time arrived from Portugal five Ships, and soon after two more. One was forced back to Lisbon by ill Weather. The Vice-Roy set out the beginning of October, with 3000 Men in 70 Sail. 13. The first thing he did after his Arrival at Ceylon, was to put upon the Rack some Subjects of that King he went to succour, that they might discover where their Princes Treasure was buried, as if he had been an Enemy, or had sent for him to make him his Treasurer. In the second place, he searched the Dead Man's Palace, and found 80000 Ducats. Thirdly, He demanded 200000 Ducats for his Charges, which was immediately granted. And, Fourthly, he took the Field with his Three thousand Portugueses, and Four thousand of the Kings Men. The King of Ceytavaca met them with a like Number; but soon fled into the Mountains, followed only by 100 Men.
His City was plundered, and the Booty very considerable. The Vice-Roy turned over the Earth, and dug up the Foundations of Buildings, to discover hidden Treasures. One was found, consisting of many Gold and Silver Idols of a large size, and other things. One half of right belonged to the King we pretended to Relieve, according to Agreement; but the Wants of India per∣mitted no performance of Promises. Had the Indian broke his Word with the Chri∣stian, he had been a Barbarian. I know not what a Christian is, that breaks his with the Barbarian: Perhaps wiser Men know. It appeared we went in search of hidden Treasures, not to Relieve distressed Kings; when this King desiring Five hun∣dred Portugueses might be left with him, to prevent his Enemies making Head again, he was left without any, because there was no more hopes of Treasure. But we shall soon see the King of Cota revenged by the King of Portugal, that it may appear the Actions of Kings are Divine, when they are their own. 14. Mean while Don Antony de Noronha scoured the Sea of Calicut, making great havock in it, and along the shoar. The Vice-Roy returned to Cochin, bringing with him a Kinsman of the King of Cota, who was become a Christian; went to Portugal, where he was received with Honour, and sent back to India, and died in the Faith. The Vice-Roy found the dispatch of the Homeward-bound Trading Ships, was re∣tarded
by the Prince of Chembe, he resolved to punish him, and set out with a Fleet that contained Four thousand Men. Thirty thousand were gathered from Calicut to oppose him, and some endeavoured to hin∣der the Landing, but were soon put to flight. 15. Our Men landed and marched to the City; the Enemy met them, and there followed a bloody Battle, in which we lost forty Men; but the Enemy was put to flight, and the Vice-Roy satisfied with ravaging the Country, returned to Cochim, and dis∣patched the Ships for Portugal. In them went an Embassadour from Nautaquim, Prince of Tanixumaa, or Taquixima, one of the Islands of Iapan, and a rich Present; he desired Five hundred Men to conquer the Island Lequio, and in return offered to pay Tribute. The Embassadour was one Iames Gomez de Almeyda, who was lost in the Unfortunate Ship in which Emanuel de Sousa & Sepulveda was Cast-away, with his Wife D. Leonor de Albuquerque & Sá, who being put ashoar at the Cape of Good Hope, endured incredible hardships, and at length died miserably, giving occasion to sundry Relations that are spread about the World, which being in part false, I will here give a brief Account of the whole Mat∣ter.
16. They got ashoar at the Cape of Good Hope, to the number of Five hundred and thirty Souls; and at first marched in good Order, with Colours and a Crucifix on high, designing for Mozambique. They began their march the 3d of Iuly, and about the end of it several were left behind Famished, and among them a Natural Son of Emannel de Sousa. D. Leonor marched afoot; for those who had carried her were no longer able to support themselves. At the end of three Months and a half they came to the Cot∣tages of Oinhaca, a little Prince on the Banks of the River Del Espiritu Sancto: This good Old Man entertained them with great kindness, offering to relieve them till some Portugues Ships came to the Neighbouring Shoars, whereof his People had always Notice. He also warned them, That further on was the Little Prince Ofumo, who would do them all the harm he could, if they proceeded on their Journey. Ema∣nuel de Sousa following his Destiny, went on; but seeing that of Five hundred and thirty Persons, he had but One hundred and twenty left, and that his Wife D. Leonor could hardly go farther, taking her turn with the Slaves in carrying her little Chil∣dren, he began to shew some signs of Di∣straction, which was an incredible Grief to his Wife, who doted on him. Being come to Ofumo's Country, forgetting the Warn∣ing Oinhaca had given, he trusted him, and resolved there to wait for Portugues Ships. Ofumo designed to rob him, but feared his
Mens Arms. He persuaded him to deliver them up, and he should have all Necessaries abundantly provided; pretending his Sub∣jects did not supply him for Fear. Not∣withstanding all Persuasions to the contrary, he delivered them, and had scarce done it when he was robbed of all his Jewels, and only their Cloaths left them. At this he run quite Mad, and his Wife taking him by one hand and her son in the other, her Slaves following, and some few Men, they went on till the Cafres fell upon and strip∣ped them. D. Leonor endeavoured to defend her self to no purpose, and with hazard of her Life, till her Husband persuaded her to choose the lesser Evil; but she thought it less Ill to dye, than be seen Naked by any, but her Husband. As soon as she was stripped, she made her Slaves stand about her, and sitting down on the Sand, made a Hole, where she covered her self to the Waste: Then looking upon the Pylot, An∣drew Vaz, said, You see how God permits, as a punishment of my sins, that my Husband, Chil∣dren and I perish in this miserable manner. If you get to Portugal, or India, give an ac∣count of it. The Pylot not able to return an Answer for grief, went whatever way Chance guided him. Emanuel de Sousa had run to the Wood, to gather some wild Fruit for his Wife and Children, who were pe∣rishing with Hunger, and returning found one dead, and her with the other scarce alive. He buried the dead Child, and re∣turned for more Fruit, but too late; for
when he came they were both dead. After pausing a while, he made a Hole and buried his Son, and then his Wife; after which he ran into the thickest of the Wood with∣out once looking back. Three of his Slaves got to India, who gave this Relation, as others who reached Moçambique did, of other Passages. Among these was Sebastian de Sá, who in this Misery experienced two Notable things: One, That the Gravity even of a Portugues Gentleman (as he was) must yield to Misfortunes; for he, to ob∣lige the Cafres to give him some Sustenance, played the Antick, or Buffoon. The other, That this sort of Life is the surest in the World.
CHAP. X. Continues the Government of the Vice-Roy, D. Alfonso de Noronha. 1. THE Great Turk offended at what we had done at Caxem, or Catifa, and attempted at Baçora, studied Revenge; and to execute it set out Pirbec, an Old Pyrat, with Sixteen thousand Men in strong Galleys and other Vessels. D. Alvaro de Noronha, Commander of Ormuz, concluded this Storm threatned him. He sent some to discover the Enemy, and among them Simon de Costa, who met Pirbec's Son sent also before in a Galley to discover. Our Barque slipped under his very Oars so swift∣ly, that two of the Men were left hanging at them; the Galley pursues, but Simon scat∣tering Mony among his Men, may be said to have got off with Golden Oars. The young Man raged that this Prize should escape him; but was somewhat appeased when he met another Barque, in which was the Wife of Iohn de Lisboa, Commander of Mascate, and those of some other Portugueses that lived there, with two Old Men, all sent away to Ormuz for fear of the Enemy. The Women were secured, and the Men put to the Oar.
2. The Enemies Fleet came before Mas∣cate, which held out almost a Month against that great Power; but was forced to submit and capitulate. Pirbec broke the Articles, putting the Captain and sixty Men to the Oar; some of them were afterwards ran∣somed. This done, Pirbec goes on to Ormuz▪ D. Alvaro de Noronha had Nine hundred Men in that Fort, and in it was the King, his Wife, Children, and the Chief of their Court, who had taken Sanctuary there. He laid up Am∣munition for a long Siege, and secured forty Sail that were in the Bay, among them one of those that the year before went from Portugal. The Turk being come to an An∣chor, presently Landed and Encamped. He Intrenched, raised Batteries, planted much Cannon, and played it furiously without in∣termission for a whole Month. Finding he sustained much Loss, and laboured in vain, he plundered the City and went over to the Island Queixome, whither many considerable Men of Ormuz had withdrawn themselves; here he got a great Booty, and retired. 3. Before Pirbec departed from Ormuz, he offered our Commander to ransom the Prisoners taken at Mascate, and sent him as a Present the Wife of Iohn de Lisboa, the two Old Men, and the two Souldiers that hung to the Oars of his Sons Galley. D. Alvaro received the two last, and sent back the others with some Presents, and this Message; That the Present was in return for the Men he received: That the Old Men he sent, because they had not rather hose to lose their Lives,
than Liberty; and the Woman (though Innocent) to punish her Husbands guilt, by seeing her return into slavery. This Proceeding was no ways justifiable; and Pirbec to shew he did not again receive what he had once given, or∣dered them to be left upon the Shoar. 4. The Governour informed of the dan∣ger that threatned Ormuz, but not of its deliverance, with great diligence fitted a Fleet to go in Person to relieve it. All Ranks vied in aiding him towards this Work, at such time as six Ships arrived from Portugal, it being the beginning of September. He sailed as far as Diu, and hearing Ormuz was out of danger, returned to Goa. At this time D. Duarte Deça sailed for Ceylon, to suc∣ceed D. Iohn Enriquez, deceased; with him went St. Francis Xaverius, carried by the de∣sire of making a Spiritual Conquest. 5. A bold Turk, by Consent of Zamori, scoured the Seas with fifteen large Vessels well Manned. He fell upon Punicale, where Emanuel Rodriguez Commanded with seventy Portugueses. The Fight was sharp, till Antony Franco taking the Enemies Colours, they fled. The Turk enraged sent again Fifteen hun∣dred, who put all our Men to flight, except the Captain and seventeen, and these made a desperate resistance; but at last were ob∣liged to quit the Town and fly to Bisme Naique, a Subject of Canarà, who made them all Slaves. The Turk, after plundering the Town, returned to his Ships Victorious. The News being brought to Cocim, stirred up a general desire of Revenge. Whilst
things were debating, Giles Fernandez de Carvallo offered himself to go, and bear all the Charge, desiring only Shipping. All was provided with great diligence, and he set out in search of the Enemy; but by ill Luck Lawrence Coello fell into their hands, and was slain with all his Men, having fought bravely, Carvallo being no way able to come to his Relief, by reason of the contrary Wind. 6. On the 15th of August he fell upon the Turks with great Fury, and was received with no less Courage. The Fight lasted some hours with much bravery; all the Ene∣mies Ships were boarded and taken, but much shattered; many killed in them, and others swimming to the Shoar. Then Giles Fer∣nandez went to ransom the Prisoners, and restored Emanuel Rodriguez, not only his Li∣berty, but also Goods of great value the Turk had taken from him at Punicale. 7. At this time the two Brothers, D. Alvaro de Ataide and D. Pedro de Silva, at Malaca, were at Variance about that Command; the former was most to blame, endeavouring to Remove the other before his time. Iames de Melo Coutino and D. Duarte Deça acted worse in Ceylon; for, after the Example of the Vice-Roy, having taken Mony of that Prince to assist him with each fifty Men against his Enemy, the King of Ceytavaca; the first after demanding more Mony, sent but Twenty; the other after receiving his, sent none, and because he refused, more in∣creased the Feud he ought without any Bribe
to appease. Melo had secured that Princes Father by D. Alfonso his Order; upon pre∣tence of Suspition; in reality, because he owed him 12000 Ducats of 100000 he promised on account of being succoured. Deça, instead of mending this Fault made it worse, keeping the Old Man with more rigour, and much more when he heard he was converted to the Faith, which might hinder his wicked Designs. A wicked pra∣ctice of many Portugueses, who hindred the Conversion of many Souls, because it was an obstacle to filling their Purses. The Priso∣ners Wife bribing the Guards got him out, and set him at the Head of a Body of Men she had in readiness to revenge this Out∣rage. He began to act successfully, till his Son appeased him. This year departed this Life St. Francis Xaverius, and the next was brought to Goa with great solemnity. 8. At Constantinople Pirbec's Head was cut 1553. off, for going beyond the Commission he received from the Turk, notwithstanding he made him a Present of all the Riches he carried. At the same time Moradobec set out by that Prince's Order with fifteen Gal∣leys, to prevent the harm the Portugueses might do in revenge for what they had re∣ceived. Moradobec was the Captain that lost Catifa, and desired to recover his Reputa∣tion. On the Coast of Persia, D. Iames de Noronha met him with his Fleet. They sa∣luted one another with showers of Bullets and Arrows. In the height of the Engage∣ment the Wind calming, left our Galleons
without motion. That of Gonzalo Pereyra Marramaque was far distant from the rest. The Turk laying hold of this opportunity besets him with his Galleys, tears all his Rigging and pierces him in a thousand places. However Pereyra stood firm, and did much Execution among the Enemies, but receives more harm; for almost all that was above Water of the Galleon was torn in pieces. The Gentlemen, Souldiers and Seamen fought with incredible Courage, and appeared wherever there was occasion, though weakned with several Wounds. 9. The Captain was always where the greatest danger threatned, and the Turks never durst board him. Our Admiral raved that he could not relieve and share with him in that Honour, and after making his Vows to Heaven, without being heard, even railed at Providence, stamped and tore his Beard for madness. He sent some Boats, but they could not reach the Galleon, be∣cause the Galleys compassed it round. To∣wards Night the Wind began to freshen, and the Admiral to move. The Turk not daring expect him, retired. The Admiral came up to the Galleon, admired the Bra∣very; but scarce knew the Men, they were so disguised with Wounds, Blood and the Smoot of the Powder. He embraced every one, and bestowed due Praises on them.
10. Pereyra his Galleon and Men were not in a condition to proceed, so they were sent to Ormuz with some Barques. The Ad∣miral pursued the Galleys, which kept close in with the Shoar. Our light Vessels forced a Ship that had been taken by Pirbec to run aground; the Men leaped Over-board to save themselves and were killed. The Ship was taken and brought off, and our Admiral returned to Ormuz, having in vain endea∣voured to overtake Moradobec, who run up the Euphrates, where there was not Water for our Galleons. At this time arrived in Goa only one Ship from Portugal; four set out thence, one of them was forced back, the other two came later. In the first Ship went our admirable Poet Luis Camoens, to try if he could advance his Fortune by the Sword, which had been so little favourable by the Pen. 11. Now comes the King of Cota's Re∣venge (as was promised before) for those Wrongs done him by the Portugueses. One of the Orders Fernandalvarez Cabral, Cap∣tain of the Ship newly come from Portugal, carried, was, That all that had been exacted from that King, should be restored; Which, though slowly, was executed. Another, That Bernardin de Sousa should be Imprisoned for what he had done at the Maluco's: He was Imprisoned, but not long. And another, That the Vice-Roy should no way employ D. James de Almeyda Commander of Diu; for that the King had struck him out of his Books, never to e received into Service: This also was put in
execution. Almeyda's Crime was, That he had seemed to undervalue the Kings Favour, refusing some Grace offered him. The Vice-Roy was concerned, that the differences between the Kings of Pimienta and Cochi grew daily greater. Towards the End of November, the Vice-Roy sailed with a good Fleet to assist the latter, who was our Friend. He was met at Sea by D. Iames de Noronha and his Fleet, with whom came Gonçalo Pereyra Marramaque, who was received with much Joy, for his great Bravery in the late Action with the Turks. It was agreed, after some Consultation, to land in the Islands called Alagada's, belonging to the King of Pimienta. The Natives in crowds opposed our Men landing with showers of Arrows; but the Cannon made way. After a vigo∣rous Resistance all was destroyed with Fire and Sword; only one Man was lost on our side. 12. Gomes de Silva was left to prosecute the War, which he did so successfully that the King sued for Peace, which was con∣cluded to our advantage, and he was satis∣fied with the restitution of the Islands, his Wife, and the People taken in them. The Vice-Roy dispatched the Ships for Portugal. That of Ferdinand Alvarez Cabral was Cast∣away at Aguada de S. Blas; some of the Men got ashoar in Boats. After a tedious Journey by Land, Cabral and D. Alvaro de Noronha, with his Family, were drowned in a River. The Vice-Roy sent his Son D. Ferdinand, with a good Fleet to the Red-Sea. He at∣tempted
to gain the Fort of Dofar, but was repulsed with loss of seven or eight Men; so he returned without any effect. 14. At Diu arose New Troubles on ac∣count of the death of the King Sultan Manaud. He was bred with Poison (like Mithridates,) that none might hurt him. When his Women were near their time, he opened them to take out the Children. He was one day hunting a Deer with some of them, and falling off from his Horse hung by the Stirrup; the Horse dragged him, and one of the Women running cut the Girts with a Cimiter; in requital he killed her, saying, A Woman of such courage, had enough to kill him. A Page, in whom he had great confidence, murdered him; for Tyrants al∣ways dye by the hands of those they trust. A Child, accounted his Son, succeeded him. The Nobility offended at the Insolence of Madre Maluco, who with the Title of Go∣vernour managed the Affairs of the Crown, rebelled in several parts. One of these was Abixcan at Diu, who suffering his Men to Affront ours, obliged D. Iames de Almeyda to enter the City with Five hundred Men, killing a great number, and plundering their Houses. Abixcan, though late, saw his Error, and came to Composition; and was after∣wards more submissive than had been at first desired of him.
14. D. Iames de Noronha succeeded Al∣meyda in that Post, in pursuance of the Kings Order before-mentioned. The Moors for∣getting their Fault, and the Punishment they had incurred, relapsed again. Noronha with Six hundred Men so refreshed their Memories, that they abandoned the City. Cide Elal, who Commanded in the Castle that was in the City, offered to defend him∣self; but seeing our Men begin to scale it, submitted to march away without Arms. The Castle was demolished. Scarce was it done, when Abixcan appeared with Four hundred Men. Ferdinand de Castanoso advanced to meet him with One hundred and twenty; but Three hundred of the Enemies Horse obliged him to retire in such disorder, that on a sudden he found he had but seventeen Men left. He posted himself where the Horse could not come, and the Three hun∣dred Enemies dismounting beset the 18, who back to back defended themselves till they were all killed, their Hearts cut out, and carried to the General. 15. D. Iames de Norona marched on with the rest of the Men, ignorant of what had happened; but so impatient to engage with Abixcan, that he could no way be dissuaded from pressing forward. Meeting the Three hundred Horse, he fell on furiously and put them to flight; but Abixcan coming on with his Cannon, D. Iames was forced to retire, rather losing than gaining Reputation in this Action. Common Conveniency brought them to an Accommodation. Noronha this
day lost by his Rashness, what he often de∣served for his Valour; for the Factor endea∣vouring to stop his fury, and saying to him, He ought to consider the King's Fort would be lost. He Answered in a Passion, No matter, when I am gone, all is gone. This saying was remembred when he was in election to be Vice-Roy of India, and deprived him of that Post; because it was thought, so great a Trust could not with safety be reposed upon so rash a Man. 16. The Great Turk hearing Miradobec was come off worse than the Unfortunate Pirbec, and Alechelubij making great boast of what he would do, gave him the Com∣mand of fifteen Galleys. D. Ferdinand, who was come out of the Red-Sea, went after them. On the 25th of August he had sight of them near Mascate. Alechelubij not da∣ring to give Battle, endeavoured to get off with all his Galleys; but six of them could not escape, being taken by our Caravels. 17. D. Ferdinand put into Mascate, re∣fitted the Galleys, bought the Slaves, and appointed them Captains. Alechelubij pur∣sued by some of our Vessels was drove into Suratt with seven of his nine Galleys, and there shut up by D. Hierome de Castellobranco, Nuno de Castro and D. Emanuel Mascarenhas. The other two were pursued by D. Ferdinand de Monroy and Antony Valadares, till they were beaten to pieces on the Coast of Damam and Daru.
18. But because one is coming to succeed our Vice-Roy, let us say somewhat of him. He was modest, easie, and not active, which was the Cause his Government answered not expectation. As to his Person, he was of a middle Stature, a graceful Countenance and agreeable Behaviour; his Complexion swar∣thy; his Hair black. In the number of Vice-Roys he was the 5th, in that of Gover∣nours the 17th, and held it four years, the second of the Name and Sirname. CHAP. XI. The Government of the Vice-Roy D. Peter de Mascarenhas, from the Year 1554 till 1555, King JOHN the Third still Reigning. 1. DOn Peter de Mascarenhas was of one of 1554. the best Families of Portugal, and had born the most considerable Offices in the Kingdom, and was 70 years of Age when named Vice-Roy of India. He set out of Lisbon with six Ships, one of them was drove back, and that in which he went, as soon as he Landed at Goa, sunk downright. In these Ships were Two thousand Land∣men. The first thing the Vice-Roy did,
he appointed his Nephew Ferdinand Marti∣nez Admiral, to the great dissatisfaction of all Men. Martinez had 32 Sail given him, and Orders to bring to Goa the 7 Turkish Galleys that were blocked up at Suratt. Cáraçen, Commander of that place, would not permit it, and gave good sufficient Rea∣sons for his refusing; so by consent of both sides they were taken to pieces, and the Turks fled into the Woods and Mountains: The late Vice-Roy D. Alfonso de Noronha now failed home with the Trading Ships; whereof that Commanded by Belchior de Sousa was lost, with all the Men. 2. The Great Turk (as it were) fore∣seeing the Fate of Alechelubij, immediately sent after him Zafar, a Janizary, to take upon him the Command of the Galleys: But too late; for he only came time enough to hear the News of their Destruction. He took four Merchant Ships of ours bound for Ormuz, and returned rich to Suez. About the same time Gemes de Silva took several Prizes in the Sea of Calicut. 3. The Vice-Roy sent F. Gonçalo Rodrigues, and Bro. Fulgentius Freyre, of the Society of Iesus, to persuade the Emperour of Ethiopia, to redress the Abuses introduced among his People in Matters of Religion, and with them went Iames Diaz, well versed in the Affairs of that Empire. The Emperour could not be moved to admit our manner of Baptism, and abolish Circumcision; the Priest continued at his Court, but to no effect. In February set out Emanuel de Vas∣concelos
with three Galleons, and five small Vessels, to discover what Zafar was doing at Suez. He spent some time under Mount Felix, and returned without doing any thing. With him went the Famous Luis de Camoens, who finding no employment for his Sword, exercised his Pen. 4. Some great Subjects of Hidalcan at this time, Treated with the Vice-Roy about making Mealecan, who had lived long at Goa, King of Visapor; and assisting to sup∣port him in that Title. In Return, they offered to make over to the Crown of Por∣tugal the Lands of Concan, worth a Million of yearly Revenue. A great Bait for our Avarice. The Profit was considered, but not the Difficulties, and Peter de Faria his Advice to Martin Alfonso on the same occa∣sion was now forgot. We shall see in its place, how much more proper it had been to consider the Difficulties, than the Profit. The Offer was admitted, and Meale imme∣diately Proclaimed King of Visapor; and his Wife and Children left at Goa as Hostages for the performance of our Hopes. Three thousand Portugues Foot, and Two hun∣dred Horse, marched with a Body of the Natives of the Island. After a small Resi∣stance they took the Fort of Ponda, and sent Advice to the Vice-Roy, who set out with the New King, and at Ponda delivered him to his People that there waited for him. He left D. Antony de Norona to Command the Fort with 600 Men.
5. The Vice-Roy returned so sick to Goa, that he died in a few days; and it was be∣lieved if he had continued in that Govern∣ment some years, he had re-established Truth, Justice and Honesty in India. It is a mark of his Justice, That he gave no Em∣ployment to any of his Servants; because he would not deprive them of it to whom it was due by Merit. A Friend of a Court-Favourite, complaining he did not dispatch him after serving Three years; He An∣swered, I am now busie about those that have served twenty, fifteen, ten or five years; as soon as I come to those that have served three, I pro∣mise I'le remember you. 6. D. Peter Mascarenas had such an awful Presence and majestick Deportment, that no Body before him durst do or say any thing undecent. He is famous on six several accounts, any one whereof might give ano∣ther a Name after death: He was a Valiant Souldier, a Wise Commander, a Magnifi∣cent Embassadour, a Singular Tutor, a Just Vice-Roy, and what is best of all, a very Good Christian. He was Tall, and though lean, Graceful; his Complexion brown: His Gravity no ways made him intractable. Of Vice-Roys he was the 6th, of Governours the 18th; held it ten Months, and was the second of the Name and Sirname. He is Buried in the Church of Alcazar do Sal, where he had built a Tomb worthy of him.
CHAP. XII. The Government of Francis Barreto, from the Year 1555, till 1558, in the Reign of King JOHN the Third. 1. FRancis Barreto succeeded D. Peter Mas∣carenas with the Title of Governour. He was a Gentleman of Merit, and qualified for this Post, and had gained much Esteem, being Commander of Bazaim. His Govern∣ment began with a Fire kindled by a Squi, which burnt Ten the finest Vessels in India, notwithstanding he used the utmost dili∣gence, and promised great Rewards to save them: Yet this Care saved the rest of the Fleet. He soon repaired this Damage, building others no less beautiful. 2. He went to Ponda, to carry on what his Predecessor had began, by Installing Mealeacan King, and appointed Officers to receive the Revenues about Ponda, leaving D. Ferdinand de Monroy in that Fort, and sending D. Antony de Noronha, who had it before, to receive the Revenues at Concam. Xacolim Aga, who was gathering the same for Hidalcan, with Seven thousand Men pre∣vented him. The Governour sent a supply of Ammunition to Noronha, which he no sooner received, but he marched to Cural,
of which he took possession, (the Com∣mander of it being fled) and with Kind∣ness attracted the Natives to come and in∣habit the Town and Country, leaving Por∣tugues Officers to look to the Revenue. Then hearing that Xacolim continued ga∣thering the Rents, he went to find him. By the way he met two Ships, in which was Xacolim's Wife, Children, and Goods of Va∣lue, which he fearful of some danger sent to Cambaya. Noronha easily made himself Master of all. 3. Not far from Achara he halted, and designed to pass the Night. Xacolim sent a Thousand Men to surpize ours; but they were upon their Guard, and D. Iohn the Mo∣risco falling upon them killed Seventy, and put the rest to flight; after the Pursuit he returned to D. Antony. They marched toge∣ther to meet Xacolim, who was drawn up in good Order on the other side of a River. After a vigorous opposition our Men forded it, and there ensued a bloody Battle, in which D. Antony and Xacolim met, and ha∣ving tryed each other parted. In this Acti∣on were lost 24 Portugueses, above 1000 of the Enemy were slain, the rest fled. Our Men proceeding, gathered the Re∣venue. 4. Mean while Meale was solemnly Pro∣claimed King at Visapor. He enjoyed it not ong; for there were some of those who et him up, that designed to betray him to Hidalcan, who offered great Rewards for him. He succeeded not this way; but did,
purchasing Fifteen thousand Men of the King of Bisnagar, that were so successful, they killed the Chief of those had made Meale King, and took him Prisoner. Hidal∣can immediately sent Forces to recover the Lands where D. Antony was employed. The Governour hearing of it sent him Orders to withdraw, as also to Ferdinand de Monroy, who was at Ponda. They unwillingly o∣beyed, remembring how prudently Peter de Faria had before dissuaded this Under∣taking. 5. This year sailed from Lisbon five Ships, one of them was Cast-away at the Island Tercera, and another at the Islands beyond Madagascar. The Captain of this last left a∣bout Four hundred of his Men on that Shoar, and in his Long-Boat got to Goa. These Four hundred who were left, built a small Vessel and arrived at Cochim. In the other Ships went the Bishop D. Belchior Carnero, a Jesuit, and some other Religious Men, sent by the Pope to the Emperour of Ethiopia. D. Alvaro de Silveyra was now made Admiral of a Fleet of 21 Sail, provided for the Sea of Calicut, and against the Queen of Olala, who refused to pay her Tribute. He over∣run all those Coasts with Fire and Sword, destroying many Towns and Ships, and all things that stood in the way; particularly the City Mangalor, and a sumptuous Pagod. Zamori sensible of his Losses, desired Peace, which was concluded. Silveyra returned Victorious.
6. Let us return to Ceylon. Tribuli Pandar having made his Escape (as was related) out of Prison, fled to Balande. Madune subtilly exasperates him against the Portugueses, and sent him Six hundred Chingala's, with whom and his other Men he was so succes∣ful, that he reduced the Towns of Paneture, Caleture, Maça, Berberi, Gale and Beligam, to the last Extremities, destroying our Churches, and killing many Christians, Converted by the Religious of St. Francis, who first Preached there. Now comes Al∣fonso Pereyra de Laçerda to take upon him this Command: Madune, who before had assisted Pandar, now offers to aid Laçerda against him. He accepts the Offer. The King sent his Son Raju by the way of Ca∣leture with an Army. Laçerda sent Ruy Pereyra with Two hundred Men, and Antony de Spinola with One hundred two other ways to assault the City Palandu, where Tri∣buli was. They beset the Town at one time, and after a vigorous Resistance the Portu∣gueses entred it; the King fled, his Wife was taken, and many of his Men killed. The Portugueses returned Victorious, and Madune obtained one of the Ends he had proposed to himself, which were either, That the Portugueses should destroy Pandar, or he them. 7. The beginning of this Year sailed Iohn Peixoto with two Galleys for the Red-Sea, 1556. to discover what was doing at Suez. He found all quiet, and being loath to re∣turn without doing something, he Landed
before Day in the Island Suanquem, with the King whereof we were at Variance. It being a dead time of Night, he found all asleep, and might say (as a Prince who killed a Man that was sleeping) that he left those Islanders as he found them; for many were killed before they awaked, others after. The same fate befell the King in his Palace. Peixoto returned to his Galliots, carrying Slaves and Booty without recei∣ving the least damage. Next day, keeping along the Coast he destroyed several Towns, and returned to Goa, having purchased as much Honour with two small Vessels, as others with many. He brought away F. Gonçalo Rodriguez, whom he found at Ar∣quico, much dissatisfied that he had not pre∣vailed with the Emperour of Ethiopia, to admit of the Rites of the Church. 8. The King of Baçora, oppressed by the Turks, made now the same Offers to the Governour, he had done before to the Vice-Roy D. Alfonso de Noronha, in case he would assist him to throw off the Turkish Yoak. The Conditions were admitted, and nei∣ther this time did it succeed; for D. Alvaro de Silveyra going upon this Design with twenty Sail, met not with the success he had the year before against the Malabars. A terrible Storm so disabled him in that Port, that he was not in a condition to at∣tempt any thing a second time. Michael Rodriguez Coutino prospered better, going to the Lands of Salsete and Bardes against some Parties of Hidalcan, who sought Revenge
for our favouring Meale. All the Sea-Ports were destroyed with Fire and Sword, and many Ships perished. He killed and took many Prisoners, and returned with Honour and Riches to Goa. The chief of the Booty was a great Ship of Meca, taken at Dabul after a sharp engagement; for there were Two hundred Moors in her, who killed eight of our Men. 9. This Misfortune the more enraged Hidalcan; and to mend it, he sends a nume∣rous Army into those same Lands. The Governour set out with a strong Body to oppose him. The War lasted all the Win∣ter, without any Action worthy relating. In September arrived four Ships from Portu∣gal; in them went Ferdinand de Sousa and Castellobranco, Embassadour to the Emperour of Ethiopia, and F. Iohn Nunes Barreto, Pa∣triarch of that stubborn People. His Com∣panion was the Bishop Andrew de Oviedo, who did nothing, because the Emperour could not be reduced to change his Old Rites. With these came to India F. Gon∣çalo de Sileyra, to be Provincial; he after∣wards received the Crown of Martyrdom in Monomotapa. All this shall be related in its proper place. 10. The Governour set out to Visit our Forts in the North, with a Fleet consisting of One hundred and fifty Sail of all sorts. He gained the Mountain and Fort Azarim for a small purchase, by the means of Coje Mahomet, a Trusty Moor, living at Bazaim. This Mountain is not far from the City,
and rises very upright for the space of a League; a little below the Top it is girt with a sort of Border standing out, which renders it almost inaccessible, the rest being very difficult of ascent. It is kept by Three∣score Men, who need no other Arms to de∣fend them but the Stones that lye there, which rolled down the Passes, must carry before them all that is in the way. The Garrison lives upon the Top, which is plain and almost round. They light themselves with sticks of Wood that grow there, and burns like a Torch, with that odds, that they cannot be quenched by Wind or Wa∣ter. 11. Antony Moniz Barreto was sent to take possession of this place; he left there a Captain and 60 Portugueses, and went on to take the Fort of Manora, not far distant, which the Inhabitants abandoned; he left there George Manhans with 120 Men, and returned to Bazaim, where he found the Governour receiving an Embassy from the King of Cinde, who desired Succour against a Tyrant that infested him. We were desi∣rous of this Prince's Friendship, and thought fit to purchase it by Relieving him. Seven hundred Men were sent to him in Twenty eight Vessels, all Commanded by Peter Bar∣reto Rolim. 12. The Fleet arrived safe at Tatá, the Court of the King of Cinde. The Prince, who was there, visited Barreto, and sent word of his Arrival to his Father, who was absent in the Field: He Answered, desiring
our Commander to wait till he Advised what was fit to be done. Barreto stayed, and soon after hearing the King was agreed with his Enemy without giving him notice; he asked of the Prince leave to depart, and that he would pay the Charge of the Fleet, as was promised by the Embassadour. The Answer was so little to satisfaction, that Barreto landed his Men, entred the City, and in the Fury killed above Eight thousand Persons, and destroyed by Fire the value of above two Millions of Gold, after load∣ing the Vessels with one of the richest Boo∣ties that had been taken in Asia. He lost not one Man in this Action. He spent eight days, destroying all on both sides Indus. The Fort of Bandel made some Resistance, but being taken was demolished. 13. Gaspar de Monterroyo, a Souldier of Note, going accidentally into a Wood, met some Blacks, who bid him go no farther; for hard-by there was a Serpent had just then devoured a Bullock. He desiring to see such a Monster as they described, went on till he discovered the Head, which was of a wonderful bigness; and not satisfied, came so near as to touch it with the Point of his Sword, and the Monster lifted up its Head; and he gave it such a fortunate stroak on a soft place, that it soon after died. It was thirty Foot long, and propor∣tionable in bigness. Barreto returned thus Victorious over Men and Monsters to Chaul. There he found Orders to go to Dabul, where he would find Antony Pereyra Bran∣dam
Admiral of that Coast. They were to joyn in order to destroy that City in part of Revenge, for the damage Hidalcan did us. Being joyned they attacked the City, and though vigorously defended, it was taken, and wholly reduced to a heap of Rubbish. Then they did the same to all the Villages upon the shoar of that River. CHAP. XIII. The End of the Government of Francis Barreto. 1. HIdalcan's General, Nazer Maluco, en∣tred 1557. the Lands of Salsete and Bardes with 2000 Horse, and 18000 Foot. The Governour with 3000 Portugueses, 1000 Canara's, and 200 Horse, met him in the Fields of Ponda, having then but 17000 Men, and a Mountain on his back. He furiously attacked, put him to flight, and returned victorious to Goa. D. Peter de Meneses, who Commanded the Fort of Rachol, did what he could, which was not much, because the Ene∣my was too numerous. Iohn Peixoto vigorously opposed Moratecan in the Lands of Bardes. A Renegado Portugues, who had fortified himself, doing him much harm, he assaulted and routed him twice, killing 200 of his
Men, and  Captain. Nazer Maluco in∣trenched himself again at Ponda. 2. Five Ships arrived now from Portugal, three of them were Cast-away in their Re∣turn home; one at Tierra del Natal, another at the Island St. Thomas, and the third at Madagascar. The arrival of these Ships, and some damage we had done Hidalcan, obliged him to conclude a Peace, which we sued for, yet was not dishonourable. 3. D. Duarte Deça, Commander of Ternate, was not idle. He was harsh and covetous, so easily falling out with the King, he Un∣christian-like Imprisoned him, his Mother and Brother Cachil Guzarate, using them very unworthily, and to compleat his Cru∣elty, ordered they should have nothing to eat. Publick Complaints obliged him to con∣sent the Hospital of Misericordia should main∣tain them; and his desire of killing them made him so base as to poison their Water, which was discovered by a Stone the King had in a Ring. The Ternatenses took Arms, and called in the Tidores, so that the Fort was in great danger. 4. D. Duarte having received Relief, ven∣tured to fight at Sea with as good success, as if Justice had been on his side: But the Por∣tugueses themselves no longer able to endure his Obstinacy, put him into Custody, and discharged the Prisoners, which put an end to that Discord. No Man would take upon him the Command of the Fort, till Antony Pereyra Brandam was forced by the People to accept of it in Trust, till the Governour
disposed of it. Whilst some Portugueses in the Maluco's, by their Actions, appeared most barbarous Heathens, some Infidels became Christians; a thing to be admired, having such ill Examples before them. The King of the Island Bacham was converted by F. Antony Vaz, a Jesuit. 5. The War continued at Goa. A Moor with Five hundred Men waded over the Ford of Zacorla, in the Island Choram, and surprizing those few Portugueses that were in it, gained some advantage, till others coming in from several Parts, drove them headlong into the Water, where many of them were drowned. The Governour hear∣ing of this, marched to their Relief, and sent before George Mendoça, Commander of the City, with some Gentlemen, who be∣haved themselves well, and brought many Heads of Moors to the Governour. All was kept quiet afterwards by D. Francis Masca∣renhas, who was left in the Island with 300 Men. 6. The Governour desiring to secure the Promontory of Chaul, asked leave of the King Nizamuxa to fortifie it. He not only refused it, but secured the Messenger, and sent 30000 Men, who began to build an impregnable Fort there. The Governour sent Alvaro Perez de Sotomayor with some Ships, to keep the Mouth of the Port till he came, which was soon after. He brought 4000 Portugueses, besides Natives. The Enemy better advised, proposed a Peace, which was concluded to our content, on
Condition the Work of the Fort should not advance. The Governour returned home. A Miracle was seen here, which was, That the Moors could never cut down, or remove with force of Elephants, a small Wooden-Cross, that was fixed upon a Stone. 7. The Governour having setled Affairs at Goa, was wholly employed in fitting out a mighty Fleet against the King of Achem, who is the only Terrour of Malaca. In a few Months he provided 25 Galleons, 10 Gallies, and 80 Galliots, all so well furnished, it re∣newed the hopes of fixing our Empire in India. But all this Industry falls to nothing; for now a new Governour comes, and the New ones never prosecute the designs of the Old. However this Force was well employ∣ed, though not as our Governour designed. 8. Francis Barreto brought to Lisbon a Jewel wrought by the hand of Nature. A Portugues Souldier on the Coast of the Island Ceylon, met a Iogue (that is, a sort of Penitent Heathen,) who among other things had picked up a brown Pebble, of the shape and bigness of an Egg, on which were re∣presented the Heavens in several Colours, and in the midst of them the Image of our Blessed Lady with our Saviour in her Arms. The Souldier gave him some small thing for this Stone; and afterwards it came to the hands of Francis Barreto, who presented it to Queen Catherine, and by virtue of it God wrought several Miracles in India and Por∣tugal.
9. Francis Barreto was a couragious, dis∣creet and generous Gentleman, and such a Governour as India now mourns for. He afterwards returned as Governour and Con∣querour of the Empire of Monomotopa, where he died, as shall be seen in its proper place. He had a stately Presence, his Complexion tawny, and black Hair. He Governed three years, was the 19th Governour, and second of the Name. CHAP. XIV. The Government of the Vice-Roy D. Con∣stantine de Braganza, from the Year 1558, till 1561, in the Reign of King SEBASTIAN. 1. ABout the End of the Government of Francis Barreto, died King Iohn 1558. the Third. In him ended the good For∣tune of Portugal, as did that of India in the Vice-Roy sent thither, after his death, by those who managed the State during the Minority of King Sebastian. D. Constantin, Brother to Theodosius, Duke of Bragança, was 30 years of Age when he accepted this Charge. What he wanted in Age for so great an Employ, was made up by being of the Blood Royal, and by his great Parts and natural Endowments.
2. He sailed from Lisbon on the 7th of April, with four Ships and two Thousand Men, and arrived at Goa about the beginning of September. Three things remarkable hap∣ned in his Voyage and at his Arrival; the first, that he had not the least bad Weather in his Passage; the second, the great demon∣strations of Joy wherewith he was received; and the third, that he no way affronted the Governour that went off, as was always used in India. 3. Our Vice-Roy commenced as usual, by sending Commanders to Forts. D. Payo de Noronha went to Canaor, and by his Ingra∣titude in receiving some Presents sent by that King (though not with sincere mean∣ing) gave occasion to his resentment, signi∣fied by not suffering the Portugueses to re∣sort to the City. The Vice-Roy sent four∣teen Sail to their assistance, and gave the Command of them to Luis de Melo de Silva. The Vice-Roy was bent upon possessing him∣self of the Town of Damam, a place of consequence, to secure the Lands of Baçaim, and whereof Francis Barreto had obtained a Grant from the King of Cambaya. The difficulty lay in wresting it out of the hands of Cide Bofata, who was in Rebellion against his Prince, which was the chief Motive why he so freely gave what he could not get for himself. Bofata was well provided, and with a Resolution not to sell the place at an easie rate. The Vice-Roy having held a Council about it, the result was, he should go thither in person.
4. He first dispatched the Trading Ships for Portugal, in which went his Predecessor; the Ships were seven, and only three of them came to Lisbon. One was lost at the Island St. Thomas: Two were forced back to Mozambique, in one of which was the late Governour Francis Barreto: The Captain of a fourth finding her sinking, got into a Long-Boat with 60 Men, and came to Goa, the rest of the Men all perished. Francis Barreto, at Mozambique, spent 20000 Ducats of his own in refitting the two Ships. They set out again, and being in distress, the other Ship ungratefully forsook him; yet he afterwards seeing her perishng saved all the Men, so that he had 1137 Persons aboard. In this condition, not able to go forward, he almost miraculously returned again to Mozambique. This year ended with the Foundation of that Fort, and return of Barreto to Goa. 5. Luis de Melo, at Cananor, being assaulted in his Trenches by 3000 Moors, put them to shameful flight; and while he sent for Succours to the Vice-Roy, followed Fortune that now seemed to Favour him. Mean while the Vice-Roy set out with the Fleet, had been fitted out by Barreto, having in∣creased it to 100 Sail. 6. The Vice-Roy arriving at Damam, sent D. Iames de Noronha to take a view of the Works; he found them strong, and defended by 4000 Men. Notwithstanding all this Preparation, no sooner our Men landed but the Enemy fled, abandoning both City and Fort. The Vice-Roy entred, and giving
Thanks to Almighty God for this Bloodless Victory, blessed the Mosque under the Invo∣cation of the Purification of the Blessed Vir∣gin, on which day it was taken. 7. The Enemy, after their flight, encamped at Parnel, two Leagues off, and thence with 2000 Horse infested the Vice-Roy. Antony Moniz Barreto offered with 500 Men to remove them. He marched all Night to∣wards the Enemy, and being come up with them, found that he had but 120 Men, the rest wandring in the dark through unknown ways; yet thus he attacks and puts them to flight, as believing the Vice Roy was there with his whole Force. The Morning disco∣vering from how small a number they had fled, Bofata and his Men come down from a Hill, whither they had retired, and falling upon Barreto pressed him hard, till those that were scattered coming up, he again routed the Enemy, killing 500 of them. In their Camp were found 36 good Pieces of Can∣non, some Cart Loads of Copper-Mony, and other Plunder. 8. The Vice-Roy with Liberality and good Usage attracted the Country People, who were fled for fear; and confirmed to the Neighbouring King of Sarçeta the Du∣ties he had in Damam. For the more security he resolved to possess himself of the Island Balzar, not far distant. He intended to go thither in Person, but sent before D. Peter de Almeyda with 150 Horse, and as many Foot. The People of Balzar abandoned the Town, which D. Peter entred, and the Vice-Roy
being come, left Alvaro Gonzales Pinto to Command there with 120 Men, and some Cannon. Being returned to Damam, he sent D. Alvaro de Silveyra with 20 Sail to the Red-Sea, being informed Cafar was fitting out his Gallies. This Fleet was dispersed by Storms, and put into several Ports of India, without effecting any thing. 9. D. Iames de Noronha was appointed Commander of Damam, and had 1200 Men given him under five Captains, who were to keep Tables for them. Tables are kept in India for such as have not any thing of their own; or if they have, yet will accept of this Liberality. I admire there are men that will stoop to receive this, but much more there are any that give it; for the same Men when they come to Spain, have not the Heart to give a stick of Wax, which there is worth nothing, and here a Half∣peny. The Vice-Roy after this success re∣turned to Goa. 10. In the City St. Thomas, or Meliapor, a Portugues, one of those who more religi∣ously worship their Interest, than the Hea∣thens their Idols, and of those there are many in India; persuaded Rama Rajo, King of Bisnagar, to march against the City, telling him the Plunder would be worth two Mil∣lions, and it would be a great Service to the Idols he worshipped, which were there thrown down by the Christians. He was a good Christian, that was so zealous for Idols. The King hearkning to the hopes of Gain, set out with 500000 Men. Peter
de Ataide encouraged the Inhabitants to defend themselves; but they, to palliate their Fear said, It was but Reason the King should be admitted to waht was his own. Ataide went away to Goa; the Townsmen prepared for the reception of the King, and sent him a Present of 4000 Ducats, where∣with he was somewhat appeased. He En∣camped and would not enter the City; but ordered all the Inhabitants of both Sexes, and all Ages, and all their Goods, to be brought to his presence. Which being per∣formed, he found the whole Value did not exceed 80000 Ducats. Enraged at the Wickedness of the Informer, he ordered him to be thrown to the Elephants, who tore him to pieces. He discharged the Citi∣zens, and restored all their Goods so pun∣ctually, that only a Silver Spoon being mis∣sing among them all, it was sought and re∣stored. 11. Luis de Melo de Silva, who sailed last year for the Coast of Malabar, did much harm there, and ruined the Trade of the Moors. At Mangalor he ordered two Cap∣tains to bring him a Vessel belonging to our Enemies of Cananor, that was in the River, but the Owners and some of the Towns∣men coming to defend it, our Men were worsted. Melo enraged hereat assaulted the Town, and put all Living Creatures to the Sword; then fired it. An old Moor lead∣ing a Company of the Inhabitants that fled, with a Dagger in his hand met our Com∣mander, and struck him through the Arm.
He laying hold of his long Hair, delivered him to those that were near, saying, Take away that Devil. He had scarce said it, when the Moor was cut in pieces. Melo having burnt the City with loss of some few Men, returned to his Ships. 12. Thirteen Ships of Calicut and Cana∣nor were coming up to attack Melo; but he went out to meet them with only seven. He was formost in his Galliot, and the Ad∣miral of Calicut, a Turk, advanced before the rest to meet him. As soon as they came within Cannon-shot, our Gunner made one so fortunate, it swept him from Stem to Stern, and in a Minute the Keel of the Ship appeared above Water, all the Men perish∣ing. Three other Ships board the Galliot, and kill many of the Men; but Melo step∣ping forward, not only cleared his own Deck, but pursued into the Ships, in which not one Man was left alive. Our other Ves∣sels took the other three Ships of Calicut, so that not one of them escaped; and the Admiral of Cananor fled with his seven, ha∣ving only stood by as a Witness of what the others did. The Enemy lost above 400 Men. For a long time after the People along that Coast would not eat Fish, because a man's Fingers were found in the Belly of one. 13. Luis de Melo went thus Victorious to Goa, and the Vice-Roy confined him; be∣cause he had done those Actions when his Presence was required at Cananor. His Con∣finement was censured, and the Vice-Roy
being none of those that will obstinately persist in their Opinion, though it do never so much mischief; he went in person to be Friends with Melo at Pangim, where he was in Custody. Melo knowing well how to esteem such Favours from Superiours, was abundantly satisfied, and returned with his Fleet, by the Vice-Roy's Order, to Cananor, because D. Payo de Noronha, was in some distress there. Emanuel de Vasconcelos went to Ternate with three Ships, and other small Vessels. 14. Luis de Melo was the Life of Noronha: who was in great danger at Cananor, being threatned with a Siege by all the Princes of Malabar stirred up by Ade Rajao, not with∣out some provocation given by Noronha. Rajao with 100000 Men attacks the Fort, and enters the Trenches. Melo, who was in them with 60 Men, flew about like Light∣ning, Antony de Villena, with Fifty, did Wonders among the Moors, who had entred his House. In fine, the whole number, which was 500 Men, did more than human Actions among that multitude of Enemies. It is said, A Religious Man at his Prayers saw the Holy Ghost in the form of a Pigeon on a Beam of the Church, and shewed it to many others. Our Men hearing of it fell on with new Vigour, and so effectually that they put the Enemy to flight, having killed 15000 of them. Of the Portugueses 25 were lost. The fight lasted 12 Hours. Luis de Melo played the part of a Souldier as well as Commander. Francis Risca, a Man of ordinary Extra∣ction,
performed extraordinary acts of Va∣lour. The Enemy went home admiring the Valour of our Men, and Peace was restored to Cananor. 15. It is strange, that among all the Churches erected in India, none till this time had been dedicated to its Apostle St. Tho∣mas. Our Vice-Roy taking this into Consi∣deration, began to build at Goa a sumptuous Church to him, which was not finished, be∣cause the time of his Government expired, and remains to this day as a heap of Ruins, none of his Successors having put his Hand to advance so good a Work. CHAP. XV. Continues the Government of the Vice-Roy D. Constantin, in the Reign of King SEBASTIAN. 1. AT this time the Emperour of Ethio∣pia was much molested by the Turks and Moors, and obtained some Vi∣ctories over them, having some Portugueses in his Service. Our Bishop could not work upon him to leave his Heretical Customs, and therefore resolved to leave him; but stayed at the Request of the Portugueses.
The Emperour being Invaded by the King of Mallassays, contrary to the Advice of the Portugueses, marched to meet him, and they followed. He was slain by Malassays; and they seeing his Subjects fly, cast themselves among the Enemies, and after doing more than is credible, were most of them killed. 2. The Turk desiring to possess himself of the Arabian Ports on the side next Persia, sent this Year an Officer with two Gallies and seventy Barques, with 1200 Turks and Janizaries, against the Fort of Baharem. Rax Morado, a resolute Commander, was in it, who provided the best he could, and sent Advice of the danger he was in to the King of Ormuz, and D. Antony de Noronha, then Commanding that Fort. D. Iohn de Noronha went to relieve him with ten Ships; he was near taking the Turkish Galleys, but missed for want of pursuing, and the next day they obliged him to take shelter in the Creeks along that Shoar. D. Alvaro de Silveyra re∣ceiving Advice from Ormuz, came up, and joyning D. Iohn took the Galleys. The Bassa having lost them, concluded he was also lost, if he took not the Fort, and therefore pressed on his Attacks. Rax Morado and D. Alvaro had a Meeting, and agreed it was not convenient to fight, but besiege the Be∣siegers; yet such was the Insolence of the Soudiers, that Mutinying they obliged them to give Battle. Rax joyned the Portugueses with 300 Persians, well Armed, they at∣tacked the Turks, who purposely (though with loss) gave way, till they drew them to
an Ambush, which put them into disorder in spight of all D. Alvaro could do, till he fell by a Musquet-Ball that hit him in the Throat. The Portugueses fought desperately, some to defend, and others to bring him off, but to no purpose, for the Turks cut off his Head. Above 70 of our Men were killed, and several taken. Rax Morado retired with many to the Fort, after behaving himself in such manner as might be envied by the Por∣tugueses. Thus was the rashness of those that were so hot for fighting punished. 3. Peter Peixoto succeeded in the Command of our Men, and following the Advice be∣fore despised, besieged the Island, and so streightned the Turks they sued for Mercy; whereby it appeared how great a Fault it was not to take this course at first. D. Antony de Noronha receiving Advice at Ormuz of our loss, presently set out to revenge it. The Siege continued, and in conclusion the Turks surrendred on Condition to return our Pri∣soners (they were about Thirty,) and deliver up their Cannon, Arms and Horses, and 10000 Ducats. They were to be carried to Baçora, but were so weak with Hunger and the Pestilential Fever, which about that time rages at Baharem, that only two hundred of them lived. Many of our Men died of the same Disease. 4. About the end of this Year arrived in India five Ships from Portugal; six sailed thence, but one was drove back. In them went F. George of St. Lucy, and F. George Te∣mudo, the first was Bishop of Malaca, the
latter of Cochim, both Dignities new Created; for Queen Catherine seeing the See of Goa was over-burthened, had obtained of the Pope the Instituting these Bishopricks; but subordinate to Goa, as were to be all others that should be Instituted. 5. The Vice Roy understanding the Ene∣my was fitting out Ships on the Coast of Malabar, where Luis de Melo was, sent to his Aid 17 Sail with 600 Men. Melo distributed them about the Mouths of the Rivers, and he himself ran along destroying the Towns and Woods. Seven strong Parao's, well manned and equipped, came down the River Maim, where Gonçalo Perez de Alvelos was, firing their Cannon upon him, and he an∣swering sunk one of them: But the Powder taking fire in one of our Ships, blew it up and all the Men in it; so the Enemy esca∣ped. Melo continued the War this Year and the next with success, and utter desolation of all that Coast. 6. Bofata, not long since defeated, now marched towards our Fort of Balzar with 600 Horse, and a great Body of Foot. Our Commander Alvaro Gonçalez Pinto boldly meets him with 20 Horse, 100 Portugues Foot, and 500 Natives. The first Charge they killed 50 of the Enemy; but being overpowered by the Multitude were routed, the Captain and most of the Portugueses killed, and 150 of the Natives, the rest fled. Bofata immediately attacks the Fort, not at all doubting to carry it; but was vigo∣rously opposed by the Valour of Gomez de
Silva, who though not born a Gentleman, in this Action shewed how Gentlemen are Created. The Enemy encamped, and Silva did great Execution on them, till Tristan Vz de Vega came to his Relief, from Damam, with ten Vessels well furnished. In spight of all opposition he Landed and got into the Fort, and Bofata seeing no hopes of pre∣vailing drew off. Not long after he returns, and our Commander Alfonso Diaz Pereyra meeting him in the Field, had the same success as Pinto, and was killed as well as he; all the difference was, that the Enemy now entred the Fort pell-mell with our Men; but Vincent Carvallo drove them again out headlong. Calisto de Sequeyra killed 20 with his own hand. They were quite spent with continual Fatigue when Luis Alvarez de Tavora brought Relief from Damam, at sight whereof the Enemy retired. 7. However, by the Vice-Roy's Order, the Fort was abandoned, and the Enemy returning razed it; then went on doing great harm in the Villages, till they came to Tarapor, where Martin Lopez de Faria was with 40 Men; they attacked his Works and were repulsed with such loss, that they de∣sisted and went on. This Action cost Lopez his Life, being mortally wounded, whereof he died at Damam. D. Iames de Noronha marched after the Enemy, and found them in the Country of Vaypim, being 600 Horse and 1000 Foot; with him were 150 of the former, and 350 of the latter. He fell on with such Fury, that 60 of the Enemy fell
the first Charge, and after a sharp Dispute they all fled, leaving him many Prisoners, their Women, Mony, Baggage, Horses, Arms and Ammunition, with which he returned triumphant to Damam, notwithstanding the Enemy rallying attacked him in the Rear; but at last fled to lament his Loss in the Woods, whilst it was celebrated in the Town. 8. Christopher Pereyra Homem sailing for Ethiopia with three Vessels, only to set ashoar 1560. there B. Fulgentius, a Jesuit, sent by the Vice-Roy to the Bishop with some Church-stuff, near Arquico met Cafar his four Gallies, and with difficulty escaped them. But the Ad∣mirals Galley coming up sometime after, the Fight could not be avoided, and Pereyra boarding her with 30 Men, the Turks who were 150 killed every Man of them. The other two Vessels leaving him in the danger got to Goa, where Vincent Carvallo and Rock Pinheyro were put in Gaol for their Cowar∣dize; for had they done their Duty, Cafar had been taken. 9. B. Fulgentius was taken, and afterwards ransomed; the loss of him and what he carried, was lamented by the Portugueses in Ethiopia. Adamas Sagad succeeded the Em∣perour that died, and defeated many Rebels, in which Victory the Portugueses had a con∣siderable share. The Turkish Bassa returning with a greater Power, defeated Sagad with the assistance of some Portugueses; for they can be Turks when they please. This was the cause that Emperour never after trusted. them.
10. Bisminaique, Lord of the Pearl-Fishery, seeing those of Punicale would pay no great∣er acknowledgment than One days Fishing, resolved to right himself by force. He marched with 1000 Men, Melrao lead the the Van, doing much harm. D. Duarte de Meneses after several Skirmishes killed him, and stopped the current of his Men, till the useless People, as Aged Men, Women and Children, with the best of their Goods, got off in a Ship, where they suffered much Hunger, and such Thirst that they drank their own Water. The Commander of the Fort, Emanuel Rodrigues Coutinho, Charged a Body of those that Melrao had Commanded, and did good Execution; but Bisminaique coming up with his Army, D. Duarte was forced to retire to his Ship, and Coutinho to another, where he was taken with all his Men, and after ransomed. The Enemy en∣tred and plundered the Town. 11. Four Ships arrived now in India, of six that sailed from Lisbon: In them went the first Archbishop of Goa, and the first Inquisitors, sent to suppress the Jews. One of the six Ships was forced back to Lisbon. Another Commanded by Ruy de Melo, was drove to Brasile, and thence set out again so unsuccessfully, that she was lost beyond the Cape of Good Hope. The Men got ashoar, and part of them Coasted along in the Long-Boat and two Barques they made, the rest marched along in sight of them, till they took three little Ships which held them all, and so went up a River in the King of
Menanchabo's Country. Their neglect, and the Beauty of D. Francisca Sardina, Wife to Iames Pereyra de Vasconcelos, gave courage and opportunity to those Barbarians to assault them, and steal her. They fell on our Men on a sudden and killed 60, carrying away this Portugues Hellen or Proserpine. The rest arrived in India. 12. The late Governour Francis Barreto put to Sea the third time, and arrived safe at Lisbon with D. Luis Fernandez de Vascon∣celos, who had before lost his Ship. The Kings of Cochim and Cananor were now at War, and the Portugueses intermedled not, because they were both Subjects to Portugal; in the end he of Cochim had the better. Those of Cranganor committing some Out∣rages, Iohn Pereyra chastized and reduced them. 13. The Vice-Roy was now preparing to make War upon the King of Iafanatapan, and Lord of the Island Manar, because he persecuted the Christians, and had usurped that Crown from his Brother, who fled to Goa, and was Baptized by the Name of Al∣fonso. He Landed near the City Iafanapa∣tan with 1200 Men, forcing the Prince to retire, who with 2000 opposed him. The Portugeses entred at a large Street in which were some Pieces of Cannon, which killed N. Sardina, Ensign to Luis de Melo. Iohn Pessoa took up the Colours, and marched up to the Canon. Luis de Melo and D. Philip de Meneses were both Wounded.
14. The Vice Roy came on, and six or seven Men were killed about him. The Prince coming down another Street made some resistance, but to no effect. Night coming on the King retired to his Palace, and not thinking himself safe there, set fire to it and withdrew to a Fort a League off. Thus the Vice-Roy was left possessed of that beautiful City. He marched after the King, who thinking that Fort too weak, was fled farther off. D. Constantin took possession of it, and sent several parties to pursue the King, the first of them Commanded by Luis de Melo, the Achilles of those times. They pursued him till he cried for Mercy; and to purchase an Accommodation, offered to restore the Treasure taken from Tribuls Pandar, and his Mother-in-Law, Wife to the King of Cota, to pay an Acknowledgment to the Crown of Portugal, and give up the Island Manar. The Vice-Roy accepted the Conditions, considering how difficult it was wholly to deprive him of that Crown, and restore it to his Brother, though he had never so much right. 15. Fortune is as quick in over-turning, as bestowing her Favours. Whilst the Condi∣tions were putting in execution, the Natives falling upon the Portugueses, who were se∣cure in their Submission, killed many. The Vice-Roy escaped narrowly and got aboard the Fleet, whence he sent D. Antony de No∣ronha with 400 Men to relieve the Fort, where Ferdinand de Sousa was, and had killed many of the Natives in defence of it.
They two being joyned made themselves way and marched to the Shoar, carrying all that was in the Fort, and killing all that opposed them. The Vice-Roy thus succes∣ful at first, and afterwards unfortunate, set Sail, carrying with him the Prince, given as an Hostage for performance of the Ar∣ticles of Peace. He sailed to the Island Manar, where he built a Fort, and translated thither the Inhabitants of Punicale, to re∣deem them from the Tyranny of that Nayque who would fleece them. Emanuel Rodriguez Coutinho was left to Command there, and with him some Franciscans and Jesuits, all satisfied with the equal distribu∣tion the Vice-Roy made of all things. Then he sent Balthasar Guedez de Sousa to Com∣mand in chief in Ceylon, and with him the King of Cota, his Grandmother and Kindred, whom the King of Iafanatapan had deli∣vered to him, being one of the Conditions of that unfortunate Treaty. CHAP. XVI. The End of the Government of the Vice-Roy D. Constantin. 1. AMong the Treasure lately taken from the King of Iafanatapan, was an Idol adored throughout all the Coast of Asia, and so highly esteemed by all those Princes, particularly the King of Pegu,
that he every year sent Embassadours with rich Presents, to get a Print of it. This so much worshipped Relick was nothing but a Tooth of a white Monkey. Some say, the rarity of the Colour was the cause of his being so much admired, as the King of Siam's white Elephant: Others affirm, besides his Whiteness, he came into such esteem by finding out the Wife of an ancient Indian King, that was run away from him, and had been sought for through all parts to no pur∣pose, the King loving her beyond expression. The King in requital made much of the Beast while it lived, and after its death erected Altars to it: Others are of Opinion, it was a Mans, not a Monkeys Tooth, and perhaps the Man had the same Employ as the Monkey; for all was no better than Pimping, a great step to Preferment with Princes. However it was, the King of Pegu hearing our Vice-Roy had the Tooth, sent to offer him 300000 Ducats for it, and it was not doubted his Zeal would extend to give a Million, if the Bargain were well drove. Most of the Portugueses were for taking the Mony, and some wished they might be employed in carrying the Tooth to Pegu, not doubting but they should gather a Treasure by shewing it by the way. 2. The Vice-Roy doubtful whether he should accept, or reject the Offer, and to throw the blame of either Resolution from himself, had a meeting of the Chief of the Clergy and Laity, where the Question was discussed long, and with much
heat. The Resolution was, That the Tooth should not be sold, but consumed to Ass. The Vice-Roy accordingly, in the presence of them all, caused it to be beaten to dust in a Mortar, and then burnt. All men at that time seemed to applaud the Act; but not long after, (two Teeth being set up instead of that one, as shall be related in the Go∣vernment of D. Antony de Noronha) they as much condemned and railed at it. 3. D. George de Meneses Baroche at this time did much in Ceylon in defence of the King of Cota against his Brother Madune. D. George was hard to please, because he loved to en∣dure hardship; he hearing one Morning, in his Galley, a Souldier asking an on for Breakfast, said to him; What do you  for Dainties? There is no provision in this Store, but Powder and Ball. A good Example for our Times, when a Portugues lords half a Gal∣leon with Hen-Coops, and  of Sweet-Meats. 4. This Severity in D. George caused some Souldiers to desert to Cota; he went to bring them back, and at his return found that George de Melo his Lieutenant d fallen up∣on the Enemy so successfull that he cut off a number of them. Baroche envious of this Honour, attacked them in another place and killed 200, and with the same heat run up a River after Madune, till a Cannon Ball kil∣g 20 of his Seamen at once, he retired a e. Then matching by Land, after Raju  Son, who had above 3000 Men h him put him to flight, killing 150,
without losing one Man. The Enemy forti∣fied himself in a convenient place, and D. George going on to attack him, was told there was no Powder; then says he, Load your Muskets with Sand. He advanced un∣fortunately; for what with an Ambush, and what with the assistance of the Elephants, he lost above 70 Men. D. George was in danger of being killed by an Elephant, had not Pdralvarez Freyre fortunately shot it. He retired in such a Rage for this ill success, that he bit the Sand, perhaps because it had not served him instead of Powder. 5. Madre Maluco, King of Cambaya, taking the advantage of the Vice-Roys absence from Damam, resolved to recover that City, and was ready to march with a formidable Power. D. Iames de Noronha, who spent much Mony in Intelligence, soon understood his design, and finding he could not oppose him with open Force, had recourse to Artifice. He dexterously persuades Cedemecan Lord of Suratt, his Neighbour and Friend, that his Brother-in-Law, Madre Maluco, was coming to expel him that City, and therefore gave out his design was upon Damam. Cedemecan gave credit to the Fiction, and going to Visit his Brother-in-Law in the Camp, persuaded him to Sup with him in the Town, and carry with him the principal Heads of his Army. Scarce were they in his House when he kil∣led them all, and falling upon the Camp put the Army to the rout with great slaughter Thus Noronha avoided this Danger without drawing Sword, and Cedemecan drew on him∣self
another, to shun that which did not threaten him. The Manager of this Intrigue was, D. Iames Pereyra, a Gentleman of great Prudence and Vigilance, who performed it very dexterously, not without great danger to himself. 6. Chinguiscan with a prodigious Power marches to Suratt, to revenge the Death of his Father, and enters the City; Cemedecan retiring into the Fort, Chinguiscan sets down before, and begins to batter it furiously, and Cedemecan omitted nothing towards his de∣fence, when 10 Ships arrive, sent by D. Iames under the Command of Luis Alvarez de Ta∣vora, with Orders so to manage himself, that either of the two Enemies might believe he came to their assistance. D. Iames under-hand writ to Chinguiscan, acquainting him he had sent those Ships to his Aid; Ta∣vora had a Letter from him to Cedemecan of the same purport. All this Preparation va∣nished; for the Besieger hearing another Enemy invaded his Kingdom, agreed with the Besieged and returned home. So did Luis Alvarez, having given much Content to our Neighbour, who had he known all, had more cause to be highly dissatisfied. Alvarez com∣ing to Damam found D. Iames de Noronha at Death's door, and he soon after expired at he Age of 44. He died Poor, having spent ll he got in the Service of his King and Country. D. Antony de Noronha, after Vice-Roy, used to say, That a man must be mad to ractice this sort of Liberality. After that rate ow-adays all Men are very Wise.
7. The Vice-Roy being at Cochim, dis∣patched 1561. three Ships for Portugal, two of them arrived safe, the other was forced back. Then he had a meeting with the King of Pimienta, with whom he was at variance, and they agreed. The Princes of Calicut being sent to be bred at Cananor, and those of Ca∣nanor at Calicut, caused such a Confusion, that Iohn Pereyra, Commander of Cananor, was in some danger, attempting to hinder the Passage of the Malabars, who had possessed themselves of the Island Primbalam, belong∣ing to Cochim, which might prove the loss of our Fort. The Vice-Roy sent first D. Francis de Almeyda with ten Ships, and after him Luis de Melo de Silva with 500 Men, and the King of Cochim assisted with his Forces. There was a great Fight, many of the Enemies were killed, and the rest expelled the Island. Martin Alfonso de Melo afterwards cleared all the Passes, and restored the Island to the King. D. Constantin returned to Goa. 8. He sent Commanders to several Forts; and a Fleet of 21 Sail under the Command of Sebastian de Sá, to assist the King of Ba∣çora against the Turks, for which he offered to permit us to build a Fort there. This Fleet was by bad Weather scattered and put into several Ports. Cedemecan sent to acquaint the Vice-Roy, That Chinguiscan was again marching towards him, and he being in no condition to oppose him, would deliver up that Fort to the Crown of Portugal, only upon Condition to be carried with his Fa∣mily and Treasure where he should appoint.
Don Constantin immediately fitted out four∣teen Ships, the Command whereof he gave to D. Antony de Noronha. With him went Luis de Melo, to receive the Command of Damam from Iames de Silva, who held it by the Death of D. Iames de Noronha. There they found four Galliots of Sebastian de Sá his Squadron that was dispersed, and so made up 500 Men, and passed to Suratt. They went up the River through such showers of Bullets, that there was scarce a Vessel but lost some Men. Then they Landed, and immediately entred a Work, and after a te∣dious Engagement Chinguiscan with above 20000 Men, was beaten by 500 Portugueses, and our Captain remained Master of the Field. 9. In the same Heat he entred the City, where Chinguiscan was, and retired honoura∣bly, though not without danger: But com∣ing to Treat with Cedemecan about delivering up the Fort as he had promised, found him quite estranged from it. Some say, he durst not do it for fear his own Men should kill him; and 'tis likely it was so, for D. Antony being gone to Goa, they would have murdered him only for the Intention; so that he was forced to make his escape from them, and being taken by Chinguiscan had his Head cut off. Caracen his Brother-in-Law succeeded him in Suratt, and found the means of obliging Chinguiscan, so that he left him in peaceable possession.
10. Emanuel de Vasconcelos being arrived at the Moluco's, prevailed with the King of Ternate, to quit his claim to that Kingdom, as being left by the rightful Possessor, who died a Christian at Malaca to our King. Accordingly King Sebastian was Proclaimed in all the Neighbourhood, he that Resigned still keeping the Title and Government. Vasconcelos having made War against the King of Tidore, soon after died. Sebastian Machado his Lieutenant succeeded him, and sent George Ferreyra against the Sangaje of Gilolo, who brought him to Submission. The Christian Faith was now very much propa∣gated in these Parts by the labour and indu∣stry of the Jesuits. 11. The Year ended the Government of D. Constantin, applauded by all lovers of Truth, though censured by the Vile Portu∣gueses in India. He was endued with all those Parts that make a man Great, and was fortunate in his Undertakings; his Govern∣ment such, that King Sebastian offered it him for Life, and he refused; and when that Ex∣cellent Vice-Roy D. Luis de Ataide returned thither the second time, he bid him Govern like D. Constantin. 12. His Countenance was beautiful and majestick, his Complexion white, his Beard thick and black. In the number of Vice-Roys he was the 7th, in that of Governours the 20th, and held it three years.
CHAP. XVII. The Government of the Vice-Roy D. Fran∣cis Coutinho, Count de Redondo, from the Year 1561, till 1564, in the Reign of King SEBASTIAN. 1. IN the beginning of September arrived at Goa D. Francis Coutinho, Count de 1561. Redondo, no less known for his witty Sayings, than his Actions in Peace and War. He brought five Ships, and sailed from Lisbon the beginning of the Year. The Count having sent Commanders to several Forts, dispatched five Ships for Portugal, in one of which went D. Constantin. Next he sent D. Francis Mascarenhas with 650 Men in 23 Ships, to seek out Cafar's Gallies that were abroad a pilfering; but he missing of them through neglect, returned to the Coast of Malabar, where he secured the Trading Ships for the term of three Months, and then went into Port. 2. In February the Vice-Roy sent George de Moura with three Galleons, and some small Vessels, to secure our Ships that were to come from Ormuz against Cafar's Gallies. On the Coast of Caxem he met a Ship of Achem of great strength and value, it car∣ried 500 fighting Men and 50 Pieces of Brass Cannon. Towards Night Peter Lopez de Rebelo stood up with and boarded her, whereupon ensued a bloody Fight. The
Enemy fired the Galleon, and Antony Cabral coming up in the Night with another, think∣ing it was the Ship, attacks the Galleon. Perceiving his Mistake he drew off, and the Ship taking fire both were inevitably lost. Cabral saved Rebelo and his Men. Of the Enemy only a few escaped in the Long-Boat. Moura was coming on with the rest of the Ships, when discovering a Sail he gave it chase, but in vain. He cruized there some time and saw several Ships, but could not fetch up any. 3. In September arrived in India 6 Ships from Portugal, with 3000 Land-men. The Vice-Roy was preparing to set out for the Sea of Calicut, whilst Cide Meriam was marching to besiege Damam with 800 Horse and 1000 Foot, after doing much harm in the Neighbouring Villages. Our Men went out to meet them, a Dominican carrying a Cruci∣fix before them; at the first Charge several of our Men fell, and among them the Dominican; a Souldier took up the Crucifix and marched before till a Ball broke the Arm of it, which much stirred up our Men to revenge. In the heat of the Action Cide appears, calling upon Garcia Rodriguez, who spurring his Horse met, and with a stroak of his Lance dismounted him; but Garcia fell too, and Meriam recovering came at him with his Cimiter; Garcia embraces him fast, and so they strugled till one of our Souldiers run Meriam through with a Pike. Our Captain mounted again, and running into the thickest of the Enemy, they were
disordered and fled; many were killed, many taken, and a considerable Booty. 4. About the beginning of December the Vice-Roy set out of Goa with 140 Sail, in which number were ten very large Gallies; in this Fleet were 4000 Men. All this Pre∣paration was only to meet Zamori, and Swear to the Peace already concluded. They met at Tiracole, the Vice Roy walking through a Lane made by his 4000 Men, and the King through another of 40000. After the usual Ceremonies the Articles were read, and then sworn to by each after his own manner. 5. The Count returning to Cochim, dis∣patched the Ships for Portugal, which ar∣rived safe, except one that was never heard of. The Portugueses of this great Fleet having no other employments for their Swords, fell to Challenging one another, by which means above 50 were killed. The grounds of these Quarrels are com∣monly so idle and ridiculous, that it is not worth time to mention any of them. 6. The Vice Roy began this Year, send∣ing some Commanders to several Parts: 1563. But there was nothing of moment, but the Business of Amboina, one of the Maluco's, whither he sent Henry de Sá with some Re∣lief. Amboina is an Island in that Eastern Sea, about 16 Leagues in compass; but con∣tains in that little Space many good Towns. Iordan de Freytas, Commander of Ternate, got a Grant of it for himself (as is before said) from the King of it, who being con∣verted
by his means repayed him with that Gift, which afterwards fell to the Crown of Portugal. Sá sent his Nephew Vasco thither to build a Fort; but he behaved himself so ill, that he estranged the Hearts of all the People, chiefly the Inhabitants of Ative, where he was; and those of Aito, not far distant. The better to compass their Re∣venge, they offered Subjection to the Queen of Iapara, in the Island Iava, that she might assist them with her Shipping. The other Islands also sent a Fleet, and joyning with those that were in Arms, killed many of the Christians newly converted by St. Francis Xaverius. One of these called E∣manuel, gathering a Number, put a stop to this Current, till Henry de Sá joyning they totally defeated all those Enemies, with a great slaughter of them. Then Sá took in hand the punishing the Rebels, among which were two Infamous Portugueses, who had laid the muzzles of their Musquets to Ema∣nuel, because he defended the New Christi∣ans; that it may appear, there are many New Christians better than the Old. Peace being setled, the Spiritual Conquest was car∣ried on. 7. In Ceylon Madune, always aiming to deprive his Brother, the King of Cota, of his Kingdom, kept his Son Raju in the Field with a good Force. Raju with 30000 Men besieges the Fort of Columbo, Commanded by Baltasar Guedez de Sousa. He battered it several days with great Fury, but found such opposition he was forced to draw off, and
marched to the City Cota, two Leagues distant, not doubting to carry it, having been reinforced and believing the Portu∣gueses were not in condition to Relieve it. Yet Baltasar Guedez was there as soon as he with 400 Men. The City was besieged, and the Attacks carried on vigorously, and backed with Elephants. Many Portugueses were here seen fight with those Beasts single, and with many Wounds drive them back upon their own Men. 8. Though bravely defended, the Town was in great danger by reason of the Ene∣mies great number, had not Iames de Melo Coutinho, Commander of Manar, come op∣portunely with 400 Men and Provisions. Raju seeing this Relief raised the Siege, having lost 2000 Men. On our side twenty were killed, and three Franciscans. The King repaired his Works, and Coutinho re∣turned to his Command, leaving the Men he brought. 9. This Year sailed from Lisbon four Ships, one of them was forced back, three arrived at Goa, one whereof sunk there. The Vice-Roy sent D. Francis de Mascarenhas to Cananor with fifteen Sail, we being then at War with that King. Hierom Diaz de Meneses staid behind with his Ship, in which were forty tried Souldiers. He met three Parao's of Malabars, and could not with Honour avoid them; so making up to the formost layed it aboard, and killing most of the Moors, had taken it, but that the other two coming up forced our Men to
defend their own Ship, and though they behaved themselves with great bravery, were by the multitude of Enemies drove into the Poop, whence breaking out again they cleared their Decks, killing 60 Moors. They parted, and Diaz pursued his Voy∣age. 10. The Vice-Roy dispatched two Ships for Portugal, which after a dangerous Voy∣age arrived safe. Hearing what had hapned, Hierom Diaz with the Malabars, who conti∣nued their Piracies contrary to the Peace so lately sworn, he complained to Zamori. He Answered coldly, because his Intentions were never sincere, That those were some Re∣bels, and whosoever met them might punish them. The Count meditating Revenge, heard a∣bove 80 Vessels of Malabars were sailing for Calicut; these he resolved to destroy, and if Zamori complained, to Answer after this manner, That they were some Rebels had done it, whoever took might punish them. To this he sent Dominick de Mesquita, a Man of Valour and no nice Conscience, as was re∣quisite for such an Action, with 120 Men in three Ships. He cruised upon the Coast of Carapatan, and took by two and three at a time twenty four Sail. The Vessels he sunk, some of the Men he beheaded, others he sewed up in their Sails and threw them into the Sea. Above 2000 died after this manner, so that all the Coast of Malabar was filled with Cries for the loss of Friends and Goods. This Action soon after produ∣ced a very tedious War.
11. This was the Vice-Roys last Action, and scarce came to his knowledge; for he died very suddenly about the end of Fe∣bruary. His Death was lamented, because he was beloved. He was neither Prodigal, nor Covetous, a great lover of Justice, and so happy in witty Expressions, that all plea∣sant Sayings were Fathered upon him. His Countenance was jovial, his Eyes lively. In the number of Vice-Roys he was the 8th, and e 21th of Governours, and held it two s and five Months; the third of the Name, rst of the Sirname, and second that had the Title of Count, for D. Vasco de Gama was the first. 12. At this time our Famous Poet, Luis de Camoens, was at Goa, and had been well looked upon and favoured by the two last Vice-Roys. The Governour Francis Bar∣reto had Imprisoned, and then banished him for Debts and some youthful Extravagan∣cies; and the Count towards the End of his Government, had again given him up to the Law, and he was cast in Prison. We shall hereafter see him deceitfully carried to Zofala, and there sold. Such is the hard Fate of great Wits.
CHAP. XVIII. The Government of John de Mendoza, for six Months of the Year 1564, in the Reign of King SEBASTIAN. 1. JOhn de Mendoça, late Commaer of 1564. Malaca, succeeded the Vice-R with the Title of Governour. As soon as he had taken the Sword, there came to him Em∣bassadours from Zamori, complaining of the Harm Dominick de Mesquita had done the beginning of the year to his Subjects, con∣trary to the Peace so solemnly sworn. The Governour answered as the Count designed to have done; That it was perhaps some Por∣tugues who was in Rebellion; that they might punish him if taken, and he would do the same. The Embassadours had nothing to say; but before their departure came in Dominick de Mesquita, and the Governour (not to carry on the Shew too far) caused him in their presence to be apprehended. As soon as their backs were turned he released, and rewarded him as his good Service de∣served. 2. A Woman of a bold Spirit, and of good Repute among her People, Wife to one of those killed by Mesquita, running about the City of Cananor with loud Cries and Complaints, stirred up the Moors to
revenge that Action. They all run to Arms, swearing not to lay them down, till they had rooted out the Portugueses from among them. They beset the Fort where D. Payo e Noronha Commanded, and the King un∣expectedly set fire to above thirty Ships that ode under the shelter of it. The Gover∣nour sent immediately Andrew de Sousa with six Sail to the relief of that Fort, where Adé Rajao already was with a great Power. Thus began the War of Malabar, and went on slowly. 3. It being now the beginning of Sep∣tember, the Ships arrived from Portugal, in which went the Vice-Roy D. Antony de No∣ronha, to whom the Governour delivered the Sword, and went out of India poor, after bearing honourable and advantagious Em∣ployments. He was the 22th Governour, and held it half a year, was the second of the Name, and first of the Sirname. 4. Since the short time of his Govern∣ment afforded not Matter enough for a Chapter, I will give some Account of the Zamories and Preaching of St. Thomas the Apostle. It is before related how Perimal, who divided the Empire of Malabar into several Kingdoms, was persuaded to Maho∣metanism, and went to end his days at Meca. This was a false Invention of the Moors; for there were several Sovereign Princes in Malabar 500 years before the Birth of Christ. Malabar lies between the Points of Cananor and Cape Comori, 150 Leagues in length, and about 15 in breadth up the In∣land,
expiring at the Foot of a Mountain that runs through all that length. The chief Sovereignties therein are Cananor, Tanor, Moringue, Cranganor, Parum, Mungate, Repelim, Cochim, Diamper, Pimienta, Turun∣gule, Maturte, Porca, Marta, Pitimene, Cale∣coulam, Coulam, Changernate, Gundra and Travancor. 5. The differences that often arose be∣tween these Sovereigns, obliged them to chuse an Arbitrator, who was to be but of indifferent Fortune, to prevent his growing too powerful; and the Office was not to be hereditary, but he always chose by consent of those Princes. This Arbitrator they cal∣led Xara Perimal, and appointed his resi∣dence to be in the City Calicut; so ancient is this Employment. The great concourse of Merchants from all parts to that City, caused it in time to rise to an Empire, though such care had been taken to prevent it. This Dignity of Emperour (which is signified by the word Zamori) continued till the Year of Grace 347, according to the Records of Calicut; but according to those of Cochim, till 588. Whensoever it was, Xara Perimal then Reigned, who tired with the Cares of a Crown, and having some knowledge of the Evangelical Doctrin, as being a great Favourer of the Christians of St. Thomas, inhabiting at Cranganor, he resolved to end his days at Meliapor, serving in that Church. By Consent of all his Princes he resigned the Crown to Manuchem Herari his Page, esteemed worthy and able
to Govern that Empire. Perimal died at Meliapor, and it is thought one of those Bodies found with the Apostles was his. Since his time till now have been above 110 Zamories, of whose Names we do not make a Catalogue, because they are all called Manuchem and Zamori, in memory of that first Successor of Perimal. Another Relation says; This Perimal was one of the three Kings that went to adore our Saviour, new Born at Bethlehem, and perhaps that might be the Reason of his following the Apostle St. Thomas. In an ancient Manu∣script of two hundred years standing, I have found what follows: Melchior was King of Nubia and Arabia; Baltasar, of Goli and Saba; Gaspar, of Tharsis, Insula, and Grisola, where the Body of St. Thomas lies, and they were afterwards by him made Bishops, and suffered Martyrdom with him. 6. In this Empire (so in all the Kingdoms of it) the Sons do not Inherit, but the Ne∣phews born of Sisters, by reason of the ill conceit they have of the Mothers, believing this way they secure the Royal Descent. The Princesses that bring forth these Heirs, get them in this manner: The Princess is Married to a Neighbouring Prince, who leaves her untouched; a Nayre of the Fa∣mily of Naburii, destined for this Employ, gets her Maidenhead, and then departs, ne∣ver more to be seen in the Country upon pain of Death. The Princess afterwards chooses others among the Naburiis, of whom she makes use till she has Conceived.
She has liberty to choose among them all, but none of them can court her upon pain of Death. The Nayres are very poor, few of them can maintain a Wife; and he that can, need not fear another corrupting of her. For this Reason three or four of them joyn to maintain a Woman, and that is their manner of Marriage: When one goes to the Wife, he leaves his Buckler at the Door, which is a sign one is within; and if ano∣ther comes, he must stay. The Kingdom of Cochin was subject to this Empire, though without paying Tribute, and made free by the Portugueses in requital, for the fidelity of the King Uniramacoul, who Reigned when we first discovered India, and exposed himself to utter danger of being ruined, rather than deliver up the Portugueses to Zamori. King Emanuel sent him a Crown of Gold by the Vice-Roy D. Francis de Al∣meyda, which he received, submitting him∣self as a Subject to Portugal, without any other acknowledgment; but is yearly pre∣sented with two pieces of Gold; the one a Portugues, being a Coin worth 18 Ducats, on the 1st of Ianuary; the other on the day of the Epiphany, is a Cup worth 640, Thus much of the Empire of Malabar. 7. As to Meliapor, for what relates to the Apostle: It is the received Opinion he was killed at Antenodur, a Mountain a League distant from the Town, where he had two Caves, whither he retired to Pray. The nearest now belongs to the Jesuits, the other is the Church of our Lady of the Mount.
He being one day at Prayer in the former, opposite to a Clift that gave Light to it, one of the Bramens, who was watching, thrust a Lance through that Hole in such manner, that a piece of it remaining in his Body, he went to the other Cave, and there died, embracing a Stone on which a Cross was carved. Hence his Disciples removed and Buried him in his Church, where he was found by Emanuel de Faria, or Frias, and the Priest Antony Penteado, sent thither on pur∣pose by King Emanuel. 8. In the Year 1547, being about to re∣pair that Oratory where the Apostle died, digging they found a Stone, which seems to be the same he held then. It is about a yard long, and three quarters wide, the Colour grey, with some red spots. In the middle of it is carved a Portal round at the Top, with Letters between the two Borders; within two Banisters, rather than Pillars; being turned, on which are two twisted Figures, like Dogs sitting, from whose Necks rises a graceful Arch of five Borders, and between every two are knots like Beads. In the hollow of this Door is a Pedestal of two Steps, from the uppermost of which rises a Branch on each side, and over them, as it were in the Air, is a Cross, the ends of it like to that of the Military Order of Alcantara, as the History relates; but the Print shews them like three half Moons, the Convex sides outwards, and the Points meeting, as commonly we see in many ancient Churches in Europe. Over all is a
Dove flying, as it were descending to touch the Cross with its Beak. There are ancient Pillars in the East with Doves after this man∣ner. One preserved in the Pagod of Negapatan, has carved on it a Cock, a Rope and a Can∣dle. There is a Tradition, it came of it self to those parts by Sea, with a Candle burning. 9. The Chappel being repaired, or beauti∣fied in the Year 1551, the Stone was solemnly set up in it, and at the time the Priest pro∣nounced those words of the Gospel; Missus est Angelus Gabriel, &c. it began to change colour, and became black and shining, then sweating turned to its own colour, plainly discovering the spots of Blood which before were obscure. The Letters about it could not be understood till the Year 1561; a Learned Bramen said, they were 36 Hiero∣glyphicks, every one containing a Sentence, and were to this effect: In the time of the Son of Sagad the Gentile, who Reign∣ed 30 years, came upon Earth one only GOD, and was Incarnate in the Womb of a Virgin: He abolished the Law of the Jews, whom he punished for the Sins of Men, after he had been in the World 33 years, and taught Twelve Servants the Truth he preached. A King of Three Crowns, Cheralacone, Indalacone, Cuspandiad; and King Alexander of the Kingdom Erti∣nabarad, with Catherine his Daughter, and many Virgins and six Families, voluntarily followed the Law of Thomas, because it was the Law of Truth, and he gave them the Sign of the Cross to adore. Going up
to the place of Antenodur, a Bramen run him through with a Lance, and he em∣braced this Cross, which was stained with his Blood, and his Disciples carried him to Maiale, and Buried him in his Church with the Lance in his Body. And because We the above-named Kings saw this, we carved these Letters here. Hence, besides the Story, is gathered, That Maiale was the ancient Name of the City Meliapor, now called St. Thomas. This Stone afterwards sweated sometimes: Till the Year 1561 it was a good Omen; since then a bad one. 10. In the time of the Priest Penteado were also found three Brass Plates about a Span long, and half as broad, in shape like a Scutcheon, on the top a Ring. On the one side was a Cross and Peacock, the ancient Arms of Meliapor; on the other, Characters which were explained by another Learned Bramen. The first part was Titles of the King; Boca Raja, Son of Campula Raja, and Grandson of Atela Raja. He begins confessing, One God without begin∣ning, Maker of all things. And says of himself, That he is as Great a Gentleman as the Beast Chigsan, and as one of the five Kings who conquered 99: That he is as strong as one of the eight Elephants that the World stands upon, and that he Conquered the Kingdoms of Otia Tulcan and Canara, cutting his Enemies to pieces with his Sword. The other Plates con∣tained Grants of Lands to St. Thomas, di∣rected to himself, and calling him Abidarra
Modeliar. Whence may be gathered, these Princes Reigned at the time that Christ suffered. One of them begins thus: After the Year 1259, in the first Year called Icarrana Rachan, on the 12th day of the New Moon of the good Year, I give in Alms to the Saint Abidarra Modeliar, &c. Thus Another: This is a Token of Alms∣deeds to purchase Paradice, and all Kings that perform them shall obtain much more, and he that disannuls them shall be 60000 years with the Worms in Hell, &c. 11. It has always been controverted, which way St. Thomas came into India. The Heathen History says, That St. Thomas and St. Thaddeus being in Mesopotamia, they parted at the City Edessa; and the former sailing with some Merchants came to the Island Zocotora, and after Converting the People, passed to Mogodover Patana, a City of Paru in Malabar, where he built a Church. The King keeping there the Wedding of his Son, some Jewish Women came to sing, and their Musick was Texts of Scripture, many of them fulfilled by the Life and Death of our Saviour. St. Thomas being present, was so rapt, hearing those Prophe∣cies from them People, that a Heathen observing it gave him a Box on the Ear. Soon after going to fetch Water, a Tiger bit off his Hand. He came running to tell his Misfortune, and after him a Dog with the Hand in his Mouth. The Apostle took, and set it on again, so that no Mark re∣mained. Then he went to Calicut, and con∣verted
Xa Perimal. There is an Account, That he went to the Mogol's Country, where Chesetrigal then Reigned, and after being in China recurned to India, visiting the Province of Tibet, and setled at Meliapor, where he ended. 12. In the Year 800 arrived at Mogodover, or Patana, a rich Christian Armenian, called Thomas Cananeus, who with his Company pre∣sented himself to the King: He received him with Kindness, and soon after won by his Pre∣sents, gave him the Lands of Cranganor and City Patana, where there was scarce any Footsteps of St. Thomas his Church. On those Foundations he built another; another at Cranganor by the name of St. Thomas, now standing within our Fort; another of our Lady, and another of St. Ciriacus. These be∣ing the Works of Thomas Cananeus, made them erroniously be believed the Apostles. Afterwards were found other Plates contain∣ing Grants of Lands to the Disciples and Suc∣cessors of the Apostles. 12. It may reasonably be believed, that Pagod where Gama entred, as he went from Calicut to Zamorie's Palace, was of this Foun∣dation, because the Image of our Lady was there called Mary by the Heathens; and it being believed one of the three Kings that went to Bethlehem was of Malabar. The Heathens yearly celebrate a Feast to St. Tho∣mas, to preserve their Ships; because formerly many of them used to be Cast-away sailing to Parvi. End of the Second Part.
THE Portugues Asia. TOM. I. PART III. CHAP. I. Conquests under King Emanuel, from the Year 1515, to the Year 158. Lope Soarez de Albergaria, being Governor. 1. THE great Alfonso de Albu∣querque was drawing to∣wards 1515. the last Period of his Life, when King E∣manuel, as if he had fore∣seen it, sent a new Governor with a Fleet for India. The Governor was Lope Soarez de Albergaria, the Fleet consisted of thirteen Ships, and in them fifteen hundred fighting Men, many Gentlemen by Birth, most such by their Actions. Among them was Duarte Galvam, a Person of Learning, Au∣thority and Judgment, who went Embassa∣dor
to Prester Iohn, with rich Presents; some for him, some for the Church. The Governor being arrived at Cochin, by his (perhaps rather affected than natural) re∣servedness became disagreeable to many, and particularly to the King, who was used to Albuquerque's discreet Civility. D. Garcia de Noronha, who took Charge of the Dispatch of the homeward bound trading Ships, went away with them after no small Dis∣agreement with Lope Soarez. Till this time the Gentlemen had followed the Dictates of true Honor, esteeming their Arms the greatest Riches; from this time forwards they so wholly gave up them∣selves to trading, that those who had been Captains became Merchants, so that what had been Command became a Shame, Ho∣nor was a Scandal, and Reputation a Re∣proach. Lope Soarez entred upon the Go∣vernment. He visited the Forts, placed in them new Captains, gave out Orders and such other Affairs of small moment, which rather serve to fill Paper than increase the Substance of a History. 2. This year sailed from Lisbon five Ships under the Command of Iohn de Silveyra, three of them arrived in India, the other two were lost on the Sands of St. Lazaro. The Governor prepared, according to the King's Order, for the Red Sea; and being informed, that the Soldan was fitting out a great Fleet at Suez, he sailed in search there∣of 1516. from Goa, on the eighth of February, with twenty seven Sail of several sorts and Sizes.
In this Fleet were twelve hundred Portugue∣ses, eight hundred Malabar Soldiers, and eight hundred Seamen of the same Na∣tion. He arrived before the City Aden, the Commander whereof Miramirzan, finding himself defenceless, by reason a piece of the Wall was beaten down by Raez Soliman, Admiral of the Suez Fleet, Lope Soarez went in search of, he made a Virtue of Ne∣cessity, and offered the Keys to Lope Soarez, affirming he would have done the same to Albuquerque, had not he begun by Acts of Hostility. Lope Soarez pleased with this Flattery, trusted to him, and took not pos∣session of the City, but went away in search of Raez Soliman, thinking first to find out him, and then take the City; and neither did he take Aden at his return, nor meet Soliman as he went. He went up the Red Sea, in quest of Solyman, but with bad Fortune; for D' Alvaro de Castro was lost with forty Men through Covetousness; for having taken some. Vessels, he so over∣loaded his own with the Goods, that it sunk down to rights. Other Ships sustained much damage. Hearing that Solyman was drove by stress of Weather to Ioda, and had no Defence, he resolved to sail thither. 3. Ioda (or as the Arabs call it) Gidda, is seated in Arabia Felix in twenty one De∣grees and half of North Latitude, in a most barren Soil, being all a deep Sand. It was a Colony of Moors, who attended more to Trade, than Delight. The Buildings are good, but not the Harbour; the Inhabi∣tants
of two sorts, the native Arabs, and foreign Merchants. The Town was forti∣fied by Mir Hozem, after he was defeated by D. Francisco de Almeyda, for his own Se∣curity, being afraid to return to the Soldan, but upon pretence of the Defence of the Sepulchre of Mahomet and his Prince. When Hozem was busie in this Work, came to the Soldan Raez Solyman, a Turk of base Pa∣rentage, but a powerful and bold Pyrate, born in the Island Mitylene of the Archipelago. He offered himself to command the Fleet of twenty seven Sail, that was preparing at Suez to fall upon Aden, an employ Mir Hozem had set his Heart upon. The old Servant was laid aside, and the Stranger re∣ceived. The punishment of this Incon∣stancy soon fell upon Ioda. For Solyman after repairing the Loss sustained at Aden (where many of his Men were killed) and taking a great Booty in the City Zeibid, returned to Gidda, where he slew Mir Ho∣zem, and then delivered the City to the Turk, who not long before had killed the Soldan in Battel. This was the occasion that Lope Soarez found Solyman at Gidda. 4. The Port being dangerous, Lope Soarez anchored a League from the City, in which there was so good Cannon, that three or four Peices reached the Ships at that di∣stance. There came a Messenger from So∣lyman, offering a private Combat between Man and Man, or as Soarez should propose. The Challenge was received by Gaspar de Silva, and D. Antonio de Meneses, but the
Governor would not permit, saying he would answer ashore. He sounded a Chan∣nel that goes up to the City, which was terrified by the firing of a Galeon. Soly∣man appeased the Tumult, and appeared with some Men without the Walls, whilst multitudes appeared on them, filling the Air with loud Cries. Lope Soarez delayed the landing two days, till his Men began to complain of the delay. He appeased them by shewing his Instructions, wherein he was ordered to fight the Fleet, which he could not compass, not to attack that City where there might be much danger and lit∣tle profit. Tho Votes differed, it was re∣solved in Council to desist. He retired to the Island Camaran, whence he sent some to several parts of that Sea. Here died Duarte Galvam, a studious and ingenious Man, who had been Embassador in several parts of Europe, and was going now in the same quality, being above seventy years of Age, to Prester Iohn. At his death he said, that his Son George Galvam and all his Men were cast away in their Vessel, and that in the Island of Dalaca they had cut off the Heads of Laurence de Cosme and others that were sent thither. It being impossible this News could be brought to the Island where he died, yet was afterwards found true. 5. After suffering much through Famine, whereof some Men died, and losing seven∣teen Portugueses, taken by the Moors, and carried to Gidda, Lope Soarez set sail, and appeared before the City Zeyla, on the
Mouth of the Red Sea, and the African Shoar, called by Ptolomy, Emporium Avalite, being the great Market of those parts. The Town was easily taken, being unprovided, and burnt, and then the Fleet bent its course to Aden. 6. Here Soarez found how much he had been to blame in not taking possession when offered by Miramirzan; for he finding his Enemy now weaker, and the Wall repaired, refused by forming Delays what afore he offered with haste. Lope Soarez fearing to lose time, durst not call Miramirzan to ac∣count, but set sail, designing to do the same at the City Barbora, as he had done at Zeyla. But the Fleet was scattered by Storms, and drove to several Ports, and when they came after to hear of one another, it was found above eight hundred Men had perish∣ed by Hunger, Sickness and Shipwrack. All which Misfortunes made the loss of the most fortunate Albuquerque be the more la∣mented. 7. Whilst these Disstasters attended Lope Soarez, another threatened the City Goa, where D. Gutierre de Monroy commanded. According to the Orders left him by Soa∣rez, some Ships of the Enemy were taken of more Value than Reputation, and with more Danger than Profit. One Alvaro Madureira, who was married in Goa, fled to the Enemy, and turned Moor, then was reconciled, and falling again, brought the Indians to attack our Ships, putting them in great danger. And because Troubles sel∣dom
come alone, it happened that one Fer∣dinando Caldera, who also was married there, flying the punishment of Crimes, fol∣lowed the Example of Madureira, or (as was said) terrified by the Threats of D. Gu∣tierre, who desired his absence, being in love with his Wife. This is likely, since there was scarce ever any great Mischief without a Woman at the end of it. Caldera went to serve Ancostan, an Officer of Hidalcan. D. Gutierre demanded him, because he de∣sired not his absence that way. Ancostan refused to deliver him. The other chal∣lenged him, but he accepted not. De Gu∣tierre sent one who pretending to be a De∣serter should kill Caldera, he executed it, and was killed upon the Body by the Moors. Lope Soarez arriving at Goa was informed by D. Gutierre what had passed, and left it to him take the revenge he thought fit of Ancostan, which produced the loss of Men and Reputation, and brought upon the City a dangerous Siege. It fell out thus. 8. As soon as D. Gutierre had this leave of the Governor, he prepared to put his Designs in execution, and when he thought time, sent out his Brother D. Fernando with one hundred and fifty Portugueses, whereof eighty were Horse, and a great number of Canaras, against Ancostan. At Ponda they routed the Moors, who rallying, obliged D. Ferdinando to retire, having lost two hundred Men, killed and taken. This caused all the Country to rise in Arms a∣gainst the Portugueses, and Hidalcan pre∣tending
the Peace was broke, to order his General Sufo Lari to besiege Goa. Sufo Lari appeared with four thousand Horse and twenty six thousand Foot, and attempted to pass into the Island, but was repulsed. Hunger began to press the Besieged, till three Ships arrived, one from Portugal, ano∣ther from Quiloa, and another from China, so Lari raised the Siege, and the former Peace was confirmed. 9. The same Misfortune attended Mala∣ca, through the ill Government of George de Brito, and Animosities of others. The People fled from Malaca, because of their tyrannical Usage, and the King of it that had been prepared to recover it, sending before to this effect his General Cerilige de Raja, with considerable Forces, and some Cannon. He intrenched himself, and so pressed the Besieged, that had not D. Alexius de Meneses come to take the Government with three hundred Men, then had ended the Portugues Possession of Malaca. 10. Anthony de Saldana arrived now in India with six Ships from Portugal. In this Fleet went one Alcacova as Surveyor of 1517. the King's Revenue, with such a Power as lessened that of Lope Soarez, and with a will to take it all away. There soon broke out the Flame of Contention between these two. Alcacova bore down by such as envied him, took revenge on himself by returning to Portugal, and on them there by causing them to be called to account for their Pro∣ceedings. Hence began the hearing Com∣plaints
against the Governors and Com∣manders of India, and hence it was that ma∣ny took more care to heap Riches than Honor, knowing them to be a protection against all Crimes. Lope Soarez sent D. Iohn de Silveira to the Maldivy Islands, D. A∣lexius de Meneses to Malaca, Manuel de la Cerda to Diu, and Antony de Soldana with six Ships, by the King's Order to the Coast of Arabia. They arrived at the City Bar∣bora near to Zeyla, and not unlike to it, but much less. It was taken without resistance, the Inhabitants being all fled. It was burnt, and the Fleet, without doing any thing re∣markable, returned to India at such time as Lope Soarez was sailing for the Island Ceylon. CHAP. II. A Continuation of what was done in India the same Year 1517, during the Go∣vernment of the same Lope Soarez de Albergaria. 1. THE Island Ceylon is opposite to Cape Comori, and is the Southermost Land of India, within Ganges, distant from the Continent sixteen Leagues, once, as some imagine, join'd to it, in length about eighty Leagues, and forty five in breadth. The Southermost Point is in the Latitude of
six degrees, the most Northerly in about ten. In this Sea is a Fishery of precious Pearls. The ancient Inhabitants of it called it Ila∣nare. The Persians and Arabs, Seradib. It took the Name of Ceylon from the Sea that parts it from the Continent, because being dangerous, and the Chineses having lost a great Fleet there, called it Chilam, that is to say, Danger (it somewhat resembles Scylla) and corruptly it was called Ceylon. This is the ancient Trapobana, and not Sumatra, as some have imagined. It produces ma∣ny things, Cinnamon better than that of all other places, Rubies, Saphires and other precious Stones, much Pepper and Carda∣mum, Brasil Wood, and other Dyes, great Woods of Palm-trees, the Elephants bred there the most sensible, much Cattle, has good Ports, and several Rivers of good Water. The Mountains are covered with pleasant Woods, one particularly rising the space of seven Leagues, on the top whereof is a round plain of about thirty paces Dia∣meter, in the Center whereof rises a smooth Rock about six spans above the rest, on the Superficies whereof is the Print of a Mans Foot about two spans in length. This Foot∣step is held in great veneration, being thought to be of a holy Man born at Delhi, who lived many years on that Mountain, preaching to the Inhabitants the Belief of one only God, who afterwards returning to his own Country, sent one of his Teeth to the Kings of that Island, as a Token to remem∣ber him, and they keep it as a Relict where∣on
they repose much Confidence in time of Danger. On this account resort thither many Pilgrims from places a thousand Leagues distant. The Island is divided in∣to nine Kingdoms, the chiefest Columbo on the West. The others Gale on the South; Iaula, Tanavaca, Cande, Batecalon, Vila∣cem, Triquinamale, and Iafanapatam. 2. The King of Columbo in Ceylon had a Trade with the Portugueses, desired their Friendship, and furnished them with Cin∣namon from the time of Albuquerque. Lope Soarez went thither now with a Design to oblige him to pay Tribute, and to build a Fort as King Emanuel desired. He had with him seven Gallies, two Ships, and eight small Vessels with the Materials and Workmen for the Building, and 700 Por∣tugues Soldiers. They had bad Weather, but arrived safe. The King presently grant∣ed leave to build a Fort, and the Moors as soon altered his mind, and he received Soa∣rez going to begin the Work in such manner as put him to a streight; but in the end the Enemies were put to flight. They had for∣tified themselves to hinder the Work, and Lope Soarez did the same now to begin it. The King came to composition, the Articles were that he should be a Subject to Portugal, paying a yearly Tribute of twelve hundred Quintals of Cinnamon, twelve Rings of Rubies and Saphires, and six Elephants, for Soarez would not admit his Excuses, where∣in he blamed the Foreign Merchants.
3. At this time arrived from the Maldives, Iohn de Silveyra with four Sail; in his way he took two Ships of Cambaya, and the King of the Island granted leave to erect a Fa∣ctory. He went with the same Design to Bengala, where he was in great Danger, for there a Bengalian young Man that sailed with him, discovered the taking of the two Ships which were sent to Cochin, and so he was looked upon as a Pyrate not worthy to be heard. It had been worse with him, had not Iohn Coello arrived then with his Ship from Pacem, being sent on the same Er∣rand by Ferdinando Perez de Andrade, to the King of Bengala. Don Iohn de Silveyra, set Sail hence after passing the Winter with great hardship, especially through Fa∣mine. He was invited by the King of Ar∣racam to his Port, who, with the Messenger sent him a Present, but all his Kindnesses ten∣ded to destroy him at the instigation of the Governour of the other Port. This Trea∣chery took no effect, and he arriv'd at Cey∣lon at the time that Lope Soarez finished the Fort, who gave him the command of it, and left Anthony de Miranda de Azevedo with four Ships to cruise in that Sea. 4. Whilst these things were acted at Mal∣divia, Chatigam and Columbo, D. Alexius Me∣neses secured Malaca, being arrived with Men and Amunition, and putting an end to the Divisions of the Portugueses about suc∣ceeding the Governour who lay dying. Al∣fonso Lopez de Costa had the government, and Duarte de Melo the command of the
Sea. Duarte Coello was sent with an Em∣bassy and Present from King Emanuel to him of Siam, the substance of it was to con∣firm the Peace, and as a token of it, that he would send People to inhabit Malaca, that so the Moors whom he hated as much as we, might be totally expelled. He granted all with great satisfaction, and as a testimo∣ny of his Sincerity, caused to be erected in a remarkable place of the City Hudia, where he then was, a Cross with the Arms of Por∣tugal on it. Coello having thus succeeded was thrown by stress of weather upon the Coast of Pam, the King whereof received him friendly, and voluntarily submitted him∣self to the Crown of Portugal with an year∣ly tribute of a Gold Cup. This action was done rather in hatred to the King of Bintam than of any love to us. 5. The Kingdom of Siam where Coello had now been setling Peace, is one of the three greatest of Asia, the others are that of China and that of Bisnagar. The great River Menam runs through the middle of the Kingdom of Siam as it lies in length, the River has its spring in the great Lake Chiamay in the Latitude of 30 Degrees, and falls into the Sea in 13 Degrees, so that the length of this Kingdom is 330 Leagues. On the West of it is Bengala, on the South Ma∣laca, on the East Cambodia, and on the North China. It contains much Mountain and Plain, and in both sundry sorts of People, some most barbarous and cruel, who feed on human Flesh, as the Guei who for or∣nament
make figures on their Bodies with hot Irons. Here are bred many Elephants, black Cattle and Buffaloes. It has many Sea-port Towns and populous Cities. Hu∣dia is the Metropolis or Court. The Faith of the Siamites agrees in many considerable points with the Christian, as one God, Hea∣ven and Hell, Good and Bad Angels at∣tending each body. They build sumptuous Temples, in which they place Idols of vast bigness. They are very religious, sparing in Diet, much given to divination, studious, particularly in Astrology. All the Land is most fruitful, abounds in Gold and Silver, and other Metals. The memorable ser∣vices of Subjects are recorded to be read to the Prinçes, not the favours of the Kings. Against this King takes the Field, he has in a readiness almost 300000 Men, 10000 Elephants, and other Beasts of burthen. 6. About this time Fernan Perez de An∣drade (sent by the King to several discove∣ries) sailing towards the Bay of Bengala, ar∣rived at Pacem the Metropolis of one of the Kingdoms of Sumatra, where he found Por∣tugueses trading, and was well received of that King. Here he lost his biggest Ship, burnt by a Candle carelessly set up, and was thereby obliged to return to Malaca, sending away Iohn Coello in a Ship of Ben∣gala to expect him there with what Intelli∣gence he could get till he returned from Malaca. Hence Coello set out with fresh Instructions for China, and met with furi∣ous Storms and other Dangers. On the
Coast of Champa taking in fresh Water, had like to cost him his Life. At Patane he established Peace and Commerce with the Governour, the same at other places and thus spent the Winter without reaching China. He returned to Malaca, and refit∣ted himsel for his Voyage, to which he now sets out with eight Ships. 7. The Empire of China is the most Ea∣stern part of Asia, as Spain the most We∣stern of Europe. Opposite to it is the Island Hainan, as that of Cadiz to Spain. It is al∣most as big as all Europe: Divided from Tartary by a wonderful Wall running from East to West above 200 Leagues, and ends at a vast Mountain that like a Promontory is washed by the Eastern Sea. This large Empire is divided into fifteen Provinces or Governments. Along the Coast Quantung, Fokien, Chekiang, Nanking, Xantung, Leaotung. The inland, Queicheu, Iunnan, Quangsi, Suchuen, Huquang, Xensi, Kiangsi, Honan and Xansi, in which are 244 Cities. Its Riches are prodigious, its Government to be admi∣red above all others. They say they have two Eyes, Europe one, and all the rest of the World is blind. They had Printing and Cannon long before us. The City Quan∣tung, which is the Chief on the Coast, is remarkable for its Greatness, Strength of its Wall, and resort of Strangers most Mer∣chants. 8. Fernan Perez arriving here after some dangers and difficulties, had a conference with the thee Governours of this City,
and sent to them one Thomas Perez with an Embassy and Present from our King to theirs, to be sent forward to him. He set∣led a Peace with that City and traded in it and the neighbouring Parts, and then sailed for Malaca, having received advice of the dangerous condition it was in, by rea∣son of the War with the King of Bintam and the Discord between the Portugueses. 9. Fernan Perez loaded with Riches, Am∣munition, and good Success in China, was no less welcome at Malaca, than D. Alexius de Meneses had been not long before. What followed shall be seen hereafter. Now let us turn to behold Iames Lopez de Sequeyra newly possess'd of the Government. Lope Soarez de Albergaria was the third Gover∣nour. He was a comly Man, very red hair; he is pictured with crimson Breeches and Doublet, and black Coat lined with the same, his Armour white adorned with Gold. CHAP. III. From the Year 1518, tell the Year 1520, ending the Government of Lope Soarez de Albergaria, and beginning that of James Lopez de Sequeira, King Ema∣nuel still reigning. 1. ABout the end of March sailed from 1518. Lisb  Ships bound for. India, with 1500 fighting Men, all under the
command of Iames Lopez de Sequeyra, to whom the King gave the Government of India as a reward of his good Service in A∣frick, his discovery of Malaca, and worthy Qualities. At the Cape of Good Hope, one Ship was in danger of perishing by means of a great Fish, which running against her, stuck the length of two spans of a long Beak it has into her side; this was after∣wards found to be the Fish called the Nee∣dle. Lope Soarez presently resigned the Go∣vernment to Iames Lopez, and set Sail for Portugal with nine Ships. Sequeyra began to act. D. Alonso de Meneses was sent against Baticala, because it refused to pay. Iohn Go∣mez went for Maldivia, where he was to command and build a Fort. These things dispatched at Cochin, Iames Lopez went a∣way to Goa, whence he dispatched others, Anthony de Saldana to the Coast of Ara∣bia, and Simon de Andrade to China. 2. The King of Bintam who had trea∣cherously concluded a Peace, only that D. Alexius Meneses and Fernan Perez might depart for Cochin, as soon as they were gone, attacked Malaca with 1500 Men, and many Elephants, and with 60 Vessels by Sea. In the City were only 200, many sick, and most unprovided. But this sur∣prize cured many of their Feavers, and all Men running to oppose the danger, on both sides there was a sharp engagement for the space of three hours with great loss to the Enemy, and some on our side. Twenty days the King lay before the Town, and
then retired having lost 330 Men, of ours 18 were killed. Then he lay to hinder the bringing of Provisions till the Gover∣nour sent relief, and the Portugueses percei∣ving the damage they received from the Fort of Muar, whence Sansotea Raja made inroads, they resolved to gain it, and ac∣cordingly gave the assault, and after a vigo∣rous resistance entered, having killed most of the Defendants, which were 800 Moors, and then burnt it after securing the spoil, in which were 300 Cannons, some of Brass. Thus Malaca was for a long time delivered of a dangerous Enemy. 3. The King of Bintam still persisting in his resolution of taking Malaca, the Inhabitants were reduced to great extremity, having but few Men, many of them sick, and their Commander Alfonso Lopez ready to die. He delivered the City from this last danger by resigning his command to Garcia de Sa, who was newly arrived with 60 Men. Nothing of note happened at this time, only that Iames Pacheco going with two Ships in search of the Island of Gold was lost, and most of his Men. 4. Now arrived at Malaca, Anthony Cor∣rea, 1519. who came from the City Martavan, where he had been concluding a Peace with the King of Pegu, at the swearing of the Peace assisted with the King's Ministers, the Priests of both Nations, Catholick and Gentiles. The Heathen was called the Great Raulim, who after the Capitulations made in the Golden Mine, as is the Cu∣stom
of those People were publickly read, began to read in a Book, and then taking some yellow Paper (a colour dedicated to their holy uses) with some sweet Leaves of Trees, whereon were certain Characters, set Fire to it all, and then taking the Hands of the King's Minister and holding them over the ashes, said some words, which ren∣dred the Oath inviolable. Anthony Correa, to answer this Solemnity, ordered his Priest to put on a Surplice and bring his Brevia∣ry, which was so tottered and torn, that it was scandalous those Heathens should see how little respect was paid to our sacred Books. Correa observing this, ordered to be brought instead of it a Book of Church-Musick, which was more creditable, being bigger and better bound, and opening it, the first Verse he met was. Vanity of Vanities. This passed among those People as well as if it had been the Gospel. The Metropolis of this Kingdom is Bagou, corruptly called Pegu. On the West of it is the Bay of Bengala, on the East the Kingdom of Siam, on the South that of Malaca, and on the North that of Arracam. The length almost a 100 Lea∣gues, and in some places the same bredth, not including its Conquests. The Land is plain, well watered, and therefore fruitful, producing several Plants and plentiful of Provisions, as well of Cattle as Grain. In it many Temples with multiplicity of Idols and much variety of Ceremonies. The People believe themselves to be descended from a Chinese Dog and Woman, who only
escaping from shipwrack on that Coast in∣gendred, and thence they say it is that the Men are very ugly and not the Women, those taking after the Father, and these after the Mother. Sodomy being grown much in use among them, a Queen called Canane endeavouring to banish it, ordered that all should wear small Bells on the private Parts, thereby to incite them to the use thereof neglected by that horrid vice. 5. Garcia de Sa encouraged with the re∣lief brought by Anthony Correa, resolved to shew himself to the King of Bintam. He fitted 30 Ships, and in them 500 Men, whereof 150 were Portugueses, and gave the command of all to Anthony Correa. They sailed to the place where the King was lodged, which was defended by a Fort well mann'd and with much Cannon. The ac∣cess to it was guarded by many difficult Passes and Vessels well provided Our Men fell on, and the Moors stay'd not for a se∣cond attack, so the Fort was taken and in it 20 pieces of Cannon. The King re∣tired to the Town and the Portugueses fol∣lowed, and found him with 2000 Men and some armed Elephants. Mean while our Ships cleared all that hindred their going up the River, and then landing killed ma∣ny and put the rest to flight, the Town was first plundered and then burnt. The King flying on an Elephant, stopped not till he came to the Island of Bintam, where he continued long, wanting Courage and Necessaries to prosecute his hopes.
6. His success in the beginning of this War encouraged the Kings of Pacem and Achem to commit some outrages against the Portugueses. Garcia de Sa being now victo∣rious, set out a Ship commanded by Ma∣nuel Pacheco to take revenge of the harms sustained. After some success he sent out a Boat for water, rowed by Malayes with only five Portugueses in it, on a sudden they espied three Ships of Pacem with each 150 Men, the Commander made up to them before the others, and they finding it impossible to escape, boarded the Ship, and laid about them with such fury that they soon covered the Deck with dead Bodies of the Enemy, the rest leaped over-board, and after them the Captain, rather to punish them than save himself, being seen to hue them with his Cymater as he swam. The five Portugueses were left in possession of the Ship, which the other two perceiving fled. The King of Pacem terrified with this a∣ction offered Peace and Satisfaction for all the damage he had done, and so Emanuel Pacheco returned to Malaca with Honor, where the Ship taken was preserved as a monument of so notable an action. Duarte Coello was then ready to sail for China. More of him in its proper place, let us see what was done by the Commanders sent a∣broad by Iames Lopez de Sequeyra. 7. Iohn Gomez went to Maldivia to build a Fort there, but behaved himself with so much pride, that the Moors offended at it, fell upon and killed ten or twelve Por∣tugueses
he had with him. This is the Chief of a thousand Islands that lye in clusters in that Sea, and such is the signification of Mal∣divia. They lye like a long ridge of Moun∣tains, and about the middle of them is this great one, where the King resides. The Natives are Gentiles governed by Moors, and the distance between some of them so small that the Yard-arms grate against the Shoars, and Trees. They are stored with Coco-Trees, the inside whereof is pleasing Food, and the outward rine of use to make Ca∣bles. There is another sort of these Trees growing in the bottom of the Sea, the Fruit whereof is bigger than the Coco, and a greater antidote against Poison than Bezoar-stone. 8. Christopher de Sousa sent to the Coast of Dabul did much execution, not without some loss. Christopher de Sa in the Bay of Cambaya gave some trouble to Melique Az, obliging him to lay up his Fleet of Boats. 9. This year King Emanuel sent a Fleet of fourteen Ships to the relief of India, which was dispersed to several parts. The Commander in Chief George de Albuquerque and four more arrived in India. Six stay'd at Mozambique. Some fell into the Coast of Brasil where fifty of the Men were killed, and one of the Captains D' Luis de Guzman wickedly slew others and turned Pyrat, whereby he grew very rich and at last died as he deserved. One was drove back to Eisbon, another watering at Matira lost some Men, and six more at Oja, that King keep∣ing them long with kind entertainment, the
Ship sailed and left them, and was lost up∣on a Bank off of Quiloa, and the Moors of that Island, Monfia and Zanziber, slew all but one young Man. George de Albuquerque passed with much difficulty from Mozam∣bique to India, not able to follow Iames Lopez de Sequeyra to the Red-Sea, as he had sent order by Gonzalo de Louli, who by the way took up the Men that had been cast ashoar in the late Storms. 10. Iame Lopez de Sequeyra having di∣spatched 1520. the trading Ships homeward-bound, commanded by Ferdinando Perez de Andrade, and settled other Affairs, sailed from Goa on the 13th of February with a Fleet of 24 Sail, and in it 1800 Portugueses and al∣most as many Malabars and Canaras. On the Coast of Aden Lopez, his Ship struck up∣on a Rock and was broke in pieces, the Men were saved and he went into the Ga∣leon of Peter de Faria. At the entrance of the Red Sea they took a Moorish Ship, who informed them there were six Turkish Gal∣lies at Gidda with 1200 Men designing a∣gainst Aden The weather hindered going in search of them, and it had been to no purpose, for they hearing of our Fleet had haled in to the shoar. Iames Lopez designed for the Island Maçua, when by the way, on the 9th. of April being Easter-Sunday, there was seen by all in the orb of the Sun about the time of its setting, a little black Flag with some motion. Being arrived at the Island, they found the Inhabitants were fled, yet they found some Booty and Ves∣sels
in the Port, and some Prizes in the Neighbourhood. The Inhabitants of Ma∣çua were fled for refuge to the Port of Arquico belonging to Prester Iohn; the Go∣vernour of the Town sent a Messenger with a Letter to Iames Lopez, desiring he would make Peace with those People that had fled to his Protection. He asked nothing in behalf of the Town because they were all Christians, and because there was a Prophecy among them foretelling the coming of fo∣reign Christians to settle a correspondence with them, which he seeing the Christian colours looked upon to be fulfilled. Iames Lopez▪ returned a courteous answer, and stood in to the shoar, where some Chri∣stians came abroad to him. They told him their Prince Prester Iohn, had some years since, sent an Embassadour whose name was Matthew, to a King of the end of the World, whose Fleet then conquered India, to inform him of those remote Christians, and demand succour against the Moors, but that he never returned. Sequeyra hearing this, was convinced those Men dealt inge∣nuously, because he brought that Embas∣sadour with him, and had orders from King Emanuel to land him safe in his Prince's Do∣minions. The Embassadour was placed be∣fore them, who received him with great re∣spect and joy, which was no less in him for being restored to his Country after ten years absence. Next day came ten Religious Men from the neighbouring convent of the Vi∣sion with the same gladness to see him, they
were received by the Priests of the Fleet in their Surplices. There were great de∣monstrations of Joy for the Union of two so distant Nations agreeing in the same Faith, and the fruit of this meeting was, that those who from the beginning had not acknowledged the Supremacy of the Roman Church, now submitted to it. CHAP. IV. A continuation of the Government of James Lopez de Sequeyra, from the Year 1520 till the Year 1521, and reign of King Emanuel. 1. THE Kingdom of Prester Iohn, now discovered, is most known by this name, though improper, and is properly called the Kingdom of Abassia, or Empire of the higher Aethiopia. It was so called from that great Iovarus (corruptly Prester Iohn) who came to it from the Christians of Tartary, with a Cross before him like our Bishops. And this King carried a Cross in his hand, with the Title of Defender of the Faith, as being a Iacobite Christian. The Dominions of this Prince lye between the Rivers Nile, Astabora and Astapus. On the East it runs along the Red-Sea 120 Leagues, this being the least side, which in all con∣tain 670 Leagues. On the West it borders on those Blacks who possess the great Mines
of Gold, for which they pay him Tribute. On the North divided from the Moors, by a Line drawn from the City Suanquem to the Island Meroe, or Noba. On the South it borders on the Kingdom Adea, from whose mountains falls the River Obi, that loses it self in the Sea at the Town of Quilmance in the Kingdom of Melinde. 2. The Kings of Abassia pretend to be descended from Solomon and the Queen of Saba, she being delivered on the way, call∣ed the Child Meilech, and sent him to his Father to be by him declared King of Ethio∣pia, who when he anointed gave him the name of David his Grandfather. He or∣dered his Houshold, and gave him Offi∣cers of his own, and for High-Priest Azaria the Son of Sadoc, who stole the Tables of the Law out of the Temple, and carried them with his new Prince. They affirm, that the Descendants of those same Officers still possess the same Employs. They had knowledge of the Law of Christ by the means of Queen Candace, in whom they glory as being of their Country. But their true Apostles were S. Philip, and S. Matthew. The King, in memory of his Descent, begins his many Titles thus: David beloved of God, Pillar of the Faith, of Kin to the Stock of Iuda, Grandson of David, Son of Solomon, Son of the Pillar of Sion, Son of the Progeny of Iacob, Son of the Hand of Mary, &c. Em∣peror of the great and high Ethiopia, &c. The People are very religious, have many
Churches, and many Monasteries of only two Religious Orders, the one of S. Anthony, the other the Canon Regulars. They have no considerable Towns, little practice of Learning, no skill in Mechanicks, and so are very rude in their Diet and Cloathing. In such Houses as use more Grandeur, all the Furniture is of other Countries. There are as expert Thieves among them, as our Gypsies in Europe. The Religious Men who live in Convents wear long Habits of Cotton; the others and their Priests and Nuns, Skins, which does not cover as much as Modesty requires. Their Prince for the most part lives in the Field in a populous City of Tents, often removing. In his Messages he uses that style of Portugal; I the King greet you. This was what our Discoverers could then gather; let others say what is since found, and what Alterations have happened. 3. Now came the Barnagax or Governor of that Province, having received the News of the arrival of Matthew the Em∣bassador, and our Fleet. He appeared on the Shoar with two hundred Horse, and two thousand Foot. After some difference a∣bout the place for him and Iames Lopez to meet, they met on the Edge of the Water, and were seated on Chairs upon the Sand, which then burnt with the heat of the Sun; there Matthew the Embassador was deli∣vered, and with him D. Rodrigo de Lima, sent Embassador by King Emanuel to Prester Iohn. There they treated of building a
Fort either on the Island Camaran, or that of Maçua against the Moors. Lastly, they both swore the Sincerity of this Agreement on a Cross, and after they parted, sent some Presents on both parts. D. Rodrigo de Lima set forward on his Journey without Matthew, who soon after died in the Monastery of the Vision, which he had earnestly desired to reach. Iames Lopez erected a great Cross in that Port in memory of the arri∣val there of our Fleet, and caused many Masses to be said in the Mosque of Maçua. Hence he went to the neigbouring Island of Dalaca, and having burnt the City, deserted by its Inhabitants, stood over to the Coast of Arabia. One Galley and most of the Men were cast away by bad Weather, and he came to an Anchor at Calayate, where he found George de Albuquerque, who waited his coming, and going on to Mascate, left him to winter there with the Ships, and he went on with the Gallies to Ormuz. 4. Whilst our Governor was in the Red Sea, Chrisnarao, King of Bisnagar, covered the Hills and Plains, and drank up Rivers, with an Army of thirty five thousand Horse, and seven hundred thirty three thou∣sand Foot, five hundred eighty six Ele∣phants, loaded with Castles, in each of which were four Men, and twelve thousand Water-carriers, to supply all parts, that the Men might not dispese to seek it. The Baggage was numberless, and there were above twenty thousand common Women. He led all this power to take the City Ra∣chol,
belonging of right to his Ancestors, who still left the Recovery of it as a Charge to their Successors, and was possessed by Hi∣dalcan, with whom to this effect he waged War. 5. The City Rachol was naturally almost impregnable, seated on a high Mountain, fortified with several Walls, and large and deep Ditches, strong Towers, stored with Artillery, and all other Defence, garrisoned by four hundred Horse, eight thousand Foot, and twenty Elephants, with Provi∣sion and Ammunition enough to tire the most patient Besiegers. Chrisnarao encam∣ped about it, and gave many Assaults to no effect for the space of three months, when Hidalcan came to the Relief with eighteen thousand Horse, one hundred and twenty thousand Foot, one hundred and fifty Ele∣phants, and much great Cannon. After many Preludes these two Princes came to a Battel, wherein at first Chrisnarao received great damage, but recovering himself, made such havock among Hidalcan's Men, that only those escaped the Sword, or Captivity, who at last moved pity in the very Enemy. The principal Booty consisted of four thou∣sand Horses, one hundred Elephants, four hundred great Cannon, besides the small, and other Riches. Here died valiantly forty Portugueses who were in the service of Hidalcan, who saved himself by flight. As Chrisnarao returned in a rage against the City, there came to his Camp Christopher de Figueredo, with twenty Portugueses, who
brought some Arabian Horses to sell to the King. They discoursed about the Siege, and he asked leave to view the place which was granted. He gave two Assaults, and being backed in the second by Crisnarao, the Town was enter'd. Crisnarao was puffed with this Victory when Hidalcan's Offi∣cers came to beg the Booty taken in the for∣mer. He answered, It should be restored, if Hidalcan came to kiss his Foot, as supreme Lord of the Empire of Canara. The base Condition was accepted, but the execution prevented by several Accidents. Ruy de Melo, who commanded at Goa, laying hold of this opportunity, possessed himself of the neigh∣bouring part of the Continent, with only two hundred and fifty Horse, and eight hun∣dred Canara Foot. 6. About this time Lope de Brito had suc∣ceeded Iohn de Silveyra in the Command of the Fort in Ceylon, and carried with him four hundred Soldiers, and many Work∣men, wherewith he made the Fort so strong, that it raised a Jealousie in the People of Columbo, who, at the instigation of the Moors, refused to trade with him. Brito sent them some Threats, which brought on him twenty thousand Men, who besieged him five months, during which time the besieged suffered great Hardships, till Anthony de Lemos arrived with fifty Men, with this small relief they ventured to fall upon that multitude, and putting all to the rout, the place was restored to its former quiet.
7. The season being fit to sail (which in those parts is very uncertain) Iames Lo∣pez set out from Ormuz, and went to meet George de Albuquerque at Calayate, where he found one Ship arrived from Lisbon, of nine that sailed thence together, all the o∣thers afterwards came safe. One of these Ships sailing before the Wind beyond the Cape of Good Hope, stopped all of a sudden, the Sails, tho full, giving her no motion. The Cause being examined into, it appear∣ed that a great Sea-Monster bore the Vessel upon its back, the Tail about the Rudder, and Head up with the Boltsprit, casting up Streams of Water. It was removed by Exorcisms, no human means being thought sufficient. The Sailers said it was the Fish called Sambrero or Hat-Fish, because the Head resembles it, and such a one, tho less, had been seen on the Coast of Portugal, doing great harm about Atouguia. The King ordered the Governor to build Forts in Maluco, Sumatra, Maldivia, Chaul, and Diu. Iames Lopez resolved to attempt the last first. To that effect he treated with Melique Az, but was put off with delays, and he dissembling, sailed for Cochin, to provide for his return thither, in order to gain by Force what the Moor endeavoured to put off by Art. 8. He dispatched the homeward bound trading Ships under the Command of An∣tony de Saldana. Being eased of this Care he applyed himself to that of the Attempt upon Diu. In order thereunto he gathered
the greatest Fleet of ours that had been seen on those Seas, consisting of forty eight Vessels of all sorts and Qualities, and in them three thousand Portugueses, and eight hundred Malabars and Canaras. A great Power lamentably disappointed as will ap∣pear in the Sequel 9. On the ninth of February, Iames Lo∣pez appeared with all his pomp before Diu, Melique Az was then absent, being gone to the King of Cambaya, to prevent him grant∣ing the leave he persuaded us to ask for building the Fort. And being suspicious this preparation was made against him, had fortified and intrenched the City in wonder∣ful manner. He had left in it against all Accidents his Son Melique Saca, and three stout Commanders with a strong Garrison. Our Governor having observed the Difficul∣ties, had it debated in Council what was fittest to be done, and all agreeing the City should not be assaulted, they all afterwards accused him because it was not done. And tho they allowed his Prudence in private, yet in publick accused him of Cowardise, but his Valour was well known. Besides they laid several Imputations upon him, so that the innocent Sequeyra suffered for their Crime, having acted nothing with that great Power, but only lost much Reputation. A misfortune (if it be lawful to say so) well deserved by Princes, who wink at such Crimes, and do not punish Faults commit∣ted through malice. Iames Lopez went to winter at Ormuz, some of the Captains to
several Markets, and D. Alexius de Meneses, with the rest of the Fleet, retired to Cochin, with power from the Governor to act as should be expedient in those parts. 10. D. Alexius, at his arrival at Cochin dispatched the trading Ships for Portugal, and others appointed for several places. But their chief Business being Merchandise, their Names are more proper for the Cu∣stom-House-Books. But because some of them were at Sumatra, it will be fit to give some short account of that Island. CHAP. V. A Continuation of the Government of James Lopez de Sequeyra, the Year 1521, and Reign of King Emanuel. 1. THE Island Sumatra lying North-West and South-East is in length two hundred and twenty Leagues, its great∣est Breadth being but seventy, the Equi∣noctial Line cuts it into two equal parts. It is divided from Malaca by a narrow Channel, by a less its most Southern Point is parted from Ia, which is above one hundred Leagues in length, and but twelve in breadth. East of it lies Borneo, cut by the Equinoctial, so that two Thirds are on the North-Side the Line. Sumatra is plain a∣bout
the Coast, the inland mountainous, watered by great Rivers, covered with vast Woods so condensed with Fogs, that all the Force the Sun has there cannot pierce them. For this reason it is very unhealthy, yet resorted to for its Riches, and chiefly plenty of Gold. There is in it a Spring of Oil, a burning Mountain like Aetna in Sicily, it produces white Sandal, Benjamin, Camphire, Pepper, Ginger, Cinnamon, abundance of Silk, much Fish and Cattle of sundry sorts. The Natives are Pagans; the Moors first came in as Merchants, then pos∣sessed themselves as Lords, since the year 1400. Of the Natives those they call Ba∣tas who inhabit the inland are most brutal, eating human flesh. The Moors dwell on the Coast. They use several Languages, but chiefly that of Malaca. Their Weapons were poisoned Arrows like those of Iava, from whom they are descended; afterwards they used our Arms. The Island is divided into nine Kingdoms, that of Pedir was once the greatest, now that of Pacem whose Kings are no longer lived than the Rabble pleases. George de Albuquerque now carried one of their Princes expelled, to restore him to his Crown, either by persuasion or by  he having to this effect fled to the protection of the Portugueses, when Alfonso de Albuquerque took Malaca. 2. George Albuquerque arriving at the Island, and assisted by the neighbouring King of Ara, proposed to the Usurper to quit the Kingdom to the lawful Prince,
who had submitted himself to the King of Portugal. Genial the Usurper offered the same submission to keep his possession. The Offer was refused, and Albuquerque went to attack him in his Fort, which was scaled, and the Gate broke open, but va∣liantly maintained by thirty Men who were in a Tower over it with the Usurper him∣self, till Cid Cerveyra with a Musket Shot, which went through his Forehead, brought him down, whereupon the thirty Men dis∣mayed and fled. The Flower of three thou∣sand Moors (assaulted by three hundred of our Men) courageously defended a large Court or place of Arms, assisted by the E∣lephants. Hector de Silveyra directing his Lance to the Trunk of one, the Beast put it by, and laying hold of his Body threw him into the Air, but so fortunately, that he lived. Two others succeeded better, one killing the Rider, the other wounded the Elephant, so that he flew back, making great havock among his own party. The Moors retired to a lesser place, and being close pursued, the King of Aru coming on to our assistance in due time, two thou∣sand of the Enemy were slain. Four or five Men of Note were killed on our side, many wounded, George de Albuquerque twice in the Face. Next day the dispossessed Prince was restored with great state, and made tributary to King Emanuel, and a Fort raised there as in other places. 3. At this time arrived at the same Port Antony de Brito with the Fleet that
had been commanded by his Brother George, who with the choice of his Men was killed on the shoar of Achem, twenty Leagues distant from Pacem, and was sent thither with six Sail, and three hundred Men. Behold an example of Avarice and Ingratitude. Iohn de Borba, after suffering Shipwrack, having been tossed nine days on the Waves with nine Companions, and cast upon the shoar of Achem, was received and relieved by that King, as if he had been in his native Country. But George de Brito ar∣riving, he informs him there was great store of Gold in the Tombs of the Kings, and the more to induce him to commit the Robbery, said the King had taken a∣way the Goods of some Portugueses. Brito, after some inquiry into the Business, began to pick a quarrel with the King, and seise upon that Gold. He landed with two hun∣dred Men, and finding a Fort in his way, took it. Two Drunken Men issuing out after the taking were killed by the Enemy, and several succeeding to relieve or revenge them, George de Brito was at last obliged to come to their Succour at such time as the King came on with a thousand Men and six Elephants. Here Brito and most of his Men were killed, among them fifty of Note. This is the just Reward of Injustice, Ingratitude and Avarice. The sad Re∣mainder retired to their Ships, the Com∣mand whereof fell to Antony de Brito, (Bro∣ther to him slain) who now joined Albu∣querque in the Port of Pacem, where he left
some Men, and three Ships which were af∣terwards of use against a Moor who in∣fested that Coast. 4. George de Albuquerque returning to Ma∣laca, and taking possession of that Com∣mand, prepared to make War upon the King of Bintam, who was forty Leagues distant from Malaca, in the Island Bintam of forty Leagues circumference. The Island was well fortified, having two strong Castles, and the Rivers staked, so that it seemed almost inaccessible. Albuquerque set out from Malaca with eighteen Sail, and six hundred Men. Finding it impossible for the Ships to come up, he landed his Men in Boats to attack a Fort, but the Water being up to their middles, and the Enemies shot very thick, they were forced to retire without doing any execution, and having lost twenty Men, and many wounded. 5. Hence Antony de Brito set sail for the Maluco Islands, which are in the midst of many others under the Equinoctial, about three hundred Leagues from Malaca East∣ward. The principal of them are five, a∣bout twenty five Leagues distant from each other. Their Names (tho in general call∣ed Malucos) are Ternate, Tidore, Mousell, Maquien, Bacham. The biggest not above six Leagues in circumference. They are covered with Woods and Fogs, therefore unhealthy. These five produce ves, but no manner of Food, and thand Batochina, sixty Leagues in length, pro∣duces
Food but no Cloves. In some there are flaming Mountains, chiefly in Ternate. Their chief Sustenance is Meal made of the Bark of Trees like to the Palm, from these and others they have Wine and Vine∣gar. There is a sort of Canes that in the hollow have a Liquor delightful to drink. The Inhabitants are not great Lovers of Flesh, though they have plenty; more of Fish, of which there is an infinite quantity. They are not affable, but warlike, and most swift either in running or swimming. Idolaters as to their Religion. Of their Origen there is no account. They were in process of times possessed by Moors, since whose first coming to them there was yet living an old Master when Brito ar∣rived. 6. To these Islands, and particularly Ter∣nate, Brito was sent to build a Fort, which long since Boylefe the King thereof had desired. Others had gone before but to no effect, as in the time of Albuquerque, Antony de A∣breu, who lost one of the three Ships he carried, but saved the Men. He arrived in the Island Banda; five go under this name, but it is most proper to the chief, which is like an earthly Paradice, one great Orna∣ment of it being the Plant which produces the Mace. Antony de Abreu returned to Malaca, but his other Captain Francis Ser∣ram was drove to Ternate, the King where∣of seeing him, and some of his Men in Armour, concluded a Prophecy was ful∣filled, which foretold, that Men of Iron
should come to that Island, who would make it famous. Anthony de Miranda went thi∣ther afterwards, Francis Serram staying there to expect an answer from King Emanuel, to the Letters of the Kings of Ternate and Tidore each striving to have the Fort built in this sland. D▪ Tristane de Meneses after∣wards carried this answer. Because the difference increased about the same thing between the two Kings and the King of Ba∣chan who desired the same, Tristan defferred the work to avoid the danger, and get load∣ing for five Ships he had with him. This was what happened from the taking of Ma∣laca, till this time when Anthony de Brito undertook the Affairs of Maluco. 7. He had six Ships and above 300 Men. At the Island Agacim he met D. Gar∣cia Enriquez with four Sail. They set out together, and Brito arrived at Ternate at such time as the King Boleyfe was dead, and he of Tidore had admitted to the Spaniards, thinking himself as happy in them, as Ter∣nate could be in the Portugueses. Yet see∣ing the Queen of Ternate Governess of her Son, received Brito with great Joy, he vi∣sited and finding him displeased on account of the new Guests he had entertained, of∣fered to deliver them up to him. This he thought would oblige him to build the Fort at Tidore, which at length was done at Ter∣nate as the most convenient, Brito laying the first Stone, and after him all the Cap∣tains and Men of note crowned with Gar∣lands, it being upon the Feast of St. Iohn the Baptist.
8. At this time a Correspondence was held between Francis Serram at Ternate and Ferdinando de Magallanes in Portugal, which turned to the advantage of Spain, and trou∣ble of Portugal. Magallanes, or as he is com∣monly called among us Magellan, was a Gentleman of good Note, a Man of Va∣lour, and Knight of Santiago, and had ser∣ved well at Azamor in Africk, and in sun∣dry parts of India. He solicited for a sort of allowance (given usually to Men of ser∣vice in Spain and Portugal) very inconsi∣derable for the value, but of much esteem for the honour of it. With much Justice he might pretend to it, and therefore find∣ing a refusal, proceeding from the malici∣ous accusations of some Men, which found more Credit than his Service, he resolved to quit the Kingdom, and go over to the Emperour Charles the V. his Service. By his skill in Sea-Affairs, and the Correspon∣dence he held with Serram at Maluco, he guessed there might be another way to In∣dia, and this at such time as the Spaniard had began to taste the Fruit of those Islands, and accordingly he writ to Serram that he hoped soon to be his Guest at Ternate, go∣ing thither a new way. In order hereunto he went and offered his Service in Spain, was admitted, and the command of five Ships given him, with 250 Men, some of them Portugueses. He sailed from the Port of St. Lucar de Barrameda on the 20th. of Sep∣tember 1519. Many at this time took the liberty to rail and cast reproaches upon
him, but he to take off the occasion, had by a solemn act unnaturalized himself. Princes should be cautious of forcing to desperate actions by injustice, such Men as have de∣served rewards. 9. These Ships being past the Rio de Ia∣neyro on the Coast of Brasil, the Men be∣gan to be mutinous, but much more when having passed the River S. Iulian, they found not the Streight they looked for, and be∣gan to be pinched with the great cold of that Climat. Hence proceeded some dis∣respectful discourses against Magellan, not only reflecting on his Knowledge, but al∣so his Fidelity. He finding it run high, and that of necessity he must give them some satisfaction, suppressing the best he could the anger that began to swell his Breast, called together the Principal Men, to whom he made a large and learned dis∣couse. He spoke of Navigation in general, then of Discoveries, and the Pains and Hardships that great Undertakings are sub∣ject to, he encouraged them by the example of all the great Discoverers that had been before them, he put them in mind that the World would say the Spaniards were less daring than the Portugueses, and after pro∣posing many motives of Honour and Glory, concluded with threatning to put in execu∣tion the Power of Life and Death the King had given him, and accordingly to punish such as were refractory. This, instead of a Compliance, produced fresh Disputes, more Disagreement and finally a Conspiracy to
kill Magellan, thinking no other means were left to prevent the prosecution of this Voy∣age. The Chief Conspirators were three Captains Cartagene, Quixada, and Mendoça. The Design was discovered, and Mendoça immediately stabbed, and after quartered, the other two were taken, and Quixada quartered alive, both as Traytors. Carta∣gena with a Priest who had a hand in the Design were set ashoar on that barbarous Coast: most of the Men were in the Con∣spiracy, but it was necessary to pardon them, least he should want them to prosecute the Voyage. Whilst they wintered there, he sent some Men into the Country, who went up about twenty Leagues, and brought some of the Natives of the stature of Giants, being above three yards high. After suf∣fering much through Cold and Hunger, and continual Labour in the Ships, being almost spent, they reached the Cape they called De las Virgenes, or, Of the Virgins, because discovered on the Day of the 11000 Vir∣gins. It lies in 52 Degrees of South La∣titude. Below it they discovered the mouth of the Streight they looked for, b∣ing a League wide. Being entred, they found within in some places the same bredth, in others somewhat more, and in others much less. The Land high on both sides, part bare and part covered with Woods, many of Cypress, and much Snow which made the tops of the Mountains appear the higher. Having run about 50 Leagues in this Streight they spied another, and Ma∣gellan
sent one Ship to discover it, but ha∣ving staid much beyond the limited time for her return and no news of her, he or∣dered the Astrologer Andrew Martin to e∣rect a Figure, and he answered they were gone back to Spain, and that the Captain Alvaro de Mesquita was carried as a Pri∣soner for opposing that resolution. It pro∣ved so, and they spent eight Months in the Voyage. Magellan somewhat troubled at this action, called the Chief Men to Council, and contrary to the Opinions of all resol∣ved to proceed. Which he put in execu∣tion and came out into the South Sea with only three Ships of the five, that which Iohn Serrano commanded being lost, but the Men though with much difficulty all saved. 10. To shun the Cold which tormented them, he sailed towards the Equinoctial, steering W. N W. and being 1500 Leagues from the mouth of the Streight, found an Island in 18 Degrees of South Latitude, and 200 Leagues farther another. Having lost his computation for the Malucos, he found several Islands in 15 Degrees and a half of North Latitude, and at last came to that called Subo in 10 Degrees of North Latitude, being about 12 Leagues in cir∣cumference. He was well received by the King and the Natives, and so good a dispo∣sition he found among them, that the King, Queen, their Children, and above 800 Per∣sons were baptized. This Prince was at War with a Neighbour, and made use of
Magellan's Assistance against him. After two Victories he was killed in a third Bat∣tle, together with the Astrologer and some others, on the 27th. of April 1521. The King who in Baptism was called Ferdinand, seeing that slaughter, agreed with his Ene∣my to kill all the Christians that were a∣shoar, and inviting them to Dinner poy∣soned them all. They who were aboard being too few for three Ships, burnt one, and set sail with the other two, one of them the famous Victory commanded by Iohn Se∣bastian Cano. They arrived at the Malucos, and were received at Tidore by the King, in hatred of the Portugueses and Ternaten∣ses for their late Differences. There they loaded with Spice, and went thence to Ban∣da, where they took in more with the As∣sistance of Iohn de Lourosa a Portugues. The second Ship returned to Ternate, some of the Men being dead, and the rest spent by a contagious Disease. Antony de Brito trea∣ted them as if they had been his Country∣men, not intruding Strangers, relieved and sent them to India, whence they returned in our Ships to their Country. The fa∣mous Ship the Victory returned with triumph to Spain, after performing that wonderful Voyagé about the World. Their arrival raised new Contests between the Empe∣rour Charles the V. and our King Iohn the III. because the Maluco Islands belong∣ed to Portugal, according to the former a∣greement. The Year 1524. there was a meeting of Civilians and Geographers, a∣bout
this Affair between Badajoz and Elvas, which fell to nothing. But was afterwards setled in the Year 1525. CHAP. VI. Continues still the government of James Lopez de Sequeyra and reign of King Emanuel. 1. IT is absolutely necessary something be 1521. said of those Captains who the fore∣going years were sent to several parts, tho' what they did was in relation to Trade, a subject unbecoming a grave History. Fer∣nan Perez de Andrade had secured the Trade of China in the City Quantung. The profit was exceeding great, and all Mens desires were directed thither. His Brother Simon de Andrade obtained leave of the Governour to undertake that Voyage with five Ships. They anchored in the Port of the Island Tamou, opposite to Quantung where the o∣ther had been. Our Embassadour to the King of China was not yet gone thence, but went soon after up a large River with three Vessels richly furnished with Portugues Colours, it being a received Custom that none but those of China should be seen there, which are Gules a Lyon Rampant. In this manner he came to the foot of the Moun∣tain, in which are the Springs of the River he sailed. This Mountain is called Malex∣am,
which beginning at the Bay of Couchin china in the Province of Fokien, divides three Southern Provinces, that is, Quangsi, Quan∣tung and Fokien, as the Perineans, Spain and France. In one of the only two Ports there are in this division Thomas Perez landed, and travelled Northwards to the Province and City Nanking, where the King then was, having spent four Months in the Jour∣ney without staying at any place. So large is that Empire. That Prince designed to give him audience at Peking, a City farther distant. The Embassadour followed. But now appear the effects of trading avarice, for whilst he travelled, Simon de Andrade behaved himself after such a manner in the Island Tamou, that an account of his bad proceedings was sent after Thomas Perez. The Embassadour set out, but the Informa∣tion reached the King first, and was fully credited. He and his Companions were condemned to death as Spies. The rigour of the Sentence was mitigated, but the Em∣bassy not received, and they sent back Pri∣soners to Quantung, with order, that in case the Portugueses would restore Malaca to its King, who was a subject to China, they they might be restored and heard, other∣wise these should be punished, and none ever admitted, but treated as Enemies. 2. Simon de Andrade was proud and con∣ceited, and thought by high Hand to au∣thorize his unjust dealing. To this end, as if he had been King of that Island, he raised a Fort, and set up a Gallows to terrify the
People. He committed violence upon the Merchants who resorted thither, contrary to their Privileges, and bought young People of both Sexes without the usual precautions, giving occasion to Thieves to steal them from their Parents. These extravagancies which lost nothing by the carriage, were heard by the King before Thomas Perez, and had the effect above related. At this time arrived there Iames Calva with one Ship from Lisbon, and others from Malaca. The Portugueses agree in acting more insolently, which wholly exasperated the Governours of Quantung, who to punish them, secured some, and contrived to take the Ship arri∣ved last. They began to act when Duarte Coello arrived with two Vessels from Malaca, well manned and provided. The Itao or Admiral of that Sea, attacked them with fifty Sail, did some, and received greater damage from our Artillery, was forced to retire, and lying off, kept them besieged. Forty Days he had kept them in, when Ambrose del Rego came with two Ships more from Malaca, and it was resolved to force their way through Itaos's Fleet, and get out of the Island. The Fight was bloody, but a Storm rising dispersed the Enemies Fleet and left ours in safety. The Itao revenged this Disaster upon some of our People that arrived there, and upon the Embassadour, Thomas Perez and his Companions who be∣ing returned to Quantung were all slain and robbed of the Present sent to that King, and what Perez had gained. We will not
pass it in silence to show how great was the return of this Trade, for this Man being of base Parentage, and by Trade an Apothecary (though chosen for Embassadour for his good Parts) yet at this time there was found with him 2000 weight of Rhubarb, 1600 pieces of Damask, 400 of other Silks, above 100 ounces of Gold, and 2000 of Silver, three quarters of a hundred of loose Musk, and above 3000 Purses of it, at first called Papos, and much other Merchandise. 3. Mocrin King of Lasah refused to pay the tribute due to the King of Ormuz for the Islands of Baharem and Catifa, on the Coast of Arabia; and he of Ormuz was backward in paying us, excusing himself with the fai∣lure of the other. He had already sent a considerable Force with some Assistance of Portugueses to reduce him, but to no effect. He now resolved to do it effectually, and treated about it with Iames Lopez de Se∣queyra, who to secure our tribute, consented to assist him against his Enemy. The King of Ormuz set out 200 Vessels with 3000 Arabs and Persians. The Portugues party consisted of seven Ships and 400 Men, commanded by Anthony Corea. All our Ships arrived at Baharem, Raez Xaraso comman∣ded the Ormuzians, some whereof came not up. Mocrin was well prepared to receive them with 300 Arabian Horse, 400 Persian Archers, 20 Turkish Musquetiers besides Na∣tives, and above 11000 armed with seve∣ral Weapons, strong Intrenchments and o∣ther Works, the Wall well furnished with
Cannon, all under the Care of tried Com∣manders. The Persian Gulph lies between Arabia and Persia, from which last, as the noblest, it takes its name. This most famous Part be gins at Cape Iasque, or Carpela, in twenty six degrees of Northern Latitude, and ends at the Mouth of the River Euphrates; along this Coast are many Cities, Rivers, Woods and Islands. It is not so on the other side, which beginning at C. Mozandan, or Assa∣borum, and ending where it meets with Persia, yet in all that distance has but four Towns, in which is a Fishery of Pearl. Catifa is opposite to Baharem, and is thirty Leagues round, and seven in length, distant from Ormuz one hundred and ten. Its greatest product is Tamarins, but has all other Fruit that is usual in Spain. The greatest Town is of the same Name, there being in the Island about three hundred Villages. The Inhabitants are Moors and Arabs, the Air unhealthy. The Pearl found here, tho not so much in quantity, is of more value than that of Ceylon in India, or Hainan in China. Opposite to the Island on the Continent is the City Lasah, where∣of Mocrim was King, who now was pro∣vided against us at Baharem. 5. Raez Zarafo was ordered to relieve where he should see the greatest need, whilst Correa landed with one hundred and seventy Portugueses, to which his Brother Ayres carried the Van with fifty, all of them knee-deep in Water. The Trenches as∣saulted,
the Fight was hot, the King en∣couraging his Men at the Head of them, till Weariness and Heat obliged both parties to take breadth. Being recovered, they return to the Attack, and the King being shot through the Thigh, whereof six days after he died, his Men fainted, and great numbers being killed, and wounded, they left us a complete Victory. Raez Xarafo from his Vessel looked on all the time. But after knowing the dead Body of the King was carried over to be buried at Lasah, he obtained leave to go take it, and ha∣ving performed it, cut off the Head which was carried to Ormuz. We had many wounded, seven killed, and the Island in two hours was restored to our Homager. For this reason Antony Correa had the Title of Baharem added to his Name, and the Head of a King to his Arms, which con∣tinues in his posterity. 6. Whilst our Arms were exercised at Baharem, they were not idle in India. They assisted the King▪ of Cochin against him of Calicut, who braved it with two hundred thousand Men, the other having but forty thousand. The Portugues Aid being but forty Men, thirty of them Musquetiers yet so terrified the Enemy, that they retired, Iames Fernandez de Beja, who was left by the Governor before Diu, now came to him to Ormuz, ill treated by the Vessels of Melique Az, whose double dealing was now visible. Iames Lopez thought to mitigate the Grief of this Accident, by another more
grateful, and brought new Trouble upon himself at Ormuz, thinking to prevent the Frauds of that Custom-House. To this effect he placed Portugues Officers in it, which so exasperated the Natives, who were con∣cerned, that thev endeavoured to shake off our Yoke, as shall appear in its proper place. 7. Now Iames Lopez designed to reassume the Business against Diu, and therefore sent before Iames Fernandez de Beja, with four Galeons, to hinder any Ships entring that Port, he executed it effectually, and took some. But Melique Az his Vessels coming out with much Cannon and better Fortune, they sunk one of our Ships, and did much damage in the others, till the Wind, which had failed, favouring, they were obliged to retire. With like Fortune Iames Lopez drew near for having taken a Ship by the way, and divided the Moors were in her a∣mong his, those who were allotted to An∣tony Correa, set fire to the Powder, which blew the Poop into the Air, and sunk the Vessel, so miserably ended that brave Cap∣tain who had triumphed over King Mocrin. These Misfortunes obliged Iames Lopez to desist from the Enterprise, and go over to Chaul. 8. Here he found Ferdinando Camelo, who∣came from the Court of Nizamaluco, with leave for us to build a Fort there, for his own ends, and chiefly for the importation of Horses, which at that time was the Trade of Goa only. The Work was begun,
and Melique Az fearing it would lessen the Trade of Diu, and encrease our Power, resolved to obstruct it. He appeared in the Sea of Chaul, with above fifty Vessels of his own and Confederates, and presently sunk a great Ship in which Peter de Silva de Mene∣ses was newly come from Ormuz, and for for the space of twenty days did much da∣mage in the Ships and Gallies, wherewith D. Alexius de Meneses opposed them. Not∣withstanding all dangers the Work was car∣ried on with good success. 9. But it being necessary for the Gover∣nor to repair to Cochin, because his Succes∣sor was arrived, and he must prepare to re∣turn home, he set out of Dabul, rushing through the Dangers that surrounded the Work. He left his Nephew Henry de Mene∣ses to command the Fort, and Antony Cor∣rea at Sea. 10. Whilst Iames Lopez sailed to Cochin, Ag Mahamud, who commanded Melique Az his Fleet, came to hinder the Work of the Fort. To secure the Entrance of the Ri∣ver there was raised opposite to the Work a Bulwark, which was committed to the Care of Peter vaz Permeo, with upwards of thirty Men, Mahamud sent three hundred by night to surprize this Bulwark, whilst he on the other side gave a Diversion. They reached the place by morning, and the three hundred unexpectedly assaulted the thirty, and the thirty fought as if they had been three hundred; for tho the Captain and some others were killed, they main∣tained
the place till Ruy Vaz Pereyra came with sixty Men, and put to flight about two hundred of the Enemy, the rest being killed. This Success daunted our Enemies, and among them Xeih Mamud a great Man in the City, who feigning himself our Friend, sought our Ruin, and now sent a Present, and to congratulate for this good Fortune with Antony Correa. Correa, who knew his Designs, sent him for an Answer the Heads of the chief Men who carried the Present, and hanged the Bodies along the Shoar. The Barbarian was astonished, but began to act openly what before he had done underhand, encouraging the Aga by giving him intelligence of our Scarcity of Ammunition, but then arrived D. Luis de Meneses, to whom Correa gave up the Com∣mand. Mean while Iames Lopez de Se∣queyra with his Ships set out from Cochin for Portugal. He governed three years, was of a ruddy Complexion, a white Beard, is painted with a Truncheon in his Hand, a Coat of Mail, his Cap and upper Garment black, the Sleeves, Lining and Breeches blew. He was the fourth Governor.
CHAP. VII. The Government of D. Duarte de Mene∣ses, in the Year 1522, when began the Reign of King John III. 1. D. Duarte de Meneses,. now Governor of India, tho sent the year before 1522. by King Emanuel, entered not upon the Government till the twenty second of Ia∣nuary of this year, King Iohn III. being on the Throne, whose Father died the thir∣teenth of December foregoing. He brought with him twelve Ships. Having taken the Government, and sent the Commanders to their Posts, he began to feel the effects of his Predecessors, putting Portugues Officers into the Custom-House of Ormuz. He received advice the Moors had taken Arms, killed some Men, and besieged the Fort. D. Luis his Brother was immediately sent with relief, and Simon de Andre made Com∣mander of Chaul, who began his Charge with taking two Turkish Gallies, and a Vi∣ctory in Dabul, which reduced that City to pay Tribute. Melique Az. terrified with this Success, and the arrival of D. Luis, of whose Actions in Africk he was informed, withdrew his Vessels from before Chaul.
2. The Cause of D. Luis his going to Or∣muz was the Insurrection which was occa∣sioned by the avarice of the Portugues Of∣ficers there. Iames Lopez had placed them there against his Will in Obedience to the King's Commands, and at the persuasion of Men who loved Novelties, and said the reason the Tribute of Ormuz was not well paid, was, that the Officers cheated the King, to prevent which it was convenient to place Portugueses in their stead, To the avarice u∣sed by the Portugueses was added, the Vio∣lence they offered to the persons and honor of those people, forcing their Daughters, and Wives from them. D. Garcia Coutino then commanded that Fort, with whom that King conferred about sending a Present and Embassy to our King to obviate the In∣conveniences that Innovation produced. This Means was prevented, and so it broke out to the great loss of the Portugueses. For sudddenly by night they were attacked by Sea and Land with Fire and Sword at Or∣muz, Baharem, Mascate, Curiate and Soar, by private Order from the King, and a∣bove one hundred and twenty of them killed Ruy Boto was put to great Torments by the Moors in defence of the Faith. At morning some of our Men died, endea∣vouring to relieve others. All things being disposed the best the time would permit, and the Ships secured under the shelter of the Fort, D. Garcia sent advice to the Governor. Mean while he was besieged, had two Vessels burnt, and feared Hunger and
Thirst. Tristan Vaz de Vega, and Manuel de Sousa received advice hereof at Mascate, and prepared to carry Relief. Tristan Vaz arrived first, and made his way to the Fort through one hundred and sixty Sail that lay before it. Two days after appeared Manuel de Sousa's Ship at an anchor two Leagues off. It was dangerous for the Fort to relieve him, and dangerous for all if he was not relieved. Tristan Vaz with his Ship ventured to his Aid through the hundred and sixty Sail of Enemies; eighty of them pursued him, making way with full Sails, and Manuel de Sousa thinking him an Ene∣my did some harm, till undeceived. he was taken into the Ship. The King of Ormuz in a rage lays a heap of Gold on one side, and a heap of Womens Attire on the o∣ther, the one for such as should take Tri∣stan and Emanuel Prisoners, the other or such as behaved themselves not couragi∣ously. Some being covetous of the Re∣ward, and others fearful of the Disgrace, they manned one hundred and thirty Ves∣sels, and set upon that one, which through Showers of Bullets and Arrows made its way to the Fort, and brought new Life to the besieged with the Relief it had on Board. 3. The King of Ormuz began to despair of shaking off the Portugues Yoke, and fearing the punishment of his Revolt, exe∣cuted one more grievous upon himself than he could have received from those he had offended. He resolved to quit the City, and
go over to the Island Queixome, which lies fifteen Leagues in length, close to the Per∣ Shoar, and three Leagues from Ormuz, is fruitful, but not healthy. Privately he commanded all the Inhabitants to follow him, and then barbarously set fire to that beautiful City, which was four Days and Nights burning. And yet some Gentlemen from our Fort held intelligence with the King, advising how he should behave him∣self with the next Governour to be restored, and this they did in hopes to be inriched by him. Our Men, tho astonished at this bru∣tal Action were delivered from the danger of the Siege, and going out to see if any thing were left in the City, only found Wa∣ter in Cisterns, and Fire in all the Houses. Soon after came in a Ship from India with Provisions, and another with Ammunition. 4. D. Luis de Meneses sent by the Gover∣vernor his Brother to Ormuz, did nothing of Note by the way, but arrived at the Town of Soar with ten Sail. This Town they destroyed with Fire and Sword, and then gave it to Xec Hozem to hold of the King of Portugal. Mean while his own Favou∣rites murdered the King of Ormuz at Queixome, and crowned Mamud Xa, a Youth of thirteen years of Age, Son to the late King. 5. D. Luis arrived at Queixome, and after several Designs that took no effect, came to a Treaty with the new King. It was agreed, that the King should return to Ormuz, that he should pay the former Tri∣bute
of twenty thousand Xeraphins, and the Arrears due, that the Portugues Com∣manders should not meddle with the Go∣vernment of his City, and to conclude all that King sent D. Luis a Present of Pearls, Gold, Jewels and Silks for our King, and another for himself, which he accepted not but to be sent with the other, as was pub∣lickly done. Then D. Luis dispatched three Ships for Goa, which were to take lading there for Portugal. One of them perished in a violent storm on the Coast of Mascate. D. Luis followed soon after, and came to Goa. 6. He found the Governor his Brother, and all the City, in Tears, for the Death of King Emanuel, the News whereof was brought by one of three Ships that came from Portugal this year, whereof two had wintered at Mozambique. The Goveror went over to Cochin, to dispatch the trading Ships for Portugal and other parts. At this time D. Pedro de Castro was not idle at Mo∣zambique; for being informed by Iohn de Mata, who commanded that Fort, that the Island Querimba, and the adjacent, denied the Tribute to those of Zanzibar and Pemba, whereby they were disabled from paying theirs to us, he went to Querimba with an hundred Men, and after a shap Fight burnt the City, and obliged the Lord of it to pay the Tribute, the others terrified by this Example submitted. At his return he wasi n great danger by Storms and Hunger, and his Cousin D. Christopher killed by the Blacks
who defended the Fruit of certain Trees, which our Men were carried to taste by Hunger, not Curiosity. D. Diego de Melo went now with him to Goa. D. Pedro's Ship being at an Anchor in that Port, sud∣denly sunk down right, being very old, whereby it appears there is no Security in things that are aged. 7. D. Duarte set out for Ormuz with ix Sail, two of them Gallies, which on the Coast of Diu took a rich Ship coming from Pegu. Which lying between them in the night, the Moors perceived her sinking, and the Men in our Gallies asleep, so they furiously rushed into one of them, and our Men fled to the other, who seeing the Moors flie with their Vessel, and the other sink, took no notice, so that more Credit was lost by this Action than had been gain∣ed before. Melique Saca, Lord of Diu, af∣terwards had this Galley laid up, as if taken by his Vessels. About this time Iohn Rodri∣guez de Noronha, who commanded at Ormuz, pressed that King to come thither from Queixome to live, as he had agreed with D. Luis de Meneses, it was effected with the Death of one of his Favourites, killed by a bold Moor, whom D. Luis had hired before his Departure. 8. Don Duarte being arrived at Ormuz, examined who were the deepest in the late Rebellion; and it appeared they were found most guilty who had the least Power. For Raez Xarafo a mighty Man, and the very Soul of those Troubles was rewarded; and
Raez Xamexir who (according to agree∣ment with D. Luis) had killed Raez X∣dim, another Tyrant over those Kings, was banished instead of receiving the promised Reward. The young King not protected by the Innocence of his Years, had the Tri∣bute laid on him of thirty five thousand Xeraphins besides the former twenty five thousand, which he could not pay when the City flourished, and must now pay so much more when it was ruined Whilst this was acted at Ormuz, D. Luis sailed to∣wards the Red Sea, whither his Brother sent him with nine Ships, one whereof perished at Zocotora. On the Coast of Arabia he took and plundered the Town of Xaer, be∣cause they refused to restore the Goods of a Portugues who died there. At Verruma he burnt some Ships, then battered the City Aden, he entred the Red Sea, but did no∣thing considerable, and so returned to Or∣muz, where he found his Brother the Go∣vernor, with whose Proceedings there he was so much dissatisfied, that he left him, and sailed for Diu, but being forced back by the Weather to Ormuz, kept him company to India. There they found two Ships of nine that came out this year from Lisbon. 9. That part of the Continent about Goa, which belonged to Hidalcan, and was taken from him by Ruy de Melo, whilst he was busied with the War of Narsinga, was now lost by Francis Pereyra Pestana, Hidal∣can having no other Care but the Recovery thereof. Pestana was brave, and opposed
the Enemies Power. Ferdinando Rodriguez Barba obtained a signal Victory over them. Five thousand Foot and four hundred Horse of them were after defeated by Ferdinando and Anz Sotomayor, with few Foot and only thirty Horse. Nevertheless by de∣grees the Country return'd to the Obedience of Hidalcan, and was confirmed to him by the late Treaty of Peace. 10. D. Duarte de Meneses began to in∣quire into such things as related to S Tho∣mas the Apostle, a particular Care of our Kings. This was what could now and some time after be discovered. In the year 1517, certain Portugueses sailed with an Ar∣menian, and landing at Paleacate of the Province of Coromandel in the Kingdom of Bisnagar, he invited them to go visit the place where were the Ruins of many Build∣dings, the Stones of several Colours, still retaining the Footsteps of Grandeur and Art. In the middle was a Chappel entire, of indifferent Structure, on the inside and outside whereof were carved many Crosses, like to the antient ones of the military Or∣der of Alcantara, which is Fleury Fitched. A Moor resided there, who coming thither blind, miraculously recovered his sight. He said, That his Forefathers lighted that holy Body: that there was a Tradition that Church (whereof only this part was stand∣ing) was built by the same Saint when he preached the Christian Faith there, and that there were buried with him two of his Disciples, and a King converted by his
Miracles. Upon this Information D. Du∣arte sent thither Emanuel de Faria or Frias, and a Priest and Mason to repair the Chap∣pel, opening the Foundation of one side that was like to fall about the depth of an Ell they found a Stone-Tomb with an In∣scription, containing, That when Thomas built that Church, the King of Miliapor gave him the Duties of all Merchandize imported, which was the Tenths. Going deeper they found a Hollow in which it was reported the Saint lay. Here they found between two Stones a Body and the two ends of a Lance, the But and Spear. These were believed to be the Bones of the Apostle, because those of the King and Disciple also found were not so white. They were put into a China Chest, and the others into another, and hid in the Altar. Inquiry being made, it appeared by the an∣cient Records of the Kingdom, that it was above fifteen hundred years since the Saint came to that City called Meliapor, then in a flourishing Condition, in and about which there was a Tradition there had been three thousand three hundred stately Churches, that it was then twelve Leagues from the Sea, the Ruins being now upon the very Shore. That the Saint had said, When the Sea should reach thither, a People would come from the West, and preach the same Faith he did. That he converted the King and all his Family, dragging out of the Sea a vast piece of Timber, which all the Force of Elephants, and Art of Men could not
move, the King coveting it for his Build∣ings, and the Apostle for the Church. That a Bramen chief Priest to the King, envious of his Miracles, had killed his own Son, and accused the Saint of the Murder, but he restoring the Child to life caused him to say who was the Murderer. An Armenian Bishop who had spent twenty years in vi∣siting the Christians of the inland of Cou∣lam, swore he found what follows in their Writings, That the twelve Apostles being dispersed through the World, Thomas, Bar∣tholomew, and Iudas Thaddeus came toge∣ther to Babilon, and there parted. That the last preached in Arabia, since possessed by the Moors, the other in Persia, and was buried in a Convent of Armenian, religious Men near the City Tabris; and the first em∣barquing at Baçora, on the Banks of Eu∣phrates, crossed the Persian Gulph, preached at Zocotora, came to Meliapor, passed to China, where he built Churches, and re∣turned to Meliapor, where having done what is said, he at last suffered Martyrdom through the malice of the Bramens, who, to execute their Design, counterfeited a quar∣rel whilst he was preaching, to find an op∣portunity of stoning him, and was at last by one of them run through with a Lance, and buryed by his Disciples in that Church of his own Building. Another Learned Man, a Native of Coulam affirmed, That there and at Cranganor were two Houses built by the Disciples of Thomas, who were buried in them, and that in that of Coulam
was the burying place of Sibila, Indica, by whose advice King Perimal of Ceylon went to the Coast of Mascate, to meet the other two Kings that were going to adore Christ, newly born at Bethlehem. That the same King at the Intreaty of the Sibil, brought her the Picture of the Blessed Virgin which was kept in the same Tomb. This was the Invention of the Relicts of that Hea∣venly Messenger in India. And gave occa∣sion to build the City, at this time called S. Thomas, a Portugues Colony in the Port of Paleacate, seven Leagues from the Ruins of the most ancient Meliapor. CHAP. VIII. Continues the Government of D. Duarte de Meneses from the Year 1522, till the Year 1524, King John then reigning. 1. ANtony de Miranda de Azevedo was this year Commander of the Fort of Pacem, in the Island Sumatra. On the Western Coast of this Island are six Moor∣ish Kingdoms. The chief was that of Pedir, to which were subject those of Achem and Daga. But falling to War, that of Achem gained the Superiority. He of Pedir took the protection of our Fort against his ill
Fortune. D. Andres Enriquez then com∣manded it, sent to that Post from Portugal with D. Duarte de Meneses. 2. The Tyrant of Achem scoured the Sea and Land with a great Power, till coming to the City Pedir, he endeavoured to draw to his snare the King who had taken the Portugues Protection. To compass his Design, he prevailed with the Men of that City to write a Letter to the King, telling him he might safely come thither, his Ene∣my being already expelled, and that he might easily destroy him with the assistance of the Portuguses. He gave credit to the letter, desired the assistance of the Com∣mander, who gave him eighty Portugueses and two hundred Moors, commanded by his Brother D. Emanuel in small Vessels of Oars. The King marched along the Shore with above a thousand armed Elephants. He was received at Pedir with feigned Joy, and a Design to take him Prisoner that night, which was deferred to secure the Portugueses. The King being informed of the danger, next day fled with two Elephants and some Men. The Portugueses were left on the Shore exposed to the Enemies Darts and Arrows. D. Emanuel and thirty five of them were killed, the rest fled. With this loss D. Andres lost also the hopes of maintaining the Fort. He asked Provisions of Raphael Perestello, who was at Charigam, the chief Port of Bengala. Dominick Seixas was immediately sent with a Ship, who was stopped by thirty Portugueses, who were turned Pirates in that
Sea, commanded by Games Iago. Seixas landed at Tenacari to get Provisions, and one Brito making himself Captain of the Pyrats (Gago being dead) and flying with a Vessel that was laden in the Port, left Seixas and seventeen Portugueses ashore, who were afterwards Slaves in the Kingdom of Siam, Such is the Fate of those who trust them that have violated all human and divine Laws. 3. D. Andres advertised the Governor of the Condition he was in, desiring a Suc∣cessor to command the Fort, Lope de Azeve∣do was sent, to whom he would not deliver the Post through Covetousness of acquiring more, having already gained much there Azevedo returned to India. The King of Achem over-runs all that Country with Fire and Sword, enters the City Pacem with fifteen thousand Men, and summons D. An∣dres to quit the Fort. He after sustaining three Assaults to save the Riches he had there, withdraws, leaving the Command to his Brother-in law Ayres Coello, who cou∣ragiously took upon him this danger he saw the other shun. But the Sea forced back D. Andres to the danger he avoided. 4. D. Andres sailing for India, met Sebastian de Sousa, and Martin Correa, with two Ships bound for the Island Banda to load Spices. Sousa came from Madagascar, whither he was sent by King Emanuel to build a Fort in Port Matatane, which was not executed, because the Ship wherein were the Mate∣rials for the Work was cast away. These
two Captains hearing by D. Andres the Condition of Pacem, went directly to that Port. Ayres Coello had then stood a furious Assault with loss of a Post. The Enemy seeing this Relief, abated of their heat; and D. Andres after eight days resisting was forced back by the Weather. Above eight thousand Enemies one night encompassed the Fort, in which were three hundred and fifty Portugueses, some sick, some wounded, and all spent with labour and watching. With great silence they applied above seven hundred scaling Ladders, and mounted with great Shouts. The Dispute was hotly maintained on both sides, till some Ships being fired, gave light to each other, and to level our Cannon, which killed many of the Enemy and two Elephants. The morning discovered two thousand Men slain about the Fort, on our side only one Wo∣man killed by an Arrow in her Chamber. The remaining six thousand retired, leav∣ing half their scaling Ladders and Fire∣works. Nevertheless the Difficulties of maintaining the place considered, it was resolved in counsel to abandon the Fort, shipping all the Men and Goods, and then giving fire to the rest. The great Cannon were left full of Powder, that when the Fire reached them they might burst. Most of the Fort was destroyed, but the Enemy coming in saved some Cannon, which af∣terwards did us great harm. The Portugueses lost some Goods in shipping, and embar∣qued up to the Necks in Water with the
Fright, losing more Reputation by this Action than they had gained by the former. This they were more sensible of when they met at Sea a more powerful Relief sent by our Friend the King of Aru, who marched by Land with four thousand Men; and Lope de Azevedo, from whom D. Andres ill deserved it, embarqued at Malaca with Ammunition to come to his Succour. Se∣bastian Sousa prosecuted his Voyage to Ban∣da, and the Tyrant Achem followed the For∣tune which had raised him above his own Hopes. 5. At this time Martin Alfonso de Melo Coutino was gone for China, not knowing what had been done by the Portugueses at Quantung. He had four Ships, and two joined them by the way. They sent ashore for fresh Water, and returned with Blood, the Chineses being in Arms to receive them. This drew them to a Battel, in which most of the Portugueses perished, some drowned, some torn by the Cannon, and some taken, part whereof died miserably in the Prison at Quantung, and twenty three were cut in peices as Spies and Robbers, the last part of the Accusation being the truest. Martin Alphonso and Duarte Coello returned to India. 6. All things cannot be exactly related in order as they happened. Malaca was streightned by the King of Bintam, who sent a greater power against it, and George de Albuquerque what he could against him under the Command of D. Sancho Enriquez, whilst they prepared for a Sea-Fight there
arose a violent storm which destroyed se∣venty Portugueses, the whole being two hundred, the Remainder escaped. Let us see how Misfortunes when once they break out overflow. 7. Till now the King of Pam had been a Friend to our good Fortune, but at present seeing she favoured him he turned against us. George de Albuquerque (ignorant of this change) sent three Ships to his Port for Pro∣visions, where two of the Captains and his thirty Men were killed, the third flying this danger met it at Iava, he and all his Com∣pany perishing there. Simon de Abreu and Crew were killed in another Action, and in another D. Garcia Enriquez sent to hinder Provisions coming to Bintam, lost two Vessels. 8. At Surubaya in Iava ten or twelve Portugueses were killed. Sebastian Sousa and Martin Correa found Alfonso de Melo Iusarte in great danger at Banda, having offended the Inhabitants of Cantor through Covetous∣ness. 9. Such was the posture of Affairs at the Malucos, whilst these thing happened. An∣tony de Brito had put the Fort into a very good Condition, when two Bastard Sons of the late King of Ternate disagreeing, and the King of Tidore seeking revenge because the Portugueses had not built in his Island; he agrees with his Daughter the Queen Dowager of Ternate to carry on his Design, at the same time that she had consented to make war upon him. But all the Contri∣vance was discovered, the young King and
his Brothers brought to the Fort, and the Queen fled to the mountain. The War began, and Tidore was besieged. There George Pinto was killed with six Portugueses, and forty Seamen. 10. The Siege continuing, some places were assaulted. At Mariaco was a Fort on a high Ground well gaisoned, Martin Cor∣rea first, and after him Iohn Mendez en∣tered it with twenty Men. Leonel de Lima relieves them, and at last the Governor of Ternate, Bastard Son to the late King, coming on with his Men, the Tidores were put to flight, and most of them slain. Se∣veral other places being taken, the King of Tidore begged peace, which was not granted him. But because there now comes a Successor to D. Duarte de Meneses, let us take leave of him, he was of a ruddy Com∣plexion, his Beard black, his Cap, upper Gant and Breeches black, the Doublet Crimson, and the Linings. He governed three years, and was the fifth Governor.
CHAP. IX. The Government of the Viceroy D. Vasco de Gama, and of the Governor D. En∣rique de Meneses, the Year 1524 till that of 25, in the Reign of King John the Third. 1. NOW the manner of receiving and delivering up the Government seems to be settled, it will not be amiss with our usual Brevity to give some account of it. At first the Wisdom and Experience of the person to be chose, were considered as well as his Birth. Afterwards the Birth was thought a sufficient Qualification. Gentility among Portugueses being of more account than Virtue and Merit, which has been the ruin of our first acquired Reputation The Viceroy or Governor (for the Office is the same, tho the Title differ) solemnly swears, That he made no Interest to procure that Employ (how needless the Question, and false the Oath) that he will do Justice and follow his Instructions, that in bestowing Employments he will not have more regard to his Kindred and Servants, than to the Kings and such as deserve, that he will take no Bribes. All Vows made in storms all
forgot as soon as out of danger. Can any thing be better swore, or any thing less ob∣served. In India the succeeded delivers the Government to the Successor in the con∣dition it is, and a publick Instrument there∣of is made. There are always three or four sealed Patents (called Successions) in case the Governor should die. He sailed this year for India with the Title of Count de Vidigueyra, and fouteen Sail, and in them three thousand fighting Men. Two Vessels perished with all the Men, a third was lost, and the Men saved. Mossm Gaspar was basely killed by his Caravels Crew, only be∣cause he was no Portuguese. These Ships be∣ing in the Sea of Cambaya in a dead Calm, on a sudden they tssed so, that all thought themselves lost, every one thinking how to save himself, D Vasco the Viceroy perceiv∣ing it was the effect of an Earthquake, he cryed out with a loud Voice, Courage, my Friends, for the Sea trembles for fear of you that are upon it. One Man who leaped over∣board to save himself was lost, such as lay sick of Fevers were cured with the Fright. D. George de Meneses, one of the Captains, took a great Ship of Meca worth sixty thousand Cowns. The Fleet arrived at Goa. 2. The new Viceroy visited some Forts, gave necessary Orders, and from Cochin sent three Vessels of Oars towards Calicut to curb those Indians who began to be out∣ragious. One of them fought three hours with fifty , large Indian Vessels, lost three Men, and had been lost had not his
Companions relieved him, and put them to flight. Hierom de Sousa was ordered with six Vessels against the Malabars of that Coast, who defeated forty Catures, Indian Vessels, commanded by Cotiale, a valiant Moor, who hindered the carrying Provisions to the Fort of Calicut. Two Gallies having joined him afterwards, he fought eighty Paraos in the River of Bracalor, bound for Cambaya with Spice, he took twelve of them with the loss of four Men. He ordered the Commander of the Fort in Ceylon to quit it, as not worth the keeping, and had the same Orders for that of Pacem, but ne∣cessity had before caused it to be executed. Simon Sdre was sent to Maldiva with four Ships to oppose the Moors, who infested us. He fought a Moor of Cananor, who had six Vessels, took two, and the four narrowly escaped. The Viceroy, tho sick, had great∣er Designs in hand, but Death drawing on, he named Lope Vaz de Sampayo his Succes∣sor, till such time as D. Enrique de Meneses, who was at Goa, and the next named in the Patents came. He died upon Christmas-Eve, having been Viceroy three months, was of a middle stature, somewhat gross, ruddy Complexion; he is painted with a black Cap, Cloak and Breeches, edged with Velvet, all slashed, through which ap∣pears the Crimson Lining, the Doublet of Crimson Sattin, and over it his Armour inlaid with Gold. D. Vasco had a natural Boldness for any great Undertaking, angry he was terrible, a great sufferer of Labour,
and hasty in execution of Justice. In fine, fit for all that was intrusted him, as Captain, as discoverer, and as Viceroy. He was the sixth in the number of Governors, and se∣cond of Viceroys. 3. Lope Vaz de Sampayo, sent Francis de Sa to carry the News of his access to the Government to D. Enrique de Meneses at Goa. He delivered that Command to the said Francis de Sa, and came away imme∣diately. First he sent his Nephew D. George Telo with a Galliot, and five Paraos, against a Fleet that infested the Coast. They met thirty eight Vessels laden with Spice, under the Command of Cutiale, took four, and forced the rest ashore. The four were brought to Goa, with many of the Enemies hanged upon the Shrouds, the Canaras who rowed carried thirty Heads, and twelve a∣live, who were delivered up to the Boys, and by them stoned to death, the Sea threw up above sixty upon the Shore. Afterwards the same D. George had the like success a∣gainst a Ship and e Paraos, and then sailed to Cochin with his Uncle, who by the way being accidentally joined by D. George de Meneses, defeated thirty six Paraos of Diu, and took seventeen. At Cananor he hanged a Moor of Quality, which occasioned many of his Relations for shame to leave the City, and go live upon robbing along the the River. By the King's Consent D. En∣rique sent Hector de Silveyra against them with two Gallies and a Brigantine; in two days he burnt four Towns with much diffi∣culty,
and took their Cannon. Christopher de Brito set out with fourteen Gallies, and about one hundred Men. They scoured the Sea, destroyed some Moors, and at Da∣bul came out to them two Galiots, and seven other Vessels with above three hundred Men. At the first shock they killed our Commander, Christopher de Brito; to re∣venge whom, our Men falling on furiously, in four hours time killed most of them, and took the rest and their Captain in Chief, who afterwards died of his Wounds at Goa, being first converted to the Faith. The Commander of Calicut being streightened by a great number of Nayres and other people that frequented that City, forced them to retire with only fifty Portugueses. D. Enrique made little haste to Cochin, be∣cause his Kinsmen D. Duarte and D. Luis de Meneses were there, and dissatisfied with what D Vasco de Gama had done in their Business, and he had no mind to undo what the Viceroy had done to oblige his Cousins. He sent a Message before, that they should not receive him with any publick Joy, in respect to the death of Gama; this being the only Successor till then that shewed re∣spect to his Predecessor. Another part of his Message was, that they should not give him the style of Lordship, because good Men had rather deserve Honor, than make use of its Titles. Afterwards the Viceroys took the Title of Excellency, and the Cap∣tains of Lordships. With such modesty did the new Governor enter upon his Command.
Soon after he set out from Cochin with fifty Sail, besides some belonging to the In∣habitants of the Town, and Arel de Porca, a Subject to our King with twenty seven, making fifty more, and two thousand fighting Men, thus he arrived at Panane. This is one of the principal Towns subject to Calicut, seated on the Banks of the same River. It was well fortified and stored with Cannon, commanded by a Portugues Renegado. In the River were many Ves∣sels in order of Battel. The Fight began fu∣riously by Sea and Land, the Fortifications were entred, the Cannon taken, and the Enemy fled to the Woods. The Town and Vessels in the Port were burnt, many kill∣ed, of our Men nine. Next day twelve Ships were burnt in the Port of Calicut, and D. Iohn de Lima did the same in the Skirts of the City. Hence they went to Coulete, where was the same Fortification, number of Ships, and Artillery as at Panane, and twenty thousand Men in Garrison. 5. A Council of War being held, it was generally voted to desist from so dangerous an Enterprize, but D. Enrique prevailed for going on. D. Simon de Meneses was to command one Attack with 300 Men, D. Enrique another with one hundred and fifty, and the Fleet to engage one hundred and fifty Ships that were there. Great Valour was shewn on both sides; at last many of the Enemy being slain, the rest fled; of the Portugueses fifty four were killed, and many wounded. The Booty contained
three hundred and sixty pieces of Cannon, a vast number of Musquets, fifty three Ships, most of them loaden with Spice; the rest being shattered were burnt, as was the Town. D. Enrique returned to Cochin, leaving D. Simon with twenty Sail, and five hundred Men to cruise upon that Coast. 6. During the time that Lope Vaz de Sampayo held the Government by reason of the Viceroys Death, and Absence of D. En∣rique, he sent Antony de Miranda with four Vessels, and three hundred and fifty Men to the Red Sea. He was come now to Cape Guardafu, where arrived before him Antony de Macedo, with a Galeon, and two Cara∣vels, tho sent later. They had taken the Vessel of those mutinous Portugueses who had killed their Captain, and now practised Pyracy by this Crime to shun the punish∣ment of the former. One N. de Aguiar commanded them who was beheaded at Cochin, and the rest impaled or banished ac∣cording as they were found guilty. The two Antonies agreed to spread themselves cross the Mouth of that Sea, that so no E∣nemy-Ship might escape them. This Mouth reaching from Cape Guardafu in Africk, to Cape Fartaque in Arabia is fifty Leagues over. Here they took ten Zambucos and three Ships. Thence they went to the City Xael, and burnt many Moors in seven Ships, and took five. Mean while D. Simon de Meneses, assisted by Fernan Gomez, burnt the Town of Mangalor, and ten Ships in the Harbour. They scoured the Coast, had some Ren∣counters,
one with seventy Paraos, whereof they took twenty, the rest being shattered and dispersed. Another time the Moors killed Gomez Martinez de Lemos, who going to assist Dominick Fernandez, struck upon a Bank, where died also Manuel de Lima, with seven Gentlemen, and all the Boats Crew. 7. Now the King of Calicut resolved to besiege that Fort in which D. Iohn de Lima commanded with three hundred Men. Twelve thousand Men broke ground to draw a deep Trench about. D. Iohn did all that was possible to hinder the Work, but the multitude prevailed and finished it. Then they planted many pieces of Can∣non, some so large the Ball was two spans diameter. The Work being finished, Za∣mori came on with nine thousand Men. This Power was enough to terrifie any Re∣solution; yet D. Iohn was not moved, but ventured to make a Sally, which had like to have cost him his life, so he resolved to stand firm against all their Assaults. 8. The Battery began furiously at break of day on the thirteenth of Iune. Our Cannon was more dexterously played, and did great harm, but it appeared not so much in the multitude. Next day advice was sent to the Governor, who immediately sent to their Relief two Caravels, with one hun∣dred and fifty Men, commanded by Chri∣stopher Iusarte and Duarte Fonseca. The former arrived first, and there was a sharp dispute by Sea and Land about their entering the Fort, in which three Gentlemen were
killed. The Enemy immediately applyed scaling Ladders, but were repulsed with great slaughter. D. Iohn sent Duarte de Fonseca back to Cochin to demand more suc∣cour, five hundred Men were sent him. Whilst they sailed, all the military Arts then in use were practised against the be∣sieged, and above fifty of them killed. 9. This Relief could not reach Calicut, but was forced back to Cochin. The Go∣vernor joined two Squadrons he had pre∣pared, and they both appeared to the di∣stressed Fort, when Rage and Despair act∣ed more in its Defence than Valour or Con∣duct. Hector de Silveyra commanded one of the Squadrons containing seven Ships, and Peter de Faria the other of twenty five, and three hundred and thirty Men. They encouraged our Men, and did harm to the Enemy from the Water, because they could not land till the Governour arrived with twenty Sail, and 1500 Men, besides some Catures or small Craft; and Antony de Mi∣randa coming at the same time, all the Sea of Calicut was covered with Ships. A Council was held about landing, all the Votes were in the negative. D. Enrique spent four days in considering what to do, then came to this Resolution. 10. One night he put one hundred and fifty Men into the Fort under the valiant Hector de Silveyra, and the next as many more under D. Iames de Lima. By break of day he landed, clearing the Shore of throngs of Enemies with Sho Granados,
and all sorts of Weapons. In some In∣trenchments they burnt two hundred, in others three hundred Moors. Many Gentle∣men particularly signalized themselves upon this Occasion. Hector de Silveyra did won∣ders. D. George de Meneses with a two handed Sword made great slaughter, till lo∣sing the Right Hand, he took a less Sword in the Left, and went on without losing the Cutlace. But who can recount the Actions of this day. In fine, three thou∣sand of the Enemy were killed, of ours thirty, none of Note. D. Enrique remained Master of the Field, and pitched his Tents to give there the necessary Orders. Zamori sent to desire peace, the Treaty held four days, and broke up without any effect. The Fort was demolished (as King Iohn had commanded) because it was of no im∣portance. Having shipped all that was in it of Value with great care and privacy, they laid Trains to blow it up, and all drew off to the Ships. The Moors finding the Coast clear, and no Body in the Fort, run in Clusters to pillage; but the Powder suddenly taking fire, blew up the whole Fa∣brick with great slaughter of them. This shews how much must be ventured rather than hazard Reputation; since all this La∣bour and Prepararation served only to raze that Fort, because it should not be thought it was rather Fear than Conveniency forced us to quit it.
CHAP. X. Concludes the Government of D. Enrique de Meneses in the Year 1526, King John the Third Reigning. 1. THE Fort of Calicut being demo∣lished, and Peter de Faria left with his Ships to scour the Coast of Malabar, the Governor went to Cochin, to dispatch the homeward bound trading Ships, which were five, and whereof two were lost: two also of sour that came this year from Por∣tugal perished. After this Expedition D. Enrique designed to fall upon Diu. He sent out Hector de Silveyra upon other pre∣tences, to Ormuz, with instructions that o∣ther things failing, he should enter the Red Sea, and take up at Arquico, D. Ro∣drigo de Lima, who by that time was return∣ed from his Embassy to Prester Iohn. On the Coast of Arabia he assaulted and took the strong City Dofar, which he destroyed with the loss of two Men. Then he entered the Red Sea, and reduced the Islands Maçua and Dalaca, to pay Tribute. Thence sailed to Arquico where the Governor delivered to him D. Rodrigo de Lima, who was there waiting for a passage with an Embassador
sent by Prester Iohn to Portugal. They went to rest at Ormuz. 2. Peter Mascarenas, who the foregoing year went to succeed George de Albuquerque in the Command of Malaca, found it in some distress, after performing honorable Actions. Martin Alfonso de Sousa scouring that Coast with six Ships and two hundred Men had done great execution among the Natives. After returning to Malaca he a∣gain went out to meet Lacxemena, who ravaged the Neighbourhood with thirteen hundred Moors, after a bloody Fight they were defeated, and Martin being mortally wounded, died in the City. The King of Linga our Ally had asked relief of George Albuquerque, against the King of Bintam, by whom he was besieged. Eighty Men were sent, who falling upon the Besiegers killed six hundred, the rest fled. This Vi∣ctory cost but one Man. 3. Here Peter Mascarenas heard of a Rene∣gado Portugues, who commanding three thousand Men of the King of Bintam, had done much harm to the City, in which there were but a hundred, yet obliged him to retire with shame. Two hundred and fifty solemnly vowed to carry the Head of George de Albuquerque, or that of the Fa∣ctor Garcia Chaino, to the King of Bintam (all Vows are easier to make than perform) they lay in ambush in a close Wood, six Portugueses, whereof one was Francis Correa, fell into it. He seeing no possibility of e∣scaping, encouraged the other five, and
falling desperately upon the two hundred and fifty killed fourteen, the others fled. One of the six died. 4. Antony de Brito at Maluco, seeing he was not relieved, desired (the last year) a Successor might be sent him, D. Garcia Enriquez who then commanded the Cruisers upon the Coast of Malaca went thither. 5. He arrived at Ternate, where some Differences arose between him and Brito. They agreed among themselves, and by consent sent a Portugues with a small Ves∣sel to discover the Islands called Celebes, where they heard was great plenty of Gold. The Discoverer found the Islands, but not the Gold; and being upon his return, was carried away by a storm to the Eastward, till he lost his Account, and unexpectedly fell into a great and beautiful Island. The Inhabitants most simple, and treated them with great affection. Of Colour more in∣clined to white, of Body strong and comly, lank Hair, and long Beards, their Cloaths of very fine Mats; their Food, Roots, Co∣cos and Figs. Their Language was not un∣derstood, but they dealt by signs. By tokens they gave to understand that in the moun∣tain there was Gold, whereof they made no use; they had no knowledge of Iron, or any other Metal. They left this Island, which they called of Iames Lopez de Sequey∣ra the Name of the Pilot, and returned to Ternate after eight months, whence Antony de Brito was then departed, leaving D. Gar∣cia the Command of the Fort.
6. Peter Mascarenas at Malaca consider∣ing how much had been done by his Prede∣cessors in defence of that place, and that it was no less insupportable than dangerous, to suffer the King of Bintam to lie safe in his Works, and continue his hopes proposed to deprive him of both. He immediately began to put in execution his Designs, tho they proved unsuccessful. 7. George de Albuquerque sailing from Ma∣laca towards Cochin, with only one Vessel, met Arel de Porca with twenty five Barques of Calicut, who was seeking Revenge, for that D. Enrique had treated him as he de∣served for his Cowardliness at the▪ Assault of Coulete. The Case was that D. Enrique at that Engagement perceiving him stand only as a Looker on, watching the oppor∣tunity of sharing the Plunder, caused a Cannon to be levelled at him so dexterously, that it broke his Leg. Now he sought Re∣venge, and drew on himself farther pu∣nishment, for Albuquerque not able to a∣void the twenty five Barques, to lose no time of playing his Cannon, levelled among them all, they answered with Showers of Ball and Arrows. But our Artillery was so well managed, that Arel was forced to retire with considerable loss, having done no other damage to Albuquerque, than the killing one of his Slaves. 8. The Governor D. Enrique still con∣tinued his Preparations against Diu, giving out they were for Aden. In all things he acted the part of a wise Captain.
9. He set out with seventeen Sail of se∣veral sorts all large, with a resolution to clear that Coast of Pyrats, that always abound there. At Chale two Leagues from Calicut he set ashore D. George de Meneses with five hundred Men, who reduced the Town to Ashes. At Bacanor he found D. George Telo and Peter de Faria entering that River in which they shut up above one hundred Paraos, bound for Cambaya, laden with Spice. He sent to their assi∣stance D. George de Meneses, with four hun∣dred Men in two Ships. The Moors by Land and Sea were four thousand strong. Peter de Faria was left to keep the Mouth of the River, the other went up to the Paraos, and saw the Shore covered with Men and Cannon. At length they engaged, the Fight was bravely maintained, but the mul∣titude, the disadvantage of the place, and ill Fortune, obliged our Captains to retire, after losing forty Men. Victory cannot be always tied to one side, and it is wonder∣ful, that in so many Encounters our Party should scarce ever be worsted, never quite defeated. 10. This was not the greatest Loss then happened to the Portugueses, for at this time D. Enrique fell sick of an Inflammation in two Issues he had upon one Leg, and find∣ing Death came on, he gave the necessary Orders, and expired with that Calmness he had practised living. This happened at Ca∣nanor, (where he is buried) about the end of Ianuary in the thirtieth year of his Age.
He was Son to D. Ferdinand de Meneses, called the Red, of a pleasing Countenance, a large Stature, an awful Presence, of a free Mind, his Actions just, free from Co∣vetousness, continent, a true Patron of Me∣rit, and Professor of Honor. It may ap∣pear how free from Avarice in that after his Death all his Treasure was but thirteen Royals and a half, not a Crown in all; not but that he had an Estate before, but spent it during his Government on such as de∣served well. He accepted not one Jewel of all that those Eastern Princes presented him. Let us give one Example of his ready Wit, which will shew the Beauty of his Person. A Gentleman whose person was contemptible, but had served well, and was dissatisfied with the Governor, one day talking with others, lashed out and said, I am as good a Gentleman as any in India, and better than some, as much a Soldier as the best, I have served the King as well as any man; and in fine, I fear no man, nor yield to no man. The Governor finding all this passion aimed at him, to shew he un∣derstood it, and was not disturbed, an∣swered very calmly: Sir, I confess you are a better Gentleman than I, and more a Soldier than I, that you have served better, and better deserve to be Governor; but since I yield so many Points, you cannot but grant me one, and that is that you are not so genteel a man as I. So the Anger was turned into Laughter, and he doubly shamed. The most re∣nowned Governors hitherto were D. Francisco
de Almeyda, Alfonso de Albuquerque, and D. Enrique. His Complexion was white, his Beard Chesnut Colour, his Cap, upper Garment, and Breeches, black, slashed with Crimson Lining, the Doublet Crim∣son, over it a Coat of Mail, and upon that the Breast plate. He held the Government a year and a month, and was the seventh Governor. The End of the Third Part of the First Tome.
THE Portugues Asia. TOM. I. PART IV. CHAP. I. The Government of Lope Vaz de Sam∣payo, from the Year 1526 to the Year 1527, and Reign of King John the Third. 1. THE Governor D. Enrique de Meneses, when he died, left a Paper sealed, where∣in 1526. was named who should succeed him, in case the person appointed by the King was absent, requiring all there present to give Obedi∣ence to him, this Paper was lost, but the person therein named known to be Francis
de Sa, then commanding at Goa. The second Patent of Succession being opened (because the first was fulfilled in D. En∣rique) it named Peter de Mascarenas then commanding at Malaca. The distance was great, and the Season not fit to sail, after some Debates they chose the worst Expedient, which was to open the third Patent, in which was named Lope Vaz de Sampayo. The Government was put into his Hands, having swore to deliver it to Peter de Mascarenhas as soon as he came from Malaca. He immediately dispatched Captains to several places, and went out himself to scour the Coast with seven Sail. Advice was brought him from D. George Telo, and Peter de Faria, that they lay upon the Bar of Cananor, to keep in a Fleet be∣longing to Zamori. He sent immediate Orders to D. Antonio de Silveyra, and Chri∣stopher de Sousa, who were at Goa, to go join the other two, and secure the prize till he came. They performed it. 2. Cutiale, Admiral of that Fleet, per∣ceiving the danger that threatened him, disposed all things to meet it by Sea and Land. He had ten thousand Men at Com∣mand, Lope Vaz went in person through Showers of Bullets to view the Fortifica∣tions, which done, he returned and prepa∣red for the Assaults, contrary to the Votes of most of the Captains, who rather envied him the Glory of that Action, than feared the Danger, as if each were not to share with him in it. Nevertheless all obeyed,
and three Vessels were provided with one one hundred Men each to land first. Lope Vaz followed with a thousand Men in Ves∣sels that rowed. Peter de Faria was to fire the Enemies Paraos. They all at once couragiously undertook the Charge assigned them, and at the same time mounted the Trenches with great Slaughter on the one side, whilst above seventy Paraos were fired on the other. At length our Men remain∣ed victorious, above eighty Brass Cannons were taken, Lope spared the Town, because it belonged to the King of Narsinga, with whom we were then at peace. 3. Lope Vaz sailed victorious to Goa, where Francis de Sa refused to reve him as Governor, on account of the Title he had to it himself by D. Enrique's appoint∣ment in the absence of Peter Mascarenhas. But the Council of the City siding with Lope Vaz, he was admitted as Governor, and began to act as such. The first thing he did was to send Advice to Peter Masca∣renas of his Election, either that he was not yet so fond of the Government, or rather to dissemble how fond he was of it. Next he gave the Command of Goa to Antony de Silveyra de Meneses, and sent Francis de Sa to the Island of Sunda, whether he had been designed from Portugal, giving him four hundred Men in six Ships. Antony de Mi∣randa Azevedo had fourteen to guard the Coast of India. Manuel de Gama had nine for the Coast of Coromandel, which he cleansed from Pyrats, and retook a Ship of
ours taken by them. Martin Alphonso Iu∣sarte was sent to Maldiva with six Vessels, and took a rich Vessel of Meca, in which were three hundred Moors. Having given other necessary Orders, he sailed for Or∣muz with five Ships, and three hundred Men. 4. They suffered much by the way, chiefly through Thirst. In his Passage he reduced the Towns of Calayate and Mascate, which had revolted, being exasperated by the avarice of Iames de Melo; for it is cer∣tain the King and publick suffer for the Interest of private Men, a thing D. Enrique was so sensible of, that this Melo being then Commander at Ormuz, he writ to him to be more moderate, and not provoke thirty years to go from Goa to teach sixty at Ormuz, for those were the Ages of them both. Lope Vaz did nothing at Or∣muz, but compose the Difference be∣tween Iames de Melo and Raez Xarafo, which had occasioned the Revolt of those two Towns, receive the Tribute of that King, and Prester Iohn's Embassador, who came with D. George de Lima, both brought by Hector de Silveyra. 5. Who was sent to lie off of Diu in wait of the Ships of the Red Sea, that trade for Cambaya, whereof he took three. They went to Diu where he continued many days at the request of Melique Saca, who made use of him to secure himself a∣gainst the King of Cambaya, feigning he intended to deliver the City to Silveyra,
being weary of the Tyranny of that King. Lope Vaz was then at Chaul, giving Oders for fortifying several places, fearing the Rumes or Turks were coming with a great Power, whereof he sent advice to King Iohn, and sailed for Goa. 6. At the same time arrived in India two Ships of five that set out this year from Lisbon, the other three came afterwards. These two brought fresh Orders from the King, relating to the Succession in the Go∣vernment, wherein Lope Vaz was before Mascarenas, the former having been the contrary. The Surveyor of the Revenue Alfonso de Mexia, to whom they were di∣rected, desirous to kindle Broils, caused them to be opened, to the great danger of the publick Peace. 7. The News hereof met Lope Vaz on the way, and arriving at Goa he was a se∣cond time received as Governor, and went thence to Cochin. He dispatched the tra∣ding Ships home, and sent in them Prester Iohn's Embassador, who went to Rome, where he gave entire submission to the Church of Christ, through the means of the Portugueses; and having received several Favours from Pope Clement the Seventh, returned to his Prince. These Ships being gone, Lope Vaz designed to go to the Red Sea against the Turks, who (it was said) fortified the Island Camaran. Some loose Tongues said it was a policy to strengthen himself at Cochin, in order to resist Masca∣renhas, who came to take upon him the
Government. Others said he really in∣tended to go to deprive Mascarenas of all Power, and gain the Affections of the Soldiers by giving them plunder. The certainty is, he studied to secure himself, for to resign a Command voluntarily is a thing not practised since those times. 8. Raez Solyman the Turk, who killed Mir Hozem at Gidda, recovered his Princes Fa∣vour by delivering up to him this City he had gained in the Service of the Soldan, and by means of a considerable Present; for Gifts are of force even with Princes, who have no need of them. Selin, who was then at Grand Cayre, converted his Ha∣tred to Love, because Solyman promised him great Advantages in India, if he would furnish him with a competent power to act there. He gave him twenty Gallies, and five Galions that were then at Suez. Soly∣man succeeding his Father Selin, sent Hay∣darin, to deliver this Fleet to Raez, who was then fortifying the Island Camaran, where the said Haydarin upon some dis∣gust killed him. Mustapha, Nephew to Rez, succeeded him, and slew Hydarin, then sailed to Aden, and thence to Diu, seeking the protection of the King of Cam∣bya, as fearful of the Great Turk, whom he had offended with that Murder and o∣ther Actions; and having but few Vessels with him, for most of them refused to o∣bey him, and returned to Suez. Antony Tenreyro carried an account of the Success of this Fleet to King Iohn by Land, with
general admiration, being the first that performed that Journey, till then thought impossible. 9. Let us now return to Peter Mascare∣nas at Malaca, where the News being come of his Succession to the Government, he was immediately proclaimed and obeyed as such. As such he gave Orders, and be∣stowed some Commands. The Season was not yet proper to sail from Malaca to Cochin. But the Desire of Command was no season so he set out without it. A storm forced him back to Malaca, and he making a Virtue of Necessity complied with For∣tune, concluding it was Providence brought him to that City, which he had left in great distress, and taking it as an Omen of the Honor he thought to gain over Bintam, whose King entertained no small hopes of recovering Malaca, which was wholly un∣provided Mascarenhas disposed the Minds of the few Gentlemen that were there, and prepared to fall upon that King, giving out all was for the Island of Sunda, whi∣ther it was known Francis de Sa was de∣signed. He set out with twenty one Ships, in them four hundred Portugueses, and six hundred Malayes, commanded by Tuam Mahomet and Sinai Raja. 10. Great Labour was employed in clear∣ing the Mouth of the River, when thirty Barques appeared, sent by the King of Pam to the Relief of our Enemy. Duarte Coello and Ayres de Cuna went to meet them, bat∣tered some, dispersed others, and took
twelve loaden with Cannon and Provi∣sions. They return to the hard Labour of clearing the Mouth of the River, in which Work Ferdinando Serram consumed twelve Days, wherein his Men were spent with toil, and his Ship pierced with a thousand Cannon Shot. Yet he obtained his end, tho not without danger of perishing, for Laxemena fell upon him with such fury, that Ferdinando was left for dead, and both sides fought with great obstinacy. Peter Mascarenas perceiving this Action, pressed forwards in small Vessels that rowed, and coming upon the Moors made them retir with a great slaughter. Being returned to his Post, he considered the City, which was formidable for its Walls and opposite Fort, flanked with Bulwarks, stored with Men and Artillery. He ordered the man∣ner of the Assault, assigning every Man his Post, and diverting the Enemy from the place where he designed the chief Attack. 11. Our careful and almost rash Com∣mander in the dead of night, marched his men through a close Wood and un∣known way, very difficult for the Roots of Trees that crossed it, and streams of Water that spread the Superficies of the Grounds, yet before day they reached the City. The warlike Instrument sounding on a sudden from all sides, put the Moors into a Confu∣sion, at last they resort where they thought was the greatest danger, and that was where Mascarenas had posted the Malayes to give a diversion, whilst he entered on the other
side. All was full of Confusion, tho the Enemies behaved themselves gallantly. The first that mounted a Bulwark was Ayres de Cuna. Then they entred the City, and furiously run through it; Peter Masca∣renas ran to the King's Palace, where Laja Raja who commanded fell upon him, and the Fight was couragiously maintained till they understood the King was not there, for he perceiving the City was entered, mounted on an Elephant, and fled to the Woods and Mountain. This being known, the Moors gave way, some were killed, the rest fled. The Garrison consisted of seven thousand, four hundred were slain, two thousand taken. The Town was plun∣dered, the Booty great, and almost three hundred pieces of Cannon, no inconsi∣derable part of it. We had not above three killed in this Action, which was one of the most glorious we performed in Asia, to the immortal Honor of Mascarenas, and Peace of Malaca. For the King dying with grief, tho his Son Alaudin undertook the same Task, he had no power to annoy us much. The Proprietor of this Island from whom the King had taken it, begged of Mascarenhas to be restored to it, which was granted, he owning himself a Subject of Portugal. At this instant arrived the King of Linga, our All, with Succour. He was an honourable Witness of our Victory, and after congratulating, returned home. 12. Francis de Sa now prepared to prose∣cute his Voyage to Sunda. This Island is
divided on the South from Iava by a very narrow Channel. It produces pale Gold, and abundance of Pepper and Provisions. The Natives are many, unfit for War, but curious in adorning their Arms. They worship Idols, sell their Children to supply any want. The Women are beautiful, those of Quality chaste, contrary to what is usual in most of the other parts of the World. They have Convents into which they enter to preserve their Virginity as in Spain. The married Women kill them∣selves when their Husbands die; a good Custom to shew their Duty, and to prevent their killing them, were it not against the Law of Nature, and therefore a brutal Error. 13. Hither came before Henry Leme drawn by the Plenty and Goodness of the Pepper it produces, he was well received by the King Samiam, who offered a place to build a Fort, and three hundred and fifty one Quintals of Pepper, as a yearly Tribute to purchase the Friendship of the King of Portugal, in order to his support against the Moors who infested him, and were now much inferior to the Portugueses in those parts. But he attained not then the effect of his Desires; for when Francis de Sa came to raise the Fort in the place marked out by Leme, he met such oppo∣sition from the Moors, that he was obliged to return to Malaca, without doing any thing.
14. Mean while D. Garcia Enriquez did something at the Malucos, which had been glorious, if just. A War being left on foot by Antony de Brito with the King of Tidore, D. Garcia made peace with him only to un∣do what the other had done. This pro∣duced some difference between D. Garcia and Cachil de Aroez, who to revenge him∣self joined now with the King of Tidore. D. Garcia fearing this Union might prove dangerous, suddenly fell upon that City, then busied with the Funeral Ceremonies of the dead, and entring it, took away the Cannon, and burnt the rest. Thus the Peace rashly concluded was more rashly broke and the Portugueses throughout all those Islands were esteemed Men of no Faith or Reputation, for commonly a whole Nation suffers for the Faults of a few. 15. Martin Iniguez de Carchisano arrived at Port Camafe in the Kingdom of Tidore with one Ship of six the Emperor Charles V. sent the year 1525 to those parts that be∣longed not to him. The other Ships came before to an Island in three degrees of North Latitude, which they called S. Mat∣thew, where, on the Trunks of Trees they found Inscriptions denoting it to have been inhabited by Portugueses eighty years before. As soon as D. Garcia understood the new comers were Spaniards, he endea∣voured to compose the Affair, but to no effect, and perceiving they caused an al∣teration in the price of Spice, he sent first, then went in person to expel them, but
were all obliged to retire after much da∣mage sustained by the Spaniards Cannon, yet their Ship, tore by the Portugues Shot, afterwards sunk. Our Men had the like success at another Town on the Shore where the Spaniards were. D. Garcia sent Martin Correa to Malaca, where he under∣stood that the Inhabitants of Lobu, a Port of Sumatra, had slain Alvaro de Brito and seventy Men, he carried to revenge the Death of others killed there. As soon as he arrived, George Cabral recommended this Business to him, which he performed, reducing the City to Ashes, after putting all the Inhabitants to the Sword, taking all their Cannon, Brito's Galley and some o∣thers, the rest were burnt. 16. At this time came to the Malucos that renowned Gentleman D. George de Meneses, who lost his Hand at the glorious Action of Calicut, being the first that went thither by the way of Borneo, passing through many Islands, and giving his Name to some of them. The known way being five hun∣dred Leagues, he made it a thousand, and spent eight months in the Voyage, by reason of the Difficulties of that Sea, which is a meer Labyrinth of Islands and Banks of Sand. D. George and D. Garcia fell present∣ly at variance, because the latter would not return the way the other came, but by Banda, which was more easie and advanta∣geous, on the contrary of that by Borneo. It seem'd D. Garcia sought not the same that D. George; and D. George in all obeyed
Peter Mascarenas as Governor of India. The Dispute came to words ill becoming such Men, and the words to actions of the same nature. D. George puts D. Garcia in Irons. And D. Garcia being set at liberty, puts D. George into them. Being threatened by some he set him loose, and D. George being at liberty, sent after him to Banda, in case he came thither to make him Pri∣soner, and take his Ship. Vincent de Fonseca carried the Message. He also sent Vasco Lorenzo, Iames Cam, and Gonzalo Veloso to Malaca, by the way of Borneo, and with them a Present for that King. One part of the Present was a Piece of Tapestry with Figures of Men, which the Barbarian no sooner beheld, but he cryed out, They were men inchanted that would kill him in the night. And no persuasions being of force to con∣vince him of his Error, ordered the Tape∣stry should not remain in his House, nor the Messengers in his Port. 17. Fonseca was so diligent, that he arri∣ved at Banda before D. Garcia. They both armed, but Fonseca by craft took his Ship, and D. Garcia endeavouring to regain it, had two of his Men killed, and was forced to retire. He embarqued in a Vessel laden with Goods for Malaca, which was there seized upon, yet restored to him; yet after∣wards at Cochin the Vessel sunk, and the Sea swallowed to the value of fifty thousand Crowns he had in her. D. Garcia was left ashore with only the Cloaths he wore, and Nuno de Cuna, then Governor, imprisoned
and sent him to Portugal, to answer what he had done at Maluco. This was the end of those violent Courses wherewith he endea∣voured to enrich himself, and of the rash∣ness with which he durst say, That in spite of Sea and Winds he would reach Goa. 18. Whilst D. Garcia struggled with his ill Fortune, the Spaniards at Tidore were at va∣riance who should succeed in the place of their Captain who died. They agreed, and another Spanish Ship arrived, commanded by Alvaro de Saavedra. D. George modestly re∣quired them to desist, but to no purpose. Ferdinando Baldaya went against them in a Galliot. Alfonso de los Rios met him in another Vessel, they fought couragiously, the Spaniards remained victorious, having killed our Captain and others. Saavedra set sail for New Spain to bring assistance to prosecute this Act so well begun, and car∣ried with him some of the Prisoners in the Galliot he had taken. They fled with his Long-boat from certain Islands where he touched, and being afterwards taken at Ti∣dore, and brought to the Spaniards, they condemned them as Traitors to the Empe∣ror (as if they had owed him any Alle∣giance) and hanged Ferdinando Moreira, Simon de Brito was dragg'd and beheaded. After this D. George de Castro (who acci∣dentally came to Ternate) by order of D. George de Meneses went against the City Ca∣mafo, and the Inhabitants being fled, burnt it to the ground. But this belongs to next year, let us see what is doing in India.
CHAP. II. Continues the Government of Lope Vaz de Sampayo, from the Year 1527, till the Year 1529, King John the Third Reigning. 1. LOpe Vaz de Sampayo understanding at Cochin, that Peter de Mascarenas was 1527. coming from Malaca to take upon him the Government, held a Council, where it was resolved not to admit him as Governor. This done, he went away to Goa, leaving Alphonso Mexia to put in execution what had been resolved. At his departure Lope Vaz paid off the Soldiers, who presently concluded, that Action proceeded not from his Bounty, but was to gain their Affections. Mascarenas arrived the last day of February, and after some difference with Mexia, re∣solved to land unarmed, thinking thereby to disarm the other. On the contrary, as Mascarenas landed, he was met by Mexia, well armed, and mounted with armed Men, who fell upon Mascarenas, run him through the Arm with a Lance, and wound∣ed others of his Company, so that to a∣void more harm he was forced to return to his Ship.
2. The News of this Exploit being brought to Lope Vaz at Goa, it so highly pleased him, that as a Reward to the Mes∣senger he gave him the Command of Cou∣lam, taken from Henry Figuera, because he had treated Peter de Mascarenas with Civility. In this one Action he committed two Crimes, one in rewarding Insolency, the other in depriving Modesty of its Re∣ward. Now being informed, that Mas∣carenas was on the way to Goa, he sent out to take and put him in Irons, which was executed by Antony de Silveyra, who deli∣vered him at Cananor to D. Simon de Mene∣ses, Commander of that Fort. The People of Goa were so weary of these Proceedings, that they broke out into open Railing. And Christopher de Sousa, Commander of Chaul, gravely reproved him for it by Letter, comforting Mascarenas the same way, af∣firming those Affronts redounded more to his Honor than the Government could have done. 3. Hector de Silveyra, a Gentleman in all his Actions great, fell at variance with Lope Vaz, upbraided him with his ill usage to Mascarenas, and particularly with refu∣sing their pretensions to be brought to Judg∣ment as Mascarenas desired. Lope Vaz  sented it, Hector withdrew, and gathering his Kindred, Friends, and the Council of Goa, they sent a Letter signed by three hundred to Peter Mascarenhas, desiring him to come to Goa, where they would obey him as Governor. Then agreed to imprison
Lope Vaz, but he knowing it, sent Peter de Foria, Commander of Goa, to secure Hector de Silveyra, and all that were with him. Hector refused to deliver himself up, and Lope in a rage arming himse, entered the House where these Gentlemen were, then Silveyra, to prevent any publick Di∣sturbance suffered himself to be taken 4. D. Simon de Meneses, who held Mascare∣nas Prisoner at Cananor, and was no less of∣fended at Lope Vaz his Proceeeings, hearing what passed at Goa, set him loose, and toge∣ther with all that were there, swore him Go∣vernor. At this time arrived three Ships of five that set out of Lisbon, and in them D. Iohn Deca, Brother-in-law to Lope Vaz, of whom he asked whether he had not a good Title to the Government, and re∣mained satisfied of the Justice of his Cause, because approved by him and Friends. The other two Ships were cast away on the Island Madagascar. Christopher de Sousa ac∣knowledged Mascarenas as Governor, which much enraged Lope Vaz, but his anger was not of force to take place. 5. Antony de Miranda de Azevedo, Admi∣ral of the Indian Sea, desiring as well as Christopher de Sousa to prevent Distractions, joined with him, the Result of their A∣greement was, that Lope Vaz was reduced to put the business to arbitration. It was ar∣ticled, that the Competiors should stand by the Verdict, that neither should act as Governor in the interim, that all who were imprisoned on this Account should be
released, that the two who had procured this Accommodation might come freely to Goa, without any danger of Lope Vaz his anger. He at first opposed this Agree∣ment, but liking the Arbitrators, consented, adding some Conditions, the chief about Alfonso Mexia, in case Mascarenas had the preference. 6. Christopher de Sousa perceiving the Judges were all of Lope Vaz his Faction, to his great regret, caused one of them to be removed, and five others to be added. The Arbitrators being declared, many re∣sorted thither, and chiefly the Inhabitants of Cochin who, conscious, of what they had de against Mascarenas, declared, if he were preferred, they would fly to the Moors. In fine, those who before solicited for Mas∣carenas were now against him, and Sen∣tence was accordingly given against him, the twenty sixth of December. It is not much that Lope Vaz should rejoice, but strange that Mascarenas should not be at all concerned. He embarqued in one of the Ships that came this year for Portugal, was well received by the King, who gave him the Command of Azamor in Africk, on his return from thence he was lost at Sea. 7. As soon as Lope Vaz was quietly settled in his Government, he dispatched Com∣manders to some Forts, and among them Peter de Faria to Malaca. Antony de Miran∣da de Azevedo was sent with a Fleet to burn the Turkish Gallies that were left at Camaran, after the death of Raez Soliman.
Martin Alfonso de Melo Iusarte went to build a Fort at Sunda, with eight large Ships and four hundred Men. He touched at Columbo in the Island Ceylon, where Pate Marcar of Calicut oppressed the King of Cota our Ally; but hearing of these Ships he fled up the Rivers, and Madune Pandar the King's Brother who joined with his Enemy, and pretended to the greatest part of the Kingdom, raised his Siege. Martin Alfonso went thence rich, having taken some Ships of the Moors, and agreed at Calecare with the Lord about the price of Pearls, whereof there is a Fishery. Further on he destroyed the Town of Core, because the Inhabitants had killed Iohn de Flores, who guarded that Fishery. 8. Going on his Voyage, a sudden and fierce storm drove all his company out of sight, and set him upon a Bank of Sand near the Island Nagamale, opposite to the City Sodoe. He went into the Long-boat with fifty Men, and with great difficulty came to the City Chacuria in the Kingdom of Bengala, the Lord whereof, after ma∣king use of them against his Enemy, made them all Slaves. Hence they were carried to Sore, where two of his Captains arriving, thought to have stoln them away by night, but were discovered and disappointed. The Indians had made a Vow to sacrifice to their Idols the handsomest Portuguese they should take, they judged one Gonzalo Vaz de Melo to be such, and accordingly sacrificed him, notwithstanding his Uncle Martin Alfonso
promised a great ransom for him. The o∣thers were afterwards redeemed by a Moor, for three thousand Ducats. 9. One of the Captains Lope Vaz had sent out, was D. Iohn Deca, to scour the Sea of Calicut. He behaved himself bravely in se∣veral Rencounters, and took this year fifty Prizes, laden with all sorts of Goods. He burnt the Town of Mangalor, and meeting afterwards the Fleet of Calicut, consisting of seventy Paraos, well equipped, under the Command of the Chinese Captain Cutiale, he fought them, took Cutiale, and most of the Vessels, killed fifteen hundred Moors, and had almost as many Prisoners. In these Rencounters he lost twenty Portu∣gueses. 10. Antony de Miranda de Azevedo sailed the latter end of Ianuary for the Red Sea, with twenty Ships, and above a thousand Men. After taking some Prizes, he met in the Mouth of that Sea Henry de Mace∣do, engaged with a great Turkish Gallion. They boarded him, and the Turks threw a burning Dart which stuck in the main Sheet, and began to fire it, but a strong Gust of Wind shaking the Sail, cast it back into the Turkish Gallion, where falling a∣mong the Powder, it blew all up, so that only eight Men escaped, and those escaped only the Fire, not the Sword, being killed as they swam. Antony de Sylva took a great Ship of Diu, and killed all the Men. D. An∣tony de Miranda fought another two days, and she got off. Several Captains had other
Rencounters. The chief Design, which was fighting the Turks in the Red Sea at the Island Camaran, took no effect, the Winds being contrary. They burnt the City Zey∣lan, the Inhabitants having saved themselves and Goods by flight. 11. They went thence to Ormuz, and next to Diu, and were dispersed by a storm. Lpe de Mesquita met a great Ship wherein were 200 resolute Moors, and boarded her with thirty Men; no sooner were they in her, but his Gallion fell off. Being left thus they furiously fell upon the two hun∣dred, kill most of them, and take the Ship, which being much battered by the Gallion, was sinking. Mesquita with all speed sends his Brother Iames with sixteen Men in the Long-boat to save the Mony taken in the Ship, and return for those that were be∣hind. Those who thought to escape fell in∣to the greatest danger, for not reaching the Gallion, they were taken by the Fleet of Diu, and carried to the King of Cambaya, who would force them to turn Moors, but they remained constant. The King in a rage caused Iames de Mesquita to be put into a Cannon, in order to be blown in pieces, but admiring the resolution with which he entred, was appeased, and spared him. They were all put into Prison, and after∣wards released. Lope de Mesquita, the Gal∣lion and Antony de Miranda met at Chaul. Antony de Macedo came with his Ship so bat∣tered, it was almost a miracle he escaped, and his Face so monstrous no body knew
him, that caused by the Cannon, the latter by Fire, having been beset by fifty Barks and three Galliots off of Diu. He fought them a whole day, and was reduced to only six Men and a Woman, who supplied them with Powder, till accidentally Antony de Sil∣va came up with him, and the Enemies Commander being killed they fled. 12. The Moors had improved our Divi∣sions to do us much harm, Lope Vaz prepa∣red to be revenged. He left Antony de Mi∣randa to command at Goa, and went to Cochin where he fitted out eighteen Ships. At Cananor met him one hundred and thirty Paraos of Malabars. He could not attack them with the great Ships by reason of the contrary Wind. But resolving not to slip the opportunity, advanced with thirteen Pa∣raos against the hundred and thirty. He came up with and did them much harm with his Cannon, and they spared not theirs, but seeing two Paraos come out of Cananor to the relief of the thirteen, and the great Ships spread their Sails to come up, they fled, eighteen of them were sunk, twenty two taken, and in them fifty pieces of Cannon, eight hundred killed, and many Prisoners made. Those that fled, and others who joined them fell into the snare near Cochin. 13. Lope Vaz set out again with the same Fleet in search of Arel, Lord of Porca, who was seeking revenge for what had hap∣pened between him and D. Enrique at the destruction of Coulete. Lope Vaz scoured
the Coast as he went. Simon de Melo, who commanded the Brigantines, burnt twenty six Ships, and razed the Town of Chatua. The Fire ran  far as Cranganor. He or∣dered the Fleet that was there to follow him, that all might share in the plunder of Porca, which he thought secure. He had a thousand Men with him, and with them he assaulted the City. Arel was not within it, and the Moors fought couragiously in defence of their Wives, Children and Goods. But the greatest part being slain, the rest fled, and the Town was plundered. The Wife of Arel and other persons of Note were taken, with much Gold, Silver, Jewels, Silks and other Stuffs, good Cannon, and thirteen considerable Vessels, all was put to the Sword first, and then delivered up to the Flames, without the loss of one Man. The Governor returning to Cochin found there two Ships that came from Portugal with Nuno de Cuna, who came to take upon him that Government, and was behind with most of the Fleet. Lope Vaz desired to de∣liver up India to him, cleansed of Pyrats, and so prosecuted his Undertakings. He went to Cananor, and sent his Nephew Simon de Melo against Marabia, a Town not far distant, who burnt twelve of the Paraos that guarded the Port, and landing, fired the Town. The same he did at mount Delii. Antony de Silva de Meneses acted in the same nature at other places. There was no∣thing every where but Fire and Sword, Ru∣in and Destruction.
14. The King of Cambaya at this time had fitted out eighty Barques against Nizamaluco, Lord of Chaul, and did harm to the Portu∣gueses: Alexiath, a valiant oor, command∣ed that Fleet; and our Commander at Chaul and Nizamaluco both demanded aid of Lop Vaz. He set out with forty Sail, in which were above a thousand Portugueses, besides the Natives, who bore Arms. Hector de Sil∣veyra had the Command of the Vessels that rowed. Lope Vaz being arrived at Chaul, sent eighty Portugueses under the Command of Iohn de Avelar to Nizamalu∣co, then sailed towards Diu, understanding the eighty Barques steered that way. Off of Bombaim he had sight of them. Some Vessels run to secure the mouth of the Ri∣ver Bandora, left the Enemy might escape that way. Hector de Silveyra with his Bri∣gantines fetched up Aleixiath. The Can∣non began a furious Charge, and the Smoak being dispersed, there appeared in the Air showers of Bullets and Arrows. Then they boarded, and after a vigorous Engagement Alixiath fled with only seven of his eighty Barques. Thirty three of them were of use, the rest burnt, the Pri∣soners were many, much Artillery taken, and abundance of Ammunition. Hector lost not one Man in this glorious Action to which Lope Vaz was a joyful Spectator, tho envious of Silveyra's Glory. Iohn de Avelar acted no less, for scaling an almost im∣pregnable Fort of the King of Cambaya; he was the first▪ that entered, and having
slain all the Defendants, delivered it up to Nizamaluco. Here three Portugueses were lost. They were all assisted by a thousand of Nizamaluco's ubjects. That Prince ho∣nored and rewarded the Bravery of the Portugueses. 15. Lope Vaz overjoyed with this suc∣cess, thought Diu, now weakened, would 1529. surrender, if he appeared before it, and he judged right, as afterwards appeared. But all the Captains, except Hector de Silveyra, being of a contrary opinion, he was forced to desist, and went back to Goa, leaving the famous Hector with twenty two Vessels that rowed to scour that Coast of Pirats. Antony de Miranda on that of Malabar drove all that came in his way. He had destroyed twelve Paraos, when Chri∣stopher de Melo, the Governor's Nephew, joined him with a hundred choice Men in six Brigantines and a Gally. Then they took in the River Chale a mighty Ship of Calicut, laden with Pepper, and bravely de∣fended by much Artillery and eight hun∣dred Men. Near Monte Hermoso, or Mount Beautiful, they defeated fifty Sail of Calicut, and took much Cannon and many Men in three Paraos. But the Winter coming on, they retired. 16. Hector de Silveyra who was left with his Brigantines on the Coast of Cambaya did much execution. He run up the River Nagotana of Baçaim, and landed, the Na∣tives, with the Terror of his Actions, de∣serting the Towns, whereof he burnt six.
At the last the Commander of Nagotana appeared in the Field with five hundred Horse, and a great number of Foot. Hector knowing it was a raness to encoun∣ter him, retired towards his Brigantines, but the Horse coming on hindered any from embarquing. Hector faced them, and killing three, made some room. Francis Go∣dino dismounting one of the Enemy, got upon his Horse, and killing another, brought that Horse to his Captain, who encouraging his Men, made the Enemy give back, and so gained time to imbarque. Hector went hence to Bacaim, seated on the Banks of the River of the same name, found it well fortified, and stored with Cannon, through whose Mouths he must force his landing. Behind the Town lay Alixiath with five hundred Horse, and three thousand Foot. Hector entered the River by night, and in the morning in de∣spight of their Cannon forced the Works, killing many of the Defendants. As he marched to the Town, on a sudden Alixiath fell on him with his three thousand five hundred Men. Silveyra drew his Men into one Body, and bravely put all that number to flight, killing many. Whilst they fled, Baaim was plundered and burnt. The Lord of Tana, a great City, not far distant, terrified at this success, submitted himself as Tributary to Portugal, and was received by Hector, who now retired to Chaul. 17. Let us now see what was done during this time at Maluco. Simon de Sousa Galvam
was going in a Galley with seventy Men, to take the Command of that Fort of D. George, a most violent storm brought him in a miserable condition to the Port of Achem. Immediately flocked about them several Vessels upon pretence of assistance, but being come aboard they fell upon the seventy Portugueses with all manner of wea∣pons, but they recovering the Fright, bravely drove them all from their Ships sides, but not above twenty of them were left that could stand upon their Feet. The King in a rage that the Ship was not taken, ordered his Admiral to attack her in the morning. He came, and Simon de Sousa encouraging those Men that could scarce support themselves, did Feats like to those related in Fables, and repelled with great slaughter that Inundation that came upon them. But a Moor, who was in the Galley, leaping overboard, gave the Enemy an ac∣count of her miserable condition. With a fresh supply they came on again and board∣ed her, killing most of our Men, Si∣mon de Sousa was cut in pieces. Only such as had not life enough to seek their death remained alive, and were carried to the King with the Galley, and afterwards ser∣ved in the execution of his wicked De∣signs, as shall appear in its proper place. 18. Thus Simon de Sousa sailing by the way D. George de Meneses continued his Command at Maluco. He sent some Portugueses against Tidore and the Spaniards that were there, but they being put to the rout, D. George ga∣thered
the Ternatenses, they their Allies the chief whereof were Cachil de Aroez, the King of Bacham and the Sangages. They fell upon Tidore in the morning, those of of Tidore and the Spaniards fought coura∣giously, but were obliged to give ground and retire, the Spaniards to their Fort, ha∣ving lost six Men, two killed, and four ta∣ken, the Tidores to their City, whence they were forced to fly by D. George, who burnt and plundered it. Then he returned to the Fort, and summoned Ferdinando de la Forre, the Spanish Captain to surrender. He no longer able to hold out, accepted the Capitulation, the Heads of it were, that he should immediately go over to the City Camafo, that he should commit no Hostili∣ties upon the Portugueses, Ternatenses, or any of their Friends, that he should go to no Islands that produced Cloves. The King of Tidore was made Tributary to Por∣tugal, and obliged not to aid the Spaniards. Then D. George returned victorious to Ter∣nate. 19. Mean while Bohaat, King of Tidore, died in the Fort, not without suspicion of Poison given by Cachil Daroez. His Bro∣ther Cachil Daialo succeeded, who was no less suspicious of Cachil Vaiaco, whom he ac∣cused of heinous Crimes, but being afraid of his Life fled to the Fort, and suspecting D. George would deliver him to his Enemy, chose rather to die, by throwing himself out of a Window. All Ternate now mutined against D. George, and he imagining that
Cachil Vaideca had caused to be killed a China Sow he much esteemed, having more respect to that foul Beast than that noble person imprisoned, and after set him at liberty, anointing his Face with Bacon, which among that People is the most hei∣nous affront, and had been as highly re∣venged upon the Portugueses, had not the Prudence and Modesty of Antony Galvam, who succeeded in the Government, appeased the rage of the People. 20. D. George not content with this vio∣lence, sent to rob the Houses of the Moors of their Provisions. In fine, this Gentle∣man became on a sudden most wicked and outragious. The Moors stood upon their Defence, and treated some Portugueses as they now deserved. In the Town of Ta∣bona D. George took the chief Magistrate, and two Moors of Note, these two he sent back after cutting off their Hands, upon the other he set two Dogs on the shore, who tore his Flesh till he fled into the Water to shun them, but they pursuing, he defended himself with his Teeth, till the water coming up he was tore to pieces and drowned. This made D. George odious to all, and moved Cachil de Aroez to stir up the People to rise and ex∣pel both Portugueses and Spaniards. D. George catched him in the Contrivance, and be∣headed him publickly in Ternate, to the ter∣ror of all People, which occasioned the City to be unpeopled, the Inhabitants and even the Queen flying from this storm to other places. D. George was imprisoned for these in∣human
Barbarities, and sent to India, and thence to Portugal, where he was condemned to Banishment. Any Reward was too small for his former Actions, and this Punishment too slight for the latter. But because Nuno de Cuna now enters upon the Government of India, let us conclude this Chapter, and hereafter we shall see Lope Vaz return to Portugal, and his Punishment there for the Extravagancies committed against Peter de Mascarenas, and usurping the Government, which deprived him of the Reward, if not the Glory of those notable Exploits which might have rendered him deserving of it. He was Governor of it three years and ten months, his Complexion fair, and Coun∣tenance venerable, his Beard grey, Cap and upper Robe black with Crimson Lining, Breeches and Doublet of the same Colour, over all his Armour. I will reckon Peter Mascarenas the eighth Governor, both be∣cause he executed the Power some time, and because the condemning of Lope Vaz confirmed his Right. So Lope Vaz will be the Ninth in order.
CHAP. III. The Government of Nuno de Cuna from the Year 1529 to the Year 1538, in the Reign of King John the Third. 1. IN May this same year arrived at Or∣muz, Nuno de Cuna, who came the year before from Lisbon with eleven Ships. Be∣cause setting out late he had a tedious Voyage, and by the way did considerable things, we will say somewhat of him be∣fore his arrival in India. One of his Ships was lost near Cabo Verde, the Captain and some Men saved, one hundred and fifty perished. After passing the Line they were dispersed by a storm, some met again af∣terwards. Nuno put into the Port San Tiago on the Island Madagascar, where he found a naked Portuguez, no less wild in appearance than the Blacks, but they were somewhat civilized. By him he understood the loss of two Ships of five that came from Lisbon the year 1527, commanded by Ma∣nuel de Lacerda and Alexius de Abreu. 2. This Man was a Soldier belonging to Abreu, they were cast away upon the Sands before that Port. They fortified them∣selves in hopes some Ships passing by would
take them up. After waiting a year one Ship passed but could not come to them, and they no longer able to subsist there, marched up the Country to seek their For∣tune in two Bodies, and this Man was left behind sick. Nuno de Cuna having adver∣tised the King hereof. Duarte and Iames Fonseca were sent from Portugal to find these Men The first perished in that Island, the other found but four and a French Man, and was cast away with them sailing for India. The French Man belonged to one of three Ships that came that year from France, and perished in that place. The four said many of their Companions lived in the Inland, but 'twas impossible to find them. From these it is thought sprung those People that the Hollanders there found eighty years after. They said, that a Por∣tugues Captain suffering shipwrack there, conquered that place, and became Sovereign, and all his Men marrying Natives had nu∣merous Issue, that they erred much in mat∣ters of Faith. Great were their Errors that could be perceived by the Atheistical Hol∣landers! But doubtless these People could not descend from only that Shipwrack, they might be some of the first Discoverers that were never heard of, and among o∣thers the three that sailed from Cochin with Francis de Albuquerque, the year 1530. 3. Nuno de Cuna being in this Island, in∣quiring into the Affairs of it, his Ship pe∣rished in a storm. The Men were saved in the other two, much Goods and Arms lost;
and thus he reached the Island of Zanzibar, where he eased the Ships over-burdened with Men, setting ashore (the King being our Friend) two hundred sick, under the Care of Alexius de Sousa Chichorro, with or∣ders to go to Melinde as soon as recovered. 4. Nuno de Cuna went thither, he tried to pass to India, but could not. Therefore not to lose time he resolved to take revenge on the King of Monbaça, who, in hatred to us, infested those of Melinde and Zanzibar. If the City was taken he purposed to make Munho Mahomet, Son of him that so kindly received Gama the first time, King of it. Which he understanding, and returning thanks, said, That he was incapable of that honor, being begot on a Cafre Slave; but since he would gratifie his Father's Kindness to the Portugueses, he might do it in the person of his Nephew, who, tho younger, was of the Blood Royal of the Kings of Quiloa. Nuno rightly judged, that none better merited a Crown than he that coveted it not, and re∣served his Answer till he saw the Event of the Enterprize. He set out with eight hundred Men, and Mahomet with sixty, and as many with Cide Bubac the King's Ne∣phew, the other had proposed to be King. 5. As he drew near there met him the Lord of Otondo, a neighbouring Town, of∣fering to accompany him with a well fur∣nished Vessel, being admitted, shewing Silver Chains upon his Legs, he said, He wore them in remembrance that he had been wrongfully imprisoned by that King, and had
swore never to take them off till revenged; that all the motive his Enemy had to use him so, was for his affection to the Portugueses, tho be never was so happy as to serve them. The King of Monbaça knowing Cuna's Design, prepared, planting Guns on a Bulwark that kept the mouth of the River, and bringing six hundred expert and resolute Archers in∣to the City. Nuno entred the River through Showers of Bullets that flew from the Bul∣wark, which killed some Men, and bat∣tered some Vessels. Yet he anchored the Evening near the City, all the Night the Enemy poured Arrows upon the Fleet, which answered with their Cannon. Day appearing, the Attack began, and Peter Vaz, Brother to Nuno, driving all before him, was the first who set up the Portugues Co∣lours in the highest place of the City, which being seen far off, the Ships began to celebrate the Victory. Many Moors were killed, the rest left the City. D. Fer∣dinand de Lima was suddenly clasped by a stout Moor, but his own Men coming in the Moor was slain, fulfilling a Vow he had made to the King's Neece whom he loved. For this Woman going out with others, said to him: Are these the brave men of Mon∣baça, who suffer their Wives and Children to lose the City, and go for refuge to the Cafres? And he answered: Since you affront me thus, I swear by the Love I bear you, before two days, those who love shall weep for me, and you, if you value me, shall not see me to reward my Love. He fulfilled his Vow, as did
many more, not one Portuguese was lost. 6. The City was plundered, twenty great pieces of Cannon taken. D Ferdinand de Lima going to secure the Bulwark, some Moors issued out of a Wood, did harm, for a few of our Men died of their poisoned Arrows. Many of the Enemy were after∣wards slain. Hither came News of some of Cuna's Fleet who had been separated from him. Nuno the better to secure and people the City, which was great, sent to Melinde, whence presently came a Nephew of that King with five hundred Men, many of Qua∣lity, and he of Montangue with two hundred. By this means the Natives were drove out of the Island, tho Hunger afterwards for∣ced back many. The King of Monbaça, sensible of his Ruin, sent a Man of Note to treat of an Accommodaion with Nuno, offering to become Tributary, and pay a Ransom for the City. They came to A∣greement. 8. The King presently began the Pay∣ment, and as soon fell off, finding the Por∣tugueses sickened and died. Two hundred were already dead, among them some Gentlemen, and Peter Vaz de Cuna. This and other Misfortunes pressed the disposing of the City. The King of Melinde's Sons durst not undertake to maintain it without a number of Portugueses, which could not be afforded after such a loss. Nuno con∣sumed the City to Ashes, and returned to Melinde, bringing with him those who
were left before at Zanzibar, and other pla∣ces, who joined him after the City was taken. 9. At Melinde he left eighty sick Men to be carried to India by Tristan Homem, who afterwards with them defended that King against him of Monbaça, who sought to re∣venge there the harm done him by the Por∣tugueses. In May the Governor began to visit the neighbouring Places to Ormuz, making Proclamation, That all persons who had any Cause of Complaint against Portu∣gueses should appear before him. Many ap∣peared with much Cause, and the Offenders were obliged to make restitution, to the great astonishment of the Moors,, not used to see such Justice executed. At Ormuz he made a solemn Entry, which being unu∣sual, was much admired by those People. 10. He found that Raez Xarafo great Guazil, or rather Tyrant over that King, tho restored by Lope Vaz, was not clear of those great Crimes he stood accused of. The chief were Rapin and Murder. and the Circumstances such, that King Iohn had sent after Nuno de Cuna, Emanuel de Macedo, with Orders independent of the Govern∣ment, to take and bring him to Portugal. They both had a Hand in securing him. Nuno visited the King, and gave him Let∣ters from ours. He qualified the King's Displeasure for imprisoning Xarafo, and his fear for his own Offences, received his Ex∣cuse, and took leave. The King presented him with rich Jewels, Pieces of Cloth of
Gold, Silks and a stately Horse with fine Furniture after the Persian manner. Nuno refused to accept, but seeing the King was af∣fronted at it, received it in his King's Name. The Gentlemen with him received rich Gifts. 11. Nuno made some Inquiry into Xara∣fo's Crimes, and sent him to Portugal. The King for the Murder of Mahomet was sentenced to pay forty thousand Xeraphins over and above the sixty thousand he paid yearly. It is true, this Crime served only as a pretence to overload him with this Tribute, being the third part of the Reve∣nue of Ormuz. Raez Xarafo, tho guilty of heinous Offences, carried enough Riches with him to purchase Favour in Portugal, and be restored to his Employ. 12. Whilst the Governor was thus em∣ployed at Ormuz, Belchior Tavarez de Sousa came thither, he had been to assist the King of Baçora with forty Men against him of Gi∣zaira. He was the first Portuguese that went up the Rivers Tigris and Euphrates. Baçora is thirty Leagues from the mouth of these Rivers, in thirty degrees: some∣what more of Northern Latitude. It is a new Foundation in memory of the ancient Baçora, eight Leagues distant from it, the Ruins whereof are still to be seen, and in the opinion of a person of Judgment who did see them, are twice as big as Grand Caire. The Island Gizaira is formed by the two Rivers, Tigris, whose Springs are in Curdi, of the greater Armenia; and Euphra∣tes,
whose Fountains are in Turkomania. The Circuit of it forty Leagues, it contains forty thousand Archers. 13. The King of Baçora had received Sousa with State, and Joy in a Court of his Palace, so large, that it contained two thousand Men without any Throng. Next day gave him an account of his Condition, desiring he would either bring the King of Gizaira to an honorable Peace, or recover some Forts he had taken from him. The King of Baçora set out with two hundred Dalacas, or large Barques, in them were five thousand Men, six hundred whereof were Musqueteers, seven Vessels full of Turks with good Cannon, his Nephew marched by Land with three thousand Horse. He planted himself on the side of Arabià, opposite to where he of Gizaira was posted with twelve hundred Men. By order of the King of Baçora, Sousa writ to his Enemy, telling him, He was sent by the Commander of Ormuz to make peace between them, or to stand to the Event of War, The King of Gizaira answered, That being the first Request of the Captain of Ormuz, and he the first Portuguese that had come to those parts, he granted all. 14. The King of Gizaira sent persons with power to treat, and Peac as con∣cluded to the satisfaction of him of Baçora, who seeing all safe, refused to perform what he had promised Sousa, which was to deliver up the seven Turkish Vessels, and not admit them into this Kingdom again
as being our Enemies. Sousa embarqued, took one of his great Barques, and land∣ing with thirty six Portugueses, burnt a Town of three hundred Houses. Another, tho not so big, he fired on the Persian side. He again appeared before Baçora, but wanting Provisions, returned to Ormuz. 15. Nuno de Cuna, to reward Sousa, gave him the Command of that Sea, sending him at the King's Request to the Island Ba∣harem, to secure Raez Barbadim, who was revolted. But he having good intelligence baffled the Contrivance, and obliged Nuno de Cuna to send his Brother Simon with eight Vessels, and four hundred Men, be∣sides some of the Natives in their Barques. They set out. 16. Mean while Nuno de Cuna prepared to go for India. He arrived at Goa the lat∣ter end of October, where were before him four Ships come from Portugal the most fortunately that any had done yet; for of above fifteen hundred Men they brought, none died but our Captain, and they came all in perfect health. Nuno made a very solemn Entry into the City. There were at this time ready almost one hundred and forty Vessels, provided by the care of Lope Vaz, many considerable, as six Gallions, eight Royal Gallies, six Caravels, and fourteen Galliots, all well stored, with Arms and Ammunition. The Forts were also well provided. For tho Lope Vaz usur∣ped the Government, he managed it better than many that were named for it. The
Governor's presence was required at Cochin for the Dispatch of the homeward bound trading Ships and other Affairs. 17. Whilst he sailed to Cochin, Simon de Cuna came to Baharem with his Ships, and joining Belchior de Sousa, landed. He bat∣tered the Fort three days, and lost it for want of Powder, for whilst he sent for more to Ormuz, his Men so sickened, that above one hundred Portugueses died, and many were in danger, and the very Persians used to that Clime were in no better Con∣dition. With this loss he drew off. This seemed an effect of Divine Justice, for Bar∣badim offered to deliver up the Fort upon condition he might go away in safety, but our Gentlemen would not hearken to him, fearing to lose the Booty. 18. Simon de Seusa found no less a Pesti∣lence had raged among his Seamen. Thus they set sail, but being becalmed not far from Ormuz, many of the sick died, and among them some persons of good Note, and Simon de Cuna himself. A great Grief to his Brother Nuno, who had already lost his other Brother at Monbaça.
CHAP. IV. Continues the Government of Nuno de Cuna, from the Year 1529, in the Reign of King John the Third. 1. NUno de Cuna sailing to Cochin, put in at Cananor, and the King sent to welcome him. Cuna excused himself that he did not go ashore to see him by reason of his haste, and the King for not going aboard the Gallion, because he was indi∣sposed. After these Complements came the Guazil, a great Friend of the Portugueses, and to gain the favour of Cuna, as of o∣ther Governors, privately offered him a Collar, which he refused to receive. Don Iohn de Deca at that time had the Com∣mand of the Fort, he visiting the Gover∣nor aboard, brought him a Message from Lope Vaz then there, desiring him to come ashore, and he would there resign the Go∣vernment to him. Nuno sent to desire him to come and resign aboard. He came, and the Resignation was performed with the usual Solemnities. As he was in the Vessel ready to return, he was ordered by Cuna to bear him company to Cochin. Then the Governor made Proclamation, That any
who had been wronged by Lope Vaz, should repair to him, and he would do them Justice. This troubled Lope Vaz, and he sent him word, That those were rather Libels than Proclamations; for no Man that had cause of Complaint against him, needed to be stirred up by sound of Trum∣pet. At Cochin, Nuno ordered Lope Vaz to be imprisoned, and an Inventory of all his Goods to be taken, and all deposited in safe Hands to be delivered at Lisbon, as the King should direct. Lope Vaz said to the Officer that took him, Tell Nuno de Cuna, that I imprisoned, he imprisons me, and one will come who will imprison him. Nuno being told it, said, I doubt not but I shall be imprisoned, but the difference between us will be, that Lope Vaz deserves it, and I shall not. Neither was he deceived, for he had been close laid up in Portugal, had he not died at Sea: we shall see it at the end of his Government. Lope Vaz was less afflicted for his Confinement, than the insolent Re∣proaches of the Rabble, that the worst Ship was allotted him to imbarque, only two Servants allowed him, and barely so much of his own as would maintain him the Voyage. An unjust proceeding with a Man of his Worth, whose person ought not to be indecently used whilst his Crimes were inquired into. 2. Nuno de Cuna found nothing in readi∣ness at Cohin, of what he ordered from Me∣linde should be provided to make war upon Diu, which was the principal point of his
Instructions. Perceiving the year was too far gone for that Undertaking, he applyed himself to other Affairs, and fitted a Fleet of thirty Sail to scour the Coast of Mala∣bar, under the Command of Iames de Sil∣veyra, who commanded the four, came last from Portugal. Antony de Silveyra Meneses had a Squadron to cruise in the Sea of Cam∣baya. And Hector de Silveyra another for the Red Sea. Whilst these Commanders sailed on the Coasts assigned them, our homeward bound Fleet arrived at the Ter∣ceras Islands, where an Officer was waiting to put Lope Vaz into Irons. Loaded with them he landed at Lisbon, and was set upon a Mule, on which he was carried, accom∣panied by the rude Rabble up to the Castle, and put into a Dungeon, wh Orders, that not even his Wife should be permitted to see him. He was accompanied in this mi∣serable state by Raez Xarafo Guazil of Or∣muz, brought by Emanuel de Macedo. Af∣ter two years Lope Vaz his Crimes began to be taken into consideration and examined, the King having ordered him to be prose∣cuted with the utmost rigor. The principal Article against him was his unjust Pro∣ceeding with Peter de Mascarenas. The Duke of Braganca pityng the Misfortunes of this brave Gentleman, prevailed with the King to give him a hearing in Council. Accordingly his Majesty being seated in Council with all his Judges about him, Lope Vaz was brought in, venerable for his per∣son, his Face covered with a thick and
longe white Beard, and with such tokens of the Miseries he had endured in almost three years imprisonment, reckoning from India, that had Peter Mascarenas or any of his E∣nemies seen him, they might think them∣selves sufficiently revenged of all the Extra∣vagancies he had been guilty of towards them. Being placed at the Bar as a Criminal, after the King's leave obtained, he with an undaunted Constancy made a learned, comprehensive and copious Speech. In which after running over his Fore∣fathers Services to the Crown, he particu∣larized his own from his infancy till that time, reflected upon his Sufferings and Wrong done him since Imprisoned, and in general to several other brave Governors his Predecessors, exposed the Malice of his Accusers, justified his own Proceedings, illustrated by Examples how others guilty of greater Crimes than he was accused of, were pardoned in respect of their Services, then made a parallel between them and his Sufferings, and concluded, throwing him∣self upon either his Majesties Justice, or Mercy, from one of which he hoped such a Discharge, that he might have more cause to return thanks for the future, than he had till then to lament his hard Usage. The King having heared with attention, examined him upon every Article of his Impeachment, and he answered to each. The Articles were in all forty three; the principal, as was said, such as related to Peter Mascarenas, the others such as would
never have been thought of, had not those brought them in to fill up the number. In fine he was carried back to the Castle, whence he sent his Defence, as is usual in such Cases, and in conclusion was sentenced to lose all his Allowance as Governor, and to pay to Peter Mascarenas ten thousand Ducats, which confirmed the latter, not him, to have been the real Governor, and justified those who had obeyed them as such. He was also banished into Africk. But he resenting this hard Fortune, resolved to change his Country and his Prince, as the famous Ferdinand Magallanes had done be∣fore. And getting into Spain, he unnatu∣ralized himself; and from Badajoz writ a Letter to the King, affirming his usage had been highly unjust, and that he was resolved to try whether changing his Country he could change Fortune, and restore his Ho∣nor. This had such effect, that he was re∣stored to his Country. Alfonso Mexia being likewise brought prisoner to Portugal, had the same success; he was also accused of Crimes committed at Ormuz, the Com∣mander of which Fort Iames de Melo was under the same Circumstances. Let us now return to India. 3. Iames Silveyra on the Coast of Cali∣cut carried so heavy a Hand upon those People, that their King was obliged to send Embassadors to Nuno de Cuna, desiring Peace. He granted upon such Conditions as they deserved who had never kept any. They were willing to accept part, but re∣jected
the rest, so Silveyra reduced them to extreme Famine, hindering the Importation of Provisions. They received some Re∣lief from Cananor, and Simon de Sousa being forced upon that Shoar, after valiantly re∣pulsing the Moors, his Powder took fire, and blew up the Brigantine. 4. Melique Saca being expelled Diu, found it convenient for the compassing his Ends with the King of Cambaya, to use those Artifices with Nuno de una he had done with Hector de Silveyra, when he of∣fered to deliver up that City to him. He writ to Nuno, that tho he could not deliver Diu, at least he could assist him in the ta∣king of it; to this end it was convenient they should have a meeting, and in order there∣unto he might send him a Pass and Ships for himself and Retinue, commanded by Gaspar Paez, whom he had known at Diu. The Governor granted all, and he made use of it to be restored to the King of Cambaya's Fa∣vour, receiving and putting off Gaspar Paez with Subleties and Impudence, pre∣tending the Pass was not securely worded, and the Ships were too few. Paez told him he had by the way with those Vessels taken a great Ship, and put to flight fourteen Barques in the River Pormeane, and that he might go with all safety. But no Reason is of force against Craft and Falshood. 5. Gaspar Paez would have taken some Revenge, but could only burn nine Barques. The Governor enraged hereat, suddenly began to make such Preparations against
Diu as should not easily be disappointed. He had not yet seen the King of Cochin who was sick of the Small Pox. Nuno being less fearful of the Infection than the King, who sent him word, That he did not desire to see him, for fear he might catch the Di∣sease, tho he believed his fight would cure him. Nuno went to visit him, and it was much he was received, for those Princes suffer not themselves to be seen in any Sickness. The whole Conference contain∣ed nothing but Complaints of Injuries done by Lope Vaz and Alfonso Mexia. Nuno left him well satisfied with his Courtesie, so that he began to look upon himself as a King, having till then been treated as a Slave, and found himself better in health. 6. It was requisite Nuno de Cuna should 3530. now go to Goa. At Chale he visited the King, and gave him content. About Mid-February he came to Cananor, and saw that King, whom he much obliged by conform∣ing to his own Ceremonies at the Inter∣view. This Prince offered him some Jew∣els, which he fearing to affront him receiv∣ed, but delivered to the Officers of the Re∣venue as belonging to the King. 7. He ordered Iames de Silveyra to pu∣nish a rich Merchant of Mangalor, who did great wrong to the Portugueses. He scoured the Rivers along that Coast, with sixteen Ships, and four hundred and fifty Men. Then entered the River Mangalor, on whose Banks is the Town of that Name belonging to the King of Narsinga, our
Friend, but that Merchant favoured Calicut, our Enemy. This Merchant knowing the Design was against him, was well fortified. Iames Silveyra chose the lesser Vessels with two hundred and forty Men to go up the River, who were met by a great Squadron, which after some contest was put to flight. The Town was immediately entred, all the Defendants quitting it. Iames Silveyra then turned to the Fort, and after some re∣sistance took it. The Merchant fled in de∣spair, but was overtaken and killed by a Musquet Ball. Those who fled sought re∣fuge in the River, and our Swords there made it run bloody. Nothing was taken but some Cannon, for Booty being very great, the Captain caused it all to be burnt, lest he might endanger his Ships by over∣loading them. There were also burnt thir∣teen Vessels that waited for loading. Win∣ter coming on, he thought so great a Force was not requisite, and dismissed half the Fleet. But there had been use for all when he met Pati Marcar, a Commander of Ca∣licut sailing for Mangalor with sixty Paraos. The Weather prevented fighting then, so he waited their Return, and gave Battel at Mount Delii, where six Paraos were sunk, then went to Cochin. 8. Antony de Silveyra, to whom the Coast of Cambaya was allotted, had now under his Command fifty one Sail, whereof three were Gallies, and two Galliots, and in them nine hundred Portugueses. He went up the River Taptii, on whose Banks are two Cities,
the chiefest of that Coast. On the one side, Surat, containing ten thousand Fami∣lies, most Handycrafts, and all of no Cou∣rage, called Bancanes. On the other side, Reyner, of six thousand Houses, but war∣like Men, and well fortified. The River being sounded, it was found there was not Water enough for the greater Vessels, which were left at the Barr under Francis de Vasconcellos. With the rest Antony de Silveyra returning to the Mouth of the Ri∣ver, and having sailed four Leagues, disco∣vered Surat. Three hundred Horse, and almost ten thousand Foot opposed the Land∣ing, armed with Bows and Musquets, they spent their-Shot, and fled without expect∣ing an Answer. The City was entred without any farther resistance, and nothing left in it that had life, or was of Value. Then the City and some Ships that lay in the Arsenal were burnt. A little higher on the other side was the City Reyner, inhabited by the Nayteas Moors, of more Courage and Policy, who nevertheless scarce essayed our Fire, when they fled, leaving all in the Hands of the Portugueses, who had all been rich, could they have carried away all the Plunder. They carried what they could, the rest was all burnt, with twenty Ships and many lesser Vessels that were in that Port. Emanuel de Sousa was in both Actions the foremost at landing, not without great danger, especially in the latter, the Enemy playing much great Cannon at him.
9. Antony de Silveyra returning to the Mouth of the River, found that whilst he burnt those Cities, Francis de Vasconcellos had not been idle, but taken six Vessels laden with Provisions bound for Diu. Now they sailed together to Damam, a Town great and strong, yet terrified by the Disaster of the others, quitted by the Inhabitants, and burnt by our Men. On the contrary the Town of Agaçaim fourteen Leagues from Chaul, dared the Portugues Fury with four hundred Horse, and five thousand Foot. At first shock they killed five Portugueses, and the rest began to flie, but being rallied by the Captains, the Town was taken, and in it much Cannon and Riches. Many were killed, above two hundred taken. The Fire of the Town took hold of the Vessels which were three hundred. 10 Whilst Antony de Silveyra was thus employed, Francis Pereyra de Berredo, Com∣mander at Chaul, overcome by the Intrea∣ties of the Inhabitants, oppressed by Badur, King of Cambaya; who was Master of the Field, marched with fifty Horse, and one hundred and fifty Foot, till he met Popate∣rao with five thousand of the former, and twelve thousand of the latter. The mul∣titude, weariness and heat so disordered the Portugueses, that most of them were slain, Francis Pereyra seeing the Fort in danger, called Antony de Silveyra, who instant∣ly with care relieved it in person, which preserved it from falling into the Hands of King Badur, which it must have done, if
assaulted at that time. Francis Pereyra was punished for that loss and rashness by being deprived of his Command, and imprisoned by the Governor, who gave that Post to Antony Silveyra, whose Diligence had sa∣ved it. 11. Hector de Silveyra, who sailed from Goa on the twenty first of Ianuary with ten Sail, and six hundred Men, for the Red Sea, spread his Ships cross the Mouth of it from Cape Guardafu on the Coast of Asia, to Xael in Arabia, that no Enemy might escape him. Most of them had some Suc∣cess, chiefly Hector and Martin de Castro who took two great and rich Ships, killing the Defendants who made a brave resi∣stance. A Brigantine of twelve Men that accompanied the Ship taken by Hector to Mascate, made up to a great Barque, sup∣posing her a Portuguese, and discovered not the mistake till it was not possible to avoid fighting thirty valiant Turks that were in her. They fought till both parties tired, were forced to rest, and having recovered Breath all the Turks were slain. Of the Portugueses three died, the nine carrying off the Barque as a Trophy of this brave Ex∣ploit. The Fleet being joined, appeared before Aden, where Hector managed that King with such Dexterity, that he con∣sented to pay a Tribute of twelve thousand Xeraphins yearly to the Crown of Portu∣gal, offering him immediately a Crown of Gold. The Agreement was solemnly sign∣ed on both sides, and Antony Botello left in
that Port with a Brigantine and thirty Men. In the same manner the King of Xael submitted, who not long before had accompanied Mustapha, a Turkish Captain, with twenty thousand Men to make war upon Aden. In the Month of September arrived at Goa six Ships from Portugal. 12. Let us look upon the Indian Sea now 1531. covered with a Wood of Ships, the product of the Governor's great care, now full of his Design upon Diu. This Fleet consisted of above four hundred Sail, many large, more indifferent, and the greatest number small, several of them were only Sutlers, fitted out by the Natives for private Gain. In the Island Bombaim was made a general Review of the Fleet, and found to con∣tain three thousand six hundred Soldiers, and one thousand four hundred and fifty Seamen, all Portugueses, above two thousand Mala∣bars and Canaras, eight thousand Slaves fit for Service, and almost five thousand Sea∣men. The Governor landed at Damam, a Fort of Cambaya, which was immediately quitted by the Moors. Mass was said there and the general absolution given. Then three Rewards were proposed to the three first that should mount the Walls of Diu at the scaling of it. Hither came the News, that the Arabs, Turks and others, to the number of two thousand fortified themselves in the Island Beth, seven Leagues from Diu. It was by Nature and Art so begirt with Rocks and Walls, and stored with Cannon, that Nuno de Cuna gave no Cre∣dit to the Relation till he saw it.
13. On the seventh of February he came to the Island, and having in person viewed all Difficulties besieged it. He summoned the Barbarians to surrender; but they were so resolute, that many of them shaved their Heads, a Token that they fear not death, but are devoted, which they call making themselves Amoucos. Their Commander gave them a brutal Example of Resolution, making a great Fire, and throwing into it his Wife, Son, Goods and Family, that if the Portugueses overcame, they might find nothing but a heap of Ashes. Others fol∣lowed the Example. Nuno ordered the Island to be attacked at once in six several places. At Break of Day each Officer cou∣ragiously fell on the place appointed him. The Enemy received them with desperate fury. Many were killed, and among them the brave Hector de Silveyra, who in so ma∣ny Occasions had notably signalized himself. This to us was a great loss. Our dead in all were twelve. A Portuguese ran through an Islander with his Lance, and he pressing for∣ward upon it, with his Cymiter cut off the Portuguese his Leg, and they both fell down dead. One stood upon a Rock with four Women, and seeing our Men comeon, killed two of the Women by their free consent, but a Bullet preventing him from killing the other two, they both leap'd into the Sea to prevent being made Slaves, but to no effect, for they were taken in the Sea. Eighteen hundred of the Enemy were killed, and sixty Cannons taken.
14. Nuno de Cuna parting from Beth, ap∣peared no less formidable to Diu, than that City did to him. The City considered the Sea covered with that Fleet. The Fleet, a City built upon Rocks, and encompassed by them and Water, the Mouth of the Ri∣ver crossed with massy Chains sustained upon Vessels, and eighty filled with Archers and Musqueteers to defend them; within ten thousand armed Men, and an infinite number of great Artillery. The tops of Houses, Walls and Rocks covered with multitudes of People of both Sexes and all Ages, rending the Air with Shouts. Our Governor viewed the danger, consulted the Captains, and ordered the Assault. 15. On the sixteenth of February, the signal being given, the Sea and Land were cove∣red with Clouds of Smoak and Dust of the Destruction our Guns made in the City. Nuno standing in a Boat cloathed in red, to be the better seen, flew to all parts where there was occasion, and being known, was all the Mark the Enemies Shot was direct∣ed to. Which Sebastian de Sa, who, by fa∣vour, was taken out of another Boat into his, perceiving with some concern, said to him, Alas, Sir, was it for this you brought me hither! And he pleasantly, as if no danger had been near, replyed to him and others, Humilitate capita vestra. D. Vasco de Lima had not lowered his Head, for a Ball took it off his shoulders. Our Cannon be∣gan to burst with the continual Fire. Cuna perceiving this loss, and that twelve Men
were killed without doing any considerable Execution upon the Enemy, the day being spent, consulted with the principal Men, and it was agreed the Enterprize was not practical. He desisted, leaving Antony de Saldana with sixty Vessels in the Bay of Cambaya, to do what damage he could to the Enemy. It was agreed on all Hands, that had not the Governor stayed to take Beth, he had carried Diu; for the Moor Mustapha was the only cause of its holding out, who entered but three days before with con∣siderable Relief. We lost never a Vessel, and that part of the Fleet which went with Nuno de Cuna arrived at Goa the fifteenth of March, where it stayed till two Ships came in of six that sailed this year from Lisbon. Of the other four, one returned to Portugal, another perished in a storm at Cape Comori, the Captain Manuel de Macedo and all the Men being saved ashore, where they de∣fended themselves against a great number of Moors, till relieved from Cochin. A third was never heard of. And the fourth came afterwards, but returning home with another, it was never known of what became of both. 16. Mustapha as soon as the Portugues Fleet was gone, went to offer himself to King Badur, carrying great Presents, and was received with Honor, and rewarded. He gave him the Command of Baroche in the Bay of Cambaya, and other considerable Revenues with the Title of Rume, because he was a Grecian; for the Indian Moors be∣ing
ignorant of the Division of the Pro∣vinces of Europe, called all Thracia, Greece, Sclavonia, and the adjacent Countries Rum, and the Natives thereof Rumii, this Name being proper only to those of Thracia, called Romania. Therefore the Turks and Rumes are different Nations, those being o∣riginally of Turchestan, and these of Greece and Thrace, and the Rumes esteem them∣selves more honorable than the Turks. He also gave him the Title of Cham, a Digni∣ty among the Tartars, like a Duke with us, and among the Eastern People is given to Persons of great Merit. So Mustapha from hence forward was called Rume Cham. 17. Antony de Saldana, who was left in the Sea of Diu with sixty Sail and fifteen hundred Men, went to the City Madrefa∣bat, five Leagues distant towards the Island Beth, and burnt it with small opposition. Then he went to Goga twenty four Leagues distant from the last, a place of great Trade, formerly populous and strong. In the Port were fifteen of the best Paraos of Calicut, laden with Spice, who fled up a Creek, and were followed by Saldana, with eight hundred Men in the smaller Vessels. It was found necessary to land, and three hundred Horse and eight hundred Foot coming down to the Relief of the Mala∣bars, there was a sharp Engagement, till above two hundred of the Enemy being killed, they quitted the Field and Vessels which were all burnt, as was the Town and eight Ships in the Port. We lost some Men.
The chiefest Booty was much good Can∣non. The same happened to the Towns Belsa, Tarapor, Maii, Quelme and Agacim, and lastly Surat, then rising after the last Fire, and some Vessels in that River. Sal∣dana having thus terrified all that Coast re∣tired to Goa. About this time came into Nuno de Cuna's power a Brother of the King of Cambaya, who was the rightful Heir of that Crown, and through him our Governor hoped to compass some consi∣derable advantage. D. Antony de Silveyra who parted from Chaul with six Ships arrived at Aden, and found that King who not long before submitted to the Portugueses, had killed such as had stayed there, for Co∣vetousness of a Ship laden with Spice that came to his Port. Silveyra being too weak to revenge this, sailed to Ormuz, where he died, George de Lima succeeded in his Com∣mand, and took two rich Ships in the Bay of Cambaya. 18. Our Cruisers had about this time taken twenty seven Ships of the King of Calicut richly laden. He being preplexed with these Losses, and fearing greater, proposed an Accommodation. Iames Pereyra was sent to treat, and obtained what he desired, which was leave to build a Fort at Chale. Chale is an Island in a River that falls into the Sea three Leagues from Calicut, navi∣gable in Boats up to the Mountain Gate. Urinama, a Heathen, was a King of it, and next to him he of Tanor, both Subjects of Calicut. Both coveted the Friendship of
the Portugueses, as well to cast of that Yoke as in hopes to grow rich with our Trade. As soon as Nuno had obtained consent to raise the Fort, he set out from Goa with one hundred and fifty Sail, three thousand Por∣tugueses, and one thousand Lascarines of the Country. Such diligence was used in the Work, (the Gentlemen not sparing their Labour) that in twenty six days it was in a posture of Defence, the Wall being nine Foot broad with Bulwarks, Towers, a Church, a House for the Commander, and Store-houses. The Command of it was gi∣ven to Iames Pereyra, who had forwarded the Work, with two hundred and fifty Men; and to secure it by Sea Manuel de Sousa with twenty two Ships. The King of Calicut repenting he had given leave for that Work, made War upon the Kings of Chale, Caramanlii and Tanor, at the same time making Overtures to draw them to break with the Portugueses: but to no effect. 19. About the end of February Emanuel de Vasconcellos set out for the Red Sea with two 1532. Galliots, and some Brigantines. At Xael with the loss of one Man he took some Turkish Vessels laden, and among them a great Ship called Cufturca, which was sent Mascate. The King of Xael fearful of some danger, made his Peace with Submission and Presents. After Vasconcelos, came thi∣ther Antony de Saldania with ten Ships, and the King seeing he would not allow of the submission he made to Vasconelos, began to secure himself, sending out of the
Town all the Riches, Women and Chil∣dren, which were seen from the Ships, crossing the Mountain upon Camels. But the Weather obliged Saldana to leave that Sea. 20. He sailed to Mascate, thence to the Coast of Diu, seven or eight Ships of that City came out and engaged him, he took three, and stranded the rest. The same happened to a Turkish Gallion that was in Port, and endeavoured to flie. A storm rising there dispersed most of the Brigan∣tines. Saldana had three Gallions with him, and they suffered Hunger and Thirst, when the Sea driving them towards the Bar, twenty seven Ships of the Enemy that watched the opportunity fell upon them, but drew off without any considerable Action. He dispatched two Vessels to view Pate, on which he had some Design, they meeting a rich Ship bound for Diu, after a very sharp Engagement took her. The Ship had only in Gold Coin above sixty thousand Venetian Chequins. Sailing to Goa with Prizes worth above two hundred thousand Ducats, he met short of Chaul, Iames de Silveyra, to whom he delivered the Vessels the Governor ordered. At this time arri∣ved four Ships that sailed from Portugal the beginning of this year, Antony de Saldana returned home with them. 21. Iames de Silveyra sailing to Patam, twelve Leagues from Diu, plundered and burnt that City with four Ships in the Har∣bour. The very same was done to Pate, and
Mangalor. This was no new thing in Iames Silveyra, for he had before the same success at Bandora Tana, and other Towns, and on the Coast of Diu at Castelete, Tolaja and Madrefabat, by which means he came to Goa with above four thousand Slaves, and an infinite Booty, having killed a great number, and spread an universal Terror. 22. All this encouraged Nuno de Cuna to streighten Diu, and the King of Cambaya, that he might be obliged to consent to the raising a Fort in that City. And because the Growth of Bacaim might be an Obstacle to our Designs, he resolved to destroy it. Thither he went with a Fleet of above one hundred and fifty Sail, three thousand Portugueses, and two hundred Canaras. Melique Tocam Lord of Diu was then forti∣fying the City, and hearing of the Power that was preparing against it, put in a Gar∣rison of above twelve thousand Men. Nu∣no divided his Men into three parts to give the Attack, the Landing was dangerous, and the Enemy so numerous, it seemed a rashness to go on, but our Men despising all danger, the Enemy fled first to the Fort, and then to the Mountain, six hundred of them being killed, of ours only eight or nine. Here were taken above four hun∣dred Pieces of Cannon, and much Ammu∣nition. The Country about was all rava∣ged, and the Fort razed. After this Victo∣ry the Governor sent Emanuel de Albu∣querque with twelve Vessels and three hun∣dred Men, to destroy the Fort of Damam;
but he not able to effect it, burnt all the Towns from Baçaim to Tarapor, and bring∣ing under Tribute Tana, Bandora, Mais and Bombaim, then retired to Chaul with much Riches, and many Vessels taken in those Rivers. Iames de Silveyra, who sailed from Baçaim with four Gallions and fifteen Brigantines bound for the Red Sea, took off Cape Guardafu a rich Vessel. Vas∣co Perez about Zocotora took a yet richer Turkish Ship, most of her Men being slain, and near Cape Fartaque another. Iames Silveyra afterwards burnt two at Aden, and did a very generous Action, which was thus: He discovered a very rich Ship of Gidda, which spying him, lay by, and her Captain coming aboard, shewed him a Letter from a Portuguese, who was Prisoner in that City, which the Moor thought to be a secure Pass, being given him as such, Silveyra opened and found in it these Words: I beseech such of the King of Portu∣gal's Captains as shall meet this Ship to make prize of her; for she belongs to a very wicked Moor. Silveyra perceiving how the Moor was imposed upon, took no notice of the Deceit, but discharged him, chusing rather to lose the Riches of that Ship, than bring into question the Sincerity of the Portu∣gueses. At the latter end of April he re∣turned to Goa. 23. At the same time arrived in India six Ships from Portugal, a seventh perished by the way. These Ships brought new Or∣ders, that the Commanders of Forts should
be sworn by the Governor-General, by which it appears, they were till then independent of them. Nuno de Cuna had always his thought fixed upon Diu, when Melique To∣cam, Lord of that City, desired him to send a fit person with whom he might treat a∣bout an Affair of Importance to the King of Portugal's Service. He then was appre∣hensive of his own King. It was therefore thought, he would for his own security de∣liver up the Town to us. This was the in∣tent; but Vasco de Cuna, a Gentleman of parts, being sent, and having done all that could be expected in it, returned without concluding any thing, but not without hopes. 24. At the same time Tristan de Ga at Cambaya pressed that King to consent to the raising a Fort at Diu. The Result was, that the King would have a Conference with Nuno de Cuna, and his Design was ra∣ther to kill him, than grant the Fort. Nu∣no went thither with an hundred Sail, in which were two thousand Portugueses. The King was already at Diu when the Go∣vernor arrived, and delayed the Interview, desiring, he would send him some of his principal Captains, for that he desired to see them. They went richly cloathed, and were splendidly received. Discoursing, E∣manuel de Macedo took the liberty, tho in a respectful manner to tell the King, That he justly admired he would take the Com∣mand of that City from Melique Tocam his Subject, who had served him well, and
was Son of one who had done so before, to give it to Mustapha, now called Rumi Cham, whose first merit was his Disloyalty to the Turk, his natural Prince; that if he denied this, he challenged to fight either single, or as he should think fit. Rume Cham was present, and gave no answer, till the King looking angrily upon him for his silence, he said it proceeded from Contempt. Ma∣cedo repeated the Challenge, and the Turk no longer able to shun it, accepted the Challenge to be fought at Sea. Macedo, according to appointment waited for him, but he came not. The Interview took not effect for the differences about the manner of it. Nuno taking another Course, joined in League with Omaum Patxath, King of the Moguls. Then Nuno returned to Goa, and before and after dispatched several Cap∣tains, Antony de Silveyra went to Bengala with nine Vessels, Vasco Peres de Sampaya to the Red Sea with sixteen, thither also Iames de Silveyra with five Gallions, D. Stephen de Gama to Malaca, the two that were for the Red Sea made some Prizes. 25. Cunale Marcar, a bold Pyrat, about this time scoured the Sea of Calicut with eight Vessels well equipped. At Cape Co∣mori he found at night a Brigantine with eighteen Portugueses, and three Gunners, all so fast asleep, that they were all bound be∣fore they waked. Having awaked them, he caused their Heads to be bruised to pie∣ces, saying, It was to punish them for daring to sleep, knowing he was abroad. A pleasant
Cruelty. Thence he went to Negapatan, where were forty Portugueses who defended themselves, but to no effect, for the Degar, or Governor, who they thought their Friend, agreed with Cunale to rob them. Coje Marcar, tho of kin to Cunale, desirous to deliver them from this danger, did it by art, speaking to each of the two apart, and so making them suspicious to each other. Yet Cunale took some Portugues Vessels in that River, and shot to death eight of the Men. The first died for sleeping, these, I suppose, because they were awake. Antony de Silva set out of Cochin with two hundred Musqueteers, in fifteen small Vessels. Cu∣nale hearing of it, run up the Canamera, a Bay on this Coast, and fortified himself, but Antony obliged him to make his escape in the Habit of a Beggar to Calicut, leaving his Vessels and Cannon, with which Silva returned victorious to Cochin. 26. The King of Razet was revolted from him of Ormuz. Antony de Silveyra who commanded the Fort at the request of the latter, sent Francis Govea with two hundred Men and eight Sail, to reduce him. Razet received them with Fraud, designing to kill them. But it succeeded not, for Go∣vea was upon his Guard, knowing his ill Designs, and that he had with his own Cymiter killed the Officer he sent to treat with him. Our Captain sailing over to a small Island to water, met a Fleet of this Kings, and took a Vessel wherein was the King's Nephew, for whose Ransom Razet
restored the Prisoners he had, and submit∣ted to him of Ormuz, ratified the Peace made by him he had killed, and excused what was past. 27. King Iohn his Care was upon the Affairs of India. He had understood the 1534. event of Nuno de Cuna's attempt upon Diu, and that the common Enemy prepared to disturb our Progress, so he continually sent relief. This year arrived there twelve Ships with fifteen hundred fighting Men, commanded by D. Pedro de Castillobranco, who set out from Lisbon the last November. The latter end of this year came also five Ships more, which set out the beginning of this same year, they were commanded by Martin Alfonso de Sousa, who had a Com∣mission to be Admiral of the Indian Sea. The Governor immediately put him in pos∣session of the Post, sending him against Damam. At Chaul, Iames Silveyra delivered him his Squadron, and Vasco Perez his. Now Martin Alfonso had five hundred Men in forty Vessels. He found Damam destroy∣ed by its own Commander, who was retired to the Fort with five hundred Turks and Resbutos. Martin Alfonso attempted to scale it, and received some damage, one of his Ladders breaking, when the Enemy on the other side opening a Gate to fly, our Men stopped them, and entring, found a large Court full of Men, and fifty Horse, most of them were put to the Sword, and the Fort razed. The King of Cambaya fearing greater loss, desired Peace, which Nuno de
Cuna granted, and 'twas sworn upon the following Conditions. That he should give to the King of Portugal for ever Ba∣caim, with its Dependences by Sea and Land. That all Ships bound for the Red Sea from that Kingdom should set out from Bacaim, and return thither to pay the Duties. That none should go to other places with∣out leave from the Portugueses. That no Ships of War should be built in any of his Ports. That he should no more give as∣sistance to the Rumes. There were other Articles in favour of the King to sweeten the harshness of these, which were after∣wards moderated when he gave leave to raise the Fort at Diu. Now we have some footing in this Province, something may be said of its situation, people and other affairs with our usual Brevity. CHAP. V. Continues the Government of Nuno de Cuna, and Reign of King John the Third. 1. THE Kingdom of Guazarata (com∣monly called Cambaya, from its Me∣tropolis of that Name) extends from Cape Iaquete in the West to the River Nagotana
near Chaul. It makes a great Bay of the some Name. The Sea ebbs and flows with such violence in this Bay, that in swiftness it exceeds the fleetest Horse; and if in this fury it meets any Ship, it certainly perishes. To avoid this danger there is always a Man on an eminence, who when he sees that Torrent coming, gives notice with a Horn. The distance between Cape Ia∣quete and the River Nagotana is above two hundred Leagues. On the West it borders upon the Resbuti, a mountain people; on the North with the Kingdom of Chitor, and the East with that of Pale, all the Coast is covered with many Towns and Cities. It is watered by two famous Ri∣vers, Taptii and Tapetii, besides many Creeks that form several Islands. It breeds abun∣dance of Cattle, and is plentiful of other Provisions. The Country is all plain, so that they generally travel in Waggons after the manner of Flanders, but lighter, and easier drawn by Oxen somewhat less than those of Spain. The Natives are of four sorts; one called Baneanes Bagançariis, that feed after our manner; another called only Baneanes, who eat nothing that hath life. Their Priests are called Vertias, who cloath themselves in white, and never take those Cloaths off till they fall to pieces. They live upon Charity, and (like the Children of Israel in the Desart) can keep nothing for the next day. They place their great∣est hope of Salvation in killing no Crea∣ture, they use no light at night lest any
Butterfly should die by it; they always car∣ry a Broom wherewith they sweep the Ground they are to tread on, lest they tread any Worm or Insect to death. The other two sorts are the Resbuti, who are good Soldiers, formerly the chief of this Kingdom. They acknowledge one God and three persons, and worship the Blessed Virgin, a Doctrine preserved from the time of the Apostles. The last are Mahometans, called Lauteas, that is, Natives who embra∣ced that Sect, and those who came to con∣quer the Countrey. The common people are very ingenious in Mechanicks, in Works of Silk, Gold, Ivory, Mother of Pearl, Tortoise-shell, Crystal, Ebony and other things of Delight. They follow the Rules of Pithagoras, killing no Creature, but ra∣ther buy all, tho venemous, from those who take them, and set them loose again. They entertain men whose only Business it is to look about the Towns and Fields for Beasts that are sick, which they cure with great care in Hospitals erected for that purpose. Notwithstanding all this Beastly Charity, they have none that may be called human, for they will not reach their Hand to as∣sist any person in the greatest necessity. 2. In the year 1292, and according to the Mahometan Account 700, the Pagan Galacama was in quiet possession of this Kingdom, and disturbed it to deprive his Brother of the Kingdom of Champanel, left him by his Father. Galacarna employed two Brothers as Generals upon his Fron∣tiers,
Madana, one of them had the most beautiful Woman of that Country to Wife. She was of the Race of Padaminii, who are affirmed, besides their comely Shape, to have so sweet a Scent in their Skin, that they communicate it to their Cloaths, which makes them esteemed above all o others. With much reason, for it is a won∣der to find a Woman that has a good smell. Yet not impossible. They say there are scarce any of these Women in this King∣dom, but many in Orixa. There is no mis∣chief without a Woman, even where they have an ill favour; how much more where one smelt well! The King in love with this Wife of Madana, tried all means to gain her; but she being chaste (which was doubtless the sweet Smell) acquainted her Husband and Brother, who joining with Xiath Nosaradim, King of Delhi, on whom the Covetousness of that Kingdom prevail∣ed, they wasted the Kingdom of Cambaya, till Galacarna was at last slain in Battel. Nosaradim lest Habedxiath his General to conquer the Remainder. He rewarded the two Brothers who brought him to this Con∣quest, and retured home, having made the Kings of Mandou and Chitor tributary. No∣saradim soon after being killed by his Ne∣phew, Civil Wars ensued, and several Go∣vernors revolting, called themselves Kings, as did Habedxiath, to whom Moors succeed∣ed. Thus, 3. The year 1330, Hamet the Mahome∣metan Tartar, who lived in the City Cambaya,
with the assistance of Arabs, Persians, Greeks and Rumes, or Turks, usurped great part of this Kingdom, then possessed by Desingue Rao. What he had tyrannically gained, he prudently maintained. Ale Cham succeeded him, and had forty Sons, and three of them were Kings. The first Peruxiath, who succeeded him, the second Azeide Cham, who by his Wife got the Kingdom of Mandou, and the third Ale Cham, who with his Wife had the Kingdom of Agimar, bordering on that of Chitor. Peruxiath followed his Father's Example in securing his Government, and built the City Diu in memory of a Victory gained over a Chinese Fleet. Sultan Mahomet his Son succeeded him, and reigned at the time that D. Vasco de Gama discovered India, he left the Crown to his Son Madafor, as worthy of it for his Actions, as Birth. Not to his Son Scander Cham, who gave occasion to his Subjects to kill him, and set up his youngest Brother Mahomet Cham. But the second Brother Latisa Cham, to whom of right the Crown belonged, made War, but without success, and it remained in the third, his Name was Badur Cham. 4. Modafar divided the Possession of Me∣lique Az, the Lord of Diu, among his three Sons. This Distribution enraged the King's own Sons, who coveted those ands. But chiefly Badur, who poisoned his Father by whom he was as much hated as loved by his Mother. After this Murder he fled to the King of Chitor, and killing one there in the
King's presence in a Ball made to entertain him with the assistance of Crementii the Queen he fled to Delhi. 5. There he made himself a Calandar, or Religious Man, to shun the punishment of his Crimes. These Calandars go loaded with Iron Chains, and feed very hard: with this outward rigor they practise pri∣vately all sorts of Wickedness and Un∣cleanness. They enter into no Towns, but blow a Horn without, that people may bring them Alms. Sometimes they go to∣gether to the number of two thousand: Ba∣dur was one of these. Hearing of the Di∣stractions of the Kingdom of Cambaya, he repaired thither with his Chains in search of the Crown. In that manner he entred Cambaya, and was proclaimed King by fa∣vour of the people, who were pleased with those Tokens of Religion. His Brother Desta Cham thought to escape by submitting, but he caused his Head to be cut off as a Trai∣tor. Then he gave the Cities of Reyner and Surat to two rich Merchants, and after∣wards overcame in battel his Brother Latisa Cham. He caused Madremaluco to be fley'd alive, because he had settled his younger Brother in the Kingdom, in hopes to have the Administration of it, then with his own Hand beheaded the Brother, and two o∣thers that reproved that Act. 6. Badur desiring to take off Melique Saca, Commander of Diu, sent for him upon pretence of Business, but he excused himself upon other pretences, and so stop∣ped
the Execution; and being pressed, en∣deavoured to escape with his Riches, but being disappointed, went off poor, and not without danger. His Friends at Diu brought thither from Madrefahat his Brothor Me∣lique Tocam. Badur, the other being fled, had like to have killed this, but for some Reasons was obliged to pardon him and o∣thers, but he destroyed many. He set out for Champanel the year 1527, where were brought to him sorty French Men, and one Stephen Dias Brigas, a Portuguese, who for some Crimes done in his Country, fled into France, and came to India, Captain of a Ship of that Nation; at Diu they were all taken, and sent to Badur, by whom they were all miserably put to death. 7. At Champanel came to Badur Embassa∣dors from Babor Paxiath, King of Delhi, demanding homage for that Kingdom, as part of the Dominion of their Prince. Ba∣dur at first would have killed them, but re∣plyed, he would himself carry the An∣swer; and instantly composed an Army of one hundred thousand Men, four hundred Elephants, and a great Train of Artillery. His Design was disappointed, being forced to turn himself to Doitabad, a great Town, taken by Nizamaluco, and tho he recovered it, it was with great loss, some by the Wea∣ther, as being Winter, and some by a Shower of Stones as big as Oranges. At Champanel he found certain Men of the Kingdom of the Colii, who said they came to receive Tribute, which he paid by fleying them
alive. The year 1529 he marched with se∣venty thousand Horse, and two hundred thousand Foot, and did great harm in the Territories of Nizamaluco. 8. Mean while Babor Paxiath, King of the Mogols and Delhi, marched upon ac∣count of the Answer given to his Embassa∣dors the year before. The King of Chitor denyed him passage, and in a Battel there was such a slaughter, the Mogol was forced to go back to raise new Forces to prosecute his first Design. But the King of Chitor pursuing and doing him great damage in his own Country, he desisted. Badur fell upon the King of Mandou, whom he treacherously slew. Then im∣prisoned the Sons, giving the Mother and Daughters to his Favourites. Next he killed some Officers of that Kingdom who had helped to bring him in. 10. Salabedin, one pardoned by Badur, fearful of his favour, getting away, secured himself in a strong Castle, whence Badur drew him by policy, and forced him to turn Mahometan. Then he prepared to take the Fort and mountain Raosinga, where Salahedin left his Son when he was deceived by Badur's promises; and by the way designed to expel the King of Chitor, Son to him, who kindly entertained him when he fled for the Mur∣der of his Father. This young King brave∣ly resisted Badur, disappointed his Design, and made him return to the other against Raosinga, a place almost impregnable by art and nature. Here eight Portugueses who
followed him, shewed their usual Valour, Francis Tarares being the first who scaled a Bulwark. 11. Botiparao, the Son of Salahedin, fear∣ing his resistance might occasion his Fa∣ther's death, left that City, and went to recover another, the Besieged surrendered. Badur perceiving Salahedin's Women came not out, asked the cause of him, and sent in to know it, they answered, They would not come out unless with him. He was sent to that effect by the King. His Wives and Slaves (above five hundred in number) as soon as they saw him, exclaimed against his turning Mahemetan, and shewing him a heap of Wood, said, They would sooner burn themselves with , than be delivered to their Enemy. So Salahedin, with one hundred and twenty that were their Guard, killed them all upon the Pile, where they were burnt with their Riches. Badur hearing of this, hasted to save the Treasure, but was stopped by Salahedin and his Men, till all was consumed to Ashes, and they all slain. Yet Badur saved almost a million and half of the Remainder of this Destruction. 12. Salahedin, and those who died with him, were honorably buried. The moun∣tain he gave to Sultan Alamo, who came to him, forced from that place whither Botipa∣rao went from hence. Hearing there was a Portugues Fleet at Diu, he flew thither with precipitation. But that being no mat∣ter of danger, he returned to the Conquest of Chitor, with one hundred thousand Horse,
innumerable Foot, and six hundred Can∣noh. He incamped in the higher Grounds about that City, tho it was like Raasinga, it was battered the space of two months, and capitulated, and now Badur was possessed of three Kingdoms, each of which was considerable. 13. This was the time when Tristan de Ga was at the Court of Badur, by Nuno de Cuna's Order, to treat of Peace, which was delayed by sundry Accidents, chiefly the death of the King of the Mogols, whom he much feared. 14. Badur, through Covetousness, cut off the Pay of many that had served, which oc∣casioned above four thousand of Note to de∣sert to the Mogol. Mujate Cham, a prudent and notable Man, represented this to him, and he, to reward his Advice, sent him on some other pretence to Diu, with orders to Me∣lique Tocam to kill him. But Melique abo∣minating the wickedness of Badur, advised the innocent Mujate Cham to fly. Mujate, instead of flying to save himself, returned to Badur, before whom being prostrate, and delivering his own Cymiter, he said, If I have deserved death of you, here is the Traitor and the Sword. If you please to kill me, I can have no greater honor than to die by your Hand, tho my Grandfather, Father and self have deserved better. The King was sur∣prized, received him with honor, and be∣stowed new Favours on him. 15. But his Rage was turned against Melique Tocam for discovering the private
Order, so he sent Rume Cham to kill him. He got into Diu, where Melique was not at that time, but received advice of it at a Coun∣try-House where he was diverting himself, and fled. Badur came to the City, and with his usual craft brought it under. At the same time arrived there Nuno de Cuna, in order to that Interview, which took no effect. 16. It took no effect, because Badur ne∣ver made any Proposals but to shift off a danger, which he greatly feared from the Mogol, and hoping to agree with him, he was willing to break with the Portugueses. But he was deceived, for that Prince re∣called his Embassadors, and commenced the War. Let us see who this Mogol is. CHAP. VI. Continues the Government of Nuno de Cuna from the Year 1534, in the Reign of King John the Third. 1. THE Mogols call themselves Chacatais, in the same manner as the Spaniards call themselves Goths. Chacata is the Name of the Province they inhabit near Turque∣stan, and the Nobles suffer not themselves to be called Mogols. The Persians write
they are descended from Mogog, Grandson to Noah, from whom they received the Worship of one only God. This Nation wandring through many Provinces, got the best footing in Mogalia, or Mogostan, called by Ptolomey, Paropanisus; now they stretch farther, and border upon the King∣dom Horacam, which that Author calls A∣ria, or Here, now the Metropolis thereof. The Mogols go from the North to drink the Waters of the River Geum, that runs through Bactria, so called from its Metro∣polis Bactria, or Bohara (a famous place for Learning, being the Remains of great Zoroastes, where Avicen got the Learning that made him so famous) neighbouring upon Sogdiana, now called Quiximir, and mount Caucasus, which divides India from other Northern Provinces. This King∣dom now reaches to the mountainous Par∣veti and Bagous, which they call Angou. As there are in it great Mountains, so there are most large and fruitful Plains, watered by five Rivers, which compose the famous Indus. They are Bet, Satinague, Chanao, Rave and Rea. The Cities are many, the Men couragious. 2. The Mogols are Mohometans, their Lan∣guage Turkish and Persian, they are well shaped, white, and have small Eyes like the Tartars and Chineses. The Nobility wear rich and gay Cloaths, fashioned like the Persians, their Beards long. The Women are beautiful. Their military Dress is no less costly, their Arms being gilt and polish∣ed;
they are singular at the Bow. In fight violent, and of good conduct: they use Artillery. Their King is treated with great Majesty, is seldom seen, his Guard two thousand Horse every quarter. 3. The Mogols and Patanes both equally strove to conquer India. They were Neighbours. The Event of War and Treachery brought the Patanes and Delhi under the Subjection of the Mogol, at the time when Babor Paxiath, great Grandson to Tamerlane the Great, reigned among them. 4. Omaum, Son of Babor, now broke with Badur, King of Cambaya, who to be∣gin the War sent twenty thousand Horse, and a multitude of Foot upon his Enemies Frontiers. Here it may appear, that In∣gratitude never escapes unpunished. The Queen Crementii, who had saved Badur's Life, and in return was by him deprived of her Liberty and Kingdom of Chitor, now revenged her self on him, after this man∣ner. He by his Embassadors required her to send him her Son with what Men she could to serve against the Mogol. The Queen desired he would restore her other Son, whom he kept as an Hostage, that she might not be deprived of both, and that the mean while she would raise the Forces. Badur not diving into her De∣sign, sent him, and she immediately put her self into the protection of the Mogol Badur enraged at this Action, gathered one hundred thousand Horse, four hundred and
fifteen thousand Foot, a thousand Cannon, many of great Bulk, six hundred armed Elephants, and six thousand Carriages. This multitude marched in great order, and was abundantly supplyed with all things. 5. He besieged the City Chitor, and bat∣tered it furiously; but tho the besieged re∣ceived great damage, they did him much more. Badur now raging, received the News that the Mogols had slain twenty thou∣sand of the Men he sent to ravage their Country. He vented his passion upon the City, and at last more by policy than strength became Master of it, having lost fifteen thousand Men, among them four Portugueses. The Queen with the choice of her Riches fled. Badur used no Cruelty towards the City, but repaired it against future dangers, leaving Mina Hozem to command in it with twelve thousand Men. Then he marched towards his Ene∣my, who advanced victorious through the Kingdom of Mandou, in order to relieve Chitor, and being now informed it was in possession of Badur, and that he was in∣trenched about Doçor, Omaum marched thither, and encamped. 6. Badur found the greatest danger where he sought security; for being incamped be∣tween a River and a Lake, and Omaum before him, the resort of Provisions was quite cut off, so that in few days they suf∣fered extreme Famine, and such as went out to seek Relief, fell into the Hands of
the Enemy, as did Coraçam Cham with two thousand Horse. 7. This so disheartened Badur, that he stole away, and his Camp was plundered by the Mogols, who found there vast Riches. Badur with all speed fled towards Mandou, accompanied by Rume Cham, and some Portugueses, being left by many persons of Note, and particularly Melique Liaz, for the murder of his two Brothers. In fine, very little of that mighty Army escaped the Sword or Famine, and what did was di∣spersed and disarmed. Badur got into Man∣dou, having slipped ten thousand Mogols, who thought to prevent his reaching that place. 8. Badur fortified this City, and gave the chief Command to Rume Cham his Favou∣rite. Omaum hearing of it, lengthened his Marches to come upon him. Rume Cham, now fearful of his Master, deserts to Omaum, Rume's Wife, Daughter and Riches were at Champanel. Badur and Rume strove who should first secure Champanel, the former ha∣ving there one (tho the least) of his three Treasures, which only in Copper-Mony was worth thirty Millions, besides Pearls, Precious Stones, and other things of value, with this Treasure he sent Rume's Family and Riches under a strong Guard to Diu, whilst he himself hearing the approach of Omaum, wasted the Country, and destroyed the Artillery, lest it should fall into the Enemies Hands. The same he did at Cam∣baya Rume Cham seeing his Wife and
Riches were carried away, obtained of his new Master five thousand Horse to follow them. As he entered one Gate of Cam∣baya, Badur was going out at another, who seeing himself so close pursued by Rume, left his Women and Riches by the way, that they might put a stop to his pur∣suit. So it fell out, for Rume Cham return∣ed to Champanel, and Badur got to Diu, whilst Omaum was at Champanel dividing his Kingdom, and conquering that im∣pregnable place with Liberality. 9. Champanel was impregnable by Art and Nature, and the Mogols not used to spend time even in easie Sieges, but Tyrants have nothing secure, so these Rocks which might have been a secure Retreat to him, turned against Badur. This mountain is thirty Leagues from the Sea, and yet visible thi∣ther, the ascent of it being almost five Leagues. Where Nature left any passage, Art supplyed it with strong Walls. The City stands on the side of it, has sightly Buildings, twenty thousand Families, and a great Trade. The City it self is not walled, but there are many places upon the Mountain well fortified, strongly garrisoned and stored with Cannon. Somewhat higher is the Royal Palace, wonderful for Structure and Greatness, and on the top a Fort can terrifie the most daring. Here Badur found no security, for Tyrants can meet none in the World, and think them∣selves between Sheets, when they are be∣tween the strongest Walls, and when be∣tween
the finest Sheets they imagine they lie upon Thorns. 10. These Misfortunes were the Motives that induced Badur to consent to our raising the Fort at Diu. Before, to secure our Friendship against the Mogol, he had sur∣rendered Baçaim to Nuno de Cuna, and now in hopes of our assistance to recover what was lost, he offered Diu. Badur sent to dispose Martin Alphonso de Sousa, who was at Chaul, and he urged the necessity of rai∣sing the Fort, giving advice hereof to Nuno, and desiring leave to go treat about this important Affair. Cuna refused him leave; jealous that any but himself should compass a matter so much desired by his Prince, and sent his own Secretary Embassador to Badur. 11. Still Badur struggled with his Pride, and thought to get assistance from the Turk to recover his Kingdom. To this ef∣fect he sent Saf Cham Embassador with a rich Present, but hearing the Mogol had ta∣ken Champanel, utterly despaired. He re∣solved to fly to Meca, and there wait the Turks Answer, but his Mother and Friends dissuaded him, advising to grant leave to the Portugueses to raise the Fort at Diu, and by their assistance his Fortune might be bet∣tered. Instantly he sent to offer it to Mar∣tin Alphonso at Chaul, whither also came a Message from the Mogol with the same Offer. 12. Martin Alfonso having sent advice to the Governor, asked not a second time for
leave, but set out immediately for Diu, as Badur desired. At Sea he met the Secretary Simon Ferryra, and both arrived at Diu on the twenty first of September. They soon came to an agreement upon these Articles, That Badur confirmed all that had been done relating to Baçaim; that something which concerned Trade should be transferred thence to Diu, that there should be a League offensive and defensive between the King of Portugal and him, that the Fort should be raised, where and in what manner the Governor should appoint, that a Bul∣wark upon the Sea should immediately be delivered to him, that they should not med∣dle with the King's Revenues at Diu, &c. Immediately a Iew and an Armenian were sent to Portugal with this News to the King; and to the Governor at Goa, Iames de Mesquita, one of the Portugueses who ser∣ved Badur at the Siege of Chitor, that King desiring that Nuno de Cuna would instantly come to Diu. 13. Whilst these things were in agitation, seven Ships arrived from Portugal with Men and great Riches. They came to Goa be∣fore the first advice reached the Governor, and before the second could come he was under sail, with a resolution to accept the Offer of Badur. The King received him with much honor and demonstration of Joy. After the first Visits, he desired him to send some Men to recover the Fort of Vivarcne, taken by the Mogols upon the River Indus, and some Relief to the City
Baroche. Vasco Perez de Sampayo was sent to the first with two hundred and fifty Portu∣gueses in twelve Barques. To the latter Enterprize went Emanuel de Macedo, who returned to Diu, without doing any thing, the Inhabitants having quitted the place which was too big for his small number to maintain. 14. About this time there was one Iames Botello in these parts, who was in disgrace with King Iohn, because it was said he de∣signed to go for France, being skillf in the Affairs of India. The Favour of Princes is generally recovered either by something very inconsiderable, or else by some Action that seems impossible. Botello resolved upon the latter. He knew how earnestly the King desired the raising the Fort at Diu; scarce was it granted, when he getting the Draught of it, and a Copy of the Capitu∣lation, committed himself to the vast Oce∣an that is between Spain and India, in a Barque that was but sixteen Foot and half in length, nine Foot broad, and four Foot and a half deep. He set ou privately with his own Slaves, three Portugueses, and two others, saying he went to Cambaya. Being out at Sea, he discovered his Design, they were all astonished, but overcome by fair Words and Promises. Till finding they were reduced to unspeakable Miseries, the Slaves agreed to kill him, and killed a Ser∣vant, which occasioned all the Slaves, who were Sailers, to be slain. Without Seamen or Pilot he held his Course, and to the ad∣miration
of all Men arrived at Lisbon, where the Barque was immediately burnt, that no Body might see it was possible to perform that Voyage in so small a Vessel. The King was greatly pleased with the News, and Iames Botello restored to the Royal Favour, without any other Reward for this prodigious Action. 15. Nuno de Cuna began the Work with diligence, and a great number of Hands, being himself the first that la∣boured at the Foundation, which was done, with Sound of Trumpets, Fifes, Drums, Noise of Cannon and Shouts. The Work was soon finished, and the Command of the Fort given to Emanuel de Sousa, with nine hundred Portugueses, and sixty Pieces of great Cannon. Badur already reaped the Benefit of this Concession; for Niza∣maluco, at the instance of Nuno de Cuna, not only made peace with, but assisted him against his Enemy. Vasco Perez had reco∣vered Varivene, and King Omaum hearing Nuno de Cuna was at Diu, despaired of ta∣king that , and employed his Arms a∣gainst other places. 16. Badur pleased with this success, de∣sired to view in person how much of his Kingdom was yet left him. This he com∣municated to Nuno de Cuna, desiring a number of Portugueses might go with him, and particularly Martin Alfonso de Sousa. Nuno approved his Resolution, and gave him five hundred Men, whereof fifty were of Note. Now Cuna fearing Omaum would
fall upon Baçaim, sent to its Relief Garcia de Sa, with four hundred Portugueses. He seeing a mighty Army threaten that City resolved to quit it, to the terror of all the Inhabitants, and with miserable Cries of Women and Children. Antony Galvam considering the loss of the Portugues Repu∣tation, persuaded him with strong Reasons to alter his Resolution. Sa began to forti∣fie the place, and the Mogol knowing thr Resolution, drew off. This Retreat of the Mogols encouraged Mirao Muhmold, Ne∣phew to Badur, who was upon the Fron∣tier of Nizamaluco to recover many places taken by the Mogols, which brought fresh Hopes to Badur of regaining his Crown. 17. Badur being thus prosperous with the assistance of the Portugueses only, and re∣penting he had given leave to raise the Fort, would build a Wall between it and the City, covering the Design he had thereby of gaining the Fort, with the pretence of parting the Portugueses and Gurarates, whose too free Communication caused Divisions. There was some bickering between the King and Nuno about it, till the King de∣sisted. Nuno de Cuna went to Baçaim, and began the Fort there, giving the honor of laying the first stone to Antony Galvam, in reward of his resolution in defence of it. Garcia de Sa was left to carry on the Work, and Nuno returned to Goa. 18. Let us return to Malaca and Maluco, whence the course of the Occurrences in In∣dia drew us. During the Government of Lope
Vaz de Sampayo, the King of Achem had cau∣sed to be killed Simon de Sousa, and others, bound for Maluco, and taken others prisoners. He feigned to be sorry for that Action, and sent three of the Prisoners to Peter de Fa∣ria, then commanding the first time at Malaca, offering Peace, and desiring him to send persons fit to treat of it, and he would deliver to them Sousa his Galley, and the other Prisoners. This was much for the ease of Malaca, and therefore Peter de Faria sent presently a Vessel with some Portugue∣ses, who were all killed by that Tyrants Order before they came to him. Six months after Garcia de Sa then commanding, the King writ a Letter to him, saying, He wondered no Body was sent to treat of Peace; believing by reason of the Secresie used in murdering the others, it was not known; and at the same time caused the Prisoners he had (whom, to compass his wicked ends, he treat∣ed kindly) to write to the Commander about it. Sa presently sent a Gallion well provided with Men and Cannon, com∣manded by Emanuel Pacheco, who suffered himself to be circumvented by the King's Barques, and he with most of the Men were slain, the Gallion was carried for the King to see, who then caused the rest of the men, and the prisoners he made much of to be killed. Then he joined with the King of Aru, and all this to the intent to gain Malaca, having intelligence with Sinaya Raja, a considerable Moor, who
lived in that City. The Correspondence being discovered by some drunken Achemes, produced the publick safety and death of Sinaya, who was thrown headlong from a Tower by Garcia de Sa his order. 15. The year 1530 Gonçalo Pereyra set out from Malaca for Maluco, and in pur∣suance to the Governor's Order, by the way visited the King of Borneo, offering him liberty to trade at Malaca. Borneo is an Island fruitful of Provisions, rich in costly Merchandize, and produces the finest Diamonds. The King is powerful, his Re∣ligion the Mahometan, so his People. The City of that Name is large, has beautyful Buildings and strong Walls. The Island has four principal Ports, to which resort Merchants from sundry parts. The Offer pleased the King. Gonçalo Pereyra arriving at Ternate, D. George de Meneses delivered him the Fort, and King Cachil Daialo, who was there prisoner. The Queen his Mo∣ther, who had fled from her City as was before related, hearing of the new Com∣mander, sent to put him in mind, how kind∣ly the King her Husband had received the Portugueses, how ungrateful the Return had been from them, who caused his Son and Heir to die in a prison, and now kept the other, and obliged her their Mother to fly to the Mountains, having lost the City where she was born, and whereof she was Queen. That she demanded Reparation of D. George his Cruelty, and Liberty for her Son. After some Scruples Gonçalo Pereyra
solemnly swore he would set him at liberty as soon as opportunity served, whereupon she returned to the City, and they agreed; as did the King of Tidore, being eased of a Tribute, imposed by D. George, which he was not able to pay. There was also an Accommodation with the Spanish Captain Ferdinand de la Torre. Thus things were settled as was suitable to the Portugues Re∣putation. 20. Gonçalo Pereyra, in pursuance of the Governor's Orders made D. George a pri∣soner. He was carried to Goa, thence to Portugal, whence he was banished to Brasil, and killed by the Heathens there in a Battel. After this Gonçalo Pereyra examined the Pro∣ceedings of the Portugues Officers of the Revenue, and found them guilty of great Frauds. They offended at this Discovery, conspired with the Queen to kill him, which they executed, tho he defended himself with Resolution, yet most of the Murderers were killed by the other Portugueses, who main∣tained the Fort which was in great danger of being lost, and Luis de Andrade kept the Command as Lieutenant. 21. Bras Pereyra, who commanded by Sea, would have succeeded his Kinsman. But the Conspirators elected Vincent Fonseca one of their Companions. He having pro∣mised the Queen her Sons Liberty, if she would assist him in obtaining that Post, now loaded him with Irons, and secured his Brothers and Family. She withdrawing into the Country, stopped all provisions
from coming to the Fort, and so obliged him to set her Son free, and all was appeased for the present. 22. This Quiet lasted not long; for the King being near of Age to govern, Pate Sarangue, who governed for him, finding his power expiring, conspired with Fonseca, to set up Tabarija, the King's Bastard Bro∣ther, who was younger. To this effect they began to lay several scandalous Impu∣tations upon the King, and Fonseca attempt∣ed to secure him, which he having notice of fled to the Mountain. Fonseca follows, pre∣tending he had a Design upon the Fort. The King might have defended himself, but forbore in respect to the Portugueses whom he loved. He fled with his Mother to Ti∣dore. His Enemies set up Tabarija, and following to Tidore, oblige both Kings to seek security in the Mountains. Fonseca was the more inraged against the King for that at his return a Moor had killed his Son, and endeavoured to slay Tabarija, who escaped; and because many obeyed not the Usurper, calling him Fonseca's King, whereas they might more properly term Fonseca, Tabarija's King. He sent Pate Sarangue with Forces, and subdued all. He by treachery catched the Queen Mo∣ther, and gave her as Wife to Sarangue, and the deposed King's Wife to the Usur∣per. The distressed King leaving his Mo∣ther and Friends had recourse to the King of Gilolo's Courtesie.
23. Now Fonseca sends Blas Pereyra and others prisoners to India. The Governor informed of the Insolences committed at Ternate, sent Tristant de Altaide to com∣mand there, who secured Fonseca, and sent him to Goa. With him went the Spaniards from Gilolo, in order to be sent to Spain in the Portugues Ships. But the King of Gilolo refusing to surrender the Spaniards, Tristan was obliged to go with a power, in which the Kings of Ternate, Tidore and Bacham joined, the City was abandoned and burnt, and the Spaniards set at liberty. 24. Tristan de Ataide, at the instigation of Samarao, put Tabarija in prison, and set up his younger Brother Cachil Aeiro. The King's Mother and Sarangue were also se∣cured, and the City became desolate, the Natives of it finding no Comfort in their Neighbours, who upbraided them for ad∣mitting so wicked a People as the Portu∣gueses, who since they had footing in this Island were guilty of the most exorbitant Villanies that could be imagined. In fine, Ataide sent those Prisoners to Goa, for the Crimes he was guilty of himself, and so Nuno de Cuna judged it, taking care to send them back to their Country. 25. Now Tristan de Ataide employed his Thoughts on the Profit he designed to make by the Sale of Cloves, and ordered it so, that the King of Bacham would not con∣sent. Tristan in a rage sent his Men armed, the King protested he was a faithful Friend to the King of Portugal; but they sought
Spice for themselves, not Friendship for their King. So they were convinced by the Sword, many killed, and the rest were shamefully put to flight. Tristan in a greater fury joining with the Kings of Ter∣nate and Tidore, forced him of Bacham to abandon his City, which was destroyed, and to sue for peace, which was sold him for a Tribute to be paid in Cloves. Yet at the same time this King conspires with those of Gilolo, Tidore and the deposed of Ternate, and with Samarao to kill Ataide, and take the Fort. They began their De∣sign by persuading him to send Ships several ways, where he lost many Men, and Ca∣chil Daialo, the deposed King of Ternate, laying hold of the opportunity, recovered part of his Kingdom, with the assistance of those of Gilolo, Tidore, Bacham, Maquiem and Moutel, with whose aid the Ternates slew all the Portugueses about the Island. Ataide prepared to take revenge, when Simon Sodre arrived from Malaca with a Ship and many Men, that brought new life to the desperate Ataide, and put him in a posture to recover some places. 26. The Moors endeavoured to burn some of our Vessels, bringing to execute this design almost three hundred Sail, they received some damage, but would not desist, nor hearken to Ataide, who sued for Peace, being in the Fort, and reduced to eat all sorts of Vermin. D. Ferdinand de Monroy, a Spa∣nish Gentleman, who came from Banda with Provisions, delivered him out of this danger.
This Success was answered by a Misfortune, for all the Inhabitants fled from Ternate, and the Moors killed some of his Men, and took a Ship, but now a new Captain comes to the Fort, which stood in need of it. Tristan de Ataide was as deformed of Body as his Actions were scandalous. Let us re∣turn to the Affairs of India. CHAP. VII. Continues the Government of Nuno de Cuna, the same Year 1536, in the Reign of King John the Third. 1. WE have already related how the Empire of Decan by the death of Mahomet Xiath, was divided into seven parts, by as many Governors who set them∣selves up as Kings, and warring among themselves were reduced to five. The first and chief of these was Hidalcam, whose Territories lie from North to South along the Sea Coast from the River Domel, eight Leagues off Dabul, to Cintacola, eleven be∣low Goa, and has sixty Leagues in length, and fifty in breadth where largest. On the North it borders upon Nizamaluco, on the South upon Canara, and part of Nar∣singa, and on the East upon Madremaluco,
Melique Verido, and Cotamaluco, which make the five into which that Crown was divided. Cotamaluco and Verido were at war because the former reflected upon the latter, as dis∣loyal to the dead King, as if either of them were innocent. Cota came off with loss. 2. Hidalcam upon such like occasion took Arms against Cotamaluco, who was then at Golconda, a City almost impregnable, being seated upon an inaccessible mountain, well fortified and garrisoned. Hidalcan set down before it with one hundred thousand Horse, and four hundred thousand Foot. Cota, not without reason, was apprehen∣sive of this danger, but reposed great confi∣dence in twelve Portugueses he had with him. The Enemy the first Attacks lost twenty thousand Men, and afterwards an hundred thousand, as well by Famine as Sword, for Catamaluco cut off all his Provi∣sions, and such parties as went out for them, and of what he took he sent ten thousand to Hidalcan without Ears or Noses, bidding him put upon them those of his Men he had served so the last War. The Sorrow for, these Misfortunes caused his Death, whence sprang Wars between his Sons. These were Mulacam, who was received as Heir, and Abraham, who could not brook his being owned as such, and being en∣couraged by Cotamaluco and others, disturb∣ed the common Peace, and was at last himself taken prisoner. 3. Cotamaluco set upon Mulacham as he was carrying his Father to bury him, but
was forced to fly to the Woods. Mean while Abraman escaped out of prison, and by the assistance of Nizamaluco possessed himself of the Kingdom, and took his Brother Mulacam whom his Army infamously de∣livered up at Bisapo. Açadacam set out with a good Army to rescue Malucam. But Melique Cuf, in whose custody he was, cruelly put out his Eyes, and delivered him and his Trea∣sure to Abraham. He desiring to appease Açadacam, made him great Offers, which were all rejected; Açadacam encamped within five Leagues of him, and sent a Messenger to him, whose Name was Caçem; this Man Abraham prevailed with to un∣dertake to murder his Master, which Açada∣cam discovering, caused him to be stabbed before he approached him. 5. Açadacam endeavoured to alienate the Hearts of the great ones from Abraham, but was not altogether so successful as he wished. In fine, Cogerte Cham, who at his instigation acted in the same manner, was obliged to fly for relief to Nizamaluco, in whom he sound his Ruin, being robbed by him, and brought to such misery, he resolved to retire to Mecha, but passing through Dabul, he accepted the Offer of Protection made him by Simon Guedez▪ then commanding there, till Nuno de Cuna re∣ceived him at Diu, and obtained of King Badur to entertain him according to his Quality, where after he became one of the chief Generals of Cambaya.
6. The new Hidalcan (I mean Abraham, for those Princes, when they come to the Crown, all take this Title) was perplexed with the Proceedings of Açadacam, and endeavoured to reconcile him. Açada∣cam's Forces at this time ravaged all the Continent about Goa, and Hidalcan made fresh Instances to bring him to his Court, but to no effect. Mean while the desola∣tion of that Country was such, that the Natives freely offered it up to Nuno de Cuna, he, after conferring about it with Açada∣cam, accepted the Offer to deliver that Country from utter Ruin. 7. Açadacam was a Mahometan as well in his Dealing, as Belief. The more to perplex Hidalcam, he goes into the Ser∣vice of the King of Bisuagar, who received him with great honor. Nuno de Cuna was not exempted from his Frauds; therefore to carry on his Designs, he persuaded him to send Christopher de Figueredo, promising to prevail with the King of Bisnagar to resign to the King of Portugal the Continent a∣bout Goa, to which he had an ancient Title. Hidalcan being informed of these Proceedings encamped near him of Bisnagar with four hundred thousand Men, and 700 Elephants, the other had a 1000 Elephants more, and some thousands of Men. He sent to let him know, that according to former Agreements, he ought to deliver up to him his Slave Açadacam. The King of Bisnagar referred it to Açadacam himself to give the Answer, and he gave it such as deceived,
and at the same time was approved of. 8. But the King was soon undeceived; for Açadacam, who had done all this only to better his Fortunes, now went over to Hidalcam, when least he expected it. Co∣tamaluco, who had joined Hidalcan, to op∣pose Açadacam, seeing him received with great honor, goes over to the King of Bis∣nagar, who was marching to besiege the City Rachol, which he had before taken, and had again submitted to Hidalcam. At last these Princes came to a Composition, parting the Territory of that City, which fell to the Lot of Hidalcam. Açadacam, by order of his Master, marched after Co∣tamaluco to the City Naiteguir taken by him, and recovered it, and obliging him to put himself into Hidalcam's Power, with a Grand daughter he had offered him to Wife. The Wedding reconciled all this Discord. 9. King Badur pretended by an ancient Custom of Indostan to have the power of giving the Title of King. He sent the Royal Ensigns to Hidalcam, desiring he should acknowledge him as his Predecessors had done: but Hidalcam accepted his Friend∣ship, and rejected the Title. Badur's inten∣tion was to secure Hidalcam against the Portugueses, to whom he owed the Reco∣vering of his Crown▪ Açadacam, being suspicious of Hidalcam, endeavoured to be far from him, and to this end prevailed with Cotamaluco to return home and declare war. Hidalcam discovered the Author of
this Discord, and would have killed him, but the Design being disclosed, Azadacam threw himself at his Feet with two hundred thousand Pardaos of Gold, begging pardon, tho he said he had done nothing to ask par∣don for. Thus he bought his Life, and Hidalcam sold his safety. Such is the power of Gifts, even over those who can give greater. 10. Hidalcam now bent his thoughts upon recovering the Lands about Goa. Açadacam, who had been the cause that Nuno de Cuna took them, now was the promoter of his Master's demanding them. Nuno referred the Answer to Diu, whither he was going, being sent for by King Badur, at his arrival almost despoiled of his Crown. They ex∣pected no answer, but suddenly Solyman Aga invaded those Lands with almost six thousand Men. They began to hinder the carrying Provisions to Goa. D. Iohn Perey∣ra, who then commanded, sent to adver∣tise Solymam of the Injustice of his Under∣taking, but he gave no ear to it, and killed some Portugueses not without receiving con∣siderable damage. He besieged Christopher de Figueredo in the Fort of Mandor, to whose relief came Iordan de Freytas, with some Men, sent by D. Iohn, so the Turk raised the Siege, and fled as far as Margam. 11. Don Iohn marched at the heels of Freitas, and being at Mador, the Aga sent him word, he came not to make war, but to receive the Rents of those Lands: the Answer was, That he should march off
within an hour and half. Don Iohn fol∣lowed the Messenger to force the Turk, in case he obeyed not, but finding he did, re∣tired. 12. Solyman halted at Ponda, from whence he made fresh Instances to D. Iohn to resign those Lands to Hidalcan. He an∣swered, he acknowledged him not as his Minister, and prepared for War. He built the Fort of Rachol, where some Blood was spilt, Solyman endeavouring to obstruct it, who lost three thousand Men about Bailim and Singuizar, slain by the Gentils, assisted by two hundred Portugueses. Iordan de Freytas, with fifty Men, routed the Turk Sarnabose, sent by Solyman with five hun∣dred. Emanuel Vasconcelos razed a Bulwark the Enemy was making in the Pass of Borii, and burnt some Houses. Solyman advan∣ces as far as Margam. Pereyra went to meet him with five hundred Portugueses, and seven hundred Canaras The Fight began, the Canaras and some Portugueses gave way, terrified with strange Fire-works made by a Witch, who in Man's Cloaths sought to revenge the Death of her Husband. Perey∣ra seeing this Disorder, advanced, crying out, Let who will follow me, for I hope with the help of God to overcome the Enemy. All following his Example, Solyman quitted the Field, having lost eight hundred Men, on our side not one was killed. The Booty was considerable. 13. Mean while Açadacam attempted to recover these same Lands, but met no great
success, for Hidalcam endeavoured thus to divert him, while he gained his City of Bilgam, where his Riches lay. At length they agreed, and Açadacam designed again to attempt the Dependences of Goa. He proceeded not with Vigor, being conscious, Nuno had by his advice possessed himself of them, and because he had lately received a Message from him after his Return from Diu. Yet in conclusion he marched as far as Ponda with twenty thousand Men. 14. From that place he sent a Letter of Hidalcam to Cuna, demanding those Lands. The Answer was, He held them by consent of Açadacam, that if he desired war the Portugueses were not backward, and that he could not restore them, or raze the Fort of Rachol without his King's Consent. Aça∣dacam fearing his Master would take his City, acted not much on this side. So there happened no considerable Action. 15. Now the Answer of Hidalcam was brought, containing, That since Açadacam was the Cause of his taking those Lands, he would stand by what should be agreed between them. Both coveing the same thing for themselves, they came to no a∣greement. Cuna relieved Vasco Fernandez who was in some distress, and they put the Enemy to flight. Hearing the Enemy ap∣peared now in greater Numbers, he sent Don Iohn Pereyra with one hundred and thirty Horse, six hundred Portugues Foot, and one thousand Canaras, commanded by Crisna, an honest Pagan. They found the Enemy
at the Foot of a Mountain, and attacked them with such Vigor, they presently fled, their Commander and many more were slain, on our side only four. 16. Açadacam, after these Losses, desired a Conference with Nuno de Cuna, but it suc∣ceeded not, so the Inroads were continued chiefly about Rachol, where our Cannon killed some. Winter expiring, Nuno began to act more vigorously. He sent Antony de Silveyra to the Continent with two hundred Canara Horse, and seventeen hundred Por∣tugues Foot. Antony went three Leagues up the Country, making great havock, and killing three hundred Moors, and two con∣siderable Officers, with loss of eight Portu∣gueses. Mean while Gonzalo Vaz Coutinho destroyed the Coast of Dabul, and thence brought to Goa many Vessels taken, and three hundred Prisoners, and abundance of Provisions, which encreased the Joy of the other Victories, and relieved the City di∣stressed for want. 17. The Clamours of that ruined People, and a Letter from Nuno de Cuna coming to Hidalcan, he ordered Açadacam to desist. He obeyed not, but to justifie his refusal, sent him a Present of a stately Horse and Cymiter, set with Jewels. Hidalcan going to take off a piece of Silk, in which the Cymiter was wrapped, was hindered by his Mother, who caused a Page to unfold it, he instantly fell down dead, as did two Men who were ordered to mount the Horse, Such was the Poison the Present
carried. Then the Queen looking upon her Son, said, Behold your Father's Murderer. For it was believed he had been poisoned. The Governor perceiving that Açadacam did not desist, sent Gonzalo Vaz Coutino with thirty Vessels and three hundred Men, half Canaras, who burnt the Town of Ponda, and many Ships, and returned with three hundred Prisoners. Azadacam in a rage marched towards Rachol, and opposite to it began to erect a Fort called Bori, to ob∣struct our Sailing up the River of that Name; and notwithstanding our oppo∣sition, put it into such condition, it appear∣ed formidable. Nuno de Cuna sent a fresh Supply to hinder this Work, and they as∣saulting it with more courage than con∣duct, four hundred of them were slain, and forty taken, whereof one appearing naked before Açadacam, he took off part of his own Garment to cover him, saying, The Portugueses were not to be so used. This Loss caused the demolishing the Fort of Rachol, which the Governor ordered Peter de Faria to execute. Nuno de Cuna's pre∣sence was required at Diu, and he fearing to leave Goa in danger, concluded a Peace with Açadacam. This was rather a Truce than Peace, for neither desisted from his pretensions, unless Açadacam did by going away from Ponda. 18. Whilst these things were in agitation at Goa, the King of Calicut marched to Cranganor, upon pretence of visiting those parts, as their Emperor, but in reality to
destroy the Portugueses, induced thereto by King Badur. Thence he designed to pass to Vaipaim, which being suspicious, Peter Vaz commanding at Cochin, endeavoured to pre∣vent, striving withall to avoid affronting him, or being faulty in his Duty. Having made provision by Sea and Land, he desired the King to desist from that Design. The King gave no ear to him, but sent many Ships to clear the Passage: but they failed, above a thousand of their Men being slain, and much damage received by Vincent de Fonseca's Artillery, which guarded that Pass, many more flying with precipitation, were drowned. This happened near the Churches of S. Thomas and S. Iames, which they endeavoured to burn, but could not compass. The Passes were valiantly de∣fended all the Winter. 19. On the nineteenth of September, Martin Alfonso de Sousa set out of Goa with one hundred and fifty Men in fifteen Ves∣els, and passing by Calamute, two thousand Nayres would have kept him in, whereof he killed many, dispersed the rest, burnt their Town, and took seven Barques. He arrived at Cochin, where were five Ships newly come from Portugal. The King of Calicut understanding Martin Alfonso was coming to meet him with almost a thou∣sand Men drew off. Martin Alfonso now bent his Force against the King of Repelim, who had offended him of Cochin. Antony de Brito who had led the Van, met a vigo∣rous opposition at this Island, till Martin
coming up they fled, who maintained the Outworks. The King retired to his City, in which were six thousand fighting Men. Next day Sousa attacked it, after some re∣sistance the King and all the Defendants fled. As Sousa entered a Mosque, he had like to be killed by a Moor, but receiving the Stroke on his Buckler, he run the Moor through with a Javelin. This Victory cost us fourteen Men, the City was plundered and reduced to Ashes. The principal part of the Booty that fell to the King of Cochin, on whose account this Action was under∣taken, was a piece of Marble, by him high∣ly valued, because on it were carved the Names of the Kings of Malabar for three thousand years past, which was taken from him by the King of Repelim; some Brass Plates with Serpents engraved on them, e∣steemed a great Relick by the conquered King; and his Hat lost in the flight, which among them is the greatest Disgrace to the Conquered, and highest Glory to the Victor. 20. The King of Calicut returns with for∣ty thousand Men to attempt the Pass of Cambalam. Martin Alfonso posts Francis de Barros de Payra to keep the Pass of Cranga∣nor with three Vessels, which proved of great use; he himself goes to the other, and landing, sees five thousand of the King's Men attempt to pass the Ford. Our Men began to fear, but he encouraging them, boldly falls on, and killing three hundred of the Enemy, made them turn
their Backs. Zamori comes up with the Gross of his Army, attempts the Ford, and is repulsed with equal loss. Now the Prince of Cochin joins us with twenty thousand Nayres. Martin Alfonso leaves Antony de Bri∣to with them, and four hundred Portugueses, who in the space of twenty days fought six Battels with the King of Calicut, wherein he made such havock as obliged him to draw off with great Loss, and greater Shame. 21. The Reason why Martin Alfonso left that Post, was because, like a watchful Commander, he was at once in two places by his Vigilance, here in Body, and in Thought at Sea, where now appeared a powerful Fleet of Calicut. He therefore seeing the Valour of Brito, and the assi∣stance of those Nayres, left him to com∣mand there, and put to Sea with three hundred Portugueses in eleven Ships. At Chale he met Iames Reynoso with five Ves∣sels, Cutiale, Admiral of Calicut, had taken one from him, he took Reynoso with him. He went in search of Cutiale, and found him with twenty five Vessels, and in them fifteen hundred Men, some of our Vessels impatient of delay, advanced before the rest, and forced him to retire to Tiracole, whither Martin Alfonso pursuing, the Fight lasted till night with great slaughter of the Enemy, who fortified themselves, and in the morning appeared six thousand strong, having flocked from all the Neighbour∣hood. Just at this time came an Express
from the King of Cochin, desiring Martin Alfonso to return with all speed, because the King of Calicut knowing he was absent was coming down with a fresh Power This Advice diverted any farther Action He returned, and the King of Calicut who came on, because he was absent, retired as soon as he knew he was present. So great is the Force of Conceit. 22. Mean while Madune Pandar, King of Ceitavaca, besieged his Brother of Cota, with a Fleet by Sea. Nuno Freyre de Andrade, in defence of the latter went to Columbo to meet the other with only eight Portugueses, and six hundred Natives, where he killed many, and took four Paraos, with good Ar∣tillery. Madune demanded Aid of Zamori, he sent him two thousand Men. With this Assistance he besieged the City of Cota for the Term of three Months. Knowing then that Martin Alfonso was coming to his Bro∣ther's Relief, who had desired it as a Sub∣ject of Portugal, he raised the Siege. When Martin came, Madune was drawn off, and reconciled to his Brother. There being no∣thing left for Martin Alfonso to do here, ha∣ving visited the King, who was most thankful for the speedy Succour, he set out in search of the Malabar Fleet, which had assisted Madune, and met it at Mangalor, where after a sharp Encounter it was defeated, and twelve hundred Moors slain.
CHAP. VIII. Still continues the Government of Nuno de Cuna, from the Year 1537, till the Year 1538, in the Reign of King John the Third. 1. THE King of Cambaya, Badur (who with only the assistance of the Portu∣gueses had recovered his Kingdom) now stu∣died their Ruin, and repenting he had granted leave to raise the Fort, endea∣voured to take it, and kill the Commander, and all the Garrison. Nuno de Cuna under∣stood his wicked Design, and began to pre∣pare to prevent it. That brave Gentleman Emanuel de Sousa then commanded at Diu, by him Badur designed to begin the Execu∣tion. On the eighth of October at night a Moor came to the Wall, and told Sousa, The King would send for him next day to kill him, that he would not tell his Name, let it might be thought an invention to get a Reward. Emanuel was long in doubt whether to go or stay, at last he resolved to go, and using at other times to have a numerous Retinue well armed, went now with only one Servant, being sent for at the hour he had been before warned. The King seeing him unconcerned, converted his malice for that time into an honorable
Reception, and Emanuel returned to the Fort. The King's Mother endeavoured to dissuade him from this wicked intention, and he thought it was better by often vi∣siting the Captain in the Fort to take off all suspicion, and so murder him there, and seize upon it. He was of a violent nature, and so began his first Visit at an unseason∣able hour of the night, not regarding the very unseasonableness was enough to ren∣der it suspicious. Sousa received him upon his Guard, they discoursed of things indiffe∣rent; the King went away, believing he had ensnared Sousa, and he had given him a sufficient caution. 2. Nuno de Cuna being advertised by Ema∣nuel de Sousa of the posture of Affairs at Diu, thought strange, That he had not se∣cured the King when in his Power, and his wicked Intentions were known; and that he had given out that Ships were come from Portugal with great Supplies. This Inven∣tion endangered Nuno, for Badur resolved to murder him first, that he might not come to the Relief of the Fort when Sousa was killed. He writ to him, desiring he would come to Diu about important Affairs. Nuno, tho he knew his wicked Designs, made no difficulty of going. He set out of Goa on the ninth of Ianuary, and with what Ves∣sels he carried, and followed him, appeared there with near three hundred Sail. 3. He put in at Chaul, and found that Nizamaluco, induced thereto by Badur, had been there with eight thousand Men,
pretending it was to divert his Women at Sea, but in reality with an ill design on that place, which was disappointed by the care of Simon Guedez, who commanded there. At Baaim he took up his Brother-in-law, Antony de Silveyra, a Man of great worth, and left in his place Ruy Vaz Pereyra. 4. King Badur was at that time in the mountains hunting. Nuno sent to visit him; but he who let slip no opportunity, now e∣specially, prevented him by sending to him first one Iohn de Santiago, not long before a Christian, but fallen again, and become a Favourite of Badur, by the name of Frangue Cham. Cuna was indisposed, and feigned himself worse, so lying off of Diu he sent to excuse himself to the King for not landing immediately. The King feign∣ing great Friendship presently enters into a Boat in which he had sent Nuno a Present of Venison. There went with him thirteen Men of Quality, and Emanuel de Sousa, who had carried the last Message from Nuno de Cuna to him. He received him aboard the Galeon in the best manner he could. Be∣ing seated, they discoursed of indifferent things, but the King was surprised to see a Page whisper Nuno de Cuna, and it was a Message from Emanuel de Sousa, who be∣lieving he was to be there secured, or killed, sent word that some Captains were waiting his Orders. The King was somewhat quieter, seeing Cuna did not mind the Page, and soon rose, and went away. Cuna had thought it strange that Sousa did not secure
the King when he had him in the Fort alone, and now having him aboard the Gallion he did not detain him. Nuno or∣dered all the Officers to accompany the King first, and then Emanuel de Sousa to the Fort, where he proposed to secure the King, when he came to visit him; as the King on the other side had resolved to seize him at a dinner he had a design to invite him to, and send him to the great Turk in a Cage. 5. Emanuel de Sousa was going to invite the King to the Fort, while Nuno de Cuna got thither. He came up with the King's Ca∣tur or Barge, and made the offer by the means of Rume Cham, who at the sametime advised the King not to go, because he su∣spected they would secure him. He slighted the Caution, and bid Sousa come into his Barge, who stepping over fell into the Sea, but being taken up, the Officers who came with him carried him to the King. At the same time came up another of our Barges and some Gentlemen, who seeing Emanuel de Sousa entred hastily into the Kings. He suspecting their hasty coming aboard, toge∣ther with the Caution given by Rume Cham, ordered his Officers to kill Emanuel de Sousa. Iames de Mesquita understanding it, flew at, and wounded the King, whilst they killed that valiant Captain. There was a bloody Fray in which four of our Gentlemen were killed, having slain seven of the Enemy. Other of our Barges coming up received some damage from a Page who shot several
with the King's Bow, till killed with a Musquet Ball. Three of the King's Ships came up to rescue him. He seeing the dan∣ger began to fly, but was stopped by a Can∣non shot which killed three of his Men that rowed. The King thought now to escape by swimming, but being in danger of drown∣ing, cried out, discovering who he was. Tristan de Payva de Santarem coming up, reached out to him an Oar to bring him a∣board his Vessel, when a Soldier struck him cross the Face with a Halberd, and so o∣thers, till he was killed. He was a little while above Water, and then sunk, and nei∣ther his nor Emanuel de Sousa his Body could be found, tho Nuno de Cuna caused them to be diligently looked after to give them the due Funeral Honors. 6. Most of the Citizens from the Walls beheld this Engagement, and no sooner was the News of the King's Death spread, but they began to abandon the City in such confusion, that many were trampled to death, running hastily to save life. The fear was that Nuno de Cuna would fall upon the City for the Plunder, but he soon quiet∣ed them with publick Proclamations. Such as had not fled, stayed; and those who had, returned. He was seen to enter the Town unarmed, comforting the Inhabitants, and restraining the Avarice of his Men, so that not the least Disorder was committed. Then he went to the Fort. 7. He gave the Command of the Fort to Antony de Silveyra Meneses, his Brother-in-law,
whom he brought from Baaim, and the Sequel shewed it was his Worth, not Kindred, that procured him that Post. Pay Rodiguez de Araujo was appointed his Lieu∣tenant. The Queen Mother was retired to Navanaguer. Nuno de Cuna sent to com∣fort her, and demonstrate the death of her Son had been of his own seeking, but she would not hear the Messenger. What was found in the Palace in Gold and Silver did not exceed two hundred thou∣sand Pardaos. The quantity of Ammuni∣tion was to be admired. In the Port were one hundred and sixty Vessels, some of great bulk. No less wonderful was the number of Brass Cannon, for that of Iron was not reckoned. Among the first were found three Basilisks of such prodigious Greatness, that Nuno de Cuna sent one as a rarity to Portugal, which is to this day kept in the Castle of S. Iulian, at the mouth of the River of Lisbon, and called, The Gun of Diu. 8. Among the dead King's Papers, and those of Abdel Cader his Treasurer, were found Letters from Saf Cham, containing the progress he had made towards bringing the Turks upon the Portugueses, and Copies of others from the King to those of Aden and Xael to the same purpose. Nuno ha∣ving gathered these and other Testimonies against the King, called Coje Zofar, a Man in great repute among the Mahoetans and Gentils, who gathered the principal Merchants and Cazies, that is, Teachers of
the Law. Before all these the Governor produced the Letters and other Testimoni∣als, which convinced the wicked Designs of the King, and justified all his own Proceed∣ings in that Affair. All the Moors and Pa∣gans confessed themselves fully satisfied, as to the Justice of the Action, and according∣ly gave him Certificates thereof in the A∣rabian and Persian Languages, signed by Coje Zofar, and the principal Merchants and Caziçes, which were dispersed to the Princes of Decan, Narsinga, Ormuz, and the Coast of Arabia as far as Aden, that they might all be informed of the true Cau∣ses of this Accident, and that the Jealousies caused by the King's death might be al∣layed. 9. For the greater satisfaction of the pub∣lick, Nuno ordered the Mahometans should have the free Exercise of their Religion and Laws; and that the Constitutions made by Badur should be observed as if he were present. All Pensions or Salaries allowed by him were continued. Among many that resorted to reap the Benefit of this unex∣pected Liberality was a Moor of Bengala, who by authentick Informations was found to be three hundred and twenty years of Age. He was seen long after, as shall be said, when we speak of his death, or va∣nishing. He had at this time two Sons, one ninety, the other twelve years old. His Beard and Teeth had fallen and grown a∣gain four or five times. To appearance he seemed about sixty years of Age. Of per∣son
indifferent, rather little than tall, nei∣ther fat nor very lean. He said, that being one day in his first Century, looking to his Cattle on the Bank of a River, there ap∣peared to him a Man cloathed in Grey, girt with a Cord; with Wounds in his Hands and Feet, praying him to carry him over upon his Shoulders. And that having done it, he told him, That as a Reward for that Act of Charity, he should continue in the same disposition of Body, till he saw him again. The Portugueses, after this coming into India, and he into one of their Churches, and seeing the Image of S. Fran∣cis, cryed out with surprize: This is, this is the Man I carried over the River so many years ago. This was the cause why Badur maintained him, and why now Nuno de Cuna continued his Allowance. 10. Mir Mahomet Zaman descended from the Kings of Delhi, who had reigned in Cambaya, hearing the death of Badur, went to visit the Queen Mother at Novanaguer. She fearing he came to rob her, would not see him. Zaman had no such intention then, but came to offer her his Service, and to revenge the death of the Son. She think∣ing she was not secure there, resolved to re∣move, and he offended at her Contempt, lay in wait for her with two thousand Horse, and robbed her of all that was of Value, which amounted to above two millions of Gold, and gathering above five thousand Men, was by them proclaimed King of Guzarate, and with this Title entered No∣vanaguer.
Hence he sent to Nuno de Cuna, acquainting him with the posture of his Af∣fairs, his Title to the Crown, and desiring his Assistance, in requital for which he offered the Portugueses all the Coast from Mangalor to Beth, the Town of Damam as far as Ba∣çaim, the Royal Country-House of Novana∣guer, and other advantageous Conditions. Nuno admitted them, and caused him to be proclaimed King in the Mosque of Diu; at the same time advising him to raise Forces, and disperse the other Pretenders. Zaman fearing the Advice was deceitful, lay still, and found the ill Consequence, for the People set up Mahomet, Nephew to the de∣ceased, and prepared to fall upon Zamam at Novanoguer, but delayed the Execution because Cuna was so near. At this time ar∣rived five Ships from Portugal. 11. The Governor being gone as the Princes of Guazarate desired, the better to 1538. maintain Mahomets Title, two of them marched towards Zamam with sixty thou∣sand Men, they corrupted most of his Offi∣cers. He being sensible of it, ordered his Friends to carry about them as much Gold and Jewels as they could to serve them in their flight. Those who were corrupted did not fight; the others did wonders, par∣ticularly Zamam, who fled to Omaum, King of the Mogols, of whom he received the Kingdom of Bengala. The Conquerors called Antony de Silveyra, Commander of Diu, to an account for the King's death, and being satisfied of the Causes, proposed
a Peace, but refusing the Conditions grant∣ed by Zamam, broke off. Cuna hearing this News, made ready to return to Diu, dispatching the homeward bound trading Ships, and sending Martin Alfonso de Sousa with forty Ships to guard the Coasts of Malabar. 12. The greatest Enemies the Portugueses found in India were the Moors, inhabiting from Chaul to C. Comori, the space of 200 Leagues, who had flocked hither in great numbers for the great Riches of the Sea in Pearls, and vast Trade of all those Ports. Pate Marcar, a powerful Moor of Cochin, offended that the Portugueses had taken some of his Vessels, went over to Calicut the bet∣ter to annoy them with the assistance of that King. There he was furnished with above fifty Ships, two thousand Men, and four hundred Pieces of Cannon, to go to the assistance of Madune Pandar, against his Brother the King of Ceylon, our Ally. At Coulam he found a great Portuguese Ship la∣ding with Pepper, he beset her, and after a sharp Engagement was forced to retire, ha∣ving killed the Captain of her. Farther on he took a Ship, and killed all that were in it. Beyond C. Comori he destroyed a Town of the Christians. Martin Alfonso hearing of this, pursues, and running up a River with only nineteen Barques, offers him battel, but he refused, and got off. It look∣ed like a rashness to follow further, so Mar∣tin returned to Cochin, in order to set out again better provided.
13. He set out with twenty three Vessels, all to row, and four hundred Men. At Beadala he met Pate Marcar careening, in order to go over to Ceylon. Pate, seeing Al∣fonso, gathered seven thousand Men, and Alfonso with his four hundred resolved to fight him. He ordered Gaspar de Lemos with seven Barges to stay till he gave the signal with a Cannon, and then to come up with all the greatest noise he could to di∣vert the Enemy on that side, while he at∣tacked them on the other. A Piece being fired without order, Lemos thinking it was the Signal, came up, and was killed with others, before Martin Alfonso could relieve him. At last he came and revenged the death of those, killing above seven hundred of the Enemy, and putting the rest to flight, whereby he remained Master of the Sea and Field. Thirty Portugueses were lost. A∣mong the Portugues Slaves here set at liberty was a Woman, who was Mistress to one of them loaded with Chains, who could not be prevailed upon by Threats nor Promises to renounce her Faith, but with great Con∣stancy (much to be admired in such a Woman) encouraged the Slaves to con∣tinue firm in the Faith, in contempt of all Tortures. The chief party of the Booty consisted of twenty three Barques, four hundred Cannon, fifteen hundred Musquets, and many Prisoners. This happened on the fifteenth of February. Martin de Ayala was sent to the Governor in a Catur or Barge, with fifteen Men, who meeting
near Chale, a Galliot with two hundred Ma∣labars, fought them so long till both sides desisted through weariness. Ayala being recovered, found he had but four Men left alive, and with them prosecuted his Voyage. 14. Martin Alfonso sailed over victorious to Columbo, the King of which place was besieged by his Brother Madune Pandar, who at first thought our Fleet had been that of Pate, coming to his assistance. But hearing the Ruin of it, raised the Siege, and made Peace. Martin and his Officers honored and presented by the King, sailed to Cochin, from whence they again set out to scour the Coast. Off of Mount Delii they met six Paraos, and took five of them. A little farther they had the like Success with seventeen others. Next day they took six, and a Ship laden with Provisions. Six thousand Pardaos were offered Martin for the Ransom of one Moor, and he chose rather to hang him for an Example. Being ordered by the Governor to Diu, because a great Fleet of Turks was expected, he forced ashore by the way a great Gallion of theirs, and loaded his small Vessels with the Riches were in it. Thus Martin Alfonso struck a Terror into all the Enemies, and purchased us great security for some time. 15. D. Emanuel de Meneses was gone a∣bout this time Embassador to Xael, and was there imprisoned by that King with all the Portugueses who were in the Town. So base and insolent Spirits were the Cause of
this Action. The King had favourably re∣ceived some Portugueses in his Port, but they being a loose People, required his Kind∣ness with Injuries. One of these among others had robbed the King's own Cousin, and after other Tortures hung him and two other persons of Note by the private Parts, to make them discover their Treasure. Gonzalo Vaz committed another Robbery. Alvaro Madera being kindly entertained by an honest Moor, forced his Wife from him. One Godino had the Honor to treat the King at his House, and payed it with calling him Drunkard. Others took a Ship be∣longing to his Subjects, and impudently came to sell it in his Port. These and o∣ther Villanies had been acted, when D. E∣manuel de Meneses came with seventy Men to settle a Peace. He was ignorant of what had happened, and suspected it the less, being well treated by the King. He was lodged, and then beset, the Moors kill∣ing all the Portugueses about the Town. A just Punishment for such Extravagances. The King sent for D. Emanuel to Court, he went with seventy Men, but was admitted with only one, and received very civilly, but detained a Prisoner, as were all the seven∣ty, except Godino, whose Head was cut off in the presence of the King. For Insolen∣cences committed upon Royal Persons ad∣mit no delay of punishment. Of the se∣venty he sent thirty as a Present to the Turk to purchase his Favour, thinking he had by this Action lost the Portugueses. A∣mong
the thirty was Madera, who making his Escape from Constantinople, carried the News to Portugal of the Turkish Fleet that was fitting at Suez to invade India. This Advice caused the King to send continual Succors, and immediately he dispatched five Ships. 16. Nuno de Cuna hearing what had hap∣pened at Xael, ordered D. Ferdinand de Lim who was going to command at Ormuz, by the way to conclude a peace with that King. He did it, the Peace was sworn, and D. Manuel de Meneses with those who were still there restored. Nuno being satisfied the Turks were not coming, as the Moo gave out to terrifie him, began that vast Cistern, which is there of such bigness, that being twenty five Spans deep each Span contains a thou∣sand Pipes of Water. This he provided a∣gainst a long Siege, and added new Forti∣fications. Having given all the necessary Orders in this place, he sailed to Goa. CHAP. IX. Continues still the Government of Nuno de Cuna, the same Year 1538, in the Reign of King John the Third. 1. LET us now turn a while to the Bay of Bengala, into which falls the fa∣mous River Ganges, by two mouths. This River has its springs in the mountains of
great Tartary, from whence it runs to the Southward near 600 Leagues, and divides India into two pats Intra & extra Gangem. On the mouth that falls into the Sea to the Eastward is the City Chatigam, on that to the Westward Satigam. The Ganges runs through the middle of the Kingdom of Bengala, to which were subject on the East those of Caor, Comataii, Sirote, Codovoscam, Cou and Tipora, but these two last joining to∣gether, threw off the Subjection; on the West of the River Cospetir, (whose Plain is overflowed by Ganges, as Egypt by the Nile) conquered by the Patanas. The Heathens here say, that God granted these particular Prerogatives or Blessings to five Kingdoms. To that of Bengala infinite numbers or Foot, to Orixa Elephants, to Bisnagar People skilled in Sword and Buckler, to Delhi a∣bundance of Towns, and to Cou innume∣rable Horses. The Country of Bengala ly∣ing between twenty two and twenty six de∣grees of Northern Latitude, and being very well watered is most fruitful, and produces many sorts of Fruit some like that of Spain, Sugar and long Pepper, abundance of Cat∣tel and foul, infinite quantities of Cotten, which they work, the Curiosity of their Quilts is extraordinary. The Natives are Heathens, and Men of no Courage, but false and treacherous, that it may appear all the World over Cowardize and Treachery go together. The King is Heir to all Men. The principal City Gouro seated on the Banks of Ganges, three Leagues in length, con∣taining
one million and two hundred thon∣sand Families, and well fortified; along the streets, which are wide and streight, Rows of Trees to shade the People, which some∣times is in such numbers that some are trod to death. 2. About fifty years before the Portu∣gueses discovered India, came o Gouro an Arabian Mahometan, who growing rich and powerful, obtained the then King of Ben∣gala, a Victory over the King of Orixa. The King besides other Rewards made him Captain of his Guard, and he ingratefully killed the King, usurped the Kingdom, and left the Inheritance thereof to the Moors that succeeded. They observe no Rule of Inheritance from Father to Son, but even Slaves sometimes obtain it by kill∣ing their Master, and whoever holds it three days they look upon as established by Divine Providence. Thus it fell out, that in forty years space they had thirteen Kings succes∣sively. At the time when Martin Alfonso de Melo Iusarte was prisoner to Mahomet Xiath, that King who tyrannically held the Crown kept his Court at Gouro, in great apprehension of being deposed, but with such state that only his Women amounted to the number of ten thousand. Martin and the others who were Prisoners with him obtained him success against the Patanas with whom he was at War. 3. Martin and his Fellows obtained their Liberty by the means of Coje Sabadim, a rich Moor, who promised, i Nuno de Cuna
would carry him to Ormuz, he would con∣trive the King of Portugal should have a Fort in the Port of Chatigam. The Governor earnest upon this important Affair, grant∣ed all he demanded, and sent thither Mar∣tin Alfonso with two hundred Men in five Vessels. The better to gain the King's good Will, Martin Alfonso sent him a Present, but he being suspicious, would have killed the Messengers, had not some Moors, and a Gentil reputed a Saint, and to be two hun∣dred years of Age, dissuaded him. 4. Thirteen who carried the Present, and thirty of forty wherewith Alfonso was invi∣ted to a Dinner, were secured at the same time, the former at Gouro, and the latter at Chatigam, the other ten that were with him were killed in the Fray. 5. Nuno de Cuna hearing hereof by those who escaped in the Ships, sent Antony de Silva Meneses with three hundred and fifty in nine Vessels, to treat of ransoming the Prisoners, with the assistance of Coje Sba∣dim, the Author of that Expedition, and detained a Ship of his richly laden, for se∣curity of his fair Proceedings therein. Syl∣va from Chatigam sent the King the Go∣vernor's Letter, and a Present. The An∣swer being long a coming, Sylva thought the King had secured the Messenger, and so rashly fell upon, and burnt Chatigam and other places. As he was spreading Sail, the Messenger came with the King's An∣swer, who knowing what Antony had done, kept the Prisoners more hardly.
6. Necessity obliged him to turn his Seve∣rity into Kindness, for Xercham, a Man of Note with the Mogol, disobliged by his Prince, deserted to the King of Bengala with his Brother Hedele Cham. Both were put into great Posts. Xercham, now at the Head of a great Army, resolved to revenge upon this King the Death of a Child, by him murdered to secure himself the Crown. At the same time, Omaum the Mogol, in revenge of what Xercham had done at Delhi, met and defeated him. But being apparently reconciled, he recovered him∣self. 7. Xercham streightened the King, and he advised with Martin Alfonso how to with∣stand him, when Iames Rabelo came to Chatigam, sent by Nuno de Cuna with three Vessels to procure Martin's Liberty. The King being in distress ordered him to be favourably entertained, and to gain assi∣stance from Nuno de Cuna, sent him twenty two of the Prisoners. Nuno sent nine Vessels. Mean while Xercham marched to gain a Pass upon the Fort of Gorii, which is where the Ganges enters Bengala. By ad∣vice of Martin Alfonso, the King sent two of his Vessels, commanded by two Portu∣gueses, with eight others to stop his Pas∣sage. They stopped him there, and he ta∣king another away, set down before the City Gouro with forty thousand Horse, two hundred thousand Foot, and fifteen hundred Elephants. Down the River came three hundred Almadies, which sailed to the
place where the King had eight hundred Paraos to oppose them. Here eight Portu∣gueses, commanded by Duarte de Brito, did wonders in the King's sight, to take an Ele∣phant that was swimming, and much co∣veted by the King; he was taken with the loss of three of the eight. Xercham distres∣sed the City, and the King bought a Peace, and was content that he from his Army should do him reverence. 8. The King being at ease, gave liberty to Martin Alfonso and his Men to go for India, leaving only five as Hostages for the assistance he expected from the Go∣vernor. Soon after Xercham returns and enters Gouro by force, obliging the King al∣ready wounded to abandon the City, who died on his way to Omaum, the Mogol, while Xercham plundered the place. It was said Xercham drew off with above sixty millions of Gold value, when Omaum came on bringing the dead King with him. At this time Vasco Perez de Sampayo arrived with the Succour, but acted nothing. O∣maum finding the City abandoned, buried the King, and set up in his place his own Brother-in law, Mir Mahomet Zaman, late∣ly deprived of the Kingdom of Cambaya, and soon after of this; for Xercham having secured his Treasure, with diligence re∣turned to Gouro, and made him fly thence. 9. Omaum again set out to meet Xercham with one hundred thousand Horse, and one hundred and fifty thousand Foot, besides the Followers of the Army, which were above
two hundred thousand. They met on the Banks of Ganges, near the City Canose. Xercham by a stratagem got the day with such a slaughter, that Omaum with only twenty five Men never stopped till he came to Labor, where his Brother Camiran Mirza received him better than he deserved, Mirza being then under Cure of the Poison he had given him. Xercham treated Omaum's Wo∣men, taken in that Battel with great respect, and afterwards restored them, well con∣vinced of his Modesty and Liberality. 10. Omaum finding himself too weak for the Enterprize of Bengala, bent his Thoughts against Cambaya, and demanding Aid of his principal Subjects was by them disappointed. He went into Persia, in which King he had great Confidence, on account of the Friendship of their Fathers. Nor was he deceived, for the Persian King received him with Magnificence, gave him rich Presents, and lastly, an Army of twelve thousand Horse. And because Sultan Xiath, King of Quereman, to whom he gave the Command of them, excused him∣self, saying, It was not for his Reputation to engage where the person of his Prince was not. He gave him h Son and Heir, yet in his Nurses Arms, and ade him Go∣vernor of him. So far can a truly royal Bounty extend when it resolves to do good. 11. Besides these twelve thousand given by Xiath, ten thousand Voluntiers offered themselves to Omaum. Who joining his own Forces, invested the City Candar,
where his Broster Astarii Mirza had pro∣claimed himself King of Mogostam. The City taken, he gave to the young Prince, who possessed it not long, but died soon of the Fatigue of the Marches. King Sultan Xiath, his Governor, went to a City where many of the Persian Kings lie buried, to in∣ter the Infant, leaving all the Men with Omaum for the space of two years, under four General Officers. These soon left him, and returned to Persia, where they were disgraced by the King, and made incapable of any Post of Honor, declaring he could not have wished the young Prince a more glorious death than he had in his Nurses Arms, assisting such a Prince as Omaum. Xercham raised by Fortune to a formidable pitch, having at command four hundred thousand Horse, and being courted by all the adjacent Princes, aspiring now to greater Undertakings, took the City Cali∣jor of the Resbutos, with intent to rob the Treasure that was there in a Temple. Pointing a Cannon to kill an Elephant be∣longing to that Temple, he killed himself; for the Piece bursting, tore him and many more to pieces. So that Fire turned all his Glory into Smoke. Such is the end of Pride. 12. At Malaca there were no less Trou∣bles than in these parts. D. Paulo de Gama had the Command of this place, he, to found. Alaudim King of Viantana, Son to him of Bintam, destroyed by Mascarenhas, sent Sebastian Vieyra with five Pórtugueses to
settle a Friendly Correspondence. The King, at the instigation of him of Pacem, bound and poured boiling Water upon them till they died, and then gave them to be de∣voured by wild Beasts. D. Paulo was not then in a condition to take revenge. He sent Emanuel Godino to the Kings of Panda and Pate, who concluded a Peace with them, whereby Malaca was relieved with Provisions, which he of Vjantana cut off on the other side. The year 1534 D. Stephen de Gama came and took possession of that Command, and repaired the Works. Hear∣ing some Vessels of the Enemy were in the River Muar, he sent one to discover them, he returned pursued by ten sent by Lacxe∣mena, who came to the assistance of Vjan∣tana with seventy sent by his Uncle Tuam Gaba. Instantly D. Paulo set out with nine Sail. Two Paraos were sent after to their assistance but too late, for when they came up a bloody Battel was ended, in which al∣most all our Men were slain, having done wonders, and made such a slaughter of the Enemy, that they durst not take the Ships whose Crew they had killed. Only three Men of Note escaped. 13. D. Stephen now resolved to destroy the City of Vjantana, and set out with twen∣ty six Sail and two hundred and fifty Men. Vjantana is the South East Point of the Coast of Malaca, from which forty Leagues distant. On the West of it runs into the Sea the deep River Tor, on whose Banks was seated King Alaudim's City, and three
Leagues below it a Fort so well stored with Cannon, it could sink any Vessel should attempt the Entrance. Here D. Stephen en∣tred with much danger, both Banks being covered with armed Men, but a party of Musqueteers on each side cleared the Shores. The first Attacks of the Fort D. Stephen re∣ceived damage, but afterwards did much more for the space of eight days. The Be∣siegers began to dismay, but were encoura∣ged by D. Stephen and Peter Barriga. Now the Enemy having received fresh Succour, drew out into the Field, where such slaugh∣ter of them was made, that they fled that day in despair to the Fort, and the next a∣bandoned it, the King escaping with his Women and Treasure. The City Tor was plundered and burnt, much Cannon and some Vessels taken, such as could not be carried, perished in the Flames, and D. Ste∣phen returned victorious to Malaca, where he was received in triumph, this being one of the notable Victories till then gained in Asia. 14. The King began again Acts of Ho∣stility, and D. Stephen returns with four hundred Men. He found the Fort he had destroyed repaired, and in it five thousand Men Five hundred of them were killed the first Assault. Many Ships were burnt, and D. Stephen marched towards the City, when the King from the Mountain, whi∣ther he had retired, sent to treat of Peace. He was ordered to send Hostages, and sent an Uncle of his own, with his Wives, so
D. Stephen returned to Malaca, whither four Embassadors followed, who concluded the Peace upon these Conditions. That the King should send to Malaca all the Can∣non that was in his Country, that he should build no Ships of War, that he should erect no Forts, that he should restore all Pri∣soners and Goods taken, that he should not hinder bringing Provisions to Malaca, that his Subjects should resort thither to buy and sell. This Peace being sworn to, brought great Tranquility to Malaca. The year 1537 this Quiet was disturbed by a Commander of Achem, who attacked the Bridge with three thousand Men. D. Ste∣phen met him with some Gentlemen and two hundred Soldiers, and slew five hun∣dred without the loss of one, so the Ene∣my drew off with shame. Soon after he returns with five thousand, and retired with the like Disaster. 15. D. Stephen had sent Francis de Bar∣ros in a Ship with twenty Portugueses to the King of Patane. In that Port Tuam Ma∣homet, Admiral of Vjantana, fell upon him with forty Sail. The Fight was desperate, some Portugueses and many Enemies fell, and they parted. All advise Barros to save himself ashore, most leave him, and he stays aboard with only two, who at last pre∣vail, and firing the Ship, they get ashore in the Boat, and bring off the Cannon. The King received them kindly. Henry Mendez de Vasconcelos was sent to bring them back. Those of Iava fall upon them both
with twenty Calaluzes that carried two Rows of Oars, well furnished with Can∣non. Mendez and Barros were in two Ves∣sels, ten Calaluzes attack each, one had sixteen, the other but few more Portugueses. The Fight was very hot, some Portugueses fall, and Mendez was stun'd with a poisoned Arrow. Barros was in danger, having but three Men and himself wounded. Vascon∣celos recovering, comes to his aid, shatters some, takes others of the Calaluzes, puts the Remainder to flight, and obtains an entire Victory. 16. Mean while Tristan de Ataide, at Maluco, through avarice, caused great Troubles. He took King Tabarija and sent him prisoner to Nuno de Cuna, who endea∣voured to remedy these Disorders, by send∣ing a very orderly Commander. Such was Antony Galvam, whose Prudence healed all the Sores made by his Predecessors. Having taken possession of the Command, he act∣ed with Modesty and Justice, without fa∣vour or affection. The Fort was unprovi∣ded of Cannon and Ammunition, he fur∣nished all at his own charge, and because Timber was wanting for the Works, he was always the fitst that went to the Woods, and returned loaded. 17. All things being settled here, Galvam turns to Tidore, where eight Kings with a vast number of Men were allied against the Portugueses. He sent to sound them, and they made a Truce, but observed it not, and Galvam seeing he had but few Men,
that those decreased by Famine, and 'twas too tedious to expect relief from India, he resolved upon an Action that was account∣ed rash. He set out in four Ships with on hundred and seventy Portugueses, and fifty Moors. Tristan de Ataide was left in the Fort. Galvam was met by 2000 Moors, there passed some Blows. Soon after ap∣peared three hundred Sail, containing above thirty thousand Moors, who thought to have terrified Galvam, but in vain; for he held on his course, and they followed him. They anchored at Tidore, the Shores were covered with multitudes who rent the Air with Shouts. The Cannon of the Fort played, but the Shot went over the Ships. The Fort appeared impregnable, but by that it was resolved to begin. Galvam scales it with one hundred and twenty Portugueses, and as many Slaves as made up in all three hundred. The Kings came upon him with fifty thousand Men, but he draws into a close Wood. They thought he fled, and pursue with hideous Shouts. Soon were they turned into Lamentations. King Ca∣chil Daialo, who led the Enemies Van, came another way to fall upon Galvam, endeavouring to amuse him, till the Body of the Army came up, which he perceiv∣ing, gave the sign to fall on, and after a hot Dispute, the Enemy fled, the King being killed among the first. Some of those that fled disordered them that were march∣ing, others run to the Fort. Galvam pur∣sues the latter, and enters along with them.
They abandon the Fort, and he set fire to it. Whilst the Fort flamed, the Kings fled to the Mountains with their Treasure, and Antony marches to the City. The Inhabi∣tants abandon, and he burns it down to the Ground, levelling the Works so that scarce any memory of the City was left, but the signs of the Ashes. Many Moors were kill∣ed, and many taken. This unparallel'd Victory cost but one Slave. 18. Those Kings thought to do us some harm with Ambushes at embarquing, and afterwards at Sea, but came off with loss. He of Tidore afterwards came to a peace, the Conditions honourable on our side. Antony, the more to oblige that King, offer∣ed to rebuild the City, which was immedi∣ately put in hand, with these and other Courtesies he so much obliged him and his Subjects, that they confided in him as an ancient tried Friend. 19. Galvam found it was easier to over∣come the greatest Army of Barbarians, than the least Portugues Avarice. He pro∣posed to put in execution the King's In∣structions relating to the Trade of Clove, and the Portugueses opposed, because they put a stop to their Frauds and Robberies. Next he would have examined into the Crimes of Tristan de Ataide, and he con∣scious of his own Guilt begged Mercy. Tho undeserving, Galvam took pity on and reconciled him with many, that they might not be his Accusers. Ataide requited his kindness by provoking most of the Portu∣gueses
to mutiny about the Trade of Clove. Antony endeavouring to appease, found them them all in Arms. At length Tristan sailed for India, having hindered the loading Clove for the King's use, and carrying a∣way most of the Mutineers. So the Fort was exposed to eminent danger. If the Commanders were bad, the Moors could not live with them, if good, they could not live with the Portugueses. 20. The Kings of Gilolo and Bachan pre∣pared a fresh to fall upon Galvam. He be∣ing weak, offered peace; for the same Rea∣son they refused it. Galvam finding himself in no condition to withstand, challenges them both to fight Man to Man. They ac∣cept of the Challenge, but the King of Ti∣dore interposing, came to an agreement. The two Kings so religiously observed this Pacification, that they refused to admit in∣to their Ports two Spanish Ships forced thi∣ther by stress of Weather. They were cast away upon the Coast, and those few that escaped, taken by the Natives, and ran∣somed by Galvam, who treated them cour∣teously. Their Captain was Ferdinand de Grijalva, sent out the year 1537 by Ferdi∣nand Cortes. Now the Ternatenses were at variance, refusing to obey Cachil Aeiro as King, set up by Tristan de Ataide, and cla∣mouring for Tabarija, by him imprisoned and sent to India. They offered to make Galvam King till they had a lawful one. He refused and endeavoured to make them agree. This Action of his, and the persua∣sions
of the King of Tidore, prevailed with them to admit Aeiro. After this all things continued in a wonderful Calm. 21. Galvam heared a great Fleet was coming upon Ternate, he borrowed some small Ships of the King of Tidore, into which he put forty Portugueses, and gave the Command to the Priest Ferdinand Vinagre, who behaved himself so well he beat that Fleet, and killed their Admiral. Then he quieted the Country, sometimes handling the Sword, sometimes putting on the Sur∣plice, he baptized many. Galvam perceiv∣ing how great Fruit this Priest produced, assisted him to prosecute the Conversion; and he so treated the Converts, that the Na∣tives said, It must needs be a true God that such a man adored, and his Religion ought to be embraced by all men. At this time Gal∣vam was informed, a great Fleet was com∣ing from Iava, Banda, Macaçar and Am∣boina to load Clove at Maluco, by force of Arms. To meet them he sent Iames Lopez de Azevedo with forty Portugueses, and 400 Ternatenses and Tidores. The Battel was fought at Amboina, that Fleet defeated, Ves∣sels, Cannon, Arms and Men taken. He scoured the Coast, and baptized three whole Towns, Ativa, Matelo and Nocivel. Two Brothers, Gentlemen of the Island Maca∣çar, came to Ternate to take Galvam, for their Godfather in Baptism, and took the Names of Antony and Michael with his Sir∣name. They afterwards came to visit him with Ships richly laden, and several young
Gentlemen who were also baptized. They gave an account much might be wrought in their Islands, and those of Celebes both in Spirituals and Temporals. Galvam sent sent Francis de Castro with two Priests, who were drove by bad Weather to discover o∣ther Islands a hundred Leagues North of the Malucos. The first they came to was Sati∣gana, the King and People Pagans. Castro made Peace with him, which was confirm∣ed by drinking each the others Blood, to which effect they had a Vein opened. Then the King, Queen, a Son, three Brothers, and many Nobles were baptized. Next they discovered the Island Mindanao, where the same happened with the King, Queen, their two Daughters and many People. After them were baptized the Kings of Butuano, Pimilarano and Camisino, the two first took the Name of Iohn, the latter was called Francis. Francis de Castro brought to Ternate many Sons of the new Converts, for whom Galvam, at his own expence, e∣rected a Seminary, where they might be in∣structed, which was the first in our Con∣quest. The obstinate Mahometans were asto∣nished at so many Conversions, and endea∣voured to persuade the Kings to put a stop to their progress; but were quite amazed when they saw an Arab, whom they reverenced al∣most as much as Mahomet, from whom he was descended, leave him to follow Christ. The term of Galvam's Command expiring, those Kings begged of ours to continue him for life. But wordly Felicities especially in Government are never lasting.
22. Antony Galvam seeing all things settled, and that it was unjust the Kings of that Island should always be Prisoners, set at li∣berty Cachil Aeiro persuading him to choose a Queen. This confirmed the great opinion the Ternatenses had of him, and they made publick Songs in his Praise, which are the only History or Records they use. He com∣posed all Differences between the Portugueses and Islanders, and being now at leisure built the Fort and all the Houses after the manner of Spain. After his Example the King beautified Ternate, with Buildings, and granted Lands to the Portugueses, who began to make curious Orchards and Gardens and Country Houses, the Moors did the same. Now Antony Galvam seeing there wanted Water, brought it from three Leagues distance. Being told he consumed his own without making any advantage of the Trade of Clove: he said, He could not meddle with Cloves, because it bore five Nobs, which represents the Wounds of Christ, and are the Arms of Portugal. His Command at Ternate expiring, he re∣turned to Portugal full of Debts, thinking (but he thought ill, if he knew his own Country) that he should find some Reward of so much Valour, such Service, so great Parts and Merits. He found Contempt and Misery, which brought him to die in an Ho∣spital. This was the Reward those who de∣served best found in Portugal, where Heroick Actions were looked upon as Crimes, and Crimes as Heroick Actions. But his Fame will live for ever.
CHAP. X. Which ends the Government of Nuno de Cuna this same Year 1538, in the Reign of King John the Third, and concludes the First Tome. 1. THE Present sent by the King of Cambaya to the great Turk to obtain Succour from him, was delivered together with the News of his Death. The great Value of this Present demonstrated to that Prince the vast Riches of India, and stirred up in him a desire of becoming Master of it. He thought he might expel the Portu∣gueses in the East, and one of them a Rene∣gado, then at Constantinople, promoted the Design by making it easie. 2. The Turk ordered a Fleet to be fitted, and gave the Command of it to the Eu∣nuch Solyman Bassa, Governor of Caire. Solyman was a Greek Janisary, born in the Morea, of stature short, his Face ugly, and Belly so big, he was more like a Beast than Man, his Age eighty years, he could not rise up without the help of four Men. His Purse purschased him this Command, offering the Turk to furnish the Shipping at his own Cost. The better to perform this, he put to death many rich Men to seize their Estates. Among others he hanged Mir Daud, King of Theayda, after taking
from him a great Sum of Mony. So it might well be said, this Fleet was rather built by the Dead than by the Living. It contained seventy Sail, most large Gallies, well stored with Cannon, Ammunition and Provisions, seven thousand Land-Men Ja∣nizaries, Turks and Mamalucs, the Seamen and Slaves of the best, many of the latter taken out of the Venetian Gallies then at Alexandria, which were seized upon, the Peace made by Bajazet in the year 1503, being now broke. 3. Solyman having set out committed Villanies natural to a Tyrant and Coward as he was. He caused four hundred Sol∣diers to be put to the Oars, and because they complained, put to death two hundred. He thought to have taken the King at Gid∣da, but he, who well knew him, escaped. At Zebet after receiving a rich Present he beheaded the King. In like manner after receiving a Present and Relief from the King of Aden, counterfeiting he had many sick Men aboard, they were set ashore pri∣vately armed, and seized the City while he murdered the King aboard. About the be∣ginning of September he came before Diu, having lost six Vessels by the way. 4. When King Badur was killed upon the Sea with some of his Reinue, one Coje Zo∣far swam to shore, and was well received by the Portugueses, who put all others to the Sword. He upon several occasions shewed himself so grateful, that Nuno de Cuna much favoured and recommended him earnestly
to Antony de Silveyra. At last without any provocation he fled from Diu to the new King of Cambaya, offering his Service, and persuading him to war upon the Portugueses, and drive them from that Coast, affirming it might be easily done with the assistance of the Turkish Fleet, which he knew would soon be there. The King with this Encou∣ragement forms a Body of five thousand Horse, and ten thousand Foot at Champanel. The first that appeared was Coje Zofar, with three thousand Horse and four thou∣sand Foot, maintained by himself, know∣ing it is suspicious to advise dangerous En∣terprizes, and not have part in them. An∣tony de Silveyra having notice hereof pro∣vided for a long and dangerous Siege. 5. Coje Zofar made the first Breach, fall∣ing upon the Town of the Rumes near Diu, where he did much harm. Francis Pacheco defended himself bravely in a Bulwark with fourteen Portugueses, till relieved by Antony de Silveyra and Zofar, was obliged to draw off, being wounded in the Arm. At the same time appears Alu Cham, the King's General with all the Army, and he and Zo∣far set down before the Passes. Antony de Silveyra orders the Officers, commanding them to quit those Posts, the better to main∣tain the City and Fort. In the Execution of these Orders they lost some Ships and Guns. 6 By reason of this Loss, and because there were many private Enemies, who only waited an opportunity of shewing
their malice, Silveyra could not maintain the City. Some he hanged, and retired to the Fort, always taking the Advice of his Captains. Alu Cham and Coje Zofar pre∣sently possessed themselves of the City and Island abandoned by us, and began to play their Shot vigorously. Lope de Sousa, who guarded the Wood and Water, whereof the Fort stood in need, had several Rencoun∣ters, and slew many of the Enemy, without losing one Man, but was himself much wounded. Antony de Silveyra, hearing of the approach of the Turkish Fleet, with speed sent advice thereof to Nuno de Cuna, the Answer was the Diligence wherewith he prepared to relieve him in person. 7. Michael Vaz, a resolute Man, sent by Silveyra to discover, saw the Enemies Fleet, and the better to view it, came up so near, that their Shot reached his Vessel. He got off, and carried the News to the Governor at Goa. The Fleet came to an Anchor in the Harbour, and was now formidable, not only to those few Portugueses, but even to the Moors, who had expected it. Next day Solyman landed six hundred Janizaries well accoutred, and armed with Bows and Mus∣quets to terrifie the Beholders. They en∣tered the City, and there acted all the Inso∣lencies used among Soldiers. Then drawing near the Fort, they killed six Por∣tugueses, but three hundred of our Musque∣teers advancing, killed fifty of them, and forced the rest to retire.
8. A storm obliged Solyman to remove to Madrefavat, a safer Harbour. There he continued twenty days, in which time Sil∣veyra bettered the Fortifications, planted his Artillery, and assigned every Man his Post. The same was done by the Turks, assisted by Coje Zofar. Some of their Can∣non played upon a Bulwark, to burn which they built a wooden Castle on a great Barque filled with combustible Mat∣but Francis de Gove, who had his Com∣mand by Sea, went out by night, and with great difficulty got to and burnt it. At this time came some relief sent by Nu∣no de Cuna, yet the greatest Comfort they brought was the hopes of his coming after in person. 9. Solyman returns from Madrefavat, and fires his Cannon upon the Bulwark where Francis de Gouvea commanded; from whence, and from S. Thomas his Tower, he was so well answered, that one of his Gallies sunk with most of the Men. The greatest harm the Portugueses received, was from their own Cannon, which burst and killed some: for the Enemy only killed two Brothers, whose Mother took them in her Arms, and carried off the Bodies with∣out shedding a tear. Zofar now furiously battered Francis Pachecho's Bulwark, which he rendered not tenable, seven hundred Janizaries assaulted it, and set up their Colours, but some of the scattered Portu∣gueses advancing, fell on, dislodged them, and killed one hundred and fifty. The
Dispute lasted all day, and the Enemy drew off with shame, for the weight of this Action lay upon two resolute Gentlemen. Next day Pacheco in despair surrendred. The Enemy enters the Bulwark, casts down the Christian Colours, and set up the Turkish. Iohn Perez, enraged hereat, throws down the Turkish, and again rears the Christian Ensigns, the Turks come on, and five Por∣tugueses more join Perez, who all were kill∣ed upon the spot, and their Bodies cast into the Sea, which laid them at the Gate of the Fort, where they were honourably bu∣ried. Pacheco and those with him had ar∣ticled for Life and Liberty. The latter was not performed by Solyman, the first he granted, cloathing their Bodies with Turkish Garments, as they had cloathed their Souls with Infamy, in accepting them. Then he sent one of them to Silveyra to summon him to surrender. He made a jest of the Pro∣posal. 10. Solyman enraged at this Contempt, prepared to batter the Fort. He planted his Artillery in several places under the di∣rection of Coje. Among the Cannon were nine Pieces of wonderful bigness, carrying Ball of above ninety pounds weight. Thus several other Sizes of Cannon, which in all were above one hundred and thirty, guard∣by two thousand Turks. Upon Monday the fourth of October, the Battery began, and continued violently twenty days, doing great harm to the Fort, from whence scarce any could be done, nor they could hardly
repair the most dangerous Breaches, tho all Art and Diligence was used. 11. The sixth day after they began to bat∣ter, the Turks perceiving Gaspar de Sousa's Bulwark much damaged, thought to carry it, but many of them were killed in the Attempt, with the loss of two of ours. E∣very day there was Action. Goncalo Falcam had his Head shot off. Iohn Fonseca being wounded in the Right Arm, held his Lance with the Left, as if he had received no hurt. The Gallego Iohn, a Youth of nine∣teen years of age, of a little Body, but great Heart, pursued a Moor till he run into the Sea, thither he followed, till losing ground he was like to drown. The Moor perceiving it, laid hold on him to kill him, but he recovering himself without losing Gun or Sword, slew him, and came out all bloody, walking leisurely towards the Fort, while Showers of Bullets flew about him. Many other singular Acts of Valour were performed this Siege. 12. But by this time many brave Gentle∣men had been killed in the Fort, Powder grew short, the Provisions shorter, the Re∣lief of the Viceroy D. Garcia de Noronha, now arrived in India, moved slow, the Neighbouring Forts sent no Aid, and all began to be in confusion. Which was in∣creased by a sickness that hindered most from swallowing the little Provision they had, swelling the Gums, and loosening the Teeth, so that they fell out; this was cau∣sed by the bad Water. In fine, the Portu∣gueses
fought and suffered, as if so much Misery could not overcome them. Let the Valour of the Women now take place here. Donna Isabel de Vega, a Woman of great Virtue, and some Beauty, was Wife to Manuel de Vasconcelos, he fearing the Fort might be lost, and she taken by the Turks, earnestly entreated her to go to her Father Francis Ferram at Goa, but she beg∣ged not to be parted from him; which, with much regret at last he granted. Then this Virago considering there were many Men employed in the Work who might fight, and their places be supplied by as many Women, calling together all of that Sex that were in the Fort, she exhorted them to undertake that Labour, to the end so many Men might be added to the num∣ber of their Defendants. They all follow∣ed, she led and gave the Example, and with her Anne Fenandez, with whom she had before communicated her Design. This Anne was Wife to a Physician, and so cou∣ragious, that by night she viewed all the Posts, and appeared at Assaults, encoura∣ging the Soldiers. Her Son being killed in her sight, she drew him away, returned where the Service was, and that ended, went to bury him. 13. Perceiving the Turks undermined his Bulwark, Gaspar de Sousa sallied with seventy Men to view their Work, which he did with great slaughter of the Enemy. At his Retreat missing two Men, he turn∣ed back upon the Enemy, fought bravely,
and being surrounded, was hamstringed, yet so defended himself on his Knees till op∣pressed by the multitude. The Mine was countermined; the continual Labour was insupportable, and impossible to repair so many Ruins. 14. At this Juncture arrived four Ves∣sels, sent by the Viceroy D. Garcia, which carried only twenty Men of Relief. Soly∣man was concerned at this Succour, tho small, and much more that the Fort stood so many Assaults, Coje Zofar having assured he would carry it at two. At the begin∣ning of the Siege there were six hundred Men in the Fort, many were killed, and some Cannon burst. But the Turk placed no confidence herein, and looked toward the Sea, fearful of the Portugues Fleet he heared was coming upon him. 15. This moved him to press the Siege with more vigour. The Bulwark of the Sea where Antony de Sousa commanded, was furiously attacked with fifty Barques, two whereof were sunk by our Cannon. Then they attempted to scale it, and were repulsed with great slaughter. The Assault was repeated, and still the Enemy came off with loss. Sousa sent the wounded Men to be dressed, among them Fernan Penteado, who waiting, heared the noise of a fresh Attack, and forgetting the Dressing, run thither, and received another Wound, the very same happened to him the third time, and then was dressed of all three. By this time there were left in the Fort but two hun∣dred
and fifity of the six hundred Men, fit to take Arms. 16. Solyman now in despair resolved to venture all. First he counterfeited he would raise the Siege, and twelve Gallies put to Sea, that Silveyra might be the easier sur∣prized, but he provided still to repulse the greatest danger. One night some Noise was heared at the Foot of the Wall by water, it appeared they were applying great numbers of scaling Ladders, they were op∣posed, till morning appearing shewed the place beset round, and assaulted by fourteen thousand Men. First the Cannon was played, and then they mounted on all sides, chieflly next the Commandant's House, where it was weakest: but he had placed such Men there as made a great slaughter. Failing there, they attempted a Bulwark, powring in showers of Arrows and Bullets. Great was the Confusion and Havock on both sides. Now come up fourteen Gallies powring in their great shot, but do no Exe∣cution. Francis Gouvea made them draw off, having battered two, and killed some Men with his Cannon. By this time two hundred Turks had entered the Bulwark, and planted their Colours. Scarce thirty Portugueses were there to oppose them, but they rushing on desperately regain the Work. The Enemy being very thick, none of our shot is lost, they sustain great da∣mage, and such as were in this Action draw off. Fresh Men succeed, and set up four Colours. The Portugueses wounded
and burnt run for ease, and dipped them∣selves in Jars of Salt Water, where they pe∣rished, seeking Refreshment with hellish Torture. Antony de Silveyra indefatigably repaired to all places, encouraging all. Here a Soldier wanting Ball pulled out one of his Teeth to load his Musquet. The Enemy had much the better this second Assault, which a few Gentlemen perceiving, furiously rushed upon them. Iohn Rodri∣gues, a Man of great Body, and as great Courage, run out with a Barrel of Powder, crying, Clear the way; for here I carry my own and many a Man's death. He threw the Barrel among the Enemies, and suddenly above a hundred were carried up into the Air, torn in peices, twenty lay burnt upon the ground. Iohn himself came off with∣out hurt, and doing other considerable Actions, deserved afterward some of the first Rewards and Honours gained this Siege. Other Fireworks burnt the four En∣signs who had set up the Colours. Two of our Cannon cleared the place of Enemies, and two Bullets threw down two Ensigns that succeeded the former. The Enemy withdraws, and fresh comes on the third time, and place their Colours. The Com∣mander of these, Son-in-law to Coje Zofar, being killed, his Men dismayed, and turn∣ed their Backs. These Assaults lasted above four hours, the same small number of Por∣tugueses withstanding still fresh and nume∣rous Enemies. Our Women in the Fort, and theirs on the Walls of the City, being
Spectators of the whole Action. The Por∣tugueses all smeared with Powder, looked more like Moors and were known by their Cloaths not Colour, and among themselves by the Voice, every one looking as if he came out of Hell, their black hue wrought with Fire, Blood and Sweat. In fine, the Enemy carried off above a thousand wound∣ed and left above five hundred Men killed. Of ours fourteen were killed, and two hun∣dred lay useless for want of Blood. Only forty remained able to bear Arms, and the Arms lay broken to pieces about the Ground, some serving such as could not stand on their Legs for Crutches. No hope was left if the Enemy renewed the Attack. The Walls were all shattered, and no Pow∣der left. Nothing but horror appeard. Only the brave Silveyra's Countenance was what encouraged all Men. 17. Solyman put an end to all these Ca∣lamities; for not knowing the Condition the Fort was in, and terrified with this ill success, he raised the Siege. Antony Silvey∣ra seeing them weigh anchor, and hoise sail, thought it was still counterfeit, and pre∣pared to resist as if he had any thing to trust to. He posted the forty Men, and caused some that were wounded to lean against the Walls, to shew a number; those who could not rise ordered themselves to be car∣ried in their Beds, saying, It was to die in an honourable place. Some of the Women also armed themselves, and appeared upon the Works. The Night was spent upon the
watch, but the Morning was more com∣fortable to the afflicted; for Solyman was under Sail without any thought of return∣ing. Tho fear did much, yet a Device of Coje Zofar did more towards removing So∣lyman. Coje was moved to it by two Rea∣sons, one that he was weary of the unsup∣portable Pride of that Turk; another an Order that he had from his King, in case he found the Turk would keep that City and Fort (as was feared) he should rather endeavour to leave it to the Portugueses. Coje's Device was, that he framed a Letter which came to Solyman's Hands, who find∣ing it contained, that the Viceroy of India would be there the next day with a vast Fleet, he thought not fit to delay his De∣parture, and so sailed away on the fifth of November. The same night Coje's Men fired the City, and marched away. This was the first Siege of Diu which was admired throughout the World, and added new Lustre to the Portugues Glory, all due to the invincible Courage of the ever re∣nowned Antony de Silveyra, and those va∣liant Gentlemen who were with him, and whose Fame will last from Generation to Generation. 18. Solyman touched at the Ports on the Coast of Arabia, and took up some Portu∣gueses he found there. He gathered a∣bove 140, and cutting off their Heads, then the Ears and Noses, salted and sent them to the great Turk to shew what he had done. Among these was Francis Pacheco,
who had not the Courage to die like a Gentleman in his Bulwark. Solyman being come to the great Turk, and not well a∣greeing with one who aspired to his Post, was reduced to kill himself. Such is gene∣rally the end of Tyrants. 19. This famous Siege was far advanced when the Viceroy D. Garcia de Noronha ar∣rived in India, to whom Nuno de Cuna im∣mediately resigned the Government. His arrival with so considerable Relief as he brought might well have bettered the Affairs of Diu; yet on the contrary it much en∣damaged them. For had he not come, Nuno had relieved Diu with eighty Sail he had in a readiness for that purpose, and prevented so many Miseries and the death of so many brave Men. Still fresh Ad∣vice was brought of the danger the be∣sieged were in, and still D. Garcia wasted the time in considering of means to relieve them, without chusing any, or taking the advise of Cuna. Thus the Siege was raised before he found the method of relieving, having gathered one hundred and sixty Sail for that purpose. 20. D. Garcia wanted not Courage, having given good demonstrations of it under Alfonso de Albuquerque. But he chose ra∣ther to commit an Error through his own wilfulness, than act rightly by the advice of Nuno de Cuna. 21. It soon appeared Noronha was not at all disposed to take advice of Cuna, treat∣ing him in such manner at Goa as obliged
him to go to Cochin, to order his Affairs in order to return to Portugal. At Cochin he refused him a convenient Ship, contrary to an Order he had from the King to act as Go∣vernor, and chuse such Vessel as he liked. He was forced to set out in a Merchant-Ga∣leon, hired for himself and Family. Tho the Viceroy treated him ill there, no less ill usage was designed him here; and doubtless the knowledge D. Garcia had of the ill will the Ministers of State here bore him was the cause of his hard usage there. 22. Nuno de Cuna by the way fell sick and died. He protested at his death, that he had nothing belonging to the King but five Pieces of Coin, or Medals of Gold, found among the dead King Badur's Trea∣sure, which for their Beauty e carried to shew to the King. A Chaplain asked, How he would have his Body ordered to be brought home. And he answered, Since God is pleased I should die at Sea, let the Sea be my Grave. Since the Land would not have me, I will not give it my Bones. He died like a good Christian. Ordered a sufficient Weight should be tied to his Feet to carry him to the bottom. Thus ended an excel∣lent Governor of India. His Age fifty two years. He was Son of Tristan de Cuna and Donna Antonia de Albuquerque. Of stature large and well proportioned. He want∣ed one Eye. Tho he had Majesty in command, he was courteous, and not sub∣ject to any passion, easie to be reconciled, loved to do good to all, an observer of
Justice, free from Avarice, prudent in Counsel, affable in Discourse. His Picture represents his Complexion fair, his Beard black, all the Cloaths black, only the Cap blew. He governed ten years wanting two months, and died the beginning of the year 1539. He was the tenth Governor, and first of the Name. The End of the Four Parts of the First Tome.
DEDICATED TO HER MOST SACRED MAJESTY, CATHERINE, QUEEN-DOWAGER OF ENGLAND, &c.
THE PREFACE. SINCE our Asia now re∣ceives a new Prince, let us begin another Tome with a different Style. As the other Prefaces were fil∣led with Instructions and Do∣cuments of pure Zeal; so shall this with the delightful Enter∣tainment of a curious Refle∣xion. For when Fortune makes it her Sport to heap Burdens of Care, there is none so resolved or unmoved but requires Di∣version and Ease. The King∣dom of Portugal parted from
consider, that it began and en∣ded in Henry's, and in the num∣ber 12; that the last King died on the Day and last Year of Peace; that the King and King∣dom expired where they had their Birth; that being foun∣ded by a Spanish Female, by another they were extinguished; and such-like Reflections; we shall discover no less remarka∣ble Circumstances in the Portu∣gues Asia. The Promoter of this wonderful Discovery was Prince Henry, and Henry was the last of our Princes that Pos∣sessed it. Alfonso was the Foun∣der of the Royal Throne of Portugal in Europe, Christ ap∣pearing to him; and another of that in Asia, when the Cross appeared to Alfonso de Albu∣querque in the Red-Sea. The
Throne of this Kingdom was raised on the Victory obtained by Alfonso at Orique over the Moorish Emperor called Isiael; and the Prince of Goa, the Me∣tropolis of our Dominions in Asia, taken by Albuquerque, was called Ismael; and the King of Persia, deprived of his Sove∣reignty over Ormuz, was also Ismael. Ferdinand Tellez de Me∣neses was the last Governour of India sent by our Natural Prin∣ces, and his Picture was the last the Hall in the Palace of Goa, appointed to hang up the Por∣traitures of the Viceroys and Governors, could contain. The Name of the first Viceroy of India was Francis, and conse∣quently his is the first of those Pictures; and now we see the Name of the first Viceroy sent
by a Spaish Prince is Francis, and therefore the Picture of that Name is the first in the second Hall destined to pre∣serve those Memorials. If there be still any obstinate Philoso∣sophers, who hold, That all Worldly Things are the meer Effect of Chance, let them contemn the Consideration of these Parallels on such impor∣tant Occasions; but let not those despise it, who allowing the most inconsiderable Earth∣ly Affairs to be the Work of Providence, cannot but be as∣sured the Great are much more its Care. Let not those, I say, undervalue it, who know the Immortal Providence can be discovered but by Shadows. The Divine Power has always taken this course to manifest it∣self
to Man. What Wonder then it should take that Method in the Revolution of a King∣dom, more peculiarly belong∣ing to Christ himself? Thus then, these wonderful Presages first concurring, (not to spea of Comets,) the Kingdom of Portugal returned to its formet Original, after 500 Years Pere∣grination over the whole cir∣cumference of the Earth: And now bringing that Precious Scepter from the East, puts it into the Hands of Philip in Spain, who had the Fortune to be the great Ocean to which run all the great, in∣different, and small Rivers of so many Empires, Kingdoms, and Sovereignties, spread over the whole Face of the Terre∣strial Globle. Who would not
believe, that the Portugueses would lose their Valour, ha∣ving lost their Natural Prince, since it is certain the Presence of Princes is the chief Strength of it? We shall see them de∣prived of this Glory, but not of that Virtue. Our Hero's of this Age did not degenerate from those of the other, so soon as naturally might be ex∣pected. Such was their Bra∣very, such their Courage, they seem to have exceeded the Bounds of their Fortune, and even of Nature.
THE CONTENTS. TOM. III. PART I. CHAP. I. The Government of the Vice-Roy D. Fran∣cis Mascarennas Count De St. Cruz, fromthe Year 1581, till the Year 1584 Page 1 CHAP. II. Continues the Government of D. Francis Mascarennas 9 CHAP. III. The Government of the Vice-Roy D. Du∣arte de Meneses, from the Year 1584 till 1588. 20 CHAP. IV. Continues the Government of D. Duarte de Meneses 28
CHAP. V. Continues the Government of D. Duarte de Meneses 40 CHAP. VI. The End of the Government of D. Duarte de Meneses. 47 CHAP. VII. The Government of Emanuel de Sousa Coutinno, from the Year 1588, till 1590 56 CHAP. VIII. The Government of the Vice-Roy Matthias de Albuquerque, from the Year 1591 till 1597. 64 CHAP. IX. Continues and Concludes the Government of Matthias de Albuquerque 71 CHAP. X. Of the Propagation of the Gospel in the Em∣pire of China during these later Years 78 CHAP. XI. Continues the Subject of the Propagation of the Gospel 85
TOM. III. PART II. CHAP. I. THE Government of the Viceroy D. Francis de Gama Count de Vidi∣gueyra, from the Year 1597 till 1600 93 CHAP. II. Continues the Government of D. Francis de Gama Count de Vidigueyra 99 CHAP. III. Continues the Government of D. Francis de Gama Count de Vidigueyra 107 CHAP. IV. The Remarkable Revolutions of Pegu, du∣ring the Government of D. Francis de Gama Count de Vidigueyra 117 CHAP. V. The Government of the Viceroy Ayres de Saldanna, from the Year 1600, till 1604 124
CHAP. VI. The Government of the Viceroy D. Martin Alfonso de Castro, from the Year 1604 till 1607 138 CHAP. VII. The Government of the Archbish D. F. Alexius de Meneses, who was Gover∣nor from the Year 1607 till 1609 148 CHAP. VIII. Of the Viceroy D. John Pereyra Frojas Count de Feyra, in the Year 1608 153 CHAP. IX. Of the Governour Andrew Furtado de Mendoça, in the Year 1609 162 CHAP. X. The Government of the Viceroy Ruy Lo∣renço de Tavora, from the Year 1609 till 1612 166 CHAP. XI. Of the Propagation of the Christian Faith in China 174
TOM. III. PART III. CHAP. I. The Government of the Viceroy D. Hierome de Azevedo, from the Year 1612 till 1617 181 CHAP. II. Continues the Government of the Viceroy D. Hierome de Azevedo, in the Year 1613 190 CHAP. III. Continues the Government of D. Hierome de Azevedo, in the Year 1614 197 CHAP. IV. Continues the Government of D. Hierome de Azevedo 207 CHAP. V. Continues the Government of the Viceroy D. Hierome de Azevedo, in the Year 1615 212
CHAP. VI. Continues the Government of the Viceroy D. Hierome de Azevedo, in the Year 1615 220 CHAP. VII. Continues the Government of the Viceroy D. Hierome de Azevedo, in the Year 1615 224 CHAP. VIII. Continues the Government of the Viceroy D. Hierome de Azevedo this same Year 1615, and that of 1616 229 CHAP. IX. Continues the Government of the Viceroy D. Hierome de Azevedo the same Year 1616 234 CHAP. X. Continues the Government of the Viceroy D. Hierome de Azevedo, in the Year 1616 242
CHAP. XI. Continues the Government of the Viceroy D. Hierome de Azevedo the same Year 1616 249 CHAP. XII. Continues the Government of the Viceroy D. Hierome de Azevedo, in the Year 1617. 256 CHAP. XIII. Particular Discoveries made in the Island of Madagascar, or St. Lawrence, by Order of the Viceroy D. Hierome de Azevedo. 264 CHAP. XIV. Continues the Discoveries in the Island Ma∣dagascar, under the Viceroy D. Hie∣rome de Azevedo 271 CHAP. XV. The Government of the Viceroy D. John Coutinno Count de Rodendo, from the Year 1617 till 1619 278
CHAP. XVI. Continues the Government of the Viceroy D. John Coutinno Count de Redon∣do 284 CHAP. XVII. Several wonderful Accidents during the two Years Government of the Viceroy the Count de Redondo 292 CHAP. XVIII. Of the Governor Ferdinand de Albu∣querqe, from the Year 1619, till 1622 299. CHAP. XIX. Continues the Government of Ferdinand de Albuquerque. 308 CHAP. XX. Of the Viceroy D. Alfonso de Noronna, in the Year 1621 314 CHAP. XXI. Of the Propagation of the Faith in Japan, and Ethiopia about this Time 316
TOM. III. PART IV. CHAP. I. The Second Government of the Viceroy D. Francis de Gama Count de Vidi∣gueyra, from the Year 1622 till 1627 Page 321 CHAP. II. Continues the Government of the Viceroy D. Francis de Gama Count de Vidi∣gueyra 331 CHAP. III. The Government of D. F. Luis de Brito, Bishop of Cochim, from the Year 1628, till 1629 343 CHAP. IV. Of the Viceroy D. Francis Mascarennas, in the Year 1628; with sundry Occur∣rences at Pegu, Martavam, Prom, Siam, and other Places. 347
CHAP. V. Continues the Affairs of the Kings of Siam and Peg 357 CHAP. VI. Of the Governor Nunno Alvarez Botello, in the Year 1629 364 CHAP. VII. Continues the Exploits of the Governor and General Nunno Alvarez Botello 370 CHAP. VIII. The Government of the Viceroy D. Michael de Noronna Count de Linnares, from the Year 1629 till 1635 374 CHAP. IX. Of the Affairs of Ethiopia, during the Government of the Viceroy D. Michael de Noronna Count de Linnares 383 CHAP. X. Continues the Government of the Vice∣roy D. Michael de Noronna, Count De Linnares. 387 CHAP. XI. Of the Recovery of Ceylon, during the Government of the Viceroy the Count de Linnares. 396 CHAP. XII. Of several Occurrences till the end of the Government of the Viceroy the Count De Linnares. 402
CHAP. XIII. The Government of the Viceroy Peter de Silva, from the Year 163, till 1638 408 CHAP. XIV. The Government of Antony Tellez de Silva, from the Year 1639, till 1640. 412 CHAP. XV. Of the Viceroy John de Silva Tello, who went for India in the Year 1640 414 A short Account of what the Portugueses are possest of between the Cape of Good Hope and China; of the several Dig∣nities, Commands and Revenues in the said Possessions, and of the Religious Houses in those Parts 415 An Account of all the SHIPS that sailed from Lisbon to the Discovery of the Coasts of Africk and Asia, and the Annual Trading Ships, from the time Prince Henry first attempted the Disco∣very, till the Year 1640. 421 The Viceroy and Governors of India, from the first Discovery till the Year 1640 433 Books in Print and Manuscripts out of which the Portugues Asia was Col∣lected 436
THE PORTUGUES ASIA. TOM. III. PART I. CHAP. I. The Government of the Vice-Roy D. Fran∣cis Mascarennas Count de St. Cruz, from the Year 1581 till the Year 1584. 1. DON Francis Mascarennas Count of Santa Cruz, was the First Vice-Roy of India sent after the Revolution of the King∣dom of Portugal by the King of ain. The Honours and Advantages con∣ferred on him, together with this Com∣mand, exceeded all that till that time had been heard of upon the like Occasion. D. Francis very well deserved all Rewards of Honour and ofit, having served well in India, and bravely defended the City Chaul
with a few Men and no Wall, against the Power of Nizamaluco, who sieged it with 150000 Men. Yet this his Advancement may be attributed, rather than  his Merit, to the Policy of Princes, who when they gain a Crown, to which there are other Competitors, endeavour to gain Hearts by Bounty, and heap on one what at another time would serve many. The Vice Roy had five Ships. 2. Being come to Goa, he found all India had already proclaim'd King Philip, accord∣ing to the Orders not long before snt to the Governor Ferdinand Telles de Meneses. It is credible the great Favours bestowed on the Count were only to animate him to pro∣cure the peaceable submission of India to the new King, and that being already per∣formed by Ferdinand Telles, the Count for∣tunately reaped the Benefit of his Care and Industry. 3. The new Vice-Roy being eased of that Care, applied himself to the usual Affairs of the Government, sending out Squadrons as customary in the beginning of Summer. Mathias de Albuquerque with two Gallies and Twenty other Vessels and Seven hundred Men, were ordered for the Coast of Mala∣bar. 4. He being on that Coast, sent Francis Fernandez with Eighteen Sail to burn Coulete the lesser, which was a Nest of Pyrats, it was executed by him without losing one Man; the same at Capocate, where ty Almadies, being fishing Vessels, were taken, and the
Country made desolate for a long ti A hundred Moor of Capocate seeing their Houses bu un in a Rage to the Shore where Alo yra with Eighteen Men withstood em till he was relieved from the Ships, and got off without Loss, some of the Enem being killed by our Cannon. D. Giles Yanez burnt some Vessels, and killed several en up that River, then they all returned to their Admiral, who was become t Tror of all that Coast. 5. This Destruction fell chiefly on the Queens of the Mountains between Calicut and Car, and her of Olala, their Towns and Wods being burnt and cut down. The neighbouring People terrified herewith, submitted and paid the Tribute they owed for some Years; and the Balala of Panabur was again brought under subjection. Franci Fernandez, Alvaro de Avelar, and Andrew Frtado took each of them a considerable Ship. Alfonso Ferreyra over against Coul razed a Fort of the Moors, having killed s of One hundred and fifty, he attacked with few Men. 6. Iames Lopez Coutinno de Santarem, cruzing on the Northern Coast with Eight Sail, near Suratte burnt a Village of the Mogols, because they had killed Six of Twen∣ty four Men, who without Orders went ashore; but as he drew off, the Enemy came down very numerous with some Elephants, and one piece of Cannon, and wounded many of his Men and himself, so that he was forced to be sent to Damans to be cured.
Afterwards burning another Village he came off with Loss. 7. The Vice-Roy being informed that the Turkish Gallies, which the Year before plun∣dred Mascate, were again at Sea, ared they would make some attempt upon Moçambique, and therefore sent thither two Ships to re∣lieve that Place. Mean while an Army of Mogols with Elephants and other Necessaries for a Siege entred the Country of Damam, burnt Villages, and encamped not far from the City. Our Commander there, Martin Alfonso de Melo, having but few Men, and being ill fortified, sent Advice to the neigh∣bouring Commanders and to the Vice-Roy; and in few Days so many Gentlemen resorted to him, that they valued not the Enemy. 8. The Mogol thinking nothing was to be got by Men who so freely offered them∣selves to Danger, forbore the Siege, and with fresh Fury over-ran the whole Coun∣try. He took a view of the Fort where Fer∣dinand de Miranda had Commanded, and was well known to him; he called Miranda loud, and rid out from the Front of his Army. Ferdinand knowing he that called was Calichan, General of those Troops, went out, and pointed his Lance so well, that hitting on his Breast it pierced the Ar∣mour, wounded him, and flew in pieces, but he fell not, being tied to the Saddle. Calichan retired to his Men, decamped and marched away, but left a Garrison to keep Possession of one Village.
But the Portugueses had like to have done themselves the Damage they might have feared from the Mogol, being drawn up in order to fight among themselves, on account of some Disputes about Superiority, and a∣bout opposing Alfonso de Melo, for impri∣soning a Soldier. A fortunate alarm pre∣vented this Mischief. 10. mana da Rama, King of Sarceta, five Leues Northward of Damam, a Friend to the Portugueses, being upon this occasion entrued to secure the Women and Chil∣dren, covetous of the Riches they carried with them, refused to restore them. Martin Alfonso de Melo and Ferdinand de Miranda marched towards him with Eight hundred Portugueses, whereof 140 Horse, and 400 Musqueteers, and 1000 of the Natives. Being come in sight of the City Raumalaje, the King sent to offer he would restore all, provided they would proceed o farther. They, thinking it was only to amuse them, marched on. The King with his Wife and Jewels getting on Elephants, and being fol∣lowed by the Inhabitants, fled to a Moun∣tain, whence he could see the City plunder∣ed and burnt, and all the Country about de∣stroyed. 11. The Enemy made some attempts upon our Quarters, and at last the King me in Person with a good number of Men, for some time put our Men very hard to it, but in the end was forced to fly, and from his retreat sent to make entire restitution of all that had been demanded.
12. In Ceylon, Raju was preparing to fall upon Columbo. The Vice-Roy sent five Sail to its Relief, and Raju understanding it, stirred not. Iohn Correa de to, Com∣mander of Columbo, eased of that care, sent back three of the Ships, retaining only two. 13. D. Hierome de Mascarennas, who was with a Squadron in the Red Sea, met with no Enemy, but one Night the Sky being se∣rene and clear, they all saw a great opening in the Region of the Air with such bright∣ness as enlightned all the Sea, then there fell abundance of Flames like flashes of Pow∣der. This lasted not long; the Night after it continued clear as before, and they sailed to Ormuz. 14. The Kings of Lara always aspired to raise themselves above those of Ormuz, as formerly they had been. He that now reigned resolving to possess himself of all Mogostan, and leading a powerful Army, had taken several Towns, and kept the Fort of Ormuz in a manner besieged, by hindring the resort of the neighbouring Country Peo∣ple, who supply it with Provisions. The King of Ormuz who was equally apprehen∣sive of this danger, had a Conference with D. Gonzalo de Meneses, Commander of the Fort, and having adjusted Matters, they both set out in August, when the heat of the Sun is intollerable, to meet the Enemy. The King led 3000 Men, D. Gonzalo 800 choice Portugueses, with a train equal to the great∣est Princes. These 800 were divided into three Bodies. They marched to the Fort
of Xamel, which they judged impregnable, not so much  Art as its, natural Situation, in it were Fire hundred Lines, the flower of that . 15. In ing our Cannon we lost one Man, and had many Wounded. The Fort was battd Twenty Days without any Ef∣fect. The Battery was removed against a Bastion ar the Gate, where it soon made a consable impression. The Bastion was assauld and gained with the loss of six Men. 16. The Battery was removed thither, and continued playing till the King of Lara dying, and his two Sons falling at variance about the Succession, instead of relieving the Besieged, they were forced to surrender upon Condition to march out with their Baggage. As they marched the Amadises of the Army of Ormuz, who had feigned themselves  Friends, only to get the opportunity of revenging the Affronts re∣ceived from them in the Persons of their Wives and Daughters, now suddenly fell upon them, killed 150, and had destroyed the rest, had not the King and D. Gonzalo interposed. Milascar, one of their Officers was killed by our Men whom he assaulted, believing them the Breakers of the Articles. 17. Xascambar, another of their Officers more discreet, put himself into the Prote∣ction of D. Gonzalo who found much diffi∣culty to save him. The Amadises begged of him, since he would not suffer them to kill him, he would at least permit them to lay their Mouths to his Wounds to
suck his Blood in revenge of their Affronts, with great trouble he appealed them. The King put Coiecenadam with Five hundred Men into the Fort, and returned to z. Im∣mediately after, Provisions, w grown scarce in the City, were plentifully brought to it. 18. At the same time the King of Achem came to Malaca with 150 Sail, and finding two Ships in that River, batter'd them the space of fifteen days. D. Iohn de Ga who commanded there, and whose time was now expiring, was most vigilant till Rocque de Melo succeeded him. The Enemy weary with battering the Ships resolved to burn them, and had compassed it, had not Bar∣tholomew Fernandez a Mulato, with two Soul∣diers turned off from them a flaming Vessel designed to set them on Fire. 19. Nunno Monteyro coming from the Sreight of Singapura in a Galliot with sixty Portugueses most of them born at Malaca, had the boldness to attack all that Fleet. Though it seem fabulous, at the first onset he made all those 150 Sail give way, then the greatest of them boarded him, and he had visibly the better of them, when some spark of Fire falling into his Powder blew up him, his Vessel and all the Men: Yet this Accident was but a just Punishment of Monteyro's Disobedience to the Commander of the City, and the Enemy content with this success weighed Anchor and made away. 20. The Enemy sailed thence to the City Ior, and began furiously to batter it. Re∣gale
the King se to Malaca to desire Suc∣cour, it was sent him in twelve Ships, which entred that Port so unexpectedly, that be∣fore any resistance could be made, they fired some of the greatest Gallies, killing all that were in t, and presented the King with the Head of one of those Commanders, which being set up on the Shore so terrified the whole Fleet, they all fled. 21. et us return to Damam. Ferdi de Mirda put to Sea again with his Squa∣dron, consisting of twenty Sail. After most violent Storms they were forced to come to an Anchor at Suratte. Setting out thence they attacked a mighty Ship of Balala, which surrendred, having articled for the Mens Lives. CHAP. II. Continues the Government of D. Francis Mascarennas. 1. MIranda's Men in a Rage that they were deprived of the Booty of that Ship which had submitted it self, beset him to the number of Fourteen Sail, and after much reproachful Language, left him and sailed away to Damam, putting that Town into a great fright, because they had set up black Colours. They landed and marched in warlike manner into the City, committing extravagant Enormities. Every
one was astonished not knowing the cause▪ nor daring to ask it, and their Resolution was to kill Miranda as soon as he landed. As soon as he entred the Por they ran to the Shore rashly, wounded several instead  him, no Authority being sut to  them. Miranda privately with to the Convent of St. Francis, and sent  to offer them as much as could com to every Man's share of that booty, whereth they were appeased. It was not above  Crowns a Man, which they valued above their Ho∣nour and Duty. 2. Miranda sailed hence with some small Vessels, and took another Ship at Goga, and then stood for Castelee, a Nest of Robbers long since threatned by the Portugueses. He now coming furiously upon it demolished the Fort, burnt the Town, and put the Inha∣bitants to the Sword. 3. Zamori seeing so many Villages on the Coast destroyed by Mathias de Albuquerque, offered a Peace, Albuquerque was Commis∣sioned to treat of it, he finding himself still amuzed with Delays, fell again to acts of Hostility, destroying all the Coast with Fire and Sword. The City of Calicut felt this Fury, being strongly cannonaded, as were Paracale, Capocaate and Chatua. This done Mathias went away to Ormuz, of which Place he was appointed Captain, leaving his Squa∣dron under the Command of D. Giles Yanes Mascarennas, who came to succeed him with eight Ships.
4. This Year Five Ships set out from Lisbon, two  them  forced in again, one was  away a ▪ two ed in India,  o  upon  fought th or fo  Vessels, and  off with Honour. 5. D. Home de  and Ferdi de Miraa being  with their Sq∣drons, took each of them two Mar Sps. Both tse Commanders were go  Emanu de Saldanna, Captain of , against the King of the , who  over he Camponeses of that Neigh▪ These Commanders being joined with 200 Horse, 800 Musketeers, almost 1000 laves and Natives, and the King of Sarceta at the request of the Vice-Roy with 150 Horse and 500 Foot, they marched with great dif∣ficulty for the great heat and badness of the ways by Agaçaim, Manora, Assarim, and at the end of Fifteen days discovered the City Tavar they sought for. The City had beau∣tiful Buildings and Gardens, seated on a Hill that overlooks a very large Plain. The King and Inhabitants being fled, it was easi∣ly burnt with the neighbouring Villages, and the Country People and Cattel carried a∣way. 6. Our Men advancing into narrow De∣files where two could not go abreast, the King of the Coles with 6000 Men fell upon their Rear, whilst some Parties annoyed them from the tops of the Hills. Here they were brought into great danger, and forced
to make their utmost Efforts. Many Gen∣tlemen signalized themselves, and the King of Sarceta appeared always in the greatest danger, encouraging e Men wh his Sword in hand. At length our Men made their way through the Defiles, and the K. f the Coles defeated, was forced to sue for Peace, and accept of such a one as we were pleased to grant him. 7. This year began with two grea Losses. D. Iohn de Gama sailing from Malaca to∣wards Goa with his Wife, Children, much Riches, and many Men, lost his Ship at midnight at Nicobar▪ Above 50 Persons were lost, and among them, his eldest Son. Another Son, his Wife, and almost 300 Per∣sons, were saved in an Island not inhabited. He framed a Barque which held 90, and with great Hardships, after being made Slaves, they got to Cohim, the rest being left behind till they could return to fetch them. Simon Ferreyra coming in a Ship richly laden from China, was cast away in sight of the Coast of Ior. He desired that King to assist him with some Vessels to save part of the Goods, and the King took them to himself. 8. D. Giles Yanes Mascarennas, who com∣manded the Squadron on the Coast of Ma∣labar, would not seem inferior to his Prede∣cessor. He made such havock along that Shore, that nothing was heard but the Cries of the Inhabitants. He twice set fire to Ca∣licut, Panane, Calegate, Marate, Conche, and the Island Daruti, not without opposi∣tion
with great slaughter of the Hea∣thens. 9. They came to the River Cunnale, upon which is a Fort of the same Name, the Re∣fuge of Pirats subject to the Commander of the Fort. Two Malabar Ships were stand∣ing in, and being attacked by two of ours, the one was taken; in the other, 50 Men kil∣led by one Ball that swept from Stem to Stern; being boarded, and almost taken, she ungraed, and made to the Shore that was covered with Mores, and defended with Cannon. Tavora, who commanded our Ship, pursued to save 6 Portugueses who were car∣ried away by the Enemy, till a Cannon Ball carried away his Leg, of which he died. Of the 6, only one was carried to Cunnale, who at one stroke cut him in two. The King of Chale, to prevent his own Ruin, agreed to pay Tribute, assign a place, and furnish Work∣men and Materials to raise a Fort. Masca∣rennas on his way to Goa, in the River Sal, burnt the Villages of Aselonor, and those of Cuenti in Salsete. 10. Bracalor, a City seated on the Coast of Canara in almost 14 Degrees of Latitude, was once one of the most noted places of Trade in India in the form of a Common∣wealth, but much decayed since the Portu∣gueses built a Fort there. The People of this place observing, that our Commander Francis de Mello & Sampayo was wholly taken up in heaping Riches, and pleasing his Wife, resolved to rid themselves of that Clog. They agreed to fall upon, and kill all the Por∣tugueses
taken up with the Procession on Maundy-Thursday, and had effected it but that Giles Yancz put in there with his Squa∣dron in his way to Goa.  departing on Friday, they prevailed with some Christians to let them into the Fort on Eer Night. The Design was discovered, and the Conspi∣rators quartered. Now they resolve to at∣tack it by open force, and joyning with their Neighbour King of Tolar and 5000 Men, burn the outward Town, and bring all into great danger. The Viceroy having notice, sent Andrew Furado, w routed those Mu∣tiniers, and going up the River made great Havock along the Shore. Thus the Fort was secured, but the Officers not justified. 11. The Religious of the Society of Ie∣sus, who have so much laboured for the Con∣version of Infidels, had sent some of their Number into the Island Salsete, which con∣tains 66 Villages of Pagans. These Fathers took great pains, and the Viceroy D. Antony de Noronha finding the People incorrigible, destroyed all their Pagods, yet they in the year 1559. taking up Arms, ruined our Churches. 12. This done, they refused to pay the Tribute they owed us, and fell to destroy∣ing the Preachers of the Gospel. At this time F. Rodulphus de Aquaviva desiring to spread the Faith in the five Villages of Cocolii, went thither with F. Francis Pacheca and F. Francis Aranna, three Portuguese Soldiers, and some Natives. The Heathens fell upon them, cut off F. Rodulphus his Legs, and
then his Head.   was struck through with a Sp d then stuck full of Arrows. The rest were all slain after several . The same y .  d Azevedo that went to Bll with 40 Companions, all suf∣fered Mar. 13.  Figyredo Comman∣der of , by the Viceroy's Order  a great laughter of the People of S, destroyed the Habitations▪ and leftt them not  Tem standing▪  by a wi tting those into  had  Father▪  of them; which , that  of them d, new Chr Ces we erected, and Crosses  the Hills. 14. This was the posturr of Affairs in India, when ve Ships arri from Pgal, and in them F. Vi de Fouseca a Domini∣c▪ who went to succeed F. Henry de T in the Arch-Bishoprick of Goa. 15. Sultan Amodifar the lawful King of aya, kept Prisoner by the Mogo after he had surped his Kingdom, at this time fed by the means of some Women. In dis∣guise he came to a Baneane at Cambay, by whom he was conveyed to Iambo, one who in the late Revolution had secured to him∣self a Limb of that Empire. He dutifully owned, and caused him to be owned by o∣thers, so that in few days they gathered an Army, in which there were above 30000 Horse. Behold, how attractive is the Per∣son of a Prince found after having been lost▪
In a very short time▪ either  force or con∣sen▪ they recovered most  Kingdom of aya. 16. Our Viceroy, the better o take the advantage of these Confusions▪ and hoping thereby to gain Suratte▪ went th 40 Sail to Chaul, and thence sent some stand∣ing Men to Baroche▪ then besieged by Am∣difar, the Wife and Children of Xotubidi∣chan, whom he had fraudulently taken and slain being in the Town. Tse Ages had Orders to Treat both with the Kin and that Woman, without letting either of hem know any Correspondence was field with the other, that so our Interest might be ∣cured with  prevailing Party. But the Mogol coming down with a great Power, and recovering all he had lost, put a stop to the Viceroy's Proceedings▪ who returned to Goa much afflicted for the Death of D. Iohn de Castro. This young Gentleman commanded a Ship of Ferdinand de Miranda's Squadron, and being parted from him by a Storm, was attacked by two Malabar Paraos between Tarapor and Maii, and his Powder taking fire, the Ship blew up, only three of the Men escaping Death to be led into Sla∣very. 17. Whilst the Viceroy was absent from Goa, many of the principal Subjects of Hi∣dalcan, provoked by the Insolencies of Larva∣can his Favourite, resolved to set up Cuocan Son to that Meale, who being Prisoner at Goa, so long kept this powerful Neighbour in awe. Cufo was at Goa, and the Conspi∣rators
contrived how to get him out, and Larvachan prending to act for them, cor∣rupted the Guards, and procured his Liber∣ty. This Treachery was managed by an infamous Portuguese, called Iames Lope Bayam, much in the King's Favour for such∣like Services. Cufo thinking he went to them that designed to Crown him, found himself in the hands of Larvacan, who cau∣sed his Eyes to be put out. 18. Then came to Goa a Woman of great fame, formerly banished by Hidalcan. She was about 65 years of Age, little of Sta∣ture, of Complexion fair, still shewing the Ruins of Beauty, esteemed a Virgin, and much valued for her Prudence, Wit, and Courage, for in a Man's Habit (except her Head which was dressed in white) on Horse∣back with a Bow and Arrow she followed the Army like an Amazon, and gained Reputa∣tion. Her Name Abchi. She pretended to Treat with the Viceroy about important Affairs, which were never known. She was taken by the Inquisition, banished to Ormuz, and thence fled to the Mogol. 19. Zamori now tired with so much De∣struction, and the Clamours of his Subjects, his own Palace in Calicut being burnt by D. Giles Yanez, and all that lay without the Town, at last sued for Peace, and concluded it on such Terms as we thought fit. 20. At Cochim, that King having assigned over all the Customs to the Portugueses, the People rose to the number of 20000, swear∣ing on a Mass-Book to die in defence of
their Liberties hereby infringed. D. George de Meneses Baroche, who commanded there, finding the Tumult too high to be opposed, suspended the Execution of the Viceroy's Orders relating to this Affair. 21. D. Giles Yanez Mascarennas being ap∣pointed to go to Cochim to endeavour to sup∣press that Tumult, was ordered by the Vice∣roy by the way to destroy the Nayque of San∣guicer, who having raised a Fort on the River of that Name, protected Pirats to our great loss. He had 14 Sail with 300 of the choice Men of Goa. 22. D. Giles run up the River, and the better to come where he desired, went out of his Galeon into a small Vessel, and run so far between the Rocks that he could not get out, and his Stem lay almost on the Shore. Those of Sanguicer poured in their Shot, so that all his Men left him where he was killed, the other Vessels being no way able to relieve him. 23. Iames de Azambuja, Commander of Tidore, was driven to great streights, be∣cause no Relief came from Malaca, Ferdi∣nand Ortis de Tavora designed thither, having been stopped by the coming of the King of Achem upon that City. He understood by Santiago de Vera Governour of the Philippine Islands, that King Philip was Proclaimed in Portugal, and therefore asked Succour of him, who sent ten Sail commanded by D. Iohn Ronquillo This was not only a Supply of Ammunition, for the Spaniards were assisting to him with their Persons,
especially by taking some Vessels of Iava, that to our loss used that Port. Babu King of Ternate dying, left his Bastard Son Bozai possessed of the Crown, though he had a lawful Heir, who wanting Power lost his Right: For seldom does Right prevail where Force is wanting. 24. About this time the Great Turk sent Mahomet Bassa with 12000 Horse, many Pio∣niers, much Artillery and Money, to secure his late Conquests in Persia. Xa Codabanda joyning with Semecombel, the Georgian met him with a moderate Army, and as he was fording a River cut off many of his Horse, and caused 40000 Foot to be drowned. The Persians and Georgians got not only the Vi∣ctory, but much Riches. 25. Persia was now in a great confusion, for the Georgian Mirsa Salmas, Son-in-Law and Favourite to Xa, perswaded him, that his Son Abax Mirsa King of Ceorazone stiled himself Emperour of Persia, and caused him to Arm against him. The Emperour mar∣ched against his Son, cutting off the Heads of many principal Men, till he came to the City Hers built by Tamerlan the Great, and now the Court of the innocent Abax, whō not knowing the cause of this his Father's motion, had fortified himself. But now coming before his Father and clearing him∣self, the wicked Salmas his Head was cut off in his presence. The Turk taking this ad∣vantage, sent the Bassa Ferabat with 100000 Horse, and much Money, to conquer the Province of Raviam. He did much harm
there, and had done much more, but that the Emperor reconciled to his Son, put a stop to his Current. 27. Now arrives in India D. Duarte de Meneses, who went to succeed the Viceroy D. Francis, who delivered up the Sword, after having held it three Years, being the 16th Vice-Roy, and 31th in the number of Governors, and Third of the Name and Sirname. CHAP. III. The Government of the Vice-Roy D. Duarte de Meneses, from the Year 1584 till 1588. 1. D. Duarte de Meneses, though of great Quality, yet was better known by his Valour, which moved the King to make choice of him without any Recommenda∣tions or Pretensions of his, not doubting he would be as successful in India as he had been in Tangier. He had six Ships and a pro∣sperous Voyage. 2. The first thing he applied himself to was the appeasing the Tumults at Cochin. The Vice-Roy D. Francis had sent Commissi∣oners to treat with the Heads of that People, and they had reduced them to hearken to an Accommodation. D. Duarte now arri∣ving admits their Proposals, so that the
Affair of the Custom-House was settled. He dispatched the Ships for Lisbon, one whereof was never heard of. The Vice-Roy D. Francis returned in one of them. 3. The Vice-Roy being at Goa treated with the Ambassador of Hidalcan, about the manner of chastising the Nayque of Sanguicer, for the Death of D. Giles Yanez, and to prevent Piracy. The Ambassador agreed that Rostican, Governor of Ponda should assist with Forty Thousand Men by Land, whilst D. Hierome de Mascarenuas, sent by the Vice-Roy, attacked the Nayque by Sea. 4. Hierome entring the River, sent up 13 Vessels that rowed, and at break of Day couragiously landed, attacked some Works, killed many of their Defendants, and took their Cannon. Then they marched to the Town, and the Inhabitants flying up the In∣land, fell into the Hands of Rostican, who, according to agreement, was upon his March destroying all before him. Next day D. Hierome landed, and he marching on the one side, and Rostican on the other, they laid all the Country in Ashes. The Nayque from the Woods sent to implore Mercy, promising to perform Conditions, if the ruined Country were restored to him, which was granted. 5. Iames de Azambuja, Cammander of Tidore, was in great want of Ammunition, the Governor of Manila sent four Barques to his Relief, commanded by Peter Sarmiento, who by the way took Possession of the Island
Mousel. The King of Ternate, whose the Island was, resolving to be revenged on three of the Barques that went for Provi∣sions to Baçham, sent his Brother Cachil Tulo with 24 Galliots to take them. They being abroad on this Design, met two Vessels be∣longing to the Philipine Islands that had also brought Relief to Tidore, commanded by N. de Duenas. He not able to avoid them, attacked the Admiral Galliot and sunk her, but all the others falling upon the 2 Vessels, in which were but 12 Spaniards, they were all slain, having fought to admiration, and killed and wounded many of the Enemy. Tulo proud of this Success, met those he be∣fore looked for, after a desperate fight night parted them, 200 of the Ternatenses and 8 Spaniards being killed. 6. Then arrived at Tidore Duarte Pereyra with one Galleon, he went to succeed A∣zambuja, who instead of resigning the Com∣mand, assaulted Pereyra in a House where he was with his Wife and Family, and all was in great danger, had not the King in∣terposed. At the same time arrived 400 Spaniards from Manila to assist Azambuja to recover the Fort of Ternate, but he sear∣ing Pereyra in his absence would take Posses∣sion of the Command, resolved to let slip this opportunity. Pereyra understanding it, and being of another mind, said, Such im∣portant Affairs ought not to be lost upon such Motives; that if the other would go, he would bear him Company. At length Azembuja set out, accompanied by the Kings
of Tidore, Bacham and Celebes. They land∣ed, though opposed by the Natives, batter∣ed the Fort without effect, lost some Men, and retired to Tidore. 7. The City Tauris, on the Borders of the greater Armenia, at the Foot of the Moun∣tain Orote, was once the Court of the Kings of Persia, and is now one of the most famous Places of Trade in the East, rich and plen∣tiful. The Great Turk desiring to raise a Fort there, sent Osman Bassa with a power∣ful Army, who encamped before it on the Banks of a River. The Persian Emperor was ready to receive him with 70000 Horse, and sent out a Party to engage him, while his Son Mirazen Mirsa lay in Ambush with 10000 to break out in the heat of the Fight. The Youth was brave, and performed his Part so well, that at one onset he killed 7000 Turks, and retired with Honour and Booty. 7000 pursue him, and he facing them cut off one half of them. Next day the Turks assault the City, but the Persians sallying, killed 3000 at that time, and again at Night 4000 more. But the Governor after this abandons the City, yet the Inha∣bitants stood upon their defence, and at first made a great slaughter, till over-powered by the multitude many of them were put to the Sword, their Wives and Daughters abused, and all plundered. 8. Osman being now in Possession, in a Months time raised a wonderful Fort for greatness and strength in the Royal Gardens as the most convenient place. Some of the
Turks frequenting the Baths in the City, fell out with some of the Inhabitants, and being worsted by them, stirred up the whole Army to revenge. They left no sort of Villany unessayed, but Murdered, Ravished, Robbed, and marched out with an unspeakble Trea∣sure. The Prince of Persia in a Rage ob∣tained of his Father 20000 Horse, and fall∣ing upon the Turks, at one time killed 8000, and soon after 20000. They decamped and began to march, and the Prince desiring to recover the Treasure they had taken at Tauris, was so successful, that killing 20000 more he retired with 18000 Camels loaded with Riches, and an infinite quantity of Arms and Ammunition. He pursues them again, but Fortune changing, he did less harm than he received, and was forced to retire with loss of 3000 Persians. 9. Fifteen Years before this time there came upon the Country of Moçambique, such an Inundation of Cafres, that they could not be numbred. They came from that Part of Monomotapa where is the great Lake, out of which spring those great Rivers whose source was formerly unknown, to these were joined the Cafres, Macabires and Ambei, and other Borderers upon Abissinia. With them came their Wives and Families as those that sought new Countries to inhabit, their own not being able to contain them. Their choice Food human Flesh, and for want of it that of Beasts. They left no other signs of the Towns they passed by, but the heaps of Ruins and Bones of the Inhabitants. For
want of them they eat their own, beginning by the Sick and Aged, so that doubtless Fa∣thers became Food to their Children. The Women deformed and hardy, carry their Goods on their Backs, and in fight use the Bow as dexterously as the Men, these march in Armour, and where-ever they halt fortifie themselves. 10. Hierome de Andrade, from the Castle of Tete, sent out a Party of Musqueteers, who firing among that Multitude killed some to their great astonishment, having never before seen that sort of Arms, that they fled without looking back; in two Ran∣counters above 5000 were slain. They stop∣ped not till they came to the Country of Moçambique, having destroyed all in their way like a fiery Inundation. This Place was approved of by Mambea, Commander of about 6000, and he began to build a Fort and Towns two Leagues from Moçam∣bique. The Fort of Cuama where Nunno Vello Pereyra commanded, was much incom∣moded by them, he therefore sent out Antony Rodrigues Pimentel, or Pinto, with 400 Men, four of them Portugueses, who unexpectedly falling on the Barbarians, slew a vast number and burnt the Fort, but retiring in disorder, they fell upon and killed him and all his Men, except three Portugueses and very few Blacks. All the dead were eaten by the victorious Cafres, except their Heads, Hands and Feet. 11. Since this Relation has brought us to Moçambique, it will not be amiss to give
some Account of that Country. It is full of Orchards and Fruit-trees, especially Ci∣tron, Limon and Orange-trees, has all sorts of tame and wild Beasts, as in Europe, an infinite number of Elephants. The People feed on Indian-Wheat, the Woods are of Ebony, a high Tree, bearing a Leaf like that of our Apple-trees, the Fruit like Med∣lars but not eatable; from the Ground up∣ward it is so covered with Thorns, it is dif∣ficult to come to it; where one is cut down, another never grows; the Bark of it is as susceptible of Fire as tinder. There is ano∣ther sort of a yellowish Colour that is of value. The best Manna is produced here. Among the Fish of that River, there is one as devouring as Crododils; no Man in reach escapes them, but they touch not Women, so great is the Privilege of that Sex. One of these of a prodigious bigness was taken that had Gold Rings in the Ears. It was supposed to be some piece of Witch∣craft of the Cafres, to clear the River of those dangerous Monsters. To confirm this Opinion, Metude a learned Arabian relates in an account of Modern Prodigies, That about the Year 863, in the Foundation of an Aegyptian Temple there was found a bra∣zen Crocodile with certain Characters, which being broke to pieces the Crocodils of Nile began to devour Men; whence it was in∣ferred, that was a Charm upon the Croco∣diles. 12. Hatred conceived against the Favou∣rites of Nizamaluco in Canara, brought the
Mogols upon the Kingdom of Verara, who after much Plunder and Desolation possessed themselves of many Towns and Cities. The occasion was, that the King being ill of a contagious Distemper, his Favourite Ace∣decan first, and after him Calabatecan, kept him up without suffering any Body to see him. The Prince and People ad recourse to Arms to oblige these Tyrants to give them a sight of the King; and they per∣swading it was to depose him, so far pre∣vailed, that he meeting them in hostile man∣ner, made a great slaughter of them, and hereupon the Mogols were called in to their aid. 13. Five Ships sailed this Year from Lis∣bon for India, one of them was lost beyond the Cape of Good-Hope, at the Place called Bajos de la India, a Promontory that rises with many Points, which at a distance look like Trees; it is oval and three Leagues in length, and abounds in Coral, which being naturally soft and white, grows hard and turns green, grey, black and red, but being pounded to Dust, resumes its whiteness. 14. The Captain with a few Men got into a Boat, and after six Days landed at Quilimane. About sixty got into another Boat, others put to Sea on Planks, above two hundred were upon the Rocks expecting to be swallowed by the Sea, or else scorched by the Sun, or starved to Death. 15. Those in the second Vessel chose Duarte de Melo de Baçaim to command them, and being over-loaded, were forced the first
time to throw Seventeen into the Sea to save the rest, and, not being light enough, afterwards some others, among which the Lot fell upon one of two Brothers, the youngest whereof freely leaped overboard, but having swam three Leagues after the Boat, was again taken up. 16. A Boat built by the Pilot Roderick Migueys contained 40 Men, as they were under Sail a great Storm arose at Night, and is said to have ceased, by casting into the Water a piece of the Holy Cross one of them carried. Of 400 Men that were in the Ship, only these mentioned are known to have escaped. CHAP. IV. Continues the Government of D. Duarte de Meneses. 1. THE Vice-Roy governed India, and his Unkle Ruy Gonçalez de Camara him, who desiring to engross all that was honourable, endangered what was necessary. It was requisite at the same time to send a Squadron into the Red Sea, and another to build a Fort at Panane in Malabar, and he would command the one and build the o∣ther. The Work ought to be solid and of Stone, yet the Vice-Roy agreed it should be slight and of Wood, that being soon finish∣ed Camara might be free to take the other Command.
2. Camara being come to Panane, adver∣tized Zamori of his Design, and he con∣senting, desired him to wait his coming, for he would be present at the chusing the Ground. He delayed coming, because his Bramenes could not find a lucky day for him to set out; and Camara being in haste, sent Presents to those Fortune-tellers, who there∣upon presently found a fortunate hour. 4. Zamori being come, the Fort was made of Wood, and the Command of it given to Ruy Gomez de Gram, who pulled it all down, and built it after another manner, and of considerable strength. So that Gram built the Fort, and Camara had the Credit of it. 4. As soon as Camara had, as he thought, finished what Gram believed not begun, he went aboard his Squadron, which having been ill undertaken came to a worse end. Too much haste in going to Panane, made him too slow in going to the Red Sea; and now this slowness in going to Sea was as prejudicial as the haste in building the Fort. His Squadron consisted of four Gal∣leys, two Galleons, and twenty other Ves∣sels. 5. Cosme Faya went before to discover, and being deceived by a Xeque in the Island Camaran, was slain with all his Men. Ca∣mara sailing with the Wind at East, entred the Mouth of the Red Sea, and came to an Anchor in a Bay on the Coast of Arabia, Eleven Leagues from the City Moca. Some of his Ships were dispersed, and he design∣ingo
take fresh. Water while he waited for them, sent some Officers and 60 Soldiers with those that were to take Water. Thir∣ty Turkish Horse and 500 Foot falling upon them out of an Ambush, killed 5 or 6; but our Men taking courage stood them eight hours, killing many, till Relief coming, the Enemy fled. Camara sailed thence to find his scattered Fleet, he found and lost them again, and after suffering much, chiefly through want of Water, he put into Ormu, without having done any thing. 6. But before his going in, he sent Peter Homem Pereyra with 15 Sail against the Niqui∣lus, now dangerous Neighbours, who hin∣dred the carrying of Provisions to Ormuz, from whence 5 Vessels more were sent him, with which he made up 600 Men, many of them Men of Note. Scarce were they lan∣ded, when the Enemy rising from an Ambush fell on them with such fury, that breaking those who were drawn up, and hindering the others from forming themselves, they slew 250, forcing the rest to swim to their Vessels, many whereof were drowned. This was one of the greatest and most shameful Losses we sustained in India. 7. The pretence for sending this Squa∣dron to the Red Sea, was to fight the Turkish Galleys that were to set out from Moca, whereas in truth there were no such Galleys, and the real design was only to employ Ca∣mara, and strengthen his Pretensions; and whereas he ought to have entred Goa in mourning after such a Loss, he entred
that place with all demonstrations of Joy as if Triumphant, and had great favour shewn him. So fortunate is undeserving Impudence. 8. Nevertheless the pretence of sending out this Squadron was made good by two rotten Galleys that afterwards put to Sea from Moca. One of them so rotten, she sunk as soon as out of the Port; the other did as much as might have been expected from a sound Squadron. Of such efficacy is the Valour or Fortune of one single Man. Such was the More Mir Alibet, who now confirmed the great Opinion before concei∣ved of his Abilities, for coming before the City Magadano, he brought it under the subjection of the Great Turk only by telling the Inhabitants, he was but the Forerunner of a great Fleet that came to conquer all the Coast of Melinde. At the City Lufiva he took from Rocque de Brito a rich little Ship that had there put itself under the Protection of the King of Lamo, who basely betrayed it to the More upon Promise from him of being spared himself, which Promise the More after broke. The Portugues defen∣ded himself bravely, but was at last put to the Oar, and died at Constantinople. 9. The same happened to another Portu∣gues Ship at Pate. Alibet had thus framed a Fleet of 20 Pangayo's or small Vessels, and daring much, brought under the Turkish Sub∣jection the Kings of Ampaza, Pate, Lamo, Mombaca, Calife, Brava, Iugo, and other Cities. All submitted to the force he gave
out followed him, whereas he might have been destroyed by any Portugues Vessel, for in his Galley there were but 80 Men, and she was in such a condition, that she sunk in the Port of Maça before she could be carried home, without any stress of Weather. 10. Iohn Cayado de Gamboa being abroad with some Ships against the Pirats of the North, found that Caliche Mahomet had a Ship at Surat which he designed to put out without the Portugueses Leave. Gambo lay to keep him in, and Mahomet sent him 3000 Ducats underhand to remove, which he took, and therewith in the Town bought Provisions, whereof he stood in need to con∣tinue there. This done, he returned the Money, letting the More know, He was not a Man that would sell his Honour, but re∣turned Thanks for supplying him with Pro∣visions whereof he stood in need, to lay wait for his Ship. The More was amazed, and ashamed to be so slighted, and lost his Voyage. 11. Some time since, Raju Son of the Tyrant Madune of Ceylon had besieged our Fort of Columbo, commanded by Emanuel de Sousa Coutinno, who defended it with Valour. He now again sits down before it, Iohn Cor∣rea de Brito being Commander. But percei∣ving that his Father, Brothers, and some principal Subjects, were a hindrance to his wicked Designs, he murdered them all. This was a just Judgment of God, for his Father Madune had done the same with his own Fa∣ther and Brothers; but this was no Excuse
for Raju's Cruelty. Having nothing now to stand in awe of but his Mother-in-Law, a venerable Matron, who had tenderly bred him as her own, he caused her to be strip∣ped before him, and sent into Banishment, where she died with grief. 12. The Tyrant began to turn his Fury upon the Portugueses, and they, though but few, engaged a Body of 4000 of his Men, killed 800 of them, and their Commander Palida, on the day of the Invention of the Holy Cross in May, which therefore was established an annual Feast in that Place. Raju had yet a Nephew that gave him some jealousie, he sent for him to a Village where he th resided. The Message was full of Kindness, but the young Man well understood the smiles of Tyrants are fatal, and that the hour he went to him would be the last of his Life. He therefore with a pleasing Countenance entertained the Mes∣sengers (who had orders to carry him by force if he refused) and preparing a Dose of most strong Poison, went with it where his Wives, Children and Family were. After exhorting them to die couragiously, he drank first, and then offered it to each of them, whereof not one refused to bear him Com∣pany in Death. The Messengers weary of staying, went in and found them all dead. 13. The Great Turk understanding his Fort lately built at Tabris in Perfia wanted to be supplied, and desiring to raise another in the City Gonsar; to effect both, sent the Bassa Ferat with 160000 Horse. The Per∣sian
having notice hereof, ordered Hoalican, Governor of Gousar, to go and treat with the Georgians his Neighbours to bring them to his assistance. He sent the Prince with 20000 Hor to secure Gansar, and e with the rest of his Army sat down before Tabris, and reduced the Turks in Garrison there to the last Extremities. 14. The Prince (not long before the Terror of the Turks) was overcome by the Beauty of the absent Governor's Daughter, and enjoyed her. Advice being given the Father, he concluded hastily, but to con∣tent the Affair he was sent to; and dissem∣bling with the Prince, bribed his Barber with 20000 Crowns to cut his Throat as he sha∣ved him. He did it, and was torn in pieces by the Servants. 15. The Death of the Prince, who was the Terror of the Turks, endangered the whole Persian Empire, and so Ferat, with∣out any Opposition, relieved Tabris and raised the Fort at Gansar, giving the Com∣mand thereof to Chedar Bassa, by Birth a Portugues. Gansar is one of the most popu∣lous and beautiful Cities of Media, divided from the Province of Xeinam by the River Lirus, which the Turks call Cur. The Per∣sian Emperor was shut up in the City Casby, and the offended Governor conspiring with others, resolved to set up Tamas Mirsa, the King's Third Son, who was blind. But Abas Mirsa, who was the Second, and then govern'd Coerazone, being the lawful Suc∣cessor, took Arms to oppose them. The
Rebels thought to take him by Treachery, but he dexterously apprehending the Heads, put them to Death, and prepared to March and Depose his Father. 16. The old Man fearing he would kill him, hauging a Sword about his Neck, and leading his third and fourth Sons, presented himself to Abas Mirsa, saying, He would save him the trouble of looking for his Father or Bro∣thers, if he desired to Murther them, for there he had brought both them and the Sword The Youth vanquished with that miserable Spe∣ctacle, cast himself at his Father's Feet, and said, He was his Father, his Lord and his ing; but since his Age and Infirmities would not permit him to do it, he begged he might be al∣lowed to put a stop to the Ruine tha threatned their Affairs, not as a King (for only his Fa∣ther should be so whilst he lived) but as General of his Army. The old Man took comfort hereat, and the Son marched to curb the Fury of the Usbeques, who, led by their King, in great numbers had broke into Co∣razone. 17. In the Moluco Islands the Kings of Tidore and Ternate were at War, for that the latter refused the former his Sister that he had promised to give him to Wife. At that time arrived there N. de Brito with one Galeon from Malaca, and Orders to treat with the King of Ternate about restoring the Port. He carried a Letter for him from King Philip, and another from the Vice-Roy, and a Present that rather offended than ob∣liged him, for though but of small value,
it was not to be given him unless he per∣formed what was proposed. Whilst he knew not this Condition, he agreed with the Portugueses and King of Tidore; but as soon as it was made known to him, broke off in such a Passion, that he ordered no Portugueses should enter the City unless they came bare-footed. 18. Iames de Azambuja now gave up that Command to Duarte Pereyra, who came from Manilla, where he had stayed for that Post. He agreed with the King of Ternate, who fearing his Unkle Mandraxa, the rightful Heir of that Crown, would deprive him of it, perfidiously killed him. That Prince was in love with his Niece, the King's Sister, who had promised her to him of Tidore, and seeing that Promise, hindred him from giving her to his Unkle, agreed with him he should steal her, that so there might be a plausible excuse made to the other. Man∣draxa had scarce possessed himself of the Bride, when the King accused him of this Violence, whereupon he was condemned to perpetual Imprisonment, but the Nephew caused him to be stabbed, and married his Sister to the King of Gilolo. The King of Tidore resolv'd to be reveng'd of this Affront, and consulting with Duarte Pereyra, they agreed to contrive the Death of the King of Ternate, by the means of his Unkle Cachil Tulo, offering him the Kingdom. He ap∣proved of the Proposal, and they concluded on the manner of doing of it.
19. Rajale, King of the City Ior, offend∣ed that a Vessel of his had been sunk at Ma∣laca, though they made him satisfaction, studied Revenge, hindring the resort of Provisions to that place. D. Hierom de Aze∣vedo, who came to be Admiral of those Seas, sent Peter Vello to burn a Town near Ior with 8 Ships. He executed it, but the Enemies Fleet meeting him on his return, he was beaten, lost 4 Vessels, and had lost all but that Peter da Cuma Carneyro coming up with his Galeon, bravely brought him off. Rajale thinking himself Victorious, appeared in the River Malaca with 100 Sail, but this Bravade cost him dear, much harm being done him as he drew off by our Fleet. 20. Paul Diaz at Angola prosecuted the War against that King with his usual suc∣cess; the King was in the Field with 600000 fighting Men, whom he put to flight with little more than 100 Portuguses; and a num∣ber of Blacks. 21. The beginning of this Year sailed from Lisbon for India 6 Ships, one of them by the way had a sharp Engagement with two English Vessels in one Degree and an half of North Latitude. In these Ships went Or∣ders for erecting the Court of Chancery at Goa. The Portugueses of India had sued for it, being pestered with Law-Suits, and they begged Locusts, for now they beg for Mer∣cy being devoured by Lawyers. Two of the Ships that went from India this Year were lost, the Men and Goods saved. By the way died the Archbishop F. Vincent, who
left his Archbishoprick, being no longer able to bear with the Viceroy, Ministers, and even with the Church-men. He said, He came to inform the King and the Pope; the Accusation ended with his Death. One of the Ships about the Islands Azores was taken by Sir Francis Drake, who using honourably of his Victory, gave the Captain and his Men a Galeon, in which they came to Lis∣bon. 22. About this time many Pirats put to Sea from the Fort of Cunnale, who scouring all that Coast, killed and took many Portu∣gueses. These in the Dungeon were kept several days from starving by a Mouse, for that Creature having made a hole through the Wall into a place where there was much Rice, every Night caused as much to fall through that hole as kept them alive. Ema∣nuel de Oliveyra, one of these Slaves, being asked by Cunnale, Whether any of them would fight one of his Men? Answered, He would challenge any two. Cunnale replied, If he would turn Mahometan, he should have great Favours bestowed upon him; and several times endeavoured to prevail by kindnesses, and then again by Threats, but all to no effect; for Oliveyra declared, He would rather Die, than forsake the Faith; and accordingly had his Head cut off upon the Shore, and gained a Crown of Martyr∣dom. 23. The King of Melinde, always most faithful to us since our first Discoveries in Afia, advertised the Viceroy how prejudicial
to our Affairs, what Mir Alibet had done with the Gall of Mca; would prove. And , this was a great ep towards the  sign of possessing himself of the Mines   and Cuo, the King of  having given  leave to raise a Fort re. The Viceroy hereupon con∣sted the Men of most Experience in those Ats, the Resolution was, That a confide∣rable Fleet must be sent to stop their further Progress. Eighteen Sai were fitted out, and the Command of them given to Martin Al∣fonso de Melo Pombeyro. 24. They came to an Anchor in the Port of , becae that being the first place that offended, it was thought it to punish it first, as also because that King relying on his Fortifications, and 4000 Armed Men, had executed Iohn Rabelo for not renoun∣cing the Christian Faith. Our Men assaulted the Town in two Bodies, the first met great opposition, and slew the King, then making their way, both Parties entred the Town, sparing neither Women nor Children. The Town and Vessels in the Port were burnt, whilst the Woods were cut down. Ten days were spent in destroying all, with the loss of only four Men on our part. 25. The King of Pate seeing this Ruin, submitted, he of Lusiva fled to the Moun∣tains, and our Admiral gave this Kingdom to a Matron, who had been deposed by him, that fled and came now to plead her Right. The King of Mombaca at first made shew as if he would oppose us, having got toge∣ther
7000 Men, but afterwards fled out of the Island, and from the top of a Mountain beheld the Flames that consumed his City. Our Admiral set sail for Ormz, according to his Orders, and sent to advertise the King of what he had done, and by the way saved a Ship of the former Fleet that was just sink∣ing. The Admiral died at Ormuz, and ano∣ther went to raise the Fort at Maeate, who finished it. 26. The Commander of Moçambique, D. George de Meneses, was not idle, but still imployed against the Mores, who endeavou∣red to settle themselves in the Trade of those parts of the Island Madagascar, that lay op∣posite to him. Many of ours were slain, and among them F. Iohn of St. Thomas, a Dominican, who preached the Faith to those Infidels. CHAP. V. Continues the Government of D. Duarte de Meneses. 1. THE King of Ujantana took many of our Ships, and hindred the car∣rying of Provisions to Malaca, insomuch that Famine raged there to such a degree, that 100 died in one day, and Mothers cast away their Children for want of Food. The Ma∣nacabo's, a Neighbouring People, contri∣buted much to this Misery, destroying what
grew about the Town, and hindred the Country People from bringing in any Sup∣plies. 2. Iames de Azambuj lately come from the Molucos, marched against them with 100 Portugu and 600 Malyes, whereof 400 were Musqueteers. With great labour they came to the Town of Nam, where they met 2000 of the Enemy. D. Emanuel de Al∣mada charged them with half our Men, and driving them out of the Field, pursued them into their Works, which he cleared with grt slaughter. Thence our Men proceed∣ed to Bombo, where the King of Ior had a Fort, which the Commander forsook, and the Inhabitants submitted▪ pleading they had no hand in what was done to our preju∣dice. 3. The King of Ac seeing Mala di∣stressed had provided a Fleet of 300 Sail to fall upon it, and was ready to set out, when his General Moratiza, who had long since designed to usurp that Crown, murdered him, the Queen and Chief of the Nobility, and stayed at home to secure his usurped Kingdom, which was the saving of Malaca. But Rajale setting Sail from his Port of Ior, entred the River of Malaca with 120 Vessels, in which were 6000 Men. Iohn de Silva, who commanded in the Town, and D. An∣tony de Noronna at Sea, both applied them∣selves with all diligence to the Preservation of that place. 4. The Enemy attempting to Land in two Places, were drove back to their Ships with
great loss, and many of them drowned, our Ships with their Cannon sunk two of theirs, and did good Execution: In the Church of the Cap is said to have been seen a Friar driving out the Enemies, who not appearing afterwards, was suppos'd to be St. Francis. The Commander stood at the Gate buying the Heads of the Enemies at 20 Crowns each. 5. D. Hierome de Azevedo cruising about Romania, took and sunk some Ships which proved some ease to Malaca. The City of Cochim sent thither plentiful and speedy re∣lief. Iohn de Silva the Commander, whe∣ther through any other Accident or Grief of the Miseries he saw there, is not known, ran mad. The Bishop took upon him the Government. Baçaim, Chaul and Goa, sent the Vice-Roy Money to relieve this City, the latter desiring that D. Paul de Lima might command the Squadron to be sent thither, and Malaca having desired the same, the Vice-Roy consented to it. 6. D. Paul de Lima set Sail with 500 Men in two Galleys, three Galleons, four Gal∣liots, and seven other Vessels. In their way to Malaca they suffered much for want of Water, and got some, though with danger, on the Shores of Achem, where they took some Ships, killed many Men, and made several Prisoners, but particularly Rajale's Ambassador, who was there to incite that our professed Enemy to join with him a∣gainst us.
7. Before D. Paul could come up, some of his Ships joined those commanded by D. Antony de Noronna before Ir. The Ene∣mies Fleet attacked them, and at the first Charge of our Cannon fled again, two of them were tak. D. Antony seeking to-ga∣ther his Squadron, found his Men battering the Fort of Curi, ed above the Wa∣ter, with Thirty Pieces of C, and Two hundred, many of the Defendants were slain, the rest fled. Antony de Andria land∣ing, brought off the Cannon, leaving the Fort in a Flame. Then they fir some Shipping and the Suburbs, and rtired to their Ships with much Booty and many Pri∣soners. 8. This Success made D. Antony de No∣ronna believe it was easie to take the City, if he assaulted it in the Morning. Ambitious of gaining this Honour, and contrary to the Opinion of the Captains, he Assaults the City with only 200 Men, knowing there were 12000 within, and the Walls at every step planted with Cannon. Nevertheless he entred it, but had lost his Life, had not D. Paul de Lima's Captains snatched him out of the Enemies Hands, being penned up between Palisades with only Seven∣teen Souldiers, and gained him time to re∣tire to his Ships. 9. The City Ir is seated on the heighth of a Point of Land in the Country of Ma∣laca, in one degree and half of North La∣titude, not far distant from the Shore, girt with thick Walls, though of Wood, yet
strong, being composed of vast Beams well knit together; at small distances are Bastions all well stored with Artillery, and defended by great numbers of Malays, Manancabo's, and Islanders of Iava and other Warlike Places, some of them commanded by their Kings, as those of Tringale, Dragut, Cam∣par, and others. The River adds much to this strength, embracing the City with two Arms. 11. D. Paul being come, consulted the manner of attempting the place, and began a Battery with good success. The Enemies Fleet endeavoured a Diversion, but in vain. The Battery was continued till the day of the Assumption of our B. Lady, to which D. Paul had a peculiar Devotion. 11. The morning of that day he landed 600 Portugueses in three Bodies. D. Antony de Noronna, who led one, had a hot Dis∣pute about landing with a Number of the Enemies Musketiers, who being repulsed, still rallied; but at length our Men made their way to attempt the Town, where some of them were killed, endeavouring to force a passage where there was none. 12. In the mean while D. Paul cutting through 2000 of the Enemy in a Wood, joyned D. Antony, and both together broke into the City. The Enemy no longer able to sustain our Fury, gave way, and was pursued by those two Bodies into the City. The third of our Battalions had the same success in getting in, and with equal danger, being charged by one of the Kings upon an
Elephant with a strong and resolute Party. But the Beast being shot by D. Nunno Alva∣rez Pereyra so disordered them, that our Men had the opportunity to advance. 13. The Fight was very desperate in the Streets, many Arrows and Darts flying from the Windows; yet our Men advanced till they came to the place where the King was with his Allies, and there the Battle was re∣newed. D. Paul encouraged his Men, not only with Words, but with his Example, leading them on with Sword in hand. 14. After 6 hours Combat, the fortune of the Day still seemed dubious, till Matias Pereyra, who had only 15 Men left with him of 150, attacked and entred the Fort Bota∣bato, which gave new Life to our Men almost spent with continual Labour. 15. Luis Martines Pereyra, who was left to command the Fleet, ceased not battering the Town, hearing only the noise of the Fight, and seeing the Enemies Colours upon the Walls, but seeing the Christian set up on the Fort Cotabato, he desisted. The Kings also discovering them, and other signs of their Ruin, mounted on Elephants with their Wives, and fled up the Inland. 16. After the Victory the City was fired, which being great, and of combustible mat∣ter, raised a terrible Flame. Many People were burnt, chiefly Women and Children, who in the Confusion could not escape. The Booty was very great, the Prisoners many, and the number of Slain by the Por∣tugueses amounted to 4000, besides near
3000 killed by those that came to assist Ra∣jale when they saw he was defeated; on our side 80 were lost. Almost 1000 Pieces of Cannon were found, some very large, 1500 Muskets, and 2200 Vessels. D. Paul of all the Booty took to himself only an Image of our B. Lady, found by a Soldier in the Wood where he was first ingaged. 17. The City Malaca resolved to receive D. Paul in Triumph; D. Antony de Noronna, for the share he had in this Victory, desired he would let him go by his Side, and he re∣plied, Gloriam mea alteri non dabo. D. An∣tony offended hereat, acquainted his Soldiers, and they resolved to anticipate the Tri∣umph. They landed with found of Drums, Trumpets, and noise of Cannon, and cove∣ring the way with their Cloaths, led him to the Church. D. Paul landed in the same manner he had done at Ior, was received by the Religious Orders with their Crosses, and singing, placed under a Canopy, and crown'd by the Bishop with a Garland of Roses and Flowers.
CHAP. VI. The End of the Government of D. Duarte de Meneses. 1. THE Tyrant Raju resolving to possess himself of our Fort of Colombo in C, to this effect gathered 0000 fight∣ing Men, 60000 Pioniers, and near as many Artificers and other Labourers; 2200 Ele∣phants, 40000 Oxen, 150 Pieces of Con, 50000 Axes, Shovels, Picks, and Spades; an innumerable quantity of spare Arms and Tools; two Castles, carried each upon a great Cart with 9 Wheels, and almost 500 Sail. He thought fit first to consult the Idols about the Success, and having placed Men behind them, who should say as he had directed them, the Answer was, That if he would enter Columbo, he mst shed innocent Blood. 2. The People was astonished at this fami∣liarity between their Prince and Idols, and he pretending Obedience to the Divine Commands, caused 500 Children to be snatched from their Mothers Arms, which were all slaughtered, and the Idols sprinkled with their Blood. 3. Thus prepared, he marched and sate down before the Town, choosing the Ground he best liked, there being no body to hinder
him. Our Commander Iohn de Brito know∣ing this Storm was like to fall upon him, had made the best provision he could. He had but 300 Portugueses, the third part of them useless, being old Men or Children, and 700 Natives and Slaves, which he posted to the best advantage about that Wall, the Circum∣ference whereof is very great, reserving 50 to be ready with himself wherever the great∣est Danger called. Raju spent a month in dreining a Lake that on one side secured the Town, about this Work, and securing some Boats, we had upon that Water, there were many Skirmishes, in which the Enemy came off with great loss. 4. The Fort was much weakened by the want of that Water, which was the chief Defence on that side. Our Commander gave Advice of the Danger he was in to the Neighbouring Places. The first that sent Relief was Iohn de Melo Commander of Ma∣nar, it consisted of 40 Men under the Com∣mand of his Nephew Ferdinand, and Ammu∣nition. Ferdinand was posted on the side of the Lake. Whilst Raju prepared for the Attack, there was a Skirmish between the Besiegers and Besieged, in which the former lost many Men, and had some of their Works levelled. 5. On the 4th of August, before day, Raju advanced to give the first Assault, with such silence he could not be heard, and the Darkness was such he could not have been seen, but the Musketiers lighted Matches discovered them. They laid their Ladders,
and mounted the Bastions St. Michael, St. Gon∣calo, and St. Francis, 2000 Pioniers at the same time working below to undermine the Wall, many of the former were cast down upon these last, and abundance of them in the Field torn in pieces by our Cannon. 6. All within and without was full of con∣fusion with the Cries of Women and Chil∣dren, Groans of Wounded Men, and Noise of Cannon and Elephants. These, forced to the Walls by their Governors, were again put back with many Wounds, and did great execution among their own Men. The multitude of the Enemy was such, no Slaugh∣ter seemed to lessen them, fresh Men still succeeding in the place of the Dead. 7. Our Commander was in all places where the greatest Danger called, and after a most tedious Dispute, that vast number of Enemies gave way, leaving 400 Men dead or dying under the Walls. Some few Chinga∣la's, who were retired to the Fort for fear of the Tyrant, fought as if they had been Portugueses. 8. Twice after this was the Assault re∣newed, and the Enemy as often repulsed. The King enraged fortifies himself anew, and provides for another Attack. Iames Fernandez Pessoa coming from Negapatan with a Ship of his own was stopped by a Storm, but came afterwards. Antony de Aguiar & Vasconcelos arrived with a Ship, and com∣forted the Besieged. The Modeliar of Can∣dea D. Iohn de Austria, and the Arache D. Alfonso, did great execution among the
Barbarians; and a Soldier called Ioseph Fer∣nandez of great strength, threw several of them behind him for those that followed to kill them, he having before broke his Spear. 9. The City Cochim understanding the danger of Columbo, fitted out 6 Ships with Men and Ammunition, under the Command of Nuno Alvarez de Atouguia, to relieve that place. But Raju resolving to prevent all Relief, on the 20th of August, at night, gave another general Assault both by Sea and Land, so that Religious Men were forced to play the parts of Officers and Soldiers; and the Enemy after a great Slaughter was again re∣pulsed in both places. 10. Then came Atouguia with the Relief sent from Cochim; and from St. Thomas and other places, arrived of their own free will Ferdinand de Lima, Emanuel de Amaral, and Roderick de Alvarez. Emanuel Mxia rising out of an Ambush fell upon one Arache, (who the former Siege had killed 29 of our Men) and running him through with a Spear, brought him to the Fort, where one of our Men cutting him open at the Heart, drank his Blood. Such was the Hatred they had towards him, as obliged them to commit this brutal Action. In September arrived a Galley and 6 Ships, under the Command of Bernardin de Carvallo, sent to their Assistance by the City of Goa. 11. Before these Ships departed thence, four were come in from Lisbon; five set out, but one was forced back. These Ships car∣ried
new Instructions about Trade, the King having agreed with Merchants about setting out the India Squadron. These Instructions were so prejudicial to the Inhabitants of Goa, that the Viceroy had need of all his Authority, and that of Religious Men to appease them. All this was the Project of insatiable Ministers of State, who, for their own interest, will hazard the Ruin of an Empire, on pretence of Zeal to the Prince. 12. The Relief being come to Columbo, Raju despairing of carrying the Place by Assault, resolved to undermine it, and had effected it, but that Thomas de Sousa found out a way to destroy the Miners in the Work. The Tyrant next applied himself to Treachery, and agreed with some of his Wizards, that counterfeiting Discontent they should desert to the Town, poison their Water, and bewitch our Men. These were suspected, put to the Rack, confessed the Design, and were drowned. While one of these was on the Rack, he uttered some Words which deprived the Executioners of their Senses, and left them struggling with Convulsions for 24 hours. Raju afterwards sent others, and they were punished as the former. 13. Treachery failing, he turns again to Force, and causes his Fleet to attack ours commanded by Thomas de Sousa, who sunk two of his Ships, and took two, killing most of the Men, and hanging the rest at the Yard. Arms. Of the Enemy 300 were slain, of
ours only two private Men. Raju in a rage beheaded the Captains of his Fleet, because they had not overcome ours. Now arrived Philip Carneyro with a Ship laden with Am∣munition sent by the Viceroy, and Antony de Brito, and Emanuel de Macedo, Voluntiers. The Enemy gave another Assault by Night with the same Success as the former. 14. At the same time came Iohn Cayado de Gamboa, sent by the Viceroy with a Galleon and 150 Men, many of them of Note. Our Commander finding himself strong, sent out Peter Alfonso with a Squadron to destroy all he could along the Coast. He did so in the Towns of Belicote, Berberii, and Beligao, where, for haste to take off the Women's Bracelets and Pendants, they cut off their Hands and Ears, and having made great Ha∣vock in many other places, they returned with much Booty and Prisoners. 15. But now Sickness threatned to do what Raju with all his Power could not effect. This Disease began to rage in the Neigh∣bouring Towns, and being brought into the City, the Physitians found no Cure for it. This Year was drier than any had been known that Age, and that was thought to cause this Malady. The Doctors opening some that died of it, found their Entrails im∣postumated, which they said proceeded from Heat occasioned by that Drought. They then applied cold and dry Medicines, and the Disease decreased. 16. The Year ended, but not the Siege. In the beginning of Ianuary Raju gave two
Assaults, in the last of which the Bastions of St. Sebastian, St. Conçalo, and Santiago, were in great danger; but by the bravery of the Defendants the Enemy was at length re∣pulsed, having lost many Men, and three Ele∣phants. 17. Mean while our Fleet, again sent out under the Command of Thomas de Sousa, ruined all along the Coast of Ceylon. He destroyed the Villages of Coscore, Madania, Guindurem, Galé, Beligao, Maturé, and Ta∣navar, where the Idolaters were now unde∣ceived, who believed, our Arms could never reach that place by reason of a Pagod that is there. The Pagod is seated on a Hill not far from the Town, and at Sea locks like a City. The circumference of it was above a League; it is richly Vaulted, and the Arches covered with gilded Copper Plates; the Idols in it were above 1000 on the side Chapels, and large Cloisters. All round were Streets full of Shops, because People from all Parts resorted to the Pagod. Sousa entring this Temple, cast down all the Idols, demolished the curious Workmanship, carried away all that could be removed on Men's backs, and killed Cows within, which is the greatest Affront can be offered to those Idolaters. 18. Let us in a few words here perpetuate the Memory of two illustrious Actions; the one the effect of a sincere Love, the other of true Generosity. Among the Prisoners taken at Coscore, one was a Bride. As the Ships were ready to weigh Anchor, there ran suddenly into that where the young Wo∣man
was a lusty Man, and embracing her, and she him, they said many words not un∣derstood. By the help of an Interpreter it was known, that that Man was the Bride∣groom, who being abroad when the Bride was taken, came to be a Slave with her ra∣ther than live without her. And, she said, That since he by that demonstration of Love had made her happier than all the Chingala Women, (for they were of those People) she esteemed her Slavery rather a Blessing, than a Misfor∣tune. Sousa hearing hereof, resolved not to part such real Lovers, and taking hold of both their hands, said, God forbid two such Lovers for my private Interest should be made unhappy, Love has sufficiently captivated you, I freely give you your Liberties. Then he or∣dered them to be set ashore; but they two seeing his unexpected Bounty, requited it by despising their Liberties, and replied, They only desired to be his, and die in his Ser∣vice. They lived afterwards in Columbo, where the Man on sundry occasions faithfully served the Portugueses. 19. The Viceroy careful of the security of Columbo, sent to the Relief of it Ema∣nuel de Sousa Continno, and D. Paul de Lima. Scarce did Raju see Sousa enter that Port, af∣ter he had ruined all the Coast and the great City Chilao; and was informed, that D. Paul was coming, some of his Ships being already in the Port, but despairing of Success when the Bd least expected it, he decamped, and bgan to march away.
20. Yet our Men, not to suffer him to go quietly away, fell upon his Rear, and in se∣veral Skirmishes cut off many of his Men. During this Siege, some say he lost 10000 Men, others not above half the Number. Many Towns, Cities, Villages, and Ships, were burnt and destroyed. The Cannon, Prisoners, and other Booty taken, were con∣siderable. This rendred Raju very con∣temptible in the Eyes of those Princes who waited the Success of his Undertakings. On our side were killed 140 Men, 30 of them Portuguese. Of the Sickness before men∣tioned died 500. 21. D. Paul came the day after the Siege was raised. Eight days were spent in level∣ling Raju's Works. They repaired the Damage done to the Fort, and furnished it with 600 Men and Ammunition. 22. The Viceroy, after receiving the joy∣ful News of this Victory, and honouring Emanuel de Sousa and D. Paul, died of a violent Sickness in the beginning of May. He was little of Stature, but Graceful, Cou∣ragious, Prudent in Counsel, and of great Authority, a good Latinist, and Italian, and so addicted to Poetry, that he writ good Verses, a lover of Justice, and free from Avarice. The Fault laid to his Charge is, that he suffered himself to be governed by one less capable of Government than him∣self. He was the 15th Viceroy, and 32d Go∣vernour, for the space of almost four Years, the 2d of the Name, and 5th of the S∣name.
CHAP. VII. The Government of Emanuel de Sousa Coutinno, from the Year 1588, till 1590. 1. THE Viceroy being dead, and Patents of Succession opened, they first ap∣pointed Matthias de Albuquerque, who was gone for Portugal; the second, Emanuel de Sousa Coutinno, then present, who took upon him the Government, and was well quali∣fied for it, as being very brave, and well ex∣perienced in the Affairs of India. 2. Soon after arrived 5 Ships from Portu∣gal. D. Paul de Lima, weary of the Toils of War, and much more troubled that he was so ill rewarded, resolved to return to Portugal. 3. The Ships that were homeward bound▪ being dispatched, D. Paul imbarked in that called The St. Thomas, whereof Stephen de Vega was Captain. On the Coast of Natal she sprung aleak in the Stern, and a Storm raging she could not be kept above Water, though they threw over board all the Riches that was in her. 4. The Boat being lanched, all strove to perish in it, because they would have it hold all that the Ship contained. Several were killed upon this occasion, and D. Paul stand∣ing on the side with his Sword drawn, could
no way prevent it. At length, those that the Boat could not contain returned to the Ship. The Women were let down, and al∣most drowned before they were taken in, because it could not come to the Ship's side. Da. Ioanna de Mendoca going in to it, left behind a Daughter but two Years old, and calling for her afterwards, could not get her, because the Nurse would not let the Child go unless they would take her with it. 5. The Boat was not far from the Ship when they saw it swallowed up by the Sea. It was yet worse, that being over-loaded with 120 Persons, and there being no other Remedy left, they were forced to throw some into the Sea, who immediately sunk. The Boat came to the Shore. 6. Ninety eight Persons, Men and Wo∣men, landed, several of them Gentlemen of Note, their Wives, and some Friers, one of which after having confessed, the People in the Ship would have stayed to die with them, that he might be aiding to them in that last hour. They marched in good or∣der, a Frier going before with a Crucifix on high. The Women put themselves into Men's Habit after the Indian manner, that their Coats might not be a hinderance to them in going. 7. The Place where they landed, by the Portugueses is called, The Country of the Fu∣mos, by the Natives of the Macomates, being inhabited by Cafres of this Name. It is in the Latitude of 27 deg. 20 min. beyond the River of Simon Dote, 50 Leagues South of
the Bay of Lorenzo Marquez. All the Land of the Fumos belongs to the King of Vira∣gune, and runs 30 Leagues up the Inland, bordering on the South with the Country of Mocaapata, the King whereof extends his Domion to the upper part of the River St. Lucia, in the Latitude of 8 deg. 15 min. and to the Kingdom of Vambe, that con∣tains a great part of Terra del Natal. From hence to the Cape of Good Hope there are no King, but Ancozes, or Lords of Villages. Next the Kingdom of Viragune, is that of Innaca, towards the N. E. to the Point of the Bay S. Laurence, in 25 deg. 45 min. of South Latitude, and has two Islands opposite to it called Choambone and Stimuro, the last not inhabited is the receptacle of the Portugueses that resort thither to buy Ivory. About the Bay many great Rivers fall into the Sea, as Beligane, Mannica, Spiritu Santo, Vumo, An∣zate, and Angomane. At Vumo died Da Leo∣nor and her Children, and Emanuel de Sousa was lost. Anzate runs along the edge of vast inaccessible Mountains covered with Herds of Elephants, the People of a Gi∣gantick Stature. In the Latitude of 25 de∣grees the River De ls Reyes, or Del Oro, falls into the Sea, West of which are the Kingdoms of  and Mannuca. From this place to Cape Corrientes the Sea makes a great Bay, along which inhabit the Moeran∣ges, notable Thieves. Opposite to the Point St. Sebastian are the Islands of Bazaruta, and not far from it the Kingdom of Inabuze, that reaches to the River Inarigue; then
that of Pande, bordering on the other Monibe, which extends to that of Za∣vara in the Inland. Near these are the King∣doms of Gamba and Mocuraba, next to it is Cape Corrientes. 8. After suffering much Hunger, Thirst, Weariness, and being persecuted by Thieves, they came to the Town of the King of M∣nica, by whom they were courteously re∣ceived, and entertained; he offer'd them to live in his Town, or in the Island (where we said before the Portugueses used to reside, during the time of their stay) till such time as Portugues Merchants came thither. They accepted of the Island, where some died. Being ill accommodated there, they passed over in Boats to the other side of the Con∣tinent, and in the Passage were parted. Some few got to the Fort of Zofala, others to the King of Innaca's Town, where were some Portugues Traders, who had also suf∣fered Shipwrack, here after enduring great Hardships, many died. 9. D. Paul de Lima ended his Days, and was there buried on the Shore. Such as escaped Death a long time after went over to Goa. Among these were three Wo∣men, Donna Mariana, Donna Ioanna Men∣doça, who after led a solitary Life, and Donna Beatrix, Wife to D. Paul, who car∣ried his Bones to Goa, then went to Portugal, and Married again at Oporto. 10. Let us return to India. Mir Alibet encouraged by his Success in the Year 1587, set out the beginning of this Summer from
Moca with four Gallies, and the Vessel he had taken from Rocque de Brito at Lamo. He anchor'd off of Melinde, and was obliged to remove the first Night by Matthew Men∣dez de Vasconcelos, who commanded on that Coast. Our Governor, Emanuel de Sousa Coutinno, understanding this Pyrate was a∣broad, sent against him his own Brother Thomas de Sousa Coutinno with 900 Men in 20 Vessels of several sorts. 11. After a troublesom Voyage he arrived at Mombaça in February, where Mir Alibet had already fortified himself. Our Fleet passed through the Enemies Fire up the River, took the four Gallies, killed above 70 Turks, released many Christians, and took many Prisoners, and 30 Pieces of Cannon. 12. The Muzimba's at this time were on the other side (in such Numbers as shall be related in the Year 1593) intending to kill and plunder the Moors of Mombaça. Ha∣ving from thence with admiration beheld what the Portugueses had done, their Com∣mander sent to Thomas de Sousa to desire him, That since the Portugueses were Gods of the Sea, and he of the Land, and they had done their Work, they would give him leave to begin his. Sousa consented, and they entring the Island, killed the Moors and Turks, who from the City fled to the Woods. Many fled to the Ships and were taken in, the rest were cut in pieces to be eaten by the Muzimbas. Among those that preferr'd Captivity before Death, was Mir Alibet, and a Son and Brother of the King of Qua∣life.
13. Sousa went over to the Island, the King whereof had been a Principal Actor in this Revolt, and being now in Arms re∣fused to come to him; but D. Bernardin Coutinno with only one Souldier ran up to the King at the Head of his Men, and threat∣ning to stab him if any one stirred, brought him away. He, the King of Qualife's Bro∣ther, and two Governors of Pate were be∣headed. The King of Sio was put to the Oar, the rest were all fined. Then our Commander passed over to the Island Mandra, the People of which Place had told some Portugueses, that only the Sun Beams could enter there. Yet the Island and Town were entred, the one wasted, the other levelled with the Ground. 14. Thus Sousa brought all that Coast under Subjection, and was received at Goa with great applause. Mir Alibet was brought to Portugal where he died a Christian. 15. About the end of the Year arrived in India five Ships from Portugal. 16. It is not my Intention to relate only what is honourable of the Portugues, I will here set down four ridiculous and destructive Actions of theirs. The first was thus: The King of Banguel our Friend, desiring to de∣stroy a Wood belonging to an Enemy of his, desired our Admiral of the Coast of Calicut to assist him with 300 Men, to guard those that cut down the Wood. They were sent, and instead of securing him, so dispersed themselves in the Wood, that the Enemy taking the advantage cut them all off. The
second; A Portugues Galley meeting some Pirats of Cangane pursued them with Scoffs, scorning to take up Arms against them, and they turning upon the Galley entred it, and put all the Men to the Sword. 17. The third; The Admiral that was so unfortunate in the Red Sea in the Year 1586, having now taken a rich Ship of Meca and killed the Captain, order'd the Moors in her (as if it had been one of his Gal∣leons) to follow the Admiral's Light. They as soon as it was night fled, and he being ashamed to be so deceived, endeavoured to excuse himself by saying, The Jesuits had advised him so to do, as if that were any Justification of his Folly. The fourth; Seven hundred Portugueses from Chatigam, took a Town, and being in it, a Cannon that was hid accidentally took fire, and they without examining further, fled to their Ships in such a Consternation, that one single Moor durst follow them throwing of Stones. 18. Two of our Gallies going to Chaul, to bring an Ambassador sent by the Mogol, were set upon at the River of Carapatan, Eighteen Leagues from Goa, by a great Squadron of Malabars, commanded by the famous Moor Castamuza. After a tedious fight, the Enemy left them in such a Con∣dition, that only their departure could have saved our Men, who may be said to have had the Victory, because they kept the Field.
19. In May 1591, Matthias de Albuquerque arrived in India alone, having set out of bon with five Ships, four whereof were driven back to Portugal. He went to suc∣ceed Emanuel de Sousa with the Title of Viceroy. Sousa having given up the Sword, Embarqued for Portugal on the greatest Ship that had ever been seen on the Ocean, and vastly Rich, and was cast away on the Sands of Garajo, nothing that was in the Ship being saved. This Ship made up the num∣ber of 22 lost in this Voyage between the Years 1579, and 1591, a great loss for so short a time, and may be attributed to two Causes, the over-loading, and making them too big, both faults proceeding from Co∣vetousness. 20. In fine, Emanuel de Sousa Coutinno was born in the Village de los Arneyros, in the Diocess of Lamego, and was a Gentle∣man, might make the Place of his Birth honourable. He was the 33th Governor, first of the Name, and second of both Sir∣names.
CHAP. VIII. The Government of the Vice-Roy Mathias de Albuquerque, from the Year 1591 till 1597. 1. MAthias de Albuquerque, a Gentleman well deserving this Command, was before named for this Govermnent by the Patents of Succession, but being come for Portugal when they were opened was again here appointed with the Title of Vice-Roy. The Season was so far advanced, it was ge∣nerally believed he could not go through, but he caused himself to be Painted on his Colours standing upon Fortune, and setting them up in his Ship, said, He would perform the Voyage in spight of her, and did it. About the time he entred upon the Govern∣ment, there sailed from Lisbon Iames Pe∣reyra Tibao in a small Ship, and in December Ruy Gomez de Gram in a Galleon, and Gaspar Fagundez in a Caravel, who were to be in India about the middle of this Year we now enter upon, and about the end of it arrived there four Ships, that set out about the be∣ginning. 2. The Vice-Roy understanding that the King of Iafanapatan assisted him of Candea against, and delighted in Persecuting such as imbraced the Christian Religion, calling himself King of Kings, sent against him An∣drew Furtado, that great Commander, with 20 Sail.
3. Off of Calicut he met three Ships of Meca, after a hot Engagement he sunk two and took one. Then he sailed in search of the Pirat Cotimuza, Nephew and Admiral to Cunnale, who with 14 (some say 22) Galleys, was become absolute on the Coast of Coromandel, had taken several of our Ships, and designed to take from us the Forts of Columbo and Manar. At the Mouth of the River Cardiva, Furtado met and fought him, and he having behaved himself well escaped by swimming, leaving us pos∣sessed of his whole Fleet. It is pity we want the Particulars of this fine Action. 4. Our Admiral after this Victory entring the Port of Manar, found there a great Fleet, and made himself Master of it, many of the Men swimming a-shore to join the King's Army. Furtado Lands and marches toward the Town, which was well forti∣fied, manned and provided. He assaults the Works, and drives the Defendants into the Town, whence the King with severe Lan∣guage made his Commander return to Charge the Portugueses, without hearkning to the Advice he gave him to shift for him∣self, because they would soon be in his Pa∣lace. The General returned, and was kill∣ed with all his Men. The Portugueses ad∣vancing, slew the King and his eldest Son, his younger Brother casting himself at Fur∣tado's Feet begged his Life, which was granted him, and the Government of that Kingdom, till the Vice-Roy should order it otherwise. He was afterwards made King upon reasonable Terms.
5. At this time Cunnale Marcar, a Sub∣ject of the King of Calicut, successfully scoured that Coast with a good Squadron. Against him the Vice-Roy sent D. Alvaro de Abranchez with a considerable Fleet. F. Fran∣cis da Coa was then Prisoner at the Court of Zamori, who inclined that Prince to treat of Peace with the Portugueses, and to that effect sent the same Father to D. Alvaro, who was then in that Sea. D. Alvaro sent him to the Vice-Roy, the Peace was con∣cluded to the content of both Parties, and Zamori not only released all the Slaves in his Kingdom, but encouraged the Jesuits to build a Church, himself laying the first Stone. 6. The beginning of this Year sailed from Lisbon four Ships, two whereof we shall see miserably perish, at the latter end of the Year following. 7. Let us go to Moçambique, where there happened a great loss. Our Commander of Tete had some Skirmishes with the Cafres our Enemies. Tete is a Fort of that Authority, that all the Neighbours for three Leagues about, divided under eleven Captains, obey the Commander of it, as each does their own, and upon the least signal given resort thither, to the number of 2000 armed Men. With these Cafres, and some Portugueses, he marched against Quisura, Captain of the Munbo Cafres, who was at Chicarongo. Six hundred of these gave him Battle, and were cut off every Man of them, whereby many Prisoners were released, who were to have
been slaughtered like Cattle for the Sham∣bles, theirs being of human Flesh. The Tyrant Quisura was also killed, who used to pave the way to his Habitation with the Sculls of those he had overcome. 8. Andrew de Santiago, Commander of the Fort of Sena, designing as much against the Muzimba's, found them so well fortified, he was obliged to send to Peter Fernandes de Chaves, Commander of Tete, for aid. Chaves marched with some Portugues Mus∣queteers and the Cafres under his Command; but the Muzimba's being informed of it, and fearing the Conjunction of those Forces, fell upon him so unexpectedly, that they slew him and all his Portugueses, being ad∣vanced before their Cafres, who thereby had time to retire. The Victors quarter'd the dead for Food, and returned with them to their Works. F. Nicholas of the Rosary, a Dominican, was reserved from this gene∣ral slaughter, and after shot to death with Arrows. 9. Next day the Muzimba's marched out of their Works after their Leader, who had put on the Casula, or Vestment taken from the martyr'd Priest, and holding a Dart in his Right hand, and the Chalice in the Left. The Men carried the Commander of Tete's Head on a Spear, and the Quarters of the Portugueses on their Backs. Andrew de San∣tiago astonished at that Sight thought to re∣tire by Night, but the Enemy falling upon him he was killed with most of his Men; so that in both Actions above 130 of them
were cut in pieces, to be buried in those Barbarians Bellies. 10. D. Peter de Sousa, Commander of Mo∣çambique, under whose Jurisdiction Tete is, set out with 200 Portugueses and 1500 Cafres, to take Revenge on these Munzimba's. He batter'd their Works, but with no success, and endeavouring to Scale them was repul∣sed. Being likely to succeed, by raising Gabions as high as their Trenches, he was prevented by some cowardly Portugueses, who, to hide their fear, pretended the Fort of Sena was in danger. Our Commander draw∣ing off to relieve it, was attacked by the Muzimba's, lost many of his Men, the Cannon and other Booty. Yet the Enemy offered a Peace, which was concluded. 11. Soon after one of these Muzimba's marching Eastward, gather'd 15000 Men, and killing all in his way that had Life, set down before Quiloa, which he entred by the Treachery of one of the Inhabitants, and put them all to the Sword. 12. This done, he caused the Traytor and all his Family in his presence to be cast into the River, saying, It was not fit such base People, who betrayed their Country, should be spared, nor yet eaten, because they were venomous, therefore he cast them to be Food for the Fish. So odious is Trea∣son even among Barbarians. He designed to have done the same at Melinde, but that King, assisted by 30 Portugueses, withstood him till 3000 of the Mosseguejo Cafres coming to the Relief of Melinde, the Muzimba's
were so slaughtered, that of all that Army only 100 escaped with the general, after they had ravaged 300 Leagues. Behold the Chalice of this Muzimba. 13. Mahew Mendez de Vasconcelos by force of Arms re-established the King of the Island Pemba, expelled by his Subjects; and they soon after, provoked by the Villanies of the Portugueses, forced him and them to fly to Mombaça, after having killed many, and deprived the rest of the hope of ever returning to that Island. 14. Let us return to India. Melique had a City opposite to Chaul, and of the same Name, full of Moors, and of great Trade as being a good Port, and famous for wea∣ving of Silks. The Commander of it was an Eunuch, once a Slave to the Portugueses, now to Melique. This Man posted himself on that noted Height, called Morro, with 4000 Horse and 7000 Foot. Morro is a Pro∣montory over the Sea, and this runs down to the Shore of Chaul which lies to the North∣ward of it, the River running between them. 15. They terrified the Portugueses of Chaul, and destroyed them with 65 large Cannon they played from that Elevation. This motion was made by Nizamaluco con∣trary to the Peace establid when Francis Barreto governed, and he justified it with Complaints against Matthias de Albuquer∣que.
16. This Siege was commenced in April, when Winter begins, at a time the Moors infested the Lands of Bacaim, and some Horse, those of Chaul. Small Vessels did great harm along the Coast, but much more was sustained in the City from the Cannon. Then came 14 Mogols to be present at the taking of the Portugueses, which they held as a thing certain, but being assaulted by some of our Men, 9 were killed, 2 taken, and the other 3 fled. The Eunuch Taladar escaped being taken, and died of his Wounds, as did a Turk that succeeded him in the Command. After him, that Post fell to Faratecan. 17. He with continual Batteries gave our Men no respite. About 1000 withstood his Power, till D. Alvaro de Abranches brought 300 from Baçaim, and another 200 from Salsete. They now made up 1500 Portugue∣ses, and a like number of such faithful Slaves, that they received the Wounds themselves to protect their Masters. Having appoin∣ted a day to attack the Enemy, they all con∣fessed themselves, and then went up the River in several Vessels. 18, The Portugueses, beyond all expecta∣tion, made their way to the Plain on the top of the Promontory, and there the Fight was renewed. Ten Elephants being turned loose, a Soldier of ours gave one such a cut as made him run back, trampling his own Men till he fell into the Ditch, making us a Bridge to pass over. Another Elephant made way to a Wicket, the Portugueses en∣tred,
and found so many dead, as were a stop to them from killing others. 19. Some Accounts say, 10000 were slain, others make them no less than 60000. Fara∣tecan, his Wife, and Daughter, were taken; he became a Christian before he died, as did his Daughter, and came to Portugal; his Wife was Ransomed. Only 21 Portugueses were lost. There were taken a great quan∣tity of Ammunition, many Horses, 5 Ele∣phants, and 75 extraordinary Pieces of Cannon. CHAP. IX. Continues and concludes the Government of Matthias de Albuquerque. 1. THE Portugueses, in hopes the Death of Raju might contribute towards recovering what they had lost in Ceylon, gave Advice thereof to the Viceroy, who sent thither Peter Lopez de Sousa with a good number of Men and Ammunition. This Commander made a halt at Palnagure, and ordered Francis de Silva to bring the Queen of Candea, whom he would put into Posses∣sion of that Kingdom. But Iohn Chingala, who had usurped it, taking the advantage of Peter his ill Conduct, took him and almost 500 Men Prisoners, and cut off their No∣ses. The Queen was put in Prison, and
above 150 Portugueses suffered several sorts of Death. 2. D. Hierome de Azevedo succeeded Peter Lopez in this Command, and with 400 Por∣tugueses fought 12000 Chingala's, but came off with great loss. These Mutiniers were commanded by Dominick Correa a Chingala, who was afterwards taken, carried to Colum∣bo, and there quartered. 3. Five Ships arrived now from Portugal, and then was first carried into India the Bull of the Croisade, whereof F. Francis de Faria a Dominican was Commissary. 4. The Ship St. Albertus sailing for Portu∣gal, was cast away on the Coast Del Natal, some of the Men lost, the rest marched in a Body under the command of Nunno Vello Pereyra, suffering great Hardships to the Ri∣ver of Lorenço Marquez, where finding Ema∣nuel Malleyro with a Ship, Nunno and most of the Men imbarked and came to Moçambique. Those who were left behind travelled by Land, and forgetting their miserable condi∣tion, so provoked the Cafres with their In∣solence, that they killed most of them. 5. Nunno Vello Pereyra imbarked again on the Ship Chagas, commanded by Francis de Melo, and had no better fortune the second Voyage than the first. Near the Islands Azores three English Ships met, and after a bloody Fight, burnt them. Only 12 escaped, burning or drowning on Planks, among which were Nunno Vello, and Blas Correa; they were taken up by the English, carried into England, and ransomed.
6. The Annual Ship coming in April from China vastly rich, and being on the Malabar Coast almost in sight of Goa, was set upon by 14 Galliots of the Enemy. There were but 14 Portugueses in the Ship, 1594. who fought 3 days and 3 nights till they were all killed; then an Islander of Iava going into the round Top from thence, with a Barrel of Powder set her a fire, so that the Enemy got little by her. A poor Com∣fort. 7. The Viceroy fitted out a Squadron of 18 Sail with 700 Men, and gave the Com∣mand of it to Andrew Furtado. On the first of August he met 3 Ships belonging to Zamori full of Riches, and People of both Sexes and all Ages, above 2000 of them were killed in Fight, the Ships taken, and the Booty was such, that a Servant happen'd upon 5 Bags of Pagods, a Gold Coin of the bigness of half a Royal Plate, but thicker, and worth a Crown. Furtado went on, and found the Malabar Fleet he went in search of in the River of Cardiga, which shunned not the Ingagement, but was totally defeated, and a great Booty taken. 8. Then he sailed for Ceylon, arrived at Columbo, and secured that place, in great danger of utter Ruin by means of the Por∣tugueses, who were at Variance among them∣selves, and mutinied against their Captain. This done, he returned with fresh Honour to Goa.
9. Now arrived 3 Ships from Portugal, and found another beautiful one built, called The Mother of God, to return with them, which was lost on the Coast called Desierto de la Ethiopia Oriental, between Ma∣gadaxo and the Island Zocotora. Many 1595. of the Men were drowned, and more pe∣rished with Hunger and Thirst ashore: Only 16 escaped, enduring such Miseries, they often envied the Happiness of the Dead. 10. I find not any account of the Occur∣rences of this Year, only that about the end end of it came 5 Ships from Lisbon, and in one of them F. Alexius de Meneses, of the Order of St. Augustin, who went to suc∣ceed F. Matthew in the Archbishoprick of Goa. 11. About this time the Religious of St. Dominick, to secure the Preaching of the Gospel in their District, raised a Fort at Solor, which grew so considerable, it was afterwards found convenient to send a Com∣mander thither. The first, or among the first, were Antony de Vellegas, and Antony de Andria, who put to the Sword many of the Natives that had killed some Religious Men. This Punishment, in stead of Amendment, made them worse, for two years after con∣spiring together, they agreed to kill the Commander and Friers. They fell furiously upon the Town and Fort, in the Town they did much harm, the Commander withdrew himself out of the Fort, and could not be found. They imagining he had forsaken it,
entred, and Andria with a few Portugueses coming upon them through a private Door they knew not of, killed most of them. 12. A Galley and five other Vessels of ours cruizing off Cape Comori to secure our Tra∣ders from Coromandel, were so surprised by the Malabars, that they entred and burnt the Galley. The 5 Sail that were at some distance coming up time enough to have taken the Enemies Vessels, suffered them to go away without molestation. 13. On the 5th of February happened the Death of the 7 Franciscan Martyrs of Iapan. They suffered at Nangataqui under the cruel Cambaco, in revenge 1596. for the Numbers they had converted. Their Names were, F. Peter Baptista the Commis∣sary, F. Martin of the Assumption, F. Francis Blanco, and the Brothers, Philip of Iesus, and Francis de Barrilla, and Gonzalo Garzia, with 20 Iaponneses, among which were 3 Bro∣thers Jesuits, and 3 Children, Thomas, Antony, and Lewis. They were Crucified, and then shot with Arrows. 14. On the Coast of Malabar, between the Cities of Goa and Cochim, 77 Leagues from the one, and 33 from the other, is the little Port of Pudepatam, within which the Creeks form a Peninsula, joyning to the Land on the South side. On the North of it are the Ariores or Lords of Baragare and Mo∣tonge. They are all divided by a Rivulet, and towards the East a River falls there from the Mountain Gate, and another called Capocape on the South. The Moor Pate Mar∣ca
perceiving how convenient a place this was to shelter Pirats that might scour all that Coast, obtained Leave of Zamori, whose Subject he was, and the Peninsula his, to build a Fort there. 15. He went over thither with his Kin∣dred and Followers, and began to raise a square Fort on the East Point of it. From hence he began to make War upon us, taking many of our Ships richly laden. He assaulted the Village of Tana in the Island Salsete near Baçaim, and carried away a rich Booty, taking the opportunity of doing it, when those who should defend it were at the De∣votions of the Holy Week. 16. Mahomet Cunnale Marca succeeded him in the Sovereignty of that Fort, finished and increased it; and foreseeing the Portugueses would seek Revenge, he fortified the Town (called also Cunnale) by Sea and Land. On the Land side he made a deep Ditch with double Trenches 2 Yards and a half thick from Sea to Sea. At distances he raised Towers that flanked the Work, and on the Towers (by them called Zarames) planted small Cannon Between the two Creeks he built a strong Wall which secured the Town, with two Towers, one at each end, and along the Sea-shore stuck Palisadoes, where were also two Bastions, one greater than the other, planted with gross Cannon to secure the entrance of the Harbour, which besides was made very difficult even to small Vessels by Masts strongly chained together.
17. Being thus secure, he took upon him the Style and Title of King, and carried on his Uncle's Design against the Portugueses with greater success. He took one of our Galleys, a Ship coming from China, and many lesser Vessels, assisted the Queen of Olaba when she revolted, and Melique at the last Siege of Chaul, and now robbed not only the Portugueses, but the Malabars also, fil∣ling his Peninsula with Riches. 18. Our Viceroy concerned at the in∣crease of his Power, resolved towards the end of his Government to weaken it, and by D. Alvaro de Abranches, Admiral of that Sea, advertised Zamori, how that Pirat was equally prejudicial to him as to the Portu∣gueses, and therefore it would be convenient they should both joyn to extirpate him. That Prince being made sensible of this Truth, a new Peace was concluded, and they agreed, That he by Land, and the Portugueses by Sea, should joyntly undertake the expulsion of Cunnale, and razing the Fort. Both Parties provided for this Expe∣dition, when a new Viceroy coming, the prosecution of it was carried on, as shall be seen in his Government. 19. Matthias de Albuquerque was one of the most deserving Men that arrived to this Command, as well for his Fortune and Va∣lour, as his Prudence and Justice. In the Treasury he left 80000 Ducars in Money, and Jewels of Ceyln of great value. He thought no body could cheat him, and a Soldier to undeceive him received his Pay
three times in three several Shapes, and by as many Names. Matthias afterwards hear∣ing of it sent for him, and was kind to the Man, advising him to use that Art no more. 20. He was of a middle Stature, lame of one Foot, but not lame in Manners, being as much a Christian as a Gentleman, of Vice∣roys the 16th, of Governours the 34th, first of the Name, and second of the Sir∣name. CHAP. X. Of the Propagation of the Gospel in the Em∣pire of China during these later Years. 1. THE manner of the introducing and propagating the Gospel in China from the Year 1580, till 1600, was so re∣markable and worthy of memory, that thô I descend not to the Particulars, I cannot but give ome general Account of it. 2. Some Religious Orders had with Cou∣rage and Profit laboured therein before the Holy Society of Iesus appeared in India. The first that set foot there was the Order of the most Holy Trinity, in the Person of D. Vasco de Gama his Confessor, who (as is before said) was of that Congregation. The second was that of St. Francis, and the third of St. Dominick's, who trampling all Diffi∣culties,
sowed the Doctrine of Life there, watering i with their Blood. Afterwards some Secular Priests, and even Lay-men, made themselves famous by this Spiritual Work. 3. This was the Estate of Christianity in Asia, till its new Apostle St. Francis Xaverius came thither, who from the Year 1541, till 1552, never ceased Preaching to those Peo∣ple, and died in the Island Sancham, with an ardent desire of entring China. By his Death, the design of instructing the Chineses was laid aside till the Year 1580, when F. Alexandrinus de Valiniano an Italian, and Visitor of the Society in Asia, undertook it, notwithstanding all the Difficulties that ob∣structed. 4. None of the smallest was the hardness of the Chinese Language, more uncouth to us than all the others of Asia. Yet at length a few attained some knowledge of it; and the first that set foot in Quantung, was F. Mi∣chael Rogerius a Neapolian, on pretence of Administring the Sacraments to the Portu∣gueses who Traded there, and by this means converted some of the Natives, who went over to Macao, where for their better In∣struction was erected a sort of Seminary near to the House of the Iesuits: 5. Valiniano considering the greatness of the Difficulties, was resolved to desist, but God prevented the execution of this Reso∣lution. This Language, at first so difficult, was afterwards the best spoke and writ by these Fathers, and other Obstacles, though
not removed yet, began to appear less ter∣rible. By order of the Visitor Valiniano, who resided at Iapan, there came from In∣dia to Macao F. Matthew Rivius an Italian, to assist F. Michael Rogerius. They founded a Confraternity in that City for such Iaponeses and Chineses as were converted, calling it, The Sanctuary of Iesus. Other Fathers re∣sorted thither, and among them F. Francis Pasius. 6. This was the posture of Affairs, when the Viceroy of Xanking, for his private In∣terest, sent for the Bishop and Governor of Macao. The one sent F. Rogerius, the other Mattheus Penela, with a Present which satis∣fied him. F. Rogorius returned thither again with F. Plasius, and presenting the Viceroy a Striking Watch, and Triangular Glass which shews Things of several Colours; the No∣velty of these Things so pleased him, that he gave them leave to build a Church and House in the Suburb, where he entertained them kindly. But after 4 Months, a new Viceroy succeeding, they were forced to return to Macao, where Plasius died. 7. The new Viceroy sends for the Fa∣thers, the same Rogerius and Matthew Rivius go to him, and return without any Success, but with much Trouble. In May they are again sent for to Xanking, whither they came in November, 1583. are kindly received, and have a pleasant Place assigned them with∣out the City to build.
8. It is remarkable, that when these Reli∣gious Men were banished this City, they left an Altar-Stone in the custody of Nicho Chus, a Youth well inclined to Christianity; at their return they found it decently placed in a Room with Perfumes burning before it, and over it a Board with these Words, TIEN CHU, that is, To the Lord of Heaven. Here the Religious, for this strange Accident, said Mass, till their Church was made ready. 9. The Fathers, to be the more accepta∣ble, put on the Chinese Habit, and named God in their Prayers by that Title they had seen on the Board, which much pleased the Natives. Many of the Gentry and Learned Men began to Reverence the Images of Christ, and the blessed Virgin; they began to give ear to Matters of Faith, printed and dispersed among the People the Ten Com∣mandments, highly approving of them, supplied the Church with Lights and Per∣fumes, and gave Alms to the Fathers. 10. The first baptized was a sick Man of mean condition. The Christian Doctrine was printed after their manner, and disper∣sed through the whole Province with no small Reputation for the great Titles the Viceroy bestowed on the Authors of it. 11. F. Rogerius now went to Macao, to seek some Relief to the great Poverty that place was in. Mean while the Chineses changing their humours, began to slander the Fathers, and often threw Stones at their House. F. Matthew Rivius was carried be∣fore
the Supream Court, he carried his Sleeves full of the Stones had been thrown at him, and letting them fall at the Judges Feet, so mollified him, that he caused the Accuser to be whipped, and ordered on severe Penalties no Wrong should be offered the Fathers. Rivius was skilled in the Mathematicks, and made Maps and Dials, all pleasing and new there, particularly seeing so many Countries in the World to them unknown, as belie∣ving there was nothing beyond Asia. This Novelty attracted People from very re∣mote Parts to behold it, and proved a great Motive to incline them to receive the Faith. 12. F. Rector Francis Cabrall, Superin∣tendent of this Mission, came from Macao to visit this new Colony of the Church. He found more Fruit than was expected, and baptized the first Converts, among which a learned Man of the Province of Fokien, whom he called Paul, and another Iohn, which was he that with such Reverence kept the Altar-stone aforemention. 13. The Visitor Valiniano, for joy of this Success, made this Mission Independent of Macao, subjecting it immediately to himself, and the Provincial of Iapan. D. Duarte de Meneses, then Viceroy, settled an Allowance out of the Custom-House of Malaca upon the Fathers. 14. F. Almeyda and Rogerius, having obtained leave, went to erect another House in the Province of Chekiang, where they immediately baptized an ancient Gen∣tleman,
Father to the Governor of Xanquim, and soon after others. This was in the City Xanchin. 15. But this lasted not long, for the Fa∣thers were soon expelled. Those of Xanking were in danger, but got off, and their Ac∣cusers were punished. These religious Men considering, this Prosperity could not be lasting without the King's Authority, sent F. Rogerius to Rome to obtain a Letter and Present from the Pope for the King; but the Pope dying the Business was delayed, and F. Rogerius ended his days at Salerno, in the Kingdom of Naples. Mean while the Fathers at Xanking were not without Trou∣bles, but still protected by the Viceroy; converted many People, till a new Viceroy coming they were banished, and all they had taken from them. 16. On their way to Macao they were overtaken by fresh Orders from the Viceroy; whereupon they returned to Xanking, and had a Place assigned them to settle at Han∣cheu. Not far from that City is a most de∣lightful Plain along the side of a River, and in it a vast Temple and Monastery of 1000 Bonzos, called Manhoa, and yet the number of Idols exceeds that of the Bonzos, for only in one of 12 Apartments, into which it is divided, there were seen 500. These, as they call them, religious Men live there with their Wives and Children, and when they think fit, go out to rob. To this place were the Fathers led, that if they liked they might settle there, and were well received
by the Bonzos, but the design of the Reli∣gious was to live in the City. 17. The Fathers were admitted into the City with the general good liking of all People. They soon suffered by the Conta∣gion of the Air, which infects the very Na∣tives with a Disease like an Ague, yet esca∣ped the danger. From Macao two young Chinese Converts were sent to be their Com∣panions, who were afterwards the first of that Nation admitted into the Society. 18. They laboured with no small Fruit, some Persons of Note being converted. A∣mong the rest, Cuytaiso, the Son of a great Man, having lost or spent his Fortune, came to F. Rivius, thinking he was a Chimist, and might teach him the way to make Gold, and being by him instructed, found the true Treasure of the Faith. The same happen∣ed to an ancient Gentlemen of almost eighty Years of Age. 19. A Persecution was now raised at Han∣cheu, and the Governor examining into it, decreed to punish the Causers of it, but par∣doned them at the Intercession of F. Rivius. In the Year 1591 was converted a Rich Mer∣chant, who long had consulted the Idols and their Ministers about the way to Salvation, and at length found it among the Jesuits. F. Rivius went with his Disciple Cuytaiso, and by his Perswasion to Nanking where he had innumerable Auditors, baptized six, left many many more in good Disposition. He had done much more here, but that he
was sent for to Hancheu, whither he return∣ed, and converting many, suffered another Persecution, but weather'd it. 20. Till the end of the Year 1594, our Fathers wore their own Habit, and shaved as in Europe; and then changed it for that used by the Lawyers, for three Reasons; first, to avoid being called Bonzos, for that those cloathed like them and shaved; secondly, to gain the better admittance to Magistrates, who familiarly receive none without that Habit; and thirdly, to please the People. CHAP. XI. Continues the Subject of the Propagation of the Gospel. 1. ABout the middle of the Year 1595, F. Matthew Rivius set out for the City Nanking in Company of a Great Man. The Way was up great Rivers, in one of which the Vessels were sunk, and F. Rivius forced to swim for his Life, having lost his Companion Iohn Barradas. His Design was to settle a Residence in that Court, where he found many Opposers, and among them a powerful Man who had pretended much Friendship. 2. He went to Nancham, the Metropolis of the Province Kiangsi, between Nanking and Quantung. Being there in despair of any Success, he obtained a Lodging, where
he said Mass on the Day of St. Peter and Paul, and afterwards leave to fix a Residence, whither resorted F. Iohn Soeyro from Macao, and the Brothers Francis Martinez and Se∣bastian Rodriguez from Hancheu; with much trouble they founded a Church. 3. The Visitor Valiniano seeing how in∣convenient it was the Affairs of China should have any dependance abroad, granted F. Mat∣thew Rivius the full superintendence of them. He resolved again to attempt settling a Re∣sidence at Nanking. From hence he pro∣posed to send advice of his coming to that King, with a Present of Things very com∣mon in Europe, though there much esteemed for their Rarity. These were Clocks much admired of the Chineses, for that they move of themselves. Triangular Glasses, that re∣present variety of Colours. A Harpsical. But what was more surprizing than all the rest, was the Learning of F. Rivius, his Art of Memory, his Maps of the World, his Un∣derstanding, Wit and Judgment. 4. There being no way to send the Pre∣sent, it was agreed the Fathers should carry it themselves, going in Company of a Noble∣man that Travelled thither. In the way to Peking they saw many Cities and innume∣table Villages along the Banks of the Rivers up which they went. Being come to Peking, they spent a Month soliciting an Audience of the King, but without success. 5. Rivius with great trouble returned to Sucheu, being sent for by his Disciple Cui∣tayso. This is doubtless the most glorious
City in those Parts. It is built in a River, as Venice in the Sea, and is of great strength to prevent all Accidents. The occasion of sending for F. Rivius, was to fix a Residence there. The Viceroy of Nanking's leave was requisite for this undertaking: Both Master and Disciple take a Journey thither, and and the Viceroy grants leave to settle in both Places. Here F. Rivius disputed with a fa∣mous Bonzo, and overcame him even in the Judgment of his Adversaries. 6. The Court of Publick Works propo∣sed to the Fathers to buy a House that had long stood empty because haunted by Devils, they did, and all the People was astonished to see that after their entrance the Fiends had forsaken it. They could not undertake any thing than at Sucheu for want of more Fathers. 7. Still F. Rivius his Thoughts were bent upon Peking, to obtain the King's consent to proceed. Whilst he prepared for this Jour∣ney, the Faith considerably spread at Nan∣king. The first Baptized was a discreet old Man 70 Years of Age, of a Noble Family, who had an hereditary Military Command, his Sirname was Chin, and he was Christen∣ed by the Name of Paul. His Son, a Learn∣ed Man, followed the good Example, and was named Iohn, then all their Family, and some Kindred. 8. On the 16th of May 1600, F. Rivius Embarqued the second time upon the River for Peking, with him went F. Iames Pantoja a Spaniard, called by a learned Man Golden
Hands, for the delicate Works he wrought, and the two Brothers Sebastian and Emanuel. At Nanking remained F. Lazarus de Catania and B. Iohn. 9. Whilst they went up the River, the Viceroy of the Province of Xangsi's Wife dream'd she saw a Sovereign Deity with two Children. She concluded her Dream was expounded, when her Husband relating the Things contained in the Present, for the King mentioned a Picture of our Blessed Lady, with our Saviour and St. Iohn Baptist. The Lady desiring such a Picture, and there being no Painter to Copy it, F. Rivius gave her a Copy he had. The Viceroy receiving it with respect, assured him he and his Fa∣mily would always Reverence the Mother and Son. 10. At the City Linchin a covetous Eu∣nuch, who was Receiver-General of the Revenue, called Mathan, imprisoned them in the Fort of Tiensim, seizing upon the Present they carried for the King, and all they had. After six Months confinement, an Order came from the King (without know∣ing who had procured it) that the Fathers should be sent to him. All things were re∣stored them, and they arrived at Peking a∣bout the end of the Year 1601. The Pre∣sent was publickly carried to Court, and the King as soon as he saw the Picture of Christ admiring it, said; This is the living God. Yet afterwards caused it to be removed out of his sight. The same happened with his Mother; nevertheless it was set in a decent
place, and honoured with Perfumes, and is said to be preserved in that Palace to this Day. A striking Clock was much admired; so several other things. 11. Afterwards they were sent for; a fa∣vourite Eunuch spoke to them in the King's Name; they gave him an account who they were, whence they came, and what they desired. He acquainted the King with it, and they were lodged in the Palace, in the Apartment of the Mathematicians, and nobly entertained. There they instructed some Men appointed by the King in the Motion of the Clocks, and how to keep them, and then removed to a hired House. The King saw them not, because he scarce used to see his own People, but to have some sort of sight of them, sent Painters to draw their Pictures. Having seen the Pictures he took them for Moors. Pantoja was again introduced into the Palace, to teach some Musicians to play upon the Harpsical. 12. Thus far were our hopes advanced, when the Fathers were imprisoned by the Court of Ceremonies, for presuming to re∣side there, without presenting themselves before their Tribunal. This confinement lasted but three days, because the King sent for them. Though he sent for them they saw him not, yet performed all the usual im∣pertinent Ceremonies to his Throne as if he had been there. The Supream President of that Court more particularly examined F. Rivius who he was, whence he came, and what he and his Companions pretended at
Court; and he being the most expert in the Chinese Language, in most lofty terms answer'd to all those Particulars, to the great admiration of the President and all the Au∣ditory. 13. The King being informed hereof, granted the Fathers leave to live at that Court, and all the Courtiers favoured them, especially the Ministers of State and Manda∣rins. F. Rivius so far gained the favour of a Calao, the Supream Dignity in that Empire, that he treated him as his equal (a thing never used in that great Place) seated him at his Table, and gave singular attention to all he said, particularly in Matters relating to Religion. One of the things that most pleased him was, that Christianity allowed not of more Wives than one. Thus Rivius contracted Friendship with the President of the Supream Council, and soon after most of the Principal Men. 14. Thus with Divine and Royal Assi∣stance the Faith was propagated at Peking, Hancheu, Nanking and Nancham. There were converted Mandarins, Lawyers and o∣ther Persons of Note; some with their whole Families; and the Society of Jesus, after 20 Years labour, in the Year 1601 was posses∣sed of four Residences in China, one where∣of at Court, which was to support all the rest. 15. F. Nicholas Longobardo, a Sicilian, who was Rector at Hancheu, suffered very much, but some Men of Note, especially one Tauli, pleading for the Fathers, the Storm was
somewhat appeased. But it broke out more furious at the Instigation of a Witch, who, there being a great Dearth, said, the God∣dess Quonhin would not give Rain whilst the Fathers were there, and F. Nicholas was threatned with Death, who desirous to suffer Martyrdom, ran to the Place where they were threatning him. He finding those Peo∣ple disputing about the Rain, told them how vain it was to expect it from any but the God he preached; and immediately there fell such abundance as refreshed the Fields, and quenched their Thirst after his Blood; so that House for that time was re∣stored to its former quiet. Let this for the present suffice touching the Conversion of China, till we have occasion to speak of it again. The End of the First Part.
THE PORTUGUES ASIA. TOM. III. PART II. CHAP. I. The Government of the Viceroy D. Francis de Gama, Count de Vidigueyra, from the Year 1597 till 1600. DON Francis de Gama Count de Vi∣digueyra arrived at Goa in May, ha∣ving set out from Lisbon the Year before with five Sail, whereof only his Ship Winter'd at Mombaçá. He carried himself from the beginning with such State, that he gained the general ill Will of all Men, notwithstanding in other things he en∣deavoured to oblige. 2. He disposed of all Places in the gift of the Viceroys to his own Creatures, who sold them to underserving Persons, whereby those
who had merited them by their Service were put by their Right. Yet afterwards hearing the just Complaints made against this unjust Proceeding, he caused the Buyers to be re∣funded, and gave those Places to Men of more worth. 3. Manasinza, the great Mogol's Favou∣rite, marched to subdue the Patanes who were in Rebellion, because Catula King of Orixa having plunder'd and profaned a famous Pagod, they unexpectedly fell upon him, and killed his Son with 2000 Men. Manafinza had with him 35000 Horse, 80000 Foot, many Elephants with Castles and great quantity of all other warlike En∣gines. At the City Iassalor all the Inhabi∣tants, to the number 6000 fell furiously upon the Enemy, resolving to die, and ordering as soon as they were cut off, their Goods, Wives and Children should be burnt, that the Enemy might not possess their Riches or dishonour their Families. They did great Execution at the first onset, but were all cut to pieces, and there being no time to put in execution their design, Manasinza entred Iassalor plundering the Riches, and ravish∣ing Women; which struck such a Terror into the rest of the Patanes they all submit∣ted themselves. Then marching towards the King of Orixa, and he not daring to stand a Battel freely offered Subjection. 4. In Ceylon, the Tyrant D. Iohn King of Candea, taking the advantage of time when our General D. Hierome de Azevedo had dispersed his Men to refresh them, caus'd
the King of Uva and the Princes of Dina∣vaca to join, and take the Field with 4000 Men, many Musketeers, and armed Ele∣phants. With this force they marched to∣wards our Fort of Corvite (six Leagues from Ceitavaca) where Salvador Pereyra de Silva commanded with 100 Men. Silva by the General's order chose some of his Men, and marched one Night with such a secrecy four Leagues to the Place where the Enemy was Encamped, that they sooner felt than heard him, killing many of their Men before they could handle their Arms. The Confusion was such they▪ presently fled, he pursued them, slew above 1000, and carried away some Prisoners, Elephants and other Booty. 5. In the Summer D. Iohn, takes the Field again with the King of Uva and Simon Correa, who being in Rebellion called him∣self King of Ceitavaca. He thought to draw our General D. Hierome out of his Works, by attacking our Quarters at Mature, where D. Ferdinand the Modeliar commanded. D. Ferdinand understanding the Enemy was near, thought to have performed such another fortunate piece of Service as Salvador Pereyra had done, but his Companion Simon Pin∣cham prevented him, and after a desperate Fight, in which he was almost lost, obtain∣ed a Victory equal to that of Pereyra, and falling upon the Rebels in their Works killed most of them, so that the Flower of Candea fell this Day. 6. At the end of May died at Columbo the lawful King of the whole Island of Ceylon,
D. Iohn Parea Pandar, a Catholick and without Heirs. King Philip was with the usual Solemnity immediately Proclaimed King of the whole Island, and the Oath of Fidelity to him taken by all the Principal Men, as being appointed Heir by the last Will of the Deceased. 7. About this time came first into India the Scourge of the Portugues Pride and Co∣vetousness; for in the Month of September News was brought to Goa, that the two first Holland Ships which durst cut those Seas, had been in the Port of Titangone, and were bound for the Island Sunda. The Viceroy having held a Council about this Affair, it was resolved to fit out a Squadron of two Galleons, three Gallies, and nine other Vessels, and the Command of it was given to Laurence de Brito, an ancient and expe∣rienced Captain deserving of greater Com∣mands. 8. Three Ships arrived now from Por∣tugal. That which had brought the Vice∣roy was ready at Cochim to return thither with them, and accidentally taking fire was burnt with all the Riches in her, amounting to a Million and half. 9. Not only Custom but Necessity now required the sending out the two usual Squa∣drons for the Coast of Malabar and the North; the design of the Northern Squa∣dron shall follow; that of Malabar was to give a Check to Zamori, who not only wink∣ed at but went shares with the Pyrates of the Fort Cunnale. Among other Losses that of
Captain  de  and Melo was great∣est, he  Cape  with  Sps,  eight  of Malabars,  his  slain, after having ed  The Squadron the Vi  that Coast, con∣sisted of , and 36 other Vessels, with almost 2000  Men, under the Comm of  D. Luis de Gama. They did  in the same nature as has been related on the like Occasions, which   to incline to make W on Cle, rather to avoid the harm we did him, thn in observance of the A∣grnt before made. The Squadron for the North con∣ed of 10 Ships commanded by Luis de Silva. He  nding the Pyrats he was in search of in the Island of the Sanges, landed and ravaged it for harbouring of them. In the River C he found four Paraos of these Pirats, took two and  one, killing many of the M. Of those who got ashore above 200 were taken, and being Beheaded, their He re set up at the Mouths of those Riv to  their Companions. Near Chaul he took a Galliot, and further on ano∣ther, more properly a Galley, in which was the Nephew of Cunnale with 200 Men, whereof 100 were killed, without the loss of one Man on our side. 11. The War continued at Ceylon. The Tyrant of Candea endeavoured to better his Fortune, by distring us with several odies, of 3 or 4000 Men ch, Our Ge∣neral
D. Hierome de Azevedo ordered Salva∣dor Pereyra de Silva, and Simon Piam, with a few, but choice, Men to oppose him. They with singular success destroyed Towns, took Forts, slaughtered many People, (not without Cruelty to strike a Terror) and re∣duced all the Corlas or Precincts that were in Rebellion to our Obedience. 12. The two Holland Ships, before men∣tioned, did some small Damage along the Coast of Malabar, and other places, till on that of Malaca they met 6 Ships coming out o the Port bound for India, and comman∣ded by Francis de Silva. They ingaged and fought all that afternoon, and part of the night. Next morning they fell to it again, and held it for 8 days continually, till the Hollanders finding themselves too weak, made for the Port of Queda, many of their Men being killed, and most wounded. There for want of Men they quitted the weakest Ship, and going all into the other, were cast away on the Coast of Pegu. 13. D. Luis de Cerqueyra Bishop of China, went this year to succeed D. Peter Martinez, who died at Iapan, that nothing might be there wanting towards the Spiritual Con∣quest for the lack of a Prelate. 14. With the Bishop D. Luis went F. A∣lexander de Valiniano. They were present at the Death of Taicozana, Emperor of those Islands. Some time before his Death he had designed to cause himself to be ado∣red as a God, and to this purpose to have his Images set upon Altars in the chief Parts
of certain beautiful Gardens in the Fort of Tuxi. But scarce had he fixed the place of his Adoration, when on the 20th of Iuly, 1596. there appeared over the City Meaco a wonderful Blazing Star, then it rained Ashes and Sand, and there followed an Earth∣quake which threw down the Fort and Pa∣lace of Tuxi, and in other places many Temples of Idols, with great slaughter of People. The Sea breaking out, and over∣flowing for 20 Leagues towards Miaco, Zio, and Bungo, drowned whole Cities and Towns, over-running the Tops of some Mountains like the general Deluge. Never∣theless after his Death he was adored, and Statues raised to him with the Title of The God of War. CHAP. II. Continues the Government of D. Francis de Gama Count de Vidigueyra. 1. ZAmori was now sufficiently incensed against Cunnale, who called himself King of the Mlabar Moors, and Lord of the Indian Sea. It was not these Titles, or his Pride, or the Complaints of the Portugueses, that provoked Zamori, but that Cunnale had caused the Tail of one of his Elephants to be cut off, as also the Privy Parts of a Nayre, which were also fastened to his Mouth.
2. The Portugueses laying hold of this op∣portunity, offered their Assistance against that common Enemy, and blew the Coals of Za∣mori's Anger they saw already lighted. The Viceroy instantly fitted out some light Ves∣sels, ordering D. Ferdinand de Noronna to lie with them before the Mouth of the Port o Cunnale, till a greater force could be sent to joyn, in order to assist Zamori, who was marching to besiege that place with 20000 Men, and some Cannon. 3. That which is properly called the Coast of Malabar, runs from Cananor to Cochim the space of 42 Leagues. Two to the little Island Tremapatan, opposite to which is the mouth of a good River, thence half a League to the River Sal, thence one and a half to that of Maim, one to the Town of Comen∣na, at a small distance those of Motangue, Curiare, and Baregare; then the River Pude∣patan; two Leagues farther, the Town of Tiracole, two Leagues from Cotulete, a League from this the River Capocate, one farther Pu∣diangare, one thence to Calecut, two to the River Cale, two to the City Pananor, two thence to Tanor, and two more to Paranora, one more to the famous River Panane, thence nine to Paliporto, four to the River of Granganor, and five more to Cochim. At the mouth of the River Pudepatan is the Fort of Cunnale, seated in a square Penin∣sula, the length of the Sides about a Can∣non Shot. Just within the Bar a Creek turns towards the South, good Vessels can go about half way up it, beyond that only
Almadies or Boats; the great River runs first towards the North-East, then turning to the South forms that Peninsula. Upon that turn of the River the Fort is built. The Imus is secured by a strong Wall about a Musket-Shot in length from the Creek to the River, which there opens and forms the little Island Pinale. We have al∣ready spoke particularly of the Fort, in general it was large, strong, well Manned, and stored with Cannon. 4. Cunnale was well provided, and had distributed the Posts to 1500 choice Moors well armed. Our small Vessels at the mouth of the River battered the Fort to keep the Defendants in action, that they might not be any hindrance to Zamori who was on the other side, taking up the Ground for his Army. 5. D. Ferdinand scoured the Coast, and taking some of the Pirats, hindred the re∣sort of Provisions to the Fort. Now comes our Squadron commanded by D. Luis de Gama, Brother to the Viceroy, both unfor∣tunate, the one in choosing, the other in being chose. 6. D. Luis his Squadron consisted of 4 Gal∣leys, and 35 smaller Vessels, 10 more brought by private Gentlemen at their own charge, three full of Men and Ammunition sent by the City of Cochim. Besides, there were two large Barques with heavy Cannon to batter the Fort.
7. The King of Cochim fearing that great Power that was falling upon Cunnale might be his Ruin, by entirely uniting Zamori and the Portugueses, gave out, That Zamori had agreed with Cunnale to cut off all our Men at one stroke when they should be deepest ingaged in the Assault. D. F. Alexius de Me∣neses Archbishop of Goa, who was there on his way to the Mountains of St. Thomas, at first was fearful, imagining this might be a faithful Discovery; but considering better, perceived it was the Politick Product of the King's Jealousie, answered the King mo∣destly, diverting him from any other designs seeing this fail. He assured the City their Ships might safely set sail, yet sent Advice to proceed with Caution. All our Fleet now joyned, they found Cunnale had added to the former Works a Line of Galiots on the edge of the Water under the Fort, ima∣gining he might be attacked that way. 8. It was resolved in Council to enter the River, and draw up the Ships in a Line, with their Stems to the Shore, that they might cover the Men who attacked the Fort. This Resolution was sent to Goa, and approved of by the Viceroy, who ordered his Brother to put it in execution! He over∣perswaded by some Gentlemen that sought his Disgrace, disobeyed, and carried the  by th side of Ariole, believing the  might be fatal, and his  lay  not g it.
9. Zamori, who was battering the Town, desired some Portugueses might be sent him; D. Luis being suspicious of him deed Hostags, which were presently sent, being 6 principal Men, and among them the Prin∣ces of , Chale, , and the chief Judge of his Kingdom. The  ta∣ken, 300 Portugueses were sent to him under the command of Belchior Ferreyra. On the 3d of May, at night, our Men began to land, Luis de Silva led the van with 600 Men, and among them the Major D. Antony de Leyv. The Sign for both Armies to fall on, was a burning Lance. Before this was lighted, there appeared one in the Air, which run∣ning along swiftly, at last vaed in Sparks. 10. The Besieged took this for a good Omen, as the Besiegers for a bad. Belchior Caaca, who was to give the Sign with the Lance, mistaking the hour gave it too soon, and all began to be in confusion. For Fer∣reyra, who was in Zamori's Army waiting the Signal, as soon as he saw the Flame, fell on with his Portugueses and 5000 Nayres, and assaulting the Works, lost at the first onset 28 Men. 11. But Luis de Silva, though he was rea∣dy, seeing it was not past midnight stirred not then, which proved of ill consequence to the others, the Enemy not being diverted on this side. Towards morning he passed the Creek of Balyçupe in 60 Almadies or Boats with 500 Men. Benedict Correa was the first that Landed, and was killed. Luis
de Silva, as soon as ashore, was slain by a Musket Shot. The Ensign Antony Dias con∣cealed his Death, by stripping the Co∣lours off the Staff, and covering him there∣with. 12. Thus they landed without Colours or Commander. D. Francis Pereyra, who succeeded D. Luis in the Command, followed him also in Death. The next was the fa∣mous Major Leyva, and he seeing all lost, chose rather to die, than stain his Honour by flight; and having performed incredible Feats, was slain with many other Gentlemen that stuck by him. 13. F. Francis Baptista a Capuchin, who en∣couraged the Men, holding up a Crucifix till it was shot to pieces; after moistening it with Tears, bathed it with his Blood, being killed with it in his Arms. So Luis Cardoso, who getting from under a Vessel that over∣set, upon the Keel defended his Companions that were swimming from the Moors. 14. Whilst those mentioned and many other Gentlemen died honourably, perfor∣ming Actions beyond all belief, about 150 shamefully fled, many of them meeting Death, where they sought an Inglorious Life, no Perswasions being of force to bring them back. Doubtless these were some condemned Malefactors who were pardon'd on account to serve in this Expedition, for none are greater Cowards than infamous wicked Men. Our Commander in chief, who had left the Fleet to D. Vasco, and had po∣sted himself on the other side the River,
opposite to the Fort, running into the Wa∣ter up to the Waste spent himself, calling upon and incouraging the Men, but could send no Relief for want of Boats. So this proved the greatest Disgrace the Portugueses received in Asia, (next to that of Ruy Gon∣zales de Camera at Ormuz.) Three hundred Men were lost, the greatest part drowned, the others piercing up to the Fort, had burnt the Mosque, and part of the Town, and killed 500 Moors and Malabars, well reven∣ging their Deaths. Among the Enemies Dead there was above 40 of Note. 15. The Commander in chief, D. Luis, resolved to retire to Cochim, and leave some∣body to guard the entrance of the River, but no body would accept of that Post ex∣cept D. Francis de Sousa, who perceiving some of his Men intended to forsake him and swim away, ordered a Boat to be brought to the side of the Galley for them, and said, He would keep none by force, nor have them go away with danger. This made them ashamed, and they all stayed, and he more by Policy than Force hindred the Ves∣sels resorting with Provision to the Fort. D. Francis perswaded Zamori to assault the Town, believing the late Slaughter had so weakened the Defendants, it might be easily carried; and he, desiring to have all the Booty he supposed was within to himself, gave the assault with 20000 Men, but was repulsed. 16. This bad News being carried to Goa, Orders were sent to D. Luis for him to e∣turn
to Cunnale, and there settle a Peace with Zamori to his content, that he might not raise the Siege that Winter, but lie till our Fleet could return the beginning of Sum∣mer and take the Town. He returned, and D. Ferdinand de Noronna went to swear the Peace to the liking of Zamori. The first Article was, That he should permit the Faith to be preached in his Kingdom and Churches erected. The Peace concluded, the same D. Ferdinand was left there with 12 Ships. 17. D. Luis de Gama returning to Goa, re∣freshed the ill-will all Men bore him and his Brother, because he was going to be Com∣mander of Ormuz, which they looked upon as a Reward of his ill Success, whereas it was the King's Grant before he came from Portugal, whereof he could not be deprived without being found guilty of some Misde∣meanour. To fix some Crime upon him, he was brought to a Trial, but acquitted. 18. About this time came to the City Mea∣co a Spanish Vessel, commanded by D. Iohn de Samudio, from Manila, he raised a Fort in the Port of Pinal, notwithstanding D. Paul de Portugal, who commanded there, opposed him. He protested against this Proceeding, and made use of Threats, but all to no effect.
CHAP. III. Contiuues the Government of D. Francis de Gama Count de Vidigueyra. 1. THE Hollanders, in hatred to our new Prince, and desirous to purchase the Spices of Asia at a cheaper rate, resolved not to beg them any longer in Portugal, and to this effect set out, in the Year 1595, some Ships which were unsuccessful; yet this did not deter them, for in the Year 1597, they fitted out the first Squadron for this Voyage, and reaped the benefit of it in 1599. This Squadron consisted of 8 Ships, in which were 800 Men, and Provisions for 3 Years. Their Admiral was Iacob Cornelius Neque of Amsterdam, they set sail from that Port on the 13th of May, 1598. arrived at Madera on the 15th; on the 17th at the Canaries, where they took Wine; on the 23d at the Islands of Cabo Verde; on the 29th they were in the Latitude of 6 degrees, and pas∣sed the Line on the 8th of Iune; a wonder∣ful swiftness, and to me incredible. 2. On the 24th of Iuly they saw the Cape of Good Hope, where a violent Storm parted three of the Ships which arrived at the Island Banda the latter end of April. The others on the 24th of August discovered the Island Madagascar, and on the 30th Cape
St. Iulian. On the 20th of September they came to the Island Cerne, or Cisne, in 21 de∣grees of Latitude, and called it Mauricia. Here they found Tortoises of such a magni∣tude, that they carried two Men on their Backs, and Birds they killed with Sticks, which made them conclude it was not inha∣bited. At Banda they joyned the other three Ships. They loaded four which returned for Holland, the others steered for the Mo∣luces. 3. On the 21st of Ianuary they discove∣red the great Iava, and touched at the City Tuban, and on the 27th at the Port of Ma∣dura, an Island in 2 deg. 30 min. of South Latitude. There they endeavoured to Ran∣some some of their Country-men, part cast away in their former Ships, and part secured for offering false Money; because the Na∣tives demanded too great a Rate for them, they attempted to rescue them by force. In the fray, two Boats full of Men they would rescue were sunk, and at last they were for∣ced to Ransome them. At Amboina they settled Trade. Two Ships returned to Ban∣da erected a Factory, and loading Spice, ar∣rived in Holland on the 20th of April, 1600. Those that were left at Amboina went to Ternate, were well received by the King, and loading Clove, returned home. 4. D. Hierome de Azevedo in Ceylon raising a strong Fort at Manicravare to be the nearer to the Kingdom of Candea, the Conquest whereof was his chief aim, so perplexed the Usurper, that he setting out several Bo∣dies
with the King of Uva to distract our General, was in all places by him over∣thrown. More had been done, but that the Men mutinied for want, and dispersed themselves throughout the Villages for suste∣nance. Being refreshed, they returned to their Duty, and reduced all the Corlas to our Obedience, D. Hierome cutting off many Heads as a Punishment to them, and Ter∣ror to others. The Year following he ob∣tained another Victory on the Borders of Candea. 5. D. Alexius de Meneses Archbishop of Goa was gone to visit the Christians, called of St. Thomas, who live dispersed about the Mountains of Malabar in Malia, Turubuli, Maota, Batimena, Diamper, Pimienta, Tete∣mute, Porca, Paru, and Cartuti. 6. Those Christians continued firm in the Faith till about the Year 750, though with some mixture of Errors. About the Year 810, came thither the second Thomas, (men∣tioned at the end of the second Tome,) re∣paired the Temples erected by the first, and restored the Doctrine. Thus it continued almost 100 Years, till about the Year 900 it was over-run with the Nestorian Heresie. In the Year 890 came thither from Babylon two Caldeans, called Mar Xarsio, and Mar Prod, who divided that District into two Bishop∣ricks, and were ever after prayed to as Saints, till our Archbishop, suspitious of them, forbid it. After them came Mar Io∣anne, (sent by the Greek Patriarch,) who living at Cranganor, introduced the Caldean
Brevlary. His Successor was Mar Iacob, who died the Year 1500, and after him Mar Io∣annat. 7. Thus the Bishops and Heresies conti∣nued till the Year 1556, when Pope Paul the Fourth confirmed D. Iohn Bermz Patri∣arch of Ethiopia, and Simon Sca Bishop of Caemit, the Metropolis of Mesopia; and Mar Elias, and Mar Ioseph, confirmed by the Pope, the first as Patriarch of Mus∣sal, and the others in their Suffragan Bi∣shopricks, and ordered Ioseph, who was Bi∣shop of Ninice to go govern the Christians of Malabar, and the Bishop D. Ambrose Mou∣teceli for his Coadjutor. Thus the Patriar∣chal Seat was divided into two, the one Orthodox at Mussal, the Heretical at An∣tioch. Ioseph and Ambrose passed over to the Mountains of Malabar, where the latter would not follow the other, and after read∣ing Divinity at Goa, died at Cochim in the Year 1557. D. George Temudo, Bishop of that place, perceiving Ioseph spread the Poi∣son of Nestor, caused him to be secured, and brought in Chains to Portugal, whence he returned to his Bishoprick upon promise of Amendment. He found Mar Abraham in his Place, being chosen in his absence by the Thomites. Abraham being Persecuted, went to Rome, and promising to reduce that Peo∣ple to Truth, got Pope Pius the Fourth his Breves as Prelate. Neither of them per∣formed what they had promised, but conti∣nued in their Heresies.
8. Then came Mar Simon, saying, He was sent by the Patriarch of Babylon to succeed in that Bishoprick. The Queen of Pimienta received and placed him at Cuse, where he exercised the Episcopal Power; till being carried to Lisbon, he went thence to Rome, and was condemned by Pope Sixtus Quintus, as not being so much as a Priest, and a meer Nestorian. Abraham died, and his Arch∣deacon governed the Diocess, no Babylonian Bishop daring to come there, D. F. Alexius endeavouring to keep out such Heretical Prelates, and that was the occasion of this his Visitation. 9. This Prelate found, that amidst their other Errors they denied the Virginity of our Blessed Lady, rejected the Use of Images, believed the Souls of the Just enjoyed not God till the General Judgment; allowed but three Sacraments, Baptism, Order, and the Eucharist; used, in stead of Confession, a Perfuming in the Churches; that their Consecration Wine was of Cocos; that their Host was a Cake with Oyl and Salt; that Priests were Ordained at 17 Years of Age, and Married after Ordination; that Fa∣thers, Sons, and Grandsons, administred Sacraments in the same Church; that their Wives (called Catotiaras, or Cassaueras, that is, Priests Wives,) wore a particular Mark to be known by; that in Matrimony they used no other Formalities but the consent of Parties, and the uniting the Couple by getting a Child; that Women observed the time of the Old Law to be Churched; that
no Sacraments were administred gratis; that Holy Water was made with Dust of Frank∣incense, and some of the Earth where they believed St. Thomas had trod; that they used Sorcery and Witchcraft; and in fine, that all was Error and Confusion. 10. D. F. Alexius with great Labour and Toil convinced them of their Errors, and reduced them to receive the true Doctrine. Whole Towns were baptized, and submited to the Roman See. 11. He held a Provincial Synod at Diam∣per, and all its Decrees were confirmed by the Pope, and Francis Rodrigues a Jesuit, who had assisted the Archbishop, was made Bishop of that Diocess. The Synod break∣ing up, D. F. Alexius visited all those Churches. 12. The Archbishop being in the Queen of Changanate's Country visiting the Church of Talavecare, one of the ancientest in those Parts, (where they shewed him three Plates, on which were ingraven the Priviledges and Revenues granted by the King of Cey∣lon when the Babylonians Xabro and Pro built there) met Topamuta Pandara King of Gundara, Neighbouring on that place, and presented him a Letter of King Phi∣lip, in which he granted him the Title of Brother, in regard he had allowed liberty for the Christian Religion in his Dominions.
13. Towards the End of this Year arriv'd in India eight Ships from Portugal, which brought the News of the Death of King Philip; five of them being ready to Sail the Year before, were detained because the Earl of Cumberland lay before the Mouth of Lis∣bon River with an English Squadron, till the Season was spent. One was lost on the Parcell de Zofala; another at her return fought two Holland Ships near the Island St. Helena and worsted them. 14. The Viceroy having dispatched the Homeward bound Ships and usual Squadrons, began to think of carrying on the War against Cunnale. There were Men enough, but they wanted a Commander; neither was such a one wanting, but that the Envy of the Portugueses endeavoured to rob Andrew Furtado of that Glory, or rather their Coun∣try of that Advantage. 15. At length they were forced to comply and employ him to recover our lost Repu∣tation, for Cunnale Marcar proud of his late Success, had added to his former as vain Titles, calling himself, Defender of Mahome∣tanism, and Expeller of the Portugueses. Many Princes began to have an Eye upon his Suc∣cess; nevertheless D. Antony de Noronna, who lay before the Port all Winter, had perplexed him, taking several Vessels laden with Provisions, and killing above 100 of his Men that opposed him taking fresh Water. 16. The Fleet Andrew Furtado was to Command, consisted of 3 Gallies and 54
other Vessels. By the way he diswaded the King of Banguel and Queen of Olala, who designed to assist our Enemy, from their Purpose, and cut off the Relief five Ships of Meca were bringing to him. 17. Our Commander being come to an Anchor in the Port of Cunnale, set forward to treat with Zamori, and he advanced to meet him on the Shore. The King was naked from the Wast upwards; about his middle a piece of Cloath of Gold that reached several times about him, and hung down to his Knees, fastned with a Girdle of the breadth of a Hand, of an inestimable value; his Arms cover'd to the Wrists with Gold Bracelets set with rich Stones, the weight of this Treasure was so great that two Men supported his Arms; about his Neck was an extraordinary rich Chain; in his Ears hung so many Diamonds and Rubies, as stretched them down with the weight; his Age was about 30 Years, his Presence very Majestick. A little from his side came the Prince with his Sword naked held up, behind him the Nobility, and somewhat nearer F. Francis Rodriguez. The King and Furtado embraced kindly, and all the Can∣non of the Fleet was fired. Being come to the King's Tent, they were seated, and dis∣coursed about the Affair in hand. Furtado at taking his leave, put a rich Collar about the King's Neck over the other, and they parted very amicably. 18. Zamori sent the Prince of Tanor and other great Men aboard the Admiral with
full power to treat and conclude all things that were for the common Interest of both Parties. This done there arrived from Goa and other Places one Galleon, one Galley, eleven Ships and twenty-one other Vessels, with Ammunition, and 790 Men. Furtado went himself to view the Enemies Works, raised others, Planted his Cannon, and be∣came absolute Master of the River. He caused some Outworks to be attacked, the Moors fled, but Cunnale coming in Person to second them, they made our Men give ground till Furtado landing came up with Sword in hand and renewed the Fight, here he was in great danger, but at length re∣mained Victorious, killing 600 Moors. On our side were slain two Captains and nine Soldiers. 19. Fort Blanco, or the White Fort, was next assaulted with greater Bravery than Suc∣cess. Here Captain Andrew Rodriguez Pal∣lota loosing nine Teeth by a Musket Shot, jesting said, Doubtless the Moor knew I had no need of them: Which he said in respect he was always so poor he wanted sustenance. Cunnale being in distress, bribed Zamori with great Presents to accept the Surrender upon Security of the Mens Lives. Zamori was yielding, and Furtado understanding it furiously assaults the Works; the King per∣ceiving it, falls on on the other side with 6000 Nayres. The Works were entred, and the lower Town plundred and burnt. Batteries were raised against the upper Town
and Fort, and doing great Execution redu∣ced the Defendants to despair. 20 In fine, Cunnale Surrendred upon no Condition but Life, and marched out with a black Veil on his Head, carrying his Sword with the point down, which he delivered to Zamori, and he to our General. Cunnale was about 50 Years of Age, of a low Sta∣ture, but well shaped and strong. He and his Nephew Cinale and 40 Moors of Note, were sent Prisoners aboard the Fleet and well treated. Furtado dealt generously with Zamori, for it being one of the Articles of Agreement, that the spoil should be equally divided, he said it was to be understood only in relation to Artillery, and appeased the Soldiers, who expected that Reward of their Labour. The Fort and all other Works being levelled with the Ground, Furtado returned to Goa. 21. As soon as some of the Prisoners were set ashore, they were torn to pieces by the Rabble. How can they who are guilty of such Inhumanities call the much more honou∣rable Indians Barbarians. Cunnale and his Nephew Cinale were both publickly behead∣ed, without any regard that they had arti∣cled for Life. So did that Government and Rabble go hand in hand in Murder and breach of Faith.
CHAP. IV. The remarkable Revolutions of Pegu, du∣ring the Government of D. Francis de Gama, Count de Vidigueyra. 1. THE Kingdom of Pegu, before not very considerable, was raised to be one of the greatest Empires in Asia, by the King of Uva and Brama, assisted by 1000 Portugueses under the Command of Antony Ferreyra de Braganca, who served him as his natural Prince. The Kingdom of Pegu, properly so called, borders on that of Arracam, the Countries of the Brama's and Iungoma's; on the West is bounded by they Sea of Bengala, from the City Rei to that of Sidoa, distant 90 Leagues from each other; the breadth of the Kingdom is about the same, and its true Name is Bagou. 2. It is about 1000 Years since this King∣dom was first erected by a Seaman, who was the first King; then his Son, who lived 80 Years; next the Grandson, called Tam; these and all their Successors added to their Name the Title of Banna, Caél Uca, Ta∣lanna, Inda, Darar, Mampla. Ximindo, the last, who died the Year 1640 (as was be∣fore related) when Branginoco so far in∣larged it by his Conquests, that it extended to China and Tartary, and was Sovereign of
Twenty-four great Kingdoms, beside Eighty Princes not inferior to Kings. Thus it be∣came the powerfullest Monarchy in Asia, except that of China. 3. This King for the Conquest of Mar∣tavam, thirty Leagues distant from Pegu, gathered 700000, Men and 1700 Ships. The Siege lasted six Months, in which died 160000 Men. The City being taken and the King killed, 140000 Houses were burnt, besides 1600 Temples, in which were taken 60000 Idols, most of Gold and precious Stones; there were also taken 3000 Ele∣phants, 6000 Cannon, and innumerable Prisoners. The King's share of the Spoil was above 100 Millions of Gold. 4. For the Conquest of Siam he led a greater Force, possessed himself of the Kingdom, and took the King and his two Sons, called, by reason of their different co∣lour, one the Black, the other the White. He was content to leave that King in Posses∣sion of the Crown as his Vassal, having him∣self been till then his Subject, carrying away his two Sons as Hostages. 5. Branginoco returning Victorious to Pegu, entred the City in Triumph, many Waggons going before loaded with Idols and inestimable Booty. He came at last in a Chariot with the conquered Queens loaden with Jewels at his Feet, and drawn by the Captive Princes and Lords; before him marched Two thousand Elephants rich∣ly adorned, and after him his victorious
Troops. He built a Palace as big as an ordinary City. The least part of its Beauty was rich Painting and Gilding; for the Roofs of some Apartments were covered with Plates of solid Gold. Some Rooms were set with Statues of Kings and Queens of massy Gold, set with rich Stones as big as the Life. He was carried on a Litter of Gold upon many Mens Shoulders, the Re∣verence paid him was more like a God than a Prince. 6. After some time the two Brothers ask∣ed leave of the King to go visit their Fa∣ther, which he granted, and afterwards sending to demand the usual Tribute, the black Prince refused to pay it. The King in a Rage sends his great Favourite Banna with a powerful Army against him. Banna ravaged the Country of Siam, and Besieges the Prince in Hudixa, who defended it so bravely, that Banna being forced to draw off, he fell upon and totally defeated him. The King sends his Brother-in-Law with a greater Power, and he receives a greater overthrow, 200000 of his Men were cut in pieces, with a great number of Elephants and Horses, many more of both taken. The black Prince remained Victorious, his Men were enriched, and all encouraged to follow their good Fortune. 7. The King of Pegu raises another Army of 1700000 Men, 1500 Elephants, 80000 Horse and all Necessaries proportionable; the Command of it he gave to Mapa Raja his Son, with the Title of King of Siam,
not doubting of the Victory. At the News of this Power all Siam trembled, except the valiant Black, now King, who met his Enemy, and gave him Battel. The two Kings encountring on their Elephants fought, and he of Pegu was cast dead off his Ele∣phant, at which sight his Men fled, and the Siamites pursued them a Month, de∣stroying the greatest part of that vast Army. 8. The King of Pegu in a Rage for the Death of his Son, turned his Fury against the People, and some days burnt above Ten Thousand, throwing so many into thè River Ganga, as stopped the Passage even of Boats. He forbid them sowing, which caused such a a Famine, that they not only eat one ano∣ther, to which purpose there was a publick Butchery of Man's Flesh, but devoured part of their own Bodies. For want of Fuel they made fire of human Bones, ha∣ving first taken off the Flesh to eat. It is wonderful all this Tyranny never obliged that People to rebel. A good Example given by Heathens, to those more barba∣rous Christians, who dare fly in the Face of just Princes, without the least shadow of Oppression. 9. This was followed by a Pestilence that depopulated all the Kingdom. The neigh∣bouring Princes taking this advantage, fell upon the King of Pegu, covetous of his Treasures. Among them was the Black of Siam, who retired with the loss 100000 Men. The King of Tangu was he that pos∣sessed himself of all, he promised Life, Li∣berty
and Estates to all that would come over to him. The first that deserted were the Portugueses and Moors; for some Portu∣gueses are like Moors in Matters of Interest. After them followed a Bastard Son of the King, whose Head was cut off by Order of the King of Pegu's Sister, Wife to him of Tangu, saying, That he who was false to his Father could not be true to her. She said and did well, but who will punish her for treating her Brother barbarously when taken. 10. He in despair delivers himself up to the King of Tangu, who being possessed of the City and Palace found such Treasure, that he made no account of Silver, and o∣ther Metals and Riches. It is avouched for truth, that he could not remove all the Jewels and Gold in twelve Caravans, each consisting of Seven hundred Elephants and Horses. The News of this Treasure drew thither the King of Arracam, who content∣ing himself with what he of Tangu under∣valued, gathered above Three Millions, and a great Train of large Cannon. The King of Tangu presented him of Pegu to his Si∣ster; and she who (having killed his Son for betraying him) it was thought would comfort, used him Reproachfully, and after∣wards seeing the King her Husband inclined to Mercy, caused him to be beaten to Death. 11. The King of Tangu, in whose House he of Pegu was Murdered by his own Si∣ster, was his Creature, and Son to a Car∣ter.
So that Kingdom had its beginning in a Seaman or Waterman, and ended in a Carter, both Employs of the same Nature, one by Land and the other by Water. 12. This Year came into India from the remote Mountains of Scythia or Tartary, the Prince Baxan, Fourth Grandson of Ta∣merlain the Great, was by the Augustin Friars converted to the Faith, lived some time, and marryed a Woman of Quality at Goa, and thence came over to live in Por∣tugal. 13. Four Ships arrived safe at Goa from Lisbon, commanded by Ayres de Saldana, who went Viceroy of India. One of these Ships was taken coming home at the mouth of Lisbon River. In another returned the late Viceroy, D. Francis de Gama, better beloved by the Elements than by the Por∣tugueses, as will appear by what follows. 14. Matthias de Albuquerque one of the great Men of India, who afterwards fell at variance with the Count; before that hap∣pened, sent him a Present of two Horses worth Two Thousand Crowns. He accept∣ed, but upon the falling out returned them. Albuquerque would not take them, and the Count's Messenger left them by his Order tied at the Door of one of Mathias his Ser∣vants. Albuquerque commanded his Servant to turn them loose, and they run about the City, till no Body receiving them, they were by his Order tied at the Hospital Door with a Bill, signifying they were given to the Poor.
15. The Statue of the Great D. Vasco de Gama, Grandfather to the Count, of a large Proportion cut in Marble, stood over the principal Gate of the City, fastned to the Wall by a strong Iron Bar. The French Ingenier Sebastian Tibao, at the Instigation of those Gentlemen, the Count's Enemies, in the Night applied to the Iron that Herb that has the quality of eating it, by which means the next Night it was pulled down, broke, and the Quarters hung up in publick Places. 16. The Day the Count was to Em∣barque, Forty Men well armed got aboard before him, and hanged up at the Yard Arm his Effigies made exactly like him in Face and Habit. He was going aboard as they returned, and seeing that sight asked what it was; they answered, It is your Lordship, and those are the Men that did it. He only replied, No more, no more India. He caused the Statute to be dropt into the Sea, set sail, and within two Days came again into the Port, to take in Fowl for the Voyage, because all he had before were poisoned. This is a common Practice in India, especially among the great Ones. 17. But as was said, the Elements loved the Count better than the Men, for he was the first that ever came from India to Lisbon without furling Sail. The continual biting of the Yards upon the Masts had so fast∣ned them, that they were forced to out them down when they came . Lisbon to lower them, because they would not run.
18. He set sail on the 25th of December, and arrived at Lisbon the 27th of May, so that he spent but 5 Months in the Voyage, which equals the swiftness of the Winds themselves, and could not have been perfor∣med but by running continually with them. The Count was tall, and well shaped, of a grave Aspect, his Complexion fair, capable of the greatest Command, and not Cove∣tous. He was the 17th Viceroy, and 35th Governour, 5th of the Name, 3d of the Sirname, and the 5th Count. CHAP. V. The Government of the Vice-Roy Ayres de Saldanna, from the Year 1600, till 1604. 1. AS soon as Ayres de Saldanna had ta∣ken upon him the Government, he dispatched the homeward bound Ships, which were six, under the command of D. Hierome Continno. That called the St. Simon, com∣manded by Iames de Sousa of Viana, came first to the Island St. Helena, where there were two great Holland Ships, with each two tire of Guns. They presently sent aboard our Ship to tell the Captain, He must in∣stantly yield, and go aboard them, un∣less he would soon be sent to the other World. Sousa considering that Message required a loud Answer, sent it from the
mouth of a Cannon, and they understand∣ing it, replied with 8; the Terror whereof made our Men drop from the Yards who were furling the Sails, but they soon recove∣red themselves. 2. The Enemies Cannon playing, killed at first two of our Men, and tore the Rig∣ging and Masts; at which our People were so frighted, they sought to abandon the Ship. Sousa with much Valour encouraged them, and began to play his Guns with good success. The Fight lasted without ceasing that afternoon, all night, and the next mor∣ning, wherein the Hollanders receiving great Damage, made away, leaving ashore the Cask they had sent for Water. Our 5 Ships came up afterwards, and continued their Voyage together. 3. The Viceroy found at Cochim great Complaints against the King of Iafanapatan, for that, contrary to the Treaty of Peace, he gave Passage to the King of Candea through his Country. The Commander of Manar, Manuel Barreto de Silva, was sent against him with 1000 Men. The King ex∣pected him with 12000. Being upon the point of ingaging, the Difference was ami∣cably made up by F. Emanuel of St. Mat∣thias. Religious Men are good to promote Peace between Lay-Governors, but when they take upon them Secular Governments, they confound all. 4. This Year 4 Ships set out of Lisbon for India, and were all drove back. Five Galleons also sailed, and two of them were
forced in again, one lost on the Coast of Zo∣cotora. Another returning next Year from India richly laden, met at the Island St. He∣len 3 Holland Ships of 30 Guns each, ours had but 27 small ones, yet could not avoid fighting. 5. The Fight lasted some days, till the Galleon was beaten to pieces, and the Ene∣my got nothing by the Victory. The Cap∣tain and most of the Men were taken, and basely treated by the Hollanders, who put them ashore in the Island of Ferdinand de Noronna, whence they passed to Pernambuco, and were there nobly entertained by Iames Botello, provided with all Necessaries, and sent home. 6. The Ships that were forced back the last Year, and two more, arrived in India, and brought the News, That on the 24th of November, 1602. there appeared over Italaca a Blue Cross, seeming to the Eye about four Fathoms in length, and two in breadth, of a curious form, with Green Boughs over it. It continued two hours about day-break, du∣ring which time it was seen by above forty Christians of Suneputat, who were going to Mass to their Parish of St. Lazarus. The fol∣lowing Year 5 Ships went from Portugal. We have no farther account of the Occur∣rences of these Years, and therefore must be content with what follows, which happened about that time. 7. Andrew Furtado went over to the Mo∣luco Islands, in hope to recover them. He drove the Hollanders out of Amboina and
Sunda, restored the Rosatelos to our subje∣ction, gained many strong Places from those of Ito, Nao, and Veranula, and then appea∣red before Ternate; from which by bad Wea∣ther, and other Accidents, he was drove, after having spent 5 Years in continual la∣bour. Let us leave him at Amboina while we treat of the Conquest of Pegu, which hap∣pened about the same time. 8. Xilimixa King of Arracam, who had possessed himself of the Crown of Pegu, to express his Gratitude to the Portugueses that served him, gave them the Port of Si∣riam, at the mouth of the River of the same Name, that runs within a League of Bagou, the Court of the Kings of Pegu. This Grant was obtained of the King for the Portugueses by Philip de Brito & Nicote, who most ingratefully proved false to that Prince, that had raised him from a vile Collier to his Favour and Esteem. The manner was thus: 9. Xilimixa confiding in Nicote, was by him perswaded to erect a Custom-house at the mouth of that River for the encrease of his Revenue, and his design was to seize upon it, and build a Fort there to give footing to the Portugueses for the Conquest of that Kingdom. The King, who suspe∣cted not the Design, having finished the Work, put it into the Hands of one Banna∣dala, who fortified himself, and suffered no Portugues to enter there, except F. Belchior de la Luz a Dominican. Nicote seeing that Design fail, resolved to carry it on by other
means before the Works were too far ad∣vanced. 10. He had with him three Portugues Offi∣cers, viz. Iohn de Oliva, Paul del Rego, and Sal∣vador Ribeyro, with 50 Men; these he order'd to surprise the Fort, and turn out Ban∣nadala, not doubting but his great Cre∣dit with Xilimixa would bear him out in it. 11. The three Captains so well performed Nicote's Orders, that they gained the Name of Founders of the Portugues Dominion in that Kingdom; and Ribeyro was like to carry the whole Fame of this Action, some affirm∣ing, he was the real Author of it. 12. Bannadala, who foresaw the Designs of the Portugueses, contrived to expel them thence at the same time that Riberio thought to surprise him. Banadala provided many flaming Carts guarded by 600 Men, which advancing by night took such effect, that the Portugueses were obliged to quit their Facto∣ry; but flying thence, attacked Bannadala's ort with such fury, that having left many Men, he was glad to retire to an Island not far distant, where he fortified himself, ga∣thering 1000 Men, and securing the Trea∣sure of the Pagod of Digan to maintain them. The King being informed hereof was much offended, and resolved to relieve Banadala, but was dissuaded by the false Ni∣cote, who put him in mind he favoured a Sacrilegious Robber, and offered to com∣pose Matters with the Portugueses. He went thither, and ordered Things to his own
mind, so that the Work still advanced un∣der the Portugueses. 13. Nicote seeing the Fort in a good po∣sture, went to Coa in order to deliver it up to the Viceroy, and thence facilitate the Conquest of his Master's Kingdom; perswa∣ding him at the same time, his Journey was to bring Succours wherewith he might be∣come Emperour of all Bengala. He perswa∣ded every one of the Neighbouring Princes. If he would joyn with the Viceroy, he might easily be King of Pegu. Some of them sent Embassadors to this effect along with him. Scarce was Nicote gone when the King, being sensible of his oversight, sent down the Ri∣ver a Fleet with 6000 Men under the com∣mand of Banadala. 14. Coming down towards the Fort, they were met by 3 Vessels with only 30 Portu∣gueses, commanded by Salvador Ribeyro, who in a little time, without losing one Man, kil∣led many, took 40 Ships, and put the rest to flight. The King joyning him of Pram, beset the place with 1200 Sail by Water, and 40000 Men by Land. Ribeyro understanding they observed no Order, boldly fell upon them with his handful of Men, and killing the General, put that whole Army to the rout. 15. Bannadala gathering 8000 Foot of this scattered Army, sate down the third time before the Fort, lodging his Men in good order, and furiously battering the Place, till in the dead of night he ventured to give a fierce Assault. Our Men bravely
opposing, killed above 1000, which were seen the next morning to fill up the Ditch. 16. The Enemy continued the Siege eight months. Some of our Men deserted, yet Ribeyro was no way dismayed, but encou∣raged those that had stayed with him, and to take from them all hope of Escape, burnt the Vessels that were in the Port. The Viceroy Ayres de Saldanna hearing of these Proceedings, sent considerable Succours, and many, covetous of Honour or Profit, volunta∣rily resorted thither; so that the Comman∣der finding himself 800 strong, resolved to attack the Enemy in his Works. He put this Design in execution with much Conduct and Bravery, and was received with no less, till at length Banadala was forced to fly 3 Leagues without looking back, and then stood to see all the Works he had raised in a Year burnt. The Portugueses thinking this Success had secured their Affairs in Pegu, di∣spersed every Man to make his own advan∣tage, so that there remained with the Cap∣tains only 200 that had been sent by the Viceroy. 17. The Enemy returns the fourth time with many moving Castles, and several sorts of Fireworks. The Fort was reduced to a dangerous condition, when a fiery Meteor so frighted the Besiegers, that they fled, leaving their Castles behind, which were soon fired by our Men. Lastly, the Victory we obtained over King Massinga in the Pro∣vince of Camelan, killing him, and doing great harm both by Sea and Land, produced
the Security we so much sought after. For those People finding us not only Victorious, but Courteous, followed us so, that in few days we had above 20000 of them. These Men considering the Success of Philip de Bri∣to & Nicote, and his natural good Temper, (which occasioned their calling him Changa, that is, Good Man,) proclaimed him King of Pegu. Salvador Ribeyro accepted of the Crown in his Name, he being then absent, and this, perhaps, might be the cause it was thought in Spain, it was he that was pro∣claimed. 18. Nicote afterwards received the King∣dom in the Name of his Prince as a Loyal Subject, and was the first of our Men that rose to that pitch of Fortune in Asia. Ro∣derick Alvarez de Sequeyra succeeded him in the Command of the Fort, who bravely de∣fended it till it accidentally took fire, and only the bare Walls of it were left stand∣ing. 19. Mean while Nicote sollicited for Suc∣cours to carry thither, which were not hard to be obtained; for the Viceroy seeing his great Riches, and the prospect he had of more, married him to a Niece he had born in Goa of a Iava-Woman, and for her sake could deny him nothing. He gave him the Title of Commander of Siriam, and General of the Conquest of Pegu, and Succours in 6 Ships. Being come to Siriam he repaired the Fort, built a Church, and sent a rich Pre∣sent to the King of Arracam, who had sent to compliment him upon his arrival.
20. He ordered the Affairs of the Custom-house according to the Viceroy's Instru∣ctions, obliging all Vessels that traded on the Coast of Pegu to make their Entries there. Some of the Coast of Coromandel refused to obey; against them he sent D. Fran∣cis de Moura with 6 Sail, who discharged him∣self well, and took on the Coast of Tanaza∣rim 2 Ships of Achem richly laden. The King of Arracam, to the intent to possess himself of that Custom-house, resolved to joyn with the King of Tangu, and sent an Embassador to him with 20 Ialias, or small Ships. Nicote understanding it, caused Bar∣tholomew Ferreyra, Captain of our small Craft, to fall upon them, who put them to flight, so that they were sorced to make their escape to the King of Iangona's Country. The Enemy thus exasperated, gathered 700 small Vessels with 4000 Men under the command of the Prince his Son, with whom were Ximi∣colia, and Marquetam, Sons to the then Empe∣ror of Pegu. 21. Paul del ego Pinnero set out to meet them with the Boats and 7 Ships, and ha∣ving taken 10 Boats that were advanced before the rest, returned to secure them and set out again: but observing the Enemy was too strong for him, went in to gather more Force. Being reinforced he meets the Prince, routs him, and takes several Vessels. The Prince thinking to save himself by running up a River, got into a small Creek, where Pinnero took all the rest of his Vessels, obliging him to escape by Land, having
lost One Thousand of his Men. Then he took the Fort of Chinim, and in it many Prisoners, among which was the Wife of Bunadala. 22. Nicote was now abroad with Fourteen small Vessels, in which were Sixty Portu∣gueses and Two hundred Pegues, he run up a River, and hearing the Prince was on the Shore with Four thousand Men, Nine Hundred of them Musqueteers, he attacks him. Xi∣mitoto, a valiant Pegu, attempted to take the Prince, and being himself hurt wounded the Prince in the Face, which occasioned his being made Prisoner, and gained us the Victory. Two Thousand Men of the King of Pram came to the Prince's assistance as he was taken, and were also defeated. The Pegues seeing their Prince carried away to Captivity, would all have gone with him, striving to get into our Vessels. Such as could not, remained on the Shore, cursing their hard Fortune, that would not permit them to follow him a Prisoner, as they had done in Liberty. Christians may here learn the Duty they owe to their Princes. 23. Nicote may also be a President to all Men; how to use their Victories; for he not forgetting he had been a Slave to the Prince now his Prisoner, served him with the same respect now, as he had done then. He watched him sleeping, holding his Buskins in his Hands with Arms across, a Ceremony used by the meanest with their Kings in those Parts, and himself attended him upon all Occasions. This generosity may well
equal him with great Men, and purchased him together with other the like Proceed∣ings, the Name of Changa, which, as was before said, signifies Good Man. 24. But now ends the Government of Ayres de Saldanna, by the arrival at Goa of Martin Alfonso de Castro, who came to succeed him with the same Title of Viceroy. He set out from Lisbon with five Ships, whereof one was forced in again. About the end of the same Year there sailed thence two Ca∣ravels. 25. Ayres de Saldanna seems to have had more natural Goodness than Inclination to War; for in his time nothing of this sort was set on Foot. He was one of those few Viceroys and Governors who are believed not to have wronged the King. On his re∣return home he died in the Latitude of the Islands, and the Ship that brought him was lost at the mouth of Lisbon River. He was tall and somewhat corpulent, of a tawny Complexion; of Viceroys the 18th, of Go∣vernors the 36th, and First of the Name and Sirname. 26. I have purposely reserved for the end of this Government the Discovery of Grand Cathay, for which we are beholding to F. Nicholas Pimenta, Visitor-General of the Jesuits in Asia. He chose for this em∣ploy B. Benedict Goes, a Man well versed in several Languages, and particularly the Per∣sian, which was the most important for that Design. B. Goes cloathed himself in the Habit of an Armenian Christian Merchant,
and after their manner took the Name of Abdula Isai, which signifies, Christian Lord. He set out from the Mogol's Court with that Prince's Favour and Merchandize. In his Company went two Greeks well skilled in the manner of Travelling, and were Leo Grimanus a Priest, and Demetrius a Mer∣chant. These had four Mahometan Ser∣vants (who were afterwards Christians) which they left at Laor (one of the Mogol's Courts) as useless, and took in their stead Isaac an Armenian, who had a Wife and Children there, and was there faithful Com∣panion. From Laor they set out on the 6th of Ianuary 1603. 27. With great Labour and Hardships they passed through the Cities Abec, Passaur, Caferstan, Guideli and Cabuo. Here they were forced to stay 8 Months, and meeting a Sister of Hamet Can King of Cascar, that was going a Pilgrimage to Meca, and was taking up Money at Interest. B. Benedict considering it would oblige that Princess and her Brother, through whose Dominions he was to pass, lent her 600 Ducats without Interest, which afterwards stood him in good stead. The Priest Grimanus spent with Labour, turned back from Cabul. The Caravan set forward, and passed the Domi∣nions of the Mogol's, in sight of the Cities Characar and Parvam. 28. They passed the high Mountains of Aingaran, and entring Chalca saw a fair People like the Germans, then went through Gialalbat, Thalham, Quenam, Badaxa,
Carebumar, Serpanil, Sarchunar, Tanguetar, Iaconich, in which Journey almost two years were spent with great Toils and Dangers. Hence they Travelled to Hiarcan, the Court of the King of Cascar, and Place of great Trade. They stayed a Year for another Carravan, and then set out, much favoured by the King, for the Kingdom of Chalis. The Son of the Pilgrim Lady they lent the Money to at Cabul was very serviceable to them, and they were repaid in precious Jaspar-stone, the richest Merchandize in that Country. In their way they passed through these Towns, Iolchi, Hanchalix, Al∣chegret, Hagabareth Cambaxi, Aconferset, Chi∣acor and Acfu. Acfu is a Town belonging to the King of Cascar, where a Grandson of his, only ten Years of Age, then governed, who favoured Goes the time he was obliged to stay there. 29. B. Benedict and Isaac setting forward again (for Demetrius stayed behind at Hiar∣cam) and passing the famous Desert Cara∣catay (that is, The black Land of Catay) and these Towns, Oitograck, Gazo, Canani, Delai, Saraguebedal, Ugan and Cucha, they came to the City Chalis, where a Son of the King of Cascar governed, and where they were in great danger, and stayed 3 months. Here came in the Caravan from Cathay, by whom our Discoverer heard of F. Matthew Rivius, then residing at Peking, and found that China and Cathay were the same Coun∣try, and only the Names differed. Goes joyful of this Discovery resolved to proceed. On
his way he passed through these Towns, Pu∣chan, Turfan, Arumuth, Camul and Quiacio, (whence may be seen that famous Wall that parts China and Tartary) and came to Su∣cheu, where hearing much of the Court of Peking, he was throughly satisfied that China and Cathay where the same thing. 30. Then ended the Year 1606. The 4th of these Travels now grown pleasing to B. Benedict, for that he had compassed his end, found his Order where it was least to be expected, and could relieve them with what he had got by his Merchandize, which amounted to 2500 Crowns, and at that time was a considerable Treasure. He gave ad∣vice of his arrival to F. Matthew at Peking, and he sent B. Iohn Fernandez, a Novice of the Converts to conduct him forward. He arrived at Suche the latter end of March 1607, and 11 Days after our Discoverer died, not without suspicion of Poison given by the Moors to rob him, as they did, abu∣sing Isaac and B. Fernandez, who having buried the deceased went to Peking.
CHAP. VI. The Government of the Viceroy D. Martin Alfonso de Castro, from the Year 1604 till 1607. 1. DON Martin Alfonso de Castro en∣tring upon the Government, gave some signs of being ambitious of Glory, but Fortune was not favourable to him, or, as some say, his own Humour was an im∣pediment. Therefore let us proceed with the Affairs of the Conquest of Pegu. 2. Ximilica King of Arracam considering his Son was Prisoner, thought good to treat with Nicote, and he, to come to an agreement the better to make his advan∣tage of the Profits of the Custom-House, sent Advice of all to Goa, and received Orders thence to return the Prince without any Ransom. But Interest being his great∣est aim, neither Obedience to the Viceroy, nor the Respect he owed that King, whose Creature he was, could prevail to hinder him from selling that Prince for 50000 Crowns, pretending it was for the Charge of the Fleet the King had obliged him to fit out. 3. The King of Arracam justly offended hereat, set out a small Fleet against Siriam, which was easily defeated, but gave him oc∣casion
to enslave 100000 Christians, and treat them with great rigour; which never∣theless moved not many of them, though but new Converts. Afterwards he combines with the King of Tangu, who Besieges the Town with a great Army by Land, while he shuts it up by Sea with 800 Sail, in which he had 10000 Men. Paul del Rego, met him with 80 Ships, and failing of the suc∣cess he had formerly, setting Fire to the Powder, blew up himself and all that were with him, rather than fall into the Hands of the Enemy. The Siege continued so long, till the besieged were ready to surrender, when on a sudden upon some suspicion the King of Tangu quits the Field by night, and he of Arracam found it to no purpose to lie longer upon the Sea. 4. Some of the neighbouring Princes startled at this success of Nicote sought his Friendship, and an Alliance with the King of Portugal. The first that effected it was the King of Tangu. Nicote marries his Son Simon to a Daughter of the King of Martavam, thereby to strengthen himself, and have the opportunity of gathering more Riches. And being now desirous to rob the King of Tangu, tho actually then in Peace with him, to colour his wicked Design he pretends that King was overcome by him of Ova, (as indeed he was and made Tributary) since the Treaty, as if that could absolve him for breach of Faith. In fine, with the King of Martavam's assistance, he fell upon, took, and robbed him of Tangu, and returned with him and
above a Million of Gold, without hearkning to the Protestations he made of his continu∣ing a faithful Vassal to the Crown of Por∣tugal. 5. Let us keep in mind these his unjust Proceedings, and in its place we shall see them rewarded as they deserve; for all these Particulars happened not at this time, but it is anticipated, to prevent too much dismembring the Relation of them. Indeed it is to be admired, a Christian Govern∣ment should support such Unchristian Pro∣ceedings. 6. It will be fit to return to the Affairs of the Moluco Islands. The Hollanders were now strong in those Seas, and well backed by the Islanders, who tired out with our in∣satiable Avarice, joined with those Rebels to expel us. 7. The Hollanders about this time having forced us thence, had possessed themselves of Amboina. Gaspar de Melo commanded there, whom absolute Necessity obliged to quit it, yet being unjustly accused and in danger of suffering with Disgrace, his Wife poisoned him. A strange Government, where notorious Criminals were not punish∣ed, and an innocent Person was so Perse∣cuted, that she who loved him took away his Life, least they should take away his Honour, who had none of their own. The Portugueses who were at Tidore since the loosing of Ternate, seeing the King did not deliver them up to the Hollanders who de∣manded them, and had nine Ships in the
Harbour, but that he was resolved to stand by them, took such Courage, that they withstood the continual Batteries of 120 Cannons, which played on them without intermission. 8. The King of Ternate sends a Fleet to assist the Hollanders, and Landing batters the Fort on the other side. All we had to op∣pose this Power, was 10 or 12 pieces of Cannon, and but a small number of Men able to bear Arms. After four days Bat∣tery the Enemy gives the Assault, our Men encouraged by their Captain Peter Alvarez de Abreu, with Sword in Hand bravely re∣pulse them. In the midst of their hopes that this defeat would oblige the Enemy to desist, the Powder by some accident taking fire, blew up the greatest part of the Fort and most of the Men; so that the Enemy entred it when they least expected, and our Men were forced to accept of some Vessels to go where they thought fit. 9. About Four hundred Persons of all sorts were shipped, and got to the Philip∣pine Islands, where D Peter de Cunna Com∣manded. Neither was their Voyage with∣out danger, the enraged Sea being ready to swallow them; but the Mercy of God brought them safe ashore, by virtue of certain Reliques thrown into the Water by a Jesuit, which laid the Storm, and after their land∣ing were brought and laid upon the Sand by a Fish.
10. In February Cunna sailed from the Philippine Islands towards Ternate with One thousand Spaniards and Four hundred of the Natives. He Besieged the Fort, in which was the King himself, and had above One hundred Cannons. The Hollanders and Ter∣natenses thinking to surprize the Besiegers, made a Sally, and were so received by Iohn Rodriguez Camelo, who commanded a Com∣pany of Portugueses, that he not only beat them back, but entred the Fort along with them. So that when the Spanish Comman∣der came up, fearing some mischance might be occasioned by that heat, Camelo met him at the Gate with the Keys of the Fort, and Cunna to honour him for that Action, put about his Neck a Gold Chain he had upon his own. 11. The Ternatenses in the fright aban∣doned the City as they had done the Fort. The Spanish Commander losing no time, drove the Hollanders out of Tidore, and cut off their hopes of ever settling in those Islands, which from that time forward re∣mained subject to Spain. 12. Though the Hollanders lost Tidore, yet they aspired to greater Conquests. To this purpose they made a League with seven of the Neighbouring Kings about Malaca, thinking to gain that Place. They gather∣ed a Fleet of One hundred and fifty Sail, in which were 16000 Men. There were but few above One hundred Portugueses in a condition to oppose this Power, but they
were Commanded by the Great Andrew Fur∣tado de Mendoça. He sent out several Par∣ties to discover the Enemy's Designs. The first was but of four Soldiers with Gaspar de Fonseca; the Enemy thinking they Desert∣ed, gave them free Passage, but were unde∣ceived, receiving considerable damage from only those five Men. Next Captain Ferdi∣nand de Costa de Andria with Forty Men, some of them Iaponeses, cut off a good Par∣ty of them, and retired without any loss. 13. The Enemy having taken their Ground, began to batter the City; and those within to feel the Miseries of a Siege, being in want of all Necessaries. To this was added, that the Master-Gunner was a Hollander, who designedly burst many pieces of Cannon, having under-hand Intelligence with the Enemy. A Moor who commanded some Men acted no less treacherously, but being discovered, they were both hanged over the Wall. Many of our Men signalized themselves by brave Actions, and particu∣larly Iohn Rodriguez Camelo, who with great danger brought a number of Men and did good Service with them. The Enemy lost so many Men during four Months the Siege lasted, in which time they spent above Fifty thousand Cannon Balls; that despairing of success they raised the Siege; the Kings re∣turning home, and the Hollanders to their Ships. 14. The News that D. Martin Alfonso de Castro, our Viceroy, was coming with twelve Galleons, four Galleys, and seventy
other Vessels, caused the Siege to be sooner raised. He set out of Goa in May, on St. Antony's Day in Iune came to Anchor at Achem, where he took three of the Ene∣my's Ships loaden with Provisions, and re∣solved to take Revenge on that King for receiving the Hollanders into his Ports, con∣trary to a former Agreement. On the 29th the Men landed, the Enemy's opposed them in great numbers with many Elephants, but after a brave resistance were forced to their Works. Our Men mounted and planted their Colours, and had they followed their Victory, the City had been that day de∣stroyed. Yet the fight lasted all that and next day; when the Viceroy perceiving no Benefit accrued, shipped his Men, much affli∣cted that he had slipped such an Opportu∣nity. 15. After suffering much for want of Water, and loosing some Vessels by bad Weather, the Fleet came before Malaca, where Andrew Furtado acquainted the Vice∣roy the Siege was carried on by Sea and Land, on the Sea were eleven Ships and seven Galliots of the Hollanders, and Three hundred small Vessels of the Natives; by Land, eleven neighbouring Kings in their Persons with 14000 Men. Both of them, during those four Months the Siege lasted, had destroyed many Buildings, and commit∣ted great Outrages against Images and other holy Things. On the 17th of August the  Ships went out to receive our Fleet, play∣ing their Cannon furiosly, and were answer'd
in like manner with equal loss, till Night parted them. 16. Morning appearing the Fight was renewed with great Fury, but the Damage was greater on our side, because the Ene∣mies Ships exceeded us in strength, swift∣ness, number of Cannons, and goodness of Gunners. Sebastian Suarez boarded one and burnt it, after having killed many Hollan∣ders. Alvaro de Carvallo would have done the like to another, and Duarte de Guerra coming up to second him, they all three were consumed by fire, and none of the Men saved. 17. D. Henry de Noronna boarded the Admiral Cornelius Madclif, and being both in danger of being burnt, they parted by consent, promising if they met again they would not encounter. Whereupon Noronna quitted his Command, telling the Viceroy, He had rather serve as a private Man, than be obliged to perform the Promise he had made to the Enemy. D. Peter Mascarennas succeeded him in the Command, who did Wonders; for the Dutch Admiral coming up to salute him, supposing it had been Noronna, they engaged furiously; and after the fight, Four hundred Cannon shot were found in the Galleon, which had done no other harm than the killing one Cafe. The Fleets were engaged eight Days, and our Vessels very much disabled. On the 24th of August the Viceroy again offered the Ene∣my Battel, but they all fled.
18. The Viceroy entred Malaca, which had been ruined during the Siege. An∣drew Furtado was of Opinion, the Fleet should be kept together, lest the Enemy might destroy it, being separated: Others advised it should divide; the worst Advice was followed. D. Alvaro de Meneses had a Squadron of seven Galleons, to go meet the Ships that were expected from Portugal at the Islands of Nicobar. Nunno Alvarez Pe∣reyra; another of five, to secure the Ships of Iava, that brought Provisions to Malaca, through the Streight of Singapura, but ha∣ving met the Enemy, he returned into the Port. 19. The Hollanders having refitted, and hearing our Fleet was divided, came again before Malaca, and finding there the five Galleons, they began a desperate fight on the twenty-second of October. Many Men of Note of our side were killed; one of our Vessels blew up, and only seven Men were saved: In fine, the whole Squadron was destroyed. Of the Hollanders about Five hundred were killed. The Viceroy soon after died at Malaca, it was believed that of Grief for this Loss. 20. The Hollanders met not with the like Success in the Bay of Polobutum, where D. Alvaro de Meneses was with his Squadron of seven Galleons; for after a bloody Fight, they were forced to give way, having lost three Ships. But since the Viceroy is dead, and we must enter upon a new Govern∣ment, it will be fit to mention what Ships
sailed from Lisbon for India during his Life. In the Year 1605, 7 Ships. Before them three Galleons, which were with the Fleet at Malaca. After the 7 Ships, set out Bel∣chior Rodriguez in a Caravel with some fresh Advice, who overtaking them under the Line, returned to Lisbon. 21. In the Year 1606, 3 Ships were to have gone, but were prevented by a Dutch Squadron that lay at the mouth of the Ri∣ver till the Season was past. Thus much of the Government of D. Martin Alfonso de Castro, who was Viceroy two Years and a half, the 19th of that Number, and 37th Governour, the second both of Name and Sirname. Of Stature somewhat tall, of Complexion sallow, a good Christian, a good Gentleman, well beloved in India, and Zealous of the Kings's Service, a Thing now rare in the World.
CHAP. VII. The Government of the Archbishop D. F. Alexius de Meneses, who was Gover∣nour from the Year 1607, till 1609. 1. DOn Martin Alfonso de Castra the Vice∣roy being dead, D. F. Alexius de Meneses Archbishop of Goa succeeded him in the Government, but not in the Title. About the beginning of his Government failed from Lisbon the three Ships, which were to have set out the Year before. After them followed two Galleons, and two small Ships, the two former were to remain in India. 2. The Hollanders now aimed at the Con∣quest of the Island of Moçambique. Our Fort there was commanded by D. Stephen de Ataide, who not long before had obtained of the Emperor of Monomotapa a Grant of all the Silver Mines in his Dominions, which are much richer than those of Asia, to the Crown of Portugal. The Motive of this Donation was, that we might assist him to subdue his Rebellious Subjects, which D. Ste∣phen performed, securing him in his Throne, and to us that great Gift, if we had known how to make use of it. 3. About the end of May, Paul Vercaden the Dutch Admiral anchored in the great
Port of Moçambique with 8 Ships well sto∣red, and carrying 1500 Men. In the Fort there were but 80 Men, a few and but indif∣ferent Pieces of Cannon, and that scarce fit for Service. Nevertheless D. Stephen lost no Courage, but posted his Men, whilst the Enemy invested the Place. 4. The Enemies Cannon-Balls flying very thick, kept the Walls bare of Men, so that a Colonel of theirs boldly rode about view∣ing our Works, till he was struck down dead with a Bullet. The Enemy carrying on their Approaches under the shelter of their Batte∣ries that continually played, our Men were forced to appear upon the Walls to oppose that Danger, and the Hollanders being tired, offered a Truce, which was accepted. While it lasted, they reproached the Portuguses that they had degenerated from their an∣cient Valour, who, to convince them of the contrary, offered to fight 50 of them with only 25; which they refusing, it gave new Courage to the Besieged. 5. The Truce expiring, the Cannon on both sides began to play. The Enemy thought to take off the use of ours, by bring∣ing up to the Walls great Wooden Towers equal with our Paapets. It was a dark stormy night when they began to advance, but our watchful Centinels perceiving it, so many Fireworks were heaped on them, they were forced to retire with some loss. Next night, notwithstanding all opposition, they were laid close to the Walls. Twenty five
Portugueses sallied with a Resolution to burn or break them, but succeeded not. 6. Being disappointed of that Design, they fall upon the Hollanders, who increased to 500, and killing many, those 25 retired without losing one, only some were woun∣ded. This Action seemed to have astonished the Enemy, for the next day they stirred not; nor after that for a whole week, thô they saw their Castles burnt. At last the Admiral sent Ataide a Letter, threatning to spoil all the Country about, unless he re∣deemed it from Ruin with a Sum of Mo∣ney. 7. Our Commander refused, and the Hol∣lander burnt down all that the Fire could lay hold of, so the Town and other Buildings pe∣rished. Next they cut down all the Woods, and then raised the Siege which had lasted two months; during which time, 13 of our Men were killed, and of theirs above 300. As they went over the Bar, one of their Ships was sunk by our Cannon. Scarce were they gone in the beginning of Iune, when three of our Ships from Portugal, under the com∣mand of D. Hierome Coutino, entred the Port. Not long after came in Peter Blens, about the end of Iuly, with 3 Holland Ships, and 2000 Men, which might have been our Ruin had they come sooner. 8. D. Hierome, having the best he could relieved the Place, was under Sail for India, when Blens came in, imagining Vercaden was by that time possess'd of the Fort. The
Portugueses undeceived him with some Can∣non Shot, to which he answered by landing his Men, and besieging the Fort as the other had done. The first day the Batteries played they spent above 300 great Shot, which laid one side open; and they might have entred, had they been as resolute to Assaul, as furious in making the Breach. The Damage received by Day, was repaired by night. Next morning 25 Men sallying killed 30, and returned without losing one, bringing in Arms, Drums, and Colours. One of these engaged with three of the Enemy well Armed, killed two, and put the other to flight. 9. A Frenchman and 4 Hollanders came to the Wall, begging to be protected as being Caolicks Blens in a fury demands them of o Commander, who refused to deliver them, and he in revenge ties 6 Portugueses taken at his entrance into the Harbour, and shoots them to Death. One hundred and fifty more were in the same danger, who were taken out of a Galleon, which coming from Portugal, and knowing nothing of what had happened there, run into the midst of the Enemies Ships, and was burnt by them. D. Stephen chose rather to expose those Men to danger, than break Faith with those five he had taken into Protection. But Blens his Passion being over, he recalled the Sentence, raised the Siege, and setting Sail, put all the Portugueses he had taken ashore in the Island of St. George. The loss on both sides now, was much the same as
had been given and received before by Ver∣caden. Blens sailed out of the Port about the end of August. 10. While the Archbishop was Gover∣nour, two Squadrons sailed from Portugal for India. That of the Year 1608, shall be spoke of in the next Chapter, because it carried D. Iohn Pereyra Frojas Count de Feyra, who went Viceroy of India, but died by the way. The other of the same Year which arrived there in 1609, and carried Ruy Lo∣renço de Tavora to the same Command, shall be spoken of in the Chapter of Andrew Fur∣tado de Mendoca, who succeeded the Arch∣bishop. This Religious Man governed two Years and a half, and was the 38th Gover∣nour, the first of the Name, and sixth of the Sirname, and first Church-man that had that Post. He was of a middle Stature, white of Complexion, grey with Years, of a se∣rene Countenance which moved Respect, and took such care of his Servants, that many got Estates.
CHAP. VIII. Of the Viceroy D. John Pereyra Frojas Count de Feyra, in the Year 1608. 1. AT the beginning of this Year sailed from the Port of Lisbon for India D. Iohn Pereyra Frojas Count de Feyra with the Title of Viceroy. He raised in all Men great expectation, as well for his Personal Merit, as the greatness of his Quality, and the Preparations for his Voyage were suita∣ble, being the greatest that till then had been. His Squadron consisted of 6 Ships, and 8 Galleons. 2. The Viceroy set out on the 29th of March, died on the 15th of May; his Body was sent back, and brought to Lisbon the 24th of Iuly. The Admiral Noronna suc∣ceeded in the Command of the Fleet. The Count was the second that died by the way going to govern India, and may be accoun∣ted 3d of the Name, 20th Viceroy, and 39th Governour; for the Patent, not the Possession, make a Man so. 3. But since this Viceroy has not afforded Matter for a Chapter, let us make it up with one of the greatest Prodigies of the Portugues Fortune that Asia produced. Three Years she was big with this Monster, from 1605, till 1608. We shall see another
Iames Suarez de Melo, and another Philip de Brito & Nicate, famous for their incredible Rise and Insolence. This was Sebastian Gonzalez Ti∣bao, a Man of obscure Extraction, as born in the Village of St. Antony del Tojal, near Lisbon, a Place never yet produced any worth Note, either for Parentage, or wor∣thy Actions. In the Year 1605 he imbar∣qued for India, went over to Bengala, listed himself a Soldier, and then fell to dealing in Salt, which is a great Merchandise there. By this Trade he soon gained as much as purchased a Ialia, that is, a sort of small Vessel. In this Vessel he went with Salt to Dianga, a great Port of the King of Arra∣cam, at such time as that King slew 600 Por∣tugueses who resided there, and suspected nothing less, living quietly as good Subjects under his Protection. The Motive of this Cruelty was, That Philip de Brito & Nicote being possessed of Siriam, thought it would be for his Advantage to gain Dianga. He fitted out some Vessels, and sent in them his Son as Embassador to beg that Port of the King. Some Portugueses perswaded the King, Nicote's design in getting that Port, was to deprive him of his Kingdom. He orders the Son with his Officers to come to Court, and there murders them; the same was done in their Vessels; and afterwards that Fury fell upon all the Inhabitants of Dianga. This was in the beginning of the Year 1607. Some few escaped into the Woods, and 9 or 10 Vessels got to Sea, whereof one was that of Sebastian Gonzales.
4. Emanuel de Mattos Commander of Ban∣del of Dianga, who died not long before, had been Lord of Sundiva, an Island 70 Leagues in compass. Fatecan a resolute Moor, whom he had intrusted with the Island in his ab∣sence, hearing of his Death, makes himself Master of it, and the more to secure him∣self, murders all the Portugueses that were in it, with their Wives and Children, and such of the Natives as were Christians. Then he gathered Moors and Patans to his assistance, fitted out a Fleet of 40 Sail, and plentifully maintained this Charge with the Revenue of the Island, which is great. Sebastian Gonzalez and his Companions, with those 9 or 10 Vessels that escaped at Dianga, ha∣ving no Head to govern them, lived by rob∣bing in the Country of Arracam, carrying their Booty to the King of Bacala's Ports, who was our Friend. Fatecan understand∣ing they plyed thereabouts, went out to seek them with such assurance of Success, that he had this Inscription upon his Colours; Fatecan, by the Grace of GOD Lord of Sun∣diva, shedder of Christian Blood, and destroyer of the Portugues Nation. 6. One evening he thought to surprize them, and had effected it, but that they quarrelling about dividing some Spoil they had taken; this falling out, proved their Preservation: For Sebastian Pinto upon that account leaving them in a River of the Island Xavaspur, met Fatecan's Fleet and gave them notice. They ingaged and fought despe∣rately all night, the morning discovered
80 Portugueses victorious over 600 Moors and Patanes, and 10 Vessels over 40. Not one Sail got off, nor a Man escaped being killed or taken; among the Dead was Fatecan. Had they been under a Commander that knew how to make use of the Victory, the Island must then have been their own. This obliged them to choose a Head, and they pitched upon Stephen Palmeyro, a Man of Years, Experience, and Discretion. He gave Proof hereof, by refusing (notwithstanding their repeated Instances) to Command such wicked People. However they desired him to appoint one, and they would punctually obey him. He named Sebastian Gonzales Tibao. 6. As soon as the Commander was named, they resolved to gain Sundiva. More Portu∣gueses were gathered from Bengala, and other Neighbouring Ports. Tibao articled with the King of Bacala, That he would give him half the Revenue of the Island, if he assisted him to conquer it. The King sent some Ships, and 200 Horse. In March, 1609, he had above 40 Sail, and 400 Portugueses. The Island having had time to provide for its Defence, was full of Reso∣lute Men. A great number of Moors, com∣manded by Ftecan's Brother, received them at Landing, but were forced to retire into a Fort. The Portugueses besiege it, and lying long before it, were in danger of pe∣rishing, not being able to come at the Pro∣visions and Ammunition that were aboard their Vessels, Gaspar de Pina, a Spaniard,
delivered them from this Danger, for he coming with his Ship to that Port, and re∣solving to assist them, landed 50 Men he was Captain of, and marching by night with many Lights, and great Noise, made the Enemy believe he brought great Succour. As soon as he came up the Fort was assaul∣ted, entred, and all within that had life put to the Sword. The Natives of the Island, who before had been subject to the Portu∣gueses, presently submitted themselves to Sebastian Gonzales. He received them upon condition they should deliver up to him all the Strangers that were in the Island. They brought him above 1000 Moors, and as they came he cut off their Heads; about as many more were killed in the Fort. Thus Seba∣stian Gonzales became absolute Master of the Island, and was obeyed by the Natives and Portugueses as an absolute Lord independent of any Prince, and his Orders had the force of Laws. 7. To recompence the chief Portugueses who had served him, he gave them Lands in the Island, and then repenting, took them away. In stead of giving the King of Ba∣cala half the Revenue of the Island, as had been agreed, he made War upon him. As he grew Great, so he grew Insolent and Un∣grateful, and had now at Command 1000 Portugueses, 2000 Natives well Armed, 200 Horse, and above 80 Sail with good Can∣non. Many Merchants traded thither, and he erected a Custom-house. The Neigh∣bouring Kings surprized at his prodigious
Success, sought his Friendship. From the King of Batecala, to whom he owed so great Favours, he took the Islands of Xava∣pur and Patelabauga, and other Lands from others, so that on a sudden he was possessed of vast Riches, equal with many Princes, and sovereign of many brave Men. But these Monsters are like Comets that last little, and threaten lasting Ruin. They are like Lightning, that no sooner gives the flash but it is gone. Let us proceed, and we shall see this verified. 8. Such was the fortune of Sebastian Gon∣zales in Sundiva, when there happened a Difference between the Prince of Arracam and his Brother Anaporam; the Occasion was, that the latter refused to give the other an Elephant, to which all other Ele∣phants of that Country were said to allow a sort of Superiority, and durst not appear before him. The Prince seeing he could not prevail by Intreaties nor Threats, raises a great Army, and deprives his Brother both of his Kingdom, and that so much co∣veted Beast. Anaporam fled to Sebastian Gon∣zales for Succour, who demanded his Sister as a Hostage. Then he sets out to fight the Conqueror, but to no purpose, for he had too great a Power, to wit, 80000 Men, and 700 fighting Elephants. King Anaporam re∣turned with Sebastian Gonzales to Sundiva, bringing over his Wife, Family, Treasure, and Elephants. Thus he remained as a Subject to Sebastian Gonzales, who Baptizing his Sister, married her, and though so vile a
Wretch, pretended he did that Prince a great favour. Soon after the Prince dies, not without suspition of Poison, for Seba∣stian Gonzales seized upon all his Treasure, Elephants, and Goods, without any conside∣ration of his Wife and Son. To stop the mouths of the People, he would have mar∣ried the Queen to his Brother Antony Tiba Admiral of his Fleet, but could not com∣pass it, for she could never be prevailed upon to become a Christian. 9. Sebastian waged War upon the King of Arracam with good success. An Instance hereof may be, that his Brother Antony with only 5 Sail took 100 of that King's. This moved the King to conclude a Peace with him, and thereby recovered his Sister-in-Law and Brother's Widow, whom he married to the King of Chatigam. At this time the Mogol undertook the Conquest of the Kingdom of Balua, and Sebastian consi∣dering it might prove of dangerous conse∣quence, that Kingdom lying opposite to him, he makes a League with the King of Arra∣cam for the defence of that Country. The League concluded, the King takes the Field with 80000 Men, most of them Musketiers, 10000 Pegues that fought with Sword and Buckler, and 700 Elephants loaded with Castles and Armed Men. He put to Sea above 200 Sail, carrying 4000 Men, which were to joyn Sebastian Gonzales his Fleet, and to be under his Command. The agree∣ment was, That Sebastian should hinder the Mogol from passing to the Kingdom of Balua,
till the King of Arracam could march thi∣ther with his Army; and that the Mogol be∣ing expelled, half the Kingdom of Balua should be given to Sebastian, who gave the King, as Hostages for his Fleet, a Nephew of his own, and the Sons of some Portugueses Inhabitants of Sundiva. 10. The King of Arracam entring the Kingdom of Balua with his Army, expelled the Mogols. It was thought, that Sebastian overcome with Bribes had given them free passage, which, according to the Agreement with the King of Arracam, he was to ob∣struct. Others say, He did it to revenge the Death of the Portugueses slain by that King in Banguel of Dianga. Be it as it will, he was guilty of an execrable Treachery, for, leaving the mouth of the River Dagatiar, he gave them free Passage. He enters a Creek of the Island Desierta with his Fleet, and calling all the King of Arracam's Captains aboard his Ship, murders them, then falling upon the Ships, killed or made Slaves of all the Men. Having committed this infamous Action, and secured that Fleet, he returned to Sundiva. Mean while the Mogols com∣ing down again with a greater Power, en∣tred the Kingdom of Balua, and reduced the King of Arracam to such distress, that with much difficulty he escaped by the help of an Elephant, and came almost alone to the Fort of Chatigam. 11. Sebastian Gonzales understanding the Slaughter the Mogols had made of the Arra∣cam Army, and that they were possess'd of
the Kingdom of Balua, he sets out with his Fleet, plundering and destroying with Fire and Sword all the Forts of Arracam that lie along the Coast, and were then unprovided, and confiding in the Peace that was between them. He had the Impudence to go up to Arracam, where as the Matter was more, so was the Destruction, there were burnt many Merchant Ships of several Nations. The King was highly concerned at these Losses, though not so much at those occasioned by the Mogol, as those he sustained by this Por∣tugueses, as being all the effects of Treache∣ry; but above all, he resented the loss of a Ship which he kept in that Port for to take his Pleasure. It was of a vast Bigness, and wonderful Workmanship, with several Apart∣ments like a Palace, all covered with Gold and Ivory, and yet the curiosity of the Work surpassed all the rest. 12. The King seeing the Insolence and Falshood of Sebastian Gonzales, and that he did not, or would not, remember his Nephew was in his Power as a Hostage, he resolved to put him in mind; and causing a Stake to be run through him, made him be set up on a high place below the Port of Arracam, that his Uncle as he went out might see him. But he who had no Honour, valued not at whose Cost he advanced his own Interest. Nevertheless the guilt of so many Villanies began to touch his Conscience, and being come to Sundiva, he began to apprehend some heavy Punishment would fall upon him, which he had little means to aert, for all
Men looked upon him as a Traytor unwor∣thy of any Favour. The Arracams, because he betrayed them to the Mogol; and the Mo∣gols, because he was so false to those that trusted him. But what he did not expect from those we call Barbarians, he shall obtain of the Portugues Government in India which shall assist him, and both he and they that Relieve him shall receive their just Reward, as will appear under the Government of D. Hierome de Azevedo. CHAP. IX. Of the Governour Andrew Furtado de Mendoça, in the Year 1609. 1. MOst Men appear fit for publick Em∣ployments before they have them, and afterwards wholly incapable of them; It was not so with Andrew Furtado, for every body esteemed him fitter to Govern when he was placed in that Power, than they had done before, and yet there was none before but wished to see him in that Post. The Arts by which he gained this Esteem, were Valour, Generosity, Liberality, and Affabili∣ty. And being now advanced to this Com∣mand, he confirmed the good Opinion the World had conceived of him, by being cour∣teous to his Inferiors, and not lifting himself above those who had been his Equals.
2. When a private Captain he dressed costly, now being Governor plainer than a private Captain. The Work-houses were his Rooms of State, the Shore his Garden. His thoughts were full of great Underta∣kings; but considering how small a Bank there was for such Designs, he gathered the Council of Goa, the Chief Gentry, and rich∣est Men of that City. Being assembled, he made a Speech, representing the great Pro∣gress the Hollanders had made in India, and exhorting them with their Persons and Purses to be assisting to expel them. 3. They all assured him there should be nothing he could propose, but they would forward to the utmost of their power. This was soon made good, for within two months and a half he had a great Fleet, well man∣ned and provided. All Men were in expe∣ctation of the Effect of those great Prepa∣rations, when on the first of September there appeared at a great distance several Sail that seemed to be of bulk. It was conclu∣ded they were Hollanders. Our Governor hearing of it, run down to the Shore, and in a few hours made ready some Ships and Galliots, saying, Now shall they see how An∣drew Furtado with these light Vessels boards their three Deck Ships. The time is come. 4. Just as he came out to order Affairs, so without returning to Court was he going aboard, without calling any Body; but this his Resolution being known, there soon flocked to him as many Men as there was occasion for. So it happened to King Ema∣nucl
(whom he now seemed to imitate) who hearing the danger Arzila was in, set out Post, and without beating Drum by that his speed presently raised a great Army. But as the Governor was spreading Sail, advice was brought that they were no Enemies, but Ships from Portugal, that brought a new viceroy. 5. This was Ruy Lorenço de Tavora, who sailed from Lisbon at the end of October with four Galleons and a Caravel, and had Win∣tered in the Island of Ibo. Those who came received a double satisfaction, one in their safe arrival, the other in seeing that Port of Goa covered with such a number of Ships, as represented the past more happy times. 6. Many were sorry Furtado was so soon deprived of that Government, for the great hopes they had conceived of his good For∣tune, and Heaven seemed to favour his con∣tinuance, by the Death of the Count de Feyra, who was going to that Command. 7. Even the Viceroy that went to succeed him was troubled; for seeing that Bay full of many so Ships and in such Order, he asked; Who governed India? and being told that An∣drew Furtado, he replied, I thought so, for the greatness of this Work assured me it could have no other Author. I am sorry I came now to India to take this Command; because it is a hindrance to the great Actions might be expected from such a Governor. 8. Since this untimely arrival of the Vice∣roy, has cut off what might be expected from Furtado's Government, let us Epito∣mize
what he acted under others. At 16 Years of Age he was in Africk, when the un∣fortunate King Sebastian went over thither. Then passed over into India, and having performed some Military Exploits, had the Command of ten Ships, with which he re∣lieved the Fort of Braçalor besieged by King Sincarnoboro. He not only raised the Siege, but reduced the King to become Tributary to Portugal; then falling upon those that had combined with him, destroyed their Coun∣tries with Fire and Sword, and took one of the chiefest with all his Vessels, putting all the Men to the Sword. He took several Ships of Meca, defeated the great General Cotimuza, destroyed another Fleet at Manar, taking many Ships, slew the King of Iafa∣napatan that was in Rebellion, ruined a Fleet of Malabars that did us great harm on those Seas; raised the Siege Raju had laid to Co∣lumbo, levelled the Formidable Fort of Cun∣nale, bringing him and his Nephew Pri∣soners to Goa; drove the Hollanders from Amboyna and Sunda, reduced the Rosatelo's then in Rebellion, gained many strong holds in the Islands of Ito, Nao and Veranula; and being Commander of Malaca held out a Siege of four Months against the Hollanders and 11 neighbouring Kings. 9. It was great to overcome so many Ene∣mies, but far greater to conquer himself. In the dead of Night a Woman got into his Apartment, offering him her Daughter, mo∣ved thereto by extream want. After a se∣vere Reprimand, he charges her to marry
the Daughter, and gives her a Purse of Mo∣ney, with assurance he would make up the Portion. 10. All these great Actions he had per∣formed at the Age of 45, besides many more which in another had been considerable, but not of Note to him. He was as to his Qua∣lity of the best of Portugal. Having go∣verned three Months, he Embarqued for Portugal, died by the way of the Jaundice, and lies in the Church of our Lady of Grace in Lisbon. Of Stature he was somewhat tall, his Complexion tawny, of Body lean, and was the 40th Governor, and 2d of the Sirname. CHAP. X. The Government of the Vice-Roy Ruy Lorenço de Tavora, from the Year 1609, till 1612. 1. SCarce was Ruy Lorrenço de Tavora set∣led in the Government, when there came in 5 Ships from Portugal, which with the same number that carried him made 10, and consequently a great number of Men that went in them. 2. About the beginning of the Year were set out the usual Squadrons, but more nume∣rous and better manned than usual, by reason of the great Preparations before spoke of, and the Men that came newly. At
the same time came from Lisbon 3 Ships for India. 3. The greatest Action at this time was in Ceylon, where D. Hierome de Azevedo, who had that Command, went on with the usual Success that always attended him in that Post. He marched with 700 Portugueses and 25000 Lascarines (that is Chingala Sol∣diers) to assault the City Candea, and find∣ing by the way the Fort of Balane abandoned, left Antony de Costa Monteyro in it with two Companies. Then advancing to the River of Candea, and finding it well fortified, nevertheless he attempted to pass it, recei∣ving the Enemy's Fire, which for some time did no Execution. Yet our Men gave way till F. Gaspar de la Madalena, a Franciscan, ran into the River holding up a Crucifix and encouraging them, whereupon they charged and drove the Enemy from their Works, who fled to the Mountains abandoning the City, which was burnt, and such as could be overtaken slain. 4. This Success so thoroughly reconciled the King of Candea to us, that he admitted the Conversation of the Franciscans, and put his two Sons into their Hands to be bred Christians. Thus the Peace was concluded, and he writ to our King Philip to Compli∣ment him upon his accession to the Crown, testifying the great Affection he bore him, and desiring to be esteemed among the Princes of Asia, as one that most desired his Cor∣respondence.
5. The Moor Abdala Carima, Tanadar of Nizamaluco, who, besides his natural hatred to the Portugueses, was malicious on account that he had lost half a hand by them, disturb∣ed the Peace at Chaul. His Pretence was re∣ceiving his Prince's Revenue, wherein he pro∣ceeded with much Insolence; and we on our part bore much, rather than break into open War. 6. Our Commander, D.Francis Rolim, com∣plained to Nizamaluco, who answered with Threats, that he would fit out a Fleet, and that the Hollanders were already in that Sea. To be as good as his Word, he set out 30 Paraos, which robbed all that came in their way belonging to the Portugueses. The Ta∣nadar being thus backed, hearing that George Henrique was gone out to a Wood, he kill∣ed him, and took his Wife and two Daugh∣ters. 7. The People of Chaul pressed the Com∣mander to commence the War, he having no Orders from the Viceroy, and but few Men; yet sent out 16 Men with two Officers one Night, they found 30 Moors near the Pagod of Ramaçeyra, and killing half of them retired. Peter Cornejo with 30 Men fell upon the Village of Tal, killed the In∣habitants, burnt the Houses, and sunk two Vessels that were in the Port. Tho' this was a sufficient Revenge against the Tanadar, yet knowing some Men value not their Ho∣nour, whilst their Persons are untouched, it was thought fit to make him feel some part himself.
8. To this purpose D. Francis Rolim marched to Upper Chaul with 350 Men in three Bodies, one Commanded by him, ano∣ther by Michael de Abreu, and the third by Calleyros. Abreu entred first into a narrow Street which ended in a broad Place where the Enemy was drawn up, and with their first fire killed our Captain and two Soldiers. Rolim coming up, they made way into the broad Place, and revenged the Death of those three, with the slaughter of many Ene∣mies, the rest saving themselevs by flight. Thus they came to the Tanadar's House, which being forsaken by him was burnt; the same happened to a whole Street, where the Moors had renewed the Fight, firing out of the Houses. Marching out of the Town victorious, they killed all that had Life in the Fields, so that Town and Country were covered with dead Bodies. 9. At the end of this Year arrived at Goa three Ships from Portugal. In October sailed from Lisbon two Caravels, in November one Galleon, in which went Antony Pinto de Fon∣seca with the Title of Visitor and Prove∣ditor of the Forts in India, as if no Viceroy had been there; in December another Gal∣leon, in which went a Patent for D. Hierome de Azevedo, to succeed in that Govern∣ment. 10. The War being begun at Chaul, both Parties encreased, and several Skirmishes happened, in which the Portugueses always had the best, till D. Francis de Sotomayor came thither with the Northern Fleet,
and left there three Vessels. Being thus re∣inforced, our Men took the Field, and offer∣ed Battel to the Moors, who were also in∣creased. Antony Furtado de Mendoça advan∣cing too far with only two Men was killed, and the Portugues Body coming up worsted; for though they did great Execution, be∣ing drawn into an Ambush, Gonzalo de Abreu was killed, his Country-House lost, afterwards the War went on with less vi∣gour. 11. Whilst this happened at Chaul, Nuno de Cunna fought the English at Suratt with more valour and Success. He had four Gal∣leons well manned, but ill provided with Gunners, for they were ignorant and fear∣ful. He found in that Port a great English Ship and a Ketch, which had a short fight between the little Island of Iohn de Nova and the Bank called Baxo de la India, beyond the Cape of Good Hope, with two Ships of ours, of three that this year sailed from Lisbon for India, one whereof commanded by D. Luis de Gama making for Zocotora, was drove by a violent Storm between the Islands called Dos Hermanos, whence he got late to Goa, after losing four hundred Men; some by the Fatigue of the Sea, and others through the Miseries they endured in defence of the Ship, and the Cruelty of that barbarous People. 12. When the English, whose Ships were excellent Sailers, discovered our heavy Vessels, though they had cause to fear their number, they undervalued them by reason
of that fault. They presently ingaged us in the Evening, and fought till dark Night parted them, having killed 30 of our Men. As soon as Day appeared they fell to it a∣gain, and two of our Galleons running to Board the two English Vessels, were stuck on the Sands, there being too little Water for the Galleons. The Pink seeing them aground, kept firing its Cannon upon one till the Evening Tide brought it off. The great Ship kept the other two Galleons that were a float in play all that Day. The third day all the Galleons being afloat made up to board the Enemy, but they who relied on their Cannon and swiftness, made away to Castelese, a Bay of the Pyrats of Diu. 13. Luis de Brito who plied upon that Coast with some small Vessels gave advice to Cunna, that the English were in that Port. He sailed thither, and they fought two whole Days, in which time our Ships, by reason of their heaviness, could never board them; at length the English stood away, having put up black Colours in token their Captain was killed; they lost many Men, and slew many of ours. They made to Su∣ratt, Cunna followed; they left the Port, and Cunna returned to Goa, where then D. Hierome de Azevedo had been Governor two Months. 14. Some time before 5 Galiots set our for China and two Merchant Ships for Iapan, they all Wintered at Malaca, the Season be∣ing unfit to Sail. Provisions were very scarce
there, and the more now by the addition of those Men. Michael de Sousa sent out some Ships to get Provisions in the Neighbourhood. These met several Sail bound for Pam and Ior, laden with Spice and other Goods, which they took and brought to Malaca. Then sailed to Pam where the King of Ior was with a Fleet, and tho' at Peace with the Portugueses he went out of their way. Not far from Patane they took 8 Vessels richly laden, and returning with them to Malaca, that City was not only relieved, but enrich∣ed. 15. The Viceroy receiving Advice from Portugal, that a considerable Fleet was fit∣ting out in Holland, with a Design against Malaca, he sent Iames de Mendoça Furtado, with 8 Galliots to relieve it. Being under Sail for Pulobutum they were dispersed by a Storm in the Golph of Ceylon, but met again in that Port. Four of them sailed out be∣fore the Admiral and the others, and meet∣ing a Ship of Iava with seventy Men who traded in the Kingdom of Quedar, with which we were at War, attacked it, and were well received, having four Men killed and ten much wounded; but being provoked by this loss, they boarded the Vessel and kill∣ed all in her. 16. The Admiral Iames de Mendoça con∣tinued his Voyage to Malaca, whence he passed not without danger of the Sea to Pam, to bring thence some Princes of Borneo who were travelling.
16. Leaving those Princes at Malaca, Mendoça with Emannel Mascarennas, Com∣mander of that City, went over to the King∣dom of Pera, understanding that three great Ships of Guzarat's richly laden were in that Port, which lessened our Customs. Men∣doça had Fifteen Ships, he entred the River, which is so narrow, only two Ships can sail abreast. He boardest the first of the three Ships, and tho' the Enemy fought well, entred her, and they set fire to her, so she perished; the second Ship was easily taken; the third escaped thro' our own fault, for being too busie about the Plunder of the other; the Day was spent, and the Enemy stole away by Night. The Ship taken was brought to Malaca, it had 32 Guns and rich Lading. Iames de Mendoça Furtado re∣turned to Goa, where he found D. Hierome de Azevedo was then Viceroy. Ruy Lorenço de Tavora was Viceroy three Years, the 21th of that number, 41th Governor, and second of the Name and Sirname. He had more Inclination to Peace than War, which produced Concord with all the Kings of India, of Stature tall, his Complexion fair, aged, and a good Christian, a rare thing among Men of Quality.
CHAP. XI. Of the Propagation of the Christian Faith in China. 1. THough these Affairs properly apper∣tain to the Ecclesiastical History, of which I design a particular Volume; yet for the satisfaction of those who desire some Information herein, and having at the end of the First Part said somewhat touching the first entrance of Christianity in China, I will here briefly relate its Progress till the Year 1640, though it be anticipating the Time, that the Relation may not be too much dismembred, and because that Order is chiefly observed by me in Martial Af∣fairs. 2. The four Houses or Residences of Xan∣cheu, Nancham, Nanking, and Peking, being setled, F. Emanuel Diaz was sent as Visitor of the three first, because F. Matthew Rivius could not be spared from the other, which was the Soul of them all. The Visitor-General Valiniano setled 30 Crowns a Year upon each Residence, finding it sufficient to cloath and maintain the Religious who were to live there, that they might not obstruct the advancement of the Faith by the neces∣sity of asking any thing. 3. The Visitor sent new Fathers to all the Residences. In the Year 1604, Cuitayso was
Baptized, till then he only gave ear to it, but was the cause that many were converted, and procured the Foundation at Nanking. He was called Ignatius. In the Year 1606, died the Visitor Valiniano at Macao; Nicholas Pimenta succeeded him. 4. F. Matthew Rivius died at Peking in the Year 1610; the King appointed his place of Burial, and allotted his Companions a House and Church. The Mandarins and others celebrated his Funeral with great de∣monstrations of esteem. He was the first buried in that country, for all that died be∣fore were carried to Macao. 5. The Year 1613, the Religious were expelled Hancheu, and coming to the City Nanhiun built a Church there, and after∣wards others. In the Year 1616, there were 7 Residences, two at Peking, one of them without the Walls, one at Nanking, one at Hancheu, one at Nancham, one at Caiyeu, and one at Nanhiun. In them all were 22 Fa∣thers, the Converts amounted to 6000, among them many Nobles, Lawyers and Mandarines, and some Bonzo's. 6. The Year 1617, the Religious were expelled from all their Residences, the Perse∣cution began at Nanking. Some escaped to Quantung and Macao, 14 remained hid in China, who were afterwards called by other Cities to erect new Foundations. One was at Kiencham, in the Province of Kiangsi, through the means of a Lawyer who was converted, and christned Stephen. Another at Xambay, in the Country of Paul the Do∣ctor.
Another at Quartim, in the Province of Nanking, which City it could serve with∣out a Residence there; but the Fathers were restored to it by the assistance of Doctor Mi∣chael, a great Admirer of them and of Chri∣stianity, and afterwards one of the most fa∣mous Preachers of the Gospel. By degrees the Persecution ceased, and the Fathers were every where restored. Two new Residen∣cies were erected in the Cities of Xansi and Xensi, and some of those that had been ba∣nished returned from Macao. 7. The Year 1622, two other Residences were setled in the Province of Fokien, ano∣ther at Xansi, another at Xensi, another at Honan. All things went on successfully, and the Year 1630 the Converts came in by hun∣dreds, afterwards by thousands. 8. In the Year 1634, there were in China 22 European Fathers and 4 Brothers, greatly esteemed by the Mandarins and other Per∣sons of Note. A Prince of the Province of Xantung sent for some Fathers to hear their Doctrine, so did other Provinces after∣wards. 9. At Peking there were 288 Converts, among them Mandarines, Lawyers, and Sol∣diers, one Eunuch, and one Bonzo, which is considerable, they being a sort of Priests; he converted his Father, and some Rela∣tions. 10. At Nanking, 70 Converts, and a No∣ble Eunuch of 75 Years of Age. The Chri∣stians here were so zealous, that when the Fathers removed, a Lawyer and his Nephew
carrying the Vestments and other Church∣stuff on their backs, and being told by the Father, The Servants might do it: They re∣plied, It was not fit any body should car∣ry the Things of the Church, but they who were proud to be Porters to Iesus Christ. 11. At Kiamcheu and Pucheu almost 2000 Converts, at a time when the three greatest Calamities of this World succeeded each o∣ther. The first was Famine, which raged to that degree they eat one another; two Wo∣men were shot to Death, being convicted of eating 40 Children. A Father and Mother, rather than see their Child perish in their Arms, cast it into a River, and themselves after it. Others buried a Child alive; a Christian, call'd Peter, saved both the Chil∣dren, and brought them up. The next Calamity was War; and the third the Plague. 12. At Hancheu, in the Province of Che∣kiang, the Converts amounted not to 150. At Xamhay 400. At Narcham only 26. At Quiencham 80. In the City Fokien 257, and many in the Country. At Singam not 100, by reason of the Famine that raged; as at Quiamcheu they eat the Dead, ground Stones, and used the Dust in stead of Meal. Some at Hoacheu and the Neighbourhood. At Ho∣nan but 30. In the Kingdom of Hannam, which the Portugueses call Tonking, almost 100000. 13. Thomas, a Native of Thinhoa, labou∣red in the Kingdom of the Lao'. That
People is white, good conditioned, and have no Thieves among them. Those of Han∣nam undervalue them for eating of Vermin. They wear narrow Gowns, their Feet bare, the Head commonly uncovered, their Hair round and short like a Lay-Brother, only one Lock on the Temples, which is run through holes made to that purpose in the Ears, they adore an Idol called Theica, with the same Ceremonies those of Hannam wor∣ship their Tham. They Trade into this Kingdom their Merchandize, Elephants, Bu∣da's Skins, Benjamin, and Amber. 14. At Dangthan 2441 Converts, and many at Thinhoa. At Nighihan 4200, the Resi∣dence is at Rumo; there are 26 Churches, and the Divine Offices are celebrated with much magnificence. In Bochinh, a half Pro∣vince next Cochinchina, 130 were Baptized. In an Orchard here was found a Tree brought from the Laos, the Leaves whereof gain him that carries them the Affection of all he meets, and Reconcile them if Ene∣mies. Being examined whether it was not Superstition, it was judged to be a Natural Virtue. 15. In the Year 1635, there were not above 3300 Converted among all the Resi∣dences. The House at Chincheo was then first founded. A Church was erected in the Town of Yunchum, and another in the City Chancheu. Now there will be a greater Fruit reaped, because the King protects and countenances the Religious, and their Doctrine; and in the Year 1638, gave them
2000 Taes or Crowns to buy a House and Land. He also granted them (what was more than they could have wished) to put over their Door this Inscription, I the King Approve of and Protect the Science of Hea∣ven. 16. In fine, there are now in China this Year 1640. above 100000 Catholicks, and among them many Nobles, Mandarines, some Bonzos and Eunuchs. Of Mandarines and Colao's, the most admirable were 3 or 4 Pauls, one Michael, one Ignatius, one Leo, and one Stephen, who were not only Con∣verted, but Preached the Faith with great Elegancy, and much Profit. The great Colao Paul herein surpassed all others. 17. The Jesuits at this time in China have twelve principal Residences in the chief Provinces and capital Cities; under these above 500 private Oratories, with hundreds of Christians belonging to each. They have also gained good footing about the Neighbouring Countries, as in Tomking, Co∣chinchina, Cambodia, Laos, and other King∣doms. In these last Countries, between 10 and 15000 Souls are converted every Year. 18. The King of China himself casts down Idols, and orders the Prince his Son to fall down before the Images of Iesus and Mary. The Queen in her Apartment gives ear to what the converted Eunuchs say concerning our Religion. Mass is often ce∣lebrated in the Palace, and there is great hope of the King, whose Piety and Zeal have inclined him to respect the Divine
Law, insomuch that our Religious have been joyed upon his Conversion. 19. What wonderful Accidents have hap∣pened, and Miracles been wrought in the Conversion of those Christians, are set down in sundry particular Relations, and in the History of China, and are not so proper for this, which is only a profane History. Be∣sides, that being miraculous to some Rea∣ders, they will appear as Fictions; those who are curious, may see them in the afore∣said History and Relations. Having given the substance of what was writ on a Stone found in China at the end of the Second Volume, it will be needless to repeat the whole, which is long, and is no more than the same thing in many more Words. What has been said relating to China in these two Volumes, may deserve the Credit of all Men, as being the Observations of the Cu∣rious, as well as Learned and Pious F. Alva∣ro Semmedo, who spent 22 years, Preaching and Teaching, in that Country. The End of the Second Part.
THE PORTUGUES ASIA. TOM. III. PART III. CHAP. I. The Government of the Viceroy D. Hierome de Azevedo, from the Year 1612, till 1617. 1. AT the end of last Year came to India the King's Orders for D. Hierome de Azevedo to succeed Ruy Lorenço de Tavora as Viceroy. This Gentleman had purchased a great Name by many Years service, and chiefly by 18 spent in Ceylon, a Thing rare for one who had also gathered great Riches. Not that Riches make a Man incapable of a good Name, but because commonly the means of acquiring them contribute much to stain it. The Fame of his Substance contributed as much as that of his Valour t his Promotion
to this Employment, it being thought, that he who had so much, would be less guilty of those Crimes that proceed from Avarice; whereas Experience teaches, that those who have most covet most. But D. Hierome had offered to accept of that Post without the usual Salary, yet afterwards he received it, making that a Crime by breaking his Pro∣mise, which had been none if not offered. 2. On Christmas Eve Ruy Lorenço de Tavora delivered him the Sword; and the first thing he did, was to forbid the payment of Debts contracted by his Predecessor, who resolved not to depart India till the payment of them was secured, as well for his own Reputation, as in respect no Viceroy for the future would be able to get any Money advanced upon the urgent Necessities of the State, if that ill Precedent was given, and his Debts were all on the account of the Publick. At length it was concluded, they should be paid as Tavora had ordered. The next Action of the Vice∣roy was to dispatch Danisbeque Sedesable Em∣bassador from Abas the Xa or King of Persia, who falsly courted the Friendship of all those Princes he designed to spoil, promising each great Advantages, and stirring them up one against the other. Thus he Treated with King Philip in Spain, and King Iames in Eng∣land, which he found most suitable to his Designs. Thus he had taken the Island Ba∣harem, and strove to possess himself of Or∣muz.
3. Danisbeque was returned from Spain with the Answer of his Embassy; and be∣sides, what the King had given him in return for a Present of Silks he carried, the Vice∣roy had Orders to add something at his dis∣cretion. He added the value of 12000 Crowns in Spice, which in Persia was worth much more; and having nobly entertained him, sent away with him D. F. Antony de Gouvea Bishop of Sirene, who also came from Spain, and went to propogate Chri∣stianity, which had but a slender beginning there. The Bishop went no farther than Ormuz, for the Persians being already ill∣affected towards him, he feared it would be worse when the Embassador had delivered his Answer. So it happened, for the King finding the Embassador brought not the Re∣turn he expected, caused him to be killed, and obliged 6000 Armenians to renounce the Faith. 4. The Viceroy as well versed in the Af∣fairs of Ceylon, gave the necessary Orders for its preservation, recommending the put∣ting them in execution to Antony Vaz Feyre, Surveyor of the Revenue in that Island. Antony Pinto de Fonseca, who had served well in Flanders, and was now Visitor of the Forts in India, with the Viceroy's Leave went to perform the Duties of his Employ, D. Henry de Noronna being confirmed in the Command of the Coast of Malabar given him by Ruy Lorenço, united the Kings of Vanguel, Sierra, and Carnate, against Venta∣panaique, on pretence of their safety; where∣as
indeed it was to secure our selves against him, in whose Dominions we held Braçalor and Onor. 5. This done, D. Henry steered for the Coast of Malabar with 28 Sail. Andrew Coello was sent by the late Governour with 3 Ships to relieve Palicate and Siriam, and being now driven by stress of Weather to Columbo, they were beaten to pieces on that Coast, but the Men saved. 6. When D. Hierome came from Ceylon to be Viceroy, he gave the supream Command there to Fran. Rojo, a Man of unknown Birth, but noted Valour, and by his Courage had attained to the greatest Preferments. It was since found, that he was of the Family of Meneses, as being Son to D. Iames Count de Ericeyra, and Grandson to D. Henry de Me∣neses, who was Governour of India. 7. This D. Francis de Meneses Rojo being General in that Island, and understanding the King of Candea lay before the Fort of Balane, and the Commander Emanuel Falcam was in some anger, he instantly set out with a very small number, spreading his Orders for all Men to follow, and marched o Leagues afoot that day. In three he reached Balane, and the King at the sight of him raised the Siege. D. Francis relieved the Fort, and returned with Glory to his Quarters, destroying all the Enemy's Coun∣try. 8. The Tanadar of Chaul meditating Re∣venge for the Losses he had sustained by us the last Year, hired some Moors Naytia's
that lived in Caranja, and were free with the Portugueses to kill Baltasar Rabello de Al∣meyda Commander of that Fort. They guided by Melique Balane, entred suddenly when he was at Supper, and killed him and a Sister-in-Law of his. This done, they shut themselves in, but the Portugueses forcing the Gates, put them all to the Sword. Fer∣dinand de Sampaio & Cunna succeeded in the Widow and Command. About the middle of April, Abascan General of the Enemy led a great Body of them to revenge the Death of the others on Caranja. He could not be prevented entring the Town, but being in disorder killing and plundering, Simon Ran∣gel with 17 Portugueses doing great Execu∣tion, began to put the Moors to flight, whilst Cunna coming on another way with few Men, they made a great slaughter. This was a warning to the Naytia's not to return to Ca∣ranja. Afterwards Cunna, not satisfied with what he had done, ravaged their Country, and brought away above 3000 Prisoners. He shewed much Generosity, when two Moors being brought to him for entring a Place for∣bid them upon pain of Death, he set them at liberty; because being asked, How they durst come thither without a safe Conduct; one of them answered, That they had done it, relying on the Fame of his Cour∣tesie, to ransom certain Kindred of theirs. 9. Ruy Freyre de Andrade, who cruized on that Coast with a Squadron of small Ships, understanding that Nizamaluco, since the War broke out at Chaul, spread it as far as Sal∣sete
and Agacaim, he repaired thither. In a Village between Caranja and Tana, he cut off some Moors that opposed him, and put the rest to flight. Higher they discovered 500 Moors, and an Elephant with a Castle on his Back, in which were two Cannons. Twelve Soldiers landed, a Captain with 80 Horse attacking them was shot dead, our Men seeing the Enemy halt, stood some time, and then George Marino sent to chal∣lenge their Leader, but he not accepting of it they returned aboard. 10. From Tana Freyre sent some Ships to relieve the Town of Agaçaim, which being indanger'd by the Moors, run a greater ha∣zard through the discord of the Inhabitants. They were but 50 Families, yet all full of Division, and Ruy Freyre could no way re∣concile them. Every one said he was able to defend all their Houses, and all together could not defend one; for 2000 Moors soon forced them thence into the Monastery of St. Francis, shewing them how great diffe∣rence there is betwixt saying and doing, be∣tween Animosity and Discretion. Freyre carried the Women and Children to Baçaim, and then relieved Manora, passing through multitudes of Enemies who expected him ashore, and sought resolutely, insomuch that one laid hold of the Colours, on which was the Picture of the Blessed Virgin, carryed by Emanuel Ambrosio, the Moor was shot dead. He got into the Fort without losing one Man, having killed and wounded many, and after securing all things there, return∣ed
to the Mouths of the Rivers of Tana, where he behaved himself well. 11. The Affairs of Agaçaim grew worse, for fresh Troops of Melique resorting thither, Ruy Freyre was obliged to return to their assistance. At his coming he saw the Enemy was firing Iohn de Caldas his House, where he had fortified himself, and Iames Rodri∣guez Caldera, a Soldier well known for his Valour, was let down by a Rope to quench it, as he did. Freyre with much difficulty brought off those that were left, and carried them to Baçaim. There he landed, and joining the Commander of the Fort, and Men of the Northern and Diu Fleets, they pursued a Body of Moors, till it was thought fit to retire, for fear of an Ambush. A few Days after, Freyre and the Northern Squa∣dron being gone to convoy a Fleet that lay at Damam for fear of Pirats, Andrew Pereyra de Sousa with three Companies was drawn into an Ambush, and not a Man of them escaped. 12. The Moors at the upper Chaul were drawn into the like snare by D. Emanuel de Azevedo, Commander of that Place, a Man well skilled in Military Affairs, having gain∣ed Experience by several Years Service in Ceylon. 13. The Necessities of Damam, represent∣ed by the People and their Commander Nunno Alvarez Pereyra, obliged Ruy Freyre to make some stay there. The Case was, that among other Enemies the King of the Sarcetas, who lives in intricate Woods which
serve him for defence, had sent out Parties of Horse and Foot which destroyed and car∣ried away all they found in the neighbouring Villages. Freyre gathering about 200 Men from Damam, Maim and Trapor, fell upon 600 of the Enemy in their Woods and Works before Day when they were all a∣sleep, slew a great number of them, and retired with a considerable Booty, burning all that could not be carried away. Above 700 of the Enemy pursued him, but not da∣ring come too near, he retired in good Order and got into Damam with Honour. 14. D. Henry de Noronna had detached George de Castilo with some small Vessels to∣wards Cape Comori to convoy the Fleet of Turocori. There he discovered a Galliot that carried 170 Moors. Francis de Soufa Pereyra with his little Ship in which were but 16 Souldiers bore down upon her, Ca∣stillo sends two more to second him, and they discovering some Ships of Bengala, leave him to follow them. Those of the Galliot see∣ing our small Vessel forsaken, fire their Can∣non upon her, which killed three of the Men that rowed, and the rest leaped into the Sea. The Moors board her, and all our Men were either killed or taken. 15. In May, Nunno de Cunna sailed from Goa for Baçaim to succeed Ruy Dias de Sam∣payo as Admiral of the North Sea; his Squa∣dron consisted of 13 Ships, in which were 400 chosen Souldiers, designed to carry on the War against Melique, who was grown strong. By the way he had some Encounters
not considerable enough to be related, and at the City Galiana after entring the Ene∣mies Works, taking some Cannon, and kill∣ing many with the loss of one Man, was forced by a Storm to desist from his Design of burning some small Vessels. 16. Being at Baçaim he kept the Enemy in great awe, notwithstanding they had 400 Horse and as many Foot, whereas we had but 30 Horse and 160 Foot. Several were killed in Skirmishes this Winter, the number of theirs not known, on our side 40. On All Saints Day the Enemy came on through a Plain, having to distract us made a feint of coming through the Water. Their Horse having made Antony Pinto de Fonseca give way, were bogged, and our Men rally∣ing upon them, killed, and took some, put∣ting the rest to flight. Francis Tavares who carried Lope Sarmiento's Colours, stripped and wrapped them about his Arm, charging the Enemies with the Spear, till being thrown down he lay upon the Colours, so that they could not be taken from him, but the Portugueses coming into his assistance he rose, and tho' the Blood run from him, fell in again among the Moors. 17. During all this time the Moors shew∣ed such respect to the Christian Churches, as may well confound Christians themselves. The Portugueses made use of two Churches dedicated to our B. Lady, putting 50 Men into each, and tho' thence they annoyed the Enemy, yet the Moors never made one shot at them, because some of them had there
recovered their Health, making Vows which they punctually paid. CHAP. II. Continues the Government of the Viceroy D. Hierome de Azevedo, in the Year 1613. 1. IT was the fate of the Fort of Mom∣baça to have insolent Commanders. Emanuel de Melo Pereyra herein exceeded many of his Predecessors treating the King Sultan Hazen with unexpressible disrespect. The chief Promoter of the Disagreement be∣twixt Melo and the King was his Unkle Munganaje, an old Man, who, pretending much Zeal for our Affairs, aimed at the Crown. He vented his Malice one day by giving out in the Fort, the King designed to kill them all. 2. Melo resolved to attack the King's House, but he being sensible how fruitless any excuses would be, fled with the Chri∣stian Colours to the Town Quolifi of the Cafres seven Leagues distant. That People pressed him to reinthrone himself by force, but he several times withstood their Impor∣tunities. 3. At length not able to prevail upon him they marched without him, and entred the Town of the Moors, but they were all retir'd into our Fort. The Cafres not thinking
good to assault the Fort, were upon their return, when Emanuel de Melo, who obser∣ved them, pursuing and falling suddenly on them, cut off the best Part. A few days after the King returned to his House, and having excused himself to our Commander thought he was satisfied, but he only dis∣sembled his Malice, as shall appear here∣after. 4. Our Fortune in Pegn now declined with the same swiftness it had rise, and it was just a wicked encrease should have a sudden detriment. The violence committed by Philip de Brito Nicote on the King of Tangn, provoked the Anger of the King of Ova, under whose Protection he was. Scarce had he heard the News, when casting on the Ground his Gown and Veil, he vowed to the Idol Biay of Degu, he would not enter within his Gates till this Quarrel was re∣venged. He marched with 120000 Men, having put to Sea 400 Vessels of considera∣ble strength, in which were above 6000 of those Moors of noted Valour (called de Caperuça, or that wear Caps. All that was without the Walls of Siriam he burnt, but met with vigorous opposition at that Place, notwithstanding Nicote was quite unprovi∣ded, having suffered most of his Men to go for India, and being scarce of Powder, as who had fired the vast quantity of it found at Tangu. In this distress he sent a Soldier to buy Powder at Bengala, and he run away with the Money; and having sent for some to the Town of St. Thomas, they
sent him none. Besides, those few Portu∣gueses that were with him committed such Outrages, Robberies and Murders as seem∣ed to hasten his Ruine. 5. For want of Powder there was no firing of Cannon, they poured boiling Pitch and Oil upon the Enemy. His number of Men might suffice, having 100 Portugueses and 3000 Pegues. Nicote sends out three Ships against the Fleet, in one of them all the Men were slain, the two retired with all theirs wounded. The Enemy began to un∣dermine the Works, and the Besieged la∣boured much, but to small purpose. After the Siege had lasted 34 Days, Nicote sent to beg Mercy, but was not heard. He thought to prevail by the means of the King of Tangu whom he had robbed of his Crown, Riches and Liberty, but the King of Ova understood, and was resolved to punish him. 6. The King of Arraçam whom he had so grievously offended, sent 50 Sail to his As∣sistance, which were all taken by the Be∣siegers. The King of Ova gives an assault, and they fought three days without inter∣mission; the end of it was, that 700 of the Besieged were slain, one Banna whom Nicote had always honoured having betrayed him. Nicote was taken, carried to the King, and by him ordered to be impaled, and set up in an Eminence above the Fort, that he might the better look to it, as the King said. He lived two Days in that misery. His Wife De Luisa de Saldanna was kept 3
Days in the River to be cleansed, because the King designed her for himself, but being brought before, and exclaiming against him, he ordered her Leg to be bored, and that she should be sent to Ova among the other Slaves. 7. Francis-Mendez and a Nephew of his were treated as Nicote. Banna demanding a Reward was soon torn to pieces, the King saying, He could never be true to him that betrayed the Man who so much had ho∣noured him. Sebastian Rodriguez was coop∣ed up with a Yoke about his Neck. At first the King designed not to spare any of the Inhabitants of that Place, but growing calm, he sent many Slaves to Ova. Then passing by Martavam he obliged that King to kill his own Daughter's Husband, because he was Nicote's Son, that none of the Race might remain. This was the end of that Man's Avarice, who being naked a few years before, was raised to be worth 3 Millions; he had one when he went to Goa, brought another from Tangu, and had got at least another since by Prizes and Trade. The Enemy confessed they lost at that Siege 30000 Men. 8. But that it may appear that seldom any great Calamity happens without the help of a Woman, it is necessary to show how Nicote's Wife was one of the Principal Cau∣ses of his Ruin. She entertained one of his Captains as her Gallant, and perceiving the Portugueses censured their familiarity, they perswaded Nicote he had no need of them,
which was the reason they were dismissed, and that the cause of his Ruine. 9. Our Viceroy understanding the danger of Siriam, and thinking to relieve it in time, sent thither Iames de Mendoça Furtado with 5 Galliots. He had orders to act something by the way, and endeavour to strengthen himself by the addition of some other Ships and Men, which he effected not till he came to Martavam, where in the River he found a Fleet of 20 Sail, which after a sharp En∣gagement fled, except 4 that were taken with some Men, from whom he heard what had happened at Siriam, so that there was no need to go farther. 10. Nor long before this set out from Goa for China Iohn Cayado de Gamboa with 3 Gal∣leons, and was to join Michael de Sousa Pimen∣tel, who was there with 4 others to secure our China Trade against the Hollanders, who were this Year very strong in those Seas. One of the 3 Galleons was cast away near Sancham 60 Leagues from Macao, the Sea then run∣ning so high that it drowned several Towns. There were above 200 Men in that Vessel, whereof about 60 Portugueses and 80 others escaped. They chose Gonzalo Machado a noted Souldier to command them, and ha∣ving the good Fortune to be well treated, cloathed and fed by the Chineses, came to a City where they were so nobly entertained, they had almost forgot the end of their Voyage. Their common Food was three Pullets a day each, they were feasted on the River in stately Boats like Palaces with se∣veral
Apartments, and garnished with Gold. In fine, on their way thence to Macao they were attended as if they had been Chinese Colaos, or Mandarines. At the Inns they were treated with a sort of Food most plea∣sant and delicious, which afterwards they were informed was made of Toads and Worms. What chiefly they admired after this Journey was the Chastity of the Chinese Women; for tho' they are beautiful, and Beauty be inclined to Wantonness, and though our Men were long among them and familiarly entertained, yet they could never by any means prevail with any of them to yield to their Desires. At Macao they found the other two Galleons, which had escaped the Storm, having more Sea room. 11. Near the end of this Year Luis de Brito & Melo entred the Port of Goa from Cruizing in the Sea of Diu, and brought with him a rich Ship of the Mogol's that came from Meca. He took her off of Suratt, after a vigorous resistance, in which he lost some Men, and was forced to send to Ruy Freyre for aid. This provoked the Mogol to Besiege Damam, and destroy the Country about it. The King of Decan did the same about Chaul and Bacaim, at the Instigation of the Mogol, who thought to drive us out of Asia. 12. A Letter writ by D. Luis de Gama from Ormuz with more Passion than Discre∣tion, moved the Persians on the other side to gather 300 Barques, in order to take the Port of Bandel, and stop the Course of the
Water that goes to Ormuz. Ferdinand de Silva Admiral of that Sea went to quell them, and as he ingaged, his Powder taking fire was blown up. D. Nunno Alvarez Pereyra succeeded him, who drove them away with such slaughter, that the Xa of Persia excused himself to the viceroy, saying, that at∣tempt was made only by the Sultan of Lara. 13. Francis Lopez Calleyros brought into Malaca a Dutch Pink, that had taken a rich Portugues Ship. The News of the Hollanders taking that Prize, was the occasion of his setting out in a Ship of his own with 28 Soldiers. 14. This Year expired with great dissa∣tisfaction in India (tho' the like had happen∣ed other times) for the Ships from Portugal, which were expected with impatience, the better to oppose the English and Hollanders, were forced back to Lisbon, after having been five Months abroad; they were four. 15. D. Hierome de Almeyda returning to Portugal with the Ships of the last Year, in the Bay of St. Helena met four mighty Holland Ships. They sought with much equal Courage and Loss. The Dutch Admiral was sunk, and ours beginning to take fire Emanuel de Prado & Magallanes rowled himself upon it till he quenched it. For this Action the Command of the Fort of Mascate was given him, with the Privilege of leaving it to whom he pleased in his Will. We shall see him here∣after serve well, and die valiantly in fight.
CHAP. III. Continues the Government of D. Hierome de Azevedo, in the Year 1614. 1. THE King of Ova grown Proud with his success against the Portugueses at Siriam, resolved to conquer all the neigh∣bouring Princes. He caused himself to be Crowned at Bagou, and by the Conduct of his Brother with 50000 Men was soon Ma∣ster of the Kingdom of Tavay. This Ge∣neral moves to Tenasarim, and Besieges it by Sea and Land. Christopher Rabelo, who had fled from his House at Cochim for some Crimes, durst attack his Fleet of 500 Sail with only 40 Portugueses and 70 Slaves in 4 Galliots, and put it to flight, after burning many Vessels, and killing 2000 Men. 2. The King of Siam, to whom that Town belonged, for joy of this Action highly ho∣noured the Victorious Portugueses, and offer∣ed them leave to build a Fort in any part of his Kingdom they would chuse; to this intent sending for Iames de Mendoça Furtado, who was in that Sea with a Squadron, and offering him the Title of an Earl with a suitable Revenue; but there being too much then on our hands these offers could not be accepted of. Furtado in his way to Ma destroyed the Towns of Queda and Pa with Fire and Sword.
3. D. Iames de Vasconcelos sailed from Gao with the Squadron for the North consist∣ing of 17 Sail, he had orders to take in D. Emanuel de Azevedo at Chaul and carry him to Diu, being appointed Commander of that Place. By the way landing at the River Sifardam in Melique's Lands, he destroyed a Town abandoned by the Inhabitants. 4. Azevedo being come to Diu. seized on the Goods of his Predecessor Sebastian de Macedo, for the Money he was indebted to the King. Next he resolved to fall upon the People of Por, for the Damage the Trade of Diu sustained by their means; Gaspar de Melo & Sampayo was sent with a Squadron to this Expedition, who came be∣fore that City (40 Leagues distant) with much difficulty, because our Vessels could go but one at a time up a narrow Creek that leads to it, and the Enemy pour'd in showers of Bullets and Arrows from the Shore, and from the Bastions, killing 18 of our Men. The Walls were scaled on the one side, whilst our Men entred at a Breach on the other, notwithstanding the vigorous opposition of 4000 resolute Enemies, whereof many were slain, the rest fled, some into the Fields, and others to a Fort standing in the middle of the Town. 5. Those in the Fort offered Forty thou∣sand Crowns, if we would not batter the Place. It was denied; they attacked to no purpose, and our Men forced to depart with double dissatisfaction, for refusing the offer and suffering the repulse. The City was
plundered, 1000 killed, and 300 taken; the Houses then fired being full of Perfumes cast a delightful smell. 6. Iames de Vasconcelos from Diu sailed with 9 Ships to the mouth of the River of Agaçaim, where 16 Paraos of Malabars set upon him. Without the Loss of one Man he slew many, took several Prisoners, and all the Paraos. Vasconcelos himself took one of them, thinking their Commander Porcasse had been in it, but that Honour fell to Mi∣chael Ferran de Castellobranco. 7. Ruy Freyre de Andrade went from Da∣mam to Chaul, to succeed in that Command to D. Emanuel de Azevedo, who was gone to that of Diu. He was ordered by the Vice∣roy only to secure himself within the Walls, and not attempt any thing abroad, because the Country swarmed with Enemies, and there were but few Men in the Fort. But he training many Camponeses; raised new Works, and forced the Enemy to withdraw with great loss. 8. Gaspar de Melo now commanded the Northern Squadron consisting of 16 Sail, he went to Bacaim understanding there was most need of his Assistance. The posture of our Affairs was much mended by this Relief, the Enemy being kept more in awe, till one day fighting from Sun to Sun, our Men with∣out losing one Man overcame a great multi∣tude. 9. The Fort of Manora, four Leagues from the mouth of the River of Agaçaim, being besieged by the Decariis, and Bacaim
in a good Posture, Gaspar de Melo resolved to relieve it, and Antony Pinto to bear him Company; the chief of their Strength was 700 Portugueses. Gaspar one night went him∣self to view the Enemies Camp, and find∣ing it stronger than he had imagined; when he returned perswaded his Men it was much weaker. He prepared them to fall on before day, which was done so successfully, that some fled at first with the surprize, and many being killed, the rest followed. Thus that Siege was raised without the Loss of one Man. 10. Hence Gaspar de Melo went to Damam again infested by the King of the Sarceta's, and in sight of the Enemy cut down their Woods and Orchards, they not daring to oppose him. The heat of the Sun was then so violent, that it caused a Soldier imme∣diately to run mad, and died soon after; this was all the Loss sustained by us in that Action. 11. Then Melo returned to Chaul, where he found Ruy Freyre de Andrade successful over his Enemies. They marched to destroy a Wood near Upper Chaul, in defence whereof a great multitude of the Enemy met them, and there ensued an obstinate fight. Here Melo forgetting the Duty of a Captain, acted more like a private Soldier, which heat of his Ruy Freyre did endeavour to mo∣derate, he now gave the advice he would not afterwards take. They returned victo∣rious, but not without losing some Men.
12. Freyre being left alone, gave Orders to fall upon the Enemy, Captain Peter Gomes Villano answered, They had no Men. Ad∣vancing still, he again orders them to fall on, and at the same time received a Musket Shot in his Belly. His Men seeing it, began to give way, but he running forward, cryed out, There is no cause to retire, I am very well; yet for some time his Life was in danger. Here it was he wanted the Advice he gave to Melo, yet that Resolution pro∣duced an honourable Victory. 13. Melo again joins Pinto de Fonseca at Bacaim in order to relieve the Fort of Assa∣rim, that high Mountain that overtops the flight of Birds, and is counted impregnable. Tho' the Country swarm'd with Enemies, they conducted 200 Waggons to that Moun∣tain, and having relieved it returned in safety. 14. We had not the like success at Diu, for Francis Sodre being sent against the Res∣butos at Coche with 300 Men in 13 Ships, behaved himself so indiscreetly, that they slew many of his Men, and forced him to retire to his Ships in haste, but not cow∣ardly, for he still faced them, and did all that could be expected at such a time. 15. Our Affairs at Mombaça were in a very bad posture, for King Sultan Hazen be∣ing persecuted by his Unkle Munganaje, who armed at the Crown, and by the Commander Emanuel de Melo, who thirsted after his Riches, was accused of Treason, those being really the Traytors who accused him. His
feigned Crimes being laid before the Vice∣roy, he rashly orders him. to be brought to Goa, directing Simon de Melo Pereyra, who went to succeed Emanuel de Melo to seize him. The King understanding the Design, endeavoured to avoid being taken, and the new Commander attacking his House obli∣ged him again to fly to Arabaya of the Ca∣fres. Our Commander with Money prevail∣ed to have him killed, and cutting off his Head sent it to Goa, as it had been a Tro∣phy of some great Conquest. Then he puts the Government into the Hands of the Traytor Munganaje, joining with him Me∣linde, Brother to the deceased. But he who desired no Colleague, laid Crimes to his Charge, as was done to his Brother, and caused him to be beheaded. We shall here∣after see the Benefit reaped by this Tyranny and Treachery. 16. Cojenitamo, Commander of Suratte for the Mogol, with 800 Horse and some Ele∣phants, on a sudden over-ran the Country of Damam, burning the Villages; and some of our Men endeavouring to put a stop to him, were drawn into an Ambush, and all slain. The Enemy comes on again with a greater Power, and was now absolute Master of the Field, when Luis de Iito & Melo Admiral of the North-Sea came into that Port with his Squa∣dron, which consisted of 14 Sail, and in them 350 Souldiers. These joined 200 of Damam, and 70 Horse, and above 10 other Foot. They attacked the Enemy who far exceeded them in numbers, yet
drove him out of those Lands, killing above 400 of them, 2 Elephants, and their Com∣mander in Chief Dalapute Rao; on our side only Antony Godinno was slain. 17. Luis de Brito pursued them to the Fort of Baroche, and entring the Port, burnt the Town, and all the Vessels that lay there. As he returned Victorious, discovering the City of the Resbuto's, called Barbute, he re∣solved to attack it. A great number of them met him, and after a Fight which was long dubious, were defeated with the loss of 450. On our side died one Captain, and four others. The City was burnt, and the Heads of most of the Dead cut off, which were cast ashore near Surat, to be seen by the Moors of that place. 18. At Bacaim and Chaul there were many Skirmishes, which for brevity are omitted; but many Towns were burnt, much Plun∣der taken, and the Enemy on all sides kept under. 19. Emanuel Mascarennas Homem succeeded D. Francis de Meneses Rojo as General of Ceylon; he had Orders to curb the Insolence of the Portugueses, well known to the Vice∣roy since he Commanded there, and which did us more hurt than the Enemies Sword. We had not grown odious to the Chingala's, had we not provoked them by o infamous Proceedings. Not only the poor Soldiers went out to rob, but those who were Lords of Villages adding Rapes and Adulteries, which obliged that People to seek the com∣pany of Beasts on Mountains, rather than
be subject to the more beastly Villanies of Men. 20. The viceroy perceiving that India was not in a condition to withstand so great Enemies as was the Mogol, and Xarife Melique Commander of Ponda, and suspecting that Ibrahim Idalxa underhand supported him, sent Antony Monteyro Corte Real, Embassador to the latter, with a Present for the King, and another for his Favourite. Being come to Visapor, he had the desired Success, which was to obtain, that Melique should be Impri∣soned at Ponda; that the Hollanders, who laboured to settle a Factory there, should be expelled. This was done by the assistance of Vincent Ribeyro a Portugues, who lived at Visapor, and had much interest with the Fa∣vourite. 21. At Baçaim, Luis de Brito & Melo, and D. Iohn de Almada Admiral of the Diu Squa∣dron, joyned Antony Pinto de Fonseca Com∣mander of that place, resolving to force the Enemies Camp. They made up 1500 Men, and marched toward the Enemy, who had 1000 Horse and 1500 Foot well intrenched. Our design was to surprize them, but they had intelligence from some Portugueses in the City; nevertheless their Trenches were for∣ced with the loss of 6 or 7 of our Men, and not above 500 of the Enemy escaped. This Victory secured the Inhabitants of that Coun∣try, and the Island of Salsete, who had suf∣fered much during the two last Years. 22. Zamori possessed himself of the King∣dom of Upper Granganer, which was of dan∣gerous
consequence to our Town of the same Name, which he always coveted, having an Eye upon a Pagod where the ancient Empe∣rors of Malabar used to be Crowned. This Neighbourhood became the more dangerous, for that the little King of Paru, a small Island, relying on his Friendshop with Za∣mori, had began the War in the Rivers be∣tween Cochim and Paliporto. The King of Cochim (not without cause offended at the Portugueses) underhand kindled this Fire. The Viceroy sent D. Lope de Almeyda with one Galley and ten Ships to relieve Cananor. He came upon the King of Paru, who ter∣rified thereat, concluded a Peace. Only the King of Cochim and Zamori now remained: an Embassy, and Presents were sent to the latter; both which he admitted, but nothing was concluded. 23. At this time arrived at Goa 4 Ships from Portugal, five came thence, but one was lost within two Leagues of Melinde. Of 3000 Soldiers that were shipped aboard these Vessels, not half the number came to India, the rest dying by the way, which was a great loss, by reason of the want of Men there was there, having so many Enemies upon them, and because these same Ships should have come the Year before, and were forced back to Lisbon. Three Ships home∣ward bound had yet worse fortune, for one was cast away at the Maldivy Islands; ano∣ther, in which were all the Men of the for∣mer at the Island Fayal, where above 200 Men perished; the third arrived at Lisbon.
24. The Viceroy with that small Recruit resolved to go in Person to the North to meet our European Enemies the English and Hollan∣ders, who were strong in these Seas, he sent before D. Emanuel de Azevedo with 22 Sail, who at Suratte joyned the two Squadrons un∣der Luis de Brito, and D. Iohn de Almada. They landed, and destroyed the Lands of Cifandam and Diva; the Towns of Baroche and Goga were plundered and burnt, as were six great Ships in that Bay. Hence they sailed to the City Patane, the Inhabitants whereof, terrified by the Flames of Goga, fled to the Woods; so the Town was fired without any opposition. 25. Mean while the Viceroy set out with 7 Galleons, that in which he was so large, it carried with ease 230 Men at Arms, the 30 all Gentlemen. There were besides two Pinks, one Galley, one Caravel, and five other Vessels. In all which were 1400 Portu∣gueses, and much Artillery, but unskilful Gunners.
CHAP. IV. Continues the Government of D. Hierome de Azevedo. 1. THE chief Design of this Squadron, which at Suratte joyned those three under Azevedo, Brito, and Almeyda, was to destroy four English Ships that lay in that Port. These Preparations seemed too great for such an Enterprize, but the Event proved the contrary. Being come in sight of the English, the Viceroy ordered the two Pinks, the Caravel, and other smaller Vessels, to lay aboard one of the Ships which was separated from the others. Having all grappled, and almost entred her, the other three coming up beat them off. The first three of our Vessels having taken fire, endea∣vouring to burn that of the Enemy, perished, and the English escaped. All this day was spent without any Success on our side; and the next nothing was done, because the Ships lay in a hole, where only one of our Gal∣leons could come at them at once, and so might be one by one disabled by the Ene∣mies Cannon. Some said, this was only a pretence of those who had no mind to come at them. It was attempted to burn them with Fireships, but without success.
2. The Viceroy perceiving he only lost his Time there, sailed to Diu to send thence Relief to Ormuz, having received Advice from D. Luis de Gama Commander of that Place, that the Fort of Comoran was besieged by a Persian Captain of Xirav with 14000 Men by Sea and Land. This Siege was laid by order of Abas Xa of Persia, on account that Gama did not pay him certain Duties due to the King of Lara, and the Persian was now possessed of that Kingdom. He was glad of this pretence of taking Arms, as desiring to possess himself of Ormuz, to∣wards which he thought the Fort of Como∣ron was a good step. Nor did he miss his aim, for no sooner did the ancient Men of Ormuz hear that Fort was delivered, but they concluded this lost. D. Luis sent some Succour which hastened the Surrender, be∣cause one half of it was cut off, and the rest returned. Andrew de Quadros commanded at Comoran, he had but few Men, and less Cannon, (for always our Aim was at trade,) and was forced to surrender upon Condi∣tions, which the Enemy never observed. This was done when the Relief of 9 Sail, sent by the Viceroy, arrived under the com∣mand of Michael de Sousa Pimentel, who having nothing to do there, and to shun the Distasts that happened between him and D. Luis de Gama, went away to Mascate. 3. The Viceroy returning with his Fleet from Diu, discovered the 4 English Ships a great way from Surat making all the sail they could, and standing to the Southward.
He made the best of his way, and in the afternoon came up alone within Cannon∣shot of one of them, because his Galleon was a better Sailer than the rest of the Fleet. His Gunner offered to sink her with two 40 Pounders; many opposed it, representing the other 3 Ships would come upon him, and the Fleet being out of sight, the Galleon would be lost, which would be a great dis∣credit, besides the Damage at such a time when the Government was so poor. The Viceroy submitted to their Opinions, with∣out obliging them to give it under their hands, thinking they would never deny it, which they did when he was accused for not doing what the Gunner proposed. The English returned Thanks for this kindness, firing their Cannon without Ball. 4. The Ships that this Year went from Portugal, carried Orders to the Viceroy, to sell all Commands and Employments that would yield Money, there being no other means than to supply the Wants of that Government. This was put in execution, and much resented, for three Reasons; one, That it had never been done before; another, Because many were debarred there∣by the Right to those Places they had pur∣chased by long Service; and the third, Be∣cause by this means those who had Money, though never so undeserving, would get those Posts. 5. The Ships that this Year sailed from Lisbon for India, in which the abovesaid Order went, were four▪ D. Antony Tello
Captain of one of them being ashore when they set sail, and not able to get aboard, though he followed in another Vessel as far as the Island Madera, returned to Lisbon, and taking with him Captain Emanuel de Prado de Magallanes, travelled to India by Land, found his Ship there, and returned in her to Portugal. Francis Lopez Carrasco, Captain of another of those Ships, was left behind through neglect at Goa when the Ships came away, and Francis de Magallanes came in his Place. Iohn Pereyra Cortereal, a third Captain of the same Ships, returned not without Trouble, which he overcame like a good Commander, for some of his Men mutinying, he with his own hand slew one of them, and caused two to be hanged; for which good Service he was rewarded. 6. This Year also set out from Goa ano∣ther Ship commanded by Francis de Brito, which was lost off of the Islands of Querim∣ba, where and at Moçambique the Men were saved with the Fatigues usual in those Ship∣wrecks. D. Hierome Manuel, who comman∣ded the 4 Ships that came from Lisbon, re∣turned next Year, when we shall speak of him. 7. Abas Xa, King of Persia, desiring to settle some Trade with us to vend his Silks, writ to our King, telling him, He was wea∣ry of receiving Friers as Ambassadors, and desiring him to send some Gentleman of Note, for he should better know how to treat with such a one, and God and his Majesty would be better served, because a Religious Man out of his Cell was like a
Fish out of the Water. D. Garcia de Silva & Figuero a Spanish Gentleman, well qua∣lified for that Employment, was sent to him. He carried a rich and beautiful Present, and of rare Workmanship in Silver and Gold, set with precious Stones. He went from Ma∣drid to Lisbon, thence to India, where he was to receive further Instructions, and 20000 Crowns consigned on the Custom-house of Ormuz for his expence, besides what he had before received, because his Equipage was very great. Thus far we had an account of this Embassy; hereafter we shall see that Ormuz was lost, which was what the Persian coveted; so that it seems the Embassy did not divert him from that Thought. 8. The Blacks besieged the City of St. Tho∣mas, and raising a Fort, they put in Ammu∣nition and 600 Men, spreading 20000 about the Town, which they battered from the Pa∣god near St. Francis. Captain Emanuel de Frias besieges the Fort, which was surrendred to him for want of Water. Among the Can∣non found in it, there was one Piece of 25 Spans, that is, 6 Yards and a quarter in length, that carried a Ball of 50 Pounds weight. 9. A Peace was concluded between the Mogul and us through the sollicitation of Hierome Xaverius of the Society of Iesus.
CHAP. V. Continues the Government of the Vice-Roy D. Hierome de Azevedo, in the Year 1615. 1. DON Iohn de Silva commanded for the Spaniards at Manila, who de∣manded Succors of the Portugueses to defend the Moluco Islands against the Rebellious Hol∣landers. The Viceroy sitted out 4 Galleons for this Expedition under the Command of Francis de Miranda Enriquez. It was easie to foresee they would be unfortunate, be∣cause most of the Souldiers were Outlaws, Men who have Courage to commit Villanies, but in dangers of Honour are meer Cowards, as has always been found by Experience, and was at this time, for many deserted as soon as they had received their Pay at Goa, and many at Malaca, the Admiral contrary to his Orders, having touched there. 2. Between the Islands of Nicobar they were some time becalmd. Not far from those of Diu they met two Holland Ships coming from Paliacate, our Admiral prepared to fight, and they having made show of stand∣ing to it, after some Cannon-shot exchang'd, stood away. Being pursued very close they threw many Goods overboard to be the ligh∣ter; among other things they cast over some Pigeons, the weight whereof could not much
hinder them, but in the Confusion they knew not what they did. Our Galleons could not make up with them, and in the morning they were not to be seen. It was afterwards known they skulked behind the Island of Pulopinam. 3. The Galleons being in the Road of Malaca, the Admiral landed D. Gonçalo de Silva, Bishop of that City, whom he carry∣ed to this intent, and thought to hold on his Voyage, having already been out above 2 Months, and it being about the middle of Iuly. Going out of the streight there arose a storm, and the Vice-Admiral springing a Leak, they were forced to put into Malaca; where they all stayed, resolving to prose∣cute their Voyage the next Year, not know∣ing the ill Fortune that attended them there. 3. When they came in, Iames de Mendoça Furtado, Commander in Chief by Sea and Land, was ready to set out with 6 Galleons and 12 Jalia's, or small Vessels. They were manned by the Garrison of Malaca, and went to meet the Ships that were expected from China, and at the same time to dis∣cover whether any Fleet of Achem appear'd as was reported. They discovered it about  Leagues from the streight; it consisted of above 500 Sail, whereof above 100 Gal∣leys greater than ours, and above 150 less, yet considerable. The King came himself in this Fleet with his Wives, the best of his Treasure, and 60000 Men. He carried no Colours, but Globes of massy Gold, as was
the Throne whereon he sate. He was four Years in fitting out this Fleet. 5. Iames de Mendoça Furtado having well viewed that fleet, designed to fight, and in order thereto called all his Captains to Council; it was resolved he should not fight but return to Malaca, which was weak for want of those Men they had drawn out. He stood thither, sending Advice to the Gal∣leons to prepare to fight. The Admiral Fr. de Miranda Enriquez received the Advice, and with Furtado's Squadron on the 4th day met that vast Fleet, which was standing for Ma∣laca. Both Parties drew themselves into order of Battel, and after Noon Miranda began to play his Cannon without losing a Shot, the Enemy stood so thick, and they received all his Fire without making any re∣turn, as it were in contempt of him. 6. Furtado and Ferdinand de Costa with their two Galliots attack 7 Galleys; one they boarded and burnt, another was blown up by a Ball that fell into their Powder Room. Several of the Enemymade up to the Galliots, our Galleons move to succour them, and then the whole Enemies Fleet comes on. This was towards Evening when a Storm rising so separated our small Vessels, that they could not join the Galleons till next day at Noon. Being joined they made towards the Enemy, who not regarding them stood in for Malaca. Our Galleons being ill man∣ned, because many of the Men were fled to the Woods, it was found expedient to take
those out of the Galliots who were of try'd Valour. Thus they prepared for Battel, which the Enemy accepted, drawn up in the form of a half Moon. This happened on a Sunday in the Afternoon about the middle of November. 7. The Admiral, and D. Iohn de Silveyra's Galleons were boarded, Ant. Rodrigues de Gam∣boa with his Galliot came to assist Silveyra his Brother-in-Law, but the Galliot taking fire fired the Galleon, and both perished. There were 50 Men in them, 20 of them died, and the other 30 were taken. The Admiral Miranda was three times boarded, and, tho' he had but few Men, still cleared the Decks, killing numbers of the Enemy, and sinking some of their Galleys. Ships were fired on both sides, and the labour to quench them was great especially on our side. The fight lasted till midnight, the flaming Ships and other fires lighted of purpose by the King affording them light. 8. In fine, the Admiral's Galleon during this time was attacked by the whole Fleet 14 times, fired 18, and as often quench∣ed, Men wrapped in wet Blankets rowling themselves in the fire. Miranda being struck down by a great Splinter, a Soldier cried out he was killed, but he instantly arose, saying, I am not dead, here I am alive, fight couragiously my brave Lions, for Heaven pro∣mises us a glorious Victory. The 3 Galleons were in a Line at about a Musket shot di∣stance from each other, and for want of Wind the 2 could not come up to succour
the Admiral, against whom the Enemy bent all his Force. Could they have come up, the Enemy had been utterly ruined, for they were so disabled, that they retired towards Bancales. 9. Day appearing, and the Enemy gone, our Galleons thought to pursue them but could not. Their Loss was computed to 20000 Men, and 50 Sail of all Sorts. Iames de Mendoça & Silva being upon discovery with his small Vessels, found the King had sent out his Boats for Water, he fell in a∣mong them and took them all, and 200 Pri∣soners. The King after this loss asked the Prisoners he had taken, whether an Embassy to treat of their Liberty would be acceptable at Malaca, and being by them assured it would, he writ to the Admiral and Com∣mander of the Town, affirming our Ships had attacked him without cause, when he was going only to subdue his rebellious Sub∣jects, expressing concern for the loss of our Galleon and Galliot, offering to restore the Prisoners without Ransom, if they sent for them. This King being very subtle and false, it was not fit to give two much Credit to him; yet his Ambassadors were well re∣ceived, and it was answered, that the King's Designs not being known, it could not but he believed he designed against Malaca. They sent him all his Subjects taken by Iames de Mendoça and a good Present, thanking him for the offer of restoring the Portugueses, and desiring he would deliver them to him that carried the others. The King being under
sail when our Messenger came to him, said he would answer after he had treated him as became a Portugues Ambassador. He had rather have taken his answer there, being suspicious of the King, but was forced to follow. The King being come home, re∣ceived the Embassy friendly, and a Month after dispatched him well satisfied with the Prisoners. 10. The reason why, as was before hint∣ed, the 3 Galleons could not pursue the A∣chem Fleet, was because they had advice that 8 Holland Ships were sailing towards Ma∣laca. Mendoça was of opinion to repair to the City for the security thereof, but Mi∣randa was for pursuing the Enemy, and ha∣ving destroyed them they might retire to Polubutum or Gale; which would have ruin∣ed the Achem Fleet, and saved our Galleons which were destroyed afterwards by the Hollanders. These drawing near, Ferdinand de Costa was for securing the Galleons at Gale; Miranda for fighting; and Furtado advised to draw the Galleons close to the little Island, so that the Hollanders might not pass between them and the Land, so they might do the more Execution, bringing all their Cannon over to one side. This Opi∣nion being approved of, was scarce put in Execution, when the 8 Ships appeared and made at them. Every Ship exceeded each of our Galleons in number of Men and Can∣non, able Seamen and Gunners. The order of drawing under the Island was so ill exe∣cuted, that the Hollanders took the Post ours aimed at.
11. The Battel began and continued all that day with equal Loss. Next day one of Galleons, after losing 3 Captains, and be∣ing torn to pieces even with the superficies of the Water, was quitted by those Men that were left. The 3d day only 10 Men being left in another Galleon, they fired it and got ashore. The Admiral Miranda would defend himself, tho' wounded in the Leg, with only 6, but they and a Jesuit by force carried him into the Island, leaving the Galleon on fire. About 200 Men were lost in them all. The loss of the Hollanders was considerable, but being Masters of the Sea they sailed to the Mouth of the Streight, to intercept the Ships that were expected from China, till understanding that D. Iohn de Silva, Governor of Malina, was coming that way with his Fleet, they quitted that Sea, which was no small comfort after so great a Loss. 12. Francis de Miranda Enriquez went to Goa, where he walked upon Crutches, by reason of the hurt received in his Legs when he fought the Hollanders. However he was brought to a Tryal, for not sailing directly for Manila, according to his Instructions, or not retiring where they might have been secured. In the Conclusion he was cleared, and having behaved himself so bravely, it was but reason he should. 13. D. Iohn de Silva being informed that the four Galleons could not go to Manila, did all that could be expected of a good Commander to join us in order to suppress
the Hollanders. He sent Ammunition to our Fleet a Malaca, and advice for our Ships to avoid falling into the Enemies hands. But all failed, the advice by the ill Conduct of him that carried it; and the Ammunition, be∣cause our Galleons were lost when it came. Without knowing hereof he put to Sea with 10 strong Galleons, the product of his great Care and Industry. Eight days after his de∣parture 6 Holland Ships came to the Bay of Maribeles and were the first of that Nation that passed the Streights of Magellan. Had D. Iohn set out 10 days sooner, he had taken the 8 Ships that defeated Francis de Miranda, and 10 Days later those other 6. Ships On the Sea of Pulatinam he found the Galleon commanded by Captain Antony Ho∣men de Azevedo and the Plate Ship coming from China. Having passed the Streight of Singapura, he left the Galleons with his Vice-Admiral and with two Galleys, he had went himself and convoyed those two Ves∣sels to Malaca. There he was received un∣der a Canopy with great State, and demon∣strations of Love and Gratitude; there also he soon fell sick in such manner, that the seventh Day were buried with him the great hopes conceived of destroying the Hol∣landers by his Zeal, Valour and Conduct. The Galleys carrying the Body returned to his Nephew, and the Vice-Admiral and he with them to Manila.
CHAP. VI. Continues the Government of the Viceroy D. Hierome de Azevedo, in the Year 1615. 1. ABout this same time a Peace was con∣cluded at Damam between the Por∣tugueses and King Choutia. Gonzalo Pinto de Fonseca was appointed to go to exchange the Ratifications. The King would not come into our Dominions to swear it, nor would we go into his; those of the King of Sarceta, tho' our Enemy, and his Father-in-Law, were agreed upon. Pinto came to a Village appointed for this Ceremony with 400 Foot and 50 Horse, and found the King there with 40 of the latter, and 900 of the former. Our Commissioner offer'd his Tent, and the King his, urging his Character. It was accepted to avoid displeasing him. The Quarrel had been about certain Lands the King pretended to, and now quitting his Claim the Peace was solemnly sworn with satisfaction of both Parties. He offered to serve our King with 1000 Foot and 200 Horse, and that his Son should live at Da∣mam to Command a Fleet at Sea. He added pleasantly, that he envied those who could be in Damam at the publick Feasts, and cau∣sed Pinto with some of the chief Portugueses to go to his House, saying, the Queen was
desirous of seeing him. She saw him, but not he her, being behind a close Lettice. The King made fresh offers, and gave good Proofs of real Friendship. 2. The same Gonçalo Pinto concluded a Peace with the Mogol. The Articles were, That Iahanguier, King of the Mogols, and the Viceroy should hold no Correspondence with English or Hollanders. That they should harbour neither of those Nations in their Ports, that they should be obliged to expel them the Sea of Guzarate in 3 Months after any of them came thither. That if the Eng∣lish entred the Lock of Suratte, the Portu∣gueses should have leave to plant Guns ashore to drive them out. That all Animosities laid aside, the Mogols and Portugueses should Trade freely in each others Ports. That Prisoners be restored on both sides. That the King should restore all the Portugues Ef∣fects in his Kingdom, after repaying himself 70000 Xerafines, he had received Damage in a Ship that came from Meca. That the Hulk of a Ship should be given to the Queen-Mother for one of hers burnt at Goa. That the Viceroy should give leave for two Ships of his once, and one every Year to Trade from Suratte to Meca, without paying any Duties. That the Malabars should be excluded the Ports of both Parties as per∣nicious Pirats. That by this Peace the King of Portugal's Right to the Duties paid at Diu, by the Ships that Trade in the Bay of Cam∣baya, should be no way infriged.
3. About the middle of February, Gonzalo Rodriguez de Sonsa came to the Moluco Islands with 6 Galliots of War, and two of Merchants. He was sent by the Viceroy with Succours. D. Iohn de Silva, Governor of Manila, with his Spaniards were then besieged at Ternate by 11 Dutch Ships, Sousa in sight of them relieved the Place, and the Besiegers stood away to the Southward. D. Iohn ordered two Galleys and a Pink with the Galliots to follow the Enemy, who steered for Macassa. These put the Towns of Arsula Best, and the greater and lesser Manciolas to Fire and Sword. They burnt Ships belonging to the Kings of Ternate, Ma∣quien, Bacham and Cacoa, who favoured the Holland Rebels. Landing in the Kingdom of Corane, they easily took the chief Fort, the King who was in it flying for shelter to the Woods. Returning aboard, they discover∣ed three great Ships in which came the King's Son-in-Law and Grandson to his aid, the latter was taken, the other killed. On the 2d of April they arrived at Macassa, a such time as the Admiral of the 11 Hollanders seen at Ternate, was coming into that Port. After half a Day's fight being upon the point of taking her, a sudden Storm parted them. Our Men returned to Ternate with Booty, Provisions, and more Ships than they carried out. 4. In Ceylon our Gen. Em▪ Mascarennas Ho∣mem marched against Candea with 14 Com∣panies of Portugueses of 30 Men each, and the Dissava's, or Chiefs of the Natives▪ Near
the River of Candea fell so great a Rain, there was no dry place to lie down, and in the Morning they were all running Blood, being bit by Leeches. It appeared difficult to pass the River being then swelled, but there being 11000 Men there they cut Trees, and laying a Bridge over passed. The Chin∣galas began to Skirmish, chiefly at Night, taking the advantage of the Woods. We lost some Men. The like happened at the Entrance into the Kingdom of Uva. 5. They marched to the City Babule, Metropolis of that Kingdom, burning all that lay in their way. Three thousand of the Enemy, who lay in Ambush near the City, fell upon Simon Correa who led our Van, but 600 Musqueteers charging them, they fled to the Woods, about 40 being killed on both sides. The same happened in the Rear. There being no Plunder in the City it was burnt, and all Fruit-Trees cut down. Our Ge∣neral spent 3 Months in this Expedition, in March returned to Sofragan, and thence to Malvane, having done the Enemy great harm. 6. In August he sent Peter Peixoto de Silva, with 8 Companies to Tumpane, another In∣let into the Kingdom of Candea towards the North a League from Balane. He spared neither Sex nor Age, for that the Tumpa∣nenses had endeavoured to betray us to the Enemy. The Lands of Archiapato of Candea were burnt; but in a Village they cut off 20 of our Blacks in an Ambush; 25 of them were slain in the same manner on their way
to Matale. Near Matale 70 more fell of 1500 that came to oppose us, which caused them to quit the Field, and Peixoto return∣ed to Manicravare with 500 Prisoners, and 2000 Head of Cattle, some of them Ele∣phants. 7. After this the Dissava Philip de Oliveyra had much the same success, making a Road into Candea with 10 Companies. The suc∣cess, continued as long as Emanuel Masca∣rennas Homem commanded in that Island, which was little above a Year, every one wishing it had been much longer as much in respect of his Valour, as Fortune and Affa∣bility. CHAP. VII. Continues the Government of the Viceroy D. Hierome de Azevedo, in the Year 1615. 1. IN the Year 1608 we gave an account of the prodigious rise of Sebastian Gon∣zales Tibao, who of a poor seller of Salt in a small Barque the Year 1605, in that of 1608 was become an absolute Sovereign without dependance on any Prince what∣soever. It is now time to show the end of such Monsters. This base Man being lift∣ed to that height, the steps by which he ascended being Treachery and Ingratitude, he now found it was no longer possible to
support his Power without some conside∣rable Succour. 2. This Man, who in his Prosperity forgot to submit himself to the Viceroy, now see∣ing the probability of falling, acquaints him with the Danger he is in. He proposes like an absolute Prince, That if the Viceroy will effectually support him, he will become Tri∣butary to Portugal, with the acknowledgment of a Galleon loaden with Rice, to be deli∣vered Yearly at Goa or Malaca. He urged, all had been done by him was to revenge the Murder of the Portugueses slaughtered by the King of Arracam in Banguel of Dianga; and (to gain the Viceroy by the hope of Profit) hinted, that the vast Treasure of that King might be taken. This last so blinded the Viceroy, that in stead of abhor∣ring the Villanies of that Wretch, he resol∣ved to assist him, contrary to all Human and Divine Laws. 3. For this Expedition, the Viceroy fitted out 14 of the largest Galliots, one Flyboat, and a Pink, and gave the Command of them to D. Francis de Meneses Roxo, who had go∣verned Ceylon. He sailed from Goa about the middle of September well manned and equipped, but not without much forebo∣ding of an unfortunate Event; for as the Viceroy only weighed the prospect of Gain, the People considered the injustice of the Enterprize. 4. On the 3d of October D. Franc arri∣ved at Arracam, the chief Port and Resi∣dence of that King, he had before sent a
Galliot with Advice of his coming to Seba∣stian Gonzales at Sundia. His Instructions being opened before all the Captains, they contained, that he should enter that King∣dom without expecting Sebastian Gonzalez. It was more reasonable that man should have been expected, as who knew the Coun∣try, and their manner of Fight, besides the Forces he was to bring; but God had de∣creed the Ruin of that vile Wretch, and of that unjust Succour. On the 15th of Octo∣ber, they discovered coming down the Ri∣ver a Fleet so numerous, they could not see the end of it. The foremost was a Dutch Pink, and many Hollanders commanded other Vessels. All that could be discoverd appea∣red full of Men, and well equipped, an ill sight for 15 little Ships that expected them; neither were they now 15, for one was gone to Sundiva; the Pink was in pursuit of a Ship that fled, and another was gone to fetch the Pink. 5. The Dutch Pink fired the first Gun, and then the Fight began furiously, our Gal∣liots advancing without any dread of that vast Fleet. Four Galliots got before the others, and in an instant their Captains and many Soldiers were killed, yet the rest were no way dismayed, and the other eight came up, darkening the day with Smoak, notwith∣standing the repeated flashes of Fire. Ma∣ny of the Enemy were drowned, overset∣ting their Vessels through haste to fly from us. The Fight lasted from morning till evening, when the Enemy drew off, think∣ing
some Relief was coming to us, having discovered the Galliot that went to seek the Pink, which they could not find. We lost 25 Men of Note, besides others. 6. Next morning the Pink came up, aboard him the wounded Men were carried, and such as he had fit for Service taken out. D. Francis resolved to lie at the mouth of the River till Sebastian Gonzalez came to joyn him, and then again attack the Enemy. At length Gonzalez came with 50 Sail well man∣ned and equipped, and hearing what was done, railed against the Viceroy for giving such Orders, and against D. Francis for obey∣ing them. About the middle of November they sailed up the River, discovered the Ene∣mies vast Fleet riding in a safe Place, and resolved to attack it. D. Francis took half Gonzalez his Ships, and gave him half those he brought, so they made two equal Squa∣drons. They divided themselves and fell on on both sides, firing upon those Vessels they could reach, but none of them advanced. The King from the Shore encouraged his Men, causing the Heads of some that fled to be set upon Spears for a Terror to the rest. 7. Scarce had our Men time to breath, when a great part of that vast Fleet came down upon them divided into 3 Squadrons. This was at Noon, when the heat of the Sun scorched. Sebastian Gonzalez put to flight those that attacked him; our Pink did as much with the Hollander. D. Francis recei∣ved and did much harm. The Advantage
was visible on our side, till about Sun-setting our Admiral D. Francis was killed by two Musket-Balls, one in the Forehead, the other in the left Eye. A Signal given on Board his Galliot, caused Sebastian Gonzalez to cease ollowing his good Fortune, and the Tide ebbing, the Fleets parted; but Gaspar de Abren's Galeot being left among the Ene∣my, all her Men were slain, and the Vessel torn in pieces; yet Abreu was brought off by Antony Carvallo mortally wounded, and lived some days after. 8. Our Fleet being come back to the mouth of the River, care was taken of the Woun∣ded, and above 200 Dead were buried in the Sea. The Body of D. Francis was embal∣med. D. Luis de Azevedo the Vice-Admiral succeeded in the Command. They all sailed over to Sundiva, and D. Luis with his Squa∣dron thence to Goa, notwithstanding Seba∣stian Gonzales for his own security laboured all he could to keep him there. Not long after the King of Arracam falling upon him in his Island, took it, and reduced him to his former miserable condition; so his Sove∣reignty passed like a Shadow, his Pride was humbled, and his Villanies punished. Our Fleet on their return burnt some Ships of the Moors, laden with Provisions, upon the Coast of Paliacate and St. Thomas. But Iohn Gomez Paez fighting with others, had his Galliot blown up, and few Men were sa∣ved.
CHAP. VIII. Continues the Government of the Viceroy D. Hierome de Azevedo this same Year 1615, and that of 1616. 1. THE Viceroy fitted out the Squadron for the North, which consisted of 12 Ships, and as many small Vessels, in which were at least 20 Gentlemen of Quality, whom the Portugueses call Fidalgos, that served as Voluntiers. The Admiral was Ruy Freyre de Andrade. 2. This Fleet set out about the end of October. Ruy Freyre by the way visited the Northern Forts. At Balcar, beyond Surat, he sent out the Fleet for Cambaya under the Convoy of two Ships, giving Advice to the Commander to send away that which was there. As soon as Ruy Freyre came to Su∣ratte, Nababo, who commanded there for the Mogol, sent him two Vessels loaded (as he said) with fresh Provisions, but they were costly Curiosities and Silks. Ruy Freyre to receive this Message, called all the Captains aboard his Galliot, and before them viewed and commended the Present. That done, he took only one Piece, assuring the Messenger, All must be returned, but that he should be as ready to serve his Master, as if he had
received the whole Present. Nababo much admired this Proceeding, understanding it was Freyre's custom rather to Give than Re∣ceive. 3. The Piece Freyre kept was Cambolim, worth about 20 Pardao's. The value of a Pardao is 12 Royals and a half. Cambolim is a piece of Stuff the Women wear on their Shoulders like a Veil. The Captain's extol∣ling this Action, he said, The Cambolim was due to some Lady; that they should agree whose Mistress was handsomest, and it should be given to her. The Price with∣out any dispute was allowed to ippolito Fur∣tado his Mistress. 4. Whilst the Merchant Fleet stayed at Cambaya, Freyre went to visit the Fort of Diu, and landed by the way at Goga, once a proud City of the Moors, but humbled by our Arms the last Year. At the end of De∣cember, the Fleet sailed from Cambaya, and was the greatest that had been seen in many Years, Freyre with his Squadron convoyed it: Near Damam there arose such a Storm, that it was a wonder they did not all perish. Two Ships were lost, with all the Men; of another, only one Man was saved; of a fourth, all the Men. What caused most admiration was, that 10 small Boats escaped, which in a calm Sea carried but a span above Water. At length they got into Bacaim; 8 Merchant Ships being drove to Chaul, met there 4 Parao's of Pirats, who took two of them. Freyre caused the Beards of the Sol∣diers of the other six to be cut off for not
following his light. At last he came safe to Goa with the Fleet. 5. D. Bernard de Noronna commanded the Fleet on the Coast of Malabar. Zamori had again broke the Peace, and distressed Gran∣ganor. Noronna hasted thither, and cut off all Correspondence between Zamori and 3 Holland Ships that came into that Sea; and in despight of all the Nayres relieved Gran∣ganor. Mean while D. Henry de Sousa sent by him with 11 Sail to Calicut, burnt there a great Ship belonging to that Emperor, loaded and ready to sail for Meca. This done, D. Bernard having visited the Forts of Malabar and Canara, returned to Goa. 6. D. Nunno Alvarez Pereyra succeeded Emanuel Mascarennas Homem, as General of Ceylon, and made several successful Roads into the Kingdom of Candea, bringing thence many Prisoners, and much Cattel. But let us relate a dangerous Commotion that happened in that Island, the Occasion whereof, though it be not new in the World, is one of those that, though often repeated, is still admired, and was thus: 7. Some Years before this died Nicapeti King of Ceylon, who being converted, and having no Issue, made the King of Portugal his Heir. At this time there lived in Ceylon a poor Fellow called also Nicapeti: He ser∣ved the Portugueses, and gaining admittance to one of the Queens of Valgameme, heard somewhat of that Prince called Nicapeti. This Fellow being of the same Name, re∣solved to represent his Person, and perswade
the People, that he was their Natural Prince come to Life again. He feigns himself a Iogue, (that is, the same as an Hermit among us,) and beginning to appear about Mare∣guepore, gave out, That taking compassion on the Calamities of his Country, he came to free them from the Portugues Bondage. He found Credit, and Men flocking to him entred the seven Corla's, when the Disava Philip de Oliverae was absent. At Matiagama he slew two Fathers of the Society, in 6 or 7 days was succoured by the King of Candea with 2000 Men, and declared King by most of the Country. 8. As soon as our General had notice hereof, he sent Emanuel Cesar with some Men to quench this Fire before it grew Ma∣sterless. Cesar meeting him with 6000 Men at Gandola, a Village on the River Laoa, they ingaged, and Ferdinand Caldeyra, who led our Van, going on rashly, was killed, with 10 or 12 Soldiers, and Captain Gaspar de Antas: 9. In the heat of the Battle 1000 Chinga∣la's, who served under Luis Gomez Pinto, de∣serted to the Enemy. At this sight our Men gave themselves for lost, but much more when D. Constantine a Chingala, but Subject of Portugal, and of the Royal Blood, step∣ping forward, cried aloud, Whither do you fly, my Friends? If you look for your Natural King, here am I, who by seven several Branches am descended from them. In a moment they all turned to, and proclaimed him King, and he made use of this opportunity to reduce
them that had revolted from us. After a long Dispute, the Enemy fled over the Ri∣ver. Next morning our Men passed over, and meeting no Enemy, stayed there for fur∣ther Intelligence. 10. In the mean while Philip de Oliveyra returned from Candea, having heard of Ni∣capeti's Attempt, but not of our Victory. There was then a considerable number of Chingala's who served under him; to incite these to rebel one came, and from the top of a Mountain admonished them to forsake the Portugueses, and follow their Natural Prince. This caused much disorder among the Men, and next day Oliveyra marching on, came to the Field of the late Battle, and finding above 1000 slain, could not discover who had gained that Victory. On a Tree was seen an Inscription, signifying that all Portugueses were slain, no body of them left in Ceylon, and that Columbo was surrendred. This startled the Portugueses, and not a little re∣joyced the Lascarines, (the Chingala's that serve among us are so called,) who were 800 in number. 11. As Philip de Oliveyra continued his march, 300 Men attacked his Rear, but as soon as he faced them, fled. Nyhe came upon him near the River Laoa, he sent to Emanuel Cesar and they joyned, which made the Revolters fly to the Woods. They two agreed to take all the Women and Children of some Villages, hoping by that means to reduce the Chingala's that were in Arms. Oliveyra took above 400; the same night the
800 Lascarines deserted with their Arms, lea∣ving the Portugueses alone, who were not above 200. These marched 5 Leagues to the Pagod called Atanagale, near Maluana, where the General resided, who sent them 500 Men, 200 whereof were Portugueses. He ordered D. Emanuel de Castro to take care of Provisions and Ammunition, having made D. Constantine Dissava of the Corlas, (this was the Chingala, who, as was above∣said, brought back those who fled from us,) in stead of D. Philip de Oliveyra, wrongfully punishing him for the desertion of the 800 Lascarines. CHAP. IX. Continues the Government of the Viceroy D. Hierome de Azevedo the same Year 1616. 1. NIcapeti, like an absolute King, bestowed Imployments and Lands, having gathered an Army of 24000 Men, with which he marched towards Columbo; so vain, that half a League from that Town on the Banks of the River Nacolega, he would be proclaimed Emperor of Ceylon. He sent to the King of Candea to send him one of his two Wives, who answered, It should be done when the Portugueses were subdued. Nicapeti, in a Rage at this Answer, threatned to use
that King like the Portugueses. Those 2000 Men, sent by him to Nicapeti's assistance, hearing these Threats, deserted him, and returned home. This set those two Ene∣mies of ours at variance, and was no small help to our Affairs. 2. The two Commanders, Emanuel Cesar and D. Constantine, being joyned, they marched towards Nicapeti, and found the way he was to come very clean, and strewed with Flowers. A Chingala carried Nicapeti the News of our approach, who caused him to be impaled, saying, There were no Portu∣gueses left in Ceylon. He was soon undecei∣ved, the two Vanguards coming in sight of each other. Nicapeti instantly possesses him∣self of a Hill, and intrenches with 7000 Men. Our Van attacks and enters his Works, kill 1000 of his Men, and force him, laying aside the Regal Ornaments, to fly to the Woods. We lost only an Ensign. The other part of the Enemies Army seeing this defeated, fled over the River Laoa. Night coming on, our Men rested there, and in the morning found themselves strengthen'd by 500 Chingala's, who had deserted from the Enemy. 3. At this time a Chingala, who had been a Christian, and Follower of the Portugueses by the Name of Antony Barreto, served the King of Candea. Though of base Birth, his Valour advanced him to be General of that King's Forces, with the Title of, Prince and Governour of the Kingdom of Uva. This Man laying hold of the opportunity of Nicapeti's
Revolt, came with a considerable Power to seize our Fort of Sofragan. Barreto counter∣feiting Friendship, drew our Men, which were but 60, under two Captains, Faria and Matoso, to a Conference, and treacherously slew most of them. Those that escaped retired to a Church, where want of Ammu∣nition obliged them to surrender, and they were carried to the King of Candea. 4. This misfortune was justly due to those Portugueses for murdering an Embassadour sent by that King to Treat of an Accom∣modation, that they might joyntly carry on the War against Nicapeti. The King, who might justly have put to death Faria and his Men in Revenge for his Ambassadour, Trea∣ted them courteously. He sent two of them to Balane, to advise our Garison there to deliver that Place to him, being distressed by Nicapeti; they went, and having advised the contrary, returned into Slavery. 5. The King being informed by these Mes∣sengers, that those of Balane would not sr∣render, fell upon them with 10000 Men, and many Elephants. Our Commander Emanuel Falcam held out some days, but seeing 6 Portugueses had deserted, and there was no hope of Relief, was forced to Capi∣tulate. The King treated him and his bet∣ter than they deserved He was so desirous of Peace, that he presently sent an Ambas∣sadour to Treat thereof with our General D. Nunno Alvarez Pereyra, but the Success of that Negotiation belongs to the next Year.
6. An Embassy came to Goa from the King of Siam, acknowledging the Favours received of the Portugueses. The Heads of the Message were, that he had received a Letter from Iames de Mendoça, who stayed not for the Answer, that he offered the King of Portugal the Port of Martavam to build a Fort there; that he would maintain the Gar∣rison and a small Fleet to Cruize on that Sea against the King of Dua. The Ambassadors were splendidly entertained, and F. Francis of the Annunciation, a Dominican, sent along with them with the same Character. He set out the beginning of May, with a costly Present for the King. The King re∣ceived the Ambassador with great Satisfacti∣on, who proposed to him how ambitious the Portugueses were of his Friendship, that they should both join their Forces to subdue the King of Ava, that there should be a free Trade between Siam and Malaca; that he should not admit the Hollanders into his Country. 7. The King answer'd, That the Portu∣gues Merchants might freely resort to his Ports and be exempt from all Duties, and his Subjects should Trade to Malaca; that the reason they had not done it of late was the ill usage they found there, whereof he gave good Instances; that he had admitted the English, Dutch and Malayes into his Ports for the great respect they showed him, and the need he had of them; that he had as∣sisted the Portugueses against the Hollanders; that he was no way concerned for the harm
those of Malaca had done the Queen of Pa∣tane, because she was a Madwoman, but she being now dead he had placed one of more Sense there, and desired there might be free Trade with her as well as with Siam; that the Goods of such Portugueses as died in his Dominions should go to their Heirs; that he had ordered all Portugueses who committed any Crimes, should be tried at his Court, to prevent any wrong being done them by the prejudice of Magistrates. Thus our Ambassador was answered and dispatch∣ed, and the King sent with him two Siam Gentlemen, to go his Ambassadors into Spain. 8. There were great Complaints against the Commander of Moçambique Ruy de Melo & Sampayo, for that he robbed the Natives, and did not pay the Soldiers, having pri∣vately strangled some of them, which caused a Mutiny. Francis de Fonseca Pinto was sent from Goa to regulate these Disorders. With him went Salvador Vaz de Gama to succeed Melo, in case he were found Guilty. Melo's Conscience accusing him, he refused to ad∣mit the Judge, who resolved to return to Goa, but hearing that Melo had left open a Wicket of the Fort, he rush'd in, and de∣posing him, gave the Command to Guerra, contrary to what the Viceroy had ordered. He was also to Victual the Fort at Tete, and furnish it with Cloth, that Fort being main∣tained to continue the discovery of the Mines of Monomatapa, which gave great hopes of Profit. But before we relate what
happened at this time, let us refresh the Me∣mory of what was before. 9. In the 10th Chap. of the 3d Part of the 2d Vol. we gave some account of what was acted by some of our Commanders in these Parts. Chunzo a powerful King rebelled a∣gainst the Emperor of Monomotapa, and was subdued by the assistance of the Portugueses; so other Rebels. To gratifie these Favours he for ever gave all his Mines to the King of Portugal, making a resignation of them to Iames Simoens Madera, Commander of Tete, who was then in his Service. The substance of the Instrument was, That he gave all his Mines of Gold, Silver, Copper, Tin, Iron, Lead, to the King of Portugal, upon Con∣dition he should support him in his Throne; That the King should admit of him as his Brother; That the next Year he would send his Son with an Ambassador to Goa; That he had put two Sons, and would soon two Daughters, into the Custody of Iames Si∣moens to be bred Christians. The Emperor ordered Simoens to have an Instrument made hereof; and he asking how he would Sign it, since in his Empire none could write, the Emperor made three Crosses on the Ground, one under the other, and said, he would sign it that way, which accordingly he did. 10. This done, Simoens with his Men ac∣companied the Emperor who was marching towards Ancone that was in Rebellion. Ga∣spar Pereyra Cabral being left behind wound∣ed was carried by Cafres, who run away from him. Simoens understanding it, went
back with one Slave, and helped to carry him on his own back. An Act worthy of memory▪ from a Captain to a Souldier. The Rebel being subdued, Simoens returned to Tete with the Emporor's two Sons. They were baptized by the Names of Philip and Iames. The latter remained there, the other went back to his Father. 11. The Emperor thinking he could now overcome his Enemies without the assistance of Portugueses, marched to the Kingdom of Baroe, and was there defeated; at Mongas he had a Son killed, and Matuzianne usurped the whole Empire. Iames Simoens restored him, and possessed himself of Chicova. Ma∣tuzianne raising new Forces was defeated and killed by the Portugueses. D. Stephen de Ataide raised a Fort at Massapa, and gave that Command to Iames Carvallo, whom he sent to Monomotapa with a present to obtain the Delivery of the Mines. 12. Carvallo went and told the Emperor he had a great Present, but gave him none; and he seeing the Portugueses entred his Lands for Gold without his consent, caused all they had to be taken from them, and many to be killed. Carvallo had with him some Forces belonging to the Emperor, with whose assistance he curbed the Robbers of Quizinga, and supported himself. He resolved to revenge the spoiling of the Por∣tugueses by a horrid Treachery against those that served him, for joining with the Qui∣zinga's, he one Night fell upon the Cafres, and killing many put the rest to flight, who
justly cursed the falseness of the Portu∣gueses. 13. Carvallo fearful of his own Wicked∣ness, abandoned the Fort of Massapa and went to Tete, leaving all the Country in Arms against the Portugueses. All he acted was by order of D. Stephen de Ataide, who, in stead of appeasing the Emperor, threatned him with War. He sent out from Sena, and by his order Carvallo raised another Fort on the Banks of Zambeze, two days Journey from Tete. Iames Simoens Madera was left to Command at Tete, because Ataide returned to Moçambique, hearing the Hollanders were coming thither. D. Stephen perceiving no Dutch appeared in 6 months, returned to Tete. The Emperor sent to offer him Chi∣cova if he would send the ordinary Present, which was a Debt, and no Gift. D. Stephen would not so much as hear the Embassadors, refusing to give a Present of 5000 Crowns, which might have saved much greater Char∣ges, for above 30000 were already lost at Massapa to no purpose. 14. D. Stephen set forward with 150 Men, but being better advised, expected News from Portugal and India. In Iuly he recei∣ved the King's Orders to go to Goa, and give the Command of Tete to Iames Simoens, and that of Moçambique to D. Iohn de Ataide the Viceroy's Brother. D. Stephen obeyed against his Will, leaving Simoens 140 Sol∣diers without any thing to maintain them in that dangerous Conquest. However Simoens made the best on't, and resolved to proceed,
beginning with Chombe a powerful Cafre, de∣manding of him what he owed as our Tri∣butary, and the Restitution of the Portu∣gueses he had. Some infamous Portugueses advised Chombe to take no notice of Simoens, because he could do him no harm. This cau∣sed that King first to slight, and then to mo∣lest him in the Vessels wherein he sailed for Tete. Simoens landing drove the Cafres so, that they troubled him no more. CHAP. X. Continues the Government of the Vice∣roy D. Hierome de Azevedo, in the Year 1616. 1. JAmes Simoens Madera raising 6000 Ca∣fres, marched with them and his Portu∣gueses against Chombe at the beginning of September. One night they heard a Voice that said, Chombe rejoyces at your coming, and desires you will make haste, for he is hungry, and expects to feast upon your Bodies. Simoens mar∣ched on, and fortified himself close under the Enemies Works, which were half a League in length, and in breadth propor∣tionable, furnished with 8000 Men. Simoens attacks them twice, but to no effect. Next night a Cafre fled to the Enemy, and from them a Christian Black Woman to us with Advice, That Chombe would fall upon our
Men before day. Simoens expected them with silence, and killing 1000, put the rest to flight. 2. The Enemy proposes a Peace, but no∣thing is concluded. Simoens attempts their Works, but without success; he sends to the Commander of Senna for Succour, who sends him 40 Portugueses, and 3000 Cafres. The Works were again assaulted in vain; soon after some Deserters informed, the Intrench∣ment was weakest on the side of a Lake. Here the Assault was renewed, the Works entred, Chombe put to flight, and the Place given to Quitamho a Cafre, who faithfully served us, on condition to pay what Chombe had denied. 3. Iames Simoens was now bent upon the Conquest of the Silver Mines in Chicova. The Emperor sent to acquaint him, He again resigned those Mines to him, upon condi∣tion he should not go thither with an Armed Power. Simoens desired, he would send one to put him in Possession thereof, and to receive Cloth to the value of 4000 Ducats he had to present him. The Em∣peror was satisfied, and Simoens, with Ap∣plause of all the Cafres, took possession of Chicova on the 8th of May, 1614. being put into it by Onanxangue a great Man, Ne∣phew to the Emperor. The first thing he did was to raise a Fort there; the next, to joyn Friendship with a powerful Cafre called Sapoe, and his Country Borore.
4. The Lord of Chicova, now subject to the Portugueses by virtue of the Emperor's Resignation, withdrew himself from them; so that Complaint was made thereof to the Emperor, who gave leave to Depose him, and put another in his Place, sending a Ca∣fre called Cherema to shew the Mines. This Man twice deceived Simoens, causing him to dig in Places where he had hid some Ore, for which reason he was confined; and then shewed another place, of which some hope was conceived, he excusing himself what was done had been by the Emperor's Order. Nevertheless Simoens sent him a Present; he detained the Messengers, and sent word, He would have Needles, Pins, Knives, Looking-Glasses, Candles, Soap, Zafran, Pepper, and some rich Silks. He repented the giving of Chicova, and sought occasion of Disagreement, thinking that Simoens could not send what he damanded. But he sending all things, the Emperor seemed satisfied. 5. That D. Philip the Emperor's Son, whom Iames Simoens caused to be Baptized, attempted several times to make his escape to the Portugueses, and was taken; at length he got to the Fort of Chicova, and was joy∣fully received. Hearing there that Chirema was fled to avoid discovering the Mines, he sent for him, pretending to be sent Embas∣sador by his Father, and having rebuked and secured him, went himself to Tete. The Emperor hearing hereof, proffered great Rewards to any would kill his Son. At the
same time it fell out, that a Soldier gather∣ing some Fruit, the Son of the Owner, who was a powerful Man, forbid him; the Sol∣dier complains to his Captain Iames Teyxera Barroso, who without farther examination shot the young Man. The Father, in Re∣venge of his Son's Death, did the Portugueses much harm; and the Emperor declared War, because they entertained his Son against his will. 6. In March, 1615. 10000 Cafres assault the Fort, but were forced thence with great loss, Iames Simoens coming in time with Succour. The Country being clear, Simoens sent some Men with Cherema to discover the Mines; after some days digging they disco∣vered Ore, whereof one half was pure Metal, and some scarce wanted casting. It appeared to be no cheat, some being grown into the Roots of a Tree. 7. Our Commander being assured there were rich Silver Mines, resolved to send three great clods of Ore for a Proof to Spain. The Messengers and Ore were received with great joy at Madrid. Gaspar Bocarro was so ambitious of carrying this News, that after the others were gone, he gave 2000 Ducats to purchase the Employ, and offered to go by Land at his own Expence; but he ended his days at Moçambique. 8. The excessive Heat caused a Sickness in the Fort of Chicova, whereof the Soldiers died in 3 or 4 days. Next followed a Fa∣mine, which gave occasion to the Cafres, who served the Fort and dug in the Mines,
to run away, so that there was no Silver to buy Cloth, and consequently no Cloth to purchase Provisions with at Sape, it being the only Coin that passed there. Iames Si∣moens had acquainted the Viceroy, That Conquest could not be maintained without Relief. The chief Sustenance of that Ga∣rison for some days was a small Fruit, so harsh they could not swallow it, unless rowled in Ashes. 9. The Supplies were sent by the Viceroy to Moçambique, but never reached Chicova, which thereupon was abandoned. The ha∣tred the Lawyer Francis de Fonseca Pinto, to whom the Viceroy had given the whole Charge of the Affair, bore to Iames Simoens, was the cause he was not Relieved, and that important Place lost. 10. This is that Francis de Fonseca Pinto, who (as was said before) took the Com∣mand of Moçambique from Ruy de Melo & Sampayo, and had all Necessaries for Chico∣va, as well of Provisions as Tools to work in the Mines. But his hatred to Simoens diver∣ted him from sending those Succors; besides, he sold all that was to relieve that Place, and converted it to his own use, and seized upon Ruy de Melo's Effects. Iames Simoens pres∣sed him by Letters for Relief, in his last pro∣testing with all his Men, If the Place were lost, the fault would lie upon him. 11. All the Answer that insolent Fellow returned, was putting Simoens his Nephew, sent to conduct him, in Irons. Then he en∣tred his Lands, and destroyed all that was
there, selling his Slaves; he forbid the In∣habitants on pain of Death corresponding with, or relieving those of Chicova, and sent word to the Emperor, that he might freely kill Simoens, for entring his Domi∣nions without Orders from the Viceroy. Not satisfied to procure his Ruin by those means, he marched towards Chicova with intention to murder him. Simoens under∣standing it withdrew thence, and Pinto hear∣ing of it, though so near, would not relieve the Fort, not examine the Mines as he had in Orders, but returned hastily to Tete, fearing Iames Simoens should meet him. But going back to the Fort, caused the Notary to draw an Instrument, containing the Causes why that Fort was abandoned, to which they all signed. This done, they marched with their Women and Children towards Tete. 12. Weakness caused them to march very slow, and two Soldiers fell dead for want. At Marenga, Simoens received a Summons from Pinto, to appear before him at Tete in 9 Days to answer for himself. But knowing now he had quitted the Fort, sent 2000 Ca∣fres commanded by a Portugues to murder him; they, tho' the opportunity was pre∣sented, would not do it. Simoens stayed in the Country of Inambanzo which was his own, and all the Company went to Tete. There Pinto inquired of them, whether there were any Mines at Chicova, they all unani∣mousl answered there were. But he in hatred to Simoens desiring to conceal them, with
Threats and Rewards prevailed with each of them single to swear there were none. Then he gave Sentence against Simoens for abandoning the Fort, not considering if there were no Mines there (as he endeavour∣ed to made out) it was no Crime, and that if any fault were it was his own, since the other held it longer than could be required. 13. This done Pinto Promises the Em∣peror a considerable Present, if he would fall upon Simoens at Inambanzo. The Em∣peror not only expelled Simoens those Lands, but so distressed Tete, that they were forced to make up the Present promised by Pinto, to buy his absence, the Emperor positively re∣quiring it at their hands. Iames Simoens after∣wards returned to Tete, being utterly ruined by his good Service, and Pinto who had ruined all was enriched by his Villanies and Rapine. This is what happened about the Mines of Monomotapa. I will only add that the first Com∣mander there, Francis Barreto, was undone by a Divine, and now Iames Simoens the last by a Lawyer; and the King, by employing such Gownmen in things they understand not, lost the great Advantages might be expected from those Mines.
CHAP. XI. Continues the Government of the Viceroy D. Hierome de Azevedo the same Year 1616. 1. THE Inhabitants of the City Meliapor, commonly called St. Thomas, were all divided, killing one another without any regard of Human or Divine Laws, or any Shame, that even the Moors and Gentiles abominated their Wickedness. The occa∣sion was what they call Points of Honour. To appease these Disorders, the Viceroy sent Ruy Diaz de Sampayo with 7 Sail, and 250 Soldiers. 2. Ruy Diaz performed all that was given in Charge to him, and having reconciled the Citizens of S. Thomas, sent 6 of his Ships to scour the Coast of Carriero under the Com∣mand of Peter Gomez de Sousa, a Man more couragious than discreet. At Montepoli he made cruel havock, surprizing the Inhabi∣tants. As he returned with great Booty, and many Women and Children, an ancient Moor appeared upon the Shore, who coming to our Men told them, he was much wrong∣ed by Cotamuza King of Goloconda, and therefore would not only turn Christian, but show them a Fort (meaning that of Carriero) they might easily surprize. This was all a Fiction devised by a Moor, who seeing
what was done by our Men, had gathered 600 Moors, and lay in Ambush to see whe∣ther Peter Gomez would suffer himself to be deceived by this Messenger. 3. Peter Gomez, though warned that all this was Treachery, gave Credit to the Moor, followed him a League, and there fell into the Ambush, where he and all his Captains, save one that was left at St. Thomas, with 130 Portugueses were all slain, 25 taken, and only 30 escaped by flight: 186 Indians were killed in the Action. 4. Ioseph Pereyra de Sampayo, who was left Prisoner by Peter Gomez, carried the remainder of the Men and Ships to S. Thomas. The Moors sent the Portugueses they had taken to the King of Goloconda, who com∣plained to F. Bartholomew Dias, sent to him by the Bishop of Meliapor, that the Portu∣gues should enter his Country in hostil man∣ner, at the same time they treated amicably with him. The King admitted the weak excuse, that it was not done by order of the Government, and delivered the Prisoners upon condition those of Montepoli should be restored. 5. D Emanuel de Meneses sailed from Lisbon with 3 Ships for India, one of them springing a Leake was forced to put into the Port again; another arrived safe at Goa, after being parted from D Emanuel by a Storm on the Coast of Guinea. D. Emanuel near the Island of Madagascar met 4 Eng∣lish Ships, the Commander of them sent to order our Captain aboard, who refused,
but sent an Understanding Man to view their Strength, and he returning said publickly, that the Enemy's Admiral alone was too strong for our Ship. D. Emanuel taking him aside, blamed his Indiscretion for dis∣heartning the Men; then he sent word to the English, that since their Kings were at Peace, there was no reason the Subjects should break it; that they should bear off, and not come a head of him. Neverthe∣less the least of the 4 did, he fired at her, and then all the 4 at him. 6. Night came on, our Ship held her Course, and in the Morning found her self among some Islands near the Head of that called Mannoto. The Enemy coming on, and the Wind calming, we were forced to engage, our Vessel was soon unmasted, and made the best it could for the Island Anga∣giza. The English sent to tell D. Emanuel he was running to his Ruine; that if he would surrender himself, all the Men should be landed at Suratte, whence they might travel by Land to Goa; he answered, if any more such Message were sent him, he would hang him that carried it. The Ship driving towards the Shore with the Tide, stuck be∣tween two Rocks, which proved the saving of all the Men, who got ashore leaping a narrow Gut, into which many fell for haste. 7. As soon as landed, the Cafres received them with showers of Stones. They were appeased with some Gifts, and the help of some Musket Balls let fly among them by Ioseph Alvarez Torres, who (though it was
plain their Safety consisted in their Arms) advised they should be cast into the Sea, be∣cause the Cafres would not furnish them with Provisions as long as they were armed. D. Emanuel consented, and scarce were they seen next day unarmed, when the Cafres stripped them even of their Shirts. Some travelled up the Country, and others along the Shore; the latter in two Days found no Water to drink, were consumed with the heat of the Sun, and some died for want. 8. The 3d Day they met other Cafres, who seeing nothing to take from them, gave them Milk and Water with Signs of Com∣passion. Sebastian Prestes, the Pilot of the Ship, attempted to save himself with a few Men in the Boat, and coasting along the Island, met Chande a Noble Moor of Pate, who was sailing for the Island Madagascar with two Pangayos. He told the Pilot that King was his Friend, and for his sake would use them all well. The Pilot sent to ac∣quaint D. Emanuel, and it appeared those Cafres with whom he was, were that King's Subjects. They all came to the Port, and the Moor gave each of them a Cloath to cover his Nakedness. Here it appeared how little the Cafres esteem what we most value, they gave many Pieces of Eight for a Rag scarce worth a Farthing, and fetching Bags full of Money out of the Ship, scattered it about the Rocks, and putting their Heads into the Bags were very well pleased. 9. It may well be doubted whether a Por∣tugues would have done with 600 Moors, as
this Moor did with 600 Portugueses in that miserable Condition. He maintained them, gave them Cloaths, which sold to the Cafres had been worth much Money; justly resto∣red them Jewels of great value wherewith they entrusted him, and gave them his two Pangayos to go over to Mombaça. They arrived thither on the 4th of September, and were maintained and clothed by the Charity of that little Town. On the 10th of that Month they Embarqued, and arrived safe at Goa. The Viceroy sent Presents to D. Emanuel de Meneses, and comforted him for his Loss. D. Hierome Manuel, who com∣manded the homeward bound Ships about the Islands of Flores fought with 4 Pirats, and put into the Island Tercera, whence he came to Portugal with the Ship that was put back the Year before. 10. The Trade of the Port of Soar in A∣rabia much lessened the Customs of Ormuz and Mascate. To remedy this the Viceroy sent D. Francis Rolim with a Galley and five other Vessels, who joined D. Vasco de Gama Admiral of that Sea with five Sail more at Mascate. Amer, Head of a Hord of Arabs, to revenge himself upon Mahomet King of Soar, took part with us, and marched by Land with 1200 Men. Our Men landed, and possessed themselves of some Mosques to secure themselves till the Cannon was set a∣shore. 11. A Fort on a Hill was first attacked, but so well defended it could not be entred that Day, tho' Mahomet who commanded it
was killed with a Musket-Ball. We lost a Captain and 6 Men. In the Morning the Trenches were entred, then a Mosque, and lastly a Town, where many Women and Children were made Prisoners, and much Booty found. In this Action we lost 6 Men more. The Fort not able to hold out for want of Men surrendred; and the King's Brother being taken, was put to Death Our Men violated the Articles they had made, killing and plundering many of them that marched out. And having agreed with A∣mer, that there should e no Prisoners made, yet they took several Girls on pretence of Breeding them Christians, as if that were an excuse for Breach for Faith. Iohn de Sousa was left to Command that Fort, and Antony Pimenta joined with him, as skilled in the Affairs of that Country. 12. At Cananor happened an accident sad enough, and yet ridiculous. The Nayres show no Mercy to a Thief, tho' the thing stolen be of no value. They impale the Criminal, and leave him to be eaten by the Birds. An Indian that was turned Christian stole a Knife, the Nayres apprehended him, and sent to acquaint the Judge of the Portu∣gueses at Cananor. He returned answer, they should kill him. They instantly cut off his Head, thinking it was a piece of Civility, being he was a Christian, to kill him our way. Our Commander, Nicholas Soveral, sent some Soldiers to fetch the Body, and revenge his Death on the Nayres, as if they had not obtained leave for what they did.
The Soldiers killed a Nayre, which provo∣ked them in great numbers to besiege the Fort with great Threats, if Satisfaction was not given them. Our Cammanders made show of hanging one of Soveral's Servants to appease the Nayres; and being cut down put him into a Coffin, as if he were really dead. The Nayres were satisfied, and our Men as well pleased that this Fiction had passed upon them, as if the Condescention had not been equal, whether the Act was faigned or real. 13. The King of Ova, or Avaa (for both Names are given him) fearing the Kings of Siam and Arracam, his Enemies should come to an accommodation with the Portugueses, sent Ambassadors to settle a Peace with us, excusing the killing of Philip de Brito Nicote, offering to restore the Prisoners he had taken, and to assist us against the King of Arracam, of whose great Treasure he de∣sired nothing for himself, but the white Elephant. The Viceroy accepted of the Ambassadors Proposals, and sent back with them Martin de Costa Falcam to ratifie the Agreement. He spent many Days in sollici∣ting an hour's Audience, at length it was appointed at Midnight, and he was led in the dark to a Place where they ordered him to speak, for the King heared; he spoke and saw no King, nor heard no answer. He signified the desire he had of seeing the King, and was ordered to wait his going abroad. He went out one Day upon an Ele∣phant, and knowing Falcam waited in the
Street to see him, never so much as turned his Eyes that way. Such was the account he made of our Embassy, so the Ambassador returned to Goa without concluding any thing. 14. Let us conclude this Year with an account of a Monster. In September was born at Chaul this Monster, whose Head and Face were as round as a Ball, the Mouth of excessive bigness, the Nose quite flat, the Eyes very little, the Ears vastly big like those of an Elephant, the Neck extream thick, in other respects like a Pig. It died the hour it was born. CHAP. XII. Continues the Government of the Viceroy D. Hierome de Azevedo, in the Year 1617. 1. THE Affairs of Ceylon were in a dan∣gerous Condition, for we had three powerful Enemies, but few Men to oppose them, and lost the Forts of Sofragam and Balane. Our Enemies were the King, the Chingala Antony de Barreto and Nicapeti, who though overcome still was strong. Our Ge∣neral, D. Nunno Alvares Pereyra, divided his Men, who with much hazard put all to the Fire and Sword, sparing neither Sex nor Age; for neither Mercy obliged the Chin∣gala's,
nor did Cruelty terrifie them. The Particulars are not worth relating, let us see what happened with Nicapeti. 2. Our Forces marched after Nicapeti from Pelandu to Catugambala, Devamede and Cor∣nagal, taking some Forts by the way, kill∣ing many, and carrying away 600 Prisoners. The Tyrant retired to Talampeti his usual Refuge, our Men advanced to Polpeti in sight of the Enemies Camp, and forcing their Works passed to Balapane of Religiam, whence they sent away the Prisoners and wounded Men. It was debated in Counsel what was best to be done, and the worst advice prevailed, so D. Constantine marched with a Party towards Alicur after Barreto, and heard he was fortified with 6000 Men at Iatipara, having secured all the Women of the Araches and Lascarines, and that Ni∣capeti was at Moratena. Our Men being di∣vided did little, and had performed much more, if the best advice, which was to keep together, had been followed. The Chin∣gala's when the Portugueses prevailed offer'd submission, but upon any ill success of ours recanted. At last our Forces quite harassed, went into Quarters at Botale. 3. At this time Laurence Perez de Car∣vallo sailed from Goa for Ceylon with Men and Ammunition in a Pink, all at his own proper Charge. A Counsel being held be∣fore our General D. Nunno Alvarez at Co∣lumbo, the result was, That he marched in Person with a considerable force to drive Barreto from Sofragam and Mature; Luis
Gomez Pinto was left with his Regiment to secure Alicur, and oppose Nicapeti, and E∣manuel Cesar stayed at Botale with 100 Men. It was about the End of March, when those who were for Sofragam set out, carrying Laurence Lopez Carvallo with them. Our Parties were successful on all sides, driving the Enemy from their Works, and slaughter∣ing them in the Woods. 4. In May our Army advanced towards Nicapeti, who was well fortified at Moratena, yet fled towards Candea with such speed, that our Army could not keep with him. Luis Gomez Pinto with his Men and two Com∣panies more was detatched to pursue him, who was so intent upon overtaking Nicapeti, that he passed by several rich Booties that offered by the way. At length he overtook him in the Deserts of Anorojapure, and un∣expectly fell in with him. Nicapeti having killed one of our Lascarines with an Arrow, fled to the Woods, his Men made a small stand till 60 were slain, and then took the same shelter of the Woods. Nicapeti's Wives called Queens, and a Grandson of Raju, and Nephew of Madune, who used to be at Uva with Barreto, were taken. The Fame of this Victory brought the Inhabitants of the Corlas loaded with Rice to submit them∣selves to our General at Malvana, which had been much distressed, but for this unexpected Victory that happened about Iuly. 5. The News hereof also moved Anaras Pandar, King of Pandar, to send his Ambas∣sadors with 32 Portugueses he had Prisoners
to treat of Peace. Our General sent his Letters to Goa, and the Viceroy read them in Council. The Contents were, That a per∣petual Peace should be settled; That he would become Tributary to Portugal with the yearly acknowledgment of 4 Elephants, and a quantity of Cinnamon; That he would repair and restore the Fort of Balane; That he would consent to the raising another in Candea; That his Kingdom should be con∣firmed upon him, and his three Sons. All the Conditions were admitted, only in what related to setling the Kingdom on him and his Heirs, care should be had that nothing of the Claim the Portugueses have to it were diminished. Yet afterwards finding us less formidable, he recanted of part of the Con∣ditions, and the Peace was concluded only with the yearly Tribute of two Elephants. 6. The King of Portugal had a Title to the Kingdom of Iafanapatan, that King dy∣ing and leaving his Son a Child under the Tuition of his Brother Chingali, a fair op∣portunity was offered of seizing that Crown, but other Affairs diverting our Forces, the Viceroy ordered Chingalij should continue his Possession with the Title of Governor. 7. The Cities of Baçaim and Chaul, and Lands of Trapor and Tana, were consumed by Discord among the Portugueses, and some of them were daily killed. Bacaim chiefly was full of Broils, occasioned by Ferdinand de Miranda and Andrew de Abreu. To sup∣press these Disorders, the Council sent thi∣ther Dominick Cardoso de Melo Judge of the
Criminal Court, and with him D. Peter de Azevedo Commander of the North. We shall hereafter see God's Judgments on that City and the other Places, to convince those Men they could not escape his Justice, tho' they did that of Men. 8. Ruy de Melo, who was deprived of his Command of Moçambique by the Judge Fr. de Fonseca Pinto, went to Goa, and being tryed was cleared of all the Crimes laid to his Charge, and ordered to be restored to his Post; Iames de Cunna & Castellobranco Judge of the Criminal Court, was sent to restore him. The Viceroy charged Melo to forget past Grudges, to take care of the Peace and Preservation of that Place, and not to offend Guerra or Pinto; and the more to secure the latter, continued his former Commission during his stay in those Parts. The same Charge he gave to the Judge Cunna. 9. Melo and Cunna sailed from Goa in two Vessels, and Cunna arrived first at Moçam∣bique in May. As soon as he came he pro∣mised to reconcile him to Melo, and in re∣turn desired him to secure Pinto, contrary to the Viceroy's Orders, which made their Power equal. Pinto coming with above 100000 Crowns he had gathered by Extor∣tion, was put into Irons. Being a Prisoner in the Fort he made use of his Rhetorick, telling Guerra how much he was beholden to him, and offering, if he would release him and secure Cunna, to give him sufficient Certificates to save his Reputation, and clear
him of all Crimes at Goa. This he said, be∣cause Guerra's guilt was no less than his own. 10. Guerra overcome with these Promises, releases Pinto, and sending for Cunna on pre∣tence of Business detains him Prisoner. He seeing himself in the Power of his two great∣est Enemies, whose design was to stay him at Moçambique, giving 18000 Ducats secu∣rity, got loose and escaped to Mombaça, where Ruy de Melo was detained. They two with Simon de Melo Pereyra, Commander of that Fort, and Emanuel Freyre de Andrade gave Sentence of Death against Guerra, as a Rebel. Melo and Cunna Embarque for Moçambique; mean while Pinto to secure his Gold was sailing for Goa. Guerra was advised not to stay the coming of his Enemies, yet he did, and receiving Melo at the Gate deliver'd him the Keys. Melo, or his Son (for in this particular Relations vary) embracing Guerra stabbed him, then spurning and reviling, caused him to be apprehended. A few Days after he was condemned to be hanged, and tho' he offered to fit out a compleat Gal∣leon for the King's Service to purchase Life, was executed. 11. The Chineses provoked by the Inso∣lencies of the Portugueses at Macao, were drawing together Forces to expel them. The Mandarines of the Province of Quantung, sent to them first to reproach them of their Crimes, ordering that either they should for the future resolve to live honestly, or immediately withdraw from thence with their Wives and Children. The Portuguses
pleaded innocence, excused their Faults, and promised for the time to come to ob∣serve their Laws. 12. D. Garcia de Silva (of whom mention was made before) was still at Goa, in order to go Ambassador to Persia. The Reason of his stay was because that King continued to commit Hostilities, having taken from us Bandel of Comoram in Arabia. Yet now he resolved to send an Ambassador to Spain, and chose for this Employ Robert Sherley an Englishman. 13. The Persian sending an Ambassador to Spain, it was thought the Spaniard might safely go to him. D. Garcia began to make ready, but his long stay at Goa having been chargeable, he demanded 30000 Ducats of the Viceroy, who was forced to give him the best part of that Sum; but this being in the dead of Winter, his Voyage was put off till Spring, and I cannot find any farther account what became of him or his Embassy. 14. The Viceroy, to gratifie the King of Macassa for his kind Entertainment of Gon∣çalo Rodrigues de Sousa, answered his Letter, and sent him a Present by Augustin Labato, who sailed from Goa on the 3d of October with 2 Galliots. On the way he took two Vessels of Achem, and being well received and dispatched by the King of Macassa, he sailed then loaden with Provisions for Ternate. He fought two Dutch Vessels, landed the Provisions, returned again and brought more from Macassa, then going to Manila winter'd there.
15. The Portugueses sailing from Malaca to Manila, found there was a Days diffe∣rence between those two Places; that is, they who go from Malaca think they arrive at Manila on a Sunday, and it is Monday; and the contrary from Manila to Malaca. The reason is, that those who sail to the Eastward at every 15 Degrees have the Sun rising an hour sooner, and they who to the Westward an hour later. From Portugal to India 7 hours are gained, the rest from Goa to Manila, which added to those lost between Manila and Spain, make up the difference of a whole Day. 16. Our Viceroy earnestly desired to hear of the many Portugueses were said to be cast away on the Island of Madagascar since the Discovery of India, as also to plant the Christian Faith there, and settle a friendly Correspondence with the Kings thereof, to the Exclusion of the Hollanders out of those Ports. To this effect he sent thither several Vessels during his Government. I have thought fit not to divide the Relation of those Expeditions, and therefore place them together in the following Chapters.
CHAP. XIII. Particular Discoveries made in the Island of Madagascar, or St. Lawrence, by order of the Viceroy D. Hierome de Azevedo. 1. THE Viceroy, in pursuance of the King's Orders for discovery of the Affairs of the Island Madagascar, or St. Law∣rence, fitted out a Caravel for that Expedi∣tion under the Command of Paul Rodriguez de Costa, with Soldiers, two Jesuits, and In∣terpreters. 2. They set sail from Goa at the end of Ianuary, and reached that Island about the middle of April. The circumference of it is about 600 leagues, the length 260, and lies North-North-East, and South-South-West; the breadth, where most, is not above 80 leagues on the South part, and less North∣ward, for there it ends in a Point which bears the Name of St. Ignatius, and is about 5 leagues in length from East to West. It is therefore divided into 3 parts; the first made by an imaginary Line drawn from East to West at Cape St. Andrew, forms the North part: The other two are divided by a ridge o Mountains running from the said  the middle of the Island to Cape  omanus.
3. I will not name the Kingdoms it con∣tains, because they are too many, and confu∣sed. It is very Populous, the Inhabitants living in Cities and Town of different extent and grandeur, well watered, and diversified with Mountains, Valleys, Bays, and Ports. The Names of Madagascar and St. Lawrence are given it by Strangers, the Natives ha∣ving no general Name thereof. There is no certainty of the first Planting of it. The generality of the Natives, called Buques, have no Religion, and consequently no Priests, or Churches. Any body circumcises the Chil∣dren between 5 and 7 Years of Age. 4. They are not all of a Colour, some quite Black, with curled Hair; some not so dark, with lank Hair; some like Mulato's; and some up the Inlands whiter, yet of both sorts of Hair. Of Stature large, well made and strong, of a clear judgment, and apt to learn. Every Man has as many Wives as he can or will, and turns them off at pleasure, and they find other Husbands. The Hus∣band gives the Portion, saying, It is a Recom∣pence for their Fathers by whom they were bred for them. Their Funeral Obsequies consist in Feasting the Guests. The Mourning, in laying aside all marks of Joy, cutting the Hair, or covering the Face and Body with Clay. 5. Their Government is Monarchical, the Kings are called Andias, Anrias, and Dias, without any dependance on another. They are continually in War, the end whereof is rather Plunder than Slaughter. No Arms
were found among them, but some Guns gi∣ven by the Moors and Hollanders, which they do not use, and are fearful of them in their own hands. Their Merchandize is excellent Amber, white Sandal, Tortoises, Ebony, other sweet Woods, and abundance of Slaves. There is plenty of all sorts of Cattle. Their Goat is as sweet as our Mutton, They have abundance of Sea-Cows, Sea-Horses, Mon∣keys, some say Tigers, and Snakes not very very venomous. No Elephants, Horses, Asses, Lions, Bears, Deer, Foxes, nor Hares. 6. This is the Island of Madagascar, where our Discoverers now were in a large Bay near Masialage, in which is an Island half a league round, which contains a City of 8000 Inha∣bitants, most of them Weavers of excellent Stuffs made of the Palm-Tree, in the Lati∣tude of 16 degrees. Here the Moors used to buy Boys, whom they carried to Arabia to serve their Lust. The King of this Place was called Samamo, with whom Friendship was established, and he granted Leave to Preach the Gospel. They coasted almost 40 leagues Westward, discovering the mouth of the great River Balue in the Latitude of somewhat more than 16 degrees. Turning Cape St. Andrew, they saw the River and Kingdom of Casame in 17 degrees of Lati∣tude, where they found little Water, and had much Trouble. Here also Amity was esta∣blished with the King, called Sampilla, a dis∣creet old Man, but in all this way heard no News of the Portugueses sought after. About the middle of May; on Whisunday, Mass was
said on Shore, and two Crosses set up, which that King seemed to be pleased at, promi∣sing to restore them if at any time they fell. 7. In the Holy-days they discovered a small Island in 18 degrees of Latitude, which they call Espiritu Santo; half a degree far∣ther Banks of Sand 9 leagues in length, where they were in some danger. On Tri∣nity-Sunday they landed further on, were again in danger of Sands, anchored at the 7 Islands of Cuerpo de Dios in 19 degrees of Latitude, near the River and Kingdom Sa∣dia, to which they came on the 19th of Iune, and found scarce Water enough for Caravels. The Kingdom is large, the City on the Banks of the River has about 10000 Inhabitants, great plenty of Flesh, Indian Wheat, Tar, Tortoises, Sandal, Ebony, and sweet Woods, the People black, simple, but good natured, and have no Trade. The King's Name was Capitape, an ancient Man, much respected, and very sincere. He esta∣blished Peace, and gave his Son to guide our Men, and assist them along that Coast. All along this Coast from Massalaje to Sadia, which are 130 leagues, is used the Language of the Cafres. All the rest of the Island uses the Language called Buqua, which is the Native. 8. Turning towards the South they dis∣covered the Country of the Buques, a very wicked and poor People, feeding upon the Spawn of Fish. The Inland Kings, who are more powerful, oppress them. They passed
by the River Mane; that of Saume in 20 de∣grees 15 minutes of South Latitude; Mano∣puta in 20 degrees 30 minutes, (here they heard of Portugueses;) Isango in 21 degrees; Terrir 21 degrees 30 minutes; the 7 Islands of St. Elizabeth in 22 degrees. On the 11th of Iuly they came into the Port of St. Fe∣lix in 22 degrees, and heard somewhat of Portugueses from Dissamuto the King. 9. Our Men offering a Silver Chain here for some Provisions, the Natives gave it to an old Woman to try whether it was right, she said, That 3 days Journey down a River there was an Island inhabited long since by a white Warlike People, habited like our Men, that wore Crosses about their Necks, and lived upon Rapine, that they easily took what they would, being Armed with Spears and Guns. Our Men were pleased at this Information, and here whilst they were at Mass, the Prince of Loquexa with a Black ran away. Three Portugueses catched him, and he begged they would kill him; being brought back and better treated, he wholly submitted to their will. 10. Passing by the Bay of St. Bonaven∣ture, and the mouth of the River Massiman∣ga, they entred the Port Santa Clara, whi∣ther Diamassuto came to them, concluded a Peace, and on his knees worshipped the Cru∣cifix. They were told, that white People resorted to the Neighbouring Port, which were supposed to be Hollanders. Going on they found Banks of Sand not set down in the Charts, and entred the Port in 24 de∣grees
of Latitude. The People were affable, their King's Name Diacomena; they said, That on the opposite Coast there were Por∣tugueses who had been cast away, and fed Cattle; that the Hollanders had been there three times, and left them four Musketiers, with whose help they made War on their Enemies. Friendship was established here, upon condition they should not again admit the Hollanders. Some Inscriptions were found carved on Trees, one of them had these words, Christophorus Neoportus Anglus Cap. And another, Dominus Robertus Schurleius Comes, Legatus Regis Persarum. 11. In the Latitude of 25 degrees, en∣tring a Port they called it of St. Augustin, the Name of the Kingdom is Vavalinta, the King's Diamacrinali a Buque, who no sooner saw the Portugueses but he said, Are these some of the Men of the other Coast? This confirmed what had been heard of the Por∣tugueses before; and the King, being asked, said, They were 6 days sail thence. In Sep∣tember our Men saw Cape St. Mary, where they spent 40 days in stormy weather, and on St. Luke's day entred the Port of the same Name in the Kingdom of Enseroe. The Natives said, That half a day's Journey off there were white People with Crosses, who had a great Town. Randumana the King came to the Caravel, and sent one of his Subjects with a Portugues to shew him where he said those White Men were, but the Black left our Man half way.
12. Among others, there came thither to Trade with our Men a King with above 500 fighting Men, his Sons almost white, their Hair long, wearing Gowns and Breeches of Cotton of several colours, with Silver But∣tons, Bracelets, and other Jewels of Gold, Pearl, and Coral. This King's Name was Bruto Chembanga; his Kingdom, called Mata∣cassi, borders upon Enseroe on the West. He shewed Arabick Books. He said, The Por∣tugueses were all dead, who not far from thence had built a Town of Stone, and wor∣shipped a Cross, on the foot whereof were unknown Characters. He drew all on the Sand, repeated Portugues Sirnames, and de∣manded much Gold for telling his knowledge herein. Some of his Men wore Crosses, and informed our People, there were two Holland Ships in Port St. Lucy or Mangascafe. 13. In a small Island here was found a square Stone Fort, and at the foot of it carved on a piece of Marble the Arms of Portugal, with this Inscription, REX PORTUGALENSIS ☉ S. Many Judgments were made of that Circle be∣tween the two last S's, but nothing of cer∣tainty can be concluded. 14. The King Chambanga desired a Portu∣gues might be sent to his Court to treat about important Affairs, leaving a Nephew Hostage for his safe return. The Master Antony Gonçalez, and F. Peter Freyre, were sent, who at 12 leagues distance found his Court, called Fansaria, very populous and magnificent. He Treated them well at first,
then coldly; but they making him a consi∣derable Present, they were good Friends, and he delivered them his eldest Son to be carried to Goa, desiring as Hostages for him the two Jesuits, and four other Portugueses, to whom he gave the Island of St. Cruz to live in. 15. These People are descended from the Moors, and call themselves Zelima's; they use the Alcoran in Arabick, and have Faquies who teach them to write and read; they eat no Bacon, are Circumcised, and some marry several Wives. CHAP. XIV. Continues the Discoveries in the Island Madagascar under the Vice-Roy D. Hie∣rome de Azevedo. 1. THE same King told the Portugueses▪ That in his Father's time a Ship of theirs was cast away on that Coast; that about 100 of the Men came ashore, some brought their Wives, others married there, and left a numerous Offspring. He repea∣ted several of their Names, and shewed a Book writ in Portugues and Latin, and some Maps, and concluded, saying, There were more Portugueses on that Coast 7 days Journey Northward. 2. Inquiring further, our Men found an old Man 90 Years of Age, who had known
the Portugueses that were cast away there, and could remember still some odd Words of our Language. The Ships that were lost, and never known where since the disco∣very of India, were as follows. In the Year 1504, three Ships; one in the Year 1505; in 1527, two were cast away on the Island Madagascar, and the Men remained there for want of Vessels to transport them; four were lost the Year 1534, not known where; one more in the Year 1538. The Portugueses, those People spoke of, must be∣long to some of these Ships. 3. Our Men all set their hands to work, and built a small Chapel and House for the four Portugueses and two Religious Men, who were to remain there. The Work done, Mass was said, and many of the Natives came to learn to make the sign of the Cross. The King seeing some Men labour under a Cross that was to be set upon a Rock run half naked and bare footed, and carried it alone to the Place appointed. The Portu∣gueses might say, they had found another Emperor Heraclius, for after this pious Action he became wicked, in this manner. 4. Our Captain being ready to sail, de∣manded that Son the King had promised to send with him; and he not only refused to perform, but denied he had made any such Promise, and offered a Slave. The Captain seeing this change, sent the Master and Pilot with some Men to demand Hostages, that a Portugues might go to Port St. Lucy to sound it, and see an Inscription the Natives said was
in that place. If the King granted this, they were to require no more; if not▪ to endea∣vour to bring away by force one of his Sons. 5. The Peace thus broke, and some At∣tempts of getting one of the King's Sons failing, some Portugueses marched with their Muskets. The King dreaded them, but kept his Men in readiness▪ a Fray ensuing, they catched one of his Sons 11 Years of Age, who was his Darling. The King endeavou∣red to rescue him, but was repulsed by our Shot. The Subjects of another King came to offer any thing for the Boy's Ransom; but being told, it was the Viceroy's Com∣mand, the King's Promise, and that they should lose their Heads if they did not carry him, they went away satisfied. Thus ended the Year 1613. The Child came to Goa about the middle of the Year 1614, the Viceroy caused him to be well instructed in the Faith by the Jesuits, and was his God∣father in Baptism, giving him the Name of Andrew because it was on that Apostle's day, and the Sirname of Azevedo as his God∣child. 6. The Viceroy treated him with all Ho∣nour and Magnificence, hoping to gain him, that when he succeeded his Father, he might forward the Propagation of the Gospel▪ and believing he was sufficiently grounded, sent him away with four Js. The Ves∣sels were a Pink and a Caravel, commanded by Peter de Almeyda Cabral, and Iohn Car∣doso de Pin, who set out on the 17th of
September 1616, and on the 20th of March they discovered the Island Del Cisue, or The Swn, a most delightful Place, watered with pure Springs, and bearing several unknown Plants and Herbs, besides many known both Sweet and Medicinal. The Religious on the Barks of the Trees carved the time of their arrival there, and planted some Crosses. 7. In this Island there are two Mountains that overtop the Clouds. The Wreck of two Holland Ships was found there. Our Ships entred Port St. Lucas, in the Island of Madagascar. The King and Queen came  receive their Son with great joy, and delive∣red Hostages at taking him away. 8. With the Prince went the Fathers and six Soldiers. He was every where till he came to the Court, received with demon∣strations of Joy, which to us seem ridicu∣lous, as those used by us would appear to them. This done, the King made the same Agreement with our Captain that had been with the former, which was, that the Reli∣gious should inhabit the Island of Santa Cruz, and thence have the liberty to go out and Preach the Gospel; that there should be a League Offensive and Defensive between the King and Portugueses. So the Fathers, Al∣meyda and Costa, went to the Fort of Santa Cruz, and D. Andrew the King's Son sent them Workmen and Provisions. 9. The Captain Peter de Almeyda had Or∣ders to carry the King to Goa; or if he re∣fused, another Son, which, if not consented to, should be taken by force. A Son being
demanded, he answered, He had but one, who was too young for that Voyage. Almeyda think∣ing this was but an Excuse, began to commit Hostilities, but being 1617. informed it was true, desisted. Yet he car∣ried away Anria Sambo the King's Nephew, who was Baptized at Goa by the Name of Hierome. 10. Being now a Christian, he was sent to his Country in a Pink, commanded by Emanuel Freyre de Andrade, with 100 Sol∣diers, 2 Jesuits, and a Present worth 4000 Ducats for the King and Prince. They set out in the beginning of February, and being forced to water at the Island Del Cisne, or The Swan, they saw three Ships sunk at the mouth of a River. Our Men landing, found 2 leagues from the Shore 20 Hollanders guard∣ing the Goods they had saved. They made some opposition, but being overcome, Freyre carried them to his Pink, with a great quan∣tity of Clove, Pepper, Arms, Ammunition, and Provision, then fired all that was left. The Hollanders said, They came from the Molucco Islands with a Pass from their Admi∣ral Lawrence Ales. 11. Freyre coming into Port St. Lucas, the two Jesuits came to him, both sick, affirming it was impossible to live there, and that those who had been left with them were dead. The Captain sent the King the Letters he had for him, and a Present, by his Nephew D Hierome's Servants. The King in return sent 100 fat Oxen, much Fowl, Honey, and 6 Slaves, but would not come himself; and
it was found, that his Son D. Andrew fell off from the Faith into Mahometanism. The Sadio's and Fansayr's are Mahometan Cafres, and love the liberty of having many Wives. The King was a Fansayr, and now designed to destroy Freyre by Treachery. The cause of this Change was a Chingala, Slave to the Jesuits, who running away from them, per∣swaded the King the Portugueses would de∣prive him of his Kingdom, and undertook to destroy them. Many Cafres coming to the Shore, to this purpose began a Fray, giving F. Almeyda a cuff, then Stones and Darts began to fly, but our Bullets also fly∣ing, some were killed, and their Quarters hung upon the Trees for an Example, and one of their Towns was burnt. 12. Emanuel Freyre carried away with him the King's Nephew D. Hierome, and a Bro∣ther of his taken in the Skirmish with the Cafres, who was converted, and died at Goa. All the Jesuits agreed to desist from that Mission, and depart with the Captain, though he opposed them, and came to Goa, where the Viceroy not allowing their weak Excuses, much condemned their remisness in that Af∣fair. 13. Towards the end of this Year arrived in India D. Iohn Coutinno Count de Redondo, who was to succeed the Viceroy D. Hierome de Azevedo, and of whom 1617. we shall next treat. D. Hierome returned to Portugal in the same Ship that had carried the Count, and no sooner anchored at Lisbon but he was made Prisoner, and put into the
Dungeon of the Castle. He was disrespect∣fully treated, after a long Imprisonment, had a Hearing, and then again was worse used. The chief Crime laid to his Charge, was not fighting the Hollanders. 14. He was so rich at his entring upon the Government, that Nunno de Cunna tel∣ling him after all his Misfortunes, he was still worth 4 or 500000 Ducats; he answe∣red, I am worth that in Cattle. Notwith∣standing all this Riches, he died poor in Prison, and the King got nothing by it. His Liberality was so great, he gave the value of several thousand Ducats in one Present of Curiosities at Ceylon. He was of the Ancient and Noble Family of Azevedo, a Soldier of Valour, and wise Commander, and zealous Viceroy. 15. But it is not amiss to observe, that though this Gentleman could not justly Suffer for the Crimes laid to his Charge, yet these his Misfortunes were a Judgment from the Hand of GOD for his extraordinary Cru∣elty. In the height of his Success in Cylon, he forced Mothers to cast their Children be∣tween Mill-stones, and having seen them ground to Mash, they were afterwards Be∣eaded. 16. He caused the Soldiers to take up Children on the Points of their Pikes, and hearing them cry, bid them hark how those Cocks crowed. Playing upon the likeness of the Names, those People being called Gala's, and Cocks in Portugues Galo's. He caused many Men to be cast off the Bridge of M∣vana,
for the Souldiers to see the Crocodils devour them. And those Creatures were so used to this Food, that at a Whistle they would lift their Heads above Water. 17. D. Hierome was of a middle Stature, thick and swarthy, his under Lip hanging, and always moist, a certain Token of Cruelty. He was reduced to such Extremity in Prison, that the Society of Iesus maintained, and after his Death decently buried him. He held the Government almost five Years, and was one of them who best deserved it. Of Viceroys he is the 22th, of Governors the 42th, the 1st of the Name and Sirname. CHAP. XV. The Government of the Viceroy D. John Coutinno Count de Rodendo, from the Year 1617 till 1619. 1. THis Year sailed from Lisbon D. Iohn Coutinno Count de Rodondo with sour Ships, one whereof was forced back from the Line. During his Government, which lasted not two Years compleat, there hap∣pened wonderful Prodigies, Storms, Dearths, and other Judgments. I will give an ac∣count of the most remarkable, dividing that from what relates to his Government, which shall be first spoke of. 2. The War continued at Mangalor, where Salvador Ribeyro Marinno commanded, who
being assisted by D. Iames Coutinno, Com∣mander in Chief of Malabar, took the Field against 11000 Natives, and destroyed many with the loss of 6 Men. The little King of that Banguel, or District, who was our Friend, not able to maintain it against his Enemy Bentacanayque, made it over to us to defend it. Antony de Saldanna was left to command there afterwards. D. Francis de Meneses de Bacaim was sent to his assi∣stance with an allowance of 4000 Crowns; for now the Wages were grown grea∣ter than the Employments. The Men landing in disorder, the Moors, who lost no advantage, slew some; but the others forming themselves put them to flight. For some time they were kept under by 300 Por∣tugueses and 1000 Indians. 3. Soon after another Skirmish happening with the Canara's, the Plain was covered with the dead Bodies. In August the Vice∣roy sent thither Francis de Miranda Enriquez with 8 sail, and by the end of the same Month 4000 of the Enemy were slain, with the loss of 800 Portugueses. Miranda having taken a rich Ship of the Queen of Olala co∣ming from Meca, gave her occasion to assist our Enemy with a good Body of Men, they besieged our Fort of Banguel, burnt the Town, and hereupon followed so sharp an Engagement, that though many of the Ene∣my were slaughtered, it was with such loss on our side we had no cause to rejoice. Mi∣randa thought to have taken the Fort of Olala by Storm, but was repulsed. The be∣ginning
of the next Year was more unfor∣tunate; for Bentacanayque with 12000 Ca∣nara's falling upon Luis de Brito & Melo, who carried Succors, and D. Francis de Mi∣randa, killed them both with 180 Portu∣gueses, and above 60 Slaves. The day after the News of this Disaster came to Goa, there was found a Lampoon upon the Viceroy, the Secretary, the Surveyor of the Revenue, and the Chancellor, laying that and other Misfortunes to their Charge. 4. It has been related how Ruy de Melo, and Sampayo, and Iames de Cunna executed Salvador Vaz de Guerra at Moçambique. The News of that impudent Action brought to Goa so terrified the Judge Francis de Fonseca Pinto, then a Prisoner, that he made his Escape by Bribes, and died in the Country of the Moors. 5. The Viceroy sent an Ambassador to the Mogol, to desire he would not admit our Enemies the English and Dutch into his Ports; F. Emanuel Pineyro, a Jesuit, went on this Errand. The result was, that the King took off the Embargo that was upon 200 Sail of ours in his Ports, and forbore making War upon Damam and Diu, for which purpose he had already detatched 30000 Horse from the Army, that was ready to march against the Persians who in∣vaded his Territories. His Army consisted of 300000 Horse, the Foot innumerable, many Thousand Camels, 12000 Elephants, 6000 Yoke of Oxen drawing as many Carts, be∣sides such as carry on their backs like
Mules; 70000 poor People followed this multitude. 6. This multitude being to pass a rapid River that falls from a Mountain, he laid over it a wooden Bridge for the Men, and broke the Fury of its Course with a Dam for the Beasts to swim over safely. A whole Month was spent in passing. The Camp was 8 Leagues in compass so regular, so beautified with rich Tents, and so well sup∣plied with all Necessaries, that it looked like a well govern'd City. 7. This Year sailed from Lisbon for India 3 Ships, and 2 Flyboats, under the Command of D. Christopher de Noronna. Six English Ships lay then about the Cape of Good Hope, which taking one of the Flyboats, under∣stood the others were coming, and lay in wait for them. They meeting, the English Admiral said, He had Orders from his King to seize Effects of the Portugueses to the value of 70000 Crowns for the Damage done by the Viceroy D. Hierome de Azevedo to the 4 Eng∣lish Ships in the Bay of Surat. This Sum was immediately paid him, and 20000 Ducats more to divide among his Men. Our Admi∣ral no sooner arrived at Goa, but he was se∣cured by the Viceroy, and sent Prisoner to Lisbon. 8. The King of Iorcon came into the Ri∣ver of Malaca with 80 Sail in a miserable condition, as who was expelled his Domi∣nions by the King of Achem. Our Officers ing to visit him, he desired Assistance
against that Enemy, which was denied him; and yet afterwards they desired the same of the King, to oppose the Power of Achem which threatned that Place, and was more formidable than it had been till that time. 9. A small Squadron was sent from Mala∣ca, under the Command of Lope de Sousa, to plunder the Hollanders Factory at Iae, where they found only 4 or 5 Dutch Men with a number of the Natives, yet would not attack them for fear of exposing the Son-in-Law, and Son of the Commander of Malaca, who, if not to be exposed, ought not to have gone. They lost the opportu∣nity of taking a great Sum of Money that was kept there, and in stead of plundering that Enemy, gained another, by destroying some Towns along the Coast. 10. The Tartars having ruined part of the famous Wall of China, entred like a Tor∣rent with above a million of Men, bearing down Cities, and whole Provinces, till they drew near the Court of Peking in so terrible a manner, that the King was about withdraw∣ing to Nanking. But the Chineses recovering of the first Fright, fell upon the Tartars, and made such a slaughter as obliged them to quit that Province. The Jesuits here gained much Esteem, having been very serviceable with their Intelligence. For an Example to posterity, I will relate the Particulars of this Invasion of the Tartars till the Year 1640.
11. When Humvu, the first of the Family, now reigning in China, expelled the Tartars, who for 90 Years had been possessed of that Crown, he not only recovered what had been lost, but conquered the Frontiers of Tartary, dividing them into several Govern∣ments. These in time grew to such a height, that they raised themselves into 3 Kingdoms, one on the East, the other towards the West, and the third on the North. The two last immediately cast off the Chinese Yoke, the other continued in Obedience till the Chine∣ses seeing it grow powerful, without any other occasion resolved to weaken it. But the Tartars oppressed taking courage, reven∣ged themselves, running to Arms, and secu∣ring a strong Hold in the Province of Leao∣tung, by which and other Actions they be∣came Masters of the Field. The other two Kingdoms moved by the hope of Gain, joyned with the former, and in the Year 1618, (which was 300 after Humvn,) for∣med a most formidable Army, which coming to Battel with that of China, no less nume∣rous, gave it a total overthrow, rather to be attributed to the ill Conduct of the Chi∣neses, than Valour of the Tartars. The King of China so much neglected his Govern∣ment, he seemed to be in a perfect Lethargy; and all the Industry used by his Ministers to awake him, was of no effect. 12. In fine, the Tartars continued the War with such Success, that they conquered the Northern Province of Leaotung, and forced the Kingdom of Corea to pay them Tribute,
as they did till then to China. After the Tartars were beaten from Peking, a Chinese Woman headed some Troops against them, and gained great Fame, defeating them in several places. CHAP. XVI. Continues the Government of the Vice∣roy D. John Coutinno Count De Re∣dondo. 1. AT the time the Tartar Invasion ap∣peared most formidable, Gonçalo Teyzeyra a Portugues was at Peking, having carried thither a Present from the City Ma∣cao to the Mandarins, he in the Name of the said City offered to assist them with a number of expert Soldiers. They accepted the Offer, and sent thither him that made it, and F. Iohn Rodriguez a Jesuit. Four hundred Men were raised in the City, most of them Portugueses, the rest Chineses bred among them, and consequently good Mus∣ketiers. Every Soldier had a Mulato Ser∣vant bought at the King's expence, and their Pay was so great, they all cloathed themselves in costly Apparel, bought the best Arms, and yet thought themselves rich. They embarked under two Captains, Peter Cordero in chief, and Antony Rodriguez del Cabo. At Quantung the Chineses were asto∣nished
at their Volleys, and Exercise. They were sent in Boats  the▪ River, and well treated. Being come to a Mountain they crossed it on ck, and then  oats again, crossing almost all the Province of Kiangsi, till they came to the Metropolis thereof. The People admired their Pre∣sence, Arms, and Garb; and because some had their Cloaths slashed, said, They could not imagine why Men of sense should pur∣posely tear a Stuff that was whole. 2. These Men, who might have been so serviceable upon this occasion, were from that City sent back to Macao. The princi∣pal Reason is supposed to be, That the Chi∣neses of Quantung; who are Factors for the Portugueses, fearing this might be a means for them to be admitted into the Kingdom, whereby they should lose the Advantages they made of them in the way of Trade, represented it to the Magistrates as a thing dangerous to introduce those Strangers into the Kingdom, and under-hand bribing the Mandarins, prevailed with those very Men who had advised the King to send for the Portugueses with so great Expence to send them back, saying, It was not convenient to make use of them. 3. The King answered: It is not long since you proposed making use of these Men against the Tartars, now you say, it is not convenient. When you propose any thing again, consider of it better▪ and if they are not for our service, let them return. It is remarkable, that whereas the
Chineses are so jealous, they suffer no Stran∣gers (even Ambassadors) to view their Towns, especially the Court, these Soldiers had liberty to see all Things at thier plea∣sure without any lett. The same liberty  given to the Ambassadors sent by the City Macao, and to the Jesuits▪ 4. The Jesuits made at this time good progress in the propagation of the Faith, and were informed of a certain People cal∣led of the Cross, as being descended from ancient Christians. Two Fathers had this Intelligence from certain Jews in the City Caifumfir. These Jews had there a Syna∣gogue as big as a large Church, well adorned, and the Bible in Hebrew, Syriack, and Chal∣daick 5. They gave some account of those Peo∣ple of the Cross, who were then dispersed, and their Church converted to a Heathen Pagod. The Jesuits inquiring in the Neigh∣bouring Towns, found some footsteps of that People, though they concealed them∣selves, fearing this search after them was upon some ill design. One of these had the Pictures of St. Peter and St. Paul. 6. Four Galliots sailing from Macao, w attacked by a Holland Ship, and being boar∣ded by them, fired herself. One Iaponese was saved, who said, That Ship carried Mo∣ney to supply their Forts, and that there were aboard some Chineses of Quality taken not long before. Five Portugueses were lost in the Ship.
7. Constantine de Sa & Noronna succeeded D. No Alvarez Pereyra, who was gone to the Conquest of the M of Cma, in the Post of General of Ceylon. He built the Fort of Sofragam, because the Neigh▪ hood was in Arms, and left there 100 Port▪ gueses and 200 Lascarines. Then he ma▪ ched towards Madune, who was fortified at the two Corla's, the ancient trimony of his Forefathers, a Mountainous Cou well watred, bearing much Rice, and abo 7 Leagues in compass. Noronna stayed some days at Ceytavaca to get Provisions, and settle 30 Portugueses in a high Tower, the only part standing of that great City. After a month's march through the Enemies Coun∣try, where Hunger began to pinch, he under∣derstood Madune fled. He follows to his City, and finding  abandoned, burns it. A Budiame was here destroyed, that is, a Tree those People highly esteem, saying, Their God Budum leaned against it▪ whence it takes its Name. On the foot of this were the Images of several Idols curiously carved. 9. Noronna finding no Enemy, was upon his return, when 500 of Madune's Men ap∣peared in his Rear, commanded by Chacatien Zala. Our General laid a few Portugueses and 1000 Lascarines in ambush, and though some of our Men at first fled, he broke the Enemy, killing ma▪ and taking 35 Men of great Note, whereof one was Catien. The Enemy seeking Revenge another day, had 30 principal Men slain, and among
them the Prince of Uva, who called himself King. 10. The Hollanders this Year took seve∣ral good Prizes, the Portugueses endeavou∣ring to gather Wealth, but not providing the means to defend it. The Particulars are too inconsiderable to be related, I will say somewhat of the Malabar Pirats, whom our Carelesness and Presumption made bold. 11. Whilst our Admiral of the Malabar Sea was upon that Coast, D. Pedro (a Cou∣sin of that Cunnale who was beheaded at Goa) after becoming a Christian fled from that City, and commanding 5 Parao's, took several of our Ships, hindred the Trade, and took the Island De las Vacas, and that of Tristan Golayo. Our General D. Co∣tine de Sa from Columbo sent 40 Galliots to Manar, to joyn 18 small vessels there, and destroy that Pirat. They set out on the Eve of the Ascension, and being parted by a Storm, the 18th met at the Island of Golay. Vitorio de Abreu commanded them, who being informed by two Blacks, left there by the Owner of the Island, that the 5 Parao's were gone to some Place near for Ammuni∣tion, and that before they returned he might possess himself of Goods to the value of 30000 Ducats lt there by D. Pedro in a House; he made light of this Intelligence, and staying for the Enemy, lost 12 of the 18 Sail, and about 300 Men besides those that were taken, whereof he was one.
12. Mean while our Squad convoyed the Merchant Fleet after such a manner, that the same Pirate took a Vessel without their offering to desend it. The Merchants of Nan  the Captains of the Con∣oy to recover that Ship, but they would, or d not. A Spanish Flyboat accidentally pg by, at the request of that City re∣took it. 13. Constantine de Sa, ever since he was General of , had intelligence, that Cli Care King of Itan, and  ect, assisted Ma. He offered  Money to wave receiving the Price of the Elephants due as Tribute. Cli pri∣vily Armed, and Constantine sent Philip de Olivoyra wit▪ o Portugueses, and 3000 Les,  demanded the value of the Elephants, and  answered not to the pur∣pose, relying on 8000 Men well Armed, and his strong Walls. Oliveyr advanced, and the King understanding it by a treacherous Portugues, sent to him not to proceed, and he would stand by the former Capitulation. This was only a gem to cut off our Van, which was far advanced under L Ca∣bral de Faria. 14. Oliveyra credited the Fraud, and sent Orders to Faria to come back, but at such time as the Enemy had attacked him; he answered, It was then too late, and breaking a Body of 1000 Blacks, advanced. Two thou∣sand that followed him were defeated by Oliveyra, who hearing the noise, marched with all speed. Changali flying over the
River, was taken, and with him 8000 Crowns, our Men undecently treating the Princesses that were in his company. The King seeing his Brother in-Law's Ears cut off for the Ear-Rings, took out his own, and gave them to the next Man. Oliveyra ordered him at Iafanapatan to make a List of the Portugueses he held Correspondence with. He made one, and among the many named was Oliveyra himself, with the allowance of 2000 Crowns, and the late General D. Nunno Alvarez Pe∣reyra with 9000. The King was carried to Goa, Oliveyra was left to govern the King∣dom. Madune wanting this Friend, submit∣ted himself. 15. Andrew Botello de Costa coming to Ia∣fanapatan with 6 Sail, understood there was a great Danish Ship at Gale that had taken some Prizes, he found out, and after three hours Fight, took her. Of the Enemy, 8 were killed, some burned, others got ashore with the Captain, and 40 were taken. On our side 8 were slain, whereof one was the Commander. 16. The Hollanders took a Portugues Ship bound for Brasil, and cast into the Sea 20 of the Men, their Hands and Feet bound. The rest they carried to Iacatra to serve that Place; but they run away to the English, who had a Factory 20 leagues off, and sent them to Malaca. They said, one of the English had told them, they had lost a Ship at Sunda that carried the Money given by D. Christopher de Noronna to save fighting, and that they had several times fought the Dutch
by Sea and Land, always worsting them; and lastly, that the Dutch had taken the Governour sent from Portugal for Angola, and carried him to Iavs. 17. Augustin Lobato sailed from Malaca with two Ships and a Galliot. At Ioatume he fought and worsted a Hollander; then hearing the Dutch had a Factory at Bima, 7 leagues distant, assaulted it with 14 Men, slew 4, took 3, whereof one was the Fa∣ctor; he distributed 600 Crowns among the Soldiers, having done damage to the value of 20000. Having burnt the Factory he retired, and burnt seven Towns about Ende. 18. At Solor he landed with 40 Men, and fought many thousand Enemies, killing 200. but lost 10 or 12, to the great admiration of the Adversaries, who thought them to be Sons of the Sun, and consequently Im∣mortal. This encouraged them to press on, and it was much the 30 escaped. Lobato being ready to imbark, was killed by a Ia∣ponese. 19. Malaca feared to be besieged by the King of Achem, but he armed to defend himself against the Viceroy, who, 'twas said, would go thither in Person. Fifteen English Ships at Sunda fought 20 Hollanders and de∣feated them, killing 1500 Men. At Patane the Dutch had better success, taking two of the Victors, and killing a Captain who was a Portugues, and was visiting the Factories of that Nation. At Iava they took a Dutch Ship, another was lost in a Storm. It was
reported, the Governour of Manila took five in one Fight. At this time there were in the South 35 Ducth Ships, and above 20 English. The French had Factories at Macassa and Iava. 20. The Viceroy sent Gaspar de Melo with a Squadron to succour Mangalor, and destroy a Fort built by the Canara's. The little King coming on while he battered the Fort, was twice defeated, and many of his Men made Prisoners. This Year sailed from Lis∣bon for India four Ships, two Galleons, and three Flyboats. CHAP. XVII. Several wonderful Accidents during the two Years Government of the Viceroy the Count De Redondo. 1. IN May 1618, there was a general, and doubtless Diabolical Storm, whereof it is convenient to give some account. On the 15th of that Month it began at Baçaim (the Portugues Ninive) so terrible, that the People hid themselves in Cellars, not doubt∣ing the Houses would be torn to pieces; but an Earthquake beginning at two in the mor∣ning, many Houses fell. The Sea, though remote from the Town, was brought into it by the Wind.
2. The noise of the Waves overcame that of the Ruins, notwithstanding the tops of Churches were blown off, and vast Stones flew a great distance. Two thousand were killed in the Town and adjacent Parts. The Fish died in the Ponds, and corrupted the Waters. Most of the Churches were laid even with the ground, as if God had shewed there was no need of them among such wicked People. A Lamp remained burning before the Blessed Sacrament in the Church of St. Dominick when the Wind overthrew Buildings. 3. Many Vessels were lost in the Port. Some Cattle was seen to fly, and the Birds to fall. The Woods were torn up by the Roots. Men fled to the Mountains for shel∣ter, and the wild Beasts to the Town. Na∣ture seemed reversed, the People rent the Skies with Cries for Mercy, which at last obtained, the Storm ceased. 4. There were strange Prodigies before and during this Storm, as Giants seen in the Air throwing great Globes of Fire one at the other. A confusion of Human Voices was heard there, trampling of Horses, and the sound of Warlike Instruments. A Troop of furious Horsemen was seen to attack the City, and a Man cloathed in Skins to oppose them; those were concluded to be Devils, and he St. Iohn Baptist. 5. At Bombaim the Sea swallowed above 60 Sail, some Men, and much Riches. At Agacaim a Boat flew out of the Sea into a House, where it killed a Woman and her
Child. At Tana, a Beast taken up by the Wind fell upon a Tree that was torn up by the Roots, and a Branch struck through the Body of it. A Woman seeing a Giant-like Man carrying a Pan of burning Coals, asked him for one, and he blowing it, burnt her Face. Much of this nature happened at Salsete, and other Places. 6. D. Luis de Gama coming from Ormuz, where he had Commanded for Goa, in a Ship full of Riches, was cast away on the Coast of Bombaim. A new married Couple being upon a Plank, the Bridegroom fell off, and the Bride for grief cast her self after him; he came up again and was saved, with∣out Wife or Goods. A Maid that went to be a Nun escaping, was ravished by the Moors, and then killed. Thus several Ships belonging to Captains who came from their Commands perished, perhaps a Judgment for their unjust heaping of Wealth. 7. The City Goa seeing this destruction, had recourse to Heaven. All the Religious Orders made Processions, and performed great Acts of Mortification. The Women rent the Clouds with Cries of Mercy. All lay down in the Churches to be trampled up∣on. This lasted some days and nights; the Churches were continually open, the Streets full, yet in all the Concourse the least noise was not heard. 8. This Example was followed at Cochim. The Bishop of this City had excommunica∣ted any that should buy Timber of the Queen of Coulam. A Portugues presumed to build
a Ship there, when it should be Launched, no Force or Art could move it. The Portu∣gues confesses his Crime with Repentance, and returning to the Ship, it was Launched without the least difficulty. 9. There reigned through all India a new Distemper, which caused great Pains over all the Body, and contraction of Sinews, so that some lost the use of their Limbs. Ma∣ny with Anguish ran mad; whole Families sickned at once. The only Remedy was found to be Bleeding. A Chirurgeon being no way able to stanch the Blood of a sick Man, laid upon it a Cross he had, in which was believed to be a piece of that of our Saviour, and it stopped immediately. 10. A Cafre fled from a Widow, whose Slave he was, to a Fidalgo or Nobleman's House, and afterwards returned to his Mi∣stress. The Fidalgo sent to demand the Slave of her, as if he had been his own. She refusing, he sent some Soldiers to take him by force; but she received them with Granadoes in her hands, and they returned with shame. 11. N. Barreto a Fidalgo, 16 Years of Age, killed his Father, for which his Head was cut off; so Justice was done where there never was any. The Mercers of Goa, esteemed more Honorable than the Goldsmiths, would not allow them to use a sort of Umbrello, with an Ornament on the top and middle of it. A Goldsmith went abroad with such an Umbrello, the Mercers broke it and beat him. The other Goldsmiths coming to assist
their Brother, there ensued a Fray, in which much Blood was spilt, and much Plunder got, though no victory, for the Algnaes or Officers robbed the Shops of those who were fighting. 12. On the 11th of November appeared a Comet in the East, and another on the 24th. They were seen at four in the morning, both under the Sign Scorpio. The first extended towards the South in the form of a Palm, the other toward the North, and was like a Flower-pot. The latter lasted till the be∣ginning of Ianuary, the other till the 20th of December. 13. The first time the King of Arracam went to the City Chatigam after the Portugue∣ses inhabited there, they presented him a Bough thick set with Figs; he offered it to his white Elephant (so coveted by all the Eastern Princes) to eat, but he would not, though the King prayed him to take it for the King of Ova, the Mogol, and his own sake. But scarce did he desire him to eat it for the King of Portugal, when the Elephant joyfully snatched it in his Trunk. The King in a Passion caused him to be deprived of all his Ornaments, as a Golden Dish on which he fed, Gold Chain by which they led him, and the like. The Beast for Grief would not eat, and the King, for fear it should die, was forced to restore its Furni∣ture. 14. At this time died at Bengala that Moor so famous for his Age, being above 300 Years old when Nunno de Cunna took Diu, which
was 60 Years before this time, and he seemed now but 60 Years of Age. It was reported, there were others 200 Years old thereabouts, but upon enquiry none appeared. Only one Woman was found about 100 Years of Age, and had married that same Year, having before buried seven Husbands. Thus much for the Year 1618, now for that of 1619, which is no less wonderful. 15. Upon one of the three Hills that over∣look Goa stood a large wooden Cross, on which very many of the Inhabitants of that City, the 23th Day of February, saw the perfect Figure of a Man Crucified. The Archbishop having examined the Truth of it, took it down, and of it made a small one two spans in length, with a Crucifix of Ivory upon, and a Glory of Gold round. The remaining Pieces were distributed to the Churches and Persons of Quality. Ten Days after the Cross was taken down, Water gushed from the hole where it had been fix∣ed, in which Cloaths being dipped wrought many miraculous Cures. On the Place where the Cross stood was built a Church. 16. It was debated in an Assembly of the principal Clergy, whether the Threads the Bramenes hang across their Shoulders were a Heathenish Superstition, or only a mark of Nobility; after some time it was concluded in favour of the latter, as only a distinction of Honour. The reason of examining this Point was, because many of the Bramenes refused to embrace the Faith, only for that
they were obliged as soon as Christians to leave off those Threads. 17. D. F. Christopher, the Archbishop, said the first Mass in his Cathedral at Goa, which was finished this Year, and is not inferior in Grandure to many of the European Churches of Fame. It was dedicated to St. Catherine, on whose Day that City was taken. 18. There happened a great Dearth and Famine, which destroyed many People. In only the little Island of Bardes almost 400 died. There was a wonderful Eclipse of the Sun most visible at Moçambique, soon after noon, the day becoming quite dark the space of two hours. This caused great Admiration, as did another of the Moon at Goa. 19. In the Province of Peking in China it rained not for a whole Year. In that of Xantung the Famin was such, Men eat one another. Two Women were executed for eating eleven Children. In that of Nanking was a Plague of Mice. Two Parts in five of the King's Palace were burnt; and five Towers were blown down in the City. Two Suns were seen together, the one eclipsing the other. A Man entred the Palace to kill the Prince. In the Province of Xangsi ap∣peared a Man cloathed in yellow with a green Cap and Fan of Feathers, who said. Vambie (that was the King's Name) does not govern; he has reigned long; is always a∣sleep; the Kingdom going to Ruine, the People starves, the Captains are slain. This said he
vanished, and, though all means were used to find him, he could never be heard of. 20. That there might be somewhat ex∣traordinary in the Viceroy, he died on the 10th of November of a swelling upon his Back as big as the Crown of a Hat, so black and monstrous, it frighted not only the ignorant, but the ablest Physicians. 21. The Viceroy was buried in the Church of the King's, a League down the River, the usual Burial Place of those who die in that Command, as his Father did who is there interred. He was not of a very piercing Judgment, but positive; of Stature tall, well shaped, neither white nor swarthy. Of Viceroys he was the 23th; of Governors 43th; the 4th of the Name, and 3d of the Sirname. CHAP. XVIII. Of the Governour Ferdinand de Albu∣querque, from the Year 1619, till 1622. 1. THE first Patent of Succession being opened, there was found named Ferdinand de Albuquerque, a Gentleman 70 Years of Age, 40 whereof he had been married, and an Inhabitant of Goa, and con∣sequently well versed in the Affairs of India. But having lived long at ease, was become
slow in Business, which suited not with the pressing Occasions of that time. 2. The King of Porca always ill affected to the Portugueses, this Year embraced our Friendship with great Demonstrations of Sincerity and Affection. 3. The Arache D. Luis, who became a Christian only to gain the better Opportu∣nity of raising new Troubles, now disturbed the Peace of Iafanapatan. He stirred up the People to Enthrone a Prince at Remancor, and marched with 30000 Men towards our Men, who were fortified in a Pagod. Philip de Oliveyra had but 30 Men, having sent the rest to Ceylon as fearing no Insurrection. With those 30 he withstood all that number of Enemies, who first attacked the Church of our Lady, in which were 30 other Por∣tugueses, and then the Pagod where Oliveyra was, and were at both Places repulsed with Loss. Oliveyra held it out a Month, till Relief came from Ceylon. Andrew Coello brought Succors by Water, and Luis Teyxeyra 1600 Men by Land. The latter entring the Kingdom, did many Actions barbarous and inhuman. He clove Men with Axes like Trees, opened the Wombs of Women and put in their Children snatched from their Arms. These are impieties unworthy a Chri∣stian, yet sometimes excused in War. 4. Oliveyra finding himself thus strong took the Field, slew a multitude of the Ene∣mies, and gave them a total overthrow. Scarce had they breathed after this Victory, when the Prince of Remancor appeared with
his Army, but Teyxera suddenly falling upon him made such havock, he was glad to cast himself at Teyxeyra's feet, who received him with great Courtesie. They returned to give Thanks for this Victory in Our Lady's Church, where the Religious at the Door, offering Oliveyra a Palm, he said it was due to Teyxeyra, and caused it to be given to him. Both deserved, but he doubly who refused, once for conquering his Enemies, another for overcoming himself in not ac∣cepting it. A wonderful Victory in our Age. 5. The Arache D. Luis escaped, his Wife and Children were taken, she in despair slew her self, whilst he perswaded the Nayque of Tanjaor he might make himself King of Iafanapatan. He raised 2000 Badagaes, and gave the Command of them to Chem Nayque, that King of the Carcas who not long be∣fore assisted Chingali. Oliveyra was strong in Our Lady's Church, but in November met the Enemy. The fight being desperate with some loss on our side; he advanced to en∣courage the Men, the Enemy knowing him, seven of them attack him, and one of them struck a Spear through his Mouth out at his Throat, yet he recovering killed two of them, the others fled. 6. The Enemy retired to their Trenches, Oliveyra being reinforced by 1000 Men from Ceylon assaults them, kills many, and took many more; yet after all he ransomed 1500 taken by the Chingalaes, and set them at Li∣berty. The Nayque still coveting that
Crown raised more Badagaes, Oliveyra sent three Captains with their Companies to sup∣press him; they slew so many without losing one Man, that being weary of killing they returned with 1000 Heads. 7. The Prince, Son to the late King of Iafanapatan, who had escaped the Tyranny of Chingali, being in the Hands of the Fran∣ciscans, was baptized together with his Mo∣ther and many Nobles and Commoners, and at last making over his Claim to that King∣dom to the King of Portugal, took the Habit of that Order, by the Name of F. Constan∣tine of Christ. 8. Chingali, who was taken some time before, was sent to Goa with his Wife, there condemned to Death; and being first con∣verted to the Faith made a most happy end. His Wife following the Example given by him was baptized by the Name of Margaret of Austria; and retiring to the House of the Converts in that City, led a Life that may be an Example to all ancient Christians. 9. I think I have not specified the cause of these Troubles, which was thus. Para Raja Cheygra Pandara, made Governor and King of Iafanapatan when Andrew Furtado slew the former King, wore that Crown 28 Years, and hoping the Viceroy would con∣firm his Choice, named a Son of the deceased to succeed him, who being but 7 Years of Age, he ordered his Brother Areaquerari Pandara should govern till he was of Age, him Chan∣gali Cumara murdered to usurp the Crown. After that he slew many others, whereupon
the People mutinying reduced him to great Streights, till being succoured by a number of Badagaes, raised by the Nayque of Tan∣gaor, and commanded by the King of the Carcas; they came to a Battel, wherein Changali being victorious, secured the Crown for some time. This Tyrant not content that the Portugueses winked at his bad Title, refused to pay them the usual Tribute, which was the Cause why Oliveyra fell upon and took him as has been related. 10. Abas Xa King of Persia being bent upon possessing himself of the Island and King∣dom of Ormus, Camberbeque Cam of Lara be∣gan to undertake it, on pretence an ancient Tribute was not paid him, which he never had since Alfonso de Albuquerque entred that Place He hindred the Trade, and secured several Portugues Merchants; and seeing we did not agree with him about the Trade of his Silks, he settled it with Iames King of England, concluding a League with him for the taking of Ormuz. Ray Freyre de An∣drade who came the Year before from Lisbon with 5 Galleons to cruize on that Sea, sent to Goa for Succour but could not obtain it, tho' he only desired 4 small Vessels. 11. Nevertheless Freyre fights the En∣glish and worsts them, The Arabs joining with the Persians had taken Iulfar and Dola, which caused great scarcity of Water at Ormuz, where there is none but what is brought from abroad. Freyre went over to forward the building a new Fort at Queixome, and by his Absence
the Fleet before weak, was much impaired. Then came two Galleons from Goa com∣manded by D. Emanuel de Azevedo and D. Iohn de Silveyra, an Enemy to Freyre; they were ill manned, and scarce of Ammuni∣tions, and brought Instructions that curbed the Power of the Admiral. 12. Being now strong at Quixome he scou∣red that Coast, where were burnt 400 Sail, and the Towns of Boami, Camir, Cong, Astan, and Doçar, at Niquilay he took and destroyed four Ships, and above 80 great Barques. The Persians assisted by the Eng∣lish furiously batter'd the Fort at Queixome, yet Freyre carried on his Work, and assisted the Arabs that continued firm to us. When Freyre was somewhat streightned, the two Captains that came with the Galleons to his assistance from Goa left him. 13. This Year sailed from Lisbon for India 4 Ships under the Command of Nunno Al∣varez Botello. There came also two Pinks, one for Malaca, the other for Moçambiqus; and two Ships more under Iacome de Morales Sarmiento, who was to be General at Mo∣çambique during the War about the Mines of Monomotapa, as if he were like to last as long as the War. 14. The Ships that came from Portugal under the Command of Botello, returned the next Year, and with them two more built at Goa, with the Men and Loadings of two o∣thers, one left in India as unfit for the Voy∣age, the other lost at Mombaça. In one of these two Ships called the Conception, was a
Hermit, who whilst they Winter'd at St. Helena stole away, and being asked why he left the Company, said, He had rather stay in that desert Island, than to go see the Misfor∣tune that Ship would soon fall into. Being come to the Island Tercera, they found Or∣ders there to make the Lat. of 39 Deg. where they would find D. Antony de Ataide, Admiral of Portugal. They obeyed, but missing of him, one Morning at the Mouth of Tagus they met 15 or 16 Sail of Turks. Our Ship was ill manned, had but few Guns, and her Steeridge full of Bails. 15. The Turks having powred in their broad-sides boarded the Ship, killing 20 Portugueses of 140 that were in her, most of them sick, yet the Enemy receiving great damage entred with 400 Men, who were all slain save 8 or 9 that got off. This done our Ship cast Anchor in an advantageous Place, but next day received Orders to put to Sea where she would find the Fleet to de∣fend her. She was no sooner out but the Turks attack her, yet after a desperate fight again left her. But the third Day the Ene∣my coming on again burnt her, few of the Men escaping Death, and those remaining in Captivity. 16. The Ship called St. Iohn, another of the two built in India, had no better For∣tune, for springing a leak she was with much labour of Pumping brought as far as the Cape of Good Hope, where three Holland Ships pursued her 20 Days, whereof 8 were spent in fight. Our Ship being totally disabled,
offered to surrender upon Conditions, but whilst they treated a Storm parted them, and she was drove aground full of Water two Leagues from the Shore in the Bay of Lagoa, which is in the Lat. of 32 Deg. The Captain was forced with his own hand to kill a trou∣blesom Pilot, who to save himself and 30 more would expose all the rest to perish in∣evitably. 17. The Captain landed the Ammunition and Provisions with the loss of 9 Men, and marched with 260 towards Zofala, having burnt the Ship, and saved the Diamonds, Pearls, Amber and Musk. They marched in sight of the Sea, carrying the Women on their Shoulders. Having set forward the beginning of September, about the end of November, being weary of carrying those things of value, they cast into a River all the Musk. 18. Those who carried the Women could no longer hold out, tho' many thousand Du∣cats were promised them. A Maid not able to go a foot was left to the Mercy of Cafres, or Fury of wild Beasts. A young Man her Brother would have stayed with her, but was not permitted, and he soon after died for Grief. 19. Some Men died with Fatigue, and the strongest conspired to take all the Dia∣monds and march faster. The Captain be∣ing informed of it, slew him he thought to be the Ringleader of that Contrivance. A∣bout the middle of December, those who carried four Women would do it no longer,
10000 Ducats were offered to any to under∣take it, but none accepted the offer. Six∣teen were left behind with their Slaves who murdered them, and afterwards overtaking the Company, and being examined were hanged. Hunger forced them to eat these and others that died. The Captain Morales died, and Francis Vaz de Almada succeeded him. There were but 150 Men left, and half of them not able to fight when the King of Mocaranga assails them with 1000 Cafres and robs them, killing some. Those that escaped came to Moçambique, having travelled 500 Leagues with unspeakable Mi∣sery. 20. At this time Ruy Freyre de Andrade, who had but Three hundred Portugueses in the Fort of Queixome with some of the Na∣tives and Arabs that came afterwards, was besieged by the Sultan of Xiras with 20000 Men, and the Fort began to be undermined. Freyre defended himself with much valour; but the News being brought that the Eng∣lish Succours were at hand, the Defendants dismayed.
CHAP. XIX. Continues the Government of Ferdinand de Albuquerque. 1. FReyre being besieged by Sea and Land, the English and Persians being joined; Simon de Melo came from Goa with 13 Sail, rather to affront than relieve them. 2. The Commander of Ormuz, who some∣what comforted Freyre in these Troubles died, and Simon de Melo by the Governor's Order succeeded him; which was another wrong done to Freyre, because according to the ancient Custom he being Admiral of that Sea ought to have succeeded. This was the Ruin of Ormuz, for had he been there it had not been lost. Freyre nevertheless de∣sisted not from sending advice to Ormuz, which Melo slighted, relying on the Strength of the Place, though it was in no posture of Defence, the Commanders of it for many Years having only taken care to enrich them∣selves, so that there was but little Cannon, and that lay on the Ground without Car∣riages, and stopped up with Earth. 3. The English offered Freyre honourable Conditions if he would surrender, but he refused, thinking Ships would have come that Night from Ormuz, to carry him off and dismantle the Fort. D. Gonzalo de Silveyra came with only one Barque carrying some
Ammunition, a small Relief in that Distress. Freyre seeing this, sent fresh Advice to Melo how to act in his own defence; and he ta∣king it in ill part, writ to the Governor, accusing Freyre of Arrogance and Ignorance, for pretending from Queixome to instruct and terrifie him. 4. Freyre no longer able to withstand the English and Persians, resolved to burn the Fort, and die honourably in the Field; but his Men crying they would not cast away their Lives to no purpose, designed to de∣liver him up to the English; and some leap∣ed from the Wall into the Sea to save them∣selves. Freyre was forced to capitulate to march out on the side of Arabia with his Colours, Arms and Ammunition; the Capi∣tulation was not observed, for the Portugueses were stripped, the Natives delivered to the Persians, who put them to the Sword, Freyre and four Captains sent Prisoners to Surat. 5. Melo at Ormuz thinking the Enemy would be satisfied with the taking of Quei∣xome, began to treat of Peace with the Per∣sians, but to no effect. Above 12000 Per∣sians came over in their Barques, and the English in 6 Ships, besieging the Town and furiously battering it. 6. Luis de Brito agreeing with others who loved not to expose their Lives, was let down from the Wall by a Rope, con∣cluded Articles of Surrender with the Eng∣lish, and returned to the Town to put them in Execution. Simon de Melo seemed to op∣pose
the Surrender, but the Soldiers feign∣ing to mutiny (for it was supposed to be done by his Direction) the Enemy entred the Town, above 2000 Portugueses of both Sexes and all Ages were sent stripped to Mascate, leaving a great Treasure, and the Honour of their Country, in the Enemies Hands. 7. Mean while Freyre, who was Prisoner, with the four Captains made his Escape, and having lost one of them with the other three got to Damam, thence to Baçaim, and at last to Mascate. Constantine de Sa was then there with Succours for Ormuz, and they were upon going thither when the People that were dispossessed of that Place appeared. Freyre insisted to go on, hoping to surprize the Enemy, but could not pre∣vail upon Sa; so he went away to Goa, and Embarqued for Portugal. 8. At this time the Mogol was highly re∣spected by all the Eastern Princes, and there resided at his Court several Ambas∣sadors, who carried him rich Presents. One sent by the King of Massanapatan was valu∣ed at Two Millions, consisting of Elephants with costly Trappings, Camels and precious Sones. 9. The Portugueses, who in the Years 142 and 145 had escaped the Destruction of the Cities Liampo and Chincheo, lived in the Island Lampaçau, till the Year 1557, they then built the City Macao, the greatest we have in Asia next to Goa. The manner was thus: They resorted to the Island San∣chuan
on the Coast of China to Trade, where they lived in Huts made of the Boughs of Trees, and covered with Sails during their stay. 10. From this Island to another called Gaoxama, are 18 Leagues closer in upon the Coast of China. The Island being inicate and mountainous, was the Refuge of Rob∣bers who infested the Continent. The Chi∣neses, who had twice expelled the Portu∣gueses, thinking them a more tolerable Evil than those Outlaws, offered them the Island if they could root out that Generation of Thieves. The Portugueses undertook and performed it without losing a Man. 11. The Island being cleared, every one began to build where he liked best, there being no Proprietor to sell the Land, which afterwards was sold at a great Rate, the Trade and Fame of this City increasing. This caused the Hollanders to have an Eye always upon it, desiring to make themselves Ma∣sters thereof. 12. It contains about 1000 Portugues In∣habitants, all Rich, and of the best in India, because the Portions being there very con∣siderable, many Persons of Quality resort thither for Wives. There is besides a con∣siderable number of Christian Chineses, who are cloathed and live after the manner of Portugal; and of Heathens, being Artificers, Shopkeepers and Merchants, about 6000. They have a Bishop and a Judge. The Duties of the Ships trading thence to Iapan amount to 300000 Xeraphins, at 10 per Cent.
A Xeraphin is almost a piece of Eight. The Yearly Expence of the City to main∣tain their Fortifications and Garrison is above 40000 Ducats. At the Fair of Quantung is paid the like Sum for Duties, at six and seven per Cent. The Voyage of Iapan, with Embassies and Presents for the King and Tonos, costs 25000. The House called La Misericordia spends 8 or 9000 in Works of Charity. The City maintains two Hospi∣tals, three Parish Churches, five Monasteries, besides the continual Alms it sends to the neighbouring necessitous Christians in China, Aynam, Iapan, Tunquim, Cochinchina, Cam∣bodia and Siam. 13. On the 19th of Iuly, 17 (some say 23) Sail of Hollanders came before this City, hoping to take the Fleet that was there ready to sail for Iapan, having taken se∣veral Chineses and Portugues Ship about the Philippine Islands. They had aboard 2000 fighting Men. Their Admiral Cornelius Re∣gers intending to gain the City, battered the Fort of St. Francis the space of five Days. On Midsummer Day in the Morning he landed Eight hundred Men, and without much opposition made himself Master of an Intrenchment. 14. The Enemy marched towards the City, thinking to meet no resistance, but Iohn Suarez Vivas, seeing them advance to gain a considerable Post, prevented them with 160 Men. After a Discharge of their fire-Arms, they fell to the Sword, the Hollan∣ders ed with precipitation to their Ships,
leaving 300 dead on the Shore; seven and their Colours were taken, one piece of Cannon, and all their Arms which they threw away when swiming to their Ships. Mean while the Ships battered the Fort, which answered so effectually some of them were sunk and 60 Men killed. This Victo∣ry cost us 6 Portugueses, and some few Slaves. A Cafre Woman a Slave had share in it, who fighting in Man's Cloaths with a Hal∣bard killed 3 Hollanders. 15. The Citizens seeing themselves ex∣posed to such Attempts, built a Wall round the Town, with six Bastions. On that of St. Paul, which overtops the City, they planted six large Cannons; on that of the Bar fourteen, some 50 Pounders; eight on that of Our Lady of Good Deliverance; five on that of St. Peter; eight on that of St. Francis, that looks towards the Sea; and three on that of St. Iohn. And because the Mountain of Our Lady of the Guide overtops the Bastion of St. Paul, they fortified it, planting thereon 10 large pieces. 16. This Year were computed to be con∣verted in India 10000 Souls. Some with such pure Zeal, that five being condemned to Death, and desiring first to be Baptized, they were told it should not save their Lives, they answered, They knew it, and only sought the Salvation of their Souls. They were all Baptized under the Gallows, and died with Resolution and Stedfastness in the Faith, though they saw the others hanged before them.
17. The Government of Ferdinand de Al∣buquerque, in what related to the Civil Ad∣ministration, was inferior to none; in the Military, especially what concerned Ormuz, unfortunate. It was observed how little care was had of this Government in Spain, for that during the whole time of his Govern∣ment he had not one Letter from the King. He was of a middle Stature, a good Chri∣stian, the 44th Governor, 2d of the Name, and 3d of the Sirname. CHAP. XX. Of the Viceroy D. Alfonso de Noronna, in the Year 1621. 1. IN the Year 1597, D. Alfonso de No∣ronna commanded the Ships that went for India, and was now chose Viceroy, as well in respect of his good Services, s his Birth and Experience. He set out the 29th of April with four Ships and six Galleons, of all which only one reached India, by being a little a head of the others, which were all put back to Lisbon. This makes good that notable Saying of an able Seaman, who being asked when was the best time for the Ships to Sail, answered, The last Day of February is too soon, and the first of March too late.
2. In fine, D. Alfonso was put back with all that Relief whereof India stood in great want; he, his Ship, and the Captain of her were used to this Misfortune, having been put in the Year before. Some would attribute this to the ill Fate of the Captain or Ship. 3. This was the last Governor of India named by the Pious Philip III. (but Second of Portugal) and the first that sailing from Lisbon with that Command was forced in again. D. Alfonso de Noronna was ancient and well qualified for that Post; affable and courteous, moderating the gravity of his Age. As soon as the News was brought to Lisbon of the shameful Surrender of the City Baya in Brasil to the Hollanders, without re∣garding his Quality, Age and Commands he had bore, he listed himself a private Cen∣tinel for that Service. A bravery well de∣serving eternal Fame, and an Example that moved many to follow it. 4. As we have hitherto reckoned the Vice∣roys and Governors who were chosen, tho' they enjoyed not the Command, we will account D. Alfonso de Noronna the 24th of the former, and 45th of the latter; the 3d of the Name, and 5th of the Sirname.
CHAP. XXI. Of the Propagation of the Faith in Japan, and Aethiopia about this Time. 1. SOme small hints have been already given of the Progress of Christianity in Iapan, since their Apostle St. Francis Xa∣verius began to Preach there. The Proceed∣ings there are much like those in China, save that the latter has not been so much sprink∣led with the Blood of Martyrs. I will only touch upon some Martyrdoms that happened in Iapan. 2. At Firando, in the Year 1622, F. Peter de Zuniga, and F. Luis Flores of Saint Dominick, were burnt alive by the Em∣peror's Command, together with Captain Ioachim, a Iaponese, who carried them in his Ship from Manila, and twelve Seamen beheaded. 3. At Mamgasaqui 25 were burnt alive, and 25 beheaded. Of the first number was Father Charles Spinola, a Genoese, and Fa∣ther Sebastian Quimura born at Firando the first Iaponese Priest, and six Iaponese Lay-Brothers all Jesuits. Five Franciscans, and nine Dominicans. Also a Woman and twelve Children were executed, and after that a Dominican and others.
4. At Omura, a Dominican, a Franciscan and twelve more were burnt alive. Ten suffer'd Martyrdom at Iquinosima. Ano∣ther was burnt at Firando, fourteen at Nam∣gasaqui, and others in other Places, all which made up the number of 118, whereof 46 burnt alive. 5. In the Year 1624, another Persecution was raised at the Court by means of a Bon∣zo, who becoming a Christian in hopes to grow rich, and being disappointed, became an Informer against Christians. The Em∣peror gave him the Charge of Discovering them. The first apprehended were two Jesuits and a Franciscan, who being com∣mitted to Prison where Faramandondono the Emperor's Cousin was, Baptized there forty Persons: Fifty in all were taken out of the Prison and burnt alive. Two Gentlemen who were Christians, but not known, be∣ing present, leaped from their Horses and cast themselves into the Fire, crying, They died for the Faith. At Night Three hun∣dred Christians assembled and stole the Re∣licks of the Martyrs. This gave occasion to a new Search, and almost Five hundred suffered. To prevent the concealing of any Religious Men, all the Spaniards were ex∣pelled Nangasaqui; and some married to Iaponese Women were parted from them. Many Natives who would not renounce the Faith were banished, and many more, espe∣cially at Ozaqua, had a Cross burnt deep on their Foreheads, that they might be
known to be Christians; and they joyfully said, Now we shall be known to be Slaves of Iesus. They were turned off with that mark, and almost naked in the dead of Winter, with their Children, and many of them died. 6. In the Year 1637, Father Marcelas Francis Mastrili of the Society of Jesus, was apprehended with his Companion La∣zarus, and carried to Namgasaqui, where he endured many Tortures. On the four∣teenth of October he was brought out in sight of all the People, with a Paper on his Back whereon were these Words; Iogan Sama, Emperor of Iapan, Orders this mad Man to be Executed, for Preach∣ing in these Kingdoms a Law contrary to that of Xaxa, and Amida, and of the F∣toques. Come all to see him, for he is to die hanging in the Cave for an Ex∣ample. At the Market-place of Ten, where the Portugues Merchants resort, he saluted them three times with his head, ha∣ving a Gag in his mouth. 7. He was hanged up by the Feet in the Cave of the Mountain, where generally Martyrs suffer, and is therefore called Holy. He hung four days uttering wonder∣ful Doctrine, and the Blood never fell into his Head, as is usual in such Cases. Seeing he did not die, they took him out to be beheaded, and he expected the stroke on his Knees, saying twice, My Father Saint Francis Xaverius. It is believed he saw that
Saint, and that was the occasion of naming him. The first stroke took no Effect, the second made an impression, and the third his Head fell to the Ground, having called upon Jesus and Mary. There followed an Earthquake all the Country about. Being dead he had many Wounds given him, then was burnt, and the Ashes cast into the Sea. Thus much of Iapan, let us say somewhat of Ethiopia. 8. In the Year 1521, Sultan Sagued be∣ing Emperor, the Society of Jesus had a Residence at Gorgora in the Kingdom of Dambia, and a stately Church. Another Residence at Colela in the Kingdom of Go∣gan, to which was subordinate the Mission of the Agaos, a large Province. Another at Fremona in the Kingdom of Tigre. 9. The first Patriarch of Ethiopia was D. Iohn Bermudez, chosen by the Emperor and confirmed by the Pope, of whom we spoke in the Sixth Chapter of the Fourth Part of the Second Tome. The second Patriarch was D. Iohn Nunnez Barreto, a Jesuit, of whose Sanctity it is a sufficient Testimony, that he being at Tetuan serving the Slaves, the Bassa of that Place said, The Works of the Holiest Moor were not to compare with his. He died at Goa without reaching Ethiopia. The third was D. An∣drew de Oviedo, of a very Religious and Austere Life. He suffered much Persecu∣tion, for Preaching and Converting many Ethiopians. The fourth Patriarch was D.
Belchior Carnero, a Jesuit, who died at Goa. The fifth, D. Alfonso Mendez, of whom we shall speak hereafter. The sixth, D. A∣pollinarius de Almeyda, of whose Banishment also a further Account shall be given in its Place. The End of the Third Part.
THE PORTUGUES ASIA. TOM. III. PART IV. CHAP. I. The Second Government of the Viceroy D. Francis de Gama Count De Vidi∣gueyra, from the Year 1622, till 1627. 1. DON Francis de Gama Count De Vi∣digueyra having lest the Govern∣ment of India much hated, and affronted, always endeavoured to obtain that Com∣mand again; not to be revenged, as some said, but to satisfie the World he had not deserved that ill Usage. Twenty Years passed before he could obtain his Desire, which was upon the Accession to the Crown of Philip the Fourth of Spain, and Third of Portugal.
2. He sailed from Lisbon on the 18th of March with 4 Ships. Not long before him parted thence Sancho de Tovar & Silva with 2 Galleons and 2 Pinks. On the Coast of Tierra de Natal a flash of Lightning falling upon the Count's Ship, burnt the Colours, and did some harm, but killed no body. Under the Line two of his Ships left him, and arrived at Goa at the end of August. The third stayed behind him; it was thought they shunned his Company designedly. 3. About this time 6 Dutch Ships plied near the Islands of Angoxa, one of them pe∣rished in pursuit of a Portugues. The Vice∣roy standing for Moçambique, met the other five on the 22d of Iune. His other Ships had now joyned him, and there ensued a terrible Fight, which fell heaviest upon the Vice-Admiral, who was entirely disabled. The Viceroy and D. Francis Lobo rescued and brought him off. But the Ship being so much battered sunk, some Men and Mo∣ney were saved, and some fell into the Ene∣mies hands. Night coming on, the Viceroy and Lobo were drove upon the Sands, and their Ships lost; they saved what Goods, Rigging, Ammunition and Cannon they could, and fired the rest, that the Enemy might make no Advantage os it. The Viceroy shipped all the Goods, and what Men he could, aboard some Galliots, and arrived at Cochim. Gonzalo de Sequeyra was gone before with his Galleon to relieve Or∣muz, but came too late.
4. From Cochim he went to Goa, and ar∣rived there in September. His Enemies see∣ing him in that Post, were all terrified, fearing he now in Power would revenge the Affronts done to his Person, but he carried himself with more moderation than was ex∣pected. The Count thought of punishing Simon de Melo and Luis de Brito, as the most guilty of the shameful loss of Ormuz. Melo was fled over to the Moors, and Brito in Pri∣son; this was Beheaded, as was the other in Effigies. 5. Gonçalo de Sequeira, who was to have relieved Ormuz, stayed with his Galleon at Mascate, believing his Assistance necessary upon a Report that the Persians designed against that Place. Hearing the Enemy for∣tified at Soar in Arabia, he fitted out 7 Sail, and coming before it, expelled the Persians with much slaughter, and not without loss, because they defended it with more Valour than the Portuguezes had Ormuz. Goncalo de Sequeyra remained there, and again defeated the Enemy endeavouring to gain Mascate. 8. The Dutch, who had lain before the Bar of Goa, being gone towards Triquilimale, the Viceroy sent Constantine de Sa and Ruy Freyre with a Squadron to assist Sequeyra in the Sea of Ormuz. They chased an English Ship, which got away from them, and re∣turning to the Sea of Ormuz took two Ships of the Moors, putting them all to the Sword.
7. Three Galleots of Cochin defeated some Dutch and Pegu Ships at Paleacate. D. Francis Mascarennas, a Person of known Valour and Prudence, was sent to Command at Macao to oppose the Hollanders, and quiet the Disorders that were among the Citizens. The Divisions among the Laity being made up, there began others among the Clergy about the Government of that Cathedral for want of a Bishop. 8. Three Ships, three Galleons, and two Pinks, sailed from Lisbon for India. One of the Ships returning home, was lost at the mouth of Lisbon River, the Men and some Goods saved; another perished at Moçambique; the third on the Island St. Helena, part of her Loading being taken into the other Ships, the rest fetched away from Brasil. Two of the Galleons were also cast away at Moçam∣bique; and a Pink, through the unskilfulness of the Pilot, on the Coast of Arabia. In these Vessels were 5000 Men, whereof many died of Sickness, besides what perished by Shipwrack. 9. Now begins the Year 1624, famous for the Sufferings of Gativanda Queen of Dopoli at Xiras in Persia, and Cruelty of the King Xa Abas. But this having relation to the Religious of St. Augustin, who laboured much in the conversion of Asia, I will relate some Particulars of what they did in those Parts. They resided at Ormuz, where, a∣mong many others, the Heir of that Crown was converted, and took their Habit by the Name of F. Hierome Iaete, and afterwards
Preached with much Zeal. With him was Baptized D. Alfonso Nordim of the Blood Royal, and his Sister Da. Philippa Morada. 10. The Fathers preached also with suc∣cess along the Skirts of Arabia Petrea. When Ormuz was lost, they went over to Baçora, a City subject to the Turk, below Babylon, on the Borders of Arabia Felix, with Orders from the Archbishop of Goa to endeavour chiefly the Reduction of the Armenian Schis∣maticks called Christians of St. Iohn, in the Kingdom of Bombareca, where F. Francis of the Presentation, and F. Matthias an English∣man, who died at Ormuz with a general Opinion of Sanctity, had been before, but with no success. After them F. Nicholas de la Vega, with the consent of the Turkish Bassa, erected there a House and Chapel. 11. F. Iohn de los Santos, and F. Ioseph of the Presentation, built a Church and Con∣vent, and many Schismaticks were reconci∣led to the Church. The Bassa gave them Power over all the Christians, Chaldeans, Nestorians, and Jews, and many Chaldeans were Baptized. Many Infidels, Arabs, Turks and Persians, resorted to the Convent, and some were converted. In the City and the Neighbourhood there are about 70000 Inha∣bitants, whereof about 5000 Christians of St. Iohn, so called, because they have a Tra∣dition, That their Forefathers were Bapti∣zed in the River Iordan by the Baptist. 12. The Portugueses, after the loss of Or∣muz, setled their Trade in this City, and founded a Seminary for Learning. The
Bassa very much countenanced the Religious, and seeing a Christian Soldier in love with a Moorish Woman, secured and delivered him up to them. They sent him to Mascate, she followed, was baptized, and married him. He consented that a Girl should be taken from her Mother, who seeing her go, fol∣lowed, and both were reconciled to the Church. 13. The first time Vespers were sung, a Drum going about to gather the Christians, all the Moors flocked thither, in so much that the Cacizes said, This was some particular Act of Divine Providence, and cried, The World must be at an end. 14. These Religious first entred the Court of Ispahan in the time of King Sebastian, af∣terwards 5 Armenian Bishops, many Priests, and a multitude of People, submitted to the See of Rome. The King offered the Fathers 2000 Ducats a Year, which they refused, lest it should be thought they went to enrich themselves, not to plant Religion. They were afterwards Imprisoned by the Moors, ill Treated, and sent to Xiras, 100 Leagues di∣stant. The Governour of that Place sent them to the Convent with Fetters on their Feet, and Yoaks on their Necks. The Go∣vernour pretended the cause of their Impri∣sonment was, That Ruy Freyre had secured three Moors at Ormuz, and said, They should be set at liberty if those were restored. Brother Peter carried Advice hereof to Goa, and the Moors were released.
15. The Labours of these Fathers have been very succesful in Gorgistan or Georgia. The first that undertook that Mission was F. William of St. Augustin, who was well re∣ceived by the Georgians, but put to Death by the Sultan of Fabris, and was buried by the Armenian Religious of the Order of St. Do∣minick. 16. The King of Persia invading one of the Georgian Princes, he sent his Mother cal∣led Gativanda to Treat with him, who, after giving an ambiguous Answer, caused her on the way home to be apprehended, and car∣ried Prisoner to Xiras. This Lady was kept in Prison 11 Years, living always a most godly Life in Fasting and Penance; her greatest Grief was, to hear that some of the Captives of her Country wavered in the Faith. 17. The Religious coming at that time to Xiras, greatly comforted her. The King of Persia being solicited to release Gativanda, sent to advise her to turn Mahometan, other∣wise she must expect to endure the cruelest of Tortures. She desiring a little time to recollect herself, spent it in Prayer, and that ended, resolutely told the Officers, They might fulfill their Orders. They taking compassion, endeavoured to perswade, tel∣ling her, The Torments would be insuppor∣table, and she replied, The Delay was the most grievous Torture. 18. Her Hands being tied, the Executio∣ners put on her Head a Copper Vessel made red hot, and tore her Cheeks and Breasts with burning Pinchers. Not a Sigh came
from her till she was stripped to the Waste to have her Breasts cut off, looking upon it more grievous to be naked, than to endure such unsupportable Pains. Her Feet were torn, and she then fainting, they cast all the Fire upon her. Seeing she neither died nor complained, the Executioners strangled her, after having suffered alone enough to pur∣chase many the Glory of Martyrdom. 19. Tamarascan, the Queen's Son, under∣standing the Death of his Mother, entred Persia in a rage, and obtained several Victo∣ries, in 3 Years slew above 70000 Persians. At length a Peace was concluded, and he restored to all he had lost. 20. Two of the Religious of St. Augustin travelled towards Georgia suffered great Ex∣tremities in vast Desarts, in some Places near perishing in Snow. At Emanenga in Arme∣nia they were entertained by the Religious of the Order of St. Dominick, who reside there. 21. At Ervan, the Metropolis of Arme∣nia, they were courteously received by the Patriarch in a Convent of 30 Religious of St. Basil, whose Office is long, being the whole Psalter every day, and Matins at mid∣night. That Prelate was a Man of a very austere Life, gave great Alms, redeemed Captives, repaired Churches, was a great Reformer of Manners, and suppressed Mar∣ried Priests. He was almost Adored by the Armenians, and hearkened to the Proposal of submiting to the See of Rome. Our Re∣ligious found him Preaching in a Church, but
as soon as he saw them, he took leave of the Auditory, and went to receive them, washed and kissed their Feet, telling the People. Those were the true Apostles of Christ. 22. At length our Religious entred Geor∣gia, were honourably received by the King, who refused to let them kiss his Hand, but made them sit; and knowing they carried the greatest part of his Mother's Body, de∣clared himself pleased above measure. 23. That day they dined with the King, the next with the Queen; she and her La∣dies went to receive the Body, and heard Mass with great attention. The King cau∣sed his Mother to be buried among the an∣cient Kings of Georgia. Speaking of the Pope, he said, He owned him as chief Pre∣late, and had always declared him such. Being presented with two Images of our Saviour and Blessed Lady, he said, He wor∣shipped them not because they were Idols, and only honoured Pictures. One of the Fathers reprehended him, and was going away, but he held by his Habit, kissed him, and begged Pardon, affirming, He knew not what he said. 24. Next day the King and Queen excu∣sed themselves to the Father, praying him not to depart, but to choose any Place in the Kingdom to build a Church and Monastery. He pitched upon the City Gori, which is seated in a Plain watered by two great Ri∣vers well stored with Fish. The Patriarch an ancient and venerable Person, with the
Bishops and other Clergy, thought they could never sufficiently encourage the new Foun∣dation. This happened about the end of the Year 1628. 25. To conclude, with these Religious they laboured as much as any in China, India, Persia, and Arabia. On the 17th of May, 1626, after Noon, at Bassora was seen a Cloud rising in the East in the form of a Half-Moon, the Horns whereof seemed to inclose that City. It appeared like Smoke and Ashes, and moved with a Noise that seemed to threaten Destruction. All the Country about for the space of half an hour was quite dark, then for two hours followed such a storm of Wind and Thunder, as ter∣rified all those People. The Turks and Per∣sians fled to the Christian Church, believing that the only safe place, and crying aloud, the former, Codá, Codá; the latter, Ala, Ala; that is, God, God, without remembring Mahomet. 26. In the Year 1627, the Enemy surpri∣zed a Ship of ours there, and killed all the Men but three, who being carried before Hazen Governour of Humo, he offered them their Lives if they would become Mahome∣tans. They answered, They were ready to die rather than do so. He caused them to be Beheaded on the 21st of December, 1628. 27. In Africk these Religious baptized the Prince of Melinde, who afterwards coming to the Crown acknowledged the Pope, wri∣ting a Letter to him in the Year 1627, which
he signed by the Name of D. Hierome Chin∣galia. This was the first King that received the Faith in those Parts, which might have spread more, had not the Portugueses by their Enormities obliged this Prince to fall off from them and the Faith, as shall be seen here∣after. CHAP. II. Continues the Government of the Vice∣roy D. Francis de Gama Count De Vi∣digueyra. 1. THis Year sailed from Lisbon two Ships and six Galleons under the Command of Nunno Alvarez Botello, and arrived all safe at Goa. Mean while Ruy 1624. Freyre de Andrade with his Squadron was successful in the Sea of Ormuz, cutting off Provisions from that Town, sinking some Vessels, and chasing others. He had done more if better supported. 5. Some English and Dutch Ships having relieved Ormuz distressed by that Gentle∣man, the Viceroy strengthened by those Ships come from Portugal, would not suffer them to depart without being visited. He sent Nunno Alvarez Botello Admiral against them with 8 Galleons. They sailed at the begin∣ning of the Year 1625, and were separated by a Storm; but six meeting Botello, appeared
in the Sea of Ormuz, and was received by twelve of those two Nations. The Fight was very terrible, and the Enemy having the Wind, our Admiral could not come to board as he desired. The Dutch Admiral and Vice-Admiral being disabled, were forced to draw off. At the same time Ruy Freyre having heard the noise of the Cannon came up with three Galliots, and the Enemy drew off to the Bay of Comoram. We had many Men killed and wounded, among the latter our Admiral Botello. 3. About the middle of February they met again. Nunno fearing he should not be able to come to board them, sent a Challenge to their Admiral; but he not accepting of it, the Fight began, and was continued with great fury till the Enemy again drew into Comoran, having lost many Men, and we 2 Captains and 40 Soldiers. Botello went to Water at the Island Larea opposite to them, and hearing a Cannon fired, answered with another, supposing it had been a Signal of Battel, but the Enemy stirred not then, though our Vessels were almost unmasted since the last Engagement. At last they thinking it time to depart drew out, and being pursued, there ensued another Fight. The Enemy fled, having lost in those three Encounters 1000 Men, and 3 Ships which were sunk; some of them carried 60 Guns. 4. Our Admiral gave chase, but soon lost sight of them, and went to Winter at Mas∣cate, whence he set out in September with 7 Sail, whereof he lost three in a Storm, the
Men saved. He came to an Anchor with the rest at Soveral, where he took a rich Ship of Meca that sailed with a Dutch Pass. Understanding by the Prisoners some of the Enemies Ships were at Surat, he hasted thi∣ther, and found they were the same that escaped after the Fights of Ormuz and Co∣moran. It being impossible to come at them, he provoked them by Signs, and set up a Challenge on the City Gates; but seeing they did not stir, sailed away. Not far from Damam he discovers three English Ships, and coming up with them found they were strong, and carried two Tire of Guns. They fought three days, at last the Enemy made away. 5. There were great Tumults at Macao, the Inhabitants of that City forcing their Commander D. Francis Mascarennas to shut himself up in the Fort, but being defeated, were pardoned by him. The Chineses grow∣ing jealous on account of the Wall built by him, it was found absolutely necessary to throw down part of it. 6. The Patriarch D. Alfonso Mendez now set out from Diu for Ethiopia with 6 Fathers, and other Retinue in 3 Vessels. He landed at Bailur, a Town subject to a little King, and travelled over the Field called of Salt, because that is found there which passes in stead of Money being like small Bars. Next is the Mountain, where is another sort of reddish Salt, good against some Diseases. Travelling by night, by reason of the heat of the day, they saw an Exhalation so
bright, it enlightned all the Country about. This was held as a good Omen. At Fremona they understood the same Light had been seen there. They travelled with greater labour to the Court, and were received with great joy by the Emperor, who soon after acknowledged the Pope's Supremacy; but this Happiness was not lasting, as shall ap∣pear hereafter. 7. About this same time was discovered the famous Kingdom of Tibet, extending to the Springs of Ganges. The Natives are well inclined, and docible, zealous of their Salvation, and value Things of Devotion given them by their Priests called Lama's, who profess Poverty and Chastity, and are much given to Prayer. They have strange Customs and Ceremonies, Churches like the most Curious of ours, and some knowledge of the Christian Religion, but mixed with many Errors; they abhor the Mahometans and Gentiles. It plainly appears, that in former Ages they had the true Light of the Gospel. They are easie to be converted. The Country produces some Fruit like that of Europe, Rice and Wheat, and breeds Cat∣tle, but there is much barren. It is fit to say somewhat of their Religion and Lama's. Their Habit is a Red Cassock without Sleeves, for the Arms are naked; it is girt with a piece of Cloth of the same colour, the ends whereof hang down to the Feet; on their Shoulders a striped Cloth, which they say is the Habit of the Son of God; at their Waste hangs a little Bottle of Water.
They keep two Fasts, in the greatest they eat but once a day, and speak not a word; necessary Affairs are expressed by Signs: In the second it is allowed to eat as often as every one pleases, but Flesh only once. They call to Prayers with Trumpets, some made with dead Men's Bones; the Skulls serve to drink out of: Of other Bones Beads are made, which they say is to put them in mind of Death. The Churches are opened only twice a Year, those who resort to them walk round three times, then enter and do Reverence to the Images. A∣mong which are some of Angels, called by them Lat. The greatest is he that inter∣cedes before God for the Souls. It being painted Armed, with the Devil under its Feet, make it supposed to be St. Michael. It is not unworthy consideration, that Lamas, the Name of their Priests, begins with La, which signifies an Angel. The young Lama's go about the Towns dancing regular and modestly with Crowns, Bells and other noisy Instruments. They say, it is in imi∣tation of the Angels, as they are painted among us, singing in Choirs. The begin∣ning of every month they make a Procession with black Flags, Figures of Devils, Drums and Musick, and believe this chases the Evil Spirits. Holy Water is made with ma∣ny Prayers, and putting into it Gold, Co∣ral, and Rice, and is used against Devils that haunt Houses. The Country People bring to the Towns black Horses, Cows, and Sheep, over which the Lama's say many
Prayers, saying, the Devils endeavour to get into black Cattle. They cure the Sick by blowing on the Part afflicted. Three sorts of Funerals are used, according to the Star rules the time of Death. One is after our manner; and there are Tombs adorned with gilded Pyramids. Another is burning the Body, and of the Ashes mixed with Clay they make Images, by which they swear. Another is casting the Bodies to certain white Birds like Cranes, and this is reckoned the happiest Burial. These three Forms are used with such as are esteemed to have lived well, for others being cut in pieces are thrown to Dogs. They believe the Good dying go directly to Heaven, the Bad to Hell; but such as are indifferent between both, their Souls instantly return into noble or base Creatures, according to their deserts. They advise Fathers to give their Children the Names of filthy Beasts, that the Devil may be loth to meddle with them. They use Divination after a ridiculous manner. In fine, they acknowledge One God in Tri∣nity; that his Son becoming Man died, and is in Heaven; that he is God as well as his Father, and Man at the same time; that his Mother was a Woman, and gone to Hea∣ven; that from the Death of the Son till that time, were about 1600 Years. They know there is a Hell, in the same manner as we do. They burn Lamps, that God may light them in the way of the other World.
8. F. Anthony de Andrade, and Andrew Marquez, both Jesuits, set out for this King∣dom from Delhi in the Mogol's Country with a Caravan, that conducted Pilgrims to a famous Pagod. They passed the Kingdom of Laor, and came to the vast Mountains, whence the Ganges falls into the deep Valleys. On the way they saw many stately Temples full of Idols. The great Fatigue lessened the pleasure of seeing the variety of beauti∣ful Trees, and smelling those odoriferous Flowers, on the scent whereof the Ancients said those People lived. At the Kingdom of Siranagar they saw the Ganges running over Snow, the whiteness whereof almost blinds such as travel that way. 9. At the end of 50 Days they came to the Pagod on the Borders of the Kingdom of Siranagar, whither Multitudes resort to wash in a Spring so hot it is scarce tolerable, which they imagine cleanses them from Sin. There Food here is raw Flesh, and are very healthy eating much Snow. The Women there do what is the Work of Men among us, and the contrary; the Women Plow, and the Men Spin. Hence the Fathers came to the Town of Mana, and having rested, continued their Journey, almost blind with the continual travelling among Snow, till they saw the Springs of Ganges, which runs out of a great Lake. Soon after they en∣tred the Kingdom of Tibet, and were ho∣nourably received by Officers sent to that purpose from the King's Court at Chaparague. The King and Queen heard them with much
Satisfaction, and admitted their Doctrine without any dispute. 10. The time being come they must re∣turn to Siranagar, the King would not per∣mit them to depart till they swore they would return, and then he promised they should have liberty to Preach, and he would build them a Church, being much pleased with a Picture they left him of our Lady with our Saviour sleeping in her Arms. The Fa∣thers returned acccording to promise, and the King in pursuance of his built the Church with great joy, and was afterwards Baptized with the Queen, notwithstanding the Lama's for their private Ends did all they could to oppose it. The Fathers understood by Mer∣chants who came from China, that it was 60 Days Journey distant from that Court, travelling through the Kingdom of Usangu, 40 Days Journey from the same Court, and thence 20 to China: That there were two great Kingdoms where the Cross was much used. That Cathay is not a Kingdom, but a great City and Metropolis of a Province subject to the Grand Sopo, very near China. Hence perhaps some gave China the name of Cathay. Perhaps this Empire of Tibet is that of Prester Iohn, so much spoken of, and not Ethiopia, as was believed. But let us return to India. 11. In April 4. Malabar Parao's took a Portugues Ship, carrying the Men into slave∣ry under Arcolo, a King of the Country oppo∣site to the Place where the famous Fort of Cunnale once stood. Among the Prisoners
were two Franciscans, one whereof proved so acceptable to the King, that he was the cause of settling a firm Peace between him and the Viceroy. 12. Two Ships arrived from Lisbon, which returning home the next Year were lost, with the whole Portugues Fleet upon the Coast of France in a terrible Storm, and was the greatest Loss Portugal sustained since the time of King Sebastian. 13. There being nothing remarkable this Year in India, let us see what the Carmelites did in Persia, where they got footing in the Year 1604. They soon erected several Con∣vents, and confirmed the Armenians who were in danger of falling from the Faith, terrified with the Persecution raised by the King of Persia. F. Basil of St. Francis was very successful among those called of Saint Iohn about Bassora. In the short space of six Months he Preached in the difficult Per∣sian, Arabian and Turkish Languages, as if he had part of the gift of Languages peculiar to the Apostles, and gained such Reputation, that many neighbouring Princes permitted him to Preach and build Churches in their Dominions. 14. F. Iohn Thadeus and F. Peter of Saint Thomas went to the City Xiras, being sent for by the Sultan thereof, where they con∣verted some Mahometans; others gave them their Doubts in Writing to be sent to Rome, assuring if they were satisfied in those Points, there would be no need of Preaching to convert them. Vetaviet Moses an Arme∣nian
Bishop, acknowledged his Error in denying the Supremacy of the Church of Rome, and promised to perswade all her Dio∣cess to acknowledge it. In fine, these Fa∣thers have laboured with great Profit and Success. 15. Three Ships sailed this Year from Lisbon to India, one of them at his return, on this side the Cape Good Hope, fought twice with three Dutch Ships, and came off with Honour. 16. Nunno Alvarez Botello sailing with his Galleons for Mascate, there arose such a terrible Storm, that it parted all his Com∣pany from him, and he had much difficulty to perswade his Men in despair to work: The Tempest ceasing their Provisions fell snort; there was but one Pipe of Water for 500 Men, and no Land near where they might be supplied. Some died with Thirst, others running mad leaped over∣board. After a Fortnight spent in this mi∣serable Condition, they discovered the Land of Rozalgat always fatal to the Portugueses. The Men cried to go ashore, but Nunno with fair words and kindness disswaded them, and coming to Teve they were relieved with∣out danger. 17. Off Surat Nunno discovered six Dutch Ships, he gave them cace, but lost them. He sailed to Bombaim to refit a Galleon, and thence to the Bar of Diu. An English and Dutch Squadron, both consisting of 17 Sail, sailed to Bombaim thinking to find him there. They battered the Fort, and mting no
Opposition burnt the poor Towns along the Coast. A Dutch Captain entring the Church of Our Lady of Hope, with his Sword cut to pieces a great Crucifix, and burnt part of it. He had soon after the Reward of this Barbarity, his Ship being burnt by Ruy Freyre, and he with all the Men slain. Nunno hearing of this Action begged the Crucifix of the Rector, vowing to carry it always with him, till he had revenged the Wrong, or died in the Execution of it. So it fell out, as will be seen hereafter. 18. The King of Achem fitted out a Fleet of 35 Galleys against Malaca, D. Francis Coutinno with 16. Sail burnt 34 of them kill∣ing or taking 3000 Men, and bringing off 800 pieces of Cannon. 19. On the 17th of Iune 4 Dutch Ships came before the Port of Macao, designing to fall upon the Fleet was ready to sail for Iapan. The King's Revenue being low, our Commander could act nothing against them, some rich Men undertook it in Merchant Ships. They fitted out five, and boarding the Enemy's Admiral burnt her, killing 37 Men, taking 50, 24 pieces of Cannon, a quantity of Ball, some Money and much Provisions. The other 3 fled. 20. Ferdinand de Sousa commanded at Angola, and after defending it against two Dutch Squadrons, fortified the Coast the space of half a League, raising 4 Works planted with Cannon, and cast up a Trench at the Bar of Corimba, which secured it against any attempt. Zinga Queen of Angola
went with a great Power to Besiege the Gar∣rison of Ambaça, but Iohn Carreyro sending a Company of Portugueses to assist that Lord who was our Friend, the Queen was defeat∣ed. A Body of Men marching to her aid was met by nine Portugueses with a number of Blacks, who fled at first sight; the nine Portugueses fought till their Pouder was spent, and two being killed, the other seven were taken, which was no small Satisfaction to the Queen, and many of the Blacks who before were our Friends, hereupon became Neuters. 21. Soon after the Queen was defeated and deposed, and her Brother Airiquibange Crowned King, being become a Christian, as did many Persons of Note by his means. At Congo the City Salvador was taken by the Prince of Sunne, who killing the King, placed in his stead D. Ambrose of the same Blood Royal. He proved a wise and reli∣gious Prince. 22. The beginning of this Year went from Portugal for India but one Ship, and a Pink. The latter as it return'd was burnt by the Dutch, and the Men made Prisoners. But in November 3 Ships more set sail. The Viceroy returned to Portugal in the first Ship, having resigned the Government to D. F. Luis de Brito Bishop of Cochim, by reason D. Francis Mascarennas, appointed to succeed him, was gone to Spain. The Count this second time Govern'd above 5 Years. He was the 25th Viceroy, and 46th Governor; the 6th of the Name, and 4th of the Sirname.
CHAP. III. The Government D. F. Luis de Brito, Bishop of Cochim, from the Year 1628, till 1629. 1. THE King having ordered the Count de Vidigueyra to resign the Govern∣ment to D. Francis Mascarennas then gone to Spain, he committed it to D. F. Luis de Brito, Bishop of Cochim. There being no account of any thing memorable in this first Year of his Government, we will go on to next. The first that occurs is what happen∣ed at Ceylon. 2. Our General Constantine de Sa having declared War against Candea, F. Francis Negram sent him advice to attack that City immediately, and he might take the King, as being wholly unprovided; he lost the Opportunity by only a short Delay about other Affairs. Nevertheless the City was destroyed with Fire and Sword. 3. The King of Achem imflamed with the Desire of recovering Malaca, contrary to the Laws of Nations, imprisoned our Am∣bassador then residing at his Cot, and made extraordinary Preparations for a Siege, as designing to undertake it in Person. Laçamane his great General who had con∣quered many Kings for him, opposed this
Resolution, for which he lost his Prince's Favour. 4. Marraja ambitious by Flattery to gain his Prince's Esteem, promised the King to make him soon Master of that so much co∣veted Town; and hereupon had the Com∣mand of the Sea given him, as Laçamane that of the Land. The King set out with a Fleet of near 250 Sail in which he carried 20000 Men, and a great Train of Artil∣lery. In this number of Vessels were forty∣seven Galleys of extraordinary Strength, Beauty and Value, all near One hundred Foot in length, and of a proportionable breadth. The King went aboard with his Treasure, Wife and Children; but upon some ill Omen the Fleet sailed without him, and came before Malaca at the beginning of Iuly. 5. As they landed they marched towards the Castle that is between the City and Pangor. Antony Pinto de Fonseca with 200 Men, charges them, and kills above 300 without losing a Man. Iohn Suarez Vivas, who commanded 350 Portugueses at Iller, after doing great Execution among the E∣nemy on several occasions, overpower'd by their numbers was forced to abandon that Post. 6. The Enemy having gained Mount St. Iohn, thence battered the Fort furiously, which answered with no less liberality. The Capuchin Convent of the Mother of God was of importance to the defence of the Fort, Iames Lopez de Fonseca having de∣fended
it 50 Days, made a Sally with 200 Men defeating 2000 of the Enemy. Lopez falling sick, Francis Carvallo de Maya took that Post and defended it so well, that the Enemy was provoked to batter it with such Fury, that the Monastery was abandoned, being levelled with the Ground. Out of those Ruins the Enemy raised good Works, where Laçamane held his Quarter with 3000 Men. Maraja had another large Fort upon Mount St. Iohn; there was another towards Iller; another at St. Laurence, and so in other Places with Lines of Commu∣nication. They provided Boats to run up the River, and straiten the Town on all sides. 7. Our General Fonseca desiring to di∣sturb Laçamane, sent Vivas with 220 Portu∣gueses to attack his Works. He killing 100 and the rest flying, possessed himself of the Work by Night, and retired with some of the Cannon. The King of Pam our Allye understanding the Posture of our Affairs, sent a Fleet with 2000 Men to the assistance of the Town. Next came Michael Pereyra Borallo with five Sail from St. Thomas, but all was too little to remove so powerful an Enemy, though they had lost above 4000 Men, having killed but 60 of ours. This was the Condition of the Town at the end of October when Nunno Alvarez Botello arriv'd there. 8. The Bishop then Governor was in∣formed of this Design upon Malaca in Iune, and of the weakness of the Place, which
required a speedy Relief. It was then the dead of Winter, and the Bishop was not very forward; so the business was put off till September. The Bishop falling sick mind∣ed the Recovery of his Health, more than the Town, and was put in mind by the principal Men of Goa (moved thereto by Nunno Alvarez Botello) of the great danger that Place would be exposed to, if not spee∣dily relieved. They desired him to ap∣point some Person who might forward that Business since sickness hindred him. He, after seeming to approve of what they said, could never be prevailed with to name any, fearing perhaps he so named would wrest the Government from him sooner than Death. 9. But Death took him away about the end of Iuly, that those who were Ambi∣tious to relieve Malaca might put their De∣signs in Execution. That Bishop governed nineteen or twenty Months, was the Forty∣seventh Governor, second of the Name, first of the Sirname, and the second Prelate that had that Command.
CHAP. IV. Of the Viceroy D. Francis Mascarennas in the Year 1628, with sundry Occur∣rences at Pegu, Martavam, Prom, Siam, and other Places. 1. DON Francis Mascarennas had served so well in India, that without sol∣liciting he was appointed Viceroy there, at the same time he was coming for Spain. Be∣ing arrived here, he was sent back this Year with the same Title, and sailed from Lisbon with three Ships, only one of them reached India, the other two with the Viceroy were put back to Lisbon. 2. In the Viceroy's Ship a Gentleman was taken actually committing an abominable Crime, whom the Viceroy caused to be shot in pieces at the mouth of a Cannon. He He was accused of this Action, as not ha∣ving power of Life and Death, being at that time upon his return, yet he was well recei∣ved at Court, and sworn of the Council of State of Portugal. He may be reckoned the 27th Viceroy, and 48th Governor, the 7th of the Name, and 4th of the Sirname. 3. Since this Gentleman not passing to India has deprived us of the worthy Actions might be expected from him, let that Want be supplied with an account of Exploits of
the Black King of Siam, in whom appeared a strange mixture of Virtues and Vices. Much has been said of him already, whereof some hints shall be given here, and all that was before omitted added. 4. In the Year 1544, the King of the Bra∣ma's by Sea and Land besieged the City Mar∣tavam, Metropolis of the great and flou∣rishing Kingdom of that Name, whose Yearly Revenue was 3 Millions of Gold, Chaubainaa being then King, and Nhay Ca∣otoo Queen thereof, who from the height of Fortune fell to the depth of Misery. The Brama Fleet consisted of 700 Sail, 100 of them great Galleys. In them were 700 Por∣tugueses commanded by one Iohn Caeyro, re∣puted a Man of Valour and Conduct. 5. After a Siege of 7 Months and 5 As∣saults, wherein the Brama's lost 12000 Men; Chaubainaa found it was impossible to with∣stand that Power, Provision being already so scarce, they had eaten 3000 Elephants. He offered to Capitulate, but no Conditions were allowed by the Besieger; and therefore resolved to make use of the Portugueses, to whom he had always been very just and ser∣viceable. But Man never remembers Fa∣vours received in Prosperity of those he sees in Adversity. 6. The disconsolate King sent one Seixas to Cayero to offer, if he would receive him, his Family and Treasure into the four Ships under his Command, he would give half the Treasure to the King of Portugal, become his Vassal, and pay such Tribute as should
be agreed upon, not doubting with the assi∣stance of 2000 Portugueses, who should be maintained at his own Expence, to recover his Kingdom. Caeyro consulted the princi∣pal Portugueses, and in their presence asked of Seixas what the Treasure of Martavans was; who affirmed, he had not seen all, but that of what he had two of our Ships might be loaded with Jewels and Gold, and 4 or 5 of Silver. The Portugueses envious of the great Fortune Cayero might make by accept∣ing that Offer, threatned to discover him to the King of Brama if he consented. 7. The King of Martavam surprized at this refusal, and seeing Seixas took his leave to fly the Danger that threatned the City, gave him a pair of Bracelets, excusing the smallness of the Gift, and they were after∣wards sold to the Governour of Narsinga for 80000 Ducats. Then he resolved to fire the City and, sallying with those few Men he had left, die honourably among his Enemies. But that night an Officer with 4000 Men de∣deserted to the Enemy, and discovered the Design. The King thus betrayed, Capitu∣lated with the Enemy for his own and the Lives of his Wife and Children, and leave to end his Days in Retirement. This and more was granted easily, because the Con∣querour designed to perform no part of the Promise. 8. From the City Gate to the King of Brama's Tent was a league distance, all which way was a Lane of many thousand Muske∣tiers of sundry Nations, and next the Gate
were posted the Portugueses. The first came out was the Queen in a Chair, her two Daughters and two Sons in two others. A∣bout them 40 beautiful Ladies led by as many ancient ones encompassed with Talegrepos, (a sort of Religious Men among them ha∣bited like our Capuchins) who prayed and comforted them. Then came the King guarded by his Enemies, seated on a small She-Elephant, cloathed in black Velvet; his Head, Beard, and Eye-brows shaved, and a Rope about his Neck, which moved even the Enemy to compassion. 9. The unfortunate King seeing the Por∣tugueses would not stir one foot till they were removed from that Post, and that done went on. Being come before the King of Brama, he cast himself at his Feet; but not being able to speak for Grief, the Raolim of Mounay Talaypor, Chief Priest of those Gen∣tiles, and esteemed a Saint, made an Ha∣rangue in his behalf, of force to have moved to Compassion any other but that obdurate King. The miserable King, his Queen, Chil∣dren, and Ladies, were secured. The two following days were spent in removing the Treasure, at which 1000 Men laboured, and it amounted to 100 Millions of Gold. The third day the Army had liberty to plunder, which lasted four days, and was valued 12 Millions. Next the City was burnt, wherein perished by Fire and Sword above 60000 Souls, besides as many made Slaves; 2000 Temples, and 40000 Houses, were laid even with the Ground. There were in the
Town 6000 Pieces of Cannon, 100000 Quintals of Pepper, and as much of other Spices. 10. The morning that followed this De∣struction, there appeared on a Hill called Beydao 21 Gibbets, with a strong Guard of Horse. Thither was led the Queen, with her Children and Ladies, in all making 140, and were all hanged up by the Feet. The King and 50 Men of great Quality were cast into the Sea with Stones about their Necks. The Army seeing this Barbarity, mutinied, and the King was in great danger. 11. He leaving People to Rebuild the ruined City, returned to Pegu with the rest of his Army, and among them Iohn Caeyro and his 700 Portugueses. Of these, four stayed at Martavam; one of them was Iohn Falcam, who, in stead of assisting Fernan Mendez Pinto, sent by Peter de Faria Com∣mander of Malaca to confirm the Peace with the murdered King, accused him to the Go∣vernour of the Town as an Enemy to the King of Brama. The Governour seized Pinto's Vessel, and in it Goods to the value of 100000 Ducats, killed the Master and some others, and sent the rest Prisoners to Pegu. This false Dealing was not new in Falcam, for he had before forsaken the murdered King after being much honoured by him. 12. The King of Brama, who thought now to reap the Fruit of his Victories in Peace, was alarmed by him of Siam, who attempted to recover the Kingdom of Tangu,
which had been wrested from him. In March 1546, he embarked 900000 Men on 12000 Vessels upon the River Ansedaa, and passing out of it into that called Pichau Ma∣lacon in April, came before the City Pro. The King hereof was dead, and had left a Son to inherit but 13 Years of Age, married to the King of Avaa's Daughter, from whom he expected 60000 Men would come to his Assistance. This moved the King to press the Siege, hoping to gain the City before that Succour could come. After 6 days, the Queen offered to hold the Crown of him, and pay what Tribute he should impose, provided he would draw off from the City. 13. The King insisted, that the Queen should put herself into his hands with all her Treasure, but she knowing how perfi∣dious he was, resolved to defend herself. He gave several Assaults, and by the Sword in them, and a Plague that raged in the Ar∣my, lost 80000 Men, among which were 500 Portugueses. 14. This way of Assault proving so per∣nicious, he raised a Mount, which overlook∣ing the Town, and being full of Cannon, left no place of safety to the besieged; but 5000 of them sallying, destroyed the Mount, kil∣led 15000 of their Enemies, carried off 80 Cannons, and wounded the King, who in a rage slew 2000 Portugueses that were upon the Guard, as negligent of their Duty.
15. About the end of August, Xemin Me∣latay, one of the four principal Men that commanded in the City, treacherously gave him entrance, and the Place was utterly sub∣verted with Fire and Sword. Two thou∣sand Children cut in pieces were served as Food for the Elephants. The Queen was publickly whipped, and delivered up to the Lust of the Soldiers till she died. The young King was tied to her dead Body, and cast into the River; the same was done with 300 Gentlemen, after Stakes were drove through their Bodies. 16. The Prince of Avaa marching to the relief of his Sister, understood what had happened, and meeting the Traytor Xemin that had betrayed her leading a great Power, they came to a Battel, in which all the Avaa's were slain to 800, having made an incredi∣ble slaughter of their Enemies. The King coming up, fell upon those 800 and slew them all, with the loss of 12000 of his Army, and then beheaded the Traytor Xemin. 17. After this Victory he went up the Ri∣ver Queytor with 60000 Men in 1000 Boats, and coming to the Port of Avaa about the middle of October, burnt above 2000 Ves∣sels and some Villages with the loss of 8000 Men, and among them 62 Portugueses. He understood the City was defended by 20000 Moors, 30000 of which People had at Me∣leytay slain 150000 of his Army; and that the King of Siam was preparing to come to their Relief. Upon this News he retur∣ned with speed to Prom and fortified him∣self,
whilst an Ambassador went to purchase Succours from the Emperor of Calaminam with rich Presents, and the offer of certain Lands. 18. The Empire of Calaminam is said to be 300 leagues in length, and as much in breadth, formerly divided into 27 King∣doms, all using the same Language, beauti∣fied with many Cities and great Towns, and very fruitful. In it is to be found all that Asia produces. The Metropolis is called Timpham, seated on the River Pitui, which is covered with multitudes of Boats. It is girt by two strong and beautiful Walls, con∣tains 400000 Inhabitants, the Buildings good, especially some stately Palaces with fine Gar∣dens; in and about it are 2500 Temples belonging to 24 several Sects. Some use bloody Sacrifices, and some of the Priests abstain from Women, but satisfie their Lust by such ways, it were better they did not abstain. The Women are well shaped, fair and beautiful; though beautiful, they are chast, two Qualifications seldom go toge∣ther. Their Habit suitable to their Quality, not the Purse. The great ones are served in Gold. In their Law Suits, (O happy Coun∣try!) they use no Attorneys, Sollicitors, not Prctors; all Things are decided at one Hear∣ing. The Kingdom maintains 1700000 Sol∣diers, 400000 of them Horse: 6000 Ele∣phants, whereof the Emperor styles himself Lord by reason of their numerousness; his Revenue is above 20 Millions. There re∣main some footsteps of Christianity from
ancient Times among them; as, that they believe the Blessed Trinity, and make the sign of the Cross when they sneeze. 19. This was the Empire of Calaminnam, whither the King of Brama sent his Ambas∣sador. He being returned, the King sent 150000 Men in 1300 Boats against the City Sebadii, 130 leagues distant towards the North-East. The General Chaunigrem ha∣ving lost many Men in several Assaults, raised two Mounts, whence he did great harm in the City; but the Besieged sallying, killed at once 8000, another time 5000 of his Men. Let us a while leave the King of Brama's Affairs in this condition to see what was done at Siam, in order to treat of them both together. 20. The King of Cheammay, after destroy∣ing 30000 Men that guarded the Frontiers, besieged the City of Guitirvam, belonging to the King of Siam, who immediately ga∣thered 500000 Men, among which were 120 Portugueses much honoured by him. This multitude was conveyed along the Ri∣ver in 3000 Boats, and by Land marched 4000 Elephants, and 200 Pieces of Cannon. He found the Enemy had about 300000 Men, and 2000 Boats. The Siammite gave the Command of his Army to three Gene∣rals, two Turks, and one Portugues called Dominick Seixas. At first the Siammite was worsted, but recovering, defeated his Ene∣my, killing 130000 Men, whereof almost 40000 were good Horse. This Victory cost him 50000, but of the worst of his Army.
21. This done, he marched against the Queen of Guibem, who had given the Enemy passage through her Country, and entring the City Fumbacor, spared neither Sex nor Age. The Queen being besieged in her Court of Guiror, agreed to pay a Tribute of 60000 Ducats, and gave her Son as Hostage. Then he advanced towards the City Taysiram, (whither he thought the King of Chiammay was fled) putting all to Fire and Sword, on∣ly sparing the Women; then Winter coming on, returned home. 22. Being come to his Court of Oiaa, or Odiaz, he was poisoned by the Queen, then big with Child by one of her Servants; but before he died, caused his eldest Son, then young, to be declared King. He left 30000 Ducats to the 120 Portugueses that served him, and ordered they should pay no Duties in any of his Ports for 3 Years to come. 23. The Adulterous Queen, being near the time of her Delivery, poisoned her lawful Son, married her Servant, and caused him to be proclaimed King. But they enjoyed not the Crown long, being both slain at a Feast on the second of February by the King of Cambodia and Oya Pansiloco, with all their Adherents.
CHAP. V. Continues the Affairs of the Kings of Siam and Pegu. 1. THERE being no lawful Heir to the Kingdom of Siam, Pretiel a Religious Talagrepo, bastard Brother to the poisoned King, was by common Consent received as such, in the beginning of the Year 1549. The King of Brama or Pegu (for it is the same) seeing the Affairs of Siam in Consu∣sion, resolved to conquer that Kingdom. He raised an Army of 800000 Men, among which were 1000 Portugueses, 40000 Horse, 60000 Musqueteers, 20000 Elephants, 1000 Cannon drawn by as many Yoke of Oxen and Abadas, and 1000 Waggons of Ammunition drawn by Bufaloes. The Portugueses were commanded by Iames Suarez de Melo called the Gallego, who came to India in the Year 1538, in 1542 was Pyrating about Moçam∣bique, in 1547 was at the Relief of Malaca, and in 1549 being in the Service of this King was worth four Millions in Jewels and other things of value, had a Pension of 200000 Ducats yearly, and the Title of the King's-Brother, was supream Governour of all his Dominions, and General of his Army. 2. The King marched with that prodi∣gious multitude, and after one repulse took the Fort of Tapuram defended by 2000 Si∣ammites,
putting all to the Sword, with the loss of 3000 of Men. By the way the City Iuvopisam surrendred, and he sate down before Odiaa, the Capital of Siam, which seemed to make no account of that great Power. Iames Suarez who commanded in chief surprized hereat, gave an assault and lost 10000 Men. Another attempt was made with Elephants, but with no better success. 3. The King offered 500000 Ducats to have a Gate of the City delivered to him; Oya Pasiloco who commanded in the Town understanding it, opened a Gate, and sent to tell him he might bring the Money, for he was ready to receive it. The Tyrant had no answer to make, but continuing the Siege with vigour, was forced to flacken upon the coming of the new King. Five Months being spent with the loss of 150000 Men▪ News was brought that Xemindoo, a Man of great Parts, had rebelled at Pegu, and killed 15000 Men that opposed him. As soon as this was known in the Camp, 120000 Pegues deserted in hatred to that Foreign Ring that oppressed, and to the Insolence of Iames Suarez who commanded them. 4. Xemindoo was of the ancient Blood Royal of Pegu, a great Preacher, and esteem∣ed a Saint. He made a Sermon so effica∣cious against the Tyranny of Princes and Oppression of that Kingdom; that he was taken out of the Pulpit and proclaimed King. Whereupon he slew 5000 Brama's
in the Palace, seizing all the Treasure, and in a few Days all the strong Holds in the Kingdom submitted to him. 5. The Armies of the two Kings met within two Leagues of the City Pegu; that of Brama consisted of 350000 Men, Xemin∣boos of 600000; of the latter about 300000 were slain, and 60000 of the former. The victorious King entred Pegu, and contrary to agreement slew many, and seized great Treasures. 6. Mean while the City Martavam de∣clares for Xemindoo, killing 2000 Bramaes. Xemim of Zatam did the same in the City of that name. The King marched towards him, but he contrived to have him murder∣ed by the way. This was the end of that Tyrant. 7. Xemim was proclaimed King by his Party, and in nine Days gathered above 30000 Men. Chaumigrem, Brother to the dead King, plundered the City and Palace and fled to Tangu where he was born. Xe∣mim de Zatan became so odious by his ill Government, that in four Months many of his Subjects fled, and some joined with Xe∣mindo, who made an Army of 60000 Men. Let us leave him a while to relate the end of Iames Suarez de Melo, after the wonder∣ful Rise already mentioned. 8. Iames Suarez passing by a rich Mer∣chant's House, on the Day of his Daughter's Wedding, and seeing the great Beauty of the Bride, attempted to carry her away by force, killing the Bridegroom and others
who came to her rescue. Mean while the Bride strangled her self. 9. The Father expecting no Justice whilst that King Reigned, shut himself up, and never stirred abroad till Xemim de Zatan coming to the Crown, he so lamented his Wrong about the Town, that above 50000 of the People gathered about him crying out for Justice. The new King searing some worse consequence caused Suarez to be apprehended and delivered up to that Rabble. 10. This was accordingly performed, and and the multitude stoning him he was in a minute buried under a heap of Rubbish. No sooner was that done, but they took the Body from under that Pile, and tearing it in pieces delivered it to the Boys to drag about the Streets, they giving them Alms for so doing. His House was plundered, and the Treasure found being much less than what was expected, it was believed he had buried the rest. 11. The new King Xemim de Zatan soon followed Iames Suarez, for his Subjects no longer able to bear his Cruelty and Avarice, fled in great numbers to Xemimdoo, who was now Master of some considerable Towns. He marched to the City Pegu with 200000 Men, and 5000 Elephants. Zatan met him with 800000, and the Fight was long doubt∣ful, till Gonçalo Neto who with 80 Portu∣gueses followed Xemimdoo, killed Zatam with a Musket Shot, which opened the way for Zemimdoo into the City, where he was Crown∣ed
on the 3d of February 1550. Gonzalo Neto had 10000 Crowns for that fortunate Shot, and his Companions 5000. 12. Chaumigrem, who the Year before retired to Pegu, hearing afterwards that Xe∣mindoo was unprovided, marched against him, and obtaining the Victory brought that Crown again under the subjection of the Bramaes. Xemindoo taken some time after, was publickly beheaded. 13. The War began again between Chau∣migrem King of Pegu and him of Siam. The Army of Pegu consisted of 1700000 Men, among which were many Portugueses, and 17000 Elephants. All this Army came to Ruin, and the Kingdom of Pegu was made subject to that of Arracam, as was related in the 3d Chapter of the 2d Part of this Tome. The Kingdom of Siam, though much ha∣rassed with these Invasions, held out, and in the Year 1627, whereof we now treat, was possessed by the Black King, so called because he really was so, whereas all that People is white and fair. 14. This King in the Year 1621, sent an Embassy to Goa, desiring some Franciscans would come to Preach in his Kingdom. F. Andrew of the Holy Ghost went, and was much honoured by him at his Court of O∣diaa. He not only gave him leave to erect a Church, but was himself a the whole x∣pence, and offered the Father great Riches, which he constantly refused to the great ad∣miration of that King.
15. This Prince was of Stature small, of an ill Presence, and of Temper in part most wicked, and in part generous. Tho' cruel Men be generally Cowards, he was most cruel and valiant; and whereas Tyrants for the most part are covetous, he was most liberal. As much barbarity as he practised in some things, he shewed as much goodness in others. 16. He was not content to put Thieves and Robbers to common Deaths, but caused them to be torn to pieces in his Presence, and for his Pastime by Tigers and Croco∣diles. Understanding that a King his Vassal was about to Rebel, he shut him up in a Cage, and fed him with morsels of his own Flesh torn from his Body, and then had him fryed in a Pan. With his own hand he cut 7 Court-Ladies off at the Waste, only be∣cause he said they walked too fast. He cut off the Legs of 3 others because they staid long, being sent for Money he was to give to certain Portugueses: The first suffered for going too fast, these for being too slow. 17. This severity extended to brute Beasts. He cut off the Paw of a Monkey he much valued, because the silly Beast put it into a Box wherein were some Curiosities. A Horse no less esteemed had his Head cut off in the Stable before the rest, because he stopt not when he checked him. Some Crows making a noise over the Palace, he caused 500 of them to be catched, some were kill'd, others shut up, and others turned loose with Yokes about their Necks. A Tiger that did not
immediately seize a Criminal cast to him, was by his Command beheaded as a Co∣ward 18. Thus much of the wicked part of this Prince, now to speak of his Vertues. He kept his word inviolably, was rigorous in the Execution of Justice, liberal above mea∣sure, and very merciful to those that com∣mitted pardonable Faults. He sent a Portu∣gues with much Money to Malaca to buy several Goods, he after buying them lost all at Play, and yet had the boldness to re∣turn to the King's Presence, who received him kindly, saying, He valued the Consi∣fidence reposed in his Generosity, more than all the Goods he could have brought. He shewed great respect to our religious Men, and encouraged the planting of Christianity in his Dominions. His Valour was unspeak∣able. 19. Let us conclude this Chapter with a short Description of this Kingdom. Its pro∣per Name is Sornau. The extent along the Coast is about 700 Leagues, and the breadth up the Inland 260. Most of the Country consists of fruitful Plains, being watered by many Rivers: It is plentiful of all sorts of Provisions. The Hills are covered with variety of Trees, particularly abundance of Ebony, Brasil and Angelin. There are many Mines of Sulphur, Salt-Petre, Tin, Iron, Silver, Gold, Zaphirs and Rubies; much Sweetwood, Benjamin, Wax, Cinnamon, Pepper, Ginger and Cardamum, Sugar, Honey, Silk and Cotton. The King's Re∣venue
is about 13 Millions. In his Domi∣nions are almost 13000 Cities and Towns, besides innumerable Villages. All the Towns are walled, the People for the most part timorous, weak and unarmed. The Coast reaches to both Seas; on that of India are Iunzalam and Tanauzarim; on that of China, Mompolocota, Cey, Lugor, Chinbu and Perdio. CHAP. VI. Of the Governor Nunno Alvarez Botello, in the Year 1629. 1. THE Bishop late Governor being de∣ceased, and the next Patent of Suc∣cession opened, there appeared two named; D. Laurence de Cunna Commander of Goa for the Civil Government, and Nunno Al∣varez Pereyra for the Military. Of this last Name there were two in India, or none; for if D. Nunno Alvarez Pereyra, a Gentle∣man well known, was meant, there wanted the Title of Don; and if Nunno Alvarez Botello, the Sirname was wrong. 2. It was thought unlikely the Title of Don could be omitted through a mistake, because in Portugal it is peculiar to some Families only, and therefore could not be forgot. The mistake as to Nunno Alvarez Botello was more probable, because he had
long gone by the Name of Pereyra, in me∣mory of his Grandfather Alvarez Pereyra, and changed Pereyra for Botello when he in∣herited the Estate of his Father Botello; yet some called him by the one, and some by the other Name. For this Reason, and be∣cause the Counsel of Goa, and the Count de Linnares when he came to India allowed Nunno Alvarez Botello as such, I have given him this Place among the Governors of India. 3. Nunno Alvarez Botello zealous of the Honor of his Country, and considering how dange∣rous Delays might prove to Malaca then in distress, undertook the Relief of that Place, saying, he would refer the Decision of the Debate about his or the others Right to the Government till his return. Nevertheless by general Consent he went with the Title of Governor. Afterwards it was concluded by the Counsel of Goa, that Gonçalo Pinto de Fonseca the High Chancellor, should have the Charge of the Administration of Justice. Thus the whole Government was divided between Cunna, Fonseca, and Nunno. 4. Nunno now admitted as Governor, left the Palace to go live upon the Shore, to be the more at hand to forward the Prepara∣tions for his Design, wherein he used such Diligence, that having that Charge com∣mitted to him on the 2d of August, by the beginning of September he had gathered 900 Portugueses, a good Train of Artillery, store of Arms and Ammunition, and had 30 Sail ready to put to Sea, if the Weather had per∣mitted.
5. He set Sail the 22th of September, and was in 4 Storms; 2 of them so terrible, they all gave themselves for lost. In this manner he sailed to Pulubutum, and sent 2 Vessels to give notice of his coming at Ma∣laca, but came himself before the Advice, and understood that Michael Pereyra Botello sent by the Bishop late Governor was there before him. At Pulubutum he found a Vessel of Cochim, and two of Negapatan, which was some addition to his Fleet. On the 22th of October after Noon, the Fleet arrived at Malaca divided into 3 Squadrons, Nunno commanded one, the Vice-Admiral Coello and D. Hierome de Silveyra the other two. Laçamane was strangely surprized, because his Fleet was then in the River Pon∣gor, a League from the Fort, whence they could not escape ours. 6. Our General landed and gave the ne∣cessary Orders, then imbarquing again entred the River through showers of Bullets, which he repaid so effectually, that the Enemy the same Night abandoned their advanced Works, retiring to those of the Capuchin Monastery. There was not Water enough in the River Pongor for our Ships, therefore our General put what Men he could aboard 33 Balones or Balames, lighter Vessels, and with them went in Person to view the Ene∣my's Strength. 7. The Enemy in care for their Galleys, quit their Works at Madre de Dios and St. Iohn, and with wonderful Expedition cast up others. Nunno attacks them, and gain∣ed
so much advantage, he proposed to the Enemy to surrender, Marraja returned a civil and resolute Answer. 8. His Case being desperate, he attempt∣ed to escape by Night in the lesser Vessels, leaving the main Fleet to our disposal, but was discovered and prevented by the vigi∣lance and bravery of Beltasar Mendez Vas∣quez de Evora, who cut off many of his Men, not without some Loss, whereof was no small part that of his own Arm. Our Go∣vernor understanding the Enemy resolved to make use of their formidable Galleys pre∣pared to receive them, and perceiving that called The Terror of the World move, sent Francis Lopez Admiral of our Galleys to at∣tack her: He pierced through Clouds of smoke, and millions of Bullets, boards, and after two hours fight makes himself Master of her, killing 500 of 700 Moors she car∣ried, with the loss of seven of his own Men. 9. On the 25th of November the Enemy firing a Galley that was full of Women brought to People Malaca, and now sent to People Hell, again attempted to break through our Fleet, but without success, many of them were taken, and many leaping into the Water fled to the Woods, where they were devoured by wild Beasts. Laçamane hanging out a white Flag, sent Commissioners to treat with Nunno, who answered, No Treaty could be allowed, till they delivered our Ambassador Peter de Abreu, whom they kept
Prisoner. But they delaying, our Cannon began again to play furiously. 10. The last Day of November our Go∣vernor understood Marraja was killed, and at the same time, that our Allye the King of Pam was coming with 100 Sail to his assistance. Nunno went to visit him, and his Mother who came with him, and was received with the greatest Ceremonies used by those Eastern Princes to our Gover∣nors. Presents were sent reciprocally, and Nunno returned to his Post. The Enemy played their Cannon so desperately, it made our Men abate of their Confidence, but on the 4th of December sent our Ambassador Abreu with Proposals, only desiring 3 Gal∣leys of all their Fleet to carry off 4000 Men that were left of 20000 that came before the Town. 11. It was answered, they must imme∣diately surrender upon promise of Life. Whilst Laçamane doubted, Nunno assaults him, and forcing all his Works puts many to the Sword; some flying to the River are drowned, others in the Woods become food to the wild Beasts. In fine, Nunno obtain'd the most glorious Victory the Portugueses ever had in India; for of all that Fleet not one Vessel got off, and of that great Army not a Man escaped being killed, or taken. The Booty was such, all our Men were en∣riched, and Nunno reserved for himself nothing but a Parrot much valued by Laça∣mane.
12. He distributed the Cannon that was taken among the Forts of India, the Galleys and Slaves among the Religious, and so the rest to others. This done, he entred the City in Triumph, not that he desired it, having begged they would suffer him to go alone and barefoot, to prostrate himself be∣fore the Lord of Hosts, and acknowledge this Victory was wholly his, and not of the Portugueses, but he was forced to submit to the Will and Intreaties of the City. 13. The Streets were thronged with Men, the Windows and tops of Houses with Wo∣men, sprinkling sweet Waters, and strewing Flowers upon our Hero. The Musick could not be heard for the noise of Cannon, and all the City was filled with Joy. The like Demonstrations were afterwards in all our other Eastern Conquests. 14. This done, the Governor returned aboard, having other Designs in hand. Then came an Embassy from the King of Pera Tributary to him of Achem now de∣feated, he offered to pay our Crown the Tribute, he had till then paid the other, and to deliver up great Riches left in his Custody belonging to that King and the General Laçamane. D. Dierome de Silveyra was sent with 11 Ships to receive the Trea∣sure, and established the Peace, which he performed, and returned with all that had been promised. It was applied to pay the Men, and refit the Fleet. 15. The King of Pam came to congratu∣late the Victory, and Nunno set out to meet
him. Great Civilities and presents passed between them, and the King desired leave to see the City, which was granted, and whilst he was there nobly entertained, the Magistrates and Officers went to visit his Mother, a wise Woman, and great lover of the Portugueses. These Ceremonies per∣formed, Nunno resolved to sail towards the Streight of Cingapura, to secure the Ships that were expected from China against the Hollanders. The King kept him Company a little way, and they parted on the 11th of December, Nunno earnestly recommending to him the taking of Laçamane, who was fled into the Woods, and the King promi∣sing his utmost endeavours, after which they steered several Courses. CHAP. VII. Continues the Exploits of the Governor and General Nunno Alvarez Botello. 1. ABout the middle of Ianuary Nunno Alvarez Botello being about Romania, there were brought Prisoners to him Laça∣mane, and two other Officers, one of them the first Lord of Achem. Such was the dili∣gence used by the King of Pam. Our Go∣vernor received them honourably, and Laça∣mane being before him nothing daunted, said, Behold here Laçamane the first time over∣come
and Prisoner; but two things concur to make my Misfortune more tolerable, one, That I am overcome by you; another, That Obedience to my King contrary to my own advice, has brought me into this Condition. Nunno repli∣ed, Malaca is beholding to you for the advice you gave your Prince, and I for your Obedience to him. 2. Nunno Alvarez, by reason of the con∣trary Winds, could not come up with five Holland Ships that were about Pulolaor, and took one of our Galliots coming from China, the Men getting ashore. He returned to Malaca to refit his Ships, and resolved to attempt the Fort of Iacatara, the best those Rebels possest in Asia. But first he sent An∣tony de Sousa Coutinno with Laçamane's Ad∣miral Galley, called The Terror of the World, in which he was Prisoner in order to be sent to Spain, the Galley went of a Present to the City Goa. This Galley carried one Gun of Tambaca, a precious sort of Metal, which was valued at above 7000 Ducats, another much more for its curious Workmanship. Laçamane died before he could be brought to Portugal. 3. Nunno understanding the new Viceroy, the Count de Linnares, was arrived at Goa in October, gave him an account of what had been done, and desired assistance and his approbation to continue in those Parts, in order to carry on his Designs against the English and Dutch. About the end of April the Viceroy sent all he desired and much more, which was a full Power to act as Go∣vernour,
without being obliged to expect any Orders from Goa. 4. Mean while Nunno sailed with 2 Ships towards the Streight of Cingapura. Putting in at Iambe, a Place abounding in Pepper, and therefore much resorted to by our Euro∣pean Enemies, after a stout opposition he took two large Ships, the least whereof, with the Prisoners, was sent to Malaca. Then sailing up the River, he discovered another Ship so large and beautiful, he de∣signed it to make his entrance into Goa, but a Bullet falling into the Powder, blew her up. Passing farther up, several of the Men seeing the Water cool and clear, and not knowing its venomous quality, drank of it and died. 5. They spent 22 days going up the Ri∣ver with much trouble. About two leagues from them was the Town where the Hollan∣ders had two Ships under shelter, and our Admiral was desirous to take them. He manned 14 light Vessels to go view the Place and Works; 26 Sail of the Natives and Dutch met him, and were put to flight. 6. Having viewed the Works, and found it not practicable to attempt the two Ships by reason of the shelter they were under, he destroyed all the Neighbouring Places with Fire and Sword, then sailed down the River designing for Iacatara. By the way he dis∣covered a Dutch Ship of 24 Guns laden with Powder for their Forts. Our Vessels beset and boarded her, and she took fire.
7. Nunno understanding the Danger, or∣dered his Ships to draw off, lest the Enemy's blowing up some of them might be lost with it. Finding D. Antony Mascarennas did not bear away from her, he made to him with his Galliot to bring him off; but coming about the Poop of the Enemies Ship, she blew up, and sunk his Galliot downright. All our Vessels made to that place, and of all that was in the Galliot, they found nothing above Water but the Body of Nunno Alva∣rez, as yet with some life, which soon fled. 8. Every body was astonished at this un∣fortunate Accident, the Body was opened to be embalmed, and his Heart was found to be of an extraordinary bigness. At Malaca the Body was received with a general La∣mentation of the whole City, and honoura∣bly buried in the Church of the Jesuits. 9. Nunno Alvarez was well shaped, of a clear Complexion, his Hair yellow, some∣what tall, and Limbed proportionably, his Srength and Valour equal, his Countenance pleasing and grave. He was virtuously incli∣ned, addicted to Learning, chiefly Poetry, very Liberal, and not known to be addicted to any Vice. 10. The News of his Exploits and Death being brought together to King Philip the Fourth, he writ with his own Hand as fol∣lows. Considering the two Pinks that were fitting for India may be gone without an account of my Concern for the Death of Nunno Alvarez Botello, an Express shall immediately be sent by
Land with Advice, That if I were not now in Mourning for my Aunt the Queen of Poland, I would wear it for him. I create his Son an Earl, and allow his Wife the Honours of a Coun∣tess, and the Profits of the Fort of Mocam∣bique to pay her Debts, and whatever she has belonging to the Crown for ever, the Revenues of Military Orders she is possessed of for four Lives after her with 1500 Ducats Pension from others, and 1000 more during her Life. And if the Kingdom were in a better condition, I would bestow a great Estate on her. Nunno Alvarez was the 49th Governour, and D. Laurence de Cunna may be reckoned the 50th. CHAP. VIII. The Government of the Viceroy D. Michael de Noronna Count De Linnares, from the Year 1629, till 1635. 1. THis Year sailed from Lisbon D. Mi∣chael de Noronna Count de Linnares, Viceroy of India, with three Ships and six Galleons. One of them was cast away near the Cape of Good Hope, 1629. and not a Man of 400 that were aboard saved. 2. When the Count arrived at Goa, Nun∣no Alvarez Botello was gone for Malaca, and all Men promised themselves good success, when about the beginning of the Year came
the News of the Victory by him obtained. The Viceroy returned Thanks to the King of Pam for the Succours he carried to Ma∣laca, and sent him Presents. In the same manner he endeavoured to oblige the Neigh∣bouring Kings, and honoured the Admiral Antony Pinto de Fonseca for his good Ser∣vice. 3. Constantine de Sa, who Commanded in Ceylon, puffed up with the Honour of ha∣ving destroyed the City Candea, and relying too much upon the Fidelity of the Christian Chingala's, who underhand held Correspon∣dence with that King for our Destruction, gave too much Credit to Theodosius their Captain, by whom his Head was promised to the King, at the same time he promised D. Constantin to deliver the King into his hands. D. Constantin had more faith in that Traytor than in the Franciscan, who being among the Enemy sent him intelligence, or in his own Officers who foresaw his Ruin, which soon followed. 4. He marched from Columbo, leaving that Fort with almost no Garison, entred the Kingdom of Uva with 400 Portugueses, and destroyed the Capital City. As he re∣turned after this Victory, the King of Can∣dea, who had left that Town as a Bait to draw him on, meets him with a great Power. D. Theodosius and his Chingala's no sooner discovered the King's Forces, but they went over to him and faced the Portu∣gueses, whom they served the moment be∣fore.
5. The 400 Portugueses and 200 Natives that remained with them fought three days with incredible bravery. The General D. Constantin having done more than Man, was slain, and then his Men being broke, many were put to the Sword, and many made Prisoners. The King of Candea understan∣ding how weak the Garison of Columbo was, sate down before it with 50000 Men, and a number of Elephants, believing the Natives had (as was agreed) murdered those few Portugueses left there. But they seeing far∣ther than their General, had destroyed those were to kill them, and so the King was dis∣appointed. The Death of D. Constantin being known, Lancelot de Seixas succeeded him in the Command, and being in that Di∣stress, did more than could have been expe∣cted from so small a Force. 6. He distributed 400 Men, which was his whole Strength, including the Religious, among the most important Posts, who beha∣ved themselves so well, the King found he had a harder Task in hand than at first he had imagined. But Hunger was a more dange∣rous Enemy within the Walls, than the other without. This was much increased by the useless multitude of Women and Children, notwithstanding D. Philip Mascarennas Com∣mander of Cochin sent a Ship loaden with Provision and Ammunition to their Relief, D. Blas de Castro five from St. Thomas, and the Viceroy one. Yet all their Hope was in Nunno Alvarez Botello, not knowing, as yet, of his unfortunate End.
7. The Inhabitants of Cambolim à Penin∣sula, 40 leagues from Goa, and in sight of Cananor, offered the Viceroy leave to build a Fort there upon certain Conditions. Iames de Fonseca, Commander of Zofala, was sent to carry on that Work. Being begun, it was interrupted by Virabadar Hayque, the Usurper of the Kingdom of Canara. After much opposition, finding it could not be obstru∣cted, he made a Virtue of Necessity, and seemed to be well satisfied it should go on. The principal Article of the Cambolims was, That no Religious, but those of St. Francis, should be sent thither. At this time arri∣ved at Goa two Ships from Portugal, one of them returning, was lost upon the Bar of Lisbon. 8. It is, doubtless, those who are destined to perish unfortunately, meet their Fate even where they thought to find their safety; this will appear by the loss of the Ship St. Gonzalo, some of the Men whereof being taken up by that mentioned in the last Paragraph, were cast away in her; I will therefore give some account of the loss of the said Ship St. Gon∣zalo, in relation to the other. This Vessel having set out from Goa with two others, finding, after being parted from her Com∣pany, that she could not be kept above Water, they made the shore, and came to an Anchor in the Bay called Formosa, for its largeness being 3 leagues over, exposed to no Winds but the East, North-East, and South-East, and lies near the Cape of Good Hope.
9. Being come to anchor, they ought whilst the Weather favoured to have landed the Men and Goods that were not before cast overboard; but in stead of that, at the persuasion of some Officers, they at∣tempted to suck the Ship dry in order to sail again. Three Men were let down one after another to clear the Pump, and returned not; then a fourth being put down with a Rope about him, and brought up almost dead, it appeared the Steam of the Pepper which had taken wet killed them. 10. In order to refit the Ship, 100 Men landed, and 130 remained aboard, who af∣ter 50 days perished together with the Ship, by a sudden Storm being beaten to pieces upon the Coast. The 100 Men left ashore built Huts, because it would be long before they could find the means of going to Sea, which were only by building two small Ves∣sels out of the Wreck and the Trees on the Mountain. The Captain being old and sick, gave the Men leave to choose another, and they pitched upon Rocque Borges, who beha∣ved himself well; but one Simon de Figuey∣redo, in that misery ambitious of Command, endeavouring to kill him missed his Design, yet grievously wounded him, but Borges re∣covering, stabbed him, and all was quiet again. 11. They sowed some Seeds, and reaped the Fruit; mean while they lived upon Rice that had been saved, some Fish taken, and Cows and Sheep they bought of the Natives for Iron. The Language of these Natives
could not be understood, therefore they had recourse to Signs. They are not quite black, go naked, cover their Privy Parts with a Skin, in Winter wear Cloaks of the same, about their Necks hang Bulls Pizles, their Bodies anointed with the Dung of those Beasts, they make sudden stops in their Speech, carry Fox tails in their Hands to make Signs with; have no Towns, but wan∣der with their Cattle like the Hords of Arabs; some carry Stakes and Mats to make a sort of Tents; they use no Tillage, and offered our Men a Cake that seemed to be made of Meal of Roots mixed with Cow-Dung; they eat Flesh, but almost raw, just shewed to the Fire, which is made by rubbing Sticks together; their choicest Food is the Guts and Tripes, the Filth only squeezed out; their Weapons are Darts and Bows, no sign of Religion was discovered among them. But it was observed, that on Midsummer or St. Iohn Baptist's Day they appeared crowned with Garlands of sweet Herbs and Flow∣ers. 12. The Soil is fruitful, free from Stones, produces all sorts of Herbs, Plants, sweet Flowers, and variety of Trees. It is wa∣tered by great Rivers, and many Springs. The Spring begins in November. Summer and Winter in these Parts, as also in India, are not caused by the Sun coming near or going from the Zenith as in Europe, but by the Winds. It is Winter when it rains, and then the Sun is in his greatest Altitude; when in his greatest Declination it rains
not, and then it is Summer. Winter begins about the end of May, when the West Wind reigns, which brings great Rain, and lasts till September, during which time all Navigation ceases. From September till May the North East Winds blow, which keep a serene Sky, and this is the Summer when all put to Sea. Let us return to the de∣scription of that Country, and our Men there. 13. There is an infinite number of wild Beasts, and those very large, as Deer, Wolves, Sea-Horses, Bufaloes, wild Boars, Monkeys, Tigers, and Elephants, and some Rabbets not unlike our Ferrets. They have abun∣dance of wild Turkeys, Geese, Pigeons, Turtles, and Partridges, which last build their Nests hanging on Branches of Trees. Thus much of the People and Country a∣bout the Cape of Good Hope. There lived our Shipwreck'd Portugueses, and had erected a sort of Church where Mass was said, and there were frequent Sermons, five Priests being in that Company. 14. The Ships being built, in stead of Tar they made use of Benjamin and Frank∣incense; and wanting Oyl to dissolve them, supplied it with that of Sea-Wolves. Be∣fore their departure they erected a Cross on the top of a Mountain, with an Inscription signifying their Misfortune. The Vessels were launched, the Men and Goods shipped, one Party designing for Portugal, the other for India. The former, after some days fruitless labour, were almost in the same
place they set out from, and in that condi∣tion were taken up by Antony de Sousa & Carvallo in that Ship which, as was before said, afterwards perished. 15. D. Nunno Alvarez Pereyra was Com∣mander of Moçambique, and died this Year. D. Philipa Christian was Emperor of Mono∣motapa, with whom we were in league. A Cafre, called Capranzirle, rebelled against him, who falling upon a Body of our Men as they marched to Tete, slew 300 Portugueses, the chief cause whereof was a Dispute be∣tween our Captains about Superiority. All had been lost but for Christopher de Brito & Vasconelos, who put a stop to the Current of the Victorious Enemy. Iames de Sousa & Meneses commanded Moçambique at that time in the Place of Pereyra. Soon after it was known the Cafre died of a Musket Shot he had received, and a Brother of the Empe∣ror but 13 Years of Age, and a Christian, baptized by the Dominicans by the Name of Dominick, was proclaimed King. 16. About the end of this Year a great Danish Ship entred the Port of Coulam. Emanuel de Camara & Noronna Admiral of the Canara Coast went to meet her with a Galley and eight other Vessels, she fled, he gave her chace, and coming up after a sharp Dispute, fired and then took her; what re∣mained of her was carried to Coulam. 17. In April 1631, D. Blas de Castro, who commanded 12 Sail at Negapatam, took a Dutch Ship, and soon after in a Storm lost half his Ships, and about 100 Portugueses,
who got ashore, were left in slavery. The excessive Covetousness of the Portugueses keeping the Prices of Spice so high, moved our European Enemies to seek it at a cheaper Rate in India, and their Insolencies inclined the Indians to receive those Holland Rebels into their Ports. Covetousness couched under the Pretence of Religion, carried the Por∣tugueses to conquer those remote Countries; and the insatiable Avarice of some expels and makes them esteemed less than Rebels and Pyrats. 18. Two Ships that sailed from Lisbon for India, after five Months Voyage were put back into the same River, having lost many Men by sickness. In November sailed two Pinks. The Viceroy desiring to recover Ormuz, sent Dominick de Toral and Valdez a a Spaniard, to view the Place, and confer with Ruy Freyre then at Mascate about it, but it came to nothing. However a Fort was built at Iulfar, a Fishery of Pearl 50 Leagues distant from Mascate. 19. This Year our European Ene∣mies ranging the Seas without any 1632. opposition took many of our Ships, and ruined our Trade. Besides they incensed the Indian Princes against us, we having no body at those Courts to disappoint their Designs. The Ruine of our Affairs proceeds from the little regard the great ones have for the lesser sort; and the covetousness of the small ones, which made them forget their Coun∣try and their Honour.
20. The Portugueses dispersed in Ceylon since the defeat of D. Constantine, gathering again considerably annoyed the Enemy. Hence it appears our own Disorders are our Ruine. The Portugueses can recover what is lost, but know not how to preserve what they gain, which is the most glorious part, it being the Work of Fortune to gain, and that of Prudence to preserve. CHAP. IX. Of the Affairs of Ethiopia, during the Government of the Viceroy D. Michael de Noronna Count de Linnares. 1. THis being the last time we shall treat of Ethiopia, it will not be amiss to relate some farther Particulars of the Recep∣tion of the Patriarch D. Alfonso Mendez, though somewhat has been already said con∣cerning it. He sailed from Goa on the 17th of November 1624, and at Chaul received a Letter from the Emperor, Congratulating his arrival in India. 2. All the way he travelled in Ethiopia, he was entertained by the Governors and principal Men, was met by the Sons of those Portugueses who went thither with D. Chri∣stopher de Gama, to the assistance of the Em∣peror then Reigning, and came to Fremona, the chief Residence of Catholicks on the 21th
of Iune, 1625. The Emperor much rejoy∣ced at the News of his arrival, and sent two Men of great Quality to Conduct him, but could not then see him, being in the Field with his Army against certain Rebels. On the 6th of February 1626, he was sent for by the Emperor to the Army. The Prince accompanied by the Viceroys and Nobility, went out to meet and conduct him through a Lane of 18000 Men to a Tent provided for his reception. There he put on his Pontifical Robes, and being mounted on a Horse led by the Emperor's High-Steward Sarta Christos, and under a Canopy held up by Viceroys and Lords, went to the Church, where the Emperor sitting in a rich Chair, with a Crown of Gold on his Head, and rich Cushions at his Feet, expect∣ed him. The Emperor rising embraced him, and then all the Cannon was fired. 3. The Emperor went to his Palace, the Patriarch to the Habitation of his Religious, and having put off his Pontifical Ornaments returned to Court. The Emperor made him sit, expressed much Joy for his coming, and appointed a Day for all the Nobility to meet and make their publick Submission to the Sea of Rome. Wednesday the 11th of Ia∣nuary being the Day prefixed, the Emperor and Patriarch were equally seated, and there appeared before them all the Princes, Vice∣roys, Lords, Commanders, Priests, Reli∣gious, Masters and Lawyers. The Patri∣arch made an Harangue to them, which was answered in the Emperor's name by his
Nephew and High-Steward Viceroy of Semen Melcam Christos. 4. The Speeches ended, the Emperor turning to the Patriarch said, I would not have your Lordship believe the thing I am going about is newly thought of, for it is long since I made my Submission to to his Holiness by the means of Father Su∣perior, who is here present. Then the Patriarch opening a Missal, or Mass-Book, the Emperor knelt and swore in these words. We Sultan Segued, Emperor of Ethiopia, do believe and confess, That St. Peter, Prince of the Apostles, was by our Lord Jesus Christ constituted Head of all the Christian Church throughout the World, when he said to him, Tu es Petrus & super hanc Petram edificabo ecclesiam meam, & tibi dabo claves regni coelorum; and again, Pasce oves meas. We believe and confess that the Pope of Rome, duly elected, is the true Successor of St. Peter the Apostle, and has the same Power, Dignity, and Supremacy over all the Catholick Church. And we do Promise and Swear to give true Obedience to, and humbly submit our selves and our Empire at the Feet of the Holy Father Urban, by the Grace of God the Eighth, and our Lord: So help us God and the Holy Evangelists. 5. All there present Swore in the same manner, and that done they took an Oath to the Prince as Heir apparent. The Em∣peror allotted the Patriarch more and better Lands than his Predecessors had enjoyed,
and sent him a Present of 2000 Crowns. There was a great resort of Ethiopians to be instructed in the true Catholick Doctrine, their greatest difficulty was to be satisfied with one Wife, and fast Lent; nevertheless the number of Converts in a few Days amoun∣ted to 100000. 6. The Emperor after this taking the Field against the Rebels, subdued them, kill∣ing above 100000. Still the Empress con∣tinued obstinate, and was a great favourer of the Schismaticks. In the Years 1627 and 1628, above 160000 were converted. There were nine Residencies of the Jesuits, and in them above 200000 Communicants. 7. Who would imagine this same Empe∣ror Sultan Segued, who had given such evi∣dent Signs of a real Conversion, should en∣deavour to root out the Faith in his Domi∣nions. The same Emperor on the 24th of Iune 1632, by publick Proclamation banish∣ed the Catholicks, and gave free liberty to all his Subjects, to return to their antient Ceremonies and Errors. 8. The chief Motives of this great Change, were the natural inconstancy of the Ethio∣pians, and their Inclination to Judaism. Im∣mediately after the Proclamation for banish∣ment, 4 Portuguezes suffered Martyrdom; nor were there wanting Ethiopians who re∣mained constant, notwithstanding the seve∣rity of the Edicts. Thus ended the great hope of reducing the Emperor to the Church.
CHAP. X. Continues the Government of the Vice∣roy D. Michael de Noronna, Count De Linnares. 1. IN its proper place we said the Portu∣gueses would one day pay for the In∣solence wherewith they treated the Kings of Mombaça, and now the Day is come, which was the 15th of August. Peter Leytam de Gamboa was Commander of that Fort, who using that King as if he had been his Slave, provoked him to revolt, and deliver himself from the Tyranny he was under. The King was D. Hierome Chingulis, who being bred a Catholick at Goa under the Religious of St. Augustin, had submitted to the See of Rome, as was related in the Year 1627. The me∣mory of his Father's Death, who was cruel∣ly murdered by the Commander Simon de Melo Pereyra, was no small incentive to stir up the King. 2. He used often to visit his Father's Tomb, and was once observed by a Portugues, who seeing him weep, and use some Cere∣monies he thought savoured of Mahometa∣nism, gave an account thereof to the Com∣mander Gamboa, who told him privately, he would the next Day secure and send the King to Goa. As soon as that Man heard it,
he acquainted the King by whose Order he was slain in a Wood by the Cafres. 3. The King having dispatched that Por∣tugues, gathered 300 Cafres, and entring the Fort as it were to visit the Captain, slew him and all the Guards, making himself absolute Master of the Place. The Wife and Daughter of the Commander were killed with a Priest, for refusing to renounce the Faith. 4. This done, the King in his Fury put all the Portugueses to the Sword, and fired their Town. Some few escaping to the Convent of the Augustins, held out 7 Days, when for want of Provision they surrendred upon promise of their Lives, but were all with their Wives and Children shot to Death. Then the King declared himself a Maho∣mtan, affirming he had long hated the name of a Christian. This was the effect of the Portugues Villanies; for could he have lived among them, he had never proceeded to commit all these Murders. 5. After gathering the Plunder of the Dead, the King came out a Horseback to view the Bodies of the slain, which were 60 with their Families. Some of the Converts died among the Portugueses, the rest being assembled in the Church the King made a Speech, advising them to return to their old Religion, which some of the Auditory did; such as refused were sent to Meca with Mer∣chandize to be sold in order to bring some Turks to his Assistance. All was sent in a good Ship, which returned with a Flag; the
Cazices or Priests of theirs said, would de∣fend them against all Enemies, being set upon the Fort. 6. The King putting to Death all that would not renounce the Faith, only spared his Queen who was a Native of India, and that at the request of his Aunt, but treated her as a Slave, and it was said afterwards, when he fled to Arabia, he prevailed with her to turn Mahometan. In fine, all that belonged to the Church was profaned, and then the King applied himself to carry his Revenge farther, advertising the neighbour∣ing Kings of what he had done, and advising them to kill all the Portugueses in their Do∣minions. Those of Montangante, Tanga and Motone put it in Execution; others sent him Succors. Manazonga King of the Mozungoes, came in Person to his Assistance. 7. The News of the Loss of Mombaça being brought to Goa, all Men of Sense ra∣ther admired it had been kept so long, than that it was now lost, being sensible of the reason there was to expect it: However im∣mediate care was taken for the recovery of it. The Viceroy fitted out a Galley, a Pink, 7 Galliots, and 7 other Vessels, carrying 500 Portugueses and his Son, who being too young for that Command, it was given to D. Francis de Moura, a Man well versed in the Affairs of India. He sailed from Goa about the middle of December, came to Am∣paza on the 2d of Ianuary, and was 1632. there informed of the Posture of those Af∣fairs by certain Portugueses. On the 10th
he arrived at Mombaça, and was joined by 3 small Vessels sent from Mascate by Ruy Freyre with 100 Men; Adam Barbosa and Martin Lorenco brought 20 Men at their own charge. The Cities of Chaul and Baçaim sent each a Vessel, in which were 30 Soldiers; so the number of Sea and Landmen was made up to 800. It soon appeared this Fleet would not be very successful; for whereas they might have taken or burnt some Ships of the Enemy that were in the Harbour, they did neither, every-Captain striving to execute it, it was omitted by all. 8. D. Francis began to land some Men with difficulty, because the Sea ran high, and on the 11th of Ianuary went in his Boat with the Viceroy's Son to view the Channel of Marepa, leaving five Vessels there to hin∣der any resort from the Continent to the Island. Five Men deserted to us from Mom∣baça. Gaspar Pacheco was ordered to land all Necessaries for a Siege under the Fort upon the Continent. Two Boats that were under the Fort were taken, and D. Francis sent an Express to our King by the way of Moçambique, promising speedily to make himself Master of that Place, but the Event depending upon Fortune, he was not so good as his Word. The Major Dominick de Toral & Valdez, who went over with the Viceroy from Madrid, was sent to view the Ground about the Fort, which he found would be dangerous to be supplied with Pro∣visions from the Sea, because being in the middle of the Island, Provisions and Ammu∣nition
must be conveyed thither with a strong Guard. 9. Andrew Vello took 6 of the Enemies Boats, and had 5 Seamen and a Soldier killed and others wounded. On the 15th Toral went again to view the Fort with 10 Men in a Boat, had 3 killed, and the Ensign Carvallo who dying confessed great Crimes aloud. Andrew Vello attempting to burn the Cops near the City lost one Man had 3 wounded, and failed of his Design. On the 16th D. Francis with the Viceroy's Son went to view the Fort on the side of the Sea. Toral and others going up a Creek observed that side. On the 17th D. Francis and Toral viewed the City of the Moors, and Bastion of the Turks. It was resolved in Council to land at the Place called Our Lady. 10. D. Francisco was ashore on the side of Tuaca preparing Gabions and Necessaries to land, he made a Review of his Men, and found above 400 Portugueses and many Blacks. On the 22th he ordered Andrew Vello what was to be done on the side of the Moors City to divert the Enemy, that they might not hinder our Landing. This Day 8 of our Seamen deserting to the Enemy dis∣covered our Designs; which caused them to move their Cannon to a place whence they could annoy us. On the 24th the Men at∣tempting to land, could not perform it in the place appointed, because the Sea was rough, but did at the place where two of the Enemies Ships lay.
11. They marched in good Order with their Cannon, through difficult ways to a Wood where they halted and Entrenched, to find out a fit Place for a Battery. Three hundred Blacks opposed the Landing, but were repulsed with Loss; of our Men 8 were killed. Those who were to return to the Ships did it in a great Conster∣nation, some throwing away their Arms at the first sight of the Blacks. On the 26th the Enemy appeared, shewing the Heads of 2 Portugueses they had killed the Day before. In order to make our Approaches, a House defended by some Blacks was taken, but found of no use to us. Three Battalions of Blacks beset the House, and pressed those within so vigorously, that we lost 28 Men, besides many wounded, among which was D. Francis hurt with 24 Arrows; 7 of which were mortal, as being poisoned, if the Limb be not cut off, or the Blood-sucked. A Ser∣vant sucked those Wounds and died, but saved the Life of D. Francis. 12. The nose of the Fight brought D. Ferdinand the Viceroy's Son thither with some Men, which saved those that were left in the House, for the Blacks presently re∣tired to a Wood, whence they annoyed us, till the Cannon being brought they fled. D. Francis being unfit to Command by reason of his Wounds, was carried aboard his Gal∣ley, and Gonçalo Barros de Silva was appoint∣ed to Command in his stead, but the Men refusing to obey him, Peter Rodriguez Bo∣tello the Vice-Admiral, who had before re∣fused
that Post, was obliged now to accept of it. It was now the beginning of February, and our Men were more attentive to commit Villanies, than prosecute on the War; D. Francis understanding it, caused himself to be carried ashore in a Chair, and put some Remedy to it. Two large Vessels were built to batter the Fort, and they began to exe∣cute it successfully, and promised a good E∣vent. A Battery was also raised upon the Turks Bastion. On the 2d of March the E∣nemy began to play a twelve Pounder from the Moors Town, which did much harm aboard our battering Vessels, killing 3 Men and wounding 10. 13. On the Turks Bastion were planted 2 ten Pounders, and began to play. The Moors of the Continent attacked it by Night, killed 2 of our Men, and wounded 6. At last that Battery was found to be useless, so all was Shipped again; and it was agreed, there was no staying there longer, for Win∣ter came on, and it was necessary to return to Goa. Winter begins there at the end of May, and March was not yet over; there was time enough to take the Place, because it could not hold out four Days. In fine, D. Francis returned to Goa, leaving three Ships to guard the Coast, and hinder any Provisions from being carried to the Enemy. Two of them had Orders as soon as Winter began to retire to Patij and Zanzibar, which they did before their time, leaving their Vessels behind. A Seaman deserting before the Fleet set Sail, gave Intelligence to the
Enemy of our Designs; and they planting a Gun on the top of the Mosque did much harm, chiefly among those that were wa∣tering to return to Goa. The Fleet sailed on the 20th of March, and arrived at Goa the last Day of May. 14. As soon as the King of Mombaça saw the Coast clear, he made use of his own and our two Ships left there, to get away. He imbarqued all the Artillery, razed the Fort and City, destroyed all Fruit-trees, and then sailed with his Treasure, some Moors, and some Native Christians to the Coast of A∣rabia. That Place lay 2 Months desolate before any of our People knew it, and might have been so much longer, had not some Moors advertised Peter Rodriguez Botello who was at Zanzibar, and immediately went over to Mombaça, where beginning to build he found 5 or 6 Servants of Portugueses that had lain hid in the Woods when that De∣struction happened. 15. Mean while at Goa the Viceroy was accused for sending D. Francis de Mour upon that Expedition, and he for want of Con∣duct, and coming away too soon. The Viceroy excused himself, and put the other upon his Tryal, desiring Toral to take the Guilt upon himself, by saying he had voted for coming away, which he refused, and was 2 Months in Prison without any cause shown. At last he was released to accom∣pany D. Roderick de Costa, who towards the end of this Year was going to discover cer∣tain Islands, but meeting two Dutch Ships
about Damam had his Head struck off by a Cannon Ball the first Charge; so the Fleet returned without doing any thing. D. Fran∣cis de Moura was cleared of that Impeach∣ment, being honoured at Madrid. 16. The Hollanders lying at Pulolaor inter∣cepted most of our China Fleet, which en∣abled them to relieve all their Forts and Factories. This great Booty cost them no Blood, because we had no fighting Ships on that Sea, all being imployed at Mombaça and Ceylon. 17. The Persecution of the Christians con∣tinued at Iapan, but there were hopes it would cease, the Emperor lying very ill. In China they were alarmed by the Tartars. Nababo Azafacan Father-in-Law to King Corran with the Army of the Mogol besieged Visapor, and some time after drew off with great loss sustained by Want and Sickness. The Mogol so highly resented this Misfor∣tune, that he removed Nababo, though his Favourite, and preferred to that place Mo∣batecan his Enemy, a Man of great Repute among the Soldiers. Thus ended this Year, much dreaded in India, without any known reason, every Body saying before it came; Ob that the Year 32 were past.
CHAP. XI. Of the Recovery of Ceylon, during the Government of the Viceroy the Count de Linnares. 1. AFter the Natives had left but a small part of the Island, Ceylon in our Pos∣session, the Kings of Matale, Uva and Candea with 20000 Men came to Besiege Columbo, the chief Place then in our hands. The Be∣sieged were reduced to that Extremity, it is said they eat the Dead, and some Mothers their own Children. Then came in five Ships sent by the Viceroy, rather to take up the Cinnamon was to be sent to Portugal, than relieve the Place. But the Besiegers thinking it was Relief raised the Siege. D. Philip de Mascarennas went over from Cochin to Ceylon with a Pink loaden with Provisions and well manned at his own expence, which was a great help to that Place. 2. The Viceroy gave the Command of General of Ceylon to D. George de Almeyda, who set out on the 19th of February 1631, in the great Galley taken by Nunno Alvarez Botello, when he destroyed the Fleet of A∣chem. This Vessel tho' large being not sound enough to endure any Storm might rise, a Flyboat that went loaded with Provisions, was ordered to keep close always with D. George, which soon left him, and was the cause that many perished.
3. The Galley having coasted as far as Cape Comori, and then striking over to Cey∣lon, a Storm arose, and it appeared impossi∣ble to save her. D. George perceiving she must perish, launched the Boat and got into it with 29 Persons, whereof 4 were Religious. This was done so late and with such preci∣pitation, that there was not in the Boat Provision for one meal. The Night was spent in lading out the Water the Sea and Rain brought into the Boat. In the Morn∣ing discovering a Sail at a distance, tho' D. George assured them in 3 or 4 Days he would bring them to Maldivia, they made towards it, and coming near found it was their own Galley then sinking. 4. With much trouble on the 4th Day they reached one of the Maldivia Islands about evening. This was at a time that the Natives keep a Fast of 30 Days, during which time they eat nothing between Sun and Sun, and do nothing but gormandise all the Night. Here D. George stayed 30 days, spending what he had got to maintain his Men, and got some Shipping to go over to the Coast of India. The Men made a sort of Habitation, but D. George lay in his Boat to be always the readier against the Moors, who kept them always upon their Guard. There was a vast number of Mosquitoes or Gnats, that made the Blood run where they stung; next followed a Sickness which none were free from, and was cured by Bleeding; two died of it, one a Franciscan. The King of the Islands writ to D. George, condoling
his Misfortunes, and sending him a parcel of Rice. 5. Being provided with all Necessaries they sailed to Cochim, where D. George lay sick a long time. When he was somewhat recovered, there came to that Port 2 Pinks sent by the Viceroy to the Relief of Ceylon with 500 Cafres, 800 Canaraes, some Portu∣gueses, 40000 Xerasins, which are worth a∣bout a piece of Eight each, Provisions and Ammunition. D. George embaqued with them, having raised some more Men; sailed from Cochim on the 17th of October, and ar∣rived at Columbo the 21th. He marched not presently towards the Enemy (though cen∣sured upon that account) by reason the Season being wet, that Country, which is for the most part plain, is boggy and overflowed. Besides the Trees are full of Leeches, which drop down upon Men as they pass, and bleed them to Death. 6. The Season being somewhat more fa∣vourable, D. George marched on the 5th Day of Ianuary 1632, and passed the River Calane towards the North. Six Ships were ordered to go up the River with several Pieces of Cannon, but only two could per∣form it. The first day they could march but one League, and quartered at Calane. Next Morning having heard Mass, they marched with great difficulty, by reason of the Bogs and Waters, through which they waded up to the Breast. Besides the Ene∣mies Musketiers endeavoured to hinder our Passage about the Fort called Tranqueyra∣grande,
but many of them were slain, our General giving 3 or 4 Pistols for every Head that was brought him. This Pass being clear∣ed they advanced to another, where the E∣nemy appeared again. Our General went himself to view it, and returning disposed his Men to attack those Works, in which were almost 6000 Men. It was done with such fury, that many of the Enemy being killed, the rest fled, firing all they left be∣hind. Our Army advanced to Maluana, where they found only 3 old Men, who said the Prince of Candea hearing the ap∣proach of our Men, had the day before aban∣doned that Place. All the Houses were burnt by D. George his Order. 7. The Fame of these Actions made many come in and submit, whom our General treated with kindness and rewarded; but Fear and Malice being equally prevalent in them, they hid themselves, thinking to get away to their own People again, which D. George understanding caused them to be apprehended, gave some as Slaves to the Captains, and delivering one to the Cafres, they in sight of his Wife and Children im∣mediately cut him in pieces, which they di∣vided among themselves to eat. 7. The Army marched to Cardevola, where were 2 Forts, whence showers of Bullets flew. The General having viewed them, drew out 3 Battalions to give the assault. These advanced, and the whole Army ambi∣tious of sharing the Honour, followed of their own accord, and D. George had much
difficulty to stop them. On a sudden the 3 Bodies crying St. Iames applied the scaling Ladders, mounted, and planted our Colours upon the Walls of both Forts. We lost two Officers and four private Men, and had some few wounded. As our General entred one of these Forts, a Chingala came and told him that of Tanqueyra Grande was aban∣doned by the Enemy; he sent thither a Body of Men, and found it was true, and that they had left in that Fort good Brass and Iron Cannon, many Muskets and Ammuni∣tion. Those of Cardevola which were pre∣sently demolished were no worse provided, one piece of Cannon was found with the Royal Arms of Portugal upon it. 8. In several Parts of the River Bodies were afterwards found with Cymeters, which showed many in confusion were drowned for haste. The Enemy had strowed Crows∣feet about the Fort to gall our Men, which did them the greatest harm as they fled. Our Army pursued the Enemy, but could not come to any Action, till they met at the Foor of the Mountains of Candea, where they were defeated, and we remained Ma∣sters of the Forts of Manicravate, Sofragan, Maluana, and Caliture. About Maturé, where D. Theodosius lived as a King, was the like Success. 9. The same at Chilao, a Sea-Port, which our General assaulted by Sea and Land, and took there a great Booty, part whereof were 130 Vessels. The King of Candea sent Am∣bassadors to sue for Peace, the General was
against it, but being importuned by the re∣ligious, in consideration of the Misery the Country was reduced to by those Troubles, he granted the Ambassadors should go to Goa, to treat with the Viceroy. In fine, D. George not only recovered our lost Reputa∣tion, but encreased it. 10. D. George found the Inhabitants of Columbo, that ought to have worshipped him for delivering them from a deplorable Condition, more dangerous Enemies than the Natives. He endeavoured to put in Execu∣tion the King's Orders, to prevent the Frauds committed by the Officers of the Revenue; they arming made several Shots at him, by one of which he lost a Finger. This Mutiny being looked into, those concerned were put out of their Places and the Island; and it was declared in the Council of State, that D. George had acted better then any before him; and it was requisite for the King's Service, he should be continued in that Post. Peter de Silva, who was Viceroy after the Count de Linnares, removed him, only because it is a Custom for the new Viceroy to undo what his Predecessor has done. But no sooner did D. George leave the Command of the Island Ceylon, than all that he had gained was lost. Returning to Goa poor and full of Merit; he died in a low Condition, rather (as was be∣lieved) through Grief than Age.
CHAP. XII. Of several Occurrences till the end of the Government of the Viceroy the Count De Linnares. 1. AN Indian Woman married to a Portu∣gues was delivered at Bardes of a Monster with two Heads and Teeth, the Ears like a Monkey, on the Forehead an Ex∣crescency of Flesh like a Horn, the Legs so joyned they looked like one, leaping out of the Midwife's hands; it seized a Black, and bit out a piece of her Flesh. The Wife of a Heathen Barber brought forth much such another Creature, and a Cow a third, all successively one after the other. These Pro∣digies were general through most of the World this Year. 2. The Year 1633. was not quite unlike it; the beginning of this Year we lost the Town of Golin in Bengala in this manner. The Mogol having lost above 50000 Horse the last Year in several Engagements he had with Hidalcan, attributed it to the Assistance the latter received from the Portugueses. In Revenge thereof he now besieges Golin with almost 200000 Men by Land, and a vast Fleet sent down the River Ganges. In the Place were 200 Portugueses and their Slaves, who defended themselves several days with∣out
out any Fortifications, killing 50000 Mogols. Being no longer able to hold out, they at∣tempted to escape in four Vessels, two whereof full of Women and Children, and vast Riches, fell into the Enemies hands. The Women, rather than remain in Slavery, fired the Vessels, and were burnt with their Children and Treasure. The other two Ships with the Men were also taken; and the Mogol offering their liberty to such as were not Inhabitants of Cambolim, they re∣fused, saying, They would all share the same Fortune. It is not known whether they were killed or made Slaves. 3. The War continued in Ceylon with the King of Candea. The false D. Theodosius had returned to our Friendship but with a design to deceive us, but was at last killed. The King sued for Peace, and submitted to our Conditions, but then again refused to ratifle it, and Iames de Melo & Castro offering him Battel if he persisted in the denial, he signed the Treaty. Thus we were again restored to all that had been lost in Cey∣lon. 4. Last Year three Ships were ready at Lisbon to sail for India at the usual time, which is about March, but the Weather pro∣ved so bad, they were disappointed. In Iuly three others set out, and two of them had the good fortune to make the Voyage without seeing Land till they came to Goa. This Year we now treat of sailed the three Ships that were disappointed the last. One of these coming back, was cast away beyond
the Cape of Good Hope, but lost not one Man, and very few of them died ashore. Of the Wreck, and some Wood cut in the Moun∣tains, they built two small Vessels that car∣ried them off, though not without difficulty, the greatest to make the Men agree to this only means of saving themselves. 5. On the 16th of February 1634, Antony Tellez de Silva sailed from Goa towards the North with 6 Galleons, in search of the like number of Dutch Ships that came from Per∣sia. About Trapor he discovered them, and giving chase they fled, throwing overboard many Goods to lighten. 6. The Viceroy was not so wholly taken up with the Military Affairs, but he could attend adorning and beautifying the City. He built a Church dedicated to St. Laurence near the Bar, and gave it to the Francis∣cans. Then he founded and endowed an Hospital for the Poor in the Field of St. La∣zarus, which made four Hospitals at Goa. He rebuilt the Council-house of the Inqui∣sition, and Palace of the Viceroys, which were going to ruin. 7. For Military Works, at Panelim he finished that called the Powder-house, where are daily made 14 Quintals of Powder. Repaired the Fortifications of Mascate, and others. These Works seem sufficient to have made him beloved, but either some Humours made him odious, or else it was impossible to please the Portugueses. Some discontented Persons, when the Viceroy was about to depart, set up several scandalous
Libels against him in publick Places, and hanged his Effigies on the publick Gibbet. Yet after all it was voted, that an honou∣rable Statue should be erected to him in the same place where the other had been hang'd, but it succeeded not, for when the Pedestal was set up, there arrived a new Viceroy, and the arrival of such always reverses whatso∣ever was done before. 8. Now died the famous Commander Ruy Freyre de Andrade full of Merit unrewarded; we have already spoke of his Actions, his Qualities were a mixture of good and bad, more Politick than Conscientious. He was Prudent and Generous. Gave all his Orders in doubtful terms, to reserve a Meaning to justifie himself by in case of ill success. Was familiar with no body, choosing rather to be feared than beloved. He heard all Soldiers standing, or made them sit. Any breach of Orders he never pardoned, but beheaded a Captain for saving a beautiful young Woman, being commanded to put all to the Sword. It is needless to repeat more Extravagancies of this kind. 9. Two Ships sailed from Lisbon, carrying a new Viceroy to India. The Count De Linarez returned with them, one whereof was cast away near Lisbon; the other, in which he was, went to Malaga, where many of the Men died, much of the Loading was wasted, and the Ship was broke up. 10. The Count went to Court, and was the first that presented his Prince with part of what he had gained. To the King he
gave a Hatband, to the Queen a pair of Pendants, both valued by some 100000, by others 80000 Crowns. He was at first re∣ceived with Hononr, and after Imprisoned. The Count was of a beautiful Presence, and comely Aspect, discreet and well inclined, of Viceroys the 27th, of Governours the 51st, and 6th of the Sirname. 11. This Year was remarkable in Cochin∣china for a Dearth, which caused such a Famine as had not been known in the me∣mory of Man, and for repeated Treasons. About the beginning of the Year a Bastard Son of the King, but Adopted by the Queen, went to govern the Provinces between Ca∣cham and Chapa; he had before his depar∣ture conspired with eight principal Men to bring the Government of the Kingdom into his and his Brothers hands, which then was managed by the Sons of another Woman. As soon as he came to his Government he began to make Warlike Preparations; the King understanding it sent for him, and he kept off till the Kind died, and the Princes possessed themselves of the Palace. The Conspirators came to celebrate the Funeral Rites. An Uncle of those young Princes was present, who understanding those Trai∣tors design to murder his Nephews, called up the Guards that were ready to execute his Orders, but he thought it enough to terrifie those Conspirators. The Funeral ended, the Prince having with difficulty got the Royal Seal from the Queen, tendred it to his Uncle, offering to acknowledge him as
King; but the old Man unwilling to be out∣done by the Youth, refused the Offer, only desiring him to remember his Children. 12. The News of the King's Death being brought to the Bastard at the City Cacham, he ordered the deepest Mourning according to the custom of that Country, which was to cut their Hair short. This to them is a great Affliction, for they wear their Hair at length like Women, and think it makes them beau∣tiful, whereas they are very ugly. This done, he raised Men, and fortified himself at Turam. The young King's two Brothers soon came upon him, and were Masters of all. He fled, and being taken, attempted to kill himself with a Knife; but failing, was committed to Prison, where he poisoned himself. After his Death many Persons of great Note, being Accomplices in the Trea∣son, were put to Death.
CHAP. XIII. The Government of the Viceroy Peter de Silva, from the Year 1635, till 1638. 1. ABout the end of this Year 1635, the Count de Linarez resigned the Go∣vernment of India to Peter de Silva. The same People that accused the Count for be∣ing so rigid, accused Silva of being too easie. Perhaps they blamed the Extreams, but what Man can overcome his Inclinations? Every Man's Qualifications ought to be looked into before an Employment is given him. I know not whether Sylva were natu∣rally easie, but he had gained the Nickname of Mole, which in Portugues signifies Soft. Neither did he like the Government, being often heard to say, God forgive them that na∣med me for this Imploy, for I am not fit for it. 2. In March, Antony Tellez set out again with his 6 Galleons, after 13 Sail of Dutch he expected to meet at Surat. A Storm forced him to Bombaim, and the Enemy to shun him put into Dabul. Tellez returned to Goa, and being there at Anchor, four great Hol∣land Ships appeared before the Port, he went out, and having fought two days, for∣ced them to lighten their Loading, the better to escape. This done, he enters the Port
again, and a Squadron of 10 Sail of the Enemy was seen at his Heels, the Disadvan∣tage being too great, it was not thought expedient to fight them. 3. This Year was signalized with a Mi∣racle that happen'd with a Crucifix. There is a Monastery of Nuns at Goa, in the Arch of their Choir facing the Nuns was placed a Crucifix, the Workmanship whereof was not liked because the Eyes were quite shut, and the Knees too high. On the first Friday of Lent, after the usual Procession, some Nuns being at Prayers in the Choir, di∣stinctly saw the Image open its Eyes; the Women frighted cried out, and all the other Religious with the Father Confessor resorted thither, and before Midnight all of them saw the Eyes open 26 times, and sometimes the Body and Cross seemed to move, the Mouth opened as if it spoke, and Blood ran from the Temples and Wounds. Some part of these Wonders were seen several days, till on a Tuesday, the Church being full of People, they all saw what the Nuns had seen, for the Body of the Image turned to one side. The Bishop and Inquisitors were Witnesses of much of this Motion, and the whole was confirmed by the Asseveration of all the Citizens. The Eyes remained half open, the Knees stretched lower, the Feet falling and dragging the Nail after them, and the whole Body of the Image appeared more beautiful.
4. Only two Ships sailed from Portugal this Year for India, whereof one was put into Lisbon again. D. Hierome Chingala, who now called himself Sufo, that had lost the Kingdom of Mombaça, as has been related, appeared about this time in the Island Ma∣dagascar. When he fled he carried with him above 400 Christians, and sold them on the Coast of Arabia, obliging many to turn Mabometans. After wandering on that Coast he returned towards Africk, and landed at Madagascar, where the King of Massalaye and Moors of Pate favoured him. The News hereof being brought to Moçambique, the Inhabitants of that Town resolved to attack him. They fitted out 10 Ships and some other small Vessels, in which were about 60 Portugueses and 110 Cafres, com∣manded by Andrew Borges and Antony de Oli∣veyra, who were to obey Rocque Borges that was about that Coast. 5. On the 17th of May the Cafres landed to discover Sufo's Works, where they slew some Men, and brought the Heads of three, losing one Man. Borges resolved to assault the Works next day, leaving the Care of the Vessels to Iohn Gomez Suarez, a secure Man, that he might have a Retreat in case of any Misfortune. The Men marched half a League through Bogs up to the Knees, at the foot of a Mountain Sufo met them with a multitude of Blacks. After a resolute Fight, Sufo retired so orderly, that Borges suspected it was to draw him into some Am∣bush; wherefore after 4 hours Engagemet
finding it impossible to overcome by reason of the multitude of Enemies and disadvantage of Ground, he withdrew to the Ships, having killed many of the Blacks without losing one Man. Suarez had not been idle there, for 1000 Blacks and Moors of Pate had assaulted the Ships, but were repulsed with conside∣rable loss. Our Commander carried the War along the Coast, burning some Towns and 15 large Vessels, besides the small, where∣of he saved much Rigging, Ammunition, and Cannon. 6. On the 21st of Ianuary, Antony Tellez obtained leave to set out to fight the Hollan∣ders, who upbraided us with Cowardice. After 8 hours Dispute the Enemy gave way. Our Admiral meeting them again about the middle of February in the Northern Sea, had the like success. 7. At Malaca the Feuds were so great be∣tween the Commander of the Town and Admiral of the Coast, that the latter shot an Uncle of the other. This encouraged the King of Achem to break with us, impri∣soning Francis de Sousa & Castro, who resided there as Ambassador, and killing all the Por∣tugueses about his Court. Malaca being much distressed for want of Provisions, and the Viceroy endeavouring to relieve it, News came that our Commander at Damama was dead, whereupon it was found necessary to divide that Relief. Four Galleons were sent to Malaca, and Antony Tellez the Hero of these Times with 500 Men, half of them Soldiers, to Damam. Tellez went no farther
than Bacaim, understanding there that the Peace offered by the Mogol was conclu∣ded. 8. Two Ships sailed from Lisbon for India. About the end of Iune died the Viceroy Peter de Silva. An Inventary being made of what he was worth, it was censured to be too much for the little time he had to get it. He held the Government almost four Years, was the 28th Viceroy, and 53d Go∣vernour, the third of the Name, and first of the Sirname. CHAP. XIV. The Government of Antony Tellez de Silva, from the Year 1639, till 1640. 1. ANtony Tellez de Silva served in India with much Valour, and had been successful against the Hollanders, as has been related. He was named to succeed in the Government in one of the 1639. Royal Patents, which were opened upon the Death of the Viceroy Peter de Silva; others also were appointed, whose Names were not known to the Military Men, they might perhaps be singular for Sanctity, which, when real, is very private. But because Antony Tellez was then absent, D. F. Francis of the Martyrs Archbishop of Goa, who was one of those before-mentioned, took upon him to
Govern in his Name. He sent Tellez Advice of his Election, and the mean while em∣ployed himself in fitting out 12 Men of War, and some Victuallers, to relieve Ma∣laca. 2. At the same time 9 Holland Ships en∣tring the River of Goa, fired three of our Galleons that were at Murmugam without the least opposition, because the Fort was quite destitute of Men and Ammunition. Then arrived the Governour Antony Tellez storming at this unlucky Accident, not so much for the greatness of the Loss, as for Shame that the Enemy should compass their Ends in our Harbour, without sustaining the least harm. 3. After this Misfortune, News was brought, that two Enemies united were in sight of Ma∣laca, the Dutch with 12 Men of War, and King of Achem with 25 Galleys. 1640. The Governour was taken up, making grea∣ter Preparations to remedy these Disasters, than the low condition of India seemed to promise, when one came to succeed him in the Government, which he held not long, because it would have been for the advan∣tage of India. He was the 53d Governour, third of the Name, and second of the Sir∣name.
CHAP. XV. Of the Viceroy John de Silva Tello, who went for India in the Year 1640. 1. JOhn de Silva Tello, who had Comman∣ded the famous Place of Mazagam, on the Coast of Africk, and done good Ser∣vice there, was now made Viceroy of India, and sailed from Lisbon with two Ships and two Pinks. He received the Sword from Antony Tellez de Silva then Governing, who presently imbarqued for Portugal, and so India lost him, he not thinking it proper to serve as Admiral where he had been Gover∣nour. Other Authors will write the Actions of the Viceroy Iohn de Silva Tello, for he begins his Task where I end mine, which is at the end of the Fatal Year 1640, the Pe∣riod of my Labours. I will only reckon him the 28th Viceroy, 54th Governour, the fifth of the Name, and third of the Sir∣name. The End of the Fourth Part.
A short Account of what the Portugueses are possest of between the Cape of Good Hope and China; of the several Dig∣nities, Commands and Revenues in the said Possessions, and of the Religious Houses in those Parts. 1. THE Portugues Empire to the East∣ward, extends from the Cape of Good Hope in Africk, to Cape Liampo in China, distant from one another 4000 Leagues along the Sea-Coasts, without including the Shores of the Red Sea and Per∣sian Golph, which make about 1200 Leagues. Between this space lies half Africk, and all Asia with innumerable Islands adjoining to those two vast Parts of the World. These 4000 Leagues are divided into seven Parts: The 1st is bounded by the Cape of Good Hope and the Mouth of the Red Sea; the 2d by the Mouth of the Red Sea and Persian Golph; the 3d by that Golph and the River Indus; the 4th by that River and Cape Co∣morij; the 5th by that Cape and the River Ganges; the 6th by Ganges and Cape Singa∣pura; the 7th by Cape Singapura and that of Liampo. 2. The first Division between the famous Cape of Good Hope and Mouth of the Red Sea, contains along the Coast many King∣doms of the Cafres, as the vast one of Mo∣nomotapa,
who is Lord of all the Gold Mines in Africk; those of Zofala, Moçambique, Quiloa, Pemba, Melinde Pate, Brava, Ma∣gadoxa, and many other Sovereigns. Here the Crown of Portugal is possest of the Forts of Zofala and Mombaça, and the City and Fort of Moçambique. 3. The second Division between the Mouth of the Red Sea and Persian Golph, contains the Coast of Arabia; where we have the impregnable Fortress of Mascate. 4. The third Division between Bazora or the Persian Golph and Indies, contains the Kingdoms of Ormuz, Guadel and Sinde, part of those of Persia and Cambaya; here we hold the Fort of Bandel, and that of Diu. 5. The fourth Division between Indus and Cape Comorij, contains what is properly called India, that is part of Cambaya, De∣can, Canara, and Malabar, subject to several Princes. Here we have the Forts of Da∣mam, Assarim, Danu, St. Gens, Agaçaim, Maim, Manora, Trapor, Baçaim with the City, Tana, Caranja, the City Chaul and opposite Fort called Morro. The most noble City Goa, large, strong, and populous, the Metropolis of our Eastern Dominions; an Archbishoprick, whose Prelate is Primate of all the East: This is the Residence of the Viceroys, and here are the Courts of the Inquisition, Exchequer and Chancery, a Custom-House, Arsenal and Magazines well provided. The City is seated in an Island girt with a strong Wall and six mighty
Castles called of Dauguim, St. Blas of Bas∣soleco, Santiago, Agaçaim, Panguim and Nu∣estra Sennora del Cabo. On the other side to secure the Bar is that of Bardes. Oppo∣site to the Castle Dauguim is the Fort of Norva, with a good Town. On one side of this Island lies that of Salsete, where is the Fort of achol. Then going along the Coast we have the Forts of Onor, Barcelor, Mangalor, Cananor, Granganor, and then Co∣chim, which is a Bishoprick; behind it An∣gamale another Bishoprick, and near Cape Comorij the Town and Fort of Coulam. 6. The fifth Division between Cape Co∣morii and Ganges, contains Coromandel and Orixa, where we have the Fort of Negapa∣tam, that of Meliapor with the City which is a Bishoprick of late called St. Thomas, and Masulapatam. 7. The sixth Division between Ganges and Cape Singapura, contains the vast King∣doms of Bengala, Pegu, Tanazarim, and o∣thers of less Note. Here we have the City Malaca, a Bishop's Seat, and the last place we possess in the Eastern Continent. 8. The seventh Division between the Capes Singapura and Liampo, contains the Kingdoms of Pam, Lugor, Siam, Cambodia, Tsiompa, Cocbinchina, and vast Empire of China. Here we have no place but the City Macao, yet Trade all along those Coasts. 9. In the Island Ceylon we possess the City and Fort of Columbo, those of Manar Gale and others. Beyond Malaca a Fort in
the Island Timor. The number of our Forts in all this great Tract is above fifty, and twenty Cities and Towns, besides many Vil∣lages depending on the others. 10. As to the Revenue; the Customs of Diu are worth above 100000 Crowns; those of Goa 160000; those of Malaca 70000; the Tribute paid by several Places amounts to 200000, all which with Prizes and other Profits uncertain, will make above a Mil∣lion. If the Officers had any honesty, it might amount to Two Millions; for there is no doubt but they cheat the King of half his Income, as may appear by what fol∣lows. 11. The Forts of Zofala and Mocambique are worth to their Commanders 200000 Du∣cats each; Mombaca 30000, Mascate 50000, Bandel 2000, Diu 60000, a Fort at the Mouth of that River 1000, the Pass of Bran∣cavara 1000, Assarim 4000, Danu 600, S. Gens 600, Agaçaim 600, Maim 600, Ma∣nora 15000, Trapor 400, Baçaim 30000, Tana 400, two Forts upon that River 2000, Chaul 80000, Goa 20000, the Fort of Dau∣guim 3000, St. Blas 1000, Agacaim 2000 Bardes 6000, Noroa 1500, Rachol 600, Onor, 12000, Barcelor 30000, Mangalor 12000, Cananor 15000, Granganor 6000, Cochim 100000, Coulam 12000, Negapatam 8000, Musalapatam 8000, Meliapor or St. Thomas 12000, Malaca 150000, Columbo 40000, Manar 24000, Gale 16000, Solor: 6000, besides others of lesser value.
12. All together are worth to their Com∣manders yearly half a Million. The value above is computed for three Years. There are other Emloyments no less profitable than the Command of Forts, as are the se∣veral Voyages. That from Goa to China and Iapan is worth to him that Commands it 100000 Crowns. From Coromandel to Ma∣laca 20000. From Goa to Moçambique 24000. To Ceylon 4000. This arise only of the Freight of Goods carried, and the Captain makes as much more by way of Trade. 13. The Viceroy's Salary is 18000 Crowns, besides the disposing of Places, which are all sold; but the chief thing which they all look upon is Trade, for whereas the King gets nothing out of India; some Viceroy have cleared 3, some 5, and some 800000 Du∣c. All other Officers have great Salaries, besides their lawful Profits, and their more considerable Frauds. The Salaries are con∣siderable enough to have made Men honest, but Avarice knows no bounds. Thus much of the Temporal Power, let us come to the Spiritual. 14. The Archbishop of Goa is Metropo∣litan and Primate of all Asia. Cochim was made a Bishoprick in the Year 1559; Ma∣laca the same Year; Meliapor 1607. The Bishops of China were instituted by Pope Pius Quintus. There is also a Bishop of Iapan, and one of the Mountain near St. Thomas Me∣liapor. There were Bishops of Persia, as also Patriarchs of Ethiopia. The City Angamale is a Bishoprick, as is that of Macao.
15. We will set down the Houses, Chur∣ches, or Monasteries of Religious, accord∣ing to the time of their first going into India. The Franciscans have 22; the Do∣minicans 9; the Augustins 16; the Jesuits about 28 Monasteries, Colleges and Semi∣naries, besides a vast number of Residencies, so called by them where there are only 2 or 3 Fathers. This may suffice to show the great Progress made there in propagating the Faith, which has been more particularly spoke of in many Places of this History.
An Account of all the SHIPS that sailed from Lisbon to the Discovery of the Coasts of Africk and Asia, and the Annual Trading Ships, from the time Prince Henry first attempted the Disco∣very, till the Year 1640. 1. ONE Ship sent by Prince Henry, who began these Discoveries about the Year 1412, and reached as far as Cape Boja∣dor, none till then having passed beyond Cape Nam, which in Portugues, according to their way of Pronouncing, signifies No, as who should say, There was no going far∣ther. Year 1412 2. Two Ships having lost their Account in Storm, accidentally discovered the Island called Puerto Santo 1418 3. The same two going out again with another, found the Island Madera. 1419 4. Two Ships passed 30 leagues beyond Cape Bojador, where they landed and retur∣ned home. 1434 5. Next Year set out two Ships which advanced 12 leagues farther, fought with some of the Natives, and brought home Skins of Sea-Wolves. 1435 6. Two Ships touched at the place where the former killed the Sea-Wolves, fought with the Natives, and brought some Priso∣ners to Portugal. 1440
7. Anthony Gonzalez with one Ship disco∣vered the River he called Del Oro, or of Gold, because he found somethere, and brought the first Blacks to Portugal. Year 1442 8. Nunno Tristan discovered the Islands of Arguim, and that of Garcas. 1443 9. A Company being erected to carry on these Discoveries, one Lancelote sailed with 6 Ships discovered the Island Nar, and o∣thers. 1444 10. Gonzalo de Sintra with one Ship passed 14 leagues beyond Rio del Oro 1445 11. Antony Gonzalez went with 3 Ships to Trade at Rio del Oro. 1446 12. Nunno Tristan with one Ship went to Rio del Oro. 1446 13. Dinis Fernandez with one Ship reached to the River Sanaga, and discovered the Islands of Cabo Verde. 1446 14. Antony Gonzalez with 3 Ships sailed as far as the Islands of Arguim. 1447 15. The same Year set out first 3 Ships, which went no farther than the Islands of Arguim. Then 14 Sail, after them 3 more. Then another Squadron, the number of Vessels not known, but they carried 2600 Men to conquer the Canary Islands. After this another Squadron; no number of Ships known. Then Nunno Tristan with one Ship, who went as far as Rio Grande, and was there killed. And last, Alvaro Fernandez, who passed 40 leagues beyond Rio Grande to the River Tabite. All these set out in one Year. 1447
16. Giles Yanz with 10 Caravels went no further than what was before discovered. Iames Gil Homem with one Ship passed be∣yond Cape Gue, and brought the first Lion from those Parts to Lisbon. Ferdinand Alonso with one Ship went Ambassador to the King of Cabo Verde. Gonzalo Vello with one Ship discovered the Islands Azores. All these the same Year. Year 1448 17. Suero Mendez with one Ship went to build a Fort at Arguim, which was the first erected in those Conquests. 1449 18. Antony de Nole with 3 Ships disco∣vered the Islands Mayo, and St. Philip and St. Iacob. 1460 19. Peter de Sintra with 2 Ships sailed as far as Sierra Leona. 1467 20. Iohn de Santarm with two Ships went as far as Cape St. Catherine. Ferdinand Po with one Ship discovered the Island Hermosa; there were also other Discoveries, but the Discoverers are not known. 1469 21. Iames de Azambuja with 12 Sail and 600 Men built a Fort in Guinea, from which time the King styled himself Lord of Gui∣nea. 1481 22. Iames Cam with one Ship discovered the River of Congo, or Zayre. 1484 23. Iames Cam setting out again with one Ship, ran 200 Leagues farther, disco∣vering the Kingdom of Beni, and Empire of Ogane. 1485 24. Bartholomew Dias with 3 Ships disco∣vered the Bay called Angra de los Vaqueros, the Island De la Cruz, the River Del Infante,
and Cape he called Tormentoso, but King Iohn the Second named it Cape of Good Hope. Year 1486 25. Gonçalo Coello went to assist the Prince of Ialof, the number of his Ships not known. Peter Vaz de Cuna sent to the River Zanaga with 20 Sail. 1488 26. Gonzalo de Sousa sailed with 3 Ships to Congo. 1489 27. Vasco de Gama with 3 Sail discovered India. 1493 28. Peter Alvarez Cabral sailed for India with 13 Vessels, whereof 5 were cast away, one put back to Lisbon, and another acciden∣tally discovered Brasil, being drove thither by a Storm. 1500 29. Iohn de Nova with 4 Ships, one of them discovered the Islands Conceiçam, and St. Helena. 1501 30. D. Vasco de Gama, the first Discoverer, returns again to India with 9 Sail. 1501 31. Vincent Sodre commanded 5 Sail bound for India, as are all that follow, so that it will be needless to repeat it; two of these were lost 1502 32. Stephen de Gama with 5 Sail. After him Alfonso de Albuquerque with three, then Francis de Albuquerque with three, Antony de Saldana with three; two of this number were lost, one found the Island Zocotora. 1503 33. Lope Soarez de Albergaria with 13 Sail. 1504 34. D. Francis de Almeyda, first Viceroy of India, with 20 Sail; one was cast away. Peter de Anaya with 6 Sail, two of them pe∣rished.
Sebastian Baruda, or Cyd Barbosa, with 2 Sail. Year 1505 35. Tristan de Cunna with 16 Sail, who discovered the Islands to which he gave his own Name; one of these Ships was cast away. Alfonso de Albuerque with 6. 1506 36. George de Melo with 4 Sail. Ferdi∣nand Suarez with 4. Vasco Gomez de Abreu with 7. 1507 37. Iames Lopez de Sequeyra with four Sail. 1508 38. George de Aguiar with 13 Sail, three of them were cast away. D. Francis Cou∣tinno with 17. 1509 39. Iames Mendez de Vasconcelos with 4 Sail. Gonçalo de Sequeyra with 7, one of them was lost. Iohn Serram with 3. 1510 40. D. Garcia de Noronna with 6 Sail. 1511 41. George de Melo with 9 Sail, one cast away. Garcia de Sousa with 4. Iohn Cha∣noca with one Ship. 1512 42. Iohn de Sousa & Lima with 4 Sail, two of them cast away. 1513 43. George or Christopher de Brito with 5 Sail, one cast away. Luis Figueyra with two. 1514 44. Lope Suarez de Albergaria with 17 Sail. Fernan Perez de Andrade with 3. 1515 45. Iohn de Silva, or Silveyra, with 5 Sail, two of them cast away. Iames de Unnos, or Unes, with only one. 1516 46. Antony de Saldanna with 6 Sail. 1517 47. Iames Lopez de Sequeyra with 12 Sail. 1518
48. George de Albuguerque with 14 Sail; one of them cast away, the Captain ran away with another. Raphael Castano with 3. Year 1519 49. George de Brito with 10 Sail. 1520 50. D. Duarte de Meneses with 12 Sail. Sebastian de Sousa with 3. 1521 51. D. Peter de Castro with 4 Sail, one of them lost. 1522 52. Iames de Silveyra with 9 Sail, one cast away. 1523 53. D. Vasco de Gama with 17 Sail, 3 cast away. 1524 54. D. Lope de Almeyda with 4 Sail. 1525 55. Christopher de Vega with 5 Sail. 1526 56. Emanuel de Lacerda with 5 Sail, two were lost. 1527 57. Nunno de Cunna with 11 Sail, three lost. 1528 58. Iames de Silveyra with 5 Sail. 1529 59. Francis de Sousa Tavarez with 6 Sail. 1530 60. Achilles Godinno with 5 Sail. 1531 61. Peter Vaz with 5 Sail. 1532 62. D. Iohn Pereyra with 7 Sail, one cast away. D. Peter de Castellobranco with 10 Sail. 1533 63. Martin Alfonso de Sousa with 5 Sail. 1534 64. Fernan Perez de Andrade with 7 Sail. 1535 65. George de Lima with 5 Sail. 1536 66. George Cabral with 5 Sail. D. Laurence de Silva with 6. 1537
67. Iames Lopez de Sousa with 8 Sail. Year 1537 68. D. Garcia de Noronna with 11 Sail, one lost. 1538 69. Iames o Peter Lopez with 6 Sail, one lost. 1539 70. Francis de Sousa Tavarez with 4 Sail. 1540 71. Martin Alonso de Sousa with 5 Sail. 1541 72. Henry de Macedo with 4 Sail, one was lost. 1542 73. Iames de Silveyra with 5 Sail. 1543 74. Fernan Perez de Andrade with 6 Sail, one cast away. 1544 75. D. Iohn de Castro with 6 Sail. 1545 76. Laurence Perez de Tavora with 6 Sail. Lionel de Sousa with one. 1546 77. D. Francis de Lima with 6 Sail. Mar∣tin Correa de Silva with 3. 1547 78. Francis Barreto with 3 Sail. 1547 79. Emanuel de Mendoça with 5 Sail. Iohn de Mendoça with 3. D. Iohn Enriques with 3. 1548 80. D. Alvaro de Noronna with 5 Sail, one lost. 1549 81. D. Alfonso de Noronna with 5 Sail, two lost. 1550 82. Iames Lopez de Sousa with 8 Sail. 1551 83. Fernan Suarez de Albergaria with 6 Sail, one cast away. 1552 84. Fernan Alvarez Cabral with 5 Sail, one burnt, one cast away. 1553 85. D. Peter Mascarennas with 6 Sail, one lost. 1554
86. D. Iohn de Meneses & Sequeyra with 5 Sail, one cast away. Year 1555 87. D. Leonardo de Sousa with 5 Sail, one lost. 1556 88. D. Luis Fernandez de Vasconelos with 5 Sail, two cast away. 1557 89. D. Constantin de Bragança with 4 Sail. 1558 90. Peter or Lope Vaz de Sequeira with 6 Sail. 1559 91. D. George de Sousa with 6 Sail, one lost. 1560 92. D. Francis Coutino Count de Redondo with 5 Sail. 1561 93. D. George Manuel with 6 Sail. 1562 94. D. George de Sousa with 4 Sail. 1563 95. D. Antony de Noronna with 4 Sail. 1564 96. D. Francis de Sa with 4 Sail, one lost. 1565 97. Luis or Ruy Gomez de Cuna with 4 Sail. 1566 98. Iohn Gomez de Silva with 4 Sail. 1567 99. D. Luis de Ataide with 5 Sail. 1568 100. Philip Carnero de Alcaçova with 4 Sail. 1569 101. George de Mendoça with 4 Sail. Ema∣nuel de Mesquita with one Galleon, Francis Barreto with three. 1570 102. D. Antony de Noronna with 7 Sail. 1571 103. Duarte de Melo with 4 Sail, one lost. Bartholomew de Vasconcelos & Cuna with one Ship. 1572 104. D. Francis de Sousa with 4 Sail, one lost. 1573
105. Ambrose de Aguiar Continno with 6 Sail. Year 1574 106. D. Iohn de Castellobranco with 4 Sail. 1575 107. Ruy Lorenço de Tavora with 5 Sail. 1576 108. Pantaon de Sa with 4 Sail, one cast away. 1577 109. Matthias de Albuquerque with 2 Sail, one lost. D. Luis de Ataide Count de Atou∣guea with 3 Sail. 1577 110. George de Silva with 3 Sail. 1578 111. D. Stephen de Meneses Baroche, and Iohn de Melo, with 2 Caravels. 1578 112. Iohn de Saldanna with 5 Sail. 1579 113. Emanuel de Melo de Cuna with 4 Sail. 1580 114. D. Francis Mascarennas Count de Santa Cruz with 5 Sail, one lost. 1581 115. Antony de Melo & Castro with 5 Sail, one lost. 1582 116. Antony de Melo & Castro with 5 Sail. 1583 117. D. Duarte de Meneses with 6 Sail, one lost. 1584 118. Ferdinand Mendoça with 5 Sail, one lost. 1585 119. D. Hierome Coutinno with 6 Sail, two cast away, one taken by Sir Fr. Drake. 1586 220. Fr. de Melo with 6 Sail, one lost. 1587 121. Iohn de Tovar Camina with 5 Sail, one lost. 1588 122. Bernardin Ribcro Pacheco with 5 Sail, one lost. 1589 123. Matthias de Albuquerque with 5 Sail, one lost. 1590
124. The Commander not known three Sail. Year 1590 125. Ferdinand de Mendoça with 6 Sail, one cast away, another burnt, and a third taken by the English. 1591 126. Francis de Melo with 4 Sail, one cast away. 1592 127. D. Luis Coutinno with 5 Sail, 3 lost. 1593 128. Ayres de Miranda Enriquez with 10 Sail, one lost. 1594 129. Iohn de Saldana with 5 Sail, 2 lost. 1595 130. D. Francis de Gama Count de Vidiguey∣ra with 5 Sail, one burnt, one run ashore. 1596 131. D. Alonso de Noronna with 3 Sail. 1597 132. D. Hierome Coutinno with 5 Sail was ready, but went not from Lisbon, the English lying before the Harbour. 1598 133. The last Year's Commander with four of the same Ships, and Simon de Mendoça with three others. 1599 134. Ayrez de Saldanna with 4 Sail, one cast away, another taken. 1600 135. D. Francis Tello de Meneses with 4 Sail, all forced back to Lisbon. Antony de Melo & Castro with 5 Galleons, he taken by the Dutch. 1601 136. D. Francis Tello de Meneses with 6 Sail. 1602 137. Peter Hurtado de Mendoça with 5 Sail. 1603 138. D. Martin Alonso de Castro with 5 Sail, one lost. More 2 Caravels. 1604 139. Blas Tellez de Meneses with 6 Sail, two lost. Alvaro de Carvallo with 3 Galleons. Bel∣chior Rodrigues with one Caravel. 1605
140. D. Hierome Coutinno with 3 Sail, set not out the Dutch lying at the mouth of the River. Year 1606 141. D. Hier Coutinno with the last Year's Ships. Iohn Correa de Sousa with 4 Sail. 1607 142. D. Iohn Pereyra Count de Feyra with 6 Sail, 3 cast away. D. Christopher de Noronna with 8 Galleons, one lost. Ruy Lorenço de Tavre with 5 Sail. 1608 143. D. Em. de Meneses with 5 Sail. 1609 144. Luis Mendez de Vasconcelos with 3 Sail, one lost. 1610 145. D. Antony de Atayde with 3 Sail. 1611 146. Andrew Coello with 2 Caravels. An∣tony Pinto de Fonseca one Galleon. Iohn Cor∣res de Mendoça one Galleon. 1611 147. D. Hier. de Almeyda with 3 Sail. 1612 148. D. Em. de Meneses with 4 Sail, all put back by stress of Weather. Belchior Rodri∣guez one Ship. 1613 149. D. E. Coutinno with 5 Sail, 4 lost. 1614 150. D. Hierome Manuel with 4 Sail. 1615 151. D. Em. de Meneses with 3 Sail. 1616 152. D. Iohn Coutinno Count de Redondo with 4 Sail. Afterward 4 Sail more. 1617 153. D. Cbr. de Noronna with 5 Sail. 1618 154. D. Fr. de Lima with 4 Sail. Ruy Freyre de Andrade with 5 Galleons. 1619 155. Nunno Alvarez Botello with 4 Sail, one lost. Iacome de Morales Sarmiento with two. After them two more. 1620 156. D. Alonso de Noronna with 4 Sail, were all put back by stress of Weather. D. Alonso de Noronna again with 6 Galleons, all put back again but one. 1621
157. D. Francis de Gama Count de Vidi∣gueyra with 4 Sail, two were lost. Sancho de Tovar y Silva with 4 Galleons. Year 1622 158. D. Antony Tello & Meneses with 3 Sail, all lost. D. Philip Mascarennas with 5 Gal∣leons, three lost. 1623 159. Nunno Alvarez Botello with 2 Sail. Se∣bastian de Costa Valente with 6 Galleons. 1624 160. Vincent de Brito & Meneses with 2 Sail, both cast away. 1625 161. D. Emanuel Pereyra Coutinno, with 3 Sail. 1626 162. Iohn Sequeyra Varejam with 2 Sail. Dominick de Camara with 4. 1627 163. D. Fr. Mascarennas with 3 Sail. 1628 164. D. Michael de Noronna Count de Li∣narez with 9 Sail, two lost. 1629 165. D. George de Almeyda with 2 Sail, one lost. 1630 166. Antony de Saldana with 2 Ships, both put back by Weather. Fr. Vas de Almada with 2 Sail. 1631 167. Ios. Pinto Pereyra with 7 Sail. 1632 168. Antony de Saldana with 5 Sail. 1633 169. Hier. de Saldana with 3 Sail. 1634 170. Peter de Silva with 2 Sail, one lost. Gon∣zalo de Barros & Silva with two 1635 171. Iohn de Melo with 2 Sail. 1636 172. Iohn Suarez Vivas with 2 Sail. 1637 173. I. de Sequeyra Varejam with 4 Sail. 1638 These are all the Ships there is any account of that sailed from Lisbon to discover, and af∣ter for India, since the Year 1412, when Prince Henry first attempted finding the way to India by Sea.
The Viceroy and Governors of India, from the first Discovery till the Year 1640. 1. DON Francis de Almeyda, first Vice∣roy and Governor Year 1505 2. Alfonso de Albuquerque, second Gover∣nor 1509 3. Lope Soarez de Albergaria, third Gover∣nor 1515 4. Iames Lopez de Sequeyra, 4th Gover∣nor. 1518 5. D. Duarte de Meneses, 5th Governor. 1522 6. D. Vasco de Gama Count de Vidigueyra, 2d Viceroy and 6th Governor. 1524 7. D. Henry de Meneses, 7th Governor. 1527 8. Peter Mascarennas, 8th Governor. 1529 9. Lope Vaz de Sampayo, 9th Governor. 1529 10. Nuno de Cunna, 10th Governor. 1529 11. D. Garcia de Noronna, 3d Viceroy and 11th Governor. 1538 12. D. Stephen de Gama, 12th Governor. 1540 13. Martin Alfonso de Sousa, 13th Governor. 1542 14. D. Iohn de Castro, 4th Viceroy and 14th Governor. 1543 15. Garcia de Sa, 15th Governor 1549 16. George Cabral, 16th Governor 154 17. D. Alonso de Noronna, 5th Viceroy and 17th Governor. 1550 18. D. Peter Mascarennas, 6th Viceroy and
18th Governor. Year 1554 19. Francis Barreto, 19 Governor 1555 20. D. Constantin de Bragança, 7th Vice∣roy and 20th Governor. 1558 21. D. Francis Coutinno Count de Redondo, 8th Viceroy and 21th Governor. 1561 22. Iohn de Mendoça, 22 Governor. 1564 23. D. Antony de Noronna, 9th Viceroy and 23d Governor. 1564 24. D. Luis de Ataide, 10th Viceroy and 24th Governor. 1567 25. D. Antony de Noronna, 11th Viceroy and 25th Governor. 1571 26. Antony Monez Barreto, 26 Gov. 1573 27. D. Laurence de Tavora, 12th Viceroy and 27th Governor. 1576 28. D. Iames de Meneses, 28 Gover. 1576 29. D. Luis de Ataide Count de Atouguia the second time, 13 Vicer. and 29 Gov. 1578 30. Ferdinand Tellez de Meneses, 30th Go∣vernor. 1581 31. D. Francis Mascarennas Count de Santa Cruz, 14 Viceroy and 31 Governor. 1581 32. D. Duarte de Meneses, 15th Viceroy and 32th Governor. 1584 33. Emanuel de Sousa Coutinno, 33 Gov. 1588 34. Mathias de Albuquerque, 16th Viceroy and 34th Governor. 1691 35. D. Francis de Gama Count de Vidiguey∣ra, 17th Viceroy and 35th Governor. 1597 36. Ayres de Saldanna, 18th Viceroy and 36 Governor. 1600 37. Martin Alfonso de Castro, 19th Viceroy and 37th Governor. 1604 38. D. F. Alexius de Meneses Archbishop
of Goa, 38th Governor. 1607 39. D. Iohn Pereyra Count de Feyra, 20th Viceroy and 39th Governor. 1608 40. Andrew Furtado de Mendoça, 40th Governor. 1609 41. Ruy Lorenco de Tavora, 21th Viceroy and 41st Governor. 1609 42. D. Hierome de Azevedo, 22th Viceroy and 42th Governor. 1613 43. D. Iohn Coutinno Count de Redondo, 23th Viceroy and 33th Governor. 1617 44. Ferdinand de Albuquerque, 44 Gov. 1619 45. D. Alfonso de Noronna, 24th Viceroy and 45th Governor. 1621 46. D. Francis de Gama Count de Vidigueyra the 2d time, 25 Viceroy, 46 Governor. 1622 47. D. Luis de Brito Bishop of Cochim, 47th Governor. 1628 48. D. Francis Mascarennas, 26 Viceroy, 48 Governor. 1628 49. Nunno Alvarez Botello, 49 Gov. 1628 50 D. Michael de Noronna Count de Lin∣nares, 27 Viceroy, 50 Governor. 1629 51. Peter de Silva, 28th Viceroy, 51th Go∣vernor. 1635 52. Antony Tellez de Silva, 52 Gov. 1639 53. Iohn de Silva Tello, 29 Viceroy, 53 Governor. 1640
Books in Print and Manuscripts out of which the Portugues Asia was Col∣lected. BOOKS in Print. 1. EIght Volumes of the Affairs of India, by Ferdinand Lopez de Castanneda, who went into India only to examine into he Truth of what he writ. His Stile nor Geography are not commendable, but he has many curious, though tedious Remarks. It has been translated into French and Italian, and I suppose some other Languages. 2. Four Decades of the great Iohn de Barros, who though posterior to Castanneda as to time, is preferable to all for Judg∣ment, and is particularly esteemed for his Geography. 3. Four other Decades of Iames de Couto, Historiographer of India, from the 4th to the 7th; for he began at the 4th, for then that of Iohn de Barros was not publick. 4. Commentaries of the Actions of the great Alfonso de Albuquerque, writ by his Son of the same Name. 5. Antony Pinto Pereyra his Chronicle of D Luis de Atayde, the famous Viceroy and Supporter of India, writ in the Days of King Sebastian. 6. Ferdinand Mendez Pinto his Indian
History, writ at the same time as the last: Many make a doubt of Truth of what he writes; and as many who have travelled those Parts affirm he might with truth have writ much more no less incredible to our apprehension. I look upon him as a very true Historian, for many Reasons. Yet sup∣posing he is not, it is in things wholly omit∣ted by me. 7. The Bishop D. Hierome Osorio, wrote the History of India in Latin, which beyond dispute is the best Work of that Nature, next to Titus Livius. As to his Latin, all Men grant him to be the best Ciaeronian. His me∣thod is singular, his Judgment piercing, his Reflections sharp, his Ornament majestick. In fine, he is accomplished in all Points. 8. Mafeus is well known and very plea∣sant; he did little but Epitomizing the De∣cades of Iohn de Barros, as to the Substance of the History. 9. F. Antony de S. Roman, did little more than Translate Mafeus, but not with Ele∣gancy equal to him; the Translation there is of him in Italian is better. 10. Iohn de Lucena a Jesuit, in the Life of S. Francis Xaverius brings in many Parti∣culars of the Indian History. He sticks not to the Rules of History▪ but in his way of Writing deserves esteem for his Judgment, Elegancy, and way of Reasoning. 11. Antony Galvam who was Commander of Ternate, writ much concerning India, and particularly of the Affairs of those Islands, which has not been Printed, or is extant,
at least it has not come to my Hands. I only saw the Books he calls of Discoveries, which is only short hints of things. 12. Dr. Garcia Dorta, of the Drugs and Medicinal Plants of Asia. 13. A Collection of several small Books by several Authors, giving an Account of many Shipwrecks that happen'd, whereof we make mention in their Places. 14. Several Relations, particularly of the Jesuits. 15. My own Book of the Empire of Chi∣na, collected from the Memories and Obser∣vations of F. Alvaro Semedo, of the Society of Jesus. 16. Bartholomew de Argensola of the Mo∣lucoes, who in many Particulars errs as much as F. Urreta. 17. Manuel Xaverius a Jesuit, of the Vi∣ctories obtained by Nunno Alvarez Botello. 18. Two Poems of Hierome de Cortereal. 19. Francis Alvarez a Priest of the Affairs of Abassia. 20. F. Iohn de los Santos a Dominican, of the Affairs of Ethiopia. 21. F. Luis de Urreta. MANUSCRIPTS. 1. ONE Volume of the Portugues Voy∣ages, found among the Papers of the Bishop D. Hierome Osorio. Emanuel Fer∣nandez Villareal helped me to the sight of it. and from me it went to D. Hierome Masca∣rennas of the Council of Orders in Castile.
2. Five Decades of Iames de Couto Histo∣riographer of India, from the 8th to the 12th, the last but half compleat. 3. The History of the Actions of D. Paul de Lima, a great Man in India, by the same Couto. 4. The 13th Decade of Antony Bocarro, Historiographer of India, yet not divided into 10 Books, as the Title implies. 5. Military Affairs of India, a Book of great Learning written by Francis Rodriguez Silveyra, who served there some Years, and gained Reputation. 6. The Spiritual Conquest in Asia, by F. Paul of the Trinity a Franciscan in the Year 1630. I saw it upon occasion of its being designed to be Printed at Madrid in the Year 1638, when the Ordinary sent it to me for my approbation. It is a good Work, and treats of what relates to that Order. 7. A Translation of that which among the Malabars is held in the same Account as the Bible among us. It treats of their Gods and Ceremonies; it is strange, and resembles Ovid's Metamorphoses. The Heads of it are in the 4th Part of the 2d Tome of my Asia. 8. One Volume of several Relations of the Affairs of Asia, and of some Shipwrecks. A Relation of the Government of the Viceroy the Count de Linnares, given by his Order to a Spaniard, who promised to write his Actions. Another of the same by Captain Dominick de Toraly Valdez, who served under him in India.
9. A Copy of several other Relations communicated to me by Emanuel de Severim, as also the Book of the Malabars, that of the military Affairs, and that of Bocarro above mentioned. 10. Loose Papers and annual Letters of the Jesuits, imparted to me by F. Alvaro Semmedo of the same Order, out of which I afterwards collected the History intituled, The Empire of China. 11. The Chronicles of King Alfonso the 5th, and the Earl D. Duarte de Meneses Commander in Africk, by Gomez Yanez de Azurara, Historiographer to King Alfonso the 5th. 12. One Volume of divers Relations of Occurrences in Africk, during the Reigns of King Iohn II. Emanuel, Iohn III. and Seba∣stian. 13. A Description of Ethiopia, by F. Ema∣nuel Barradas a Jesuit, who having seen the Country himself, truly and zealously disco∣vers the many and remarkable Errors set down in his Ethiopia by the Learned and Ele∣gant F. Luis de Urreta. Emanuel Severim de Faria imparted it to me. Besides the Books above mentioned, there is much relating to Asia in the Chronicles of King Iohn II. King Emanuel, King Iohn III. and King Sebastian, as well in those which are still in Manuscripts, as those Printed. FINIS.
