G1429 13603835 100742
A POEM Most humbly offered to the MEMORY Of Her late Sacred Majesty, QUEEN MARY. By R. GOULD. Licensed, Ian. 23. 1694/5;. D. POPLAR. LONDON, Printed for Iacob Tonson and Francis Saunders, at the Iudge's-Head near the Inner-Temple-Gate in Fleet street, and the Blue-Anchor in the Lower-Walk of the New-Exchange, 1695.
A POEM Most humbly offered to the MEMORY Of Her Late Sacred Majesty. BOth kind and fortunate the Year begun Her happy Course, and long went smiling on; Fresh Blessings daily ope'ning to our view, With Promises of Greater to ensue. The Senate did their Sove'reign's Wants supply, And ready Grants are half a Victory: That done, He early opens the Campaign, Armies at Land, and Navies on the Main. Where never British Sails before were spread In Hostile Guise, our conqu'ring Fleets are led. Lords of the Ocean long our selves we nam'd, And now as far as that does reach, are fam'd.
Spain, whose Armado made the World afraid, Fell by our Strength, and rises by our Aid. Though from the vaster Continent dis-join'd, The Balance falls, as Britain is inclin'd: If Peace she gives, she does compose the Jar, And does as surely conquer, if 'tis War. To their own Ports confin'd, the French-Men see, "We ride without a Rival on the Sea. As Tourville, Russell; so their Gen'ral too At Land does think it safest out of view, Entrench'd he lies, and fights us by delay; But let him think of Cannae's fatal Day. A Day like that, and quickly too, may come, And Paris, took, be humbled in her Doom, Though that less famous Warrior fail'd of Rome. Thus our Affairs abroad—At home no less The bounteous Year did all our Labour bless. The fertile Soil, like Aegypt heretofore, By Handfuls a prodigious Product bore: Ne'er had the Reaper's Gripe so large a Pull: And still our Garners and our Stores are full. Mean while our neighb'ring Foes, by want of Rain, To Dearth reduc'd, had scarce their Seed again: Starving, and harass'd by their Tyrant's Lust, They crouch beneath his Spurn, and lick the Dust. This Harvest o'er, another yet succeeds, William return'd! and crown'd with glorious Deeds!
That just Restorer of our Rights and Laws: And, hark! the Universal lov'd Applause Welcomes, at once their great Deliv'rer home, Our CAESAR, too, from Gaul in Triumph come. Bells, Guns, and Shouts in one loud Concert joine; The Voice of Nations is the Voice Divine. Scarce Sacred Charles, whose Absence long we mourn'd, Joy of our Hearts, more lov'd and blest return'd. Saviour of Nations, hail! Nor have w'implor'd The Pow'rs in vain, You are in Peace restor'd! Thus far w'are happy—Hitherto the Year Was not th'Occasion of a Publick Tear: Almost expir'd, who wou'd expect to find Her blackest Day, and gloomiest Scene behind! It now has cancell'd all it gave before, Ne'er but with Grief to be remember'd more! Our Sun of Beauty's set! Our Joy is done! And with Her Life the British Glory gone! Where was the Guardian-Angel of these Isles? (On which, 'tis said, delighted Nature Smiles) Or where was Hers? To what strange Region gone, And left his Charge to Perish here alone? Return! Return! and, paler than Her Ghost, See what the World by your Neglect has lost! Death of thy Absence has th' Advantage took, And dreadfully he grinn'd, and deep he strook! Banish'd from Paradise be now thy Doom, Ne'er to thy Native Seat again to come:
Hadst thou been careful, as thy Nature's kind, Our Light that is extinguish'd, yet had shin'd! But with our Hopes let now our Lives be done, And that way mourn the QUEEN of Britain gone! But though thy Ministers their Charge forsake, O Heav'n! thy Eyes for ever are awake. You might, at least, (but you are pleas'd 'tis so) Have stood between HER and the Fatal Blow; Nor let the pale-fac'd Tyrant from us torn That GEMM, by Britain with such Glory worn. Why do we Mortals Adoration pay? For Blessings praise you, and for Blessings pray? If those we dearest love, and highest prize, Are snatch'd the soonest from our wond'ring Eyes! Hard your Decrees! your Laws unequal made! Why must the fairest Flow'rs the soonest fade? Why must that Sacred Life so quickly end, On which the Peace of Nations does depend? In all Her Sweetness, Glory, Youth and Prime, Abhorring Vice, and still redeeming Time: Ah, cruel Heav'n! so little in your Eye, And yet less great in Pow'r than Piety. When the bright Sun hastes to his Ev'ning-Fall, Like Age deceas'd, he scarce is miss'd at all: But if, in his Noon-Station in the Skyes, A black Eclipse does shroud him from our Eyes, W'are pale with Fear, and his lost Glory mourn, Though sure both Heat and Light will soon return.
How shall we then our present Fate deplore? Our Light's extinct, and is to shine no more! 'Tis true, the Stars their baleful Infl'ence shed, And Death's fierce Agents thro' the Town were spred, Diseases rag'd and whet their Arrows keen, And flew in Pestilential Air unseen: But Princes should from common Ills be spar'd, Not perish meanly with the Vulgar Herd: In Pow'r so like th'Immortals, they shou'd be, Methinks, least subject to Mortality. Or granting humane Nature to be frail, Prayer is prescrib'd, why did not Prayer prevail? Why deaf, ye Powers, to all our Vows and Cries? Sent up aloud, yet banish'd from the Skies. Ah, may we not too sadly now complain, That we have pray'd with Faith, yet pray'd in vain! Had Prayer been efficacious, She had been A Living, not a Dead, a Perish'd QUEEN! But 'tis your Will, and we submit to Fate, Our Part's to hope, and not expostulate; Since in all Turns and Changes, here below, You still have Ends above our Reach to know: Forgive me then, that thus I dare to blame Divine Decrees, and tax the Sacred Name.— But we may mourn—That wretched Liberty You cannot to our out-cast Race deny: Grief seems to be our sole Prerogative, Faithful to Life, and all that Life can give:
Your Love and Bounty, as you please, are shown In other things, but Misery is our own. Hear then, ye Britains, and attend me well, While the sad Muse does all those Wonders tell In which the bright MARIA did excell: Then, pale and dying with your Grief, bemone Th'amazing Loss of so much Goodness gone! Tho' She did move in such a Glorious Sphere, She often stoop'd, and made the Poor Her Care, And seem'd to place Her sole Diversion there: Her Favour and Compassion did extend Where e'er there was Occasion to befriend. Wide as Her Pow'r, and boundless as Her Mind, Was Her diffusive Love to Human-kind. You, Ladies, that still had HER in your View, And saw to what a Pitch Her Vertues flew; O blame me not, that in the Van I place Her Charity, that first best Fruit of Grace: Above the Clouds it does its Vot'ries raise, And leaves on Earth their Everlasting Praise: But O! our Praise must now be mixt with Mone! The QUEEN of Bounty, and of Britain's gone! But tho' this Vertue bore so strong a Sway, Yet did She not more often Give, than Pray: The Charming Suppliant for our Fau'ts wou'd kneel, And we th'Effects of Her Devotions feel. How often has Her Sacred Knees been bent Mercies to crave, and Judgments to prevent?
Ah! grant (She'd cry) ere yet thy Vengeance fall Upon these stubborn Lands and ruine all; By Penitence they may thy Rage divert, And make thy Laws their only Joy of Heart. Long they have err'd, and trod in impious Ways, Prophan'd thy Sabbaths, and renounc'd thy Praise! O set 'em right! and let Religion be Not thus in talking of, but following Thee. Such earnest Raptures wou'd She, living, breathe, And, dying, did in Legacies bequeath. Who now will for a murm'ring People sue, That grudge both Caesar and their GOD his Due? Our Sins have lost HER—we can hope for none! Our mighti'st Earthly Intercessour's gone! So firmly She all Sacred Truth believ'd; (O more than Saint!) She ev'ry Month Receiv'd: Fixt to that Orb, She kept Her Soul in Tune, And thought She never cou'd excel too soon. So easie all Offences to forgive; Ev'n Hermits die less pure than SHE did live. No Parallel can reach HER, Lamb or Dove, Nor this in Innocence, nor that in Love. Angels alone are with like Meekness grac't, And dying Virgins only are as Chast. If those that most abase themselves must be Exalted, and attain rhe Top Degree, SHE was a QUEEN by Her Humility.
Zealous not of Her own, but People's Ease, For Pride and Sloth were Her Antipodes. Tho' on Her Head She wore the Sacred Gold, Her Fingers wou'd the feeble Distaff hold; Nor from the Needle wou'd She turn her Hand, But that and t'other artfully command; The golden Thread in rich Embroide'ry twine, Till it was wrought into some Form Divine; At his Return Her Monarch to adorn, And only fit to be by Monarchs worn. How ill will this fam'd Pattern now agree With the loose Race of Lazy Quality? If, Ladies, you wou'd have a Glorious Name, Like HERS in Life, and after Death in Fame; Fly Idleness, and ill-perswading Ease, Nor be too proud, or over-fond to please: Think of the Plainness of your Sove'reign's Dress, It neither made Her Worth, or Beauties less. If Vertue don't from Death her Vot'ries free, How can you be preserv'd by Vanity? Think of Her Fate, and soon expect your own; Can Glow Worms hope for Light, when Stars have none? If Mercy shou'd some Humane Likeness take, She cou'd not a more Glorious Figure make; Cou'd not our Souls more pleasingly allure, Or scarce more Blessings to those Souls procure. No Sweetness, nor no Charm that Heav'n cou'd prize, But sate triumphant in Her conq'ring Eyes!
To gaze but on HER struck so bright a Flame Up in our Hearts, it yet does want a Name! Not such with which weak Beauties blind our Sight, At once 'twas Love, Amazement and Delight; In Her soft Aspect, and Her easie Meen Were all the Beauties, Loves and Graces soon, And SHE o'er All presiding as their QUEEN. Others they might to our Esteem prefer, But they themselves had their Esteem from HER. They flow'd not to HER, but did from HER run, As Light from Flame, or Brightness from the Sun. Then, when She spoke, She charm'd the Air around: Musick no more was a harmonious Sound: To savage Natures it did Mildness bring, Rage was disarm'd, and Envy dropt her Sting. If fam'd Amphion with his Lyre cou'd call Th' enliven'd Stones into the Theban Wall; What was Her Tongue, that cou'd our Jars compose, More rugged, and to polish worse than those? Weakness with Strength, the Backward with the Bold She closely join'd, and in a Gordian Fold. But O, the Line is cut! the Union's done! The QUEEN of Concord, and of Britain's gone! You who were with Her Royal Converse blest Must feel this Blow more deeply than the rest; Your Joys are null! the tuneful Voice is ceas'd! Run through the Court with your dishevell'd Hair, Swoon with your Grief, and rave with your Despair!
With Sighs and mournful Cries fill ev'ry Room, Then pale as Death into the Presence come! Where late you waited on the Beauteous QUEEN, Only the Canopy of State is seen; And that too with dark Sables cover'd o're, And dumbly seems HER Absence to deplore. Let not the Vulgar Sorrow yours exceed, You shou'd not only weep HER Loss, but bleed! They cou'd but see Her outward Pomp and State, Kneel at Her Feet, and on Her Chariot wait: Yet when the Gracious Sove'reign pass'd but by, With Hands upheld, and Joy in ev'ry Eye, God save HER! was the Universal Cry. Then to their Toil return'd, a-new reviv'd, As if HER Sight had made 'em longer liv'd. Nor did they judge amiss; the Nation took Enlive'ning Hope and Comfort from Her Look. But O, no more She'll be in Publick seen! No more be greeted with God save the QUEEN! God save the QUEEN will now be heard no more, With the united Voice and Cannon's Roar, Echo'd from Land to Sea, and from the Fleets to Shore! Despair and Horrour now assume the Place, Anguish and Care, and all the ghastly Race! That Voice of Melody is turn'd to Mone! And with HER Life the British Glory gone! Cruel Disease! of all Death's Agents worst, By Nature fear'd, and ev'ry Tongue accurst!
Ev'n where you spare y'are fatal, leaving still Behind thee Marks of a most envious Will, Ev'n that defacing which thou canst not kill. Thy Rage, like Winter, on our Verdure feeds, And no reviving Spring thy Blast succeeds. Beauty once gone, alas! returns no more, No Pencil can the Glorious Rays restore, That charm'd so soon, and shone so bright before. Thou dost at once what Age is doing long, And harder treat the Beauteous and the Young. By other Ills though w'are of Life bereft, There's yet at least some Humane Likeness left: But when we do thy barb'rous Work behold, We know not if the Dead were Young or Old. From the detestable and loathsome Sight We turn our Eyes, and stiffen with Affright! The Mother knows her only Darling's gone, And tears her Hair for Grief, but looking down, She shrieks, and scarce believes it is her own! By thee disguis'd, so lies our Sacred QUEEN! No more with Joy and Wonder to be seen! A Lazar, scarce to Her Attendants known, Her Vernal Hue and Balmy Sweetness gone! Ye Sons of Aesculapius, boast no more, That you the Weak to Health and Strength restore: Vain is your Learning, and your Art a Cheat, At least 'tis ever Fatal to the GREAT. All you can do is but a happy Guess, And a whole College has the least Success.
Like a sharp two-edg'd Sword you both ways slay, Oft by your Haste, and oft by your Delay. Those by your Help recover'd, had, no doubt, Sooner recover'd to their Health without. You are your selves an Epidemick Ill, And for the Few you save you Thousands kill: To Plagues and Pestilential Blasts a-kin, Their Poysons reign without, and yours within. From You 'tis Weakness to expect Relief, Both Atheists in your Practice and Belief: From GOD can Favour on your Work be shown, When you so boldly argue there is None? Yet O, (to this Reproof though justly mov'd) Had You This Life preserv'd Y'ad stood approv'd, By Poets prais'd, and Nations been belov'd. Those that wou'd live must your Prescriptions shun: Tho' who, alas! wou'd value now his own? The Great, the Good, the Just MARIA gone! Adieu, Thou Best of Human-kind, adieu! And O, not only Best, but Fairest too! A long Farewel Thy wretched Subjects give, And for thy Death resolve in Grief to live. What tho' our Conqu'ring Monarch may restore A Publick Peace? YOU must return no more! YOU wou'd to us a Greater Blessing be, Ev'n Peace was not so much ador'd as THEE! While that was with us it less brightly shone, Nor has been so lamented since 'twas gone!
But tho' for HER (ye Pow'rs!) in vain we pray'd, Ah, let HIS Fate the longer be delay'd! Those Years, which for Her Reign so short did seem, And all SHE shou'd have liv'd transfer to HIM. Yet so to pray is scarce to be His Friend, Since but with Lite His Sorrows will have End! Ah, Gracious PRINCE! when You hereafter come From Gallia, cover'd with Your Lawrels, home; When You have done what Y'are prescrib'd by Fate, Enlarg'd our Bounds, and rais'd a sinking State; Compos'd our Foreign and Domestick Jars, And put a Glorious Period to the Wars; Though all the Nation shall in Joy appear, The Court for Your Reception Balls prepare, Will You not grieve to miss MARIA there? SHE was the Soul, the Nation's but the Ghost, That, but the Shadow, SHE, the Substance, lost!— But then remember, SHE's but lost to gain A Brighter Crown, and a more Lasting Reign! FINIS.
