G881 15720860 104524
THE GLORY OF THE WEST OR, The Tenth Renowned Worthy, and most Heroick CHAMPION of this BRITTISH ISLAND. Being an unparallel'd Commemoration of GENERAL MONCK'S coming towards the CITY of LONDON. TO unperplex the Riddles of our State, And to discover t'us our hidden part, Welcome (we cry) Welcome to George the Great, A joyful sight to see. Not like the Macedons impatient sword, That solv'd the doubt tyed in the Gordean Cord, Great George doth time proportion due afford, A joyful, &c. Wisdomes great pattern bred at Bellones Brest, Prudence and Valour joyned in one Rest, No more St. George shall be but George the Blest, A joyful, &c. As Cesar did the affrighted Boat-man learn, When he sate trembling at the stinking stern, My fates Embarqued that do's the world concern, A joyful, &c. So the wrack't Vessel of the state distrest, With Heav'ns angry blasts, now seeks for rest, From the Favonian Gales of George o'th West, A joyful, &c. His great excelling merits in the Scale, Of our rais'd hope, nor shall the angry Taile, Of any Comet 'gainst our peace prevail, A joyful, &c. Another Fabius, whose wise delays, (Like a misty morn, guilt with the Suns noond-rayes) Have Crown'd him with the Glorious Bayes, A joyful, &c. He that has marched quite three Kingdoms o're, subdu'd his great mind for to make them four, The signes to bring peace and plenty to our Door, A joyful &c. Let all antient Glory then be a Romance, Let old fame, and craz'd Time, lye in a Trance, Nothing new but Hony Soit qui mal y pense, A joyful, &c. This is the Noble Champion of the Garter, The great Defender of the Magna Charter, The soveraign good come from the Northern Quarter A joyful, &c. To settle a Nation without any Blowes, To break down the Fridge of another Nose, To do what all wish, but no body Knowes. A joyful, &c. To compleat a Design without any Noyse. To amuse the Loud cry of Vive le Roys, And sport all a long with your Commonwealth toys, A joyful, &c. But all the grand Hero's and wise ones together, None had such advantage of Wine and Weather, 'Tis true he's sprung of a Princely Feather, A joyful, &c. Where shall we begin his Trophees to raise? Or when shall we make an end of his praise? The blessing and honour and joy of these dayes. A joyful, &c. The untam'd Scot (before his glorious time) Has made t'expiate their treacherous crime, They own him sole conquerour of that clime, A joyful, &c. His great and most powerful Influence, Ha's restraind them in their obedience, As if they own'd the Vice-roy of their Prince, A joyful &c. The shifting Irish bey'd his great command, The slaughtered Dutch, yet rowling on the sand, Crave a reflux, to keep them from his hand, A joyful, &c. Thrice did he Victory over them repeat, And the a'most wearied State were forc'd to treat, To save them from a final last defeat, A joyful, &c. Whether we conque'rd are, or must submit, By his all-powerful hand to them that sit, We are sure to be eas'd of our present fit, A joyful, &c. What if great George should come to the Citie, And in all your good humours should presently fit ye, As I hope he will do; else more is the pitie, A joyful sight to see. London, Printed for Charles Gustavus.
