h1191 12171949 55446
Vera Effigies Samuelis Haworth, M. D. R. White sc
A DESCRIPTION OF THE DUKE's BAGNIO, AND OF THE MINERAL BATH AND NEW SPAW Thereunto belonging. WITH An Account of the Use of Sweating, Rubbing, Bathing, and the Medicinal Vertues of the Spaw. BY SAM. HAWORTH, M. D. LONDON, Printed for Sam. Smith, at the Prince's Arms in St. Paul's Church-yard. 1683.
TO His Royal Highness JAMES DUKE OF YORK & ALBANY, &c. Great Sir, SInce it hath pleased Your Highness to express so much Candour and Condes∣cention,
as to encou∣rage this New Under∣taking, by suffering it to be called by Your Royal Name; this smal Tract, which is a De∣scription of it, presumes to throw it self at Your Highness's Feet, hum∣bly imploring Your Favour and Patronage: For tho it hath too ha∣stily broke Shel, and is stil Callow, yet it ven∣tures to take Wing, and fly to Your Princely Bosom for Shelter and
Protection, rejoycing at the Opportunity it hath given its Author of rendring a Grateful Acknowledgment for those Undeserved Fa∣vours Your Highness hath already vouchsa∣fed him. Particularly, I return Your Royal Highness most submis∣sive Thanks for intro∣ducing me into His Majesty's Favour, and recommending me up∣on the account of the Success I had in Cu∣ring
Consumptive Per∣sons by a Particular Method. That Your Highness would stil go on to Fa∣vour, and continue to retain candid Thoughts of this Great Under∣taking, now almost Compleated; And that this Bold and Ambiti∣ous Attempt, of pre∣fixing Your Name to this smal Treatise, may be wel resented by Your Highness, is the
humble Request and earnest Desire of, Great Sir, Your Highness's most Submissive Servant, Sam. Haworth.
A DESCRIPTION OF THE DUKE's BAGNIO, AND OF THE Mineral Bath, & New Spaw, &c. THE Design of this Trea∣tise being onely to ac∣quaint the World with the particular Conveniencies of the New Bagnio, &c. We suppose it needless to make any Prelimi∣nary Apologie or Introduction to usher it in. We shal therefore
with al possible Plainness and Brevity present the Reader with our Thoughts about it, and de∣sire his Candid Perusal. This Bagnio is erected near the West end of Long-acre, in that Spot of Ground which hath been called by the Name of Salisbury-Stables. At the Front of it, next the Street, is a large commodi∣ous House, wherein dwels that Honourable Person Sir William Jennings (of whose great Worth, and Services to His Majesty at Sea, not onely the King himself, but almost the whole Nation be∣sides, is sufficiently sensible); who having obtained His Maje∣sties Patent for the making of al Public Bagnios and Baths, either for Sweating, Bathing, Wash∣ing,
&c. is the Onely Underta∣ker of this New Building. In this House there are several Rooms set apart for the Accom∣modation of such as shal come to the Bagnio; and to the fur∣ther side of it, the Structure of the Bagnio is adjoyned. So that the first Room we enter to go into the Bagnio, is a large Hal, where the Porter stands to re∣ceive the Money. Hence we pass thorow an Entry into ano∣ther Room, where hangs a Pair of Scales, to weigh such as our of Curiosity would know how much they lose in Weigh while they are in the Bagnio. Thorow this Room we pass into a large Room, called the Dressing-room: This Room hath on each side
several private Boxes, for Persons to undress and dress themselves in: The middle Walk, between the Rows of Boxes, is paved with Black and White Marble. This Room is always moderately warm, to prevent taking cold when the Body is stript; it is 32 Foot in length, and about 30 Foot broad; 'tis flat on the top, and covered with Lead. At the farther end of this Room is an Entry, which is somewhat warm∣er; in this Entry the Rubbers stand and wait, when they are not employ'd. On the farther side of this Entry is a Door or Passage into the Bagnio it self, which is a stately Edifice, of an Oval Figure, in length 45 Foot, and in breadth 35. 'Tis covered
at the top with a high and large Cupola, in which there are several round Glasses fixt, to let in Light, which are much larger, and so fewer in number, than those at the Royal Bagnio. This Cupola is supported by eight Cylindrical Columns of white Stone Pillars, each of which are 20 Inches Di∣ameter, and 16 Foot high. Be∣tween these Pillars and the Sides of the Bagnio is a sumptuous Walk, about 7 Foot and a half broad, quite round the Bagnio; so that the Middle of the Bagnio, within the Pillars, and just under the Cupola, is 36 Foot long, and 26 broad: yet the Heat within these Columns, and likewise round about them, is exactly in the same Degree. The mentio∣ned
Walk in the Bagnio is Arch∣ed over with Brick; which Arch, with the Cupola, and al the top of the Bagnio, is covered with Lead. The Bagnio is paved with Mar∣ble, and in the middle of it is placed a Marble Table, which is 20 Inches high, and 6 Foot square. The Sides of the Bagnio are covered with White Gally-tyles, and in the Wals are made ten convenient Seats, such as are in the Baths at Bathe: there are likewise 14 Neeches in the Wals, in which are placed so many Marble Fonts or Basons, with Cocks over them of hot and cold Water, for the convenience of Washing. On one side of the Bagnio hangs a very handsom Pendulum-Clock, which is kept
to give an exact Account how Time passeth away. Adjoyning to the Bagnio there are four little round Rooms, about 8 Foot over, which are made for De∣grees of Heat, some being hotter, others colder, as Persons can best bear, and are pleased to use. In each of these little Rooms is fixt a Leaden Cistern, about 2 Foot high, 6 Foot long, and 2 Foot and a half broad: Over every of these Cisterns are placed two Cocks, the one to supply with hot, the other with cold Water. These Rooms are likewise al co∣vered with Cupola's, and their Wals with Gally-tyles. The Inside of this Bagnio be∣ing thus described, it's now re∣quisite we say something of the
manner of Entertainment in it, which is as follows. The Person that comes to re∣ceive the Benefit of this Bagnio, when he first enters, pays his Money to the Porter, or Person appointed for that purpose, then if he pleaseth, he may be weigh∣ed in the Scales: whence passing into the Dressing-room, he is re∣ceived by the Barbers, and pre∣sented with a Box to himself, his particular Barber attending him, who immediately undresseth him, causing him to sit down on the Squab or little Couch placed in the Box. Being thus undrest, and his Head wrapt about with a Napkin, he hath a Linen Cloth put round his Middle, which reacheth down to his Feet, and
another thrown about his Shoul∣ders, which hangs like a Mantle down to his Middle, he hath a pair of Slippers given him, and so passeth to the Entry of the Bagnio, attended by his Barber, where he is met by a particular Rubber destin'd to wait on him, who bringing him a pair of Wooden Clogs, which he chan∣geth for his Slippers, introduceth him into the Bagnio, and then leaves him to walk about, or sit down on one of the Seats, or else lye along upon the Marble Table, which best pleaseth him. Thus, observing the Clock, the Person may continue as long as he wil: If he purposeth to sweat much, and desireth a greater de∣gree of Heat, he may walk into
one of the little Rooms designed for that purpose; and if he finds himself almost overcome, or rea∣dy to faint, he may pass thence into another of these little Rooms on the other side of the Bagnio, which is much cooler, and there find present Relief; or, if he please, he may cal for a Bottle of a Diaphoretic Liquor, which our Apothecary hath always in readiness, which is a very plea∣sant Cordial, and wil both pre∣vent Fainting, and quickly re∣store him from it if he already faint, and likewise much pro∣mote his Sweating. After he hath been in about an Hour, more or less, he cals for his Rub∣ber who first causeth him to sit down in a Chair, over against
one of the Stone Basons in that Bagnio; there with his Hands he artificially rubs him over, be∣ginning with the Arms, then the Legs, afterwards the Back, and then the Breast and Belly: Here∣by he fetcheth off much Scurf; which before stopt the Pores, and so hindred those Sluces of Perspiration from sending forth those Heterogeneous Particles which Nature deems not fit to remain mixed with that whole∣som Liquor the Blood, and there∣fore endeavours to throw them off that way. After this, to make the Parts more pliable, the Rubber stretcheth every Limb of the Body, and distends every Joynt in each Limb; then he throws warm Water upon him,
and washeth his Body all over, and hereby renders him white and clean. Having thus done, he takes him into a little Room, which is a Degree colder; there he rubs his Body al over with a Hair-Chamlet Glove, which gently scratcheth the Body, and is exceeding pleasant to the Sense; the particular Use and Benefit of which, we shal relate in the Sequel of this Discourse. After he hath continued this pleasant sort of Friction for some time, more or less, as the Person desires it, he fetcheth a Bason of a Perfumed Lader, with which he washeth the Body al over; this, the Rubber tels you, he finds at his own Charge: The Body being washed hereby, re∣tains
a very grateful and pleasing Scent. This being finisht, he rinseth the Body with Water, and the fils the Leaden Cistern, setting the Cocks of hot and cold Water both running, where∣by the Cistern is soon filled with Water moderately warm. The Cocks being then both stopt, the Person is desired to lie or sit in the Cistern of Water; and the Cocks being at his Hand, he sets the cold Cock a running, which renders the Water in the Cistern gradually colder and colder: Thus he cools himself at pleasure; and when he thinks himself cool enough, fresh Li∣nen is brought him: He then walks to the Door of the Bagnio, where his Barber meets him with
a pair of Slippers, and a long white Linen Frock; which ha∣ving put on, he is again convey∣ed to his Box, where lying along upon the Couch, he is with fresh Linen wiped dry, and covered with Clothes for some time, where he lies till he is desirous to dress: The Barber then brings him his Shirt warmed at the Stove, which is at one corner of the Dressing-room; having put on his Shirt, he helps him on with his Clothes, and then brings him his Shoes ready clean'd: Having put on his Clothes, Shoes, and Stockings, he shaves him, if he desires it. The Per∣son then repairs to the Scales, and sees what he has lost; and then leaving the Bagnio, he betakes
himself to his Pleasure or Busi∣ness, finding himself as brisk, active, and vigorous, as if he had just skipt into the World, and never wearied his active Members by any Exercise or Occupation. The same Reception and En∣tertainment do also Women find, only with this difference, viz. On Womens Days there are all imaginable Conveniences of Privacy, and not a Man to be seen; but all the Servants are of the Female Sex, and such as are not only neat and cleanly, but likewise skilful and dexterous in the Business they have to do. They likewise use a Water which affects the Skin with an admira∣ble Whiteness and Clearness,
with which they wash the whole Body, but especially the Hands, and Face, and Neck; whereby much Lustre and Beauty is ad∣ded to those Parts. The Days appointed for Men are Mundays, Wednesdays, Thursdays; and Satur∣days; those for Women are Tuesdays and Frydays only. Having thus described the In∣side of this Bagnio, and given a concise Specimen of the Manners and Customs appointed for the Accommodation of such as shall frequent it; it is altogether requisite we should give as short an Account as may be of the Particulars belonging to it, espe∣cially the Bath and Waters, be∣fore we relate the singular Use and Vertues of them all; which take as follows.
On the East side of the Bagnio there is a Coffee-house fronting the Street, with this Inscription upon the Sign, THE DƲKES BAGNIO COFFEE-HOƲSE. Near the end of this Coffe-house is the great Gate, which opens into a large Court-yard, conve∣nient for the receiving of Coa∣ches: In this Court-yard is visi∣ble the Front of the Bagnio, ha∣ving this Inscription upon it, in Golden Letters, upon a Carved Stone, THE DƲKES BAGNIO. On the left hand of the Yard, over against the Coffee-house, is a very convenient Building, ere∣cted for the Accommodations belonging to the Bath; on the outside of which is inscribed in like manner, THE DƲKES
BATH. This Building is about 42 Foot broad, 21 Foot deep, and three Story high. There are in the lower Story, of first Floor, several Partitions: On the West side of it is a narrow Room for a Laboratory, in which are Chy∣mic Furnaces, Glasses, and other Instruments necessary for ma∣king the Bath-Waters. At the East end a Door opens, thorow which Persons that come to the Bath first enter into an Entry, and then turn on the Right-hand into a convenient Room ap∣pointed for their Reception; and on the further side of this Room a Door opens to the Bath, round about which, within the Partiti∣on, is a Place for the Friends or Servants attending such as go
into the Bath, to stand, who may lean over, and see those that wade in the Waters. At one Corner of the Bath are five or six Steps down into the Water. This Bath is about 10 Foot long, 7 Foot broad, and 5 Foot deep; tho it seldom or never is ful quite up to the top: It holds about 10 Tun of Water, according to the Rules of Gaging: On the further side of it are Seats in the Wall, such as are in the Baths at Bathe: At one corner of it is a large Pipe, to let in Water upon occasion; and also a Cock somewhat smaller, which is con∣stantly running to supply the Bath with Water. There is likewise another smal Cock, and several Vessels adapted for our
purpose, thro which those pre∣pared Liquors pass which im∣pregnate the VVater, and cause that Heat and Ebullition which appears immediately after their mixture with the Water. The Bath is hereby kept continually hot to an exact Degree, and is impregnated by the very same Mineral Principles wherewith the Natural Baths are; only in this Bath they are more pure, be∣ing separate from al noxious Fumes, Arsenical Particles, and other poysonous and unwhole∣som Mixtures: So that this Ar∣tificial Bath is much safer and better than any Natural ones; for (not to lessen the Esteem of Natural Baths, they being extra∣ordinary Blessings which God
hat conferred upon some Countries) in Natural Baths there is much of Contingency and Casualty; and 'tis almost as probable that the Currents of Water in the Bowels of the Earth should fal upon a poyso∣nous, as upon a wholesom or in∣nocent Mine; and so may al∣most as soon be impregnated with Antimonial, Arsenical, or Mercurial, as with Sulphureous, Nitrous, or Vitrioline Particles. Hence several Baths in Europe do retain such deadly and pernici∣ous Qualities, that none dare to enter them: Others, tho fre∣quented, are in some measure hurtful and destructive: And there is no Natural Bath in the World but hath some unwhole∣som
Particles swimming about with the numerous Sulphureous ones. On the Right-hand coming out of this Bath is a little square Room, accommodated for the wiping and wrapping such Per∣sons as use the Bath; which Room is kept moderately warm by the Heat of the Bath. At the end of this Room there is a Door into the Entry, and at the end of the Entry a pair of Stairs up to the Chambers above, where there are Beds, Fires, and al man∣ner of Necessaries for such as bathe. There are likewise Gar∣rets for Servants Lodgings, and other Conveniencies. The Manner and Circum∣stances of Bathing are these. The
Persons desiring to use the Bath, whether one, two, three, or more, first come directly to the Bath-house, thro the Court-yard ad∣joyning to the Bagnio and Bath, and, by a Servant appointed for that Business, are conducted in∣to the common Room of Re∣ception, who having received their Money, either taketh them into the private Room at the end of the Bath, or else up Stairs, if they desire it, and there undres∣seth them: After they are stript, he puts on them a Canvas Shirt or Shift, gives them a pair of Clogs, and so leadeth them to the Bath. If they are feeble, and unable to help themselves, they have a Guide enters with them; otherwise they go in without.
When they are in, they either walk about, or sit down on one of the Seats in the Bath, which Seats are some higher and big∣ger, some lower and lesser, for the Convenience of tal and short, great and smal Bodies. They continue in the Bath as long as they please, or so long as their Physician, if they consulted any, advised them. They have also, while they are in the Bath, offered them by the Apothecary a Bottle of the mentioned Diapho∣retic Cordial Liquor. During the time they stay in the Bath, they either divert themselves by talk∣ing with their Friends or Ser∣vants about them, or else by ta∣king notice of the somewhat strangeness of the great Ebulli∣tion
and Heat which now and then by Intervals they will per∣ceive to be caused by the above∣mentioned Mixtures: Also, if they please to order the Win∣dows to be shut, and so the Bath darkned, the Surface of those Vessels wherein the Mixtures are made wil appear Light and Fla∣ming, and several shining Va∣pors or Exhalations wil be seen to ascend, in the manner of Fiery Meteors; which Phenomena are caused by the avolition of the Sulphureous Aporrhea or Fumes from the Mineral Principles of this Bath, and are somewhat pleasant to behold: So that al∣tho the great Virutes and admi∣rable Qualities, besides the Clean∣liness of it, is the main Induce∣ment
to perswade Persons to make use of it; yet these Curi∣osities being for Diversion-sake worth observing, I thought fit to mention them in the Descri∣ption of the Bath, intending by and by to insist upon the peculi∣ar Vertues and Qualities of it. Therefore to return from this Digression, and proceed in what is yet behind, in reference to relating the Manner and Cir∣cumstances of Bathing. The Persons in the Bath having con∣tinued there as long as is thought convenient and necessary for this time, they come out, being handed up by a Servant, and en∣tring the adjacent little Room, they are wiped dry, a Shirt or Shift and Gown is put on them,
and hence they are either con∣veyed into warm Beds prepared for them in the Chambers, or else they are carried in a close Chair to their own Lodgings near the Bath, such as they shal chuse for themselves. Women likewise two Days every Week are here received with al Decency and due Re∣spect, by Persons of their own Sex, ordered to attend them. There is also one Day appointed in every Week for a particular Bath prepared for Children in the Rickets, very effectual in that Distemper, as wil appear in the following Part of this Treatise, and likewise by the Experience of such as wil have occasion to send their Children to it.
But to avoid being prolix, I shal now (having given this summary Account of the Parti∣culars belonging to the Bath) in as few Words as may be, give a Description of the New Spaw. This Spaw is a Well of Medi∣cinal Waters, artificially made, by Mineral Principles, conveyed into the Earth by appropriated Vessels, there springing up in a sufficient Quantity to supply al Persons that shal have occasion to drink them. Their Colour is clear and transparent, their Taste sweet, and somewhat stip∣tic; they turn Purple if mixed with Gals, and are reduced to Transparency by a few Drops of Spirit of Vitriol: Oyl of Tar∣tar per Deliquium will curdle and
turn them White, and Spirit of Vitriol wil restore them to their former pellucid Colour. The Wel is covered over with Stone, with a Figure upon it, and other Carved-work about it: It hath a smal Iron Door, which is kept lockt, and opened only by the Person that draws the Water. This Wel is made close to the Wal of the Bath-house, in the Yard, about the middle of that Building; and 'tis encompassed on the Yard-side with tal Palliza∣does, in which there is a Door made for the Person that draws the Waters to pass to the Wel, and likewise a Window, out of which the Waters are to be de∣livered to those that want them. Near to these Pallizadoes is a lit∣tle
Room, for Persons to sit in that drink the Waters. There are also al other convenient Ac∣commodations for the Drink∣ing these Waters, as Bottles, Cups, Glasses, &c. This is all I thought necessary to relate in reference to the De∣scription of the Bagnio, the Bath, and Spaw. The subsequent Part of this Tract is to be spent in mentioning the great Vertues, Effects, and Qualities of them al: And we shall begin with the Use of the Bagnio. Amongst the many excellent Helps and useful Inventions wherewith the Industry of Anci∣ent and Modern Physicians hath supported the tottering Fabric of Mens Bodies, the Practice of
Bagnios deservedly claims an ho∣nourable Mention, and justly challenges a venerable Esteem. And indeed if we consider how long they have been known to the World, it cannot be suppo∣sed (whithout a manifest Re∣proach to the Judgment of the Learned in so many Ages, who having often experienced the great Advantages they have re∣ceived by them, took care to hand them down to our Times, and recommended them to the Use of succeeding Generations) that their Usefulness is not found to equal the Character which they have always given them, and which we now contend for. Besides, when we remember how nearly Art resembles Na∣ture
in this sort of Administrati∣on, we have no reason to que∣stion such considerable Effects from Means so highly probable; for, as 'tis generally acknow∣ledged, that by observing the singular Benefit some have re∣ceived by involuntary Bleeding at Nose, some at the Hemorhoids, others in other Parts, we were first directed to take up the Lan∣cet, open a Vein, and cal in the Assistance of Phlebotomy; so 'tis not unlikely, that the Ancients taking notice of the great Relief some have found after, Critical Sweats, by a free Transpiration of the Fuliginous Parts of the Body thorow the Pores, received the first hint of attempting the like Evacuations by Artificial
Baths or Bagnios, thereby pow∣erfully assisting the weakness of sluggish Nature, in throwing off the offending Matter. We need not look back so far as to the Times in which Rome, when Mi∣stris of the World, boasted of near 200 beautiful Structures erected for this purpose, since the present Practice of the Turks obviously presents it self to our Consideration; the Wisdom of whose Governours hath thought fit to provide such Accommo∣dations in all the principal Places of that vast Empire, and endow them with large Revenues: Nor do they think their Charge and Trouble in erecting these Bag∣nios lost; for they apparently find themselves much recruited
and invigorated by the frequent use of them; as likewise several Distempers are hereby prevent∣ed. It's rare to see any there af∣flicted either with Gout, Dropsie, or Rheumatisms; the Reason of which can be ascribed to no∣thing so much as this wholesom Custom of using Bagnios. Not only in Turkey, but also in several Parts of Europe, the use of Bagnios is much esteemed of; particularly in several Parts of Hungary, Germany, Sweedland, Denmark, &c. where they are in great request. Now if Bagnios are thus use∣ful, the frequent Sweating in them so beneficial; if they are so much in request abroad, and found to be of such extraordina∣ry
Advantage to Kingdoms, why should we exclude them? 'Tis matter of great wonder to me, that in this pregnant Age, when almost every Art and Science (but more particularly the No∣ble Faculty of Physick) hath been more improved than in several preceding Generations, and almost al ingenuous useful Inventions, whether found out in Europe, or any other Parts of the World, have been brought into immediate Use and Practice, that so admirable and Invention, and so publicly known in other Parts, was not thought on in England till about four Years ago. Certain I am, that if the real Vertues and Benefit of fre∣quenting Bagnios were wel
known and believed by the ge∣nerality of the Inhabitants of London and Westminster, 'tis not the Royal and the Duke's Bagnio would be able to receive the twentieth part of those that would crowd in upon them. But such is the remiss, careless, and negligent Humour of the Inhabitants of these Ilands, that they think not of preventing Di∣stempers til they come upon them, and then they smart for't. There is no Part of Physic so much rejected and forgotten, as the Prophylactic or Hygieinal, which is the Preservative Part, tho no one Part of Medicine ought to be more respected. To this very end Mr. Boyle, the Mir∣rour of our Age, hath prompted
us to this Study, in his Ʋsefulness of Natural Philosophy, Part 2. Essay 4. Now that Bathing and Sweating is useful in the Prophy∣lactic or Preservative, as well as in the Therapeutic or Healing Part of Physic, is evidently e∣nough demonstrable. For no∣thing tends more to the prevent∣ing of Distempers, and so, ex consequenti, for the preserving of Health, than the assisting of Na∣ture in throwing off what is of∣fensive to her, and incongruous with her Balsamic Crimson Li∣quor, and other deputrated Jui∣ces. The Pores of the Body, which are the Out-lets of those unwelcome Guests, are soon ob∣structed, by the constant and successive thronging forth of
Effluviums by insensible Perspi∣ration, some of which are gluti∣nous, or rather crooked, and so hang in their very exit, by which others are afterwards stopt in their passage, and so in time seve∣ral Pores of the Body are almost quite clogg'd, and Nature many times put to a force to burst them open: In the mean time several of these pernicious Cor∣puscles, which the Blood would otherwise transmit thorow those Pores, finding no passage into the open Air, at the yet too weak repulse of Nature, are hurri∣ed about again by Circulation, and hereby oftentimes such irre∣gular Motions in the Blood cre∣ated, by Natures strenuous en∣deavour to throw them off, by a
kind of abhorring violence and impetuosity, that the genuine Ferment, and slow and mode∣rate Motion of the Blood, is ex∣alted to a rapid Motion and fu∣rious Ebullition, and so many times fatal and destructive Ma∣ladies are created; all which, by the moderate use of Bagnios, might be prevented. And this is the reason why the Turks, and the Natives of other Countries that have the frequent use of Bagnios, are seldom sick, and live to a prodigious Age, because constant Perspiration being here∣by promoted, the very Seeds of Distempers are thrust out, and the Enemies of Nature quite ex∣terminated; so that Nature ha∣ving nothing heterogeneous, or
contrary to the Principles of Life, she performs her proper Functions with the greatest re∣gularity to a competent Old age. The Body then resigns not by being overcome by any Distem∣pers, but because its Organs are quite worn out and impaired by their long Exercise, and so unfit and unable for longer Service. We may mention the Use of Bagnios not only in preventing Diseases, as we have just now evinced, but also in curing and removing some particular Ma∣ladies and Infirmities. What can be prescribed better for a new-taken Cold, than to sweat moderately in a well-tempered Bagnio? For, as the Sulphure∣ous and sticking Particles of the
Blood do sometimes hang toge∣ther in their Passage from the Body, and so obstruct the Pores; so it is also undeniable, that fri∣gorific and cold Particles, which swarm and glide about in the fluid Air, especially in Winter, darting upon the Body exposed to the Air, do often stick in the Pores, and so hinder Perspirati∣on, and hereby occasion very bad Effects, and perplexing Symptoms in the Body. Now it is not only highly probable, and easie to imagine, but cer∣tainly the Effect and Product of daily Experience, that these per∣nicious cold Particles are soon driven away and put to flight by the calorific or hot Particles, of which there are enow floating or
rather jumping about in Bagnios. Cold Particles have likewise o∣ther hurtful Effects upon the Body, besides secluding the Pores; which is by entring the Body, and mixing themselves with the Blood, and hereby cau∣sing Coughs, Catarrhs Defluxions, Hoarsness, Quinzies, Pleurisies, Fevers, Rheumatisms, Pains, Head∣aches, Toothaches, Deafnesses, &c. All which direful Maladies are prevented, if the Party soon af∣ter taking Cold enter a Bagnio, the Heat expelling those Particles which are the Causes of the men∣tioned Evils. Another Use of Bagnios may be to recruit the Body after a te∣dious and wearisom Journey; for if a Person coming off such
a Journey do immediately make use of the Bagnio, it presently refresheth him, prevents, Stiffness of the Limbs, and renders him as fit for Business the next day, as if he had never travelled. To what hath been said, I may add, That Sweating is useful in Surfeits gotten by Fruits, Meats, Wines, and other Strong Li∣quors; by causing the Blood to throw off and separate that which being mixed with it, gave it the Surfeit: For which reason it is very proper and benficial for such as drink hard, to make fre∣quent use of Bagnios. Bagnios are likewise many times helpful to such as have Old Pains and Aches, and also newly contracted Rheumatisms.
Farther we have to add con∣cerning the Benefit of Bagnios, That the Friction or Rubbing used in them is of extraordinary use to Humane Bodies, as wel as the Sweating: For hereby the Circulation of the Blood in the smal Capillary Vessels is exceed∣ingly promoted, and the narrow Ducts and Passages in the ex∣treme and superficial and cuta∣neous Parts of the Body, where∣in the Blood and other Liquors are often coagulated, or those Vessels stopp'd by other Acci∣dents, are hereby opened; the tender Nervous Fibres are also hereby rubb'd up and stimula∣ted to perform their Exercise. So that many and considerable are the Advantages of so little
and unthought-of a thing as Friction. And this is not only my bare Opinion, but the Opi∣nion of several Learned Authors. Galen in several places of his Works highly commends Fricti∣on; particularly, in Lib. de Artic. cap. 81. he saith, Frictiones red∣dunt Fibrarum substantiam plenio∣rem, Carnium vero validiorem; Frictions render the substance of the Fibres fuller, the Flesh more firm. Also Lib. de Offic. cap. 25. he saith, Frictio moderata nutrit; Moderate Friction nourisheth. We have not only the Authority of Galen for the abetment of our Assertion; but likewise several Modern Authors do testifie the same. The Lord Verulam, in his Hi∣story
of Life and Death, looks up∣on Touch and Friction as a great Medic Branch, and effectual Cure of many Diseases and In∣firmities; That Motion and Warmth (which make up Fricti∣on) draw forth new Juyce and Vigour into the Parts; and that they also contribute much to the Prolongation of Life, &c. See his History of Life and Death, Hist. 6. Sect. 3. & in Canon xiii. Mr. Boyle, in his Ʋsefulness of Experimental Philosophy, Part 2. c. 15. compares the Bodies of Animals to Engines, whose di∣stant Parts may be altered much for the better or worse, by Im∣pressions upon some other Part, by Motions confessedly Mecha∣nical: He also tels us how much
the wel-dressing and Currying of a Horse contributes to his Thriving; that he shal look bet∣ter by such wel-ordering, than twice the quantity of Corn without such care taken of him; That the Brasilian Emperics, tho otherwise very unskilful, do strange things in the preserving of Health, and removing Dis∣eases, by such means; curing Cronic Diseases by Friction, Acute ones by Unction. You may see more among Dr. Beal's Communications con∣cerning the Cure of Excrescen∣ces and Wens by the Touch of a Dead Man's Hand, and Fricti∣on; and of some that would cause Vomiting or Purging by different Stroking, and give ease
in the Gout; as also the Benefit an old Gentleman received, ha∣ving his Feet lickt by a Spaniel. Of which see at large in Philoso∣phic Transactions, N. 12. p. 206, 208. for the Year 1666. 'Tis likewise credibly report∣ed, and I am apt to believe it, That Mr. Hobbs, who lived to a great Age, was a great Admirer of Frictions, and oftentimes im∣ploy'd his Man to rub him down with a course Cloth, if not con∣stantly. It's also more than probable, That many great Cures which have been done by some Private Persons, who have been Famous for Stroaking or Rubbing the Parts, and have been thought to have had an Extraordinary or
Divine Gift or Happiness, that way, have oftentimes been no other than the natural Effects and Consequents of Friction. The Famous Van Helmont tels us, That he himself could by the Milk of an Ass tel whe∣ther she had been that day di∣ligently Curried or no. Now so considerable an Alteration in Milk, should methinks strongly argue, that a great one is in the Blood, or other Juyce of which the Blood is elaborated, and consequently in divers of the principal Parts of the Body, which must have preceded it. Now there being so sensible an Alteration made in the Body of a Brute by meer Currying, how much more Benefit and Advan∣tage
must needs accrue and re∣dound to the Body of Man by accurate Friction? Thus we have endeavoured to demonstrate the great Use and Benefit of Bagnios. Now that this ample and spacious Structure of the Duke's Bagnio doth not fal short of, but rather exceed most of the Bagnios in Europe, is the Assertion of al Travellers that have yet seen it. That which next occurs to our Consideration, is the Use and Benefit of Baths, and parti∣cularly of this New Artificial Bath. Not undeservedly have Natu∣ral Baths been applauded by the most Eminent and Learned Phy∣sicians of many successive Gene∣rations;
neither hath the gene∣ral Esteem of the Vulgar for them, for so many past Ages, been meerly the Fruits of Fansie, without Ground or Reason, since the multitude of Cures that have yearly been effected by the Use of them, hath been a suffici∣ent Manifesto of their great Vir∣tue and Usefulness. Never was the Use of Baths so much in vogue in Europe as now. The most Renowned, and those that indeed excel al other Natu∣ral Baths in Europe, are those of Hungary,Dr. Brown's Travels. at Glas-Hitten, an Hungarian Mile from Schemnitz: There are five very convenient Baths, with handsom Descents into them, and cover∣ed over with large high Roofs.
These Baths are exceedingly fre∣quented, by reason of the ex∣traordinary Cures that are done by them. Also at Eisenbach, which is four English Miles from Glas-Hitten, are two very com∣modious Hot Baths, which are very much frequented. Not only in Hungary, but likewise in Germany, Natural Baths are high∣ly esteemed, and much used: Particularly those of the famous City of Aken are much celebra∣ted in many Parts of Europe. They were found out in the Year of our Lord 53. by one Granus, a Noble Roman, who adorned them after the manner of the Roman Baths, and built a Noble Habitation near them, part of which is stil to be seen,
retaining the Name of Turris Grani. Hence likewise these Thermae are stil called Aquae Gra∣niae. Within the Wals of this City are three Baths, viz. the Emperour's Bath, the Little Bath, and the Bath of St. Quirinus. The Emperour's Bath was very large, but is now divided by Partitions into several Bathing-rooms. This is that Bath in which Charles the Great formerly took so much delight, that he spent the latter end of his Days here, and would frequently swim in it, and invited abun∣dance of his Friends to this Bath, so that a hundred at once did frequently enter it. There are likewise other Baths about this City, as the Bath of St. Cornelius,
the Rose-Bath, so called from Mr. Rose, a Citizen, that built it; also the Compus Badt, or Poor Mans Bath. These are esteemed to be Sulphureo-Nitrous; their Smell is offensive, and Water not transparent. About a Furlong from the South Bath of Aken is a Village called Borset, where there are Twenty eight Baths, eath of them holding Fifty Tun of Water, and all of them fre∣quented. In Austria, at Baden, are Four∣teen very sumptuous and de∣lightful Baths, al of them wel beautified, and much resorted to. The Turks also make great use of Baths, as wel as Bagnios; and do most of any Nation
beautifie their Baths, and always build large Cupolas over them. We may likewise mention the Hot Waters at Bourbon in France, the use of which in Bathing, as wel as Drinking, have given such satisfaction to the World of their singular and admirable Quali∣ties, that Persons from al Parts of Europe do throng and flock thi∣ther for the sake of Bathing in them. Thus we see how For∣rein Parts prove exemplary to us in the frequent use of Bathing. 'Twil not be amiss now to mention something concerning the Natural Baths in our own Native Country. Those that are most known and frequent∣ed, are those of Bathe in Somer∣setshire, which were ('tis said)
found out by one Bladud, King of the Britans, about 900 Years before Christ. This Bladud was sirnamed a Magician, and was counted by the Common Peo∣ple to be a Conjurer, tho al that he did to deserve that Character, was nothing but the Effects of his Learning and Ingenuity. Guidot of Bath.The Baths of Bathe are in number chiefly three; the King's, the Cross, and the Hot Bath; the Queens being but an Appendent to the King's, as the Lepers to the Hot Bath. The King's Bath is about 58 Foot long, and 40 Foot broad: The Queens, 25 Foot long, and 24 Foot broad: The Cross Bath, 24 Foot long, 19 Foot over Northwards, and 12 Foot over
on the South: The Hot Bath, 30 Foot long, 13 Foot broad. If we reckon by Gage, we find that the Kings Bath contains about 314 Tun of Water; the Queens 81 Tun 3 Hogsheads, the Cross 53 Tun, the Hot 54 Tun. These Baths are much frequented in the Summer; yet not so much as they would cer∣tainly be, if due Observation was made, and notice taken of the many Cures are done by them, and the admirable Virtues of them. But for what farther might be mentioned of these Baths, I refer the Reader to Dr. Jorden of Natural Baths, and Guidot's Discourse of Bathe, and the Hot Waters there. Another admirable Bath in
England is the Sulphur-Bath at Knaisbrough in Yorkshire, the ex∣traordinary Virtues of which, as the Causes of its Heat, are ac∣curately discussed by that Inge∣nious Physician Dr. William Simpson (lately deceas'd) in his Discourse of this Bath, adjoyn∣ing to his Zymologia Physica, or a Philosophic Discourse of Fermen∣tation. It might now be expected we should say something of the Causes of Heat in the Hot Baths, and of the particular Minerals wherewith they are commonly impregnated; but the Largeness of that Theme will not agree with the Brevity which we have resolved to limit our selves unto, and therefore I shall not enter upon it.
Nor shal we launch out to re∣late the Virtues of particular Natural Baths, but only betake our selves to declare the Use of this New Artificial Bath, by gi∣ving an Account of the several Diseases that it may safely and successfully be prescribed for. Only let us premise thus much, to take off whatsoever prejudice the Reader may possi∣bly have entertained against an Artificial Bath, That there can be no Reason in the World al∣ledged, why Baths may not by Art be prepared with the same Mineral Ingredients that the Na∣tural ones are impregnated with, which shal equal, if not exceed any of them al. The Reason may be this, That there are no
Metals in the World but by Art may be so prepared, as that the prepared Particles of those very Metals may be mixed with Wa∣ter, and so the particular Virtues of those Particles communicated to the Water. Secondly, There are no Saline, Aluminous, or Esurine Particles in the Body of the Earth, which, impregnating Water, render it able to prey upon and dissolve the Metals or Mineral Sulphurs there, but what may be obtained or prepa∣red by Art, or something analo∣gous to them. Thirdly, There are no Natural Baths in the World but have some Arsenical, Antimonial, or else some other unwholesom offensive Particles, mixed with the more wholesom
and powerful Principles of it, which render those Waters less helpful and effectual in routing those Maladies for which they are prescribed. But this Artifici∣al Bath consists of Principles most refined and depurate, and so consequently most innocent and effectual: For whatever is poysonous and pernicious to the Nerves, is abstracted and separa∣ted from them; but whatever is purely Sulphureous, Balsamic, and agreeable to the Nerves, is added to them. Besides, our Bath is much more convenient than the Baths at Bathe, it being within-doors, and covered, so that Persons need not fear the bad Effects of being exposed to the open Air. This likewise ren∣ders
our Bath useful in Winter, as well as in Summer. Another Convenience of it is, that it is at London, whither the numerous Diseased Persons, that either have not Money, or Strength to tra∣vel down into Somersetshire, may here be accommodated with smal Charge or trouble, and that altogether to as much purpose. We shal now mention the particular Distempers in which this Bath gives immediate Re∣liefe: And that which first oc∣curs, and hardly admits of any Relief from any other Means than Bathing, is the Palsie. This it doth by opening the Pores of the Body, absolving the Nerves from their Obstruents, dinting the Acrimony and Sharpness of
the Serum, dissolving coagulated Blood, and giving Current to that fluid Balsam of Life, and at length reducing the Nervous and Membranous Parts to their due Order and Tone. For the same Reason this Bath is likewise very effectual in Convulsions, Cramps, Epilepsies, Pains, Numb∣ness, and Lameness in the Joynts, and al other Affects of the Ner∣vosum genus, which are caused by the various Seisures of pungent, acid Particles upon the Nerves, hereby first vitiating the Ner∣vous Juyce, and then causing Contorsions in those tender Vessels, whereby their Tone is altered, contracted, or relaxed. Now as these Nervous Maladies are created by the prevailing of
supervening Acids, resulting from some spurious inordinate Fermentation upon those Ani∣mal Chords, and so causing Ob∣structions, Contractions, Relaxati∣ons, Coagulations, &c. so, in or∣der to their Cure such Remedies are to be sought after as may dint, alter, and dulcifie such kind of Acid Particles, and thence may loosen the contracted, smooth and make even the con∣torted, and strengthen the relax∣ed Nerves; yea, and may every way answer the Indications of the depraved Tones of those Animal Pendulas or Vital Strings, whereby the imprisoned Spirits may again be set free, and al the Animal Functions be restored to their pristine State. Now of
this sort is our New Artificially-prepared Bath, which by correct∣ing the Acids, supples and softens the contracted, strengthens and binds up the weak, and very much repairs the depraved Tone of the Genus Nervosum. We may also add under this Head, the Stiffness of the Limbs and Joynts, Contractions of the Tendinous and Musculous Parts: For these out∣ward Maladies being caused thro some rejected Acids, which wanting a due Fermentative mo∣tion to give them wing by Per∣spiration, are coagulated or hard∣ned in the external Parts: By this Bath the Pores being open∣ed, and they dissolved and put into Motion, are either sweetned, or carried off.
We may likewise here menti∣on, That this Bath may be used in Atrophyes or Aridulas, Wither∣edness of one or more Parts; for by helping a fresh Fermentation of the Blood, it may force its passage into the otherwise de∣serted Parts, and thereby be∣come capable of distributing an equal Nourishment to every Part. The next general Distemper that this Bath is proper for, is the Gout. O, what direful Pains, what wracking Dolours do some undergo, by means of this cru∣ciating Malady! How are some (otherwise stout and undaunted Persons) forced to cringe, stoop, and cry out, when this Tyrant begins to teize them? Now no∣thing
more safe and speedy to give ease in these horrid Tor∣ments, than to enter into this New Bath: It immediately dints that Fermental Acor imprest upon the Synovia of the Joynts, so easily communicable to the adjacent Nerves: For this Distemper, as wel as the forementioned Mala∣dies, is chiefly determined and specificated by Acid Particles fixt and coagulated upon different Humours and Parts. Now it is the essential Efficacy of a subti∣lized Sulphur (and such is the chief Principle of our Bath) to dint Acids, and to resolve such as are coagulated; so that by the Use of this Bath I doubt not but Persons will find so much Alleviation of these previous
Symptoms, and such a Mitigati∣on of the Severity of a future Fit, as that it wil soon need no Pen to commend it, or Tongue to assert its Usefulness. Under this Head may be added, Rheu∣matisms, Sciaticas, Old Pains and Aches, Strains, and other Griefs, here too tedious to relate; all which Affects may be removed, or at least in a great measure lessened, by the use of this Bath. The next grand Malady for which the frequent use of Baths is proper, is a Scorbutic Lassitude, Debility, Sloth of Limbs, Drowsi∣ness, Obtuseness of the Internal Senses, and other liminary Sym∣ptoms of the Scurvy. Most of the Affects which are the Buds of that reigning Malady the
Scurvy, do depend on the Intem∣perature of the Animal Spirits, not being potent enough to per∣form their Offices with alacrity, to which their accustomed just Temperament is absolutely re∣quisite. Now by moderate Ba∣thing the Animal Spirits are quickned, the Nerves cherished, and all Obstructions and Remo∣ras to their spritely Motion ta∣ken away, and so these unwel∣com Symptoms quite removed. The Blood and Humours are likewise hereby purified: and so the Bath becomes also useful in other Symptoms of the Scurvy, as Spots, Blotches, Elephantiasis, and other Scorbutic Impurities of the Blood: For by Bathing in this Bath there are procured
most excellent moderate Sweats, whereby the impure Acid Parti∣cles (which are precipitated or cut off from the Blood in its Circulation, and topically fixt upon this or the other external Part) are loosened, dissolved, or mortified. The next General Use of this Bath which we design to menti∣on, is for Womens Distempers; particularly, Barrenness, Proneness to Miscarry and not retain; Di∣stempers of the Womb, Obstructions of the Natural Courses; al which Distempers this Bath is very use∣ful for: But for Modesty sake, being unwilling to disgust the Ladies, we shal omit insisting on them; tho we resolved to men∣tion them, that they might not
plead Ignorance in the great Virtue and Efficacy of our Bath in this Particular. Another admirable Effect of this Bath is to Cure the Rickets in Children; for which purpose we have ordered, that One whole Day every Week the Bath be wholly employ'd for Children, admitting no other Persons in∣to it on those Days. Besides, on those Days we appropriate our Bath for that Distemper, by somewhat altering the Mineral Principles of it from those which impregnate it on other Days. Because Bathing may at first seem something uncouth for this Distemper, it being unusual, and seldom prescribed, let us a little inquire into the Nature and
Cause of this Distemper, and consider whether Bathing may not then seem the most Rational and Probable Remedy that can be prescribed for it. The Rickets is a Distemper which hath been known but a few Years in the World; and theSee Glisson de Rachitide. first Place that it was taken notice of was in England, about Fifty odd Years ago. It first appeared in Dorset and Somersetshire, and af∣terwards by little and little it came to be minded at London; and stil in the Northern Coun∣ties of England it is not so com∣mon, and in some places hardly known. 'Tis uncertain who was the first Person that took notice of
this Malady, who gave it that Name, and for what Reason: The most probable Etymology or Derivation of the Word is from , or , Spinalis, quasi  Morbus Spinae dorsi, because the Spine or Back∣bone is the Part primarily af∣fected in this Distemper. The Spinal Marrow being first af∣fected, its Tone vitiated, an Im∣becillity and Relaxation caused, the adjoyning Nerves do al by consent likewise suffer, and also al the Membranous and Fibrous Parts, to which those Nerves are fastned; hence Impotence, want of Motion, Torpitude, Dulness, and Imbecillity, &c. which are the first Symptoms of it, disco∣ver this Distemper to be creep∣ing
on, which in a little time renders the whole Habit of Bo∣dy feeble, the Tone of the Parts relaxed, flaccid, soft, and lubri∣cous; whence succeeds such an internal Slipperiness in al the Parts, that they are quite despoi∣led of their Faculty of Retain∣ing and so Assimulating that Nourishment which Nature con∣veys to them: Hence an une∣qual Distribution and Retention of Nutriment doth proceed, whereby one Part becomes less, another bigger, than in propor∣tion it ought to be: for some Parts are much emaciated and extenuated, as the Legs, Thighs, Arms, &c. other Parts are swel∣led, as the Head and Liver. There are likewise in this Distem∣per,
for the same Reason, several Protuberancse of the Bones, particularly at the Wrists, An∣cles, and Extremities of the Ribs. There is likewise, which is ano∣ther Symptom attending this Disease, a Sharpness and Strait∣ness upon the Breast. We may likewise add, that several Bones are sometimes inflected or bent, as the Bones of the Legs and Thighs, Arms and Shoulders, &c. All which Symptoms, with seve∣ral others which might be men∣tioned, if not removed by Art, do tend very much to the future Prejudice of Children. How many crooked-boned, Bandy-legg'd, Strait-breasted, Jolt-hea∣ded, Wry-back'd, Weak, Decre∣pit Persons do we daily see? The
Original of all which Infirmities may be attributed in a great measure to the Relicts of the Rickets, with which they labour∣ed when they were young. Now of Al the Remedies that ever were yet invented for this Mala∣dy, there's none like that of Ba∣thing: Therefore to prevent the Injury that Children would o∣therwise necessarily receive by this Disease, we have ordered a particular appropriated Bath to be made every Saturday, for such as are afflicted with it; by the use of which the vitiated Tone of the Parts is rectified, the Parts themselves comforted and strengthened, equal Distribution of Nourishment promoted, and the Causes of the former inequa∣lity
of Nutrition and Extenuati∣on removed; and, in fine, the whole Habit of Body in those tender Punies reduced to its due Eutaxy and regular Disposition: So that among all the Remedies that have hitherto been in vogue for Curing the Rickets, as Scarri∣fication of the Ears, Issues, Leech∣es, Cupping-glasses, Blisters, Liga∣tures, Rollings, Strait Stockins, Clisters, Purges, Vomits, Specific Powders, Syrups or Electuaries, Oyntments, &c. none can be safer and more effectual than Bathing in this appropriated Bath; for by the use of it this Distemper is prevented where there is fear or danger of it; its Progress is stopt where it is begun, and al its Symptoms in a short time re∣moved
where it hath arrived to an Increment and considerable State. The Certainty of al which, and much more than I have as∣serted, wil appear to such as shal hereafter use it. Another very afflicting and somewhat spreading Malady, to the Cure of which Bathing may much contribute, is the Dropsie; and that because it is found by experience, that Bathing pro∣vokes both Urine and Sweat: For a Man shal scarce wel get out of the Bath, but he shal be inclinable to make Water; and then Sweat doth in some consi∣derable measure succeed, which if promoted by some inward Diaphoretic, wil help notably to transpire the superfluous Serum
or Water in the Blood, especial∣ly in that sort of Dropsie which is called Anasarca, where the Blood is too much diluted, and the Limphaducts obstructed in the Habit of the Body: So that two grand Symptoms or Effects of a Dropsie, and perhaps a third, are hereby removed, viz. Stop∣ping or Difficulty of Ʋrine, Obstru∣ctions of the Pores, and lastly, De∣bility of Ferments in their separa∣ting Functions. For hereby the Reins, Ureters, and Sphinctor of the Bladder are reminded of their Duty, the Pores of the Bo∣dy are opened, the inward and outward Parts rendred Perspira∣ble, and the Digestive Ferments fortified: So that tho the use of this Bath it self, without concur∣ring
Means, is not sufficient to Cure a Dropsie, yet if Bathing be joyned with other Remedies, it will certainly prove very useful and beneficial. We may here likewise menti∣on another great Convenience of it, which is, That it is very useful for. Corpulent Persons, for gross and fat Bodies: For by opening the Pores, and exciting a new and brisk Ferment in the Blood, it assists Nature to emit the superfluous Unctuous Parts of the Blood; it likewise wastes and causeth to exhale that Mat∣ter that hath already been setled into Fat: Thus Fat and Corpu∣lent Persons may in a little time be eased (at least in a great mea∣sure) of that heavy Burden
which they generally complain of. Nor doth this Bath make Lean Persons become Leaner, for the same Reason that it makes Fat Persons Lean; because in Lean Bodies there is none of that superfluous and Unctuous Mat∣ter which it meets with in gros∣ser Bodies; but in Lean Bodies it plumps and corroborates the Fibres of the Muscles. We shal in the next place add, That this Bath may with very good Success by used to give present Ease in the Fits of the Stone and Gravel; for by a kind of an Anodyne Vertue it obtun∣deth the acute Sensation of those Nervous and Membranous Parts which suffer in this Distemper: It likewise causeth a propension
to make Water, and so either expels the Gravel or Stone if it be smal, or else if it be too big to force its exit thro the Meatus Ʋrinarius, or Urinary Passage, it often causeth a Removal of it from the top of that Passage, and so present Ease ensues. But we shal not insist farther on this Head, our Mineral Waters, the Vertues of which we shal hereaf∣ter relate, being of exceeding Ef∣ficacy in this wracking Distem∣per. The last thing I purpose to mention in Commendation of this Bath, is, That it Beautifies the Skin, tho some Natural Baths make it more Tawny and Un∣handsom: To which end I can commend it to Ladies, to smooth
and whiten their Skin, increase its Plumpness and Lustre, and preserve the Body in a good Ha∣bit and Disposition: It takes a∣way Wrinkles and Shrivellings in the Skin, and is very useful to take away Chaps in Womens Breasts and Bellies after Lying-in: It fetcheth off Spots, and other Cutaneous Deformities: It also washeth from the Body that Scurf and Dirt which ad∣heres to it, so that the use of it is very neat and cleanly: It takes off that yellow and unhandsom Colour of the Skin which re∣mains in the Yellow Jaundies af∣ter the Cause is removed. These things, besides the great Pleasure of Bathing and Wash∣ing the Body, are al I design at
present to mention concerning the great Usefulness and Vertue of this New Mineral Bath: of which much more might be said, but, for brevity sake, let what hath been here concisely related suffice til a future Oppor∣tunity, and more apparent Te∣stimonies of its real Benefit, do present themselves. We shal therefore now proceed to give an Account of the Nature and Virtues of the New Spaw, or Mi∣neral Waters designed for Drink∣ing. Having made it part of my Study to dive into the Nature of Waters, I must declare my Opi∣nion to be, That Mineral Waters are not only of great use in Phy∣sic, and retain in them very ad∣mirable
Vertues; but also, that no other sort of Medicines, let them be made up in what Form soever, have that Energy in re∣ducing the Blood to its pristine Eucrasie, the whole Body to a sound Diathesis, and routing the Mineras and Seminalities of Dis∣eases, as wholsom Medicinal Wa∣ters. Of the Truth of which Opinion, not only I my self am fully satisfied and perswaded, but also the whole European World becomes every day more and more convinced. How many thousand Cures have been performed in this small Iland, within few Years? What flock∣ings are there every Summer to Tunbridge, where the best Mine∣ral Waters in England are? How
is Epsom, Northaw, Scarborough, Knaisborough, &c. yearly frequen∣ted? Not only in our own Country, but in other Parts of Europe, Mineral Waters are much in vogue, especially in France and Germany. How are the Wels at Burbon crowded in May and September, by Persons of several Nations? And what a Confusi∣on of Tongues is there every Summer at the Spaws in Germa∣ny? This being my first Thesis, That Medicinal Waters are of ad∣mirable use and efficacy both in Preserving and Restoring the Health of Man: My next Posi∣tion is, That there is no Mineral Water that is naturally made in the Bowels of the Earth, but may be likewise prepared exactly by a
skilful Hydrotomist: For al such Waters are made by a Mixture of such Mineral Particles with their Bodies as they have washt off from the Mines or Metals by which they pass. Thus if a Current of pure Elementary Water fal upon an Allum-Mine, it is immediately impregnated with an Esurine Quality; whence passing on, it may probably meet with an Iron Bed: here by the Esurine Quality which it before acquired, it gnaws and erodes that Mineral, receiving several of its finer Particles into such Pores or smal Cavities in its Bo∣dy as those Particles are adapted for by their Figures; and thus it becomes a very wholesom Alu∣mino-Chalybeat Water: And of
this Nature are the Spaws in Ger∣many. So likewise a Current of Water within the Caverns of the Earth gliding thorow the Marcasites of Vitriol, which a∣bound in some Countries, and the Nitrous Glebes wherewith some Lands are saturated licking up the Saline Particles of those Bodies, and then meeting with a Sulphur-Bed, there is instantly an Effervescence and Ebullition caused by the strenuous Conflict between the Acid and Sulphure∣ous Particles; a notable Fervour presently arises, and a Heat hard∣ly to be endured by the Hand; which Waters afterwards break forth in Hot Springs: Thus the Waters of Burbon in France are made. I might instance in se∣veral
other Springs, but I aim at Brevity. Now al that is thus ef∣fected by Nature, may be per∣formed by Art, by a Person wel studied in the Nature and Prin∣ciples of Mineral Waters; such curious Preparations may by La∣bour be made, as may by their solution in pure Fountain-water enrich it with the excellent Qua∣lities of Natural Spaws. For my own particular, having pried and been more than ordinarily cu∣rious and inquisitive in the Ana∣tomy of Spaws and Mineral Wa∣ters, I dare say so much in my own behalf, that I never went about to imitate any particular Water, but in the end I exactly effected it. Further, to pleasure any Person of Quality, or parti∣cular
Friends, that are desirous to drink the Burbon, or Spaw Waters of Germany, I do here offer to make either of them, so exactly, that those Persons that frequently have drunk them, or the greatest Hydrotomist or Pro∣ficient in the Study of Waters, shal not be able to distinguish them from the Natural Waters, either by Taste, Smel, Colour, Operation, and Virtues, or what∣soever Experiments he shal make to try them. But to proceed: Another Po∣sition that I would lay down, be∣fore I come to relate the Virtues of our Spaw, is, That a Mineral Water may be prepared by Art, much purer, wholesomer, and more effe∣ctual in answering the Indications
they are prescribed for, than any Natural Waters can be. My Rea∣son for this Assertion is, That Natural Medicinal Springs being the Products of Chance and Con∣tingency (not to detract from the Providence of the Infinitely-wise Creator) must needs receive many unwholesom male-figur'd Particles with their other Princi∣ples: Those Springs being ca∣sually made, have no intrinsic Ferments in them, that wil throw off the Arsenical Particles which they have accidentally devou∣red, to which no Poyson can be compared for Mischief; they have no Streiners to secern them from the impure Mixtures; no Preparations made by the Alem∣bics in the Earth, that wil preci∣pitate
the Mercurial Corpuscles; nor any Expedients to dissipate the deadly Fumes or noxious Aporrhea they have received. I wil not maintain, That al Mine∣ral Springs have in them Arseni∣cal and Mercurial Particles; but this I dare be bold to affirm, That many Waters in Europe, that are frequently drank of, do retain in them some of either of these Particles, tho in a smal quantity; and likewise, That there are no Natural Waters, that are impregnated with Mi∣neral Principles, but have likewise in them some very impure Par∣ticles: But now such Waters may Artificially be made, as shal be altogether pure, being im∣pregnated with nothing but the
most refined and wholesom Particles of those Minerals from which they receive their Virtues; which pure Principles and curi∣ous Preparation are divorced and separated by Art and Labour from the gross Recrements and impure Sordes that accompany al those Metals out of which the Natural Springs extract their Medicinal Qualities. And cer∣tainly Waters thus diligently prepared, must needs excel the Effects and Products of meer Chance and Casualty, and prove more innocent, wholesom, and effectual. Being fully convinced of the Verity of this my last Assertion, by considering the Reasons I have here mentioned, I endea∣voured
to make a Mineral Wa∣ter that should recede in Virtue to no other, either Natural or Artificial; and therefore I set about the Work with as much Care and Diligence, as Pleasure and Curiosity; and at last, by dissecting some of the most wholesom Minerals by the In∣strument of Fire, have accom∣plisht my expected and desired End, and obtained so admirable a Water, that I really think that al the Countries in Europe can∣not produce a Natural Water equal to it. I do not say but Physicians, by taking the same Pains that I have done, may in time effect the same; but that this Water, or any thing like it in Vertue, was ever yet made, I dare confidently deny.
Now 'tis by the Perswasions of two or three Persons of great Quality, as wel as my own Am∣bition, and Inclination to plea∣sure my Country, and add any thing to the promotion of Health, or Improvement of Phy∣sic, that I am induced to make public these Excellent Waters; not doubting but the general Benefit that wil be received by them, by al that drink them, wil Quickly give an universal Satis∣faction of their Goodness. These Waters, with al Accommo∣dations, being now almost ready for Public Drinking, we have gi∣ven them the Name of the New Spaw; the particular Virtues of which we shal just mention, desi∣ring no other Judge of the Rea∣lity
of what we have or shal af∣firm concerning them, than Common Experience. The Chief Virtue of these Waters consists in their Diure∣tic Quality; for they work po∣tently by Urine. To some Bo∣dies they give a Stool or two, especially if they drink them quick: They make the Excre∣ments very black, and the Urine pale: They dilute the Blood, and dissolve those Salts that are fixt upon the Nerves, or other Parts, causing acute Pains, and other Maladies, and force them out of the Blood thorow the Reins and Bladder: So that the particular Distempers they are proper to be prescribed in, are these.
1. They are very safely and successfully drank by Scorbutic Persons; tho indeed the Word Scurvy is grown so general a Term in Physic, that some Pra∣ctitioners, whatever Symptoms their Patients labour under, when they are any way doubtful of the Distemper, immediately term it the Scurvy: whereupon seve∣ral Physicians of late have decla∣red their Opinions to be, That there is no such Distemper in Nature as the Scurvy, and that the Notion of the Scurvy is a meer Imposition upon the Fan∣cies of Men: Yet I am fully per∣suaded, and that for several weighty and convincing Argu∣ments, that there is such a Di∣stemper as the Scurvy, which some
cal the Scurvy, others the Scorby, and the Scorbute. 'Twould not only be too te∣dious to enter upon explaining the Causes of the Scurvy, but likewise needless, it being so ac∣curately done by Dr. Willis, in his Book de Scorbuto, and like∣wise by Dr. Gideon Harvey, in his New Discovery of the Scurvy, to which I refer the Reader. We shal therefore only reckon up some of the chief Symptoms and Effects of the Scurvy, for which these Waters may suc∣cessfully be taken. The Scurvy, for the most part, appears in the Gums and Teeth; the Gums are swelled, spongy, discoloured, and sore; the Teeth become loose, and in process of time they do
inevitably rot and caviate; and a Stinking Breath doth frequent∣ly render the Disease very in∣commodious. The Gums wil bleed at the least touch, inso∣much that some Scorbutic Per∣sons can hardly bite a piece of Bread, but the Remainder in their Hands wil appear Bloody. Hereupon the Gums sometimes fissure or cleave, and afterwards become Ulcerous; which little Ulcers are many times succeeded by malignant Cancerous Ulcers, threatning Deformity to the circumjacent Parts. Another grand Symptom of the Scurvy is Weakness and Lassitude in the Limbs, especially about the Knees and Ancles, which is attended with Shortness of Breath, great
Faintness and Weariness upon the least Exercise: Sometimes there is an universal Soreness of the Limbs, especially the Arms, Shoulders, Neck-bones, and Back, and no disposition to stir or move, but a Heaviness and Drowsiness possesseth the Body, especially upon the least alterati∣on of Weather. Another Concomitant of the Scurvy is Pains in the Joynts, ex∣treme Tortures in the Wrists, Knuckles, Elbows, Shoulders, Hips, Knees, Ancles, Toes, and Fingers; and that which is worst of al, miserable Pains about the Neck and Back-bone, shooting and darting Pains in the Head. The Scurvy is also frequently discerned by Spots and Blotches,
of several Colours and Figures, on the Legs; Pustules, Tumours, and Tubercles on the Shins; thick, hard, callous Skin about the An∣cles: The Spots are commonly first red, then yellow, afterwards livid, and at last of an Ash-co∣lour. After this appear Blotches on the sides of the Legs, which are first red, then yellowish, and in time grow rough, and peel off: these generally are succeed∣ed by Pustules, Tumours, and sometimes nasty Scabs. Not on∣ly the Legs, but many times the whole Skin is deformed by Scor∣butic Spots and Eruptions. To these we may add frequent Itch∣ings al over the Body, a livid and deadish Complexion of the Face, and pale Tallow Habit of Body;
a , or bad Digestion of the Stomach, sowr Belchings, Dulness and Drowsiness after Meat, want of Appetite, and sometimes too sharp an Appetite, puffing of the Sto∣mach, and tension of the Belly, especially after Food; Costiveness, and sometimes Fluxes of the Bel∣ly, as Diarrheas and Lienteries; suppression of Natural Courses in Women, with a sort of painful Whites. These being the Chief Sym∣ptoms of this Epidemic Disease in England, nothing can be more proper or more effectual in re∣moving them, than our New Spaw Waters: In confirmation of which, I do assure the Reader, that I have frequently prescri∣bed not only these Waters Arti∣ficially
prepared, but likewise the very Principles of which they are made, to several Persons in this City, with great Success, for this very Distemper. By these Waters the Scorbutic Impurity of the Blood is washed away, and the whole Mass of Blood purified, the exalted salt, acid, and saponary Quality of the Blood removed, the Habit of the Body rectified, the Concocti∣ons altered, the vitiated Tone of the Parts reduced: so that by drinking of this Water every Morning, for some considerable time, al the mentioned trouble∣som Symptoms are made to va∣nish and disappear. 2. The next Disease these Wa∣ters are useful in, is the Stone and
Strangury. I wil not pretend that these Waters wil dissolve or break the Stone in the Reins or Bladder, for no Waters in the World can effect that: But yet these Waters are certainly as helpful in this Distemper, as any Waters in Europe; for by swift∣ly gliding thorow the Reins and Bladder, the Places where Gravel and the Stone have their Nati∣vity, by the abstersive quality of their esurine Salt they hinder the Increase or Growth of the Stone, by carrying away the recremen∣tal Sordes that would otherwise adhere to the Stone, and so in∣crease its Bulk; and likewise by their weight they keep the Cur∣rents open, dilate the Passages, and take the opportunity of slip∣ping
a Stone now and then, with a stream of water, thorow the Sphincter of the Bladder. Not undeservedly are the Spaws in Germany much resorted to upon this account, and ex∣ceeding Benefit and Relief found by such as drink them. Now there is nothing in these Waters, that ericheth them with these excellent Qualities, but it likewise impregnates our Waters: Why therefore should not our Wa∣ters, which are more refined and exactly prepared, be endowed with as great Lithontriptic Qua∣lities as the Spaw-waters in Ger∣many? 'Tis certain, that some Mine∣ral-waters, by being drank, oc∣casion and cause the Stone, as
Dr. Tonstal in his Anatomy of Scarborough-Spaw proveth, by se∣veral undeniable Arguments; and relates several Stories and Observations concerning Per∣sons who never were troubled with this Distemper in their Lives, yet upon drinking those Waters for other Distempers, have afterward been tormented with direful Pains of the Stone. And Dr. Simpson, in his Hydrolo∣gical Essays, prescribeth a Method to correct the Petrifying Quali∣ties of those Waters. And it's my Opinion, That there are ve∣ry few Natural Medicinal Waters, but among their Mineral Parti∣cles and Recrements that are dis∣solved in them, there are several Lapidific and Petrifying Particles.
But these Waters are free from al such kind of Sabulous Mix∣tures. 3. A Third Malady that may be helped by these Waters, is the Dropsie: For by these Waters the main Cause of a Dropsie, which is an Obstruction of the Reins, is removed: The Esurine Salt, which is a Solvent in these Wa∣ters, dissolves the coagulated Matter in the Reins, and makes free passage both for it self, and for the exit of the restagnating Water which before floated in the Abdomen and Legs, and so caused that Swelling in them. In the Dropsie likewise there is a vi∣tiated Ferment in the Stomach, and an adust Sordes impacted in the Tunicles thereof; whence a
Feverish and pressing Thirst con∣stantly attends Dropsical Per∣sons: Now this Water doth cleanse the Stomach, it looseneth and dissolveth the Sordes of Di∣gestion, and so carrieth it off. Perhaps it may seem some∣thing contradictory and unrea∣sonable, that Dropsies are to be helped by Waters, because the Blood in this Disease is too much diluted already: But if we consider how these Waters re∣move the Cause of this Malady, the strangeness wil be taken away. Besides, when Dropsical Persons desire these Waters, we can, by adding to them some Preparations of the Mineral Principles of them, make them much stronger; and so conse∣quently
a smaller quantity of them may be more potent than a much greater, and so this Ob∣jection quite removed. 4. The Yellow Jaundice is cu∣rable by these Waters: For here∣by Obstructions in the Bilary Ducts are opened, the regular and genuine Motion of the Cho∣ler promoted, and the Blood cleansed from that Yellow Li∣quor which before was mixed with it, and hurried about thorow the Veins and Arteries by the Circulation, whence the ultmate Fibres and cutaneous Parts are at last discoloured by it. 5. These Waters may be drank with admirable Success in Hypochondriac Melancholy, and Affects of the Spleen. The Cau∣ses
and Nature of this Distemper I have related in a little Tract which I published several Years ago, called , or A Phi∣losophic Discourse concerning Man; which the Reader may peruse at his leisure. 6. In al manner of Uterine Affects or Diseases of the Womb, these Waters may be recom∣mended. I shal not dispute whe∣ther Hysteric Passions, or Fits of the Mother, proceed from the Womb, as Sennertus, Riverius, and other famous Authors tel us; or from the Explosion of the Animal Spirits in the Nerves, as the Renowned Willis wil have it; or else from the more than ordinary Effervescence or Ebul∣lition of the thinner and more
flatulent Blood in the Heart and Lungs, as Dr. Highmore asserts; whence (he saith) the Heart and the Pneumatic Vessels are ap∣prest and straitned, difficulty of Breathing caused, and a kind of Rising in the Throat. But what∣ever the primary and original Cause of it is, we find by experi∣ence, that by these Waters it may be removed. They are likewise proper in al those Di∣stempers peculiar to Women, as Obstructions of the Courses, immo∣derate Fluxes, Whites, Suffocations of the Womb, the raging and un∣bridled Furor Ʋlterinus, Inflam∣mations of the Womb, Barren∣ness, &c. 7. Nothing more proper and beneficial in great Surfeits, than
to dilute the Blood, and separate from it those impure Mixtures wherewith 'twas surfeited, by drinking of these wholesom Me∣dicinal Waters. 8. In the beginning of a Hectic,See the Cause of a Consumption, in a Discourse of that Distemper▪ which I lately published. and a tenden∣cy to a Consumption, nothing can be safer than these Waters. Where a Consumption is feared, and the Body inclinable to it, these Waters, if drank in a suffi∣cient quantity every day, for some Weeks, wil in al probabi∣lity prevent it. 9. In a Cachexy, or il Habit of Body proceeding from undue and depraved Concoctions, these Waters are certainly effectual: For by being often drank, they
assist Concoction, by taking away what was injurious to it; and whet the Appetite, by cor∣recting the vitiated Acid in the Stomach; purifie the Blood, by separating from it what is hete∣rogenious, and leaving some of its wholesom Particles with it; and so in a short time the whole Body is reduced to a regular Crasis and Eutaxy. We might here add several other Maladies for which these Waters are of great use and effi∣cacy; as, Preternatural Vomitings, Pains at the Stomach, Heats of the Liver and Bowels, Thirst and Bit∣ter Tastes in the Mouth, Obstructi∣ons of the Mesentery and other Bowels, Sarpness of Ʋrine, and Dif∣ficulty of making Water, Ʋlcers of
the Reins, Bladder, and Yard, Tu∣mours of the Hemorrhoids or the Piles, Colics both Bilose and Ne∣phritic, Dysenteries or Bloody-flux, Worms, Headach, Meagrim, Giddi∣ness, Bleedings at Nose, Palpitati∣ons of the Heart, the Itch, Bastard-Leprosie, Scabs, or other Break∣ings-out or Eruptions in the Skin. In fine, we may safely say of these WatersPetr. Givrius Arcanum A∣cdulaum, c. 10. as a very late Author writeth in praise of the Spaw-waters in Germany;Non arbitror omnes Medicos tam Antiquos quam Mo∣dernos ullum unquam remedium adinvenisse adeo proficium adeo∣que amicum humanae naturae, quod uno eodemque tempore purgat, de∣terget, temper at & corrobor at omnia viscera, & tot tamque diversis mor∣bis
auxiliatur; I do not think (saith he) that the Ancient or Mo∣dern Physicians have ever yet found out a Remedy so beneficial, so agree∣able to Humane Nature, which at one and the same time purgeth, de∣tergeth, temperates, and corroborates al the Bowels, and is helpful in so many and so differing Distempers. To apply this; I would not be understood, that I think no Phy∣sicians can by their Endeavours make Waters Artificially, which may be as good as these: but my Opinion is (as I have already asserted). That no Form of Me∣dicines do in any respect equal that of Mineral Water. Much more might be said in Com∣mendation of these Waters; but I have already exceeded my limi∣ted Bounds.
These Waters may be drank from One Quart to Two and Three in a Morning: The Per∣son that drinks them is to use moderate Exercise, as Walking, Playing at Bowls, Ninepins, &c. after them: About two Hours after he may drink a Glass of Wine, which wil help their Pas∣sage: He must not eat til two or three Hours after he hath drank them, nor use any violent Motion. He must use a mode∣rate Diet during the whole time of his drinking them, not over∣charging the Stomach with too much or too great Variety of Food: His constant Drink is to be clear, fresh, and not too strong; neither new, nor too stale. He may now and then
rest a day or two, and then drink again. It's convenient to purge gently, after he hath drank them a fortnight or three weeks. Such as please may have them made stronger, by adding some of the Essence of these Waters to them, and so may drink them in lesser Quantities. What I have farther to add concerning these Waters, I shal reserve til a Treatise of Observa∣tions that may be made upon the Bath and Spaw, which we hope to finish by next Summer, shal be published. FINIS. ERRATA. Page 98. line 1. read Scorvey. p. 99. l. 1. r. cariate. p. 102. l. 14. r. Endemic. p. 111. l. 4. r. opprest. l. 17. r. Ʋterinus.
