H2261 10409648 44957
ΣΤΙΓΜΑΙ OR MARKES Of the Absurd Geometry Rural Language Scottish Church-Politicks And Barbarismes OF JOHN WALLIS Professor of Geometry and Do∣ctor of Divinity. By THOMAS HOBBES of MALMESBURY. LONDON, Printed for Andrew Crocke, at the Green Dragon in Pauls Church-yard, 1657.
To the Right honourable Henry Lord Pier∣repont Vicount Newarke, Earle of Kingston, and Marquis of Dorchester. My most Noble Lord, I Did not intend to trouble your Lordship twice with this Contention between me and Doctor Wallis. But your Lordship sees how I am constrained to it; which (whatsoever reply the Doctor makes) I shall be constrained to no more. That which I have now said of his Geometry, Manners, Divinity, and Gammar all to∣gether is not much, though enough. As for that which I here have written concerning his Geometry, which you will look for first, is so clear, that not only your Lord∣ship and such as have proceeded far in that Sicence, but also any man else that doth but know how to adde and sub∣stract Proportions (which is taught at the twentieth third Proposition of the sixth of Euclide) may see the Doctor is in the wrong. That which I say of his ill Language and Politicks is yet shorter. The rest (which concerneth Grammar) is almost all another mans, but so full of Learning of that kinde, as no man that taketh de∣light in knowing the proprieties of the Greek and Latine Tongues, will think his time ill bestowed in the reading
it. I give the Doctor no more ill words; but am returned from his manners to my own. Your Lordship may per∣haps say my Complement in my Tittle page is somewhat course; And 'tis true. But, my Lord, it is since the writ∣ing of the Title page, that I am returned from the Do∣ctors manners to my own; which are such as I hope you will not be ashamed to own me, my Lord, for one of Your Lordships most humble and obedient Servants Thomas Hobbes.
TO DOCTOR WALLIS In answer to his SCHOOLE DISCIPLINE. SIR, WHen nprovok'd you addressed unto me in your Elenchus your hash com∣plement with great security, wantonly to shew your wit, I confesse you made me angry, and willing to put you into a better way of considering your own forces, and to move you a little as you had moved me; which I perceive my Lessons to you have in some measure done; But here you shall see how easily I can bear your reproaches, now they proceed from anger, and how calm∣ly I can argue with you about your Geometry, and other parts of Learning. I shall in the first part confer with you about your Aritmetica Infinitorum, and after∣wards compare our manner of Elocution; then your Politicks; and last of all your Grammar and Criticks. Your spirall line is condemned by him whose Authority you use to prove me a Plagiary, (that is, a man that staleth other mens inventions, and arro∣gates them to himself) whether it be Roberval or not that wit that paper, I am not certain. But I think I shall be shortly, but whosoever it be, his authority will serve no lesse to shew that your Doctrine of the sprall line from the fith to the eighteenth pro∣position of your Arithmetica Infinitorum, is all false; and that the principal fault therein (if all faults be not principal in Geometry, when they proceed from ignorance of the Science) is the same that I objected to you in my Lessons. And for the Author of that paper, when I am certain who it is, it will be then time enough to vindicate my self con∣cerning that name of Plagiary; And whereas he challenges the invention of your Me∣thod delivered in your Arithmetica Infinitorum to have been his before it was yours, I shall (I think) by and by say that which shall make him a shamed to own it; and those that writ those Encomiastick Epistles to you ashamed of the Honour they meant to you: I passe therefore to the ninteenth proposition, which in Ltine is this.
Your Geometry. Si proponatur series Quantitatum in duplicata ratione Arithmetice. proportionalium (sive juxta seriem numerorum Quadraticorum) continu crescentium, à puncto vel o inchoaarum, (puta ut 0. 1. 4. 9. 16. &c.) propositum sit, inquirere quam habeat illa ratonem ad seriem totidm maximae aequalium. Fiat Investigatio per modum inductioni ut (in prop. 1.) Eritque & sic deineps. Ratio proveniens est ubique major quam subtripla seu ⅓▪; Excessus autem perpetuo decresci prout▪ numerus terminorum augetur (puta 1/6 1/12 1/18 1/30 &c.) aucto nimirum fractionis deno∣minatore sive consequente rationis in singulis locis numero senario (ut paet) ut it rationis provenientis excessus supra subtriplam, Ea quam habet unitas ad sextuplum numeri terminorum posto; adeo{que}. That is, if there be propounded a row of quantities in duplicate proportion of the quantities Arithmetically proportional (or proceeding in the order of the square num∣bers) continually increasing; and beginning at a point or 0; let it be propounded to finde what proportion the row hath; to as many quantities equal to the greatest; Let it be sought by induction (as in the first proposition) The proportion arising is every where greater then subtriple, or ⅓, And the excesse perpetually decreaseth as the number of termes is augmented, as here, 1/6 1/12 1/18 1/24 1/30 &c. the denominator of the fraction being in every place augmented by the number six (as is manifest) so that the excesse of the rising proportion above subtriple is the same which unity hath to six times the number of termes after 0; and so. Sir, In these your Characters I understand by the crosse + that the quantities on each side of it are to be added together and make one Aggregate; and I understand by the two parallel lines = that the quantities betwen which they are placed are one to another equall; This is your meaning, or you should have told us what you meant else: I un∣derstand also, that in the first row 0 + 1 is equal to 1, and 1 + 1 equal to 2; And that in the second row 0 + 1 + 4 is equal to 5; and 4 + 4 + 4 equal to 12; But (which you are too apt to grant) I understand your Symboles no further; but must confer with your self about the rest. And first I ask you (because fractions are commonly written in that manner) whe∣ther in the uppermost row (which is ) 0/1 be a fraction, 1/1 be a fra∣ction,
½ be a fraction, that is to say, a part of an unite, and if you will (for the cy∣phers sake) whether 0/1, be an infinitely little part of 1; and whether 1/1, or 1 divided by 1 signifie an unity; if that be your meaning, then the fractio 0/1 added to the fra∣ction 1/1 is equal to the fraction ½: But the fraction 0/1 is equal to 0; therefore the fraction 0/1 + 1/1 is equal to the fraction 1/1; and 1/1 equal to ½ which you will▪ confesse to be an absurd conclusion, and cannot own that meaning. I ask you therefore again if by 0/1 you mean the proportion of 0 to 1; and consequent∣ly by 1/1 the proportion of 1 to 1, and by ½ the proportion of 1 to 2: if so, then it will follow, that if the proportions of 0 to 1 and of 1 to 1 e compounded by addition, the proportion arising will be the proportion of 1 to 2. But the proportion of 0 to 1 is infinitely little, that is, none. Therefore the proportion arising by composition will be that of 1, to 1, and equall (because of the symbol =) to the proportion of 1 to 2 and so 1 = 2: This also is so absurd that I dare say that you will not own it. There may be another meaning yet: perhaps you mean that the uppermost quantitie 0 + 1 is equal to the uppermost qantity 1; and the lowermost quantity 1 + 1 equal to the lowermost quantity 2: Which is true: but how then in this equation ½ = ⅓ + ⅙ is the uppermost quantity 1 equal to the uppermost quantity 1 + 1; or the lower most quantity  equal to the lowermost quantity 3 + 6? Therefore neither can this be your meaning; unlesse you make your symbols more significant, you must not blame me for want of understanding them. Let us now try what better successe we sall have where the places are three, as here : If your Symbols be fractions, the compound of them by addition is 5/4; For 0, ¼ and 4/4 make 5/4; and consequently (because of the Sym∣bole =) 5/4 equal to 5/12 which is not to be allowed, and therefore that was not your meaning. If you meant that the proportions of 0 to 4 & of 1 to 4 & of 4 to 4 compounded is equal to the proportion of 5. to 12. you will fall again into no less an inconvenience. For the proportion arising out of that Composition will be the proportion of 1. to 4. For the proportion of 0. to 4. is infinitely little. Then to compound the other two, set them in this order 1. 4. 4. and you have a proportion compounded of 1. to 4. and of 4. to 4. namely, the proportion of the first to the last, which is of 1. to 4. which must be equal (by this your meaning) to the proportion of 5. to 12. and consequently as 5. to 12. so is 1. to 4. which you must not own. Lastly, if you mean that the uppermost quantities to the uppermost, and the lowermost to the lowermost in the first Equation are equal, tis granted, but then again in the second Equation it is false. It concerns your fame in the Mathematicks to look about how to justifie these Equations which are the premises to your conclusion following, namely, that the proportion arising is every where greater then subtriple, or a third; and that the excess (that is, the excess above subtriple) perpetually decreaseth as the number of terms is augmented, as here
1/6 1/12 1/18 1/24 1/30 &c. which I will shew you plainly is false. But first I wonder why you were so angry with me for saying you made proportion to consist in the Quotient, as to tell me it was abominably false, and to justifie it, cite your own words Penes Quotientem, do not you say here, the proportion is every where greater then subtriple, or ⅓? And is not ⅓ the quotient of 1. divided by 3? You cannot say in this place that Penes is understood; for if it were expressed you would ot be able to proceed. But I return to your conclusion, that the exess of the proportion of the increasing quantities above the third part of so many tmes the greatest, decreaseth as 1/6 1/12 1/18 1/24 1/30 &c. For by this accompt in this row  where the quantitie above exceeds the third part of the quantities below by ⅓' you make ⅓ equal to ⅙' whih you do not mean. It may be said your meaning is that the proportion of . to the sub∣triple of 2. which is ⅔ exceedeth what? I cannot imagine what, nor proceed further where the ters be but two. Let us therefore take the second row, that is,  The summe above is 5. the summe below is 12. the third part where∣of is 4. if you mean, that the proportion of 5. to 4. exceeds the proportion of 4▪ to 12. (which is subtriple) by 1/12' you are out again. For 5. exceeds 4. by unitie, which is 12/12 I do not think you will own such an equation as . Therefore I believe you mean (and your next proposition assures me of it) that the proportion of 5. to 4. ex∣ceeds subtriple proportion by the proportion of 1. to 12. if you do so, you are yet de∣ceived. For if the proportion of 5. to 4. exceeds subtriple proportion by the proportion of 1. to 12. then subtriple proportion, that is, of 4. to 12. added to the proportion of 1. to 12. must make the proportion of 5. to 4. But if you look on these quantities 4. 12. 144. you will ee and must not dissemble that the proportion of 4. to 12. is subtriple, and the proportion of 12. to 144. is the same with that of 1▪ to 12. Therefore by your asser∣tion it must be as 5. to 4. so 4. to 144. which you must not own. And yet this is manifestly your meaning as apppeareth in thse words; u  rationis prvenienis excessus supra subtriplam a quam abet unitas ad sextuplum numeri terminorum post 0, adeoque, which cannot be rendered in English, nor need to be. For you ex∣press your self in the 20th. prposition very clearly; I noted it only that you may be more merciful hereafter to the stumblings of a hasty Pen. For excessus ea quam does not well, nor is to be well excused by subauditur ratio. Your 20th. proposition is this▪ Sipropnatur serie quantitatum in duplicata ratione Arithmeticè proportionalium (sive jux∣a seriem Numerorum Quadraticorum) continuè crescentium, a puncto vel O in choatarum, ratio quam habet illa ad seriem toidem maximae aequalium subtriplam superabit; eritque excessus ea ratio qua habet unitas ad sexuplum nmeri terminorum post 0, sive quam habet radix Quadra∣ticae termini primi post 0 ad sextuplum radicis Quadraticae termini maximi. That is, if there be propounded a row of quantities in duplicate proportion of A∣rithmetically-proportionals (or according to the row of square numbers) continually increasing, and beginnin gwith a point or 0. The proportion of that row to a row of so
many equals to the greatest, shall be greater then subtriple proportion, and the excesse sall be that proportion which unity hth to the sextuple of the number of termes after 0, or the same which the square roo of the first number after 0, hath to the sextuple of the square root of the greatest. For proof whereof you have no more here, then pae ex praecedenbus; and no more before but adeo{que}. You do not wel to passe over such curious propositions so slightly; none of the Antients did so; nor, that I remember, any man before your self. The pro∣position is false, as you shall presently see. Take for example any one of your rows; as . By this proportion of yours 1 + 4 which makes 5 is to 12 in more then subtriple proportion; by the proportion of 1 to the sextuple of 2 which is 12. Put in order these three quantities 5. 4. 12. And you must see that the proportion of 5 to 12 is greater then the proportion of 4 to 12, that is, subtriple proportion, by the proprtion of 5 to 4. But by your account the propor∣tion of 5 to 4 is greater then that of 4 to 12 by the proportion of 1 to 12. Therefore as 5 to 4 so is 1 to 1. which is a very strang Parodox. After this you bring in this Consectary. Cum autem cresente numero terminorum excessus ille supra rationem subriplam conninuò minu∣atur, ut tandem quovis assignabili minor evat (un ptet) si in ininium producatur prorsus eva∣niturus est. Adeoque. That is, seeing as the number of tearms encreaseth, that excesse above subtriple pro∣portion continually decreseth, so as at length it beomes lesse then any assignable (as is manifes) if it be produced infinitely, it shall utterly vanish, and so. And so what? Sir, This consequence of yours is false. For two quantities being given, and the ex∣cesse of the greater above the lesse, that excesse may continually be decreased, and ye never quite vanish. Suppose any two unequal quantities differing by more then an unite, as 3 and 6, the excesse 3, let three be diminished, fist by an unite, and the ezcesse will be 2 and the quantities will be 3 and 5. 5 is greater then 4; the excesse 1. Again, let 1 be diminished and made ½. he excesse ½ and the quantities 3 and 4½. 4½ is yet grea∣ter then 4. Again diminish the excesse to ¼, the quantities will be 3 and 4¼ yet still 4¼ is greater then 4. In the same manner you may proceed to ⅛, 1/16, 1/32, &c. Infinitely; and yet you shall never come within an unite (though your unite stand for 100 mile) of the lesser quantity propounded 3, if that 3 stand for 300 Mile. The exceses above subtriple proportion do not dcreas in he manner you say it does, but in the manner which I shall now shew you. In this first row  a third of the quantities below is ⅔. set in order these thre3 quantities 1. 2/9. ⅔. The first is 1 equal to the sum above, the last is ⅔ equal to the subtriple of the sum below. The middlemost is 2/9 subtriple to the last quantity ⅔.
The excesse of the proportion of 1 to ⅔ above the subtriple proportion of2/9 to ⅔ is the proportion of 1 to 2/9, that is, of 9 to 2, that is of 18 to 4. Secondly in the second row which is  a third of the sum below is 4 the sum above is 5. Set in order these quantities 15. 4. 12. There the proportion of 15 to 12 is the proportion of 5 to 4. The proportion of 4 to 12 is subtriple; the excesse is the proportion of 15 to 4, which is lesse then the proportion of 18 to 4. as it ought to be; bt not lesse by the proportion of ⅙ to 1/12, as you would have it. Thirdly, in the third row, which is . A third of the sum below is 12, the su above is 14. Set in order these quantities 4 . 4. 12. There the proportion of 42 to 12. is the same, with that of 14 to 4. And the poportion of 4 to 12 subtriple, lesse then the former excesse of 15 to 4. And so it goes on deceasing all the way in this manner, 18 to 4. 15 to 4. 14 to 4 &c. which differs very much from your 1 to 6. 1 to 12. 1 to 18 &c. and the cause of your mistake is this; you call the twelfth part of twelve 1/12, and the eighteenth part of thirty ix, you call 1/18, and so of the rest. But what need all those equations in Symbols, to shew that the proportion decreases; is there any man can doubt, but tht the propartion of 1 to 2 is greater then that of 5 to 12, or that of 5 to 12 greater then that of 14 to 36, and so continually forwards; or could you have fallen into this errour, unlesse you had taken, as you have done in very many places of your Elenchus, the Fra▪∣ctions ⅙ and 1/12, &c. which are the quotients of 1 divided by 6 and 12. for the very proportions of 1 to 6, and 1 to 12. But notwithstanding the excesse of the proportions of the encreasing quantiies, to subtriple proportion decrease stil, as the number of tearms increaseth, and that what proportions soever I shall assigne, the decrement will in time (in time I say without proceeding in ininitum) produce a lesse, yet it does not follow that the row of the increasing quntities shall ever be equall to the third part of the row of so many equalls to the last or greatest. For it is not, I hope, a Paradox to you, that in two rows of quantities the proportion of the excesses may decrease, and yet the excesses them selves encrease, and do perpetually. For in the second and third rows, which are  and  5 exceeds the third part of 12, by a quarter of the square of for, and 14 exceedes the third part of 36 by 2 quarters of the square of 4, and proceeding on, the sum of the in∣creasing quantities where the termes are 5 (which sum is 30) exceedeth the third part of those below (those below are 80 and their third part 26⅔ by 3 quarters and ½ a quarter of the square of 4. and when the tearms are 6 the quantities above will ex∣ceed the third part of them below by 5 quartes of the square of four. Would you have en beleeve, that the forther you go, the excesse of the increasing quantities above the third pr of those below shall be so much the lesse? And yet the proportions of those above, to the the thirds of those below, shall decrease eternally; and therefore your  propositon is alse, namely this.
Siproponatur series Infinita quantitatum in duplict ratione Arithmeticè proportionalium (sive juxta seriem numerorum quadraticorum) continué crescentium  puncto ive O inchoataum; eri illa ad seriem toidem maximae aequalium, ut 1 ad 3. That i, if an infinite row of quantities be propounded in duplicate proportion of A∣rithmetically proportioalls (or ccording to the row of quadratick numbers) continual∣ly increasing and beginning from a point or 0; that row shall be to the row of as ma∣ny equalls to the greatest, as 1 to 3. This is false, ut patet ex praecedentibus, and conse∣quently all that yo say in proof f the proportion of your Parabola to a parallelogram, or of the spiral (he true spiral) to a circle is in vain. But your spiral puts me in mind of what you hve underwritten to the diagramme of your prop 5. The spirall in both fgures was to be continued whole to the middle, but by the carelessnesse of the Graver it is in one figure manca, in the other intercis. Tuly Sir, you will hardly make your Reader beleeve that a Graver could ommit those faults without the help of your own Coppy, nor that it had been in your coppy, if you had known how to describe a spiral line then as now. This I had not said, though truth, but that you are pleased to say, though not truth, that I attributed to the Printer some fults of mine; I come now to the thirty ninth proposition which is this Si proponatur series quantitatum in triplicata ratione Arithmeticè proportionalium (sive juxta seriem numerorum cubicorum) continuè cresentium a puncto sive O incoataum, (puta ut O. 1. 8. 27. &c.) propositum sit inquirere quam habeat series illa rationem ad seriem totidem maximae qualium. Fiat investigatio per modum Inductionis (ut in prop. 1 & prop 19.) Eritque Et sic dinceps Ratio proveniens est ubique major quam subquadrupla, sive ¼. Excessus autem perpuo decrescit, po ut numerus terminorm augetur, puta ¼. ⅛. 1/12. 1/16 &c. Aucto nimirum fractionis denominator ive cansequente rationis in ingulis locis numero quaternatio (ut patet) ut sit ra∣tinis provenie xcess supra subquadruplam e quam habet unitas ad Quadruplum numeri terminorum post 0. Adeo{que}.
That is, if a row of quantities be propounded in triplicate proportion of Arithmetically proportionalls (or according the row of cubiqūe numbers) continually encreasing, and beginning from a point or o (as 0. 1. 8. 27. 64. &c.) let it be propounded to enquire what proportion that row hath to a row of as many equalls to the greatest Be it sought by way of induction, (as in prop. 1. 19). The proportion arising is every where greater then subquadruple, or ¼, and the ex∣cesse perpetually decreaseth as the number of tearms increaseth as ¼, ⅛, 1/12, 1/16, 1/20, &c. The denominator of the fraction, or consequent of the proportion being in every place augmented by the number 4 (as is manifest) so that the excesse of the arising proportion above subquadruple is the same with that which an unite hath to the quadruple of the number of the tearms after 0. And so. Here are just the same faults which are in prop. 19. For if 0/1 be a fraction, and 1/1 be a fraction and ½ be another fraction, then this e∣quation  is false. For this fraction 0/1 is equal, to 0▪ and therefore we have 1/1 = ½, that is the whole equal to half. But perhaps you do not mean them fracti∣ons, but proportions; and consequently that the proportion of 0 to 1, and of 1 to 1 compounded by addition (I say by addition; not that I, but that you think there is a composition of proportions by multiplication, which I shall shew you anon is flse) must be equal to the proportion of 1 to 2. which cannot be, For the proportion of 0 to 1 is infinitely little, that is, none at all; and consequently the proportion of 1 to 1 is e∣quall to the proportion of 1 to 2▪ which is again absurd, There is no doubt, but the whole number of 0 + 1 is equal to 1, and the whole number 1 + 1 equal to 2. But reckoning them as you do, not for whole numbers, but for fractions, or proportions, the equations are false. Again your second equation 2/4 = ¼ + ¼ though meant of fractions, that is of quotients it be true, and serve nothing to your purpose, yet if it be meant of proportions, it is false. For the proportion of 1 to 4 and of 1 to 4 being compounded are equal to the proportion of 1 to 16, and so you make the proportion of 2 to 4 equal to the proportion of 1 to 16, where as it is but subquaduplicate, as you call it, or the quarter of it as I call it. And in the same manner you may demonstrate to yourself, the same fault in all the other rows of how many tearms soever they consist, Therefore you may give for lost this 39. prop. as well as all the other 38 that went before. As for the conclusion of it, which is, that the excesse of the arising proportion &c. They are the words of your 40▪ proposition, where you▪ epresse your self better, and make your errour more easie to be detected. The proposition is this. Si proponatur series quantitatum in triplicata ratione Arithmeticè proportionalium (sive juxta seriem numerorum cubicorum) continue crescentium à puncto velo inchoaarum, ratio quam habet illa ad seriem totidem maximae aqualiùm subquadruplam superabit; eritque excessus ea ratio quam habet unitas ad quadruplum numeri terminorum post 0; sive quam habet radix cubica termini primi post 0 ad quadruplum radicis cubicae temini maximi. Pat ex praecedente. Quum autem crescente numero terminorum excessus ille supra rationem subquadruplam ia con∣tinuo
minuatur, ut tandem qulibet assignabili minor evadat, (u paet) si in Infinitum proce∣datur, prorsus evaniturus est. Adeque. Paret ex prop. praecedent. That is; If a row of quantlties be propounded in triplicate proportion of Arithmeti∣cally proportionalls (or according to the row of cubick numbers) continually en∣creasing; and beginning at a point or 0; The proportion which that row ath to a row of as many equals to the greatest is greater then subquadruple proportion; and the ex∣cesse is that proportion which one unite hath to the Quadruple of the number of termes after 0. Or which the cubick root of the first term after 0 hath to the quadruple of the root of the greatest tearm. It is manifest by the precedent propositions. And seeing, the number of tearmes increasing, that excesse above quadruple propor∣tion doth so continually decrease, as that at length it becomes lesse then any proportion that can be assigned (as is manifest) if the proceeding be infinite, it shall quite vanish; And so. This conclusion was annexed to the end of your 39 proposition; as there prooved. What cause you had to make a new proposition of it, without other proof then pate ex praecedente, I cannot imagine. But howsoever the proposition is false. For example, set forth any of your rowes, as this of fower termes. The row above is 36▪ the fourth part of the row below is 27. The quadruple of the number of termes after 0 is 12▪ then by your accompt, the proportion of 36 to 108 is greater then subquadruple proportion by the proportion of 1 to 12. For trial where∣of set in order these three quantities 36. 27. 108. The proportion of 36 (the uppermost row) to 108 (the lowermost row) is compounded by addition of the proportion 36 to 27, and 27 to 108. And the proportion of 36 to 108 exceedeth the proportion of 27 to 108 by the proportion of 36 to 27. But the proportion of 27 to 108 is subquadruple proportion. Therefore the proportion of 36 to 108 exceedeth subquadruple proportion, by the proportion of 36 to 27. And by your account by the proportion of 1 to 12; and consequently as 36 to 27 so is 1 to 12. Did you think such demonstrations as these, should alwayes passe? Then for your inference from the decrease of the proportions of the excesse to the vanishing of the excesse it self, I have already shewed it to be false; and by consequence that your next Proposition, namely, the 40 is also false. The proposition is this. Si prponatur series infinita quantitatum in triplicata ratione Arithmeticé proportionalium (sive juxta seriem numerorum cubicorum) continuè crescentium à puncto sive 0 inchoatarum, erit illa ad seriem totidem maximae aequalium, ut 1 ad 4. paet ex praecedente.
That is, If there be propounded an infinite row of quantities in triplicate proportion of Arithmetically proportionalls (or according to the row of cubick numbers) continual∣ly increasing, and beginning at a point or 0; it shall be to the row of as many equalls to the greatest as 1 to 4. Manifest out of the precedent proposition. Even as manifest as that 36. 27. 1. 12. Are proportionalls: seeing therefore your Do∣ctrine of the spiral lines and spaces is given by your self for lost, and a vaine attempt, your first 41 propositions are undemonstrated, and the grounds of your demonstrations all false. The cause whereof is partly your taking quotient for proportion, and a point for 0, as you do in the 1. 16 and 40. propositions and in other places where you say be∣ginning at a point or 0; though now you denie you ever said either. There be very ma∣nay places in your Elenchus, where you say both; and have no excuse for it, but that in one of the places, you say the proportion is pnes quotientem, which is to the same or no sense. Your 42 proportion is grounded on the 40; and therefore though true, and demon∣strated by others, is not demonstrated by you. Your 43 is this. Pari methodo invenietur ratio seriei infinitae quantitatum Arithmeticè proportionalium in rati∣one quadruplicata, quintuplicata, sextuplicata, etc Arithmeticè proportionalium à puncto seu 0 in choatarum, ad seriem totidem maximae aequalium. Nempe in quadruplicata it, ut 1 ad 5; in quintuplicata ut 1 ad 6; in sextuplicata ut 1 ad 7. Et sic dinceps. That is, By the same method will be found the proportion of an infinite row of Arith∣metically proportionalls in proportion quadruplicate, quintuplicate, sextuplicate &c. of Arithmetically proportionalls beginning at a point or 0, to the row of as many equalls to the greatest; Namely, in quadruplicate, it shall be as 1 to 5, in quintuplicate as 1 to 6; in sextuplicat as 1 to 7; and so forth. But by the same method that I have demonstrated that the 19. 20. 21. 39. 40. 41. Pro∣positions are false, any man else that will examine the 43 may finde it false also. And be∣cause all the rest of the propositions of your Arithmetica infinitorum depend on these, they may safely conclude that there is nothing demonstrated in all that Book, though it consist of 194 propositions. The proportions of your Paraboloides to their Parallel∣logrammes are true, but the demonstrations false, and infer the contrary. Nor were they ever demonstrated (at least the demonstrations are not extant) but by me; nor can they be demonstrated, but upon the same grounds concerning the nature of proportion, which I have clearly laid, and you not understood. For if you had, you could never have fal∣len into so grosse an errour as is this your Book of Arithmetica Infinitorum, or that of the Angle of Contact. You may see by this that your symbolick Method is not onely, not at all inventive of new Theormes, but also dangerous in expressing the old. If the best Masters of Symbolicks think for all this you are in the right, let them declare it. I know how far the Analysis by the powers of the lines extendeth, as well as the best of your half-learn't Epistlers, that approve so easily of such Anlogismes as those. 5. 4. 1 12, and 36. 27▪ 1. 12▪ &c. It is well for you that they who have the disposing of the professors places take not upon them to be Judges of Geometry, For if they did, seeing you confesse you have
read these Doctrines in your School you had been in danger of being put out of your place. When the Author of he paper wherein I am called Plagiary, and wherein the honor is taken from you of being the first inventor of these fine Theoremes, shall read this that I have here written, he will look to get no credit by it; especially if it be Roberval, which me thinkes it should not be. For he understands what proportion is, better then to make 5 to 4 the same with 1 to 12. Or to make again, the proportion of 36 to 27 the same with that of 1 to 12; and innumerable disproportionalites that may be inferred from the grounds you go on. But if it be Robeval indeed, that snatches this invention from you, when he shall see this burning coal hanging at it, he will let it fall again, for fear of spoiling his reputation. But what shall I answer to the Authority of the three great Mathemiticians that sent you those Encomiastick letters. For the first, whom you say I use to praise, I shall take better eed hereafter of praising any man for his Learning whilst he is young, further then that he is in a good way. But it seemes he was in too ready a way of thinking very well of himself, as you do of your self. For the muddinesse of my brain, I must confesse it. But r, Ought not you to confesse the same of yours? No, men of your tenets use not to do so. He wonders, (say you) you thought it worth the while to ol your fingers about such a piece. Tis well; Every man abounds in his own sense. If you and I were to be compared by the complements that are given us in pivate letters, both you and your Complementors would be out of Countenance; which omplements, besides that which has been printed and published in the Commendations of my writings, if it were put together would make a greater volume then either of your Libels. And true∣ly Sir, I had never answered your Elenchus as proceeding from Dr. Walli▪ if I had not considered you also as the Minister to execute the malice of that sort of people that are offended with my Lviathan. As for the judgement of that Publick Professor that makes himself a witnesse of the goodnesse of your Geometry, a man may easily see by the letter it selfe that he is a dun. And for the English person of quality whom I know not, I can say no more yet, then I can say of all three, that he is so ill a Geometrician, as not to detect those grosse Paralo∣gismes as iner that 5 to 4 and 1 to 12 are the same proportion. He came into the cry of those whom your title had deceived. And now I shall let you see that the composition of proportion by multiplication as it is in the 5 df. of the 6 Element, is but another way of adding proportions one to another. Let the proportions be of 2 to 3, and of 4 to 5. Multiply 2 into 4 and 3 into 5 the pro∣portion arising is of 8 to 15. Put in order these three quantities 8. 12. 15. The propor∣tion therefore of 8 to 15 compounded of the proportions of 8 to 12 (that is, of 2 to 3) and of 12 to 15. that is, of 4 to 5 by addition. Again, let the proportion be of 2 to 3 and & 4 to 5 multiply 2 into 5 and 3 into 4 the proportion arising is of 10 to 12. Put in order these 3 numbers 10▪ 8. 12. The proportion 10 to 12 is compounded of the proportions of 10 to 8 that is of 5 to 4, and of 8 to 12, that is of 2 to 3 by addition▪ I wonder you know not this. I finde not any more clamour against me for saying the proportion of 1 to 2 is doublé to that of 1 to 4. Your Book you speak of concerning proportion against Maybonius is like to be very useful when neither of you both do understand what proportion is. You take eceptions at that I say, that Eucilde has but one word for double and duplicate; which neverthelesse was said very truely, and that word is sometimes  and some∣times ▪ And you think you come of handsomly with asking me whether  and  be one word.
Nor are you now of the minde you were, that a point is not quantity unconsidered; but that in an infinite series it may be safely neglected. What is neglected but unconsi∣dered? Nor do you any more stand to it, that the quotient is the proportion. And yet were these the main grounds of your Elenchus. But you will say perhaps I do not answer to the defence you have now made in this your School Discipline, Tis true. But 'tis not because you answer never a word to my former objection against these prop. 19▪ 39. But because you do so shift and wriggle and throw out ink, that I cannot perceive which way you go; nor need I, especially in your vindication of your Arithmetica Infinitorum. Onely I must take notice that in the end of it, you have these words, well, Arithmetica Infinitorum is come off clear. You see the con∣trary. For sprawling is no defence. It is enough to me, that I have clearly demonstrated both, before sufficienly, and now again abundantly, that your Book of Arithmetica Inniorum is all nought from the be∣ginning to the end, and that thereby I have effected that your Authority shall never hereafter be taken for a prejudice. And therefore they that have a desire to know the truth in the questions between us, will henceforth, if they be wise, examine my Geome∣try by attentive reading me in my own writings, and then examine, whether this writing of yours consute or enervate mine. There is in my 5 lesson a proposition, with a diagramme to it to make good, (I dare say,) at least against you, my 20. Chapter concerning the dimension of a Circle. If that demonstration be not shewn to be false, your objections to that Chapter (though by me rejected) come to nothing. I wonder why you passe it over in silence. But you are not, you say, bound to answer it. True, nor yet to defend what your have written against me. Before I give over the examination of your Geometry, I must tell you that your words (pag.  of this your Schoole Discipline) again the first Corollary are untrue. Your words are these, you affn that the proportion of the parabola A B I to the parabola A F K is triplicate to the proportion of the time A B to A F, as it is in the English. This is not so. Let the Reader turn to the place and judge. And going on you say, or of the imp B I to F K, as it is in the Latine. Nay, as it is in the English, and the other in the Latine. Tis but your mistake; but a mistake is not easily excused in a false accusation. Your exception to my saying, That the differences of two quantities is their proportion (when they differ, as the no difference, when they be equal) might have been put in a∣mongst other marks of your not sufficiently understanding the Latine tongue. Differre and Differentia differ no more then vivere and vita, which is nothing at all, but as the other words require that go with them, which other words you do not much use to con∣sider. But differre and the quantity by which they differ, are quite of another kinde. Di∣ferre () differing, exceeding, is not quantity, but relation. But the quantity by which they differ is alwayes a certain and determined quantity, yet the word differrentia serves for both, and is to be understood by the coherence with that which went before. But I had said before, and expressly to prevent cavil, that relation is nothing but a comparison, and that proportion is nothing but relation of quantities and so defined them, and therefore▪ I did there use the word differentia for differing, and not for the quantity which was let by substraction. For a quantity is not a differing. This I thought the intelligent Reader would of himself understand without putting me, in∣stead of differentia to use (as ome do, and I shall never do) the mongrell word  differre. And whereas in one onely place for differre ternario I have writ ternarius, If you had un∣derstood what was clearly exprest before, you might have been sure, it was not my
meaning, and therefore the excepting against it, was either want of understanding, or want of Candou; chuse which you will. You do not yet clear your Doctrine of Condensation and Rarefalion. But I beleev you will be degrees become satisfied that they who say the same Numerical Body may e sometimes greater, sometimes lesse, speak absurdly, and that Condensation and Rarefacti∣on here, and definitive and cicumscriptive and some other of your distinctions elsewhere are but nares, such as School-Divines have invented —, to intangle shallow wits. And that that distinction which you bring here, that it is of the same quantity, while it is in the same place, but it may be of a different quantity, when it goes out of its place, (as if the place added to, or took any quantity from the body placed) is nothing but mee words. Tis true that the Body which swells changeth place; but it is not by becoming it self a greater body, but by admixtion of Aire or other body; as when water riseth up in boyling, it taketh in some parts of Aire. But seeing the first place of the body is to the body equal, and the second place equal to the same body, the places must also be equal to one another, and consequently the dimensions of the body remain equal in both places. Sir, When I said that such Doctrine was taught in the Universities, I did not speak against the Universities, but against such as you. I have done with your Geometry, which is one . As for your Elquence let the Reader judge, whether your or mine be the more mud∣dy, though I in plain solding should have out done you, yet I have this excuse which you have not, that I did but answer your challenge at that weapon which you thouht fit to choose. The Catalogue of the hard language which you put in at the 3. and 4. pages of your School-discipline, I acknowledge to be mine, and would have been content you had put in all. The titles you say I give you of Fooles, Beasts, and Asses I do not give you, but drive back upon you; which is no more then not to own them; or the rest of the Catalogue I like it so well as you could not have pleased me better, then by setting those passages together to make them more conspicuous, thats all the deence I will make to your accusations of that kinde. And now I would have you to consider whether you will make the like deence against the aults that I shall inde in the Language of your School-Discipline. I observe first the facetiousnesse of your Title page. Due Correction for Mr. Hbs, or Schoole Discipline, for not saying his lessons right, what a quibble is this upon the word Lesson; Besides, you know it has taken winde; for you vented it amongst your ac quaintance at Oxford then when my Lessons were but upon the Presse. Do you think if you had pretermitted that peece of wit, the opinion of your judgement would have been re the lesse. But you were ot content with this but must make this Metaphor from the rod, to take up a considerable part of your book; in which there is scarce any thing that your self can think wittily said besides it. Consider also these words of yours; It is to be hoped that in time you may come to learn the Language, for you be come to great A already. And presently after, were I great A before I would be willing to be so used, I should wish my self little a, a hundred times. Sir, you are a Doctor of Divinity, and a professor of Geometry, but do not deceive your self; this does not passe for witt in these parts; no
nor generally at Oxford. I have acquaintance there that will blush at the read∣ing it. Again, in another place you have these words, Then you catechize ut, whats your name. Are you Geometricians? who gave you that name &c. Besides in other places such abun∣dance of the like insipid concipts as would make men think, if they were no otherwis acquainted with the Universitv but by reading your Books, that the dearth there of salt were very great. If you have any passage more like to salt then these are (ex∣cepting now and anon) you may do wel to shew it your acquaintance, lest they despise you; For (since the detection of your Geometry) you have nothing left you else to defend you from contempt. But I passe over this kinde of eloquence; and come to somewhat yet more rurall. Page 27. line 1. You say I have given Euclide his Lurry. And again pag. 129. l. 11. Ad And now he is lest to learn his Lurry. I understand not the word Lurry. I never read it be∣fore, nor heard it, as I remember, but once, and that was when a Clown threatning ano∣ther Clown said he would give him such a Lurry come poope &c. Such words as these do not become a learned mouth, much lesse are fit to be Registred in the publick writings of a Doctor of Divinity. In another place you have these words, just the same to a Cows thumb, a pretty Adage. Page 2. But pree-thee tell me. And again page 95. pree-thee tell me, why doest thou ask me such a question, and the like in many other places. You cannot but know how casy it is and was for me; to have spoken to you in the same language. Why did I not? Be∣cause I thought that amongst men that were civilly bred it would have redounded to my shame, as you have cause to fear that this will redound to yours. But what moved you to speak in that manner? were you angry? If I thought that the cause, I could pardon it the sooner, but it must be very great anger that can put a man that proesseth to teach good manners, so much out of his wits as to all into such a language as this of yours; It was perhaps an imagination that you were talking to your inferiour, which I will not gran you, nor will the Heralds I beleeve trouble themselves to decide the question. But how∣soever I do not finde that civil men use to speak so to their inferious. If you grant my learning but to be equal to yours (which you may certainly do without very much dispar∣ageing of your self abroad in the world) you may think it lesse insolence in me to speak so to you in respect of my age, then for you to speak so to me In respect of your young Doctor-ship. You will finde that for all your Doctor-ship, your elders, if otherwise of as god repute as yo, will be respected before you. But I am not sure that this language of yours proceeded from tht cause; I am rather inclined to think you have not been enough in good company, and that there is still somewhat let in your manners for which the honest youths of Hedington and Nincsey may compare with you or good Lan∣guage as great a Doctor as you ar. For my verses of the Peak, though they be as ill in my opinion as I beleve they are in yours, and made long since, yet are they not so obscene, as that they ought to be bla∣med by Dr. Wallis. I pray you Sir, whereas you have these words in your Schoole-Dis∣cipline page 96. unlesse you will say that one and the same motion may be now, and anon too; what was the reason you put these words now and anon too in a different Character, that makes them to be the more taken notice of; Do you think that the story of the Mini∣ster that uttered his affection (if it be not a slnder) not unlawfully but unseasonably, is not known to others as well as to you? what needed you then (when there was no∣thing that I had said could give the occasion) to use those words; there is nothing in my verses that do olerehircum, so much a this of yours, I know what good you can receive by ruminating on such Ideas, or cherishing of such thoughts. But I go on to other words of  by you reproached, you may as wel sek the Focu of the Parabola of Dives and Lazarus,
which you say is mocking of the Scripture. To which I answer onely, that I intended not to mock the Scripture, but you; and that which was not meant for mocking was none. And thus you have a second . Grammar and Critickes. I come now to the comparison of our Grammar and Criticks. You object first against the signification I give of , & say thus, what should come into your cap (that if you markit in a man that wears a square cap, to one that wears a Hatt is very witty) To make you think that  signifies a mark or brand with a hot iron, I perceive where the businesse lies. Twas  run in your minde when you talked of ; and because the words are somewhat alike you jumble them both together. Sir, I tould you once before, you presume too much upon your first cogitations. Aristophanes, in Rnis. Act. 5. Scen. 5.  &c. The old Commentator upon the word  saith thus . That is,  for  for he (Adiman∣tus) was not a Citizen. I hope the Commentator does not here mock Aristophanes for jum∣bling  and  together for want of understanding Greek. No,  and  signifie the same, save that for branding I seldom read  but . For  does no more signifie a brand with a hot iron then  a point made also with a hot iron. They have both one common theam , which does not signifie pungo, nor interpungo nor inuro (for all you Lexicon) but notam inprimere, or pungendo notare, without any restriction to burning or punching. It is therefore no lesse proper to say that  is a mark with a hot iron, then to say the same of . The difference is onely this, that when they marked a slave, or a rascal as you are not igno∣rant is usually done here at the Assizes in the hand or shoulder with a hot iron they called that , not for the burning but for the mark. And as it would have been called  that was imprinted on a slave, though made by styning or incision, so it is  though done with a hot iron▪ And therefore there was no jumbling of those two words together as for want of reading Greek Authors, and by trusting too much to your Di∣ctionaries (which you say are proofes good enough for such a businesse) you were made to imagine. The use I have made thereof was to shew that a point (both by the word  in Euclide, and by the word  in some others) was not nothing, but a visible mark; the ignorance where of hath thrown you into so many Paralogismes in Geometry. But do you think you can defend your Adducis Malleum aswel as I have now defended my ? You have brought, I confess, above a hundred places of Authors where there is the word Duco, or some of its compounds; but none of them will justifie Addu∣cis Malleum and (excepting two of those places) you your self seem to condemn them all, comparing yours, with none of the rest but with these two only; both out of Plau∣tus, by you, not well understood. The first is in Casina Act. 5. Scen. 2. ubi intro hanc No∣vam Nuptam deduxi, via recta, Clavem abduxi. Which you presently presuming of your first thoughts (a peculiar fault to men of your principles) assure your self is right. But if you look on the place as Scaliger reads it cited by the commentator, you will finde it should be obduxi, and that Clavis is there used for the bolt of the lock. Be∣sides he bolted it within. Whither then could he carry away the key? The place is to be rendered thus, when I had brought in this new bride I presently lockt the door, and is this as bad every whit as Adducis Malleum. The second place is it Amphytryo Act. 1. Scen. 1. Eam (Cirneam) ut à matre uerat natum plenum vini Eduxi mei. Which you interpret
I brought out a flagn of Wine. Unlearnedly. They are the words of Mercury transform∣ed into Sofia. And to try whether Mercury were Soia or not, Soia asked him where he was and what he did during the Battle; to which Mercury answered, (who knew where Sofia then was and what he did) I was in the Cellar where I filled a Cirnea, and brought it up full of Wine, pure as it came from its mother. By the mother of the Wine meaning the Vine, and alluding to the Education of Children, for Ebibi said Eduxi, and with an Emphasis in meri, because Cirnea (from , Misceo) was a vessel wherein they put water to temper to their Wine. Intimating that thugh the vessel were Cirne∣a, yet the Wine was meru. This is the true sense of the place; but you will have E∣duxi to be I brought out, though he came not out himself. You see Sir, that neiher this is so ad as Addus Malleum. But suppose out of some one place in some one blind Author you ad paralled your Adduis Mllum, do you think it must therefore presently be held for good Latin, why more then learn his lurry must be therefore thought good English a thousand years hence, because it will be read in Dr. Wallis long▪liv'd works. But how do you construe this passage of the Greek Testament . You construeit thus: she shall be saved notwithstanding Child bearing, if (the wmen) re∣main in the faith. Is child-bearing any obstacle to the salvation of women? You might aswel have translated the first verse of Rom. 5. in this manner, Being then justified by fait, e have peae with God notwithstanding our Lord Jesus Christ. I let pass your nt nding in ▪ as good a Graarian as you are, a Nominative case to . If you had remembred the place. 1. Pet. Chap. 3. verse 20. , that is, They were saved in th wars, you would have thought your construstion justified then very well; but you hd been deceived, for  does not there signifie causam, nor ablationem impedimenti but tranm; not cause or removing an impediment but passage. Being come thu r I found a friend that hath eased me of this dispute; for he shewed me a letter written to himself from a learned man, that hath out of very good Authors collected enough to decide all the Grammatical questions betwen you and me both Greek and Latin. He would not let me know his nae, nor any thing of him but only this, that he had better ornaments then to be willing to go clad abroad in the habit of a Grammarian. But he gave me leave to make use of so much of the letter as I thought fit in this dispute. Which I have done and have added it to the end of this writing. But before I come to that, you must not take it ill (though I have done with your School Discipline) if I exmine a little some other of your printed writings as you have examined mine; for neither you in Geometry nor such as you in Church politicks can not expect to publish any unholesome doctrine without some Antidotes from me, as long as I can hold a pen. But why did you answer nothing to my sixth Lesson? because (you say) it concerned your Collegue onely; No Sir, It concerned you also, and chiefly. For I have not heard that your Colleague holdteh those dangerous principies which I take notice of in you. In my sixth Lesson page 62. upon the occasion of these words, not his but yours. Perhaps you tke the whol History of the fall of Adam for a fable, which is no wonder, seeing you say the rules of honouring and worshiping of God are to be taken form the laws. In answer to which I said thus. You that take so hainously, tha I would have the rule of Gods worship in a Christian Com∣mon-wealth to be taken from the Laws, tell me from whom you would have thm taken. From your selfe? Why so, more then from me? From the Bishops? Right, if the Supreme power of the Common-wealth will have it so; if not, why from them rather then from me? From a Consistory of Presytrs▪ themselves or joyned with Lay-Elders, whom they may sway as they please? Good, If the supream Governour of the Common-wealth will have it so. If not, why frm them rather then from me, or from any man else? They are wiser and learneder then I▪ It may be so; but it ha
nt yet appeared. Howsoever, let that be granted. Is hre any man so very a fool a to subje himself to the rules of other men in those things which do so neerly concern himself, for the title they assume of being wise and learne, unlesse they also have the sword which must portect them. But it seems you understand the sword as comprehended. If so, Do not you then rceive the rules of Gods worship from the Civil Power? Yes doubtlesse; and you would expect, if your Consistory had that sword, that no man should dare to exrcise or teach any rules concerning Gods worship which were not by you allowed. This will be thought strong arguing, if you do not answer it. But the truth is, you could say nothing against it without too plainly discoveing your disaffection to the Go∣vermet. And yet you have discovered it pretty well in your second Thesis maintained in the Act at Oxford 1654, and since by your self published. This Thesis I shall speak briefly to. Scotch-Church Politicks. You define Ministers of the Gospel to be those to whom the preaching of the Gospel by their o∣fice is injoyned by Christ. Pray you, first, what do you mean by saying preaching ex Offici is enjoyned by Christ. Are they Preachers x Officio, and afterwards enjoyned to Preach? Ex Officio adds nothing to the definition; but a man may asily see your purpose to dis∣joyn your self from the State by inserting i. Secondly, I desire to know in what manner you will be able out of this dinition to prove your self a Minister? Did Christ hiself immediately enjoyn you to preach, or give you orders? No. Who then, some Bishop, or Minister or Ministers? Yes; by what Authority? Are you sure they had Authority immediately from Christ? no. How then ar you sure but that they might have none? At least, some of them through whom your Authority is derived might have none. And therefore if you run bck for your Autho∣rity towards the Apostles times but a matter of sixscore years, you will inde your Autho∣rity derived from the Pope; which words have a ound very unlike to the voice of the Laws of England. And yet the Pope will not own you. Theres no man doubts but that you hold that your Office comes to you by successive impoition o hands rom the time of the Apostles. Which opinion in those gentle terms passeth well enough; But to say you derive your Authority from thence, not through the Authority of the Soveraign power civill, is too rude to be endured in a state that would live in peace. In a word you can never prove you are a Minister, but by the Supream Autho∣ity of the Common-wealth. Why then do you not put some such clause into your de∣finition? As thus, Ministers of the Gospel are those to whom the preaching of the Gospel is enjoyned by the Soveraign power in the name of Christ. What harm is there in this definition, saving onely it crosses the ambition of many men that hold your pinciples? Then you dine the power of a Minister thus; The power of a Minister is that which belongeth to a Mi∣nister of the Gospel in vertue of the Office he holds; in as much as he holds a publick Station, and is distinguished from private Christians. Such as is the power of preaching the Gospel; ad∣ministring the Sacrament; the use of Ecclesastical censure; and Ordining of Mini∣sters &c. Again; how wil you prove out of this definition that you or any man lse hath the power of a Minister, i it be not given him, by him that is the Soveraign o the Common-wealth▪ For seeing (as I have now proved) it is from him that you must drive your Ministery, you can have no othr power then that which is limited in yur Orders, or ha neithe
longer then he thinks fit. For if he give it you for the instruction of his subjects in their du∣ty, he may take it from you again whensoever he shal see you instruct them wih undutiful and seditious principles. And if th Sogeraign power give me command (though with∣out the ceremony of imposition of hands) to teach the Doctrine of my Leviathan in the Pulpit, why am not I if my Doctrine and life be as good as yours, a Minister as well as you, and as publick a person as you are? For publick person primarily is none but the ci∣vil Soveraign, and so secondaily all that are imployed in the execution of any part of the publick Charge. For all are his Ministers, and therefore also Christs Ministers be∣cause he is o; and other Ministers are but his Vicars, and ought not to do or say any thing to his people contrary to the intention of the Soveraign in giving them their Com∣mission, Again, if you have in your Commission a power to Exommunicate, how can you think that your Soveraig who gave you that Commission intended it for a commission to Excommunicate himself, that is, (as long as he stands Excommunicate; to deprive him of his Kingdom) If all Subjects were of your minde, as I hope▪ they will never be, they will have a very unquiet life. And yet this has (as I have often heard) been practised in Scotland, when Ministers holding your principles had power enough (though no right) to do it. And for Administration of the Sacraments, if by the Supream power of the Common∣wealth it were commited to such of the Laity as know how it ought to be done as well as you, they would ips facto be Ministers as good as you. Likewise the right of Ordina∣tion of Ministers depends not now on the Imposition of hands of a Minister or Presby∣tery, but on the authority of the Christian Soveraign Christs immedit Vicar and supream Governour of all Persons and Judge of all causes both spiritual and temporal in his own Dominions, which I beleeve you will not denie. This being evident, what Acts are those of yours which you call Authoritative, and re∣ceive not from the Authority of the civil power? A Constable does the acts of a Con∣stable authoritatively in that sense. Thereore you can no otherwayes claime your power then a Constable claimeth his, who does not exercise his Office in the Conablery of ano∣ther. But you orget that the Scribes and the Pharisees it no more in Moses Chaire. You would have every Minister to be a Minister of the Universal Church, and that it be lawful for you to preach your Doctrine at Rome; if you would be pleased to try, you would finde the Contrary. You bring no argument for it that looks like reasn. Exam∣ples prove nothing, where persons, times, and other circumstances differ; as they differ very much now when Kings are Christians, from what they were then when Kings perecu∣ted Christians. It is eaie to perceive what you aime at. You woul fain have Market-day Lectures set up by authority (not by the authority of the Civil power but by the authority of example of the Apostles in the Emission of Prea∣chers to  Ifidels) not knowing that any Christian may lawfully preach to the Infidels. that is to say, proclaime unto them that Jesus is the Mesiah without need of being other wayes made a Minister; as the Deacons did in the Apostles time; nor that many teachers unlesse they can agree better, do any thing else but prepare men for faction, nay, rather you know it well enough; but it conduces to your end upon the Market-dayes to dispose at once both Town and Country, under a false pretence of obedience to God, to a Neg∣lecting of the Commandments of the Civil Soveraign, and make the Subject to be wholly ruled by your selves; wherein you have already found your selves deceived. You know how to trouble and sometimes unde a lack Government, and had need to be warily lookt to, but are not fit to hold the reies. And how should you, being men of so little judge∣ment as not to see the Necessity of unity in the Governour, and of Absolute obedience
in the Governed, as is manifest out of the place of your Elenchus above recited. The Doctrine of the duty of private men in a Common-wealth is much more difficult, not onely then the knowledge of your symbols, but also then the knowledge of Gometry it self▪ How then do you think, when you erre so grosly in a few Equations, and in the use of most common words, you should be fit to Govern so great Nations as England, Ireland, and Scotland, or so much as to teach them. For it is not reading but judgement that en∣ables one man to teach another. I have one thing more to adde, and that is the disaffection I am charged with all to the Universities. Concerning the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge, I ever held them for the greatest and Noblest means of advancing learning of all kinds, where they should be therein imployed, as being urnished with large endowments, and o∣ther helps of Study, and frequent▪ with abundance of young Gentlemen of good families d good breeding from their childe hood. On the other side, in case the same means and the same wits should be imployed in the advancing of the Doctrines that tend to the weakning of the publick, and strengthning of the power of any private ambitious party, they would also be very effectual for that; And consequently that if any Doctrie tending o the diminishing of the civil power were taught there, not that the Universities were to blame, but onely those men that in the Universities either in Lectures, Sermons, printed Books, or Thesis did teach such Doctrine to their hearrs or readers. Now yo know very well that in the time of the Roman Religion, the power of the Pope in England was upheld principally by such teachers in the Univer∣sities. You kow also how much the Divines that held the ame princiles in Church Government with you, have contributed to our late troubles. Can I therefore be justly taxed with disaffection to the Universities for wishing this to be reformed. And it hath pleased God of late to reform it in a great measure, and indeed as I thought totally, when out comes this your Thesis boldly maintained to shew the contrary; Nor can I yet cal this your Doctrine the Doctrine of the Vniverity, bt surely it wil not be unrasonable to think so, if by publick act of the Vniversity it be not disavowed, which done, and that as often as there shall be need, there can be no longer doubt but that the Vniversities of England are not onely the Noblest of all Christian Vniversities, ut also absolutly, & of the greatst benefit to this Common wealth that can be imagined, except that benefit of the head it self that uniteth and ruleth all. I have not here perticularized at length all the ill consequences that may be deduced fromthis Thesis of yours, because I may, when further provoked, have somewhat to say that is new. So much for the 3. .
An extract of a Letter concerning the Gramma∣ticall part of the Controversie between Mr. HOBBES and Dr. WALLIS. Mr. Hobbes hath these words LOngiudinem percusam motu uniformi, cum impetu ubique ipsi B D quali. Dr. Wallis saith cum were better out, unlesse you would have impeus to be onely a companion, not a cause. Mr. Hobbes answered it was th Ablaive case of the manner. The truth is the Ab∣latives case of the manner, and cause both, may be used with the conjunction cum, as may be justified. Cicero in the 2. de Nat. Deor. moliri aliquid cum labore operoso ac molesto; and in his Oration for Ccinn. De se autem hoc praedicat, Antiocho Ebulj sevo imperâsse ut in Caecinā advenienem cum serro invaderet. Let us see then what Dr. Wallis objects against Tully; where a Causality is imported; Though we may use with in English, yet not cum in Latine, to kill with a sword (importing this to have an instrumental or causal inluence, and not onely that it hngs by the mans side whilest some other weapon is made se of) is not in Latine, occidere cum gladio, but gladio occidere. This shews that the Dr. hath not forgot his Grammer, for the subsequent examples as well as this rule are borrowed thence. But yet he might have known that great Personages have never confined themselves to this Pedantry, but have chosen to walk in a greater latitude. Most of the Elegancies and Idioms of every Language are exceptions to his Grammar. But since Mr. Hobbes saith it is the Ablative case of the manner, there is no doubt it may be expressed with cum. The Doctor in the mean time knew no more then what Lilly had taught him; Alvarez would have taught him more. And Vossus in his Book de constructione Cap. 47. expres∣sly teacheth, Ablativs causae, instrument, vel modi, non à verbo regised à praepositione o∣miss, à vel ab, de, è, vel ex, prae, aut cum, ac praepositiones eas quando{que} exprimi nisi quòd cum ablativis instumenti haud emerè inveias; and afterwards he sath non timerè imitandum. If this be so, then did Mr. Hobbes speak Grammatically, and with Tully, but not usually. And might not one retort pon the Doctor, that Vossius is as great a Critick a ie. His next reflection is upon praetendi scire, this he saith is an Angliisme. If this be all his Accusation, upon this score, we shall lose may expresions that are used by the best Authors, which I take to be good Latismes, though they be also Anglicismes, the latter being but an imitation of the former. The Dotor therefore was too fierce to condemn upon so general an account, that which was not to have been censu∣red for being an Anglicisme, unlesse also it had been no Latinisme. Mr. Hobbes replies, that the Printer had omitted se. He saith, this mends the matter a little It is very likely, for then it is just such another Anglicisme as that of Quintilian; Cùm loricatus in foro am∣bularet, praetendebat se id metu facere. The Doctor certanily was very negligent, or else he could not have missed this in Robert Stephen. Or hply he was resolved to condemn Quintilian for this and that other Anglicisme, Ignorantia ptendi non potest, as all those
that have used praetendo, whch are many and as good Authors as Docr Wallis that makes his own Encomiasts (not an English ma) amongst thm to wte Agli∣cismes. Then e blmes Tractatus jus partis trtiae, in qâ mous & magnitudo per se & abstract consideravimus, teminum hic statuo. Here I st conesse the exception is colonrable, yet I can parallel it with the like objection made by Erasms agast Tully, out of whom E∣rasmus qotes this passage; Dut ùs commtans Athents; quoam ven negabant solvendi facultatem, eat anius ad e scrbere: and excuses it hu, that Tully might have had at firt in his thoughts vbam or statuebam, which he afterwards relinquished for erat animus, and did not remember what he had antecedently wittn, which did not vary frm his suc∣ceeding, though, but words. Ad this excuse may passe wih any who knows that Mr. Hobbes values not the study of word, but as it srves to expresse his thoughts, which were the same wheher he wrot; in quâ metus & mgiudo per se a abstractè considerati sunt, or consideravimus. And if the Dr▪ will make this so capital; he must prove it voluntay, and shew that it is greater then what is legible in the pny Letter of his Encomiast, whom he would have to be beyond exceptn. Now ollowes his rdiculous apolgi for adducis malleum, ut occidas muscam▪ The cause why he did use that provrb (of his own phrasing) was this. Mr. Hobbes had taken a great deal of paines to demonstrate what Dr. Wallis thought he could have prov'd in shor; upon this occasion he objects, ad ducis malleum ut occidas muscam, which I shall sup∣pose he intended to English thus, you bring a beetle to kill a y. Mr. Hobbes retored that adduco was not used in that sense. The Dr. vindicates himself thu; duco, dedu, reduco, perduco, produco, &c. signifie srange things, ergo, adduco may be used in that sense; whih is  most ridiclo kinde of arguing, where we are but to take up our Language from others, and not to coyue new phrses. It is not the Grammar that shall secure the Dr. nor weak Analogies, where Elegance comes in contest. To jusiie his expression he must have shewed it usu tritum, or alledged the Authoriy of some Author of great note for i. I have not the leasure to exame his impertinent citations about those o∣ther compounds, nor yet of that simple verb duco; nay, to justifie his saying he hath not brought one parallel example. He talkes indeed very high, that duco (ith its com∣pounds) i a word of a large signification, & amongst the rest to Bring, fetch, carry &c. i so exceeding frequent n all Authors (Plautus, Terence, Tully Caar, Tacitus, Pliny, Seneca, Virgil, Horace, Ovid, Claudian, &c that he must needs be either maliciously blind, or a very stranger to the Latine tongue that doth not know it, or cn have the face to to denie it.  ead what will e my doom for not allowing his Latine; yet  must pro∣fesse I dare secure the Dr, for having read all Authors, notwithstanding his assertion, and I hope he will do the like for me. And for those which he hath read, had he brought no better proofes then these, he had, I am sure, been whipped soundly in Westminster-School, for hi impudence as well as igornce, by the learned Mster therof a present. But I dae fther am, the Dr. hath no read in this point any, ▪but onely consulted with Robet Sephen's Thesaurus Liguae Lainae, whence he hth borrowed his allegations in adduco; and for the other I had not so uh Idle ime as to compare them. And lest the fact might be discovered he hath sophiicated those Authors whence Stephen cites the expressions, and imposed upon thm others. If it be not so, o that the Dr. could not write it right whn the cpy was right before him, let him ell me where he did e∣ver read in Plautus, adducta res in fastidium. I fine the whole setence in Plinie's pre∣face to Vespasan (out of whom in te precedent Paragraph he cites it) about the iddle: alia verò ita multis prodita, ut in factidium sint adducta, which is the very example Stephanus
useth, although he doth pemise his adducta res in fastidium. Let the Dr. tell where he ever did read  Horace Ova noctuae &c. aedium vini adducunt▪ Did he (or any else) with the interposition of an &c) make Trochaicks? I say, and Stepanus saies so too, that it is in Pliny lib. 13. cap. 15. neer the end; the whole sentence runs thus; Ebriosis Ova noctuae per idum data in vino, aedium ejus adducunt. I doubt not but these are the places he ai∣med at, although he disguised and min▪d the Quotatios; if they be not, I should b glad to augment my Stephanus with his Additions. These things prmisd, I come to consider the Doctors proofes: Res eò adducta est: ad∣ducta vita in exremum: adducta res in fasidium: rem ad mucones & s adducere: contracta res & adducta in agusum: es ad concordiam adduci potest: in ordinem adducere: adducere febres, sim, taedium vini (all in Robert Stephen) betwixt which and adducere malleum, what a vast difference there is, I leave them to umpier iteretes & religiosas nacti sunt aures▪ who are the competent Judges of Elegancy, and onely cast in the verdict of one or two, who are in any place (where the purity of the Ltin ongue flourisheth) of great esteeme▪ Lsaeus in his Scop Linguae La∣tinae, ad purgandam Linguam à barbarie, &c. (would any think that the Doctors ele∣gant expression, frequent in all Authors, which none but the malicious or ignorant can deny, should suffer so contumelious an expurgation?) Losaeus (I say) hath these words, Adferre pleri{que} minus attentiutuntur pro adducere. Quod Plautus, in Pseudolo, insigni exemlo notat. C. Attui hunc. P. Quid attulisti? T. Adduxi volui dicre P▪ Quis istic est? C. Chari∣nus. Satis igitur admonet discriminis inter ducere, reducere, adducere & abducere, quae de persnâ; et erre, adferre &c. quae de re dicuntur. Idem. Demetrium, quem ego novi, adduce; argentum non moor qu feras Cavendum igitur est ne vulgi more, (let the Dr. mark this▪ and know that this Author is authentick amongst the Ciceronians) adferre de personâ dicamus, s adducere; licet et hoc de certis quibusam rebus non ineptè dicatur. In this last clause he aith as uch as Mr. Hobbes saith, and what the Dr. proves; but tht ever the Dr. brought an example which might resemble adducis malleum, is denied; for I have mentioned al∣redy his allegations every one, of adduco. Another Author (a fit Antagonist for the elegant Dr.) is the arrago ordidorum Verborum, oyned with the Epitome of L. Valla's elegancies. He saith, Accese, adduc Petrum, latinè dicitur pro eo quod pueri dicunt▪ adfer Pe∣trum. And this may suffice to justifie Mr. Hobbes's exception, who proceeded no fur∣ther thn this Author to tell the Doctor that adduco was used of Animals. But the Dr. replies, this signification is true, but so may the other be also▪ I sy, if it never have been used so, it cannot be so, for we cannot coine new Latine words, no more then French or Spanish who are Forreignrs. Mr. Hobbes was upon the negative, and not to disprove the contrary pnion. If the Dr. would be believed, he must prove it by some exam∣ple (which is all the proofe of elegancy) and till he do so, not to beleev him, it is sufficient not to hve cause. But Dr Wallis, why not adduco for a ammer as well as a tree? I answer, yes, equally for either, and yet for neither; Did ever any body go about to mok his Reades thus solemnly? I do not finde, (to my best remembrance) any ex∣ample of it in Sephen, and the Dr. is not wiser then his Book; if there be, it is strange the Dr. should omit the onely pertinent example, and trouble us with such impertinen∣ces for three or four pages. In Stephen there are adducer habenas and adducere lorum, but in a different sense. It is not impossible I may guesse  the Doctors aime. In Tully de Nat▪ Dor (as I remember) there is this passage; Quum autem ille respondisset, in agro am∣buanti raulum adductum, ut remissu esset, in oculum suum recidisse, where it signifies no∣thing else but to be bent, bowed, pulled back, and in that sense, the hammer of a Clock▪ or, that of a Smith, when he fetcheth his strok▪ may be said addui. And this I conceive the Doctor would have us in the close think to have been his mening; else wht doth he
drive at in these words? Whn you have done the best you can, you will not be able to find better words then adduere mallum and reduce▪ to signifie the two contrary motions of the Hammer, the one when you strike with it, (excellently trivial!) The other when you take it back (better and better) What to do? to fetch another stroak. If any can believe that this was his meaning, I shall justifie his Latine, but must leave it to him to prove it sense. If he intended no more, why did he go about to defend the other meaning, and never meddle with this? Which yet might have been proved by this one example of mine? May not therefore his own saying be justly retorted upon him in this case, Adducis malleum, us occidas muscam? Another exception is▪ Falsae sunt et mult istiusmodi (propositiones) I wish the Doctor could bring so good Parallels, and so many, out of any Author, for his Adducis malleum, as Tully affords in this case. Take one for all out of the beginning of his Paradoxes; Ani∣madverti saepe Catonem, um in senatu sententiam diceret, Locos graves ex Philosophia tractare, abhorrentes ab hoc usu forensi et publico, sed dicendo consequi tamen, ut illa etiam populo pro∣abilia viderentur. This is but a Solaecophanes, and hth▪ many psidents moe, as in the second ook of his Academical questions, &c. I cannot now stay upon each particular pssage; I do not see any necessitie of tracing the Dr. in all hi figaries. Now he disllows tanquam diceremus, a if we should say. But why is that lss tolerable then tanquam feceris, as if you had done? It should be quasi (forsooth!) Or ac si, or tanquam si, which is Tulli's own word. (What is tanquam si become but one word?) tanquam si tua res agatur &c. Good Dr. leave out Tully and all Ciceronians, or you will for ever suffer for this, and your Adducis malleum. Is not this to put your self on their verdict, when you oppose Mr. Hobs with Tully? But the Dr. gives his reason. And though he hath had the luck in his Adducis malleum, to follow the first part of that saying, Loquendum cum vulgo, yet now it is, sentiendum cum sapi∣entibus. For tanquam without si signifies but, a, not, as if. It is pity the Dr. could not argue in Symbols too, that so we might not understand him, but suppose all his Pa∣pers to carry evidence with them, because they are Mathematically scratch'd. How does he construe this, Plance, tues alto Drusorum sanguine, tanquam Feceris ipse aliquid, propter quod nobilis esses. So Coelius, one much esteemed by Cicero, who hath inferted his Epistle into his works, saith in his fifth Epistle (Tul. Epist. sam. lib. 8. Ep▪ 5) Omnia desiderantur ab eo tan∣quam nihil denegatum sit ei quo mius paratissimus esset qui publico negotio prpositus est. But it was not possible the Dr. should know this, it not being in Stephen, where his examples for tanquam si are. But the Dr. having pitched upon this Criticisme, and penned it, some body, I be∣lieve, put him in mind of the absurditie threof▪ and yet the generous Professour (who writes running hand and never trascribd his papers, if I am not misinformed) pre∣sumed no body else could be more intelligent then he, who had perused Stephen. He would not retract any thing, but subjoyns, That he will allow it as passable, because other modern writers, and some of the Antients, have so used it, as Mr. Hobs hath done. I know not what Authors the Dr. meant, for, if I am not much mistaken, I do not find any in Stephen. His citation of Columlla is not right L. 5. cap. 5. (nor can I de∣duce any thing thence till I have read the passage) but if he take Juvenal and Coelius for modern Authors, I hope he will admit of Accius, Nvius, and Cameta for the only antients. Let him think upon this ▪Criticisme, and never hope pardon for his Adducis malleum, which is not half so well justified, and yet none but mad men or fools reject it.
But certainly the Dr. should not have made it his businesse to object Anglicisines, in whose Elenchs I doubt not but there may be found such phrases as may serve to con∣vince him that he is an English man. However Scottified in his principles. If the Dr. doubt of it, or but desire a Catalogue, let him but signifie his minde, and he shall be furnished with a Florilegium. But I am now come to the main controversie about Em∣pusa. The Dr. saith nothing in defence of his quibble, nor gives any reason why he jumbled Languages to make a silly clinch, which will not passe for wit either at Oxford, or at Cambridge; no nor at Westmister. It seems he had derived Empusa from  and , and said it was a kinde of Hobgob∣lin that hopped upon one legge; and hence it was that the boyes play (Fox come out of thy hole) came to be called Empusa. I suppose he means Ludus Empusae. This derivati∣on he would have to be good, and that we may know his reading (though he hath soarce consulted any of the Authors) he saith Mr. Hobbes did laugh at it, until some∣body told him that it was in the Scholiast of Aristophanes (as good a Critick as Mr. Hobbes) Eustthius, Erasmus, Coel Rhodiginus, Stepanus, Scapula, and Calepine. But sure he doth not think to seape so. To begin with the last, Calepine doth indeed say, uno in∣cedit pede, unde et nonn. But he is a Moderne, and I do not see why his Authority should outweigh mine, if his Authors Reasons do not. He refers to Erasmus and Rhodiginus. E∣rasmus in the adage. Proteo mutabilior, hath these words of Empusa. Narrant autem uno vi∣deripedi (this is not to hopp) unde et nomen inditum putant, . He doth not testifie his approbation of the derivation at all, onely lets you know what Ety∣mologies some have given before him. And doth any body think that Dr. Harmar was the first which began to shew his wit (or folly) in eymologizing words? Coelius Rhodiginus doth not own the derivation, onely aith Nominis ratio est, ut placet Eustathio, quia uno incedit pede; (is this to hopp?) sed nec desunt qui alterum interpretentur habere neum pedem, & inde appella Empusath; quod in Batrachis Aristophanes expressit. And then he recites the interpretation that Aristophanes's Scholiast doth give upon the text, of which by and by. If any credit be to be attributed to this allegation, his last thoughts are opposite to Dr. Wallis; and Empusa must be so called, not because she hopped upon one legg, but because she had but one, the other, being brasse. But for the for∣mer derivation he refers to Eustathius. As to Eustathius, I do easily conjecture that the Reader doth beleeve; that Rodiginus doth mean Eustathius upon Homer, for that is the book of most repute and fame, his o∣ther piece being no way considerable for bulk or repute. But it is not that book nor yet his History of Ismenias, but his notes upon the 23 verse of Dionysius . The Poet had said of the stone Jaspis, that it was, , Upon which Eustathius thus remarks;  (fortè  Steph.) . This testimony doth not prove any thing of hopping, and as to the derivation, I cannot but say that Eustathius had too much of the Grammarian in him, and this is not the first time, neither in this book, nor elsewhere, wherein he hath trifled. It is observable out of the place that there were mre Empusa's then one, as indeed the name is applied by several men to any kinde of▪ frightful phantasme. And so it is used by several Authors, and for as much as phantasmes are various, according as the persons affrighted have been severally educated, &c every man did impose this name upon his own apprehensions. This gave men occasion to sain Em∣pusa
as such (for who will beleeve that she was not apprehended as having four leggs, when she appeared in the form of a Cow, dog, &c.) but as apprehended by Bacchus and his man at that time. I do not finde that she appeared in any shape, but such as made use of legges in going, whence I imagine that Empusae might be opposite to the , which appellation was anciently fixed upon the gods (propitious) upon a two∣fold account, first for that they were usually essigiated as having no feet (which is evi∣dent from ancient sculpture) and secondly, for that they are all said not to walk, but rather swim, if I may so expresse that non gradiuntur, sed fluunt, which is the assertion of all the commentators I have ever seen upon that verse of Virgil, Et vera incessu patuit dea— This whole discourse may be much illustrated from a Passage in Heliodorus, Aethiop. L. 3. Sect. 12, 13. Calastris told Cnemon that the gods Apollo and Diana did appear unto him, Cnemen replied, ; upon this the old Priest andswered, that both gods and demons, when they appear to men, may be discovered by the curious observer, both in that they never shut their eyes, . Farnaby upon the place in Virgil observes, that, Deorum inces∣sus est continuus & aequalis, non dimotis pedibus, neque transpositis, . Cernelius Schrevelius in the new Leyden notes, saith, Antiquissima quaeque Deorum simula∣chra, quod observarunt viri magni, erant , dij{que} ipsi non gradiuntur sed fluunt. Their statues were said to stand rather upon Columnes then upon legges; for they seeme to have been nothing but columnes shaped out into this or that figure, the base whereof carrying little of the representation of a foot. These things being premised I suppose it easie for the intelligent Reader to finde out the true Etymology of Empus, quasi , or  from going on her feet, whereas the other gods and demons had a different gate. If any can dislike this deduction, and think her so named from , whereas she alwaies went upon two leggs (if her shape permitted it) though she might draw the one after her, as a man doth a wooden legge; I say if any, notwith∣standing what hath been said, can joyn issue with the Doctor, my reply shall be, . Now as to the words of Aristophanes upon which the Scholiast descants, they are these. Speaking of an Apparition strangely shaped, sometimes like a Camel, sometimes like an oxe, a beautiful woman, a dog &c. Bacchus replies, . The scholiast hereupon tells us that Empusa was  And this is all that is material in the Scholiast, except that he addes by and by, that  is all one with the leg of an Asse,
And this very text and Scholiast is that to which all the Authors he names, and more, do refer. I come now to Stephen, who in his Index and in the word , gives the derivation of Empusa. , gradior, inced, (not to hop) sic Suidas  dictam ait . In the Index thus; sunt qui dictam putent , quod uno in∣cedat pede, quasi , alterum enim pedem aeneum habet. But neither Stephen, nor any else (except Suida, whom the Hypercritical Dr. had not seen) no not the Scholi∣ast of Aristophanes (a better Critick then Mr. Hobbes) doth relate the etymology as their own. Nay, there is not one saith, Empusa hopped on one legg, which is to be proved out of them. The great Etymological Dictionary deriveth it , to binder, let &c. its apparition being a token of ill luck. But as to the Doctors deduction, it saith . It doth onely seem so. And it is strange that  should not alter onely▪ its aspiration, but change its ν into μ, which I can hardly beleeve admittable in Greek, least there should be no difference betwixt its derivatives and those of . When I consider the several  which the Grecians had, some whereof did fly, some had no leggs &c. I can think that the origine of this name may have been thus. Some amazed person saw a spectrum, and giving another notice of it, his companion might answer, it is , &c. but he meeting with a new phantasme, cryes,  or , for which apprehension of his some body coyned this expression of . It may also be possibly deduc'd from  might afterwards be reduced to the single terme of Empusa. Nor do I much doubt, but that those who are conversant in Languages, and know how that several expressions are often jumbled together to make up one word upon such like cases, will think this a probable origination. I beleeve then that Mr. Hobbes's friend did never tell him it was in Eustathius, or that Empusa was an hopping phantasme. It had two legges, and went upon both, as a man may upon a wooden legge.  is also a name for Lamia, and such was that which Menippus might have married, which I suppose did neither hop nor go upon one legge, for he might have discovered it. But Mr. Hobbes did not except against the derivation (although he might justly, derivations made afterwards carrying more of fancy then of truth, and the Dr. is not excused for as∣serting what others barely relate, none approve) but asked him, where that is, in what Authors he read that boyes play to be so called. To which question the Dr. (to shew his read∣ing and the good Authors he is conversant in) replies, In Junius's Nemenclator, Rider and Thomas's Dictionary, sufficient Authors in such a businesss, which me thinks no man should say that were neer to so copious a Library. It is to be remembred that the trial now is in West∣minster School, & amongst Ciceronians, neither whereof wil allow those to be sufficient Au∣thors of any Latine word. Alas they are but Vocabularies; and if they bring no Author for their allegation, all that may be allowed them is, that by way of allusion our modern play may be called Ludus Empusae. But that it is so called, we must expect till some Author do give it the name. These are so good Authors that I have not either of them in my Li∣brary. But I have taken the paines to consult, first Rider; I looked in him (who was onely Author of the English Dictionary) and I could not finde any such thing. Tis true in the Latine Dictionary which is joyned with Rider, but made by Holyoke; (O that the Doctor would but mark!) in the Index of obsolete words, there is Ascoliasmus, Ludus Empusae, Fox to thy hole, for which word, not signification, he quoteth Junius. The same is in Yho∣masius, who refers to Junius in like manner. But could the Dr. think the word obsolete when the play is still in fashion? Or doth he think that this play is so ancient, as to have had a name so long ago, that it should now be grown obsolete? As for Junius's inter∣pretation of Empusa, it is this, Empusa, spectrum quod se inelicibus ingerit, uno pede ingredi∣ens. Had the Dr. ever read him, he would have quoted him for his derivation of Empusa,
I suppose. In Ascoliasmus he saith, Ascoliasinus, Ludus Empusae fit ubi, altero pede in aere librato unico subliunt pede. , Pollux. Almanicè. Hinctelen. Belgiè, Op  been springhen. Hinctepinen Flandris. But what is it in English he doth not tell, although he doth so in other places often. What the Dr. can pick out of the Dutch I know not; but if that do not justifie him, as I think it doth not, he hath wronged , and grossely imposed upon his Readers. But to illustrate this controversie further, I cannot be perswaded the Dr. ever looked into Junius, for if he had, I am confident, according to his wonted accuratnesse, he would have cited Polluxs's onomasticon into the bargin, for Junius refers to him, and I shall set down his words, that so the Reader may see what Ascoliasmus was, and all the Drs. Authors say Ludus Empusae and Ascoliasmus were one and the same thing. Jul. Pollux, Lib. 9. Cap. 7. . (old editions read it ) . So that As∣coliasmus, and consequently, Ludus Empusae, was a certain sport which consisted in hopping, whether it were by striving who could hoppe surthest, or whether onely one did pursue the rest hopping, and they fled before him on both leggs, which game he was to continue till he had caught one of his fellows, or whether it did consist in the boyes striving who could hop longest. Or lastly, whether it did consist in hopping upon a certain bladder, which being blown up, and well oyled over, was placed upon the ground for them to hop upon, that so the unctuous bladder might slip from under them and give them a fall. And this is all that Pollux holds forth. Now of all these wayes there is none that hath any resemblance with our, Fox to thy hole; but the second: and yet in its description there is no mention of beating him with gloves, as they do now adayes, and wherein the play consists as well as in hopping. It might not∣withstanding be called Ludus Empusae, but not in any sort our Fox to thy hole, So that the Dr. and his Authors are out; imposing that upon Junius and Pollux, which they never said. And thus much may suffice as to this point. I shall onely adde out of Meu's Ludi Geaeci, that Ascolia were not Ludus Empus but Bacchisacra, and he quotes Aristo∣phanes's Scholiasts in Plutus, . As also Hesychius; . But I could have told the Dr. where he might have read of Empusa as being the name of a certain sport or game, and that is, in Tunebus adve sar. Lib. 27. Cap. 33 There he speaks of several games mentioned by Istinian in his Cde, at the latter end of the third book; one of which he takes to be named Empusa; addding with all, that the other are games, it is indisputable, onely Empusa, in lie & causa erit, quod nemo nobis a ite ass sit Ludum esse, eùm constet spectrum queddam fuisse formas variè mutans. Sed quid vetat eo nomine Ludum fuisse? certè ad vestigia vittatae Scri quàm proxin è accedit. Yet e onely is satisfied in this conjecture, till somebody else shall produce a etter. And now what shall I say? was not Turnebus as good a Critick, and of as great Bead? as Dr. Walls? who had read over Pollux, and yet is afraid that no body will beleeve  to have been a game, and all he alledgeth for it is, quid vetat? Truely all I shall say, and so con∣clude this businesse, is, that he had read over an infinitie of ooks, yet had not had the happinesse which the Dr. had, to consult with Junius's Nomenclator, Thomus and Riders Dictionary, Authors sufficient in such a case. I now come to the Doctors last and greatest triumph, at which I cannot but stand
admiration, when I consider he hath not got the victory. Had the Dr. been pleased to have conversed with some, of the fift form in Westminster Schoole (for he needed not to have troubled the learned Master) he might have been better informed then to have ex∣posed himself thus. Mr. Hobbes had said that  signified a mark with a hot iron; upon which saying the Dr. is pleased to play the droll thus, Prethee tell mee, good Tho▪ before we leave this point. (O the wit of a Divinity Dr. !) who it was told thee that  was a mark with an hot iron? for tis a notion I never heard til now (and do not beleeve it yet.) Ne∣ver beleeve him again that told thee that lye, for as sure as can be, he did it to abuse thee,  signifies a distinctive point in writing made with a pen or quill, not a mark made with a hot iron, such as they brand rogues withal; and accordingly , di∣stinguo, interstinguo, are often so used. It is also used of a Mathematical point, or some∣what else that is very small, , a moment, or the like. What should come in your cap, to make you think that  signifies a mark or brand with a hot iron? I perceive where the businesse lies; 'twas  ran in your minde when you talked of , and because the words are somewhat alike, you jumbled them both together, according to your usual care and acuratenesse, as if they had been the same. When I read this, I cannot but be astonished at the Doctors confidence, and applaud him who said, . That the Dr. should never hear that  sig∣nifies a mark with a hot iron, is a manifest argument of his ignorance. But that he should advise Mr. Hbbes not to beleeve his own Readings or any mans else that should tell him it did signifie any such thing, is a piece of notorious impudence. That  signifies a distinctive point in writing made with a pen or quill, (is a pen one thing and a quill another to write with?) no body denies. But it must be withal acknowledged it signifies many things else. I know the Dr. is a good Historian (else he should not presume to object the want of History to another) let him tell us how long ago it is, since men have made use of pens or quills in writing; for if that invention be of no long standing; this signification must also be such, and so it could not be that from any allusion thereunto the Mathe maticians used it for a point. Another thing I would fain know of this great Historian, how long ago  and  began to signifie interungo? for if the Mathematicks were studied before the mystery of Printing was found out (as shall be proved when e∣ver it shall please the Dr. out of his no reading to maintain the contrary) then the Ma∣thematical use thereof should have been named before the Grammatical. And if this word be translatitions, and that Sciences were the effect of long contemplation, the names used wherein are borrowed▪ from talk, Mr. Hobbes did wel to say that  prece∣daneously to that indivisible signification, which it afterwards had, did signifie a visible mark, made by a hot iron, or the like. And in this procedure, he did no more then any man would have done; who considers that all our knowledge proceeds from our senses; as also that words do, primarily, signifie things obvious to sense, and only secondarily, such as men call incorporeal. This leads me to a further consideration of this word. Hesychius (of whom it is said that he is Legendus non anquam Lxicographus, sed tanquam justus Au∣thor.) Interprets , which is a point of a greater or lesser size, made with a∣ny thing. So  signifies to prick or marke with any thing in ay manner, and hath no impropriated signification in it self, but according to the writer that useth it. Thus in a Grammarian  signifies to distinguish by poining often, sometimes, even in them, it is the same with , sometimes it signifies to set a mak, that something is wan∣ting in that place, which marks were called . In maters of policy  signifies to disallow, because they used to put a  (not ) before his name who was either disapproved, or to be mulcted. In punishments it signifies to mark or brand, whereof I cannot at present remember any other wayes then that of
an hot iron, which is most usal in Authors, because most practised by the Antients. But that the marke which the Turks nd others do imprint without burning may be said , I do not doubt; no more then that Hrodian did to give that term to the antient Britaines, of whom he sayes, . Thus Horses that were branded with  and  ( and ) were said . Thus in its origine  doth signifi a bend or mark with an hot Iron, r the like, and that must be the pro∣per signification of , which is proper to , none but such as Dr. Wallis an doubt. In its descendants it is no less evident, for from  comes Stigmosus, which signifies to be branded; Vitellianâ cicatrice Stigsus not Stigmatosus. So Pliny in his E∣pistles, as Robert Stephen cites it. And  (the Derivative of , which signifies any mark, as well as a brand, even such as remain after stripes, being black and blew) was a Nick-name imposed upon the Grammarian Nicanor, ▪ And though we had not any examples of  being used in this sense, yet from thence for any man to argue against it (but he who knows no more then Stephen tells him) is madness, unless he will deny that any word hath lost its right signification, and is used only (by the Authors we have, although neither the Dr. nor I have read all them) in its analogical signification. I have alwayes been of opinion, that  signified a single point, big or little, it matters not; and , a composure of many; as  signifies a line, and  a ltter, made of several lines. For  sig∣nified the Owle, the Smana, the letter K, yea whole words, lines, Epigrams engraven in mens faces; and , I doubt not, had signified a single point, had such been used, and so it became translatitiously used by Grammarians and Mathematicians. I could give grounds for this conjecture, and not be so impertinent as the Doctor in his Sermon (where he told men that  was not in Homer; that from  came Ebrius; that Sobrietas was not bad Latine, and that Sobrius was once (as I remember) in Tully. Is this to speak suitably to the oracles of God, or rather to lash out into idle words? Hath the Dr. any ground to think these are not impertinences? Or are we, poor mortals, ac∣countable for such idle words as fall from us in private discourses, whilest these Ambassa∣dours of Heaven droll in the Pulpit without any danger of an after reckoning? But I proceed to a further survey of the Doctors intolerable ignorance. His charge in the end of the School▪ Masters Rant, is, that he should remember  &  are not all one. I complained before that he hath not cited Robert Stephen aright, now I must tell him he hath been negligent in the reading of Henry Stephen; for in him he might have found that  was sometimes all one with  though there be no example in him wherein  is sed for . Hath not Hesod (as Stephen rightly citeth it) in his Suum. ubi Scholiastes; . So Johannes Diconus upon the place, a man, who (if I may use the Drs. phrase) was as good a critick, as the Geometry Professour. Thus much for the Doctor. To the understanding Reader, I say, that  is sed for burning with a hot iron; ▪ Macchab. 9. 11. where speaking of Antiochus's lamen∣table death, his body putrifying, and breeding worms, he is said ; being pained as if he had been pricked, or burned with hot irns. And that this is the meaning of that ele∣gant writer, shall be made good against the Doctr, when he shall please to defend the vulgar Interpretation▪ Pausanias, in Baeoticis, speaking of Epaminondas, who had taken a town belonging to the Sicyonians called Phaebia () wherein were many Baeotian fugitives, who ought by Law to have been put to death, saith, he dismissed them under
other names, giving them onely a brand or mark . It is true  is here put adverbially, but that doth not alter the case. Again Zonaras, in the third ome of his History, in the lfe of the Emperour Thophilus, saith, that when Theophanes and another Monk had reproved the said Emperour for demolishing images, he took and sigmatised each of them with twelve lambicks in their faces. . A place so evident, that I know not what the Dr. can reply. This place is just parallel to what the same Au∣thor saith in the lie of Irene, . If the Dr. object that he is a moderne Author, he will never be able to render him as inconsiderable as Adrianus Junius's Nomenclator, Thmafius and Rider. If any will deny that he writes good Greek, Hieronymus Wlfius will tell them, his onely fault is, , redundancy in words, and not the use of bad ones. Another example of  used in this sense, is in the Collections out of Diodorus Si∣culus lib. 34. as they are to be found at the end of his works, and as Photius hath transcr∣bed them into his Bibliotheca. He aith that the Romans did buy multitudes of servants and employ them in Sicily; . These are the words but of one Author, but ought to passe for the judgement of two, seeing Photius, by inserting them, hath made them his own. Besides, it is the judgement of a great Master of the Greek tongue, that stigmata non tam puncta ipsa qudm punctis variatam superciem Grci vocaverun: I need not I suppose, name him, so gret a Critick as the Dr. cannot be ignorant of him. Nor were  commonly, but upon extraordinary occasions, imprinted with an hot iron. The letters were first made by incision, then the blood pressed, and the place filled up with ink, the composition whereof is to be seen in Aeius. And thus they did use to matriculate Souldiers also in the hand. Thus did the Grecian Emperour in the prece∣dent example of Zonaras. And if the Dr. would more, let him repair to Vintas's Com∣ment upon the fifteenth Epigram of Ausonius. And now I conceive enough hath hath been said to vindicate Mr. Hobbes, and to shew the insufferable ignorance of the puny professor, and unlearned Critick. If any more shall be though necessary, I shall take the paines to collect more examples and Authori∣ties, though I confess I had rather spend time otherwise then in matter of so little moment. As for some other pssages in his book, I am no competent judge of Symbolick Stenography. The Dr. (Sir Reverence) might have used a cleanlier expression then that of a sitten piece, when he censures Mr. Hobbes's Book. Hitherto the letter. By which you may see what came in to my (not square) cap to call  a mark with a hot iron, and that, they who told me that, did no more tell me a lie then they told you a lie that said the same of ; and if  be not right as I use it now, hen call these notes not , but  I will not contend with you for a trise. For howsoever you call them you are like to be known by them. Sir, the▪ calling of a Di∣vine hath justly taken from you some time that might have been imployed in Geometry. The study of Algebra hath taken from you another part, for Algebra and Geometry are not
all one; and you have cast away much time in practising and trusting to Symbolical writ ings, and for the Authors of Geometry you have read, you have not examined their de∣monstrations to the bottom. Therefore you perhaps may be, but are not yet  Geome∣trician, much lesse a good Divine. I would you had but so much Ethicks, as to be civil. But you are a notable Critick So fare you well, and consider what honour you do either to the University where you are received for professor, or to the Vniversity from whence you came thither, by your Geometry; and what honour you do to Emanuel Colledge by your Divinity; and what honour you do to the degree of Dr. with the manner of your Language. And take the counsel which you publish out of your Encomiast his letter; think me no more worthy of your pains, you see how I have ouled your fingers. FINIS.
