H84 R14574 12157874 55195
Two Essays of LOVE AND MARRIAGE. Being A LETTER Writ∣ten by a Gentleman to his Friend, to disswade him from Love. And an ANSWER thereun∣to by another Gentleman. Together with some Chara∣cters and other Passages of Wit. Written by Private Gentlemen for recreation. —Si quando gravabere curis, Haec lege, pro moestae medicamine mentis He∣beto. London, Printed for Henry Brome, at the Hand in Pauls Church-yard, 1657.
THE STATIONER To the READERS. Gentl: THese scattered Pa∣pers coming to my hands, I thought fit upon good Reasons, to commu∣nicate them to you. I might tell you they are delight∣full
and ingenuous; but you will not take me for a competent Judge, being neither learned, nor indif∣ferent; Laudat venales—The truth is, my aim is as the Scots was, for all your geuds, And to please you, and profit my self, is the ambition and design of Your Servant, H. B.
To his honoured Friend on his being in love. I. True Friend, BUt that I know heresie is fashionable, and mad∣nesse the time-Livery, thou wouldst force me to no little wonder, which way possible thou shouldst stum∣ble into Love, be sick and sot∣tish in Love, lost as well to reason as good company, lockt up from all the World but thy own thoughts, and onely conversant with thy self; yet
formerly pleasant and affa∣ble, desirous and desired of Society, and one that I know has lived no Anchorite upon Earth; nor yet hast had thine eyes tied up to any one face, but hast both viewd and dis∣courst with variety of Beau∣ties; nay, I dare say, not guil∣ty of the ignorance of more: yet that after so many Anti∣dotes, thou shouldst be so far fallen from thy primitive goodness, as to lose thy self in dotage, and that dotage on one creature, and that creature a woman, and call it Love too, really next to a miracle, is my onely admiration. Prethee do not miscall thy disease,
and be sick of lust, and com∣plain of Love; I can never believe that that noble passi∣on can be the ruine of its sub∣ject; neither will I so much disparage it, as to make a wo∣man its object. If there be love, tis to Heaven, Vertue, thy Countrey, Parents, Kin∣red, Friends, or what is of worth: but to the femall Sex, and in thy sense where sensuality cannot but have an interest, though licenc'd by an Ordinance, 'tis onely Love scandall'd, it being (to the pity of the poor passion I speak it) but concupiscense handsomly burnisht, or a car∣nall appetite speciously in ti∣tled.
And therefore could I never win my judgement to affirm, that the most eager of sinners were in love with sin, but onely temptingly sedu∣ced to a vicious doting; they did rather erroneously affect, then truly love. But let me inquire into thy passion: what, is it from the paint of nature, those beautifull flo∣wers of red and white? me∣thinks thou shouldst as well be enamoured with thy Mi∣stris's picture as her body; for even that too is not excusa∣ble from art, and may be the worst drawn. Frank, he that marries for a face, marries for a year; 'tis not a Summer
since thy desires wrought as strongly upon Mistris M. R. as now on this, and may be on as good a cause; yet how soon did a little disease wi∣ther both her beauty, and thy love? and I hope thou hast not indented either with sickness or time for this. Canst thou be so prodigall of thy affection as to waste it on such incertainties? binde up thy self to love for an age, when the cause of that love may perish in a moneth? But I tell thee Frank, beauty is a Chimera, and has no being in nature: Every man makes his own Mistris, and just so much lustre do's he finde in
her, as first his fancy gives her. For I dare challenge thee to shew me but one face in the whole world, that all opinions will give in for beautifull; so that Lovers, as thou call'st them, are but in the number of Pagans; they but worship that Idoll which themselvs have made. May be thou wilt tell me of manners, carriage, and ver∣tue; I am very glad to hear of it; but let not thy passion hang in thy eyes when thou lookst on them; for many of them, their gestures are but School-postures, and seem rather like a motion then a carriage. Consider that in
the presence of their Servants they are on the Stage, and 'tis rather action then beha∣viour: it may be wert thou a peeper on them in their with∣drawing rooms, thou wouldst as much wish thine eyes clo∣sed then, as now open. For their vertues, as I will not disallow the judgement of that reverend Doctor, That 'tis possible to finde some vertue in some women: so I cannot believe there is such a grand stock of it in any of them, as to command any man out of his senses for the love of it; but I suppose, as we more wonder to finde a Diamond on the shore then
on the rock: so but a spark of vertue in a woman, gets greater reverence then a bo∣died lustre in the nobler Sex; for 'tis our humour to admire the more where we expect the less. The cause then of thy love is either from beau∣ty or vertue; if from beauty, how wilt thou love her when she is old? If from vertue, why dost thou covet to lie with her? there needs not that low act of generation to the high communion of ver∣tues; and I should scarce take thee for a platonick Lover, to warm a bed with her. But shall I tell thee the cause? don't be afraid of truth then;
thou first lovest her to satisfie thy lust; and if thou after continue to lie with her, 'tis either for want of a better, or 'cause thou canst not be rid of her. For I look on all the perfections in females but as so many encourage∣ments to desire; and that the best of women, like the best of sallads, procure the strongest appetite; and in truth 'tis the woman is af∣fected, not this, the Sex be∣ing the substance, and the Mistris but the shadow; or that the rule of thy affection, and this the instance. But then thou wilt be goring of me with that common goad
of objection, thy so much curiosity in choice, and ra∣ther my Lady then Jone. Pre∣thee tell me, be thy appetite never so good, do's thy meat relish the worse for being the cleanlier drest? I never knew that good cookery did turn the edge of a good stomack; and especially if thou limitest thy fancy to one dish, thou hadst need to be both long in choosing, and neat in dres∣sing, as well to avoid nausea∣ting, as to continue provoca∣tion. Remember that July holds not all the year, nor youth all thy life; there is a December and Winter of age that attends on both; and
that passion that in its Spring will take fire at any face, will in its Autumn be frost at all; a bed-ridden palate is scarce sensible of sauce, much less meat; not the best of weapons, how brisk and keen soever at the first, but after long using grows dull, and requires a whetting: so that this studious culling of bed-fellows, argues but the serious contemplations of mortality, and is no more then a wise provision for fu∣turity. Where Frank is your love then? Call'st thou that love, that ebs and flows with the blood? that is the brat of a goatish humour, meerly
servient to the body, and of∣ten dead before it? No, the essence of that passion is as pure and lasting as the soul it waits on; a sacred Vestall flame, perpetually torrid and unextinguishable; 'tis thy under-girdle love thats mor∣tall, of flames gross and tran∣sitory, which moving in a region lower then thy heart, prove rather flashes then steady fires. I know thou art no stranger to multitude of examples that have beene hotter then Italians in the chase of their games, and more frozen then Scythians after the taking it, that in the same year have been ready
to die of contraries, both love and hate; and with the same eagerness studied both a marriage and divorce; that have not more long'd to ob∣tain, then having obtained, to desert their hopes, and their loves perish'd together, the fruition of one the expi∣ration of the other. But may be thou wilt adde to thy o∣ther motive, that of wealth, she's rich. Nay now I hear thee, and do so far allow thee to court the Lady for her fortune, as I would the Chambermaid for her Mi∣stris; but have a care of lo∣ving in earnest, or letting in of love farther then thy
tongue; a sigh or two in the presence if thou wilt, but no ejaculations in private; re∣member a difference betwixt acting and suffering a passi∣on, be nothing the sadder though nothing the richer; like a good Souldier rise not so repulst from one Leaguer, but to retaine strength e∣nough presently for another, that in a while thy soul will become face-proof, the later beauty the pellet of the for∣mer, till variety give the ma∣stery to thy judgment, & make thee a Catholick Servant, but no particular Lover. But thou wilt justifie yet farther; thou hast a fortune of thine
own, and the weightiness of that requires a partner in the managing it. I don't gainsay it; nay I am so much of thy side, that I think a wife in no case more allowable, then either for the getting or pre∣servation of an Estate. As, for thy love-marrying, I rec∣kon it both the paradise and purgatory of fools. But yet this Frank is onely an Apolo∣gie for a wife, not love, and think me no enemy to marri∣age, but to the fondness of thy desire; I would have thee get a wife, but not to lose thy self; to serve thy oc∣casions, but to master thy passions; so to love with rea∣son,
as not to woe without sense. Credit me, I do not at all think it to savour of im∣possibility, seriously to court and marry too, and yet un∣cing'd by any spark of love, though I cannot but ac∣knowledge the temptations of the other Sex; for I rec∣kon them amongst their stu∣dies: yet that reason, or the soul and gallantry of man, should be basely prostituted to them, I should as soon be∣lieve an Eagle to stoop at flies, or Divinity at toys. I conceive Frank, the necessi∣ty of thy marrying streight∣ens not thy judgement to this one Lady; I would have
thee to look on her as not without companions, and then if thou makest an un∣lucky cast of it, thy fortune will have this comfort, thou art no loser, though no win∣ner. Prethee why should not a woman be view'd with as little ardour as an handsome Statue? or what is the influ∣ence of flesh, as to the eye, above that of marble? If thou comest into a spacious Gallery variously behung, thou canst walk it round, look on this Picture and like it, then turn thy face and forget it in the beauty of an∣other; there needing no more to the aspect of a face,
then of Imagery, but onely the complacency of the be∣holder, and the commenda∣tion of the Authour. Wo∣men are a kinde of traffique too: If thou comest to a shop, seest a commodity and likest it, thou cheapen'st it; if thou bargainest, thou ta∣kest it, if not, to the next standing, the Markets full and free. I tell thee 'tis an injury no less to nature then reason, to impale all perfe∣ction within the circuit of one creature. Now after all this, do I expect thou shouldst bid me turn the Tables and play my selfe the question, Was I never in love? Troth
Frank I cannot excuse my selfe from the vanities of youth, may be I have; but let me remember thee, I have had rattles and hobbi-horses too in my daies, but I have left them, and now look on them and thy thoughts with the same disdain. That Ma∣riner that hath scaped a rock, may be a Pilot to the next passenger. 'Tis my faith now, that 'tis as possible to be sick of the plague a year, as of love a day; and I doubt not, when time shall ripen both thy judgement and age, but thou wilt then sit a most strict judge upon thy self, and think no censure too severe
to thy present follies, or cha∣rity too bountifull to the true advice of Thy true Friend, J. H. II. PRethee, dear Friend, do not burn Diana's Temple onely to be talked of: Mo∣dern wits (like spirits of the lower Region) once conjured up, must be set on work, though of mischief. I must confess thou venturest hard
on the paradoxology of thy brain, that darest enter the Lists Athanasius-like, contra mundum; disputing that with thy pen, which the World from Adam, and thy self by thy practice provest undenia∣ble. What is said in case of Religion, a little Philosophy makes men Atheists, but e∣nough confirms them in the truth, is true of thee in point of love; of which and its objects thou art no more competent a Judg, then a Red∣coat is of a Moot-case. Did I not know that all wonder proceeded of ignorance, and that people most admire what they least understand, I
should wonder at thy won∣der, that a man of thy parts and complexion, and born of a Mother, should call that stumbling, which is so grace∣full and naturall a motion; fall out with Love and Wo∣men, yet by thy own confessi∣on, understand neither. Thou turnest Andabate and fightest blindfold, not knowing a∣gainst whom, or for what. I prethee, Friend, what Coun∣trey Girle has sleighted thy Madrigals, and disentertained thy affections, that thou quarrellest and fallst at defi∣ance with the whole Sex? He that said all Crecians were liers, was himself a Crecian:
and thou condemnest all Lo∣vers as mad, yet art thy self a Lover, and consequently mad, or else more mad that thou art not a Lover. I ne∣ver yet knew any despise Mo∣narchy, but those that could not be Monarchs. Every man in this is a Huntsman, who co∣ming short of the Hare, cries, Hang her, 'tis dry meat. Among the rest of thy wonders, thou maist put this for one, that I who am unconcerned, should at this distance take up the cudgels in defence of a friend, whom thou hast laught into silence; but the proverb excu∣ses me, He whom sorrow makes dumb, deserves double pity. For
my part, I must confess I love to sleep in a whole skin, and not to engage in anothers quarrell, unless he will lend me his skull to bear the blows: but this being the common cause, 'tis pity truth should be out-worded, and her innocence be suspected to want clearness, meerly for want of clearing. There is no man more unfit for this work then I, having been e∣ver as atheistical in love as thy self; and so far from be∣ing an Opponent to thy Thesis, that I have ever been a noted Assertor of thy Doctrine, till experience reformed my judg∣ment, and makes me look on
my former error with regret and disdain. 'Tis so far from being a wonder to me, that one pleasant, affable and so∣ciable, one that has view'd variety of beauties, should fall in love with one woman, that I wonder how it could be o∣therwise: none being fitter for love then one so qualifi∣ed; nor can any finde a best, that have not view'd all. That Love per se is the ruine of its subject, I deny; yet I allow it may be accidentally true, and be a passion not the less noble. And as I would not have it onely restrained to woman for its object: so I would not have them totally
excluded. And truly I am so far from believing that Sex not an object of love, that I can hardly admit of any be∣sides. That Love has several objects, as Heaven, Vertue, and the rest which you rec∣kon up, with many more, I deny not. But all they, as ob∣lique objects, are so far from being adaequate, that they draw love in severall denomi∣nations, as piety, duty, friend∣ship, &c. And but that seri∣ousness would be thrown a∣way on thee, and any thing here but sophistry useless, I could tell thee from the lear∣ned, that Love is onely an ex∣pansion of the soul to its object;
which is, whatever is attra∣ctive: and that naturally man loves himself best and first, and all other things in subor∣dination to himself; and that whatever is most like man in nature and habit, is the pro∣perest object of his love. Then 'twill follow (whether you will or no) that no object is so proper as woman. But thou'lt laugh at these old-fashion'd grounds, and ac∣count them like Harry's cod∣pieces. To abstract Love from sensuality in a naturall sense, is both impossible and need∣less, it deriving a greater in∣fluence from the sensitive soul, and being a passion from
which bruits are not exempt. Nay that very thing which you call sensuality, and will allow it to derive its legitima∣tion onely from an Ordi∣nance, may shew an ancienter coat then Ordinances; it be∣ing the onely way chalked out by nature for propagation and preservation of every species. So that your Epithites and Synonoma's of concupis∣cense and carnal appetite, &c. I attribute to the luxuriance of your fancy; and must tell you, we can easily give you and your ways the like tearms without the help of a Sylva.  your main besitancy is, , are you causes of love?
'Tis not bare red and white that are either causes of, or colours for it, but the scitua∣tion and contexture of both. I never loved my Mistris face, because fair, but because I liked it, and thereby thought it so, and I therefore thought it so, because hers: so that should time or accident (from which no face has a protecti∣on) alter the complexion in the eye, I'd retain the same Idea still in mine. Next, for the Gentlemans change (with which you upbraid him) much may be pleaded in ex∣cuse: for besides the great delight in variety, I know no reason why, if a man finde
himself in an errour, he may not repent and take a new course. Nor may you call it prodigality of affection; he that grounds his love right, is above uncertainties, in re∣gard the true cause of love, which is sympathy, cannot pe∣rish before its object. And because you say, Beauty is a Chymaera, and every man a pig∣mation that carves to himself a Mistris; will you from thence infer; that because all men do not think one face beauti∣full, no man should think any so? And I appeal to the Sy∣nod of Divines, whether for a Lover to choose his own Mi∣stris, and love her, or court
her, be a piece of ignorance or paganism. Nor can you de∣ny that manners, carriage and vertue, are incentives to love; and that these things are re∣ally visible in that Sex by any that look not through specta∣cles of prejudice. But he that has an ill sight dislikes all ob∣jects. Thou hast an humour in thine eyes, whereby thou canst not discern action from behaviour; I like it not the worse if acquired; no more then I do a good Scholar that speaks Latine by the Gram∣mar. That there are arcana imperii among them, as well as us, is undeniable; for if all were as they appear, they
would be rather Angels then women. 'Tis true, much acti∣on and deceptio visus is in both Sexes in point of Courtship, whereby they reciprocally draw their expectations to a height unobtainable, and suc∣ceeding enjoyments convince both Sexes of a handsom (but commonly an equall) cheat. I shall not onely allow of that Doctors charity, that held, That 'tis possible some vertue may be found in some women: but also shall experimentally adde, That much vertue may be found in many. 'Tis not for nothing that all vertues are declined by Grammarians with haec, and fancied by Painters
in female shadows. Vertues are like Diamonds, rare and small; nor should we esteem them were they to be bought by the pound. I take vertue and beauty to be causes of af∣fection; but I mean not by beauty the meer superficies of a visage, but the symmetry of parts; and he that grounds his affection rightly on that, findes a becoming beauty, e∣ven in old age. Vertue also I conceive a cause of love, and love a motive of copulation. Nor is generation for the communion of vertues, but propagation of issue; since 'tis an undoubted law of nature, that all creatures desire and
endeavour perpetuation. You call lust the cause of love; 'tis true, if you take all altitudes by your own Jacobs staff, 'tis so to you: so the Wolf con∣ceives all creatures to eat raw flesh, because he do's. I can∣not imagine such a stoical a∣pathy in men, unless in Euto∣pia, but that we do and may make that which you call lust, a part of love. Nor is that passion it self blameable, but circumstances may make it so: for the Stoicks them∣selves got children, and did not deny the being of desires in men, but their domineer∣ing over Reason. Nor is it the work of a wise man to be
without passions, but above them. Consider man as with a soul compounded of Will and Reason, the conquest of the will in this life, can be but by synechdoche; which being considered, it will follow, That men abstracted from desires of this nature, are ra∣ther to be looked for, then found. And for your erratical love, that is so planitary and unfixed, it shews its own weaknesse, but not your strength; though it be peri∣patetical, it makes not you a Philosopher; since Love, like Sun-beams, being diffused, are but faint: but contracted to one Object, are fervent and
calefactory. Wives are not Quelque chores, in whom on∣ly variety breeds delight, but are solid food which never nauseate sound stomachs. For a man to love Vertue abstra∣cted from its subject, is to fancy a Chymaera; but Vertue in a woman is an undoubted motive. As to your similitude of Joane and my Lady; take the whole Proverb; put in (in the dark) and you'r an∣swered, 'Tis not want of dif∣ference, but due discerning; nor is she as good, but seems so. The Cuckow once sang better then the Nightingale; but remember who was Judge. Times swift motion,
and youths transitoriness are common places in the beaten roads, where ever travelling wit baits and refreshes him∣self in his pilgrimage. But yet Desires being part of the soul, and so immortall, do not de∣cay in age, but onely alter their motives and object. Nor is the world barren of exam∣ples of aged men, eagerly desiring and performing rites of conjuncture with women. As for those changeable and quick-silver minds which love and loath in a moment, 'tis their vice, and may give you this notion, That as their love can so soon and easily change into disdain: so your present
scorn may turn to a dotage on the like ground. And though perhaps you have not yet been in love, 'tis commu∣ne malum (since you will call it so) like the small pox, eve∣ry one hath been, or must be troubled with it; and bodies unacquainted with lesser di∣seases, are irrecoverably swal∣lowed up of greater. Your wary advice to your friend, to love with discretion, I al∣low and commend; and for my part were I to love again, would not go a foot further then my counterpart should meet me; but where I found reall love, I would scorne to be out-vied, being of Alex∣ander
his resolution, No crea∣ture should conquer me with love or hatred. T'is not good to, play the Butcher with that naked Sex that have no arms but to imbrace with, nor Emprick-like, kill them by whole-sale. I never yet met any of either Sex good at the sport, but at last they met with a requitall. 'Tis within the memory of man since a pregnant Spark furnished with two of your Cardinall Vertues, wit and disdain, slung his fire-balls of contempt on the whole Sex, courted some into dotage, and then jeered 'um; who at last fell foul on a Kitchin-wench, and
doated, who repayed him with the same devices; and which was worst, at last in despight married him. Ho∣micida is of both Genders, and belongs to both Sexes. Your other points of marry∣ing for wealth and yoke-fel∣lowship, I shall agree to with silence. But I would not make wealth my Mistris's Master, while woman stands by like the Chamber-maid with a broom to attend her. Let my Mistris be a figure, and her portion the Cyphers; which added to her, advance her much, but of themselves sig∣nifie nothing. Passionate Court∣ship should, but cannot, be
avoided by all; every one is not Hercules: but dissimula∣tion may and must be shun'd by all. There is no Souldier, beleaguers a Garison, but with hopes to come off un∣touched: no Lover attempts a Mistris, but hopes for frui∣tion without bloudshed; yet the Souldier may receive a shot, and the Woer a repulse; and that which he intends for a sin, oft proves a punish∣ment. He that lives a Catho∣lick Woer, may at last come to the purgatory of a generall contempt. But methinks (Friend) you wheel about and approve that which at first you decried; there might
be some hopes of agreement and hand-shaking between us. Allow love and marriage and I will joyn with thee against dotage; and would have Love sequestred from do∣tage, as much as thy minde from this obstinacy. But I see the Devil has alwais a cloven foot; you would now allow of marriage without love, and confound love and dotage, as if the same. To wed with∣out love, is to be tied by the loyns like a Monkey to a bed∣post; neither is it possible to court or marry without love, as you write, for that want of love turns courtship to flattery, and marriage to a
bargain. That Women are Natures Errata, with Aristo∣tle I acknowledge; and that they study temptations, is undoubtedly true: but yet that they do it not alone, your own example proves; who by this fancy of Anti∣womanism tempt the Sex so much, that I could wish my self one to dote on thee. Do not call the lawfull and ne∣cessary intermixture of both Sexes to be a base prostituti∣on of the Reason, Soul, and Gallantry of a man; 'tis so false and groundless, it de∣serves no answer but the lye. Let thy friend alone with his choice, and if he think her
so, she is pieceless; only I ad∣mit your Caution, While he seeks to win her, let him not lose himself; nor shoot away all his shot at one volley, but keep a reserve for a fresh encounter; 'tis but discretion. And now to answer your similitudina∣ry Question, Why a woman cannot be viewed with as lit∣tle ardour as a Statue? it is because a Statue is not a Wo∣man, nor directly like a Woman; if it could be, Pigmation will tell you there may be like af∣fection, nor is the influence different as to the eye, but the power that actuates it; if a man view a thousand Pi∣ctures, he generally likes one
best, and having perused all, returns to that; and though the Market be free, and Wares various, a good Chapman sticks to what he best fancies, and deals in it. Neither is all perfection thereby impaled in one Crea∣ture; but there may be e∣nough supposed in one, to content one. That your self hath ever loved, I question; but that you have fancied, and mist, may be true; but you cannot thereby go out a cometetent Tutor. Nor should I ever take that Mariner for my Pilot, who hath no other experience then splitting his own Ship; first guide your
own Vessell to the Port, before you take another to your management and steerage. What it is to be sick of Love or the Plague, you know much alike, and so shall be believed, having studied both but in shape; for my part, I have knowne many sick of Love, and yet recovered; but the Plague I have no skill in. My desire is, that you partici∣pate of your own counsell; suspend your severe censure to your friend, and sit first a strict Judge on your self, till time and experience ripen your judgement and change your minde. Which I hope I shall not longer expect,
then untill you have serious∣ly perused and weighed the experimentall directions and wholsome advice of, Thine, and thy Friends Friend. A. B.
A Letter to a Friend, delivering an Opinion concerning the Scotch Rising. SIR, THat you may receive an account of the Scotch business, and that there hath been such irresolute altera∣tion about the Treaties lately, 'tis fit you know this Northern storm, like a new Disease, hath so far posed the Doctors of State, that as yet they have not given it a name; though perchance they all
firmly believe it to be rebel∣lion; and therefore, Sir, it is no wonder if these do here as the learned in Physick, who when they know not certain∣ly the grief, prescribe Medi∣cines sometimes too strong, sometimes too weak. The truth is, we here iudge con∣cerning the Scotch Affaires much after the rate as Mor∣tals do of the Moon; the sim∣ple think it no bigger then a bushell, and some likewise think it a vast World, with strange things undiscovered in it; two ill waies of casting it up; sure the first will make us too secure; the other too fearfull. I confess I know not
how to write in the middle, and set it right; nor do I think you know; since I should believe the question rather to be, A King or no King? then A Bishop or no Bishop? In great mutinies and insurrections of this na∣ture, pretences speciously conscionable were never wanting; and indeed they are necessary; for rebellion is of it self so ugly, that did it not put on the vizard of Religion, it would affright ra∣ther then draw people unto it; and being drawn, could not hold them without it. I∣maginary cords that seem to fasten man to Heaven, have
tied things here below faster then any other obligation. If it be liberty of conscience they ask; it is a foolish request, seeing they have it already, and must have in despight of power. For as Theodoret saith to the Jews, Nemo cogitur cre∣dere invitus. If they exercise that liberty, 'tis dangerous; for not three men are of the same opinion in all; and then each Family must have a War within it self. Look up∣on the long Preparations, and consider withall that Prophe∣cies are ceased, and therefore they could not foretell this ook should be sent to them, and you will conclude they
rather imploy'd conscience then conscience them. Inquiry after the Leaders, and you will hardly finde them Apo¦stles, or men of so high san¦ctity, that they should order Religion; Lesley himself if his sore were searched, would certainly be found one, who because he could not live well there, took up a trade of killing men abroad; and now is return'd to kill men at home. If you will have my opinion, I think their quarrell to the King is the same they have to the Sun that he doth not warm them so much, nor visit them so oft as he doth others. God
and Nature placed them in the shade, and they are an∣gry with the King for it: To conclude, this is the case; the great and wise Husband∣man hath placed these Beasts  out-fields, and they would needs break hedges to come nto the Garden. This is the belief of Yours, J. S.
A Whore IS one of Sampson's Foxes, that carries fire in the tail, to destroy the standing corn, She goes under the name of a decayed Gentlewoman; and indeed she is gentle e∣nough, a half Crown will make her come to hand. The Devil and she are co-partners in undoing, for one spoiles the body, the other the soul. Turn-up she affects above all roots in the Garden. She cares not for the Bridewell, having lain often at the com∣mon
Ward. Her walk is Co∣vent-Garden; and her Ex∣change a Tavern. He that goes to salute her, is decei∣ved, for she is very coy of her lips, and therefore bul∣warks them about with paint. Her breath stinkes worse then a Bear-garden; her furniture consists of a Playster-box, a Periwig, and a Looking-glass; besides a Pimp, which she accounts one of her necessary imple∣ments. She is a she-Bias, and can say, Omnia mea mecum porto. She is a preservative against a hard frost; and a Regiment of them will beg∣gar Newcastle, for they carry
fire about them. Her chil∣dren, if any, are like wind∣falls, and found in the Kings high-way. She is not ambi∣tious, but delights in fallings; yet by her falling her Stalli∣ons rise. She is a hackney Jade, and lets every foole ride her; a Barbers chaire, as soon as one is out, another is in. She is a very Butcher, and sells her flesh by the stone; one may buy her a∣whole at the price of damna∣tion. She is like a Medlar, ne∣ver ripe till rotten; like Ca∣momile, she thrives the bet∣ter the more she is trod. A∣bout thirty she is in her Ze∣nith, and then from thence
she declines; for the pox, or rotten teeth, &c. will write her stale, or ugly, and trading will decay; and then her on∣ly preferment is the degree of a Bawd, where three Strong-water bottles, an ounce of Tobacco, and two Countrey Wenches, sets her up; and she drives a trade till Shrove-tuesday; and a Cart and a bunch of Turnips is the re∣ward of her labours; and the Bridewell the limbo of both body and bones.
A Patentee WAs sometimes a Gen∣tleman of Fortunes, but being cast over-board by his own riot or folly, layes hold of the next thing he meets with. He is begot like a Mule, between a Courtier and a Citizen, but turns Par∣ricide to both. No aire nips him so much as a West winde coming from the Parliament-House, for that brings him to the Falling-sickness; the Re∣publique and his re-private never are in conjunction; but
like Castor and Pollux, when one sets the other riseth. He is an excellent Alchymist, and can draw Gold out of Sope, Candles, and Marrow-bones, and what not? Nothing an∣gers him so much as the sound of a Reformation; for then he is projecting to pro∣cure a Patent to hang him∣self. Like a Louce, he shrowds on the shoulders of Great∣ness; for that is his main protection. All honest men shun his company, and he theirs; in which regard you may call him a Separatist. His walk is Westminster-hall, or the Court, with his hand∣full of Papers, because he
would be taken for a man of note. The Monopolist and he, like Hippocrates twins, both live and die together. In his chamber his Glass and he are in a deep consultation, how to set his face that it may go even with the times; like a Watch, whereof his tongue is the Alarum. His pretences are faire, for the benefit and ease of the Subject; To re∣form some grievance (mean∣ing his own poverty;) to in∣crease Trade, (meaning of Patentees) and to prevent disorders; to which he rather adds a saile then a ballast. He has little skill in the Law, but onely in the penall Sta∣tutes,
and that in a defensive way to play the knave in a circle, and yet keep out of their bounds to prevent hanging: and less in the Go∣spel, unless to fish by Peter's example, for such fish as have Money in their mouths. His Religion is commonly but skin-deep, it may appear in his countenance, but it never comes near his heart; 'tis writ upon changeable Taffa∣ta, for good and lawfull con∣siderations; his Religion and his Practice make him like the new invented Pictures, one way an Angel, another way a Devil. All his life is a continued Cataline's Conspi∣racy;
he and the Common∣wealth are like two feet, if one rise, the other falls; if both chance to rise together, 'tis but a leap, that the fall may be the greater. He feeds upon new Projects; his drink is the tears of the poor La∣bourers; and commonly his Livery is the ruine of some Corporation. His disease lies in his ears, for he is common∣ly infected with a Pillory; which at last comes into his neck, and Tiburne ends him; where his onely glory is, that he died for the Common∣wealths good.
A Politick IS one that makes Heaven bow to Earth; he placeth his summum bonum in Earths felicity, and depends on no other Providence but the reach of his own brain. His Religion is but the vizard of his policy; and whatever vertue he has, craft is the keeper of it. His looks are candid, and hypocrisie is the onely Saint he adores. All his discourses are obscure and ambiguous; like the De∣vils in the Delphick Oracle;
you may understand the words, but not the meaning. He is like an Aspen-tree, e∣very winde of Greatnesse blowes him, and he bends. Is his Prince valourous? he is daring; covetous? he is sparing; lascivious? he is wanton; religious? he pre∣tends much; his heart is a Theatre, wherein all hu∣mours are presented, and his face pantomimicall. He is of that mans Religion, with whom he talks; a Caesarean, a Pompeian, which soever pre∣vails; he'l cry, Ʋp with them, and, Down with them, all in a breath. Like a Water-man, he looks one way and rowes
another; or like a Lapwing, keeps most noise when she is farthest from her nest; or a cunning Fencer, that seldom makes a blow without a fal∣sifie; suller of Questions then Answers; rather desiring to know anothers secrets, then bewray his own. Pleasures he is not much delighted in, but onely like the Dog at Nilus, laps as he runs, for fear of the Crocodile. Every one that he deals with, he suppo∣seth hath the Master-reach in cunning; and therefore still carries both eyes open. His sight is strong enough to ap∣prehend dangers in Embrio, and so quells them before
shape or form make them ter∣rible. If a Contract blow fa∣vourably, he hoiseth sailes, and with it steers his Voy∣age; if a cross gale comes to his main under-ground De∣sign, he thrusts out the Oars of fair Pretences through the Port-holes of his conseience. He would be accounted eve∣ry mans friend, that he might know his secrets. All his a∣ctions are tipped with fair Pretences, yet are directed to himself; and therefore looks no higher. Whatever his Theam be, his Applica∣tion is his own ends: yet he is often contented to do any cheap courtesies; and makes
himself very joyfull and hap∣py in an opportunity, so as he be sure to be no loser by it. His cap and knee, his smiles and good words, are all at a minutes warning, to be dealt about on all occasi∣ons. In a word, he is one that loves no man, but with a re∣servation; nor will trust any; nor indeed any wise man him, farther then he sees him.
A Clubber IS a Hogs-head set on two stumps, fit for no use but to hold Liquor; the Tavern only is his ubi and the proper place of his residence; any other where he is like a Fish out of the water, who doth nothing but gape. He thinks Nature gave him a mouth, not to speak, but to drink off his Liquor, for that is the main use he puts it to; he drinks not to live (as Nature commands) but lives to drink. Of all the Miracles
that ever Christ did, he thinks none so meritorious for the salvation of his soul, as the turning water into Wine; and he in imitation can work a miracle too; for he can turn a whole Shop of Wares into a Pint-pot. His onely enquiry is, where dwells the best Sack or Claret? You shall finde him and his Tribe about the declining part of the day, at rendezvous, like a Constellation fixt in the lo∣wer Region of a known Ta∣vern; where their noses ap∣pear like Comets, and por∣tend drough; there they are accommodated with a pri∣vate Room, a half-Pint, some
clean Pipes, and a Jordan. Their first Discourse is a ge∣nerall Vote about the good∣ness of the Wine; the next paire of half-Pints produces News; where each puffs o∣ver the inside of a Diurnal; but for want of that, the main Scene is, who were drunk the night before, and how they reel'd home. They are internally Pharisees, and very exact in making clean the inside of the Glass; their strictest Criticisme is, Drink off your Cup. At last, when it strikes twelve, they make a liquor'd Reckoning, drink their Wives Health, in whose defence they are dutifully
drunk, till they lose their owne; and then they stag∣ger home to bed, and finde it in small beer in the mor∣ning. A politick Citizen IS a lump of combustible ig∣norance, whom the least spark of newes fires into a blaze of unlikely conjectures; he measures all the designs of Foraign News by the line of Stow's Chronicle; which he never hears read, but out flies a piece of nonsense, which he miscalls State-policy, able to
confound Machiavel. He much haunts the Posthouse to note into what forms men concoct their faces at the reading of Letters; he frequents the Ex∣change in the Postmeridian hours, because then men em∣pty themselves of intelli∣gence; his only factorage is news; viewing a Bill of Ex∣change, he swears 'tis a Libell. Tell him of a Curranto and he's in Heaven; he takes an Almanack of foul weather for one of Merlin's Prophesies. Upon hearing of a Victory, or loss of a Sconce, he is enra∣ged, and blames the State that he was not a Generall; he extolls the Low-Countreys
Government above any Mo∣narchy, because the fat Citi∣zens rule the roast; he holds it impossible for the State e∣ver to be ruined, because it swims in Butter. His face is a piece of Stenography, where all Bicheliews designs are writ in short-hand. He keeps a common place-book of hard State-words, which though nor he nor his English Dictio∣nary understand, he after an Aldermans Plumb-broth Feast spews out among the learned Fraternity; and is therefore slander'd with the name of a Politician, and he turns Here∣tick and believes it; for they had rather ignorantly admire
his speeches, then go to the price of understanding them. All the passages he hears are Stratagems; if he hear but a Ballad, he smells Treason in it; he cannot endure Plays, be∣cause there are Plots in them; ask him a question, you un∣dermine him; answer him with silence, he takes you for a State Informer; he tells news by tale, not by weight. There is no way to strike him dumb but drawing out your Table-Book; every man is a fool that is not of his opinion, but he takes him for an undoubt∣ed wise man that applauds his conjectures; he seldome approves any thing that he
understands, and yet he ap∣proves most things; he medi∣tates on an old Manuscript more then the Pentateuch; he wonders why the Apocalyps is put in the end of the Bible, and thinks it a disgrace; he takes Brightman for a better Interpreter then Daniel; he cuts the Apocrypha out of his Bible, for fear of infection; yet cannot tell why he hates it, but because 'tis Apocrypho; and thinks Solomon but a fool in suffering his wisdom to be put there. Monarchy he can∣not abide, but says 'tis against Christian Liberty; but thinks Anarchy is as old as the Chaos. He takes Malchus's Servant
to be a Saint, because he had his ear cut; yet thinks him not right of his opinion, be∣cause he had one left. He takes Peter for a Popish Bishop, because he cut off that eare. Where'ere the Scripture says strive, he takes it for fighting; that makes him so in love with Civill War. Among his Superiours he is dumb; to his inferiours deaf; the one he offends by silence, the other by prating; to both he is ri∣diculous. In a word, he is the State Incendiary, the Cities bane, and Kings evil.
A. Schismatick. IS one of those rash Servants that will not let the Wheat and the Tares grow together; but crops off his haire, or ra∣ther weeds it up, lest it should hinder the growth of his ears, that when the harvest of tri∣bulation comes, they may be reaped by handfulls for good Considerations. He thinks it impossible to be saved if ones haire transcends his teeth in longitude. He is in the head an Hermaphridite, between a Frier and a Turk, the one
shaves round the head, the o∣ther the crown, he both; he hopes to be pulled up to Hea∣ven by the ears, like a pitcher. He is a Papist turn'd the wrong side outwards, and so strongly denies their tenets, that he grants their maximies; his Religion and theirs run round in a circle till they meet. He is fallen out with Learning so, that he thinks ignorance his main saving grace; and would be content to speak no Language but sanctified Bulls, but that the Pope useth them; he stands much for Christian liberty, yet will tie all men from the use of ceremonies; free-will he
cries down in a Papist, yet maintains that a Protestant may do what he please. All his discourse is the sand of zeal bound together without the lime of reason; for he calls that humane Traditions, and protests the Brethren do not use it. You cannot vex him more, then to tell him his soul is Gods Image; for he hates idolatry. To speak Lan∣guages (he saith) is to glory in the confusion of Babel; and to talk sense, is to advance carnall reason above the Spirit. He wears his soul, as a Gallant that has put on his Periwig the back part foremost; for whereas his will should be
judicious, his judgement is wil∣full. He flies humane Learning as from a Serpent; three words of Latine will give him nine stools. His knowledge, how small soever, never sinks into his heart, but only swims in his brain; standing bare at a Sermon makes his zeal catch cold, and that brings snuffling in the nose. He is one of the Attorneys of Dovers Court; and can with more patience talk five hours, then hear one. In company he is excellent Physick; for he will either purge your gall with anger, or your spleen with laughter. A∣gainst every new meeting, he takes in store of new Argu∣ments
to maintain some new∣fangled opinion; which when he vents, his proselytes are ra∣vish'd with admiration, and thinke him inspired with strange revelations, that he can speake English and they not under stand him. He will cross the Kings High-way ra∣ther then view a Cross there. Aristotle was never so corrup∣ted with Dutch Comments, as the Scripture is with his; his brain is like the puddle at Ox∣ford, into which Aristotle's Well dischannels it self, and becomes stinking water. When he takes a Bishop in his mouth, 'tis in that sense as a Wolf takes a Lamb; not ,
but simpliciter. Tell him of a High Commission, and he holds his ears, and says there is a mystery in that Posture. Set but his zeal on fire, and it will flame, though it smo∣ther a Kingdome; the only way to confute him is silence or laughter. He is all for In∣dependant Church Govern∣ment, yet wishes all the Or∣thodox Clergie hang'd. He holds a Stable as holy as a Church; but holds a Chamber holier then both, if it be well furnished; that is, with a Bed and a Sister; and then he cares not how long he stands. He that would draw the cha∣racter of his Religion, had
need have a Map of all the Earth, and of Hell too, where his Principles are deeply roo∣ted. He will not believe that Christ ever descended into Hell, but intends to take a Journey thither himself to dispute with the Devil. There let him go for me.
A Gallant IS one that Nature made while the World was in a Chaos, and therefore detests order ab origine. He dares use his tongue against Heaven; but scarce his hands against a Butterfly. Is he sober? his care is how to be drunk, is he drunk? his next task is how to shift the reckoning. All his Discourses are butter'd with Oaths, which he uses Eupho∣niae gratiâ. He has worn out all his friends, but the Hang∣man; and all his Apparell, but
his Sword; which he hacks sometimes against a Mantle∣post, and swears he has been in a desperate encounter; co∣ming from a Bawdy-house, he swears he has been in hot service, though his courage be soon taken down. Two French postures he has natu∣rally, viz. to have his Flanks and his haire fall off; which last defect he supplies with the mercenary Auxiliaries, a Periwig. His face speaks him no true Subject, because of its frequent risings; to which Rebels his nose is Standard∣bearer, and carries the colours. His common Notion or Title∣page is a Low-countrey Souldier;
under which vizard he boasts of Victories and Adventures which he heard discoursed of at the last Tavern. He sets his faith to sale, and cries, Who will give most? His Loyalty lasts no longer then his Money. His threats are like Thunder-claps, or the motions of Mountains; and if a blow be brought forth, 'tis like a Mouse; in the midst of his fury, if you care not for his menaces, nor fear his blows, he will shake hands with you. 'Twere fearfull if his valour were as great as his wickedness; or if his power e∣choed his will. Though he be an Infidell himself, he
would have others believe his Oaths when he promiseth payment. You cannot do him a greater discourtesie, then to make his Chyrurgeon drunk, for then he bewrays his secrets. He keeps good quarter with his Landress, lest she should discover the spots of his conversation. The first thing he does in morn∣ing, is to bid a Pox take those Fleas that bit him at night; which is sure to be granted; and the last thing he doth at night, is to curse the Gentle∣man that cudgell'd him that day. In the morning, imita∣ting the Sun immediately af∣ter his rise, he passes into an
Ale-house; or if he can get one to spend for him, to a Tavern; so passes from signe to signe, through a whole Zo∣diack in a day, till he comes to Aquarius; and then goes by water to a Bawdy-house, and comes out by fire. He believes there is no Signe of Virgo left in the World. In the end you shall finde him kick'd by his Companions for having no Money about him, which he swears is in his other pockets, when as he has but only one Suit; and that is threadbare before the Taylor is paid. Thus when he has gone his round, and been abused by his Compani∣ons
for abusing them, he reels into the mouths of the Watch, and from thence is rowled into the Counter; where to his credit, many great Actions are imputed to him.
A Ballad-maker IS a Volume of Rime com∣posed by the hand of non∣sense; or a musicall Instru∣ment, not yet tun'd. An Ale-house he accounts the only Helicon; and the Ale-drapers Wife one of the nine Muses. His wit runs thick or clear, like the Ale-barrell. He is a second Charon; for none are wafted over by the way of Tiburn, but he receives money for their passage. He exceed∣ingly longs for blazing Stars, Earthquakes, Dearths, or
strange accidents. The Bre∣thren keep constant corres∣pondency with him, that he may compose their Libels in∣to Metre; and being whipt or Pillory'd for it, he rejoy∣ceth, saying that he suffers for the truth. His Compani∣ons call him Poet at every word, but 'tis in a jeer; and being patient to bear all slan∣ders, believes it, and bears it. Call him Goose or Wood-cock, he is enraged; but yet had rather eat your words, then you should. He is sensi∣ble of no Argument but beat∣ing; and that alone drives him out of your company. He is in pay by the Countrey
Wenches, to write Love Sto∣ries to lamentable Tunes, which they sing to the Cows, and make them weep milky tears to hear them. His com∣mon Vaticans where his Books are preserved, are the windows and walls of an Ale-house in the Countrey. He like the Emblematists, is be∣holden to an Engraver; but only his Wood carver hath certain common Places; a man and a woman serve like Panpharmacons, for all occasi∣ons. He is a dutifull Son of the Church, and loves no in∣novations in Musicks; but they go like Hopkins and Wis∣dom, to the Tune of the same.
He is in no better cue to write a lamentable Story, then when he is Mawdlen-drunk; his brain is the common-shore of Poetry; the streams which he sucks from Poets, he de∣files with the muddy stinking puddles of his Additions. There is many a man is made a Martyr by his Elegies; wherein his Encomiasticks per∣secute the very ashes, and hy∣pocritically tear the dead bo∣dy of Hercules with a smiling countenance. In a word; he is the Suburbs of a Poet; whose Sepulchre is the Stocks, and his Monument a Pillory.
The Character of a self-conceited Fellow. HE is, I dare not say a Man, nor Boy; but in the Parenthesis of both; yet he thinks onely a beard is wanting to proclaim his manhood; because he has ta∣ken up Womens Smocks, he writes sumptâ virili togâ, when indeed his wit is hardly out of the clouts. He is an Ape, that imitates both, but wan∣ting the wit of the one, acts naturally the folly of the o∣ther. He thinks himself of
deep judgement, yet has nothing deep about him, but the pits of his nose; which makes him boast of hills and dales in his own possession. He affects two contraries; for he will be a laughing-stock to good company, where his highest ambition is to be told he talks like an Apothecary; or else is the Bell∣weather of children, fools, or Frenchmen; who have nei∣ther English enough to re∣prove his nonsense, nor to approve his no-wit; but pas it over for jests by ignorant laughter. He is an ignis fa∣tuus to mislead fools by a shi∣ning nothing that is in him
or a blazing Star placed in the lower Regions of a Ta∣vern; and a Cup in his brain portends the birth of some prodigious Conceit. To in∣gratiate himself into good company, he keeps constantly in pay a Regiment of jests and hard words, to salute their ears with a volley of non∣sense; which if they be not grac'd with laughter, he is non-suited. But being dis∣roabed of this store, he whi∣spers them of a Wench; and rather then want imploy∣ment, will turn Pimp. You cannot please him unless you praise him; nor praise him, unless you flatter him, It is
his summuni bonum to move laughter; and if his jests will not do it, his gesture must; if neither, you may laugh at the Jestor. He most com∣monly procures friendship with some wit, whom he en∣joyns to be the foreman in the peale of laughter; who both to his face, and behind his back, laughs at him. Much he affects to speak some Fo∣raigne Language, because in all his Discourse he would over-reach the capacity of an Englishman. He whispers How d'you, as if 'twere Trea∣son, in the ears of any new acquaintance, to make o∣thers thinke he is privie to
their secrets. He alwaies de∣tracts from other mens worth behind their backs; as if he knew by instinct others dis∣praised him; and it goes hard if a man wears any clothes, but he will pick a hole in his coat. He hath not exchanged two words with Nature in love (I had almost said since he was of understanding) be∣cause she made him so low, that he cannot overlook o∣ther mens actions; but to help this defect, he hath got∣ten the faculty of taking the wall of his betters; having nothing in himself worth this knowledge; he scorns noscere seipsum. The thing is some∣times
Poeticall wherein he casts up his ignorance, to make it seem of high ac∣count; he writes like the Egyptian darkness, wherein he shews cunning; for when men laugh at his Verses, he may say they laugh at they know not what; and can boast of more then any Mo∣dern Poet, that he writes a∣bove humane apprehension. He carries such a deep con∣ceit of his own conceits, that he thinks no man worthy to understand them; nay he is such a nigard, that he grud∣geth himself the benefit. The Subject of his Fancy is himself; wherein he truly
shews himself poeticall, if Fi∣ctions can do. He mislikes every man after the first ac∣quaintance; nay grows wea∣ry of his native Countrey, and will travell; and his a∣ctions and carriage therein, not tongue can express but his own, for he may lie by Au∣thority. Himself is gone be∣yond the limits of my Paper, where my Pen nor can nor will follow him.
The Character of a City Wit. HE is a gaudy Vacuum, gilded over with a few hard words, which he ima∣gines to have a deep mean∣ing, because his dull sense cannot dive into it; which with much pains he has wee∣ded from Authors, and pla∣ced in Garison in a common place-book, that he might draw out a Regiment of Re∣cruits when his wit is routed. His Discourse is a Line of Sand, or a composition of so
many foot and half-words, which being put together, spell non-sense. He admits not a word into his Society, under the degree of a Tetra∣silable; and takes all Dis∣course by measure, not weight. He were the only man to be Minshew's Son, and compose another Dicti∣onary of hard words, had he but wit enough to spell them, or learning to tell their signi∣fication. Yet he thinks his nose a Jacobs Staff, able to calculate the height of any mans fancy. By his tedious Discourses of Herauldry, he would make you believe he were a Gentleman. And to
gain Honour, he dares be a Souldier; and hath taken up Arms on his Signet, for de∣fence of his little finger; but intends only to fight by the Heraulds Book, where his va∣lour will be seen by the mi∣serable hanging, drawing, and quartering of his inno∣cent Coat. He had been pre∣ferred to a Trumpeters place, but that he could sound no Alarm, but his own praise. Had he but Poetry, he would out-vaper Ben; but he'l not speak a Verse, lest they should be taken for children of his own begetting, and known by their long legs. Besides his speeches are so masterless,
they think it against the Li∣berty of the Subject to be chained in a Verse. In his Arguments his Solutions are more intricate then the Que∣stion; and that man needs a deep reach that would define his definition. After many Pleonasmes and Circumlocuti∣ons, he is delivered at length of a non-sequitur; yet makes no Conclusion, for his Dis∣course is endless. You may be sick of a Consumption, and cured before he hath finished a Complement; and 'tis a won∣der if the Palsey in his tongue procure not the frenzie in his head. Shews he prefers before substance; and esteems an Al∣choran
in Folio before a poc∣ket Bible. He useth much to discommend himself; which we must interpret as a praise, the clean contrary way; yet rather then lose a drop of his praise, he will lick it up with his own tongue. The way to gain his favour, is neither to understand him, nor be un∣derstood by him; he will then applaud the depth of your judgement; for it is his property to think nothing deep, unless it be muddy. He accounts no man rich in wit, that does not gingle with it in every fooles company; he thinks not that a mans Ware∣house may be full, whose
Shop is empty; and a Foun∣tain of Learning in that head, where there is no channell in the tongue. He would fain be a Philosopher, for he is very peripateticall; and because his wit is bald, he Periwigs it with stolne Comings, which he calls his own, because he bought them, and saith he studied hard for them; but it was onely to remember them; and if by chance any word do put out his head in company, and is not concei∣ved, he'l swear 'tis an admi∣rable conceit. Because he is tall, he thinks his fancy is predominant, and therefore is apt to insult over any short
man, though he hath more understanding. He thinks every man barren of Worth, that has not his tongue tip∣ped with selfe-praise; and those unacquainted with wit, that have not their fancies writ in their faces, perspicu∣ous to every Reader. He is mighty glad if he be in com∣pany with a fool, and thinks him his foyle, though indeed he be his Looking-glass. From the ruines of good Buildings he erects the Babels of his own conceit, and enriches his brain; which indeed is no other but a confusion of Lan∣guages, where scarce one syl∣lable understands another.
In the Church we must look for him in the highest Pew; but I am loth to stay his co∣ming out, lest he offend my stomack with some tedious Paraphrase upon the Sermon; but there I leave him praying against a handsom Wife, lest he be made a Cuckold; and against a witty Companion, lest he be made a Coxscomb. J. B.
The Character of a Humourist. HIs principall humour shall be my excuse; that is, inconstancy; 'tis hard to draw his Picture, that will not settle his countenance; therefore expect it rather in a Landskip then Statua. He is unsetled both in his actions and opinions; which shews his fancy to predominate in him, rather then judgement; yet can it not be denied, but that he is master of a sound
judgement, but he makes others, not himself the sub∣ject of it; being better able to inform others, then re∣form his life; and more able to declaim against others vi∣ces, then reclaim his own. His anger is more active then hot, rather scorching then burning; soon kindled, and as soon quencht. And though that man must needs make a strange combustion in the State of his soul, that upon the landing of every Cockboat sets the Beacons on fire; yet because his Reason stands Centinell, 'tis rather a disor∣der then a mutiny. Vertue he
more gazeth after then fol∣lows; or if he do follow, it is rather with his tongue then feet; choosing to talk with her sooner then walke after her; and prefers a dram of Theoricks before a pound of Practicks. At the Game of unlawfull Pleasures he had rather be an Actor then a Spe∣ctator; seldom forsaking them till teeth like he be forced to drop off through too much satiety. Melancholy he will be in the midst of mirth; cer∣tainly when he and his se∣rious thoughts meet toge∣ther (for they are strangers) they are excellent company.
Venus he esteems above all the seven Planets; but had rather worship her in a Baw∣dy-house then in any of the twelve Celestiall Signes. In his Materials he is a Gentle∣man; but Fortune hath cast him in the City Mould. No doubt but age will reclaim his unstay'dness; 'tis no great fault in a young Horse to use unreasonable mounting. To his friends he is rather for∣mall then reall; apt to trust them with his person, not secrets. In a falling out of two friends, he will rather side with one, then bring both agreed; which is an
Index of some indiscretion; thereby he being sure of two friends, to make one his ene∣my. He is no stranger to Poe∣try, which is Musick in words; nor to Musick, which is Poe∣try in sound; yet rather makes them his Sauce then Meat. For Logick, which gives Speech substance; or Rhetorick, which gives it Beauty; or Grammar, which gives a Tongue to Speech it self; he has only ta'ne a cur∣sory view of the first of the three; but has ruminated on the two last. But lest I make my Garment to big for the Body which I took measure
of; and being something in haste, I conclude with his own Proverb, By—I cannot stay. J. B.
The Character of a FUDLER. WE will onely take a cursory view of him as he is in company, being not yet so unhappy to know him farther; but we may guess at the bulk of Hercules by his foot. He is a confused lump moulded when Nature did all things in the dark; a Cub of the Chaos not lick'd into form, rowled from Ta∣vern to Tavern onely to be drunk and laught at; where
he grunts out words as ill∣shap'd and gross as his per∣son; and if his speeches do chance to quarrell, you must take them as they fall out. His body is built like Babel, but never with an intent to reach Heaven; the Work∣men were confounded, and put Morter where Gold should be. His ordinary Dis∣course is only scurrility and profaness in a miscellany, boyled together in huge quantities of Sack, which he carves to his friends as prime Dainties. Rather then his Jests shall want fire, he will light them at Gods Altar;
and though a Conceit grow on the Banks of Hell, he will adventure to fetch it; not ca∣ring to gain his Conceit, though he lose his soul. In company he monopolizeth all the Discourse to himself; not regarding if his tongue keep on a gallop before, how far his understanding loyters behind. Sometimes his Wit stumbles on a Jest, as he that shoots thick, sometimes may hit; and then you will do him a great discourtesie, if you do not laugh; but the main body of his Discourse is a Wild-goose chase after some printed wit, which he
cannot catch. When he speaks, 'tis not the motion of his tongue, but the rat∣ling of his brains; and 'tis worth our wonder, that his belly should be so full, and head so empty; but the ful∣ness of the one is the empti∣ness of the other. His belly, like the great Fish, eats up all the rest of his limbs, yet his wit is as fat as that. He has spent much time in travell to learn to be an Ass; all that he has seen is the Tun at Ha∣dleburgh, which he studies to imitate; and all that he hath brought away, is the exact managing of his Fork at Ta∣ble.
He walks in the streets like a Rundlet of Sack on two posts; and where'ere he goes, he carries a fool with him. His study is old Jests and Tales; his recreation, Drinking; and his main oc∣cupation is Wenching. But I fear I have been too long in his company; by this time he is drunk, 'tis time to leave him lest he spue in our faces.
A Solicitor IS one of the blades of Corn that springs from the Ilian ruines, whose ears grow up for the Harvest of a Pilory. His Profession is originally like a Cuckow, from the Nest of another Trade; where he has learned wrangling and knavery enough in his own Causes to spoil another mans. With the sweetned Ingredi∣ents of City fraud he com∣pounds himself (though sim∣ple enough) for any villany.
He is truly said to follow a Cause; but a small Bribe will lame him so, that he will ne∣ver come near it. He is one of Sampson's Foxes, that fires all about him; but that his fire is generally in his nose, as well as his tail. His ambi∣tion is so low, not to have his Chamber in an Innes of Court, but in an Ale-house of the City; a Tavern is his form, and licking of Pots his Law. Most of his Actions are Assaults, or Slanders; which are broach'd where his Ale is, in a Cellar; and after a long circumstance, center themselves where they be∣gun;
where his foolish Cli∣ent, being weary of his fruit∣less endless Suit, and repent∣ing the idle expence of his Money for an imaginary va∣num, called getting the day; like the Chymist, that blows away his Silver and Lungs, for that Fools (rather then Philo∣sophers) Stone; do's by his wholsom advice, when his Money is spent, refer his Suit to Arbitrators and Ʋmpires; whose Verdict is, after long debate, A Supper for them∣selves, at the equall charge of both Parties; That both must be sony for what they have done (as they have
good cause) and sit down by their losses. He seldom gets any considerable prefer∣ment, but among Fish-wives or Watermen, or in a Countrey Village, where all stand in awe of him, and slander him with the Title of Master Lawyer. Ignorance and beggary makes him resolute, that he dares thrust his head into any em∣ployment. At last, having run through the Zodiack of all Courts, if he scape the preferment of the Gallows, he casts Anchor in a Goal, or a Bridewell; and there we leave him. FINIS.
