L1882 12616716 64415
A Letter to Dr. E. Hyde, in answer to one of his, occasioned by the late Insurrection at Salisbury. SIR, IT was my resolution a good while ago (of which I am a∣ble to give a good account, though I do not to you) never to deale with you in a private way of writing under Seal, but to maintain a publique contestatiō with you, for all the differences betwixt us in a fairer Character then either you or I can write, & to make all conscientions and rationall Readers judges of the right we claim, and of the wrong we charge upon each other: And your last Letter of March 29. rather fully confirms me in this course, then any way diverts me from it, because (as I shall prove before I conclude mine exceptions a∣gainst it) it referreth to now publique affairs, (though a little before secretly carryed in the way of a Plot) both for the mo∣tive which induced you to it, and for the end you aimed at in it. Before I come to examination and answer of the parts of it, I will premise my generall censure of the whole, which is this. In the Letter you have shewed such boldnesse, in assert∣ing that against me which is untrue, such eagernesse (in exact∣ing of me, that which is unjust) that I may well thinke when you wrote it, you set aside, not only the sincerity of a Divine, but the charity of a Christian, and the ingenuity of a Scholar. Now to the particulars, It beginneth thus.
Dr. H. Sir, you may easily remember how much I have receded from my Wives Right of Fifts, hitherto. Answer, Sir, Remembrance is of a thing that hath or had a being, and easie remembrance of that which by its evidence and importance maketh a strong impression upon the memory: Your Wives right of Fifths out of the Rectory of Brightwell (as you require them) is no such thing, but a Non ens, a meer nothing.Colleg. Conim∣bricens. in lib. Aristot. de memoria & Reminiscentia c. 10. col. 18. §. 13. I will not say but you may imagine some appearance of a right, for if (as some do) you lodge phantasie and memo∣ry both in one bed, they may be the parents of such a phantasme. But I may rather say, Sir, You may easily remember that I have proved your wife hath no such right at all to fifths; as you claim in her name, because I have given you reasons in print against it, which (I doubt not) will be acknowledged valid, and suffi∣cient (either to satisfie or silence you) by all unpartiall Judges, who shall read them, as by many such they have been already; whereas you neither do, nor can give any to the contrary, which may with any colour of truth be brought both to oppose or over-poise them. And this is not my conceit alone, but his judgement like∣wise, whose great parts have deservedly advanced him to high prelations of dignity and authority above other men. For when (about the beginning of March last) I told him I had not received a word from you, in answer to my Book sent you about the 11th. of the last November. Nor ever shall do (said he) intimating (as then I understood his meaning) that you were convinced by it (and therefore made no excep∣tions against it, for then he knew nothing (though he be a very knowing & eminently learned man) of that mystery of iniquity (since revealed) whereof you are thought to have been both sooner and more confidingly acquainted, then a true hearted English Patriot should have been, and whereby you might be not only moved, but much heartned & heightned in your spirit, to act by Mr. D. & to write to me your selfe, as of late you did. D. H. And how much you have receded from your sever all promises.
Answer. Just so much, neither more nor lesse, that is, ne∣ver a whit, either the one or the other, for I have constantly been so punctuall in performance of my promises (though to my great disadvantage, as those who best know me, will testi∣fie for me) that I have lost more, meerly to keepe my word, then somebody (I say not Dr. H.) would have done to keepe his Oath: If you will not believe me, believe your selfe, and then you will not be so forward to impute unto me the breach of promise with you, which hitherto I have not made. You are my witnesse, that to keepe my word with my Parishioners, (without any likelihood of benefit, or rather with apparent probability of damage to my selfe, from which I might have been freed within a few houres) I refused an hundred pound in hand for the first payment of a years rent, which I thought fully enough for the Rectory of Brightwell. And in your Let∣ter of the 17. of November 1653. wherein you acknowledge the receit of moneys from me: You say in your next words, For which I kindely thank you, for really it is now a great courtesie for a man to keepe his word, though I cannot say but you have carefully kept yours. Since that time, what breach of promise can you charge me with? I wish you had given me just cause to commend your constancie in the like kinde, but instead thereof, you put me to complain of your levity and unfaithfulnesse, in that you promised you would not expect the payment of Fifths above two years, for as you said, and I have shewed (page 16 of my Book) you should not need them any longer, and now (after four years receit of them) you are (as if you were distempered with an hydropical thirst of cove∣tousnesse) no lesse Pecuniarum petax, but rather more then you were at first. You say in the same line: Dr. H. And now at last you seeke to recede from your agreement. Answer. An agreement is a promise and somewhat more, and therefore to recede from it, is worse then to recede from a single promise; so worse and worse on your part, for this is the third stumble you take at the threshold, the four first lines of
your Letter contains three untruths, and this last is not the least, but so much the greater as it is more expresly confuted, pag. 24, 25, 26, of my printed Book. That I may not take it too tenderly, that you thus accuse me, you presently bring in an accusation against your selfe, saying. Dr. H. It was the sin of my civility (because you com∣plained of being raised in the contribution) to let Mr. D. offer you but 280 li. but yet in effect to give you as good as 300 li. Answer. For your sinne of civility (if it were so) he that would not pardon you (so seldome offending on that hand) hath an harder heart towards you then I have. But wherein shewed you your civility? you say in letting Mr. D. offer but 280 li. in money: why Sir, was Mr. D. to be directed by you what he should offer? and had you the disposall of his tongue and hand, to promise so much by word and writing, as he did, and of his purpose for performance of what he so promised? He is (surely too wise to take his rate from your direction, whose interest was (as he and you conceived) wrap∣ed up in mine, if the treaty were seriously and sincerely intend∣ped on his part. But when I expressed my conceit, that he was set on by you, to make me an offer, and but an offer, and that only for your advantage, he would not then own it, with any relation unto you, either as an efficient or finall cause of any motion toward a contract betwixt us: nor did he (in ef∣fect as you suggest) give me (you would say bid me, for he gave me nothing) as good as 300 li. And for the reason you render of being raised in the contribution, that might have, and in probability had, no farther operation upon you, then was commensurate with your concupiscence, after a large portion of the parsonage, which made you fear the fifths claimed by you would be so much the lesse, as the charge was the greater upon the whole. It was not (then) the sin of your civility, that Mr. Day made such an offer at that time, but your sin of hypocrisie, now, in pretending it was done to gratifie me. Dr. H. Truth is, I should have been contented with Fifths
(after that proportion) and had rather have lost my share of 20 li. per annum, then have given the Parishoners occasion of exacting upon you. Answer. Truth is, It is weil Sir, that there is some truth in your Letter, though but a word, yet is not that word so truly brought in by you as it should be, for it leadeth in a sen∣tence which no discreet man (who knoweth you) will believe to be true, viz. that you had rather lose about 4 li. a year, then that I should be raised but the eighth part of that sum in the Military Assesment. If you looke to be believed (while you so lavishly bely your selfe) that you may be mistaken for a moderate man, you must finde out an example for Solomons Aphorisme Prov. 14. 15. The simple believeth every word. Dr. H. But now (you say) since I make so ill use of all that I can do, only to try how much I am content to suffer, it is high time for me to send this letter of demand. Answer. But now. &c. I must therefore henceforth expect you will be more curst then you have been, because you con∣ceive you have been too kinde heretofore, yet must I not think the worse of you for all that, because you give two reasons for the change of your dealing with me. 1. That you have done all you can to give me content, that's your meaning (if you write sense) though your form of words reach not so far. 2. That I have abused your goodnesse by ungratefull returns, only to try the extent of your patience. He is well worthy (I confes) to be visited with the Rod, who will not be won by the spirit of meeknesse,1 Cor. 4. 21. and supposing me such an one, you come to this resolution, It is high time for you to send this letter to demand, &c. For your first reason, that you have done all you can, &c. I am sure, Sir, you have done all you can to get all you could from me, though never so much to my discontent and damage, and this I can aver upon 4 years deare bought experience, of such an inordinate desire in you, as the Apostle calleth, The root of all evill. 1 Tim. 6. 10. Your second reason is, That I have made ill use of your
favourable usage of me, only to try how much you are content to suffer. You mean this because of my Book against the pay∣ment of a fifth part, wherein I give reasons why I resolve to give it over, and not to pay that unrighteous Tribute any more. But why do you say it is only to try how much you are con∣tent to suffer, what needeth that? when I know (almost ever since I knew you) you were not content to suffer the losse of a Groat, which you might either gain or save by any pretence of right: may I not (upon just cause) conceive so of you, when being to pay you 19 li. 12 s. 2 d. upon very dear rates for over-worne utensils, the first year of my comming to Br. you tooke the whole summe, not abating so much as the odde two∣pence of so hard a bargain? and you know well enough by my Book, that I refused to pay fifths, not to try your patience, but to free my selfe from your oppression. And why do you say, Now since you make so ill use of all that I can do: Did I make any ill use of your pretended kindnesse in March last, when your Letter beareth date, or in November the last year, when I sent you my printed Acquittance the next day after I recei∣ved it from London? That, I doubt not (as I said before) is the ill use you mean. If so, why did you not write unto me until four moneths after? Why were you so silent so long, when that which so much offended you came to your notice so soon? Why was it high time toward the latter end of March, and no sooner? Sir (to deal plainly with you) not my self onely, but all who well know you, and are best able to judge of you, be∣cause they are men of sound judgement, not swayed by parti∣ality or passion, (to whom I have imparted the substance and circumstance of Mr. Day his offer, and your demand by letter, for their opinion on them both) unanimously conceive, and confidently say, that your Now and high time, point (like the finger of a Dial) to the high affronts of publick authority, by the Cavaliers at Salisbury-Assizies, and their high hopes of a general Insurrection of the people at home, and the Invasion of great forces from Princes abroad; whereof if I should say,
it is very probable you were not ignorant (before the Plot brake out into open Rebellion) I could render reasons, which (by judicious men) will not be thought either feigned or fri∣volous, and it will not be your wisdome to urge me to prove the presumption against you. And though you may haply say (that which you do not think) it is but my uncharitable mis∣conceit of you: I can truly testifie that a man of worth and note (in both Counties where you and I live) told me, you were under such suspicion of disloyalty to the present Govern∣ment, that you were to have been secured, if some ill news (which at that time made the greatest noise) had proved true. But that the time of plotting, acting, and giving out hopeful expectations, of happy success to the destructive designe of your discontented party (against the Lord Protector) and all those who (in conscience as well as in affection were en∣gaged with him in the same common cause) was the time when you were animated to resume your project upon me by Mr. D. his mediation, of whom I have no minde to say any more then his relation to you extorteth from me, and present∣ly upon that to send me the letter, to which I now addresse an answer, may thus appear. Vpon Monday morning the 12th. of March, Sir Ioseph Wagstaffe Collonel Penruddock, &c. seised on the Judges at Salisbury, took away their Commission, and carryed the High Sheriffe prisoner with them to Blanford. By the way (Sir) I do not write this as a parcell of news to you, for I will not take upon me to be your intelligencer, for such matters as you may know by prophecy, and I but by History, or hearsay: I only touch that here as a Chronologicall note of conformity betwixt their high attempts and your high demands. Vpon Tuesday morning the 13th. of March, came Mr. D. to me, with another Gentleman, whom I forbear to name, I supposed them (as soon as I saw them) sent by you (for no good to me) and therefore I told them, I would not speak with them both together, but apart. So the other Gentleman withd rawing, Mr. D. stayed and told me he came to offer me
300 li. a year for the Rectory of Brightwell; and on Friday morning March the 16th. he sent me a letter (dated the same day) wherein he offered the same, and named sureties, for per∣formance of that he offered, both in that writing and in con∣ference, when (a few dayes before) he came unto me. I took time, until the next week, to consider of an answer to his proposal, being doubtful, whether I had not promised to some of my chiefe Parishioners (upon his falling from his own offer the year before) not to let it to any one, but to keep it in mine own hands: and when such a promise, was remem∣bred and claimed by them, I told Mr. D. I was not free to accept of his offer: but if I were, I knew not any man who would bid so much, and was so well able to make good his word, as he was. It seemed very strange to me, that he, who had re∣fused to be Farmer of the Parsonage, the last year, upon easier termes, yea who would not deale with me for it, upon any termes (as he wrote to meThe copie of this Letter is in the last page of mine Ac∣quittance. the 9th. of Iune) should (about 8 Moneths after) come of his own accord, to bid me more for it, than ever I asked. He told me, it was because I had taxed him with breach of promise in Print: But why then did he not tender his Motion, and tell me his reason till March 13. when that I printed, came to your hands 4 Moneths before, and from you the notice of it, was brought very neer Mr. D. within a while after: and it is like so intimate a friend as he, should be informed assoone as any, especially since he was concerned in it, as well as your self, though not so much; and for the time of this last offer, I suppose it was rather of your choice, than his, as the reason of it might be better known to you than to him. When I had given my negative answer to Mr. Day, the next week after I received your letter of the 29th. of March,) in due order of time both inrespect of the publique proceedings of your party, & of your own private negotiation, for Brightwell. For 1 the condition of the Commonwealth, seemed on the suddaine to be strangely changed, (even to astonishment) in that so small a number of Cavaliers, at Salish: durst raise their insurrection, to such an height as there they did, when the so∣lemne
Assembly of the Judges, High Sheriff, with his armed attendants, Justicee of the Peace, Grand Jury, &c. were to cast an awe upon the whole County, then and there for such as they (so few) to affront and outface that venerable Authority, and to bear themselves as a triumphant Army, before they had been a militant troop, was a prodigie of presumption, which might amaze the people (as it seems it did) into a fear both of resistance and defence. 2 It was not probable they durst have been so rampant, but that (as hath been partly touched before) they had strong hopes. 1 That other Counties would turn Royallists and rise with them. 2 That the Antiroyallists were so divided among them∣selves, that enow of them would not unite, to make head against them. 3 That Forreign Forces would come into their assist∣ance. 4 That our wooden walls were so far distant, from our own Coasts, that they could not stop them. Sutable to such general conjectures, they gave out particular reports as Col. Penrudduck did, encouraging others to embo∣dy in that Rebellion, by telling them, that the Lord Fairfax had 8000, Sir William Waller 4000 (in London) ready for the Kings service, with many more, some more probable, others but possible, but if impossible, you have a phansie and a faith of as vast a compass, as yourQuod vale volumus, facile credimus. desires for the Ruine of—and for the Restauration of—else you would not have believed (as you said to some body about six weeks after your party was routed at Worcester) that 40000 Swedes were up in arms for Charles the second, and that he was in the head of them. But for the late Plot (which is our Theme at present) I doubt not but you confidently conceived, it would proceed so prosperously, that your hopes and my fears would grow apace, up to their Achme, and that the face of publike affairs, (like a
picture on a furrowed table) would so frown upon me, while it smiled upon you, that I would be afraid to make any long a∣boad at Brightwell, and so would soone run away and make you room, and opportunity for you thither, and then it would be no matter how much was bidden for the Parsonage, nor what bonds were given, for I durst not stay to claim the one, nor must be allowed (in case of forfeiture) to sue for the other. In your prevailing this way (but God forbid you should do so) I could not but account all my temporall livelyhood (if not my life) as utterly lost, and so not only one fifth part of the P. of Br. but all five would be yours again. Howsoever (Sir) if that (which was your chiefe end) were not attained Mr. D. his offer then (which at another time would have been too much) might serve you for a fair colour to exact the fifths (with ri∣gour) according to his rate, and this was a secondary end you aimed at, if you were disappointed of the principall which you discovered by your letter, so soon as seasonably you could, that is, the next week after I had given my negative an∣swer to Mr. Day: For then you wrote and sent your letter of demand for fifths, according to the proportion of his promise. All this sorts well with your high time in that notion which symbolizeth with the designe and doings of Sir Io. Wag. at Salisbury. Your next words are screwed up to an unreaso∣nable height, by the like contemporary influence and a∣spect. Dr. H. It is high time (say you) to send this letter to demand what remains still due upon your account for the year 1653, as also for some reckonings of the years before. Answer. If you had not been too high in your hopes of more then your right, in a way of violence, you would not have made a demand so contrary to all reason and conscience, as to require an account of me for arrears of the year 1653, and for the years precedent to that, when you do or should remember that for those years even to the year beginning, Aprill 11, 1653, and ending Aprill 11, 1654, I have made
an account unto you (and that so exactly as if I had been to passe it upon my Oath) and have received acquittances from you under your own hand, in full discharge of each whole year severally, which (if you deny) I can produce to con∣vince you of untruth. By this unjust demand you manifestly shew, that if your party had been predominant, and I forced to sodain flight from my present habitation, you might, and meant, to make my Books and other goods (which I could not carry with me) lyable to any demand or charge you would please to put upon them in my name. Dr. H. But for this year 1654, I know the proportion I have reason to expect, viz. after 300 li. per annum. for so much you may have for the living by Mr. Day, and such security as you can not but approve. Answer. If I confessed a right of fifths, due to you or yours, I should not be unwilling to pay them in a due proportion; but you know Sir, I resolutely deny it, and have rendred reasons of my deniall, whereof you seem to take no notice, because you have no minde to meddle with them, if you have, and please to make an answer to them, and I cannot confute it, I will either fairly part with Br. or freely pay a fifth part to you, according as the profits of it come into me, but not after the proportion of 300 li. per annum. Because, First, this is more (by above a fourth part) then (commu∣nibus annis & computatis computandis) I can make of it, whereof in a letter to an eminent person (whom you know) I have shewed such reasons, as any intelligent and indifferent Judge will acknowledge both for just and weighty. Secondly, though you and Mr. D. or you by Mr. D, raise the rate of the Parsonage, the new Farmers bring it down, abating no lesse then 4 li. of 14 li. a year, for the Tithes and other rights of the Parson, not taken in kinde of the Farm of Brightwell: for which abatement they plead by such reasons, as I and my friend (who in such matters hath ten times more knowledge then my selfe) cannot readily answer.
3 Mr. D. his offer was but the acting of your device upon me, as I have already shewed, wherein he gave evidence of his good will to you, as you did of your love to your self, and of your ill minde towards me, and if he had bin taken at his word and made to keep it, he might well have accounted you his dear friend, for he must needs have lost a great deal, for your sake, had he been as punctual in his performance; (whether with or against his will) as he was prodigall in his promise. But you thought it more likely that I should lose all, than he any thing, by his undertaking, and I think it was no more your meaning, really to ingage so good a friend, than it was his to be so far ingaged, to his prejudice, but to entitle your self to a demand, and to entangle me to the payment of a fourth part in stead of a fift. Having followed you thus far, I will not leave you, until you come to your final period, and now you draw neer unto it, in your next words, which are, Dr. H. Therefore having performed my part of the agree∣ment, I expect yours. Answer. I shall answer you here with a question or two, What agreement Sir, do you mean? and when was it made? If you mean that of the 19th. of October at Reading, or that of Iune the 13th. at Wallingford, you have an answer to them both in the three last pages of the Book I sent you: if any of later date, say what it was, when and where it was made, and you shall have mine assent unto it in word and deed, or just reasons of my refusall of it. You conclude with some good counsell to me, and that con∣sists of two particulars. First, Dr. H. Follow that Rule of Do as you would be done by. Answer. That Rule (I grant) is a most righteous Rule, given by our blessed Saviour himself, Mat. 7. 12. and a most just standard, (if rightly understood) whereby we must mea∣sure our mindes and dealings towards others (I say) if rightly understood, that is, when the understanding is truly informed,
and the will and desire rightly, ordered, otherwise, the appli∣cation of it to practise may prove unjust and absurd. 1. Unjust, as when a Judge on the Bench will not passe sentence upon a Malefactor at the Bar, because he loveth him∣self too well, to be content to be condemned, or when a man hath a faulty friend, who deserveth to be punished, and he inter∣cedes for favour for him, to free him from the stroke of Justice, as Agesilaus did, (when asPlutarch in his precepts of policie, p. 300. of his Morals. Plutarch reporteth) he wrote to a great Lord or Potentate for one Nicias in this manner. If he have not transgressed deliver him for justice sake: If he have, deliver him for my sake: but howsoever deliver him. So, no doubt, he would have been dealt withall himself (had he been in the offenders case) but so it was not lawfull for him to do by another. 2. Absurd, as thus, A Master (as our great Master Christ Jesus maketh the comparison) when his servant commeth from the field, will say unto him, Make ready wherewith I may sup, and gird thy selfe, and serve me till I have eaten and drunken, afterward thou shalt eat and drinke: Luke 17. 7, 8. because he would have his servant so obsequious unto him, were it not very absurd if he should receive the like command from his servant, and submit unto it? But, to take and apply the Rule as you would have me, the meaning of it, according to your minde will be this: Doe as you would be done by (that is) Pay the fifths of the Rectory of Brithwell, to Dr. H. for the use of his wife and children, and pay them freely and fully, as you would have him do to you, were you in his case. I will answer you not in your way of protestation (1) in verbo Sacerdotis, but on the faith of an Evangelicall Minister, and (if you could see into mine heart) you should not see there a syllable or a letter contrary to what I now professe (as in the presence of the Omniscient God) viz. that knowing what I do of your state and mine own, and of both our relations to Brightwell, I durst not (out of conscience) require at fifth
part of the Parsonage of you, and out of ingenuous civility (if I had not a nobler principle of operation in me then that) I would scorne to presse you with such undue demands as you do me, and to put you to the triall of the rule you bring to me; would you, were your condition such (as I have sin∣cerely set down mine à pag. 16. ad 22. of my printed Ac∣quittance) be content to pay a fifth part (as you would have it) to any one who needeth it no more then you do? you know you would not, Do then but as you would be done by: And you would do as I do, if you had no higher thoughts of the Parsonage of Br. then I have. For though you very much advance the value of the Benefice (as you call it) the Pastorall charge as I finde it, is so little beneficiall to me, all receits and disbursments rightly calculated, that weighing the benefit and burthen in all kindes together, I had just cause to write thus to Mr. Vicechancellor of Oxon. November 22. 1654. I will say thus much, and will make my word good; by my deed, if I be put to the triall, that I am so far short of competent contentment, in that condition wherein I am at Br. (chiefly through what I have suffered by you, and your most and worst affected followers, that I shall be very willing to do service to any good people elsewhere (though with a great deal lesse wages then I am thought to have here, but have not) if I may have a fair call to another place, and a conscionable discharge from this where I am. And (which may be more to your satisfaction, if you want not faith to believe the truth) I have made offer of all mine interest in Brightwell (without any capitulation at all) to a man of as excellent parts, and as potent friends as any I know, who (if he accept it) will easily acquit himselfe from your unrighteous and unreasonable exaction. Howsoever, Sir, I had rather (according to the conditions promised) resolve to leave Brightwell, then still to worke under such a rigorous Taske-master as I have found and felt you for four years together,
The other part of your counsell to me (wherewith you close up your Letter) is: Dr. H. Not to give any occasion of breach, or quarrell to him, who desireth to expresse himselfe: Your affectionate Friend to serve you. Ed. Hyde. If a breach and quarrel be not yet made by your unjust demand, and my just deniall of fifths, with reasons for it, in print, I shall not give you any greater occasion of it then I have done, for (for that tter) I shall but deny to pay them still, and that upon the same grounds. But if a breach and quarrel be made already, (and I believe you take it so) your counsell commeth too late, and you should rather have propo∣sed some means to make up the breach, to take up the quarrel: you would seeme to be peaceably disposed. when you professe a desire to expresse your selfe mine affectionate friend to serve me. But how feeble is your affection if it be true? for it is but a desire, a desire but to expresse (that is so to shew, and declare your selfe, that you may appear such a friend) how false your profession, if you act contrary to it. And how should I think otherwise, when you pretend love, and intend Law: For having heretofore used to send to me by your friends, Mr. H. and Mr. Wh. you sent me this last Letter by a professed Law∣yer; as though thereby you meant to tell me, that if I will not be lead by your Letter to do what you would have me, you would compell me by Law to conformity to it; and for that Sir, you may take your course, and when you take up
the Sword, you shall not (God willing) finde me unready to betake me to my Buckler: And so I subscribe my selfe, Yours to serve you (at the Bar of any Court of Iustice or Equity, when you serve me with Processe to attend you there.) John Ley. Brightwell, April 6. 1655. ERRATA. Page 8. line 3. read the same summe. p. 10. l. 4. r. for your return thither.
Postscript. SIR, YOV have (since I wrote this Letter) turned my suspicion of your professed friendship, into undoubted assurance of your dissembling with me: By sending a Bailiffe on Saturday, (May 12.) to attach me, or to take Bond for my appearance, on Monday May 14. in the Court of Common Pleas, Which sodain warning was not by his choice but yours, as the date of your Letter of direction to him (for serving the Sheriffes Warrant upon ) sheweth. Hereby he that hath but halfe an eye may see, you meant (not like a good Minister) to disturbe my preparations for the Sabbath, and (as unlike a good Christian) to distresse me by want of time to take Counsell, how to apply my selfe for my just defence in the Suit commenced by you. I would not, I did not, serve you so, when I sent you my Book against you (by a Messenger of purpose) the next day after Ireceived it from London, that you might have as timely intelligence of the publishing of it as I could give you. Howsoever, Sir, you may perceive my readiness to perform my promise to you, (which was To serve you at the bar of any Court of Justice or equi∣ty, when you serve me with Processe to attend you there) for that day (viz. Monday forementioned, though your sum∣mons were so short) I came to Westminster where you had put (into the Court) no Declaration against me. So forward were you to shew your teeth, before you could bite; which may give occasion of caution, and (that may be also) some cause of security to him who sincerely subscribing to the Christian sen∣tence ofAmicos deli∣gere omnium est inimicos so∣lorum Christi∣anorum Tertul. ad Scapul. Tom. 2. p. 162. item. Tertullian had rather (notwithstanding your harsh and hasty dealing with him) entitle himselfe your Respondent,Christianus nullius cst ho∣stis. Ibid. or Defendant, then your Adversarie J. Ley. FINIS.
