L2673 11875565 50209
AN ANSWER TO THE Bishop of OXFORD's Reasons FOR ABROGATING THE TEST, Impos'd on All Members of Parliament Anno 1678. Octob. 30. In these Words, I A. B. do solemnly and sincerely, in the Presence of God, pro∣fess, testifie, and declare, That I do believe that in the Sa∣crament of the Lord's Supper there is not any Transubstan∣tiation of the Elements of Bread and Wine into the Body and Blood of Christ, at, or after the Consecration thereof by any Person whatsoever; And that the Invocation, or Ado∣ration of the Uirgin Mary, or any other Saint, and the Sa∣crifice of the Mass, as they are now used in the Church of Rome, are Superstitious and Idolatrous. By a Person of Quality. London, Printed in the Year 1688.
To the Kingdom in General. HIS Majesty, having with a Grace exemplary not onely to all his Subjects of this Naiion, but to all Christian Princes and States, (however they may be themselves of the Roman Persuasion) design'd it, as the avowed Glory and Stability of his Reign, to settle such a Liberty, that there may be free discourses, and debates concerning the Truths of Christian Reli∣gion, and the Dissents of Christians in them, as from the Pulpit, so proportionably from the Press; as there∣fore the Ministers and Fautors of that Church (which would be known by the Name of Catholick) have al∣ways (and will be while they are) always active with their Pens to the utmost in their Sphaer. And as we see they have Publick Freedom, so is it not to be doubted of the Princely so Vniversal Grace, but that he intends a Freedom on the other side to an∣swer; that there may be no Inequality in holding the Beam, but that it may alike incline to all in this matter, specially now that he is making Credence of those his Royal Favours to all His Protestant Sub∣jects, who cannot but be deeply concern'd at such a Time as this; because of the great Advantages, the Interests of the Counter-Scale hope for from a Sove∣reign of their own Sentiments. But in no case is this Liberty more desirable, than when an Amphibious-Ambidextrous Bishop, who assumes, like that Angel of the Revelation, to set one Foot on the Sea, and
the other on the Earth: One Foot on the Protes∣tant Church, (which he calls one as if his self were of it) and the other on the Roman: In favour of which he so openly appeareth (to speak the most ho∣nourably of him) to conciliate toward it, at lest a Cassandrian Temperament: which, as it will never be yielded by the Protestant, so would it not be ac∣cepted, if it were offer'd, by the Papist. For he hath published (with what intentions is best known to God, and his own Conscience) a palliation of the most ir∣reconciliable Points of the Popish Religion, Tran∣substantiation, the Sacrifice of the Mass, the Invoca∣tion and Adoration of the Virgin Mary swoln to such a Monstrosity in that Religion, together with other Saints, and all with Images too; Points wherein the Wisedom of the Nation thought fit to fix the TEST, as the security of Protestancy; and that of Ima∣ges of so great Infamy in Sacred Writ, and all these with a Multitude of Rampant Words; now rather than a Multitude of such Words should not be answe∣red, or a man of lips be justified, even the very Stones would speak: Such Lies and Sophistry will not suffer Men to hold their peace, and while he seems ra∣ther to mock than argue, should not every one en∣deavour to make him ashamed? For, certainly, his ways of Discourse are like those of the Whorish Wo∣man in the Proverbs, so moveable, one cannot know them, he comes out in this Time, that he esteems a Twilight, and with a prostituted Subtilty he treats of Sacred things: he is loud and stubborn; his feet abide not in the House of his own Church, as he his self styles it; but now he is in the Streets of the Strange Religion, and layeth wait in every Corner with a New sort of Ecclesiastical Polity, or in a New
Edition, and his great Temptation is, I have, saith e Peace-Offerings with me, that carry at the same Time Reconciliableness to Rome, and likewise a Blessing himself in a design'd Indulgence to his own Genius, and caressing himself in the thoughts of his comforta∣ble Magdalen Importances, and though at a high Wa∣ter of Papacy he would be burnt for a Heretick, if he did not speak more out, which without doubt he is prepar'd to do on congruous Occasions, yet so much, at this seeming Return of the Water, is enough to be∣atifie and then Canonize him in that present Kalen∣der, where, I doubt not, he stands markt with a Red Letter, and it may be a just Reason to all sincere Pro∣testants to spue him out of their Mouths: The obser∣vation of his double dealing and appearing more like the Atheist than the Learned and Ingenuous, though mispersuaded, Papist, sowetimes transports my Style be∣yond its own Intention and Resolution, when I first es∣said to consider onely the rational part of Discourse in those matters; and I am much the bolder, because I hear from all, his Book hath much disserv'd His Maje∣sties Gratious Purpose, and created in all minds a Nau∣saea; specially observing his odd Aspersions on so emi∣nent a Person, as Dr. St. who in the thoughts of all the World is incomparably (and beyond all possibility of being nam'd together,) ten thousand times more, the Apostolick Bishop. If I have offered too largely to a just Indignation here, I having the Treatise it self mostly applied my self to the rational part, and minded chiefly to possess the Rea∣der with the true sense of things: I have therefore wav'd the persuit of his History of Transubstantiation in the se∣veral Stages of it, leaving it to more learned Persons, who, I doubt not, may observe in their usual walks and
dail-y paths, through the whole course of Ecclesiastick Times Many of his Erratick motions: but however the main point of truth, or falshood on that Head, or Article rests in this little room whether it is possible to believe such sublime spirituality (as our Lord alway breath'd) so little of kin to sense, to matter, to flesh, should in his holy dying Institution, forsake him so, that he should, in∣tend to engage his Blessed Body, that was so suddenly to become a Spiritual Glorious Body, and to Asscend far above all Heavens, to so inglorious, insipid, ineffica∣cious a desscent, as onely to dispossess a small Roll os Bread, or Wafer of its whole Substance, and as by a trick to leave its Accidents still intire to fool and baffle all the sense and reason in the World: and yet to so little effect as to suffer the Bodies and the Souls too, of the greatest number of the Eaters to be without any Evidences of good, as notorious and certain, as the miracle is supposed to be stupendous; whoever can believe this, need not go to visit the dark and too oft impure Cells where so strange a Doc∣rine was conceiv'd and foster'd, he hath a Bulimy of Faith without more ado of search and inquiry to devour all the absurdities that the name of a Church can offer him. And so to the points os Idolatry, abating from things Pious and Learned, (to which let the utmost allowances of deference and honour be yielded, and paid) the No∣tions he would imprint of it on the minds of his Readers, are an audacious affront (as he speaks in a more innocent case) to God the Creator of Heaven and Earth in his Word, who therein abhorrs all Distributions and Par∣cellings out of any the least Particles of the Glory of the One God, or Mediator to any of the most Seraphick of his Creatures, Angels, or Saints, or the Mother of God, as he speaks without Precedent from Scripture, and hardly
allowable in a Discourse of Idolatry although tolerated in the case of the Nestorian Heresie: Even so all Address of any Beings besides that God and the Mediator, his Word doth de TEST specially invisible Beings, to whom we can make not the least Application, but under the peril of Idolatry as Communicating them, in any semblances of Worship, with those Incommunicable Attributes and Pro∣perties of Omniscience and Omnipresence: He hath indeed allowed and commanded mutuous respects in the low∣er humane World for the settlement of the order of Reli∣gious, and Civil Offices; but all the figments of Men's own Brains concerning Worship of Himself, or of the Me∣diator through the Mediation of any of his Creatures, and most notoriously, by Graven Images, or any kind of Si∣militudes comprehending other Figments, he declares to be Abomination. It is a grand Audaciousness therefore to offer such an insolent piece of falshood to Christian minds as that the Cherub were by his appointment to be Worshipped, or to have Worship directed to them, because their Resemblances were placed as waiting at that Throne that was Empty of any Presence to sit upon it; but an Invisible Glory and Grace had promised favour to those who, according to his Word, praid toward that place, which He having fill'd with a visible sign of his Presence of Glory He after placed his Name there: with as much sense therefore it might have been said that every Stone in the Building of the Temple, or whatever was in the Temple, or specially in the Holy of Holies, was to be Worshipped as to say the Cherubim were to be Worshipped, of God in, through, or by them. A Parallell Essrontery it is to load the Sun and Host of Heaven, the Scripture with all the Idolatries brands, and so contrary to the very letter of it, that the Visional Representation of the Jewish Idolatries to Ezekiel, Ch. 7.
distinguisheth that of the Sun from all the Rest, I stand therefore in perfect Amaze and Astonish what the Christian, much more the Protestant, Bishop should mean, and yet make so open and publick an appeal for his In∣tegrity, God and the World in the close. As to what con∣cerns the Test and the Peerage, I humbly submit the Reason of it to the higher Judges in these things; beg∣ging pardon of any errors in so great matters, as likewise taking example in that, I beg of all Men allowance for mistakes of humane infirmity in so Critical a point and in so Critical a time. DRAWDEREVE ROFMADA.
AN ANSWER TO THE Bishop of Oxford's Reasons For Abrogating the TEST Impos'd on all Members of PARLIAMENT. Ann. 1678. Octob. 30. IN undertaking to give an Answer to these Reasons, I shall choose, as my particular Province, to insist onely upon the most substantial Principles of Rea∣son, and that may most concern, (as we usually speak) the Merits of the Cause, with all due regard to the Character of Dignity, the Laws of this Nation, and the Constitution of the Government thereof (both Civil and Ecclesiastick) have imprinted upon the Authour; as also
remembring the Admonition the Apostle Jude gives from the Example of the Arch-Angel, who disputing with the Devil about the Body of Moses, most probably in the Cause of Idolatry, did not adventure to bring a∣gainst him a Railing Accusation, but said, the Lord re∣buke Thee. Nor will I assume to make the least Reflexion upon the Insufficiencies of the Discourse, as to its particular Frame and Menage, or upon the Air, Meen, or Spirit of it, relating to either the Roman, or the Protestant Reli∣gion, or to the Names of greatest Honour, Authority and Reverence, who have acted, or written in Defence of the Reformation: But leaving all this part to those, who have both Talents, and Authority to support them in their just Censures of such a manner of Treaty of what deserves our highest Value and Veneration, I will con∣tent my self with Debating upon the principal Matters, taking them in the utmost Extent of the Offensive, or Defensive Arguments upon them. The Heads therefore according to which this Discourse is to be modell'd,Reas. 1. must be those Reasons, the Bishop gives for the Abrogating of the Test: The firstof which is; That it doth not one∣ly diminish, but utterly destroy the natural Rights of Peerage, and turns the Birth-Right of the English Nobility into a Precarious Title. Now in the first place in answer to this, I must ob∣serve; that in the very thought of utterly destroying this Right, the Episcopal Authour does somewhat relent, and recoyl from the Height of his Expression, and a∣bates it into a Turning that Birth-Right into a Precarious Title: Taking therefore advantage from that so natural, and even necessary Recess, or Condescension, if not to be thought, as it very much seems a Check upon impetu∣ousness
of style from a Consciousness of its Excess; I shall take the boldness more freely to assert, That the natural Rights of Peerage are not at all destroyed, but own'd, upheld, and more solemnly acknowledg'd by the Test-Act. Secondly, that the Birth-Right of the En∣glish Nobility is no way turn'd into a Precarious Title by it. And because this is indeed the onely Argument for the removing the Test-Act, that is of true Strength, and Merit in the whole Contexture; it deserves the more Attent Consideration. For whatever shall attempt to shake such a main Pil∣lar, and Fundamental Principle of our English Govern∣ment, ought to be both suspected, and feared; and if it indeed prove to do so, to be surpriz'd and foreclos'd from its Effect: But the Invalidity of this Charge will thus appear. 1. It is most evident the Right of Peerage in the Ge∣neral stands firm, notwithstanding the Test: Seeing this Principle of Government is not onely still, but with strongest Confirmations even from this very Test-Act on all sides preserv'd most firm and undoubted, That there is a most just Right that every Peer hath to all the pri∣vileges of English Peerage: Accordingly the very Act is founded upon that Acknowledgment, and Suppositi∣on, viz. That every Peer hath such Right to all the Ho∣nours of Peerage, and to that Right most unquestionable in it self, for else the very Ground of the Law were ta∣ken away. 2. All and every Peer submitting to that Law takes that Right, and enjoys it without any Dimi∣nution, and holds it not onely for himself, but for that whole Estate: the whole being acknowledg'd in every Member: And particularly sitting, and voting in the Higher House of Parliament, (which is therefore with
Honour to that Estate call'd the House of Lords) is ac∣knowledged to be the just Right of Peerage without any Infraction upon the Right it self. 3. Even those Noble Lords, who do refuse, or do not actually submit to the taking the Test, have yet their Right of Birth, Blood, or other Title preserv'd undisputed, and inviolate, as it is such a Right and on such a Claim; and therefore when∣ever they please to accept it on that Condition, there is no demur upon their Right. But untill they so accept, their Right is in a kind of Abeyance, and Custody of Law for them; and never dyes, or is extinguisht. 4. The Sus∣pension in the mean time amounts no higher to the De∣falcation of the Priviledge, (nor indeed so high) than the Minority of such Noble Persons, which cause's a Suspen∣sion of that Priviledge of voting in Parliament, till they are of Age, which is not at their pleasure, but requires the natural Course of Time to advance them to it; whereas in this case, they may in Construction of Law every day remove the Obstruction and enjoy their Right, seeing the Claim is always allow'd, and own'd, and the Law takes no notice of the Reasons of their refusal. 5. This is made most evident; in that all other natural Rights of their Peerage, are notwithstanding the Suspension of this particular Branch continued to them. 6. It is most undeniable; their Right of Blood, or other Claim to the Priviledge of Parliament is unmoved; be∣cause not their taking the Test, but that precedent, and still continuing just Right, gives them a perfect enjoyment of that particular Priviledge whenever they take the Test. Which is, I hope, a full Vindication of the natural Rights of Peerage from being utterly destroyed; seeing it is onely one Branch, that is in Question, and that is onely suspended, or rather deposited in trust with the House of Peers, and no way destroy'd, or extinguish'd.
2. I come therefore to make good in the second place, that the Birth-Right os the English Nobility is not turn'd into a Precarious Title, nor that which in former Ages was forfeited onely by Treason is now at the mercy of every Faction, or every Passion in Parlia∣ment. For that can never be Precarious, nor at such mercy, which subsists, and rests upon the common Base of the whole World for its security, and that is the Law of self-preservation. For when a Parliament consists of Two Houses, and the Vpper House of Two Estates, each Estate a Conven∣tion (as is to be always presumed) of the wisest, and most honourable Persons of a whole Nation, the Lower House hath always upon all their Proposals, or Offers at any Bill, the curb and restraint; that this is to pass the Vpper House, or House of Lords, and therefore cannot rationally so much, as essay them with any Law, that would destroy the Rights of their Peerage. But suppose the House of Commons should make so un∣reasonable an attempt, it can never be imagin'd, so in∣telligent a Body always provident, and watchfull, so naturally sensible of Honour, and of their own Interest, should either be impos'd upon, or drawn by whatsoever motives to consent to the Destruction of their very Constitution, there being no stronger Passion, or more binding Cement, than that of self-preservation. And yet the preparation of the Two Houses for the bringing forth a Law, does but form the Materi∣als, that they may be presented to the Royal Assent to to give them the form and life; who as the common Father of the Countrey will judg▪ of all Bills, whether they are the Products of Passion, or Faction, and so they either live, or are still-born.
When all Laws are therefore thus winnow'd, and sifted through these several Explorations of Persons sup∣pos'd to have all manner of Talents for judging, and the quickest Resentments of their own Interest, and Con∣cernment whether as the Lower, or Higher Body of a Nation, whether Civil, or Ecclesiastick, and then shall all meet in the common Head, who sees, and feels for the whole, it is very adventurous to impute such En∣actions to the Faction, or Passion of a Parliament. See∣ing this must needs be the firmest Foundation humane Affairs can be entrusted to in this World, viz. the Law of self preservation ballanc'd by King, Lords, and Com∣mons, e're any thing becomes a Law. And although, it is true, the influence of the Supreme Prince, the Genius, and Temper of an Age, or particular Inclination of Times, the Configuration of various Co-incidents may prepon∣derate to the worse, in some Laws, yet there must be submission to suffering, even when Conscience, or Reason countersways that which we call Active Obedi∣ence to such Laws; or all Government must be unhinged, and fall. And seeing it is acknowledg'd there may be a For∣feiture by Treason of the Rights of Peerage, and that it hath been in the Power of Parliaments to declare the nature and kinds of Treason, there is, nor can be grea∣ter danger to the Peerage in trusting themselves with the Suspension of one Branch of their Right than, in trusting themselves with the whole of those Rights: and it is very rare, that humane Nature (specially such sapient and honourable part of it) conspire with a Faction, or Passion against themselves, or receive a precedent srom a partial Infringment of their Rights to destructi∣on of the whole; seeing, if so great an Estate hath over∣seen in a lesser concern, it is to be concluded, it will be the
more jealous after, and where the whole is in danger; and so there is no more consequence from the Precedent of the Test-Law (which is either unawares, or by the sorce of Truth, or of meer Grace, it being unlike the rest of this Discourse, granted by the Reverend Authour to have been usefull in its season) than from a necessary and prudent opening a vein to conclude the Person that consents to the one, will therefore consent to the let∣ting out the whole Mass of Blood. And lastly after all that hath been said; the Instances this Authour gives of the first Transubstanti∣ation-Test, and the Protestation, or Test of Loyalty in which the priviledge of Peerage was so carefully provi∣ded for against injury by either of those Tests, do ra∣ther strengthen than weaken what hath been insisted on; for it confirms, how quick of apprehension the House of Peers have always been in that point, and therefore they would not suffer their own Peerage to fall under any Eclipse, sooner than they found abso∣lute necessity, and such a good arising, as would com∣pensate any so much, as Parenthesis of the full Beams of that Glory on any of their Members, and so that it should be no more than a Parenthesis; till such Mem∣bers mov'd themselves to such a position, that no part of their Orb of Honour should be unenlighten'd. But in the other Test they seeing no Reason sor the shortest Suspension on Accounts of Loyalty, sufficiently otherwise secur'd, lest there should arise a Custom of trapaning Peers out of their Rights, some Noble Perso∣nages resolv'd to Stem that Tide; even as in the wise Administration of what pertains to health, extraordinary methods may be resolv'd against; but when indeed for∣midable Symptoms appear, such resolutions may be rescinded; and so without any Dishonour but great Ho∣nour,
the Peers who entred Protestations against such superfluous Tests, as were projected to ensnare and ob∣tein upon them standing Orders of the House against any such Tests, and yet might upon pressing vehement urgencies, see it necessary for the safety of the whole Body of the Peerage to have such a Test as might bring some of their Members under a Suspension, till they gave Hostages of their not sufsering such persuasions to have the ascendent of them, as might be destructive to a Protestant Nobility in all appearance much the Major part; whereas in the case of the designed Protestation, the lesser part were probably understood to have de∣sign'd by Degrees to have disinherison'd through such Artificesthe greater Number, of which some Lords more sagacious, being aware, entred their Protestation to awa∣ken others equally concern'd, though not so foreseeing, and whose foresight gain'd upon the rest. And seeing no such Protestation was entred in the case of the last Transubstantiation-Test, it assures the evidence of the reasonableness of it, overweigh'd the very attempt: And so I take leave of the First Reason, which I have more diligently attended in all its moments of appearance, because it is urg'd not only by this Authour, but by the generality of the zealous for removing the Test-Act. And it issues into this most equitable Maxim of Govern∣ment; That the major part of each particular Body Poli∣tick in a Nation must judg, even as particular Persons do, what is best for the whole. And the House of Peers being Judg for it self, and most tender of it self; and the King, the Father and Fountain of Honour, having advi∣sed with them, and given life to a Law for the Suspensi∣on of the Rights of those Peers who neglect to take the Test; this Law can by no means shake the general Rights of Peerage, or so much as destroy, but onely
suspends the Right of particular Peers, till they yield obedience to that Law, which acknowledging their Right expects it from them, and hastens them to a compliance with it self. And this will proportionably flow down upon all parts, and Persons concern'd in the Test-Act. If the major part of each distinct Body of Men in a Nation shall not by their Representatives freely chosen, or by the whole Body it self summon'd to Parliament upon the Right of their Peerage, conclude the whole, by their most duely weigh'd, and considered Acts, presented to the Supreme Power, and impress'd by him, there can be no possible Rest, Quiet, or Determination of humane Affairs in any rational way, or method: And all this being of that nature, and so cautiously suspending, or preseerving, as in Abeyance, and not ex∣tinguishing any Right, it can never be said to destroy, nor so much as to submit to a Precarious Title, Facti∣on, or Passion of Parliament, (Words most injurious to the very Nature of Parliaments.) Any Right, much less the Right of Peerage, as being a Right of Blood and of Inheritance. I come therefore to the Bishops Second Reason. Secondly it ought to be repealed, because of its dishonourable Birth, and Original;Reas. 2. it being the first Born of Oates his Plot, and brought forth on purpose to give Credit and Reputation to the Perjury. How far the Wisedom of the Nation in Parliament shall concern it self for the Honour of both the Nation, and its Parliaments to give Reputation to the Cross Wounds it may seem to have receiv'd in that unhap∣py Assair, I will not be so bold as to pry; it being an Ark of State that hath its Secrets, and sacred Retire∣ments,
nor at all wade in so invidious a matter; but wholly wave the Paragraph, in which it is handled; onely I will consider how far a dishonourable occasion may give Birth to a Law, and the Law it self still remain in honour; and then remark upon the Little Interest the (as the Bishop calls it) Otesian Plot may have in the Test-Act. As to the Test, all Laws have this dishonour in their Original (if we might allow things of that Class, or Rank to be Originals;) to have such respect to the degene∣racy of humane Nature, that the Apostle hath said; The Law is not made for a Righteous Man but for the Lawless; and it is a known Maxime; Ex malis moribus bonae nas∣cuntur Leges. Out of such manners as cou'd ne'r be said To have been good, good Laws have yet been made: Sic verè vertit — For grant the Birth be base; don't Comets rise From Fogs and Vapours, 'fore they shine in Skies? And acts amazing by a Pesant's Son, As by a Prince's, ha ve they not been done? If so, SA. OXON is (SAI not the TEST is) gone. — Sic justè judicat EHMAMP ARTNOCAS. Aliàs DRAWDE REVEROFMADA. Laws therefore are to be weigh'd by the serviceable∣ness, and use they are of to the main Ends of Vertue, Righteous ness and Peace, and not by the foulness of their occasional Originals. And therefore they have indeed a much higher Original, if wise, vertuous and good Laws; and claim their descent from the exemplar-Wisedom a nd Goodness, and that Eternal Law of Rea∣son, Truth and Equity, which can never be stain'd, or
embas'd by the particular occasions, upon which they are Enacted, which give Being to them no otherwise, than as those Divine Emanations exert and direct them∣selves against those contrary Evils and Vices which they Forbid and Punish: so that the Birth, or Original of this Law is not to be inquir'd into (suppose it Oats's Plot) so low as Oats's Plot, but as the Peace and Safety of a Community is provided for by it; which is as the Arteria Magna, in that universal Law of Righteousness, as it concerns Humane Affairs, and as it is calculated for the Support and Security of the National Religion, against the Vsurpation of a Foreign Jurisdiction, a nobler part, than that any thing else can come in Competition with it. It is then a very petty thing to weigh the goodness of a Law by the next occasion of it; and a manifest Blunder upon a Non Cause for the True Cause, to confound an Occasion and an Original together. Let us then consider in the next place, what Interest the (so styl'd) Otesian Plot hath in this Law: For if in effect it should prove the First-Born of that Plot, the Beginning, and Excellence of its strength, and that it hath not a more Excellent Soul, and Spirit, descending from Above; it might be in danger to be Condemn'd to the same Fate. But whoever considers the Test it self, will not find the least Cognation, or Relation it hath to that Plot, nor that any Lineaments, or Strokes of it en∣ter into its Composition: so that however it might re∣ceive occasion from it, yet the Essentials of it are such Sentiments, as the Nation hath had for above the last hundred of years, and that it hath upon greatest Judg∣ment, Reason and Experience confirm'd it self in: and according to several Emergencies added to its securities by Law upon Law, against the Regurgitations of that usurpation upon it; not barely because of such Emer∣gencies,
but because of that Grand Reason, the very Essence of Popery hath given it: whether therefore the particular Emergent hath had Dimensions Long and Broad enough for the particular Laws and Constitutions which have been made, was not so much consider'd: But the whole Nature of the Evil Fear'd, and provided against, being large enough to support such Acts, it hath given Reason to all such provisions; and that was the danger of the Roman Religion Resettling and Re∣instating it self in a Protestant Nation, as the English Na∣tion is and hath been for so great a space. Thus this Last Act for the Test, setting before it only that so Full and Comprehensive Consideration of the Increase and Danger of Popery in this Nation, to which the former good Laws had proved Ineffectual, does therefore so Enact as that Act expresses. In all which there is not the least Reference to the so much Infam'd Plot, nor any Line looking toward it: Till therefore there be a change in the very Essen∣tial Nature of Popery, and a perfect Nullity of all the Fears arising from it made evident, there must be This, or That particular Accidental Cause quickning the Le∣gislative Power of the Nation to branch out it self into more and more, and further and further particular Laws, that may more effectually reach the intended Point, and be new in the Particulars; observing where former Provisions were deficient and inefficacious: which new Laws are not to be charged upon the lesser Accidental Causes, but on the Irreconcileableness of Popery, and its Growth to the peace and welfare of a Protestant Nation. And so I have finished what I think necessary upon the Bishop's Second Reason, to shew how Inconcluding it is for the Abrogating of the Test.
I proceed now to the Third Reason. The Test ought to be repeal'd, because of the incompetent Authority,Reas. 3. by which it was enacted, for it is a Law of an Eccle∣siastick Nature, made without the Authority of the Church, contrary to the Practice of the Christian World in all Ages, &c. 1. This Reason rests upon these two Principal Pillars, that the Power of making Decrees concerning Divine Verities, is a Legislative Power, given as the highest Act of Government by Christ's Commission, to the Officers of his own Kingdom, upon which the whole Fabrick of the Christian Church hath hitherto stood, and is to stand to the End of the World, and with∣out which, it must run into confusion; and that to entrench upon this Prerogative of the Holy Catholick Church, is to depose Christ from his Throne, by dis∣owning, neglecting, and affronting his Commission to his Catholick Church; so that this Power cannot be usurped without Sacriledge, and Blasphemy, and such a daring Invasion of Christ's Kingdom, as that nothing more imports Christian Kings and Gover∣nours, than to be wary and cautious, how they lay hands upon it. 2. That the Bishops sitting in the House of Lords, and (to their shame) consenting to this Law, is not sufficient to make this Law an Act of Church Autho∣rity; because it ought to have been first decreed by their own proper Authority, without any Lay Con∣currence and then to have come into Parliament, and as they judged sit, to have been abetted with Tempo∣ral Penalties, a Practice never violated, but by Aposlates, and Rebel Parliaments. And lastly because
Particular Bishops sit not in Parliament by Power deriv'd from our Blessed Saviour, but by the meer Grace and Favour of the King, so that the exercising any Eccle∣siastical Authority in that place is scandalously to be∣tray, as much as in them lies, the very being of a Christian Church, and profanely to pawn the Bishop to the Lord; and lastly because the Ecclesiastical Power is by the Law of England setled in Convoca∣tion, and therefore to enact any thing of an Ecclesi∣astical Nature without their consent is to betray the Rights of the Church of England, as by Law establish∣ed in particular, as well as of the Church Catholick in general. But as a Check and Limitation to all this, the E∣piscopal Authour interposes; the Civil Power may re∣strain the Exercise of this Ecclesiastical Prerogative, as they shall judge meet for the Ends of Peace, and the Interest of the Common Wealth, and punish it too at their own discretion, if it shall at any time entrench upon the Power of the State, and it may prevent, or correct Abuses. I have thus collected the strength of this whole Rea∣son without omitting any thing, I could think material; I have also subjoyn'd the Limitation, that it may be of the use the Authour design'd it, and may also be consi∣der'd in its place to our purpose. There are three Expressions, I desire in modesty and reverence to this R. R. Authour to draw a Veil over. 1. That Parenthetic (to their shame) viz. the Bishop's shame, who consented to the Test-Law, because it seems so much to confine on speaking Evil of Dignities; and for the same Reason, 2ly. upon that, (Except by Apostates, and Rebel-Parliaments,) as also because I would not know the di∣rect meaning of those words, but go backward to cast a covering over them. 3. On those words, I draw the
Curtain; (profanely pawn the Bishop to the Lord) lest they seem rather, fit to be retyr'd among the Bishops Ludicra. But to the main purport, and stress of the Argument I shall undertake to rejoyn these Assertions. 1. That there is no such Legislative Power given by Commission from Christ to his Church, or made the Foundation of it. 2. That all such Pretensions of Church-Power drawn from the Practice of the Christian Church, are very invalid. 3. That the Law of the Test is not a Law of an Eccle∣siastick Nature. 4. And if it were, the Church of England hath done enough in Convocation, and other Church-Acts to sup∣port it. 5. That the Presence of the Bishops in Parliament not protesting against it, are sufficient proof of the two last Assertions. 6. That according to the Bishop's own Limitation of Church-Power; it must remain a good, and necessary Law, and for which the Parliament had Competent Authority. I begin with the first. 1. That there is no such Legislative Power,Assert. 1. given by Commission from Christ to his Church, or made the Foun∣dation of it, which may be demonstrated in this manner. This Legislative Power of the Church is most contrary to that Holy Book, from whence we derive our Christian Sacred Religion, and to the soundest Reason guided by that; for by that there is, nor can be any Legislative Power in matters of Divine Verity but what is immedi∣ately from Heaven, either by voice from thence, or by the Ministery of Angels, or by immediate Inspiration given to Holy Men, Prophets and Apostles, and consign∣ed
by them into the Holy Writings we call Scriptures. All which after-Revelations are to be tryed, and Tested by their compare with, and Agreement to former Reve∣lations, as is most manifest in all parts of Scripture; and by the constant, and continual Appeal of the Old Testa∣ment to the New: So that this prerogativ'd, Legislative Church, that is pleaded into so high and rampant a Pow∣er, that All-seeming wavings of its Authority must be an Invasion of Christ's Kingdom, a Deposing of Him, an affron∣ting his Commission, smells strong of the Pride, and Am∣bition of that City, which, first, as a City, and then as a Church hath always aspir'd, to have a Kingdom over the Kings of the Earth; as also of the Luciferian Ascent of the Beast; that carries it, with and upon which, I doubt not, the Sacriledge, and Blasphemy will be found: Who exalts himself above all that is called God, or worshipped, who sitteth in the Temple of God, shewing Himself that he is God. But to us, there is but one Law-giver, who is able to save and to destroy. One Father, who is in Heaven; One Master, who is Christ, and all we are Brethren; One Le∣gislative-Lord; and the chiefest in his Church are Ser∣vants, Ministring his Word in the Scriptures, the onely law of Divine verities. And therefore in this Preroga∣tive-sense, dare not receive the title of Masters, or Fa∣thers; nor can those who receive the Law of Christ, made evident from the Scriptures to be his Law, by their Ministry, upon such Ministration yield them therefore the Names of Masters, or Fathers in a Legislative sense. For they know, they ought to Preach Christ the Lord; and themselves onely Servants for Christ's sake, that they have no Dominion over the Faith of Christians, (who are however called the Laity, yet are Christ's Clerus,) but on∣ly are Ensamples of the Flock who attends the motion of the Chief Shepherd, the Lamb, Christ Jesus, whithersoever he goes, and will not follow Strangers.
Princes, and States by Light offer'd them by the Mi∣nisterial labours, and services of the Bishops, and Elders of the Church, who labour in the word, and Doctrine are to direct their Power according to that Light they re∣ceive by such Ministrations, but together, and not with∣out their own search, into Scriptures, and constant me∣ditation therein. And the People are to obey in Agreement with that Law, and word of Christ; which they are to know for themselves in that Light diffus'd by the preaching of the word to them in season and out of season, which, I say, they are to know for themselves, and not others for them, by the deep research of their own minds into Scripture, to see whether those things are so, or not. For wisedom hath written to them, even to them, as may be seen by all the Epistles of the Apostles; that they might know the certain∣ty of the words of truth, and have their trust in the Lord, and not an Implicit Faith in Men, and might be able by Apologies for the hope that is in them, to answer the words of Truth to those, who send to them either in a way of ad∣vice, or challenge. Whatever is contrary to this undoubted evidence of the Word of God, and sound Reason, seeing every one must give an account of himself to God, as well as those, who are set over them, who by faithfull Offers of Truth discharge themselves, whatever, I say, is so propos'd, as by a Catho∣lick Church, and its prerogative, I affirm savours of that in∣toxicating Cup of Abominations in the hand of that Sorce∣ress, that calls her self the Mistress of Churches, and would Sit the Lady of the Christian World, and of the power that bears it, who under pretence of the Kingdom of Christ un∣dermines it, and hath, in the unsearchable Judgment of God delay'd, thus long its appearance to all the World; and is the Baalam lofty Prophet of that Romish Perga∣mus.
2. The pretended practice of the Church of God in all Ages, can give no presidency in this Case, be∣yond what is thus asserted; For in the times of the Old Testament, Religious Princes, did by the general advice, and Doctrine of the Prophets, and of those Priests who kept their Faith to the Law of God, themselves govern, and reform according to that of which each King was to have a Copy Written by himself, which was to be with him, and he was to read it all the days of his Life. That he might Learn to fear the Lord his God,Deut. 17. and to keep his Laws. And whereas in that precedent Law, enquiry of the Priest in the place God should choose, was commended; it plain∣ly insinuates, the divine Responses, God gave at that time by the Vrim, and Thummim, immediately from himself were intended, but yet all was to be founded in the Writ∣ten Law, there all was to be shown, and from thence to be learnt, or not to be receiv'd, no not under a power of seeming Miiracles, Deut. 12. In the first times of Christianity, for three hundred years, there were no Christian Magistrates, who would wait for the Churches Oracle's. But for the Determina∣tion of the Church without a Lay-Concurrence, it is most apparently opposite to that grand instance of the first Council, wherein the people (if any) distinguishingly styl'd the Church; and who made most manifestly one of the Estates, (if I may so express it) in the whole Conciliary management; The Apostles, the Elders, the Brethren; and the whole Consultation, and Determi∣nation mov'd upon the Poles of express Scripture, as will be most visible to any enquirer into those Conciliary Acts; For he that runs may read, Acts 15. In the days of that first and most Religious Empe∣rour Constantine, although he, as all pious Princes, and Christians would, receiv'd light from the Ministers of
sacred truth, yet so that he us'd his own Judgment to∣gether with it; deploring the weaknesses he observ'd among these who seem'd to be pillars of light, but yet it must be acknowledg'd, that that Apostasie, the Myste∣ry of iniquity, that began to work in the Apostles days was well grown up, and advanc'd, and a Legislative Church was Towring up its Power in the Christian World at that very time. But it is undoubted, There is nothing so Ancient, as Divine Truth in the Law, and in the Testimony, con∣senting with that Law of Reason Engraven in man's Heart, and to these we must goe; Fot whatsoever speaks not according to these, there is no Morning to it, nor from it; but a Night, even to a Midnight, ensues upon it, what Antiquity soever it pretends to. 3. That I may yet give a more direct Answer to this Reason, the Test-Act is not a Law of an Ecclesia∣stick Nature; For it is onely an Exploration, and Touch upon Persons, whether they are Romanists, or not: it is no Canonical Determination of the Point of Transubstantiation, it binds no Decree with a Spiritual, or Ecclesiastick Anathema, or Excommunication; which are of the Essence of Ecclesiastick Laws, as they have been always Solemniz'd, and Ratified in the Christian-Antichristianizing World upon light occasions. But this Test presumes Two Things, suppos'd be∣fore to be sufficiently certain. 1. That no Romanist will deny his Transubstantiation, nor consent, that his Invocation of the Virgin Mary, and of other Saints, and that the Sacrifice of the Mass is Superstitious, and Idolatrous. The Test does not determine, nor pretend Canonically to Define of these Things: it onely propo∣ses this, as a certain Discovery of the Votaries of a Fo∣reign Church; nor does it mind to decide the Truth of those Matters: It is enough to it, to know, who do, or
who do not assent to their presumed Truth, and there∣by to discover Men, not to Decree points of Faith. 2. Nor is it Ecclesiastick, but purely Civil, and per∣taining to the State onely, whom it will judg safe to commit the Affairs of this Nation unto, and into what Hands to entrust its Interests; and having by more than a hundred years experience, deemed it not safe for a Protestant Nation to be overgrown by a Papal Power, it hath thus Resolved, and Enacted; not at that Time enquiring after the Truth of the Things, concern'd in the Test: but satisfied with the Assurance, that a Ro∣man Catholick (as he is call'd) will not assent to them, as they are there laid. Which are here onely taken notice of, as matters of State; and their Doctrinal Truth it supposes elsewhere to have been sufficiently Ascertain'd, as shall be afterward consider'd. 4. For indeed the Church of England hath both in Con∣vocation, in continual printed manifestations of its sense, in daily preachings, and ministrations of the Truth of the word of God, abundantly, and beyond all Controversie open'd, explained, and asserted concerning these things out of and according to Scripture, so that not in a Humane Light, or Determination, but in the very Beams of Scripture, and Divine Truth, which are plainly to be seen streaming from the fountain of light the word of God, there is warranty enough without any Invasion upon Christ's Kingdom, or the Rights of the Officers of it, (supposing them what we can suppose rhem) for a Parliament safely to proceed as it did; supported by as many Assurances, as it could desire; that if the Lips of the Ministry of the Church of England preserv'd knowledge, and that the Law was to be enquired at its mouth; the Resolution of that Church, in all those cases, was sufficiently known, and no injury could be done to it.
5. Of this the presence of the Bishops in Parliament, not Remonstrating, nor Protesting against this Law, his consenting (however the Author judges it to their shame) are security enough: That they understood the Test-Law to be no Invasion of the Rights of the Church, but according to the whole Doctrine and Government of it, as by Law established. For seeing, as hath been before argued, every Body, nor Estate of Men in Parliament knew so quick and feelingly for themselves, and specially such a Body as the Episco∣pacy of a Nation; it can never be suppos'd they would, as by a common Conspiracy, agree to betray their own Rights and Priviledges, having at hand always that free∣dom of entring their Protestations of Dissent. So that although it is acknowledg'd, they sit in Parliament by the Grace of the King, and by the Constitution of English Par∣liaments, and not by Power deriv'd from Christ, nor as a Convocation according to the Laws of England in that case; yet it is always to be forethought that they sit with their Understandings, with their Consciences, with their Sen∣ses, with their Sentiments of Self-preservation about them: and that therefore they would not be Felones de se, by consenting to the Destruction of their noblest Rights; and on account of which, they are judg'd worthy to sit as an Estate, and to vote in Parliament, viz. as Bishops of the Church of Jesus Christ. 6. But lastly, it can never be understood, but that according to the Bishops own limitation, (if that be the Standard) of Church-Power and Praerogative, or his set∣ting up another Power and Praerogative to mute it, the Par∣liament have well done in this Test-Law. For seeing the Civil Power may restrain the Exerise of Ecclesiastical Praerogative, as they shall judg meet for the ends of Peace, and the Interest of the Commonwealth,
and may punish it too, at their own discretion, if it shall at any time intrench upon the Prerogative of the State, and that it may praevent or correct Abuses; who can deter∣mine, whether the States have not done according to what they might and ought to do, in preventing and correcting Abuses: For if they may prevent and correct Abuses, they must be able to judg of them; they must determine when they ly, they must judge also of the best means to prevent them. And what more lyable to such judgment of Abuses, and to undergo the best and most effectual methods of Praevention, than the things to be declar'd against in the Test; as shall be manifestly prov'd in the following Reason. And seeing that upon these very accounts it is notorious, that even in this Na∣tion Church Power and Prerogative hath swoln beyond all bounds, and entrench'd with a vengeance upon the Power of the State, why then may not the State continue the correction and punishment of it by After-Acts (seeing the Bishop allows these punishments at their own discretion) and restrain and lock down men? Certainly all the Ave∣nues to such an Exercise and Notions again of that Power, that they hav found in all Ages so destructive to the Peace and Interest of the Commonwealth. And here I cannot but reflect upon the strange Irre∣concileableness of the Bishop's Church-Prerogative, and of the Civil Power, as he hath stated it. For that such a Seeing Judging Prerogative and Legislative Power, that can alter, make Decrees concerning Divine Verities, should not know how to keep within its own bounds, nor so to learn its Power, but that it must be restrain'd for the Ends of Peace, and the Interest of the Commonwealth, and be pu∣nish'd too at discretion for its aptness to praesume, and to intrench upon the Power of the State; nay, and beyond all this, to be so extravagant, that its Abuses may have need to be praevented and corrected.
Who can imagine, Jesus Christ should be so nearly concern'd in such a Prerogative and Legislative Power, as to be disown'd, neglected, affronted, if that he be Christ risen, and that the usurpation of it should lie so near Sacri∣ledge and Blasphemy, as that his Kingdom should be inva∣ded, and Himself deposed? and on such an account, that it should be such a Seeing and Holy Catholick Church; and yet that this Civil Power that is suppos'd to know so little in Divine Verities, may bind its hands, punish, prae∣vent, correct its Abuses. What must Christ, so closely im∣portuned in it, suffer in the mean time? What kind of Kingdom and Power is here allow'd in the mean time? What Governour would accept such a Power as this of Christ's? or how can the King of Kings, Lord of Lords, Prince of the Kings of the Earth, be such an Underling? Certainly this is is a precarious Power, with a witness: Surely in this state of things, there must be a most profane pawning the Bishop indeed to the Lord, or how can ever one Firmament bear two such Suns, or the Consci∣ences of Man ever be at rest between them both? or serv two such Masters? They must adhaere to one, and despise the other; But since the Bishop must be Reverenced as a man of Sense and Reason, certenly it cannot be the Roman Ho∣ly Catholic Church, that may be thus treated by the Civil Power; nor is it any Protestant Civil Prince, or State that hath these Powers, but only a Caesar, or State of the Roman Character, Image, and Superscription hath this Power, and only on Protestant Churches under their dominion. And so I pass with the Fatigue of this confounding, per∣plexing Reason, and com to the last but longest Reason, which I shall yet but in brief consider. The fourth Reason for which the Test-Act ought to be repealed, is, because of the uncertainty and falshood of the matters contained in the Declaration it self, as,
First, That there is no Transubstantiation in the Sacra∣ment of our Saviour's Body and Blood. And Secondly, That the Invocation of Saints, and of the Mother of God, is Idolatrie. This reason so plainly divided by the Bishop into its two parts, that of Transubstantiation, and that of Invocati∣on of Saints, and of the Mother of God, must be distinct∣ly considered. But before I proceed upon either of them, I must needs object, That this Test is not fairly quoted, for in so great a concern every word ought to have its due place, and no pretence of keeping the substance, will justifie the variation of an Iota from the very Letter, except my apprehension exceedingly deceive me: the Sence is much more injured, than the Letter is varied: Indeed the Author hath been so fair, as to prefix the Text of the Act, that his unfair Repetition may be convinced by it; but the unwary, or unthinking Reader, may easily slide into Errour by it, one being in the Title-page, where it may miss being considered, the other in the body of the Book. Observ then the difference betwixt the Text of the Test and the Bishop's Quotation; the Test runs thus: I believe there is no, &c. The Bishop quotes as a proposition, There is no▪ &c. It may be a much more uncertain propositi∣on, and more liable to falshood, to asfirm, there is no Tran∣substantiation in the Sacrament of our Saviour's Body and Blood, than so say, I do believe, There is none; and so proportionably, I believe, is to be supplied to the second member of the Declaration, viz. And I believe, that the Invocation or Adoration of, &c. Now although, I make no doubt, that every Christian ought to be fully assured of the propositions themselves, to be declared in the Test; yet, plain and down-right Do∣ctrinal Propositions are not the proper subjects of solemn
sincere Profession, Testification, and Declaration in the pre∣sence of God. But such solemn sincere Professions, Testifications, and De∣clarations, properly fall upon the belief of a man's mind; which he knows, and hath judgment of, as a rational man, becaus they are within him; for the Apostle tells us, The spirit of a man knows the things that are within him. So that a man's belief, that is within him, may be wel declared and testified, even as all matters of sence and of trust? and becaus they are within him▪ known onely to himself; There are therefore many just occasions to de∣clare and testifie it to others: Of which the denial of law∣ful Authority, as a Qualification for Places of Trust and Power, are justly to be accounted among the princi∣pal. And this very observation, (as it is plain, and grounded on undeniable evidence by a compute of the words of the Test, set down by the Bishop himself, in the Title-page, and Fourth Reason, page 9.) does indeed make vain, frivo∣lous, and of no possible avail, or so much as significancie. All that follows, as to the Test, which is the thing in quae∣stion, and under debate, and brings it into this narrow compass, Whether persons so devoted to the Faith of the Church of Rome, may for the ends of Peace, and the Inte∣rest of a Protestant Common-wealth, be secluded from Pow∣er, and trust by the consent of the major part of their own particular Bodies, and of each other Body, or Estate of the Nation, and the Supreme Prince assenting, in so conside∣rable and solemn an Act, as an Act of Parliament must needs be; which hath been already discours'd. For which soever side of the Propositions should be true, yet stil, what a man within himself believes, he truly knows, and truly may declare and testifie: And the business of the Test is not to determine, as hath been said, which part of either of the Proposions is true; but what
belief each person admitted to Trust, and Power is of; that so the Nation, as Protestant, may consult its own safe∣ty against the growth of Popery into a National strength and interest, and further confirms all that hath been said, That it is no Ecclesiastic Act, but a pure perfect Magistra∣tic Act, as the Administring an Oath in all other cases concerning the Trust of matters of Faith is. So that the affirming, that those two Propositions are by this Law to be solemnly and sincerely in the Praesence of God, Protested, Testified and Declared, is a down-right un∣faithfulness (not to say, out of reverence to the Author, Falshood) in the very sight of the Sun, in the sight, if I may so speak, of the Frontispiece of the Book; which Title-Page gives of necessity the Lye to this Ninth page; and is enough to discredit, and to call into just suspicion, the badness of the whole Cause, that is so insincerely handled by a person of such a Character of Dignity, and Sacredness of Office, as a Christian Bishop, who ought to do so much otherwise. But this is not all the unfaithfulness of the Episcopal Author, in recounting the Test, he is arguing against; for whereas the Declaration in the Act runs thus: I believe, that in the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, there is not any Transubstantiation of the Elements of the Bread and Wine into the Body and Blood of Christ, &c. The Bi∣shop represents his Proposition thus: That there is no Transubstantiation in the Sacraments of our Saviour's Bo∣dy and Blood. Now it is easie for every person, that does but in the lest apply his mind to it, to perceive, that the Test leaves it free to every person to frame any My∣stical, Spiritual, Analogical, Figurative sense in his own thoughts concerning Transubstantiation; and which may sufficiently satisfie and exhaust the sense of more than most words of the Greek Fathers import, for it is obser∣vabl,
they have no word strictly Greek, for Transubstanti∣on. And onely foreprize's that so monstrous contradiction to all our Faculties, is the Transubstantiation of the Ele∣ments into the Body and Blood of Christ. And whereas the Test runs thus: And that the Invoca∣tion and Adoration of the Virgin Marie, or any other Saint, and the Sacrifice of the Mass, as they are now used in the Church of Rome, are Superstitious and Idolatrouus. The Bishop thus: That the Invocation of the Mother of God, and of Saints, is Idolatrous. Leaving out Adorati∣on, and as in the Church of Rome, and for Superstitious and Idolatrous, putting in the word, is Idolatrous. But al∣though greater exactness in this Proposition, had been more becoming; yet, I must confess in my own sense, the Amount is the same. These things being thus adjusted, how empty of sound Sense and Reason must that Tragical Ha∣rangue, that follows, be in; of the Monstrousness, and Inhumaneness of the Barbarity, that could never have entred into the Thoughts of any Man, but the Infa∣mous Author, to oblige the whole Nobility of a Nation, to swear to the Truth of such abstruse and uncertain Pro∣positions, which they neither Do, nor Can, nor Ought to understand; and this upon the Penalty of forfeiting the Priviledges of their Birth-right. Of the same Nature is, That which comes after, for what immediately follows, I will be, as uncer∣tain in, as the Argument it self is, as also in the two Fa∣mous Burgesses of Oxon. But those Words, (viz. what is meant by Transub∣stantiation is altogether unknown to the Nobility, and Gentry of the Nation, being onely the Wars between School-men, who have quarrelled about nothing more, than the Notion of Transubstantiation: And that there∣fore,
it is more uncapable to impose upon the Nobility, and Gentry of the Nation, to Abjure a thing that is mo∣rally impossibl for them to understand; and therefore it must be a profane Affront to Almighty God in whose Presence they Swear, and shews men will Swear to any thing before the Searcher of Hearts, rather than lose any Worldly interest) are to be cast into the main Heap. Together with all this, an Appeal is subjoyn'd to the Honourable Members of both Houses, whether they have any distinct Idea, or Notion in their minds, about what they Renounce; and that if every man gave his own ac∣count of Transubstantiation, it would be a Babel▪ This is what is declaim'd with relation to the first Pro∣position, on which Fallacie the Historical Account of Tran∣substantiation, design'd certainly on purpose to amuse, for it doth not add one Cubit to the Stature of the Argument, above, and beyond what is here summ'd up. Taking therefore the words of the Test, as they stand in the Test it self; I will sum up the Answer in these two Heads. I. That all the Abstruseness, Darkness, and difficultie in the Notion of Transubstantiation, and this Bishop's amusing Historie of it, doth not in the lest prejudice the reasonableness of the Test, but make it more rea∣sonable. II. That the very Point of Transubstantiation is the most reasonabl of all others, to settle the Test upon, and the more reasonable, because of the difficultie of that Notion. 1. Let the first be consider'd with Relation to the most Unknowing, and Uninquiring Men of all, who can be suppos'd to be concern'd in the taking the Test. And af∣ter
the word made common English to them, which very ordinary use does to most Men in the Nation, much more to any likely to be concern'd, whether they can sound the Word, or hammer the Notion or not, is not materi∣al; For still, what is more easy then to declare their Be∣lief according to their Senses; and that the Bread and Wine that they see before the Words of Consecration, and in which they are agreedly not mistaken, are the same Bread, and Wine after Consecration. Who would be a∣fraid to Declare, and Profess, they Believe it so? and that it is unchang'd, Vntransubstantiated into the Flesh, and Bloud of a Human Body. Let a Man be Unpreju∣dic'd, Unprepossess'd, and what the least Shade of Doubt could fall upon him in this Matter? Call in Thousands together, to observe the Progress from the beginning to the end of the Celebration; And would they not consent upon Oath, that they fully believed there was no such Transubstantiation? Let but their minds be free, undi∣sturb'd, unperplex'd, and the whole world of Touch, of Taste, of Sight, of Smell, of Hearing (so far as hearing can have interest in the trial) would be at perfect agree∣ment concerning it, their minds and understandings judg∣ing by the senses alike in all. Let such persons hear there are many Disputes, and much variety of Opinions concerning it; and how little would it affect them, except with wonder at the folly and madness of any difference? And let them know, some of the wisest and most learn∣ed men in the World, are of their Opinion, or rather of their Knowledge, by their senses, although there are others of a contrary Opinion, men of Name too for Knowledg and Learning; and it is easie to know whose minds they would be of, viz. of theirs whose Learning and Senses go together.
Thus let the thing be brought within the Verge of Scripture-judgment, and upon that so very controverted; This is my body, and discussed before the most plain and in∣artificial apprehensions; and let the general manner of Scri∣pture expressing it self oft in familiar Figures be laid be∣fore them: They would easily conclude on the side of their Senses, and that Scripture intended no violence on their Faith, against their Senses, on the side of so incre∣dible a change of the Elements into a Humane Body. Nothing but the charms or inchantments rather of a false Religion, and the Sorcery of it, which are the things to be discover'd by the Test, the slavery of an implicit Faith, (except under the terror of a severe Persecution, for a contrary Perswasion) can endanger any mans falling in∣to such an unaccountable, wilful, professed blindness. The Test therefore requires not onely the easiest, most unperplexed Assent, Belief, and Declaration, but that which all Mankind with violence runs into (if not bewitcht with Superstition) upon the lest motive of apprehension about the matter. 2. If sense goes thus far with the plainest and most un∣thinking men, how much more doth Reason and rational Faith assure the thinking and intelligent? who not onely by Sense determine the Bread is Bread, and the Wine Wine; but know, it can be no other, and the whole circle of Absurds, that crowd in upon the change into the Body and Blood of Christ, that have been so often arang'd a∣gainst such a Figment, encompass them, that with highest reason and assurance, they can declare their Belief, as the Law of the Test requires them to do. Whatever then may be the various shapes this Proteus, or Camelion of Transubstantiation hath put on through∣out the long Historie of the Metamorphos'd Notion, what∣ever dress of Representation, the Eloquence of the Fa∣thers,
the Canon of the Ecclesiastics, or the Difficiles Nugae or the vain curiosities and subtilties of the School-men have Attyr'd it in; the sincere honest mind, and the intelli∣gent Christian, leaving all the cramping Difficulties of Transubstantiation to its Slaves, can declare freely with the Test, There is not any Transubstantiation of the Elements of Bread and Wine, in the Lord's Supper, into the Body and Blood of Christ. Whatever spiritual Communion there may be between Christ in his Death, and the true Believer, is most humbly in the mean time owned and prayed for: which is the first thing that was to be shewn. The second Head is, That the very point of Transub∣stantiation, is of all others the most reasonable to settle the Test upon, and the more reasonable in all regards, because of the so exceeding difficulty of the Notion. 1. What can a civil Power have greater indignation a∣gainst, or be more willing to settle upon, as an exclusive Test of all from places of Honour, Trust, and Power; than the being Vassals to such an Imposture as destroys all the Truth and Certainty that is in the World? Who can be believ'd upon Oath, (which the Apostle says is the end of all strife) if there be no more credit to sense, then that Bread may be a Humane Body, and Wine Blood, though it hath all the evidences to sense possible, it is what it judges it to be, and that is Bread? And what more heed can be given to Reason, if its main Foundations can be thus overturn'd, so that all the principles of Government, and humane Converse, are overthrown? What may not such Bigots be screwed into, who leave themselves naked of the defences of Sense and Reason, at the Command of a tyrannic Church, and Pope, and become meer Tools in such Hands? Who can concredit to them the Interest of their Country, who couch down like Asses under such a Burden, and especially for a Notion so dark and slippery,
that no one knows where to have it? And what would become of humane Commerce, if such Things multipli∣ed? 2. Upon Transubstantiation, the Test-Act doth most deservedly fall; because, when the foundations of gene∣ral Reason, and common Sense are laid, Religion, and the Reason, and Honour of that, as it is National, comes next to be consider'd? that it may bear up it self, and in∣vite both the People of the Nation, and even the Nations round about, to a just veneration of it: But Transubstan∣tiation being made the great, and most tremendous My∣stery of the Roman Religion, yet carrieth in the very judg∣ment of sense, the Countenance, mean, and appear∣ance of the most notorious Cheat, and Juggle, that the Name of Religion ever offered to the World; for there be∣ing a most contemptible, poor, and low outside onely, without the least of Power, or Puissance, or any the thin∣nest resemblance of a Miracle; demands a Belief of the Highest, and most constant Miracle, daily to be per∣formed by the most Profligate oftentimes, and most Ig∣norant of Mankind, and depending upon their Intention too, which may defeat the Miracle. All this dishonours the very Name of Christian Religion, and is so heavy, and intollerable a Gabel, Excise, and Tax upon the Religious Sense of Mankind, as must needs eat out the whole Life, Power, and Reverence of it. And therefore it is worthy the Notice, Prevention and Correction of so grand an Assembly, as the King, the Lords, Spiritual and Tem∣poral, and Commons of the Nation met in Parliament; and the Seclusion of all Persons from so sage and awful a Con∣vention, who are under so great a Slavery, as not to re∣nounce it: For as Moses testifies, The wife Laws of a Nation in Religion give it an Estimation of a Wise, Great, and Honourable Nation. If therefore a Parliament secures
the Rights and Properties of the Nation, from any Impo∣sitions upon their Estates, but with their own Consent: How justly may it doe the same against any Illegal Im∣positions upon their Faith? And whereas this Transubstantitaion is attempted to be brought into Parallel, and placed in the Rank of other great Mysteries of the Christian Religion, as of the Blessed Father, Son, and Spirit, One God, of the Hypostatical Vnion, and Incarnation of Jesus Christ, besides the Intrin∣sick difference of the one, and of the other: There is this vast distance, That those Supreme Revelations are Hea∣venly, Divine, retir'd in Meditation, Holy Rational Discourse, and Spiritual Adorations. But this of Tran∣substantiation, while it does nothing, offers nothing to Sense▪ to Reason, or so much as to Faith from Divine Revelation, but by Gross Letter, a Figurative, Spiritual Propositi∣on into condensating, pressing, and incrassating, it pre∣tends to a real Operation, or conversion of Bread into the Body without any such thing. But yet, as if such a thing were seen to be indeed done; Mercenary Priests play all the Tricks of Gesture, Posture, Elevation, Geniculation, with the whole Train of Attendant Frauds, too many to be mention'd, upon the Score of a dull coarse Cheat even in Handicraft, and Legerdemain in Mechanicks. All which Imposture is indeed, not onely Morally, but Naturally impossible ever to be understood. 3. It ought above all other Points in Popery, to be the Subject of a Test-Act, because it hath above all other Points of Popish Falshood, been made the Test of Vassa∣lage and Slavery, and as it were that very Mark of the Beast joyn'd with the Idolatrie of Adoration, and Image-Wor∣ship; and of the Receiving his Name, and Worshipping his Image, which all must receiv, or be kill'd; and none must buy or sell, that the Psuedo Spiritual Excommu∣nication
may be pursued with secular Anathema's upon all who will not bear this Cognisance of the Bestian Usur∣pation. In short, This hath been the central Point, from which, and into which have Flowed all the Cruelties, Persecutions, Massacres, deluges of Bloud that have been pour'd out: Bloud of Men, Women, and Children, Sa∣crific'd at this Altar, that have made it indeed an Altar of Bloud, an Altar where real Flesh and Bloud have been Offered, and to say, The Bread and Wine have been so Transubstantiated into the Body and Bloud of Martyrs, were much nearer Truth. Here have been the so-much unheard-of Barbarities and Inhumanities, that would make a Historie of Transubstantiation Truth, indeed, could it be had, worth th' having, to justifie the Test, and such a one, that certainly could never upon the Account of so blessed a Religion, and of a Sacrifice of such infinite Grace, as that of Jesus Christs Offering himself once for all for Mankind, have entred into the Heart of any Man; were it not that such a very detestable Bestial Power, that bears at this very time, and hath long born a Citie, or False Church, in which wil be found the Bloud of Pro∣phets, and Apostles, and that is Drunk with the Bloud of Saints, and of the Martyrs of Jesus, is made known unto us in the Revelation. Now all this is matter of known Historie, and of e∣vident Fact; How justly therefore is Power, and Trust, endeavour'd to be surprized by a Protestant Parliament, from such hands that dare not disown Principles so dou∣b le dyed in Bloud, on the account of which such But∣cheries, and Burnings of Men alive, have been commit∣ted; that the so mis-stil'd Barbaritie and Inhumanitie of the Test-Act compared herewith, is not only Mercie andHonor to the Persons concerned, but a Monument of greatest Equitie and Philanthropie or Love to Humane Nature,
to endeavour to extinguish out of the Nation the very Principles of so much Bloud-Guiltiness, and Bloud-Thirst, of the greater heinousness, becaus if the Bishop be to be credited in the Case, it was for not believing a Transubstantiation, which it was Morally impossible for those Martyrs to know, and such abstrusities which they neither did, nor could, nor indeed ought to understand. 4. To press and force a litteral Sense upon the Holy Scriptures Free Familiar Condescension to our Weakness, in expressing things of a high Spiritual Nature in such Language, as we in Humane Bodies most easily take things into our minds by, as in the Sacrament, the real Spiritual Union, and Communication of the Value, Vertue, and Efficacy of the Sacrifice of Christ Himself, and in the Union of, and Communion, and Communication of his Spirit to us, is express'd by eating his Body, and drinking his Bloud: Now I say, to force, a litteral Sense upon this, is such a piece of Rudeness, Barbaritie, and Ingrati∣tude, that if the same measure were meeted to all other parts of Scripture, would even in the Judgment of those very Men, who are either Atheists or Bigots in this matter, not only turn it into Horrible, and Abominable Burlesque, but even Martyr and Murther those two Witnesses, as some have expounded them Rev. 11.. To vindicate therefore, those Sacred Volumes, the Pandects of our most Holy Religion, from having to do with so mid-night, and Sphingian a Riddle, in so plain, and merciful an Institu∣tion, so humble, and even Domestic (in a spiritual Sense) as the Lord's Supper is; a Riddle, set on work to so much Cruelty and Bloud-shed, is worthy the Spirit of a truely Christian, and nobly English Senate, and to set the dan∣ger of its return into use, at the utmost impossibility, Humane Providence could attain, without the expectation of Miracle.
For what is meant by Transubstantiation, the Bishop himself says, is altogether unknown and uncertain, espe∣cially to the persons chiesly concern'd, viz. the Nobility and Gentry of the Nation; and which they neither do, can, nor ought to know: What obligation can they then have to believe it, except with such a blind Faith as all Religi∣on and Reason abhors? However, if they have no Faith concerning so fugitive a thing, that like a shadow, cannot be catch'd, or like the Phantom of a Body that hath no flesh and bones to be seen and felt, as all Bodies have, and as Christ, as it were prophetically, expos'd his Body to the Experi∣ment of, when it was really there, that no such Impo∣sture concerning it should be palm'd upon the World: I say, if the Nobility and Gentry have no Faith of such a thing, why may they not profess and declare, they do not believe it? For the Bishop seems either not to be awake, or to dis∣semble a slumber, that his Discourse of mens swearing to any thing, his Burlesque on the famous Burgesses of Oxon, and his Appeal to the Honourable Members concerning their Idea's of Transubstantiation, and the Babel thence a∣rising, [the whole Notion is indeed a Babalism, or per∣taining to Babylon the Great] had been very good, if the Test had requir'd them to declare their belief of such a Transubstantiation. But now his Arguments hunt coun∣ter, and impeach the Roman Tyranny of horrid Murthers upon persons, for not believing what they neither do, can, nor ought to know, what they can so hardly pronounce the sound of, much less hammer the sturdy sullen Notion it self: For who can know what there is no knowledge of? But what more innocent than to declare, when lawfully re∣quir'd, though before the Searcher of Hearts, a man does not believe what he cannot nor ought to know, nor so much as anvil a Notion of? If it were never so true,
real, knowable, and worthy to be believed, any one might, without guilt, (when justly demanded to do so) declare he did not believe it, while he knew it not so as to find reason to believe it; it were double Hypocrisie to do otherwise: and all the Bishop's arguing and storying, can never make it otherwise. Indeed the whole recoyles upon himself, and dashes out the brains of all he hath writ upon it; which, sure, he crasly oversaw, or thought all his Readers were such Fools as to be couzen'd with the gloss. For if the infidelitie were ever so culpable, it were a Dutie, when adjur'd by a Law to declare it; but how can the infidelitie be blam'd, when after the Bishop's hunting down the Notion through the whole Historie of the Con∣troversie, He hath prey'd only upon a Ghost, miss'd of all comprehension, and he pronounces the summ, and result of all to be what is meant by that Transubstantiation is a thing altogether uncertain and unknown; and there is no one thing in which Christendom more both agrees and differs; all Parties agree in the Thing, and differ in the manner. Now it so happens, the Test was so sagaci∣ously compos'd, though it might lawfully have done much more, that it modestly leaves the Thing free, and requires only to declare a Belief of such Manner of Tran∣substantiation, as of the Elements of Bread and Wine, into the Bodie and Bloud of Christ; and requires the Decla∣rers own Belief alone, and nothing of censure upon any others Belief in this branch of the Test; which surely a∣ny man may lawfully make, that makes it truly: and seeing the whole Issue of the Notion is Scepticism, the Bishop himself being Judg, (and what can the man do that comes after the ishop?) may not every man then say, , I do not comprehend it, therefore I do not believe it.
Indeed if there were Revelation for it, like what there is concerning the Father, Word, and Spirit, one God; con∣cerning the Incarnation and Hypostatic Vnion of the Eter∣nal Word with Humane Nature, leaning not on figurative expression, but plain assertion, wrought into all the dis∣course, and whole Argument of Scripture, all Disputes were silenc'd. But when there is no pretext of Revelation, but such a manner of speaking, as if it were press'd alike into a lite∣ral sense, through the whole Book of God, it must over∣throw all Theologie. To refuse then a Figure there where it is so absolutely necessary, that else Christ must eat his own flesh, while it remain'd entire before the Apostles, and drink his own bloud, while it was circulating in his Veins, and no amaze nor so much as question upon it, is such a setting the Scripture to be broken upon the Wheel, such a Barbarity, as exceeds a thousandfold all the Barbarities and Inhumanities spoken of throughout the Bishop's whole Book: Especially when our Lord declares in a like manner of speaking, and doubts upon it; His words were spirit and life, and the flesh profited nothing. Why then should men bring the Scripture to the Engine, to torture it into the confession of what (as God speaks) never came into his heart? And so I may fairly dismiss the Bishop's longsom Hi∣storie of Transubstantiation, seeing the mouth of his Ca∣non turns upon himself for what he can; and what should a man be shie of in declaring his Non-belief of what is against all the sense and reason of mankind, what hath no ground in Revelation, and what all the Wits and Sub∣tilties the Canonists and School-men, yea the very Coun∣cils of the Roman Vassalage can, when set upon the ut∣most stretch, make nothing of, but a meer Babel, if we may believe the Bishop, in what he determines upon the
whole search in favour of it. Not like Solomon's conclu∣sion of the matter into the whole of man, but like the con∣clusion of Babel, all was Jargon, Nonsense, Confusion, and Rubbish; and worse than that, the conclusion will be like that of Babylon the Great, a perpetual Desolation and Burning. They therefore who have like Slaves bor'd their Ears to this spiritual Egyptian slavery, and under the Plague of its Darkness to be even felt, how just is it to disen∣gage them from taking the Rights of their Prince and Country into their trust, whether their contented Slavery rise from some weak part, or a worse depravedness, which inclines their always bowed down Backs, and their Eyes laden with slumber under such a monstrous Bigot∣tism. I come therefore to consider of the second Propositi∣on, which, however it runs in the Bishop's Text, is thus express'd in the Test: And that the Invocation or Ado∣ration of the Virgin Mary, or any other Saint, and the Sacrifice of the Mass, as they are now used in the Church of Rome, are superstitious and idolatrous. In which, although I confess in my own Judgment, the very Extremity, as of Sense, that the words can reach, are supported by the demerit of the things De∣clared against: Yet, because it is a Test, publickly offer∣ed, the refusal of which suspends so great an Interest, as all share in Government, as the Bishop expresses it. It will not be unfit to observe all the Lenitives, that are by the Prudence of the Composers, (whoever they were, it makes no matter) contriv'd into it. 1. Therfore, I do believe is prefix'd to the whole Test, by common Equity of Construction to be supplyed. I do believe the first Proposition, That in the Sacrament, &c. And in the second, I do believe, that the Invocation, &c.
Now it is Evident, a Man may Swear to his own Belief, if he knows he does really so Believe, although he be mistaken in the grounds of his Belief, because it is onely matter of Fact within himself. 2. There is a Limitation, As these things are us'd, and now us'd in the Church of Rome, whether by express Command, or by Approbation, or Connivence; so that the very grossness and stupidity of the most Dull and Ignorant, who stick in the very thick Matter, and are able to extricate themselves, as the finer Wits pretend to do, are to be taken into that Vsage, and that most Meri∣toriously, seeing if the Church of Rome leads such unwa∣ry, and unapprehensive Persons in Obedience to it, to the very brink of the Precipice into so deep, and impure a Mud, and that so unnecessarily; it is to be chang'd with the Vsages, as in it self. And then those words of the Test, As it is now used; sig∣nifies the first beginnings of these things were not so fresh, as now they are arriv'd to be. 3. In that, the word Superstitious is first set, as the lesser, and most undoubted, and then not the downright full-out word Idolatry, but Idolatrous. It takes off the full Blow of the Censures, for Idolatry imports a great danger, suspicion, and nearness to Idolatry, but not ab∣solute Idolatry it self. And this the Bishop ought in all candid dealing to have taken Notice of, and to have al∣lowed the Caution, with which the Test is worded; for the Stabbing, and Cut-throat word Idolatry is not used, and so the Piquancy of that his remark false. But letting slip all things that do not enter into the sub∣stance of the matter, it is first to be observed, that abso∣lutely and in earnest, all that dreadful Representation of the punishment of Idolatry in this World, is disown'd by all sober Christians: and those rigid Laws, or any such
Zelotic Spirit of Elias, as among the Jews on the account of Idolatry, are reversed under the milder temper, and more moderate climate of Christian Religion, and the compassionate Spirit of it, as repeated by our Saviour expresly in those words to the Disciples, that were for de∣manding Fire from Heaven upon the Samaritans, Luke 9.54. To which our Lord rejoyned, Ye know not what spi∣rit ye are of: the Son of man came not to destroy mens lives, but to save them▪ We disown all such torrid Enthusiasm where-ever it is found, upon this Authority, and such Ravagings upon the Lives of men meerly for their (notwithstanding so great) delusions in so plain a point of Divine Worship, are not so much as thought of in the Test: Cruelties and inhumanities of that kind, are left as the proper Inheritance of the Idolatrous, who indeed cut Throats, and cause innocent Persons to pass through the Fire alive, in the rage of their Moloch-Sacrafice: And I am fully perswaded the principal end of the Test-Act was to secure the Lives and Fortunes of a Protestant Nation from the fury and blood-thirstiness of that name of Reli∣gion, by which it is as much known (as the Scarlet and Purple it is arraied in) and that in the Historie of some Ages past, and so cannot but be still suspected. The prevention indeed of such, the public practise of those Superstitions and Idolatrousnesses, is worthy the care of a Protestant Magistracy to prevent, and to take care the Contagion may not spread, much less that a Protestant Kingdom should come under the Girdle of its Ministerial Government, (although with all Loyalty, it owns their Soveraign, according to the Christian Law, and of the Na∣tion) and then for to set such Bounds to it, as may most indemnifie it self. But for the securities of Divine Justice upon Idolatry, whenever they com to be manifested; they wil be just, and bring their conviction along with them; which may be
speedier than men are aware, the Measure of Iniquity grow∣ing now full, as of more then one God, is Idolatry, so of more than one Mediator is a Parallell Idolatry. And as letting fall any glances of Respect upon any Creature, Person, or Thing, Angel, or Diamon, Sun, Moon, or Stars, or the inferiour Creatures, as partial Gods conveying the Benifits of the Supreme God to us, is foul Idolatry: so any partial or inferiour Mediators, are alike Idolatry, under the Gospel. And as the making to our selves any likeness either in Heaven above, or the Earth beneath, &c. as a Medium to Worship God by: so the making to our selves any likeness of the Mediator; (For though we had known him after the flesh, yet (saith the Apostle) we know him so no more.) are alike Idolatrous. How certainly then are the Invocations of the Virgin, of Saints Idolatrous, as giving them a share of the incommunicable Mercy, Om∣nisciency, Omnipresence, seeing they are not visible to us, we cannot speak with them at certain times or places, we know them not, we know not they know us; there are no kinds of Communion between us; a Vail of thick Darkness is spread betwixt us, which nothing but Infinity can pierce. The Infinity of the Father, the Infi∣nity of the Mediator, God-man: Men indeed whom we see, whom we converse with, to whom we can make our selves and our condition known, we are allowed by God to Address, to give and receive mutual Religious Respects, and of Civility and Kindness, according to the Stations of Honour and Subordination we stand in one to ano∣ther. But how both Senseless, and Idolatrous, would it be with hope of good to pray to any Person upon Earth, at great, or even at the smallest distance one from another, where no Communication passes by Word, Messa∣ges, and Letters, as in our private Closets, and Thoughts;
this were to make them, as God Omniscient, Omnipre∣sent. And to pray to Saints or Angels, as Mediators, is Idolatry committed against the Mediator, as if he had not that whole Sum of Mediatorial Mercy, Grace, Privi∣ledges in himself. How certainly then are their Invoca∣tions continually us'd at Rome, not only Superstitious, but Idolatrous: And indeed all Superstition is Idolatry, against the Second Commandment; Devising an Image, a Like∣ness to go to God by them. How certainly are those abundance of Images, Pictures, Statues, Representations, us'd at Rome: Their Incensing, Bowing, Kneeling, uncovering the Head, to Images and Pictures, us'd at Rome, Idolatrous? For even Job's Mouth kissing his Hand, was an Indication sufficient of an enticed Heart. Their Elevation, Adoration, Geniflexian, gi∣ven to the Bread, as the Body of Christ, are of the same guilt, seeing Christ was never Worshipped Bodily on Earth, when his Apostles were daily with him, but in the Emanations of his Divinity, how much more (now we are to know him no more after the flesh) therefore are we not to Worship him Bodily, not in an Imaginary Transubstantiation of the Elements) into Flesh: Doth not he abhor such a Worship? For whatever we do in pretence of Worship to God and Christ, that is not either the pure Issues of that Law of the Mind, or of the Natural Conscience it self, or is revealed to us in his Word: The Wor∣ship (call it how you will, Dulia, or an inferiour Wor∣ship) not so warranted, passes before God for no other, but Superstition and Idolatry. Even the Worship of the Man Christ Jesus onely, as united to the Eternal Word, is justified by Divine Revelation: so tender and severe a thing is the Worship of the Holy Jealous God, who as he is separated from all Creatures in his Purity and Perfecti∣on, so in his Worship, and tne manner of his Worship ap∣pointed
only by himself. And so Holy, Holy, Holy, and infi∣nitely separate from all Creatures is IEHOVATH the Mediator, with whom none can be named; even as none can know but by the Revelation of the Father. All Worship therefore given to Creature-Mediators, all Wor∣ship given to him not according to his Word, is but Super∣stitious and Idolatrous in his Account. How near therefore is it to the Blasphemy, of which the Author confesses, Idolatry is a principal instance; when he speaks of the Cherubins being worshipp'd; who indeed, had by God's immediate Command, a Place of Attendance, by the Mercy-Seat: this Type of Christ, o∣ver which God filling the Tabernacle, and so the Temple after with his Glory, that none could enter, and so on∣ly gave a remaining Symbol of his Presence there; but likewise of God to be seen; but the People are warn'd over and over, to take notice they saw no Likeness or Similitude of God; nor is there the least shadow of any direction of Worship to those Cherubins; but to that God, who was pleas'd to promise his Presence there, where his Glory had appear'd, in Christ the propitiation; so that by pure spiritual Acts, they might pray towards that place, call'd by his Name, without any prophaning God by sense: From which he is always in an infinite retire∣ment, for sense is the Foundation of Idolatry. And a∣greeably what was in the Holy of Holies, not being seen, was a warning to retire all into a spirituality, and a sense of the incomprehensibleness of God, the enjoyment of him being in pure spirituality. And as false it is, that the Scripture speaks onely of the Idolatry of Worshipping the Heavenly Body. For from the heights above, to what is most below, the changing of the Glory of the incorruptible God, with any corruptile Image, or the Worship directed by the Media∣tion of any Image, is Abomination to him, as in number∣less
places of Scripture (besides the Second Commandment) particularly Duet. 4.16. Rom. 1.23. For that I can hard∣ly believe my eyes in reading the Bishop's Definition of Idolatry, and so it is as to the Redeemer, or one Mediator, who is not to be worshipped, by any Image of his Huma∣nity, nor by so despicable a Thing as Bread, which he made only the Element of a spiritual Communication of himself, as a most familiar Emblem, without the least design of Worship to it, most abhorred by him. Most false it is, therefore, that there is no Idolatry if Men do not worship Images of false Gods, or make corpo∣real Images of his divine Nature: For Angels, thô his Servants, and Saints departed, become false Gods, and Names of Blasphemy, when worshipped with any sort of Worship, as the Apocaliptick Angel testifies, chap. 21. v. 22. and the Host so worshipped, is the Symbol of a false God, as turn'd into a Likeness, and Image, before the jea∣lous God, and Mediator, who will have all pure Spiritu∣ality in the Worship of them. And yet in the mean time, I must acknowledge that the Bishop hath rightly observed concerning that Idolatry, which he is willing to allow to be Idolatry, viz. the Wor∣ship of the heavenly Bodies (and I am sure it will follow of all other Idolatry, that it is to be proportionably admea∣sur'd to) It is an iniquity to be punished by a Judge, viz. By the Civil Magistrate. And this determination con∣cerning Idolatry, is recorded in that admirable Book of Natural Religion, the Book of Job. Now the Laws of Natural Religion are irreversible, and unchangeable; so that were it not that in the great degeneracie of humane Nature, the generality of the Nations of the World were early drench'd, and even plung'd in this great evil, Na∣tures Laws had always so prevail'd: Whereas, alas, too too soon that Government grew to weak too establish it
self; and were that Government, the Government of the Law, written in Mans Heart restor'd, it must pro∣ceed with all Efficacy to the extirpating this Evil; and where it was so much restored, as among the Jews, and enforced with further Positive and Ceremonial Sharpness of Laws, the Rigors on Offenders were so great, as the Bishop has Recounted: But yet the mercy of the Gos∣pel, and of Christian Religion, is such, that although in Governments able and equal for it, there ought to be no abatement of Severity against the Sin it self, yet there is by Christ, a Relaxation, as to Persons Lives, where the most guilty Circumstances of Presumption, Obstinacy, Danger of bad Example, do not inflame the Account of the Evil: All means of Conversion and Reformation be∣ing first used; which is a great justification of the lawful∣ness, and necessity of the Test, in a Protestant Government. Nevertheless, the generality of the Sin, hath been at no time too big for Divine Vengeance; but that it hath ap∣peared from Heaven upon Idolatrous Powers, and Nations, when he saw good; And the time is approaching, when a better State of the renewed World growing on, will, by degrees, but with signal Vials powred out upon the whole Race of Idolaters and their Idolatries, make way for the perfection of that Renovation, and such a thing as Idolatry will not in one single example be endured. For Satan, that old Serpent, that hath deceiv'd the Nations into it so long, will be seal'd up into his own Abyss at the same time. But this hath been by way of Digression. It is time to return now to the just Remarks, that are to be made upon the Bishop's Discourse upon Idolatry; so contriv'd, as to lead the Unthinking, yea, the not closely observant Reader, thorough a Variety of Matter, far off from suspecting the Roman Worship of Idola∣tries, where yet Scripture-Prophesie hath settled it upon
its own Base, in that Land that is Spiritually called Shi∣nar, or Mystical Babylon: His Discourse, indeed, is blen∣ded sometimes with better, that it may convey more Artificially the intollerably bad, sometimes with things doubtful and uncertain, that the notoriously False may hope to skulk among them. I cannot, according to the brevity I have resolv'd, re∣tail to the Reader, so ambagious, or tedious an Account of Idolatry. There are two things among his own No∣tions, that if he had taken his Measures by, they would have steerd him much better, viz. First, The observa∣tion of the Great Care God took by all his Dealings with his People, Descendants from Abraham, to secure them by the Mosaick Mediatorship in the acknowledgment of the One God, Creator of Heaven and Earth, the Univer∣sal and most Natural Standard against Idolatry, together with those particular assurances of himself to them; by his Covenant with Abraham, by bringing them out of the Land of Egypt, speaking to them out of the Cloud, and Fire on Mount Sinai, by his filling the Tabernacle with his Glory, which is especially to be remark'd, both in Moses's Tabernacle, and Solomon's Temple, as being the true Reason of the Worship toward the Holy of Ho∣lies. And Secondly, the observation of the Sabbath, as a peculiar Commemoration of the Creation, as also of the further Manifestation of the same true God, Creator of Heaven and Earth, who was so particularly the God of Abraham's Posterity. Had these two Observations, together with the Types, which the Episcopal Author, with Dr. Spencer, and other Learned men, not without Reason, make Fen∣ces between Israel and the Idolatrous Nations, and their Idolatries; or, as the Apostle calls it, Partition-Wall; these would have led to the One Mediator Jesus Christ, Who is
that very Propitiation and Mercy-Seat, of which, that in the Holy of Holies was but the Type, and for which Type sake the Shecinah, or Glory once came, and sate in its filling the Temple; as between the Cherubims, or Attendant Angels, Simbolycally Represented in an Ado∣ring Posture, stooping down, and prying upon the Mer∣cy-Seat, as that Type of Christ, as the Apostle Peter al∣ludes, 1 Pet. 1.12. Worshipping; but the Spirits, whom they resemble, would have abhor'd to be Worshipped; As he most injuriously to Truth, would bear his Readers in hand, if they would be deceived by him. Now, as Redemption parallell's Creation; so the One Mediator, the One God; as our Lord himself teacheth. This is Life Eternal, to know Thee the onely true God, and whom thou hast sent, Jesus Christ, and so the Apostle tells us: There are Gods many, and Lords many in the World, Counterfeits of the One God, and One Mediator. As the Heathenish Gods, and Baalim, or Daimons, who were esteem'd a middle Region of Gods, or Mediators▪ But to us, saith he, There is but One God, the Father of Whom are all things, and we in, or for, or unto him; and One Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him. So to Timothy, There is One God, and One Medi∣ator, between God and Man, the Man Christ Jesus, which one God is now known to us, as the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which Title drinks up, as the An∣titype doth the Type of the former Titles, of the God of Abraham, &c. of the God that brought from Egypt, that sits between the Cherubins: that Title, indeed, of Creator, Lord of Heaven and Earth, is not in the least ec∣eclips'd, but shines together upon, and with, and in the Redeemer, the Lord Jesus Christ. And as a Testimony and standing Plea of all this▪ the Sabbath of Creation, is remov'd from the Seventh,
into an Union with the First Day, the Sabbath of Redem∣ption, or Lord's Day. Thus there is, as the Apostle John speaks, the true God, and eternal Life, in the very mention of which, as fore∣seeing the great Antichristian Idolatry coming upon the Christian World in other Mediators, (the same thing with other Gods) he makes the Conclusion and Farewel of his Epistle, little Children, keep your selves from Idols: and seal's it with a passionate, Amen. Now this One God, and this one Mediator, we are to worship, and only to know, and only to serv, all intro∣ducing other Mediators, either of Man, or of other Crea∣tures, as in honour to God, to worship Him, or Jesus Christ by them, join'd with some Ceremonies of a Ser∣vice, as Kneeling, Bowing, Incensing, Invoking, &c. is Idolatrous. And now to draw the whole matter of Idolatry to a conclusion; I confess, it seems necessary, that whoever takes the Test, being, as the Bishop truly observes, of the Alloy of an Oath, it is necessary he should take it in Judg∣ment, as well as in Righteousness, and in Truth. That any one may so do it, he must carry about him a Gauge, or certain Notion of Idolatry, and some general knowledge of the Usages of Rome, as to the Invocation of the Virgin, of Saints, the adoration of them in their Images, with the Sacrifice of the Mass; which by a little enquiry will be easily known, if it can be at all unknown to any Persons, who can be suppos'd to have possible obligation to take the Test: For the Roman Church does not hide its Sin; but carries the Title on its Forehead, the Title its I∣dolatrous Fornications; and its Papal Prince carries his Names of Blasphemy, Idolatry, on her Heads; and it is to be earnestly prayed, these things may not be more vul∣gerly known among us, against which the Test is one great security.
To give then in the second place, a very short, and portable Gauge of Idolatry, I should chuse to do it best, by all I have said; as encas'd, or enchs'd, in the very words, Superstition and Idolatry, truly explain'd. The first of which imports any religious Act▪ either to Per∣sons dead, as if they were now alive, and conversant with us, though above, as the Virgin Mary, or Saints de∣parted or else and (as may most agree) Super Statutum, above the Rule and Law of all religious Actions, viz. the very Law and Light of Nature, teaching us natural Religion, which consists only in the Religion of the Mind, and expressed only in the most necessary Rational Latria, or Service of our Bodies; or else which best explains all Religion to us: The Word of God; seeing, there we find nothing of such Invocation, or Adoration, so much as in any dark Line of either of these Laws; but much written, as with a Sun-Beam against them, who even knows, and believes the Word of God, may boldly call the usages of Rome superstitious. And as to Idolatry, it is the Service to an Apparition of a God, to our dark and foolish Imagination, for the One God, that made Heaven, and Earth; or the Apparition of a Mediator, besides Jesus Christ, the One Mediator, who redeem'd us by his Death: Both which are against the first Commandement, for Idolatry is a worship of any thing whatever that is believ'd to be God, and Christ, from the highest Heavens to the lowestCentre, by any Image, or sensible Representation, (as against the second Commande∣ment.) Now he may be sure of this Idolatry, whoever consi∣ders the Romish Church, (falsely so call'd) the spiritual Baby∣lon, the City made of graven Images; so certainly that headed Babylon, that in the days of John's receiving the Revelation, reign'd over the Kings of the Earth, and was
then (five of its Governments so notorious in History, being fallen, or gone off from their Principality) under its sixth King, the Heathen Emperor; and for a little space under the Christian Emperor its seventh King, but no Head, and hath been under its eighth King, that was of those se∣ven Kings, who were ever Heads, ever since the expirati∣on of Augustulus's Line, the late Emperor, An. Dom. 475. For till Rome be utterly destroy'd, and sink like a Milstone into the Sea▪ That eighth King, the Beast, or Pope▪ shall not be utterly destroyed; but Rome, and its eighth King▪ shall fall within few years, from its Ten-king'd Prin∣cipalities▪ All which may be thus demonstrated, the Bounds of the Prophesies stand eminent and unmoveable, even to demonstration, viz. the Heathen Empire therein being at one end, and the final ruin of Rome at the other; in the middle just as the short liv'd Christian Empire expi∣ring, run forty two prophetic Months, or Times of the Moon, amounting to 1222 prophetic years, which ac∣counted from 475, must end 1697. Now this Rome, and its so call'd Church, is Mysteries of Idolatries▪ and the Pope its Balam, or High Priest, or Prophet carrying it, and so describ'd in the Revelation, and the thing there Prophecied, so fulfill'd in all Eyes, and Ears, in the Blasphemies of God, and of all that dwell in Heaven, by these Idolatries; that then can be no hazard, if there was liberty to demonstrate the thing, as it may be demonstrated: It would put Transubstantiation, the Worship of the Virgin, of Saints, and the Adoration of the Mass, and its Sacrifice out of all Dispute, although the things may be otherwise set, enough beyond Contro∣versy, yet not so suddenly or surely, as by this Prophecy is well explain'd. In the mean time, to say all in a word, I cannot but make
great doubt, whether the Bishop with so great pretence, and yet such thin Sophisms in the room of Reason, and with those Unepiscopal, Unchristian, Ungentile, as well as high∣ly Senseless Reflections upon a Person of so great Learn∣ing, Gravity and Piety in the eyes of the whole Nation, (as Dr. St.) did indeed design any more, than to Ridicule what he would seem to Favor, things so False, so Fallaci∣ous, so Inconclusive, could never else have been so laid together, and to carry, as it were a fresh Remembrance. At the last he concludes his Book under a transparent Tif∣fany, with a downright Falshood, viz. As if the not taking the Test, did wrap up the Refusers in a Conviction of Recusancy; to which purpose he foist's in a part of the Test-Act, lea∣ving out what would have convicted him of sensless Fraudulency: For he well knows, not the Refusal of the Test, but the Refusal, and yet invading Offices contrary to the Test, brings any one under that Conviction: Whe∣ther therefore he was in earnest, or in a Sathanic Fa∣naticism, when he writ all this, I much doubt; but if he were, indeed, in earnest, he deserves the Character of the weakest of Men, in a disguise of a Man of Parts and Learning; if not, of the most infidelious and dishonest Sophister in the Lawn of a Protestant Bishop. But without any railing Accusation against him, or any such, I pray as I begun, the Lord rebuke them. DRA. LOCNIL. FINIS.
