L3133 R5780 11964229 51657
The French King's New DECLARATION, Published at Paris, the 26th of this Instant September, 1699. Our last French Mail brings the following Advices. Paris, Sept. 26. I Have frequently given you an Ac∣count, That the Persecution rages in this Kingdom more and more, and to confirm the same, have sent you His Majesty's Declaration, signed Yesterday in Parliament, by which you may perceive, That whereas some of th Judges did formerly take Occasion, from some Expres∣sions in former Declarations, to suspend for∣feiting the Estates of those who have left the Kingdom, it is not now in their Power to shew so much Mercy, and at the same time you will be satisfied, That I did not misin∣form you, when I said, That all the Methods hitherto taken, have not been able to suppress the Reformed Religion here, nor to hinder the Subjects of both Religions, to leave this miserable Kingdom in great Numbers. The Declaration is to the Effect following: LOuis, &c. —By our Declarations and Edicts of August, 1699. and May and July 1682. we forbad our Subjects to depart out of the Kingdom, in order to settle in Foreign Countries, on pain of Con∣fiscation of Body and Estate; which by our Declaration of May 1685. we commuted into that of the Gallies for ever: And by our Revocation of the Edict of Nantes, in October 1685. we particularly forbad our Subjects of the pretended Reformed Reli∣gion, to go out of our Dominions, with their Wives and Children, on pain of the Men's being sent to the Gallies, and the Womens being confiscated in Body and E∣state: And being inform'd, that notwith∣standing all this, many of our Subjects, who had converted themselves to the Ca∣tholick, Apostolick and Roman Religion, returning to their former Errors, had re∣tired into Foreign Countries, where they might enjoy the unhappy Liberty of the Exercise and Profession of it, we did by our Declaration of May 1686. order, That those who attempted to leave the Kingdom, should be seized on the Frontiers, the Men sent to the Gallies for ever, and the Women shut up during their Lives, in such Places as our Judges shall think met, and their E∣states confiscated to ou Use, even in those Countries where Confiscation was not pra∣ctised; and that those also who assisted them in their Escape, directly or indirectly; should incur the same Penalties. And, in fine, by our Declaration of February last, we ordered, That all the Edicts, &c. before-mentioned should be put in Execution, and renewed our Prohibitions against the New Converts going out of the Kingdom, on the Penal∣ties before specified. And tho' there was much greater Reason, that same Penal∣ties should take place against those who had sconsummated their disobedience by their actual going out of the Kingdom, in con∣tempt of our so often repeated Prohibiti∣ons. Yet being informed, That some of our Judges and Officers doubted whether it were our Intention, that such Persons should be condemned, according to the Penaltes of our said Declarations, because in our De∣claration of the 11th of February last, we had not expresly ordered it; and that in our Edict of Decemb. 1698. we had or∣dered, that the Estates left by such of our Subjects, should belong to those that ought to succeed them, in case of Natural Death. And though by attending to our Declara∣tion of the 11th of February last, they might have been satisfied of that Matter, we have nevertheless thought fit to explain our Meaning, for the removing all doubts con∣cerning that Affair, and for the cutting off at the same time all hopes from the New Converts of enjoying any part of their Estates, by means of their Children or next Relations, who should have succeeded them as in case of Death, after their having left the Kingdom: We do by these Presents, signed by our own Hand, Declare, Ordain and Will, That all the Declarations and Edicts before-mentioned, be put in Execu∣tion, according to their Form and Tenor: And that Process be compleated against all our Subjects of the pretended Reformed Religion: And New Converts, who leave or attempt to leave the Kingdom without our Permission, viz. That the Men be sent to the Gallies for ever, the Women shut up during Life, and their Estates confisca∣ted to our Use: And in case their Estates lie in those particular Seignieuries, where
Confiscation has no Place, that the Crimi∣nals be fin'd in half the value of their Estates for our Use. And  Odin an Will, That those who contribute, directly or In∣directly, to their escape, be punished in the same Manne. Given at Fountainleau Septemb. 13, 1699. Signed Louis, ad Re∣gistred in Parliament, Sep. 25. 1699. Sign∣ed, Dongois. Yesterday also there was registred in Par∣liament a Declaration by his Majesty; For Regulating the Traffick of Corn in the Kingdom. In the Preface it takes notice, That the dearth of Corn had not so much proceeded from bad Harvests, as from the Covetousness of some Persons, who, tho' they were not Corn-Merchants by pro∣fession, had nevertheless warm'd themselves into that Trade; and their chief End be∣ing to make Profit to themselves by the Necessity of the Publick, they concurr'd together to lay up hidden Magazines, whih occasioning a Scarcity and Dearth, gave them an Opportunity to sell the Corn at a much higher Rate than they bought it. That his Majesty would have reme∣died that disorder sooner, but that he staid for a more convenient Season, and better Harvest than the last; and having Advice that the Harvest had been good this Year in most of the Provinces, he judged it time to redress that Disorder, which is so much contrary to good Manners and pre∣judicial to the Publick. And therefore he commands all those who trade in Corn, to take Licenses from the Officers of Ju∣stice, and the Oaths appointed for that End, and to register the same: And that none other presume to Trade therein, on pain of forfeiting the Corn, and being fined in 500 Livres, and declar'd uncapable of following, that Traffick any more. Half the Corn is to be given the Informer. All Labourers, Gentlemen, Officers, and those concern'd in the Revenue, are forbid med∣dling with this Commerce, on pain of 2000 Livres Fine and bodily Punishment; half the Fine to be given o th Informer: And the Officers who gv Licnses to such are to lose their Places. No Corn-Merchents are to contract any Society with oher Corn Mechant, on the same Pnalties. And all argains made this Harvest for Corn upon the Ground are declar'd Null, and the like in time to come, under the Penalty of confiscating the Corn, a Fine of 3000 Livres, losing their Advance Mo∣ney, and being rendred uncapable of that Trade for the future. Yesterday likewise an Arrest of the Coun∣cil of State was Registred in the Court of the Mint, for raising the Value of the Species, viz. The Species of the first Re∣form, the Crown at 67 Sous, the Louis▪ Or at 12 Livers 15 Sous, throughout the Kng∣dom of France. In the new Conqusts, the Flanders Pieces of 4 Livres, not reform'd to 4 Livres 6 Sous. The Speices not reform'd and cried down, and those of the first Reform in the Mints, and Offices of Receipt for the King, the Crown at 69 Sous, the Louis'd Or at 13 Liv. 5 s and the Pieces of 4 Livres, at 4 Livres 10 Sous. The Reals of Weight, except those of Peru and Chapelet, at 66 Sous, and in the Officers of Recepts at 68 Sous. The Spanish-Pistoles, of weight at 12 l. 5 s. and in the Officers of Receipt at 13 l. 5 s. In the Mint, the Mark of Reals at 30 Li∣vres 10 Sous, and of Pistoles at 480 Livres. And that Materials of Silver and Gold may be augmented according to the Valuation of the Spices, the Mark of fine Silver, or of 12 Deniers, is to be 33 Livres 10 Sous; and the Mark of fine Gold, or of 24 Ca∣rats, at 502 Livres 10 Sous. Done in the Council of State at Fountainbleau, Septem∣ber 22. 1699. FINIS. Licens'd according to Order. London, Printed for J. Harrison, in Cornhill, 1699.
