M2189 12354090 60082
MEDICINA MILITARIS: OR, A BODY OF MILITARY MEDICINES Experimented. BY Raymundus Mindererus, Late Chief Physitian of the Electo∣ral Court of Bavaria, and of the Imperial City of Auspurg. Englished out of High-Dutch. LONDON, Printed by William Godbid, and are to be Sold by Moses Pitt, at the Angel, over against the Little North Door of St. Paul's Church. 1674.
A BODY OF MILITARY MEDICINES EXPERIMENTED. CHAP. I. Concerning the Morals of a Souldier. WHereas the Old Philoso∣phers wished to every one MENTEM SA∣NAM IN CORPORE SANO, a Sound Mind in a Sound Body; considering how much it conduced to the Health of the Body to have the Mind free from Vice and Vexation: It will behoove a Souldier, as much at least as any man, to endeavour after that Soundness and Integrity of con∣science
which may inspire him with true Fortitude, undisturbed from the troubles and anxieties accompanying Impiety and Injustice. To this end, he ought, in the first place, be constant in paying his Duties to Almighty God, by serving Him in publick and pri∣vate, by imploring the Divine pro∣tection and blessing in all his Just undertakings, and by returning his humble acknowledgments for every good success. Next, he ought to serve his Prince faithfully to the best of his skill and power, to obey his Officers readily, and to do to all others, as he would be done to, if he were in their condition. CHAP. II. What care a Souldier is to take of his Body. THe Mind being thus taken care of, thou art to advise with a skilful Physician concerning thy Body, whe∣ther it be not necessary to purge it,
the better to secure thy self from A∣gues and Fevers. Then furnish thy self with some Mithridate or Treacle, to use it against infection; taking of it in the morning fasting, against the ill Air, the quantity of a hasel-nut. Take also with thee a quantity of Zedoary, Angelica, Imperatoria or Ma∣sterwort, and Carlina; of which thou shalt do well, now and then to eat some for the preservation of thy strength, and against the corruption of the Air. But especially keep thy Head and Feet warm, by the neglect of which thou maist cast thy self into great danger. Take heed of surchar∣ging thy stomach, which is to pre∣pare and to convey the nourishment for the whole body, and restrain as much as thou canst thy appetite, there being nothing more hurtful to health, than when that is irregular and extra∣vagant. Gird thy self well, that thy body may be close, and so be secured from receiving mischief in leaping, fal∣ling, storming, &c. and thy bowels
from being put out of their place. Take also with thee out of the A∣pothecary's shop a powder, called Pul∣vis solutivus de Tribus, which is not dear. Of this, when thou needest purging, take the weight of a ducat or a little more, according to thy consti∣tution, in warm flesh-broath or the like, early in the morning fasting; so ordering the matter, that that day thou maist keep thy self warm in thy quar∣ter. Fast two hours after the taking of it, and then eat warm meat. The same may be done with Pulvis Sena Montagnana, and Pulvis solutivus de Tartaro. If thou be troubled with Corns on thy feet, apply to them every day fresh lard, and continue this, till by the fat∣ness of the lard they grow soft; and then they will fall off from the very roots without pain. To free or secure thy self from Ver∣min, take a good quantity of Worm-wood, and the inner cuttings of horse-hoofs, cut out by the Farriers when they shooe horses; boyl these both to∣gether
in half lye and half water, and so put thy shirt into it, and afterwards dry it in the Air, without washing it out any other way, and not a lowse will come into it. This Experiment is found approved amongst the old German Souldiers; and although there should be a lowse in thy shirt, it would not stay there. If thy feet be moist and sweaty, (which is very troublesome not only to thy self, but to others also,) take the filings of Brass, which are sometimes u∣sed for dust to dry moist writings with, and put some of it into thy socks, and walk upon it. Refresh this every other or third day, and thou shalt soon be freed of that inconvenience: Nor be thou troubled, that it makes, as it will do, thy feet look greenish; for there is no hurt at all in that, since you are not like to put them in your cap. Take also with thee some Stags or Bucks-grease, to make use of in case thou shouldst be galled any where in riding, or going on foot. Anoint the part therewith at the fire-side, and it will soon be healed.
To prevent Rust, draw thy Sword through the fat of a Goose or Capon, or grease thy Arms therewith. Take care to have always about thee a hard crust of Rye-bread; for if thou art dry, and destitute of water, wine or beer, to quench thy thirst, chew some of this dry crust, and it will moisten thy mouth, and considera∣bly abate thy thirst. The same may be done with a Leaden-bullet, rolled to and fro in the mouth, Lead being cooling. It hath been prescribed above, to take with thee the Herbs Imperatoria and Carlina. Of this be mindful; for if it should happen, that thou shouldst be obliged to stand some hours in bat∣tail or in the field, take a piece of it in thy mouth for hunger, thirst, and refreshment, and thou shalt find, it will keep thee a good while from faintness. But woe to thy fellows, if they want it; for they will certainly faint, unless thou be so kind as to give them a share in thy provision. In the best Apothecary-shops may
be found a root, called Costus, some∣what like Cinnamon; which hath the same effect. And if others should eat Onions, others drink Brandy, and I only hold in my mouth of this root the bigness of half a pea; I should keep in breath a good while longer than they. But take notice, that this, I speak of, is not the common Costus, which hitherto hath been sold for the true in common shops; but that which comes to us from the Indies. If thou art a Horse-man, take a good quantity of Bay-salt, a little Brimstone, Clove, and Ginger, and mingle with it some of the powder of the two above-said herbs, Imperatoria and Car∣lina, and give it to thy Horse, or in case of want of Provender let him have of it upon his bitt, or give him some upon a slice of bread, and it will make him strong and vigorous. If thou art to ride in a German Saddle, the two hind-knobs whereof are wont only to be stuffed out with straw or horse-hair; get thee made two Tin-flaskes with good screws, fitted
for those places. In one of them carry Brandy, in the other Vinegar. The Brandy will serve thee in cold nights, and fresh mornings; and 'twill be good also for thy horse, giving him a little of it upon bread. The Vinegar will be of use to thee for the heat of the day, washing thy mouth with it, as also spirting a little of it into thy horses mouth. Besides, mingling it with water, it will afford thee a good cooling drink. If it be very cold, put some of that horse-hair, that is wont to be curried out of their mains and tails, into thy boots. I never received on such occa∣sions more warmth from any thing, especially keeping my self dry. A Hares-skin is also good for this purpose, making socks of it; but if it grow wet, 'tis naught. Gather of the Wheel-grease that runs out at the nave of the Wheels, and would else be lost, which hath ta∣ken in some of the substance of the Iron that is about the Axel-tree, witness its blackness: This is a good Ointment for Horses.
When thou comest into the field, and art to lye abroad, look out for some rising ground, that the Rain, which may possibly fall, may run away from thee: And avoid as much as is possible, Vallies, Marishes, Ditches, Meadows, and the like low and moist places. Besides, observe the Air, and put up thy Tent towards the East; which quarter though it be cool, yet 'tis wholsom. But lest it should be too cool, order it so, that thou mayst en∣joy that wind, which comes from be∣tween the East and South, as being one of the wholsomest of all Airs, and temperate, the South-air qualifying the sharpness of the Eastern. Beware of the Western Wind, especially that which blows from between the South and West. The Air of Mid-night is wholesome enough and dry, but sharp and piercing. Believe it, a Souldier is much concern'd in the Air; nor hath Hippocrates without cause written a whole Book De Aere, Aquis & Locis, to teach, how the Air, Water, and
Places are to be discerned and cho∣sen. Moreover, look about thee for good cleer Water, such as grows warm and cool again sooner than other waters; and observe this mark for my sake. I know water, that will not boyl Pease, Vetches, Stock-fish, Flounders, &c. In some Springs Iron is turn'd into Brass, and great care is to be had in the choice of water for drinking. But if thou canst not have Spring-water, but art necessitated to use Pit or Ditch-water; have a care not to drink it without straining, least thou shouldst swallow Frog or Snake-spawn. For I have known and had in my cure a Countrey-man, who voided, though not at once but at different times, two hundred fifty and five Frogs, and of them many in my own house, in the presence of divers Ecclesiastical and Secular Persons; and some of the biggest of them, being dryed, are still to be seen in the Repo∣sitory of Mantua, as also in that of Mr. Philip Hainhofer at Auspurg. And
there is a Cook in the Hospital of Wessenburg or Landsberg, who, (as ap∣peared by the event) had drunk the Spawn of Serpents, out of which were bred divers Serpents in his body, some of which he voided by virtue of the Medicine he took, amongst which there was one of the length of a Ba∣varian Ell. The Man hath been since in good health, and continues in his service to this day. Wherefore it will behoove you to spread your handkerchief over the Ditch-water, and so drink through it; or if you take any of it up un∣strain'd, quench first a red-hot Stone or Iron in it, whereby the noxious quality will be destroyed. Or, if you lye still, and can get any Oyl of Vi∣triol, let some drops of that fall into it, and you need not then fear any corruption or poyson in such water. Otherwise, if time will permit, let it boil up and cool again, and put a crust of bread into it, and you may drink of it safely. Those Waters that run out of stony
hills and from under rocks, are the best; to which may be reckon'd those Springs, that flow from high places, and purge themselves in clear sand and pebles. If thou meet with Beer or Wine, take heed of excess; and forbear drin∣king New beer that hath not yet done working, or is not some days old, be∣cause new beer causeth the Strangury. And in case this should trouble thee, take a handful of Hay-blossoms, boyl them in water, and Urine over it, drawing into thy body the warm steam thereof, and anointing thy Na∣vel several times with warm suet. If thou art hot, and canst not for∣bear drinking, make water first; then wash thy mouth, and cool the arteries on both thy temples, and those of both thy wrists; and then drinking will hurt thee less. If you chance to drink whilst you are hot, (which is so dangerous a thing, that some have dyed within 24 hours after it; others have fallen into con∣sumptive Coughs, others been trou∣bled
with Pains in their sides and with Impostumes, &c.) then take of the leaves of Bellis or Daisy, which grows in all meadows and pasture-grounds, and is green both winter and summer, and wash them clean, and dress them like a Salad with Oyl, Vinegar and a little Salt, and forthwith eat thereof; and it helps immediately, as I know by much Experience. But this must be used presently, the sooner the better. I can say with truth, that in all my Practice of Physick for above 20 years I have not met with any Experiment of so quick an Operation from any herb, as from this. But here I must note, that I have always used the Red Daisy, and have not tryed the other sorts; though I am apt to believe, the others may have the like effect. You must not eat the Flowers, but only the Leaves. This Experiment should be put up on all posts every where, for the good of Courriers, Mowers, and other labouring Men, that are wont to drink plentifully when they are hot, and thereby spoil themselves in great numbers.
But to proceed; as thou art to be∣ware of excess of drinking at all times, so thou art especially to forbear when thou art to stand Sentinel, lest thou shouldst fall a sleep; whereby thou mayst lose thy life, at least, thy place and thy preferment for ever. Neither be fond of Gaming at dice, tables, &c. whence are occasioned quarrels, mistrusts, deceit, swearing, and what not? Avoid also the company of base women, lest thou shouldst be con∣strained to undergo the Mercurial Sa∣livation, and with it a very lean Diet, of thin broth, water-gruel, barley-broth, prunes, roasted apples, and such like, without any flesh-meat at all. CHAP. III. Concerning the Physicians and Chi∣rurgions in an Army. EVery Army ought to be well pro∣vided with one or more able Phy∣sicians,
such as are not only expert in the cure of inward Diseases, but also understanding in outward Cases, as Wounds, Burnings, Luxations, Dislo∣cations, Erysipelas's or St. Antony's Fires, &c. These Physicians ought to be no Youngsters, that are lately come from Schools and Universities, knowing only in Controversies and Disputa∣tions, but such as are expert in the Cure of Diseases, especially such as are most frequent in Armies. They are also to be Men of good nature, great honesty and condescension, wil∣ling to take pains with the poor as well as the rich. Physicians thus qualified may so gain the hearts of the Souldiers, that these will love and ho∣nour them as if they were their Pa∣rents. Likewise the Chirurgions ought to be learn'd, discreet, and affable, such as have been long vers'd, and expe∣rienc'd, in all the operations of Chi∣rurgery, that can distinguish well of Diseases, and with prudence make
their judgments thereon: They ought also to be diligent, and careful of those committed to their charge, and very knowing in all manner of outward applications, as Unguents, Plasters, Pulments, Lenitives, Stiptiques, At∣tractives, Digestives, Causticks, Es∣charotiques, as also their Mollifying, Dissipating, Repelling, Suppura∣ting and Mundifying, &c. Medi∣cines. They ought to be skilful in discerning them, and withal in knowing well the cases and times where and when to use them. They are to be very careful in observing the beginning, middle and end of Ulcers, Wounds, &c. since it often may be impertinent and even hurtful too, to use that in the beginning, that may be pertinent and beneficial in the midst of the cure, and the like. An able and dextrous Chirurgion is a great Treasure in an Army, and cannot be enough valued, especially if he consult in all dangerous cases with an understanding Physitian. These two, Physitians and Chirur∣gions,
are to be intimate friends to∣gether, assisting one another without envy and pride, for the better relief and the greater safety of their Pa∣tients. 'Tis very necessary, both these should go abroad and travel before they un∣dertake to practise, thereby to acquire experience, and to learn also to con∣verse with the more discretion and gentleness with all sorts of humors. And when they come to practise, the Chirurgions ought to advise with Physitians, who are but lame Doctors, if they be not skilled in Chirurgery; since this is the third part of Physick, from which it can and ought not to be separated, being an integral part thereof. It is recorded in history, that above 2000 years since, Podalyrius and Machaon, Sons to Aesculapius, went both with Agamemnon in the Expe∣dition for Troja, and there purchased great honour by their practise not so much of Physick as Chirurgery.
CHAP. IV. Of Fevers, Hungarian Distempers, Spot∣ted Fevers, and other Pestilential Di∣seases, as also of Hereditary Maladies, together with their Remedies. 'TIs known seldom to fail, that in an Army there reigneth some Disease or other, according to the nature and constitution of the Coun∣try, Air, and Diet. The reasons are; First, that amongst so great a num∣ber of Men, raised from so many dif∣ferent places, there are to be found Men of very different tempers and con∣stitutions, sound and unsound; and amongst the latter, some that are scabby, others scorbutical, others la∣bouring under venereal Diseases, many inclined to dangerous and in∣fectious Fevers, &c. all which a Phy∣sitian must have a watchful eye upon, and endeavour to prevent their sprea∣ding.
Secondly, that Souldiers in an Army want conveniences wherewith to take due care of their health; but are often constrain'd to expose themselves and sleep in the open Air on moist ground, the vapours whereof penetrate into their bodies; and they are careless or want opportunities of expelling them out again by sweat. Whence is caused an inward putrefaction in the blood and humors, which some∣times proceeds so far, as to assume a venomous nature, and to break out into spots, tumors, bubo's, carbuncles, &c. Thirdly, that Souldiers commonly keep an irregular diet. Sometimes they have plenty and do super-abound; at o∣ther times they have nothing; and then being very hungry, when they come a∣gain to a place of plenty, they over-feed and surfet; whence are bred cru∣dities in the stomach, and corruption, which causeth malignant Fevers in abundance. Besides, they often feed upon meat that is unwholesome, as stinking Venison, rotten cheese, musty
bread, &c. which cannot but occasion many Diseases. And when they come to places, where Fruit abounds, as Apples, Pears, Plums, Melons, Cher∣ries, Grapes, &c. they over-eat them∣selves, and thereby cause Gripings in the Guts, Diarrhaea's, &c. Lastly, sometimes the Air is cor∣rupted, especially after a great battel, and slaughter of Men that remain unburied; whereby the Air being tainted infects the living that take it in. Which is often made worse by the exhalations of low and moorish ground, and by thick fogs. These are the general Causes of the common Distempers reigning in Ar∣mies; against which thou art to arm thy self accordingly. First then be careful in thy Diet; eat not greedily and indiscreetly every thing that comes to hand; and though it be good, yet eat and drink not too plen∣tifully of it, but restrain thy appetite, considering how destructive every ex∣cess may be to thy health. If thou canst and hast no aversion
from it, drink every morning of thy own Urine, which prevents corruption in the Stomach, opens obstructions in the Liver, Spleen, Mesaraic Veins; which if not removed, there will follow Fevers, the yellow Jaundice, Swellings, and Difficulty of breathing. If thou art averse from doing so, eat some bread and butter with rue on it; or, if it be not hot weather, take in the morning the quantity of a hasel∣nut of Mithridate or Treacle; or in∣fuse in brandy, or rather in Spirit of Juniper-berries, some Zedoary, Ange∣lica, and a little Citron-peels, and drink a spoonful of it in the morning. When the Air is corrupted, and there be at hand a Goat, rub thy self at him, and let not the strong smell keep thee from it. Also put Quicksilver in an empty hasel-nut, closed up with Spanish Wax, and hang it about thy neck; or the Zenechton prepared of Arsenic, (after the man∣ner by and by to be described,) sowed up in thin leather; for if it should touch the bare skin, it would cause
blisters and do harm. This Zenech∣ton is a plaister, out of which are cut pieces of the bigness of a dollar, which are carried about the neck, and hang down near the heart; keeping good a whole year. And when the infection is past, this Zenechton, being reduced to powder, will yet serve to kill rats and mice with. It is to be thus prepar'd; Take of yellow and white Arsenic, of each an ounce, or /4 of an ounce; of gummi Tragacanth ½ an ounce; put this gummi in Rose-water or in com∣mon water over night, and it will yield a slimy water. Then beat thy Arsenic in a mortar, and put so much of this gummed water to it, as is necessary to reduce it to a paste having the consistence of dough; work it well and round it, and then cut off a slice of the bigness of a dollar, somewhat thicker; let this slice dry in the Air, and sow it in a piece of thin leather (well-dressed dog-skin is the best for this purpose;) carry this about thy neck so as to let it hang down
upon, and to touch the place of, thy heart. Some mix with it a proportion of the powder of dried toads, which I have done my self, it being esteem'd more powerful. Some carry about their necks dried spiders; Theophrastus commends Celondine, leaves and root, carried about the neck. Remember also to burn frequently Juniper-wood before thy tent; though all ordinary fires cleanse the Air; Upon which account Hippocrates advised great fires to be made in Greece at the time of a great plague, which was thought to have been remov'd by that means. Some burn only a few chips of Juniper-roots, or some of the berries of that shrub, which is as effectual. If these means cannot be had, burn some Gunpowder, ordering it like a train; this purifieth the Air likewise. And the volleys of shot made mor∣nings and evenings in a camp, con∣duce very much to the dispelling of mist, and qualifying raw weather. Frankincense also, Mastick, and such other perfumes as dry and clear
the Air, may be very usefully burnt; and even a Scholars perfume made of waste Paper is not to be despised. If thou canst get Rue, smell often to it: And remember me for this ge∣neral hint, to take good notice of all herbs that are green winter and sum∣mer, and which are not eaten by Horses or Cattel; for they are endow'd with excellent virtues for the good of Man, and therefore made to grow at all sea∣sons of the year. When the Air is pestilential or breeding any Epidemical Disease, then wash thy face with Vinegar every morning. If thou canst get Acetum of Rue, Elder-flowers, Lavender, Ro∣ses, Marigold-flowers, 'tis the better. Or, if you have the conveniency, prepare the following Acetum: Take Rue, Elder-flowers, Burnet-roots, white Dittany, Carlina, of each equal quantity; a few Orenge or Citron-peels, (of which the latter are the better of the two,) and a little Cam∣phire, and some Walnut-kernels (the fresher the better,) leaving the bitter
skins upon them; put all these into common Vinegar, and with this infu∣sion moisten every morning thy tem∣ples, mouth and nostrils, and the beating arteries of both thy wrists; taking down a good spoonful of it, and thou hast a good preservative. If it be cold weather, take Ange∣lica-roots, Zedoaria, white Dittany, some dried Citron-peels, and a little Camphir, infuse them all in Brandy, especially in such as is made out of Wormwood or Juniper-berries. Of this liquor drink in the morning a spoonful. But if thou be of a hot con∣stitution, then content thy self with the former Acetum, in which you may mix a little Treacle. Some advise to take fasting some of the Juyce of Marigold, freshly ex∣press'd out of the flower and leaves, as a good preservative against the In∣fection. This I have not tried; but I have often in such cases used the Acetum of Marigold-flowers, espe∣cially for a cordial and sudorisick, and, I think, with very good success.
Or make an Electuary, of Rue and Juniper-berries, of each equal quan∣tity, adding thereto a double quantity of Walnuts, with their bitter skin on them, some Figs, a little Treacle, and a little Saffron; beat them together in a mortar, and pour on them, whilst thou art beating, as much Rue-vine∣gar as will reduce it to a thick Puls or Electuary: Of this take the bigness of a hasel-nut or two, fasting. Take the roots of the greater Burr∣dock, and those of Celondine, both well cleared, and the bark of Ash; infuse them 24 hours in half White-wine and half Rue-vinegar; then distill it, and in the distilled water mix a little Brimstone-oyl, to render it a little sowrish. Of this take two spoonfuls in the morning for a preservative. But if any be already infected with the Plague, let him take of the same six or eight spoonfuls at a time, and sweat upon it, it being a very sudorifique li∣quor, which, under the name of Aqua Bardana composita, hath been used by me and my Collegues in Hospitals and
other places with very great success. You may mix some Mithridate with it, if you please. Else take Carlina, Imperatoria, Ser∣pentaria, Valerian, Saxifrage, Tormen∣till, Gentian, Angelica and Zedoaria, all cut small; infuse them in Brandy, and drink of it a spoonful in the mor∣ning for a preservative; but if thou hast the contagion, take two spoon∣fuls, to sweat upon it, in case the pestilential poyson be not yet broken out, and the Patients tongue not dry; but if it be, content thy self with the newly prescribed Acetum, as being more safe, and an inflammation being to be feared from the Brandy. Hold Zedoar, Angelica, Lovage, or Imperatoria, in thy mouth; but if thou be subject to the Head-ach, then cut it first small, and infuse it in Vinegar, and let it stand infused for the space of 24 hours; then take it out again, dry it, and use it as prescribed above. Amongst the good Preservatives reckon this also: Take Garden-rue, beat it in a mortar, pour Vinegar on
it, and strain all through a cloth; mix some Treacle with it, set it by in a glass, and take of it in the morning half a spoonful or a whole. Put a little Camphir to it, if you will have it stronger. Or put Camphir in Wormwood-wine, and drink a good draught of it every morning. When I served in times of great mortality, I infused in Wine Carduus benedictus, Wormwood, Scordium, Dictamne of Creet, Burnet-roots, and Citron-peels, and after I had taken every morning a good mess of sowrish broth, I drank after it a good glass of this infusion. As long as the herbs retain a bitterness, fresh wine may be infused upon them. Infuse also white and well cleansed Garlick in Acetum made of Rue, and take of it a spoonful or two in the mor∣ning. In the Apothecary-shops are Pills, call'd Pestilential Pills: Among these cause a little Camphir to be mixt, and of it let Pills be made; of which take at once three or four every week,
taking them in a spoonful of White-wine, an hour before supper. These prevent all inward putrefaction, and keep off all infection, nor do they suffer any collection of morbifique matter within thee, though they purge not, but only keep the body so∣luble. They are made up of Aloe, Myrrhe and Saffron. Formerly I have printed a whole Book of such Pills, which I call'd Marocostinas in Latin, where I have described their vertues at large. For the Rich may serve what fol∣lows: Take Terra▪ Sigillata, Bolus Ar∣menus, Pulvis Alexipharmacus, or Be∣zoardicum Nicolai, or the Cordiales A∣lexandrini Benedicti; item Species de Hydcintho, Aqua Stapediana, Acetum Theriacale, or the Red Hungarian Pow∣der; all these serving not only to pre∣serve, but also to recover, by Gods blessing. Provide out of the Apothecaries-shops Pastils of the extract of Angelica or Zedoaria; take one or two of them in thy mouth every morning, and there let them melt down.
Keep thy body clean every way; be chearful; avoid rashness; nor be affraid, considering that many have been infected by fear, terrour, and me∣lancholy. Chear thy self up now and then with a glass of good and sincere Wine, but not to excess. Never fa∣sting, nor never full. One that is empty, will soon be caught with this distem∣per, especially if he live amongst in∣fected people. If he do, let him drink a good draught of Wormwood-wine, Juniper-berry-wine, Rosemary, Sage, or Zedoar-wine; which may keep thee from many dangers. But re∣member, not to drink more of it than will chear thee up and revive thy Spirits. At least, drink a little Wine with Camphir and Vinegar, kindling the Camphir and letting it burn in the Wine, so as to let it sink into it; for if it burn on the top, it will there remain swimming: And if the Wine be skinned over with it, kindle it again till it be quite burnt out. Take of Camphir for one draught, the quantity of a pease; but if thou be
subject to the Head-ach, then Cam∣phir will not agree with thee. In case that any come to be infected, he is forthwith to be separated from the sound, and to be laid to bed, so as his head and shoulders may lye some∣what high; by which means he will be less subject to faintness. Then let him presently take some sudorifick Medicine, to make him sweat; for if the poyson be not speedily driven from the heart, the Patient is lost. You are also to take great care, that this Distemper prevail not, and to endea∣vour to discover it before the Patient be quite disabled: For, as soon as any begins to droop, grows melancholy, faint and feeble in his limbs, so as that he is hardly able to hold up his head, drawing his breath with difficulty, letting his head fall to and fro, losing his stomach, growing yellowish about his eyes, with the apples of his eyes standing out, finding head-ach, in∣terrupted heats and colds; as soon, I say, as these symptoms appear in times of the Plague, Spotted Feavers, Hun∣garian
Disease, &c. you may then look to it by times; forasmuch as such Pa∣tients, that are already infected, go often about until the sixth or eighth day, as I have known my self, until the lurking poyson of the heart has got the prevalency; and then the poor Patient is quite cast down, and often dyes in very few days, and even in a few hours. Wherefore thou art not to stay, till the swellings and boils appear behind the ears, under the arms, &c. or till the Carbuncles, Bu∣bo's, and the like, break out; but thou art immediately to make use of the best Medicines, thou canst be Master of, to drive out the poyson, if thou wilt save thy life. I never found any thing, that was considerable, done in the Plague, by means of Purging and Bleeding; but rather on the contrary, all those that had Spots, if they were purged or let blood, soon after died. However, I will prescribe nothing ma∣gisterially to any man; let every one endeavour to do, what he can give a good account of. I have, together
with my Collegues, treated many hundreds in our Hospitals infected with the Plague, without ever open∣ing a vein, and yet we have by Gods blessing recovered near 600 persons; besides those that by the same mercy we have cured in their several Houses. Now to procure sweat in the very beginning, take the quantity of two hasel-nuts of Treacle, dissolve it in common Vinegar; but if thou canst have a cordial Acetum, made of Rosemary, Lavender, Elder-blossoms, Rue, Roses, or Elder-berries, use it much rather, and give it the Patient to sweat. Or take the roots of Celondine, boyl them in Vinegar, and dissolve some Treacle in it: Or take Carduus bene∣dictus, Rue, Petasites or Butter-burr, a little Angelica, Zedoaria, or Saxifrage-roots, boyl them together in half White-wine, and half Vinegar, or only Water, dissolve a little Treacle or Mithridate in it, and let the Patient take it warm, to make him sweat. Mithridate hath the like virtue with
Treacle, yet neither of them are safe to take for Women with Child, old Persons and young Children. You may also make use to good purpose of the Saxon-powder, taking of it the weight of a Ducat in Car∣duus benedictus, Scabius, or Sorrel-water; which Powder is thus to be prepared: Take Valerian half an ounce; Ce∣londine, or Nettel-roots, of each one ounce; Polypody, Althaea, (or March∣mallow,) wild Angelica, of each two ounces; of garden Angelica, four ounces; of the rind of Laurcola, (or Lowry,) an ounce and an half: These roots are to be dug up in their best strength, viz. between the middle of August and the middle of September, and being cleansed, they are to be cut small, and then put in a glazed pot, pouring a sharp Vinegar upon it, so as to cover it two inches high. Then lute on the cover with a lute made of whites of Eggs and Flower; let all be boiled upon a gentle fire; then pour off the liquor, and dry the roots, and reduce them to powder, mixing
with it some 26 berries of Herbe Paris, (or One-Berrie) which look like Pep∣per-corns, very good against poison; and thus the powder is made. This herb grows in shadowed and mode∣rately moist places; I have found of it several times in Koshinger-wood near Ingolstad: It hath four leaves on one stalk, and one berry on the top. An herb belonging to the family of Solanum's or Night-shades; whence the leaves of it do very much cool Inflammations, especially those of the Eyes, when laid upon them. Take notice of Sorrel, bruise some of it and pour Vinegar on't, (the Rue-acetum is the best,) and strain the juice through a cloth; put into it a little powder of Angelica, about the weight of half a Ducat; or of the root of Dictam, or of Butter-burr, or a little Treacle or Mithridate, and give it to sweat. On this occasion of mentioning Dictam, I must add, that in our Coun∣trey there grows only the white Di∣ctam, which is, among others, an
excellent Antidote, but you must take of it the double quantity and weight to that of Creta. You may boil of the root of half an ounce in half White-wine and half Vinegar, or, instead of the Wine, in Carduus-bene∣dictus water; and drink of the De∣coction warm, and put your self to sweat; or take of the powder of it a drachm and an half in warm broth, with a little Vinegar, for the same purpose. The Dictam of Creta hath hairy leaves and purpureous blossoms, and is used in the preparation of Treacle. This herb by its odour drives away Serpents. The wild Goats being hurt by any Arrows eat this herb, and 'tis said, that by this means the Arrows fall out of the wound. This perhaps hath no other ground than that of the Poet Virgil, affirming that Venus with this herb healed her Son Aeneas when wounded in the War. His words are Aeneid. 12.
Hîc Venus indigno nati concussa dolore: Dictamnum genitrix Cretaea carpit ab Ida, Puberibus caulem foliis & flore coman∣tem Purpureo, non illa feris incognita Capris Gramina, cùm tergo volucres haesêre sagittae. About this time came in the Hunga∣rian Infection, which was a Disease that bred such a putrefaction in the bodies of Men, that even when they were near death, they fell a vomiting, but that with such a stench, that no body could endure it. Here those Medicines do well, that preserve the body from putrefaction; for the Plague, Spotted Feavers, and the Hun∣garian Distemper, proceed all from inward corruption. And of them, the Plague attacks the Spirits residing in the Heart, and so killeth very quickly; whereas Spotted Feavers have their seat in the Blood, and therefore do last twelve, fourteen, and sometimes
twenty days before they kill. But the Hungarian Disease is seated chiefly in the putrified Phlegm of the Head and Brains; whence those that labour un∣der it, are tormented with great and maniacal head-ach. But though these three Diseases have their rise from one and the same cause (Putrefaction,) and are to be cu∣red by the same remedies; yet is there∣in required the discretion of a prudent Physitian, for the ordering and pre∣scribing of Medicines according to cir∣cumstances. Take a drachm of Zedoary, give it pulverised to the Patient in Acetum of Rue, or Elder, or Marigold-flowers, or even in common Vinegar: Let him sweat upon it. 'Tis good against all sorts of venom, and causeth a sweet breath, as resisting inward corruption. In the Apothecary Shops you find an Electuary, called Diascordium, found by that famous Physitian Hieronymus Fracastorius. It is like to Treacle and Mithridate; only 'tis red from some Ingredients giving it that colour.
This may be used with safety by Women with Child, young Chil∣dren and all sorts of Persons, where∣as, as was said above, Treacle and Mithridate may not. It is made chiefly of Scordium or Water-German∣der, which hath the smell of Leek when bruised. Galen in his first Book De Antidotis, Chap. 12. writeth, that when in a great battel some slain bodies chanced to fall upon this Herb, they rotted not as far as they were touched by this Herb. The said Fracastorius did compound this his Diascordium out of this Herb Scordium, Tormentil, Serpentaria, Gen∣tian, Bole Armeniac and Terra Sigillata, and such like Ingredients. It is chiefly to be used in the hot Diseases of the Head; which I have done many a hundred times. Take of it the weight of about two ducats in common Vinegar, or in Elder∣water, or rather in the expressed Juyce of fresh Sorrel, and sweat upon it. Tis very good especially in the Hunga∣rian
Sickness and other venomous and infectious Diseases. To young People you may give a lesser quantity, and proportionably you are to lessen the dose for Women with Child or in Child-bed, and little Children. Besides take notice of the Powder of Doctor Hessius, which hath been used with great benefit, and is thus prepared; Take a drachm of Sugar-candy, a quarter of an ounce of pulverised Gin∣ger, and a drachm of Camphir; re∣duce all to a fine powder; give of it to the infected Patient the weight of a drachm in Vinegar mingled with the water of Marigold-flowers, Sca∣bious or Sorrel, and sweat upon it. If you have none of these waters, then look that the Vinegar be not too sharp, and to that end dilute it with some wine and water. Mean time, though in this case I highly value Camphir, yet in stead of Ginger I would use Zedoary, Saxifrage, Carlina or Imperatoria, or the true Petasites or Butter-burr.
Again, Brimstone is none of the meanest remedies in these infectious cases; for it preserves the body from putrefaction. Wherefore take of the noble Flowers of Sulphur a quarter of an ounce, being sublimed from Colcothar; add to it one scruple of Camphir, an ounce of the Spirit or Oyl of Cyprian or Venetian Turpen∣tine. Put all this into a Glass-head, lute it well and put it upon hot sand or ashes, whereby the Oyl of Tur∣pentine will come to open the Brim∣stone, and produce a red colour like a Ruby, or at least as yellow as a high-colour'd Hyacinth. Of this give some to the Patient three or four times, mingled with a little Treacle, or in Sorrel, Cardobenedictus, or Scabious-water. This Balsom is excellent also in sore Breasts that are growing puru∣lent, taken in warm broth, or in a good wound-drink. But this must be in cases of no great heat or inflamma∣tion, in which it would be dan∣gerous. Amongst all the Remedies, which
serve against Infectious Diseases, that of Henricus Stapedius, to be found in my Book de Pestilentia, is an excellent one, and perhaps the best for curing as well as preserving; of which half a spoonful being ta∣ken fasting, is able to keep a Man well for twelve hours or more: But if any be already infected, he must take of it at any time imme∣diately, to the quantity of a spoon∣ful and an half, or two spoonfuls, for sweating. Which is to be re∣peated every eighteen or twenty four hours, to make the Patient sweat, till he recover, or till the Pestilen∣tial Boyls and Carbuncles break out behind the Ears, under the Arms, or else-where. This Water, though it be somewhat dear, yet its ver∣tue countervailes its price. The older it grows, the more vertue it hath. Many have ascribed great efficacy to the Blood of Animals: Thus old Democritus, (witness Galen,) prepared an Electuary of such Blood, called
Diathaematôn. Some esteem much the Blood of Storks, because they eat Toads and Snakes; others value the Blood of Hens, because they eat Spi∣ders and other venomous Infects. I should esteem most the Flesh or Blood of Badgers; which is to be dried in the shade, and that done, you must mix with it Saffron, Camphir, and some or other of the Anti-pestilential roots, as of Angelica, Zedoaria, or the like, together with a little live Brimstone to the quantity of a ducat; which is to be taken in Acetum of Rue, or Marigold-flowers, or Walnuts, and in case of want of these, in com∣mon Vinegar: Upon which the Pa∣tient is to sweat. If thou art a good husband, have ready a good Acetum of Rue, Walnut-kernels and Marigold-flowers, taking the greater quantity of Rue; and as you use it, fill it up again with Acetum of Elder-berries. The Rich do use for their Physick in the time of the Plague the red Hun∣garian, as also the Imperial red and
gray Powder, Bezoar, Harts-horn, Antidotum Matthioli, Terra Sigillata, Bole Armeniack, Scorzonera and Contra∣yerva, Species de Gemmis, Diamargariton de Hyacintho, and other high Medicines, of which I have largely discoursed in my above-cited Book De Pestilentia. But I, though I have used such reme∣dies among the Rich, yet I content my self commonly with the plainer and most common Medicines, of which I have more knowledge and experience. The Pickle of Ebulus or Walwort, (aliàs Dane-wort or Dwarf-elder,) which is of kin to Elder; as also the Pickle of Juniper-berries, are also of great use in this case. The Physitians of Ausburg made great use, in the year 1572, of the red Imperial powder; the composition of which is in the Augustan Dispensa∣tory at large, as also in my Book de Peste. These are the several means to pro∣voke sweat, which I esteem to be of great efficacy for that purpose upon a
sudden. And though Souldiers have not the conveniency of a bed for sweating, when they are in a march, and often cannot put off their cloaths for many nights together; yet let them use such sudorifique means: for, though they cannot sweat outright, yet they may fall into a dampish moisture, which if it strike not in again, may prove as good as a sweat. Yet in this case he must turn his shirt: Quod non facit sudor, praestat id tenuis udor. But here is to be noted, that 'tis not enough, once only to give a su∣dorifique Medicine to an infected Bo∣dy; considering that the venom, like a raging Sea, is tossed to and fro every way. And though it should seem to thee, as if by thy approved Antidote thou hadst overcome the Disease, the Symptoms of it excepted, yet thou art not to trust in this case; for I my self have been sometimes deceived, and hard put to it to make good what by confidence I had omitted. Where∣fore you must not trust to the once taking a sudorifique potion or pow∣der,
because such malign and lurking Diseases, that keep no stitch, do in∣deed fly the first time from thy Medi∣cament, and hide themselves under it, but they are wont suddenly to re-appear. Wherefore you must repeat the Antidotes, that were first admini∣stred to you, for the time of 16, 18, 20 or 24 hours, according to circum∣stances, and so long and often, till you judge your sick Brothers or Friends Heart secured from the infecti∣ous Venom. When the sweating is over, thou must then refresh thy Patient, first by drying him well, and next by giving him a little Vinegar to taste in a spoon. The Rich may afford some slices of Citron, of which Theopompus Chius writeth, that the Tyrant Cle∣archus Heracleota, who lived in Pontus, having poisoned many People, the vertue of Citron was at length found out, of which a slice being eaten pro∣ved an effectual Antidote against it. The same vertue may be found in a slice of a common Apple; and the
Syrupus de Pomis is one of the Cordials of our shops. But the thirst, that uses to follow upon sweating, will not be quenched with so small a matter; wherefore take three parts of water, one part of Vinegar, and, if the Patient be not too hot, one part of Wine, mixing some Sugar therewith, and of this let him drink a good draught, and it will cool and refresh him. Besides, take some of the guts of Hens, and some slices of Radish, sprinkle them with Vinegar and Salt, and bind them to the soles of his feet; this will draw away the heat. But let not the Radish lye too long upon them, because it will give a stink that may increase the head-ach, where∣with the People that have the Plague are commonly troubled enough with∣out provoking it. Moreover you will do well to tye about his wrists some Rue beaten with Vinegar. Anoint his Loyns and Back-bone with the Unguent of Roses, or with fresh But∣ter; but if there appear any Spots,
forbear to anoint him, lest they should be driven in. You will do well to have Epithe∣mata of good things about you, as of Rose-water and Elder-vinegar, to lay over the Heart; with which mix some Camphir. But if you find any thing of Specks, &c. broke out, you must use no wet thing. Anoint his Heart with Oyl of Scor∣pions, take the Oyl of Sea-blossoms and of those Earth-worms that appear after rain, of each six ounces, of St Johns-wort Oyl two ounces, of fresh Elder-blossoms and Rue, each a hand∣ful and an half, of the Acetum of Marigold-flowers and Roses, each a∣bout three ounces, of live Spiders forty five: Boil all these together, till the Vinegar be so qualified, that when 'tis thrown into the fire, it cause no cracking there. Then strain it, and in this strained Oyl put a matter of five and twenty Spiders more, of the biggest sort, and add to it of Camphir dissolved in the Spirit of Roses half a drachm; let it stand in Balneo Mariae
or upon hot embers for twelve hours, and then put to it of Treacle and Mi∣thridate, of each half an ounce, and let them work together. With this Oyl anoint the eight Pulses, viz. both Temples, behind both Ears, both Hands, and both Knees, as also the Heart. And this is an excellent Suc∣cedaneum to Scorpion-oyl, much used by the Germans. Besides, you must refresh and streng∣then the Patient with convenient Meat and Drink; I mean with good Flesh- or Barley-broath, with a little Vinegar in it to make it savoury to him who will have appetite too little else, till he have shaken off this veno∣mous Distemper; which when he hath done, his stomach will be so keen, that you will find work enough to keep him from surfetting. Be also careful to keep thy Patients Body open; if he be obstructed, use a Clister, or take Butter or Hogs-grease, mixing a little Salt with it, or, if it be to be gotten, a little Mice-trickles, and put it into his bowels. Physick
at the mouth for this purpose is not al∣ways safe: When the Patient is dischar∣ged of the venom, a little liquor of stew'd Prunes with some Senna-leaves in it will do well for opening the body. Some fresh Butter eaten in the morning, or melted in warm Broath, and taken down, is wont also to keep the body soluble. The Drink of these Patients may be, Water with some Bread soaked in it; or take of such Water, wherein Bread hath been soaked, one quart, and a little Vinegar, with two or three spoonfuls of Kitchin-sugar, mingling it well together. If you have no Su∣gar, use such Water with Vinegar alone: This affords good Drink in malignant Feavers. Among the Ro∣mans it was drunk by the Souldiers, under the name of Posca. You may also take a handful of well cleaned Plantain-roots, and boil them up in three quarts of Water, and then decant the Water, which though it be, somewhat bitter, yet 'tis very good in Fevers, and a good Drink in hot Di∣stempers.
If you have Oyl of Vitriol, let a few drops of it fall into clear Water, mingling it well; and you will have a factitious Sawer-brun or Acidulae. But use no Metalline Vessel for this purpose. With this kind of Water many People have been served in all sorts of Fevers; the Oyl of Vitriol in such Distempers, if rightly used, being very beneficial. But if a Man should have with it any Pulmonick Disease, in that case he must forbear acid things, and use Liquorice, and content himself with Ptisane. Nor is it at all good to use acids in Pestilential Pleurisies. And since on this occasion we men∣tion this case, and we having above given warning, not easily to blood in Pestilential Diseases; yet may Venae-section be sometimes, upon good consideration, used in that Pleu∣risie, provided it be done in the very beginning, and the Patient be strong and full of blood. Yet this is not to lessen the blood, but only to give it vent; but before bleeding the Patient
is to sweat by taking some of the above specified Antidotes. If the Patient have violent Head∣ach, lay on his head Vine-leaves or fresh Cabbage-leaves; and, if you have no Alablaster-salve, take two parts of Vinegar, and one part of Oyl of O∣lives (the Sea-blossoms Oyl, and Elder-Vinegar were better;) dip long rags of linnen therein, and having well squeez'd them again, lay them luke∣warm over the face and temples. E∣ven Vinegar alone is good. Of such Applications you may make many, of Acetum of Roses, Elder-blossoms, and the like, with a little Camphir. The expressed Milk of Peaches is also very effectual in this case. If at the going off of this Distem∣per, a hot defluxion should fall into the Eyes, take Camphir and infuse it in water, and often moisten the Eyes therewith; and if it should be cold and windy weather, you will do well to keep your self out of the open Air, and not to let this water dry up in your Eyes in the cold wind.
In case of having lost thy hearing, take of thy own Urine, and with it wash thy Ears within, but withall dry them very well, because that moi∣sture is very noxious to the Ears▪ And it often happens, that after the Hun∣garian Sickness People grow deaf or hard of hearing. Others put the wa∣ter of Carduus-benedictus distilled with Wine into the Ears, or the Oyl of bitter Almonds. If thy Throat swell, or the Palate of thy Mouth be fallen down, garga∣rize thy Throat with warm Milk, wherein Figgs have been boil'd, or sweetned with Sugar. The Flowers of Phyllirea or Mock-privet, which grows in the hedges, boiled, and used for a gargarism, heals also a sore Throat. The same doth the middle rind of Oxyacantha or Haw-thorn if boiled, with a little Allom dissolved in the Decoction. If you have the juyce of Mulberries, mix a little honey of Roses with it, and often take a little thereof. The roots of Sloes boiled in red Wine, and the Mouth often
washed therewith, is also very good. If thou hast the Squinancy, boil Scabious in Meath, and drink thereof warm, when strain'd. Beat Turnips and fry them in Butter or Oyl, and clap them in a cloth round about thy Neck. If thou cast up blood, take Mouse-ear, Ground-ivy, Cumfrey; boil them in half Wine and half Water, or in Meath, and drink often of it. But if the Plague reign not, open first a Vein. For a violent Cough, boil white Turnips, well cleansed in common water; throw away this first water, pour on other water, and in it let the Turnips boil till they grow soft. Strain this water, sweeten it with Sugar, or infuse in it Liquorice cut small; and drink of it mornings and even∣ings warm. Or make a Decoction of St Johns bread, and drink it, abstaining from all sour and salt things, The bleeding at the Nose is also in∣cident to persons infected; which is no good sign, though in sound per∣sons
it often frees from the Head-ach, and cools the Liver. If this bleeding be too violent, clap Ice-cold water about the Patients Neck, or let him put his Pudenda in cold Vinegar. CHAP. V. Of the Inflammation of the Tongue, its rise, and concomitants, together with the Remedies. VVHen the Tongue is infla∣med, the whole Oesophagus or Weasand is inflamed also, and this from beneath upward, because the inward fire sends up its smoak all along, as it were, that chimney, which like soot sticks to it, drying and black∣ning the same. But there is another Inflammation, much more dangerous, which taketh its rise about the Heart, and therefore is call'd the Inflammation of the Heart, which proceeds from the great inflammation of the orifice of the Sto∣mach,
situate near the Heart, in which is inserted the sixth pair of Nerves, which maketh the said orifice very sensible of any pain. This part be∣ing seized by so great an inflammation, which is venomous withall, it must in a manner harden, and shrink; and this heat is of that extent, that, the inner Membrane of the Stomach and that of the Tongue being one and the same, what befalls the Stomach, the Tongue must needs be sensible of it. Whence it comes to pass, that if the Gall overflows and passeth into the Stomach, the Tongue presently finds the bitterness of it; or if the Stomach be full of slime, or foul, or the like, the Tongue is soon affected therewith. There is another kind of Inflam∣mation, by the Latins called Prunella alba. This is of the same kind with the rest, but not of the same degree; for 'tis not of so dry a nature, as the others are, but commonly is moist, yet overlays all the Gums, the Throat, and the Weasand with such a tough white slime, like a kind of leather,
and so covers the Almonds with the same, that sometimes it can hardly be removed even with Instruments, The Tongue is as if it were crusted over with dough, the Gums like an Oven that by the heat of fire is burnt white, the Almonds cover'd as 'twere with white leather, and the Palate of the Mouth likewise. And in this case if the Patient will speak, he lalls and stutters, his Tongue being burthen'd with a load of slime; or, if he make his Tongue wagg, the slime spins out like a thred, and so invades the Teeth as if they were laid over with varnish. And when this varnish on the Teeth grows black (as I have often observ'd it to do) and drieth on them, 'tis a mortal sign; of which Hippocrates saith, Quibus in febribus livores circum dentes nascuntur, his fortes fiunt febres, 4. Aph. 53. These are the three sorts of Inflam∣mation; for which let us now seek out the Remedies, beginning from the last, the White. This is not to be ma∣ster'd by gargarisms alone, but the
hand must be employed also. Take therefore Cotton-wool, or Flax, and wind it about a stick or rod, and dip this in Vinegar, and rake his Throat and Gums therewith, yet taking care not to make it raw; let him gargarise between, and wash well his Mouth with Water and Vinegar, or Mul∣berry-juyce. Privet that grows in the hedges, or the middle rind of Haw∣thorn, boiled in Water and a little Vi∣negar, then strained, with a little Sal∣armoniack put into it, is in this case an excellent gargarism; but if there be blisters upon the Tongue, or else∣where, then take instead of Sal-armo∣niack a little un-burnt Allom, and mix it therewith. If you can have the Juyce of Turnips, or the Juyce of fresh House-leek, dissolve therein also a little Sal-armoniack, and use it to wet the stick, wherewith thou cleansest the Throat of the Patient; dipping it often therein, and carrying it about the Uvula or Palate of the Mouth; and you will see lumps come away as big as Pease. The skin is
under this Prunella alba fair and red, but tender. Whilst thou art clean∣sing the Patients Mouth, let him often gargarise with the Waters above-specified, and he will clear his Mouth of the loosen'd lumps. If thou canst get Mulberry-juyce mixt with Honey of Roses, the Mouth will heal the better; for upon this sort of Inflam∣mation there usually follows a Putre∣faction of the Mouth; and in case thou perceivest any such thing, take Wood-sorrel, and the abovesaid rind of Haw∣thorn, make a Decoction of it, and put in it a little Allom, and often gar∣garise with it. Clean thy Teeth from the slime with Water well sharpened with Vitriol. The common Inflammation of the Mouth may be cured with frequent washing of the Mouth, taking a gar∣garism made of House-leek, Lettice, Night-shade, or Self-heal Water, mix∣ing a little Honey of Roses and Mul∣berry-juyce with it. Of this garga∣rism the Patient is also to swallow a little, thereby to moisten the Throat.
Some take House-leek, and beat it, and put to a pound of it half an ounce of Sal-armoniack, mixing it well to∣gether. And so they put it for some days in an earthen pot glased under ground; then they distill of it a Wa∣ter in Balneo or in Sand: Which is excellent both to drink and to garga∣rise, though the Sal-armoniack make it a little unpleasant. But there is nothing better to allay this Inflammation than Niter; which is so well known amongst Souldiers, that they are wont to give one ano∣ther Gunpowder to drink, which Powder performs this effect not upon the account of the Coals or Brimstone, but the Saltpeter. For this cause Experienced Physi∣tians and Chirurgions endeavour to purifie Niter for this use, that it may have the greater effect; and this they do in manner following: They take of the purest Niter they can get, as much as they think fit; they beat it to a fine powder, and melt it in a large Crucible, and whilst it
boils up and foameth, they pour into it a little powdered Sulphur, and so let it boil together, till the blew Sul∣phur-flame ceaseth; then they cast in more fresh Sulphur: Which they re∣peat often, and then pour out the Niter into an earthen vessel glased, making Lozenges of it, of which they put one pulverised into a quart of limpid water, and so give the Pa∣tient to drink of it as much as he needs to quench his thirst. Or they give of this purified Niter to their Patients, labouring under this Inflammation, the quantity of a ducat or half a ducat weight in Broath, or in Ptisan, till they find the Tongue cleared of its slime. The use of Salt-peter thus prepared removeth also the Inflammation of the Heart, especially if it be melted upon Lead, and then proceeded with as before. For Lead is a considerable cooler, of which cooling quality the Niter, whilst it is melting upon it, taketh in not a little. Let then your Lead melt, and when 'tis melted,
dissolve the Niter upon it, and then, to purifie it, cast some Brimstone into it, as was said above, till it be clean∣sed from all impurity; and then give of it to thy Patient two or three times a day, according as need shall require. Otherwise, take live Crafishes and fresh House-leek, beat them together in a mortar, squeeze out the Juyce, with it mix a little Sal-armoniack, or a pretty deal of thy prepared Niter; make a Potion of it, and give of it even cold to thy Patient, repeating this several times, every eight or ten hours once, according as you shall see occasion. Or, take fresh Lard, (if it be salted, draw it through hot water to unsalt it,) and cut a slice of it two fingers large, and of the thickness of a knives back; put this into the Mouth of thy Patient, it is an excellent remedy a∣gainst this Inflammation; of which I shall give the reason hereafter. I have seen wonders done with it. But if thy Patient do rave, then fasten this slice of Lard with a thred and needle
to his shirt or doublet, lest he swallow it. Or take fresh Butter, and put it in cold water, and of it give thy Pa∣tient at a time the quantity of a hasel∣nut to hold it upon his Tongue, and let it melt there; which will keep the Tongue always moist. And if thou work among this Butter some of thy prepared Niter, it hath a wonderful effect, though the taste be not pleasant. I promised above to explain the Reason of the Cure of these Inflam∣mations. When you take a garga∣rism of the Waters of Night-shade, Wood-sorrel, Knot-grass, Endive, House-leek, and the like, mingled with Vinegar, you do well, but this is not enough; the reason is: If you wet a piece of Leather, you make it indeed limber, but when it comes to be dry, it grows hard and shrinks; except you grease it over with some fatty matter, and then it will remain smooth. So it is with the Tongue; though it be made clean with garga∣risms, yet will it become again rough and untoward, unless some fatness be
used: For which cause I have directed to use Lard, or Butter mixt with Niter. If the Almonds be swelled, thou must abstain from all sowr things, and prepare a gargarism of Figgs, St. Johns Bread, Mallows-flowers, Liquorice, El∣der-canes, mixing with it some Rose-honey or Juyce of Walnuts, or the Rob Diamorom, gargling often with it, seeing that this symptom is a dange∣rous thing; for when the Throat swells of it, few Patients do escape death, especially if it be a Pestilential Squinancy. And in case there appear any Tumour outwardly, take fine Flower, Milk and Saffron, making a Pulse of it, and, to keep it from grow∣ing hard, mix with it Althea-salve, or Houndstongue-salve, the Oyl of blew Violets, Mullein, white Lillies, Camo∣mile, or the like, adding a little Oyl of Scorpions to it, and applying this outwardly. Make also a Scraper of Alder-wood, if it may be had; if not, other wood will serve, though Alder be best. Throw it into cold water, and let it
lye there, using it as often as there is need; yet take heed of making thy Tongue sore or raw. CHAP. VI. Of Fevers, Belly-aches, Tumors of the Belly, Yellow Jaundise and Distempers of the Liver. IN Camps there is nothing more frequent than Fevers of the Sto∣mach, arising from ill dyet, which Souldiers are often put to for want of better, eating what they can get, Cheese, Herbs, Flesh half boiled, stale and musty Bread and the like. Hence is gather'd a morbifick matter in the Stomack, which causeth putrefaction, and consequently Stomack-feavers. In this case thou art first to purge: And for that purpose make use of the Pulvis solutivus de tribus, recommended above, taking the weight of a ducat or a ducat and an half, in warm broath, and fasting two or three hours after
it. Or fetch from the Apothecary of the Tabulatum Diaturbith cum Rhubar∣baro, or the Diaphoenicon in tabulis, ta∣king half an ounce at a time, and keeping thy Chamber. Or, infuse Sena-leaves in Wormwood-wine, and drink a small glass-full of it an hour before thy break-fast: This will also serve very well, especially if some Carduus benedictus have also been fer∣mented in the Wormwood-wine. If thou art troubled with Gripings or Inflation of the Belly, take of Ze∣doar, or Angelica-roots, or Orange-peels, cut them small, and take at a time the weight of a ducat in hot broath. If the Inflation be much, take in the morning the quantity of a hasel-nut of Mithridate, fasting an hour after it; and if the pains of thy Belly prevail, make a Decoction of Wormwood in Wine, and drink of it as hot as thou canst; this will allay the pains and give thee some stools. Mean time abstain from raw Fruit, and Beer, Milk, Herbs; and such like.
If thou art swollen, take half a drachm of Rubarb, and about the same quantity or a little less of Mechocan; reduce it to powder, and take it in Wormwood-wine, or warm broath, in the morning fasting, and eat no∣thing within an hour or two after. Be careful to take down some Treacle in the morning fasting; but you are first to be purged. Otherwise make a Decoction of the Roots of Elecam∣pane and Pimpernel, or Swallow-wort, in Wine, and drink a warm draught of it mornings; it will pro∣voke Urine. If thou canst bear a∣mongst it Wormwood, Carduus bene∣dictus, or Centory, add them in the Decoction, and it is a good potion for the Liver. An Herb, call'd by the Latins Eupa∣toriam Avicennae, in English (I think) Common Hemp-Agrimony, hath a great operation in swelled People, drinking of the Decoction thereof, made in Wine. Besides, use in this case Par∣sley and Smallage-roots in thy meat. Boil Horse-radish, and drink of the
Decoction warm in the morning. Thy ordinary drink is to be a water, in which hath been boiled a good quan∣tity of Cummin, Annis or Fennel. You may also now and then drink a little Wine, swelled People having no great heat in them. From these obstructions of the Li∣ver and Mesaraic Veins comes diffi∣culty of Breathing and a dry Cough, which occasions the Inflation of the Belly, and helps to entertain the cru∣dities and indigestions: Mean time there useth to follow upon this the Yellow Jaundise. For this, take the Roots of Cyclamen or Sow-bread, re∣duce them to powder, and take the weight of half a ducat in Meath, or Wine mixt with a little Honey, swea∣ting upon it; and you shall find your sheets discoloured of a yellowish co∣lour. In the same manner make use of the Seed of Aquileja, or Columbine. I have reduced these three to powder, and mixt them together, and given of it the weight of a ducat to sweat; which hath proved very successful.
Orange-peels used in like manner, do also much good in this case. The bit∣ter Centory boiled in Meath, and a good draught drank of it warm in the morning, is also very good. Like∣wise a Decoction of the white Hore∣hound and Cichory-roots is also used to good purpose in this case. These things expel also Worms, if any do lodge within thee; for which may also be used the Souldiers Pills of Aloe, called Marocostinae. In this case Vi∣neger of Squills is also an excellent remedy, taking of it in the morning early a spoonful, two or three, and exercising after it. It will open the Breast, and make you expectorate phlegm and slime in abundance. If you be troubled with Wind and Gripings of the Guts, be careful to have your Body soluble. Boil Calamus, cut small, in broath, drink of it hot, putting a little Angelica, or Master∣wort. Do this mornings and even∣ings, and beware of drinking cold, and abstain from all Milk, keeping your self very warm, especially about
the Feet, which you will do well to bath with a Decoction made of Asa∣rabacca, Camomile, wild Trefoil, wild Marierom, wild Thyme, putting a little Salt into it. For your drink, boil Cummin, Annis or Fennel in water; and now and then a glass of wine may do well. These Gripings may also be cured with drinking very bitter Worm∣wood-wine, as hot as you can endure it. This is also opening. If you boil Elecampane, and Orange-peels with the Wormwood, it will have the greater effect. And if you add to it Allium Sylvestre (Crow-Garlick) you have an excellent Medicine for this purpose. This I have used my self, and found present relief from it, when in a very hard Winter upon a Journey I was taken with these Gripings. 'Tis indeed a very unpleasant potion, ex∣ceeding bitter, especially being to be drunk hot; but the good effects will make amends for that. If the pains should not cease after all this, mix with it the quantity of a hasel-nut of
Treacle or Mithridate, and so drink it off together. If you can get Malvasy, mix a little Oyl of Olives with it, and drink of it warm. Oyl of sweet Almonds would be better, one half of that and the other of Malvasy; though these things perhaps will not so easily be had in a Camp. Fresh Butter may serve instead of Oyl. Else make a Decoction of Juniper-berries, or Laurel-berries, and Ele∣campane in strong Wine, and drink a good draught of it mornings and evenings. Or reduce the Herb Car∣duus benedictus to powder, and drink its weight of a ducat in warm Malvasy or other strong Wine; it will remove the Gripings, especially if you mix with it a little Zedoary pulverised. For your Meat, take Larks, if they chance to be in season, draw them, and fill their bellies with Garlick, and so rost and eat them. Make a Decoction of Burnet, or of Master-wort, and Laurel-berries, in Beer, strain it, and melt a little
Butter in it, adding a little Pepper, and so drink of it hot. For an outward Application, take the Oyl of Rue and Wormwood, dip Cotton into it, and put it warm to thy Navil. Or beat Onions, and fry them in Dill or Camomile-Oyl, wrap it up in a linnen Cloth, and apply it to thy Belly, where the pain is most violent, refreshing it often. The Oyl of Laurel-berries, mixing a little Juniper-berry-oyl or Nutmeg-oyl with it, may be used with great benefit, anointing the Navil there∣with, and afterwards put to the Na∣vil a warm dry bag filled with Bran and Camomile-blossoms. Or fry Cow-dung in the Oyl of Dill, or of Camo∣mile, or of white Lillies, and apply it thus to thy Navil, keeping thy self, and especially thy Leggs, very warm. If you perceive any Hydropical Distemper in you, make a Decoction of Wormwood and Juniper-berries in Wine, drink every morning a warm draught of it fasting. You may also to very good purpose boil with it Swal∣low-wort,
Burnet, or Succory roots, ad∣ding also to it some Annis or Fennel-seed. But it will be requisite first of all to purge with Mechoacan and Rhubarb; and now and then to repeat this pur∣gation. Abstain from Milk, Beer, Fruit, and all raw and obstructing food. If you knew how to use Elder, you would have an excellent Purge to free your Body from the Hydropical water, because the Juyce of the Roots of Elder purgeth Hydropical Persons exceedingly: But 'tis not so safe to use it, unless you do it with great caution, because a very little of it taken in∣wardly purgeth both by stool and vomit, like Antimony. Half a nut∣shel full may suffice. The like effect you'l find in Elder-buds boiled, and then dressed with Oyl and Vineger like a Salad, eating a very little of it. But I advise you not to use too much of it; else it will cast you into great faintness. The Juyce of the Roots of blew Lillies hath the like vertue, but is likewise to be used with great discretion.
Otherwise take Earth-worms, and having wash'd them clean in Wine, reduce them to powder, and take of it for some mornings the weight of half a drachm in warm Broath or Wine, mixing a little Rhubarb with it. The Swelling of your Leggs may be removed by heating some Tiles and sprinkling them with Wine, and clapping them about your Leggs to make them sweat. For a swelled Groin, take warm Milk, wherein Ca∣lamus Aromaticus hath been boiled, and sweeten it well with Sugar, and apply it. CHAP. VII. Of all sorts of Fluxes; as also the Te∣nasmus, or vain endeavour of going to stool; and the Hemorrhoid or Riles, and Marisca's or sore Fundaments. IN Wars and Camps, Bloody and other Fluxes are very frequent, caused by an irregular and ill dyet;
and these Distempers, especially the Bloody Flux, carry away abundance of Men. Where it is to be noted, that the Bloody Flux is infectious, and very catching. Common Fluxes and Loosenesses may easily be cured. Amongst other Remedies, take burnt Harts-horn, and take it often in Broath; or pulverise Medlar-kernels, and take of the pow∣der in Broath likewise. Also an Ele∣ctuary made of Quinces and Sloes will cure them. The same does Nut∣meg, and the Roots of Tormentil, Snakeweed, or the Roots of Cinque∣foil, baked in Eggs, and eaten. Like∣wise the Seed of Dock, broad Plan∣tain; item Terra Sigillata, or Bolus Ar∣menus, and Wheaten-bread coming hot out of the oven, and dipt in red Wine, and eaten. Again, Mastick pulverised, and put into Almon-milk, red Wine, or Broath, the weight of a drachm, is good for such a Looseness especially as comes from indigestion; adding a little Nutmeg or Galingal to it. Oaken-leaves also, or the Rinds
of Pear-trees, with a little Mace boi∣led in Wine, and drunk, cureth com∣mon Fluxes. Again, Bursa Pastoris (Shepherds-Purse) boiled in Steel-water with a little Coriander, and drunk, is also very good; and so are Crafishes boiled in Vinegar, and the scales beaten to powder, taking a drachm of it mornings and evenings, either in red Wine, or in Broath wherein red-hot Steel hath been seve∣ral times quenched. Hawes also boi∣led, and made into a thick Electuary, and strained, is beneficial, if taken in the morning fasting, and an hour or so before supper, the quantity of a Walnut. Besides, take new Milk with its Cream on it, quench therein divers times red-hot Pebble-stones, so that the Milk may grow hot of it; then mix with it two or three well-beaten Yolks of Eggs, two ounces of Sugar, melting in it an ounce and an halt of the Suet of a Deer or Stagg, and about half an ounce of Album-graecum, using it for a Clyster, which cleanseth and
healeth the Guts, and allays the sharp∣ness of the Blood and other corrosive humors, that annoy the Bowels. But take heed of not stopping too suddenly the Bloody Flux, or any o∣ther Laske; for if you do, the annoy∣ance will remain in the Body, and cause Impostumes, Difficulty of brea∣thing, and other dangerous Distem∣pers. Wherefore consult with thy strength, and if that be considerable, make not too much hast; yet keep a bridle upon it, so as to be able to stop it when there is need. Mean time, if it be without a Fever or heat, you may do much with new Milk, drin∣king it also mornings and evenings warm, some red-hot Stones having been quenched therein, and some Su∣gar mixed with it, to prevent curd∣ling in your Stomach. This Medi∣cine was known to the famous Grecian Physitians, Aetius, Alexander Tral∣lianus, and Galenus himself, l. 10. de Simpl. Med. facult. If you add a little Album-graecum to it, 'twill be the bet∣ter. I have my self done much good
with thus prepared Milk, but then there must be no Fever; which if there be, you'l easily perceive it by a great thirst, quick pulse, hot hands, and little sleep, &c. For, Bloody Fluxes are not wont to be accompanied with shaking Fevers, but only with hot fits, which spend more of the Pa∣tients strength in an hour, than sha∣king Agues in several days; which is to be well heeded. Eggs boiled hard in Vineger, and given to the Patient, that is troubled either with the Bloody or any other Flux, it will be stopped. The Roots of Tormentil, or of Snake-weed pulverised, and this pow∣der drunk in a convenient vehicle, the weight of a drachm, is one of the most approved remedies against these Flux∣es; Tormentil-roots being very pow∣erful not only to stop them, but also to take away their carching malig∣nity. The Moss that grows on wild Rose-shrubs, reduced to powder, and ta∣ken in Wine, wherein have been
boiled the husks of Acorns; is an ap∣proved remedy in this case. Scrape red Lead or Rudle, such as Carpenters mark their lines with, put it into Wine or Broath, wherein hath been boil'd the broader kind of Plantain and Tormentil-roots; or take it in an Egg. Hares-blood dried, and taken in∣wardly, is also a tried Medicine in this Distemper. Item, open a new-laid Egg, take out the white, and fill it up with Nutmeg, or the pulverised root of Tormentil or of Snake-weed, and give it the Patient to eat; or put into it some pulverised Blood-stone, and it will do good. I have used with good success the Seed of the broader Plantain, grosly beaten, and rosted in an Egg, against the Flux; and I know it also to have been beneficially used against the Bloo∣dy Flux. Take of Mummy, a little Mastic, Bol Armeniac, Sanguis Draconis, mix them together, and make a powder of them, and take of it in a convenient
liquor, the weight of a drachm, once or twice a day. Take Rye-biscuit, and boil it in water with Coriander and the roots of Tormentil or of Cranes-bill; quench some Steel in it once or twice, and give of it to the Patient to drink. Make a Decoction of Shepherds-purse and Meadow-sweet, in water and wine, and now and then drink of it. Burn live Crasishes in an earthen Pipkin well-closed, until they be so burnt as to be reduced to powder; of which give to the Patient mornings and evenings a thimble-full or two in a convenient liquor. A dried Liver of a sucking Lamb, or of any other such Animal, is very good in this case, provided such a Liver, before 'tis dried, be boiled in Vine∣ger. Let the Patient take a drachm of it twice a day. Also the Blood of a Lamb, or of a Hind, both dried, will have here a good effect. Take a Pigeon, Wood-cock, or Partridge, and having drawn any of
them, fill them with Mastic and a little Nutmeg, and so rost them on a spit, and whilst they are rosting, baste them with red wine, and so let them rost till they grow so hard as will make them pulverable; then re∣duce them or any of them to powder, and take a spoonful of it at a time in warm broath. The highest Experiment in this case is Crocus Martis, taken in the Juyce of the broader kind of Plantain, or in a Pulse of red Beans, or Rice-broath; the dose is half a dram. But when the pain is very great, you may then add to it some opiat Medicine, as of the Trochisques de Garabe, or one onely grain of Laudanum Opiatum. And give the Patient now and then a little new-made Treacle, or mix with it a few grains of the Confection of Archi∣genes; for of such Medicaments a Field-Apotheque is not wont to be destitute. For the Patients ordinary drink, boil water, and in it Coriander, dried Sloes, dried slices of Quinces, burnt
Hartshorn, Mastic, Nutmeg, or any one of these; putting to it some of the roots of Snake-weed, Tormentil, or such like adstringent roots. Of this water the Patient may drink ac∣cording as his necessity shall require. The red Juyce of Quinces, boiled up without Sugar, is also much to be commended in this case, for streng∣thening the bowels, two or three spoonfuls of it being taken at a time, and that twice a day. In many places a drink is made of Sloes, Pilosella or Mouse-ear, and Ju∣niper-berries, infusing them all in common water, and letting them fer∣ment together. This yields a pleasant acid drink, allaying the violence of the Flux, and quenching thirst with∣all. The Rich may make Granat or Quince-wine. But I have here un∣dertaken to deliver such things, as are parable and cheap for the poor com∣mon Souldier. I am sorry, that in the Field there is no conveniency of administring
Clysters: For, though I prescribe none without great necessity; yet Clysters being of great benefit in Di∣seases of the bowels; they being to them like Plaisters, I cannot but re∣commend in this Distemper Clysters of Milk, wherein Pebble-stones have been several times quenched, mixing a little of the melted suet of a Stag or Hind, without any oyl or other fat. I remember, I had once a Pati∣ent of quality, that had about an hun∣dred stools within twenty four hours, who by the use of such Clysters, once or twice applied, was fully restored. The cause whereof is, that the Milk washes the bowels, and clears them of the sharp humors that annoy them; moreover, it is healing and repair∣ing, by reason of the Pebbles quen∣ched therein. The Sugar is abstersive, and helps to clean the injured places. The Far sticks to the parts annoyed, to defend them from being further hurt by the subsequent humors, which run∣ning down over it, can find no stay there, and consequently cause no more hurt to those parts.
Yet must you not put in any greasie Fat, or any Oyl of Olives, because they hinder healing; and all Oyl, ex∣cept that of Linseed, Poppies, Hemp and Almonds, is very sharp; and you will find, that if any drop of Oyl of Olives should chance to fall into your eye, no Juyce of Orenges or Limons is so strong as to exceed the acri∣mony of that Oyl. But of this Oyl more will be said in the next Chapter, to which I therefore refer you. If you would have your Clyster yet mil∣der and more sanative, you may beat a yolk or two of new-laid Eggs, and mix them with it; though I have con∣tented my self with the Ingredients before mention'd, and found great benefit thereby. Else you may in this case use for a Clyster the Cremor hordei, mixt with yolks of Eggs beaten in it; which is also very good to wash out the bowels. Here is no conveniency of making much use of Apothecary-shops; else many things might be prescribed to lay upon the belly and the navil, as
also divers fermentations, and stoma∣chical unguents. You may therefore content your self with those plain and easily parable means, already deliver'd, and be thankful to God for them. But then you are also to think upon means to obviate Symptoms of this Distemper, and particularly Drought, which is wont very much to torment people in this Disease. 'Tis true, Acid things do quench thirst, but they cannot be used boldly, and there∣fore you must use them with great discretion and wariness. And as for sweet things, they usually increase thirst, and do easily corrupt, and turn into gall. Wherefore give to the Patient preserved Currans; or, if fresh ones be in season, mix a quantity of them with Honey or Sugar, and give him of it to eat upon white-Bread and Butter. Or plump dried Black-cherries, or dried Damascene-prunes, in half Wine and half Water, and let him hold and squeeze them in his mouth. Or, if you can, mingle some Almond-milk with Chalybeat-water,
and let him drink thereof; and this is both meat and drink. Or let him drink water, wherein Corian∣der and roots of Tormentil have been boiled. Or boil in water dried slices of Quinces, roots of Bistorta or Snake-weed, and burnt Harts-horn, put into it a tosted crust of Rye-bread rubb'd with Nutmeg, but let it not lye in it above a quarter of an hour, lest the water should thicken and become viscous. Marmelat also of Quinces, Black-cherries, and Sloes, is proper in this case, giving the Pa∣tient a slice of it to hold upon his tongue, and so to swallow it down. Further, you must learn how to remedy a Tenasmus, which is more irksome to the Patient, and occasions more trouble to the Physitian, than the Bloody-flux it self, since it night and day painfully provokes the poor Patient to go to stool, and yet to no purpose. For this I have used many remedies, but found almost nothing more beneficial, than Fomentations of this nature following: Take Poten∣tilla
(wild Tansie Silver-weed) Knot∣grass, Mullein, and Oak-leaves, of each as much as you please, put them into two linnen bags, and let them boil in Smiths-water, wherein much Iron hath been quenched: Squeeze out these bags between two boards, and let them be held alternately to the anus, as hot as can be endured. Black Pitch, such as is found on Larch and Fir-trees, put upon a heated fire-shovel, and the fundament held over it, is also a good remedy; and so is Turpentine, used after the same manner. Again, take a black well-burnt Brick out of the hearth, heat it tho∣roughly, and wet it with sharp Vi∣negar, and wrap it about with a linnen cloth, and let the Patient sit on it as hot as he can endure it. This was the Experiment and Remedy of old Aetius; but he reduced the Brick to powder, and by boiling it in Vine∣gar, reduced it to a pulse, and so put it into a linnen rag, and ap∣plied it to the fundament. You
may chuse which you please of the two. Milk-Clysters, such as above pre∣scribed, would also be good, but that 'tis not safe with Clyster-pipes to vex the anus, which is already sore e∣nough. Yet you may give a Suppo∣sitory of Deers-suet mixt with some Oyl of Mullein. And the grey Dia∣pompholox, or the white Camphire-unguent, or the like, mixt with it, would not be improper in this case. If there be a Falling down of the fundament, then let it often take in the fumes of the above-mention'd Herbs, adding to them the beaten stalks of Sloe-shrubs, and those of red Roses, as also Mouse-ear, and Mug∣wort. The outer bark of Elder, and of Shepherds-purse, doth also well with it. But above all things keep the Patient warm, and let by no means any of the abovesaid steams grow cold on the sore part. Make also a Decoction of Garlick, and pour it hot into your close-stool, let the Patient sit upon it, to receive
the hot steams. Besides, put some burnt Hartshorn in a linnen cloth, and so strew it upon the fundament, by little and little to draw it up. Or heat an Oaken-board very well, and cover it over with Stags-suet, and let the Patient sit upon it whilst 'tis hot. Put Colophonium or the Rosin of Pine-tree upon a heated Iron, and let the Patient by holding his fundament over it take in the steams thereof. A∣noint also the part with Butter, in which Onions have been boiled; and strew upon it Album-graecum very fine∣ly pulverised. You may also make a Salve of Ceruse, Bol Armeniack, Dragons-blood, Stags-suet, Blood∣stone, Oyl of Myrrh, or Butter in which first hath been boiled broad Plantain, Mullein, or wild Tansie Silver-weed; and with this anoint the fundament. As for the Marisca's, which do tor∣ment Men especially, they may be cured with Oyl of Eggs, Salve of red Hounds-tongue, as also with the Unguentum Populeum, or with Butter
stirr'd up and down in a Leaden Mor∣tar, till it turn grey or blackish. Let the Patient drink also of Scrophularia or Fig-wort, infused in his drink, this being a specific for that evil. Also the Oyl of Mullein, Elder-blossoms, Water-lilly, and White-lillies, is an excellent remedy for it, a rag dipped therein being laid upon the part affected. To use scarifying on the lower part of the back-bone, is also very good, though it be very painful. If the Hoemorrhoid-vein bleed in a convenient time, and do not over-bleed, it is an exceeding good thing, and preserves from many Diseases, as the Inflammation of the Lungs, Stit∣ches of the sides, the Leprosie, Me∣lancholly, Quartans, and the like. If the same vein should bleed in one that is mad, or disturbed in his mind, or in one that is troubled with the Inflammation of the Kidneys, these Distempers would thereby be allayed. But if it should bleed too often and too violently, it weakens much,
causeth a pale colour and the Dropsie. My Collegues and I have often open'd it by Leeches, and thereby found great benefit. But in case it should exceed in bleeding, you must deal with it as you do with the Bloody Flux, and give to the Patient Terra Sigillata, Bol Armeniack, burnt Harts-horn, and the like adstringent things. If you can get some teeth of the Hippo-potamus, rasp it into pow∣der, and drink some of it in red or white wine; it stops all bleeding, of the nose, mouth, guts, fundament, hoemorrhoids, the matrix, especially the bleeding of Women after deli∣very. Here is also very useful the express'd Juyce of Plantain, Shepherds-purse, and of the tender leaves of Ras∣berries, or Brambles, infused in wine and drunk.
CHAP. VIII. Of Pestilential Boyls, Ulcers, Carbuncles, and other venomous Sores. ABove I have prescribed some, both Preservative and Curative, Medicines against the Plague, reser∣ving for this place the Chirurgical means, to be used against that Di∣stemper, thinking it best to discourse of them together in a place apart. Concerning then the Pestilential Bubo's and Sores, that rise behind the Ears, under the Arms, and about the Groin, the Cure of them con∣sists chiefly in this, that they be ri∣pen'd with speed; for which end are to be employed meer emollient and suppurating things. Yet are you to know to distinguish between Boyls, there being some of them that are not venomous, especially in young people; and they may be hereby dis∣cerned, that at the touch they cause
no pain, whereas the Pestilential ones are very painful; which are also discover'd by the accompanying venomous Feaver, and other pernici∣ous Symptoms. And of these latter great care must be had to bring them out, and to a speedy maturation, be∣cause those that lye deep are very dan∣gerous. Some there have been, that have used Scarification, and even Vesica∣tories, thereby thinking to fetch out the venom. Others have pierced the Sores through, about a hands breadth beneath the Sores, putting the root of black Helebore into them, thereby to draw out the venomous matter. But such means have rather irritated the evil, caused great pains, and put the Patient to greater danger. Wherefore I judge nothing safer and better, than, as I was intimating, to use Emollients. Take then of the common Diachylon, and lay it upon the invenom'd Boyls; and besides make a pulse of these herbs, viz. of Camomile, Mallows, Melilot, Dill,
Line-seed, Fenu-greek, Althaea, the roots of White Lillies, as also salve of Althaea, Oyl of Camomile and Lillies, mixing a little Saffron with it, and some Oly of Scorpions. Of this pulse make some warm, and lay it over the Diachylon upon the Sore. Or, boil Wheaten-bread in the broath of Mallows and Camomile, till it grow soft, then saffron it over, and mix March-mallows-salve with it, and lay it on. Or make a Plaister of Figgs and rosted Onions; or, make a pulse of Bread-leaven, Honey, yolks of Eggs, and the juyce of Onions, adding a little Turpentine to it, and so lay it on. If the meer common Diachylon be not sufficient, use the Plaister Dia∣chylon cum gummis or de Mucilagini∣bus, or mix a Melilot-plaister with the common Diachylon, make a pulse of it with Oyl of Lillies, mix∣ing a little Oyl of Scorpions with it, and so lay it on. In laying on of Treacle, I have this consideration, that Treacle hin∣ders
putrefaction, which is the thing here most of all desired, because all maturation, which here is a reducing the Sore to suppuration, is a kind of putrefaction. Here also the Plaister call'd Basilicon is of good use; likewise the Ceratum Oesipum Philagrii and Mesuae, which Cerata are made of Gummi Ammoniac, Bdellium, Turpentine, liquid Styrax, Goose-grease, Marrow of Cows-bones and Oesipum, and a little Saffron. Some take a dried Toad, and lay it upon the boyl, to draw out the venom. Now when the Sores are softned and ripe, and yet break not of them∣selves, they are to be opened with a lancet; and if you have to do with Persons so delicate that they cannot endure a lancet, you may make use of the Lapis Septicus or Corrosive-stone, which opens without pain, but is more slow. Mean time beware of opening the Sores too soon; for then they will turn to a hard swelling, which the Patient will not wear off whilst he liveth.
There are also some Plague-sores that never break, but wear away by sweat. Yet if they should leave be∣hind some hardness, you may, when the danger is past and the sickness overcome, make use of some fomen∣tations of Melilot, Camomile, March-mallows, Mullein and such like: You may also take of the Gum, call'd Ta∣camahaca, and mix with it a Plaister of Melilot or Diachylon, and lay it on. The Sores being open'd, they must be kept open with small pellets, (called by the Germans, Quellmaisseln,) dipt in a Salve made for this purpose out of fresh Butter, Yolks of Eggs, and Tur∣pentine, well mixt together cold. But it happens sometimes, that such Bubo's, by reason of the venomous matter, do eat in, or grow fistulous, or make matter-baggs, in which the matter settles. In this case you must use the Unguentum fuscum, Apostolicum, or the Aegyptiacum: Or make the fol∣lowing water, to be squirted into such Sores; namely of Celondine, Scordium
or Water-germander, Carduus-bene∣dictus, Centory, or the like Herbs, together with Tormentil and Whit∣low-grass; all boiled in wine. If the Sores be very ill, you may boil with it some quick Brimstone, and Myrrh, and, if need be, mix with it a little fine Verdigrease. Or, take Honey four ounces and an half, a quarter of an ounce of Aloes Epatica, a drachm of Salt, an ounce and a half of Scordium, mix all well together, and keep it for use; and when you have occasion for any of it, then dis∣solve it in wine, and spirt it in. Mean time, enlarge the opening of the Boyls with the aforesaid pellets, that so the matter may have vent enough, and come away without any impedi∣ment. The Unguent of Ulysses Aldrovan∣dus is also very good, for the clearing of such Sores; and 'tis made of Oyl of Roses, the Juyce of broad Plantain, sharp-pointed Dock, Centory, and Night-shade, with a little Litharge, burnt Lead, and prepared Camphir.
Instead of the Juyce of Night-shade you may take that of Cumfry. As for the Sores call'd Anthraces, and those they call Carbuncles, great care must be taken to break them soon, and to heal them slowly, that so the poisonous matter may all come away. They ripen and break soonest by fatty (but not hot) Plaisters and Unguents; especially such as are made of butter, leaven, yolks of Eggs and Honey; or if you mix together Turpentine, Unguentum Populeum, or Rose-salve mixt with yolks of Eggs, or the Un∣guentum Anodynum mixt with the Ointment of Hounds-tongue, and laid on it. It must be often refreshed, because such hot Sores and Ulcers, before they break, do so draw, waste, and, as 'twere, lick up those fatnesses, that sometimes of the plaisters, that have lain on them, there remains no∣thing but the bare ragg. The Em∣plastrum Basilicon, or the common yel∣low drawing plaister, is here the most useful. You must also surround the An∣thrax
with good defensives; for if it invade the neighbouring part never so little, it will soon make a large halo or circle, which will at length separate from the sound, and fall away like an escarre. For such defensives make use of Album Campho∣ratum, or the Unguentum de Liqui∣ritia, known by our people under the name of Dr. Mindererus his Lico∣rish-ointment. Item the Unguentum de Lithargyro; or the Unguentum Jovis, prepared of fresh Butter, with Thla∣spiminus, or Bowyers Mustard, (other∣wise Narrow-leaved wild Cresses,) Cranes-bill, Elder, Poppy, Vervain, and some shaved Licorish. Some take nothing but Vervain and the fresh leaves of Henbane, beaten together, and the Juyce strained, and so used. Of this Ointment you may make much with confidence; for it will do you very good service in Inflam∣mations, especially in the case of the swelling of the groins. Amongst the approved Medicines for this purpose, may deservedly be
reckoned the plaister made of Soot; which is thus to be prepared: Take of the finest Chimney-soot one ounce and a quarter; of Leaven, Turpen∣tine and fresh Butter, ana one ounce; of Venetian Soap an ounce and a half; two yolks of Eggs; of Treacle and Mithridate, ana a quarter of an ounce: Beat all these together in a mortar; and so reduce it to a paste, and then use it plaister-wise. When the Anthrax or the Car∣buncle is broken, you must then handle it very gently and discreetly; using only the above described Egg-salve, putting it into the opening, and covering the Sore only with the common yellow drawing plaister, or the plaister prepared of Oyl, Wax, and Rosin, or Turpentine. Let the matter work out well, and when you are sure that 'tis very clean, and have a mind to consolidate it, make only use of Triapharmcon▪ i vulgarly call'd the brown Diachylon; you may besides put into it some of the Unguentum de Tutia, and that of the Diapompholox
and one of the plaisters of them upon it. The Ulme-plaister also, made of Oyl and Ceruse, heals also very well. But be very careful, lest any of the matter remain lurking in the Ulcer. If here and there any should be found yet remaining, as often happens, then make use of the Emplastrum Apostolo∣rum. But if you can prepare the Diapalma, otherwise called Diacalci∣thros, make use of that. I am wont to call it the Fistula-plaister, because it doth not easily suffer Fistula's to stink, but keeps them clean and sweet. Such a plaister is also that, which is called Isis, to be found in Galen, and performing the same thing. They are both to be found in the Augustan Dispensatory, together with the way of preparing them. Now what concerns Old Sores, which many are troubled with, in their Leggs especially, because the humors of the body usually settle there; you must above all things be careful to keep them clean, and to that end wash them, at least once a
day, with your own urine: Or boil Carduus-benedictus, Egrimony, Plan∣tain, and roots of Tormentil, in half small meath and half wine, and wash the Ulcer with it, as often as you dress it. Among the common plaisters for such evils is the brawn Diachylum one of the best. Else you may prepare this Ointment which follows: Take the middle rind of Elder, and St. Johns-wort, boil them in oyl, putting a little wine to it, and so let it boil up till the wine be boiled away; then take it off from the fire, and let it cool; this done, stir a little Turpentine amongst it, and a yolk or two of Eggs, according as you make a greater or lesser quan∣tity; mixing with it a little Allum, and Vitriol, (the white is the best) stir all well together, and apply it to the Ulcer, and make a bandage, and cover it as usually. For a good Drawing-plaister, take Rosin, Bee-wax and Oyl-olive; the quantity of the Rosin must be but the half of the Wax: Let them melt together, and
stir amongst it some Tartar exquisitly powder'd. Use not much of fatty things to such Ulcers. I have had under my care such Ulcers, that were to be healed with only dry things, as with strewing in of Crocus Martis, and the red Earth of Vitriol, of which hereafter. For this reason the antient Physi∣tians and Chirurgions invented a dry Stone, which they kept so secret, that they called it Lapis Philosophorum; which is easily made, as followeth: Take Allum, Hungarian Vitriol, of each one pound; beat them to pow∣der, and mix them well together; then put all into a glased earthen pot, and pour upon it two quarts of water, boil them together, and stir them continually with a Spatula, taking off the scurn: When 'tis boiled in, put to it an ounce of Bolus Armenus, an ounce and a half of Ceruse, a quarter of an ounce of Camphir, all finely powder'd, stirring it well about; lastly put it to a quart of sharp Vine∣ger, and boil all together to a stony
consistence; which reduce to pow∣der, and of it strew a little into the Ulcer, or let some of it dissolve in a convenient liquor, and wash the Ulcer therewith, or dip some linnen raggs in it, and lay it over the place. 'Tis also prepared this way: Take green and white Vitriol, of each a drachm; of Lapis calaminaris, Ceruse, Bol Armeniac, of each two ounces and a half; of Sal Armoniac an ounce. Beat them all to powder, put them in an earthen pot, mingle and stir them to∣gether in Vineger, to be a thick pulse; then put your pot upon a hot charcoal-fire, to let it grow red hot, so as that the matter be reduced to a stony con∣sistence; of which dissolve about half an ounce in half a pint of water, dip linnen raggs into it, and put it twice a day upon the Ulcer. 'Tis also very good for purulent Breasts. I was speaking above of Lave∣ments: These you may prepare of all sorts of Wound-herbs, by boiling Consound, Bugle, Fluellin, Ground-ivy, Yarrow, Snake-weed, Avens,
Arsmare; you may also, against putre∣faction and the settling of purulent matter, mix sometimes a little Myrrh, or Aloes Epatica, Frankincense, Ma∣stick, quick Brimstone, Camphir, Ni∣ter, Allum, Vitriol, or the like. Nor is it need to bind your self to this or that precisely, but you may take such of them as you can get. I have a peculiar Ulcer-salve, which I call Unguentum Decameron, being made of ten sorts of Juices. Of these the principal is the Juice of Per∣sicaria, (Arsmart;) to which are ad∣ded the Juices of Groundsel, Tobacco, Yarrow, sharp-pointed Dock, Cranes-bill, broad and pointed Plantain, Centory, St. Johns-wort, and Celon∣dine. These Juices must be well strained, and then kept for some days in glasses or glased vessels to settle; and then very gently pour off the clear from the sediment. Which done, boil them with fresh butter, and some good Licorish newly scraped, as also some Tormentil and Cumfrey, adding a little red Hounds-tongue salve and
Oyl of Myrrh, and Deer-suet: Let all be boiled together, till the cracking cease, and the Juice be boiled in. Then strain it through a linnen cloth, and add to it some Venice-Turpen∣tine, Gum Elemi and a little Bees-wax, both the latter melted each a part. Of the Wax there needs no more than to bring the Salve to a due consistence. Then is this Unguent prepared, to which may be added a little refined Verdigrease, which will make it perfect. It is of great efficacy in foul wounds, for both cleansing and healing; as experience will shew. A Chirurgion, in meeting with Ulcers, is to observe well the purulent matter that issues, since he may from thence learn the condition of the evil, whether it proceed from foul blood, gall, corrupt phlegm, or adust melancholy. If the evil grow worse, and the humors of the body force their way copiously thorow, then beware, and withall exhort the Patient to purge, or to sweat with taking some Sassafrass, or the like.
The Sanies or matter that is thick, white, and well digested, is the best; but when there runs but a sharp water out of the Ulcer, this is not good, and is withall painful. Which to obviate, you must use Litharge, Cerusse▪ and the like; putting also beaten Lead upon the place, and cleansing the fistulat holes with Lead-oyl, qualifying its sharpness with Oyl of Eggs. This Lead-oyl is made two ways, the one out of Cerusse, which is green; the other out of Litharge, which is yellow or reddish. Both are prepared with Vineger. Boil Celondine in wine, and with this wine you may also cleanse the Ulcer with good effect. Mix after∣wards a drachm of Verdigrease with about four ounces of the Juyce of Ground-Ivy; use it with wiecks or raggs dipt therein for the foul Ulcer-holes. Burn Oyster-shells to powder, and use it for old Ulcers that need clean∣sing, which this powder will well perform by reason of the Salt that is
in those shells. You may sometimes have occasion also of the Mercurius praecipitatus, or the Mercurius dulcis Cosmeticus. If you can prepare this, you have a good Remedy. As for hard Knobs and Boyls, they commonly owing their rise to the Ve∣nereal Disease are not so proper for this place. However you may make a plaister against such Knobs of the phlegm of Althaea or Marsh-mallows, Gummi Ammoniac, Galbanum, Tur∣pentine, Myrrh, Missel-toe of the oak, mixing a little Bee-wax therewith and some Oyl of Earth-worms. If you will have it stronger, mix with it Gumm Elemi, Tacamahaca or Ca∣rana. But this can only be compassed by the rich men; the poor must be content with the Melilot-plaister, mixt with Saffron and the Oyl of Mullain or Dill. You may also pre∣pare for such Patients a Salve of Fox-oyl, Dill-oyl, Turpentine, Man-grease, and the like, mixing there∣with some Oyl of Earth-worms and the Oyl of Mullain-flowers, Camomil and white Lillies.
CHAP. IX. Of the Chirurgical means of staunching blood, of Wound-balsoms and plaisters, of Wound-drinks, and remedies for Burnings. THis is the most necessary Chapter of this whole Tract. For, al∣though in every Camp, yea in every Regiment, and even in every Com∣pany there ought to be one or more Chirurgions; yet because in a battle, or the storming of a strong-hold, there may be wounded a very great number of men, who, by reason of the mul∣titude, cannot all be dressed by the Chirurgions, every common Soul∣dier, that is found and un-hurt, is obliged to assist his fellow, considering it may soon be his own case. In the first place then, refresh thy fellow, that is wounded, with wine, cold water, vineger, or the like; then place him in a right posture.
For, if the wounds be in the head or about the breast, you ought to lay him high with his head and shoulders, that so the blood may sink down from the places wounded. If his legg be hurt, put it so that it may not hang downwards, and thereby the afflux from the body be prevented, which otherwise might cause a tumour. If the wounds be in the middle of the body, then place him so, that, if possible, he may lye somewhat hollow with his back. This done, wash the wound very gently, (so as not to anger it,) with meer wine, or even with pure com∣mon water, only with a very little salt cast into it; or with the Patients own urine; and then dry it with lint of long-worn linnen, without much stir∣ring in the wound, for fear of making the veins bleed again. If any one do bleed so copiously, that it is not easily stopp'd, and the Patient is in danger, then receive of his blood in an Iron pan, and letting it run about therein, hold it over the
fire till it be dry and between your fingers friable to powder; of which strew some into the bleeding wound, and it will stop it. But of this case more hereafter. The wound being cleansed, and the bleeding stayed, take fine linnen-raggs, burn them as you are wont to do for tinder, and quench it in Oyl of Olives; and put some of it into the wound. If you have no plaister at hand, take a slice of unsalted lard and lay it on. If that be also wan∣ting, dip a pledget of linnen-raggs in warm wine, and being wrung out very dry, lay it upon the wound, and a dry bandage over it, that so the moist pledget may long keep warm. Though in such wounds, as are apt to bleed much, warm bandages are often to be avoided, and sometimes (but with singular care and discretion) cold bandages to be used, if the hurt be not in the brain, breast or bowels. Whence old Hippocrates hath this A∣phorism: Frigido verò in iis locis uten∣dum, unde sanguis aut fluit aut fluxunus est.
Yet this must be done with great caution, lest in the place affected there should follow a Gangrene. After this, take Oyl of Olives and Wine, beat them well together, and warm the mixture; dip in it linnen pledgets, wring them dry, and lay them on warm with a dry bandage over it. This must be done once every hour or every two hours; nor let this care and labour seem irksome to you, for it will have a good effect. This Dress is almost the only thing, which the Knights of Maltha make use of at Sea to heal their wounds; for the Oyl allays the pain and the swelling, as the Wine cleanseth, and these two together cause healing. Whence the Samaritan in the Gospel is said to have poured only Oyl and Wine into the wounds of him, that was fallen among Thieves. You may therefore make out of these two  Wound-salve that may be equivalent to almost every common Wound-bal∣som, preparing it thus: Take one part of Oyl-olive, and
two parts of Wine, boil them toge∣ther till the Wine be boiled in, and the Oyl, when any is thrown into the fire, cracks no more; and you have a Wound-oyl according to wish: Put of it with fine linnen shavings into the wound, and it will, for a plain remedy, do marvels. You may also melt Lard unsalted, mix it with Honey and Rye flower, and so make it into a Salve, which, though plain and simple, may, when put upon the wound; have as good an effect, as many Plaisters that are in great esteem. Otherwise, for a very good Wound-salve, take of the best Aloes cleanly pulverised the weight of a ducat, mingle and stir it with half an ounce of fine honey; melt afterwards by it self half an ounce of Deer-suet, and stir it among the other Ingredients: Thus you have a good Salve against the putrefaction of wounds, and for the asswaging of their pains, as also for healing them, if you duely apply it to the wound: If you'l add to it
a little Cyprus-Turpentin with the yolk of an Egg, you may. The black Wheel-grease in a time of need is also a good Wound salve, and is only despised because of its plainness. When you use it, lay only over it the leaves of Snake-weed, or of pointed Plantain. But by all means keep the wound clean, and let not many look into it, for fear they should by their breath annoy it; some being fasting, others having eaten one thing, others ano∣ther. But especially admit not many women, when you open the wound for cleansing and dressing it. But above all things take care, to exclude the Air as much as is possible from the open'd wound, especially if any Artery or Nerve be hurt. Take no∣tice, that Carpenters and Joyners, when they have hurt themselves, do almost by this only means of well closing their wounds and keeping out the Air, heal themselves. They take a very thin chip, and lay upon it some of the glue, wherewith they joyn toge∣ther
the boards of their work, and this they apply to the wound, first well cleansed, and let it lye on, till it fall off of it self, and the wound is healed. But this will not do in case any Bones be hurt. Item, take Honey and the Dust-flower of the Mills, fresh Butter and Bol-armeniack, and knead it well to∣gether, without any fire, until it be as thick as a Plaister, and this laid on, is very good. Item, take Cumphrey well clean∣sed, out it small, add to it one or two of the Vulnerary Herbs, such as you may  et with in the field, as Pyrola or Winter-green, Yarrow, Plantain, Fluellin, Orpin, Confound, Sanible, Bugle, &c. Boil this in Linseed-oyl and a little Wine, until the Wine is boiled away; and this being strained, put to it some raw Honey and one or two well beaten yolks of Eggs, (according to the quantity you make) and a little Turpentin, and so thrust it, with some Hemp or Flax dipt in it, into the wound.
Lime-water is one of the simplest on plainest remedies, but healeth ad∣mirably well. Take only some un∣flaked Lime, pour on it clear water, and let it stand upon it till the Lime be fallen to the bottom: Wash the wound with it, especially such as are old running Sores, and you'l find a wonderful effect. These plain means may be raised, in case you want a Chirurgion, ta∣king the assistance of your Fellow-souldier in the application; though those very remedies may challenge a place among the most chargeablednes, prescribed and applied by Masters. And provided the Chirurgion do not under-value these my plain and cheap remedies, but receive them thank∣fully, I am ready, here to teach him some ways, hitherto concealed by me, which I scruple to keep any longer from publick knowledge. Know then first, that to a Physitian belongs also the knowledge of Chi∣rurgery, as a third part of the Art of Medicine, the other two being the
Pharmaceutica, prescribing Medicines for inward Diseases, and the Diate∣tica, ordering the Patients Diet and other necessaries. I have my self, whilst I practised Physick, dressed in Camps many wounds with my own hands and cured them, carrying al∣ways my Chirurgical apparatus about me, without any disparagement to my Profession; imitating herein the Examples, above alledged, of Poda∣lyrius and Machaon, two of the chief Physitians of the Antients in the Army before Troy, who were not at all asha∣med to practise Chirurgery, and to attend the cure of wounded Soul∣diers! First of all then, consider well, whether the wound be mortal or no. Next, what limb or part it is that hath received the wound: The wounds in the Head are commonly the most dangerous, by reason of the Symptoms incident to them, as the Apoplexy, Falling Sickness or other Convulsions, the Palsey and Laming of the limbs by reason of the hurt
nerves, as also Phrensy, Loss of Hea∣ring and Speech, &c. which are wont to be consequent, according as the respective nerves have been struck or wounded. If the Breast be any where wounded, great care also is to be had, and the means must be directed to prevent purulency (which that place, by reason of the heat there, is subject to,) and to heal the pleura or the inner membrane of the ribbs; the like is to be done concerning the diaphragme, &c. You ought also to observe, what kind of wound it is, you have to do with, whether any bone, any nerve, or artery be hurt; whether it be a meer flesh-wound, and the like. If it be a gaping wound, you must, if it hath taken cold from the Air, bath it with warm wine, and keep it very close; and make use of the strong astringent plaister, prepared of Ro∣sin, Gumm Elemi, Turpentin, Pitch, with some Mastick, Frankincense, Sarcocolla, as also some Blood-stone, Mummy, and Crocus Martis mixt
therewith, and keep all on carefully with a good bandage, which is a great matter in all wounds. For, some months since, I had a Patient under my cure, whose Skull in the place of one of its sutures was sever'd, so as that I found a considerable space between the two parts separated. I order'd a Chirurgion of my particular acquaintance to draw those parts for∣cibly together with good bandages; which being well done, I caused his hair to be shorn away, and an astrin∣gent plaister to be applied, which was almost like a Rupture-plaister; where∣by in three or four weeks, to the ad∣miration of many, my Patient was perfectly healed. This plaister was the Ceratum expelle arietina, mixt with Gumm Elemi, and with a little Cera∣tum de Betonica. You must also be provided with good Blood-staunching remedies. The common ones are, Bol-armeniac, Sheep-trickles, Blood-stone, Tragacanth. Terra Sigillata, Mill-dust, Hares-hair, Pea∣cocks-dung, &c. Avoid by all means
Causticks, especially Sublimat, Arse∣nic, Colcothar; with which you an∣ger a wound, and cast the Patient into very dangerous symptoms: For, though they may by their corrosive∣ness at first astringe the wound, yet they do afterwards so fret and eat it, that you would think, hell-fire were in it. Beware also of a hot Iron, which many have a refuge to as to a Master-piece and the last remedy. Among the chief Astringents, is Frog-spawn; which therefore you are, when 'tis in season, to make good provision of, for the whole year. Take therefore in the Spring a lump of raggs, and dip it into Smiths-water, in which first some crude Allum hath been dissolved. Let this lump be dried again, and then draw it tho∣rough the Spawn of Frogs, so as that the Spawn may every where hang on it, and expose it to the Air to dry; and afterwards draw the same again thorough Frog-spawn: Which repeat as often as you can, during the season of Frog-spawn; for the oftner
you dip the raggs into it, the more vertue they will receive. This Spawn stauncheth bleeding, with a good bandage. I have often used with good success the distilled water of Frog-spawn in the bleeding of the Nose, first mixt with crude Allum, and then drawn up into the Nostrils. Take a green Frog, burn him in a pipkin, not to ashes, but so as to be redu∣cible to powder: This powder put into a small Taffaty-bagg, and hang it about the neck of a woman that floods excessively; and she will find great help from it. Having often made mention of Al∣lum, which is one of the chief reme∣dies for stopping of blood, I will make publick the Magistery of Allum, which I have hitherto kept secret. Take then of the best and clearest Allum as much as you please; pul∣verise it, and put the powder into an Oxe- or Swines-bladder, tying it very close: Then throw it into a kettle of hot water, and the Allum will be dissolved; this Solution bring over
the helm out of a low retort, until the Allum get a caput mortuum; then cease to urge the fire any more, lest you force corrosive spirits from it, which are noxious to our present purpose. This caput mortuum put a∣gain into a bladder, and dissolve it as before; and do this so long, until the whole body of your Allum be brought over the helm. But you must filter the first solution, for fear of any dust or other heterogeneous matter mixt with it. This is the Magistery of Allum, able to draw the veins together with∣out corrosion. Apply this to wounds, or any other bleeding part. You may mix with it Tragacanth, Gummi A∣rabic, Sanguis Draconis, and well-bea∣ten Whites of Eggs. Take good notice, whether the wounded Patient have heated him∣self in storming a place, or by any other military execution, or whether he be yet distemper'd by passion; for, as long as this lasts, the blood is in a rage, and can hardly be stopped
In this case stop the wound with Pea∣cocks dung; and take Vineger and Whites of Eggs well beaten toge∣ther, a little Allum, and refined Salt-peter; put to it as much Frog-spawn, Shepherds purse, broad Plan∣tain, or other convenient water, as is necessary; so that there may be three parts of water and one part of vineger; dip pledgets into it, and clap them cold to the wound, and the bleeding will cease. Crocus Martis also is an excellent stauncher of blood, to be used both inwardly and outwardly. For in∣wardly it cureth the Bloody Flux and other Fluxes; and outwardly applied to wounds and strewed into them, it closeth the veins. But it must not be prepared with Aqua-fortis, or distilled Vineger, or any corrosive thing, but only by the heat of a re∣verberating furnace; and afterwards distill often from it some proper water, as of Roses, Speed-well, Self-heal or broad Plantain; after which prepa∣ration it is divers times to pass again
through a reverberating furnace, un∣til it grow as light as a down-feather: And then 'tis fit for our purpose; for as long as it is strong and heavy, the body of it is not throughly opened. Among other things, you may make use of the Red earth of Vitriol; which is to be thus prepared: Take Vitriol, as much as you please, put it, in a new unglased pipkin, into a Potters oven, to deprive it of its moisture, and to reduce it to a Col∣cothar: Then pulverise this calcined Vitriol, and in a large glased earthen dish pour hot water on it, letting it stand so for four or five hours; then decant the water, and pour other hot water upon it, as before, repeating this three, four, or five times, until all the salt be got out of the said Col∣cothar; which whether it be done, may easily be found by the taste. Then dry this red dulcified Earth, and it will prove a very good blood staun∣ching medicine; which may also in other cases be variously used; as you'l find it hereafter of great use in my
plaister for wounds made by thru∣sting. The water you had poured on this Colcothar, you ought not to throw a∣way as useless, but to put it by; and, for other occasions, you may boil it away, and it will leave a Salt behind, as white as snow, with which you may do wonders in foul Sores. I have used it with good success in such cases; in which it cleanseth and ma∣keth a firm ground for new and good flesh to grow, upon. For, though there be many things, that cleanse Sores, yet they leave the flesh loose and spung; but this is both astrin∣gent, and withall maketh such a found and firm bottom, that you may trust to it: Whence also it is to be used in fistulous Sores. But to return to the stopping of Blood; take the blood of a Lamb or Sheep, let it stand in a clean earthen vessel, until the serum be sever'd from it; pour this off, and dry the blood well in a new glased pipkin, upon hot embers; Then pulverise it, and
mix with it a fourth part of clean pul∣verised Tragacanth, and strew this into the wound. If the issue of the blood be so impetuous, that it washes away the first application, then wipe the wound again, and strew into it of the same powder the second time. Put∣ting amongst it Allum, Crocus Martis, or the red Earth of Vitriol, you will do well: Bind the wound with the Emplastrum Santalinum, (which is cal∣led Incognitum by our Chirurgions,) or with the Ceratum ex pelle arietinae, due to Arnoldus de Villa nova. The blood being stopt, and the wound cleansed, you must then ap∣ply good vulnerary Oyls or Wound-balsoms. Oyls are all, as I mention'd above; fatty; whence it is, that they do not easily consolidate wounds, un∣less you put to them some refined Mastic, Sarco-colla, Sanguis Draconis, Sandarach, or the like. But to open unto you the good af∣fection of my heart, I shall describe here my Wound-balsom, wherewith I have, by Gods assistance, done much good; viz.
Take as much as you please of Tur∣pentin of Cyprus, which comes from Venice, and is taken inwardly; and the same quantity of the red Oyl of St. Johns wort, dissolve them together! Then take Gumm Elemy, dissolve it apart, and pour it among the other; and so let all cool, and when 'tis half cold, pour amongst it a little Oyl of Bees-wax, and your Balsom is prepa∣red. I cannot tell you the precise weight of each ingredient, because as often as I have prepared it, I have done it by the Eye, and as it seemed good unto me; only note, that there must be so much of the Gumm Elemy as to give it a due consistence; which you may try, by casting a drop or two of it into cold water; this Balsom being to be thinner than an Unguent, and yet thicker than Oyl. This Balsom heals very speedily, especially when used in wounds freshly inflicted, on fine pledgets, and only with a yellow Tractif bound over it. Be also provided with good Plaister for wounds made by Thrusting, such
as are the Opodeldoch of Theophrastus, or the good black Thrust plaister, thus to be prepared: Take of Oyl of Rose seven ounces; of Colophonium, black Pitch, white Wax, Roman Vi∣triol, Cerusse, Frankincense, Myrth, ana eight ounces, of Mastic, one ounce; of the Oyl of Eggs, two oun∣ces; of Spike-oyl, one ounce, of the Oyl of Juniper-berries, three ounces; of Mumia, two ounces; off white Vitriol and red Corals, ana two oun∣ces; of Heron-suet, one ounce; of Magnet, two ounces; of well clean∣sed Earth-worms pulverised and of Camphir, ana one ounce: Of all this make a powder secundùm artem. My Opodeldoch, that I make use of, is almost like this, but that I mix with it the red Earth of the Oyl of Vitriol, above spoken of in the matter of Blood-staunching; and add also to it Turpentin and Gumm Elemi, with some Tutia, Aloes epatica, well pre∣pared Lapis Calaminaris, and Crocus Martis: And thus the Plaister be∣comes red and hard, like Spanish
Sealing-wax. I take also Gummi Am∣moniac, Galbanum and Opoponax, the Oyl of St. Johns-wort and Myrrh. This Plaister draws from the bottom, and reaches deep. A Souldier, ha∣ving this about him, and, upon oc∣sion, working it only to some flatness, there being no need of laying it on a cloth, may thus put it on the wound, taking it off mornings and evenings to wipe it clean; and then working it through again, lay it on as before: And so he may heal himself; which when done, let him clean the Plai∣ster, and role it up in a bladder, for another occasion. I have seen considerable operations of Gumm Elemi used alone, laid on leather, and put upon the thrust; but this wound is then to be kept from falling together. To prevent incidental heat and in∣flammation of the wounds, make use of the Oyl of Roses, Bol Arme∣niac, Whites of Eggs and Camphir. But to avoid trouble, you may find ready, in the Apothecary-shops, the
Unguentum album, Unguentum de Minlo, Camphoratum de Liguiritia, de Lithar∣gyro, Santalinum, and the like; to be put about the wound when dressed. You may with great benefit, and you ought also, especially in the wounds of the Head, provided there be no dan∣ger of bleeding, lay over the ban∣dage some fine raggs moisten'd in wine, and well dried again. This allays the pain, and withall prevents swelling. And in case the wound be swelled, you may also to good purpose make use of Fomentations, made of the herb and flowers of Mullein, Betony, Egrimony, Cowslips, Camomil, Melilot, Ground-ivy, red Roses, Bugle, and the like: But beware of all hot things, whatever they be. Boil the aforesaid herbs or the like in half wine and water; but if the wound be not in∣flamed, take two parts of wine and one of water. With such fomen∣tations I have done much good; a∣mong others upon a Fencing-Master of Nurenberg, called Cameysen, who
in the publick Fencing-school received thrusts in both his Eyes, insomuch that by reason of the great swelling that ensued thereupon he lost all his sight; but by the use of such fomen∣tations, God blessing the means, I recover'd his sight. A Bone being broken, set it care∣fully, and bind it up strongly, having laid upon it Oxycroceum or Emplastrum de pelle Arietina. You may also com∣fort such wounds with the like fomen∣tations, as before described. On the bank of the Rhine is found a Stone in the gravel, call'd Lapis sa∣bulosus, which is easily reducible to powder: Of this, if you can get it, give to the Patient, whose bone is broken, a drachm to be taken in broath, mornings; of which he will find a very good effect. In the case of a Limb wrenched, clap to it Bran boiled in wine, some∣times, according to occasion, mixing with it a little Salt, and Marsh∣mallows or red Hounds-tongue-salve. If it have happened long ago, then
make a pulse of Wheaten-flower, Milk, and the Oyl of Camomil or Mullein, mixing a little Saffron with it, and clap it on hot. If there be any collection or coagulation of blood, the Unguent of Hounds-tongue will do well, together with a linnen com∣press moistened in warm wine. You must also be provided with good Wound-drinks; but they must be prepared diversly, according to the several places wounded. Thus in the wounds of the Head, Betony challen∣ges the pre-eminence and the greatest quantity of all the Vulnerary Herbs; in the wounds of the Sides, Carduus benedictus claims that right; in the wounds of the Breast, Veronica (or Speedwell) ought to have it; in those about the Kidneys, the Herb Straw∣berry must be preferred; in those near the Liver, Agrimony will have the precedency, and so forth. Mean time, the Vulnerary Herbs, to be used in such occasions, are these; Sanicle, Winter-green, Ladies-mantle, Speedwell, Orpine, Mugwort, Ground-ivy, Straw∣berry-leaves,
Agrimony, St. Johns-wort, Cinquefoil, Bugle, Tormentil, Snake∣weed, Avens, Woodrooff, &c. You may make an excellent Wound-drink of these four Ingredients, viz. Winter-green, Orpine, Mugwort and Snakeweed, boiled in half wine and water; but in case there be an inflam∣mation, wine is to be forborn, or very little of it to be employed. If any Bone be broken into splinters, do not pull them out with any vio∣lence, but loosen them with a good Ointment of Eggs, keeping the wound open the longer. Nature herself will not suffer any splinter to remain be∣hind. Now you must be ready with some good thing for blood coagulated, in case any person should have been flung down, squeesed, beaten, or fallen from a high place. The right pow∣der for this purpose is thus made: Take of Terra Sigillata or Bol Arme∣niac, Sanguis Draconis and Mumia, ana half an ounce, of Sperma Ceti and Rhubarbana half a drachm, reduce it
to a powder; of which give the Pa∣tient the weight of about a ducat in wine, or chervil-water. Or take a good quantity of Chervil, boil it in meath or flesh-broath, and let the Pa∣tient drink a good draught of it warm, three times a day. Or let him drink a thimble full of Sperma Ceti in beer, ad∣ding a little butter to it. Or take of Mumia half an ounce, of Sperma Ceti two drachms, of Oculi Cancrorum (of which the blew ones, which some∣times fall from Crafishes whilst alive, are the best,) three drachms, adding to it a little Licorish and Cinnamon, and some Tormentil-roots: Of this pulverised give every day to the Pa∣tient, mornings and evenings, the weight of about half a ducat, and by this means you will expel purulent matter and blood, and bony splinters, and sometimes even bullets lurking in the flesh; not omitting other good Wound-drinks, and vulnerary Bal∣soms, Plaisters, Ointments and Fo∣mentations. Again, take of the red Hounds-tongue Ointment, of the bigness
of a great Walnut, dissolve it in warm broath; it expels all coagulated blood, especially if you mix some Sperma Ceti with it. If you have any thorns, thistles, bullets, small shot, or the like, to draw out, where perhaps you cannot reach them with Instruments, then burn live Crafishes in a new pipkin, until they be reducible to powder, but burn them not to ashes. This pow∣der mix with Hares-suet, and lay it on, and you will find a good effect. Also take the roots of the big Reed that grows in marishes, dry them to be pulverised, and mix Virgin-honey with it, and lay it upon the part; and of the same powder give the Pa∣tient to drink, twice a day, the weight of half a ducat in wine, or in broath, or in a vulnerary potion, if you have any at hand. The first of this I lear∣ned of the Excellent Doctor Schleer of Constance. The excrement of a Gander, being applied, is also powerful in drawing out Iron. Again, Quince-wine min∣gled
with vineger, and putting some saffron and gun powder amongst it, if you give it to one that hath been shot, it will do him good. Other∣wise, they make a plaister of the roots of Cumfrey, Aron, Polypody, Juniper, and dried Radishes, all reduced to powder, and mix it with Hares-suet and grey Diachylum, making a thick Ointment of it, and spreading it over a piece of Hare-skin, and so laying it on. This is greatly praised, especially when seconded with good Wound-drinks, of which Master∣wort is one of the Ingredients: But if you have not this at hand, take a Beet and boil it in wine, and lay it warm on the wound. Likewise, young Swallows, not yet fledge, burnt to powder, and this powder made by acetum of Roses into a pulse, and laid on, does the same. You ought also to be provided for the Synovia: And if you proceed a∣right with my Wound-balsom above described, and keep the wound warm, you may therewith do much good.
Mix with it, ex abundanti, the red Earth of Vitriol, above discours'd of. This Synovia is a dangerous thing, and often causeth almost intollera∣ble pain, if it be not well handled; the Herb of Straw-berries and its Juyce have great vertue in this case. Some make use of the White of Eggs, Bol Armeniac, and the like. The Ma∣gistery of Allum also belongs hither; for, Allum mixed with vineger, and clapp'd on very warm, allays it also. Elder-blossoms likewise, used every way, are effectual in the same case. Employ also diligently such Defen∣sive-plaisters, as are not fatty, because fat lays no hold on water. To proceed to Burnings, I know almost no better Salve for burning than this; Take a Tench, or any com∣mon Pond-fish; fry one or more of them with good butter, pour the fat∣ness upon cold water in a broad ear∣then part, and you have an excellent Ointment against Burnings. When, some years since, a Powder-mill was blown up, and the Attendants upon
the work so miserably burnt, that they looked as if they had been rosted, they were healed with this Ointment, only a little finely powder'd Sage being mixt with it. Cream and Linseed-oyl mingled together, and raggs, moisten'd there∣in, put upon the burnt part, healeth, though the burning were made with Aquafortis; for, to my knowledge, a certain Chymist that had thus burnt all his arm, was thereby restored. Or, take Oyl of Elder, or stale Oyl that hath been long in a burning lamp; beat half as much, as you take of that, of the Whites of Eggs a∣mongst it, and anoint the burnt part therewith. If you can get no Oyl of Elder, take any other cooling Oyl, as of Nymphaea (Water-lillies) Poppy-seeds, Violets or Roses, or the Oyl of Poplar-buds, or of Marh-marigold Flowers. If you can have Quince-wine, it marvailously extinguishes the burning of any shot, dipping a linnen pledget in it and drawing it through the
wound, or left in it, repeating this every twelfth hour. The Juyce or Wine of Quinces must be used as it comes from the fruit, without any mixture of Sugar. This I learn'd from a Nobleman, a great Souldier, of long experience in the Wars of France, the Low Countries, and Hungary. The Unguentum Jovis, made of Hen∣bane, Vervain and Butter, is also very useful for this purpose. Likewise the Ointment of Calx viva, which is first six or seven times to be slaked and dul∣cified with pure water, pouring eve∣ry twelve or sixteen hours fresh water upon it, and decanting the former, so as to leave always the Calx at the bottom; which is then to be mixed with Oyl of Roses, or some other cooling Oyl, for an Ointment. If you be well acquainted with Elder, and know how to use it, you may obtain out of it one of the best Cures of Burnings, especially out of its middle rinds. Again, Yolks of Eggs and Linseed-oyl, equal quanti∣ties, mixt together, and spread over
the burning, is also very good. Egg-oyl likewise used by it self, and Ver∣nice employed by Joyners, do well also; but the latter of these two, if it be mixed with Oyl of Spicanard, or Petroleum, is to be mingled amongst Linseed-oyl. Spread fresh Butter upon Cabbage-leaves, having first fryed the Butter with some blossoms or the middle rind of Elder; and so lay them to the bur∣ning; Elder being a great resister of Inflammations, and therefore very good to allay St. Antonies fire; if you pull its mild green rinds from the stem, and lay them on, without moistening them. Else they use against the said Fire, Flower mixed with the pow∣der of Licorice, to be clapt on with a ragg done over with red Saunders. My way is, to take the shavings of some fresh and juycy Licorice, and to fry them in new Butter; then to strain the Butter from it, and to fry the like fresh Licorice therein, and to strain the Butter from that again; repeating this five or six times. A∣mong
this strained Butter I stir some pure and fine Cerusse, Whites of Eggs and a little Camphire. And with this Ointment I have, by the assi∣stance of God, done much good in the said inflammation of St. Antonies fire; and the common people do to this very day call this Ointment by no other name than that of Doctor Minderer's Licorice-ointment. But to return to the quenching of Burnings. If you can have Milk-cream, min∣gle it with Cow-dung freshly made, and so clap it on; though fresh Cow∣dung alone allays burning. Crafishes pounded alive, and fryed in fresh But∣ter or in common Suet, the Butter strained herefrom, is also a good Oint∣ment against burnings. Unsalted Lard, melted by a Wax-candle, or an hot Iron, and dropp'd upon fresh cold water, and then gather'd up from the water, and carefully rubbed from the same, hath the like operation. Take one of the cooling Oyls above-named, and fresh Butter, boil the middle rind of Elder in it, and with a sufficient
quantity of Wax make of it a Salve, and this also will cure burning. You ought also to be provided with a fit apparatus, Lints, Swathing-clouts, &c. and to take Deer-suet, Oyl of Roses or Elder, and white Wax, and melt them over the fire, yet so as that you melt the Wax by it self, and add of it no more to the rest than to make it a thin plaister. Into this compound you must dip some fine lint, and you'l find it very useful for any angry part; as also when one limb presses or otherwise incommodes another, as happens in hydropical and other swollen people, whose belly so sinks down, that the thighs suffer by it; in which case such lints are to be put between the parts, to keep them from immediately touching and pressing one another. A Gangrene is cured with Sal-armo∣niac boiled in Urine, especially in that of the Patient, and clapping such U∣rine upon the part affected: The quan∣tity of the Sal-armoniac may be six drachms.
For frozen Feet, take Gander-suet and Deer-suet; dissolve them toge∣ther, and pour them into a white ex∣cavated Turnip, and expose this for a while to the Air, Rain, Wind, Hoar-frost, Snow, according as the season shall be. Then mince the Turnip, and fry it in the same Suet which you had poured into it; that done, squeese it out, and let the fat fall upon cold water; and being there brought to consistence, take it off, and bring it over the helm from burned Wine, and decant this carefully from it again, and 'tis duely prepared. You may also recover frozen Feet with white rotten Turnips, beaten with Butter or Tallow, and so clapt on.
CHAP. X. Of several promiscuous Medical Practises, for the Service of the honest Souldier. THis Chapter I have annexed to the former as an Appendix, for the ease and good of Souldiers; wherein some things will occurr, not inferiour to those, that have prece∣ded. But herein I have kept no order, but set them down promiscuously, yet faithfully, to supply what may have been omitted before. If you be troubled with the Tooth∣ach, coming from the cold in winter, take the root of Pyrethrum (Pellitory of Spain) and boil it in Vineger, and hold this Vineger warm in your mouth, and it will draw out the phlegm that causes the pain. Or, take the root of Elder, boil it in half Wine and half Water, and hold it warm upon the Teeth. But what you take of this Decoction must be
often spit out, and other fresh taken into your mouth; of which I have found wonderful Effects. The root of Heath boiled together with the same herb in wine, and laid on, is esteem'd to be powerful in draw∣ing out thorns and splinters. You may make a good Ointment against the Itch and Scabbs, of Savin, stale Fat, Brimstone and Juniper-ber∣ries Oyl. If your Limbs after a long sickness be weak, boil Valerian-roots in Camo∣mil-oyl, and anoint such Limbs there∣with. Also the Oyl of Lillies in the valley, and that of yellow Violets, is good for the same purpose. For worms in the Fingers, bruise Persicaria (Arsmart,) and lay it on; or take of a Piggs Bladder of Gall, and put it on the affected Finger like a Thimble. If you have any coagulated or con∣gealed blood in your Breast, make a Decoction of Scabious, Chervil, and Germander, in two parts of wine, and one part of water; strain it, and
drink of it mornings and evenings. Against the putrefaction of the Mouth, make a Decoction of Privet in water, adding afterwards a little Allum to it, and use it for a gargarism. Also a Decoction of the middle rind of Hawthorn, with a little Allum, is of great effect in the same case. Cabbage and Colewort-leaves burnt to ashes, and a Lixivium made of it, and clapp'd on, cureth a Gan∣grene, and the wild Fire, especially if you mingle a little Oyl of Elder therewith. If you can have no Elder-blossoms for this Oyl, take the green middle rind of Elder, and boil it in Oyl Olive, and then strain the Oyl; which done, take fresh rind of Elder, and proceed with it as before, repea∣ting it three or four times to make the Oyl the stronger. You may add a little wine to it whilst 'tis boiling, but that must all boil away, and so long till the Oyl cracks no more in the fire. Southern-wood stamped with grease and laid on, draweth out splinters.
If you have the Itch or are scabby, and can light upon some water stan∣ding in the hollowness of a Beech-tree, wash your self with it. Or make a Decoction of the brown rind of Alder, (which is under the gray,) in Butter, and anoint your self with it; mixing, if you will, a little Brimstone there∣with. If you be troubled with the Ring∣worm, or any running Scab, infuse Litharge in Vineger, and let it stand a night infused, or make a Decoction of the same in Vineger. But your pan or vessel must be of brass. This Vineger mingle with Oyl of Elder, or of Roses, or the like, and it will become a fine gray Salve, curing such running Scabs as aforesaid, and coo∣ling also Inflammations. If your Body be bound, take Sage pulverised, and mix it with grease, and anoint your Navil with the quan∣tity of a hasel-nut of it. This I have with very good success advised to women in childbed, that were thus bound and obstructed. If you will
have it stronger, mix with it the Gall of a Fish or of any Animal whatso∣ever; but then you must not give it to a woman in childbed. Gromel (by the Latins call'd Milium Solis) pulverised, and the weight of half a ducat of it taken in wine or broath, provoketh urine; yet must the belly be open'd first. The same doth Linaria or Toad-flax, boiled in wine or broath. Likewise distilled water of Radishes, repeating the distil∣lation several times from other fresh Radishes. Which will have the bet∣ter effect, if the Patient bath his lower parts in a bath made of Marsh-mallows, Melilot, and the like. Gromel, above-mention'd, taken in warm broath, expels the birth: And so do the blossoms or buds of Walnut-trees; Crabs-eyes also, pulverised and taken in warm broath; likewise Issop boiled in wine, and drank warm. This I have inserted for the sake of poor Souldiers-wives, who amongst us of∣ten follow the Camp. If they have any great After-pains, let them bath
their lower parts in a Bath made of Dill, and Camomil-flowers. And the yolks of hard Eggs, beaten toge∣ther with some convenient Oyl (Nut-oyl is the best,) and a Plaister made of it, and laid to the belly, is also very good. If they have too great a profusion of blood, let them take a drachm of burnt Harts-horn, and burnt Ivory, in a convenient Ve∣hicle. In case of a mortal wound, take of pure Turpentine four ounces, wash it with fresh limpid water, and then dissolve it over a mild fire; which done, mix with it two ounces or two ounces and an half of white Wax, dissolved apart: To this add about three ounces of Womans-milk, which is sucked by a Boy. The Turpentine and Wax being somewhat cooled to∣gether, must be well stirr'd, and then powred on cold Vineger; whence, when 'tis brought to a consistence, it is to be taken off, and made into a Plaister, and so laid on. Horse-tail (in Latin, Equisetum) heals
the wounds in the urinary parts, the powder of it being taken in broath or Speedwel-water, or the Decoction thereof being drank. Gummi Ammoniac is a good discu∣tient of hard Tumors and Knobs: Ta∣camahaca appeaseth pain proceeding from cold, being laid on the part affected. To make the pellets used to be put in wounds that are to be kept open, (which here in Germany we call Quell-maissel,) take a Spunge of the finest sort, put it in Whites of Eggs well beaten and mixed with Rose-water, to make the said Spunge imbibe this moisture. Which done, bind it close together with thred, and let it well dry in the Air, and so convey of it into the wound that is to be kept open: where it will swell again, and so distend the wound. If you be troubled with the Gonor∣rhoea, take House-leek growing on old walls (call'd by the Latins, Semper vi∣vum minus,) put it into your shoes, and go bare-foot upon it; anoint your
loyns and privy parts with Henbane-oyl; and take mornings the quantity of two big hasel-nuts of well washed Turpentine, for some days together, avoiding all aromatic, hard, and salt meat. An old Experimenter hath noted, That whosoever shall wash his head twice a week with a Lixivium made of Juniper-ashes, his sight shall never fail him, but remain good to his end; nor shall that person be troubled with any vermin upon his head, nor with any head-ach, nor suffer any change of his hair. For my part, I never tryed it; but it being a very plain and safe thing, I thought good here to in∣sert it. Against the biting of a Mad-dog, lay Assa fatida with Garlick upon the bite; it will draw out the venom. To free your self from the Gravel, make a Decoction of Ash-wood in wine, and drink of it warm once or twice a day upon an empty stomach; using withall good baths. Vervin also, the leaves and roots, beaten together,
and drank, is very good in this case. If you have a strong breath, pro∣ceeding from a foul stomach, infuse Wormwood and Carduus benedictus, toge∣ther with some Citron-peels, in wine, and let them boil a little therein, and then drink a good draught of it mor∣nings. Chew also and swallow some∣times a little Myrrh, and take now and then three or four Aloes-pills. I could add many other things, if my leisure would permit: These which I have set down, you will take in good part; and though I have not tryed them all my self, yet you may rest assured, that such as have not been experimented by my self, have been tryed by my honoured Collegues and other honest persons, and approv'd. FINIS.
INDEX. A. AIr, what to be observed of it in the Campy 9. Preservatives against the corruption of the Air, 21, &c. Animals, their blood of what efficacy, 45. Antonies fire, how to be allayed, 140, 141. B. BElly, the cure of the Aches and Tu∣mors and Gripings thereof, 65, 66. Beer, new beer causes the Strangury, 12. Blood, how to cure casting up of blood, 54. And the bleeding of the Nose, ibid. Blood coagulated, how to be helped, 133, 145. Boyls pestilential and their cure, 92, & seq.
Brick well burnt good against a Tenasmus, 87. Brimstone a good Medicine in infectious cases, 41. Bread, wheaten-bred coming hot out of the oven and dipt in red wine very good against Fluxes, 75. The same duely prepared good in pestilential Sores, 94. Bones broken, how to be order'd, 131. Bran good for wrenching of Limbs, 131. Burning, how to be healed, 137. C. CArbuncles pestilential, and their cure, 92. Carlina good against faintness, 6. Chirurgions of an Army, and their qualities, 14. Cold Nights how to provide against, 8. Corns of the Feet how to be cured, 4. Cough, and its cure, 54. Crafishes burnt alive good against the Bloody-flux, 80. Crafishes, after a certain way prepared, of great use for drawing out of the body thorns, small-shot, &c. 135. The same
fried in fresh butter allays burning, 141. Crocus Martis a high Remedy against the Bloody-flux, 81. Clysters, and their use in the field, 83. Chearfulness good in pestilential times, 31. D. DAisie and its excellency, 13. Diseases in an Army, and their cure, 18, &c. Diet to be well observed in the Camp, 20. Drinks how to provide in the field, 7. The excess of it to be avoided, 12. The danger of drinking whilst one is hot, and the care to be taken in that case, 12, 13. Drinks in cold weather, 25. Drawing out of thorns, splinters, &c. how to be effected, 135. 145. Dropsie, and its cure, 72. Drought, how to be remedied, 85.
E. EGg-oyl good for Burnings, 140. Elder-flowers good in the plague, 24. 48. Elder-vineger good to apply to the Heart in the plague, 48. Elder-roots, the Juyce of them purgeth hydropical persons exceedingly, 73. But to be used with great caution, ibid. Boiled Elder-buds have the like ver∣tue, ibid. Emollients in pestilential Boils, 93. Excrement of a Gander is powerful in drawing Iron out of the body, 135. F. FAintness how to prevent, 6, 7. Feet sweaty how to remedy, 5. Feet frozen how to recover, 143. Feavers of all sorts how to he managed and cured in an Army, 18. 65. Fluxes, their several sorts and cures, 74. Of the Bloody-flux in particular, and its cure, 77.
Frankincense dryes and clears the Air, 23. Fundament, the cure of its falling down, 88. G. GAngrene how to cure, 142. 146. Galling how to cure, 5. Garlick useful in Fluxes by way of de∣coction, 88. Goat, good for men to rub at them when the Air is corrupted, 21. Groin swelled how to cure, 74. Guts, the Griping of them how to be cu∣red, 69 — 72. Granat-wine cures the Bloody-flux, 82. Gun-powder purifies the Air, 23. Gum Elemi of considerable use in wounds, 129. Gonorrhoea how to be order'd, 150. Gravel how to be removed, 151. H. HAwes cure Fluxes, 76. Harts-horn good against Fluxes, 75.
Hearing how to be recover'd. 53. Heart, the cure of its Inflammation, 61. Haemorrhoid-vein, the use of its blee∣ding,90. Horses how to be made vigorous, 7. Oint∣ment for Horses, 8. Hunger and Thirst to be prevented by cer∣tain herbs, 6. I. JAundise, the cause and cure of it, 68. Imperatoria good against faintness, 6. Infection, its preservatives and cures, both for the Poor and Rich, 20 — 36. The Hungarian Infection and its cure, 37, & seq. Inflammation, its several sorts and cures, 55 — 65. Juniper-wood burnt, good in times of the plague, 23. Itch how to be cured, 145, 146.
L. LArd, when fresh very good against the Inflammation of the Mouth, 62. Lard good against Burnings, 141. Lead a considerable cooler, 61. Leggs, the cure of their swelling, 74. Liver, the cure of the Obstructions there∣of,68. Lillies, the Juyce of the Roots of blew Lillies have great vertue of purging hydropical persons, but to be used with great discretion, 73. Lapis sabulosus good to heal broken Bones,131. Luxations how to be order'd, 131. M. MArisca's, and the cure of them, 89. Mastic, drys and clears the Air, 23. Mesaraic-veins, and the effects of their being obstructed, 68. Milk duly prepared good against the Bloody-flux, 77.
Moss of wild Rose-shrubs an approved Re∣medy in Bloody-fluxes, 78. Mouth, how to remedy the falling down of the Palate of the Mouth, 53. N. NIter excellent to allay Inflammations, 60. The way how to prepare it for that use, 61. Nose, how to remedy the bleeding of it, 54. O. OBstructions of the Liver, and the cure, 68. Oyl of Scorpions very good to anoint the Heart with in the Plague, 48. A good Succedancum to it described, 48. Oyl of Vitriol good in Feavers, 51. Oaken-leaves do cure common Fluxes, 76. P. PEstilential Diseases and cure, 24, & seq. 92, & seq. Physitians of an Army and their quali∣ties,14.
Pear-trees, the rinds of them cure com∣mon Fluxes, 76. Preservatives fit for Souldiers, 3, 26, &c. Purgatives fit Souldiers, 3, 4. Putrefaction the cause of grievous Di∣seases, 38. 65. Putrefaction of the Mouth how to be cured, 145. Q. QUince-wine good against the Bloody-flux, 82. The same extinguishes marvellously the burning of any shot, 138. R. RIng worm, how to be cured, 146. Rust of Arms how to prevent, 6. Rye-biscuit duly prepar'd good against the Bloody-flux, 80. S. SCarification and its use, 93. Souldiers Morals, 1. Souldiers care of his body, 2.
Souldiers Diseases in the Field; through the whole Book. Sores pestilential and their cure, 92, & seq. Spotted Feavers and their cures, 18, & seq. Squinancy and its cure, 54. Strangury and its cure, 12. Surfets and their cures, 19. Swellings of the Throat and Almonds, how to be cured, 53. 64. Swelling of the Leggs how to cure, 74. Sweat and the ways of procuring it, 33, & seq. See also 44, & seq. Swallows, burnt to powder, good to those that have been shot, 136. Synovia, how to be order'd, 137. T. TEnasmus and its cure, 86. Tench fried good for Burnings, 137. Thirst, how to quench in case of want of drink, 6. Thirst how to quench in Fluxes, 85. Throat swoln how to cure, 53 Tooth-ach, its cure, 144. Tongue, the cure of the Inflammations of it, 55.
Turnips, after a certain way prepared, or rotten, cure frozen feet, 143. V. VErmin how to remove, 4. Vein, the use of the bleeding of the Haemorrhoid-vein, 90. Vesicatories and their use, 93. Ulcers and their cure, 92. Vineger good to wash the Temples with, in times of the Plague, 24. Venae-section not easily to be admitted in pestilential Diseases, 32, 51. Vulnerary Herbs for several sorts of Wounds, 132. W. VVAter, its differences and choice, 10. Wheel-grease a good Ointment for Horses,8. Wind in the Guts requires keeping the Body soluble, 69. Worms; Earth-worms good against the Dropsie, together with the way of pre∣paring them, 74.
Wounds, their Inflammation how to be prevented, 129. Their swelling how to be helped, 130. Wound-drinks of several sorts, 132. Wounds mortal how to order, 149. Worms in fingers, how be oured, 145. Wounds how to be cured, see chap. 10.
