M2922 10767667 45750
THE Most Strange AND WONDERFUL PREDICTIONS OF Cleombrotus AN HEATHEN JEW, PROPHESIED In the Year One thousand Two hundred Se∣venty and two; upon the Reigns of Twen∣ty Nine Kings of ENGLAND, from EDWARD the First to CHARLES the Fifth, One thousand Se∣ven hundred Ninety nine. Found in the Colledge of WITTENBƲRGH in GERMANY. LONDON. Printed for Langley Curtis, in Goat-Court on Ludgate-Hill. MDCLXXIX.
The most Strange and Wonderful Predi∣ctions of CLEOMBROTƲS, &c. WHen Sixteen hundred year is come, And Twenty five, the I is done; The Letter C shall take the Crown, And Reign Nine years in great Renown; But then beware of Lebon Rex, Lest that the P the Lyon vex; For then sad Fates and Destinie By Wars, throughout his Reign shall be; Then, with a Blow, the Times will turn, And Thousands for one Man shall Mourn; The C shall stoop unto the C, But, pray the first, it be not He. But before this day come, there will reign a mighty War; Many Towns will be brought low, stately Cedars will bow their Heads, and mighty Ca∣stles stoop to Cottages. Then will England be surfeited with the Blood of Innocents, and remain a while without King, Lords, or Commons; then will Churches be made Stables, and Palaces become Prisons. The People at that time shall stand amazed, thus bewailing: O Happy certainly are they That never did live to see this day: Our Wealth is all unto Confusion brought, By those who have not left us worth a Groat. Our stately Livings to the Ground are come, But dare not speak, we must be dumb. Once had we Justice, and a Glorious King, Now Thousand Tyrants in the room of him, Which, like to Tygers, did his Life betray, Since we, like Sheep, must unto Wolves obey. We know not where to go, nor where to flye, But, like poor Job, sit down in Misery. Great Changes at that time will happen; and the Death of some Great Man will then hasten: But when you remember the Fall of Charran Cross, and see a new one built in Pauls Church, then will Captivity be led cap∣tive, and Redemption out of Bondage will draw near: at which time the
Sea will say unto the Land, I have brought home the Treasure of many years Voyage: And the Land shall then answer, It is so Rich and precious, I am not worthy to receive it. Which Time described, is in the year One Thousand Six hundred and Sixty. In the Sixteen hundred and Sixty year Strange Wonders unto England shall appear; Providence by Connexion joyneth Close The Exil'd Thistle to the Southern Rose. For Neptune of the Ocean home shall bring A second C, but what a Precious thing Will this same Letter be, and high will stand, Lord of th' Eleventh House, by Sea and Land. Describe but Mars and Venus to command. He'll come in May, or else the first of June. Pray that the Seas may calm and quiet be, Twice miss'd he Dangers, now again at Sea, Yet will be quiet from Troubles, Neptune Roar, And when He is arrived on the Shoar, Observe this Prophecy, 'twill make appear, His Reign consists, One Five and Fifty year; But yet before the Eighty first, you'll see A mighty Monarch in the World He'll be, Some great and hughy War may then ensue; If that by chance the Eagle proves not true, The Lyon Rampant may in Fury grow, Though 'tis suspected whether he will or no; For if the Eagle he should fly too fast, 'Tis thought his Tallons will be clip'd at last. For then in his Description you will find, All Europe will be subject to One Mind. Which is the Letter C predicted true, That will some Great and Neighbouring Prince subdue. And then, before the Lyon proveth kind, He'l have an Heir according to his Mind, Sprung from an House that's of a pretty Name, An Ostridge soundeth something near the same. Then Spain in Fame shall last, France by Chance may fall, Germany will stand fast, But England all in all.
Now mark, that towards the year one thousand six hundred sixty two, will great Contest be in England about Religion, at which time, will then Reign, twenty eight Scots of several Opinions, in which time will many Sparks of Dissentions, but of small Continuance, like the Snuff of a Candle, quickly waste out and soon extinguish; for then will the Crows Head and the Magpies Breast, be a stumbling Block to erroneous Er∣rors, more Disputants will be in arguing, than Parish Pastors in reconcile∣ing; many at that time will be confuted and range abroad, like seemed mad men, but after a while will be soon quieted, so that by the year, one thousand six hundred sixty five, will all become one peculiar Govern∣ment, and then it will be as hard to hear the Name of a Souldier in open Hostility, as to see a white Raven on the top of a Pinacle, a white Harvest will follow, and Peace and Plenty will continue, few Murthers will be committed, no Treasons will be thought of; but in the year, one thou∣sand six hundred sixty nine, or there abouts, will a Ship sail up the Ri∣ver Thames, and a Merchant will ask the Marriner, what News he bringeth, the Marriner shall answer, that Austria is removed to England, and the Gates of Rome doth seem to tremble; that year will some great Forreign Prince have a Fall, but England shall reign Dominical and pro∣vide a great Voyage for Sea, but beware a Swallow do not sit in the Stern of the Admiral, for if it do, it will indanger the Fleet, for that Bout. And in the year one thousand six hundred and eighty, great Turnaments will be exercised, tilting and Launces will be in high Request, and that year will a Talbot jump to a Duke of Norfolk, but it will be better for him, to absent that day, than repent of his Title all the year after; for if his Horse throw him in the Morning, let him abstain his Honour that day, otherwise he will take a Fall at Court, and pitch his Head at Berkley Castle. For the Eagle and the Leapard shall spurn him in the dark, for the Moon at that time, will be eclipsed, but if his Horse doth not stumble, as he mounteth, let him proceed, for then he shall discover, by the Light of the Moon, the Craftiness of the Eagle in all her Darkness, The sixteen hundred eighty year will bring, Great days of Honour, by a mighty King; For Nobles in the Moneth of July they, Shall try great Actions on the twentieth day. By which you'l find in this same Prophesie, A Talbot shall the Duke of Norfolk be. An Eagle then at this begins to spurne, Till she have made the Talbot's Title turn. Ʋnhappy then will be the twentieth day, Ʋnhappy Talbot, this Prediction say,
If that his Horse doth stumble when he mount, This is a perfect and a true Account. In his Behalf the Moon will lose her Light, And he arrested at the Court for Spight. For Treason and Contentions they have bred, He shall at Barkley-Castle lose his Head: But if he miss that twentieth day before, He'l live a Duke for thirty years and more. The second Prophesie of Aldura Manasach, on the Year one thousand seven hundred. THis will be a year of great Change and Alteration throughout the whole Realm, but no Wars heard or thought of; and a glorious Flower of long Continuance that year shall fall; his Colour for the Letter C will lay down in his Dormitory, and a fresh Rose will arise from the same Root; observe a little before and you shall see an Eagle alight upon the Tower of Canterbury, and two white Doves shall come and oppose him, but after a small Repose, the Eagle will return to the Wood and the two Doves, retire to the Top of the Church, and after a short space, they shall take their Flight towards some great City; then shall a man in a long Gown say, this is a great and notable Sign, what meaneth it? then shall a Man of a strange Nation answer, shaking his Head and say, some Mighty Monarch is desperate ill; But if he passeth the ninth day, and the nineteenth day, and twenty ninth, It will be added to his Reign fifteen years. It is observed this Prediction comes near of that Prophesie, on the year one thousand six hundred sixty. The third Prophesie on the year one thou∣sand seven hundred. TImes when the second Letter C Begins to reign will prosperous be, Whose great Abilities have been foretold, And Pattern to the universal World. All Malice, Envy, Hate, Discord and Spight, For length of days (will vanish from his Sight)
He will exceed all Reigns of Kings before, He'l Reign till Forty seven, if not more. And, if in Forty Eight he miss a drift, He'l Reign out Fifty, nay, till Fifty fift. With Pious, Vertuous, and a Godly Fame, Both Peace and Plenty then shall end his Reign. A Prophecy upon CHARLES the Third, and two Kings after him, by Cleomlrotus the Jew. WHen that the third of this same Letter C. do Reign, Then will be cheap all kind of Grain. The space of twenty two years 'twill consist, Which this Prediction here doth manifest. No Wars nor Rumours in his Reign shall be. Except in thirty or in thirty three, And then some Foreign Prince will with him jar, Which in the thirty fourth proves a War; In June do it but mark, in July after, 'Twixt Dip and Calis is a Mighty Slaughter, The first will dye, the third will have Renown, And win two Standards and a Crown; Which ends the Grudge, long time had been before, But after this will ne're be Battel more. The F. shall subject be unto the E. And sail subjective unto them at Sea. To Charles the third will Nations intercess, He'l live in Peace, and dye in Quietness. But then beware O Germany, For the Letter I will Emperour be. The Second Letter of this Name, will be a mighty Warriour abroad in other Nations, Great Conquests will be gotten, but in the last Battel he will intend to fight in the Eastern part of the World, let him beware the Moon he do not change, for if he do, the day will be lost in the Afternoon, and a great Prince of the Blood will be slain; but in the Afternoon he shall recover most part by the Assistance of a Monk. Three Kings will be in the Field that day, but the Victory will go to the West, and suddenly after will a Northern Prince send an Embassage to this great Conquerour; but let him beware he gives not Audience, for if he do, the Letter I will be in danger of Stab; and if he escape that, he will be delivered from a great many more that year following. But in the Moneth of December, let him sit up late, and have trusty Friends to be Esquires of his Body, for under the
Mat of his Bed-chamber, will a horrid destructive Bear be lodged, yet it will be discovered by the Scent of a Talbot, whereby the Moon will be greatly ecclipsed, and indanger the Loss of his Light. After this the Letter I will returne home, and carry the house of Austria upon his back; great Lands will be subjective, and never after will Wars or Rebellion be heard of in his Days. In Canterbury he will end his Reign in Quiet, but before this will the Prince of the Blood be born in Cornwal, and the fourth of the Name, which begins with the Letter C. but then shall London be removed to Canterbury, and remain the space of sixteen years; at which time will Eng∣land be troubled, by two Roman Senators, for then shall two Ships sail up the River of Thames, and a Merchant on the Bridge shall ask them, what Merchandize they have; and the other shall answer, two white Ravens and a Black Swan; the Merchant on the Bridge shall ask, what they will have in Exchange for them; they will answer, the Cathe∣dral of Pauls, and the Reliques thereunto belonging; then the Mer∣chant will say, the Merchandize is but Counterfeits, and Pauls is too hea∣vy for the Strength of Rome to remove, at which, the Tower will seem to thunder, and Dover-Castle, to give an Eccho. That when Charles the Fourth, should take the Royal Diadem, London will be removed to Can∣terbury for sixteen years, in which latter time, England will be troubled with two Roman Senators: that is, the Pope shall send to the Bishops of England, and endeavour to seduce them, for to acknowledge the Suprema∣cy of Rome; the Merchants on the the Bridge, signifies the Bishops dispu∣ting upon the Grounds of Religion. The two white Ravens are the Pope's Indulgences, and the Black Swan his tyrannical Penance; had he but obtained his Errand, the saying of the Bishops, Their Merchandize were but Counterfeits, was the Invalidity of their Proffers, and that Pauls was too heavy for Rome to carry away, signifies, they will keep up the Church-Government of England, and renounce his Idolatry. After this, Church-Government shall never be attempted neither by Pope nor Sectarian any more. Now the Thundering of the Tower, and the Eccho of Dover-Castle is the Roaring of some great Guns in Scorn to the Pope's Supremacy. The Description of CHARLES the Fourth. WHen Charles the Fourth Reigneth England's King, Some great Repulse to Rome that Year will bring. The true Religion he'l maintain as far, As Charles the Second his Progenitor; Or Charles the third of everlasting Fame, Or James his Father, second of that Name,
Who was Victorious both by Land and Sea, But Charles his Reign, no Wars in it shall be. Both Peace and Plenty all his dayes shall spring, That's One and Twenty years He'l be a King. So long Continuance he shall rule and sway, Then like a Rose he will depart away. With Grief of thousands, he will end his Reign, Then Seventh Edward will come in again. From James the Second, know it certainly, These Kings will rule Imperial Majesty. Till Charles the fifth, both King and Emperour then, Shall keep his Court in Germany again. Observe that near the year, one thousand seven hundred ninety nine, there will a Prince of the Blood, be born in Canterbury, and at two years of Age, the Imperial Crown will be put on his Head, and he shall remain un∣der the Tuition of a Monk three years, but York shall have the Prehemi∣nence. When that the Moneth of July doth begin, In Canterbury will be born a King. Edward the seventh, he is called by Name. But in the Linage of the former Name, Till that the time of sixteen years doth come, A Monk will be his Tutor all along. But near the eighteenth, Cleombrotus say, The Seventh Edward will depart away. And then will York rule Lord Protector he, Till Charles the fifth comes to Maturity; Which when the Royal Diadem shall take, And make the Crowns of other Princes shake; But when that twenty years is gone and past, To his Native Country, he comes Home at last, And leave his Crown, and to the Grave doth go, He'l die in Love, both Peace and Plenty too. FINIS.
