M433 R216683 99828405 32832
Mankind Displayed: OR, THE HISTORY OF THE Little World: BEING A Curious Collection out of the best Authors of the most wonderful and remarkable Things that have been performed by Men and Women in the several Ages of the World; toge∣ther with select Observations, Philoso∣phical Precepts, Maxims of State, &c. Longum Iter est per Praecepta, breve & efficax per Exempla. Seneca. LONDON, Printed, by H. C. for Thomas North∣cott, in George-Yard, in Lumbard-street, 1690.
THE PREFACE. WHen the Almighty had made the vast Fabrick of the Uni∣verse; composed of Fire, Air, Earth and Water, to glorifie his infinite Wis∣dom, and exalt his Omnipotent Power; he comprehended all in the short Epi∣tome, the Little, though Noble Crea∣ture, Man; he set him upon the Stage of the World to act as a free Agent, and to be Lord over all: But some, like the Giants of old, climb'd the Hills to fight against their Maker; while others storm'd the Heavens with their humble Prayers and peniten∣tial Tears. And therefore to shew how well and ill Man has behaved himself is the Design of this ensuing Treatise: And certainly the History
of Man is so delightful a Subject, that it must be entertaining to all, and especially to the curious; for therein is contained the Marrow of true Histo∣ry, the greatest things that have been acted by the most famous Men and Women in the World. But some may say, these are but Collections, the Works of other Men: To which I An∣swer, That, as the Spiders Web is not the better because it is extracted out of its own Bowels, so neither is the Ho∣ney the worse because it is produced from several Flowers: Though but Collections, our Examples are Great and True, and far exceeding the Ro∣mantick and Phantastical Inventions of a Rambling Brain.
INDEX. SOme Persons have unusual Fortune and felicity in their Affairs, Page 1 Persons from mean Extraction and low Fortune advan∣ced to great Honor, Page 3 Various means of the Advancement of some Persons, Page 4 Presages to some of good and evil Fortune, Page 8 Some Persons warned of their approaching Fate, yet could not avoid it, Page 10 Some have unwarily procured their own Death and Downfal, Ibid. Some Persons very unfortunate, Page 11 Of the Liberality and Bounty of some Persons, Page 12 Of one despising Riches, Page 13 The covetous Disposition of some, Ibid. The Frugality of some great Persons, Page 14 Of the Hospitality of some People, Ibid. Of the strange Customs of several Nations, Page 15 Of Atheists, Page 16 Of the Perfidiousness and Treachery of a Court-Favou∣rite, Page 17 An Example of base Ingratitude, Page 20 An Example of Gratitude, Page 21 The peaceable, meek and merciful Disposition of some, Page 22 The Patience of some, and their power over their passion, Page 23 Some Persons have been improved, and well deported themselves in their Adversity, Page 25 Injuries easily forgotten and forgiven by some, Page 26 Of the bitter Revenges taken by some upon their Ene∣mies, Page 27 Of the light and gentle Revengement of Injuries, Page 30 Some great Lovers of Justice, Page 32
The unchaste Life of some, and incestuous Marria∣ges, Page 33 The singular Chastity and Modesty of some Persons, Page 36 Of Jealousie, Page 39 Of great Love between some Men and their Wives, Page 40 Parents great Love to their Children, Page 41 Of the Reverence and Love of Children to their Pa∣rents, Page 42 The Love of a Servant to his Master, Page 43 Some Men unnatural to Parents and Wives, Ibid. Some Women are very unkind to their Husbands, Page 44 The Hatred among Brothers, Page 45 The cruel and bloody Dispositions of some, Ibid. Severe Punishments upon Malefactors, Page 46 What strange Deaths some Men have died of, Page 50 Some Bodies keep long in Tombs uncorrupted, Page 52 How long some have lain in a Trance, and of some strangely saved from Death, Ibid. Some have eaten Poison without any harm, Page 58 Some Persons strangely cured of Diseases, Page 59 Some have used to walk and do strange things in their sleep, Page 60 Some sleep much, others but little, Ibid. How long one slept, Page 61 Extraordinary things that have happened to some Men, Ibid. Some Men very compassionate, Page 62 The first Authors of divers famous Inventions; and the Works of some curious Artists, Ibid. Of keeping Secrets, Page 65 Men of Industry and Haters of Idleness, Page 66 Of the innocent Life of some, Page 67 The exact Obedience of some to Superiors, Ibid. The Fidelity of some to their Oath and Trust, Page 68 Some Persons great Lovers of Truth. Page 70 Pope Benedict though raised to great Fortune, was not
unmindful of his low Beginning, Page 72 Of Religion, and the Reverence some great Persons have had for its Professors, Page 73 Of the several Extents of the Roman Catholick, and Protestant Religion, Page 76 Of the Reverence of some to Clergymen, and Benefac∣tors to Churches, &c. Page 77 Of the early Appearance of Vertue and Learning in some young Persons, Page 80 Vitious youth reclaimed, and afterwards become very virtuous, Page 81 Reproofs taken patiently, though from Inferiors, Page 82 Some very mindful of humane Frailty, Page 83 How highly some prize their Liberty, Ibid. Death received by some Persons with great Courage, Page 84 Some mighty expensive in their Apparel, Ibid. Some great Gamesters, Page 85 Of great Eaters and Feasting, and great Drinkers, Ibid. Great Misfortunes befaln Man, when drunk. Page 87 The absurd and strange Follies of divers People, Page 89 Of the Abstinence of some from Food, Page 90 Of the inconstant Disposition of some, Page 91 Of Tributes and Taxes imposed by some Kings on their People, Page 92 Of the bold Theft of some, Ibid. Of Persons of base Birth, who have assumed the Names of Illustrious Persons, Page 93 The huge Ambition, and desire of Glory in some Per∣sons, Page 94 Of Litigious Suits, Page 97 The vain glorious boasting of some Men, Ibid. Of the Art of Painting, Page 98 Some are apt to be guilty of those Faults they have repre∣hended in others, Page 99 Scorn and Scoffing, how rewarded by some Persons, Page 100 The Passion of Joy and its ill Effects, Page 101
Of the Passion of Grief, and its mortal Effects, Page 102 Of the good Wishes of some, Page 103 Of the Appariion of Ghosts, Page 104 Many have been destroyed unwarily by rash speaking, Page 107 How some have suffered by their own Improcations, Page 108 Some Men very affable and humble, Ibid. Of Conscience and the Effects of it, Page 109 Of strange Recreations some delight in, Page 110 Of the Natural Production of Man, Ibid. Of several strange Births in Women, Page 112 A Woman delivered of a Monster, Page 114 Many Persons have been observed to die on their Birth∣days. Some Persons born with strange Marks upon them, Page 115 Strange Constitutions in some Bodies, Ibid. How Nature supplies her own Defects, Page 116 Of the five Senses in Man, Page 117 Of the Senses and other Observations of the Soul and Body of Man, Ibid. Particular observations on Man, Page 119 The numerous Issue of some People, Page 120 Of the Majesty, Beauty and Gravity in some Persons, Ib. Of Beauty, Page 122 Of the signal Deformity of some, Ibid. Of Giants and Dwarfs, Page 123 Of the incredible Strength of some, Ibid. Of Strength, Page 124 Some Persons of very long Lives, Page 126 Some though aged, yet have renewed their Age, Page 127 Some People have changed their Sex, Page 128 Of the incredible Swiftness of some, Ibid. Of the wise Sentences of some Learned Men, Page 129 The sundry Precepts of several Philosophers, Page 130 Some few Maxims of State, Page 133 The Contents of the Commission, for the Lord Lieute∣nant, or Lord Deputy of Ireland, Page 136
Some persons have unusual fortune and felicity in their Affairs. ALexander the Great was a most fortunate and happy Prince in divers respects; he had Philip King of Macedon for his Father, the noblest Warriour in his time, and in his Youth he had for his Master and Governour (the Prince of Philosophers) Aristotle; besides which 'tis observed of him that he never gave Battle to any Enemy whom he did not at length over∣come, never laid siege to any City which at last he did not take; nor never laid claim to any Nation or Kingdom which he did not subdue and bring un∣der his subjection: He was but a little Man therefore was said of him, Mens tamen in parvo corpore magna fuit. Maud the Empress was so happy that she was the Daughter of a King, (viz.)
Henry the first, King of England; Mo∣ther of a King (viz.) Henry the second, King of England; and Wife of a King (viz.) Henry the Fourth, Emperour of Germany; therefore on her was made this Epitaph; Ortu magna, viro major, sed maxima prole, Hic jact Henrici, filia, nupta, parens. 'Tis likewise said of Charles Earl of Valois that he was the Son of a King, Brother to a King, Uncle to a King, and Father to a King, and yet no King him∣self. [Sere's Hist. of France. George Nevil, fourth Son of Richard Nevil Earl of Salisbury, was consecrated Bishop of Exeter when he was not twen∣ty years of age, at twenty five he was made Lord Chancellor of England; he discharged both offices with singular care and prudence, to his great com∣mendation, his great abilities of mind supplying his lack of age. [Fuller's Wor∣thies, p. 273. Thomas Bourchier was successively Bi∣shop of Worcester, Ely, and Archbishop of Canterbury, so that he wore a Mitre full fifty one years, a term not to be pa∣rallelled
in any other person: he lived to see the Civil Wars between the two Houses of York and Lancaster begun and ended, having the honour to marry King Henry the Seventh to the Daugh∣ter of King Edward the Fourth, where∣by both the said Houses of York and Lan∣caster were firmly united. [Fuller's Worthies, p. 324. 'Twas a rare Instance of propitious Fortune that befell Thomas Speramus, who in one and the same year was con∣secrated Bishop, elected Cardinal, and also attained to the Popedom, by the name of Nicholas the Fifth. Persons from mean Extraction and low Fortune advanced to great Honour. Cardinal Wolsey was but a Butchers Son in Ipswich, who from servile Em∣ployments insinuated himself into the favour of some Courtiers, by means whereof, and of his great sagacity and dispatch of Affairs, he was recommended to the favour of King Henry the Eighth, and by him raised to the highest Prefer∣ments both in Church and State; for he was not onely Cardinal, but also the
Pope's Legate à laetere, Chancellour of England, and Archbishop of York, Bishop of Durham, and Abbot of St. Albans, besides many other Offices: he was grown to that excessive degree of Arro∣gance that he used to write, Ego & Rex meus; at length he fell into disfavour with the King, and going down to his Archbishoprick at York, he was sent for up by a Messenger from the King, and dyed on the way to London of a Lask at Leicester Abby, and was there interred. Various means of the Advancement of some persons. Thomas Cromwel was born at Putney in Sussex, his Father was a Blacksmith, and he dying, his Mother was after∣wards married to a Sheerman; he was first preferred to Cardinal Wolsey in some mean Office, afterwards by strange chance of fortune and various accidents, he was first Knighted by King Henry the Eighth, then made Master of his Jewel House, then one of his Privy Council, then Master of the Rolls, then Knight of the Garter, and lastly Earl of Essex, Great Chamberlain of England, and the
King's Vicegerent, to represent his own person, but after all these great honours he was beheaded. [Baker's Chron p. 412. Sir Walter Rawleigh, born at Budely in Devonshire, his introduction to the Court was upon this occasion; this Captain Rawleigh, coming out of Ireland into the English Court, in good habit, (his Coathes being then a considerable part of his Estate) accidentally meeting Qu. Elizabeth walking one day, and she scrupling to go over some plashy place, presently Rawleigh cast and spread his new plush Cloak over the said place, whereon the Queen trod gently, rewar∣ding him afterwards with many Suits, for his so free and seasonable a tender of so fair a Foot cloth: thus an advantagi∣ous admittance into the first notice of a Prince is more than half a degree to Preferment: when Sir Walter found some hopes of the Queens favour, he wrote in a glass window obvious to the Queens eye, Fain would I climb but that I fear a Fall. her Majesty espying it did underwrite, If thine Heart fail thee do not climb at all.
'Tis most certain that afterwards this Knight came into great favour with Queen Elizabeth. Some Kings to make a good Jest have advanced men in earnest, for when a∣mongst many Articles exhibited to King Henry the Eighth, against Gerald Earl of Kildare, the last was, finally, All Ire∣land cannot rule this Earl; then quoth the King, shall this Earl rule all Ireland; so for his Jests sake made him Deputy General of that Kingdom. 'Tis said fur∣ther of the said Earl, that he being tax∣ed before another Lord Deputy of that Kingdom, why he had committed so horrid a Sacrilege as to burn God's Church, (to wit the Cathedral at Cashel) he made Answer, That he had never burnt the Church but that he thought the Archbishop had been in it, there be∣ing a deadly feud then between him and the Archbishop. [Cambden's Re∣mains, p. 271. In the Reign of King William the Se∣cond, a rich Abby being vacant, two Monks of the Convent became suitors to the King for the place, offering great sums of money, and each of them out-bidding the other; whereupon the King
looking about, and espying another Monk standing not far off, he asked him what he would give for the place, who answe∣red, that he neither had, any thing to give, nor would give any thing if he had it, but came onely to wait upon him back whom the King should please to appoint Abbot: well, said the King, thou hast spoken honestly, thou art fitter to be Abbot than either of these, and so he bestowed the place upon him gratis. [Baker's Chron. p. 49. Much about the same time there was a Bishop who had the Collation of a rich Benefice (in his Diocese) fallen to him, whereupon he gave out, that he would install none therein unless they could resolve him who was Melchisedeck's Father and Mother, several were puzled at the matter, and thought it inextrica∣ble, there being no mention made of them in the Old Testament. But one cunning Priest, apprehending the in∣trigue, comes to the Bishop, and pri∣vately brings with him two bags, one of Gold, the other of Silver, and acquain∣ted the Bishop he thought he came the nearest of any to resolve his question, and thereupon produced his bags, and
told him he thought the bag of Gold might be his Father, and that of Silver his Mother, wherewith the Bishop was well satisfied, and so immediately gave him the rich Benefice. Presages to some of good and evil fortune. Richard the Second, King of England, being at Flint Castle in Denbighshire, and having received in thither Henry Duke of Lancaster, he was by him thence con∣veyed to Chester, and being about to re∣move, they loosed a Greyhound of the King's, as was usual whensoever the King got on Horseback, which Grey∣hound used to leap upon the King's Shoulders, and fawn upon him exceed∣ingly; being loosed at this time, he lea∣ped upon the Duke of Lancaster, and fawned upon him in the same manner as he used to doe upon the King his Master: the Duke asked the King what the Dog meant by it, 'tis an ill and unhappy o- men to me, said the King, but a fortu∣nate one to you, for by this he acknow∣ledges thee to be King now, and that thou shalt reign in my stead, which in short time came to pass accordingly. [Speed's Hist. of Rich. II.
Pope Paul the Second, upon that ve∣ry day he had promoted Franciscus Ru∣venus to a Cardinalship, when by acci∣dent he was speaking of it, I have this day, says he, chosen my Successor, the event made it appear he had spoken the truth; for Pope Paul dying, Franciscus succeeded him in the Popedom by the name of Sixtus the Fourth. Alfred a King of the West Saxons went out one day a hunting, and passing by a certain Wood he heard, as he supposed, the cry of an Infant from the top of a high Tree, he diligently inquired of the Huntsmen what that was, commanding one of them to climb the Tree, which being done, in the top thereof was found an Eagles Nest, and therein a pretty sweet faced Infant, wrapt up in a purple Mantle, and upon each Arm a Bracelet of Gold, (a sign of the Nobility of its Parents) this Child the King car∣ried along with him, and caused him to be baptized, and from the Nest wherein he was found he gave him the name of Nesting, and after he had given him no∣ble education, he advanced him to the dignity of an Earl: 'tis said from hence the Earls of Derby give for the Crest to their Arms the Eagle and Child.
Some persons warned of their approach∣ing fate yet could not avoid it. A great Earl being at a Feast and very merry, there was brought him a Letter, wherein he was certified of a Plot a∣gainst his Life; he would not give himself the leisure of reading it then, but gave order, that as a thing serious it should be deferred till the morrow, but neglec∣ting that warning, he did not live to read if, for he was slain that night. Some have unwarily procured their own death and downfall. Certain 'tis that some good while be∣fore the Duke of Buckingham's death, by the Knife of Felton, one Sir Clement Throgmorton, a Gentleman then living, and a very great Friend of the Dukes, advised the Duke to wear a privy coat of Mail, whose counsel the Duke recei∣ved very kindly but gave him this An∣swer; that against any popular fury a shirt of Mail would be but a silly de∣fence, and as for any single mans assault he took himself to be in no danger, so
dark is destiny. [Hist. of K. Charles I. Some persons at Syracuse, discoursing in a Barbers shop concerning Dionysius the Emperour his great Tyranny, what, said the Barber, do we speak thus of Dionysius under whose Throat ever and anon I hold a Rasor: assoon as Dionysius was informed of this, he forthwith cau∣sed the Barber to be put to death, and so the Barber paid for his folly at the price of his life. Many have been un∣done by rash speaking, which made a Gentleman (imprisoned in the Tower for speaking high Treason) say, Vincula da linguae, vel tibi lingua dabit. Some persons very unfortunate. 'Twas observed, as it were, in the destiny of King Henry the Sixth of Eng∣land, that although he was a most pious and good Prince, yet no enterprize of War did ever prosper where he was present. [Bakers Chron p. 283. There are many Examples of this kind, how an ill fate ofttimes attends very just and good persons, so that there is no avoiding our fate be it good or bad.
Of the Liberality and Bounty of some persons. Sir Julius Caesar, once Master of the Rolls, was so liberal to poor people, that 'tis said, A Gentleman once bor∣rowing his Coach, which was as well known to the poor as any Hospital in England, was so importuned by Beggars going through London, that it cost him all the money in his pocket to satisfie their begging, so that he might have hired ten Coaches on the like terms. 'Tis said of Pope Alexander the Fifth, that he was so bountifull to persons of merit and vertue, that he used to say that he had been formerly a rich Bishop and a poor Cardinal, but being Pope he was almost reduced to beggery. 'Tis credibly reported of one of the old Earls of Derby, being General, and having taken a Town beyond Seas, he freely gave to every Souldier the House which every one should first seize, where∣upon one of his Souldiers, having broken into the House of a Mint-master, where he found much treasure, and thinking it to be much more than fell to
his share, he acquainted the Earl there∣with, to know whether he might keep it all to himself, and the Earl with a li∣beral mind answered, 'Tis not for my Honour to play Boys play to give and take, take thou all the money were it twice as much. [Fuller's Worthies. Sir Francis Bacon Lord Verulam dyed very poor, though he had such great Preferments, in regard of his great Bounty and Hospitality. Of one despising Riches. Aristides the great Athenian Lawgiver, and one who by his great valour and prudence had made the Athenians both rich and honourable, neglected the op∣portunity he had of making himself very rich, and alwaies lived magnificently, insomuch that he dyed so very poor, that he left nothing behind to bury him according to his quality, so he was bu∣ried at the charges of the Common∣wealth. [Plutarch's Lives. The covetous disposition of some. Pope Benedict the Ninth was so ex∣tremely
desirous of Gold, that he dispo∣sed of the Popedom it self to Pope Gre∣gory the Sixth for a considerable summ of money. Cardinal Angelot was so basely cove∣tous, that by a private way he used to go into the Stable and steal the Oats from his own Horses; it happened that on a time the Master of his Horse going into the Stable in the dark, and finding him there, taking him for a Thief, he slew the Cardinal. The Frugality of some great Persons. Of Lewis the Eleventh, King of France, there is found, in the Chamber of Accounts at Paris, two shillings for Fustian to new sleeve his Majesties old Doublet, and three half pence for liquor to grease his Boots. 'Tis said of the Emperour Augustus, that he seldom wore any Cloaths but such as were spun at home, and made up by his Wife or Children. Of the Hospitality of some people. In Italy and Spain they are generally
very Hospitable and kind, especially to Strangers; for if one goes to view the Temples, Castles, Magazines, Buildings, or any other thing in that kind, or when you depart from the House of your Friend where you first lodged, if you give any money as a gratuity, to the Watchmen, Workmen, or any other Servant of your Friends, you shall de∣part an Enemy instead of a Friend, for so great is their Hospitality, that they do all good Offices for a Stranger gratis. [Howel's Letters. Of the strange Customs of seve∣ral Nations. Pharamond was the first absolute King of the French, and a Lawgiver amongst them; 'tis said that he was the maker of the Law called the Salick Law, by which the Crown of France may not de∣scend unto Females; or as their saying is, fall from the Lance to the Distaff. [Heylin's Cosmogr. p. 177. The Old Irish at every change of the Moon worshipped her, bowed their Knees, and with a loud voice thus spake unto the Planet, We pray thee leave us
in as good estate as thou findest us. [Speed's Maps, p. 135. The Danes used, when the English drank, to stab them, or cut their Throats, to avoid which villainy the party then drinking, requested some of the next unto him to be his surety, or pledge, whilst he paid Nature her due; hence have we our usual custome of pledging one another. Of Atheists. The Persians never see their Children till they be seven years old, for this rea∣son, that they may be better able to bear their death in case they die when they are very young. The Thracians do celebrate the birth of any with mourning, and their funerals with joy, in respect they are born to trouble, and when they die they are at rest from all miseries [Howel's Letters. Alphonsus the tenth, King of Spain, would usually blame Providence, and say, that had he been present with Al∣mighty God in the Creation of the World, many things should have been better ordered and disposed than they were.
John King of England, having been a little before reconciled to the Pope, and then receiving an overthrow in France, in great rage cried out, that nothing had prospered with him since he was recon∣ciled to God and the Pope. Another time the said King John seeing a fat Stag opened, jestingly said, see how prospe∣rously this Beast has lived, yet never heard Mass. 'Tis said he was a very irreligious and unmercifull Prince, and a great oppressor of his people; he was poisoned by a Monk of Swinstead Abbey in Lincolnshire. [Speed's Hist. of K. John. Of the perfidiousness and treachery of a Court-Favourite. There is nothing under the Sun more detestable than a Traytor, who is com∣monly followed with the execrations and curses of those very men to whom his Treason hath been most usefull, all men being apt to believe that he who hath once exposed his Faith to sale stands ready for any Chapman as soon as any occasion shall present it self. King Edgar of England hearing of the admirable beauty of Alfrida, the onely
Daughter of Ordgarus Duke of Devon∣shire (founder of Tavestock Abbey in that County) sent his great Favourite, Earl Ethelwood, (who could well judge of Beauty) to try the truth thereof, with Commission (if he found her such as same reported) that he should seize her for himself, and he would make her his Queen; the young Earl having arrived at her Fathers house, and being brought into her presence, upon immediate sight of the young Lady he was so surprized that he declined the King's command and wooed her for himself, and had pro∣cured her Fathers good will in case he could obtain the King's consent; here∣upon the Earl posted back to the King, relating to him that the Maid was fair indeed, but nothing answerable to the same that went on her, yet desired the King that he might marry her, as being her Fathers Heir thereby to raise his Fortune; the King consented, and im∣mediately the Earl posted back, and de∣manded the young Lady in Marriage from her Father, acquainting him that he had gained the King's consent for so doing; whereupon the Marriage was solemnized with splendor and magnifi∣cence,
which made the same of her Beauty spread abroad more than before, insomuch that it reached the King's ear, so that the King (much doubting that he had been abused) meant to try the truth himself, and thereupon taking oc∣casion of hunting in the Duke's Park, the Duke invited the King to a Noble Entertainment at his House, whose co∣ming Earl Ethelwoed suspecting, he ac∣quainted his Wife with the wrong he had done both her and the King, and therefore to prevent the displeasure of the King, upon that occasion, entreated her, by all the perswasions he could use, to cloath her self in such attire as might be least fit to set her forth and to eclipse her Beauty; but she considering within her self, that then was the time to make the most of her Beauty, and desirous to be a Queen, she would not be accessary to her own Injury, but decked her self in her richest Ornaments, which so im∣proved her Beauties that the King was struck with admiration at the first sight of her, and resolved to be fully revenged upon his perfidious Favourite; yet dis∣sembling his passion till he could take him at advantage, (the King at length
having an opportunity) he then with a Javelin thrust him through, and having thereby made the fair Elfrida a Widow he took her to be his Queen. [Speed's Hist. p. 388. An Example of base Ingratitude. One Humphrey Banister was brought up and exalted to promotion by the means and interest of Stafford Duke of Buckingham, his Master, the Duke be∣ing afterwards driven to extremity, by reason of the separation of his Army, which he had mustered against King Ri∣chard the Usurper, knew not where to retire with more safety (as he thought) than to this Banister's House, supposing he would prove to him a most trusty Friend, and would keep him secret till he could find a fit opportunity to go be∣yond Seas: presently after there was a thousand pounds propounded as a reward to him that could bring forth the Duke, whereupon this ungrateful Traytor, upon great hopes of gaining so great a summ, betrayed the Noble Duke, his Benefactor, into the hands of John Mitton, Esq; High Sheriff of Shropshire,
who thence conveyed the Duke to the City of Salisbury, where King Richard then was, and soon after the Duke was put to death; but as for that perfidious Monster the vengeance of God pursued him, for presently after his eldest Son fell mad and dyed in a Boars Sty, his eldest Daughter was suddenly strucken with a Leprosie, his second Son became strangely deformed in his Limbs, and lame, his youngest Son was drowned in a puddle, and he himself was arraigned for a Murder, but being found guilty of Manslaughter onely, he was saved by his Clergy: as for the thousand pound King Richard would not give him a far∣thing of it, saying he that was untrue to so good a Master, must needs be false to all others. [Stow's Annals p. 465. An Example of Gratitude. Sir William Fitzwilliams, the Elder, being a Merchant Taylor, and Servant sometime to Cardinal Wolsey, was after∣wards chosen Alderman of Broadstreet Ward in London, Anno 1506. going af∣terwards to dwell at Milton in Northamp∣tonshire, in the Fall of the Cardinal his
former Master, he gave him kind Enter∣tainment at his House in the Countrey, for which, being called before the King, and demanded how he durst entertain so great an Enemy to the King and State, he answered mildly, That he had not wilfully or contemptuously done it, but onely because he had been his Master, and partly the means of his greatest Fortunes: the King was so well pleased with his ingenuous Answer, and saying himself had few such Servants, he immediately Knighted him, and made him one of his Privy Council. [Stow's Annals. The peaceable, meek and merciful dis∣position of some. 'Tis said of the Sister of Edward the Third, King of England, and married to David King of Scots, that she was fami∣liarly called Jane Make-peace, both for her earnest and successfull endeavours therein. At Fez, the great City of Morocco, in Africk, they have neither Lawyers nor Advocates, but if there be any contro∣versies amongst them, both parties,
Plaintiff and Defendant come before their Alfakin, or Chief Judge, and at once without any farther appeal or delay the Cause is heard and ended. The Lord Treasurer Burleigh was wont to say, that he overcame envy and evil will more by patience and peaceableness than by pertinacy and stubbornness; and his private Estate he so managed that he never sued any man, neither did ever any man sue him, whereby he lived and died in glory. Quintus Fabius Maximus was of that meek and mild disposition throughout his whole life, that he was commonly called the Lamb. [Roman History. The patience of some, and their power over their passion. Augustus Caesar, walking near the skirt of a Wood, with one single man, by chance a wild Boar had broken the place of his restraint, and seemed fiercely to run directly towards the Emperour, his Man, in whom at that time there was more of fear than of prudence, con∣sulting his own safety, took hold of the Emperour and placed him before himself,
for which indiscreet Action Augustus ne∣ver discovered any sign of anger, or offence he had taken at it, but rather imputed it to his timidity. King Henry the Sixth of England was of that admirable patience, that being dispossessed of his Throne, and taken Prisoner, he onely said, to one who abused and struck him, you wrong your self more than me in striking the Lord's Anointed. Pericles a famous Athenian Philoso∣pher, being in the Market-place, was railed at and grosly abused by a base fellow, and going home at night this lewd Varlet followed him, and railed at him all the way home, and defamed him, notwithstanding which, when Pe∣ricles came to his House, it being dark he called to his Man and bade him light the Fellow home, lest it being night he should lose his way. 'Tis said that Philip the Second King of Spain, having written a Letter with his own hand, with much study and labour, to be sent to the Pope, when he asked for sand to be cast upon it, his Secretary half asleep, poured the Ink in the Standish upon it instead of the sand,
this would have put most into a fury, yet behold a Person of so great Eminen∣cy bare it patiently, without speaking one angry word to his servant. Bishop Cowper's Wife, being a fro∣ward woman, she, lest her Husband sho prejudice his health by his over∣much study, when he was compiling his famous Dictionary, one day (in his ab∣sence) got into his Study, and took all the Notes he had been for eight years a- gathering, and burned them, whereof when she had acquainted him, he onely said, Woman, thou hast but put me to eight years study more. Some persons have been improved, and well deported themselves, in their adversity. Diogenes the Philosopher, being bani∣shed his own native Countrey, fell to the study of Philosophy, and became Excellent therein, which before he min∣ded not. Ingenium saepe mala movent.
Injuries easily forgotten and for∣given by some. When Aristotle was asked what grew old soonest, and what latest, Benefits, said he, and Injuries; for most ps are apt to be forgetfull of Good-turns▪ but generally very mindfull of Injuries. Doctour Cranmer (Archbishop of Can∣terbury) his mildness, and gentleness in pardoning wrongs was so great, that it grw into a Proverb, Doe my Lord of Canterbury a shrewd turn, and then you shall be sure to have him for your friend while he lives. One of the Dukes of Orleans, while he was Duke, had many Enemies; and afterwards, coming to be King, he was asked, Why he did not revenge himself of his Enemies while he was Duke? To which he replied, That it did not suit with the Majesty of the King of France, to revenge the Injuries done to the Duke of Orleans. [Sere's History of France. 'Tis said of the Earl of Carnarvan, That he, being in a Coffee House, and accidentally falling into discoure with a Doctour of Physick, the Doctour told
him, he lyed: the Earl, though a Person of much Honour and Courage, without taking any offence at it, mildly said, Doctour, I had rather take the Lye of you twenty times, than Physick once. [Humane Prudence. Cardinal Wolsey, being incensed a∣gainst one of the Lords of the Privy Council, said to him in the Council Chamber, in White-hall, Thou art the veryest Fool in the Council: When the said Lord, without taking notice of it a∣ny farther, onely said, God be thanked my Master has but one fool here. Of the bitter Revenges taken by some upon their Enemies. An Italian, having got his Enemy in∣to his power, he told him, there was no possible way for him to save his life, un∣less he would immediately deny and re∣nounce his Saviour Jesus Christ: the o∣ver timorous Wretch, in hopes of mr∣cy from his cruel Adversary, did it; when the other forthwith stabbed him to the Heart; saying that he had then a full and noble revenge, for he had kil∣led at once both his Soul and Body.
George the first Duke of Buckingham, having denyed one Lieutenant Felton twice a Captain's Commission, the said Felton acted this Revenge; on Saturday, August 23. 1628. for he being then in the Duke's house at Portsmouth, ter Breakfast the Duke going out, one ∣lonel Fryer stepped before him, and stop∣ping him upon some business, the said Felton, being behind, made a thrust with a common ten penny Knife, over Fryer's Arm, at the Duke, which lighted so fa∣tally that it slit his Heart in two, the Knife was left sticking in his Body; the Duke took out the Knife, and threw it away; and laying his Hand on his Sword, drew it half out, and said, the Villain hath killed me (meaning as some think Colonel Fryer) for there had been some difference betwixt them; so, reeling against a Chimney, he fell down dead: the Dutchess, being with Child and hea∣ring the Noise below, came in her Night Dress from her Bed-Chamber, which was in an upper Room, to a kind of Rail, and thence beheld him weltring in his own Bloud: Felton had lost his Hat in the Crowd, wherein there was a Paper sewed, in which he declared, that the
reason which moved him to the Act, was no grudge of his own, though he had been far behind for his pay, and had been put by his Captain's place twice; but in regard he thought the Duke an Enemy to the State, because he was branded in Parliament; therefore what he did, was for the publick good of his Countrey: he was going to his Horse, which was tyed to a Hedge hard by, but being amazed he missed his way, and so struck into the Pastry, and boldly confessed 'twas he had done the Deed, and so he was in their hands, whereup∣on he was carried to Prison, and was tryed, found guilty, and executed for it. [History of King Charles the First, [Howel's Letters, p. 141. § 5. In the Isle of Majorca, a Lord's Slave being by him beaten severely, the Slave resolved upon a Revenge, which he thus tragically acted; the Lord one day be∣ing gone abroad, the Slave presently shut to the door, and made it fast, and then went and violated the Honour of his Lady: and the Lord returning back, knocked at the door to get in, but the Slave reviled him, and threw his Lady and two of his young Children out at
the Castle windows, and stood ready to doe the like with the third and youn∣gest Child; whereupon the Lord, seeing the ruine of all his Family but this one, begged heartily of the Slave, to save the Life of that little one, which the cruel Slave absolutely refused, unless his Lord would cut off his own Nose; the pitifull Father accepted of the condition, and had no sooner performed it, but the bloudy Villain first cast the Infant down headlong, and then himself in a barba∣rous bravery. [The Treasury of Ancient and Modern Times, l. 2. c. 10. p. 135. Of the light and gentle revengement of Injuries. Light Injuries are made none by a not regarding, which with pursuing to revenge grow both to height and bur∣then: 'tis Princely to disdain a wrong; and, they say, Princes (when Ambas∣sadours offer Indecencies) do not use to chide them, but deny them Audience; as if Silence were the way Royal to re∣venge a wrong. A certain Jeweller having sold the Wise of Galenus the Emperour counter∣feit
Jewels instead of true ones, the Em∣press, being told of the Cozenage, was mightily incensed against the Jeweller, and requested the Emperour that he might have some just punishment inflic∣ted on him; upon this the Emperour commanded, that he should be exposed to a Lyon, to be torn in pieces, upon which, the day of Execution being come and the Malefactour brought near the Lyon's den, while the said Impostour fearfully, and the People greedily ex∣pect that some fierce and terrible Lyon should be let out of his Den to devour him, the Head of a Man onely appeared from the Den, and 'twas a Cryer, who by the Emperour's order proclaimed these words, He has played the Chear, and now he is cheated himself. 'Twas the saying of a Wise man, That when an Injury is done a Man, and 'tis not in his power to revenge himself of it, 'tis best to dissemble, or take no notice of it, but when 'tis in his power to re∣venge it, then ought he generously to forgive it.
Some great Lovers of Justice. Queen Mary, the first of England, caused the Lord Stourton (for a Mur∣ther by him committed, and of which he was found guilty, and sentenced to be hanged) to be executed accordingly, having this onely favour, to be hanged in a Silken Halter. [Doctour Burner's second History of the Reformation, Life of Queen Mary. Henry the second, King of France, commanded, That a Man who had pri∣vily offended him, should be laid in Pri∣son, without relling why: the Judges, up∣on his application to them, set the Priso∣ner at liberty, having first delivered their opinion to the King, who again com∣manded, that he should be put to death, having, as he said, found him tardy in a foul and hainous offence, which he would not have to be divulged; the Judges, for all that, would not condemn him, but ordered the Prison doors to be set open to let him forth; 'tis true, that the King caused him to be taken after∣wards and thrown into the River Seines without any form of Law, to avoid tu∣mult;
but the Judges would not con∣demn a person where no proof was made that he was guilty of such Offence. [A French Historian. The Casuists say, That he that lyes with his Sister commits Incest; but he that marries her sins higher, by applying God's Ordinance to his Crime; so doubt∣less he that commits Murther by the Sword of Justice aggravates that Crime to the utmost: This was spoke by the Lord Digby, upon the Earl of Strafford's Impeachment. The unchast Life of some, and incestuous Marriages. Eugenius, the third King of Scotland, made a most beastly Act, which appoin∣ted the first night's lodging with the new married Woman to appertain to the Lord of the Manour; this infamous Law was repealed by King Malcome, A. 1057. granting the Husband liberty to redeem the same, by payment of an half Mark of Silver, which Portion they call, Mar∣chetas Mulierum, and is yet disponed by Superiours, in the Charters they give to their Vassals. [Hist. of the Church of Scot. lib. 2. p. 29.
One Walter Bishop of Hereford, in the Reign of William the Conquerour, attemp∣ting to force the Chastity of a Woman (who being a Sempstress was, out of pre∣tence of cutting out of work, brought up into his Chamber) was by her, with her Scissars, thrust into his Belly, of which he dyed. There was a Man in Arabia who had fifteen Sons and one Daughter, now this Daughter was common to all her Bro∣thers, (Incest it seems in that Countrey being allowed of) who at length being tired with their continual company, she devised a means to rid herself, or at least to ease herself somewhat of that trouble; and therefore, whereas the Custome was, that he which went in, left his Staff al∣ways at the door, to prohibit any of the others entrance; she got like Staves, and always having one of them at the door, was disburthened of their importunity; every one that came still thinking some other had been there before them: but they being once all together, one of them stole from his fellows, and finding a Staff at the door, accused his Sister to his Fa∣ther of Adultery, whereof upon disco∣very of the naked truth of the matter,
she was cleared. [Heylin's Cosm. Arabia. There was a young Man, the Son of a Widow, who would fain have debau∣ched his Mother's Maid, whereof when the Maid had acquainted his Mother, the Mother, to be satisfied of the truth thereof, bid the Maid to appoint him a Night to come to her Bed, which she having done, his Mother, at the Night appointed, went into the Maids Bed, there to meet with her Son, and to give him a severe chiding, for being so wic∣ked; the young man came at the Night appointed to the Maids Bed, where it seems the Mother, being overcome with Lust, together with the delusions of the Devil, she silently admitted her Son, and unknown to him was at that time got with Child, and at the usual time she was delivered of a Daughter, who at length being grown up to Womans E∣state, was (by strange Chance of for∣tune) unknown married to this young Man, who was his Sister, and Daughter, as well as his Wife. There was a Roman Empress so exces∣sively incontinent that 'twas observed of her, she would admit several men to her Embraces after she had conceived with
Child by her own Husband, but not be∣fore, for this reason, lest the Father of the Child might be discovered by the Countenance of the Child. [Howell's Letters. In Turkey they allow seven or eight Wives to each Man: the Turks are much addicted to Venery, and so are the Nea∣politans; for 'tis observed there are seve∣ral thousand Curtesans in that City, 'twas in this place they say the French-Pox was first ingendred. The singular Chastity and Modesty of some Persons. 'Tis said of King Edward the Confes∣sour (who was so pious and religious a Prince) that he was the first King of En∣gland who had the Blessing of God given him of Curing the King's Evil, and since derived (under God) from him successive∣ly to the Kings of England; that he was so reserved and chast as to carnal Lust, that Queen Emme his Consort declared after his death, that in the several years she had been married to him, she never knew him carnally: some will say, it proceded from debility of nature in him,
but most agree 'twas his great Chastity; nay some Divines have been of opinion, that it becomes the sin of Lust in a Man to know his own Wife carnally once af∣ter she has conceived with Child by him; Marriage being chiefly intended for the propagation of mankind in an orderly method. [Heylin's Cosmogr. Ed. the Confessour. Queen Zenobia was such a precise piece of Modesty, that after she had con∣ceived with Child, she would not admit her Husband to know her carnally. [Howell's Letters. A Queen of England before the Con∣quest, having hard labour of a Child, solemnly vowed, she would never after admit her Husband to her Embraces, for that she would never undergo the like Sorrows again, whereupon she re∣tired into a Nunnery. Thomas, Arch Bishop of York, in the Reign of Henry the First, King of England, falling very sick, sent for Physicians to apply some proper remedies for his Cure, but they all told him, nothing would doe him so much good as to accompany with a woman, but he re∣plied, the remedy would be worse
than the disease, and so dyed a Virgin. There was a Woman in Holland so ex∣ceeding modest and chast that 'tis said of her, she never so much as kiss'd any Man but her Husband; for he having a very stinking breath, and being at length told so by some others, he asked his Wife why she had never told him thereof, to the end he might have remedied it; to which she innocently replyed, Truly I thought all other Mens breaths had smell'd so. A grave Minister in Holland, having occasion, went into a Ditch to ease him∣self, where being unwarily surprized by some Women of his Parish walking hat way, he was so ashamed thereupon that he did never after shew his Head in pu∣blick or come into the Pulpit, but pined himself away with Melancholy. Lucretia, a Roman Lady, was a great pattern of Chastity, who, for that she was ravished by King Tarquin, destroy∣ed herself, on whom was made this Di∣stich, Unfortunate Lucretia, thy chast mind, By life nor death, shall vindication find. [Roman History.
In Spain the Women of Quality usual∣ly when they appear abroad have their Faces covered with a Veil. Of Jealousie. In Italy the disease of Jealousie is epi∣demical, for they are great Imbracers of pleasure, which may proceed from the luscious rich Wines and luxurious Food, Fruit and Roots, wherewith the Coun∣trey abounds, insomuch that in some pla∣ces Nature may be said to be Leua sui, A Bawd to herself. The Cardinal de Me∣dici's Rule is of much authority amongst them, That there is no Religion under the Navel: and some of them are of the opinion of the Asians, who hold that, touching those natural passions, desires and motions, which run up and down in the blood, God Almighty and his Hand∣maid Nature did not intend they should be a torment to us, but to be used with comfort and delight. 'Tis said that an Italian, having a hand∣some Wife, whom he suspected to be dis∣honest, but could not convince himself thereof by an Overt Act, grew at length so extremely jealous of her, that he cau∣sed
himself to be gelded, with this design, that if from thenceforth his Wife should prove with Child, she might be palpa∣bly convinced of her dishonesty. Procris having a jealous Suspicion of her Husband Cephalus, that he was in∣flamed with the Love of some other Wo∣man, she followed him into the Fields where he went a Hunting one day, and hid herself in a Bush, that she might pri∣vily observe what her Husband did, and unhappily stirring in the Bush where she was, Cephalus observing it, and suppo∣sing it was some wild Beast, he shot an Arrow into it, and slew her. There have been sad effects of Jealousie. Of great Love between some men and their Wives. From the Nuptial Sacrifices of old, the Gall was always wont to be taken away and cast upon the ground, to sig∣nifie that betwixt the new-married cou∣ple there should be nothing of bitterness or discontent. Edward the First, King of England, warring in the Holy-land, was by a de∣sperate Saracen unhappily wounded in
the Body with an impoisoned Knife, which had certainly proved mortal, had not Queen Elizabeth, his Wife, out of her unspeakable love to him, sucked out the poison of his Wounds with her Mouth, whereby she effected the Cure, which otherwise had been incurable. [Speed's History of Edw. the First. In some parts of the Indies those Wives do live in perpetual Infamy who will not throw themselves into their Hus∣bands funeral Piles, and so bear them Company into the other World. Parents great love to their Children. Charles the Great, King of France, was so great a Lover of his Sons and Daugh∣ters, that he never dined or supped with∣out them; he went no whither upon a∣ny Journey, but he took them along with him; and when he was asked why he did not marry his Daughters, and send his Children abroad to see the World; his Answer was, that he was not able to bear their absence. Socrates, the great Philosopher, was surprized by Alcibiades, childishly spor∣ting with his Son; and when he was
sufficiently derided upon that accoun by Alcibiades; you have not, said he such reason as you do imagine, to laug so profusely at a Father playing with hi own Child, seeing you know nothing of that affection which Parents have to their Children, pray contain your sel then till you come to be a Father your sl when perhaps you will be found as rlous as I now seem to you to be. the Reverence and Love of Children to their Parents. Sir Thomas Moore, being Lord Chan∣cellour of England at the same time that his Father was a Judge of the King's Bench, he would always when he came to Westminster to Court, go first to the King's Bench, and ask his Father Bles∣sing, before he went to sit in the Chan∣cery. When Edward the First, King of Eng∣land, heard of the Death of his onely Son, he took it grievously as a Father, but patiently as a Wise man; but when he understood shortly after of the Death of King Henry the Third, his Father, he was wholly dejected and comfortless;
whereat when Charles, King of Sicily, (with whom he then sojourned in his return from the Holy-Land,) greatly marvelled, King Edward satisfied him thus; God, says he, may send me more Sons, but the Death of a Father is irre∣coverable. [History of King Edward I. The Love of a Servant to his Master. A Gentleman's Servant in France, knowing his Master should be killed, watching the opportunity, he took his Master's Cloaths, and laid him down in the Bed where his Master used to lie, and when the Executioner came to kill his Master, he suffered himself to be kil∣led in his stead. Some Men unnatural to Parents and Wives. Nero, the Cruel Emperour of Rome, most inhumanely caused his good Mo∣ther Agrippina to be killed, and then had her Belly ript open, to see where he lay in her Body: he laid it no nearer his Heart than to say that, He did not think
he had had so hansome a Mother. The aforesaid Nero, being incensed a∣gainst his Wife, gave her such a kick with his Foot upon her Belly, being with Child, that thereof she instantly dyed. This Nero, 'tis said, caused-the Great Ci∣ty of Rome to be burned, and when 'twas in its flames, he laughed heartily, saying, If he might not be remembred for good, he would for Evil. 'Tis said farther of him, That when he was buryed, the Devils did so haunt about the place where his body lay, that the Inhabitants were forced to dig it up, and bury it in some remote place. [Roman History, in the Life of Nero. Some Women are very unkind to their Husbands. A Gentleman having invited several Friends to Dinner, and they going to sit down at the Table, his Wife coming to Dinner, but being angry at some thing; on a sudden she overthrew the Table, and tumbled down all the Meat underfoot; whereof when his Friends took notice, he said, Gentlemen, there none of you but has his Cross, and one
thing or other wherewith to exercise his Patience; and, for my own part, this is my chiefest Cross; for were it not for this Shrew my Wife, I should have been one of the happiest men in the World. Many Examples of this Nature. The hatred among Brothers. Sir George Sands of Kent had two Sons, the younger of which murthered his el∣der Brother as he lay by him in Bed, ha∣ving no apparent cause given him either by his Father or Brother, for which he was soon after condemned, and execu∣ted at Maidstone Assizes. The cruel and bloudy Dispositions of some. The barbarous and inhumane Massa∣cres in France and Ireland were dread∣full Examples thereof. In Scotland, in a place called Kyle, there is a Rock about twelve foot high, and as much in breadth, 'tis by the Scotch men called the Deaf-Craig; for though a man call never so loud, or shoot off a Gun on the one side, yet his
fellow on the other side cannot hear the noise, some persons hearts are as hard and deaf as this Rock. One Mackdonald, a notorious Rob∣ber in Scotland, among other his barba∣rous Cruelties, caused Horse shoes to be nailed to the Soles of a Widows feet, be∣cause in her grief she had sworn to re∣port his great wickedness to the King; this Villain, being afterwards taken, was first by the Order of James the First, King of Scotland, shod in like manner as he had served the Woman, and after∣wards beheaded. [Drumond's History of Scotland, p. 15. Severe punishments upon Malefac∣tours. Among the Tartars they used to beat the Soles of their Feet with great Clubs, that so the Veins which assemble there might convey the pain to all other parts of the body. In Barbary they had a sort of Engine to punish Malefactours, whereby they were presently cut in two parts, the up∣permost of which was immediately clapt on a Red-hot Gridiron, that seared up
the Veins, whereby they were a short while kept in extreme pain, and while the upermost part was thus barbarously used, they threw the nethermost to be devoured by Beasts before their Eyes. The grievous torture of Monsieur Ravilliac, for killing Henry the Fourth, King of France, was inflicted on him as followeth King Henry going one after∣noon to the Bastile, to see his Treasure and Ammunition, his Coach stopp'd sud∣denly by reason of some Colliers Carts that were in that narrow Street, where∣upon this Ravilliac, a Lay-Jesuite, (who had a whole twelve month watch'd an opportunity to doe the Act,) put his Foot boldly upon one of the Wheels of the Coach, and with a long Knife, stret∣ched himself over their Shoulders who were in the Boot of the Coach, and rea∣ched the King, and stabb'd him in the left side to the Heart, and pulling out the fatal Steel, he doubled his Thrust; the King with a ruthfull voice cryed out, Jesu bless, (I am hurt) and sud∣denly the Bloud issued out of his Mouth. The Regicide Villain was apprehended, and command given, that no violence should be offered him, that he might be
reserved for some exquisite torture, which was thus; His body was pulled between four Horses, that any one might have heard his Bones crack, and after the dis∣location they were set again, and so he was carried in a Cart, standing half na∣ked, to the place of Execution, where was prepared a Pot with boiling Brim∣stone, into which the Hand wherewith he stabb'd the King, with the Knife chained to it, was put in, and misera∣bly burnt off; then were there Pincers made red hot, with which they pulled off the Paps of his Breasts, and Brawns of his Thighs and Leggs; then a pair of Boots was drawn upon his Leggs half full of boiling Oil; then he was laid on his Back, and a roundel of Clay made round his Belly, wherein was pou∣red melted, lead; upon which he gave a dolefull shriek, he bore up against all these Torments about three hours, be∣fore he dyed; all the Confession that could be drawn from him was, that he thought to have done God good service to take away that King which would have embrolled Christendom in an end∣less War, his body was afterwards burned to Ashes, and the Ashes thrown up in
the Air, his House was pulled down, and his Wife and Children banished the Kingdom, and none to bear the name of Ravilliac ever after. [Sere's general History of France, page 1178. A fatal thing 'twas, that France should have three Kings come to violent Deaths in a short revolution of time; Henry the Second, running at Tilt with Monsieur Montgomery, was killed by a Splinter of a Lance that pierced his Eye; Henry the Third, not long after, was killed by a young Fryar, who, in lieu of a Letter he pretended to have for him, pull'd out of his long Sleeve a Knife, and thrust him therewith into the bottom of the Belly, as he was coming from his Close∣stole, and so dispatch'd him, but that Re∣gicide was hack'd to pieces in the place by the Nobles. All the Apostles, except S. John, and most of the ancient Fathers and Doc∣tours of the Church suffered persecuti∣on under several Emperours.
What strange Deaths some men have dyed of. Charles the Second, King of Navarre, having wasted his spirits with voluptu∣ousness and Leachery, in his Old age fell into a Lethargy or else a Dead-palsie, and therefore to comfort his benumm'd limbs, he was by the advice of his Phy∣sician sewed up in a sheet steeped in Aqua vitae, the Chirurgeon, having made an end of fewing the sheet, wanting a Knife to cut the thread, thereupon he took up the Wax Candle that stood by him to burn it off, but the Flame run∣ning by the thread, caught hold of the sheet in an instant, which according to the nature of Aqua vitae, burnt with such violence tha notwithstanding all endea∣vours, the aged King miserably expired in the midst of the Flames. [Heylin's Cosmogr. p. 253. One John Child, a Gentleman, hun∣ting in the depth of Winter, in Dartmore Forrest in Devonshire, lost both his Com∣pany and his way, in a bitter Snow, and to preserve himself from perishing with extreme cold, he killed his Horse, and
crept into his Bowells for warmth, and wrote the following Verses with the bloud. He that finds and brings me to my Tomb, The Land of Plinistock shall be his doom. That night he was frozen to death, and being soon after found by some Monks of Tavestock Abbey, the Abbot of Tavestock, having caused him to be decently buried, got that rich Manor. The King of Polonia, being accessary to a grievous Murther, was pursued by a multitude of Rats, and to avoid them, he retired with himself and Family into a strong Fortress, in the Lake of Goplo, whither nevertheless he was pursued with these Creatures, insomuch that the Land and Water was covered with them, and they cryed and hissed most fearfully, at length they entred in at the Windows of the Fortress, and scaled the Walls, and there they devoured the King, his Wife and Children, and left nothing of them remaining. [Heylin's Cosmogr. Gopolo in Polonia.
Some bodies keep long in Tombs uncorrupted. In the Reign of King James the First, of England, in the Church of Astly in Warwickshire, the body of Thomas Grey, Marquiss of Dorset was found in that Church, being a new Building, who was there buried in the twenty second year of the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, and albeit he had lain buried for the space of seventy eight years, yet his Eyes, Hair, Flesh, Nails and Joints, re∣mained in a manner as if he had been but newly buryed. I reade of a Roman Bishop that lay uncorrupted in his Grave for the space of two hundred years. [Baker's Chron. page 578. How long some have lain in a Trance, and of some strangely sa∣ved from Death. William Withers of Walsham in Sussex lay in a Trance for ten days without any sustenance, and at last coming to him∣self,
he spake much against Pride and Covetousness and other Sins. There was at Sir Thomas Read's house in Oxfordshire, a Maid servant of his, who happened to be got with child by one in the family; the Woman used several ways to make herself miscarry, and at length, finding her self much indisposed, she went to the Jakes, and there strain∣ing herself, she miscarried, (being well nigh her full time) and her burthen droped into the Jakes; having recovered herself pretty well, she kept it private; however one of the other Maid-servants espying the foulness of her linen, quick∣ly apprehended how matters stood with her, and she straight ways acquainted her Master therewith, who quickly ex∣amined the Maid-servant what became of her child, she giving an imperfect re∣lation therein, was sent to the Gaol at Oxford, and the next Assizes was indic∣ted and arraigned for murthering her child, and upon presumptive circum∣stances was found guilty, and received Sentence to be hanged therefore, which was put in Execution, and after having hanged above half an hour; she was cut down, being dead to all appearance.
Dr. Willis, the great Physician of Oxford, had her to dissect, and feeling about her, he felt her Pulses had some faint motion, which created in him a fancy she might be restored to life, whereupon, to try his skill he poured some choice Cordials into her Mouth, and fomented her No∣strils, and did other things to her, inci∣dent to his Profession; and afterwards caused a Bed to be well warmed and she put into it, and two other young Women to go to Bed to her, and keep her warm, so that in a small time she re∣covered by degrees, and came to her self soon after, when she could speak, Dr. Willis made all persons to depart the Room, onely himself and two other Physicians staid with the Woman, and they asked her where she had been and what she had seen since she was turned off the Ladder at the Gallows, she an∣swered, that she remembred nothing at all from that time till she recovered; this was done to prevent false stories: she li∣ved several years afterwards, they ha∣ving procured her Pardon, in regard her Innocency appeared; the child being found to be abortive. [History of the Ci∣vil Wars of England.
A Gentlewoman; having lain in a Trance for some days, was at length buried for dead, with a Gold-ring on her Finger, the Sexton knowing there∣of, he and his wife with a Lanthorn and Candle, went privily the next night and digged up the Coffin, opened it, untyed the winding sheet, and was go∣ing to take off the Ring; when sudenly the buryed Lady raised up herself, (be∣ing just then supposed miraculously to come out of her Trance) the Sexton and his wife ran away in a horrible fright, leaving their Lanthorn behind them, which she took up, and made hast to her house, and she knocking hard at the door, and the Maid-servant asking who was there, she said, 'tis I, let me in, the Maid being much surprized thereat, neglected to open the door, but ran away to her Master, and ac∣quainted him therewith, he would scarce believe it, till himself went to the door, and heard her voice, and let her in; got her into a warm Bed, and being well looked after, she perfectly recove∣red, and lived to have three Children afterwards [I read this in a Book called the Victory of Patience.
In the Massacre of Paris, one Merlin, a Minister of the Reformed Religion, fled from the Persecutours to save his life, and hid himself in a Haymow, where he was strangely preserved and nourished for the space of a fort∣night, by a Hen that came constant∣ly and every day laid an Egg by him, by which he was sustained. [Clark's Mirr. page 365. In the same Persecution, another Man, being closely pursued for his life, got in∣to a little Cellar in an old Castle, over the door of which presently came a Spider, and spun a thick Webb, where the Persecutours came presently after to look for him, but they seeing a thick Webb over the door, declined seeking him there, by which he was miracu∣lously saved. Very just and remarkable was the Judgment of God upon Pope Alexander the Sixt for his Covetousness and wic∣ked means which he intended to make use of to obtain other mens wealth and reches to himself; this Pope had a Son called Caesar Borgias, who was made a Cardinal by his Father, and a Duke by some King, or by the Emperour, and
commonly called Duke Valentine, it was a common practice with this Pope and his Son, to procure the Death of many rich men, that they might become Ma∣sters of their wealth, and for this end they upon a time conspired together to take away the life of divers of the Sena∣tours and Chief Nobility of Rome, to bring which their purpose to pass, they could devise no better means, than to invite them in a friendly manner to sup∣per, which was accordingly done, and the place appointed (as the custome in Italy is) was under a Vine, to avoid the heat; Duke Valentine, having poisoned two Pots of Wine, which he intended for his guests, delivereth them to his servant who knew nothing of the mat∣ter, to be carried to the Vine for Sup∣per, with a straight charge that he should give of that Wine to no man, before he himself did come and give him order for it. The Pope cometh to the place before his guests, and being thirsty with heat calleth for some Wine, the Duke's ser∣vant supposing by the straight charge his Master did give unto him, that the Wine delivered unto him by his Master
with his own hands, was onely some special choice Wine to be preserved for the Pope's own use, powreth out there∣of and brought it to his Holiness, who had no sooner drunk, but in cometh the Duke, to whom the Pope did give the Cup to pledge him, he mistrusting no∣thing, taketh the Cup from his Father, and did drink thereof after him; the Pope presently sickneth and was carried away almost dead, and languishing a lit∣tle while dyed in great torment, the Son by reason of his youth and strength after certain months grievous sickness, by the help of Physick escaped; the inten∣ded Supper by reason of the Pope's sudden sickness was put off, and by that means the Guests were delivered from the Hel∣ish Plot, and the Plotters were punished ith their own rod. Some have eaten Poison without any harm. A Prisoner condemned to be execu∣ted, without any previous Antidote (to dispatch himself out of the way) swal∣lowed down almost an Ounce of Ars∣nick, and received no hurt thereby.
Mithridates, King of Pontus in Asia, used himself to eat Poison by small de∣grees, till at last his Body became an Antidote against Poison, insomuch that, when he would have poisoned himself he could not, which verifies the old Saying, Usus altera fit natura. [Poetical Dictionary. Some persons strangely cured of Diseases. A Gentleman being in his Barn with his Thrashers, was suddenly taken with a violent fit of the Gout, and as a pre∣sent Remedy, he thrust therefore his Leggs above his Knees into a heap of Wheat, and by this way of drying his feet received ease in a wonderfull man∣ner, and afterwards upon the same oc∣casion, made use of the same Remedy. [Observations on Physick. Another being given over by the Doc∣tours, for that he had an Imposthume in his Throat, which they thought incu∣rable, one day by a particular merry accident, he was taken with such an extreme fit of Laughter, that it broke
his Imposthume, and after he had well vomited, he was restored to his health. [Howell's Letters. Some have used to walk and doe strange things in their sleep. John Poultny, born in Little-Sheepy in Leicestershire, in his sleep would fre∣quently rise out of his Bed, dress him∣self, open the doors, walk round about the fields, and return again to his Bed, without wakening, he would also fight in his sleep, and being awaked, he ne∣ver knew what passed. [Fuller's Wor∣thies, page 137. Leicester. Some sleep much, others but little. Augustus Caesar was so intent on the Affairs of his Empire, that he never slept above seven hours, and those also not so continued, but in that space he usually awaked three or four times, and to provoke him to sleep, he had Water poured long and constantly (by his bed's-head) into a Cistern. [Suetonus in vita Augusti.
How long one slept. William Foxley, Pot-maker for the mint in the Tower of London, fell a∣sleep on Tuesday in Easter Week, and could not be awaked with pinching or burning till the first day of the next Term, which was full fourteen days, and when he was then awaked, he was found in all points, as if he had slept but one night, he lived forty years after, this matter fell out in the thirty se∣venth year of King Henry the Eighth's Reign. [Baker's Chronicle, p. 428. Faith∣full Annalist, page 76, 77. Extraordinary things that have happened to some men. There was a Man that was executed at Tiburn, where being cut down half dead, and after his privy members were cut off, that rushed on the Executioner, and gave him a blow on the Ear, to the wonder of the standers-by. [Fuller's Worthies, page 84. There was one blind till he was 7 years old, then saw; and dumb till he was 30,
and then spake. [Bker's Chron. page 8. Socrates, 'tis said of him, that whether he was merry or sad, he still, had the same Countenace. Some men very compassionate. A King beyond Seas, who was very mercifull, being once importuned to sign the Execution of a Malefactour, wished then, he was neither able to write nor reade. The King's Justice is bound by the Law, but his Mercy is not. The first Authours of divers fa∣mous Inventions: and the works of some curious Artists. As there is a time for every thing that is done under the Sun, so there is no Art or Practice, no Custome or Cal∣ling but what had its first Introducer, and some one or other from whom it did commence. Edward the Third, King of England, brought the Art of making Cloth first  England, by transporting some Ar¦tificers
from Gaunt, in Flanders, hither, who were the first Inventers of Cloth-making; to the Flemings we are like∣wise indebted for the making of Arras Hangings, Tapestries, for the Invention of Clocks, Watches, Chariots, the lay∣ing on of Colours with Oil, and the working of Pictures in Glass. [Heylin's Cosmog. Flanders. As touching that of Gunns, they were invented by a German Monk, acciden∣tally making some Experiment in Chy∣mistry, first used in the year 1380. [Hey∣lin's Cosmogr. Germany. The Instrument of perpetual Motion was invented by one Cornelius van Dre∣ble a German here in England, and by him presented to King James the First. Ralph Lane was the first person that brought Tobacco into England, in the 28th year of the Reign of Queen Eli∣zabeth, Anno Dom. 1585. [Baker's Chro∣nicle, page 529. The first person that built an House in Athens was the Son of Caelius, who taking his Pattern from the Swallows Nest, began the way of making Houses with Clay; for in old times People li∣ved in Holes and Cares of the Earth.
There was a Mathematician who made a Wooden Eagle, that flew aloft into the Air, to the great wonder of all Spectatours. [Dubartas History. There was one in Qu. Elizabeth's Reign that wrote the Ten Commandments, the Creed, the Pater Noster, the Queen's Name, and the Year of our Lord with∣in the Compass of a Penny, and gave the Queen a Pair of Spectacles, of such an artificial making, that by the help thereof, she did plainly and distinctly reade every Letter. [Dr. Heylin's Life of King Char. the first, p. 1. In the twentieth year of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, one Mark Scaliot, Blacksmith, made a Lock consisting of eleven peices of Iron, Steel, and Brass, all which, together with a Pipe Key to it, weighed but one Grain of Gold, he made also a Chain of Gold, consisting of fourty three Links, whereunto ha∣ving fastned the Lock and Key afore∣said, he put the Chain about a Fleas neck, which drew them all with ease. Now all these together, Lock and Key, Chain and Flea, being weighed, they weighed but one Grain and a half. [Hey∣lin's Gosmogr. Q. Elizabeth.
Dr. Scaliger saw in the French King's Court A Crow that was taught to fly at Partridges or any other small fowl from the Faulkoner's fist. There was a Baboon in the King of Spain's Court was seen to play upon the Guittar, and a Monkey in the King of Spain's Court was skilfull in Chess play. Of keeping Secrets. Metellus the Roman General being as∣ked by a young Centurion, (after the first onset of the Battel,) what design he intended to pursue next, the General told him, that if he thought his own Shirt was privy to any part of his Coun∣cil, he would immediately pluck it off and burn it. Secrecy and Celerity are the two main Wheeles on which all great Actions move. Strange designs have been effec∣ted by Secrecy.
Men of Industry and Haters of Idleness. Elfred, a King of the West Saxons, before the Conquest here in England, disposed the day and night equally divi∣ded into three parts to three special u∣ses, and observed them duly by the bur∣ning of a great Taper set up in his Cha∣pel: Eight hours he spent in medita∣tion, reading, prayers, for his Souls health; Eight hours in provision for him∣self, his recreation and repose, for the health of his body; and the other Eight hours he spent about the Affairs of his Kingdom. [Baker's Chronicle. 'Tis said of Dr. Thomas Aquinas, that he could scarce see those before him, or hear the voice of any so as to under∣stand what was said, he was continual∣ly so intent on his Studies. The Learned Dr. John Scaliger, one of the greatest Scholars that ever was in the World, 'tis said of him, that he did usually spend sixteen of the twenty four hours of the day, in his Studies, he did scarce allow himself moderate re∣pose.
Of the innocent Life of some. 'Tis said of Henry the Sixth, King of England, that his Father Confessour did declare, that in ten years Confession, he never found, that the King had done or said any thing, for which he might justly be enjoined penance. [Speed's Hi∣story. 'Tis said of Thomas the second Duke of Norfolk that when his Corps was car∣ried to be interred in the Abby of Thet∣ford; Anno Dom. 1524. as likewise of Ed∣ward Earl of Derby when he was buried, not a Tradesman could demand the pay∣ment of a Groat they owed him, nor a Neighbour the Restitution of a Penny wherein they had wronged him. The exact obedience of some to Superiours. There is much difference between an active and passive Obedience, for though Subjects are not bound to doe or per∣form the Commands of Magistrates or Superiours, where they apparently con∣tradict the Laws of God or Nature, yet
there must be a passive Obedience used, that is not to oppose or withstand di∣rectly. 'Tis reported of the Inhabitants of those Islands against the Coast of Florida, that they always contain themselves in great Subjection to their Lords and Ma∣sters, insomuch that if they should be commanded by them, to throw them∣selves headlong off the Rocks into the Sea, or doe any other possible thing, they will not refuse to doe it, nor never dispute the Command. The Fidelity of some to their Oath and Trust. King John of England, having left Hubert Burgh Governour of Dover Ca∣stle, when King Lewis of France came to storm the Castle, and take the Town, and finding it difficult to be done by force, he sent a Messenger to Hubert, whose brother Thomas, he had a little before taken Prisoner, that unless he would surrender the Castle, he should presently see his brother Thomas put to death, with exquisite Torments, before his Eyes, but this Threatning moved
not Hubert at all, who more regarded his own Loyalty than his brother's Life; then King Lewis sent to him again, of∣fering him a great summ of money, nei∣ther did this move him, for he had re∣solved to preserve his Loyalty inexpug∣nable as his Castle. Baker's Chron. King John. John the First, King of France, being overthrown in battle and made Prisoner by Edward, surnamed the Black Prince, and afterwards brought over into Eng∣land and imprisoned in the Tower of London, where he remained four years, and was then permitted to return into France, upon certain Conditions, which if he could make his Subjects submit to, he should be free, if otherwise, he gave his Faith to return; he could not pre∣vail with his Subjects to accept of those Terms, whereupon he returned to Eng∣land and there dyed. [Speed's History.
Some persons great Lovers of Truth. The Persians and Indians had a Law, that whosoever had been convicted thrice of speaking untruth, should upon pein of death never speak word more all his life after: And Plato saith 'tis one∣ly allowed Physicians to lye, for the comfort of the sick that are under their Cstody and Care, but all other person are obliged to a severe and strict obser∣vance of Truth. The Duke of Ossuna having got leav to release some Slaves, went on boar the Cape Galley; and passing throug the Chrms of Slaves, he asked diver of them what their Offences were, eve¦ry one excused himself, saying, he wa either put in out of malice or by inju¦stice; amongst the rest there was on sturdy littly black man, and the Duk asking him what he was in for, Sir, sai he, I cannot deny, but I am justly pu in here, for I wanted money, and took a Purse hard by Tarragona, to kee me from starving, the Duke thereupo with a little staff he had in his han
gave him two or three blows upon the Shoulders, saying, You Rogue, what do you doe amongst so many honest in∣nocent men, get you gone out of their company, so he was freed, and the rest remained still in statu quo prius, to tug at the Oar. [Howell's Letters, vol. 2. p. 37. 'Tis reported that a Scotchman, co∣ming once to be entertained as a Ser∣vant to one Collonel Edmunds, being then in the Low Countries, he said unto him, Sir, my Lord, your Father, and such Knights and Gentlemen (naming several) your Cosins and Kinsfolks, were in good health, Colonel Edmunds; tur∣ning to his Friends then by, Gentlemen, said he, Believe not one word this ly∣ing Varlet says, my Father is but a poor Baker in the City of Edinburgh, and works hard to gain a livelyhood, whom this Knave would make a Lord, to cur∣ry favour with me, and to make you believe I am a great man born, when there is no such matter.
Pope Benedict though raised to great fortune, was not unmindfull of his low beginning. Pope Benedict the Eleventh, soon af∣ter his Exaltation to the Popedom, ha∣ving sent for his mother to come to him, being a poor mean Woman, his Servants, being unwilling to let her appear before him in so me  garb, they dressed her in such good fashion, that she almost ap∣peared to be another Woman, and brought her to hr Son the Pope, he seeing her so finaly dressed, pretended he did not know her, saying, what mean you, bring me my Mother, as for this Lady, I know her not; they, under∣n his Humility, withdrew her, and undressed her, an put her on her old Cloth, and so returned with her; then the Pope imbrad her; In this Habit, said he,  my Mo∣ther; in this I know her, and in this I receive her.
Of Religion, and the Reverence some great Persons have had for its Pro∣fessors. 'Tis said, that the constancy, and strictness of the very Heathens, had been highly commendable, had their Devoti∣ons been better directed; in the mean time they shamed us, by being more zea∣lous in their Superstition, than the Chri∣stians in the true Religion. The first Religion, that ever was re∣duced to exact Rules, and ritual obser∣vances, was that of the Hebrews, the Ancient People of God, called Judaism; the second was Christianity, and the third Mahometism: Touching Paganism, and Heathenish Idolatry, they scarce de∣serve the Name of Religion; but for the former three, there is this Analogy be∣tween them, That they all agree in the first Person of the Trinity. What kind of Religion there was before the Flood, 'tis in vain to make any researches, there ha∣ving been no Monuments at all left, (be∣sides that little we find in Moses, and the Phenician Story) but Seth's Pillars, with
those so defaced, that nothing was legi∣ble upon them; as also the Oak, under which Abraham feasted God-Almighty, which was two Thousand Years after the Religion of the Hebrews was trans∣ferred from the Patriarchs to Moses, and from him to the Prophets; it was ho∣noured with the Promulgations of God himself, and his glorious appearance, especially the Ten Commandments, which being most of them Moral, and agreeing with the common Notions of Man, are in force all the World over. [Howel's Letters, vol. 2. p. 16, 17. The Christian Religion, is the most purely spiritual of all other Religions; there is no Religion that excites Man, more to the love and practise of vertue, and hatred of vice, or that prescribes greater rewards for the one, or punish∣ments for the other; it has propagated her self by simplicity, humbleness, and by a meer passive way of fortitude, grow∣ing up like the Palm Tree, under the hea∣vy weight of persecution. As to the Mahometans, the newest of all Religions, they have a great opinion of Christ, and say, he was a greater Pro∣phet than Moses, yet inferior to Maho∣met;
Nay in their Alcoran, they term him the Breath and Word of God, and they punish all that blaspheme him; they have their Alcoran only in one Language, the Arabick, and 'tis as bad as death, for any to raise Scruples of the Alcoran; the Mufti, (their Priest) is in as great re∣verence amongst them, as the Pope is amongst the Romanists; for they as well as others hold it, to be a true Principle in Divinity, That no one thing preserves, and improves Religion more than a vene∣rable high pious esteem of the Chiefest Ministers: They have no other Guide, or Law, both for Temporal, and Church Affairs than the Alcoran, which they hold to be the Rule of Civil Justice, as well as the Divine Charter of their Salvation: They have one extraordinary piece of hu∣manity, to be so tender of the rational Soul, as not to put Christian, Jew, Greek, or any other to his Oath, in re∣gard that if for some advantage of gain, or occasion of inconvenience and punish∣ment, any should forswear himself, they hold the imposers of the Oath to be ac∣cessary to the Damnation of the perjured Man: By this and other Policy they con∣serve the great Ottoman Empire, which
extends without interruption, (the Hel∣lespont only between) in one continued piece of Earth, two and thirty Hundred miles from Buda, in Hungaria, a good way into Persia. [History of the Ottoman Empire. Of the several Extents of the Roman Catholick, and Protestant Religion. Among Roman Catholicks there is th Emperor, and in him the King of Hunga¦ry, the three Kings of Spain, France, an Poland, all Italy, the Dukes of Savoy Bavaria, and Lorain, the three spiritua Electors of Cologne, Triers, Mentz, wit some few more: Touching them who hav renounced all obedience to Rome, ther are the three Kings of Great Britai Denmark, and Sweedland: The Elector Duke of Saxony, Holstein, and Witte¦burgh; The Electoral Duke of Brande¦burgh; The Marquess of Baden, and th Landgrave of Hesse Cassel, most of th Hansiatick Towns, which are eighty eig in number, some whereof are equal Republicks, and the almost seven Pr¦vinces the Hollander hath; The five Ca¦rons of Swiss, and Geneva, the Protestan
of France, who are reputed the fifth part of the Kingdom, the Prince of Transil∣vania, they of Hungary, and the large Kingdom of Bohemia, they of the Mar∣quisates of Lusatia, Moravia, and the Dukedom of Silesia, as also many in the huge Kingdom of Poland, wherein Pro∣testants are diffused through all quarters in great Numbers. [Howel's Letters, vol. 2. p. 23. 'Twas a rambling speech of one, who said, that to make a Man a complete Chri∣stian, he must have the Works of a Papist, the words of a Puritan, and the Faith of a Protestant; yet if well expounded may bear a good sense. The Jews and Turks hold, that Wo∣men are of an Inferior Creation to Man, so the Jews exclude them from their Synagogues, the Turks out of their Mosques. Of the Reverence of some to Clergymen, and Benefactors to Churches, &c. 'Tis remarkable how the House of Austria, (whence the Emperor, and Kings of Spain are now directed) came to that eminent heigth from a mean Earl,
the Earl of Haburg in Germany, who ha∣ving been one day a hunting, he over∣ook a Priest, who had been with the Sa∣crament to visit a poor sick Body, the Priest being tyred the Earl lighted off his Horse, helpt up the Priest, and so waited upon him afoot all the while, till he brought him to the Church; the Priest giving him his Benediction at his going away, told him, that for that great Act of Humility and Piety his Race should be one of the greatest the World ever had; and ever since, which was about three Hundred years ago, the Empire hath continued in that House, which was since called the House of Austria. [Howel's Collections, p. 91. The Spaniards are very full of Reve∣rence in their Devotion, and very boun∣tiful to the Churches, as appears fre∣quently in the great Chalices, Lamps, and Candlesticks of Silver; besides there are Bishopricks, divers of ten thousand Pound per annum, some of thirty thousand Pound, and the Archbishoprick of Toledo, is va∣lued at one Hundred Thousand Pound yearly Revenue; 'tis the Richest in the World next to the Popedom. Philip the Second, King of Spain, made
a vow at the Battle of St. Quintin, where he was forced to demolish a Monastery of St. Laurence Fryers, That if he had the Victory, he would erect such a Monastery to St. Laurence, that the World had not the like, and 'tis reckoned the Eighth won∣der of the World, that which he built; 'tis built (amongst a company of craggy barren Hills, which makes the Air the wholsomer) all of Freestone and Marble, and of a moderate heigth; it cost eight Millions, and was twenty four years a building, and the Founder himself saw it finished, and enjoyed it twelve Years af∣ter, and was there buried; the form of it is like a Gridiron, the handle is a huge Royal Palace (called the Escurial) and the Body a vast Monastery, or Assembly of quadrangular Cloysters, for there be as many as there be Months in the Year: There be an Hundred Monks, and every one hath his Man and his Mule, and a multitude of Officers; there are three Libraries there, full of the choicest Books for all Sciences; 'tis beyond expression, what Grots, Gardens, Walks, and Aque∣ducts there are, and what curious Foun∣tains in the upper Cloysters; for there be two stages of Cloysters; to take a view
of every Room in the House, one must make account to go ten Miles: There is a Vault called the Pantheon, under the highest Altar, which is all paved, walled and arched with Marble; there be a Num∣ber of huge Silver Candlesticks, as tall as any Man, Lamps three yards compass, and divers Chalices, and Crosses of massy Gold; there is one Quire made of all bur∣nished Brass, Pictures and Statues like Gyants, and rich Shrines of Saints, and other glorious things. [History of Spain. The Spaniard is much addicted to ga∣ming, and that in excess; yet he will say his Prayers before, and if he win, he will thank God for his good fortune after. Of the early Appearance of Vertue and Learning in some young Persons. The Angelick Dr. Thomas Aquinas, when he went to School, he was much given to silence, and being somewhat more fat than the rest of his Schoolfellows, he was by them usually called the dumb Ox; but his Master soon after by some disputation of his, having discovered his Wit, and good natural Parts, said th dumb Ox, (as you call him) shall
hereafter set up such a lowing, that all the World will admire the sound of it, which he did accordingly by the famous Books he writ. [A French Historian. Vitious youth reclaimed, and after∣wards become very virtuous. One Nicholas West born at Putney in Surrey, being a Student in Kings Colledge in Cambridge, proved a great Rakehel and very wicked, for something crossing him in the Colledge, he could not find how to be revenged but by setting on fire the Master's Lodgings, part whereof he burnt to the ground, and immediatly after he left the Colledge, and lived very loosely; but soon after by the influence of the Grace of God, and good advice, he sea∣sonably retrenched his Wildness, turned hard Student, and became an excellent Scholar, and after smaller promotions, he was at last made Bishop of Ely, after which he became a worthy Benefactor to that Colledge, and rebuilt the Master's Lodgings, which he before had caused to be burnt: He died Anno Domini, 1533. [Memorands of Kings Colledge. Those Bodies are usually the most
healthful, that break out in their youth; and many times the Souls of many prove the sounder, for having vented them∣selves in their younger days; commonly none are greater Enemies to vice, than such as have formerly been the Slaves of it; a certain blackness in the Cradle hath been observed to give beginning and rise unto the most perfect Beauties; and there are no sort of Men, that have shi∣ned in greater Glory in the World, than such whose first days have been sullied and a little overcast. Reproofs takes patiently, though from Inferiors. Prince Henry, Son to Henry the Fourth, King of England, coming into the Court of Kings-Bench at Westminster, and there keeping disturbance to have a Prisoner set free, (that was a Servant of his) and was there indicted for Felony, the Prince was by the Lord Chief Justice Gascoign, then in Court, committed to the Marshal of the Kings-Bench, where after the heat of this fury was over, he readily went; This Action of the Judge was not at all resented by the King, for that the Anti∣ent
Laws are not to be violated, no, not by the King himself. [In an Old Law Manuscript. Some very mindful of humane frailty. Philip King of Macedon, walking by the Sea-side got a fall, and after he was risen, perceiving the Impression of his Body upon the Sand, Good God, said he, what a small parcel of Earth will contain us, who aspire to the Possession of the whole World? Xerxes Son of Darius, being at the Head of his vast Army, consisting of one Hundred Thousand Men, and being on a high Hill, and looking over them, he wept, considering Man's Mortality, knowing, as he said, that no one of all those should be alive after an hundred years. How highly some prize their Liberty. The Tucchi a People in Asia, rather than they would be captivated by the Greeks, many of them threw themselves down headlong from the Rocks.
Death received by some Persons with great Courage. Queen Ann, the Wife of King Henry the Eighth, when she was led to be be∣headed in the Tower, espying one of the King's Privy-Chamber, she called him un∣to her, and said unto him, Commend me unto the King, and tell him he is con∣stant in his course of advancing me, for from a private Gentlewoman he made me a Marchioness, from a Marchioness a Queen, and now that he hath left no higher Degree of worldly Honour for me, he hath made me a Martyr. [Baker's Chron. Hen. VIII. Some mighty expensive in their Ap∣parel. Sir Walter Rawleigh being in great fa∣vour with Queen Elizabeth, went gorge∣ously arrayed always in that Cour; he was observed to wear his Shoes so set with Pearls and pretious Stones, that they ex∣ceeded the value of six Thousand six Hundred Crowns. [Fuller's History.
Some great Gamesters. The People in China exceed in ga∣ming all other Nations; for when they have lost all their Mony at gaming, they will at last, and do usually stake their Wives and Children, whom if they chance to lose, they do part with them, till they can pay the Mony they were staked for. [Herbert's Travels. Of great Eaters and Feasting, and great Drinkers. There was a Man, one Nicholas Wood by names of Harrison in Kent, who eat thirty Dozen of Pidgeons at a meal; at another time he eat a whole Sheep worth sixteen Shillings; at another time at the Earl of Dorset's House at Knowl in Kent, he eat fourteen Green Geese, as big as the Old ones, at one meal; yet one undertak∣ing for a Wager to fill his Belly for the value of half a Crown in Victuals, he was filled by eating twelve white new penny Loaves, and drinking six Quarts of the
strongest Ale: He lived about the latter End of King James the First's Reign. There was a Woman of Alexandria, that at one meal would eat twelve Pounds of Flesh, and above four Pounds of Bread, and together with it drink up ten Pints of Wine. The Old English were great Eaters, for in former times their Tables were usually spread four time a day. At the Duke of Cornwall's Wedding there were three thousand Dishes of Meat. [Heylin's Cosmog. The Emperor Maximinus did often drink in one day, nine Gallons of Wine of English measure. One of the Turkish Emperors, once drank in one day three and thirty Quarts of Wine; the accident happened thus; he had an Eunuch that was sed to be drunk, and whom he had commanded twice upon pain of death to refrain; swearing by Mahomet, that he would cause him to be strangled, if he found him the third time drunk; yet the Eunuch conti∣ sti  Deness; whereupo the Great Turk coeaving with himself that there must needs be some extraordi∣nary delight in Drunkenness, because thi
Man preferred it before his his Life, fell to it himself, and so drunk himself to death. [Howel's Letters, vol. 2. p. 73. Great misfortunes befaln Men when drunk. The Devil tempted a Man to commit one of these three Sins, either to be drunk once, or commit Adultery with the Wife of his Neighbour, or else murther his Neighbour; at last being overcome, he yielded to be drunk, as judging it a crime that had less horror in it than either of the other two; but being drunk, and the flame of his lust being filled with his lux∣ury, he feared not to violate the Chastity of his Neighbours Wife, and the Hus∣band casually surprizing him in the Act, receiving a mortal wound at his hand, whereof he soon after died; thus he that had given way to Drunkenness was invol∣ved in Adultery and Murther. An English Lord sent his Son to Paris, to learn the Language and Mode of the French Court, and withal Instructions to a Friend of his there, to have an eye of observance upon him as to his course of living; the Lord's Friend sent him word
his Son was much addicted to gaming, and neglected all other business; the Lord returned Answer to his friend, that he could make his Son refrain that vice spedily, by retrenching his allowance; the next advice the Lord had from his Friend was, that his Son was fallen from gaming, to the immoderate use of Wo∣men: The Father replied, that was a vice his Age would rectifie, and make him a∣void it of course: But the last advice the Father had from his Friend was, that from Whoredom, his Son was fallen to Drun∣kenness; nay, then said the Lord, I give him over for a Reprobate, the older he grows he will be the worse. There was in the City of Salisbury, not long since, one who in a Tavern in the midst of his carowsing and healths, drank also a health to the Devil, saying, that if the Devil would not come and pledge him, he would not believe that there was either God or Devil, whereupon his Com∣panions strucken with horror, hastned out of the Room, and presently after hear∣ing a hideous noise nd smelling a stink∣ing savour, the Vintner ran up into his Chaer, and looking in, he missed his Gut, found the Window broken the
Iron Bar in it bowed, and all bloody, but the Man was never more heard of. 'Tis said that Spain and Italy are the only Countries freest from excess of drinking: By the Ancient Laws of Spain, if a Woman could have proved her Hus∣band to have been thrice drunk, she might have pleaded for a divorce from him, for the Spaniard being not brained, he can∣not bear much drink. The boonest Com∣panions for drinking are the Greeks and Germans. [Howel's Letters. The absurd and strange Follies of di∣vers People. The great Cham of Tartary, was wont when he had dined, to cause his Trumpe∣ters to found their Trumpets before his Palace Gate, thereby to give notice, and proclaim to all the Kings of the Worl, that now the great Cham had dined, they might all take leave to go to dinner. The King of Catona at his Coronation swears, that it shall not rain unfna∣bly, neither shall there be Famine  ∣lence within his Dominions durin his Reign. [Clark's Mir. Prince in his Anger t, and whipt the Sea.
'Tis said of Henry the second King of England, he was a Magnanimous Prince; for being about to pass over to France by Sea, and the Pilot seeing the Seas boi∣strous, and the Tempest violent, durst not put forth the Ship to Sea, whereupon King Henry said, Come venture out, what, did you ever hear of a King, that was drowned? [Speed's History. Another time a Nobleman telling King Henry the II. what a brave spacious and noble Hall, Westminster Hall was, which he built? The King replied, 'tis more fit for a Chamber, than a Hall for a King of England. The Wives and Servants of the Mosco∣vites, take it most kindly, when they are beaten and evil intreated, by their Hus∣bands and Masters. A Man would not piss, for fear all his od should run out that way. Of the Abstinence of some from Food. les the Seventh, King of France, be∣id of being poisoned, abstaine  all manner of food so long, tha hen he would have eaten he could not  passag being shrunk u  o
much abstinence, and so he died most miserably of Famine. 'Tis said of Martin Luther, though he was big of body, and in very good health, that he would usually continue four days together, without eating or drinking a∣ny thing at all; and that for many days together, he would content himself with a little Bread, and one single Herring. [Melanchton in vita Lutheri. 'Tis credibly reported, that there was a Priest at Rome, who (like the Camele∣on) lived forty years together, with∣out any manner of food, but only suck∣ing in the Air. Of the inconstant Disposition of some. Bray is a Village well known in Bark∣shire, the vivacious Vicar whereof, li∣ving under King Henry the Eighth, King Edward the Sixth, Queen Mary, and Queen Elizabeth, he was first a Papist, then a Protestant, then a Papist, then a Protestant again; this same Vicar being taxed by an old Parishioner of his own, for being a Turncoat; Not so, said he, for I have allways kept my Principle, which
is to live and die the Vicar of Bray. [Fuller's Worthies, p. 82. Barkshire. Some Men make Religion only a Foot∣stool, to the Seat of Advancement. Of Tributes and Taxes imposed by some Kings on their People. The great and cruel Duke of Moscovia, commanded from his Subjects a Tribute of Sweat, and of Nightingals, in the midst of Winter, when scarce any of those Birds are to be seen. 'Tis said of Henry the Second, King of England, that he never laid any Tax or Tribute on his Subjects in all his Reign, and yet when he died, he left nine-Hun∣dred Thousand Pounds in ready Mony in his Treasury; a mighty and vast Summ in those days. [Baker's Chronicle, K. Hen. the II. Of the bold Theft of some. A Certain Cardinal in Rome having made a great Feast in his House, and the Silver Vessels being locked up in a Trunk that, stood in a Parlor next the Hall, e the Feast had been, while many
Persons were sitting, and waiting in this Room for their Masters, there came in a Man with a Torch carried before him, bearing the Countenance of the Steward, and having a Jacket on, who prayed those that sate upon the Trunk to rise up from it, because he was to use the same, which they having done, he made it to be taken up by certain Porters that followed him in, and went clear away with it: This Thief took the advantage of the oppor∣tunity while the Steward and all the rest of the Servants of the House were at sup∣per; but the Man possessed the rich Booty, for he could never be found afterwards. Of Persons of base Birth, who have assumed the Names of Illustrious Persons. One Lambert Symnel, of mean Degree, pretended himself to be Richard Duke of York, second Son of King Edward the Fourth (who died in France) and there∣upon laid claim to the English Crown; and after a terrible Battle fought in his quarrel, he was taken alive, and by Order of King Henry the Seventh, put first
into his Kitchin to turn his Spits, and was afterwards advanced to be his Falco∣ner, in which Office he died. [Speed's History, p. 706. The huge Ambition, and desire of Glory in some Persons. Richard the Third, King of England, caused several Persons to be murthered, to make way for himself to possess the Crown without Competitors. [Clark's Mir. Solon, one of the seven wise Men of Greece, said of a young Nobleman of A∣thens, That if he could but have pluckt out of his Head the Worm of Ambition, and heal him of his greedy desire to rule, that then there could not be a Man of greater Vertue than he. 'Twas well advised by Henry the Great of France, when having promoted a Per∣son of low Degree to be Chancellor, who thereupon had his own lively Effigies (made in a curious Piece of Arras Hang∣ings) standing upon the uppermost part of Fortunes-wheel, which he having shewed the King, You would do well, said the King, to pin the Wheel fast, lest it ould turn again.
The Pride of the Jesuits, is as gene∣rally as justly taxed, who being the youngest of all other Orders, and there∣fore by Canon obliged to go last, will never go in procession with other Orders, because they will not come behind them. The Society of Jesuits were first founded by St. Ignatius Loyola, (a Spaniard) a∣bout the year 1546, and were sworn to the common Vows of Poverty, Obedi∣ence and Chastity, to which Pope Paul the Fifth added Mission, that is, they were to go whithersoever the Pope or their General should send them, though to the furthest parts of the World, and through the greatest Dangers, without a∣ny Tergiversation or Excuse. [Fuller's Holy State, p. 45. In the Reign of King Henry the Seventh, of England, one Michael Joseph a Smith, being to be executed for Treason, said, he hoped by that, his Name and Memory should be everlasting. [Baker's Chron. page 349, 350. Aldred Archbishop of York, having had a repulse from William the Conqueror, upon some request he made to him, the Archbishop in great discontent offered to depart; but the King standing in awe of
his displeasure, staid him, fell down at his feet, desired pardon, and promised to grant his suit; the King being all the while down at the Archbishop's Feet, the Noblemen that were present, put him in mind that he should cause the King to a∣rise, nay, said the Prelate, let him alone, let him find what it is to anger St. Peter. [Baker's Chron. p. 40. King Henry the Second of England, Anno Domini 1170. Caused his Son Prince Henry, at seventeen Years of Age to be Crowned King, that he might in his own Life time participate in the Govern∣ment with him, and on his Coronation day, (for Honor's sake) he placed the first Dish on the Table himself, while the New King his Son sate down; whereupon the Archbishop of York said pleasantly unto him, Be merry my best Son, for there is not another Prince in the whole World, that hath such a Servitor at his Table; to whom the young King scorn∣fully answered, Why do you wonder at this? My Father (I am certain) doth not think, that he doth more than be∣comes him, for he being a King only by the Mothers-side, serveth me, who have a King to my Father, and a Queen to my Mother. [Speed's Hist. p. 478.
'Tis said, that a poor Priest, being asked why he was going to Rome, from his own Country, he answered; 'twas be∣cause the Pope being dead, he did not know but that he might be chosen Pope. Of Litigious Suits. Gloucestershire did breed a Plantiff, and Defendant, which betwixt them (with many Altercations) traversed the longest Suit I ever read of in England; for a Suit was commenced betwixt the Heirs of Sir Thomas Talbot, Viscount Lisle, against the Heirs of Lord Berkley, about certain Lands in this County; the Suit began in the End of the Reign of Edward the Fourth King of England, and was depending until the Beginning of King James the First his Reign, when (and was it not high time) 'twas finally compounded, which was about 140 Years. [Fuller's Worthies, pag. 2. The vain-glorious boasting of some Men. A young brisk Parson, newly beneficed with a good rich Living, being at a Table
with some other good Divines, and brag∣ging much of his Parts and Learning; at length made a Challenge, saying, Here are many Learned men present: Now if any of you, will propound any question in Divinity or Philosophy, I will dispute with him, resolve him his doubts, and satisfie him fully; All at the Table (ex∣cept himself) were silent for a while; then one Mr. Carter, when he saw, that no other would speak to him, calling him by his Name; I will, said he, go no farther than my Trencher to puzzel you: Here is a Fish called a Sole; Now tell me the reason why this Fish, that hath al∣ways lived in the Salt-water, should come out, and eat fresh? To this the for∣ward Gentleman could say nothing, and so was laughed at, and shamed out of his vanity. [Clark's Lives of Ten eminent Divines, page 12. Of the Art of Painting. Apelles was a famous Painter, and be∣ing resolved to make a curious Picture of Venus the Goddess of Love; he borrow∣ed a large high Forehead of one Face, a delicate brisk Eye of another, and so the
rest of the best Features he could gather, which being put together made a most disproportionate Face; Another time he was for some years drawing exactly the Foam dropping from a Horse's mouth; which at last despairing to effect, he care∣lessly threw away his Pencil, and with that throw effected it. Some are apt to be guilty of those Faults they have reprehended in others. In former times, the married Clergy of England would not hear of being di∣vorced from their Wives; the Bishops therefore, were fain to call in the Aid of the Pope; whereupon he sent one John de Crema an Italian Cardinal, jolly with his youthful Blood, and gallant equipage, who came over into England, with his bigness and bravery, to bluster the Cler∣gy out of their Wives; he made a most gaudy Oration, in the commendation of Virginity (a one who in his own Per∣son knew well, how to value such a Jew∣el by the loss thereof) most true it is, that the same Night, at London, he was caught in bed with a Harlot. [Fuller's Church-History, Cent. pag. 23. Baker's Chron. page 60.
In a Nunnery beyond Seas, a grave Old Nun, accidentally stepping into a young Nun's Chamber, saw a Frier in bed with her; whereupon the Old Nun seemed to be very angry, and said, she should be expelled the Nunnery with all Ignominy, for being so horribly wicked; but it seems the young Nun viewing the grave one, espied a Frier's pair of Breeche on her head, which she had unwarily pu on, instead of her hood, the young one acquainting her therewith, Ay Joy, said she, we are all Sinners. Some men grown weary of Honor, hav been glad to give up their great Imploy∣ments, meerly to live retired, as think¦ing it far more satisfactory and easie: Th Court is for Honor, the City for Gain, an the Country for Quietness. Scorn and Scoffing, how rewarded b some Persons. King William the Conqueror, being years, was very corpule, and by th means much distempered in his Body once he had retired himself to Roan Normandy, upon that occasion, the Fren King hearing of his Sickness, scoffing said, that King William lay in Childb
of his great Belly, which so incensed him, that he swore by God's Resurrection, and his Brightness, (his usual Oath) that as∣soon as he should be churched of that Child, he would offer a thousand Lights in France; and indeed he performed it, for he entred France in Arms, and set many Towns, and Corn-fields on fire. [Baker's Chron. Speed's History. Romulus first King of the Romans, when he had lain the Foundation of the great City of Rome, his Brother Remus, in deri∣sion of the lowness of the Walls, leapt over them; whereat Romulus was so of∣fended, that he killed his Brother Remus. [Roman Antiquities. The Passion of Joy and its ill Effects. In the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, Arthur Plantagenet, base Son to King Ed∣ward the Fourth, being imprisoned in the Tower of London, upon suspicion of be∣traying Callis to the French; while he was the King's Lieutenant there, and be∣ing afterwards found innocent of the Fact, the King thereupon, to make him some reparation for his disgrace, sent him a Ring, and with it a very gracious Mes∣sage,
by his Secretary; whereat the said Lord took such excessive Joy, that the Night following of that excess of Joy he died. [Speed's History. Of the Passion of Grief, and its mortal Effects. An Excellent Painter, fell into a very great fit of Laughter, at the fancy of a Picture he had drawn himself, whereof he instantly died, his Breath failing. Margaret, Daughter to James the Fourth, King of Scotland, married to Lewis the Dolphin of France, was of so nasty a Complexion, and stinking Breath, that her Husband, after the first Night, loathed her Company; whereupon she pined away with Melancholy, and died of extreme Grief. Queen Mary the First of England, 'tis thought she contracted a Dropsie, of which she died, through extreme Grief, by reason of the separation of her Husband King Philip from her, he then abiding in Spain, and the loss of Callis to the French, which had been so long in the English Pos∣session, for she said, the loss of Callis was written in her heart, which might be there
seen, when she should be opened. [2d. part, Dr. Burnet's History of the Refor∣mation and Life of Queen Mary. An Old man in the City of Milan in Ita∣ly, having for the space of sixty Years, never been without the Walls of the said City, yet when the Duke, hearing there∣of sent him a peremptory Command ne∣ver to go out of the Gates, during Life; he that before had no inclination to do so, died of very grief, to be denied the Liberty of doing it. Of the good Wishes of some. St. Augustine used to wish, that he might have seen three things, which were, Rome in its chiefest Glory, the Apostle Paul in the Pulpit, and Christ Jesus in the Flesh. The Spartans used to wish to their Ene∣mies, that they might always be affected with the humor of building, that they might keep Race Horses, and that their Wives might be dishonest to their Beds. Sophocles the Philosopher, being de∣manded what harm he would wish to his greatest Enemy, he answered, that he might love where he was not fancied. Plutarch's Life of Sophocles.
When King James the First, came first to view the Publick Library at Oxford; seeing the little Chains, wherewith the Books were fastened to their Places, he wished, that if it should ever be his desti∣ny to be made a Prisoner, that Library might be his Prison, those Books his fel∣low Prisoners, and those Chains his Fet∣ters: He was a Prince much addicted to Learning, and very notable at Ex tempore Sayings; he was a Prince very sagacious, and prudent: A notable Instance where∣of, was his discovery of the Powder Plot, by reading the Letter sent to the Lord Monteagle. Of the Apparition of Ghosts. 'Tis a matter much disputed among Learned men; some say 'tis the Devil on∣ly, that assumes the Airy form of the Per∣son he would represent, as in the Case, when Saul went to the Witch at Endor, to get her to raise up Samuel, and most do conclude 'twas only the Devil assu∣med the form of Samuel; but 'tis certain many Murthers have been found out strangely by them, as will appear in the following Examples I find cited for Truths.
In some part of Cheshire, a man lived, who after his Wife died, took home a young Woman, a Relation of his own to look after his House; this man some way or other debauched this young Wo∣man, and got her with Child; some while after, fearing lest it might be divulged in the Neighbourhood, he procured a Rogue to murther her, and the better to compass it, he gave out to the young Woman, that he had provided her a place where to lye in privately, whither she was to go with speed, and that when she was delivered, and well, he would take care of the Child, and she should return, and look after his House as for∣merly; she consented to this plausible Story, and the day appointed, he sent her away with the Rogue he had enga∣ged to destroy her; the Fellow and she, at length coming to a great Moss, and being far from People, he with a Pick they dig Coals with, knocked her in the head, therewith giving her several wounds; he received some of her Blood on his Stockins, which he took off, and threw them with the said Pick, into a Tust of Moss, and then covered her with Moss, and so went on his way; her Ghost
appeared the same Night to a Miller a∣bout half a Mile off, in his Mill; the man being much affrighted, seeing a Woman all bloody with the wounds in her head, and resembling in all parts her that was killed; she spake to him and told him the whole matter, as before recited; and bid him not be afraid, for she came to do him no harm, but to desire him to discover what she told him, to the next Justice of the Peace, with all speed, that the Rogues might be apprehended, and suffer death for so horrid a Murther, and so she dis∣appeared; the Miller either through neg∣lect, or much business neglected to dis∣cover it the next day, so she appeared a∣gain next night to him, as he lay in his bed, and told him, that she should not be at rest, nor let him rest, till he had discovered the matter to some Magi∣strate; he promised faithfully to do it the next day, and so she vanisht: The next day he went, and related the whole matter to the next Justice of the Peace, who sent others with him to the place where the Murther was committed, where the Body of the Woman was found, and the Stockings and Pick just as he had been told by the Ghost; from thence
they went, and seised him that got her with Child, and he discovered the other Murtherer; they were both indicted and tried at the Assizes, and upon these cir∣cumstantial Proofs, and a faint defence by them made, they were both found guilty of the Murther, and executed. 'Tis said the Woman appeared to the Foreman of the Jury. [I read this in a Book written, by a Learned Person stiled the Apparition of Ghosts: 'Tis cited there for a great Truth. Many have been destroyed unwarily by rash speaking. Some Persons at Syracuse, discoursing in a Barber's Shop, concerning Dionisius the Emperor his great Cruelty; what, says the Barber, do we speak thus of Di∣onisius, under whose Throat, I ever and anon, hold a Rasor? Assoon as Dionisius, was informed of this, he caused the Bar∣ber to be put to death; and so the Barber paid for his folly, at the price of his Life. [Cited before.
How some have suffered by their own Imprecations. Godwin Earl of Kent, in the Reign of King Edward the Confessor, as he sate at Table with the King on Easter-Monday, was speaking as to the Justification of himself, from the death of Prince Al∣fred: And, said he, if I be any ways guilty of it, I pray God I may never swallow down one Morsel of Bread more; and thereupon, eating the next piece of Bread, he was choked. [Baker's Chron. page 26, 1. Some men very affable and humble. When Duke Robert, King William the Conqueror's Son, had refused the King∣dom of Jerusalem, the Princes proceded to make a second choice; and that they might the better know the nature of the Princes, their Servants were examined upon oath, to confess their Master's faults; the Sts of Godfry of Bovillon, pro∣tested  Master's only fault, was this, t when Mass was done, he would stay  long in the Church, to know of the
Priest, the meaning of every Picture, and Image, that Dinner at home was usually spoiled by his long tarrying: All the rest of the Princes admired hereat, that this Man's worst vice, should be so great a vertue; so they unanimously chose him to be their King; he accepted the Office, but refused the Solemnity thereof, saying, that he would not wear a Crown of Gold, where the Saviour of Mankind, had worn a Crown of Thorns. [Fuller's Holy War, page 44. Of Conscience and the Effects of it. Memorable is the Example of Francis Spira, an Advocate of Padua, for becom∣ing an Apostate to his Religion; where∣of you may read at large in his own Book, and in Burton's Melancholy, Page 630. One Mrs. Honywood, was so dissatisfied in her Conscience, touching her future Estate, (for that in the Time of Persecu∣tion of Protestants in Queen Mary's Reign, she denied that she was a Prote∣stant, to save her Life, when the Perse∣cutors came to her) that several Divines could not convince her, but that she should
be damned: One Minister labouring hard with her, to satisfie her, that God in his infinite Mercy would save her; she ha∣ving then a Venice Glass in her hand, and throwing it out of her hand upon a stone Floor, No, said she, I am, as sure damned as this Glass is broken, which did not break, but rebounded up whole; after which she was quiet in her Conscience. [Foxe's Book of Martyrs. Of strange Recreations some delight in. Socrates being aged, yet used to play upon the Harp, and sing to it, saying; 'twas not absurd for any man to learn a thing whereof he was ignorant; besides he spent some time daily in dancing, sup∣posing Exercise did conduce much to bo∣dily Health. Domitian the Emperor, at his leisure hours used to catch Flies, and to thrust them through with a Needle. Of the Natural Production of Man. To make Man, there are many Acts must preceed; first a Meeting and Copu∣lation of both Sexes; then Conception,
which requires a well disposed Womb, to retain the prolifical Seed, by the con∣striction, and occlusion of the Orifice of the Matrix, which Seed being first Blood, and afterwards as 'twere Cream, is by a gentle Ebullition coagulated into a crudded Lump, which the Womb by ver∣tue of its Natural heat, prepares to be capable to receive Form, and to be or∣ganized; whereupon Nature falls a working, to delineate all the Members, beginning with those that are most noble; as the Heart, the Brain, the Liver, whereof Galen, would have the Liver; which is the Shop and Source of the Blood; and Aristotle the Heart to be the first fra∣med, in regard 'tis primum vivens, & ul∣timum moriens; Nature continues in this Labor, until a perfect shape be introdu∣ced, and this is called Formation, which is the third Act, and is a production of an Organical Body, out of the sperma∣tick Substance, caused by the plastick Vertue of the vital Spirits; and sometimes this Act is finisht thirty days after the Conception, sometimes fifty, but most commonly in forty two, or forty five, and is sooner done in the Male: This be∣ing done, the Embryol is animated with
three Souls, the first with that of Plants, called the vegetable Soul; then with a sensitive, which all brute Animals have; And lastly the rational Soul is infused; and these three in Man, are like Trigonus in Tetragono, the two first are generated, ex traduce parentium, but the last is by immediate infusion from God; and 'tis controverted betwixt Philosophers, when this Infusion is made. This is the fourth and last Act, which goes to make Man, and is called Animati∣on: The Naturalists do allow Animation, double the time that Formation had from the Conception, so they allow, to the ripening of the Embryo in the Womb, and to the Birth thereof, trebble the the Time, that Animation had; which happens sometimes in Nine, sometimes in Ten Months, according to the strength of the Child or Mother. Of several strange Births in Women. The wonder of Nature is a Church-Monument in the Hague in Holland, where an Earl and a Lady are engraven, with three hundred and sixty five Chil∣dren about them, which were all delive∣red
at one Birth, they were half Male, half Female, the odd one an Hermophro∣dite; the Bason hangs in the Church, which carried them to be Christned, and the Bishop's Name who did it, and the Story of this Miracle, with the Year, and the day of the Month mentioned, which is about awo hundred and odd Years-since; the Story is this: That Countess walk∣ing about her door after Dinner, there came a beggar Woman, with two Chil∣dren upon her Back to beg Alms; the Countess asking, whether those Chil∣dren were her own, she answered, she had them both at one Birth, and by one Father, who was her Husband; the Countess would not only give her any Alms, but reviled her bitterly, saying, 'twas impossible for a poor Man to get two Children at once. The beggar Woman being thus provoked with ill words, and without Alms, fell to Impre∣cations, and that it might please God to shew some Judgment upon her, and that the Countess might not depart the World till she should bear s many Children, as there were days in the year; which she did before the same years end, having never born Child before. [Heylin's Cos∣mog.
Holland. Howel's Letters, page 14. Sect. 2. A Woman in Holland, being great with Child, the Child in her Womb was heard to cry and lament, for the space of a Fortnight, before her Travail. There was a Woman carried a dead Child in her Womb, for the space of twelve Years, before all the Bones of it came away from her. A Woman delivered of a Monster. A Woman at Boston in New England, was delivered of a Monster, which had no Head, the Face was on the Breast, the Ears like Apes, grew upon the Shoulders, the Eyes and Mouth stood far out, the Nose hooking upward, the Breast and Back full of Prickles, the Navel and Belly were where the Lips should have been; instead of Toes, it had on each Foot three Claws; upon the Back, it had two holes like Mouths; above the Eyes, it had four Horns, and was of the Female Sex. [Herbert's Travails.
Many Persons have been observed to die on their Birth days. Some Per∣sons born with strange Marks upon them. There was a Woman, who had a Mul∣berry growing upon her nether Lip, which was smooth and plain, all the year long, till the Time that Mulberries be∣gan to ripen; at which time also hers be∣gan to be red, and began to swell more, and more, observing exactly the Season, and Nature of other Mulberries, and coming at length to the just bigness, and redness of other ripe Mulberries. Strange Constitutions in some Bodies. I heard of a Person, who in the hot Sunshine, or being in a hot Bath, would almost freeze; and being in any cold Shade, or cold Water, would sweat. There was a Man, who would usually swoon away upon the smell of a Rose. There was a Man, who could eat no∣thing, that was rosted, boiled, or fryed; he fed only upon Bread, Fruits, and Milk
How Nature supplies her own defects. Some Persons born without Arms, have done the same things with their Feet, as they could with their Arms if they had them. 'Tis reported of Count Mansfelt, that though he was blind, yet with the touch alone, he was able to distingush white from black, or between any other Co∣lours. [Howel's Letters. In Spain, many Ladies were used to make their Hair seem to be of a golden yellow Colour, perfume it with Sulphur, steep it in Aqua Fortis, and expose it to the Sun in the hottest Days. In Spain, there was a Woman about sixty years old, who had a Beard from her youth, which she suffered to grow; so that in her old Age, it reached down to the Pit of her Stomach. There was a Man had so long a Tongue, that he could lick his Nostrils therewith, like an Ox. There was a Jugler in Spain, of such strange Agility, that by the help of Iron Gloves, he had, he would skip from place to place, and climb up a smooth Wall like a Cat.
There was another Person, of such ex∣ceeding Leanness, and Lightness, that he commonly wore Shoes of Lead, and carried Lead about him, lest sometime, he might be blown away with the Wind. Of the five Senses in Man. 'Tis allowed by all Physitians, that the most exquisite Senses ever dwell with temperate Persons. Of the Senses and other Observations of the Soul and Body of Man. And as Seeing is allowed by all Natura∣lists to be the best and choicest of the Senses, so the Smelling is held to be the least needful; the five Senses are said to be the Council of the Body; and 'tis ob∣served, that some Beasts do excel us in the exquisiteness of our Senses; to wit, Nos Aper auditu praecellit, Aranea tactu, Vultur Odoratu, Lynx visu, Simia gustu.
Next to Reason, Man is not endued with a choicer or more necessary Faculty, than Memory. The internal, and eminent Faculties of the reasonable Soul in Man, (besides those of common Sense, Phantasie, Me∣mory, Passion, and Appetite common to Men, and inferior Animals) are Intellect and Will; and the proper Acts of the In∣tellect are Intellection, Deliberation, and Determination, or Decision: The proper Acts of the Will, are Volition, Nolition, Choice, Purpose, or Resoluti∣on, and Command, in relation to sub∣ordinate Faculties, and these do or should regularly precede all the imperate Acts of the Soul. Before I write, or speak, or go a Journy, or eat, &c. there is the Deliberation of the Understanding, whe∣ther I shall do this Action; the Decision of the Understanding, that 'tis fit to be done; the Choice of the Will to do it; the Purpose of the Will, that it shall be done. The Arms being extended at full length, very near answers the length of any Person, from head to foot. Children breed Teeth at seven Months, breed new Teeth at seven Years breed
their great Teeth at twenty; the Num∣ber of the Teeth, are usually thirty two. Particular observations on Man. At five Years, in an Ordinary growth, the Procerity is half of that, which will be attained at full Age. The Ordinary Period of humane pro∣creative Faculty in Males, is sixty five, or at most seventy; in Females forty five, or at most fifty. The several Periods of the Ages of the Life of Man, according to Hypocrates, are divided into seven, viz. at fourteen, at twenty two, at thirty five, at forty two, at sixty one, and from thence to the End of the Life, which at most is eighty one, or eighty four. Nasty smells suddenly strike to the Brain, poison the Spirits, and oft-times prove deadly: An Example whereof is the Judges, and others, that were killed by the stench of the Prisoners in Oxford Goal.
The numerous Issue of some People. Dame Esther Temple, Daughter of Miles Sands, Esquire, was born at Latmos in Buckinghamshire, and was married to Sir Thomas Temple of Stow, Baronet; she had four Sons, and nine Daughters, which lived to be married, and so ex∣ceedingly multiplied, that this Lady li∣ved to see seven Hundred extracted from her own Body. In the Annals of Silesia, 'tis recorded, that a Woman at one Birth, was delive∣red of thirty and six Children. A Citizens Wife in Florence, had at se∣veral Births, fifty and two Children; oft-times three at a Birth. Of the Majesty, Beauty and Gravity in some Persons. The Sophitia, a People of India, had the Stature, and Comeliness of the Body in such Estimation; that in their Infancy, they make such difference of their Chil∣dren, this way, that they would rear none, but such as they Judged to have such a Nature and Limbs, as did pre∣signifie
a good Stature of Body, and con∣venient strength, as for the rest, sup∣posing their education would prove but labour in vain, they put them to Death, and amongst them and the Ethi∣opians likewise, they made choice of such to be their Kings, as were most remarkable for Statute, and Strength; nor hath Nature it self seemed to ordain it otherwise, seeing that for the most part, Persons of Illustrions Families and Fortunes have a Character of Majesty Imprinted upon them, very different from the Common sort. Alexander the Great, though he took little care of his Body, is yet reported to be very Beautiftl; he had yellow Hair, and his locks fell into natural rings and Curls, besides which in the composure of his Face, there was something so great and August, as begat a fear in them that beheld him. [Justin's History. One Owen ap Theodore, Esquire, of Wales, after the death of Henry the Fifth, Mar∣ried Queen Catherine his widow, the mean∣ness of his Estate, was recompensed with, the delicacy of his personage; so absolute∣ly charming in all the lineaments of his Body, that the only contemplation of it made the Queen forget all other circum∣stances. [Bakers Chron.
Of Beauty. King Edward the Fourth, was exceed∣ing Beautiful, so that when a Benevo∣lence was devised to carry on his Wars in France, a Rich Widow being called before him, the King merrily asked her, What she would willingly give him, to∣wards his great expences in the Wars? By my troth, quoth she, for thy lovely countenance, thou shalt have even twenty Pounds: the King not expecting scarce half that sum, thanked her, lovingly kissed her, which so wrought upon the Old Widow, that she presently swore he should have twenty Pounds more, and paid it willingly. [Speed's History. There was a Young Man in Italy, so very Beautiful in his Face and Body, that all sorts of Women who be∣held him, fell in love with him, who at length disfigured his Face, for that his Beauty, should not be an occasion of their unchastity. [Spurina Of the Signal Deformity of some. Of Richard the Third, once King of England, 'tis thus remembred, That of Body, he was but low, Crooked-back; Hook-shouldred; Splay-footed, and Go∣gle-eyed:
his Face little and round, his Complexion very Swarthy, his left Arm from his Birth, dried and withered, born a Monster in Nature, with all his Teeth, with Hair on his Head, and Nails on his Fingers, and Toes, and just such were the qualities of his mind. [Baker's Chron. Speed's History. Of Giants and Dwarfs. There were the Bones of a Giant-found near Kilmainham in Ireland, his Skul would have held a peck, and his Thigh Bone was an Ell long, he was thought to have been Sixteen foot high. Gogmagog the famous British Giant, was twelve Cubits high. The Queen of Spain, had a Dwarf, that was but two Foot and a handful high. There was a Dwarf so little, that at the Wedding of the Duke of Bavaria, he was put into a Pasty, which being ser∣ved up to Table, and being Cut up, he leaped thereout, to the wonder of all the Nobility, and others that were pre∣sent. Of the Incredible Strength of some. The Emperor Tiberius, had the Joynts of his Fingers so firm and strong, that he
could thrust his Finger through a green, and unripe Apple; and could give a Fillip with that force, that thereby he would break the Head of any Man. Of Strength. John Courcey, Baron of Stoke Courcy in Somersetshire, the first Englishman that subdued Ʋlster in Ireland, and deservedly was made Earl of it; he was afterwards surprised, and taken Prisoner, by Hugh Lacy (Corrival to his Title) and sent over into England, and by King John Imprisoned in the Tower of London: A French Castle being then in controver∣sy, was to have the tryal of its Title by Combate, and the Kings of England, and France, to behold it; and there having been former Proofs of Courcy's Valour and Courage, Courcy being a lean, lank, and raw Bone Man, with staring Eyes; he was sent for out of the Tower, to un∣dertake the French Champion; and be∣cause 'twas supposed Courcy might have been enfeebled with long durance, a large Bill of fare, was allowed him to recruit his Strength. The Monsieur hearing how much he had eaten and drank, and guessing his Courage by his Stomach, or rather Stomach by his Appetite; took
him for a Canibal, who would devour him at the last Course, and so he decli∣ned the Combate: Afterwards the two Kings being desirous to see some Proof of Courcy's Strength, caused a steel Helmet to be laid on a Block before him; Courcy looking about him with a grim Counte∣nance (as if he intended to cut with his Eyes, as well as his Arms) divided the Helmet at one blow, striking the Sword so deep into the Wood, that none but himself could pull it out: Again being demanded the Cause, why he looked so sternly, Had I, said he, failed of my De∣sign, I would have killed the Kings, and all in the place; words well spoken, be∣cause well taken; he died in France, An∣no Domini 1210. 'Tis reported that King John, being desirous to give this Courcy a good Re∣ward for the former Exploit, and asking Courcy what Reward he should give him; Courcy only desired, that the King should give him a Charter of Liberty for him and his Heirs, to wear their Hats on be∣fore himself, or any King or Queen that should succeed him; which the King grant∣ed accordingly; and 'tis said, the Lord Courcy of Ireland now claims it, as deri∣ved to him, from that Courcy his Ance or.
Some Persons of very long Lives. There was at St. Albans in Hertford∣shire, a Morrice-dance of Eight men thereabouts, whose years put together, made up eight hundred; what was wan∣ting of a hundred years in some, being made up in another. In Cornwal, they say that ninety years, is but an ordinary Age there; the Peo∣ple generally live to be very aged, in most places of that County. There was a man in Queen Elizabeth's Time, who live in the Fens in Essex, that buried eight Wives, after he was sixty year of Age, the reason of it ap∣pears to be this: This man having al∣ways lived there, 'twas as natural to him as Eel in Mud; but bringing his Wives out of other wholsome and open clear Countries; assoon as they came there, they were choked with the Fogs and Mists, and so quickly died. [Morrison's Travels. Sir Walter Rawleigh, in his discovery of Guiana, saith, that the King of Aromaja, being one hundred and ten years old, came in a Morning on foot to his House, which was fourteen English Miles, and returned home on foot the same Day.
There was a Sexton at the Church of Peterborough in Northamptonshire, that li∣ved to bury two Generations, or the People in that place twice over; the Instance of his long Life is alledged, by such who maintain, that the smelling to perfect Mold, made of men's consumed Bodies, is a great preservative of Life. Thomas Par, was married at one hun∣dred and twenty years Old, and got his Wife with child; he lived to be one hun∣dred and fifty two years Old. Some though aged, yet have renewed their Age. An Old Abbatess in Spain, being very aged, and decrepit, suddenly became young again; her monthly Courses re∣turned, her rugged and wrinkled Skin grew smooth, her hoary Hairs became black, and new Teeth in her Head, and her Paps hardned, and swelled after the manner, as is usual with Virgins. The Flesh of a Viper, duly prepared and eaten, clarifies the Eye-sight, streng∣thens the Nerves and Sinews, corrobo∣rates the whole Body; and according to Dioscorides, procures a long and health∣ful Age, insomuch that they are prover∣bially
said, to have eaten a Snake, who look younger than accustomed; nor is Viper Wine less Soveraign, as hath been experienced by some. Some People have changed their Sex. 'Tis credibly reported, that at Rome in the time of Alexander the Great, A Maid upon her Wedding-day, became a Man; 'tis supposed, the Violent Motion of the Spirits emitted those parts of a Man, which before appeared not. Of the incredible Swiftness of Some. In the Reign of King James the First, one Bernard Calvert of Andover, rode from St. George's Church in Southwark to Dover; from thence passed by Barge to Callis in France, and from thence retur∣ned to St. George's Church the same day, setting out about three of the Clock in the Morning; and returned about eight a Clock in the Evening, fresh and lusty. [Heylin's Cosmog. There was a Boy of Nine years of Age, who in one day did run seventy five Miles outright.
Of the wise Sentences of some Learned Men. Envy is the hatred of another's Felici∣ty, in respect of Superiors, because they are not equal to them; in respect of In∣feriors, lest they should be equal to them; and in respect of Equals, because they are equal to them: Through Envy proceeded the Fall of the World, and the Death of Christ. [St. Augustine. All things are driven by their own weight, and tend to their own Center; my weight is my Love, by that I am dri∣ven, whither-soever I am driven. [St. Augustine. The sufficiency of my Merit, is to think my Merit is not sufficient. He goes better that creeps in his way, than he that runs out of his way. [St. Augustine. The greatest pain damned Souls have, is to be separate, and cut off from the Presence of God for ever. [St. Chryso∣stome. Hurtful pleasures for a minute of Joy; do bring an Age of Sorrow. [Dama∣senus. The Heart of man is but a small thing, 'tis not sufficient for a Kite's Dinner; yet
the whole World is not sufficient for it. [St. Hugo de Anima. Lust is an immoderate Wantonness of the Flesh, a sweet Poison, a pernitious Potion, which weakens the Body of Man, and effeminates the Strength of an Heroick Mind. He that gives himself over to the im∣moderate Love of Women, changes a Sanctuary destined to the Holy Ghost, into a Temple of Idols, whose Worship leads him to Damnation. He that goes about to commit Sin pri∣vately, takes pains to deceive himself. He that prefers the Pleasures of his Body, before the Salvation of his Soul, suffer's the Man to be drown'd, while he is saving his Cloak. He that's forgetful of Obligations that are done him, does not deserve to receive any. The sundry Precepts of several Phi∣losophers. Chilon being asked, what were the hardest things, said: To keep Secrets to dispose well of our leisure Hours, and to bear an Injury; never to tell a Lye never to speak evil of any Man, and no
to speak at all, but when Necessity re∣quires. Pythagoras used to say, dig not up Fire with a Sword, that is, do not provoke a Person that is angry with evil Speeches; to restrain the Tongue, especially in Feasts; to threaten none, because 'tis womanish; to visit our Friends most in Adversity; not to speak evil of the dead; to honor Old Age; to prefer loss to a reproachful gain; not to wish for things that cannot be; not to discover what we are about, till we have attained it; to keep a measure in all our Actions, and to have a respect to the End of them. Socrates being asked what was the Prin∣cipal Vertue of Youth, he replied, Not to overdo. And whether 'twere best to mar∣ry, or live single? He said, in both you may repent. And what was the difference betwixt a Wiseman and a Fool? He said, send both naked, where they are not known, and you will soon discover it: Having intreated Dionisius the Emperor, in behalf of his Friend, but in vain, he threw himself at his Feet; and being blamed for so doing: Not I, said he, but Dionisius is in the fault, who hath his Ears in his Feet. Plato said, that the Seat of Reason is
in the Head: The Seat of Anger is in the Heart: The Seat of Love in the Liver. Bion being asked, whether a Man had bet∣ter marry a fair, or a foul Woman? Said, if she be fair, she will be common, if foul, a torment; he said Old Age is the Haven of Evils. Aristotle being asked what a Lyar gains, said, not to be believed when he speaks Truth: Being upbraided for shewing mercy to a bad Man: I pitied, said he, not the manners but the man: Being asked what Hope was? He replied, the Dream of a waking Man: Being told of one that spake evil of him behind his back, he said, let him beat me too when I am absent. He said, the Roots of Learning were bitter, but the Fruit sweet. Sophocles said, that the loss of Time, was the greatest expence; that an ungovern∣ed Tongue, is less to be trusted than an unbridled Horse; that we then die, when we begin to live; and as Iron is consumed with its own rust, so is the en∣vious man with his own manners, when taxed for keeping ill Company; so said he, do Physitians, and yet have no Fe∣vers. Diogenes being asked, what Hour was best to dine in? If, said he, thou art rich,
when thou wilt; if poor, when thou canst: Lighting up a Candle at Mid-day, and go∣ing about the Streets with it, he said, he sought an honest man: A rich man un∣learned is a Sheep with a golden Fleece. Hearing a hansome Youth speaking inde∣cently, What, said he, are you not asha∣med, to draw a leaden Sword out of an Ivory Scabbord? Zeno said, there was nothing more in∣decent than Pride, especially in a young Man; being asked, what a Friend was? He said, another my self: He was so tempe∣rate, that he lived ninety eight Years in health, without any Disease. Crates said, 'twas impossible to find a man without fault, but that as in a Pom∣granate, there would ever be some rot∣ten Kernels. Some few Maxims of State. The Earl of Salisbury, the great States∣man in King James the First's Reign, said, that when an Ambassador doth abuse a State, by his Master's Commission, then the Servant is freed; but when he doth it without Commission he is culpable, and liable to be punished by the Law of that State, as having discovered to be a Ser∣vant to the King his Master. [Court of King James.
The best Course of Government is, that Justice may take place, the King's Char∣ges lessened, his Revenue increased, and the Subject not oppressed. A Deanry or Hospital bing Livings without Cure of Souls, may by the King, be justly conferred upon a Lay-man, with dispensation De non promovendo. The publick good, ought, to be the End of all Governments, and the Aim of all Governors. Marriage among Princes, as it sel∣dom confirms a sound Friendship, so doth it never extirpate an Ancient hatred. In an Elective Kingdom, scarce ever is the Heir put aside, if equally deserving with others. We ought not to despise Princes, by reason of their Imperfections, nor to censure either their Persons or Govern∣ment. The King's Justice is bound by the Law, but his Mercy is not. The Prince is the Pilot of the Com∣monwealth, and the Laws are his Compass. 'Tis a sure Maxim, that the best Chri∣stians are ever the best Subjects. The Emperor Basilius, in his Advice to his Son, bad him always make use of the Counsel of those, who through Care and
Prudence had better'd their Estates, and not of those, who through imprudence, had made them to decay; for he that can∣not husband well his own things, will ne∣ver be able to husband well the things of another. Kings are to consider themselves, under these three Notions; as Men; as Chri∣stians; as Princes. The higher any Building is, the more it requires exquisite Proportion; so a man in any high Calling, ought to be ex∣quisitely good. When a man enters first upon any Pre∣ferment, he ought to do some Notable Act, thereby to get a Name. They that have not the Grace to be religious out of Conscience, ought to be so out of Policy. Some men make Religion only a Foot-stool to the Seat of Advancement. The Parliament is prorogued or dissol∣ved by the King, but each House may ad∣journ it self. That State is in an ill condition, where∣in the justly accused shall take revenge of the just Accuser, and where he that would save his Prince, must ruine himself. 'Tis a Rule, that great Designs of State, should be Mysteries, till they come to the
Act of Performance, and then they should t to Exploits. Salus Populi Suprema Lex. The Contents of the Commission, for the Lord Lieutenant, or Lord Deputy of Ireland. To conserve the Peace; to punish Of∣fenders; to make Orders and Proclama∣tions; to receive Offenders to Grace; to give Pardons, and impose Fines; to levy Forces; to fight, and make Peace; to dispose of Rebel's Lands; to pardon all Treasons, saving touching the King's Person, and counterfeiting of Coyn; to give Offices, saving the Chancellor, Treasurer, two Chief Justices, Chief Ba∣on, and Master of the Rolls; to dispose o Ecclesiastical Livings, except Archbi∣ps, and Bishops; to receive Homage, and the Oath; to make Provision for his Houshold, according to the Ancient Cu∣m; to assemble the Parliament with  King's Privity; to receive the Ac∣nts of Officers, saving the Treasurers,  to exercise Martial Law. FINIS.
