N1272 12362127 60271
THE THEORY and REGULATION OF LOVE A Moral Essay. IN TWO PARTS. To which are added Letters Philoso∣phical and Moral between the Au∣thor and Dr Henry More. By John Norris M. A. and Fellow of Allsouls College in Oxford. Quod ergo nos Coelo restituit, Non Dei Cognitio est, sed Amor. Marsilius Ficinus Tom. 2. p. 296. OXFORD, Printed at the Theatre for Hen. Clements. 1688.
TO THE LADY MASHAM AT OATES in ESSEX. Madam, THE Esteem, wherewith your Ladyship honour'd my for∣mer writings, has at once obliged me to an high measure of Grati∣tude, and pointed me out a way of shewing it. For I was hence led to conclude, that if any thing of Mine could afford you Plea∣sure and Entertainment, when you had no other interest in it than in
the Common light of the Sun, much more would it be acceptable, if made yours by some peculiar Right and Property. The difference of advantage seeming to me much the same, as between taking a turn in a Common walk, and en∣joying the Retirements of one's own Private Garden. One only Objection stood in my way. I was a little scrupulous whether the Oblation were wor∣thy the Altar, whether so mean a Performance could Strike the Tast, much more deserve the Pa∣tronage of a Person of such nice and refined Sense, and whom Na∣ture and your own unassisted Cu∣riosity have Conspired to accom∣plish beyond what the Present Age
can parallel, Or (unless your La∣dyship will be perswaded to be∣queath some Monument of your extraordinary Genius to the world) the Future will ever believe. This Consideration I confess, did a little arrest my Pen, till I con∣fronted it with another, that your Ladyship is as Eminent for Can∣dour and goodness, as for Parts and Ingenious Attainments, and that you have Mildness and Sweet∣ness enough to temper the Seve∣rity even of your own Iudgment. These Madam, were the Con∣siderations that embolden'd me to entitle your Ladyship to this work. Concerning which (what∣ever faults it may be charged with) I have something to boast,
which I am sure all writers have not, that I make an Offering of that which is purely my Own. Which if your Ladyship please to accept, there will be much added both to the Happiness and to the Duty of Madam, Your Ladyship's most humble and devoted Servant J. Norris. All-souls Coll. March 26. 1688.
TO THE READER. HAving accounted in the first Se∣ction for the general Design of this undertaking, I have here no more to do than only to prepare the Reader, by giving him some few Advertisements con∣cerning the Manner of its Performance. In the first place, I make no Apolo∣gies; For I would not have exposed these Papers to the view of the world if I thought they needed any. Neither do I desire any Favour or kind allowances from my Reader, I only desire that he would be so kind to himself, and so just to me, as to afford me his Closest and most unprejudiced Attention, that he would suspend his Iudgment till he has gone over the whole, and that then he would Cen∣sure no farther than he Understands.
This Request is at all times Reaso∣nable, but now I think it in a man∣ner necessary. For I have here used great Liberty of Thinking, and accord∣ingly could not avoid lighting upon se∣veral Notions, which are remote from common Observation, and some that are directly contrary to the Vulgar Senti∣ments. And these I have endeavour'd to dispose according to the greatest Accu∣racy of Order and Method, and to carry on with a Thred of more than ordina∣nary connexion and Dependence. All which, as it requires a great deal of At∣tention and Application of mind in the Composer, so does it almost as much in the Reader, who can no more expect with an hasty and careless glance to comprehend the Recesses and Retirements of a nice Speculation, than a man that rides Post can discern the artful strokes and curiosities of a fine-wrought Pi∣cture. Attention therefore is the thing that I do again commend to him that shall
find leasure to persue these Meditati∣ons; Though for his comfort I must tell him, that I have endeavour'd to ease him of this trouble as much as I could, by expressing my Notions with all possible distinctness and Perspicuity. In order to which I found it necessary sometimes to use new Terms, and such as would raise more clear and distinct Ideas than those which had before obtain'd, which I hope will easily be excused by those who consider, that Words are purely in Or∣der to Thoughts, and would therefore ra∣ther think rightly, than Speak Custo∣marily. And this I was the more necessitated to do, by reason of the Novelty and Sin∣gularity of my Design. For I must fur∣ther observe to the Reader, that this way of writing Ethics is intirely New and unblown upon. For though the reducti∣on of all Vertue and Vice to the various Modification of Love be Obvious enough to any one that will consider, yet I do not know of any Moralist that ever drew
up a Scheme of Morality upon this Hy∣pothesis. I hope the Reader will find it here done to his satisfaction, though I must tell him that I do not descend to a par∣ticular consideration of Virtues and Vi∣ces, it being not my Design to insist mi∣nutely upon Particulars, but only to lay down such general Principles upon which a more Particular Scheme of Morali∣ty may be erected, or into which those Particular Morals which are already ex∣tant may and ought to be ultimately re∣solv'd. The whole I have endeavour'd to com∣prize within as little Room as may be. I have set my self this Law, to write nothing but what is directly and Per∣pendicularly to the Point in hand, and to express what is so in as few words as I could with perspicuity. For I think it the Perfection of Discourse to come as nigh Intuition as may be, and that none are so far removed from the Measures of Angels, as prolix and vo∣luminous
writers. It would have been more for my own ease to have been lax and Popular, but I thought it of more concern to consult the Patience, the Time, and the Purse of the Reader. Joh. Norris.
THE GENERAL CONTENTS of the whole. PART. I. SECT. I. THE general Design of this under∣taking, and its great usefulness to the whole drift of Morality. Pag. 1. SECT. II. Of the Dignity and Nature of Love in gene∣ral, and of the First and great Division of it. pag. 6. SECT. III. The Analogy between Love and Motion, particularly with the Motion of the Heart, with a further Illustration of the First and great Division of Love. pag. 17. SECT. IV. Of the first great Branch of Love, viz. Love
of Concupiscence or Desire, with the se∣veral kinds of it. pag. 30. SECT. V. Of the second great Branch of Love, viz. Love of Benevolence, its Division into Self-love and Charity, where also tis inquired whether all Love be Self-love. pag. 50. PART. II. SECT. I. THat Love requires some Measures of Regulation, and why Love as Dirigi∣ble is made the Subject of Morality rather than Vnderstanding. Pag. 63. SECT. II. The Measures of Love of Concupiscence all reduced to these two general Heads, what we must desire, and what we may desire. The Measures of these, both in ge∣neral and in Particular. Whether Sensual Pleasure be in its self evil, with an Ac∣count of the true Notion of Original Con∣cupiscence, and of Mortification. pag. 73.
SECT. III. The Measures of Love of Benevolence, par∣ticularly of Self-love. p. 112. SECT. IV. The Measures of Common Charity. p. 118. SECT. V. The Measures of Friendship. pag. 124. Motives to the Study and Practice of Regular Love by way of Consideration. pag. 135.
PART. I. SECT. I. The general designe of this undertaking, and its great usefullness to the whole drift of Mo∣rality. 1 THE Subject of these Con∣templations is Love. A thing that has employ'd many cu∣rious pens to little purpose, and has been perhaps the most and with∣all the worst written upon of any Sub∣ject in the world. 'Tis I confess, strange that men should write so darkly and Confusedly of that which they feel and experiment so intimately, but I must take the boldness to say that what I have hitherto seen upon this Subject,
has been so Confused, ambiguous and indistinct, that I was thereby rather di∣stracted, than inform'd in my Notions concerning it. 2 Finding therefore no Satisfaction in advising with Books, I was fain to shut my Eyes and set my self a Think∣ing, without having any regard to what others had observ'd upon the same matter, so as to be in the least sway'd or determin'd in my Conclu∣sions by it. A method that would tend more to the discovery of Truth, and to the Advancement of all Notional Learning, than that narrow straitlaced humour of adhering to the Dictates of those, who have nothing more to recommend them, but only the luck of being born before us. 3 My design therefore here is to em∣ploy my Meditations about two things, 1st. the Theory of Love according to its full Latitude and Comprehension, and 2ly. the Measures of its Regulation. The discharge of which double under∣taking
will thoroughly exhaust the Subject, and answer the Ends both of Speculation and Practise. 4 I think it requisite to begin with the Theory of Love. For since the Phy∣sitian thinks it necessary to know the Anatomy of that Body which he is to Cure, and the Logician to open the nature of those Intellectual operations which he is to direct, I know not why the Moralist should not think himself equally concern'd to frame a just Theory of that Affection of the Soul which he is to regulate. 5 The whole work I conceive to be of great usefulness and general impor∣tance to all the purposes of Morality, nay indeed to contain the whole Sum and Substance of it. For what is the grand intendment and final upshot of Morality but to teach a man to Love regularly? As a man Loves so is he. Love is not only the Fulfilling, but also the Transgressing of the Law, and Ver∣tue and Vice is nothing else but the
Various Application and Modification of Love. By this a Good man is distin∣guish'd from a bad, and an Angel of Light from an Angel of Darkness. This is that which discriminates the Orders of men here, and will consign us to different Portions hereafter, ac∣cording to that of St. Austin Faciunt Civitates duas Amores duo. Hierusa∣lem facit Amor Dei: Babylonem A∣mor Saeculi. Interroget ergo se quis∣que quid Amet, & inveniet unde sit Ci∣vis. The two Loves make the two Cittys. The Love of God makes Hierusalem, the Love of the World Babylon. Let every one therefore ask himself what 'tis he Loves,De. Civ. Dei l. 14. Cap. 28. Tom. 5. and he will find to which Citty he belongs. 6 He therefore that shall rightly state the Nature, and prescribe due Measures for the Regulation of Love, not only serves the Cause of Morality, but may be truely sayd to discharge the whole Province of a Moralist; This I take to be a Sufficient Apology
for the undertaking it self, and if the Performance come up to the Moment of the Design (whereof the world is to judge) I know of nothing wanting to render it both Serviceable and accepta∣ble to the Public.
SECT. II. Of the dignity and Nature of Love in general, and of the first and great Division of it. 1 LET us make Man in our Image, after our own likeness, sayd God. Now among other instances of Resem∣blance wherein man may be likened to God, such as the Internal Rectitude of his Nature, or Self-dominion, and his External dominion over the Crea∣tures and the like, this I think may be Consider'd as one, and perhaps as the Chiefest of all, that as in the Divine nature there are two Processions, one by way of Intellect which is the  or word, and the other by way of Love which is the H. Spirit, so likewise in the Humane nature there are as it were two Processions, and that of the same kind too as in the Divine, Vnderstanding and Love.
2 These are the two Noble Facul∣tys that branche out from the Soul of man, and whereby he becomes a little Image of the Trinity. And altho' we generally value our Selves most upon the Former; yet I know not whether there be not an Equality in these as there is in the Divine Processions, and whether it be not as much the Glory of man to be an Amorous, as to be a Rational Being. 3 Sure I am that in the Gentile Theo∣logy and in the most refined Philoso∣phy of the Ancients the preheminence is given to Love. Socrates in Plato's Symposion says Concerning Love, that it is  the el∣dest and most honorable of the Gods. And we know Love is made the first Hypo∣stasis in the Platonic Triad. The Ho∣ly Scripture goes yet higher, and does not only in several places set forth Love as the Flower of the Divinity, and ma∣gnify the Divine Essence chiefly from that Excellence, but seems to resolve
all the Perfection of the Deity into this one Point. For when it defines God it does not say he is Wisdom or Power, no not so much as Wise or Powerfull, but seems to overlook all his other Perfe∣ctions, and says in the Abstract that he is Love. They are great words of St. Iohn,1.4.16. and such as make much for the great Dignity of this Di∣vine Affection, God is Love, and he that dwelleth in Love dwelleth in God. So No∣ble a thing is Love, and so deserving of our most intense Theory and In∣spection. 5 And indeed it needs it, as well as deserves it. For there is nothing that darken's the Nature of things, and ob∣scures the Clarity of our Conceptions more than Ambiguity of Terms, and I know nothing that is more Equivocal and full of Latitude than this word, Love. It is given to things whose Ideas are Notoriously different, and men seem to have agreed together not to detect the Fallacy, and from the Iden∣tity
of the name to conclude the Iden∣tity of the thing. To give one instance out of many, what is there that passes for an Axiom of a more simple, cer∣tain and uniform Signification than that Common Proposition in Divinity, that we must love God for himself, and our Neighbor for God's sake. But now when we come to examin what Ideas we have under these words, 'tis plain that that Idea which is express'd by Love in the first part of the Proposi∣tion, is not the same with that which is express'd by Love in the Second. For Love in reference to God Signifys Simple Desire, and in reference to our Neighbor, wishing well to, which Ideas are as different as East and West, and yet because of the Commonnes of the Name, and the Jingling turn of the Proposition, this passes smoothly and unquestionably for one and the same Love. 5 But tho' this word Love be used to signify Ideas so very different that
they seem to have nothing in Com∣mon but the Name, yet I think there is one thing wherein they all agree and whereof they all partake, and which may therefore be acknowledg'd as the General and Transcendental No∣tion of Love. And that is, A motion of the Soul towards good. This I say is the first and most general Notion of Love, and which runs throughout all the Species of it. But then this in∣cludes two things. For as in the mo∣tion of Bodys we first Conceive Gravity or a Connaturality to a certain Term of motion, and then the motion it self which is consequent upon it, so also in Love (which is the motion of the Soul) order requires that we first conceive a certain Connaturality or Coaptation of the Soul to good, whence arises all the variety of its actual mo∣tions and tendencys toward it. This I take to be that peculiar Habitude of the Soul to good which the Schools call Complacentia boni a Complacence, a
Liking or Relish of good, which I con∣sider as really distinct from and ante∣cedent to its actual motion towards it. For as 'tis observ'd by Aristotle with more than Ordinary Nicenes in his 3d de Anima; The motion of Love is in a Circle. First good moves and acts upon the Soul, and then the Soul moves and exerts it self towards good, that so there may be the End whence was the Rise of its motion. This first Al∣teration of the Soul from good answers to Gravity in Bodys, and may be call'd for distinction sake the Moral Gravity of the Soul, the Second to Gravitation or actual Pressure, and may as fitly be call'd the Moral Gravitation of the Soul. 6 I further Consider that this Moral Gravity is impress'd upon the Soul pri∣marily and Originally by good in ge∣neral, or by the universal good or Es∣sence of good, that is, by God him∣self, who is the Sum and Abstract of all goodness, and the Centre of all Love. So that this Moral Gravity of the Soul
will be its Connaturality to all good, or good in general, that is, to God as its primary and adequate object, and to particular goods only so far as they have somthing of the Common Nature of good, something of God in them. Whence it will also follow that the Moral Gravitation of the Soul does Na∣turally and Necessarily respect good in Common or God as the Term of its motion and Tendency. So that upon the whole to speak more explicitly the most general and Comprehensive No∣tion of Love will be found to be, A Motion of the Soul towards God. 7 But now in this motion there is great difference. For God having un∣folded his Perfections in the Creation with almost infinite Variety, and as it were drawn out himself into a nume∣rous issue of Secondary goods, our Love becomes also Multiplied, and divides its cours among several Chanels, and tho' after all its turnings and windings we may at last trace it up to the
as Plato speaks, the greot Sea of Beauty and Head fountain of all Be∣ing and Perfection (For we love Par∣ticular goods only as they carry some impress of the universal, or to speak more properly, we love the universal good in the Particulars) yet it must be acknowledg'd that the immediat object of our Love becomes hereby more va∣rious and Multiplied, and Consequent∣ly our Love too, as receiving its Speci∣fication from it. 8 Nor does our Love receive lesse variety and diversity from the manner of its Motion or Tendency, Motion be∣ing Specify'd from the manner of it as well as from its Term. And it may be also lastly diversify'd according to the nature of the Part moved, whether it be the Superiour or the Inferiour part of the Soul. From these three, the Term of Motion, the manner of Mo∣tion, and the nature of the part mo∣ved, arise all the different kinds of Love, such as Divine and Worldly, Spi∣ritual
and Carnal, Charity and Friend∣ship, Love of Concupisccnce and Love of Benevolence, Intellectual and Sen∣sitive, Natural, Animal and Rational Love, with several others which I shall not stand to enumerate. 9 But notwithstanding this variety I believe all will be comprehended un∣der these two in general, Concupiscence and Benevolence. This I take to be the First and great Division of Love, to which all the several kinds of it may be aptly reduced. For when I Consi∣der the Motion of Love, I find it tends to two things, namely to the good which a man wills to any one, whether it be to himself or to another, and to him to whom this good is will'd. So that the Motion of Love may be Con∣sider'd either barely as a Tendency to∣wards good, or as a willing this good to some person or Being. If it be consi∣der'd in the first way, then 'tis what we call Concupiscence or Desire, if in the se∣cond, then 'tis what we call Benevolence or Charity.
10 For there is the same Proportion in Love that there is in Hatred, which also involves a double Motion. Either a declining or tending from evill, which the Greeks call , the Latins Fu∣ga, in our own language Aversion or Abhorrence, or else a willing evil to some person or other, which we call Malice or Malevolence. Concupiscence or Desire answers to the former of these, and Benevolence or Charity to the Latter. 11 There is indeed this difference to be observ'd between the Motions of Love and the Motions of Hatred, that those of Hatred are not necessarily Con∣comitant. For there may be a simple Aversion without any Malice or wish∣ing ill to, tho' perhaps the latter can hardly be conceiv'd without the for∣mer. But now in Love these Motions are always concomitant and recipro∣cal. There is no Desire without Bene∣volence, and no Benevolence without De∣sire. For every thing that is desired is
desired to some body, and so again, desiring to some body implies and sup∣poses simple Desire. And this I suppose has been the occasion of that great con∣fusion which has been generally in∣curr'd in this matter, men being very apt from union and Concomitancy to in∣fer indistinction and Identity. But not∣withstanding this Connexion, the Ideas of Desire and Benevolence are very di∣stinct, as will easily and Clearly appear to any close and attentive Thinker.
SECT. III. The Analogy between Love and Motion, parti∣cularly with the Motion of the Heart, with a further Illustration of the First and Great Division of Love. 1 HAving in the foregoing Section fix'd the general Idea of Love in the Motion of the Soul towards good, and this being a Term somwhat Meta∣phorical, and withall not so often ap∣plied by Scholastic Writers to this pur∣pose, I thought it concern'd me to draw here a short Parallel between Love and Physical Motion, and to shew the ad∣mirable Agreement and Correspon∣dency that is between them: whereby 'twill appear that the general Idea of Love could not have had a more con∣venient Representation. 2 The excellent Monsieur Malebran∣che undertaking to describe the Na∣ture
of the Mind, and considering its I∣dea to be very abstract, and such as did not fall within the Sphere of Imagination,Lib. 1. De In∣quirendâ ve∣ritate. p. 2. thought it best to Shadow it forth by the two Emi∣nent Propertys of matter, viz. that of receiving various Figures, and that of Motion or Mobility. To the Property of receiving various Figures he resem∣bles that Faculty of the mind which we call understanding. And to Motion or Mobility he liken's the Will. The first of these Parallels he persues and il∣lustrates in many Particulars, but when he comes to the last he gives only this one instance of resemblance, that as all Motions Naturally proceed in a right line, unless by the interposition of ex∣ternal and particular causes they are otherwise determin'd, so all the Incli∣nations which we have receiv'd from God, are Right, and would tend only to the true good, were they not turn'd aside to ill ends by the impulse of some forreign cause.
3 This indeed is finely observ'd by this Ingenious and Learned Theorist, but for an inlargement of the Parallel I consider further, that as in the Mo∣tion of Bodys Gravity precedes Actual Gravitation, that is, we necessarily con∣ceive a certain Congruity or Conna∣turality of a Body to a certain Term before its actual Tendency thither, so in the Soul there is a Natural Complacen∣cy or liking of good, before its actual exerting it self towards it, for we de∣sire nothing but what we like or relish as convenient and agreeable to us. But this I have touch'd upon already, and shall therefore no longer insist upon it. 4 Further therefore, as this Affection call'd Gravity in Bodys, is nothing else but that first impression or alteration made upon them by the various actings of those Effluviums or streames of Par∣ticles which issue out from the womb of the great Magnet, the Earth, so that if there were either no such Magnetic Body, or a Vacuum to intercept its in∣fluences,
there would be no such thing as Gravity; so in the like manner this radical Complacency and Connaturality of the Soul towards good (which I call her Moral Gravity) is nothing else but that first Alteration or Impression which is made upon her by the stream∣ing influences of the Great and Su∣preme Magnet, God, continually acting upon her, and attracting her by his active and powerfull Charms. So that if either there were no God, or this his influence never so little a while inter∣cepted, there would be no such thing as this Complacency or Moral Gravity of the Soul. 5 Again, as this Physical Gravity causes in Bodys an actual Effort or Ten∣dency toward the Centre, and that with such necessity that they cannot but tend thither even while violently detain'd, and when at liberty hasten with all possible speed to this last Term of their Motion, so by Vertue of this Moral Gravity the Soul actually puts
forth and exerts her self towards the great Magnet, good in general or God, and that with as much necessity as a stone falls downwards. And tho' de∣tain'd violently by the interposition of her Body, yet still she endeavours to∣wards her Centre, and is no sooner set at liberty but she hastens away to it and unites her self with it. For the will notwithstanding all her Soveraign∣ty and Dominion acts according to Nature and Necessity when she tends to her Perfection. Nay I take this Ne∣cessity to be such, that I think it ab∣solutely Impossible for God to Create a Soul without this Tendency to him∣self, and that not only because 'tis a∣gainst Order and Decorum that he should do so, but also because this Mo∣ral Gravity of the Soul whence pro∣ceed all her actual Tendencys, is caused by the continual acting of God upon her by this attractive and Magnetic In∣fluences. For God is the first Mover in Moral as well as in Natural Motions,
and whatever he moves he moves to himself. 6 Again I consider, that as the Gra∣vitation or actual endeavour of Bodys towards the Centre is always alike and uniform however their real Progress may be hinder'd or the swiftness of it resisted by accidental Letts and impe∣diments, so is this Moral Gravitation or actual indeavour of the Soul towards good in general or God always equal and uniform (for a man does not de∣sire to be Happy more at one time than at another as I have elsewhere shewn) I say this endeavour of the Soul towards good is always e∣qual,Contemp. and Love. p. 296. however her real advancing to it be hinder'd or resisted by the Inter∣position of the Body. 7 Again I consider, that as Natural Motion is a Tendency or Translation of a Body from an undue and incon∣gruous place to a place of Rest and Ac∣quiescence, whereby it acquires as it were a new Form of Perfection, so Love
is Extatical, and carries a man out from himself as insufficient to be his own good towards good without him, which by union he endeavours to make his own, and so to better and improve his Being, till at length his Desire be swal∣low'd up in the Fruition of the univer∣sal good, and Motion be exchanged for Rest and Acquiescence. 8 This Parallel between Love and Motion in general might be carried on much further, but besides that 'tis con∣venient to leave somthing for the Con∣templative Reader to work out by him∣self, I have also another Parallel to make between Love and a certain Par∣ticular Motion, namely that of the Heart, wherein as there is as much Harmony and Correspondency in o∣ther respects, so there is this peculiar in it, that this is a Motion perform'd within a man's self, and depending up∣on an intrinsic and vital Principle as well as the other. 9 First then we may Consider that
the Heart is the great Wheel of the Humane Machine, the Spring of all A∣nimal and vital Motion, and the Head-fountain of Life,  as Hippo∣crates somwhere calls it, and that its Motion is the First and Leading Mo∣tion of all, that it begins as soon as the Flame of Life is Kindled, and ends not till the vital Congruity be quite dis∣solv'd. And thus 'tis in Love. This is the great wheel of the Intellectual frame as the other is of the Natural, this is the Spring and Ferment of the Soul, that gives her Life and Energy, and without which she would be utter∣ly torpid and unactive. Love is the first and Mother Motion that both pre∣vents and actuates all the rest. 'Tis from her that all the Inclinations and Passions of the Soul take their rise, and did we not first love we should neither Hope nor Fear, nor hate nor be Angry, nor Envy nor be any other way affected. Nay we Love and De∣sire before we can Apprehend, Judge,
Reason or Discourse, nay our Love is then Commonly most impetuous and high-set; we love long before we know what 'tis to Love, nay before we know whether we love or no, even as soon as we receive the Breath of Life. And as 'tis the First, so it is also the Last Motion. 'Tis the Vltimum Moriens of the Intellectual, as the Heart is of the Natural Structure. This is the Mo∣tion that out lives and sees the Fune∣ral of all the other Operations of the Soul. For when either Age or sickness by disturbing the Crasis of the Body has also untuned and disorder'd the Fa∣cultys of the Soul, when the man can no longer understand, nor Discourse, nor Remember, when all his Rational Facultys are as 'twere benumm'd and death-struck, yet still he Loves, and in∣clines towards Happiness with as much weight as ever;Can. for Love is strong as Death, and as Importunate as the Grave, many waters cannot quench Love, neither can the Floods drown it
10 Again we may consider, that as by the Pulsation of the Heart the Ar∣terial blood is transmitted to the Brain, whereby are generated those Animal Spirits which are the Instruments of Mo∣tion throughout the Body, and which very Animal Spirits do again return and assist the Motion of the Heart by Contracting its Muscular Fibres, and so straitning its Ventricles to expel the blood contain'd in them into the Ar∣teries; the same Reciprocation may we observe in the Motion of Love. That Moral Gravity and Gravitation of the Soul impress'd on her by the u∣niversal Good acting attractively upon her, and whereby she stands inclined to good in general, first moves the under∣standing, which as the Schools allow, is moved by the will quoad exercitium actus, tho' not quoad specificationem. And then the understanding Moves the will as to particular and actual Voli∣tions concerning particular Goods. For as to these we will nothing but what we
first know and judge pro hic & nunc fit to be will'd. Which by the way may give great light to that intricate and perplex'd Controversy, whether the will moves the understanding or the understanding the will. For they both move one another, tho' in diffe∣rent respects. Even as the Heart by its Motion sends Spirits to the Brain, and is by those very Spirits assisted in her Motion. This indeed is a wonder∣ful instance of Resemblance, and the more I consider it the more strange I think it, and full of Mystery. 11 Again as by the Continual Reci∣procation of the Pulse there is caused a Circulation of the Blood, which is expell'd out of the Heart into the Ar∣teries, out of these into the parts which are to be Nourish'd, from whence 'tis imbibed by the Capillary Veins, which lead it back to the Vena Cava and so into the Heart again; and same may in proportion be applied to Love. This is the Great Pulse of the Body Politic,
as the other is of the Body Natural. 'Tis Love that begets and Keeps up the great Circulation and Mutual Dependence of Society, by this Men are inclined to maintain Mutual Commerce and in∣tercourse with one another, and to di∣stribute their Benefits and Kindnesses to all the parts of the Civil Body, till at length they return again upon them∣selves in the Circle and Reciprocation of Love. 12 And if we further Meditate upon the Motion of the Heart we shall find that it is not only an apt Embleme of Love in General, but that it also My∣stically points out to us the two great Species of Love, Concupiscence and Bene∣volence. The Motion of the Heart we know is Double, Dilatation and Con∣traction. Dilatation whereby it receives blood into its Ventricles, and Contra∣ction whereby it expels it out again. And is it not so also in this great Pulse of the Soul, Love? Is there not here also the like double Motion? For we
desire good, which answers to the Di∣latation and immission of the Blood, and we also wish well to, which an∣swers to the Contraction and Emission of it. 13 I know not what some may think of this, and I know there are a sort of men in the world that never think themselves, and look with Scorn and Contempt upon such Notions as are not to be found out without more than Ordinary Thinking; But for my part I must needs own that I stand amazed at this wonderful Harmony and Correspondence, and that I am thereby the more Confirm'd in that Celebrated Notion of the Platonists, that as the Soul is the Image of God, so the Body is the Image of the Soul, and that this Visible and Material is but the Shadow, or (as Plotinus will have it) the Echo of the Invisible and Immaterial World.
SECT. IV. Of the First Great Branch of Love viz. Love of Concupiscence or Desire, with the several Kinds of it. 1 WE have Consider'd the Na∣ture of Love in general, and have shewn it to Consist in a Motion of the Soul towards Good, whence we took occasion to represent the Ana∣logy between Love and Physical Mo∣tion, which we find to be exact and Ap∣posite even to Surprise and admiration; We have also discover'd the double Motion of this Mystical Pulse, and ac∣cordingly have branch'd out Love in∣to two General Parts, Love of Concu∣piscence and Love of Benevolence. I come now to treat of each of these severally. 2 And first of Love of Concupiscence or Desire. The general Idea of which
I conceive to be A simple Tendency of the Soul to good, not at all considering whether it wills it to any Person or Be∣ing or no. Not that there is or can be any desire without wishing well to, (For as I observ'd before these are al∣ways inseperable Concomitants) but their Ideas being very distinct, I think I may very well abstract from the one, when my business lies only to consider the other. 3 Concerning this Love of Desire I further consider, that the Primary and Adequate object of it is the same that is of all Love, namely good in general or God. For we desire good as good, or good in Common, before we desire this or that good in particular. And when we do desire any particular good, 'tis still for the sake of the universal good whereof it partakes, and accor∣ding to the degree of this Participation either real or apparent so we measure out and dispence our Love. So that good in general is the Primary and Ade∣quate object of Desire.
4 But now this general or universal good being variously participated by Particular Beings, hence it comes to pass that our Desire has many Subor∣dinate and Secondary objects, which it tends to with more or less Inclination according as the Marks and Footsteps of the universal good appear in them more or less discernable. For the u∣niversal good is so Congenial and Con∣natural to the Soul as always acting upon it and attracting it to it self, that we love every thing that carries the least image or semblance of it. 5 There is this difference only be∣tween the love of the universal, and the love of Particular goods. Our love to the universal good is Natural, ne∣cessary and unavoidable. We have no more Command over this love than we have over the Circulation of our Blood or the Motion of our Pulse. For God is the Centre of Spirits, as the Earth is of Bodys, and in our love of him we are as much determin'd as
Fire is to burn, or a stone to descend. And the Blessed in Heaven Love him with the highest degree of Necessity and Determination. But now we are not thus determin'd to the Love of Particular goods. I say not thus de∣termin'd. For it must be acknowledg'd that there is a sort of determination even here also. For good being de∣sirable as good and consequently in every degree of it, so far as we consi∣der any thing as good we must needs Love it with a Natural Inclination, that which the Schools term a Velleity or Voluntas Naturae, or a loving a thing Secundum quid, according to a certain respect; But it being possible that this Lesser Particular good may in some circumstances come into Competition with a greater Particular good or with the greatest of all, the universal good, and so upon the whole become evill, 'tis not necessary, nor are we deter∣min'd to love it absolutely, thorough∣ly and efficaciously, but may nill and
decline it Absolutely, tho' still we re∣tain a Natural Love or Velleity towards it as before. 6 For the case is the same here as 'tis in Evill. We necessarily hate evill as evill, and the greatest evill we hate Absolutely as well as necessarily. But for particular and lesser evills, tho' we necessarily hate them too by a Natu∣ral Aversion as far as we Consider them as evill, yet 'tis not necessary that we should always hate them Absolutely, but may in some Circumstances Absolutely will them as a means either to avoid a greater evil, or to obtain a greater good. And in the same proportion as any evil less than the greatest tho' it be neces∣sarily nill'd and declined in some re∣spect, may yet be Absolutely will'd and embraced, so any Particular good tho' it be in some respect necessarily lov'd, may yet Absolutely be nill'd and re∣fused.
7 Indeed the Excellent Monsieur Ma∣lebranche in his Treatise of Nature and grace, asserts this non Determina∣tion of our Love to Particular goods in more large and unlimited terms, when he tells us, that the Natural Motion of the Soul to good in general, is not in∣vincible in respect of any Particular good. And in this non Invincibility he places our Liberty or Free will. But in my Judgement this Proposition of his must either be Corrected, or better explain'd. For without this our Distinction, it will not hold true. Our Love to Par∣ticular good is Invincible Secundum quid or as to a certain respect, but Absolutely and simply speaking it is not Invinci∣ble. And if in this Absolute non Invin∣cibility he will have our Liberty or Free will to consist, I readily agree with him, and do think the Notion to be very sound and good. 8 And thus the Difference between our Love of the universal, and our Love of Particular goods is clear and apparent. Our Love to the universal good is Primary and Immediate, but
our Love to Particular good Secon∣dary and Mediate. Our Love to the universal good is invincible Absolutely and Simply, we will it necessarily, and we will throughly, but our love to Par∣ticular good is invincible only in some certain respect. We do not always love it thoroughly and effectually, tho' we must always love it. In short, our love to the universal good is like the Mo∣tion of our Blood within our veins, which we have no manner of empire or Command over, but our Love to Particular good is like the Motion of Respiration, partly necessary, and part∣ly Free. We cannot live without Brea∣thing at all, and yet we can suspend any one turn of Respiration in parti∣cular, but yet not without a natural inclination to the Contrary. And so in like manner we can't live without loving some particular good or other, but when we point to this or that par∣ticular good, there is not one but what we may nill and refuse Absolutely and
simply, tho' yet in some respect we must love it too, with a Natural Love. 9 Thus far I have Consider'd the ge∣neral nature of this First great Branch of Love, Love of Concupiscence or Desire. I come now to the Kinds of it. For the right distribution of which I consider first that any Motion of the Soul is specify'd from the Quality of the Object or Term to which it tends. Now the Object of Desire being good it follows that the Kinds of Desire must receive their distinction from the Kinds of good. Now good is Relative, and the Relation that it implies is a Rela∣tion of Convenience either to the Soul or Body, that is, either to the Soul Directly and Immediately, or Indi∣rectly and by the Mediation of Bodily sensations. So that all good is either Intellectual or sensual, and consequent∣ly the same Members of Divisition will be the adequate Distribution of Desire. That is an Intellectual Desire whose Ob∣ject is an Intellectual good, and a sen∣sual
Desire is that whose Object is a sen∣sual good. 10 But I further observe, that this same denomination of Intellectual and sensitive may be taken from the Na∣ture of the part moved as well as from the quality of the Object. The Appeti∣tive Faculty in man is double as well as the Cognoscitive, and consists of a Supe∣riour and Inferiour, of a Rational and sensitive part. For as in the Cognosci∣tive part there is Pure Intellect whereby Ideas are Apprehended without any Corporeal Image, and Imagination whereby objects are presented to our minds under some Corporeal Affection, so also in the Appetitive there is a pure and mere act of Tendency or Propen∣sion to the agreeable object, which an∣swers to Pure Intellect and is what we call Will or Volition, and there is also such a propension of the Soul as is ac∣company'd with a Commotion of the Blood and Spirits, and this answers to Imagination, and is the same with
what we usually term the Passion of Love. And 'tis in the divided Ten∣dency or Discord of these two wherein consists that Lucta or Contention be∣tween the Flesh and Spirit. That which our B. Lord intimated when he sayd The Spirit truly is willing, but the Flesh is weak, and which St. Paul calls the Law of the Mind and the Law of the Members.Rom. 7. I say in the Divided Ten∣dency of these two. Because some∣times the Intellectual and Sensitive Ap∣petite may both point one way, and conspire in the same object, as it does either in men very wicked, who sin with unity and intireness of Consent without any Check or Remorse from the Supe∣riour part, or in men Eminently good, who have reduced even their very bo∣dily Inclinations to the order of the Spi∣rit, and have attain'd to the highest degree of Mortification and simplifica∣tion of Desire. 11 And it may yet be observ'd fur∣ther, that so far as this Denomination
of Intellectual and Sensitive is taken both from the quality of the Object, and from the part moved, our Desire may be at the same time both Intelle∣ctual and Sensitive. For that Desire which is Intellectual in respect of the Part may be also sensitive in respect of the Object, (For we may Will a sen∣sual good as well as Passionately Desire it) and so on the other side, that Desire which is sensitive in respect of the Part may be Intellectual in respect of the Object. For there may be a sensitive Appetite of an Intellectual good, and we may love even God himself Passio∣nately as well as Rationally. 12 Thus is Love of Desire divided in general into Intellectual and sensual. But as for the particular kinds under these they are almost infinite, and therefore I shall not offer at a distinct recital of them. I shall only remarque some few things concerning Intellectu∣al Love, and by the way shall also briefly touch upon the principal and
most eminent species of sensual Love, and so end this Section. 13 And first concerning Intellectual Love, I consider that the general Ob∣ject of it is  or Beauty. For Intellectual Love is that whose object is an Intellectual good, and an Intel∣lectual good is that which pleases the Intellect, and the Intellect is pleas'd with nothing but as 'tis Proportionable, Harmonious and some way or other Beautifull. Whence it follows that In∣tellectual Love has Beauty in general for its proper Object. 14. But then this Beauty which is the proper Object of Intellectual Love, is either the First and Original Beauty, or Created and Derivative Beauty; if the First and Original Beauty, then the love of it is Divine Love, and if this be in a very high degree such as is the Product of an intense Contempla∣tion, then 'tis what we call Seraphic Love, which is the greatest Exaltation, and Perfection of Intellectual Love, and
withall the greatest Happiness the Soul of man is capable of in this State,See Idea of Happiness. as I have shewn at large in another Treatise. 15 But if it be Created and Deriva∣tive Beauty, then I consider that either we Ascend by and from the love of it to the love of the First and Originary Beauty, or else we stick there, or we Descend to the desire of Corporal Con∣tact, and the delight arising from it. If we take Occasion to Ascend, then 'tis what we call Platonic Love, which (as I have elsewhere more at large ex∣plain'd the Notion) is the Ascent of the Soul to the love of the Divine Beau∣ty from the Aspect of Beauty in Bodys. But if we terminate and stick in this sensible Form or Pulchritude, tho' this Affection be not so noble and generous as that which ascends higher, yet still this is pure Intellectual Love, so long as 'tis free from all desire of Corporal Applica∣tion, and for distinction's sake may be call'd the Love of Abstracted Beauty.
16 And let not any one think it strange that I make this Abstract Love of sensitive Beauty an Intellectual Love. For Beauty let the subject of its inhe∣rence be what it will, consists in Har∣mony and Proportion which is the im∣mediate good of the Soul, that only being capable both of understanding it, and of being primarily affected with it. And tho we give it the name of Sensible Beauty, yet that is only because the senses are the Instruments of Con∣veiances, not as being the part primely affected, and to distinguish it from those Beautys which are immediately Intelli∣gible, such as the Beauty of Truth, the Beauty of Vertue and the like; But in reference to the Part directly and im∣mediately affected all Beauty, even Sensible Beauty is an Intellectual good, and is one of the fainter Rays of the Divine glory, one of the remoter Mi∣rours that reflect the Supreme and Ori∣ginal Beauty. 17 The Sublime Platonist Marsilius
Ficinus has a fine Notion to this purpose.Lib. de Lumine Tom. 1. Cap. 14. p. 1006. He takes the First Beauty to be nothing else but the Splendour of Gods Glory, and of this he says there is a threefold Reflection. For he supposes Angeli∣cal Minds, Rational Souls, and Beau∣tiful Bodys as three Glasses of diffe∣rent Colours, which reflect this one and the same light after different Manners. His words are, Ipsa certe Pulcritudo Prima nihil aliud est quam Splendor Glo∣riae penes Patrem luminum, & Figura Substantiae ejus. Vnde triplex emicat Pulcritudo. Prima quidem per Angeli∣cos Intellectus, secunda vero per Intelle∣ctuales animas, tertia per Corpora ubi∣que formosa quasi lumen unum per tria quaedam vitra Coloribus inter se varia, ideoque varium ex Primo Splendorem su∣binde reddentia. The First Beauty Cer∣tainly is nothing else but the Splendour of Glory with the Father of Lights, and the Figure of his substance. Whence there shines forth a threefold Beauty. The
First through the Angelical Minds, the second thro' Intelligent Souls, the third thro' Beautifull Bodys, which reflect the same Light as it were through three Glas∣ses of diferent Colours, and accordingly they successively reflect a different splen∣dour from the First. So that sensible and Corporeal Beauty is one of the Glasses that reflect and represent the First Beauty, and tho' it must be confess'd that we see through this Glass darkly, yet still it represents according to its proportion, and is only as a Picture re∣motely drawn after several Copies, a weaker and further projected Ray of God. And therefore it must needs be an Intellectual good, and Consequent∣ly the Love of it, if abstracted from Corporal Applications, must also be a pure Intellectual Love. 18 But if we do not stick and termi∣nate here, but are by the aspect of sen∣sible Beauty precipitated down to the desire of Corporal Contact, and the pleasure thence arising, then this is
sensual Love, that is, a desire of a sen∣sual good. I may add of the greatest sensual good, and Consequently that this is the most sensual Love. And 'tis so Common with men thus to descend, rather than love Platonically or Abstra∣ctedly, that the name of love is almost wholely appropriated to this Affection, and to be in Love signifies as much as to be inclined to Corporal Contact by the Occasion of Corporeal Beauty. As if there were no other good but this Kind of sensual good, and no other love but this sensual Love. And accordingly Plato in his symposion distinguishing be∣tween his two Cupids, Intellectual and sensual Love, stiles the Latter by the name of , the Vulgar or Epidemical Love. 19 Indeed this is a very strange Af∣fection, and has so universally pre∣vail'd as to turn all other Love almost out of the World. This is a Passion that has made more slaves than the greatest Conquerours, more stir and di∣sturbance
in the world than either Am∣bition, Pride or Covetousness, and has caused more Sin and Folly than the united force of all the Powers of Dark∣ness. It has wounded almost as many as Death, and devour'd like a Contagion or the Grave. It makes no distinction, the wise man is as little secure from it as the Fool, Age submits to it as well as youth, the strong as well as the weak, the Hero as well as the Coward. In fine, this one Passion sets on fire the whole course of Nature, rages and spreads with an unlimited Contagion, and is an Image of the universal Con∣flagration. 20 And that which increases the won∣der is the vilenes of that structure which is made the Object of this sen∣sual Love. 'Tis not indeed much to be wonder'd that we should love Corpo∣real Pleasure, all Pleasure being in its Proportion lovely, but that the imbra∣cing such poor Materials should afford any, that's the wonder. Should one
Angel fall in love with the pure and refined Vehicle of another, tho' Mat∣ter even in its highest Exaltation is but a poor sort of Being, there would howe∣ver be somthing of Proportion in this: but to see a man Idolize and dote upon a Masse of Flesh and Blood, that which the Apostle calls our Vile Body,Phil. 3. Or as 'tis in the Original more Empha∣tically,  the body of our Humiliation, that is at present the Reversion of Worms, and may the very next Minute be a Carcase, this is indeed so strange to one that thought∣fully considers it, that one would think all Mankind were intoxicated with some general Philtrum or Love Po∣tion, that has thus Charm'd them into this most stupid and Wretched degree of Idolatry. So that whether we con∣sider the greatness of the Effects, or the slenderness of the Cause, this Kind of sensual Love is of all the most wonder∣full and unaccountable. 21 One thing more I have to ob∣serve
concerning this Kind of sensual Love, the Desire of Corporal Contact occasion'd by the Aspect of sensible Beauty, and that is, that this is a Pas∣sion peculiar to Man. Brutes are be∣low it, and Angels are above it. For Man being a middle sort of Creature between an Angel and a Beast, 'tis requisite he should have somthing to di∣stinguish him from each, and that in his Appetitive as well as in his Intellective Part. And thus it is, in his Intellective part he has Reason and Discourse, which is above sensible knowledge, and short of Intuition. And so likewise in his Ap∣petitive there is this Desire of Corporal Contact arising from the sight of Beau∣ty, which is a mixt Love, partly In∣tellectual and partly sensual, and is thereby distinguish'd from the Love of Brutes, which is purely sensual (for they are not affected with Beauty) and the love of Angels which is purely Intel∣lectual. So great Harmony and Pro∣portion is there in the works of him
who made all things in Number, Weight, and Measure. SECT. V. Of the Second Great Branch of Love viz. Love of Benevolence, its division into Self-Love and Charity, where also 'tis enquired whether all Love be Self-Love. 1 HAving dispatch'd the First great Branch of Love, Love of Con∣cupiscence or Desire, with the several Kinds of it, I come now to consider the Second, viz. Love of Benevolence. By this I understand a desiring or willing of good to some Person or Being that is Capable of it. And herein 'tis dif∣ferenc'd from Love of Concupiscence. The Idea of Love of Concupiscence is, A simple Tendency of the Soul to good, not at all considering whether it wills it to any Person or Being or no. But the Idea of Benevolence is A desiring or willing this good to some Being or other.
As far as 'tis a Desiring or willing of good, it agrees with Love of Concu∣piscence, but it is distinguish'd from it in that it wishes well too. 2 For as in Physical Motion a Body may be consider'd either as simply mo∣ving towards another, or as moving this other to some Certain Body, so in Love which is a Moral Motion, the Soul may be consider'd either as simply de∣siring or willing good (which is Con∣cupiscence) or as desiring or willing it to some Capable Being, and this is that Species of Love which we call Bene∣volence. 3 And I further Meditate that as in Motion the Body that moves another may either move it towards it self as in Circular Motion, or towards some other Body as in Direct Motion. So in the Love of Benevolence this wishing well to, may either be a willing of good to ones self, or to some other Being. If to ones self, then 'tis that special sort of Benevolence which we call self-love.
If to another, then 'tis what we call Charity. 4 Then again as to Charity, this may be consider'd either as extended to all men in Common, grounded upon one Common Consideration, viz. Simili∣tude of Nature, and a Capacity of be∣ing benefitted, which is Common Chari∣ty; Or as confined to one or two, and as Mutual, and as Mutually known, and withall as in a special degree of Intens∣ness and Application, and then 'tis Friendship, which differs not from Com∣mon Charity but as 'tis qualify'd by the preceding modifications. 5 But this our Division is in danger of being closed up again by some who contract all these kinds of Benevolence into one, by telling us that all Love is self-Love. Thus the Epicureans of old, who by this Plea thought to evade the necessity of owning a Providence. For when you argue from the Perfecti∣ons of God that the world is cared for and govern'd by him; No say they, the
quite contrary follows. For all Love is self-Love, and proceeds from Indigen∣cy, if therefore God be such a Full and Perfect being as you suppose, he cannot be concern'd for any thing abroad, as having no self-interest to serve. 6 And indeed the Conclusion would be right, were the Principle so. For if all Benevolence did proceed from Indi∣gence, it would certainly follow that the more perfect and self-sufficient any being is, the less he must needs regard the good of others, and consequently a being that is absolutely perfect, must necessarily be utterly void of all Bene∣volence or Concern for anothers wel∣fare. 7 But to hear an Epicurean Main∣tain this Principle is no wonder. Even Plato himself in some places seems to look favourably towards it, particular∣ly in his Lysis, where purposely treating of Friendship he concludes toward the end of the Dialogue that Friendship a∣rises from Indigence, necessity and pri∣vation.
The same he again insinuates in his symposion, when he makes Penia Indigence or Poverty to be the Mother of Love. But the Roman Plato, Cicero, in his book of Friendship will by no means allow this Notion, but contends that Love proceeds rather from Nature, than from Indigence or Imbecility. 8 There is in the other opinion som∣thing of Truth, and somthing of Er∣rour, or rather 'tis either true or false as 'tis understood. How far true and how far false, I shall determin in the following Conclusions. And first I do acknowledge that all Love of Concupi∣scence does proceed from Indigence, and ends in self-Love. For all desire is in order to further Perfection, and Im∣provement, and did we not want some∣thing within, we should not endeavour towards any thing without. And ac∣cordingly God, the self-sufficiency of whose Nature excludes all want of In∣digency, is by no means capable of Love of Concupiscence.
9 Again I acknowledge that even Love of Benevolence or Charity may be, and (such is our Present Infirmity) is for the most part occasion'd by Indi∣gence, and when unravel'd to the bot∣tom concludes in self-love. Our Cha∣rity not only begins at home, but for the most part ends there too. For it must be confess'd that we generally love others with respect to our own in∣terest, and dispense kindnesses upon the consideration of common Infirmi∣ty, and that both the Condition and the Releif may be our own another day. 10 I do also further acknowledge that things are so happily twisted and complicated together, that a man can∣not benefit another without doing some kindness to himself, either in the Consequence & final issue of things, or in the very act of Benefaction, it being not only a Pleasure to do good to others, but perhaps one of the greatest plea∣sures in the world. And this Pleasure is withal inseparable from acts of kind∣ness,
so that 'tis as impossible for a man to bestow a kindness to his Neighbour, without having it some way or other redound to himself; as 'tis for the Sun to shine upon the Earth, without hav∣ing his light reflected back again to∣ward his own Orb. 11 All this is true, and thus far I grant that Love proceeds from Indi∣gence, and that all love is self-love. But if the Meaning of the Assertion be that all love of Benevolence does so ne∣cessarily depend upon Indigence and so necessarily point to self interest, that were not a man Indigent himself, and had an eye to his own advantage, he could not possibly wish well or do well to another, in this sense I deny that all love is self love. And I think not with∣out just reason. For first there is no∣thing in the Nature of the thing to hin∣der but that there may be a pure and disinteressed Benevolence. For I con∣sider that the good of another consi∣der'd as anothers may be the object of
volition as well as ones own. For the object of Volition is good in common, or that which is agreeable to any Intel∣lectual being, whether ones self or any other. But now good as anothers or to another, is good as well as ones own, and therefore may be the object of Vo∣lition, and consequently we may will good to another independently on our own Interest. 12 If it be objected that there is no such thing as Pure Malice, for when we wish ill to another we consider his evil as making for own good, and therefore why should there be any such thing as Pure Benevolence. I answer, the diffe∣rence lies in this. That in Malice the thing which we wish to another is evil. Now evill being not any way desireable whether to ones self or another, as evil, it must in order to eligibility be consi∣derd under the formality of good in some respect or other. But now it can∣not have the formality of good with respect to our Neighbor, for to him we
wish it as Evil. It must therefore ap∣pear good with reference to our selves. That is, we consider anothers evil as making for our good some way or o∣ther, and so will it to him. But now in Charity or Benevolence the thing which we will to another being sup∣posed to be good already, there is no cessity that in order to the willing of it we should further consider it under the formality of being our own. The Nature of good in Common being suffici∣ent for that. And this I conceive to be the reason that although there can∣not be a Pure and uninteressed Malice, yet there may be a Pure and uninte∣ressed Charity. 13 Besides, this Love of Benevolence is frequently exercised without any design of Prospect, nay sometimes where there is no possibility of any self advantage. This is plain in God, who as he is the most self-sufficient and unbenefitable, so is he also the most Be∣neficient and Communicative Being. And
I question not but that it may be so in Men also. For not to mention our doing kindnesses to those, whom we are certain never to see again, to dy∣ing persons, who cannot live to requite us, or to the living when we our selves are dying, and can't live to be re∣quited, and the like, I only consider, that we often rejoice at the Happi∣ness of those who were born and lived before us, and hear with pleasure the successes of good Men, with whom (as being of another Age) our Interest cannot be at all concern'd. Now what we rejoice at we do implicitly and vertually Will, for nothing can be mat∣ter of Ioy which is not according to our will. 14 Lastly I consider that if all Be∣nevolence did necessarily spring from Indigence and self-love, then it would certainly follow that our Inclination to do good would be continually a∣bated as our Fortune rises, and we make nigher advances to Full-ness and
Self-sufficiency. But now I dare ap∣peal to Common Observation and Ex∣perience, whether there be not many generous Spirits, who retain the same Propension to be beneficial, when they are set at the greatest distance from Poverty, as they had before when at the lowest Ebb, which yet could never be, if Benevolence did necessarily depend on Indigence. More I might add, but this I thing sufficient to shew that all Love is not, as some pretend, resol∣vable into Self-love, or Founded upon Indigence, and consequently that my Division of Benevolence into Self Love and Charity is sufficiently accurate and contra-distinct.
THE SECOND PART Of the Discourse WHICH CONTAINS THE MEASURES whereby our Love is to be re∣gulated. Hitherto shalt thou come, but no fur∣ther, and here shall thy proud Waves be stayed, Job. 38.11.
PART. II. SECT. I. That Love requires some Measures of Re∣gulation, and why love as Dirigible is made the subject of Morality rather than understanding. 1 HAving finish'd the Theory of Love, I come now to consider the Measures of its Regulation. A great and important work this; for next to the Regulating of our Love, I know no∣thing either more difficult or more use∣ful and necessary, than to prescribe Measures how it ought to be Regulated. Indeed it is very Necessary to six the Bounds of Regulating our Love; and that both because of the Difficulty of Loving Regularly, and because of the Moment and Consequence of it.
2 For the Difficulty, as tis impossible not to love at all, so is it one of the Har∣dest things in the world to love well. Solus sapiens scit Amare, says the Stoic, The wise man only knows how to Love. And there are very few of these wise Men in the World, and to love regu∣larly is oftentimes more than the wisest of us all can do. For first the Appe∣tite which we have to good in Gene∣ral is so strong and Craving that it hur∣ries us on to all sorts and degrees of Particular good, and makes us fasten wherever we can trace the least Print or Foot-step of the universal good. Now this Promiscuous and Indefinite prosecution of Particular goods must needs oftentimes engage us in sin and irregularity. For though these parti∣cular objects of Love separately consi∣dered are good, as being Participati∣ons of the universal good, yet consi∣der'd as they stand in relation either to one another or to the universal, they may become evil, in as much as there
may be a Competition, and the the les∣ler may hinder the greater. As for instance, The pleasure of sense (as in∣deed all Pleasure) singly and sepa∣rately consider'd is good, but the en∣joyment of it may in some circum∣stances be against a greater good, the good of Society, and then 'tis evil as in Fornication or Adultery. But now we are so violently push'd on to Parti∣cular good, by that General Thirst after good in Common, that we don't mind how things are in Combination, but only how they are singly and sepa∣rately in themselves. For to observe how things are in Combination requires thought and Reflexion, which in this Hurry we are not at leisure to make, but to find how things are Singly in themselves there needs nothing but di∣rect Tast and natural sensation. Whence it comes to pass that we more readily do the one than the other, and so are very apt to transgress order, and to love irregularly.
3 This is one ground of the Diffi∣culty of Loving well, and as I con∣ceive a very considerable one, tho' no one that I know of did ever assign this as the cause of this difficulty. But there is also another. For as from the love of good in general we are ea∣gerly carried out to Particular goods, so from the Original Pravity and De∣generacy of our Nature, among all these Particular goods, that which we most eagerly propend to, is sensual good. The Lower life is now highly invigorated and awaken'd in us, the Corruptible Body (as the wise man com∣plains) presses down the Soul, and the Love, which we have to good in gene∣ral, does now by the Corruption of our Nature almost wholly display and ex∣ert it self in the prosecution of this one Particular good, the good of Sense. 4. Now though good of Sense be as truely good as good of the Intellect, as being a Rivulet of the same Sea, and a Ray of the same Sun, yet (as I said
before) it may in some Circumstances and Combinations cross and thwart some higher Interest, and so become Evil. And the strong inclination, which we now have to the good of Sense in general, will often betray us into the love and enjoyment of it in those par∣ticular circumstances wherein it is evil, and against Order. And that often∣times, even when we consider it as E∣vil, that is, when we do not only mind it as it is singly in it self, but as it is in a certain Combination. For this Sensual Concupiscence in us may be so strong, that though we do actually consider a sensual pleasure so circumstantiated as Evil, yet we may for that time think it a lesser Evil than to deny our selves the gratification of so importunate an Appetite, and so chuse it, and be guil∣ty of an exorbitant and irregular Love. 5 And if we further consider how we are perpetually sorrounded with sensible goods, which by Troops thrust themselves upon us, while those
that are Intellectual require our Search and Inquisition, how early they at∣tack us, and what deep impressions they make upon our then tender Facul∣ties, how much the Animal part is afore∣hand with the Rational, that we live the life of Plants and Beasts before we live the life of men, and that not only in the sense of Aristotle, while we are in the Womb, but long after we have beheld the Sun, that the Seducer Eve is Form'd while Adam sleeps, and that sensuality comes to be Adult and Mature, when our Discourses are but young and imperfect. So that by that time we arrive to some competent use of our Reason, there has been laid in such a stock of Animal impressions, that 'tis more than work enough for our riper Age, even to unravel the pre∣judices of our youth, and unlive our former life; I say if we consider this, the Difficulty of Regular love will ap∣pear so great, that instead of admir∣ing at the ill course of the World, one
should rather be tempted to wonder that men love so regularly as they do. So great Reason had the Stoic to say, The wise man only knows how to love. 6 But were it onely a piece of Diffi∣culty to steer the Ship right, and were there not also danger of splitting a∣gainst Rocks, and of other ill Contin∣gencys, the Pilot might yet be secure and unconcern'd, commit himself to his Pillow, and his Vessel to the Winds. But 'tis otherwise, there is Moment and Consequence in Loving regularly as well as Difficulty. No less a thing than Happiness depends upon it, private Happiness and publick Happiness, the Happiness of single Persons, and the the Happiness of the Community, the Happiness of this world, and the Hap∣piness of the next. 7 For as Motion is in the Natural, so is Love in the Moral world. And as the good state of the Natural World depends upon those Laws of Regular Motion, which God has establish'd in
it, in so much that there would need nothing else to bring all into confusi∣on and destruction, but the irregular Motion of those Bodies which it con∣sists of, so does the welfare and happy state of the Intellectual world depend upon the Regularity of Love. Accord∣ing as this Motion proceeds, so is the Moral world either an Harmonical Frame, or a disorderly Chaos, and there needs nothing but the Irregula∣rity of Love to undermine the Pillars of Happiness, and to put the Founda∣tions of the Intellectual World out of Course. And accordingly we see that God who loves Order, and takes care for the perfection of both worlds, has prescribed both Laws of Motion and Laws of Love. And for the same rea∣son 'tis a thing of great importance and necessity to state these Laws and Measures, the welfare of the Moral world being as much concern'd in Love, as that of the natural is in Mo∣tion.
8 And this is the Reason why Love as Dirigible is made the subject of Morality rather than understanding. For the Happiness of life is not so much concern'd in the Acts of our under∣standing, as in the Acts of our Love; in∣deed not at all in our understanding any further, than as our understanding affects our Love, and opinion influ∣ences practise. And then indeed it is, which is the ground of that Obliga∣tion to Orthodoxy, which we are un∣der as to those Articles of Faith which are call'd Fundamental. Otherwise in matters of pure Speculation the happi∣ness of Society is not at all concern'd in what we think, as for instance in that Celebrated Mathematical Pro∣blem, whether the pertual Approxima∣tion of some lines be consistent with the impossibility of their Concourse, what does it signify to the good estate of Society which way this be held? 'Tis indiffe∣rent therefore which side we take. But now we can't advance one step in the
Motion of Love, but something or other comes on't in relation to Poli∣tical Happiness, as there is not the least Motion in Nature but what tends ei∣ther to Generation or Corruption. For the difference is this, the Acts of our understanding are Immanent, and inef∣fective of any alteration upon things without us, but the Acts of Love are Transient, and leave external and per∣manent effects behind them in the course of things, and for this reason Love, as Dirigible, is made the Imme∣diate and proper subject of Moral con∣sideration, and understanding is here no otherwise concern'd than as it in∣fluences and determines our love. What the Measures of regulating our love are, I come now to define.
SECT. II. The Measures of Love of Concupiscence, all reduced to these two general Heads, what we must desire, and what we may desire; The Measures of these, both in general and in Particular. Whether sensual Pleasure be in its self evil, with an account of the true Notion of Origi∣nal Concupiscence and of Mortification. 1 BEing now to define the Measures of Love, I shall first begin with Love of Concupiscence. And here I consider that Duty and Liberty divide between them the Bounds of Morality, which ought wholely to be taken up in the consideration of these two things, what we must or ought to do, and what we may do without being Peccant. And accordingly I shall re∣duce all the Measures of Love of Con∣cupiscence to these two general Heads, what we must desire, and what we may desire.
2 Concerning the first, all that we must desire will I suppose be compre∣hended under these three, God, the good of the Community, and all those things which have a Natural Con∣nexion with it. God, as the greatest and last End Absolutely and Simply, the good of the Community, as the great∣est of Subordinate Ends, and all those things which have a Natural Connexi∣on with it, as Means without which 'tis not to be obtain'd. Wherein is also comprehended the obligation of not desiring, or avoiding whatever has naturally a contrary or opposite Ten∣dency. 3 The first thing which we must love or desire is God. But now God may be loved two waies, either confusely and implicitly, or distinctly and expli∣citly. The confuse and implicit Love of God is Natural and necessary, for tis the same with the love of good in common or Happiness, to which our Nature is Originally and invincibly
determin'd, and consequently cannot be Morally obliged. But that which we are here obliged to, is to love or desire him distinctly and explicitly, that is, to contract and concentre that Natural and Original Love, which we have to good in general or happiness, upon God, as being the true and only cause of all that happiness, to which we so blindly and necessarily aspire. 4 The love of God therefore, to which we are obliged, includes two things, a Desire and an Explicit desire of him. And this indeed is the only Love of him to which we can be Morally ob∣liged. For as to loving him confuse∣ly, that we can't be obliged to, be∣cause 'tis necessary and unavoidable; and as to loving him with love of Be∣nevolence or wishing well to, that we cannot be obliged to because 'tis un∣practicable; The former we cannot be obliged to, because of the condition of our own Nature, and the latter we cannot be obliged to, because of the Nature of God.
I know very well that I am singular in this Point, and that nothing is more common, among those that treat of the love of God, than to talk of it as of a love of Benevolence, and accordingly they alwaies express our Love to God, and our Love to our Neighbour un∣der the same common Appellation of Charity, as if they were both one and the same love, whereby we love God, and whereby we love our Neighbour. But there is I remember an old Rule, that we may talk with the Many, but must think with the Few, and I think tis very applicable in this case. For however we may use the word Charity in respect of God, to comply with popular modes of speaking, yet I can∣not see how in strictness and propriety of Notion God may be lov'd with Love of Benevolence. For certainly as Indi∣gence in the Lover is the ground of his loving with love of Concupiscence, so Indigence in the Person lov'd is the ground of our loving him with love
of Benevolence. But now what can we wish to God that he has not alrea∣dy? My goodness extendeth not to thee,Psal. 16. but to the Saints which are in the Earth, sayes the Psalmist, and to speak truely we can no more love God with love of Benevolence, than he can love us with love of Desire. God is as much above this our Love as he is above our understanding, He can indeed wish well to us, but we can only Desire him. 6 And I observe that in Scripture our Love of God is set forth in such expressions as import not any Benevo∣lence to him, but a Desire of him. As when the Psalmist saies,Psal. 42. like as the Hart desireth the Water-brooks, so longeth my Soul after thee O God; And again; My Soul is a thirst for God, when shall I come to appear before the Pre∣sence of God?Psal. 119. And again, My Soul breaketh out for fervent Desire. Again, whom have I in Heaven but thee, and there is none upon Earth that I De∣sire in Comparison of thee.Psal. 73. And so a∣gain
in the Canticles which express the very Soul and Spirit of Divine Love, saies the inamour'd Spouse, the Church, Let him kiss me with the kisses of his Mouth,1.2. for thy love is better than Wine. Again, Tell me O thou whom my Soul loveth,1.7. where thou feedest. But most emphatically of all, when She saies, I charge you O Daughters of Ieru∣salem, if ye find my Beloved,5.8. tell him, that I am sick of Love. Thus again the Angel expresses the Seraphic temper of Daniel, by calling him A man of Desires;Dan. 10. For so the Hebrew Cri∣ticks chuse to read it. I shall mention but one place more, and that is in the 2 of Tim. where the Apostle describing a sort of wicked men, saies of them, that they are , Lov∣ers of Pleasure more than Lovers of God. Which plainly intimates that our Love of God is of the same sort with that love wherewith we love Pleasure; But now we don't love Pleasure with Love of Benevolence, but only with Love of De∣sire,
and consequently that is the Love wherewith we love God. 7 If it be here objected that though there be no room for wishing well to God Formally and Directly, yet we may rejoyce and take a Complacency in those Perfections of his, which make him un∣capable of our more express Benevo∣lence, which will amount (as was urged before) to an implicit and vertual willing them to him, I answer, that what we rejoyce at we do implicitly will, if it be in a Being who either might not have had that Happiness, or holds it precariously and may hereafter be deprived of it, For here is still some Indigence in the Person to make him capable of our good wishes; But now the Happiness of God is as necessary as his Existence, and consequently how∣ever we may rejoyce in his being Hap∣py, we can no more will him to be Happy, than we can will him to exist. For to will him to be happy necessa∣rily supposes, that he has not the per∣fect
Possession of that Happiness which we will him, for if he has, why do we yet will it to him? Here there∣fore is no room for Benevolence. Nay I do not conceive how we can wish well to God so much as ex Hypothesi, on supposition that he were not happy in that respect wherein we would wish well to him. For the Supposition is impossible, and takes away the very Subject of our Benevolence. For if God were not completely Happy, he would not be what he is, but some other Be∣ing. 8 I would by no means straiten or retrench our Love to God, but am ra∣ther for inlarging and multiplying its Chanels as much as may be, and there∣fore if any think that God may be lov'd with Love of Benevolence, Let them enjoy and (if they can) act ac∣cording to their Notion. For my part I cannot bring my self to any clear conception of it, and I am very scrupulous in venturing upon any thing
whereof I have no distinct Idea. Which ought to be Apology sufficient for me, if I make Love of Desire to be the only Love, wherewith we are obliged to love God. 9 And that we are obliged thus to love him, I shall briefly make out from the consideration of our own Nature, and from the Nature of God. As to our own Nature, I consider that our Thirst after good or Happiness in ge∣neral is so natural, so necessary, and so vehement, that as at present we can neither suspend, nor moderate, nor in the least interrupt it, so we can ne∣ver expect fully to quench or extinguish it, but in the enjoyment of that Object, which has all that happiness in it, on which the whole Bent of our Soul is so strongly set. 10 From the strength and invinci∣ble necessity of this our Inclination to good in general, I conceive 'twill fol∣low that 'tis highly Reasonable, that that Being wherein is all this happi∣ness,
to which we indefinitely are in∣clined, ought to be lov'd and desired expressly by us, and not only so, but with the very same love wherewith we love happiness it self. For otherwise we should contradict our first and grand Appetite, and act against the very Frame and Constitution of our Nature. 11 This admitted, I consider second∣ly that God is that Full and rich Be∣ing, that has all this happiness in him. He is not only the Cause of all good, but the very Essence and Nature of it. He is (as the Divine Philosopher stiles him)  good it self, Lovely it self, and Desirable it self. He is indeed the First Desira∣ble as well as the First Intelligible, and as we see and understand all things in him, so in him we desire all that we desire. In short, he is the Complement and perfection of good, the End and the Centre of the whole Intelligent Creation, and all that we can desire or
enjoy; and consequently as we cannot Love beyond him, so we ought not to love short of him. St. Austin has words to this purpose worth Citing. Summa Bonorum Deus. Neque infra remanen∣dum nobis est, neque ultra quaerendum. Alterum enim periculosum, alterum nul∣lum est- God is the Sum of all good. We are neither to fix on this side of him, nor to seek any thing beyond him,Lib. De Mor. Eccl. the former is dangerous, and the lat∣ter is nothing. 12 And as we are obliged to love God, so ought we to love him beyond all other things whatsoever. We can∣not indeed love him as he is lovely at all, nor can we love him to our utmost till we shall see him as he is, but we may & must now prefer him in our love. Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy Heart, with all thy Soul, with all thy mind, and with all thy strength; so runs the Com∣mandment. And very just we should. For if even in Particular goods Order requires that the most lovely should be
loved most, much more ought we to love him who is the very Essence of good, good it self, beyond all Derivative and secondary good. For there is here no Proportion or Comparison at all. 13 And for the same cause we can never love God too much. As mode∣ration has here no excellence, so excess has here no place. An Infinite Desir∣able can never be too much desired. God is the Measure of all Love, every thing being lovely only so far as it par∣ticipates of him, and consequently the Measure of loving him is to love him without Measure. The Philosopher sayes well in his Politics, that the Ap∣petite of the End is alwaies with∣out end or Term,Lib. 1. cap. 6. and that bounds and stints are only in those things that are in order to the End. God therefore being our End we can never love him to excess, no nor the Angels in Heaven neither. Indeed the thing is Absolutely as well as Relatively im∣possible, for as the Narrowness of our
Nature will hinder us from loving him enough, so the infinite Fulness of his own makes him uncapable of being lov'd too much. 14. And thus much for the Love of God. The next thing that we are to desire is the good of the Community. This next to God is the greatest possi∣ble good. For 'tis the good of the whole, than which nothing can be great∣er. The good of the Community is the End, the Measure, the Accomplish∣ment and the final result of all private goods. Hither they all point, and here they all conspire and concentre. And consequently this is the greatest Beauty, the greatest Order, and the greatest Harmony that can possibly re∣sult from the Creature, and is the very next Resemblance of the Perfection of God, who is all in all. 15 This therefore being the greatest Delectable good in it self, it ought to be so also to us, who are to love and desire this good of the Community be∣yond
all private good whatsoever. Nay we ought to desire private good no further than as 'tis conducive to, or at least consistent with the Public Interest. For I consider Society as a Musical Instrument, consisting of va∣riety of strings of different sizes, and strain'd up to different pitches, some of whose Sounds, though ungrateful in some junctures, are yet Musical as they stand in relation to others, and in or∣der to a Common design. Now tho 'tis Natural to desire the grateful sound of every string singly, were this equal∣ly conducing to the harmony of the whole, yet certainly no body is so un∣reasonably absurd, as to desire that this or that Discord should be turned into a sound singly more grateful, to the prejudice of the general harmony, which is of infinitely greater Conse∣quence, than the single gratefulness of one or two Particular Strings. 16 And this is the Case of us men in Society, and this ought to be our mea∣sure.
We ought to consider our selves as so many strings of one great Instru∣ment, and not affect any Pitch or De∣gree more grateful to our selves, to the prejudice of the common harmony, the good of the Community, which is the most delectable good, and ought by us to be most Cordially tender'd, and Principally regarded. Especially con∣sidering that this is the good which God himself cheifly proposes, and prin∣cipally regards both in the Creation and government of the nniverse. 17 And now since the Desire of the End necessarily includes the Desire of the Means, the next Object of our De∣sire must be all things which have a Natural Connexion with the good of the Community. And here 'tis sup∣posed in the first place, that there are some things that have this Natural connexion with it. And 'tis necessary so to suppose. For as God cannot make a natural World according to any particular system whatsoever, but there
will necessarily arise upon it some cer∣tain Relations and habitudes of a∣greement and disagreement; some Mo∣tions will naturally make for its order and Perfection, and some against it. So is it impossible for God to make an Intellectual word, that is, to constitute Society in any particular condition, Scheme or posture, but Relations of a∣greeable and disagreeable will natu∣rally and necessarily arise; some things will naturally make for its order and convenience, and some things will be as naturally contrary to it. And this without any arbitrary interposition of God by the mere natural result and necessity of things. For to recur a∣gain to the instance of a Musical In∣strument, let an Instrument be so and so made, so and so strung, and so and so tuned, and some certain strokes up∣on it will necessarily be harmonical, and other some as necessarily dishar∣monical. But now let the Instrument be tuned another way, and the Rela∣tions
of convenience and disconveni∣ence will alter, the same strokes, that were before disharmonical, may be now harmonical, and so on the contra∣ry. But yet still some strokes will be naturally agreeable and some disa∣greeable, let the Instrument be set which way you please. The Applica∣tion of this to Society is too obvious to insist upon. 18 To proceed therefore, it being supposed that there are some things, which have a natural connexion with the good of the Community, the next obligation of our Love will be, that whatsoever has this natural connexion be will'd and desired by us. For as the good of the Community is the greatest Delectable good, so that which has a natural Connexion with it is the greatest Proffitable good, and is there∣fore to be lov'd with the same love wherewith we love the good of the Community it self, wherein is also im∣plied that whatever has an opposite
Relation is in the same manner to be hated and abhorred. For this is the general Reason of Moral good and E∣vil, of Vertue and Vice, and the Prime Fundamental Law of Nature, which never can cease of expire, however the Particular Instances may change ac∣cording to the variation of the Intel∣lectual Systeme: As I have more fully shewn in another Discourse,Consid. upon the Nature of Sin. and shall therefore here no further enlarge upon it. 19. And now because with relation to the present posture of the Intellectual world, there are some particular things in Specie, which have this natural con∣nexion with the interest of the Com∣munity, such as Justice, Temperance, Fortitude, Patience, Humility, Vera∣city, Fidelity and the like; hence it comes to pass that these are to be lov'd and will'd by us, by vertue of that general Canon, that whatever natu∣rally serve to the good of the Commu∣nity is to be loved, to which these are
reduced as special Instances and exem∣plifications. 20 But I do not think my self ob∣liged to descend to a particular prose∣cution of these or any other vertues, it being not my design to insist upon Particulars, but only to lay down such general Principles, upon which a more Particular Scheme of Morality may be erected, or into which those Parti∣cular Morals which are already extant may and ought to be resolv'd. And besides having brought the Reader in∣to the Road, I think I may now be ex∣cused from attending him any fur∣ther, and shall therefore advance to some other Theoryes of more remote and uncommon observation. 21 Having therefore fix'd the gene∣ral Bounds of Duty by shewing what we must desire, I proceed to consider the Bounds of Liberty by shewing what we may desire. Now the Measures of this are either General or Particular. The general Measures are two. The
First is, that we may desire any thing that is not contrary to what we must desire. From this arises the second ge∣neral Measure, which is that we may desire any thing that is not contrary or Prejudicial to the good of Society. 22 Now as to the Particular Mea∣sures, there is too much variety in them to be all minutely and punctually consider'd. And besides it would be a needless as well as a tedious undertak∣ing. I shall therefore only touch up∣on the more considerable Instances, and such as have not been made the subject of ordinary speculation. And the first Instance of our Liberty which I shall consider, is that we may desire Pleasure. First because the Desire of it is Necessary and invincible, implant∣ed in us by the Author of our Nature, and which we can no more devest our selves of, than we can of any the most essential part of our constition. 2ly Be∣cause pleasure as such in the common Nature of it is singly and simply good,
and in no respect or combination evil. It is singly and simply good, because convenient and agreeable, and in no respect or combination evil, because as such not against the good of the Community. 23 For if pleasure as such were against the good of the Community, then eve∣ry Particular pleasure would be so, be∣cause every particular Pleasure par∣takes of the common nature of plea∣sure, which would then be enough to render it evil, the least defect being a sufficient reason to make any thing so. But now this is so far from being true, that not only some Pleasures are laudable and excellent, but on the contrary no particular pleasure is evil so far as Pleasure, but only by reason of some accidental Combinations and Circumstances, wherein some higher In∣terest is opposed by it. Now this is so far from making against Pleasure, that it makes strongly for it. For if the enjoyment of particular pleasures be
then only and in such Instances and Circumstances restrain'd, when the in∣terest of some greater Happiness is thereby cross'd, it follows that plea∣sure it self is a thing principally re∣garded and provided for by God; and consequently that it is good in it self, and therefore may be desired by us. 24 So much as to the Desire of Plea∣sure in general, or as such. Now con∣cerning Particular Pleasures I propose these two general Canons, which I think will hold in all Instances whatsoever. First that that Pleasure which has no trouble or pain annex'd, may, nay in∣deed cannot but be embraced; as on the contrary, that Pain which has no Pleasure annex'd is to be avoided. The other Canon is, that that pleasure which either hinders a greater plea∣sure, or causes a greater pain is to be nill'd and avoided, as on the contrary that pain which either takes off a greater Pain, or causes a greater plea∣sure is to be will'd and embraced. By
these two general Canons we are to re∣gulate our desire of particular plea∣sures. 25 But now of Particular Pleasures, some are Intellectual and some are Sensual. As to Intellectual Pleasures there is no question to be made, but that any of them may be desired as to their kind, only there are some Mea∣sures to be observ'd with reference to their Degree, Time, Place, and other Circumstances which are too numerous to define, and withal too obvious to need it, and may therefore be left to the Discretion of common Prudence to determine according to the two pre∣ceding general Canons. 26 But now concerning sensual plea∣sure, especially that eminent Species of it which we call Venereal, there is more difficulty. Of this it may be doubted whether it be in its self Evil or no. Some we know among the An∣cients have expressly thought so, and upon this ground have condemn'd the
use of Marriage, as namely, the Sect of the Essenes among the Jews, Tatia∣nus, Marcion, Manichaeus and others. And though these were censured as He∣reticks, yet nothing more common e∣ven among Orthodox and approv'd Writers, than to let fall such expressi∣ons, from which the same conclusion will follow. For when they tax the immorality of some particular instan∣ces of Sensual Pleasure (suppose Adul∣tery or Fornication) they don't ground their charge wholely upon those Civil inconveniences, which either of them bring upon Society in their respective Circumstances, but resolve part of their immorality into sensuality as such, ab∣stracted from those other ill Conse∣quences. They condem them not on∣ly as unjust, as injurious, as inconveni∣ent to the Public, &c. but also as Sen∣sual: Now if any particular sensual pleasure be evil as sensual, then 'twill unavoidably follow that sensual plea∣sure as such is evil.
27 And that it is so, a man might be further induced to think, when he observes that in the Divine Writings (not to say any thing of our Common way of Discourse) such peculiar Epi∣thets of Infamy are given to certain Instances of sensual Pleasure, which can belong to them on no other score than as as Sensual. Nay and as if here lay the very Point of the Immorality, they often receive a Denomination from the Sensual Pleasure, but never from the injustice, unfaithfulness or the like. Thus is Adultery call'd the sin of Vncleanness. And Adulterers are common call'd unclean Persons, Filthy, brutish, &c. In like manner David in his Penitentials for that sin insists cheif∣ly upon the sensual part of it, and ac∣cordingly speaks of washing, cleansing, and making clean. From all which a man would be tempted to gather that the Moral ilness of Adultery were at least partly to be resolv'd into the sen∣suality of it, and consequently that
sensual pleasure is in it self or as such evil. 28 And this seems yet more proba∣ble from the consideration of a cer∣tain Instance of Sensual Pleasure, where∣in there seems to be nothing besides the mere sensuality. As namely vo∣luntary Pollution. And yet this is uni∣versally condemn'd as immoral, and consequently sensual pleasure seems to be in it self evil. 29. As it does yet further from those sharp invectives, which the Moral wri∣ters of all ages have ever used against it as a low, base, brutish and dishono∣rable thing, and from that Shame which naturally attends it, even in Circum∣stances professedly lawful, whereby men seem naturally conscious of some Moral incongruity in the thing purely as such. 30 But now to all this I need oppose but these two things. First that if sen∣sual pleasure were evil in it self or as such, it would be so in all its Instances.
This is an undeniable Consequence. But now that it is not so in all its In∣stances, is plain from the Divine In∣stitution of Marriage. And therefore it is not evil in its self. For it must not be thought (as some seem to fancy) that Marriage makes that good which was in it self evil. For if once evil in it self, it must eternally and universal∣ly be so, and consequently even in Marriage it self, that as to Sensual Plea∣sure being the same with Fornication or Adultery. But sensual pleasure is not evil in Marriage, therefore not in it self or as such. This is Demonstra∣tion. 31 To this I further add that even the grossest Pleasure of Sense, is one of the remoter Participations of God. For it must be granted to be at least a Na∣tural good, and every particular good be it what it will, is a Ray and Emana∣tion of the universal good. But now nothing of God can be simply and ab∣solutely evil. And besides, I consider
that in the Human frame God has pre∣pared Organs and Instruments for the use of Sensual Pleasure, and that he has also given us Natural Appetites and Inclinations to it. Whereby it appears that God has provided for the gratifi∣cation of the Animal as well as the Di∣vine life. And though this is to be chiefly nourish'd, yet the other is not to be starv'd. For it is a Tree of Gods own planting, and therefore the Fruit of it may be good for Food, as well as Fair to the eye. For there can be nothing simply evil in the Paradise of God. As tis finely made out by the excellent Doctor More in several places of his Con∣jectura Cabalistica, where the Reader may find this Argument copiously and very excellently managed. 32 I conclude therefore that Sensual Pleasure is not in its own simple Na∣ture evil, and Consequently that no Particular Instance of it is evil barely as being Sensual (for if so then sensual pleasure as such would be evil) but
only as it stands invested with some Circumstances, which make it incon∣sistent with some higher good, the good of society. Thus in voluntary Pollu∣tion there is a deordination from the End of Nature, Generation, and here∣in consists its evil, not in its being a sensual pleasure. And accordingly we find that those other Pleasures of sense, which are not appropriated by Nature to any peculiar end, are in their use wholely indifferent, as using rich Per∣fumes, drinking delicious Wines, &c. Thus again in Fornication, though the end of generation may be here serv'd, yet the ends of Convenient Education cannot. And herein lies the evil of this, not in its being an act of sensuality or a sensual Pleasure. 33 But because there are some that are ready to call in question the na∣tural immorality of simple Fornication, and those that do allow it are scarce resolv'd where to fix it, 'twill not be amiss to prosecute this a little further.
The best Account that I know of this matter, is that which is given by Tho. Aquinas,Lib. 3. con. gent. cap. 122. and indeed I think it very Full, rational and satisfa∣ctory. And because I cannot do it in better words, I will give it in his own. It is to be consider'd (sayes he) that in those Animals, in which the Fe∣male alone is sufficient for the bringing up of the young, the Male and Female af∣ter Copulation remain no time together, as in Dogs. But among those Animals in which the Female is not sufficient for the bringing up of the young, the Male and Female after Copulation remain to∣gether, as long as is necessary for the Edu∣cation and Instruction of the young. As it appears in some Birds, whose young ones can't get their living presently af∣ter they are brought forth. For since Birds don't nourish their young with milk (which Nature has made ready at hand, as in Beasts) but are forc'd to go forrage abroad for Meat, and besides to cherish their young while they feed them, the Fe∣male
would not be sufficient alone for all this. And therefore by the order of Pro∣vidence the Male among such Creatures is Naturally inclined to abide with the Female for the Education of the young. Now 'tis plain that in Human kind the Woman would by no means suffice alone for the Education of the Child, since the necessity of Human life requires many things which cannot be supplied by one only. It is therefore convenient accord∣ing to Human Nature that the Man af∣ter Conjunction should abide by the Wo∣man, and not presently depart, and take up indifferently with any body, as 'tis among those that Fornicate. Neither will the case be alter'd by the womans be∣ing so rich as to be able to nourish her child by ber self. Because the Natural Rectitude of Human actions is not to be measured according to those things, which happen by Accident in one Individual, but according to those things which fol∣low the whole Species. Again it is to be consider'd, that in Human kind the Off-spring
does not only need nourishment as to the body, like other Animals, but al∣so Instruction as to the Soul. For other Animals have Natural Instincts by which they may provide for themselves. But now man lives by Reason, and must at∣tain to discretion by long experience. Whence it becomes necessary that Children be instructed by their experienc'd Pa∣rents. Nor are they capable of this In∣struction assoon as they are born, but af∣ter a considerable time, and chiefly when they come to years of Discretion. For to this Instruction a great deal of time is required, and even then too by reason of the violence of Passion by which the Iudgment is perverted, they will want not only to be instructed, but to be subdued. Now for this the Woman alone is not suf∣ficient, but this is rather to be the work of the Man, whose Reason is better able to instruct, and his strength to Correct. 'Tis necessary therefore in Human kind to take care of the Off-spring not for a short time as in Birds, but for a conside∣rable
space of life. And therefore where∣as tis necessary in all Creatures that the Male abide with the Female as long as the Office of the Male is requisite for the Off-spring, 'tis natural to mankind that the Man associate not for a little while but alwaies with one determinate wo∣man. And this Society we call Matri∣mony. Matrimony is therefore natural to mankind. And Fornicarious mixture, which is besides Matrimony, is against the good of Man, and for this reason must of necessity be a sin. 34 Thus this excellent and most ex∣act Theorist, whose words I should not have transcribed at length, were they not of more than ordinary weight and moment. By this it appears, that Simple Fornication is naturally im∣moral, and wherein its Immorality lies. Not in its being a Sensual Plea∣sure, but in its being so circumstan∣tiated as not to comport with the good of society. And what I observe here in particular of simple Fornication, the
same may be said of any other forbid∣den Instance of Sensual Pleasure, that they are not evil as sensual, but upon the Consideration of some Accident or Circumstance, whereby they inter∣fere with the Publick interest. 35 To the Objections therefore on the other side I answer, first that it must be own'd that nothing is more common, even among approv'd Wri∣ters, than when they tax the immora∣lity of some particular Instances of sen∣sual pleasure to condemn them un∣der the Formality of their being sen∣sual. But herein is their mistake, and if men will talk confusedly of things, and assign false causes for true ones, who can help it? 36 To the second I answer, that when the Scripture gives such peculiar Epithetes of Infamy to some instances of sensual pleasure, that can belong to them on no other score than as sensu∣al, it must be confess'd that the sen∣sual part is then tax'd. But then this
is not, must not be understood as to the kind, but as to the Degree. Not the degree of Pleasure, but the degree of Affection, it being a plain Argument, that men are too much set upon Sen∣sual Pleasure, when for the sake of it they will adventure to gransgress Or∣der, and trespass against the good of Society. And this indeed is a culpable sensuality. 37 To the third I answer, that in that certain condemn'd Instance of sensual pleasure wherein there seems to be nothing besides the mere sensual perception, there is really something besides, tho not according to a Physi∣cal, yet according to a Moral Estima∣tion. For it is not barely a sensual pleasure, but a sensual pleasure deor∣dinated from the end of God and Na∣ture, namely, generation, for which it was design'd. And in this Deordina∣tion not in the sensuality consists its na∣tural evil and Moral Turpitude. 38 To the fourth I answer that those
severe declamations which the Mora∣lists of all Ages have made against sen∣sual pleasure in general, as a low, base, brutish and dishonourable thing, must either be understood Comparatively, with respect to the higher character of Intellectual Pleasures, or they are ill grounded and unreasonable. And then as to the shame, which naturally attends the acting of this sensual plea∣sure in all its instances, though it may in the first place be question'd whether this shame be from Nature or no, and not rather from Education and Arbi∣trary usages, yet for the present I will suppose it natural, and the Account of it I conceive must be this, it being a thing of vast consequence and Moment to the interest of Sociable life, that man should be propagated in a decent and regular way, and not as Brutes are, God thought it convenient for this purpose to imbue our Natures with this impression of shame with respect to venereal pleasure in general. Not be∣cause
this sensual delectation is in its own nature simply evil, but lest our Inclination to sensual pleasure in gene∣ral should betray us into those instances of it which are so. Which this natu∣ral impression was intended as a curb to prevent. By all which it plainly ap∣pears notwithstanding all the intrica∣cy, wherewith some confused Thinkers have entangled this matter, that Sen∣sual, even the grossest sensual pleasure cannot be in its own nature and as such evil, and consequently that it may be desired by us in such convenient Circumstances, wherein no higher good is opposed. 39 Now from this Hypothesis it will follow first, that Original Concupiscence must be far otherwise stated than usu∣ally it is. It is commonly understood to be a vicious disposition or Deprava∣tion of Nature, whereby we become inclined to evil. Now if you ask, what evil. They tell you, tis Carnal or sen∣sual pleasure. But now (as it has been
abundantly demonstrated) this is not simply and in its own nature evil, but only as 'tis Circumstantiated. And this original Concupiscence is not so par∣ticular (as being a blind Appetite) as to point to sensual pleasure in this or that Circumstance, but is carried only to sensual pleasure in common or as such. Which being not evil, neither can the inclination that respects it be evil or sinful, every Act or Inclination being specified from its Object. It must not be said therefore, that this Origi∣nary Concupiscence, or natural Im∣pression toward sensible good, is formal∣ly evil and sinful, the most we can al∣low is, that it is an Occasion of evil, the strong tendency we have to sensual pleasure in common, being very apt to betray us to consent to the enjoyment of it in inconvenient Instances and Cir∣cumstances. 40 Another Consequent from the Premises is this, that the Duty and ver∣tue of Mortification does not consist
(as 'tis vulgarly apprehended) in re∣moving and killing the natural Desire of sensual pleasure. For the natural Desire of sensual pleasure is not evil, its Object not being so, and consequently not to be eradicated. But that it con∣sists in such a due Repression and Di∣scipline of the Body, that our natural desire of sensual pleasure in Common may not carry us to the express willing of it in such instances as are against Or∣der, and the good of Society.
SECT. III. The Measures of Love of Benevolence, particularly of Self-love. 1 HAving prescribed some general Measures for the Regulation of the first great Branch of Love, Love of Concupiscence, I come now to set bounds to the other Arm of the same great Sea, Love of Benevolence. And because this is first divided into Self-love and Charity, or wishing well to ones self, and wishing well to some other Being, I shall in the first place state the Measures of regulating self-love. 2 This sort of Love is generally the most irregular of any, and that which causes irregularity in all the rest. We love our selves First, and last, and most of all. Here we alwaies begin, and here we most commonly end, and so immoderate are we in it that we prose∣cute
our own private interest, not only without any respect to the Common good, but oftentimes in direct Oppo∣sition to it, and so we can but secure to our selves a Plank, care not what becomes of the Vessel we sail in. This is the great Sucker of Society, and that which robbs the Body Politick of its due nourishment, and drains the Com∣mon Fountain to feed our own lesser Streams. Nay so foolishly immode∣rate and inordinate are we in the love of our selves, that we prefer our own little interest not only before greater of the Public, but before greater of our own, and love our Bodyes better than our Souls, a lesser interest that's present better than a greater that's di∣stant, tho equally sure, ond infinitely greater. In short, tis from the inor∣dinateness of this one Principle, Self-love, that we ruin the good of the Community here, and our own selves both here and hereafter. Here there∣fore is great need of Regulation.
3 Now I suppose the Measures of Self-love may all be reduced to this one in general, viz. that self-love is ne∣ver culpable, when upon the whole matter all things being taken into the Account, we do truely and really love our selves. It is then only culpable, when we love our selves by halves, and in some par∣ticular respects only to our greater dis∣advantage in others of more impor∣tance. And because this we generally do, hence it comes to pass that self-love is commonly taken in a bad sense, as if 'twere a thing evil and irregular in it self. But that's a mistake, Self-love is a Principle and Dictate of Nature, and the Instrument of attaining to that Happiness, which is the End of our Creation, and consequently can never be faulty, when upon the whole mat∣ter all things consider'd, it is a true Love of our selves, 4 Now to make it so, three things are required. First that we do not mistake our true selves by wishing well
to, or consulting the welfare of our worser part in prejudice to our better, by feeding the Brute and starving the Man. This would be to love our selves in a little, and to hate our selves in much, and would therefore upon the whole, better deserve the name of self-hatred than self-love. If therefore we would love our selves truely and re∣gularly, we must learn in the first place not to mistake our true selves. 5 The next requisite is, that we do not mistake our true Interest, by wil∣ling to our selves a lesser good, when the having it will cost us the loss of a greater. This is properly that Foolish Exchange condemn'd by our B. Saviour; 'Tis to gain a World, and loose a Soul; and what gain's that? This is indeed the Bargain of Fools and Madmen, and yet such Bargains we usually make, and what adds to the folly, think that we love our selves all the while. But this is not to love our selves truely, and therefore not Regularly.
6 The third and last Requisite for the Regulation of self-love is, that we do not will any good to our selves, that is not consistent with the good of the Community. And that not only be∣cause the Publick good is of greater Consequence than any Private good can be, but also because that which is against the good of the Community, cannot be upon a final Consideration of things really for the good of any Particular Person in it. For the good of the whole is the good of the Part, and the evil of the whole is the evil of the Part, and all private Interest is so twisted, complicated and imbarqued with the Publick, that there is no pre∣judicing this without prejudicing that. This indeed may not be the present and immediate effect, but 'twill prove so in the consequence and final up∣shot. For Society is like an Arch in a Building, where one Stone supports an∣other, and in supporting others they support themselves. And so on the
contrary, should they undermine one another, they would at length by con∣sequence undermine themselves. He therefore that out of love to himself prosecutes any private interest to the Prejudice of Society, trespasses against his own good as well as that of the Community, and when all is com∣puted, cannot be said truely and really to love himself. The Sum is, to make our self-love Regular and according to Order, we must take care not to mistake our true selves, nor our true Interest, and that we don't prejudice the Publick welfare, and then we can never love our selves too much.
SECT. IV. The Measures of Common Charity. 1 COncerning Common Charity. I consider that the Measures of it may all breifly be absolv'd in these two, the Object of it, and the Order of it. As to the Object of Charity, 'tis of a ve∣ry great and diffused latitude, and takes in first all men, whether good or bad, Friends or Enemies, Neighbours or Strangers, and in all Respects, whe∣ther as to Soul or Body, name or goods &c. It extends also in some Measure to the very Irrational Creatures, it be∣ing one of the Characters of a good man in Scripture to be Merciful to his Beast. Nay it reaches to the Angeli∣cal Natures themselves, and indeed to the whole Intellectual, Rational and Sensitive world that are capable of the least degree of Benefit. 2 In all this there is no Difficulty,
only it may be here question'd, whe∣ther the Devils and Damn'd Spirits are to be comprehended within the Sphere of our Charity? To which I answer, that there are two things that may ren∣der any Being uncapable of being an Object of our Charity or wishing well to. Either Perfect Fulness, or Perfect Indigence. Now 'tis the Perfection of Indigence to be reduced to such a De∣gree of want as not to be in a Capacity of ever being releiv'd. The former is the Condition of God, which makes him uncapable of being made the ob∣ject of our Benevolence, as was ob∣serv'd before, the latter is the case of Devils and Damn'd Spirits: And for this reason we cannot will any good to them, as not being capable of any. For we cannot exert any act of Love which we know to be in vain and to no pur∣pose at all, let the incapacity proceed either from extream Fulness or ex∣tream Indigence; for what is there that should excite any such Act? And be∣sides
if we could possibly wish well to such Beings, yet I don't see how we may do it lawfully and Regularly. For our will would not be then conforma∣ble to Gods, but directly opposite to it, and besides we should disapprove, at least tacitly and interpretatively, the Iustice of his waies, by thus loving them whom he extremely hates, and Blessing them whom he curses and abandons for ever. 3 Thus far of the Object of our Cha∣rity. Now concerning the Order of it, let these general Measures be observ'd. First that we wish well to him most, who is most likely to be serviceable to the Publick, supposing the good which we will him, to be such, as by the hav∣ing it, he become more capable of serv∣ing the Publick. Thus had I the Di∣sposal of an Ecclesiastical Benefice, which is a thing wherein the good of the Publick is highly concern'd, I ought certainly to bestow it upon him who I thought would do most good in it. Tho
at the same time I had never so many Friends or Relations that wanted it. For this is a sure and never failing Rule, that the good of the Publick is alwaies to be prefer'd before any Private inte∣rest whatever. 4 Secondly that of two that are e∣qually serviceable to the Publick, we will this good wherein the Publick is concern'd, to him that is most Indigent; for after the Publick exigence is pro∣vided for, private necessity comes in to be regarded. But if both equally ser∣viceable and equally Indigent, then we are to will it to him that is most our Neighbour, Friend, or Relation, or any other way indear'd to our Affe∣ction. 5 But thirdly, supposing the good to be such that the Interest of the Public is not concern'd who has it, then I am only to consult the good of the Person to whom I will it, and consequently here Equity will require that the Pre∣ference be given to those that are near
me before strangers, and among those that are near to those that are nearest, whether by Nature, Choice, or Place, or in any other Respect. And among strangers 'tis equitable that the Indi∣gent be prefer'd in our Charity before the Rich, the good before the Bad, and the more good before the less good, and the like. But still with this neces∣sary Reserve, that all other things be equal between them. 6 For 4ly, 'tis utterly unreasonable, that I should prefer the Convenience of my Friend before the Necessity of my Enemy. No, I ought to do the contra∣ry, and prefer the Necessity of my worst enemy before the Convenience even of my Dearest Friend. Thus I would leave my Friend in the Mire, to save my enemy from drowning. For in this and such like cases the greatness of the Necessity compensates for the want of merit in the Person. 7 The last general Measure that I shall prescribe is, that as we ought not
to prefer any man's convenience be∣fore another man's necessity, so neither ought we to prefer any man's own con∣venience before his own necessity. My meaning is, that we ought to consider our Neighbours true and best Interest, will and do him that good which he stands most in need of, and not do him a little kindness which will end in a greater mischief. Hence it follows that we ought to tender the Interest of his Soul, more than the good of his Body; the Direction of his conscience more than the ease and security of it; that we stick not to prick and launce him in order to his Cure; and (when both can't be done) that we chuse ra∣ther to proffit him than to please him. For this is true Charity, tho a severer sort of it, and he is a Fool, who when saved from drowning, complains of be∣ing pluckt out of the water by the hair of his head.
SECT. V. The Measures of Friendship. 1 I Am now come to my last Stage, where I am to give Measures to the greatest Rarity, and the greatest Excellency in all the world. For indeed among all Human enjoyments nothing is so Rarely acquired, so Dearly possess'd, and so unhappily lost as a True Friend. 2 Indeed true Friendship is so great a Rarity, that I once thought it hard∣ly worth while, to prescribe Measures to a thing that so seldom happens, and when it does, those few excellent Per∣sons, that are fit for so Sacred a union, can never want to be instructed how to conduct it. But then considering withal the great excellency, and useful∣ness of it to human life, I could not forgive my self so considerable an O∣mission, as the passing by the Regula∣tion
of so noble a Charity. 3 I call it Charity, for 'tis a special Modification of it, and differs no other∣wise from common Charity, than as 'tis qualify'd by some particular Mo∣difications and Circumstances, as was above described. It is a Sacred Inclo∣sure of that Benevolence, which we owe to all Mankind in Common, and an Actual exercise of that kindness to a few, which we would willingly shew to all, were it practicable and consistent with our Faculties, Opportunities, and Circumstances. 'Tis indeed a kind of Revenging our selves upon the Narrow∣ness of our Faculties, by exemplifying that extraordinary Charity upon one or two which we both owe, and are also ready and disposed, but by reason of the scantiness of our condition, are not sufficiently able to exercise towards all. We are willing that even this our love should be as extensive and dif∣fused as the Light, (as for Common Cha∣rity, that must and ought to be so) but
then finding that the Rayes of it would be too faint and weak, to give any bo∣dy any considerable warmth, when so widely spread and diffused, we are fain to contract them into a little com∣pass to make them burn and heat, and then our Charity Commences Friend∣ship. 4 Now as to the Measures of Friend∣ship, these have been already so amply and excellently stated by the Seraphic Pen of a great Prelate of our Church, in a just Discourse upon this Occasion, that there needs nothing to be further added; nor should I offer to write an Iliad after such an Homer, did I not think it more necessary to the Intire∣ness of this work in general, than to make up any defect in this Particular Part, which that excellent Author has not supplied. I shall therefore be the more brief and sparing in this Account. 5 Now I suppose all that is necessa∣ry for the Regulation of Friendship may conveniently be reduced to these
three general considerations. First what Measures are to be observed in the Contracting of Friendship. 2ly What Measures are to be observ'd in the con∣ducting or maintaining it. 3ly What Measures are to be observ'd in the dis∣solving of it. 6 In the contracting of Friendship our first care must be to make such a choice as we shall never have cause to repent of. For when ever we cease to love a Friend, 'tis great odds if we do not mortally hate him. For 'tis hard to maintain a Mediocrity; and nothing can reflect more upon our Prudence and Discretion, than to hate him whom we once thought worthy of our highest love. 7 Now that we may not repent of our Choice, the Measures to be observ'd are these. First, that the Person whom we mark out for a Friend, be a good and vertuous Man. For an ill man can neither long love, nor be long be∣lov'd. Not by a good man to be sure,
nor indeed by one as bad as himself. For this is a true Observation, that however men love evil in themselves, yet no man loves it in another, and tho a man may be a Friend to Sin, yet no body loves the Sinner. And according∣ly we find that the Friendships of wick∣ed men are the most temporary and short-lived things in the world, and in∣deed are rather to be call'd Conspira∣cies than Friendships. And besides their Interests will draw them several waies, and so distract and divide their union; for vice is full of Variety and Contra∣diction, sets one and the same man at odds with himself, much more with another. But now Virtue is a thing of oneness, simplicity and uniformity, and indeed the only solid Foundation for Friendship. 8 The next Measure is that we chuse a Person of a sweet, liberal and oblig∣ing humour. For there are a thousand little endearments and compliances in the exercise of Friendship, that make
good Nature and necessary as rigid virtue and Honesty. Strict vertue in Friend∣ship is like the exact Rules of Mathe∣maticks in Musical compositions, which indeed are necessary to make the Har∣mony true and regular, but then there must be something of Ayre and Delica∣cy in it too, to sweeten and recommend it, or else 'twill be but flat and heavy. 9 The next Measure to this purpose is that we chuse a Person of a humour and disposition as nigh our own as we can. This will make our friendly Com∣munications both more pleasant and more lasting. The other qualities are as the Materials in Building, this an∣swers to Figure and shape. And unless the Materials be of an agreeable and correspondent figure, though otherwise never so good, the structure will nei∣ther be sightly to the eye, nor hold long together. 10 One thing more I would have re∣member'd in the contracting of friend∣ship, and that is, that we don't make
our selves over to too many. Marriage which is the strictest of Frienships ad∣mits but of one, and indeed inferiour Friendship admits not of many more. For besides that the Tide of Love, by reason of the contractedness of our faculties, can't bear very high when di∣vided among several channels, 'tis great odds but that among many we shall be deceiv'd in some, and then we must be put upon the inconvenience of Repentance and retractation of choice, which in nothing is so uncomely and inconvenient as in friendship. Be kind therefore to all, but Intimate only with a few. 11 Now the Measures of conducting and maintaining friendship may be such as these. 1. That we look upon our Friend as another self, and treat him accordingly. 2. That we love him fervently, effectually and constantly. 3. That we use his conversation fre∣quently, and alwaies prefer it. 4. That we trust him with our Secrets and most
important concerns. 5. That we make use of his help and service, and be not shy of being obliged to him. 6. That we don't easily entertain any Jealou∣sies or Suspicions of him. 7. That we defend his Reputation when we hear it wrongfully charged. 8. That we wink at those small faults which he re∣ally has. 9. That we take the Freedom to advise, and if need be, to reprove him, and that we be well contented to take the same usage from him a∣gain. 10. That we freely pay him that Respect and just Acknowledgment that's due to his Merits, and that we shew our selves pleased when the same is done by others. 11. That we do not envy him when advanced above us, nor despise him when fallen beneath us. 12. That we relieve him plentifully and liberally when reduced to any streights or exigencyes. And lastly, that we alwaies prefer the good of his Soul before any other interest of his, and make it our strictest concern to pro∣mote
his Happy condition in the other world. This indeed is the most excel∣lent and necessary Office of Friend∣ship, and all without this is but of lit∣tle signification. 12. And thus much for the Condu∣cting of Friendship. I proceed now to the Measures that are to be observ'd in the Dissolution of it. And here two things come to be consider'd, the Cause, and the Manner of dissolving it. And first, 'tis supposed that there may be a Cause for the Dissolution even of Friendship. The wise man tells us, that for some things every Friend will de∣part, and Marriage, which is the strict∣est Frindship, has its Divorce. For tis with the union of two Friends, as with the union of Soul and Body. There are some degrees of distemperature that, although they weaken and di∣sturb the union, yet however they are consistent with it, but then there are others again, that quite destroy the Vital Congruity, and then follows Sepa∣ration.
13 Now as to the Cause, that may justify a Dissolution of Friendsh, it can be no other than something, that is directly contrary to the very Design and Essence of Friendship, such as a notorious Apostacy to vice and wick∣edness, notorious Perfidiousness, deli∣berate Malice or the like. To which (were I to speak my own sense) I would add, a desperate and resolv'd conti∣nuance in all this, For I think as long as there is any hopes of amendment, the man is rather to be Advised than De∣serted. 14 But if hopeless and irreclaim∣able, we may and must desert him. But let it be with all the tenderness imagi∣nable, with as much unwillingness and reluctancy as the Soul leaves her over-distemper'd Body. And now our great∣est care must be that our former Dear∣ness turn not to inveterate Hatred. There is great danger of this, but it ought not to be so. For tho the Friend be gone, yet still the Man remains, and
tho he has forfetted my Friendship, yet still I owe him common Charity. And 'twere well if we would rise a little higher, and even yet pay him some lit∣tle respect, and maintain a small un∣der-current of Affection for him, upon the stock of our former dearness and Intimacy. For so the deceased Ghost loves to hover for a while about her old Companion, though by reason of its utter discongruity, it be no longer fit for the mutuall intercourses of Life and Action.
MOTIVES TO THE STUDY AND PRACTICE OF REGULAR LOVE By way of Consideration. 1. COnsider O my Soul, that the ve∣ry Essence of the most Perfect Be∣ing is Regular Love. The very same Apostle that saies God is Love, saies also in another place that God is Light, and that in him there is no darkness at all, Joh. 1.5. God therefore is both Love and Light; Light invigorated and actuated by Love, and Love directed and regulated by Light. He is indeed a Lucid and Bright act of Love, not Arbitrary Love, but Love regulated by the exactest Rules and Measures of
Essential Perfection. For how Regu∣lar a Love must that needs be, where the same Being is both Love and Light! 2. Consider again my Soul, that the Material World the Offspring and E∣manation of this Lucid Love, is altoge∣ther conformable to the Principle of its production, a perfect Sample and Pattern of Order and Regularity, of Beauty and Proportion, the very Re∣flexion of the first Pulchritude, and a most exact Copy of the Divine Geome∣try. And if thou could'st but see a draught of the Intellectual world, how far more Beautiful and delightsom yet would that Orderly Prospect be. And wilt thou my Soul, be the only Irregu∣lar and Disorderly thing among the Productions of God? Wilt thou disturb the Harmony of the Creation, and be the only jarring String in so Composed and well-tuned an Instrument? As thou wilt certainly be if thou dost not Love Regularly. For 3 Consider My Soul, that 'tis Regu∣lar
Love that makes up the Harmony of the Intellectual world, as Regular Motion does that of the Natural. That Regularity of the understanding is of no other Moment or Excellency, than as it serves to the Regulating of Love. That herein lies the Formal Difference be∣tween good and bad Men in this world, and between the good and bad Spirits in the other. Brightness of understand∣ing is Common to both, and for ought we know, in an equal Measure, but one of these loves Regularly and the other does not, and therefore one we call an Angel, and t'other a Devil. For 'tis Regular Love upon which the wel∣fare and Civil Happiness of Society de∣pends. This is in all respects the same to the Moral world, as Motion is to the Natural. And as this is maintain'd in its Course by Regularity of Motion, so must the other be upheld by Regulari∣ty of Love. And therefore further. 4. Consider O my Soul, that the God of Order, he that is both Light and Love,
has prescribed two sort of Laws with respect to the two worlds, Laws of Motion, and Laws of Love. Indeed the Latter have not their Effect as Neces∣sarily and determinately as the former; for the Laws of Motion God executes by himself, but the Laws of Love he has committed to the execution of his Creatures, having endow'd them with choice and Liberty. But let not this my Soul be used as an Argument to make thee less Studious of Loving Re∣gularly, because thou art not irresisti∣bly determin'd and necessitated to Love according to Order, but art left to thy own Choice and Liberty. Nei∣ther do thou fancy God less concern'd for the Laws of Love, than for the Laws of Motion, because he has not in∣forced those, with the same Necessity as he has these, For 5. Consider yet further My Soul, that God has taken as much care for the Regulation of Love as is consistent with the Nature of Free Agents. For
has he not prescribed Laws of Regular Love? And has he not furnish'd thee with a stock of Natural Light and un∣derstanding, of Reason and Discourse to discern the Antecedent Equity and Reasonableness of these Laws? And lest thou should'st be negligent in the use of this Discursive Light, has he not as a farther security of thy Regular Love against the danger either of Igno∣rance or Inconsideration, furnish'd thee with certain Moral Anticipations and Rational Instincts, which prevent all thy Reasonings and Discoursings about what thou oughtest to Love, and point out the great Lines of thy Duty, be∣fore thou art able, and when thou dost not attend enough to see into the Na∣tural grounds of it. And left all this should prove insufficient or ineffectual, has he not bound thy Duty upon thee by the most weighty Sanctions, and most prevailing Ingagements of Re∣wards and Punishments, of Eternal Happiness, and Eternal Misery? And
to make all this efficacious, does he not assist thee by the Graces of his Spi∣rit in the Regulation of thy Love? And what can God do more with the safe∣ty of his own Wisdom, and of thy Li∣berty? And lest thou should'st fancy that 'tis either in vain, or unnecessary to apply thy self to the Study of Regu∣lar Love, 6. Consider yet further My Soul, that the great Mystery of godliness is nothing else but a Mysterious Expedient for the promotion of Regular Love. As it pro∣ceeded from Love, so does it wholly tend to the Regulation of it. 'Twas to attone for the Irregularities of Love, that the Son of God became a Sacri∣fice to his Father. To attone for it so far, that all the Lapses and Misap∣plications of our Love should be for∣given, provided we return to the Re∣gularity of Love for the future. Had he not done so much, to return to Re∣gular Love had been in vain, and had he done more, it had been Needless.
But herein is the Mystery of Godliness, that by the wise dispensation of God the matter is so order'd, that Happi∣ness is attainable by the Order of Love, and not without it. And can there be a stronger ingagement, O my Soul, to perswade thee to the Study of Re∣gular Love, or to convince thee that God is not less concern'd for the Har∣mony of the Moral, than of the Natu∣ral world, for the Order of Love, than for the Order of Motion? Be wise then O my Soul, and consult the Ends of God, the Harmony of the World, and thy own Eternal Happiness. And that these thy Considerations may be the more effectual, apply thy self with all possible elevation of spirit to the God of Light and Love.
THE PRAYER. O God of Order and Beauty, who sweetly disposest all things, and hast establish'd a Regular course in the visible World, who hast appointed the Moon for certain Seasons, and by whose decree the Sun knoweth his going down, let the Moral world be as Regular and Harmonious as the Natural, and both conspire to the declaration of thy Glory. And to this End grant that the Motion of our Minds may be as orderly as the Motion of Bodyes, and that we may move as regularly by Choice and free Election, as they do by Natural instinct and Necessity. O God of Light and Love, warm and invigorate my Light, and direct and regulate my Love. In thy Light let me see Light, and in thy Love let me ever Love. Lord I am more apt to err in my Love than in my understand∣ing, and one Errour in Love is of worse
Consequence than a thousand in Judg∣ment, O do thou therefore watch over the Motions of my Love with a peculiar governance, and grant that I my self may keep this Part with all diligence, seeing hence are the issues of Life and Death. O Spirit of Love, who art the very Essence, Fountain and Perfection of Love, be thou also its Object, Rule, and Guide. Grant I may Love thee, and what thou love'st, and as thou love'st. O Clarify and refine, inlighten and a∣ctuate my Love, that it may mount upward to the Center and Element of Love, with a Steddy, Chast, and un∣fullied Flame; make it unselvish, uni∣versal, liberal, generous and Divine, that loving as I ought I may contri∣tribute to the Order of thy Creation here, and be perfectly Happy in loving thee, and in being lov'd by thee Eter∣nally hereafter. Amen.
Letters Philosophical and Moral, to Dr Henry More, with the Do∣ctor's Answers. Advertisment to the Reader. THe Publication of this Correspon∣dence was almost extorted from me by the importunity of some friends, who would not endure to think that any Remains of so great and extraor∣dinary a Person should be lost. And truely when I consider'd, how curious and busy some men are in recovering a few broken Fragments of some old dull Author that had scarce any thing to recommend him but only, that he lived a great while ago, I began to think there was some force in the Argument, and that I should be unkind to the world as well as to the Memory of my deceased Friend, should I detain in ob∣scurity such rich Treasures of excel∣lent
Theory as are contain'd in these Letters. To the publishing of which I was yet the less unwilling to consent, be∣cause of that near Relation which some of them have to the Matter of some part of this Book, which may re∣ceive some further Light from what is herein contain'd. But there is more in the business yet. I had formerly in a Discourse, at first printed by it self and dedicated to the Doctor, but now inserted in my Colle∣ction of Miscellanies lately publish'd, laid down an Hypothesis concerning the Root of Liberty, which whether for its novelty and singularity, or be∣cause not well understood, underwent a great deal of Censure at its first ap∣pearing; And the Excellent Dr. him∣self was pleased to animadvert upon it; And I think has urged all that can be said against it. But I think I have sufficiently vindicated the truth of the Notion, and was therefore willing it
should now appear to the world in its full strength and evidence, which could not have been more abundantly con∣firm'd to me, than in its being able to stand the shock of so severe a Specula∣tist. Epistola prima ad Clarissimum Vi∣rum Henricum More. Vir eximie, QUum eruditionem tuam & Hu∣manitatem ex scriptorum tuo∣rum genio pari passu ambulare ani∣madvertam, & insuper in ipso Libri tui Vestibulo te Coram profitentem audiam, te non tibi soli laborare, sed etiam pro omnibus iis qui exquirunt sa∣pientiam, eousque mihi nativus exole∣vit pudor, ut ad te (ignotum licet) O∣raculi vice de quibusdam Arduis scisci∣tatum mitterem. Duo igitur sunt (ut apud virum ho∣rarum quam parcissimum Compendio agam) quae animum meum suspen∣sum
tenent. In Enchiridio tuo Meta∣physico demonstrare satagis immobile quoddam extensum à Mobili materia distinctum existere; Quod demonstra∣tionum tuarum nervis adductus non solum Concedere paratus sum, sed eti∣am firmissime Credo. Illud tantum me male habet, quod dimensionem istam incorpoream (quam spatii no∣mine designare solemus) in infinitum porrigas, & undequaque immensam sta∣tuas. Hoc equidem ut admittam non∣dum à facultatibus meis impetrare po∣tui. Quum enim spatium illud sit Quantitas permanens, cujus omnes par∣tes, quotquot sunt vel esse possunt, si∣mul existunt, contradictoria mihi vide∣tur affirmare quisquis illud infinite ex∣tensum dixerit. Infinitum enim esse & tamen secundum omnes partes actu existere repugnant. Nam secundum omnes partes actu existere est certis li∣mitibus claudi. Eodem modo ac qui∣libet numerus (quantuscunque assigne∣tur) continetur sub certa specie nu∣meri,
proindeque finitus concludi de∣bet. Fateor aliter se rem habere in quantitate successiva, cujus partes ex∣istunt aliae post alias, quae quoniam post quantamcunque appositionem in∣crementi ulterius capax est, suo modo cenferi possit infinita. Cujus vero par∣tes omnes coexistunt (cujusmodi est spatium) finitum sit necesse videtur, quum partes ejus (prout etiam innuit Terminus ille inclusivus (Omnes) sub certam numeri speciem cadant. Altera quam ejusdem Enchiridii tui lectio mihi suggerit Difficultas est de Penetrabilitate Spiritus. Dicis spiri∣tus non obstante illorum extensione posse se mutuo penetrare, hoc est, idem ubi occupare. Quod tamen explicas per sui Contractionem, & illustras exem∣plo Cerae in minus spatium convolutae. Quod innuere videtur, te per spirituum Penetrationem nihil aliud intelligere, quam quod duo spiritus per situs mu∣tationem in pressiorem formam redu∣cti, eundem illum locum occupare
possint quem situ non mutato unus il∣lorum forsan impleret. Itane? Sed haec non est Penetratio illa in scholis adeo decantata, scilicet Coexistentia Dimen∣sionum in eodem ubi, sed solum juxta positio in eodem loco communi, quae non minus corporibus quam spiritibus competit. Haec forsan à me non adeo dilucide prolata sunt, verum tu tam meae quam propriae mentis facilis esse potes Inter∣pres. Rogo igitur ut in tenebris hisce (modo per alia majoris momenti non stet) facem mihi accendere non gra∣veris. Non Oppugnatoris sed Quaesitoris personam gero, nec ut te inscitiae ar∣guam haec scribo, sed ut propriae igno∣rantiae Medelam quaeram. Opera tua omnia tribus voluminibus latine edita studiose perlegi, & ob summam illo∣rum eruditionem ut in Bibliotheca no∣stra statione donarentur, curavi. Uti∣nam Metaphysicam quam exorsus es per∣texeres. Scire vehementer aveo quod∣nam tibi de ista re sit consilii. Dolenda
profecto res esset, si tam admirandum opus mancum semper maneret & im∣perfectum. Maneat vero necesse est, nisi te Authore ad exitum perducatur. Quis enim alter erit Apelles, qui dimi∣diato operi manum ultimam admo∣vere sustineat? Noli igitur Curiosos speculatores spe tanta in aeternum fru∣strari. Quod superest Deum ex animo precor ut te lucidissimum in orbe li∣terato sidus diu ab occasu praeservet, & post decursum stadium beatorum choro immisceat, & ex ipso sapientiae fonte immensam tuam cognoscendi sitim tandem expleat. Sic exoptat Dovotissimus Tui & tuorum Scriptorum Cultor Johannes Norris. Dabam Oxon. ex Coll. Om. An. Jan. 8. 1684.
Dr More's Answer. Sir, I Have received your very civil and elegant Latin Letter, but answer you according to my constant use to our own Countrey men, in English. You have therein such significations of your kindness and esteem for me and my writings, that you have there∣by obliged me to a professed readiness to serve you in any thing that lies in my power. And therefore without any further Ceremony I shall endeavour, as touching those two difficulties you propound, to give you the best satisfa∣ction I can. The first difficulty, if I understand you aright, is this: How that Immobile Extensum distinct from matter which in my Enchiridium Meta∣physicum I demonstrate to exist, can truely be said to be infinite, when as it has all its parts that are or can be coexistent at once. Because to exist ac∣cording to all its parts at once is to be included within certain limits, as any number how big soever is conteined
under some certain species of Number, and therewithal conceived finite as the term [All] also implyes. And there∣fore successive Quantity seems more ca∣pable of being infinite then permanent Quantity, because there may be still more parts coming on; when as in Per∣manent Quantity all the parts are at once, and that term [All] includes an actual bounding of the whole. This I conceive is the full scope of the first difficulty propounded. To which I breifly answer first, That that Immobile Extensum distinct from matter, being really a substance In∣corporeal, I do not conceive that the Term [Parts] in a Physical sense does properly belong thereto, every Incorporeal substance or spirit, accord∣ing to my notion of things, being Ens unum per se & non per aliud, and there∣fore utterly indiscerpible into parts, it implying a contradiction, that this of the substance or Essence should be di∣vided from that, the entire substance
being Ens unum per se & non per aliud. But understanding by parts onely No∣tional or Logical parts, which will con∣sist with this Indiscerpibility, wee'll ad∣mit the phrase in this sense for more easy and distinct discourse sake, and also of Totum and Omne and whatever is a kin to them. And the same cau∣tion I premize touching the word [Quantity] that we take it not in that crass Physical sense, such as belongs to matter and bodyes, but meerly in that notional and Logical sense, which is so general that it clashes not at all with the sacrosanctity, as I may so speak, of incorporeal substances. And now secondly to come nearer to the point, if we mind closely and distinctly, what sense we have of those terms Totum and Omne, we shall cer∣tainly discern, that they may signify either the Entireness-Indefectuousness or Perfection of the thing they are pro∣nounced of, or meerly that there is no∣thing left out of that subject they are
spoken of, or else they imply also a comprehensibleness, limitableness, or ex∣haustableness of the number of those parts which are said all to be there. In this sense is Totum plainly used in summa totalis at the foot of a reckoning. But for those that hold Infinity of worlds at once, and infinite Matter, when they will easily acknowledge, That omnes partes Materiae sunt divisi∣biles, understanding by Materia a con∣geries of Atoms; Omnes Mundi genera∣biles & corruptibiles, and Tota Mate∣ria Mundana impenetrabilis, without the least suspicion that they thereby imply, that there is onely a finite Num∣ber of worlds, or parts of Matter, or that all the matter of the Universe taken together is but finite; It is plain that to them the former sense is as easy and natural of Totum and Omne as the lat∣ter; And indeed to speak my own mind, I think it is the most natural and proper of all and the onely true Logical sense of omne and totum; which
suspends it self from making the sub∣ject, of which it is pronounced, either finite or infinite, but declares onely whatever it be that there is no part left out of that Subject it pronounces of. So that if Totum, or Omne, or omnes partes be pronounced of a Subject infi∣nite, it leaves nothing of that infinite Subject out nor omits any parts, and consequentially implies the perfect In∣finity thereof. So far is it from curbing or terminating it, it reaching as far as that absolute Infinity it is pronounced of. So that it is the subject of which Omne & Totum are pronounced, when it is finite that makes them have a fi∣nite signification, and not the intrin∣sick sense of those terms themselves. Whence I think we may discern, that there is no Repugnancy to assert that all the parts of that Immobile Exten∣sum distinct from Matter do exist to∣gether at once, though it be infinite, and that [All] in this Enunciation does not curb the Immensity of this
Extensum, but rather necessarily im∣plyes it according to the true Logical Notion thereof, that term being al∣waies commensurate, when it is truely used to the subject it is spoken of. And lastly, it is onely permanent Quantity, and Spiritual, and indiscerpi∣ble, whose parts are all at once, that is capable of absolute Infinity. But as for successive Quantity, it is not capable of being infinite, neither a parte ante nor a parte post. But your phancy seems unawares to have transferred the property of successive quantity to the permanet, and so because, so soon as we can say of successive quantity there is all of it, it implyes certainly there is an end of it, and so it is finite; so you seem unawares to have imagined, be∣cause it is true of the parts of perma∣nent Quantity that there is all of them at once, therefore they are now exhaust∣ed, as the parts of successive Quantity were, and therefore are finite. This I think is the sophisme you put upon
your self. But you are the best judge of your own meaning. Now as for the second difficulty, it seems such to you from your missing my meaning in my bringing in that Instance of Wax drawn out an Ell long. And after reduced into the form of a Globe, suppose no bigger than of an ordinary Nutmeg: An heedless or Idiotick Spectator of this change may haply imagine the dimension of Lon∣gitude quite lost thereby, whenas there is not one Atom of the quantity thereof lost by this change of Site, no more than there is of the substance of the wax. But what seems lost in Longi∣tude, it is compensated in Latitude and profundity. So say I of the con∣traction of a created Spirit, suppose from a spherical form, (for we must take some figure or other) of half a yard diameter, to a sphear of a quar∣ter by the Retraction of it self into so much less an Vbi (eight times less than before) for as much as nothing
of its substance is annihilated thereby, nothing of its dimensions is, but what seems to be lost in Longitude, Lati∣tude, and profundity, is gained or com∣pensated in Essential spissitude, which is that fourth dimension I stand for, that it is in Rerum Natura. Which tho it is more particularly belonging to the contraction of one and the same spirit into it self, yet it is also truely found, when any two substances what∣ever adequately occupy the same Vbi; As suppose a Spirit occupyd a Cube of Matter of such a side or Diameter. The spirit and the Cube have their proper dimensions each of them in the same Vbi, and therefore are an In∣stance of a real essential spissitude in that Vbi. And if there were another Spirit in like manner occupying the same Cube, there would be still a great∣er essential spissitude. And he that will not grant this essential spissitude, He must either list himself with that ridiculous Sect of the Nullibists, or that
wretched sect of the Materialists, or Atheists, that hold there is nothing but matter in the Universe, which I con∣ceive I have again and again demon∣strated to be false in this Enchiridium of mine. But I suppose out of what has been said, you see plainly now that by the contraction of a Spirit, I mean that of the same spirit, whereby it may occupy a less Vbi than before, and not of several spirits so contracted, that they may take up no more space then any one of them did before con∣traction. And these hints I doubt not are sufficient to one of such quick parts as yours, to make you thorough∣ly and distinctly understand the mean∣ing of the 7th Section of the 28th chap∣ter of my Enchiridium Metaphysocum. To satisfy your desire of knowing my intention touching the finishing the said Enchiridium, I must confess to you freely, that I have no purpose of so doing. I am now of a great Age, above threescore and ten, and have
other designs also. And besides, this first part which I have finished is the most useful, the most assured, and yet I add the most difficult of all; and hav∣ing thoroughly made out the main truths of the existence of Spiritual Sub∣stance, and what its nature and Es∣sence is, intelligibly and demonstra∣tively, I make account the greatest business is done, and I may leave the rest to others, especially there being laid in so much already in other Trea∣tises of mine, as you may observe in reading the Scholia upon the 21 Sect. of the 28th chapter of the Enchiridium. Where yet I have left out what is consi∣derable, my Cabbala Philosophica, & Ex∣position of the Iewish Mercava, or Eze∣chiels Vision, the right understanding whereof contains the choicest secrets of the Iewish Theosophy or Metaphysicks. This is all for the present, but the re∣peating of my thanks for the great kindness you seem to have for Worthy Sir, Your affectionate friend to serve you Hen. More. C.C.C. Jan. 19. 1684/5
The second Letter to Dr More. Sir, THe Civility and profound subtile∣ty of your Letter are both so ve∣ry extraordinary, that I know not which most to admire. Indeed I can∣not but look upon it as an infinite Ob∣ligation, that a Person of your Age, worth, and Character in the World, should vouchsafe an Answer (and that so Candid a one) to such a green Stu∣dent as my self, one that just begins to climb that Tree of Knowledg, upon whose utmost bough you sit, and is so far from spreading his Name (like you) far and near, that he has scarce lustre enough to enlighten the little Orb wherein he moves. This great Condescention of yours bespeaks you to be a Person of an ex∣cellent spirit, as well as understand∣ing, and ingages Me (if possible) to honour and esteem you more than I
did before, and to say of you as Cicero in his book De Legibus does of Plato, Quem admiror, quem omnibus antepo∣no, quem maxime diligo. Sir, I have consider'd and digested your Letter, and I find my satisfacti∣on increases with my perusal of it. Which gives me incouragement to trouble you with another Inquiry, especially since I find you willing as well as able to inform, and that you do not send away those that inquire of you, as the Sullen Oracle did Augustus, asking concerning his Successour with — The thing then is this. I am not well resolv'd concerning the Moral Turpi∣tude of Sensuality. Not of such spe∣cies of it as are complicated and ac∣company'd with civil incommodotyes, such as Adultery, Fornication, &c. (Con∣cerning which 'tis easy to account from those mischeifs, which, consider∣ing the present system of the Intelle∣ctual world, they necessarily bring up∣on
Mankind) but of sensuality as such. Now concerning this I inquire, 1. whe∣ther there be any Moral Turpitude in it or no. And 2ly, supposing there is, wherein it lies. For my own part I am so divided betwixt Arguments on both sides, that I know not what to re∣solve. For first that there is some Mo∣ral, or intrinsick Turpitude, in Sensua∣lity as such, I am tempted to suspect from the Authority of many great Mo∣ralists (especially among the Antients) who, when they lay open the immora∣lity of Adultery or Fornication, do not fetch their Arguments wholely from those ill effects, which either of them has upon the welfare of society, but resolve part of their immorality into Sensuality as such, abstracted from those other ill Consequences. Besides I observe, that in the Divine Writings (not to say any thing of our Ordinary Oral discourses) such peculiar Epi∣thetes and Adjuncts of infamy are giv∣en to Adultery, which can belong to
it on no other score, than as 'tis an act of sensuality. Nay, and as if that were the principal Ingredient, it of∣tentimes receives a Denomination from the sensuality, but never from the injustice, infaithfulness, or the like. Thus it is call'd the sin of uncleanness. And Adulterers are said to be unclean persons, filthy, brutish, &c. In the like manner David, in his Penitentials for that sin, insists much upon its sensuality, and accordingly speaks of washing, and cleansing, and making clean. All which seems to imply, that the immorality of Adutery is not wholly to be deriv'd from those mischeivous effects it has upon Society, but does also partly (if not chiefly) consist in the mere sensua∣lity, and consequently that Sensua∣lity as such is immoral. Again 2ly (to proceed from mental abstraction to real separation) there are some acts of sensuality (such as voluntary Pollutions &c.) which are really separated from such ill effects,
and yet these by the consent of all Nations were ever condemn'd as dis∣honorable and immoral, and yet there is nothing in them besides the sensua∣lity, and consequently there seems to be a Moral Turpitude even in Sensua∣lity as such. Again 3ly, that there is some natural Turpitude in Sensuality as such, I am apt to believe, when I consider how unanimously 'tis vilify'd and decry'd by those, who were mere strangers to Revelation, and so could not derive this Notion from the prohibition of some certain Species of it. Sir I need not tell you, what a Continual Topic for Invectives this has been to the Pla∣tonists and Stoicks. Now how these men, who follow'd the mere Conduct of Nature, should all conspire in such abject and disdainful thoughts of Sen∣suality, unless it were some way or o∣ther disagreeable to the unsophisticate and genuin relish of the Soul, I cannot comprehend.
Again 4ly and lastly, that there is some Natural intrinsick Turpitude in Sensuality as such, seems to receive no small confirmation from that natural shame, which attends the acting of it, and that not only in Circumstances professedly unlawful, but also in those which are otherwise reputed, where∣by men seem conscious to themselves of some incongruity in the thing as such. From this and more that might be al∣ledg'd, it seems to me that there must be some Moral Turpitude in sensuality as such. But now wherein this immora∣lity should ly, I am still to seek. As also I am how to unwind my self from the Difficulties of the other side. For first, I find that the more Modern Masters of Morality (such as Grotius, Dr Cum∣berland, Puffendorf with many others) resolve the immorality of Adultery wholly into those pernicious effects it has upon Society, without bringing in the sensuality as such into any part of
the Account, which they could not do, did they Apprehend any moral Tur∣pitude in Sensuality as such. Again 2ly, that there is no moral Turpitude in Sensuality as such, seems to appear from hence, that if there were, it would be so in all its instan∣ces, and Consequently even in Mar∣riage it self. But 'tis said . So that hence arises a considera∣ble Difficulty. For if there be no Mo∣ral Turpitude in sensuality as such, then all abstracted Acts of it (as Vo∣luntary Pollutions &c.) must be held lawful, which are yet condemn'd. And if there be, then Marriage must be con∣demn'd, which yet is held lawful. Again 3ly, I can see no reason why that sort of Corporal indulgency, which is emphatically call'd sensuality, should be charged with any moral Turpitude, when as other pleasures of sense (and those perhaps equally intense) are not so. Such as using choice perfumes, eating delicious Sweet-meats, &c. Tis
plain these all agree in this, that they are gratifications of sense, and there∣fore why there should be a Moral Tur∣pitude in one, and not in another, I am yet to learn. Again 4ly and lastly, to argue from the simple and absolute nature of the thing, I cannot imagine how it should be a Moral incongruity for a man to please himself. What malice is there in it either against God, himself, or his Neighbour? For that there is in some particular instance (as in Adul∣tery) or in Degree (as in intempe∣rance) is purely accidental, and there∣fore ought not to be charged upon sensuality as such. These considerations do prevail with me to think, that there is no Moral Turpitude in Sensuality as such, that all the Pleasures of sense are in them∣selves equally indifferent, like the Trees of Paradise. So that if that, which we here treat of, only be evil, it must be (as the forbidden Fruit) because
made so by a Positive law (which yet I know not of) as an instance to try our obedience. But how to reconcile this with the former difficulties, I profess I know not. And here Sir, I desire your unerring hand to lead me out of this Labyrinth, and that at your own lei∣sure, (For I am not in hast, and would by no means be troublesome to you) you would be pleased to give me a Re∣solution of this whole matter, and that you would not only satisfy the Doubts, but also pardon the boldness of Most worthy Sir, Your most real Friend and most humble Servant J. Norris. Allsouls Coll. Ian. 28. 1684
Dr More's Answer. Sir, YOU may very well judge me more than ordinarily rude and uncivil, that I have not all this time answered your so friendly and affectionate Let∣ter. But I have such abundance of bu∣siness lying upon my hands, that I could not find time till now, and fore∣seeing that I shall be suddenly more busy than before, in this strait of time that I am in, I have chosen, rather than to be still silent, to write, though but briefly, and it may be brokenly to the point you propound. Viz. concern∣ing the Moral Turpitude of Sensuality. You have shewed a great deal of not onely wit and eloquence, but solidity of Reason in pleading pro and con in the case. But you had proceeded more clearly, if you had first defined what you meant by sensuality, (which, ac∣cording to the ordinary acception of the word, signifies immorally, and in∣sinuates
an irregular and ungovern∣able indulgence of the pleasure of the grosser senses) and so the business had been less difficult. But considering the whole matter of your arguing on both sides, I perceive you mean no more by sensuality, then the pleasure of what Iul. Scaliger in his Exercitati∣ons calleth the sixt sense. For so he counts that Tactus venereus, which some are so taken with. And therefore, if you will, we will state the Question according to his phrase, and it shall be, whether the pleasure of the sixt sense have any Moral Turpitude in it. Wherein I will adventure to pro∣nounce, that it has not as such. But to be captivated to that pleasure, so as to make us less capable of that, which is better, or to break the laws of what is just and decorous, this is the Tur∣pitude that is contracted therein, and argues him, that is thus captivated, to be brutish and sensual in the ordinary sense of the word. And therefore it is
no wonder such persons are stiled fil∣thy, brutish, and unclean in the holy Scriptures, because the goatish nature has got dominion over them. You have urged excellently well for the Turpi∣tude of Sensuality hitherto taken in the usual sense, though prescinded from the consequent Inconveniencies thereof. But now that Platonists de∣cry without Revelation, the delight of corporeal pleasures, and that there is a natural shame of having to do with those pleasures of the sixt sense, this looks like a shrewd argument for an innate turpitude in those very pleasures themselves, though in lawful circum∣stances; But yet I conceive this in∣stinct of natural shame, if rightly in∣terpreted, does not so much intimate any Moral Turpitude in having to do with the pleasures of the sixt sense, as admonishes us, that though these things rightly circumstantiated have no Moral Turpitude in them, yet such is the nobleness of the Soul of man, that
such gross enjoyments are exceeding∣ly below her, who is designed for an Angelical life, where they neither marry, nor are given in marriage, and there∣fore even nature has taught her to sneak, when, she being Heaven-born, demits her noble self to such earthly drudgery. If this Passion of Venereal shame be rightly interpreted, I sup∣pose this is all it signifies, and not that there is any intrinsick Immorality or Turpitude in the pleasures of the sixt sense. But for sensuality taken in the ordi∣nary sense, of which Adultery is a spe∣cimen, most certainly there is a foul∣ness and uncleanness in it, distinct from what it sins against Political So∣ciety, which by no means is the adequate measure of sound Morality, but there is a Moral Perfection of human nature antecedent to all Society. I pray read what I have writ on this Argument in my Scholia on the 3 Sect. of the 4 chap∣ter of the first Book of my Enchriridi∣um
Ethicum. Which will save me the labour of adding any thing more here. But when the matter is simply the per∣ception of the sixt sense, there . This rightly phrasing the point in question takes away all the difficul∣ties, that would infer no moral Tur∣pitude, where there is such, or any mo∣ral Turpitude, where there is none. To your third plea for no moral Turpi∣tude I answer, that corporeal pleasures in eating and drinking &c. if they be irregular or excessive, have a moral Turpitude in them. Viz. if they are so much as to hinder and lessen the bet∣ter enjoyments of the Soul, and ob∣struct the design of living , as Aristotle some where speaks, and makes our bodies a less commodious Temple for the spirit of God to dwell in. And to your fourth and last, wherein you say you cannot imagine how it should be a moral In∣congruity for a man to please himself. What malice is there in it either against
God, himself, or his neighbour? You say right, he may mean no ill to himself, but he may mistake himself, and out of ignorance of the dignity of his own nature, take that to be chiefly himself, which is least of all himself, or the meanest part of him, I mean that part which is common to him with the Brutes, the pleasures of which life the more he endeavours to shun, as far as is consistent with the health of his bo∣dy, and disdains to be captivated with the gratifications of the flesh, the more surely will he arise into the enjoy∣ment of such a life, as is unexpressibly above all the pleasures this mortal flesh can afford. But he that layes his hand to the plough and looks back is not fit for the kingdom of God. There must be assiduity, constancy, and a per∣petual guard and watchfulness over a mans waies, over the Inclinations of of his mind and outward words and actions, and devotional addresses to God for further illumination & strengths,
to carry on the work of real Regene∣ration, and the issue will at last be in∣effably pleasing and glorious. And he, that gives himself up to such a dispen∣sation of life, will not miss of meet∣ing with the clearness of all useful truths. And when his true self is awa∣kened in him, it will be a Moral Con∣gruity to please himself, that is, that Intellectual and Godlike life and sense raised in him. And all the Trees of Paradise, which God has planted, the pleasures of all the six Senses, he may tast of, so long as he keeps in the life aforesaid, and makes that the mea∣sure of all his inferiour Enjoyments, that he is not lessened above, by being captivated by any thing below. Then the pleasure of the sixt sense is not for∣bid, nor is there any thing forbid in the Paradise of God, but the irregula∣rity of our own lust and will. I hope out of this you will pick out my mean∣ing, though this pinch of time that I am in, has made me but huddle up
things together with less order than I usually endeavour to do. Thus in some hast committing you to Gods graci∣ous keeping, I take leave and rest, Dear Sir Your affectionate friend to serve you Hen. More. C.C C. April. 13. 1685. The third Letter to Dr. More. Sir, SUddainly after my receiving your last, I withdrew into the Country, whence I am but lately return'd. I had no manner of conveniency of writing to you there, but now I have, I think, my self obliged to use it forthwith, left you should suspect that I am forgetful of you, or of the thanks I owe you for your last excellent Letter. It gave me much satisfaction in several things, and I read it (as indeed I do every
thing of yours) with a peculiar plea∣sure. But since I have begun to move a Question, and you have been so kind as to Communicate to me your thoughts concerning it, I hope you will not take it amiss, if in order to the clearing up the whole matter I here re∣assume it, and desire from you some further satisfaction obout it. The Summ of the Determination which you give to the Difficulty I pro∣posed, is (if I understand you right) in short this. You distinguish of Sen∣suality as it signifies Concretely and im∣morally either as to Measure or other Circumstance, Or as 'tis Simply the Per∣ception of the pleasure of the sixth Sense. Which last (that which I meant in my inquiry) you acquit from all Moral Turpitude. Now I confess I am and ever was perfectly herein of your judg∣ment, and that (among other reasons) because of the Divine Institution of Ma∣trimony. Only there is one thing that still sticks with me. I find my self still
intangled in one of my Difficulties which, tho in your Answer you take notice of it, appears to my apprehen∣sion the most considerable of all. 'Tis this, that if there be no Moral Turpi∣tude in the simple perception of Ve∣nereal pleasure, then all Abstracted acts of it, such as voluntary pollutions, la∣scivious embraces &c. must be account∣ed lawful, which are yet condemn'd by all Moral and Divine writers. The reason of the Consequence is, because there seems to be nothing in such ab∣stracted acts, besides the simple Pecepti∣on of the pleasure of the sixth Sense. For as for excess, Captivation of Spirit, too sensitive applications and the like, these are merely accidental, and equal∣ly incident to the same acts in all o∣ther Circumstances. This is the short of the Difficulty, which I need not persue in more words to a person of your exquisite Conce∣ption. Sir I humbly crave your sense in this point, (the only thing not clear'd
in your Answer) which if you please to vouchsafe me, you will no less ingage the Affections than inform the Iudgment of (most worthy Sir) Your most real and highly Obliged Friend and Servant J. Norris. Dr More's Answer. Sir, IT is now above a Month since I re∣ceived yours. But Indisposition of Body, and several unexpected Occur∣rences have hindred me from writing till now. If my memory fail me not, I intimated to you in my last, that I would read over again that Sermon, which you was pleased to dedicate to me, and signify to you more of my mind touching it. Wherefore to be as good as my word, I will take notice of a Passage or two, before I answer this present Letter.
You fall, pag. 10. upon a very sub∣tile Subject, viz. What it is, in which our pretense to free Agency may be safely grounded, whether in the will or understanding. And in order to de∣cide the point in hand, you do with good judgment declare against talk∣ing of the will and understanding, as faculties really distinct either from one another, or the Soul her self. But tho you begin thus hopefully, yet methinks you run your self into an unnecessary nooze of Fatality, by granting the Soul necessarily wills as she under∣stands; you know that of the Poet. —Video meliora proboque, Deteriora se∣quor. —And for my part, I suspect there are very few men, if they will speak out, but they have experienced that truth. Else they would be in the state of sincerity, which over few are. But now that you would salve the Phenomenon of free Agency, pag. 11. by making it depend upon the degrees of Advertency or Attention which the Soul
uses, and which to use either more or less, is fully and immediatly in her own power, this is an Invention ingeniously excogitated, to escape the difficulty you have cast your self into, by admit∣ting the Soul necessarily wills as she understands, and necessarily under∣stands as the Object appears to her. For thus indeed we were frozen up in a rigid Fatality and Necessity. But this does not cast the ground of free Agency upon the Soul as Intelligent, more than as Volent, if so much. For unless she will exert her Advertency or Attenti∣on, how can she to any degree advert or attend to the Object? So that the ground of free Agency will be still re∣solved into the Soul, not as Intelligent, but as Volent, and willing to understand the nature of every Object she is con∣cerned to speculate. Moreover, though the Soul be wil∣ling to exert her Advertency or At∣tention to the Object, this alone seems but a defective Principle as to the re∣deeming
us into the ability and free∣dome of closing with what is best, as discerning it to be so. For as the eye, let it  never so much, if it be vitiated in it self, cannot rightly di∣scern the condition of the visible Ob∣ject it fixes its sight upon; so the mind of man, let him set himself never so diligently to contemplate any Moral or Intelligible Object, if she be made dim by Moral corruptions and impu∣rities, will not be able or free to close with what is best in the Circumstances that lye before her, being held cap∣tive by the vices the Party has not yet purifyed himself from. Wherefore the true ground of our being able and free to chuse what is best, consists rather in the purity of the Soul from vice, than in Advertency and Attention to the Object, while the mind is vitiated and obscured for want of due purifica∣tion. Which the best Philosophers and Christians have alwaies declared to be requisite to true Illumination.
And that notable Instance of Mar∣tyrdome, which you bring in to illu∣strate the case, methinks, may be made rather to illustrate and confirm what I drive at. Viz. that there is something of greater weight than Advertence or At∣tention, that will enable a man to wit∣ness to the truth with his blood. For not∣withstanding the mere being notionally convinced, that sin, or such a sin as the de∣nying of Christ, is the greatest evil in the world, though he never so closely at∣tend to this truth in the Notion there∣of, if the old man or carnal mind be still alive in him, that crafty Serpent will not fail to suggest such evasions or Tergiversations, as will excuse him from suffering, and that, it may be, though he do firmly believe the Tor∣ments of Hell, and Joyes of Heaven after this life. For the Mercy of God, and future Repentance, and Violence of the Temptation, or pretense of making amends some other way, and I know not how many other such slim Insinua∣tions,
may be fool the Unregenerate man from ever adventuring to suffer Martyrdome. But he that is to a due degree Re∣generate, and made, as S. Peter speaks, Partaker of the Divine nature; The Spi∣rit of life in the New Birth being awak∣ened in him, and the Love of God in him perfected; this New Nature in him into which he is born from above, having rather quicker sensations than the Animal Nature it self, this is the thing indeed that will secure the crown of Martyrdom to him, nor will he be liable to be imposed upon by the Car∣nal mind, to listen to such Evasions and Tergiversations as I mentioned before, but had rather dye a thousand natu∣ral Deaths, than wound and pain that life and spirit into which he is rege∣nerate. Wherefore no fear of pain from man can shake him; the Love of the Lord Jesus and of his life, into which he is regenerate, being stronger than Death, and all pains of the na∣tural
life more tolerable by far to him, than to wound and pain and grieve that life and spirit in him, which is superna∣tural and Divine. And this is that which the beloved Apostle S. Iohn witnesses, 1 Joh. 4.18. That there is no fear in Love, but perfect love casteth out fear. Because fear hath torment. He that feareth is not perfect∣ed in love. And towards the begin∣ning of that Chapter he saies, Greater is he that is in us, than he that is in the world. Speaking of the Spirit of Christ, and the spirit of the World. These things I hint to you to let you under∣stand, that sometimes more than the notional attending to the hainousness of sin is required to furnish out a Mar∣tyr. And that our being redeemed into an ability or freedom of chusing what is best, is not from mere attention to the Object, but from Purification, Illumination and real Regeneration into the Divine Image. But I cannot insist largely on any thing. Verbum sapienti sat est.
I will onely take notice of one place more in your ingenious Discourse, and that is, pag. 15. where I stumbled a little at your seeming severity towards the severe Masters, as you call them, of Spiritual Mortification. I confess some passages in them lye fair for your lash. But the high and Hyperbolical expres∣sions of holy and devout men are not to be tryed by the rigid Rules of Lo∣gick and Philosophy, but to be inter∣preted candidly, according to the scope they aym at. Which is a perfect exinanition of our selves, that we may be filled with the sense of God, who worketh all in all, and feelingly ac∣knowledge what ever good is in us to be from him, and so be no more elated for it, than if we had none of it, nor were conscious to our selves we had any such thing. And to be thus self-dead and self-annihilated is the onely sure safe passage into eternal life, peace and glory. And is the most safe and lovely condition of the Soul that pos∣sibly
can be attained to. All know∣ledg to this is but vain fluttering, a Feather in a mans Cap tossed with the wind. Here is firm Achorage, Rest, and such a Peace as passes all understanding. This is the proper Character of Christ and his followers. Learn of me for I am humble and meek, and you shall find rest for your souls. And blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of Heaven. This Mystical Death or spiri∣tual Annihilation, whereby all self-wish∣ing is destroy'd, is the peculiar tran∣scendency of the Christian state above that of the noblest Heathen Philoso∣phers that ever were. And who ever feels it will find it so. For these are Divine sensations, and lye deeper than imaginative Reason and Notion. Nor is there any mistake in this state devoid of all self-attribution. For tho the soul attribute not to her self what good she has in possession, yet she denyes not but that she has it. Like that profes∣sion of S. Paul Gal. 2.20. I am crucifyed
with Christ, nevertheless I live, yet not I but Cbrist liveth in me, namely by his Spirit. And being this Christian state is the most perfect state the soul of man is capable of, we are obliged by way of duty to endeavour after it as much as we can, according to that of the Stoick, . But I have dwelt up∣on this point also longer than I in∣tended. And I know you will pardon my freedom in thus descauting upon these two passages of your learned and Elegant Discourse. I will pass now to your Letter, and endeavour to finish the point betwixt us there, and make up what you think defective in my o∣ther Letter. We are both agreed in this, that the simple perception of the pleasure of the sixt sense hath no moral Turpitude in it. But you say hereupon that there is one difficulty still you are entangled in, which, though I took no notice of in my Letter, yet seems to you the
greatest and most considerable of all, namely, If there be no Moral Turpi∣tude in the simple perception of Ve∣nereal Pleasure, then all abstracted Acts of it, such as voluntary Pollutions, la∣scivious Embraces, &c. must be account∣ed lawful, which are yet condemned by all Moral and Divine Writers. And the Reason of the consequence, you say is, because there is nothing in such abstracted Acts besides the simple per∣ception of the pleasure of the sixt sense. For as for Excess, Captivation of Spi∣rit, too sensitive Applications and the like, these are merely Accidental, and equally incident to the same acts in all other circumstances. I suppose you mean in the state of Matrimony, where the perception of this pleasure is law∣ful and allowed. There was in my former Letter what might answer this difficulty, tho you took no notice of it. But here I will answer more fully and gradually. First therefore, though we should
admit, that the perception of the plea∣sure of the sixt sense in such Circum∣stances, as you describe, had nothing in it immoral, yet certainly it were a thing Disangelical, if I may so speak, and undivine; whenas we being born to that high condition of Angels, we ought to breath after that state, and as Aristotle somewhere adviseth (against that vulgar Proverb ) we ought , to affect the life of the im∣mortal Angels, who neither marry nor are given in marriage, and therefore to have nothing to do with that plea∣sure farther then necessity requires, not for the mere pleasures sake, which Nature has stigmatized with the sense of shame accompanying it, on purpose to remind us of that immortal and Angelical Condition we are called to, where that pleasure is perfectly silent; though at the Resurrection, we then having organized bodies, it were hard to conceive, that we should be like the
Idols of the Heathen, have eyes and see not, ears and hear not, noses and smell not, no not so much as the fra∣grant odours of Paradise, nor tast of the food of Angels, as the Psalmist some∣where expresses it. Which Philosophi∣cal Hypothesis, if it be true, there is an Obvious Reason why the sixt sense has the stamp of shame upon it, and the o∣ther five not, and is no contemptible argument of the immortal state of the Soul out of this earthly body: so hand∣somely are these things complicated gether. Secondly, it being apparent to any, that has but the least sagacity in in∣terpreting Nature, that the pleasure of the sixt sense is in order to that weighty end of Propagation, it is most manifestly a gross abuse of the pleasure of the sixt sense, to affect it, and excite it merely for the pleasures sake, the end of God and Nature being frustrat∣ed at the same time, and the due use of that sensation grosly perverted. If
this be not , an unnatural Act or the transgression of the Law of Na∣ture, what is? so that it cannot be said that this is the simple perception of the pleasure of the sixt sense, but is the per∣ception thereof in such Circumstances, as make it abominable. And here are broken the Laws of what is fit and de∣corous, as I intimated to you in my former Letter, and which might have afforded an Answer to this scruple you now again raise in this. But thirdly and lastly, There is an Analogie betwixt the pleasure of the sixt sense, and the pleasure of Tast. The former as it is in order to the propa∣gation of the species of living Crea∣tures, so the latter is in order to the sustentation of the Individuals. The pleasure of the tast is to engage the A∣nimal to eat sufficiently to nourish him and to renew his strength. Now sup∣pose any man had found some Art or Trick, to enjoy the pleasure of the Tast of Meats and Drinks all the day
long in a manner, and from day to day, though he eat no more for strength and sustenance than others do, were not this man most wretchedly sensual and gluttonous? How then can the exciting of the Venereal pleasure by voluntary Pollutions, &c. be thought to be any other than the foulest Act of Lust that may be, thus to indulge to this carnal pleasure meerly for the pleasures sake, against the Law of God and Nature. Wherefore you see that the Reason of your Consequence is very infirm, and that there is some∣thing in those Abstract Acts, as you call them besides the simple perception of the pleasure of the sixt sense. For the very Abstractiveness of this pleasure from the natural end and use of it, is its Essential Filth or Moral Turpitude, to be abhorred of all holy Souls, and abominated for the reasons I have mentioned. Nor is the pleasure of the sixt sense lawfully enjoyed, but in the state of Matrimony. But excess Capti∣vation
of Spirit, &c. are lawful in no state that I know of. And thus you have as full Resolu∣tion of this point as I can give, and if it may have the success to prove sa∣tisfactory to you, I shall think my pains well bestow'd. But if upon a delibe∣rate perusal of what I have writ, and an impartial improvement thereof to your best satisfaction you can, there should chance to remain any further scruple, I shall, if you write me word of it, readily endeavour to ease you thereof as it becomes Dear Sir, Your faithful and affectionate Friend to serve you Hen. More. C. C. C. Ian. 16. 1685/6.
The fourth Letter to Dr More. Sir, THere was no need of an Apology either for the lateness of your An∣swer, or your freedom in descanting upon some passages in my Sermon. I can very easily be contented to stay for what by its excellency will reward my Patience, and can easily forgive him that will make me wiser. For I am concern'd for no Opinion any farther than I think it true, and so far I am, and therefore as I profess my self hear∣tily obliged to you for your kind and excellent endeavours to rescue me from an Errour, so I must beg your leave to return something in defence of my Hypothesis. Which I question not but you will readily grant, especi∣ally when I assure you that I argue on∣ly to be better inform'd. And that your Authority is so Sacred with me that nothing less than the desire of
Truth should ingage me to oppose it. Presuming therefore upon your par∣don, I shall first offer something in confirmation of my Opinion, and then consider what you alledge to the con∣trary. And in the first place 'tis a∣greed betwixt us that there must be a , some Principle of free Agen∣cy in Man. All that does or can fall under debate is what is the primary and immediate subject of this free Agen∣cy. Now this being a Rational perfe∣ction must be primarily subjected ei∣ther in the understanding or in the will, or (to speak more accurately) either in the Soul as Intelligent, or in the Soul as Volent. That the latter cannot be the Root of Liberty will be sufficiently clear, if this one Proposition be fully made out, viz. that the will necessa∣rily follows the Dictate of the under∣standing, or that the Soul necessarily wills as she understands. Now for the Demonstration of this, I shall desire but this one Postulatum,
which I think all the Schools of Learn∣ing will allow me, viz. that the Ob∣ject of the Soul as Volent is Apparent good, or that the Soul cannot will Evil as Evil. Now good Apparent or evil Apparent, is the same in other terms with that, which is apprehended or judg'd to be good or evil respectively. (For to appear thus or thus does not ponere aliquid in re, but is an Extrinsecal De∣nomination of the Object in reference to the Faculty.) If therefore good Ap∣parent be the Object of the will, good Apprehended will be so too, and Con∣sequently the Soul necessarily wills as she understands, otherwise she will chuse Evil as Evil, which is against the sup∣position. This I take to be as clear a Demon∣stration of the Souls necessarily willing as she understands upon the supposition that our Postulatum be true, as can be afforded in the Mathematicks. But for more Illustration, we will bring it to an example. And for the present let
it be that of S. Peter's denying of his Master. Here I say that S. Peter judg∣ed that part most eligible which he chose, that is, he judged the sin of deny∣ing his Master, at that present juncture, to be a less evil than the danger of not denying him, and so chose it. Other∣wise if he had then actually thought it a greater evil, all that whereby it exceeded the other, he would have cho∣sen gratis, and consequently would have will'd evil as evil. There was therefore undoubtedly an errour in his understanding, before there was any in his will. And so it is in the case of every sinner, according to those trite sayings, Omnis peccans ignorant, and Nemo malus gratis &c. And therefore tis that in Scripture, Vertue is expressed by the names of Wisdom and understanding, and Vice goes under the names of Folly and Errour. All who commit sin think it, at the in∣stant of Commission, all things consi∣der'd, a lesser evil, otherwise 'tis impos∣sible
they should commit it. But this (as the Psalmist expresses it) is their Foolishness, and in another place, have they any understanding that work wick∣edness? From all which I conclude that the will is necessarily determin'd by the Dictate of the understanding, or that the Soul necessarily wills as she understands, so that in this sense also that of the Stoick is verify'd, . The Soul therefore as Volent cannot be the immediate subject of Liberty. If therefore there be any such thing as Free Agency, the seat of it must be in the Soul as Intelligent. But does not the Soul necessarily understand as the Ob∣ject appears, as well as she necessarily wills as she understands? she does so, and therefore I do not place the Seat of Liberty in the soul as judging or forming a Judgment, for that I con∣fess to be determin'd by the appear∣ance of things. But though it be ne∣cessary that the Soul judge as things ap∣pear,
yet 'tis not necessary (except on∣ly in self evident Propositions) that things should appear thus or thus, but that will wholely depend upon the de∣grees of Advertency or Attention; such a degree being requisite to make the Object appear thus, and such a degree to appear otherwise. And this Adver∣tency is that wherein I place the seat of free agency. Lower than this I discern not the least glimps of it, and higher I cannot go. Here therefore I con∣ceive I have good reason to fix, and to affirm that the only  of the Soul consists in her having an immedi∣ate power to Attend or not Attend, or to attend more or less. I say an imme∣diate power, for if you will have an ex∣press act of the will interposed, that act of the will must have a Practical Iudg∣ment, that Judgment an Objective ap∣pearance, that appearance another At∣tention, that attention another Will, and so on ad Infinitum. I think it therefore reasonable to stop at the First.
I shall now apply my self to your Objections. And first, against the ne∣cessity of the Soul's willing as she un∣derstands you alledge that of the Poet, Concerning Medea —Video meliora pro∣boque, Deteriora sequor —I answer by distinguishing the Antecedent, a thing may be judg'd good either by a Specu∣lative or universal knowledg, and that I do not alwaies follow, Or by a Pra∣ctical Knowledg, when I look upon it and pronounce of it pro hic & hunc as cloath'd with all its Circumstances, and that I do alwaies follow. But you farther urge that if so, then there would be no such thing as Sin against Knowledg. Or (which is the same otherwise worded) that then men would be in a state of sincerity. To this I answer, that a sinner according to this Hypothesis may be said to sin both knowingly and ignorantly too in diffe∣rent respects. He sins knowingly in as much as he knows in the Theory or by an Habitual judgment, that such a
Fact is a Sin, and yet he sins ignorantly too, in as much as either he does not actually attend to that Speculative and Habitual judgment of his, that such a thing is a sin, Or if he does, yet he thinks it upon the whole matter to be a lesser evil; which indeed is impli∣citly and confusely though not expli∣citly that tis not a sin, because that which is truely a lesser evil cannot be a sin, for a sin can never be eligible, but a lesser evil may. And whereas you say that Adverten∣cy, or Attention to the Object is a defe∣ctive Principle as to the redeeming us in∣to the ability of closing with what is di∣scern'd best, I confess I can easily con∣ceive how a man may be defective in his Attention, but not how Attention it self if duely applied can be defe∣ctive towards true illumination though in the midst of Moral Corruptions. All that can be said is, that these moral Corruptions may divert the Soul from sufficiently attending to the Beauty of
Holiness, and this I take to be the true and ultimate ground of all sin, and here tis I fix the necessity of Grace and Divine assistence. And whereas you say, that the In∣stance of Martyrdom which I alledg for my Opinion, does rather confirm that there must be something of more weight than Advertency to inable a man to dy for the Truth; And that though a man be notionally convinc'd that the denying of Christ is the great∣est evil in the world, and attend never so closely to this Notion, he may yet find such evasions as will excuse him from suffering; For you say the Mer∣cy of God, and future Repentance, and of the temptation, or pretence of mak∣ing amends some other way, may do it. To this I reply, that he who is notio∣nally convinc'd that the denying of Christ is the greatest evil in the world, cannot possibly chuse it so long as he continues that Judgment, or Notio∣nal Conviction, there being according
to his then apprehension no greater evil for the avoiding of which he should think it eligible. If thefore he should then chuse it, he must chuse it as a greater evil, that is, simply as evil, than which I think there can be no great∣er absurdity. As for those Considera∣tions therefore which you subjoyn, the Mercy of God, future repentance, &c. these cannot prevail with him to chuse the denying of Christ while he judges it the greatest evil, any more than they can induce him to chuse evil as such. They may indeed prevail with him in the present juncture not to think it the greatest evil, nay to pronounce it a les∣ser evil than the evil of Pain, and then no wonder if he chuse it. But this I do not conceive to make any thing against my Hypothesis, but to be ra∣ther according to it. As to what you remark concerning Humility and Spiritual Mortification, I think I may be perfectly of your mind without retracting or altering any
thing of my Sermon, for I don't find, if the business be sifted to the bottom, that we differ any thing at all. Your Determination concerning the pleasure of the sixt sense, I submit to as very full and satisfactory. And I have only one thing more to move concerning it. Which is, that since you make the Abstractedness of this plea∣sure from the natural end of it, that of propagation, to be its Essential Tur∣pitude, whether this does not conclude against all those who Marry in such an age, when 'tis impossible according to the course of nature, that this End should be serv'd. And whether there be any difference according to your Measures between the enjoyment of the sixt sense in such Circumstances or the like, and Voluntary Pollutions. I would willingly know your sense in this matter. And now (Sir) all I have to do is to return you extraordinary thanks for your many and great Civilities, to
desire a long Continuance of your health and welfare, and favourable con∣struction of the defence which I make against your Reflections. That tis not in the least from a design of wrangling and opposition, but from a perswasion of my being at present in the right, and an earnest desire of being Wiser. I am truely indifferent which side of the Question be true, all that I am con∣cern'd for is to know which is so. And being so indifferent, as I am the more likely to find the Truth, so I hope I am so to obtain pardon from you who are so great a Friend to it. Which yet you will be the more ready to grant when you consider how much your judgment (tho not in this particular fully assent∣ed to) is yet admired and esteemed by (Most honour'd and Dear Sir) Your most obliged Friend and Servant J. Norris.
Dr More's Answer. Sir, I Have received yours, and reading the Confirmation of your Hypothe∣sis (which I took the boldness a little to vellicate) and your Answer to my Objections against it, I could not but observe your ingenious dexterity there∣in with pleasure. And yet I must in∣genuously confess that I still stick where I was, nor can conceive but that the free Agency we are conscious to our selves of, is placed in the Soul as Vo∣lent as much as intelligent, because this Volency, as I may so speak, is implyed in her Attention or Advertency, and is a necessary requisite thereof. The thing therefore that I affirm being this viz. That this  is placed in the Soul as Volent as well as Intelligent, the Volency of the Soul being required to make those free attentions or Adver∣tencies on the object, let us see how you
demonstrate that it cannot be seated in the Soul as Volent. Your argument in breif is this, (For I intend to answer your Letter with all possible brevity I can) That since the Soul cannot will evil as evil she must necessarily will and and chuse ac∣cording as the betterness of the Object appears to her understanding, other∣wise she will chuse evil as evil which is against the supposition. To this I answer, that though she does not chuse according as the betterness of the Ob∣ject appears to her understanding, it does not thence follow that she will chuse evil as evil, but that she will chuse a natural good and prefer it be∣fore the Moral. So that the absurdity of chusing evil as evil here vanisheth, and the demonstration falls to the ground. And this was the case of S. Peter in denying Christ. The Object of his choice was that natural good, his security from pain and punishment, which he preferred before that Moral
good the faithful and professed adhe∣sion to his Lord and Master Christ Je∣sus. Nor could the understanding of S. Peter err so grosly as not in the No∣tion to think that faithfulness to his Lord Christ was better absolutely than the securing himself from pain and punishment (as indeed there is no com∣parison betwixt the Moral or Divine good and the natural) but there was wanting in this Act the exertion of his will towards the Divine good; or else the Divine Nature or Grace was want∣ing, whence he slipt into this choice of the meaner good. And as for that Maxim, Omnis pec∣cans ignorant; If it be true in that Vni∣versality the sense is, that whoever sins it is out of defect of either Notional knowledg or inward sense, such as ac∣companies real Regeneration; in which sense the , Insensati in Scripture are to be understood, and on the con∣trary the Pythagorick . Those that want this , though they
have a Notional knowledg of the thing, yet they may sin, and that from the want of this sensibility of Spirit. But he that is born of God sins not because the seed remains in him, this life or sen∣sibility in the New Birth which is an higher and more effectual Principle then Notional knowledg. Which alone is not able to determine the choice of the Soul to a Moral or Spiritual Ob∣ject without the accession of the other. For life and sense can onely counter∣poise life and sense, not mere Notion. Whence the , i. e. the Moral or Divine good is not followed, but what is pleasing and grateful to the Animal nature. So that the soul here wills or chuses against the dictate of her understanding, which is the sin against conscience, otherwise there would be no such thing. The cheif Pith of the last Paragraph of your Confirmation is this. Though it be necessary the Soul judg as things appear yet 'tis not necessary (except
onely in self-evident Propositions) that things should appear thus or thus, but that will wholly depend upon the de∣grees of Advertency or Attention. And in this, say you, I place the seat of free Agency, viz. in an immediate pow∣er in the Soul of attending or not at∣tending or of attending more or less to the Objects that occur. I demand there∣fore is this any thing more then what is couched in that of the Poet, Quid verum atque bonum quaero & rogo & omnis in hoc sum, Viz. A sincere Inquisition (and since∣rity is immediatly in our power, that is, it is in our power to do as well as we can) after that Truth and Good in which human Happiness consists. Which if it be done in a mere Notional way there will still remain that liberty I mentioned above of the Soul chusing contrary to the dictates of her under∣standing. So that there will be more liberties then you conclude for in this Paragraph. But if this diligent and
sincere Inquisition, or sincere desire of knowing what is man and whereto serv∣eth he, what is his good and what is his evil be absolutely sincere, it cannot fail to inquire what is the most safe and effectual way to have Objects duly represent themselves to the under∣standing as the Objects of sight to a pure and clear eye. And what can this be but the Purification of the soul as I intimated in my last to you, which is by Mortification and real Regenera∣tion, that the Divine Principle may be more fully awakened in us, and so be∣come life and sense to us in virtue whereof the soul will be free and able to chuse what is absolutely the better, that is to prefer the Moral or Divine Good before that which is Animal or Natural, and if this state advance to the highest, never to chuse any, if they stand in competition but the Moral or Divine, according to that of S. Iohn above mentioned, He that is born of God sinneth not &c. Wherefore so far as I
see, it may be but a  betwixt us as to this point where you place the  of the Soul in her immediate power of using the best means she can to find out what is her best good or readiest means to true happiness and riddance of sin and errour. Which taken in the full sense thereof as I have intimated, is, as I conceive, a sound and useful Theorem and well adapted for the chastising of the world for their sloth and laziness in these things. We come now to your Answers to my Objections. And to that of Video meliora proboque you answer indeed learnedly and scholastically, by say∣ing, a thing may be judged good ei∣ther by a Speculative or Vniversal knowledg, or by a practical knowledg when it is lookt upon and pronounced of pro hic & nunc as cloathed with all its circumstances, the former is not alwaies followed but the latter is. But is there any thing more in this but that the Eligent (when as both these
knowledges are speculative or univer∣sal, the former already granted, the other plainly implyed by the choice of the Eligent, who in such circumstan∣ces judges the choice is universally to be made, else how is he obliged to make it?) but that the Humour of the Eli∣gent onely has made this latter pra∣ctical by putting it into practice in∣stead of the former, it being clothed with the circumstances of Iucundum or Vtile, when the other recommends it self onely upon the account of Hone∣stum: which though he sees (as Medea sayes Video meliora proboque— and that hic & nunc, for she speaks of the present case and time, yet deteriora sequor) not∣withstanding he declines that which is absolutè & simpliciter melius accord∣ing to his own judgment, and closes with that which seems melius, that is, Vtilius and jucundius to himself, to his Animal Nature against the Dictate of the Divine. This is the clear case of the Controversy freed from the
clouds of the School. And therefore notwithstanding what you have an∣swered it is plain that the Soul may understand Notionally and actually bet∣ter then she practises, and not follow the dictate of her Understanding but of her Animal Appetite. To my Objection against your Hy∣pothesis, That thence every man would be sincere, nor any sin against knowledg, you answer, That a sinner may be said to sin both knowingly and ignorant∣ly, he may know in Theory or habi∣tual judgment such a fact is a sin, and yet be ignorant by not actually at∣tending to his Habitual knowledg; or by judging the sin upon the whole mat∣ter to be the lesser evil and thence im∣plicitly to be no sin, and so not sin against knowledg. But I answer, It is incredible that one that has an habi∣tual knowledg, that such a thing is a sin should not remember it is so when he meets with it or is entring upon it. It is as if one had the habitual Idea of
such a person in his mind, and should not remember it is he when he meets him in the very teeth. Nor can he judg the sin upon the whole matter to be the lesser evil, but he must in the mean time remember it is a sin and so commit it against his knowledg, one∣ly sugar'd over with the circumstance of Iucundum or Vtile or both. This Composition though there be Ratsbain in the Sugar, makes the Soul listen to the dictate of the Animal Appetite and let go that of Moral reason, tho they both clamour in her ears at once. And there the Soul against the under∣standing concludes for the suggestion of the Animal Appetite, that bears her in hand, that such a sin with plea∣sure and profit is better then an Act of of virtue with pain and wordly loss. This I conceive is the naked case of the busines. Nor does this choice seem to be of a lesser evil to the Soul as In∣tellectual, which dictates the contrary, but as sensual or Animal.
To your Answer to my third Obje∣ction of Attention or (Advertency) being a defective Principle, That though a man may be defective in his Atten∣tion, yet you cannot easily conceive how Attention it self if duly applied can be defective: I reply, that mere At∣tention of it self in a Morally corrupt mind, let it be never so great can no better rightly discover the Moral Ob∣ject, than the vitiated eye the Natu∣ral. It is the Purity of the Soul through Regeneration that enables her to be∣hold the beauty of Holiness as our Sa∣viour speaks, Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God. There is no seeing of God but by being purified and regenerate into his Image. . As Plotinus some∣where has it, touching the Divine Pul∣chritude. If thou beest it, thou seest it. If we be regenerate into the Image of the Eternal Pulchritude we then shall see it, having (if I may use the Poets expression here) —Incoctum generoso pe∣ctus
Honesto. But if this Principle of life be not sufficiently awakened in us, no Attention is sufficient to make us rightly discern the beauty of Holiness, but onely a shadowy Notion or Meager Monogrammical Picture thereof, which will not avail though you use all the Attention in the world against the dictates of the Animal sense and life un∣mortified, in the day of trial. Whence the defect of this Principle alone, is evi∣dent. But if you mean by sufficiently at∣tending to the beauty of Holiness the diligent and sincere Inquisition after Truth and Holiness, which implies our serious entring into a Method of Purifi∣cation and clearing our inward Eye∣sight by our resolved progress in the way of Mortification and thereby of real Regeneration, whereby the Divine Life and sense will sufficiently at length be awakened to counterpoise and over∣come the sway and importunity of the Animal life and sense; the neglect of
this we shall be both agreed in, that it is the ultimate ground of all sin, and that we shall discern, when we seri∣ously make trial, the necessity of Grace and Divine Assistance to carry us thro so weighty an Enterprise as you right∣ly note in this Paragraph; which I hope I have sufficiently spoke to by this. I will onely add, that, what oc∣curs Psal. 48. vers. 5, 6, 7. seems a fi∣gure of this Spiritual Progress towards the beauty of Holiness in virtue of which every one at last appears before God in Sion, according to that pro∣mise of our Saviour, Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God. And now lastly for your Reply to what I said touching the Instance of Martyrdome, which Reply of yours is this. That he that is notionally con∣vinced that the denying of Christ is the greatest evil in the world, cannot possibly chuse it so long as he conti∣nues that judgment, there being ac∣cording to his then Apprehension no
greater evil for the avoiding of which he should think it eligible. If there∣fore he should then chuse it he must chuse it as a greater evil, that is, sim∣ply as evil, than which I think there can be no greater absurdity, &c. This Reply is handsome and smart, but in my judgment not free from a fallaci∣ous subtilty. If where the greater evil is chosen the two compared evils were of one kind that Absurdity would be manifestly consequent, but when one of the Evils is Moral, suppose the great∣est Moral evil that is, the other Na∣tural and very great or the greatest Natural Evil that is, suppose a painful torturous and ignominious Death, in the avoiding of which is implied the securing to himself the natural Ease and sweetness of this present life, tho upon this account he chuse that which is the greatest Moral evil and is so e∣steemed in his notional judgment, yet he cannot be said then to chuse it as evil, but as the onely effectual means
and therefore good or expedient for that end, viz. the avoiding the highest natural Evil and enjoying the sweet of that great Natural Good, a life pain∣less and at ease. And therefore upon this account he having onely a Notio∣nal judgment of the Moral evil of that highest sin mentioned, but a lively sense both of the natural evil and Good here specified which are the one avoid∣ed the other secured by chusing the aforesaid Moral Evil: It is no wonder that, though retaining still his notio∣nal judgment of that greatest Moral Evil he yet chuses it to avoid that hor∣rid natural evil, and to enjoy the sweet of that Natural Good, viz. this life with ease and safety, there being in one scale of the balance nothing but the mere truth of Notion, in the other the urgent weight of Life and sense which will easily preponderate, if there be not life and sense also, (which is the state onely of the Regenerate) to weigh against it in the other scale of the ba∣lance.
So that though the Notional judgment be not corrupted, but that such a sin is still held the greatest Mo∣ral Evil that is, yet the Soul is born down to follow the suggestion of the Animal Life and sense against the di∣ctate of her notional discernment and may truely pronounce with Medea. — Video meliora proboque Deteriora sequor. — Nor need I proceed any further. For what is already said I hope will reach every Particular of the whole Para∣graph which contains your Reply to this last point. At least it will make good, that the Soul does not chuse evil as evil in the present case, which is the main sting of your Argument. That we agree in our sentiments touching Humility and Spiritual Mor∣tification, this profession of yours I ea∣sily beleive from reading what occurs in the latter part of your Sermon which is excellently good solid and edi∣fying.
And that I have satisfied you in my Determination concerning the plea∣sure of the sixt sense I am glad of that also. And as for this last scruple you move; whether what I have said does not conclude against all those who marry in such an Age when it is impos∣sible according to the course of Na∣ture that this end of propagation should be served, I say it does not so conclude. Because there is a considerable end of marriage besides that of propagation of children, which in our Liturgie the Office of Marriage takes notice of, viz. mutual society Help and Comfort, which comprizeth all the handsome Adjustments of the married Parties, Se∣cular affairs and Oeconomical Conve∣niences, and also their mutual help to one another in Piety and devout pur∣suance of fitting themselves for the fu∣ture State, their Age remainding them that it is not far off. And in this Re∣gard their mutual Society may be very delectable to one another while their
discourses and Meditations are of the Joyes of the other World, and so they may live chastly and comfortably with∣out any frustranious abuse of their bo∣dyes upon the titillation of lust, which exact Christian Temperance and holy Meditations and discourses together of their joyous change into the other near approaching state ought to pre∣vent. Sir, I have told you freely my sentiments touching all the things you have propounded, but I dictate nothing but leave all to your own free judg∣ment, and so wishing you good success in your vertuous studies, I take leave and rest Dear Sir, Your affectionate Friend to serve you Hen. More. C. C. C. Febr. 22. 1685/6.
The fifth Letter to Dr. More. Sir, AS I cannot express the thanks which I owe you for your great Condescension and Civility, so neither can I the pleasure which I had in per∣using your ingenious and learned An∣swer. it is spun throughout with a ve∣ry fine thred, and richly fraught with curious and retired sense. But yet tho I was and still am exquisitely pleased, I am not fully satisfyed with it, whe∣ther the defect be in your letter, or in my Apprehension I shall not take upon me to determine. But so it is I can∣not as yet bring over my judgment to yours, and that I do not dissent with∣out some Considerable reason, it shall be the business of this paper briefly to shew you. And first then I observe, that the Po∣stulatum upon which I ground my De∣monstration of the will's necessarily
following the Dictate of the under∣standing, is by you admitted, as in∣deed it is by all except only the School of the Nominals, namely, that the Soul cannot will evil as evil. This you ad∣mit by saying (Paragraph the second) that the Absurdity of chusing evil as evil vanishes, only you deny the Conse∣quence of that acknowledged absurdi∣ty upon such a choice as is made a∣gainst the Practical Dictate, by saying, that it vanishes, Here then is the  with the truth or falsehood of which I am content the Demonstra∣tion should either stand or fall to the ground. Now to make appear that this is a true Consequence, that the will by not following the Practical Dictate would chuse evil as evil, I shall not add any Positive and direct proof to the former Demonstration, but only consider whe∣ther the Consequence is any thing invalidated or evaded by what you have offer'd. You say, that although
the Soul does not chuse according as the Betterness of the Object appears to her understanding, it does not thence follow that she will chuse evil as e∣vil, but that she will chuse a natural good and prefer it before the Moral. True, but unless this natural good be in the present Circumstance, all things consider'd, judg'd greater and more eli∣gible than the Moral, the chusing of it will not be the chusing of good, but of evil as evil. For a less good (whether natural or any other it matters not) tho good singly consider'd, yet in Compe∣tition with a greater does induere spe∣ciem mali, as a less evil tho evil singly consider'd yet in competition with a great∣er does Commence good and eligible. Such a choice therefore as is here sup∣pos'd would not be the choice of a na∣tural good, nay not so much as of good, but of evil as evil. There is therefore no choice but what is according to the appearing Betterness of the Object; which Conclusion you your self seem
unawares to slip into by using the word (Prefer) for what is it to Prefer, but to think or pronounce upon the whole matter to be better or more eligible. And thus you say again concerning St. Peter that he prefer'd the natural good of security from pain before the Moral good of adhesion to his Lord. Well, if so, then however strange it may seem, his understanding did err so grossly as at that instant not to think Faithfulness to his Master to be abso∣lutely better than security from pain, otherwise his chusing the latter would have been the chusing of what he then thought a lesser good, and consequently of evil as such. Nor will it suffice to say, that there was wanting in that act of his denial the exertion of his will to∣ward the divine good, That indeed is true, but not the whole Truth, for had there not been also a defect in his un∣derstanding, there would have been no∣thing amiss in his will. As for your  or sensibility of spirit, I have
a very good liking to the notion, and do think it a Concomitant if no the principal part of real Regeneration. But whereas you say, those that want this  tho right in their judgment may yet sin, and that because Life and sense can only Counterpoise life and sense, to this I reply, that the want of this  may indeed in the heat of a Temptation be the occasion of a wrong judgment (and so indeed tis ne∣cessary to the prevention of sin that life and sense Counterpoise life and sense) but it can never be the Occasion of sin with a right and Practically unerring Iudgment, for the reasons above men∣tion'd. So that notwithstanding this  the Reason of the action good or bad will be ultimately devolv'd up∣on the rectitude or obliquity of the Iudgment. And in that respect only the Axiom will hold true, Omnis pec∣cans ignorat. As to the close of this your third Paragraph how sinning according to the
Dictate of the understanding and yet a∣gainst Conscience are consistent, I think they are very reconcileable. For he that commits a sin tho by not suffici∣ently attending to it at the moment of action either as a sin, or as a greater evil he comes to pronounce it eligible and so to chuse it, and so may be said to sin ignorantly, yet he sins knowingly and against conscience too, in as much as he does such a fact either against an actual Dictate that tis a sin, or an habi∣tual Dictate that tis also a greater evil, as I intimated to you in my last. As to the question which in this next Paragraph you are pleas'd to put to me, whether this Attention, wherein I place the seat of Free Agency, differ any thing from what is coutch'd in that of the Poet Quid verum atque bonum quaero & rogo & omnis in hoc sum. I answer that it does, and that my notion may be more clearly conceiv'd, I shall here breifly explain what I mean
by this Power of Attention. Whereas therefore the Operations and Powers of the Soul as Intelligent are usually divided into these three, Apprehension, Iudgment, and Discourse, I find it ne∣cessary to add a fourth, that of Atten∣tion, which I look upon as really di∣stinct from the other three, they being Conversant about their Objects as true and false, but this only as Intelligible, and is only in short, a general power of converting the Acies of the under∣standing towards any Intelligible Object, whether simple or complex, and answers exactly to the Application of the eye to a sensible object, and accordingly is as distinct from either Apprehension, Iudgment or Discourse as this Applica∣tion of the eye is from the very act of Vi∣sion. In short 'tis a kind of Openness or Wakefulness of Soul, such as I con∣ceive to be hinted at in Scripture by such and the like expressions as these, watch lest you enter into Temptation, Awake to righteousness and sin not, A∣wake
thou that sleepest and arise from the dead &c. The Notion thus ex∣plain'd I will now shew how it dif∣fers from that of the Poet. The dif∣ference is in this. That inquisition of the Poet denotes a particular exertion and employment of all the faculties, a diligent use of all means, methods and opportunities, and that in order to the finding out a Truth or a good not yet known, but this Attention I speak of is onely a general wakefulness of the understanding, or Application of mind to the speculation of a Truth habitu∣ally known, which will make it actually present, and so determine the Practical judgment, and by that the Will. I come now to the place where you consider my Answers to your Objecti∣ons. And here to that distinction of mine of Speculative and Practical know∣ledg, the latter of which I said was al∣waies follow'd, though not the for∣mer, you say they are both speculative and universal, the first granted to be
so, and the other plainly implied by the choice of the Eligent, who in such circumstances judges the choice uni∣versally to be made. I answer, you may call them both speculative if you please, I shall not contend with you for a word, but then 'tis to be consider'd that there will be two distinct Specula∣tive Dictates, one that is Habitual, out of the Circumstance of action, that such a thing is a sin and a greater evil, and another that is actual, in the Cir∣cumstance of action, that 'tis a lesser evil, which therefore for distinction's sake I call Practical, because of the immediate influence it has upon action. Which latter is alwaies follow'd, tho the former is not. Neither is this lat∣ter as you say made onely Practical by being put into Practice, but is so Antecedaneously, being that which de∣termines the choice of the Eligent. As to the next Paragraph, where you think it incredible that one, who has an Habitual knowledg that such a
thing is a sin, should not remember it to be so when he is entring upon it. I reply, that it seems to me most cer∣tain, that whoever commits sin must think it some way or other eligible. Now this must come to pass one of these two waies, either by his not at∣tending to it as sin, or not as a greater evil. The first of which in many cases I can easily conceive possible, and the latter in all cases I think certain. And this methinks you your self run into by saying (Paragraph the sixth) that the Animal appetite bears the Soul in hand, and such a sin with pleasure and profit is better than an act of virtue with pain and worldly loss. For what is this but in other words to say, that the Concupiscible may be so strong and rampant, that the Soul may judg pro hic & nunc the uneasiness of abstaining to be a greater evil than an unlawful Indulgence, so as upon that Judgment to chuse the latter. To your next Paragraph where you
continue your Charge upon mere At∣tention as a defective Instrument towards the discovery of a Moral Object in a Morally corrupt mind, I make this short reply, that since for such a Fact to be a sin, or for sin to be the greatest evil, are plain and obvious Theorems, I cannot conceive but that constant and actual Attention should prove a sufficient Directory to the understand∣ing, all the Difficulty is to be thus actu∣ally and constantly attentive, and here (as I said before) is the work of grace and Regeneration. And now lastly to your last Para∣graph concerning the Instance of Mar∣tyrdom, whereas I said that he, who is notionally convinc'd that the deny∣ing of Christ is the greatest evil in the world, cannot possibly chuse it so long as he continues that judgment, there being, according to his then Appre∣hension, no greater evil for the avoid∣ing of which he should think it eligi∣ble, if therefore he should then chuse
it, he must chuse it as the greatest evil, that is simply as evil, &c. This reply you say is not free from a fallacious subtilty, Concerning which you thus di∣stinguish. If where the greater evil is chosen the 2 compared evils were of one kind, that absurdity would cer∣tainly follow; But where one of the evils is Moral, the other Natural, tho a man should chuse the greatest Moral evil, yet he cannot be said to chuse it as evil, but as the only means of avoid∣ing the natural evil, and consequent∣ly as good. This is the sum of your Answer. To which I return, that I cannot conceive how the diversity of the compared evils, as to their Speci∣fick Nature, can any thing alter the case, the Question as to eligibility be∣ing not concerning their specifick na∣tures, but concerning their Degrees, not which is Natural and which Moral, but which has most of the general na∣ture of evil. So that if I chuse that which to me has the most of the gene∣ral
nature of evil, notwithstanding its being an evil of another kind, I cer∣tainly chuse evil as evil. Neither can this be brought off by saying that tis chosen as a means of avoiding the na∣tural evil, and consequently as good, for it can never be good to chuse a greater evil to avoid a less, that being all over loss and damage. And thus as briefly and as fully as I could have I set down the grounds of my opinion, which I am ready to part with upon the first conviction of their weakness or insufficiency. If you should find any thing in this paper worth your notice, you may return answer at your best leisure, for I would by no means divert you from more important con∣cerns. I am very sensible what interrup∣tions I have already given you, but I hope you will easily pardon me when you consider that tis the peculiar reve∣rence I have for your Judgment which has brought this trouble upon you from (Dear Sir) Your highly obliged Friend and Servant J. Norris.
AN APPENDIX. COnsidering with my self that those into whose hands these Papers may light, may not all of them have that other Book of mine, which con∣tains the Hypothesis here defended concerning the Root of Liberty, and that tis very necessary the Hypothesis should be seen with its Defence, I thought it convenient to set it down here for the Benefit of the Reader. The Hypothesis runs thus. That the will cannot be the imme∣diate Subject of Liberty, must be ac∣knowledg'd plain, if the will necessa∣rily follows the Practical Dictate of the understanding. And that it does so I think there is Demonstration. 'Tis an unquestionable Axiom in the Schools of Learning, that the Object of the will is Apparent good. Now Ap∣parent
good in other words is that which is Judged to be good, and if so, then it Follows that the will cannot but conform to the Dictate of the un∣derstanding; Because otherwise som∣thing might be the Object of the will that is not apprehended good, which is contrary to the supposition. In short, the will (as Aquinas well expresses it) is the conclusion of an Operative Syllogism, and follows as ne∣cessarily from the Dictates of the un∣derstanding, as any other Conclusion does from its Premises, and Conse∣quently cannot be the immediate Sub∣ject of Liberty. But then are we not involv'd in the same Difficulty as to the understanding? Does not that act with equal (if not More) Necessity than the Will? So I know 'tis Ordinarily taught. But if this be absolutly and universal∣ly true, I must Confess it above the reach of my Capacity to Salve the No∣tion of Morality, or Religion. For
since tis evident that the will necessa∣rily conforms to the Dictates of the understanding, if those very Dictates are also wholly and altogether neces∣sary, there can be no such thing as a , the man is bound hand and foot, has nothing left him whereby to render him a Moral Agent, to qualify him for Law or Obligation, Virtue or Vice, Reward or Punishment. But these are consequences not to be in∣dured, and therefore I conclude ac∣cording to the Rules of right reason∣ing, the Principle from which they flow to be so too. To clear up then the whole Business, I shall no longer consider the under∣standing and will as Faculties really distinct either from the Soul it self, or from one another, but that the Soul does immediately understand and will by it self, without the intervention of any Faculty. And that for this De∣monstrative Reason in short, because in the contrary Hypothesis, either Judg∣ment
must be ascribed to the will, and then the will immediately commences understanding, or the Assent of the will must be blind, brutish, and unaccount∣able, both which are Absurd. This being premised, I grant that as the Soul necessarily wills as she under∣stands, (For so we must now speak) so likewise does she necessarily under∣stand as the Object appears. And thus far our sight terminates in fatality, and necessity bounds our Ho∣rizon. That then which must give us a prospect beyond it must be this, that altho the Soul necessarily understands or judges according to the appearance of things, yet that things should so ap∣pear (unless it be in Propositions self-evident) is not alike necessary, but de∣pends upon the degrees of Advertency or Attention which the Soul uses, and which to use either more or less is fully and immediately in her own Power. And this Indifferency of the Soul as to attending or not attending I take
to be the only  the Bottom and Foundation into which the Mora∣lity of every action must be at length resolv'd. For a farther proof and illu∣stration of which Hypothesis, let it be apply'd to a particular case, that we may see how well it will answer the Phenomena. In the Case then of Martyrdom, I look upon sin as an evil, and not only so but (while I attend fully to its Na∣ture) as the greatest of evils. And as long as I continue this Judgment 'tis utterly impossible I should commit it, there being according to my present apprehension no greater evil for the declining of which I should think it eligible. But now the evil of Pain be∣ing presented before me, and I not sufficiently attending to the evil of sin, this latter appears to be the lesser evil of the two, and I accordingly pro hic & nunc so pronounce it, and in Confor∣mity to that dictate necessarily chuse it.
But because twas at first absolutely in my Power to have attended more heedfully, there was liberty in the Prin∣ciple, the mistake which influenc'd the action was vincible, and consequently the Action it self justly imputable. This is the Hypothesis. I shall now sum up the whole matter in this Order of Reasoning. 1. THat a Creature void of Liberty cannot be capable of Law or Obligation, Vertue or Vice, Reward or Punishment, is certain. 2. That Man is capable of all these, is certain. 3. That Man therefore is indow'd with Liberty, is certain. 4. That Liberty is a Rational Perfe∣fection, or a Perfection belonging to an Intellectual Nature, is certain. 5. That therefore this Liberty must be subjected either in the understand∣ing
or will, or (to speak more proper∣ly) in the Soul as Intelligent, or in the Soul as Volent, is certain. 6. That it cannot be subjected in that Part which acts Necessarily, is certain. 7. That the will necessarily follows the Dictate of the understanding, Or, that the Soul necessarily wills accord∣ing as she understands, is certain. 8. That therefore this Liberty can∣not be immediately subjected in the will, or, in the Soul as Volent, is certain. 9. That therefore it must be subject∣ed in the Soul as Intelligent, is certain. 10. That even the Soul as Intelli∣gent so far as it acts necessarily can∣not be the Immediate subject of Li∣berty, is also certain. 11. That the Soul as Intelligent ne∣cessarily judges according as the Ob∣ject appears to her, is certain. 12. That therefore the Soul as judg∣ing or forming a judgment, can no more be the Immediate subject of Liberty, than the Soul as Volent, is certain.
13. That, since the Soul necessarily wills as she judges, and necessarily judges as things appear, we have thus far no glimps of Liberty, is certain. 14. That therefore our Liberty must be founded upon the No Necessity of some certain things appearing deter∣minately thus or thus, or that we have no Liberty at all, is as Certain. 15. That things appearing thus or thus (unless in self-evident Propositi∣ons) depends upon the various degrees of Advertency or Attention, and no∣thing else, is certain. 16. That therefore we have an Im∣mediate Power of Attending or not Attending, or of Attending more or less, is certain. 17. That therefore this Indifferency of the Soul as to Attending or not At∣tending, or Attending more or less is the Prime Root and Immediate sub∣ject of Human liberty, is no less certain, which was the Point to be demon∣strated.
ERRATA. PAG. 37. for Divisition read Division. p. 43. for Conveiances read Conveionce. p. 57. line 14. after, for, add Our. p. 58. l. 20. for of read or. p. 71. for pertual read perpetual. p. 90. for serve r. serves. p. 97. for Common r. Commonly. p. 120. l. 19. for as r. that. p. 179. l. 2. after, take, add, no. p. 202. for hunc r. nunc. p. 204. l. 18. before of the, r. violence.
Books Printed and sold by Henry Clements. ARchaeologiae Atticae Libri Septem, by Francis Rous, and Zachary Bo∣gan. 4o. Mr. Rodericks Visitation Sermon at Blanford-Forum. 4o. 1683. Sermon at the Consecration at the Ld Weymouths Chappel at Long Leat. 4o. 1684. Education of young Gentlemen, 5th. Edition. 12o. Angliae notitia, five praesens Status Angliae succinte Enucleatus. 12o. 1688. Smith aditus ad Logicam, 12o. Brerewoodi Elementa Logicae. 12o.
