P2755 12590034 63874
PRECIOUS FAITH CONSIDERED In its Nature, Working, and Growth. By Edward Polhill of Burwash in Sussex, Esq LONDON, Printed for Thomas Cockerill at the Atlas in Cornhil near the Roy∣al-Exchange, 1675.
To the CHRISTIAN Reader. HE that with serious eyes looks on that dreadful spe∣ctacle, lapsed Angels lying in Chains of Darkness for ever, and that for one Sin, may very well stand and wonder at the Sal∣vation of Men; in which worms are as it were Angelized, and little lumps of corrupted dust are first refined by Grace, and then transfigured into Glory. The pure Origine of this great Work is no other than the Divine Grace and Love, which have so fairly pourtraied and limmed out them∣selves
upon every piece of it, that all the Saints above and below may read the Characters thereof; and have reason to cry out, Grace, Grace. Indeed Heaven and Earth too should ring with the Praises of it, and Eternity it self will be short enough to be∣hold and admire it in. To com∣pass this Glorious design the Son of God left his Fathers Bosom, and appeared in our Flesh, to make a Robe for us of his own Righteousness, and a Laver for us in his own Blood. Our Na∣ture in him is now in Heaven, and his Spirit is descended to im∣press his Image on us, thereby to make us meet for that Blessed Region, to secure all to us. Hea∣ven hath let down a great Char∣ter in the precious Gospel, in which we have a Map of Glory,
and Eternal Life set before us; to elevate our Souls, which are sparks of Immortality, out of the dust and rubbish of the Fall, and to set them aspiring after the true Pleasures and Beatitudes which are above. That we may not mi∣stake our way, or faint in it, the holy Spirit hath in the Gospel drawn many lines of Holiness and Comfort: There are pure Precepts to chalk out the Way to Heaven, and sweet Promises to cordial us therein; and to give us some Tastes of Heaven before we come there. The great condition of this Salvation which streams down out of the fountain of Grace through the Blood of Christ into the Evangelical Promises, is no other than Faith. This is the Au∣rora of Glory, Heaven and Eter∣nal Life dawn in it; This is the
Hypostasis of Things hoped for. It presentiates the Celestial Pa∣radise, and in some sort sets the Believer by the rivers of Pleasures which are there: This receives all from Grace, and ascribes all to it, prompting the Believer to confess touching his Spiritual Being and Working, By the Grace of God I am what I am, and by the Grace of God I do what I do. This u∣nites to Christ, wraps up it self in his Righteousness, feasts on his precious Body and Blood unto Life Eternal, and surrenders up Heart and Life to the blessed duct of his Spirit and Word. Walking on in holy Precepts it drinks Comfort out of Promises, following hard after Holiness it meets with Peace, such as passes understanding; overcoming earth with all its Troops of vanity, it
ascends and takes Heaven by vio∣lence; and renting off the dark veil of Time, it looks into Eter∣nity, and aspires after that Bliss∣making Vision, which is the true Center of it. Where this Grace is, there the Gospel is not in word only, but in power: The Truth stands not meerly without in the letter, but is entertained within, and springs up in the Heart as a seed of Immortal Happiness. The Divine Excel∣lencies of this noble Grace have drawn out my Thoughts in the ensuing Discourse now offered to publick view. The Errata's and Infirmities in it beg the Rea∣ders kind Indulgence: And the holy Truths therein call for a Practical Improvement. If but any Mite may get into the Treasury, if any thing thereby
may redound to the Glory of God, or profit of Men, it is enough; and a sufficient re∣compence for him, who is A Lover of Truth, Edw. Polhill.
PRECIOUS FAITH. CHAP. I. Some general acceptions of the word Faith in Scripture, premised. Precious Faith de∣scribed, and considered in the general na∣ture of it, as it is a grace of the Holy Spirit. THE word [Faith] hath many ac∣ceptions in Scripture, among which I shall touch upon some. Sometimes it imports the Go∣spel or object of Faith; thus St. Paul preached the faith, Gal. 1.23. that is, the Gospel, which is worthy to be so called, because it is the great Engine, which lets down Gods faith to men, and catches up mens faith to God.
Sometimes it imports a dogmatical or histori∣cal Faith, which is an assent to the word of God as true and infallible: thus the very devils be∣lieve a God, and (which is more then many sin∣ful worms do) they tremble, Jam. 2.19. Sometimes it imports a temporary Faith, which is but a dogmatical faith, budding and blossom∣ing with some tasts and joys in the things of God: thus the stony ground received the word with joy, Mat. 13.20. Sometimes it imports a miraculous Faith, which by a special instinct gives such a touch up∣on the power of God, as to produce wonderful effects in nature; a grain of this is enough to re∣move mountains, Mat. 17.20. Sometimes it imports saving Faith, called by the Apostle precious Faith, 2 Pet. 1.1. Omitting the rest, I shall fix my Discourse up∣on this, and that upon a double account. First, This precious faith virtually includes the rest. In Faith in the first notion, there is only the Gospel or object standing alone by it self, but in this faith the act and the object are in sweet conjunction; the soul is Gospellized, and the Gospel, which outwardly runs in the letter, is inwardly glorified in the believers heart. In dogmatical faith there is an assent to the truths of God, and so there is in precious faith, but in a more eminent manner; the first embracing the Gospel only in its naked truth, and history is but a dead and a cold notion, but the second embra∣cing the same in its goodness and spiritual myste∣ry, carries life and warmth in it: temporary
faith hath some joys in the things of God, but precious faith hath the same in a more excellent way; the former is but a flash and away, a flow∣er without a root, the Gospel is not radicated in him, but lies as it were upon the surface of his heart: Jesus Christ is not entirely received by him, but by parcels only; hence a little storm of persecution blows off all the blossoms of his joy, but the latter is a thing of a higher excellency and permanency. In the true believer the Go∣spel is intimately rooted, and Christ impartially received, even cross and all: Hence such an one can joy in tribultions, and under afflictions wait for consolations. Miraculous faith can work wonders, and so can precious too: the first works wonders in the body of nature, by a touch upon Almighty power, and the second works won∣ders in the souls of men, by a touch upon Al∣mighty grace. A grain of this can remove spiri∣tual mountains, mountains of guiltiness off from the Conscience, mountains of hardness off from the Will, and mountains of earthiness off from the Affections: outward miracles in the Chur∣ches infancy followed believers for a while, Mark 16.17. but inward miracles are ever found in them; and no wonder, for the exceed∣ing greatness of Gods power is unto them that be∣lieve, Eph. 1.19. Secondly, This precious faith doth compleat the noblest instinct in man; I mean, that natu∣ral pulse which he hath after happiness. All men would be happy, but none ever hit upon it till faith came. The Pagans by natural light
have some knowledge of God, the supream good, but the only access to him is by faith. The Philosophers, whose profession was the stu∣dy of wisdom, and whose lamp of reason burn∣ed brighter then others, were no better then the blind Sodomites, unable to find the door of happiness.De civitat. Dei. l. 19. c. 1. Hence, as St. Austin relates out of Varro, the Philosophers might be divided into two hundred eighty eight Sects about the chief good, which faith can indubitably immediately point at. Some Philosophers placed mans hap∣piness in pleasures, which yet are but the sad transformations of men into bruits. Some in honours, which yet are but great servitudes, which made the Noble Charles the fift weep o∣ver his Son, upon whose shoulders, at his re∣tire out of the world, he left the burden of a Crown. Some in riches, which yet are but thorns choaking that precious seed of the word, which would grow up (if embraced) into life eternal. Others, which were better marks-men, in moral virtues, yet even these (as a learned man observes) are but circa res humanas, their sphear is but humane converse; and they do not (as faith) elevate the soul into a conjunction with God, which is the only true happiness. When the Apostle in his Catalogue of graces (which minister an entrance into the everlasting kingdom) puts in temperance and patience, 2 Pet. 1.6. he speaks of them as Graces, not as meer moral virtues, but as Christianized by Faith, which in that place is set in the van. But waving the Pagan world, let us come to
the Christian. There the way of life is clearly manifested; yet none, void of faith, ever trod a right step in it, nay, nor spiritually discerned it, unto them that are without all things are in pa∣rables, Mark 4.11. to the unbeliever, though never so great a Scholar, Christ and grace and heaven are but as it were in parables. The Kohathites (whose name, as a learned man ob∣serves, is derived from stupidity) carried the holy things covered, and so do all the unrege∣nerate Rabbies in the Church, till faith waken them out of the stupor of the fall: they discern not spiritually the beatitude objectively exposed to view in the Gospel, till faith draw off the vail from their hearts, but as soon as that is done, the way into the holy of Holies is mani∣fest, and passable, and so the  instinct af∣ter happiness receives a compleature. Now this precious faith, being precious in the least minim of it, may be considered either in its first and lowest measure, or in its fruits and glori∣ous progresses. In its first and lowest measure, it is the very condition of the Gospel, and puts a man by virtue thereof into a state of salvati∣on; whosoever believeth, even with the least degree of precious faith, shall be saved. I shall therefore first treat of it according to the lowest measure, which hath salvation entailed on it, and then proceed to the progresses and fruits thereof; and according to the lowest measure, it may be thus described. Precious Faith is a grace of the holy Spirit, whereby the heart su∣pernaturally illuminated, doth so believe the te∣stimony
of God in the sacred Scriptures, as in a way of trust or dependance to resign and yield up it self unto Jesus Christ as Mediator, and in and through him unto God, according to his word. In general, it is a grace of the holy Spirit: in spe∣cial, there is in it, first a supernatural illumina∣tion, which is as the womb of the morning, in which this child of light is conceived, and then (which is the first-born of that light) there is a belief of the testimony of God: and lastly (which makes up the total sum of this grace) there is a dependant yielding or resignation of the soul unto the Mediator, and through him to God, according to the word. I shall in order treat of all these, and so unsold the description at large. The first thing is, in generall faith is a grace of the holy Spirit. The famous St. Austin once let drop a strange word: It is said (saith he) God worketh all in all, but not, he believeth all in all; therefore, that we believe, is our own, but that we work good, it is Gods, who giveth the holy Spirit to believers; but the good man soon called it back again,Aug. Re∣tract. l. 1. c. 23. Profeco non dicerem, truly I should not have said it, if I had then known faith to be the gift of God. The Pelagians of old understood by grace only, their own free∣will, and the Gospel-doctrine; hence that im∣pious saying of theirs refuted by St. Austin, à Deo habemus, quòd homines sumus, à nobis ip∣sis, quòd justi sumus: faith with them was but the issue of their own free-will, and it is no o∣ther with the Socinians. Peccatum originis (saith the Racovian Catechism) nullum porsus est, quare
nec liberum arbitrium vitiare potuit, there was not so much as a bruise of free-will in the fall; we have a free power of our own to believe, but what saith the Scripture? Ʋnto you  it is gratuitously given to believe, Phil. 1.29. and faith is called the Spirit of Faith, 2 Cor. 4.13. because it is not from our own spirit; and in express terms, the grace of God, Acts 11.23. it lodges in mans heart, as a beam of that eter∣nal grace which is in Gods: and to make this clear I shall offer three things. First, This precious faith is a thing above the natural faculty of man. There is in man a natu∣ral faith or believing faculty, and the very Phi∣osophers would call for it from their Scholars; but as it is in the fall of a house, not this or that beam falls, but all comes down at once: so it was in the fall of man, not this or that natural faculty fell, but all together, and among the rest, the believing faculty fell also: hence as it lyes in the dust and rubbish of the fall, it centers in the creature, and without the elevation of grace, it can in no wise lift up it self to God and Christ. We are begotten again to a lively hope by the resurrection of Jesus Christ, saith the Apostle, 1 Pet. 1.3. Observe, there must be a touch from Christ in glory, or else there will be no elevation; Christ must first apprehend us, Phil. 3.12. or else our believing faculty is but as a dead hand, unable to apprehend him. Secondly, This precious faith is a thing a∣bove moral virtue. There is a vst difference
between moral virtues and spiritual graces: the seeds of moral virtues are found in lapsed na∣ture, but of spiritual graces there are none at all in it, nothing but a naked capacity. Moral virtues do from those natural seeds bud and spring forth into being under the common in∣fluence of the spirit, but spiritual graces, not being seeded in nature, are meer infusions or creations; the seed of God must drop down from heaven into the heart, or else these can∣not exist: hence the Apostle in contradistinction to the virtues of men calls them the virtues of God, 1 Pet. 2.9. such a thing is faith, of a no∣bler extraction then all the moral virtues in the world. Thirdly, This precious Faith advances both our natural faculties and our moral virtues. It advances our natural faculties, and so shews it self what it is: grace is nature elevated above it self, a reason with an heavenly light in it, a will with an holy law in it, and affections as it were upon the wings of Angels, soaring into the upper world. After such sort doth faith elevate the humane faculties: when faith comes, God shines into the heart, and then the Rea∣son, which before had a cloud on it, sparkles out as a pearl in the Sun-beams; the day-star is up in the heart and whilest others live by candlelight, the believer hath the Sun; then the will which lay in its lusts as a slave in its chains, is set upon the wheel and made free indeed; then the affections, which conversed among the tombs of the creatures, are no lon∣ger
here, but are risen with Christ to seek the things above. Moreover it advances moral virtues also, it grafts them upon a nobler stock, they are no longer meer blossoms of reason, but fruits of the spirit. Josephus re∣lating the patience of the Maccabees under the torments of the bloody Antiochus, cryes up, Reason, Reason, as if that were the rock upon which they stood; but sure, he speaks below them, a greater then reason was there, even faith, as the Apostle asserts, Heb. 11.35. a higher spirit then their own acted in their pa∣tience, and elevated it above meer morality. Again, meer moral virtues, issuing meerly out of our own reason, are apt to breed a moth of pride and vain self-reflection: here we find the Moralist crowing after a strange rate, Beatae vitae causa & firmamentum est, sibi sidere, turpe est Deos fatigare,Sence. Epist. 31. quid votis apus est? fac te felicem, exurge & te dignum singe Deo, as if he would have no other happiness but what was of his own making; but when Faith comes, off go the plumes of pride, and humility is as a vail over all the moral vir∣tues. I live in temperance and justice (saith the believing Moralist) yet not I, but Christ liveth in me. Add hereunto meer moral virtues in their intention, rise no higher then their own level of humanity; but when faith comes, there is a pearl in the head, a pure intention in each of them towards the glory of God: he that before was temperate to himself, just to others, and patient to necessity, is now all
these to God; Feci Deo, is the Motto of every moral act. To conclude, what sweet and strong motives Faith adds unto moral virtues, may appear in the famous instance of Justus Lipsius,Melch. A∣dam. Vit. Philosoph. that great humanist and admirer of Morality, who in his last sickness, being told by one present, that he might now fetch much comfort from the Stoical Philosophers, made this answer, Illa sunt va∣na, Domine Jesu, da mihi patientiam Chri∣stianam, those are but vain things, Lord Je∣sus, give me a Christian patience. Thus much touching Faith in general.
CHAP. II. Of the special nature of Faith, and here of Spiritual Illumination, the first ingre∣dient therein. What it is, with the necessity thereof unto Faith, demon∣strated. THE next thing is to consider Faith in its special nature; and here the first thing in order, is supernatural illumination: touch∣ing which, I shall first shew what that is, and then demonstrate the necessity of it to Faith. And first, what it is, it is God shining into the heart, and lighting our candle, to make us dis∣cern divine things in a spiritual way. It is an il∣lumination above nature subjectively, and not objectively only; it is a thing above reason and all its improvements made upon external ob∣jects; reason may be taken in a double posture, either sitting with the glass of the creatures be∣fore it, and so it is meerly the light of nature, or else sitting with the glass of the Scriptures before it, and so it is a notional knowledge of Divinity; but this supernatural light is above reason in both these postures: First, take rea∣son with the creature-glass before it, and this supernatural light is much above it. And here I might shew, how much the Scripture-glass excells that of the creature: the divine words
there out-shine the Sun, out-weigh the earth, out-vye all the treasures, and out-relish all the sweetnesses in nature. God is more glorious in the Scripture-robes, then in all the visible world: his chariot in the word is statelier then that in the clouds. Evangelical light is a richer garment upon him then meer natural; in the creature there is but a print or footstep of God, but in the Scripture there is his very image and resemblance. Also, which is a consequent on the former, this supernatural light, having the purer glass, is of a far greater latitude then meer reason: it spreads it self into many myste∣ries, which never entred into natural reason, but were hid from ages in the divine mind, it takes a view of those rare Evangelical pearls which were never digged out of reasons mine, but dropt down from heaven unto the sons of men: But, because the comparison of these two lights as to their outward glasses and lati∣tudes is not so pertinent, I shall compare them as to their inward natures, and only in such things as both of them extend unto, and a vast difference will appear between them. First, Reason is a far lower light then that of Faith: in natural light Reason is the very facul∣ty, but in supernatural it is but a capacity: God must shine into the heart, there must be light upon light, supernatural upon natural, or else there is no faith. David prays, open or (as the original hath it) reveal thou mine eyes, Psal. 119.18. There is in faith, a revelation of eyes, and not of objects only; the Apostle speaks
of being renewed in the very spirit of the mind, Eph. 4.23. the rational spirit is the candle of the Lord, but unless it be new lighted, it is too dim since the fall to believe the things of God. Secondly, Reason is a far weaker light then that of Faith. It is a light shining in darkness, and after all its glimmerings, it leaves but a foolish heart and vain imaginations, Rom. 1.21. it is as a little spark  an ocean of reigning corruptions, and these keep the heart from taking fire with the love of those excellencies which are known by nature. The Gentiles knew God, but they did not like to have him in their knowledge, Rom. 1.28. millions of unruly lusts, like the sons of Belial about Lots house, beset this natural light, and keep it as it were in pri∣son; thus the Apostle, they withheld it in un∣righteousness, Rom. 1.18. and it is too weak to break out of this prison, and shew it self pra∣ctically: I shall give some instances hereof. All Nations in all climates and through all ages, have conspired together to confess a Deity: Conscience within bears witness to him, and so do all the creatures without also; one would wonder therefore that ever Idolatry should get footing in the world, but what saith the Apostle, they changed the truth of God into a lye, and the glory of the incorruptible one into a corruptible image, Rom. 1.23.25. there were store of abo∣minable idols among them; no doubt natural light gave its secret vote for God, but it was but the vote of a poor prisoner altogether insig∣nificant,
it was not strong enough to make them own God in his own world. Again, reason and nature say, that God must be worshipped with the heart, and that a pure heart, purâ mente colendus, was the old verse, in suo cui{que} consecrandus est pectore, said Seneca. God hath not , a more proper place upon earth then a pure heart, saith Hierocles; O divine saying, next door to that of our Savi∣our, blessed are the pur in heart, for they shall see God. But after all this, can this natural light work a dram of true sanctity or holiness in the heart? No, the very Schoolmen them∣selves (who ever give nature her due with an overplus) will not say so, only they say, faci∣enti quod in se est, Deus revelabit Christum & largietur gratiam. Well, if this hypothesis (which I am not now to dispute) were true, can there be an instance given among all the Pagans from the morning of the world till this day, of any one man who by the right use of turals ar∣rived at true grace? If so, what will become of that in the Apostle? Who hath called us with an holy calling; not according to our works, but according to his own purpose and grace, 2 Tim. 1.9. If not, O what a poor weak light is this of nature? and how long and universally a pri∣soner hath it been? indeed true sanctity or ho∣liness is never found without humility, but touching that, there is no footstep nor shadow of commendation in all the Pagan writers, saith the learned Amyraldus, it is not so much as a virtue among them: on the contrary ,
greatness of soul is reckoned among Aristotles virtues. Well then might Erasmus his Sancte Socrates have been spared. Notable is that of St. Bernard,Epist. 190. some (saith he) whilest they go a∣bout to make Plato a Christian, prove themselves heathens. Again, because possibly the light of reason may be weakest in the concerns of Reli∣gion, I shall instance in other things. Doth not nature and reason plead for all things of common honesty and humanity, and yet in the Laws of Lycurgus, which were of high renown, and commended even by the Oracle of Apollo, and which (as Plutarch relates) Lycurgus took singular pleasure to see put in ure, even as God rejoyced to see the world move and turn about: I say in these there are such obscenities and in∣humanities as would put any one to the blush to see them in story; what else are the dancing of maids naked, and throwing weak children into a pit of water, spoken of by Plutarch? well might the Lacedaemonians have spared the Temple and Sacrifices to their Law-giver, un∣less he had been truer to the Law of Nature. Again, is not self-preservation an intimate and natural impress in the heart of man? it is not scripta sed nata Lex, said the Orator; and yet this ingraven Law was not strong enough, no not in a grave and noble Cato, to keep him from murdering himself, and tearing out his own bowels; and over this unnatural act Seneca sounds a triumph, as being a noble and heroi∣cal contempt of death it self, that, that sword of his, which was yet pure from the blood of
others, might let out his own; but hear the censure of St. Austin,De Civit. Dei. l. 19. c. 4. Ʋtrum obsecro Cato ille patientiâ an impatientiâ se peremit? non enim haec fecisset, nisi victoriam Caesaris impatienter tu∣lisset, and in another place, non erat honestas turpia praecavens,L 1. c. 23. sed infirmitas adversa non su∣stinens, it was but a proud impatience, and mi∣serable trampling upon the Law of Nature: Moreover the light of reason doth really pro∣duce many moral virtues; and yet in these wherein its greatest strength lyeth, it is too weak to elevate any one of them to the glory of the great Creator;Contra Jul. Pelag. l. 4. c. 3. therefore, as St. Austin hath observed, the whole body of Pagan vir∣tues, for want of a single eye at that great end, is full of darkness. Thus much of the weak∣ness of reason: on the other side, the light of faith hath a great deal of strength in it; this will not, cannot, be commonly imprisoned, it is an holy unction, and at last will be uppermost, it is a mighty Engine whereby the hly Spirit lifts the heart up into belief and resignation; a thing of high birth and great activity, being born of God and overcoming the world, 1 Joh. 5.4. and because the light of reason was not able to bear up the interest of God among men, this supernatural light came to do it. In the pri∣mitive Church, whilest this shined clear, there were no such things as outward Idols or Ima∣ges, afterwards, upon the declension thereof, those things crept in by degrees, first into ban∣ners and then into Churches, and there, first for instruction only, and afterwards for adora∣tion;
yet nevertheless this holy spark shewed it self in some, as in Epiphanius his cutting the vail, and Serenus his breaking the Images, and divers others abhorrency of Idolatry; and what this supernatural light doth in Churches against outward Idols, that it doth in hearts a∣gainst inward: it will allow no Idol to stand in the secret place, not an Ashteroth of riches, not a Venus of pleasure, not a Baal, a ruling lord∣ing lust in the heart, every indulged lust stands upon the unilluminated and unresigned will; and, after Faith hath purified the heart, it must give way for God to set up his Throne there: that pure heart which the Philosophers talk of at random, as a Geographer of a terra incogni∣ta, faith plainly discovers, and practically ope∣rates. Those dishonesties and inhumanities which reason could not keep out of Laws, faith casts away from private Christians, as the com∣mon mire and dirt of a wicked world: those moral virtues which reason could not elevate to the Creators glory, faith spiritualizes by a pure intention towards it. Thirdly, The light, of reason is at a greater distance from God then that of Faith, and so doth not see him so clearly in the works of cre∣ation and providence as that doth. And first for creation, though it be a clear glass of the eternal power and Godhead, yet the Philoso∣phers, as so many Babel-builders, are miserably confounded in their language about it. Thales fetches all things out of water, as if that were the universal fountain. Anaximenes out of air,
as if by the rarefaction and condensation there∣of all were produced. Hippasus and Heracli∣tus held, that all things came out of a primi∣tive fire or light, which by its death or extin∣ction generated all. Democritus and Epicurus affirmed, that the world was made by chance, a lucky concourse of atomes framed it as it is. Pythagoras would have all things generated out of numbers, and the harmony thereof. Ari∣stotle, the Prince of Peripateticks, asserted the world to be eternal. Plato attributed eternity only to the matter; and before him Anaxago∣ras was the first, who added a mind to matter, saying, Omnia simul erant, deinde accessit mens, eaque composuit. O dark and confused Laby∣rinth of opinions! How or which way shall a man extricate himself without faith? By faith we understand that the worlds were framed by the word of God, Heb. 11.3. If Faith do but open its eyes upon the first Chapter of Genesis, the Creation, which before was dark as the Chaos, is all clear as the light. The believer sees God in every creature, not only in the great Regions of Heaven and Earth, but also in the least Atoms or particles of nature. I am, is discovered wherever there is any thing of Be∣ing: And as for Providence, reason hath not been much clearer among the Philosophers touching it, then touching creation. Aristotle holding the world to be eternally from God by emanation as light from the Sun, must also hold its continuance to be in the same manner, and without any voluntary act, such as Providence
is. God (saith he) is the first Mover, he moves the heavens and those other bodies subalternate∣ly; so God is the universal cause, and all the wheels in nature move under him; only con∣tingent things, which are not within the chain of natural causality, seem according to Aristotle not to be administred by God. Epicurus, who makes the world to consist of a fortuitous con∣course of infinite petit Atoms, owns no Provi∣dence at all: God will not break his rest and serene tranquility with any mundane affairs, and indeed in reason a world made by chance must be so governed. The Stoicks in stead of Provi∣dence brought in a Fate, or absolute necessity, resulting out of a series or connexion of causes, and binding God himself as well as other things. Plutarch relating how Timoleon was strangely delivered from two murderers, instead of ac∣knowledging a Providence, wonders at the ar∣tifice of Fortune. Nay, meer reason is apt to vilifie the great works of God: thus some said that Moses, in stead of dividing the Sea, did but take the advantage of a low Tyde to carry the Israelites over the washes, when it was low water. But when the light of faith comes, the hand of God is seen in every thing, not only in the great moments of nature, but even in the fall of sparrows and numbring of hairs. Thus far of Reason with the Creature-glass before it, but to go on. Secondly, Take reason with the Scripture-glass before it, and this supernatural light is yet above it. And here I must first admit what
reason under the influence of a common blessing can do; and then shew, how much superna∣tural light doth transcend it. Reason under the influence of a common blessing may attain a rich furniture of humane learning, and so perusing the holy Scriptures, may understand them by Tongues critically, and by School-divinity di∣stinctly, and by Logick in the consequences and connexions, and by History in some Propheti∣cal parts, and by Rhetorick in the tropes and figures, and by Comments in the abstruse and difficult places; and consequently it may ga∣ther in a great notion of Divinity, much larger in the extent and latitude thereof then the knowledge of many true believers. Yet after all this notional knowledge attained, there is in the meanest true believer an higher and diviner light, a thing above meer reason and noti∣on; and this I shall demonstrate several ways. First, The light of reason with all its ac∣quired notions is not a light as yet congruous to the things of God, which are spiritually dis∣cerned only by a supernatural light. To make out this, it will be worth our while to consider that famous place, 1 Cor. 2. where the Apostle clearly distinguishing two sorts of men, the na∣tural man and the spiritual; and two sorts of spirits, the spirit of man making the natural man, and the spirit of God making the spiritual man; and two sorts of objects, the things of man, which are the line of knowledge to the natural man endued with an humane spirit, and
the things of God, which are the line of know∣ledge to the spiritual man endued with the spi∣rit of God; Positively lays down this Thesis, the natural man , the soully man, or the man that hath only a rational soul, receiveth not , as a full vessel is not capable of the things of the spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him, neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned, ver. 14. In this Thesis the Apostle by the , or soully man, doth not mean a sensual man, who hath defloured his reason with sensual indulgen∣ces, for then he would not have distinguished between the natural man and the spiritual, but between the sensual man and the rational; nei∣ther would he have distinguished between the spirit of man and the spirit of God, but be∣tween the spirit of man or reason drowned in sensual pleasures, and the spirit of man or rea∣son keeping its station and just authority over the sensual appetite; neither doth the Apostle here mean a natural or rational man sitting in Pagan darkness, without the Gospel, for he saith, the natural man receiveth not the things of God, which imports an offer of the Gospel to him, and he receiveth them not, because they are foolishness to him: which they could not be, if altogether unknown; and (saith he) he cannot know them, why? not because they are not ex∣ternally propounded (which is the Pagans case) but because they are spiritually discerned: But the Apostle here meaneth by the natural or soully man, a man of reason, and that never forfeited
by sensual lusts, and a man of reason with the Gospel set before him; and so his conclusion is this, A man of reason with the Gospel before him, cannot receive or know the things of God. But you will say, if this be so, how can a man of reason with the Gospel before him, arrive at so great a notion of Divinity, as is before admit∣ted? I answer, the key to open this is in the Text, the natural man cannot know the things of God, because they are spiritually discerned. A man by reason and its furniture of learning may in the perusal of the holy Scriptures gather up a world of notions, and so know the things of God notionally; but he knows them not spiri∣tually, and by consequence not congruously to their spiritual nature. For the opening of this, we must consider, that there is in the holy Scriptures something humane, or which may be inventoried among the things of man, as the letters and words made up of them, and sen∣tences made up of words; not as if these were not dictated exactly by God himself, but that they are common to humane and profane Au∣thors: I mean not for the divineness of the mat∣ter, but for the phrases and forms of speech. And there is in them something Divine, or which must be computed among the things of God, as the mysteries and spiritual things them∣selves, which are represented by those words and phrases. I may illustrate this distinction farther by that of our Saviour, If I have told you earthly things, and you believe them not, how shall you believe, if I tell you of heavenly things,
Joh. 3.12. I pray, what earthly things did our Saviour tell them? was not he there preaching on that divine Theme of Regeneration? Very true, but Christ spake to them of Regeneration under the shadow of a birth and a wind, and not according to the heavenly and spiritual na∣ture thereof in it self. Thus the words and phrases in Scripture, being of common use, are as it were humane types and shadows, but the mysteries and spiritual things themselves are altogether divine. Now to apply this distin∣ction, reason improved, reaching to the things of man as its proper line, may know the words and sentences in Scripture, and so gather up a great notion of Divinity: But, unless inlightned by the holy Spirit, which searcheth the things of God, it goeth not beyond its own line, it knows not spiritual things spiritually. Reason without the light of faith, Take it in a Jew at a Sacrifice, and it saw the type only, and not Christ in it. Take it in a Christian at the holy Supper, and it sees only the outward elements, and discerns not the Lords body. Take it in the greatest Rabbi sitting with the Scriptures before him, and it sees them only in the shell or letter, and not in the mystery. And no wonder, for even in common Sciences it may be so; a man may construe and know the Gram∣mar of a principle in Euclide, and yet be igno∣rant of the Mathematical sense of it; much more in divine truths may a man be spiritually igno∣rant, who knows a great deal literally. There∣fore all Scholars may do well in their studies to
do as Zuinglius did, who having arrived at Arts and Tongues, yet in the reading of the holy Scriptures, looked up to heaven. As for the great Doctor the holy Spirit, when he comes in supernatural illumination, then we know the things of God, not by our own spirit but Gods, the very same spirit which breaths in the Scrip∣tures, shines in the heart. Hence spiritual things are discerned spiritually, by a light congruous to their nature; the spirit glorifies and shews forth Christ, as the expression is, John 16.14. Holy truths are as it were transfigured and shewn forth in glory, which before were seen but in the flesh or weakness of the Letter; the Deity sparkles out in the beauty and spiritual lustre of Scripture-mysteries, which before only appeared in the humanity of words and phrases. Now heaven opens, and free-grace passes before us, the secret of the Lord is with us, and we are of his Privy Councel. This is the first and funda∣damental difference, Reason with all its acqui∣red notions is not a light congruous to spiritual things, but the light of Faith is: Out of this all the other are derived. Secondly, Meer Reason digging in the Letter of Scripture, arrives but at notions and shadows of knowledg, and though these be as the sands on the sea shore, they are but a form of knowledg, Rom. 2.20. but when the light of faith comes, there is sound wisdom, Prov. 3.21. or, as the origi∣nal word is, essence; a thing which can no more be made up of meer notions, then a body can of shadows. Faith is the substance or subsistence of
things hoped for, Heb. 11.1. Without it, notions and literal knowledge have no hypostasis in the heart; the spiritual world is as it were lost; God and Christ and Heaven, are but notions: But as soon as faith comes and makes the day-break in the heart, the spiritual world subsists afresh. God is God, and Christ is Christ, and Heaven is Hea∣ven to the soul, all of them are reallized by faith; there is a good treasure in the heart, far more sub∣stantial then Arts and Tongues and School-noti∣ons can make. Thirdly, Reason with its notions arrives but at a knowledge falsly so called, for it knows not the things of God as they are proposed to be known; those things are proposed to be known not as meer notions, but as practical things: to be in the first place chosen, loved, embraced and pra∣ctised, but it knows them only notionally and not practically. That knowledge, whilest materi∣ally true, hath a secret lye in it; thus the Apostle, He that saith, I know him, and keepeth not his commandements, is a lyar, and the truth is not in him, 1 Joh. 2.4. 'Tis not in him in a practical way, so as to ballance the will and affections with the excellency of the things known; but as soon as faith comes, those things are known as they are proposed to be known, as practical things to be improved in heart and life. The supernatural light digests truths into blood and spirits, and turns mysteries into godliness. It knows Law and Gospel in their true tendency, which is holi∣ness; not to be holy is to blast and prophane the meaning of both.
Fourthly, The meer notional knowledge ac∣quired by reason hath no spiritual life or sense in it, it hath no life in it; meer notions are but a dead faith, but faith is a living notion. In an un∣believer the notions are all dead, affording no pulse of holy affections, or motion of true obedi∣ence, they are all buried in a grave of corruption and covered in the dust of earthly things: But as soon as faith comes, there is a resurrection in the soul, the notions before dead now wake out of the dust, and rise in life and power, every truth lives in the heart, and springs up into the new-creature. This supernatural knowledge is a well∣spring of life, Prov. 16.22. and all the vital acts of grace stream from thence. Nay, as our Saviour tells us, it is life eternal, John 17.3. heaven doth dawn and appear in it. Meer notional knowledg hath no spiritual sense in it; the unregenerate man with all his notions, lies as a man in a Le∣thargy, never feeling the weight of sin and wrath, though heavier then rocks and mountains; nor indeed savouring the sweetness of Christ and grace, though infinitely out-relishing all the things in nature. But as soon as faith comes, there are all the senses of the inward man, a seeing the sun of righteousness, an hearing the sweet charms of Gospel-grace, a smelling the odours of Christ, and the holy unction, a tasting how good and gracious the Lord is, and a touching and handling the word of life. The Learned Anatomists curiously pry in∣to the head to find out the commune Sensorium, where all the species and images of sensible things meet together. In the spiritual man faith is
an universal sense, taking in all the species and images of heavenly things into the heart. The learned Junius with all his notions, coming into a poor Country mans house, and hearing him dis∣course warmly and feelingly of Christ, immedi∣ately thought that Religion was more then a no∣tion; and thereupon reflecting on himself, was turned unto God, and no doubt sound by expe∣rience, that faith was much fuller of life and sense then meer notion. Fifthly, The meer notional knowledge gathe∣red in by reason puffeth up, as if some of the Ser∣pents poison were in it, it blows up the heart in∣to proud reflexes. Bonaventure to keep his mind from swelling, used to sweep rooms and wash vessels. I suppose it was, lest his School-notions should swell and make a tumor in his heart. But the light of faith is an humbling thing. If it enter in within the vail, and see God on his Throne, it cries out as the Prophet Isaiah, Wo is me, I am undone. If it fly up to Sinai, and sense the thun∣ders and lightnings of the fiery Law, it puts the soul into a trembling sit. If it go a pilgrimage to Calvary, and there take a view of Christ crucifi∣ed, it is greatly abasive, bowing the heart down under the conscience of sin. If it look inwardly into the heart, and there see the silthy and nasty corruptions in every corner, it will far more humble then Bonaventures sweeping and washing. And the reason of this difference is, meer notions are but the progeny and issue of our own reason, and therefore we are apt to be fond and fall a cockling of them. But supernatural
light comes from above, and is ushered in with a kind of majesty, and therefore humbles and makes us fall down and say, God is in it of a truth. Sixthly, The meerly notional knowledge is but superficial, a flash and away, a light tast, such as was in those Apostates, Heb. 6.5. a word sown but unrooted, such as that in the stony ground, Mat. 13.21. But the light of faith is another thing, it is truth in the hidden parts, Psal. 51.6. wisdom entring into the heart, Prov. 2.10. and a word ingrafted or innaturalized in the mind, Jam. 1.21. As an appendix to this difference, I may add another; meer notions, being but su∣perficial things floating in the brain, do not so establish the heart in Religion, as that supernatu∣ral light which intimately mixes it self with the heart. Hence many Princes and Grandees of the Letter have been sick with intellectual bottles, and shamefully reeled up and down in Articles of Faith. Some stumbling in the mire of gross Pelagianism, and others rowling in the ditch of foul Socinianism; with them Christs Deity is but somnium Athanasii, and original sin but Au∣gustini sigmentum, such horrid spuing from learn∣ed mouths hath been made on the glory of Re∣ligion. And no wonder, for the notionalist wants that love of the truth, which is an antidote against errors, and that pure conscience, which is the Ca∣binet of Divine mysteries. On the other hand, supernatural light is a more establishing thing: the Apostle calls it , the firmament of faith, Col. 2.5. all the heavenly truths are there as so many fixed stars in their Orb. Gerson relates
this story, A man vexed with doubts in Articles of Faith, at last came to such a certainty in them, that he no more doubted of them then of his own life; and this he had (saith he) Non ex ra∣tione aut demonstratione, sed ex humiliatione ac admirabili quâdam Dei illuminatione à montibus aeternis. All grace, because divine, hath an establi∣shing property, and among the rest, so hath the light of faith, because it comes from the eternal mountains. Seventhly, Meer notions are very apt to fume up into niceties and vain curiosities. A famous instance of this we have in the School-men, whose books are the spiders house, made of cob∣webs and fine subtleties, and those spun up into the Palace of the celestial King, and there fastned upon the ineffables of God and the sacred Tri∣nity, as if these might be wrapped up in the quiddities of reason and Philosophy; insomuch as a learned Divine, startled at this audacious vanity, saith, he reads the School-men about such things, as he hears men swear or take Gods name in vain, even seldom, unwillingly, and with hor∣ror. And the learned Capito, who professed Scho∣lastical Divinity, was soon weary thereof, because there is subtilitatis multum, utilitatis parum, found therein. But supernatural light doth not vapor upwards into niceties and curious que∣stions, but influence downwards into the will and affections. It brings the day of power into the heart, and makes a willing people, the holy uncti∣on drops from the head to the heart, and sets all on a flame with love to God and Christ and hea∣venly
things: wisdom speaks excellent things, Prov. 8.6. or, as the original is, it speaks princes or princely things, holy things are such in them∣selves. But when they are taken in by faith, they have a mighty power in the soul: Gods com∣mand to Abraham, entring by faith, wrought down into his will, and he offered up his Isa∣ack. Gods warning to Noah, entring by faith, wrought down into his fear, and he prepared an Ark. The word works effectually in them that be∣lieve, filling the inward man with holy affecti∣ons, and the outward with holy fruits. I shall conclude this difference with an excellent simily of a worthy Divine; A child and a man come into a corn field together, the child falls in love with the blue and red weeds, but the man is for the solid corn: a man of meer notions falls in love with curiosities, and fine speculations, but a man of supernatural light is for the spiritual and practi∣cal truths in Scripture; these are the corn his soul must live upon, whilest the other are but gaieties, and for a shew. Thus far I have spoken, what this supernatu∣ral light is. I shall now proceed to shew that it is requisite to faith: and this will appear in the particulars following. First, Unless a man know that God is, he can∣not believe; how can he rest on the testimony of him, whom he knows not, to have a being? This proposition, Deus est, is according to Aqui∣nas, the preamble of faith: Nay, in the Apostle, it is the first fundamental faith, He that cometh to God, must believe that he is, Heb. 11.6. But you will
say, What need supernatural light for this? Na∣ture and Reason make this known; and indeed they do so, but so weakly, as not to raise up any one faculty in fallen man unto God his Creator. Never did natural light so shew a God, as to raise up his love out of this vain world, nor as to raise up his faith out of creature-confidences unto God. Wherefore this first principle must be seen by a supernatural light, which is indeed a middle kind of light, between the light of glory above, and the light of nature below: It sees the invisible one, not as the blessed Saints see him in the heavenly vision, nor as the meer Naturalists see him by the glimmerings of reason, but in a middle way of gracious illumination. This our Saviour calls eternal life, Joh. 17.3. heaven dawns in it, and nature is illustrated by it. Secondly, As the first step of knowledge in or∣der to faith, is Deus est; so the second is, Deus verax, God is true, yea truth it self, and the first archetypal truth, his testimony is infallible, and all his words Yea and Amen. Unless this be known, a man cannot believe him as a God; the believer sets to his seal that God is true. And, if he did not know it, his seal would be to a blank: and though natural light reveal the truth and ve∣racity of God; yet, as I said before, weakly, and therefore supernatural is required. Thirdly, The third step of knowledge in or∣r to faith, is Deus dixit, seu revelavit, God hath spoken or revealed himself in the Scriptures. These are the very words and testimony of God himself. If a man do know that God is, and is
true, yet unless he know that God hath spoken in the word, that there is his very testimony, he cannot believe. Should we ask a man, why do you believe that Jesus Christ is the Redeemer of the world? it would be no rational answer for him to say, I believe it, because God is true: No, though God be the first infinite truth, yet unless he speak and testifie so much, it cannot be believed upon his testimony or authority, the only satisfacto∣ry answer is this, I believe it, because God, who is true, hath spoken and revealed it. It is necessary to faith, to know the holy Scriptures to be the word and testimony of God; that God speaks and reveals himself in them, and this cannot be known without supernatural light. To explain which, I shall lay down two things. First, There are in the holy Scriptures cer∣tain  or internal marks, whereby it may be known, that the Scriptures are the word and testimony of God. Secondly, These  or internal marks cannot be known without supernatural light. First, There are in the holy Scriptures certain marks or characters whereby they reveal them∣selves to be the very word of God, even as the Sun manifests it self by its own light. There is a Majesty in the stile; what book or writing ever run in such a strain, as thus saith the Lord? where before it was there ever any universal Law made unto all mankind, Kings and beggars without distinction? who ever before comman∣ded obedience upon pain of eternal torments in another world, or allured obedience with pro∣mises
of everlasting glory there? The fiery Law carries an awe with it, as if the thunders and lightnings of Sinai were not yet over: And in the Gospel the kingdom of heaven approaches and opens it self to believers, as it were in sparkles of glory. Again, there is a treasure of Di∣vine mysteries, touching the sacred Trinity. Nature is mute, but Scripture speaks out; Reason is but a little child, and cannot pass this infinite Abyss, unless Faith in the word take him upon his back and carry him over. Touching that Incarnation of the Son of God, never any natural man dream∣ed, or so much as started a thought of it; but in Scripture this and all the train of mysteries in our Redemption break forth in their glory. That book, which hath such and the like myste∣ries, infinitely transcending all the thoughts and reasons of man, doth by them shew that it came out of the bosom of God himself. Again, there is an unparallel'd purity in it, such as is no where else to be found. This Sun hath no spots in it, this Diamond hath no flaws in it, there is no∣thing terrene or carnal in this heavenly piece, as long as it hath stood in the world: not a dust or a dreg can be found therein, neither ever did or will it licence the least of erratas in man: In its pure spiritualness, it casts a chain upon the very thoughts and first motions of sin, and traces up sin to the black nest of corruption in lapsed na∣ture; it calls for a pure heart, made from hea∣ven in regeneration and new-creation, and the noblest births of Reason and Morality will not serve the turn. Such things as these are not so
much as named in the writings of the worlds Sophies. Plato and Aristotle never arrived at such notions. Moreover, it hath a wonderful efficacy on the hearts of men; it looks into the inmost closet and retiring room of the heart; and, like Christ, it comes and stands in the midst of it: when all the doors are shut by obstinacy and unbelief, it awakens and alarums the sleeping sinner, and makes such impressions and deep wounds in the conscience, that it plainly appears no less then the arm of God was in it. It Evangelizes the heart, and turns it into its own nature, that it may be a Temple for that spirit which breaths in the Gospel. It comforts the heart, and fills it with joy unspeakable and full of glory. That place Rom. 1.17. was to Luther porta Paradisi, the door of Paradice; and that 1 Tim. 1.15. was a sea of sweetness to holy Bilney: such activities as these are above the sphear of nature, and speak no less then the divine extraction thereof. Lastly, to name no more, the very plot and design of the Scriptures is transcendently divine; all the holy lines run into that central divinity, that God is to be exalted, and man debased. Oh! what man∣ner of self-denial doth it call for? how doth it labour to un-selve, and as it were un-man us, that God may be all in all? There Reason, as fair a Jewel as it is must vail its beauty in an acknow∣ledgment of its own folly, and yield up it self to be new lighted from heaven. The Will, as free an Empress as it is, must lay by its Crown in a con∣fession of its spiritual slavery, and yield up it self to be made free by grace. The Man must be
no longer a man in himself, but a man in Christ, clothed in a better righteousness, and acted by a higher spirit then his own. And how doth it o∣pen the glory, and blazon the arms of God? how admirably doth it set him forth in all his Attri∣butes? his eternity is the rock of ages, his immu∣tability an invariable and inconvertible Sun, his righteousness like the great mountains, his decrees and judgments a mighty deep, his mercy a glory, a mass of riches never to be told over, his holiness as the pure unmixed light, his justice as the devouring unquenchable fire; In a word, there all the glo∣ry of his Attributes pass before the believers eye: such a book as this must needs be divine. Secondly, These marks or characters in Scrip∣ture cannot be known without supernatural light. Meer reason receiveth them not; like the child Samuel, it hears a voice, a sound of words, but it knows not that it is the Lord: insomuch that some have slighted the Scriptures. Politianus said, that he never spent time to less purpose then in reading them; and Julian, that there was as good stuff in Pindars Odes as in Davids Psalms. Had they known the word or testimony of God in them, they would not have crucified them by their wretched blasphemies: But when the light of Faith comes, the Scripture appears not in letters and words only, but in the divine and heavenly characters, and by these it bears wit∣ness to it self, that it is the word of God. There is a double cause of Faith, an effective cause and an objective: the effective cause is the holy spirit inlightning the understanding and moving the
will; and the objective is the Scripture it self, by its own innate light and Majesty revealing its divinity to the inlightned soul. Tertullian having this holy light in him, adored the fullness of Scrip∣ture. St. Austin seemeth to be taken to admirati∣on with the purity of it, as not admitting so much as an officious lyc. Wheresoever the supernatural light comes, the Scripture manifests it self to be divine. Fourthly, The fourth step of knowledge in or∣der to Faith, is Deus revelavit Evangelium, God hath revealed a Gospel, a way of salvation and e∣ternal happiness. Faith (as I shall shew hereafter) is not a meer belief of the divine testimony, but a dependant resignation to God and Christ; and to this resignation no man arrives, unless he first see an overtopping superlative excellency in the Gospel, outbidding the world and all the lusts thereof; and verily believe that there and there only is the way of life and happiness: And thus to see and believe is beyond the line of rea∣son and all its acquired notions. The natural man in the midst of all his notions carries a false bal∣lance in his heart, which makes as if every trifling vanity did out-weigh God and Christ and hea∣venly things and whilest the ballance is thus, he cannot resign: and thus it will be till supernatu∣ral light come, then and not till then doth the ballance turn by a right estimate of the Gospel and the promises thereof. The spirit inlightning, and not humane reason, takes the things of Christ, and shews them forth in their glory, Joh. 16.14. And in this way God works the heart to resig∣nation.
CHAP. III. Of the second part of Precious Faith, the belief of the Testimony of God in the Scriptures: What manner of belief it is, and the consequents of it, in order to an holy self-resignation. THUS far of the first thing in Faith, super∣natural illumination. I now proceed to the second, A belief of the testimony of God in the Scriptures: and here I need use no words to prove this belief an ingredient in Faith, for faith in the Grammatical notion of it, is nothing else but a belief of a Testimony; and, being applied to God, it is a belief of his Testimony in Scrip∣ture. Only I shall open two things; first, what manner of belief of the divine testimony in Scri∣ptures this is: and then, what the consequents of it are in order to resignation. First, What manner of belief this is. And this I shall explain in these particulars. First, This belief is divine, and congruous to the divine testimony. Such as the testimony is, such must be the ratio credendi: the Scriptures be∣ing a divine testimony, must be believed for themselves, because of the divine authority stamped upon them. Thus the Thessalonians re∣ceived the word, not as the word of man, but, as it is in truth, the word of God, 1 Thess. 2.13. they lodged the divine truth in a divine faith, which
was a suitable entertainment. Humana omnia dicta testibus egent, Dei autem sermo ipse sibi test is est, saith Salvian, humane words want witness, but divine carry their own testimony in them∣selves. To believe the Scriptures because God speaks in them, is a divine faith, but to believe them upon any other account, is below their divine authority, and but an humane faith. For example, to believe the Scriptures for the saying of the woman, for the Churches testimony, is but an humane faith, for it stands on no higher ful∣ciment then an humane testimony, and therefore can be but an humane faith. Here the subtile Je∣suite would help out the Papist at a dead lift: that faith (saith he) which is resolved into the Churches authority is neque purè divina, neque purè humana, sed quasi media inferioris cujusdam ordinis; but what saith the learned Pemble to him, Just so men use to speak when they cannot tell what to say; It is Quasi, and Aliquomodo, and Alicujus generis, it is somewhat, if they could tell what, thus he. 'Tis undoubtedly clear, that that faith which calls any man Master on earth, and centers on an humane testimony, such as that of the Church, made up of men, must needs be, can be no other then humane. In∣deed the Churches testimony may be inter mo∣tiva fidei, but (if the faith be divine) it can∣not be inter formales rationes sidei. A man in the dark labyrinth of nature may be led out by the Churches lamp, but when he is out, he sees the Sun by its own light, he believes the Scriptures for their own divinity, though per ministerium
Ecclesiae, yet not propter authoritatem Ecclesiae. Divine faith hath its Master in heaven, and its record on high. Secondly, Which follows on the other, this be∣lief is a firm and stable thing, because built on the divine authority of Scripture; we believe and are sure, saith Peter, Joh. 6.69. Nothing on earth can so ascertain things unto us, as faith in the divine testimony. Julian the Apostate glorying in the Pagan learning, jeered at the Christians, because all their wisdom was but in that one word Credo, I believe: but divine faith for all his prophane taunt, hath more firmness and real certainty in it then all the Sci∣ences in the world; for it sees things in lumi∣ne veritatis primae, in the light of the first truth, and sits even in the infallible chair; so that non potest subesse falsum, a lye cannot sit under it, and glues the heart to the truth in that manner,Eonav. l. 3 disi. 23. quest. 4. that (as the Schoolman hath it) true believers, nec per argumenta, nec per tormenta, nec per blandimenta inclinari possunt, ut veritatem sal∣tem ore tenus negent, nothing could turn them away from the truth. So strong a thing is faith, when it is set upon the rock, the testimony of God; but if it have an humane bottom only, such as the Churches authority, it is weak and wavering, more like a fluctuating opinion then a faith. Durandus asserts, that Science is more certain than faith, and to that strong objection, that the divine authority by which we believe, is more certain then any humane reason by which we know; he answers thus, Divina au∣toritas,
propter quam credimus, licet sit certissi∣ma in se, non tamen nobis, qualitèr enim certi simus,L. 3. dist. 23. quest. 7. quod Deus dicat ea quae credimus, non nisi quia sic tenet Ecclesia? Observe, how this great Scholar abates the certainty of faith, be∣cause he takes up the divinity of Scriptures up∣on trust from the saying of the Church; those who build their faith purely on the divine word, speak after another rate. Junius read∣ing the first chapter of St. John, cried out in a kind of amazement, Divinitatem argumenti & authoritatem sentio: and Reverend Calvin, put∣ting the question how we shall be perswaded that the Scriptures did flow forth from God; answers as roundly as a man doth touching that which is obvious and before his senses,Instit. l. 1. c. 7. perinde est (saith he) ac si quis roget, unde discemus lu∣cem discernere à tenebris, the Scripture reveals it self as the light doth, and to the pure eye of faith it appears divine from its own innate ex∣cellency, and so establishes the heart in its holy truth. To conclude this point, faith is a stable and firm thing; but, by the estimates and lives of men, there seems to be but a very little of it in the world. Did men, as they profess, firm∣ly believe the Scriptures, could they vilifie the commands of the great God as they do? The injunctions of earthly Princes are not served so. Would they slight that wonderful charter of grace and glory in the Gospel? a Patent of petty dignities and possessions here below will be highly valued by them: durst they sin as they do, in the face of hell and wrath flashing
out of the divine threatnings? a Princes sword or Gibbet would cast them into a fit of trem∣bling. O how soon would the things of God cast the ballance in the heart, and outweigh all the world, if the Scriptures were indeed believed: but there being in men only levis opinatio, a light opinion rather then a solid faith touching the same, there necessarily en∣sues a monstrous disproportion between their faith and their life. Thirdly, This belief must be explicite as to the fundamentals of Religion. A meer implicite faith, as to believe in the lump, that all things contained in the holy Scriptures are true, will not serve the turn.In Coloss. 2. v. 2. Non est divina sed belluina fides, quae nuliam habet conceptionem five compre∣hensionem illarum rerum, quae creduntur, saith the excellent Davenant. A meer implicite faith without understanding is a bruitish thing; an explicite faith as to fundamentals is required: this will appear by these ensuing considerati∣ons. First, A meer implicite faith, if at any time might have passed for currant, in the days be∣fore Christs Incarnation, whilest religion was wrapt up in vails and shadows; but even then faith in holy men was explicite according to the measure of divine light imparted unto them: all along they looked to the Messiah, the promi∣sed seed, and probably in an obscure manner to his future sufferings. Whilest Adam was in In∣nocency, there was no promise of a Messiah, no footstep of a sacrifice; but as soon as man was
fallen, out came that first Gospel, the seed of the woman shall bruise the serpents head, Gen. 3.15. and sacrifices were set up: without doubt not without Gods appointment, for God had respect to Abels sacrifice; which, had it been a piece of will-worship, could not have been, and Abol offered it up by faith, Heb. 11.4. which, without a divine word, moves not in the least measure. These sacrifices were as it were vi∣sible Commentaries on that first Gospel, and types of a suffering Messiah. And if so and so by Gods own institution, it is not at all pro∣bable that God should hide the sacred meaning thereof totally from the faith of the first belie∣vers. Adam then, as I conceive, by the eyes of Faith saw the Messiah in that first Gospel, and withall some glimmering of his sufferings in the sacrifices: And if he saw it, no doubt he did preach and reveal it to others,Schola sa∣erif. Disp. 4 and probably (as Franzius conceives) in a solemn manner at the sacrifices. Abel (saith the Apostle) by faith offered up a sacrifice to God, not only by such a faith as did it in obedience to Gods com∣mand, but by such a faith, as through his own sacrifice did pierce to the antitype, the great sa∣crifice of the Messiah.De satis∣fact. Chri∣sti l. 1. sect. 5. Thus the learned Esse∣nius, cum sacrificia Veteris Testamenti fuerint typi sacrificii Christi, ea sides intelligenda est, quâ sacrificium illud refertur ad suum antitypum, such a faith was proper to his sacrifice. In Noahs sacrifice the Lord smelled a sweet savour, or a savour of rest, such as did (saith one of the Rabbins) make him ab irâ suâ quiescere, rest
from his anger, Gen. 8.21. and therefore surely there was more in it then meer beasts and fowls. Noahs faith fetched in him, who was to give himself an offering and sacrifice to God for a sweet-smelling savour. Abraham saw Christs day, that is, his coming and suffering in the flesh, John 8.56. a very great sight at that distance: and no doubt the faithful Seer did not conceal it, but tell his children and servants thereof for the glory of the Messiah: his joy was too great to hold it in privately to himself, and his zeal too hot to hide so much of heavenly glory. Under the Levitical Law the Israelites were to lay their hands on the head of the sacrifice, as it were to disburden themselves of sin, and lay it off upon the sacri∣fice; and by the offering up thereof, they were to make an atonement or expiation. The unbe∣lievers among them understood the outward rite of the sacrifice; and did the faithful ones see no more in it? Could or did they imagine that a poor silly beast could stand under the weight of sin, or that the blood of bulls or goats could take it away? No surely, their faith looked through the outward sacrifice to the Messiah for atonement and reconciliation. In David the Evangelical day broke out more clearly; O how much of Christ is there in the 110th Psalm? there's his kingdom and eternal priesthood; there's his passion in drinking of the brook in the way; there's his ascension in lifting up the head; there's his intercession in sitting at Gods right hand; there's his Church Catholick,
a willing people, made so by the power of his grace. This was Symbolum Davidicum, Da∣vids Creed (as a learned man hath it) reaching in a manner as far as ours: Moreover, the Saints of old by their faith kenned a resurrecti∣on and life eternal. Jobs faith looked through worms and dust to the vision of God, Job 19.26. Abrahams faith travelled beyond Canaan unto the heavenly city and country, Heb. 11.10. David is in a rapture at the full joys and right-hand pleasures with God, Psal. 16.11. When Cain talked with Abel his brother, Gen. 4.8. the Hebrew text sets not down what he said, but it hath an extraordinary pawse, implying further matter; the Jerusalem Targum says, Cain asserted that there was no judgment, no judge, no world to come, no rewards of evil or good; but believing Abel said there were all these, and then his brother slew him: It seems the first fall out was about the future world. Wisdom causes her lovers to inherit substance,Quid est ? nisi futurum saeculum. or essence (as the original word imports) Prov. 8.21. and this substance or essence is (as some Jews affirm) no other then eternal life in the world to come. Now to make my inference from all this; If faith were in a measure ex∣plicite in those early Saints, who had but the twilight of the holy types, and cock-crowing of the Prophets; how much more should it be so in us, who live in the noon-day of the Go∣spel, and as it were directly under the Sun of righteousness, in such a Church-state, wherein the least is greater then John Baptist, we should ex∣pand
and spread abroad the fails of our faith to take in the larger gales and effusions of the holy spirit. Secondly, Faith, unless explicite, cannot arrive at those ends for which it is ordained; viz. to raise up the heart to a reliance on the free grace of God in Christ, to inslame the heart with the love of God and holy things, to sanctifie the heart through the truth, and to overcome the world with its lusts: A meer implicite faith cannot reach these, it cannot raise the heart up to a re∣liance on Gods grace in Christ: to that reliance is prerequired not only a belief that God is true in the Scriptures in general, but also a belief that God is true in the precious promises in special: We are like Jacob, not believing in the mercies of God till we see the chariots, the gracious pro∣mises, which he hath sent down from heaven to carry up our faith to himself. They that know thy name, will put their trust in thee, Psal. 9.10. they and they only. Neither can it inflame the heart with the love of God and holy things: light and heat ever go together: Implicite faith is a dark and cold thing, affording no spiritual warmth at all; he that hath no more, is but a Nabal, a fool in religion, and his heart as dead and cold as a stone within him, till the love of God in the explicite notion of it shine into the soul; it will not, like the disciples at Emmaus, burn within us with love to God and his ways: neither can it sanctifie the heart through the truth, the word did not profit them not being mixed or tempered with faith saith the Apostle, Heb. 4.2.
Where there is only an implicite faith, the word lies upon the heart all in a lump, whole and un∣digested, affording no blood or spirits of sancti∣ty to the soul: it is explicite faith only which breaks the truth in the heart, and mixes and tempers every holy particle therewith, from whence the soul comes to be changed and assi∣mulated into the truth, receiving a divine like∣ness from it, according to the measure of its faith, more or less digesting the same truth in the heart; neither can it lastly overcome the world and the lusts thereof, this is the victory that over∣cometh the world, even our faith, saith the Apo∣stle, 1 Joh. 5.4. And this Faith doth, by putting a right estimate of things into the heart: where∣by it manifestly appears, that heavenly things do infinitely outweigh earthly in themselves, and should do so in the minds of men. A man of a meer implicite faith, is a man without a ballance or judgment, he knows not how to estimate or weigh the excellent things of God, and there∣fore is ever poized down by the world and the lusts thereof. It is the explicite faith only which is in the soul as the ballance of the Sanctuary, rightly determining the true weight of things, and thereby giving heavenly things the victo∣ry above earthly in the heart. Oh! where this is, what a feather, a vanity, a nothing is the world? what in it can weigh against God, or Christ, or the exceeding eternal weight of glory? surely nothing; wherefore the followers of faith become con∣querors of the world. Fourthly, This belief must be total and abso∣lute,
without any salvoes or limitations. The Gospel must captivate , all the intel∣lect, or every thought to the obedience of Christ, 2 Cor. 10.5. The Reason must not go at large or random, but be kept in safe custody under the Gospel and the divine mysteries thereof; it is not to be trusted to, never since the fall put an enmi∣ty into it against God. The Socinians believe the Scriptures only so far forth as they are congru∣ous to reason; thus Socinus professes, that if this proposition (that Jesus Christ satisfied God for our sins) were once and again extant in the sa∣cred monuments, yet non ideirco, he would not therefore believe the thing to be so as we or∣dinarily conceive of it: And another laies down this for a rule, Nihil credi potest, quod à ratione capi & intelligi nequeat, that cannot be believed by faith, which cannot be comprehended by rea∣son. It seems they will trust God no further then they can see him, and depend more on their blear-eyed reason, then the divine oracle. Touch∣ing this Socinian faith, I shall endeavour to shew, first the inrationality of it, and then the nullity. First, The Irrationality of it will evidently ap∣pear, if we distinguish between the two states of reason, before the fall of man, and since. Reason before the fall was a pure and virgin light with∣out any spot in it, afterwards it was destoured and overshadowed with the fall, and by that means all that is in the mind of man in his lapsed estate is not reason, the blinds and dark shades there are not so, but only that which is the relique of the pure primitive light, and congruous thereun∣to,
the blemish in the eye is not the light, the rust in the gold is not the pure metal, neither is all that is in lapsed reason to be reckoned reason. If then in this case we would know what is ratio∣nal, we must consider what reason, so far as it is pure and right, doth dictate to us in this point: and what is that, but that God as the first uner∣rable truth, must be believed in his words for him∣self, and above all other things, even above reason it self?Ronand. l. 3. dist. 23. Justum est (saith the Schoolman) ut in∣tellecius noster ita captivetur, & subjacoat summae veritati, sicut affectus noster debet subjacere sum∣mae bonitati, nec potest esse anima recta nisi intel∣lectus summe, veritati propter se, & super omnia assentiat, & affectus summae bonitati adhaereat: It's just and purely rational, as to love the su∣pream goodness, so to assent to the supream truth for it self and above all; that is, without any salvocs or exceptions at all; the authority being infallible, the belief should in all reason be abso∣lute. Reason says, that God should be believed as a God, one that cannot lye, no more then cease to be; and if as a God, then for himself and above all. That in the Socinian, which adds a salvo to his belief of the holy Scriptures, is not his rea∣son, but the rust and proud flesh and spiritual corruption of it; and to believe such stuff before the truth of God, and make it the allay and supream ruler of our faith, is desperately and monstrously irrational. How this rust grew upon our reason at first, is evident in the fall of man, the Serpent creeps in upon the woman, with an yea, hath God said? Gen. 3.1.
his plot was to weaken the authority of Gods word, and when she began to waver about it, and diminish the peremptory threatning of death, with a least ye dye, v. 3. her reason began to corrupt and become dreggy, which, while pure, could not but assert the truth and veracity of God. Hence the Apostle speaking to the Co∣rinthian Church as a chast virgin espoused to Christ, adds this caution, least as the Serpent beguiled Eve, so your minds should be corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ, 2 Cor. 11.2. & 3. ver. That is, take heed of falling off from the pure doctrine of the Gospel, the head of every man is Christ, so much adherence and subjection as reason hath unto him and his holy truth, so much chastity and virginity it hath;Virginitae mentis est integrasi∣des. Aust. in Joh. but as soon as it elapes, it becomes an adulteress, and should not be suffered to speak in holy things. Morcover, the irrationality of it will further ap∣pear, if we consider that the sphear of reason and the sphear of revelation are two distinct things. The sphear of reason is filled with natural noti∣ons, the elements of mans spirit; but the sphear of revelation is filled with supernatural truths, the dictates of God; Reason, so far as it is rea∣son, is a divine spark, a petty Prince in its own dominions; but when it leaves these, and passes over into the supernatural region, and there, in∣stead of sitting down at Gods seet to be taught and inlightned, assumes the magisterial chair, and falls a judging divine mysteries, it is no longer reason, but a fool and a brute, and speaks as sim∣ply in matters of Religion, as a beast, if it could
speak would do in matters of reason. Thus when our Saviour discoursed Nicodemus about regeneration, reason prattled after a strange rate, How can a man be born when he is old? can he enter the second time into his mothers womb and be born? So soolishly and absurdly doth carnal reason carry it self in supernatural things. To make this more plain, let us compare the weak∣ness of reason with the sublimity of holy myste∣ries, and then the fallibility of reason with the certainty of them. First, Let us compare the weakness of reason with the sublimity of holy Mysteries. Reason, having a bruise in the fall, is weak even in its own sphear: With how much toil doth it creep from letters to words, and from words to Arts and Sciences? And when it is there, how little doth it know? Can it span the heavens, or mea∣sure the vast back-side thereof, or number those golden letters, the stars therein, or understand the Sun, which to have done, Eudoxus would willingly have been burnt up by it, or in one of its beams: tell what light is, touching which there are no less then seven opinions in one of the Schoolmen, which verifies the old saying, Non constat ex lumine naturae quid sit natura luminis? To come lower, can it enter into the treasures of the snow, or ride a circuit with the winds, or take a rational turn with the flux and reflux of the sea, or tell how the massie earth hangs upon nothing, or unkennel an occult qua∣lity and draw it out to an open view, or unrid∣dle a loadstone; in which a late Philosopher
would have the atomes of both Poles to meet and incorporate? Nay, in a common stone, can it dive into the form or nature thereof, dic mihi, quid est lapiditas, said a Learned man; can it strip the meanest creature of the investing accidents, and look upon the pure naked essence thereof? can it comprehend a drop or a dust, in which (saith the profound Bradwardine) there are in∣finite figures and numbers,De Causâ Dei. l. 1. c. 1. pars 32. and consequently in∣finite Geometrical and Arithmetical conclusions, following one another in order, and having a mutual dependance between themselves, such as no Philosophers can ever reach unto, because be∣ing capable only of finite conclusions, they leave behind them infinite unknown? Or, if it look about its own mansion-house, the brain, can it tell where the cells of memory, or the play-house of fancy, or the shop of the animal spirits are scitu∣ate, or whether all these live together in a fami∣ly? thousands of such things there are, which may make every one cry out with Socrates, Hoc unum scio, quod nihil scio. And shall such a weak∣ling as this, dunced and posed in every atome within its own sphear, usurp the crown, and rule over sacred mysteries, and pure revelations, which come out of the bosom of God, to be the wonder of Angels and faith of men, and are in a transcendent excess infinitely above and be∣yond the capacity of both of them? shall it take up the ocean in a little shell, measure the sacred Trinity in its shallow understanding: And, if it will not lye in so narrow a room, cast it away as no article of Faith, as a thing inter impossibilia
mentis, not consistent with reason? shall its dim eyes pry into the Ark, I mean, into that great mystery, God in the flesh; and there, because it cannot see how two such natures as mortal and immortal, temporal and eternal, mutable and immutable can come together into one person, throw it away, as Smalcius doth, with this, ratio∣ni sanae repugnat, it is repugnant to right reason? When reason thus exalts it self in the things of God, it sinks below it self into brutish irratio∣nality. Secondly, Let us compare the fallibility of Reason, with the infallibility of Scripture. When the Papists lift up the Pope as supream judge in matters of Religion, it is a sufficient answer to tell them, the first Clement held the Platonical community of all things, even of wives. Marcelli∣nus sacrificed to Idols. Liberius subscribed to Ari∣anism. Innocent the first taught that little ones could not be saved without the Eucharist. Vigi∣lius was an Eutychian. Honorius a Monothelite. Hildebrand a brand of hell, and impiously dia∣bolical. John the 23th was accused in the Coun∣cil of Constance of this opinion, That the souls of men dye with their bodies, even as the souls of brutes; and should such be judges in matters of Religion? When the Socinian, by subjecting articles of Faith unto Reason, makes not one, but as many Popes as men, we need say no more to him, but humanum est errare, reason is a fallible thing. The Philosophers were the Patriarchs of heretiques; Platonical Philosophy in the Fathers, and Aristotelical in the Schoolmen, hath much
debased the truths of God, saith a great Divine. All the errors and heresies which have swarmed abroad in all ages, have been the progeny of corrupt Reason: upon this the devil begets all the black monstrous opinions which crawl within doors in the Church, or without in the Pagan world. And should such a thing as this come and sit in judgment on the pure words of God, which are surer then the voice of Angels, and stand faster then the pillars of heaven and earth, which in so many successions of Ages ne∣ver contracted the least speck of falshood, or shed a leaf in the fall of the least tittle or iota there∣of? Surely, when reason thus forgets it self and its own fallibility, it degrades it self and becomes unreasonable. Thus far of the irrationality of the Socinian faith. But, Secondly, The nullity of it is considerable, it is a nullity in its foundation, and at last it proves a nullity in the consequence. It is a nullity in its foundation; the Socinian believes the Scrip∣tures not as a divine testimony, but as congruous to reason, and so trusts not in God, but in himself and his own heart. Thus Socinus expresses him∣self, Non generalem comprobandi rationem quae∣rimus, quod eam, qui dixit, ejusmodi esse appareat, ut nullâ in re mentiri posset, sed singularem quan∣dam, quâ id nominatim, quod comprobandum est, per causas & effecia propria ita se babere demon∣stratur, adeò ut non modò quia Deum ipsum dix∣isse appareat, id verum esse constet, sed etiam quia verum esse appareat, id Deum dixisse nobis certò persuadeamus. Qaomodo poterat clariùs prodere
suam, saith a Learned man? how could he more clearly betray his infidelity? he would not have us only believe a thing true, because God says so, but believe also that God says so, because it appears true to our own reason, where this is the foundation, faith is a meer nul∣lity, and that which is a nullity in the foundati∣on, at last proves a nullity in the consequence. Reason, corrupting it self in its own pride, casts away the found principles of the Gospel, and these being gone putrifies in abominable errors, like Herod assuming a Deity to himself, it is spi∣ritually smitten of God, and eaten up of worms: I mean, those errors which are but the putrefa∣ctions of reason. How do the Socinians Paga∣nize in worshipping a creature, a Christ whom they deny to be God; Mahometize in denying the sacred Trinity; Judaize in standing for an interpreting Messiah only, and not a satisfying one; Manicheize in undervaluing the old Te∣stament; Arianize in denying the Deity of Christ; Pelagianize in denying original sin; Anabap∣tize in denying baptism to infants? how do some of them Divelaze in horrid blasphemies, calling the sacred Trinity tricipitem Cerberum; and to those who assert Jesus Christ to be Gods son; asking, An Deus habuit uxorem? Whether God had a wise? and such like hellish stuff, in which much of the devil appears. After all this fearful shipwiack of faith, what remains? too too little to denominate them Christians. Igna∣tius called the Ebionites, because they denied Christs Deity, men-worshippers; the antiont
Church styled the Samosatenians upon the same account God-killers; and a great Divine passed this censure on the Socinians, that they were a company of baptized Turks: indeed their cor∣rupted reason dissolves their faith into little or nothing. Fifthly, This belief must be such as owns the holy Scriptures for the rule of faith; To the Law and to the testimony, saith the Prophet, If they speak not according to this word, it is because, here is no light in them, Isa. 8.20. As soon as the morning of faith breaks in the heart, the word is owned as the rule. Enthusiasts going oft from the Scriptures, take the spirit for their rule. Swenckfield was altogether for the spirit and the internal word, and little or nothing at all for the external. Henry Nicholas boasting of the ho∣ly anointing, looked on the Scripture as a literal fleshly elementish thing. John Valdesso saith, that Christians may at first serve themselves with Scripture as an Alphabet, but afterwards leaving it to beginners, they attend to their proper Ma∣ster the spirit of God: Others say, the Scripture is but a dead letter, a thing of paper and ink, and we must not try the living by the dead, the holy spirit by the Scripture. Such as these, brag∣ging of their own revelations, call all other Christians Vocalists and Literalists, because of their adherence to the Scriptures. Mr. Salt∣marsh makes three sphears of administration, the Law or meer letter, the Gospel which hath du∣ty and grace in it, and the spirit, the pure spirit, which is the third heaven, higher then Scrip∣tures
and ordinances. The Weigelians talk of a seculum Spiritus Sancti, in which there shall be higher dispensations then before, and we shall be wiser then Apostles. The Quakers make the light within, that is, as I take it, natural consci∣ence the standard of all their actings. All these, though clothed in various words, agree together to crucifie the Scriptures, as if they had some∣what more noble. Unto them I shall offer some considerations. First, The Apostles direction is, Try the spirits whether they are of God, 1 Joh. 4.1. in the origi∣nal , try them, as Goldsmiths try metals by the touchstone, or by the fire, or as Magistrates question offenders, or examine those that stand for an office, use all manner of ways to find out whether the spirits be right or not: upon this as a sufficient warrant, I shall put some interroga∣tories to the Enthusiast. Thou sayest the spirit of God is in thy heart, and is it not in the Scriptures too? and where∣ever it is, is it not congruous and harmonious to it self? And what doth it say in the Scripture? doth it not say, that the Scripture is the rule? To the Law and to the testimony, saith the Prophet, Isa. 8.20. the Law of the Lord is perfect, convert∣ing the soul, the testimony of the Lord is sure, ma∣king wise the simple, saith the Psalmist, Psal. 19.7. The Scripture is able to make us wise to salvation, and perfect, throughly furnished unto all good works, saith the Apostle, 2 Tim. 3.15. & 17. Nay, such a rule it is, that nothing must be added to it, nor di∣minished from it, Dent. 4.2. no not by an Angel.
If an Angel from heaven preach any other Gospel to you, let him be accursed, Gal. 1.8. And can the spirit in the heart contradict the spirit in the Scripture? can it be contrary to it self, and de∣part from its own oracles? no surely, defectible creatures may be off and on, yea and nay in their words, but the holy spirit cannot be so. The war between Constantius and Magnentius was look∣ed upon as very portentous, because therein first cross was carried against cross, and Christians engaged against fellow-Christians; but that the holy spirit should make war upon it self, is a por∣tentous contradiction; which, if allowed, would leave no being to Gods veracity, nor standing unto mans faith: But as portentous as it is, the Enthusiast must maintain it, unless he will confess that the spirit in him, which denies the Scripture to be the rule, is not of God. Again, thou saiest thou hast the revelation of the holy spirit, but how or in what manner doth it reveal it self in thee? I suppose thou dost not pretend to a Revelation made by visions or dreams or audible voices, as it was wont to be of old, but to a revelation intellectual; and that is double, the one extraordinary in Prophets and Apostles, the other ordinary in all true believers. In the first revelation made to Prophets and A∣postles, the holy spirit did immediately infuse the species intelligibiles into their minds, and thereby did internally speak, and in a proper sense reveal things unto them. What we translate the begin∣ning of the word of the Lord by Hosea, Hos. 1.2. is in the original the beginning of the speech of Je∣hovah
in Hosea, pointing out an internal locution to the Prophet. In the second revelation made to believers, there is no such thing as in the first, no immediate infusion of species, no internal voice or locution, saying this or that is so, and therefore no revelation properly so called; but the holy spi∣rit doth enlighten their minds to make them ca∣pable, and then they hear what the holy spirit in the Scriptures speaks unto them: thus S. Paul on the behalf of the Ephesians prays for the spirit of wisdom and revelation, not that they might have extraordinary inspirations, but that the eyes of their understanding might be inlightned, Eph. 1.17, 18. To know the witness of God in the Go∣spel, the holy spirit doth not speak to their in∣lightned understandings immediately, but in and by the Scripture-medium, which is as it were E∣pistola Dei, Gods letter unto man. In the first re∣velation to the Prophets and Apostles, the holy spirit did so totally and in such an extraordinary way govern them in their speaking and writing, that therein there was nibil suum, nothing of their own, not only the matter, but quaevis vocula, every little word was of God: hence S. Peter saith, that they were  moved or carried upon the wings of the spirit above humane frailty, 2 Pet. 1.21. In the second revelation to believers, the holy spirit is as an holy anointing to their minds, and thereby puts them into a capacity to hear what God speaks in the Scripture, but it doth not so totally carry and rule them, as to make their words purely divine and free from all mixture of their own. The first revelation to
the Prophets and Apostles, being purely imme∣diate and extraordinary, makes authentical Scri∣pture. The second revelation to believers, being but ordinary, doth not make Scripture, but only capacitate their minds to take in the manifestati∣ons of the spirit therein. These things premised, I must renew my question: Say, O Enthusiast! what is thy revelation? is it a pure immediate in∣ternal locution? is it extraordinary and carried by the spirit above all humane frailty? may it be added to the Canon and become Scripture? I suppose thou canst not, darest not say so; but if thou dost, read and tremble at the sealing up of the Canon, Rev. 22.18. If any man shall add unto these things, God shall add unto him the plagues written in this book, and if any man shall take a∣way from them, God shall take away his part out of the book of life, and out of the holy city. These words are as a flaming sword at the end of the Bible, to keep thee from presuming to put any thing thereunto: Say then modestly, is not thy revelation ordinary? did not the holy spirit come to thee in the chariot of the Scripture? and why then doest thou slight and undervalue it? why doest thou call it a dead letter, a fleshly ele∣mentith thing, and the like? God hath spoken once, yea, twice, (if I may so allude) once in the Old Testament, and again in the New, expect not to hear his voice or spirit any where else but there; if thou doest, thou puttest a cheat upon thy self, and instead of a revelation, embracest a meer fancy. Again, the spirit is in thy heart, and the spirit
is in the Scripture, but where is the greatest mea∣sure of it? say in good earnest, is there a greater measure of the spirit in thy heart then in the Scri∣pture? then thou canst unriddle all the , the difficult knots in Scripture; thou canst dive down into that divine abyss, and fetch up all the holy mysteries there; thy holiness can hold mea∣sure with the length and breadth of the pure spiritual Law; thy faith runs parallel with all the promises, and can tell over all that infinite Mass of free-grace which is couched therein: the hellish root of bitterness once in thy nature, is quite eradicated, and not a string of concupis∣cence left behind; thou canst say, I have no sin, and which is the wonder, thy heart doth not deceive thee in saying so; there are no shades or dark spots in thy mind, no cracks or flaws at all in thy obedience, no , nothing lacking in thy faith or other graces: All in thy heart and life is as right as the rule, and as pure as the Christal streams in the Gospel. If there be a grea∣ter measure of the spirit in thy heart then in the Scripture, thus it is with thee: but I hope thou art not so utterly void of the spirit and consci∣ence, as to fall into so proud a dream of thy e∣state. If thou saiest thou art clean, that very word pollutes thee, quisquis se inculpatum dixerit, aut superbus aut stultus est, whosoever saith so, is ei∣ther a fool or a proud man. Say then, as the truth is, there is a greater, incomparably greater mea∣sure of the spirit in the Scripture, then in thy heart; and then tell me, what is fittest to be the rule, that which is perfect, or that which is im∣perfect,
that greater measure of the spirit in the Scripture, or that lesser, far lesser measure of the spirit in thy heart; common sence will tell thee it belongs to the Scripture. Moreover, the spirit is in thy heart, and the spirit is in the Scripture, but where is it plainest and most obvious? where can it be most easily discerned to be the very spirit of God indeed? all that is in the Scripture is indubitably of the holy spirit, but all that is in thy heart is not so; it may be it is from thy own spirit, what thou didst sup∣pose to have been from Gods: nay it may be it is from Satan transforming himself into an Angel of light. The Disciples would have called for fire from heaven as Elias, but Christ tells them, ye know not of what spirit ye are, Luk. 9.55. as if he had said, you think this motion came from an extraordinary spirit, such as was in Elias, but a∣lass, it is but from your own spirit, nay from the gall and bitterness of it, that which you take for zeal, is indeed but revenge. When upon our Savi∣ours discourse of his sufferings Peter said, be it far from thee Lord, this shall not be unto thee, no doubt he thought himself right in the thing, but our Saviour calls him Satan for it, Mat. 16.23. his meaning was pious, and as he might think, from the same holy spirit which a little before inspired him to make a glorious confession of Christ; but alass, the devil acted secretly therein. Of what I find in Scripture, I can immediately and without any more ado pronounce that it is the very voice of the holy spirit, but of what I find in my own heart I cannot do so. First, the
light must be divided from the darkness, Gods spirit must be distinguished from mans and Sa∣tans. And how such a piece of spiritual Chymi∣stry should be done without the Scripture, I can∣not imagine: There may be three different spirits in my heart, and unless I reduce them in a way of trial to the one pure spirit in the Scripture, I may be easily cheated by my heart: wherefore the Scripture, in which the characters of the spirit are more plain and legible then in my own heart, must needs be the rule. Once more let me ask thee O Enthusiast, who criest up the spirit, the spirit above Scripture, dost thou seek the spirit aright, or follow him faith∣fully? I fear thou doest neither. Thou doest not seek the spirit aright, because not in his own way, which now is not in visions and immediate revelations, but in the Scripture. Thou wouldest have the spirit, but wilt not stay upon the moun∣tains of the Prophets and Apostles for him. Thou doest like Joseph and Mary, they sought Christ a∣mong their kindred and acquaintance, when he was in the Temple. Thou seekest the spirit among thy own fancies and imaginations, when he is in the Scripture, My spirit and my words shall not de∣part out of thy mouth, saith God, Isa. 59.21. Ob∣serve, the spirit and the word are by Gods own ordinance in a sweet conjunction together, he that sunders them loses both of them. For a man to wave the Scripture and seek the spirit, is as if he should forsake the beams, and search after the Sun in some place where it shines not. The French Kings use to be crowned at Reims, because there is the
sacred oil, which (as they say) came down from heaven. If thou wouldest be crowned with hea∣venly wisdom, be in the Scriptures, there and there only is the holy Unction which will teach thee all things. Neither dost thou follow the spi∣rit as thou oughtest: the spirit, if followed in his own way, will lead thee into all truth, but if thou wilt follow the spirit in an extra-scriptural way, thou doest not follow it indeed, but thy own fancy, and whilest thou seemest to soar above Scripture, thou art like to fall far below it, into the ditch of error and wickedness. In no better place have thy predecessors been, after all their high-flying imaginations. Montanus that early Enthusiast called himself the Paraclete, and mag∣nified the writings of his two Prophetesses above the sacred Gospel. The Messaliani thought they could corporeally see the sacred Trinity, and dance upon devils, and receive the holy spirit in a visible way? Oh Satanical illusion! John of Leydens visions teemed out Poligamy and a bloody Rebellion. Into what wild assertions did Swenckfield and Henry Nicholas come by their Enthusiastical spirit, the first saying, that the Go∣spel is the Essence of God; nay, faith in the heart is so. The other blasphemously alledging, That the believer is Godded with God, and the spirit of love is God incarnate? How did Valdesso run into Fa∣milism and Antinomianism? And what else did Saltmarsh, in his book called Sparkles of Glory; making as if Christ were but a mystical sigura∣tive man, and God in the flesh were only God in his Saints? Oh mystery of iniquity! whither
will not this extra-scriptural spirit go? what errors will it not broach? what sacred founda∣tions of truth will it not demolish? how little Gospel or divine rule will it leave to Christians? Leave it then O Enthusiast, or else thou canst not follow the spirit of truth. Thus much by way of question to the Enthusiasts. Secondly, I shall in a word say somewhat to their Allegations: they say, That the Scriptures are but the Christians Alphabet, and for begin∣ners only. But let us remember, the spirit which is in believers in an ordinary way, was in the Pen∣men of Scripture in an extraordinary; I was in the spirit, saith St. John, Rev. 1.10. he saith not, the spirit was in me, but I was in the spirit, as a vessel in the sea, every way surrounded and o∣verruled by it. And who can believe that the spi∣rit in its ordinary way should exceed it self in its extraordinary; that in believers it should ut∣ter high mysteries, which in Prophets and Apo∣stles gave out only an Alphabet? If it be no more, I dare say, no man, no not the most perfect Disciple of God on earth ever throughly under∣stood his Alphabet, no mans knowledge ever di∣ved into the bottom of Scripture, no mans holi∣ness was ever parallel to its precepts, nor no mans faith ever traced the unsearchable riches of grace there unto the uttermost, and shall we say, it is only an Alphabet for beginners? Is it not the wisdom of God in a mystery? is it not able to make the man of God perfect? hath St. Paul milk only and not strong meat? was St. Peter to seed the lambs only, and not to feed them into sheep,
and when they were such? doth St. John write on∣ly to the little children, and not to the young men and fathers also? He writes to them all, plainly shewing, that no man, of what stature soever in grace, did ever outgrow the Scripture. Again they say, the Scriptures are but a dead letter, and we must not try the living by the dead. The holy Martyr Stephen long since stiled them lively oracles, Act. 7.38. and if they are now but a dead letter, who hath murdered them? who so much as the Enthusiast? who goes about to se∣parate the spirit from them. If the Law come to a man in the convincing spirit, and slay him with his own guilt, and set his conscience on fire with some tasts of hell, he may with the Apostle call it a killing letter, but he will hardly call it a dead one. If the Gospel come to him in the converting spirit, and open the glories of free-grace, and bring in a new creation into his heart, he must confess, that it is the very savour of life unto life, and the power and arm of God to salvation; and as the first life of grace is breathed through it into the dead sinner, so all the after-gales of the spirit come from it upon the new creature: Wherefore, whilest the spirit is in the word, it cannot be a dead letter; and where the spirit is in the heart, it will not be called so. The Enthusiast for all his swelling words of vanity, by calling the Scrip∣ture a dead letter, proves only the deadness of his own heart; and the true believer, who owns the Scripture for his rule, doth not try the living by the dead, but the lesser measure of the spirit in his heart, by the greater measure of it in the word.
Again, they say there is a seculum spiritus san∣cti, an administration of all-spirit, which is much above all Scriptures and Ordinances; but that there should be such a Church-state on earth is a vain dream. There are two manifestations of God unto men, the one dark and through the glass of ordinances, the other by pure and immediate visi∣on, as it were face to face. There are two states of believers, the one a state of weak and imperfect graces, the other a state of perfect holiness and purity. There are also two places, the one is earth, a vale of tears and death; the other is heaven, a re∣gion of all blessedness and life eternal. The mani∣festation by ordinances is congruous to weak graces, and such a place as earth. The manifesta∣tion by pure vision is congruous to perfect holi∣ness, and such a place as heaven. Thus hath the wisdom of God ordered things. Methinks the Enthusiast should blush to say that he is above Scriptures and Ordinances here. What? above the glass, and yet below the bliss-making vision; above the channels and methods of grace, and yet below a state of perfection; above the heavenly mediums, and yet on earth? Oh strange imagination! What saith our Saviour? Go, teach and baptize, loe I am with you always to the end of the world, Mat. 28.19, 20. Ordinances run parallel with this world, and the state which is above them, is only in the next. What saith St. Paul? Apostles, Prophets, Tea∣chers, Pastors, are all for the perfecting of the Saints, for the edifying of the body of Christ, Eph. 4.11, 12. Ordinances must continue as long as weaknesses and imperfections, and cannot be spared till the
top-stone of holiness and perfection be laid in heaven. What saith St. John, speaking of the hea∣venly City? And I saw no Temple therein, Rev. 21.22. No Temple, no Ordinances, is only for heaven, earth must alwaies want and have them. O my soul, enter not into their secret, which cry up the spirit, and despise prophesyings; be thou where Gods honour dwelleth; in the Temple of Ordi∣nances thou mayest see his power and glory. Lastly, the Quakers talk altogether of the light within; which, being as they say, common to all men, can be no other then natural conscience: this is the candle of the Lord, and much magnified by Heathen Philosophers; this is every mans Daemon, saith one: nay, it is the God in us, saith a∣nother. And it is so in such a sense as Moses was a God to Pharaoh, preaching the will of God to him; and for non-obedience, urging him with dreadful plagues: For it magisterially dictates the will of God, even in the Monarchs of the world; and in case they rebel, it hath in∣ward stings and scorpions for them. Quid aliud voces animam quàm Deum in humano corpore ho∣spitantem, saith Seneca. Were a Quaker to English it, he would go near to do it thus, The light with∣in is God manifest in the flesh, for in plain terms he will call it Christ, as if the candle could becom a Sun of Righteousness. In the mean time the devil hath a fetch, under the praises of inward light, to explode the Scriptures: But we must re∣member, that Conscience which is above man, is yet below God; and though it be a light and a rule, yet it must truckle under the greater light
and rule in the Scriptures. Take conscience be∣fore conversion, it is clouded and overshadowed with the Fall, dark and blind in spiritual things; and shall the blind lead the blind, till both fall into the ditch? must it not go & be new-lighted at the Scripture? Take heed unto the word as unto a light shining in a dark place, saith St. Peter, 2 Pet. 1.19. The heart of man is but a dark place, till the divine word shine into it; it is intoxicated with the love of sin, and by it, as the devils Opium, it sleeps at the top of the mast, in the ocean of low∣dangers, and must it not be rouzed up? ought not the silver trumpet of the word to be sounded in its ears, to prevent an eternal sleep, and awaken it unto righteousness? should it not go and wash in the pure streams of free-grace, and redeeming blood in the Gospel? it may be it is infected with errors, and by these Satan hath taken sanctuary in the intellectual tower, and utters his own di∣ctates as from God; and must it be left in such a case? should not Satan and all his lying wares be cast out by the word and spirit? but because conscience is now at the worst, take it after con∣version, are there then no reliques of darkness which call for more light? are there no fits of spiritual drowsiness, which need fresh alarums? are there no dregs of corruption, which want a new purgation? are there no spots of error, which ought to be wiped out? he that presumes a free∣dom from these, hath great reason to doubt whe∣ther there be any such thing as conversion found in him; and he that confesses them, hath as great reason to run to the Scripture to have them re∣ctified:
But because the Quaker dreams of per∣fection, I will go higher. Suppose a man abso∣lutely perfect, every wheel in his soul in right motion, and his conscience a pure Chrystal with∣out any flaw in it, yet must the man be under God, and his conscience under the word; for his very perfection stands in that subjection, and is forfeited as soon as it departs from it. Conscience is a rule, but a subordinate one, it binds and loo∣ses, but in the power and authority of the word; take away that, and conscience is no more con∣science, the inward Eccleiastes is silenced, and hath nothing to say. My conscience beareth wit∣ness in the holy Ghost, saith the Apostle, Rom. 9.1. Observe, it beareth witness in the holy Ghost; Spi∣ritu Sancto duce ac moderatore, saith Beza on the place. Conscience is no supream thing, the holy Spirit must command and moderate in it, if not in an immediate way, as in Prophets and Apo∣stles, yet in and by the sacred Scriptures as in or∣dinary Christians. To conclude with that of an an∣cient, Scripturis non loquentibus, quis loquetur? the Scripture being silent, none can speak, no not con∣science it self in a regular way; wherefore our su∣pream rule must be sought no wher else but there. Thus far I have treated touching what man∣ner of belief of Scripture this must be. But to proceed on. Secondly, What are the consequents of this be∣lief in order to that resignation, which is the last thing in faith? I answer, the holy spirit having lodged such a belief of Scripture in the heart, doth reflect and turn the Scriptural light in∣wards,
and manage it in order to resignation, by so me such steps as these following. First, It strikes in the holy light in that man∣ner, as to work a clear conviction of sin, and this conviction is manifold. First, There is a conviction of sin in its kinds, Actual and Original. I name Actual first, as being most obvious and first in the discovery. There is a conviction of Actual sin; the believed Law comes home to the heart, and gives it a charge as Nathan to David, thou art the man, these and those things are sins against the great God, saith the holy Law, and so and so thou hast done, saith the awakened conscience. God (who before had sowed and sealed up his iniquities in a bag, as the phrase is, Job 14.17.) now opens the bag, and pours out a vast sum of guilts, and exactly tells over all the smothered light, and abused love, and spirit-quenchings, and sorfeited creatures, and buried talents, and broken promises, and horrible presumptions, in all amounting to wonderful ar∣rearages, and at last enforcing the poor sinner to cry out, Guilty, Guilty. And after this follows a conviction of Original sin: The sinner traces up his sins to the impure fountain, and follows every lust home to the black nest in the heart; there, there is the root of bitterness, the seed-plot and spawn of all iniquity. Indeed in every actual sin we may, if we have our spiritual senses about us, hear the sound of its Masters feet, even of the reigning corruption within; in every act of re∣bellion we may cry out of the Pharaoh within, which saith who is the Lord? in every act of un∣belief
we may complain of the Jew in the heart, which will not receive Christ; we may tast A∣dams apple in every sensual sin, and perceive his imaginary Godhead in every spiritual self-excel∣lency; in our lives we have many sins, but all in our heart; there is a stench in vitious actions, but the filthy sink of all is within. After some such way as this doth God fill our faces with shame, that we may seek him and resign. Secondly, There is a conviction of sin in its guilt: The sinner comes to see that whilest he is in his sin, he is but a condemned man; and sin, unless pardoned, will chain him to hell and eternal wrath. God seems to speak to him, as once to Abi∣melech, behold thou art but a dead man, thou catest and drinkest and sleepest, but all the while under wrath; thou art jolly abroad among the crea∣tures, but fire and brimstone and an horrible tempest hangs over thy head. God makes the sinner know where he is, as the Syrians, when their eyes were opened, saw themselves in the midst of Samaria; so he, when his mind is in∣lightned, sees himself at the brink of hell and death; without such a sense of wrath, man is too proud to resign: he is naturally a Manasseh, a for∣getter of God, and will not turn till he be in chains. Laish-like, he sits quiet and secure, till Dan the judgment come; hell must drive him to heaven or else he will never come there; the fiery Law must melt him, or else he will never run into the Gospel-mould. Thirdly, There is a conviction of the filthiness of sin; the soul in every turn from God loses its
light, and in every turn to the creature, gathers soil and pollution; the sinner will never resign up himself to be washed in the Evangelical la∣ver, unless he first seo sin, as it is, mire and dirt, and superfluity of naughtiness, and find his pretious soul lying in a sordid manner, in a sink of plea∣sure, or a cave of covetousness, or some other lust, which is as an unclean place miserably defiling it, whilest it abides therein. Fourthly, There is a conviction of the power of sin; sin is a Baal, a Lording tyrant, and the sinner a vassal to it; in sensual sins he drudges in Sodom and Egypt, and in spiritual he is carried away to Babylon: the sinner is as a captive in his chains, and (which is the great wonder) a willing cap∣tive, the iron is entred into his soul, the chain is in his very will the Principle of freedom, a vassal he is, and loves to be so. The more freely he sins, the more is his slavery, the more imperiously he sins, the more is his weakness: thus the Prophet, how weak is thy heart, seeing thou doest the work of an imperiou whorish woman? Ezek. 16.30. un∣less God make men in some measure feel the power of sin, and go as David over Olivet, weep∣ing, because of the Absoloms, the rebellious lusts, which come out of their own bowels and make war upon heaven, they will not resign and take up the yoke of Christ as they ought. Secondly, Upon such a conviction of sin, ensue great straits and humiliations of soul. When the poor sinner sees things as they are, an host of sins round about the soul, nay and within it, an hell flashing out of the guilt thereof, a defiling filthi∣ness
in it, such as makes him ashamed to lift up his soul to God, and withall, such bonds and fet∣ters therein, as he cannot break by his own pow∣er, then he becomes a Magor-missabib, terror round about, his heart more or less bleeds in tears, & travels in pangs of conscience, & breaks under a damning Law, and droops and swoons away in fits of self-confusion and self-desparati∣on, and at last is ready to cry out Oh sin! Oh wrath! what shall I do? whither go? can I fly from the Omnipresent, grapple with the Almigh∣ty, or stand before the holy One? all's impossible: can I endure an hell, abide a never-dying worm, or dwell with consuming fire? 'tis intolerable. May my time be unravelled, my sins undone, or my self unborn, it cannot be. Oh! sinful for∣lorn creature that I am, wo wo unto me for ever. Such straits as these make way for resigna∣tion; all the sons of God come out of Egypt, out of the straits of sin, and pass through a wilderness of wants and extremities towards the Land of promise; the valley of Achor, trouble and perplex∣ity for the accursed thing, is a door of hope; husks and hunger make the Prodigal come to himself and his father. Thirdly, Upon this humiliation and strait of soul, there ensues a deliberation, a standing (as the King of Babylon did, Ezek. 21.21.) at the parting of the way, to make a true enquiry. Lo! saith the afflicted soul in a self-parley, here is the way of life, and there of death, this is the way e∣verlasting, and that's the way of time; If you live after the flesh, you must dye, but if you mortifie
the deeds of the body, you shall live, if you sow unto the flesh, you must reap corruption, if unto the spirit, life everlasting. O my soul! be not deceived; God and sin, Christ and Belial, heaven and hell, cannot mix together. Say then, O my soul, what wilt thou have? the mess of pottage, or the birth∣right, the pleasures of sin, or those at Gods right hand, the worlds trinity of lusts, or communion with the blessed Trinity in heaven? Thus the soul sits down and casts up the cost; sin on and burn in hell for ever, turn to God and shine in eternal glory, spare thy lusts and damn thy soul, slay thy lusts and save it. Oh! what a fearful cheat is sin? it proffers a profit or a pleasure, and asks a soul; it holds out a moment or two, and would have eternity in pawn for it; it tickles the sense, and stabs the conscience; it courts and flatters like the strange woman, and leads down to hell and death. Such deliberations as these make way for resignation; an indeliberate resignation is but a flash and away, but a deliberate one is fit to en∣dure. Fourthly, After all this the holy spirit doth so far press in the holy light, as to work a denial of a mans self and his lusts in some measure. I say, in some measure, for without some measure of self∣denial, a man will never resign up himself to God and Christ. Thus our Saviour, If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, Mat. 16.24. first deny himself, and then go to Christ: and a∣gain, Come unto me all ye that labour and are hea∣vy laden, Mat. 11.28. first be weary of sin, and then go to Christ; no man can serve two Masters,
he that will follow Christ, must do as Peter and Andrew did, leave his nets, all the entangling lusts of his heart, and so follow him. Whilest a man sits at the receit of custome, driving on a trade of sin, he cannot follow him. First, he must with Ma∣thew rise up from thence, and then he may fol∣low him. Also I say in some measure, for the self∣denial before precious faith, must be distinguish∣ed from the self-denial after it: self-denial before faith is wrought in us by the holy spirit, making impressions and darting in light into the heart in a transient way: self-denial after faith is wrought in us by the holy spirit, dwelling in the heart by faith, and acting therein as an abiding principle of all grace. Before faith, it is in a far lesser mea∣sure and degree, after faith it grows up to a full stature: before faith it doth in some sort cast off the soveraignty of sin, the soul no longer chuses to live under its dominion, but looking upon it as cruel bondage, casts off its allegiance: after faith it strikes at the very life of sin, in the work of mortification. What is said of the beasts in Daniel, their dominion was taken away, and yet their lives were prolonged, Dan. 7.12. the same may be said of sin, first it loses its crown and then its life. The holy spirit in the first measure of self-denial, doth as it were dethrone sin in order to resignation; and in the after-measure thereof, it mortifies and nails it to the cross, there to dye and expire. Now this measure of self-denial, which precedes resig∣nation, stands in divers things. First, There is a denial of a mans reason. Rea∣son, as the candle of the Lord is not to be denied;
but reason, as it is a false light, as it pleads for Baal, the lording lust of the soul, as it plays the serpent, seducing from holy truths, as it sows pil∣lows under presumptuous sinning, as it laughs at holiness and divine mysteries above its compre∣hension, is surely to be denied. We must become fools, that we may be wise, put out our lamp, that it may be lighted by the spirit, and crucifie our why's and wherefores, that we may believe the Gospel. Abraham having Gods promise for a seed, considered not, Rom. 4.19. and staggered not, or (as in the original) discerned not, v. 20. he did not play the critick upon the dead body and dead womb, he laid by his discretion, that he might give glory to God by believing. Secondly, There is a denial of a mans will. This is the forbidden fruit, and womb of concupis∣cence, unless this be renounced, there is no hope of resignation; our own will is a thing of Belial, and unless subdued by grace, will not take Christ's yoke: it is an inward Antichrist, and unless con∣sumed by the divine spirit and brightness, will ex∣alt it self above the will of God. Saul must have a light from heaven, and a fall to the earth, & a fit of trembling, or else he will not resign, and say, Lord, what wilt thou have me to do? Act. 9.6. the will must be un-selved, and the man become as a little child, without any will of his own, or else there can be no resignation. Thirdly, There is a denial of a mans carnal affections. These are the camels which cannot go thorough the needles eye, the weights and plum∣mets which press down the soul from God; un∣less
these be cast off, there can be no resignation; our Saviour is positive in it, how can ye believe which receive honour one of another? Joh. 5.44. A soul breathed into vain-glorious air, or drowned in sensual pleasures, or laden with the thick clay of the world, cannot resign; he that will offer up himself to God, must leave the world behind his back, his affections must be gathered in from earth, and Angel-like, ascend in the flame of faith; the vail of time must be put by, and an entry made upon eternity. Fourthly, There is a denial of a mans own power. Proud persons, puft up in their fleshly mind, vain∣ly dream that their Reason can span all myste∣ries, and their Will teem out all graces, no temp∣tations are too strong for them, nor duties too weighty. Alass! these are so far from resignation, that they are not come to illumination, through prodigious blindness they are strong in their im∣potency, rich in their poverty, free in their chains, and something in their nothingness. And what should they go to God for? as yet they are not so much as in the way thither; but let the man put off his false ornaments, and lay by his proud plumes, and sensibly feel a carnal mind, and a spi∣ritual Law, a weak heart, and strong corruptions; let him groan and cry out of the blind eyes which cannot unscale, the iron sinewed Will which cannot bow, the false heart which cannot go true, and the fallen nature, which cannot reach so high as an holy thought. Let him be weak in his impotency, till God set up Jachin and Boaz in his heart; poor in his poverty, till he have a
share in Christs riches; a captive in his chains, till God break them off and bid him go free; and nothing in his nothingness, that creating grace may pass upon him, and God be all in all. This is the way to resignation, such is Gods method to bring light out of darkness, perfect power in weakness, and call things that are not, as if they were. Fifthly, There is a denial of a mans own righ∣teousness. Every man naturally would be a self∣justifier, as the Apostle saith, Rom. 10.3. he would  establish, or make to stand his own righteous∣ness, though it be but a dead carcass, he would set it upon its legs; though but a breathless image, he would have it stand alone; and the reason is, because he would be justified by somewhat with∣in, he would not go out for a righteousness: But alass, all this while he doth not, cannot, resign; thus the Apostle in that place, going about to esta∣blish their own righteousness, they submitted not themselves to the righteousness of God. A man, whilest upon his own bottom, will not surren∣der; but take him up into Moriah, into the vision of God, and shew him the purity of Gods nature, and the sinfulness of his own; carry him to Si∣nai, and let him see the necessity of a perfect righteousness, and the impossibility of an inhe∣rent one in himself; pluck away his fig-leaves of false righteousness, and open his eyes upon his own nakedness and poverty: this is the true way to resignation. Thus far of the second thing in faith; what manner of belief of Scripture this is, and how in
the consequents of it the holy spirit strikes in the holy light upon the heart, and by certain steps brings it to the very borders of resignation: which is the third and last thing in faith now to be opened. CHAP. IV. Of the third and last thing in Faith, an holy thorough dependant Self-resignation to the terms of the Gospel; What it is, to whom and to what it is made, and for what purposes: with the adjuncts and proper∣ties of it. THE third and last thing in Precious Faith, is a dependant yielding or resignation of the soul unto Jesus Christ the Mediator, and through him unto God, according to his word. This is the vital and essential act of faith, as faith is the con∣dition of the Gospel. Touching it, I shall first ex∣plain what this resignation is; and then offer my reasons, why the vitality and essential nature of Faith doth consist therein. First, I must explain what this resignation is in general: It is no other then a surrender of the soul to God according to theterms of the Covenant. God hath chalked out in the word a method of salva∣tion, and man resigns up his soul to God in his own way. God says to man, if ever thou art saved
it must be through the Mediator Jesus Christ, his blood must wash out thy sins, his righteousness must answer the Law for thee. Content, saith the soul, I resign up my self to the Mediator, I lean my self upon his blood and righteousness for pardon and acceptance with thee. Among An∣selms interrogatories to be proposed unto men lying, in extremis at the point of death, one which the Minister offers to the sick man is, doest thou believe that thou canst not be saved but by Christs death, unto which when the sick man an∣swers, yea, I so believe, the Minister is appointed to speak to him thus, Age, dum superest in te anima, in hâc solâ morte siduciam tuam constitue, in nullâ aliâ re siduciam babe, buic morti te totum com∣mitte, bâc solâ te totum contege, totum immisee, to∣tum involve; Whilest there is any breath in thee, place all thy considence in his death, and in nothing else, commit thy whole self to it, cover and inter∣mingle, and involve thy whole self in it; this con∣ference I have set down, because it doth empha∣tically express this act of resignation. God says further, my Christ must not, cannot, be divided, if he save thee as a Priest, he must teach thee as a Prophet, and rule over thee as a King, for I have made him all these. Content, saith the soul, his blood is not, cannot be spiritless; I give up my self to his holy spirit to be taught and ruled: I desire to say with Baldassar the German Di∣vine, Veniat, veniat verbum Domini, & submitte∣mus illi, sexcenta si nobis essent colla; Let the word of the Lord Christ come, let it come teaching and ruling, and I desire to submit to it, even six hundred
necks, if he had so many. God says further, my Christ is a crucified one, and you cannot, must not divide him from the cross. No saith the soul, I will take him cross and all. I would fain say as the noble Ignatius, veniant crux, ignis, ossium con∣fractiones, modò Christum habeam, let the cross, and the fire, and the broken bones come, so I may but have Christ, I hope nothing shall separate me from his love. God says again, through this Christ thou must in all thy wants cast thy self upon me for a supply. I cannot (saith the soul) bear up my own weight in this respect, I would fain lay all upon thee; my guilt upon thy mer∣cy, my unworthiness upon thy free-grace, my folly upon thy wisdom, and my weakness upon thy almighty power; if thou doest not help me, the barn-floor and wine-press of the creature cannot do it; if thou fail me, I am confounded and expect to be miserable. Moreover says God, in all thy addresses unto me, thou must look to thy warrant, and see whether Scripture will bear thee out in it or not. The Scripture (saith the soul) is the Great Charter, above sealed by infi∣nite veracity, and below by faith; this, this is the sacred rule I desire to go by in all my resignati∣ons: After some such manner as this doth the believing soul surrender up it self. But for the more clear opening of this resignation, I shall consider three things. First, Unto whom or what this resignation is made? Secondly, For what things or purposes it is made?
Thirdly, What are the Adjuncts and proper∣ties thereof? First, Ʋnto whom or what this resignation is made? I answer, it is made unto Jesus Christ the Mediator, unto God the whole sacred Trinity, and unto the Word: unto Christ as the Mediator and grand medium of salvation; unto God as the Center and ultimate object of Faith; and unto the Word, as the warrant, rule, and way, in, by, and according to which faith must proceed. First, This resignation is made to Christ as the Mediator and grand medium of salvation. I begin with this first, because Faith cannot go to God immediately, but to the Mediator first, and so to God. Thus the Scripture saith, through him we have access to the Father, Eph. 2.18. by him we come unto God, Heb. 7.25. and which is more ex∣press, by him we believe in God, 1 Pet. 1.21. If we will go to our heavenly Father, we must first put on our elder brothers robes, we must cloath our faith and resignation in the resignations of Christ, and so appear before God; we must put our faith into the hand of a Mediator, and from thence it will ascend up before the divine Maje∣sty. Take away the Mediator, and God is a con∣suming sire, no saith, no prayer, can approach unto him: If the cloud of incense do not cover the Mercy-seat, Aaron will dye before it, Lev. 16.13. unless the Mediators merits had been as a cloud of incense about God, the sinner, though in the lowest posture of resignation, must have died be∣fore the Father of mercies. First then, there is a resignation unto Christ as the Mediator and
grand medium of salvation: For the understand∣ing whereof, two things are considerable. First, That Jesus Christ is by Gods ordination sealed to be a Mediator. There is one Mediator be∣tween God and man, the man Christ Jesus, saith the Apostle, 1 Tim. 2.5. Christ, as God-man, stood up between an offended God, and offending man, and acts as a Mediator in all his offices: As a Priest he acts with God to pacifie his wrath, and purchase grace and glory for men; and as a Prophet and a King he acts with men, to declare unto them the Will of God, and rule over them by his spirit and word; Thus the livine days∣man lays his hand upon both, God above, and man below, to bring them together in a mutual reconciliation. Secondly, That this resignation to Christ as Mediator, is in a way congruous to all his offices: Look as God above sealed him to be a Mediator by his ordination, so man below seals as it were the counter-part by his resignation: The belie∣ver yields up himself to Christ as a Priest, by a re∣cumbency on his merits and sweet-smelling sa∣crifice. This in Scripture is called, saith in his blood, Rom. 3.25. he yields up himself to Christ as a Prophet, by an humble teachableness; this is called, a hearing of the Prophet, Act. 3.22. and he yields up himself to Christ as a King, by an holy subjection; and this is called, receiving Christ Jesus the Lord, Col. 2.6. Thus this resignation, as a key to the wards of the lock, suits and hits Christ in every office. What is merit in Christ, is fiducialness in faith; What is instruction in
Christ, is docibleness in faith; What is roy∣alty in Christ, is obedientialness in faith. Secondly, This resignation is made unto God, even the whole sacred Trinity, as the center and ulti∣mate object of faith, I say, the whole sacred Trinity. For though Christ, as God-man, the Mediator, be only the grand medium, by and through which faith makes its approaches to God, yet Christ as God is not the ultimate object of faith; I say, the whole sacred Trinity, as the center and ultimate object of faith: For nothing is or can be the formal reason or terminating object of faith, but the Deity or divine nature only; whose infinit excellency and perfection doth naturally merit the same; whose infallible truth, rich mercy, matchless power, and unsearchable wisdom, calls for faith to come and repose in its bosom; there and there only can it ultimately rest and keep Sabbath: this the Scripture expresses emphati∣cally by trusting in Jehovah, the rock of ages, and center of faith. Thus then it is, faith first goes to Christ the Mediator, and then in and through him it advances unto God. The Apostle is ex∣press in it, who by him do believe in God, that rai∣sed him up from the dead, and gave him glory, that your faith and hope might be in God, 1 Pet. 1.21. Faith in Christs blood, is saith in the way, the new and living way, consecrated through the vail of his flesh; but faith in God, is faith in the ulti∣mate end and center. Moreover, that faith may arrive at him, he comes as it were out of his un∣approachable light, and manifests himself in At∣tributes; he lets down his veracity, grace, wis∣dom,
power, holiness, and soveraignty, as so many beams of his glory for our faith to lean upon, and as it were to climb up by unto himself. They that know thy name will trust in thee, saith the Psalmist, Psal. 9.10. the knowledge of Attributes is a staff to our weak faith in its walk to him. Thirdly, This resignation is made unto the werd as the warrant, rule, and way, in, by, and according to which faith doth proceed. These things are writ∣ten, that you might believe, Joh. 20.31. As for the choice blessings which faith waits for from God and Christ, the promises are the warrant. As for the obediential subjection to God and Christ, the commands are the rule. As for the teachings of the Spirit, the whole word is the way, in which believers looks for the same. If faith look up, the word is the perspective; if it work, the word is the line and plummet; if it consult, here's the oracle; if it weigh things, here's the ballance: Faith is never warrantless. There is transgressing without cause, but never believing. Faith resigns to the Mediator, and through him to God, but the commission for both is in the word. Thus far of the first thing, unto whom or what this resignation is made. But to go on. Secondly, For what things or purposes is it made? I answer, It is made for very great things and ends. In opening of which, I shall to each of them accommodate the former distinction of resignation, as to the Mediator, as to God, and as to the Word. That the nature of this resignation may the more fully appear, the precious things and ends for which it is made, are as follow∣eth.
First, The soul is resigned to be instructed in all the ways of God. And this resignation, that I may keep to the prae-appointed method, is made First, To Jesus Christ the Mediator, and as to him, first faith Disciples the soul to him, and then yields it up to him to be taught. First, It Disciples the soul to Christ; before faith a man is as a Wolf or a Lion for brutish untractableness; but after it, a little child may lead him, even the least truth in the word, and he will not break from it: his ear is opened, and his mind in a readiness for instruction. Now this Faith doth two ways. First, It doth it by revealing the excellency of Christ as a Prophet. Oh! says faith, this is the on∣ly Rabbie, the Angel of Gods face, the wonderful counseliar, lying in his bosome and knowing all his secrets; his mouth is most sweet, he speaks ho∣ny-combs of grace, and breaths beams of light, and utters sparkles of glory; nothing but myste∣ries and rectitudes and words of eternal life ever came from him, and (to make these come home to thee) he is an inward Ecclesiastes, one who can unlock thy secrets, and come into the midst of thee, and there express himself in words of life and power, and all the while his Majesty shall not swallow thee up. He speaks through an hu∣mane nature and vail of flesh, in rare condescen∣sion and compassion towards thy weakness. Whilest faith is in the high praises of this great Prophet, the heart cannot chuse but be upon the wheels ready to run to him, and say, speak Lord, for thy servant heareth.
Secondly, It doth it by humbling and softning the heart. Before faith a man is in the ruff of pride, and there's no speaking to him; his heart is as a stone or Adamant, and beats off holy truths: but after it, the man becomes as a little child, and Christ may say any thing to him, his stony heart is turned into flesh, and so made ready for God to be manifested in it. Faith doth so meeken the heart, that it will sit down at Christs feet, and hear him, even in his hardest Lectures. Let Christ talk of racks, and bloody persecuti∣ons for the Gospel, and the believer will be rea∣dy to get up the cross on his back. Let Christ preach of high and transcendent mysteries, such as reason cannot fathom, and the believer will subscribe in silence, what ever reason mutter a∣gainst it. Secondly, Faith having discipled the soul, yields it up to Christ to be taught: And because now he doth not teach in person, as once in the days of his flesh, faith yields up the soul to him to be taught by his spirit. The discipled believer loves to stand as Adam, in the wind of the day, in the gales of the holy spirit. And this will appear in two-things. First, Faith waits upon the Spirit in the Means, and when the spirit comes in holy motions, it welcomes him into the soul. Faith waits upon the Spirit in the Means, there it cries out, as Eli∣sha at Jordan, where is the God of Elijah? here's the mantle, but where's the God? here are the Scriptures, but where's the Spirit that endited them, to make holy impressions and seal divine
truths upon the heart? here are the ordinances, but oh! for the moving of the waters, awake O North wind, and come thou South, blow upon the garden that the spices may flow out. And when the spirit comes in holy motions, faith opens the everlasting doors, and welcoms him in, as Laban did Abrahams servant, come in thou blessed of the Lord; stand not only without in the Scripture-letter, come in, thou that comest in the name of the Lord. Take the throne of my heart, and bid the world go down and sit at thy footstool. Take the keys of the soul, and unlock every faculty, set up thy lamps in every dark corner, and dis∣cover the accursed things there: Speak, O hea∣venly Rabbi, speak in words of life and power, and shew me the path of life and righteous∣ness. Secondly, Faith is very chary and loth to lose the teaching spirit. Like the Spouse in the Can∣ticles, it holds him and and will not let him go, Cant. 3.4. This is to the believer as the apple of his eye, he would not have a dust of earth fall into to lest it grieve and weep out some of the holy light, and as the fire in the Temple, it must not go out, if there be but a live coal or single spark it must be brown up into a flame. Holy mo∣tions are very precious to the believer, as it were beams of heaven, better in Faiths account then the great Sun which quickens the animal world; and like so many good Angels sent from God to give the soul a visit: rather then these should be violated and abused, faith will offer all its world∣ly comforts, as Lot his daughters, to be defloured.
If the holy spirit depart, faith writes scabbed up∣on all other things, and the believer becomes as a dead man, unable to breath in prayer, or walk in holiness, or live or have a being in the spiritu∣al world. The Sun is down, and it is night with him; the dew is off, and his fleece dry; the gales are wanting, and he is at a stand in his voyage to heaven. Thus faith yields up the soul to be taught by the spirit. Secondly, In and through Christ the Mediator, faith yields up the soul to God to be taught by the spirit. I say, in and through Christ the Mediator: Without a Mediator God will not speak to a sinful creature, unless out of the fire, in words of wrath, like those at the last day, Go, thou cursed one. If he speak and commune with us in words of peace and salvation, it must be from the mer∣cy-seat, that is, through Christ, who is called Gods  or propitiatory, Rom. 3.25. Hence Christ is called the wisdom of God, because through him that wisdom doth manifest it self; and as God speaks, so faith hears and resigns, both are in and through the Mediator. I say, in and through the Mediator, faith yields up the soul to God to be taught by the spirit, the very same teaching spirit; as it was procured by the Medi∣ator, so it is given out by God. Therefore faith, for the teaching thereof, resigns up the soul as to the Mediator the procurer, so to God the donor of it: And in this resignation faith climbs up to him by that noble Attribute of his infinite wisdom. Are there transcendent myste∣ries in Scripture? Faith will resign and cry out
with Zophar, Oh! that God would speak and shew me the secrets of wisdom. Whilest the Scripture is in its hands, it sighs and looks up for the key to unlock and shew forth this and that truth in its spiritual glory, or at least in some such beams of it as it is capable of; the Original Languages will not serve its turn, without the Original Au∣thor; nor the Learned Commentators, without the great Interpreter: that only wise God who endited the Scripture, can illustrate the heart; and whilest the believer reads the one, he waits for the other. Is there a practical case dubious and perplexed, like an intricate Labyrinth or way-less wilderness? and when the believer goes about to put all circumstances into the bal∣lance, doth he tremble and demurr like Origen at the Idol-incense, and cannot be satisfied? In such a case Faith runs, and Esra-like hangs upon God for a right way; the All-wise can make a way in the wilderness, and guide thee with his eye, saith Faith: one cast or glance from his wis∣dom will disintricate thy doubts, and make thy way plain before thee. Doth the outward world grow stormy and tempestuous? is the sky of the times overclouded with troubles and dan∣gers? faith stands in the posture of Jehoshaphat, we know not what to do, but our eyes are upon thee, 2 Chron. 20.12. we know not, but thou knowest how to deliver; there is nothing but confusion below, but all is clear and serene in thy wise counsels; there is no one way or method of de∣liverance in our reason, but there are insinite mil∣lions of ways and methods with thee. Such a
faith as this made Luther in the troubles of the Church cry out, That it was far otherwise conclu∣ded in heaven, then at Norimberg; and in the blackest tempest inspirits the believer to do, as the Mariners in the Acts, cast anchor, and wish for the day, roll himself on the wise God, and wait for the dawning of comfort from him. Thirdly, Faith yields up the soul for instruction unto the word. And here are three things con∣siderable. First, Faith resigns to the word, as a warrant for both the former resignations. If you ask a be∣liever why he presumes so far, as to go to Christ and God for the teachings of the spirit, his an∣swer will be this; I find in the word divers pro∣mises, that we shall be taught of God, that the spirit shall lead us into all truth, that there is an holy an∣nointing dropping from Christ, which teacheth all things. And all these promises are very true, the counterpanes of Gods heart, and exactly congru∣ous to the grace there; God speaks in them, and without complement he speaks as he means, therefore I resign up my soul unto Christ and God for instruction; teach me good judgment and knowledge, for I have believed thy commande∣ments, saith David, Psal. 119.66. where by com∣mandements, some Divines understand all the word, including in it Promises as well as Com∣mands: however the believer hath a warrant to pray, teach me good judgment and knowledge, for I have believed thy promises of instruction. Secondly, Faith resigns to the word, as a rich mine and treasury of knowledge, there are preti∣ous
ous mysteries, such as have the divine wisdom flowing in them. Them Hungarians have a tradi∣tion, that their golden Crown dropt down from heaven; to be sure the mysteries in Scripture did so, they are pure Revelations, come down from God to be as golden Crowns on the head of Faith. The window of the Ark was (as some Rabbins say) a pretious stone, which gave light to all the creatures; and indeed the Original, which we translate window, Gen. 6.16. imports a splendor or clear light. Understanding is our window, but the Scripture mysteries make it a window of pearl. Humane learning is but pain∣ted glass, but these make windows of agates, such as are in the taught of God, Isa. 54.12, 13. These are riches of understanding, pearls and intelle∣ctual rubies, fit to be laid up in the very middle and Center of the heart. There the holy precepts and precious promises, beauties of holiness and glories of grace lye open to the embraces of Faith. There the invisible God, whose dwelling is in light unapproachable, and whose pure glory our eyes cannot look on, may be seen in the re∣flex, in the Scripture image and condescension. In a word, so rich are the veins of knowledge there, that faith, as a day-labourer, is ever digging therein, to draw out a stock of holy understand∣ing from it. Thirdly, Faith resigns to the word, as the only way in which a man may be taught of God: All men are ambitïous of so grand a priviledge. The very Gentiles in the puddle of their filthy Ido∣latries, thought themselves taught of God in
their Oracles. The Mahometans think themselves more sure of it in their Alcoran, at which (say they) the devils themselves rejoyced, and turned to God; no question they rejoyed at such a bundle of lies and blasphemies, but that they turned to God is a wild delusion. The Jews boast themselves no less in their Oral Law, which (say they) God delivered over to Moses, and Moses to Joshua, and Joshua to the Elders, and they to the Prophets, and they to the Sanhe∣drim, and they at last to writing in the Talmud; calling it, lux illa magna, that great light, which yet is but a dark labyrinth of errors and horrible falsities. The Papists run to their traditions and unwritten verities as Divine, and so bring in a load of fopperies and vain superstitions. The Enthusiasts cry up the spirit in an extra-scriptu∣ral way, and so turn aside from the main prin∣ciples of Religion. In such false ways do men lose themselves and the Divine teaching, whilest the believer knows where to sind it, even in the Scriptures; in reading them, he sits at Christs feet, and every where looks for Maschil, instructi∣on from God. In them is the Oracle, the Ʋrim and Thummim, by which God answers him; here he opens his heart, and spreads abroad all his sails to take in the gales of the holy spirit, and be filled in all the will of God, Col. 4.12. , filled with it as the sails are with the wind; Whilest the Eunuch was reading the Prophet Esai∣as, the spirit joined Philip to his chariot, Act. 8.29. Whilest the believer hath his being in the Scrip∣tures, the spirit joyns himself to his heart, and
by the infusion of holy light, makes him go on rejoycing in the way of knowledge. Here and only here doth he wait to be taught of God; such is and, since the sealing up of the Canon, ever hath been, the way of knowledge. And what of extraordinary dispensation hath been since, hath either directly turned men to their Bibles,Confess. l. 8. c. 12. Melch. A∣dam in vi∣tà Zuing∣lii. as the voice to St. Austin, tolle, lege, tolle, lege, pointing him to the Scripture; or else hath quoted or ra∣tified some Scripture-truth. Thus when it was objected to Zuinglius, that the word [est] in Scripture-parables may be taken for [significat] but not in verbis coenae, in the Sacramental phra∣ses, and his thoughts were busie about it, an an∣swer was suggested to him in a dream, a moni∣tor  telling him, Quin ignare, respon∣des ei, quod in Exodo legitur, est enim phase, hoc est, transitus Domini, in which there is nothing extra-scriptural, but a Scripture-instance given for that which before was a Scripture-truth; the Scripture is the only place where we can look for Divine teaching. To conclude, that of the Father is remarkable, qui sacrâ non utitur Scripturâ, sed ascendit aliunde, non concessâ viâ, fur est, he that goes not into knowledge by Scrip∣ture, is a thief, the believer keeps the divine road. Thus far of the first thing, resignation for in∣struction in the ways of God. Secondly, Faith resigns up the soul to be par∣doned and justisied before God; unto justification and pardon there are three things prae-requi∣red.
First, An act of free grace in God. All men are naturally sinners, and as such, Gods holiness cannot but hate them, Gods justice cannot but punish them; wherefore free-grace stepped in and found out a way, how God, who cannot ju∣stifie the ungodliness, might yet justifie the un∣godly, Rom. 4.5. and that in a way of compliance both with his holiness and justice; with his holiness, providing a perfect righteousness; and with his justice, providing a perfect satisfaction for them in a surety: hence the Apostle saith, we are justified freely by his grace, Rom. 3.24. Freely, by his grace; he uses two words, the more plainly and emphatically to decipher out to us the pure fountain of love and grace, out of which pardon and justification issue forth to poor sinners. Secondly, There must be a perfect righteous∣ness fully answering the holy Law. God cannot deny himself, he cannot deny his holiness, so as to justifie us without a righteousness, therefore there must be one; he cannot deny his truth, so as to account that a righteousness which is none, therefore it must be perfect, fully answering the Law; all-fair without any spot in it, all-pure without any mixture in it, all-perfect without and defect in it, such a thing as is not to be found in any meer man. The Jews (as it seems by Josephus) thought a meer outward righte∣ousness enough; but alass, what is this without a pure heart? The Popish Doctors look upon inherent graces as our very righteousness in ju∣stification: indeed these (because the denomi∣nation
is à meliore parte) denominate men righ∣teous, but they are but inchoate and imperfect, and therefore are short of that perfect and ab∣solute righteousness requisite to justification. They denominate men righteous, but they do it but in their own weak degree, and not in full proportion to the holy Law; a gracious man is not all grace, there is flesh as well as spirit, dross as well as gold, water as well as wine in him; his mind is not all Light his will is not all love, his affections are not all harmony; what of grace he hath is but in part, and if this be his righteousness, he can be justified but in part, or rather not at all. Neither can our good works, no not those which flow from grace, ever be our righteousness in justification. Those are good as they flow from the pure fountain of the spirit, but as they proceed from us (in whom there is much of the old Adara) they smell of the cask and soil in the channel, and contract a great deal of dross from the indwelling sin: Hence they are so far from justifying us, that they themselves need a justification. Hence holy Nehemiah prays that his good works may be remembred, with a spare me O Lord, according to the greatness of thy mercy, Neh, 13.22. Neither will it suffice to justi∣fication, if our good works are more then our evil. The Papists fable that Henry the second Emperour was weighed in the ballance, to see whether he were worthy of heaven or hell; his good works were put into one scale, his evil in∣to the other, and these were like to out weigh and sink him to hell, but that St. Lawrence put
in the Chalice by the Emperour given him, and so made the scale of good works preponderate. O vain tale! nothing weighs with God in the point of justification but a compleat rightcous∣ness, and that can no where be found but in Christ alone; he and he only fulfilled all righ∣teousness, and therefore he is called by the Apo∣stle , the end of the Law for righteous∣ness to the believer, Rom. 10.4. the Law hath its total sum and perfect compleature in him. Thirdly, There must be an expiation of sin, or else there can be no justification. The very Gen∣tiles themselves, stung with the conscience of sin and vengeance, had their expiatory and lustrato∣ry Sacrifices. The antient lews, being Gods people, had their offerings and sacrifices for sin, to make an Atonement according to the Leviti∣cal Law. The latter Jews, though they reject the sacrifice of the Messiah; yet that they might not be wholly without an expiation, offer a cock for sin, because the word [Gebher] in Hebrew signi∣fies a man, and in the Talmud a cock; hence they say, Gebher, that is, the man sinneth, and Gebher, that is, the cock suffereth. If the Prophet Isaias in the 53. chapter, had used the word (Gebher) the Rabbins (saith a Learned man) would have turned the man into a cock; but there it is not Gebher, but Ish, a man of sorrows: But these ex∣piations not availing, God hath provided an expiation in the death of his son. Without shed∣ding of blood there is no remission, saith the Apostle, Heb. 9.22. and because creature-blood could not do it, the blood of God was shed to redeem us
from sin; Jesus Christ, who is God-man, offered up himself through the eternal spirit, to purge our consciences from dead works: he paid the utmost farthing to Divine justice, and hath left nothing at all to pay for the believing finner. The Gen∣tile sacrifices were no expiations at all, being in∣deed sacrifices to devils and not to God; nay, in their own account they did not expiate in all cases. Hence when the Emperor Constantine was haunted with the innocent blood he had shed, the Gentile Flamius could tell him of no expia∣tion. But the blood of Christ is a true and uni∣versal expiation, cleansing from sin and all sin, 1 Joh. 1.7. The Levitical sacrifices, though of Di∣vine Institution, were but types and shadows, making nothing perfect. But a crucified Christ is the sum and substance of them, really atoning what those did but typically. The Rabbinical cock is a strange vanity, in which we may stand and wonder at the Jewish blindness; but what their vain Gebher could not do, that our Ish the man of sorrows, upon whom all our iniquities met, hath done indeed: he was wounded for our iniquities, his soul was an offering for sin, his life a nsom for many, his blood was shed for the remis∣sion of sins, he paid that he never took, he made  through the blood of his cross; in him God is  and reconciled. These things being premised, I say the soul by Faith doth resign up it self for par∣don and justification. And, that I may ob∣serve my first method, this resignation is made
First, To Jesus Christ the Mediator. The be∣liever, conscious to his own spiritual poverty, doth as the poor man in the Psalm, commit him∣self, or as the Original is, leave himself on the Lord, Psal. 10.14. In stead of a perfect righteous∣ness, he hath raggs of weakness and imperfecti∣on, but he leaves himself upon the perfect righ∣teousness of Christ, as a thing fully answering every jot and tittle of the Law. Indeed some great Rabbies cry out upon imputative righteous∣ness as a thing impossible, calling it putative, a meer imagination, Luthers spectrum, the pleasing dream of simple Christians; but in sober sad∣ness the dream is on their own side. If imputa∣tive righteousness be impossible, how can we stand before the righteous Law, dooming and cursing the least defect or non-continuance in all things? Imputative righteousness is impos∣siblé, and inherent is imperfect, and how can we stand? if we stand, the righteousness of God must be upon us, Rom. 3.22. Christ must be the end of the Law for righteousness unto us, Rom. 10.4. and how can this be without an imputation? A∣gain, if imputed righteousness be impossible, what is imputed sin? If that be so too, how was Christ made sin, or an offering for it? to what purpose was his blood and sufferings? what becomes of redemption, & all the train of blessings waiting thereon? what to those Ma∣sters of Reason is but a fancy, a spectrum or dream, that to the believer is the very thing he would be found in before God, Phil. 3.9. Apollodorus offer'd Socrates a pretious garment to dye in. Imputed
righteousness is the blessed robe which the belie∣ver would live, and dye, and rise in, unto the judgment-seat at the last day. Upon this he will venture his soul, against all the demands of per∣fect obedience in the Law. Moreover, instead of satisfying Justice for his debts, he hath just no∣thing of his own to pay, but he leaves himself upon the blood and rich merits of Christ; his sins are massie burdens, too weighty for all the Angels in heaven to stand under, but he unloads all upon the Lamb of God, who bore away the sin of the world: his debts to God amount to a vast sum, but he ventures upon the great surety, who paid the utmost farthing, and had a total dis∣charge in his resurrection, and now is in heaven to see the scores crossed in Gods book, and the bonds of guilt cancelled and thrown down into conscience. If the avenging Law pursue him, he slies to Christ as a City of refuge, and there hides himself in the clefts of the rock, in the bleeding wounds of his Redeemer: here is faiths anchor∣hold, here he ventures his soul against all the curses of the Law. Deny himself to be a sinner, that he cannot, for his conscience is a thousand witnesses: oppose the cursing Law, that he dares not, for it is backed by an infinite justice; but he ventures all upon the merit and satisfa∣ction of Christ: though in the night of desertion he may lye in a piteous condition, as the Levites Concubine, forced, and as it were dead with le∣gal terrors; yet still his hand like hers, will be upon the threshold, upon Christ the door of salva∣tion, till free-grace dawn and break in upon him:
without this resignation the soul can have no peace. Gardiner himself, being ready to dye, was willing to hear of a justification in the blood of Christ, nothing else could expiate the guilt of sin. Secondly, In and through the Mediator, this re∣signation is made unto God; It is God that justi∣fieth. God as supream Law-giver; the believer wraps up himself in the blood and righteous∣ness of Christ, and so yields up himself unto God to be pardoned and justified. And in this resig∣nation, the great attribute he leans on, is Gods grace: God is gracious, nay he hath riches of grace, such as no unworthiness of ours can ex∣haust; he hath glory of grace, such as no sinful∣ness can eclipse; he can abundantly pardon, or as it is in the Original, multiply to pardon, Isa. 55. 7. His grace can multiply pardons, as his power can creatures. Here is the beautiful gate, where the believer lies for an alms of pardoning mer∣cy: here he ventures himself upon God, speak∣ing like Benhadads servants, I hear that the God of heaven is a merciful God, I will put on my ropes and sack-cloth, and away to him, it may be I may catch a word of grace from him, and live for ever; or arguing like the poor Lepers, if I sit here in my sins, I dye eternally; if it go unto the world, there is a famine of gace, let me fall into the arms of a good God, if he kill me, I thall bat dye, but if he save me, I shall live for ever; af∣ter such a manner doth he cast himself upon mercy. This act of faith is very precious, it touches God as it were in his bowels, and sets
them a sounding and melting into distillations of savour. As soon as the prodigal son returned and cast himself on his fathers mercy, his father runs and kisses him; and the ring, and the best robe, and the satted calf, are all little enough for him, Luke 15. And as it is very pretious, so it is very safe.De Jusi∣f. l. 5. c. 7. Beliarmtne himself, after many dispu∣tations about justification doth yet conclude, tu∣tiss. mum est, duciam totam in solâ Dei miseri∣cordiâ & benignitate reponere, it is most safe to put all our confidence in the sole mercy and bounty of God. Thirdly, This resignation is made to the Word, as the warrant for both the former resignations. Ask a believer why he resigns to Jesus Christ for pardon and justification, his answer will be, I find in the word that Christ hath fulsilled all righte∣ousness, hore our iniquities, made an end of sin, and reconciled us to God by his cross, therefore I resign to him. Ask him again, why he resigns to God for it, his answer will be, I find in the word that God is decy phered in blessed titles, as gracious, merciful, abundant in goodness, and ready to for∣give; and that the grace in his heart slows down to us in promises of pardon, blotting out iniqui∣ty, and casting sin behind his back into the depth of the sea, therefore I resign. Parley with him further, and he will tell you, that over and besides Gods infallible word, he hath his oath. As to Christ the atoning Priest, God hath sworn, thou art a Priest for ever, Psal. 110.4. And as to his own grace and favour, he hath sworn, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that the
wicked turn from his way and live, Ezek. 33.11. and in swearing, God  interposes him∣self, as the word is, Heb. 6.17. pawns his life and essence upon it, to make the thing wholly irre∣pealable and immutable, and thereby to raise up strong and invincible consolation in us, and therefore I resign. Thus far of the second thing, resignation for pardon and justification. Thirdly, Faith resigns up the soul to be sanctifi∣ed. Sanctification stands in two things, mortifi∣cation of sin, and vivification of the soul, and for both these faith yields up the soul. And to ob∣serve the promised order; First, This resignation is made to Jesus Christ the Mediator. And first touching Mortification, the believer yields his soul to Christ in a three∣sold respect. First, He yields up his soul to Christ as the grand samplar of mortification. What Christ suf∣fered in his pure flesh by way of expiation, that must we suffer in our corrupt flesh by way of mortification. His body was nailed to the cross till the soul separated from it; & the body of sin must be so nailed, till the soul, the will, and love, and delight of sin depart. He was free in laying down his life and blood, and so must we be in laying down the life and blood of the old Adam: 'Tis true, the flesh relucts and says, as Christs hu∣mane nature, Oh! let this cup. pass from me, but the spirit is willing, and cries out, Father, thy wll be done, even in the death of my darling lusts. Christ died a violent death, and sin must not dy
a natural one. If it dye alone or of it self, it is no sacrifice, it must be cropt in the flower, and stabbed at the heart, and dye of its wounds; the violence done to God and Christ and the Spirit must be upon it, till it give up the ghost. Christ died a tormenting death, in pains and a∣gonies, and we must dye so to sin, we must suffer in the flesh, 1 Pet. 4.1. bleeding under sin, and being sorrowful to the death of it. Christ died a lingring death, and so doth sin, it doth not dye all at once, but languishes by little and little; the believer dies daily to sin. The Colossians were dead Cl. 3.3. and yet saith the Apostle, mortisie your members, v. 8. Mortification must be upon mortification, because sin is long a dying: the genius of faith is, to have sin crucified as Christ was, following his steps, as much as may be. Secondly, He yields up his soul to Christ as the meritorious cause of mortification. Christs death merited sins; hence faith glories in the cross of Christ, as in that whereby the world is crucified to the believer, and he to the world, Gal. 6.14. there it would hang up every lust as an accursed thing. Faith lies at the bleeding wounds of Christ, watching for the breathings of that spirit, which can mortisie the deeds of the body, waiting for that mind of Christ which can make us suf∣fer in the fiesh, that we may cease from sin. Christ was crucified, and the believer would have the old man crucified together, he would dye with him as the graft doth with the stock. There is a Popish fable, that the angry Adriatick Sea
was becalmed by one of the nails of Christs cross cast into it; the moral is true: the trou∣bled sea of lust in our heart cannot be subdued but by the application of Christ death; the winds and waves there obey no other voice but that of Christ crucified, he yields up his soul to Christ as the royal worker of mortification. When he sees his lusts as so many rebels rising up in arrns, he flies to his soveraign Christ for a pow∣er to subdue them: the high things and strong holds appearing in his understanding, make him cry out, Treason, Treason, the Jebusite is in the tower of David; the fleshly wisdom hath got into the understanding, O thou wisdom of God captivate and cast it down. The Pagan lusts and Gentile-wills shewing themselves in the heart, force him to break forth like the Psalmist, O God, the heathen are come into thine inheritance, thy temple they have desiled, cast them out O thou mighty Saviour, that my soul may be a sanctuary for thy self. When the battel is set before and behind, corruptions surrounding and encompas∣sing him, his eyes are upon his Lord sitting above at the right hand of power, till his enemies be made his footstool. And as the believer yields up his foul to Christ for mortification of sin, so also for vivisi∣cation of the soul. And this in the very same respects. First, He yields up his soul to Christ as the grand pattern of vivisication; the parallel is the Apostles own, Like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father, even so we also
should walk in newness of life, Rom. 6.4. Look what was done in the flesh of Christ in his cor∣poreal resurrection, that is done in the spirits of Christians in the spiritual resurrection: there the stone was rolled away from the sepulchre, here from the heart; there the flesh of Christ was raised up by an Almighty power, called by the Apostle, the glory of the Father; here the soul of the believer is raised up by the same power, as appears Eph. 1.19, 20. there after the corporceal resurrection, Christ appeared in humane lineaments; here after the spiritual re∣surrection, the Christian appears in divine gra∣ces: the genius of faith is to assimilate the Chri∣stian to Christ risen. Secondly, He yields up his soul to Christ as the meritorious cause of vivisication. Christ meri∣ted all graces for us, saith doth not dare to go immediately to God, no not for holiness it self, but it goes and sucks at the breasts of Christs humanity, well knowing that all graces are from the spirit, and the way of the spirit is by the blood, as Tagmon Archbishop of Magdenburg took the last breath of his dying Master Wolf∣gang by applying mouth to mouth; so faith ap∣plies its mouth as it were to the wounds of a dying Christ, from thence to receive the spirit of all grace; that love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, meekness, temperance, as so many rivers of living water, may flow in the heart, to make glad the habitation of God there∣in, that the holy spirit may be as it were the soul of the soul, breathing in the believers pray∣ers,
and shining on his Bible, and melting in his charity, and impowering in his infirmity, and honey-dropping in his converses, and being a Shechinah, a presence and a glory in all his ways. Thirdly, He yields up his soul to Christ as the Royal Donor of all quickning graces. Christ as a Priest merited all graces, but as a King he gives them out unto us, him hath God exalted with his right hand, to be a Prince and a Saviour to give re∣pentance, Act. 5.31. and so to give all other gra∣ces. A melting heart is but a word of power from him at Gods right hand, an heavenly heart but a touch from him sitting in heaven, every piece of holiness is a beam of glory from him; meekness, and mercy, and obedience, and pati∣ence, are as so many pearls dropping from his crown; all the sheddings of the holy spirit slow from him who is exalted above, he ascended up that he might fill all things, Eph. 4.10. that is, all the spiritual world of believers with grace. Faith therefore looks up for the sweet illapses of the spirit, and waits for graces as so many gol∣den apples dropping down from that tree of life which stands in the upper Paradise of God. Secondly, In and through the Mediator this re∣signation is made unto God, it is God that sancti∣sieth. God as the supream fountain of grace; and in this resignation faith climbs up to him partly by the Attribute of free-grace, cast thy burden upon the Lord, saith the Psalmist, Psal. 55. 22. or as the Original imports, omnia donabilia
tua, all that thou wouldest have given thee, what∣ever thy want be, mortifying grace, or quick∣ning grace, faith hath an art to cast and unload all upon free-grace: there being a famine of grace in lapsed nature, faith brings out the emp∣ty vessel, the soul void of self-worthiness, and sets it under one ordinance or other, waiting up∣on God till he rain down righteousness upon the soul. This is the rain of liberalities, as the Original is, Psal. 68.9. this faith waits for with∣out money or price of its own, because God is love, and grace free, and partly by the Attribute of Almighty power: sin is strong, but not infinite∣ly; the Almighty, who subdues all things to him∣self, can easily subdue it. The heart is a dead womb, and not able to teem out the least parti∣cle of grace, but the Almighty can quicken the dead, and raise up a divine seed therein. The fingers which made an Heaven and an Earth, can make a new heart and a new spirit: Faith takes hold on the power of God, for the work∣ing sanctification in the heart. Thirdly, This resignation is made to the word, and that upon a double account. It is made to the word as the warrant of both the former resig∣nations, and made to the word as the engine in Gods hand for the working of sanctification; it is made to the word as the warrant of both the former resignations. The word is full of pro∣mises of mortifying and quickning grace, and these promises stream out to us from the pure fountain of free-grace, through the bleeding wounds of the Mediator, and are all Yea and
Amen. Hence faith resigns to God and Christ for all sanctifying grace. It is also made to the word as the engine in Gods hand for the working of sanctification. The word is a mighty weapon, able through Gods power to cast down the heights and strong holds of sin; and an immor∣tal seed, able through Gods grace to quicken the heart, and spring up into the new-creature. Faith therefore resigns to it, that the heart may be sanctified through the truth. Thus far of the third thing, resignation for sanctification. Fourthly, Faith resigns up the soul to be ruled as to its actings, I say, as to its actings. That I may clearly distinguish it from the but now mentioned sanctification, which consists in in∣ward principles of grace. And still to press in my old steps. First, This resignation is made to Jesus Christ the Mediator. Faith translates the soul into the kingdom of Christ, and loves to live no where else; the world in its eyes is but a house of bondage, but it loves to live in Christs domini∣ons. Where holiness is, there's the King of Saints, where meekness and patience, there's the throne of the Lamb; where righteousness, there's his Scepter; where Gods will prevaileth, there he sits in Power and Majesty; at the last day sense will discover this great King Jesus coming in the clouds, in power and glory. But faith sees him here coming in state in every holy command, and riding as it were on the wings of the wind in every motion of the holy spirit. The posture
of faith herein is like that of the Israelies, when the pillar of cloud and fire went before them, then they journied, otherwise they staid in their place; when the spirit and word of Christ goes before the believer, faith follows after, else it will not stir a foot out of its place; it is really in the believers heart, to be ruled by Christ in all things. Take him in holy ordinances, these, saith faith, are the throne of Christ here below, in these he fits at the right hand of power; here the be∣liever waits to see the power and the glory, as the man with the withered hand, in stretching it forth, waited for a power to restore it, and as the blind man in his going and washing in Siloam, waited for a power to recover his sight: so the be∣liever in every ordinance waits for the power of Christ, if he break the rocky heart, & melt it in∣to the divine will, the believer cries out the Lord reigneth; here is the day of power indeed. Take him in the works of his calling, and there he is ruled by Christ; one would think the servant were only toiling and drudging in his servile employments, but if he be a believer, he is serv∣ing the Lord Christ, Col. 3.24. and by a divine praerogative above other mens, his deeds are wrought in God: such was the posture of pious Musculus in the town-ditch, as well as in the Pulpit. Faith is such an engine as brings down the kingdom of Christ (though not of this world) into the meanest trades, the believer acting there∣in, as Peter let down his net, at the command of Christ, and therein, as in his calling, abiding with God, which is more then the unbeliever
doth under divine ordinances: nay, take him even in natural actions, the believer (when him∣self) cats, and drinks, and sees, and hears, and speaks, and sleeps, and wakes, and walks after another rate then other men, doing all under the Law of Christ; that's a knife at his throat, a co∣vering to his eyes, a stopper to his cars, a bridle on his lips, when he sleepeth, that keeps him, when he waketh, that talks with him, when he walketh, that leads him; the kingdom of hea∣ven, which is not meat or drink or any such thing, is by faith brought down into all these. The genius of faith is to be ruled by Christ in all things. Secondly, This resignation in and through the Mediator, is made to God, I say, in and through the Mediator; because without him, we can expect to be ruled by God in no other way then by the iron rod of his power and justice, dashing us in pieces to all eternity; but in and through him, the believer may and doth yield up himself to God to be ruled. And here he makes use of two Attributes, Gods soveraignty, and Gods holiness; God is the supream Lord, and must be obeyed; he is the holy one, and must be sanctified in each command: the beams of his majesty and holi∣ness sparkle out, and these faith takes in to melt the heart into a compliance with the divine will. Plato being asked by one of his Scholars, how long his precepts were to be obeyed, answered, Donec in terris apparuerit sacratior aliquis, qui sontem veritatis aperiat, the believer desires to be ruled by God, because an higher and holier can∣not come.
Thirdly, This resignation is made to the word. Ask a believer how he knows himself to be where he would be, in the dominions of God and Christ, his answer will be, I know it by the command in the word, and in the command his faith eyes two things, the truth of the command and the soveraignty; his faith eyes the truth of it, the command is true, as coming from God himself, and being the very counterpane of the holiness in his heart; This is the will of God even your sanctification, saith St. Paul, 1 Thess. 4.3. Gods will is in himself, but the command is the coun∣terpane of it, thy word is true from the beginning, saith the Psalmist, Psal. 109.160. or as the Ori∣ginal is, the head of thy word is truth, the body of the command in Scripture answers to the head of it in the holy will of God. Faith looks on the command as issuing out of the very heart of God, and exactly agreeing thereunto, and up∣on this account resign to it, as to the good and acceptable will of God. Again, his faith eyes the soveraignty of it; naturally we would be Gods to our selves, and set up our wills as supream, and therefore we make war upon God and his Law: But when faith comes, God is God, and the Law a royal Law, and all the commands in Power and Majesty, by them (saith David) is thy sorvant warned, or as it is in the Hebrew, illustra∣ted, Psal. 19.11. the command to the believer is, as if a light shone from heaven, and a voice came from the excellent glory, saying, Do this or that. Gods will rides in triumph, and mans falls to the earth, as not able to stand before the Lord:
The voice of a superior, if perceived, puts an awe upon the inferior nature, so doth the voice of man upon beasts, so doth the voice of Angels upon men, and (which is the greatest awe be∣cause from the highest nature) so doth the voice of God upon the believer. After this manner doth faith yield up the soul to the command, and in it to God and Christ. Thus far of the fourth thing, resignation for a holy government. Fifthly, Faith resigns up the soul for the gracious, reward of eternal life. And here to keep the old Method. First, This resignation is made to Jesus Christ the Mediator. Faith cannot be satisfied with earth, that's but the Paradise of sense; no, nor with present graces, these are but the pawns and earnest-pennies of eternal life, faith aspires after heaven. Oh! let me go over, and see the good Land, where the Mountains are all spices, the Rivers pleasures, the Mountains are all spices, the Rivers pleasures, the Air pure holiness, the Eternal light God himself, saith faith, and for a title there∣unto, faith yields up the soul to Christ, who as a Priest hath merited heaven for us, and as a King is able to give it out to us. The Plebeian (saith Epictetus) looks for his gain from things without; the Philosopher looks for it from him∣self; but (which is a strain higher) the Belie∣ver looks for his reward from Christ. Evagrius the Philosopher gave (as the story goes) three hundred pounds to Synesius for the poor, to be repaid him by Christ in another world: the believer doth all at the same rate, hears, and
reads, and prays, and gives alms, and all to be paid in another world. Worldly men wonder at his hot pursuits after grace and holiness, but he knows what these will go for in another world; that's the reason he follows hard after them, but in the pursuit still his eyes are upon Christ as the great purchasor and pay-master. Secondly, This resignation in and through the Mediator is made to God. It is he that glorifieth, eternal life is Gods gift, our heavenly Fathers meer pleasure; faith therefore yields up the soul to him for it, and herein it climbs up to him by his free-grace, the pure river of life flows out of the throne of God and of the Lamb, Rev. 22.1. out of the regnant grace of God and merit of Christ as out of a fountain, the believer expects no eternal life but what issues out from thence. Thus the Reverend Soknius on his death bed expressed himself, Pendeo totus à Dei miserieor∣diâ, I wholly depend on Gods mercy. Thirdly, This resignation is made to the Word. There is the promise of eternal life extant, and there the way to eternal life is chalked out, there is the promise of eternal life mapped out, a mercy above all the sphear of nature: Hence the antient believers were as pilgrims here, Heb. 11.13. as if the world were too little for them, they were altogether for the heavenly country, which faith sees at a distance in the promise: There also the way to eternal life is chalked out, the world passes away, but he that doth the will of God abideth for ever, 1 Joh. 2.17. Riches and plea∣sures are but the way of time, but holiness and
righteousness are the way everlasting, Psal. 139.24. the good acts may pass, but their record is in heaven; the good men must dye, but the ho∣liness shall never see corruption; the repentant tears which fall to the earth, are bottled with God; the charity which seems lost as bread cast on the waters, will come to hand again. Poly∣crates, when he cast his ring into the sea, little thought to have met it again in his fish; but the believer doing good works, expects to meet them again in another world, sowing to the spi∣rit, he looks for a crop in eternal life. Dorcas may leave her coats and garments behind her, but the charity will follow her into another world; the commandement is eternal life, saith our Saviour, Joh. 12.50. the very way to it. The believer obeying, may in some sense say as dying Pollio, jam ingredior in vitam aeternam, now I am entring into eternal life, into that which will survive the world and live in glory. Faith re∣signs to the word, not only as it is the char∣ter of eternal life in the promise, but as it is the director to it in the command. Thus far of the second thing, for what things and purposes this resignation is made. But to proceed to the third thing. Thirdly, What are the Adjuncts and Proper∣ties of this resignation? Ʋnto which I shall an∣swer in the following particulars. First, This resignation is made in the way of God. Believers wait upon God for very great things: Since the beginning of the world men have not heard, nor perceived by the ear, neither
hath the eye seen, O God, besides these, what he hath prepared for him that waiteth for him, saith the Prophet, Isa. 64.4. But where do they wait for these great things, where but in Gods own way? Thus it follows, those that remember thee in thy ways, v. 5. Look in what way or method God gives out a mercy, in the same way or me∣thod doth faith wait to receive it. Would a man have a pardon, faith waits for it in Gods way; free-grace as immense a sea as it is in God, doth not flow out every way upon sinners, but through the bleeding wounds of Christ. We are justified freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in Jesus Christ, saith the Apostle, Rom. 3.24. Mark, free-grace issues out through redem∣ption, and in that way faith waits for it: Thus St. Peter, We believe that through the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ we shall be saved, Act. 15.11. he calls the grace of God the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, as being merited by him. The be∣liever waits for pardoning mercy, but it must be the mercy of David, coming through the Messiah the true David. Whether God might not per po∣tentiam suam absolutam, remit sin without a satis∣faction, is a question may be spared; Gods will is declared, the Scripture is definitive, there is no other name given among men, but the name of Jesus, no other remission but through his blood: the glory of the Lord, that is, his free-grace, comes into the Temple of the Church by the way of the East, Ezek. 43.2. that is, through Je∣sus Christ, who is , the East, Luk. 1.78. towards which the true believer bows down
himself for all grace. The Socinians grace, such as is supposed to issue forth without the satisfa∣ction of Christ, is not indeed the grace of God, but a fancy, an Idol of their own heart, He that abideth not in the doctrine of Christ, hath not God, saith S. John, 2 Joh. v. 9. therefore such an one must not be received, or saluted with God speed, v. 10. Let the Socinian, who abides not in the doctrine of a redeeming and satisfying Christ, cry up free-grace, and that (as he thinks) in the purest and highest strains, without all money and price, even without that of the Mediator. After all this he hath not God or free-grace in the right notion of it, the true believer dares not entertain such a grace, or say  to it, lest he should bless an Idol, and rejoyce in a thing of nought; such a grace is a meer stranger to Scri∣pture, and therefore faith, whose skill is only in that Dialect, cannot own it, though humane rea∣son speak never so fair for it. Again, would a believer have mortification? he would have it in Gods way, he seeks it not Macedonius-like, by standing in a ditch all the day, nor as the Pa∣lestine-monks, by lying as dead unburied men on the earth, nor with the Papists, by Pilgrimages and outward pennances, nor with the Flagelian∣tes, in their scourging and bloody whipping their own bodies. No, this is not Gods way, in all this Pageantry of mortification, they are at hostility with nature rather then with sin, and in shooting all their arrows at the body, they miss the mark, the chief seat of sin in the heart: Nesciunt super∣stitiosi (saith a Learned man) Deum amare im∣mutationem
cordium, non dilaniationem corpo∣rum, superstitious men know not that God loves changing of hearts rather then renting of bodies: the true believer seeks mortification in and by Jesus Christ, our old man is crucified with him, Rom. 6.6. As long as we are in the old Adam, sin will be lively, but as soon as we are in Christ the wisdom and power of God, sin, which is the weak∣ness and folly of man, dies in us. The believer seeks after the spirit of Christ, as after that which can lay our lusts a steep in godly sorrow, and nail them to the cross of Christ, and let out their vi∣tal blood, even the inward love thereof. More∣over, a believer would have instruction and teaching, but he would have it in Gods way. The Papists say, that Images are Lay-mens books, and whilest the Bible is to the unlearned a seal∣ed letter, these are Letters Patents, open to all men, he that runs may read God as it were in great Capital letters. Gregory the Great, though he condemned their adoration, yet he allowed their presence in Churches, tanquam essent me∣moracula & rudium literae; but alas! can the dumb Idol speak? or if it could, can a teacher of lies instruct? may that be our memorial which hath made many forget God? Did God ever licence the printing of such Lay-mens books? and if it have not his Imprimatur by an institution, how can we expect his benediction? surely this is none of Gods way; faith saith, the image of God is in the word, and the only crucifix in the Gospel. The Enthusiasts would be taught in an immediate and extraordinary way, but the be∣liever
goes to the word, there is the School where he would be taught of God, there are the gates and door-posts where he would hear wis∣dom speak. Secondly, This resignation is made to its entice object, and not by piece-meal. As to God the ulti∣mate object, the believer would not pick and chuse among his Attributes, but is for them all, he would not have a God all of grace, but such as he is, an holy one and a just, who will be san∣ctified even in our approaches to touch his gol∣den Scepter. The believer, whilest he casts him∣self upon Gods grace, would be assimulated to his holiness, when he catches hold on mercy, withall he trembles at divine justice, as he waits for the smilings of Gods face, so he walks as in his presence; all places to the believer are Bethels and Peniels, full of God, and too dreadful to sin in. If any man go about by his faith to single out grace from among the other Attributes, and suck that honicomb of infinite sweetness by it self alone, he doth not believe but presume, like those in the Prophet, The heads thereof judge for reward, and the Priests thereof teach for hire, and the Prophets thereof divine for money, yet will they lean upon the Lord, Mic. 3.11. O vain presump∣tion! for them standing upon such unholy ground, to lean upon the Lord, is an utter im∣possibility. A traitor who strikes off his Sove∣raigns Crown, or with Hacket stabs at his image, doth not, cannot, at that time cast himself on his Grace or Royal favour: A sinner, whilest by his sinful rebellions he strikes at the Soveraignty or
stabs at the holiness of God, doth not, cannot, lean upon his free-grace. St. John hath deter∣mined the case, If we say that we have fellowship with him, and walk in darkness, we lye, and do not the truth, 1 Joh. 1.6. Let such an one cry up free-grace, free-grace, never so much, he doth but trust in a lye, there is no such grace as he dreams of, none but what comes from the holy one as the giver of it, none but what teaches the recei∣ver a lesson of holiness. Again, as to Jesus Christ the Mediator, the believer is for All Christ, not only for him as a meriting and atoning Priest, but for him as a teaching Prophet, and ruling Lord also. Whilest he wraps up himself in the pure robes of Christs righteousness, at the same instant his ear is open to discipline, and his heart unfolds the everlasting doors to let in the King of glory; he puts the Crown upon his head, and sets him upon the throne of the heart, singing blessing, honour, power, glory, to the Lamb for e∣ver. That Christ who is in glory in heaven at the right hand of Majesty, comes to be in glory in the heart by the resignations of faith. Thus he him∣self faith, the spirit shall glorifie me, Joh. 16.14. that is, by working faith in the heart, as the Father glorifies him above, so the spirit, and under that faith, glorifie him below. If any man go about by his faith to pick out the merits and righteousness of Christ for salvation, without a respect to his teaching and ruling offices, he mangles and tears in pieces Christ, as much as in him lieth, renting of Jesus from Christ, nay and Jesus in twain, whom he admits only to save him from the
guilt of sin and not from the power and love of it, separating the blood of his Saviour from the water, and his merits from the spirit, which are and ever must be in conjunction; such an half and divided Christ as this is, is not the Christ of God, but a Christ of his own fancy, one that will save him in his sins, and justifie him in his un∣godliness; he that believes in such a Christ, doth at once miserably cheat his own soul, and as much as in him lieth, profanely trample on the blood of Christ, as if it were shed on purpose that sinful men might have the reins laid down on their necks to riot in their cursed lusts with all impunity. Moreover, as to the word of God, the be∣liever is for all of it, he is not only for cordials, and pots of Manna, and distillations of grace in the promises, but for precepts also, his meat and his drink is to do the will of his Father in hea∣ven; whilest his eyes are on the Land of promise, his feet are in the Land of uprightness. Anti∣nomians boast themselves to be above the Law, and as free as if they were in heaven, and that their sins are but seeming sins, sins to sense and to the world outwardly, but no sins to faith and before God who seeth no sin in them. But alass! these are but swelling words of vanity, to be above the Law is Antichrist-like to be above God him∣self, whose Majesty and holiness break forth in it; and if sins be but seeming sins, the Law is but a seeming Law, and God (whose authority and sanctity shine forth in it) is but a seeming God: Promises and Precepts run together in the Scri∣pture, and must be taken together into the heart
by faith. Promises are effluxes out of Gods grace, and faith takes them in by recumbency; Precepts are effluxes out of Gods holiness, and faith takes them in by obediential subjection, both must continue and be owned by faith, as long as there are grace and holiness in God. The true believer neither with the Antinomian picks out the promises from the precepts, nor yet with the Hypocrite doth he pick out only such com∣mands as do not cross his beloved lusts, as the Papists have razed out the second Commande∣ment in some of their Catechisms, because of their outward images, so the Hypocrite razes out the displeasing Commandements in his practice, because of the Idol-lusts in his heart; but the true believer, as David, is for all the wills of God, without any salvoes, because without any indul∣ged lusts. Thirdly, This resignation is made purely upon a Scriptural warrant. There may be hay and stub∣ble in the believer, but there is none in his faith; which, so far as it is faith, stands only upon holy ground. All faiths assents stand upon Scripture-propositions, all its affiances upon Scripture-promises, and all its obedience upon Scripture-precepts: What Balaam said by an over-ruling providence, that saith the believer by the instinct of faith, I cannot go beyond the word of the Lord to do less or more, Num. 22.18. he would not as to doctrinals be wise above what is written, nor as to worship be religious above what is writ∣ten, nor as to mercies and comforts be an expe∣ctant above what is written. He would not as to
doctrinals be wise above what is written: when the Lutherans and Papists met at Ratisbon, the Papists would first dispute about the Canon of Faith, the Lutherans replyed, that the Scriptures were the only rule, at which the Papists cried out, that it was very unequal to tye them to one kind of weapon only, but faith is content with Scriptural doctrines only. There is one Mediator in Scripture, and faith dares not multiply them; there is one Scripture purgatory in Christs blood, and faith will not invent another; there is one propitiatory sacrifice offered up once for all upon the Cross, and faith will not seek after any more. All the points in Popery are but so many addi∣tions to the word, and upon that account insig∣nificant to faith. The first error in the first sin was an addition to the word, the woman saying, ye shall not touch it, Gen. 3.3. whereas Gods word only was, ye shall not eat of it, Gen. 2.17. and the first and primordial error which hath ushered in all the Romish doctrines into the Church, hath been the very same thing; and because they are additions, faith cannot own them, no not faith in a Papist: opinion may own them, but faith can∣not, for it is but the souls Eccho to the voice of God in Scripture, and where there is no voice, there can be no return; humane doctrines found not at all to faith, Scripture is all. Bishop Fisher a little before his suffering lighting on that one sweet passage, this is life eternal to know thee and Jesus Christ, Joh. 17.3. brake out into these words, here's learning enough for me: the believer, who hath the whole Scripture before him, may
well say, here's doctrine enough for me, faith will not turn vagrant and lye about at humane doors for doctrines, there is enough in the word. A∣gain, the believer would not as to worship be re∣ligious above what is written; that of the Schoolmen, cultus est à naturâ, modus à lege, vir∣tus à gratiâ, worship is from nature, the manner from the Law, the power from grace, is very excel∣lent. The very light of nature saith, God is to be worshipped, but faith goes to the word for the manner, and to free-grace for the power. God in the second Commandement forbids graven Ima∣ges, not as false objects of worship, which are for∣bidden in the first Commadement, but as false means and manner of worship, and under graven Images, as being the chiefest and groffest kind of false worship. God doth forbid all other false worship humanely devised, such as these were: hence true faith looks on all humanely devised worships as so many graven Images, a kind of Teraphim, expressing, though not as they did, an humane shape, yet an humane devise and inven∣tion, things void of God, without institution and without benediction. That of the Prophet, who hath required this at your hand, Isa. 1.12. falls like thunder on all the imagery of humane in∣ventions, dashing them to pieces in a moment. Quintinus the Libertine, being present at a so∣lemn Mass with a Cardinal, boasted that he saw the glory of God. I suppose according to his loose principles of being under no outward Law, he would have said as much if he had been a∣mong Pagans at their Idolatrous worship; but
the true believer looks for that glory only in the Sanctuary of Divine Institutions, there and there only God records his Name, and commands the blessing, even life for evermore. Moreover the be∣liever as to mercies and comforts would not be an expectant above what is written. 'Tis said of Moses that he died according to the word of the Lord, Deut. 38.5. or (as the Original may be read) he died upon the mouth of the Lord; the believer loves to live and dye upon Gods mouth in the promises, there watching for the sweet words of grace dropping from him: he walks among the Promises, as the Physitian among his herbs, and by a divine instinct knows this is good for such a condition, and that for another; and when he comes to that promise, I will be thy God, he saith, this is the universal Medicine, and good for all things, as infinite a sea as Gods grace is, as vast a treasure as Christs merits, the believer can∣not tell how to climb up to these, unless he have somewhat of a promise to set his faith upon; if there be but an half-promise, faith will ascend up by it: when God saith, seek righteousness, seek meekness, it may be you shall be hid in the day of the Lords anger, Zeph. 2.3. faith will hang upon a may be, but where there is nothing at all of a pro∣mise, faith does not, cannot tell how to approach for the unpromised thing. The Perfectionists fay, that sinless perfection is attainable in this life; Joseph is yet alive, perfection of life, figured by Joseph, may be found, so thinks a Learned Doctor, My yoke is easie, said Christ, and from thence Bellarmine concludes, Legem Dei possibi∣lem
esse renatis imo & facilem observatu; but alass these are but dreams and not acts of faith. Its true, the believer groaning under the burden of sin, wishes nothing more then sinless perfecti∣on, he works, he walks, he prays, he weeps, he runs, he strives, but after all he may not believe sinless perfection attainable here; not but that the grace of God in Christ is sufficient to effect it, but there is no channel for such a grace to run in, no promise in all the word to bottom such a persuasion upon: there is a promise for the sub∣duing of iniquity, but not for the annihilating it, a promise that sin shall not reign in us, but none that it shall not be; therefore the believer would not seek for that in himself, which is only found in Christ, nor for that on earth which is reserved for heaven; that mercy or comfort which is not let down in the promise, faith doth not expect or look for. Trubern a German Divine on his deathbed, seeking comfort, spake thus, textum, textum volo, let me have the text, the text, well knowing that comfort streams out in the pro∣mises; the believer is ever for one promise or other, to give advantage to his faith in its ascension to God for mercy and com∣fort. Fourthly, This resignation is a voluntary act. It hath been disputed between Romanists and Protestants, where the seat of faith is, whether in the Ʋnderstanding only, or in the Will also; the Apostle clearly determines it, with the heart man believeth, Rom. 10.10. the heart includeth both faculties, ad esse fidei virtutis concurrit actus
rationis simul & voluntatis, quod benè innuit Apostolus in ipsâ notifieatione fidei, cum dicit fidem esse substantiam rerum sperandarum, argu∣mentum non apparentium, tangens quod est in eâ cognitionis, & quod est assectionis, saith Bona∣venture, the assent of faith is in the Understand∣ing, but the resignation is in the Will, credere est consentire, consensio autem volentis est, saith St. Austin. We read in Scripture of faith un∣feigned, and sincerity is in the Will, of the o∣bedience of faith, and obedience is in the Will, of leaning, rolling, resting, casting our selves upon God, and all these are in the Will; all the resignations which the believer makes, are acts of his Will; if he resign to the Promises, and through them to the meriting Mediator, and through him to the free-grace of God, this re∣cumbency or fiducialness is in his Will; if he resign to the commands, and through them to the kingdom of the Mediator, and through him to the holiness of God, this obediential frame is in his Will; if he resign for instruction to the Word, and through it to the great Pro∣phet, and through him to the wisdom of God; this docibleness, this tender holy flesh is in his Will; he would have salvation coming in a way of grace, and grace flowing through the Me∣diator Jesus Christ, and Jesus Christ for a teach∣er and ruler as well as for a Saviour, and all this is his choice. 'Tis not a meer velleity or ef∣fluvium of a light desire, like that of Balaam, let me dye the death of the righteous, but an act of his Will; 'tis not a mood or hot sit of
devotion, such as falls on men under warming and awakening ordinances, but a deliberate act, 'tis not a constraint or piece of servility, such as men usually have in sick and dying hours, when they are rolling off from this world, and upon the brink of eternity, with a prospect of heaven and hell before them, but it is a true and a free-will, cordially and freely offering up the soul to the terms and methods of salvation in the Gospel. Fifthly, This resignation is made in Humility. The believer, like his father Abraham, is called to Gods foot, there to lye in the lowest posture of a sinful creature, in an humble docibleness he lyes at the foot of Gods wisdom, waiting as they that watch for the morning, till the holy irra∣diations make the day dawn, and the day-star arise in the heart; in an obediential frame he lyes at the foot of Gods holiness, crying out like Paul struck down to the earth, Lord, what wilt thou have me to do? and in a fiducial re∣cumbency he lies at the foot of Gods grace, as a forlorn beggar, full of fores and extremities, waiting if free-grace will take him in, and, like the good Samaritane, bind up his wounds, pouring in the oyl and wine of mercy into his heart. The men among the Israelites could not enter into the Land of promise, but the little ones did so, the mystery is the Christians, though the history be theirs: the men among us, such as can few sig-leaves together and cloath them∣selves, such as can feed themselves at home, and keep house upon their own reason, such
as are Lords of their own actions, coming and going ad placitum, these do not believe, nor enter into the promises of the Gospel, but the little ones, who cannot dress themselves, but as free-grace swadles and wraps them up in Christs righteousness, nor feed themselves, un∣less free-grace pluck out the breast and milk out instruction, nor rule themselves, or go a∣lone, but as free-grace takes them by the hand and leads them in holy ways, these are they that believe and enter into rest: hence our Sa∣viour saith, Except ye become as little children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven, Mat. 18.3. The proud man will not suffer grace to reign in or over him, but the believer is as a little child ruleable by all the will of God, hum∣bly submitting to all the methods of salvation in the Gospel. To shut up this discourse about the Adjuncts of faith, I shall only add a caution or two. When I say that all true believers do thus re∣sign, I mean not that all have the same formal notions or expressions, but the same faith and resignation for the substance of it; the root of the matter is in the weakest of them, though not the same verdure of notions or expressions, the substance or holy seed of true resignation may be latent in a bruised reed or smoaking flax, in a poor spirit, or the pulse of a desire, I have read of a Noble person in Spain, who be∣ing, as was supposed, absolutely dead,Melch A∣danum  Vesal was diffected, and upon the opening of his breast, they found to their great amazement his heart
beating; some weak believers may seem to∣tally dead, in whom yet before God, to whom all things are naked and open, as in an Anatomy, there is found a vital pulse of faith secretly working. God (saith a Reve∣rend Divine) brings not scales to weigh, but a touch-stone to try our graces. If there be but the least dram of gold, but the least smoke or weik in the socket (as the expression is Matth. 12.20.) God accepts it; neither do I mean that this resignation is acted perpetu∣ally, but with many sad pauses and inter∣ruptions, which happen partly by the blasts of Satans temptations, making the believer walk like Peter upon the water, now a good step, and then ready to sink when the wind grows boisterous, till his faith buoy him up again, with a Lord, save me, partly by the allurements and entanglements of the world, which are to him as the stone and the string were to Anselms bird, now up in ascensi∣ons of soul to God and Christ, and then down again to the earth and earthly things, and partly from the indwelling sin which make him live, as his Saviour did on earth, a meer conflicting life, Christ endured the con∣tradiction of sinners, and he the contradiction of sins; the indwelling corruption makes his soul, like a palsey hand with contrary motions, Lord, I believe, help my unbelief, whilest faith moves forward, unbelief draws back; after he hath in a princely manner wrestled with God, he goes off Jacob-like halting in one infirmity or other.
CHAP. V. Reasons proving the Essential nature of Faith, as the condition of the Gospel, to consist in an holy thorough dependant Self-resignation. THUS far of the nature of this Resignati∣on, as to its Objects, Ends and Ad∣juncts. It remains that I lay down my reasons, why I place the vitality and essential nature of faith, as it is the condition of the Gospel, in such a resignation as is before described. And for this, First, That precious faith, which is the E∣vangelical condition, is more then a bare naked assent to the Gospel-truth, and less then an assu∣rance of love and pardon from God, wherefore it must needs be some middle thing between both, such as Resignation is. I shall en∣deavour to make good both propositi∣ons. First, Pretious faith is more then a bare naked assent to the Gospel-truth. This will be clear by the ensuing considerations. First, A naked assent is but credere Deo, a believing Scriptural axiomes to be true; but
pretious faith is a far nobler thing, and therefore very emphatically painted out in Scripture; in the Old Testament 'tis credere in Deum, a be∣lieving in Jehovah, Gen. 15.6. importing a fidu∣cial act, 'tis a trusting in the Lord, Psal. 2.12. where the Hebrew word imports a flying for re∣fuge, a running under the wings of free-grace as chickens do under the hen; 'tis a leaning upon God, Isa. 50.10. as not able to stand alone with∣out a recumbency on mercy; 'tis a rolling our selves upon God, Psal. 37.5. as weary and with∣out rest till we come to lodg in goodness; in the New Testament, 'tis , a believing into Christ, very frequent in the Go∣spel of St. John, a phrase wholly the holy spirits, never found in any Greek Author, a bare assen∣ter may believe about Christ, but the true be∣liever believes into Christ, so as to be in neer union with him; 'tis a putting on of Christ, Rom. 13.14. the believer strips himself of his lusts, nay and of his own righteousness, to be invested with Christ; 'tis a receiving of Christ, Joh. 1.12. all Christ, merit and spirit, cross and crown together, 'tis a faith which hath its be∣ing in God as its ultimate center, 1 Pet. 1.21. Scripture is but a medium, the ultimate object is God himself: All which imports of precious faith are much above the sphear of a meer as∣sent. Secondly, Precious faith is the very conditi∣on of the Gospel. God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten son, that whosoever be∣lieveth in him, should not perish, but have ever∣lasting
life, Joh. 3.16. but a naked assent is not such; that is required not only in the Gospel, but in the moral Law too; and found not only in godly, but wicked men, nay, and in devils themselves, who believe and tremble. It is true some Scriptures seem to lay much upon assent; thus we find, If thou shalt confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shalt believe in thy heart, that God hath raised him from the dead, thou shalt be saved, Rom. 10.9. And, whosoever believeth, that Jesus is the Christ, is born of God, 1 Joh. 5.1. And, these things are written, that ye might be∣lieve that Jesus is the Christ the Son of God, and that believing you might have life through his name, Joh. 20.31. But these places import not as if a naked assent were the sull condition of Gospel-grace, for then a man might be saved in his sins, a man in arms against his maker might stand; Gods grace might embrace him whom his holiness abhors, and Christ might sive him who will not have him reign over him; light might be in communion with darkness, and Christ might have concord with Belial; all which are impossibles in themselves, and in∣compossibles with the design of the Gospel: but they intend such an assent as is in conjuncti∣on with a true resignation of the heart to the terms of the Gospel. Corde credere, quad Deus eum excitaverit, est non mode assentiri historiae de excitato Jesu, sed & cert cordis siducist beneficial mortis & resurrectionis Christi amplecti, saith Re∣verend Parent on Rom. 10.9. whosoever believeth that Jesus is the Christ (namely, with such a
faith as is accompanied with all that which be∣longeth to a true faith) is born of God, so the Dutch Annotators on 1 Joh. 5.1. intelligendum est de side non qualicunque sed actuosa, saith Grotius on Joh. 20.31. The Learned Bishop Downame saith,Covenant of Grace. P. 91. that assent is the very conditi∣on required in the promise of the Gospel, but what an one is it? a true, willing, lively, effe∣ctual assent, such an one as by which we re∣ceive Christ, not only in our judgments, but in our hearts and wills, acknowledging him for our Saviour, and resting on him for salvation: Such an assent as this is no other then preci∣ous faith, but a naked assent is much below it. Thirdly, Precious faith doth unite us unto Christ, and gives us a being in him: A belie∣ver from the first instant of faith is no longer in himself or the old Adam, but a man in Christ; hence the same royal robe of righteousness which Christ hath upon himself, covers him also, which renders faith exceeding precious. George Prince of Anhalt was upon this account much delighted with this similitude, As the ring is highly prized for the diamond in it, so faith justifies us for the pearl of price, the Son of God, whom it apprehends; the believer is found in Christ, not having his own righteous∣ness, which is of the Law, but that which is through the faith of Christ, Phil. 3.9. Hence also the very same spirit of holiness which is upon Christ in heaven above measure, falls down up∣on the believer according to measure; a piece
of bread is a poor imnimate thing in it salt, but when by digestion it comes into the body and is transubstantiated into flesh, there is an humane spirit in it; a man before faith is an earthly carnal thing, but as soon as by faith he becomes a member of Christ, a piece as it were of his flesh and of his bones, he hath ano∣ther spirit in him, even the same with Christ; Christ above and he below, and the same spi∣rit in both: a great mystery, such as a naked assent cannot reach unto: he that hath no more is but a glass eye, or wooden leg in the body of Christ, or rather he is not at all in it, but outwardly tied to it by a name and form of knowledge, without any part in the righte∣ousness or spirit of Christ. Fourthly, By virtue of its union with Christ, Precious faith bears many excellent fruits, it ushers in a spiritual life into the soul; that of the Prophet, the just shall live by his faith, thrice quoted by St. Paul in the New Testa∣ment, is exemplisied in every believer; but he that hath but a naked assent, though with a goodly structure of Evangclical truths standing upon it, is but a dead man, and his notions, like the Egyptian Pyramides, are but monu∣ments for the dead. Again, it brings down pardon of sin into the soul. whosoever believeth in him (that is, in Christ) shall receive remissi∣on of sins, Acts 10.43. but a naked assent leaves a man as fast in the  of guilt as ever before. Moreover, it purifies, the heart, and quenches the fiery darts of Satan, it car∣ries
out the dust and rubbish out of the heart, and makes it a sanctuary or holy place for God, and if Satan come and let fly his temp∣tations, it beats them off from the soul. Thus Bucer when in his sickness he was admonished to arm himself against Satan, answered, in Christo sum, nihil habeo cum diabolo commune, I am in Christ, and have nothing in common with Satan; but where there is only a naked assent, the holy truths going no further then the Understanding, the Will is left in the mire and pollution of its lusts, and is ready, as soon as the tempter comes, to join with his seducing proffers. Thus far of the first proposition, that faith is more then a naked assent. Secondly, The second proposition is, That faith is less then an assurance of love and pardon from God; only we must first distinguish be∣tween faith in the root and faith in the flower; between faith in the lowest stature, and faith in its full-grown perfections. That assurance which the infant faith cannot reach, the full∣grown faith may arrive at; which I suppose was the reason that those prime Reformers Luther and Calvin, and after them Beza and Zanchy, with many others, did define faith by a plerophory or full perswasion of Gods love, they being themselves in the joys of faith, drew its picture not according to the infant model, but the perfect lineaments thereof, as they found them in themselves, so they held them out to the world. Again, we must di∣stinguish
between seminal assurance and actual; an infant faith hath seminal assurance, light is sown for the righteous, Psal. 97.11. but the crop of comfort doth not immediately spring up, the weakest believer is heir to all the joys of heaven, only he doth not presently know his title, he hath not ordinarily actual assu∣rance at the very first; I say, not ordinarily, for we must not limit the holy one, who by his royal prerogative may let in the sweet sense of his love in the first instant of believing. These distinctions premised, the meaning of the pro∣position is, That faith in its lowest measure, which is the condition of the Gospel, doth not essentially include assurance. And this I shall manifest by the ensuing considerati∣ons. First, All true believers have not assurance. Scripture and experience manifest it; there are Lambs which are gathered into the arms and laid in the bosome of free-grace, yet know not where they are. There are little ones, babes in Christ, which can only hang upon the breast, and are not grown up into the reflections and joys of faith; the poor in spirit, the mourners, the hungry and thirsty after righteousness, men∣tioned in the fifth chapter of Matthew, are all of them true believers, blessed ones, and heirs of the promises, and yet all of them are with∣out any glimpse of assurance; the poor in spirit, all in rags of unworthiness and self∣nothingness, as if he had no title to the king∣dom; the mourners weeping and desolate,
like Hagar in the wilderness with her bottle spent, as if there were no Well of comfort near them; the hungry and thirsty, like men in a famine, drooping and fainting away in fits of soul-emptiness, as if there were no such thing as hidden Manna for them. It is very observable in the Canticles, that Christ takes no∣tice of the tender grape just at its first appear∣ing; the very first opening or budding forth of faith is welcom to him; if the wine be but in the cluster, if there be but faith in de∣sire, Christ saith, destroy it not, the blessing of Abraham is in it, out of this little grain of mustard-seed heaven will grow, in this smoking slax there's a divine spark, though the smoak of doubts and temptations muffle it up in ob∣scurity, it will break out at last into slames of love and joy; in the infant-believers assurance is not to be expected, because of their primor∣dial weakness; and in well-grown believers it may be suspended, because of Gods infinite soveraignty in the dispensing thereof as he pleaseth. Cruciger on his death-bed prayed thus, Invoco te Domine languidâ & imbecillâ side, sed side tamen, Lord, I call upon thee with a weak and languishing faith, but yet with a faith. Pious Justus Jonas, who was pre∣sent with Luther at his death, and took as it were his last breath into his bosome, was in his own sickness sainting and cold-hearted, till a servant of his rubbed him up with some comforts out of the Gospel, Holy Bayn saith of himself, I thank God, sustentation in Christ
I have, and some little strength, suavities spiri∣tual I tast not any: even the choice servants of God may walk in darkness and see little or no light, their light may be like that in the Pro∣phet, Zach. 14.6. neither clear nor dark, they may live in crepusculo in a kind of twilight, in a mixture of light and dark∣ness. Secondly, Faith goeth before justification, but assurance followeth after it. Faith goeth before justification. Scripture is express in it, by him all that believe are justified, Acts 13.39. with the heart man believeth unto righteousness, Rom. 10.10. the righteousness of God is upon all them that believe, Rom. 3.22. we have believed in Jesus Christ that we might be justified, Galat. 2.16. might justification go before faith, it were possible that a man might be saved in his sins, a child of wrath might be in the arms of divine love, a captive of Satan might be a son of God, a man out of Christ might be justifi∣ed in him; all which are impossible, but assu∣rance follows after justification, justification is necessarily presupposed to assurance; for to be∣lieve my sins forgiven, that they may be for∣given is absurd; to believe my sins forgiven before they be forgiven, is false; to believe my sins forgiven because I believe so, is vain and foolish. Remission must first he, before it can be manifested to be, it must first be grant∣ed out of the Court of heaven, before there can be any true Copy of it in conscience, un∣less we allow a distinction between a faith of
resignation before, and a faith of assurance af∣ter justification, we cannot possibly deal with the Romanists. Bellarmine speaking of that special faith whereby a man believes himself just before God in and through Christ, puts this Quaere;De notis Ecclesiae. l. 4. c. 11. Cum incipio credere me esse justum, vel sum justus, vel injustus, si justus, non justi∣ficor per fidem banc, quia ista fides posterior meâ justitiâ, si injustus, ista fides est falsa, when I begin to believe my self just, am I just or un∣just, if just, I am not justified by this faith which is after my righteousness, if unjust, this faith is false; neither is there any imaginable way to dissolve this knot regularly, with∣out such a distinction between faith as an∣tecedent to justification, and faith as conse∣quent. Thirdly, Faith justifieth us in foro Dei, be∣fore God, assurance justifieth us in foro consci∣entiae, in our feeling, and declaratively only. Faith justifies us before God; all those expres∣sions in St. Paul touching justification by faith, are meant of a justification before God. I shall name but one or two, that no man is ju∣stified by the Law in the sight of God, is evi∣dent; for, the just shall live by faith, Gal. 3.11. the justification before God, here denied to the Law, is attributed to faith. And a∣gain, a man is not justified by the works of the Law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ, Gal. 2.16. He doth not say, faith declares a man justifi∣ed, for that even the excluded works may do, but saith justifies: Faith ?uts on Christ and
his righteousness, assurance only bears witness that the wedding garment is on: Faith waits at the footstool of free-grace to have a pardon sealed in heaven, assurance copies it out and pro∣claims it in conscience; unless we admit this di∣stinction, we open the flood-gates to Antinomi∣anism. Fourthly, Faith is a permanent thing, an im∣mortal seed which never dies, it is built upon the rock of ages, and cannot be moved, it hangs upon an infallible word, the least jot or tittle thereof cannot fall to the ground, it is fed with an everlasting spring, the holy spirit be∣ing in the believer as a well of water springing up to eternal life, but assurance is transient; now the believer hath nothing but wine and honycombs of grace, and a little after he hath a cup of gall and wormwood; now a sheet full of celestial joys and comforts is let down to him, and then all is taken up into heaven a∣gain: he is much like Joseph, sometimes in the coat of many colours, in the visible badges of his fathers love, and anon stript and cast into the pit; like poor Heman, free among the dead, and laid in darkness, he is a spiritual Heliotrope, who is all day in heavenly amours, wheel∣ing and turning about to the light of Gods countenance, and anon, when night approach∣es, contracts his leaves and hangs down his head, till there be another Sun; it the effence of faith be in assurance, the believer stands, as it were upon a sea of glass, in a very lu∣bricous condition, 'tis well with him whilest
he hath the light of Gods countenance, whilest Gods spirit bears witness to his, that he is a child of God; but what if God withdraw and retire as it were into his unapproach∣able light? what if the crannies of the heart be all shut up, so that neither the sunny beams of Gods favour, nor yet the starry graces in the heart can appear? what if the arch-ene∣my Satan come with those instruments of death, the threatnings, and rake in the old wounds of sin, and join the darkness of temp∣tation to the darkness of corruption in the believer, to cause, if it were possible, utter darkness? must he be an Apostate, a cast∣away, a man fallen from grace? God for∣bid. St. Bernard, speaking of the manifesta∣tion of Gods love, cries out, Rara hora, bro∣vis mora, O si durâsset! it is a rare hour, but a short stay, Oh that it would continue with me! the believers standing is not in it, but in his union with Christ; this was nota∣bly exemplified to us in Christ, when he cri∣ed out, My God, My God, why hast thou for∣saken me, Math. 27.46. the hypostatical union was not dissolved, but the present vision sub∣stracted; in like manner the believer, the man in Christ, when in desertions and temp∣tations, hath a sure conjunction with Christ, even whilest there is a suspension of com∣forts; unless we own this distinction, we can∣not maintain the doctrine of perseverance a∣gainst the Remonstrants.
Fifthly, Faith is the first-born of all graces, and leads the van to all the rest, it is the mo∣ther-grace, and as it were teems out all o∣ther graces; and no wonder, for it unites us to Christ, out of whose fulness we receive grace for grace, and into whose image we are changed from glory to glory as by the spirit of the Lord, but assurance follows after faith and all other graces. This will be evident, if we consider the manner how assurance is produced; it is not an Enthusiasm, a voice, an internal locuti∣on, speaking to the heart some such words as these, thou art in Gods favour, or thy sins are forgiven, or thou art a son of God; no, it is in another way, the holy spirit doth so irra∣diate the heart in its reflections, and all the pretious graces lodging there, that it plainly appears, that the grace of God is there of a truth; as it was with the blind man in the Gospel, when his eyes were opened he could look abroad in the world and say, here's the earth, and there's the sea, and yonder's the Sun, Moon and Stars, sensibly pointing from one creature to another: so it is with the be∣liever, when he is irradiated by the holy spi∣rit, he can look into his own heart and expe∣rimentally say, this is the pretious faith, and that is the love in incorruption, and the other is the meekness of wisdom, and so go over all the parts of the new creature formed within him, or at least over such, or so many of them as may assure him that he is in a state of grace. This is the way of assurance, first
there is a constellation of faith and other gra∣ces in the heart, then these graces irradiated by the holy spirit send forth a kind of splendor, which the soul reflecting on it self, taking up, it comes to attain assurance, well knowing that such and such things accompa∣ny salvation, and import no less then a Di∣vine favour; notable is that of St. Paul, in whom after ye believed, ye were sealed with the holy spirit of promise, Eph. 1.13. Mark, after ye believed; first there must be faith, and the train of graces attend thereon, and then comes the seal of the spirit of promise, the same spi∣rit which endited the promises in the word, comes and seals them on the heart; whereas in the word there are such promises made to faith and love and holiness, the irradiating spirit plainly discovers that faith and that love and that holiness to be indeed in the heart, and so seals up the promises to the believer in particular, as if it had expresly said, this or that promise belongs to thee. Hence the believer so sealed may say of the promises, as Origen did of those Scriptures which did much affect him, haec est Scriptura mea, this promise is mine, and that promise is mine; nay, all the Land of promise, as much as I can set my foot on, is mine own. There are three seals to the promises, first God seals them for true in the blood of his own Son, in whom all of them are Yea and Amen; then man seals them for true by faith, he that believeth, sets to his seal that God is true; and then again
God seals them for true to the believer in par∣ticular by his irradiating spirit. Faith then goes before all other graces, but assurance comes after them, as being no other then the clear evidence of their true existence in the soul. Unless we allow this distinction, we gratifie the Enthusiasts, who declaim against all marks of grace as legal things, and sandy foun∣dations. Sixthly, Faith stands upon the word of God purely, totally and entirely. In point of expectation, it will not look without a word of promise; in point of obedience, it will not stir a foot without a word of command; in point of doctrine, it will not lend an ear without a word of instruction. Hence Re∣verend Calvin saith,Inst. l. 3. c. 2. Perpetuam esse fidei re∣velationem cum verbo, nec magis ab eo posse di∣velli, quàm radios à Sole, unde oriuntur. Faith hath a perpetual relation to the word, and can no more be sundred from it then the beams from the Sun, from whom they arise, should it be sundred from it, it would lose its nature, and cease to be faith; but assu∣rance doth not stand so purely, totally and entirely upon the word: this is also mani∣fest by the manner of attaining assurance, that is not made axiomatically in an Enthusi∣astical way, as if there were an inward voice, saying, thou art justified, but discoursively, and after some such manner as in this practi∣cal Syllogism, Whosoever believeth, his sins are forgiven, but I believe, Ergo, my sins are for∣given.
Here the conclusion, which imports assurance in it, stands upon two propositions; the Major is meerly grounded upon the word, but the Minor stands upon spiritual sense and experience caused by the holy spirit ir∣radiating the soul in its reflections upon its own estate; therefore assurance which is comprized in the conclusion, doth not stand so meerly upon the word as faith doth: Thus the Learned Pemble, speaking of that Syllogism, saith, the major is of faith, the mi∣nor of sense and experience. And the con∣clusion of both, but chiefly of faith, as it fol∣lows on the premises by infallible argumen∣tation; and partly of sense, as it is founded on the inward experience of Gods grace work∣ing upon our souls. What the doctrine of Faith is, is to be sought in Bibles, but whe∣ther there be a particular act of faith or not, such as is comprized in the minor,Com. R m. 8. cap. must be looked for in the heart. Fides non creditur, sed habetur & sentitur in corde, saith Lear∣ned Pareus, Faith is not believed, but had and felt in the heart. Actus reflexivus in ipsam fidem, quo credo me credere, non est ipsa fi∣des, sed potiùs sensus fidei,Loc. Com. 689. saith Maccovius, The reflexive act, whereby I know that I be∣lieve, is not properly faith, but the sense of it. But you will say, if the minor stands upon sense and experience, how can the conclusi∣on, which imports assurance, be de fide? And Bellarmine argues thus.D. justifi∣cat l. 3. c. 8. Nothing can be certain with a certainty of faith, unless
it be conteined in the word of God, upon which if it lean not, it is not faith, but that such or such a man is justified in particular, is not conteined in the word, neither can it be deduced from thence; for then I must argue thus, the word saith, All that truly turn to God shall find mer∣cy, but I do truly turn to him, there∣fore I am sure of mercy, in which the minor is not in the word. By the way we may observe what an excellent founda∣tion the Jesuite layes for his disputation, Fides non est, nisi verbi divini auctoritate nitatur, that is not faith, which is not bot∣tomed on the authority of the divine word. Oh rare! if this were believed, what would become of Popery? What of all the hay and stubble of their vain Traditions? Why do they play the wily Gibeonites with their old bottles and clowted shoes, obtru∣ding their unwritten verities and mouldy customs upon the Church of God? I can be assured of no Religion, which is not foun∣ded on Scripture. But for answer, The cer∣tainty of the Doctrine of Faith, which re∣spects the whole Church, is to be found in the Scripture; but the certainty of an act of Faith, which is in a particular man, is to be found in the heart by spiritual sense and experience; and so in Bellarmines minor, the certainty of my turning to God stands not upon the word, but upon spiritual sense and experience; yet nevertheless the conclusi∣on,
which imports assurance, is de fide; for every conclusion is so, which stands up∣on one proposition contained in Scripture, and upon another gathered from sense or experience, as the case is in all such pra∣ctical Syllogisms: yet withall, as I said at first, the conclusion doth not stand so entirely on Scripture as a direct act of faith doth. Seventhly, Faith is more purely faith then assurance is. In faith we look off from our selves; thus the Apostle, , looking off from our selves unto Jesus Christ, Hebr. 12.2. but in assurance we look into our selves, by reflecting on our own estate. Whilest faith goes out of self, and hangs upon free-grace in one promise or other; assurance is at home, telling over its riches, and faring de∣litiously every day in the love of God: in faith there is nothing but meer dependance, but in assurance there is a mixture of sense. If a poor man in his rags and extremities leave himself upon God for daily bread, as having nothing, and yet possessing all things in the promise, his faith is more purely faith then the rich mans is, who hath creature∣comforts flowing about him and running in at every sense. If one poor in spirit, in the midst of his wants and spiritual necessitles cast himself upon free-grace; it is more meer faith then for one to sit under assurance with pots of Manna and spiritual flagons round about him. When Jacob heard the report
of a living Joseph, and put himself upon the chariots sent for him, it was nothing but meer belief, but when he saw Josephs face, his eyes were witnesses of the thing: when a man that walketh in darkness and seeth no light, will yet hang on the report of a Jesus, and put himself upon the chariot of the promises, it is nothing else but pure faith; but when he comes to see the light of Gods face, and in it a piece of the heavenly vision, it is not all faith, but faith and sight toge∣ther. Thus far of the second proposition, that faith is less then assurance: In which phrase I intend not a comparison between them in point of dignity, but only that pretious faith, such as is the condition of the Gospel, may really be where the garland of assurance is not super∣added; as a King is really a King before his Coronation, so faith is really faith before it be crowned with the sense of Gods love. These two propositions made good, I come at last to gather up my first reason: Faith is more then a naked assent to the Go∣spel, and less then an assurance of love and pardon from God; therefore it must needs be some middle thing between both, such as resig∣nation is. Let us put another practical Syl∣logism; Whosoever believeth, shall be saved. But I believe. Ergo, I shall be saved.
the major proposition is the object of assent, the conclusion is an act of assurance, but the minor or middle proposition is an act of faith or resignation: Resignation includes assent, and, which is more, it yields up the soul to the terms of the Gospel, but it doth not immediately arrive at assurance, as it was with Jacob, when he heard his mothers counsel touching the blessing; between his assent to the counsel, and his audible hearing the blessing pronounced on him, there was a putting on the garments of his elder brother; so it is with the believer, when his heavenly Father offers him the Evangelical blessing, between his assent and his assurance of the blessing, there is a putting on the robe of Christs rightcousness: a meer assentor hath as it were but the sight of his eyes, in look∣ing on the rich treasures of the Gospel; a young believer hath a real title thereunto; and a man of assmance over and above his title, is able to bring his evidences and read them to his com∣fort. Secondly, That faith consists in resignation, will appear from the way which God uses in the working of faith. God works it in a way of perswasion, God shall perswade Japheth, and he shall dwell in the tents of Shem, Gen. 9.27. that is, in the Church of God, where the true Shem, the name of Godis. When God comes with his Almighty Oratory and speaks to the heart, perswading, dwell not O man any lorger at home, in thy will or righteous∣ness,
come into Shem, into my Name, into my mercy by a true recumbence, into my holiness by a cordial obedientialness, and by the sweet strains of free-grace the man is charmed into a surrender of himself unto the Divine call, then there is saith indeed. Hence believers in Scripture are called perswaded ones; And some of them believed, Act. 17.4. in the Original it is, And some of them were perswaded; and on the contrary, unbelievers are called the unperswadeable ones, ver. 5.  such as will not suffer themselves to be per∣swaded. Faith is called perswasion, a yield∣ing to the true Suada, the spirit and wisdom of God, none ever spake or taught like him; and unbelief is called an unperswadethleness or contumacy, it contradicts and blasphemes at the sweet compellations of free-grace, if not outwardly, as those wretches, Act. 18. 6. yet inwardly, for it gives God the lye, 1 Joh. 5.10. Again, God works it in the evidence and demonstration of the spirit; thus the Apostle saith, His preaching was in the demonstration of the spirit and power, 1 Cor. 2.4. and then, as a sweet fruit thereof, fol∣lows faith standing in the power of God in the very next verse; when the spirit comes in its divine Logick, and demonstratively points out, this is the true Jesus, that is the ve∣ry Gospel, and here is the only way of sal∣vation, and the pure light and evidence pres∣ses in so far upon the man, that, like one under a clear demonstration, he is out-rea∣soned,
and cannot say nay to it, but yields and delivers up himself to the Gospel, to be moulded and cast into the holy figure there∣of, then there is true faith wrought in him. Hence faith is sometimes set out by silence in Scripture, truly my soul waiteth on God, Psal. 62.1. or as it is in the Hebrew, my soul is silent to God; when the truth comes in the clear evidence and demonstration of the spi∣rit, the soul is silent, let God say what he will, the soul contradicts not, but keeps an holy silence, scaling and subscribing to the truth and goodness of God in every thing. Moreover, God works it in the power of spi∣ritual arms, casting down strong holds, and captivating thoughts to the obedience of Christ, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. when God comes to the heart, which naturally is as a strong City, full of forts and towers of pride, and by unbe∣lief barred and fast locked up against all ho∣ly truths, and layes a close spiritual siege to it, and shuts it up under sin and wrath, and makes inward batteries upon the forts and towers thereof, and the trumpet of the word sounds louder and louder in conscience, till the cursed walls fall down, and the ever∣lasting gates be opened to the Lord of glory, and the heart surrender up it self with all its thoughts, as a willing prisoner to those Gospel-truths which before it imprisoned in unrighteousness, then there is precious faith indeed; the heart, which before was shut up, now opens it self to the truth, as we
see in Lydia, Acts 16.14. When the Geno∣ese vanquished the Venetians in a sea-sight, and took the Island of Chioggia, the Venetian Senate sent them a blank Charter, bidding them write down their own conditions, and they would accept thereof; when God by his word and spirit makes a conquest on the heart, and it yields up it self as a blank for him to write all his wills and pleasures in, then there is true faith wrought in the soul. Thirdly, That faith stands in resignation, will appear from the titles given unto faith in Scripture. 'Tis a leaning or rolling upon God, Cant. 8.5. Psal. 37.5. which are postures of resignation; the believer doth not stand upon his own bottom, nor bear up his own weight, but layes all upon God. 'Tis a committing ones self to God, 2 Tim. 1.12. which is an act of resignation; a believer pawns his soul to God, and as a pawn he leaves it upon God, as the expression is, Psal. 10.14. well knowing that it cannot be in a surer hand, as it were going out of the possession of himself, that he may be al∣together in the custody of God. 'Tis a submitting to the righteousness of God, Rom. 10.3. which is the resignation of a subject to his Prince; a believer casts off his own righ∣teousness as rags, and will be under no o∣ther righteousness but Christs. 'Tis a cast∣ing our burden on the Lord, Psal. 55. a be∣liever finds sins and wants too weighty for
him to bear, and he throws off all upon God, who is able to pardon and supply him. In the Old Testament we have it called a trusting in God, and in the New a believing in Christ; a believer is not, as Adam, his own trustee, he hath not his estate in his own hands, but all in a way of dependance upon God. Moreover, it is called a giving ones self unto the Lord, 2 Cor. 8.5. a resigning up the property a man hath in himself, that Christ may be all in all: A believer as to his being is not a man in himself, but a man in Christ; as to his living, it is not he that liveth, but Christ in him; and as to his work∣ing, it is not he that labours, but the grace of God with him; and to name but one more, it is a resting on God, 2 Chron. 14.11. a believer is not at rest in himself, or the creature, but under perpetual tossings and fluctuations, till he come to lay himself stedfastly upon God, as the Center of souls, and Sabbath of eternal rest. Fourthly, That faith stands in resignation, may appear from the obstacles of faith. Look what of sin is an obstacle to resignation, is also an obstacle to faith, and what of sin may consist with resignation, may also con∣sist with faith. For the clear understanding whereof, I must first premise some distincti∣ons; there is original sin and actual, there is actual sin known and unknown, there is actual sin of meer infirmity and incursion,
and actual sin which hath will and delibera∣tion in it; there is actual sin in one single act, and actual sin in a series and succession of acts. These distinctions premised, I shall lay down this point in divers propositi∣ons. First, The meer in-being of original sin doth not impede resignation, and consequently it doth not impede faith: whatever the actual outflowings of it may do while the orisice of lust is open, the meer in-being of it doth not impede, is is an inmate in the heart; when the first work of faith is wrought there, on∣ly God by his Almighty grace doth suspend and bridle it that it doth not put forth, but lye hid in its own root: Thus say our famous Divines in the Synod of Dort, touching con∣version; Divina haec actio non laedit volunta∣tis libertatem, neque tamen extirpat radicitùs vitiosam resistendi possibilitatem, quamvis enim Deus in ipso regenerationis opere adeo poten∣ter in voluntatem agat, ut actualiter resisten∣di potentia proxima pro illo tempore suspenda∣tur, remotam tamen & in actu prima positam resistendi potentiam ne tum funditus extirpat, sed in suâ amarâ radice delitescere permittit. God layes the precious foundation of faith and the new-creature, as it were in mighty waters, in the very same heart in which there is a fountain of sin; only he doth as those that build upon great Rivers do, put back the fountain to make room for the hea∣venly structure, which is set up in the heart
in a very wonderful way, as the stones were in Jordan, corruptions, as the waters of that river, standing on an heap on this side, and as it were cut off on that, whilest free-grace is a doing the great work. On the other side, the indulgence of original sin doth impede resig∣nation, and by consequence faith: A man that foothes up the old man and earthly members, and upon the view of his heart returns om∣nia benè, all is well as it is, the heart is good enough, cannot, whilest such, believe; and why? to believe is to resign, and why or how should he resign to Christ for grace, who feels no want? such an one really poor but opinionatively rich, turns off all the rich offers of grace, as Esau did Jacobs present, I have enough, and goes away empty from all the treasures of Christ. Secondly, All unknown actual sins are not obstacles to resignation, and so are not obstacles to faith. Who can understand his errors? Psal. 19.12. who so knowing as to know his in∣tellectual errors? It hath been observed by some Papists, that there are above 200 er∣rors in the Commentaries of Cardinal Caje∣tan,Dr. Rey∣nolds de libr. Apoc. in the Master of the sentences, whom the Papists extol as more worth then one hun∣dred Luthers, two hundred Melanctons, three hundred Bullingers, four hundred Martyrs, five hundred Calvins, they have yet noted more then twenty erroneous Articles, unto which they add this, hic Magister non tene∣tur;
who so holy as to understand his practi∣cal errors? no man ever searched the gulf of corruption in his own heart to the bottom, no man ever fully measured the breadth of the pure Law; there are in the best reliques of self-love which cover a multitude of sins, blinds of custom, which hinder the sight of sin; what with carnal profits which blow dust into our eyes, and what with carnal plea∣sures, which, because brutish and bestial, hin∣der reflection; there is a great deal of sin unseen to us, which is plain to the pure eyes of God. On the other side, where unknown sins are obstacles to resignation, they are also obstacles to faith; of which I shall give some instances. Some unknown sins are therefore unknown because they arise out of an Abyss of darkness, out of a gross ignorance of fun∣damentals in the heart, and so in respect of their origine are inconsistent with faith, whose origine is light, such ignorant ones cannot resign; sin to them, because unknown, is no burden; holiness to them, because unknown, is no beauty; Christ and grace to them, be∣cause unknown, are no attractives; and how can they resign? resign recumbentially they cannot, for they know not the promises; re∣sign obedientially they cannot, for they know not the precepts; resign in an humble docible∣ness they cannot, for they know not so much as their want of knowledge. Again, some sins, though unknown, carry in the matter of them a direct repugnancy to resignation and
so to faith. For instance, every man hath some natural Popery in his heart, he would be justified by a righteousness of his own. The Jews being asked, whether they believed to be saved by Christs righteousness, made this answer, every fox must pay his own skin to the flayer, every man must stand upon his own righteousness; he that doth thus, need not, cannot resign to Christs righteousness: he need not, for why should he go out of doors for a righteousness which he hath within in his own heart; and he cannot, for justification by our own righteousness and justification by Christs are contraries, and so are a dependance on our own righteousness for justification, and a dependance on Christs for it. Hence the Jews, when they went about, though ig∣norantly, to establish their own righteousness, could not believe, they submitted not them∣selves to the righteousness of God, saith the A∣postle, Rom. 10.3. their own unresigned righ∣teousness kept them from believing, as be∣ing in the very matter of it contrary there∣unto. Moreover, some sins, which may not be known for fins in the matter of them, may yet be darlings, Delilahs, and as the He∣brew word imports, exhausters, such as drain out the very marrow of the heart; I mean, the prime love, choice desire, and supream delight thereof. These in respect of their intimate conjunction with the soul are barrs to resignation, and so to faith. How can ye believe which receive honour one of another?
saith our Saviour, Job. 5.44. their darling vain-glory made their believing impossible: After the same manner all lawful things, when once they are set up as Idols in the heart, and the love and the joy dance before them, are obstacles to faith; thus we find, They would not come to the marriage-supper of the Gospel; and why? their darling farms and merchan∣dise kept them away, Math. 22.5. Haec vincu∣la, hae catenae quae carnales constringunt; these are the bonds and the chains which keep men from resignation, and the more dangerously, because they lie invisible and hid among the stust of our lawful things. Christ and earthly things (saith a Great Divine) come often in competition, in every unjust gain, Christ and a bribe; in every oath, Christ and a blasphemy; in every sinful fashion, Christ and a rag or ex∣crement; in every piece of vain-glory, Christ and a blast; in every intemperance, Christ and a vomit: whatever the thing be in it self, lawful or sinful, as soon as it becomes the Idol of the heart, it proves an obstacle to faith. Thirdly, All known actual sins are not abso∣lute barrs to resignation, and so not to faith: there are peccata quotidianae incursionis, sins of meer infirmity, such as are not the proper formal issues of deliberation, but the inevi∣table effluviums of humane frailty; these may be in a man, and may be known to be in him, and yet through grace he may resign, not∣withstanding these black moats slying round
about him, his faith may look up to the mer∣cy-seat; on the other side, known actual sin issuing out of deliberation, if it be but in one single act, doth, whilest it is acting, put a barr to resignation, and so to faith, for that single act is rebellion, and how can a man, whilest he is knowingly in arms against God, resign? it is as the sin of witchcraft, 1 Sam. 15.25. and how can a man, who is virtual∣ly in covenant with the devil, enter into terms with God? that faith is not truly re∣cumbential, which is not also obediential, nei∣ther doth it, can it, indeed lean upon Gods grace, whilest his holiness is rejected. And if such known deliberate sin in one single act put a bar to faith, much more will it do so when it is in a course and series of successive rebellions. Thus St. John saith, whosoever sinneth, that is, makes a trade and runs a course of known sin, hath not seen him, that is, Jesus Christ, who was manifested to take away sin, 1 Joh. 3.6. such an one, though never so full of Scriptural notions, never yet saw a crucified Christ by faith, never yet looked upon the right mercy-seat, never yet set foot on the precious promises of the Gospel; Christ and Belial cannot be in con∣cord, for Christ is a holy Christ, a Christ upon his throne, and the trader in sin is a man of Belial, a man (as the Hebrew word imports) absque jugo, who casts off the holy yoke from his heart and life.
Fifthly, That faith stands in resignation, may appear from the act of resignation made by faith. Faith in Enoch resigned up his life, and in a spiritual sense every believer is by faith translated; Enoch-like he is not in the lower world, but so far as he believes, taken up by God and conversing in heaven. Faith in Abraham resigned up his only one, his Isaac, and every believer, every child of Abraham treads in the same steps of faith, go∣ing up into Moriah into the vision of God, and there offering up the only one of the heart, the darling love and joy there. Faith in Moses resigned up Egypt, and in that resign∣ed up all the world, for in doing thereof his eye was not on some other part of the vi∣sible world, but on the invisible God; and in every believer faith takes the world and casts it behind his back as dung and dross for the excellency of Christ, regard not your stuff, saith faith, all the Land of promise, a heaven of glory is before you: wonderful are the sur∣renders which faith makes in the believer, it surrenders up his understanding to super∣rational mysteries. Meer reason goes no farther then its own sphear of natural noti∣ons, but the line of faith runs as far as supernatural mysteries, such as the lingua lutea, the clay tongue of man cannot ut∣ter, such as lippus oculus, the weak eye of reason cannot see. Again, it surrenders up his will to super-moral self-denials. The Moralists self-denial is but the artifice of
his reason, but the believers is a very great mystery. The Moralist denies only the beast, the brutish lusts in his sensitive affections, but the believer denies the more fine and spiritual fins in the Will it self. The Moralists design is only to advance the Empire of Reason over the lower faculties, but the believers is to advance God and his holy Will over himself, and all that is in him. Moreover, it surrenders up his affe∣ctions to super-sensual joyes and pleasures: The Sensualist is for the Paradise of sense, but the believer for the Paradise of God: The Sensualist swills in brutish pleasures, and sports himself with the volatile joyes of the flesh, but the believer is upon the wing af∣ter the joyes of the spirit, and the pure ri∣vers of pleasure above. In a word, faith is virtually all the resignations which are in intellectual humiliations, inward mortificati∣ons, and outward martyrdomes. In intellectu∣al humiliations, faith makes reason, though a Queen in her own dominions, come down and sit at the foot of revelation. In inward mortifications, faith makes the regnant lust come off from the throne of the heart, and bids the believer, as Joshua his Captains, put his feet on the neck of his lust. In out∣ward martyrdomes, faith hath empowred men to kiss the stake, and embrace the flames, and cry out, as the blessed Martyr did, welcome sweet cross of Christ; and which is the crown of all the rest, in all these resignations faith
ventures all upon the bare word of God, and desires no better security then that for all its expectations. Sixthly, That faith stands in resignation, may appear from the scope of Religion. It is the very center of all Divinity, and grand axiom therein, that the creature is to be aba∣sed and God exalted, no flesh must glory in it self, but in the Lord, all pride must be stain∣ed, and boasting cut off, that God may be all in all, and the creature nothing. Now no∣thing is, nor can be more accommodate to this Central Divinity, then faith, consider∣ed under the notion of resignation; which I shall shew in the following particu∣lars. First, This doth exceedingly abase the crea∣ture. Resignation is the lowest posture of a creature, and so the fittest to take in all those graces which the Gospel hath entailed on be∣lievers. Would you have adoption from God? leave thine own kindred and thy fathers house, stand not upon thy birth-right or parentage, which in a child of wrath, such as thou art by nature, is as base and low as hell it self; go forth to Christ the natural son of God, that thou mayest be an adopted one. Would you have pardon and justification? stay not at home in thine own righteousness and repentant tears, these will not be habitable, when God comes in the pure glory of his justice and holiness, go out and put on the glorious righteousness of Christ, go out and lye down at the door
of the pardon-office. I, I am he that blot∣teth out thy transgressions for mine own sake, saith God, Isa. 43.25. Would you have san∣ctifying graces? thine own Will cannot teem them out, thine own power cannot form them. Albertus Magnus the Philosopher, spent fifty years in making the Statue of a man so, as that with Engines it could speak articulately, but when all was done, it was but a poor dead thing. Shouldest thou live the age of Methu∣selah, and all the while in the artifice of thy reason, and power of thy will, labour to forge out true holinss, it would be at last but an umbra, a dead shadow of grace, though it might speak fairly in the way of notions and gifts, yet it would be without the heavenly life and vitality; thou must therefore yield up thy self to Jesus Christ, that his spirit may come upon thee, and form the new-creature in thee; the sum of all is this, put off thy or∣naments, that God may know what to do unto thee, yield, resign, be in the lowest posture of a creature, that all the Evangelical graces may be thine own. Secondly, This doth highly exalt God, and that in several respects. First, It exalts the mercy of God. Now it appears that mercy in its proposals of salvation comes down to the very lowest terms; it will adopt, justifie, and sanctifie an yielding sinner, and how can it possibly go lower? should he adopt such as will not suffer him to draw his picture upon their hearts? when
Thomas Arundel was for his Martial merits made Earl of the Empire, Queen Elizabeth said, that her sheep should not be stamped alieno stigmate, with another mans mark; as long as men will keep the worlds and Satans mark up∣on them, God cannot tell how to call them sons; can he justifie the ungodly? to justifie the ungodly repenting and resigning is his infinite grace, but to justifie them hardning and rebel∣ling is impossible to his holiness, should be count them pure with the wicked balances, Mic. 6.11. every unresigned sinner hath a wicked balance in his heart, which makes as if a lit∣tle sinful pleasure did outweigh God himself, and can he justifie such wicked ones? should the sanctifying spirit with all its train of gra∣ces, come and dwell in the unclean stable of indulged lusts? Christ the holy one of God was in his admirable humility in a stable of beasts, but in a stable of indulged lusts he can∣not be; he dwells in the heart by faith, that is, in the resigning heart, and it cannot be o∣therwise: Mercy it self, if it comport with the justice and holiness of God, cannot make lower terms then to save the yielding sin∣ner. Secondly, It exalts the wisdom of God. He hath so admirably contrived the way of sal∣vation, that mercy shall stoop to the lowest terms, and the creature take it in the lowest posture, that so mercy might sit in majesty, and save in state: Princes use in their acts of mercy to give an allay of Majesty, such as may
stand with their honour. Solomon will par∣don Adonijah, but he must be a worthy man, or as the Original is, a son of virtue, 1 Kings 1.52. King Henry the fourth of France would have freely pardoned Birone, but then he must make an ingenious confession of the treason, which he neglecting to do in time, lost his head. The great God gives out mercy to poor sinners, but they must take it upon the knee, in a bending and resigning posture, such as is congruous to so infinite a Majesty; they must be put into self-emptying and self-annihi∣lating thoughts, as Moses into the clift of the rock, while the glory of free-grace passes be∣fore them. Thirdly, It exalts the veracity of God. The believer resigns up his soul, himself, his hap∣piness, his all upon the meer word of God, giving him the glory of his truth in every tit∣tle. What Peter said to Christ, when he bad him let down his net, Master we have toiled all night and have taken nothing, yet at thy word I will let down the net, Luke 5.5. that saith the believer unto God, Lord, I am toil∣ing in the dark, under sin and wrath, but at thy word I will cast my self upon free-grace; I am labouring under spiritual wants and ne∣cessities, but at thy word I will repair to the great treasures of grace in Christ, still the hangs upon a word: its true, he resigns up himself to Christ and free-grace, but his war∣rant for doing so is a meer word; how doth he know that the infinite Ocean of mercy,
whose effluxes are free, will flow out to sin∣ful men? how doth he know that the Son of God was incarnate and suffered on a cross for them? why, the word is nigh him, manifest∣ing these heavenly mysteries unto his heart; still he hangs upon a word, that, if we make a true search, lies at the very bottom of all his faith, as the foundation thereof. Fourthly, It exalts the justice of God. Ma∣ny great Rabbies have been caught by the head in the Controversal thickets, whilest they have disputed about Gods justice in the con∣demning impotent men. Not to enter into the briers; there seems to be much in this, that God condemns none for bare impotency, but for height and pride and contumacy in that estate. Christs question to the impotent man is very remarkable, wilt thou be made whole, Joh. 5.6. O thou impoten man, if thou art sensibly weak in thy impotency, poor in thy poverty, and low in thy low estate, surely creating grace is passing upon thee; but if thou art strong in thy impotency, rich in thy poverty, and high in thy low estate, thy con∣demnation is just; because in the pride of thy heart thou wilt not yield to be saved on the terms of the Gospel.Spondand. Annal. Ec∣cles. Anno 491. Zeno the Eastern Em∣peror, being in a fit of the Falling-sickness, taken for dead, was buried alive, and when he cried out lamentably to be taken up but into a Monastery, his wife Ariadne would not suffer it. If the poor sinner lying in his spiritual grave, mourn and groan under his impoten∣cy,
CHAP. VI. Precious Faith confiuered in the fruits and glorious progresses of it; and here first, of the Divine Sagacities of Faith. THUS far I have treated of Pretious Faith, in its first and lowest measure, as it is the condition of the Gospel, consisting of supernatural illumination, a belief of the Di∣vine Testimony, and a dependant resignation to the terms of the Gospel. Now I come to consider the fruits and glorious progresses of faith. Faith is like Rebecca, the Mother of thousands. That blessing of Abraham, in blessing I will bless thee, and in multiplying I will multiply thee, falls down upon all the seed of believers; their faith is blessed with a fair progeny of graces and comforts, only these are not born all at once, for though adopti∣on and justification immediately ensue upon faith, comforts and statures of graces do not do so, but come forth into being gradually, in some sooner, in some later, as grace is actu∣ated and as God is pleased to dispense them: wherefore what I shall lay down touching the fruits of faith, I intend not as universal∣ly applicable to all believers at the very
first, and before a progress made in grace, ju∣stification and adoption are found in every believer, nay, and some measures of sanctifi∣cation, but higher degrees of grace and ma∣nifestations of Divine Love are not so; nei∣ther do I mean critically to time, when each holy fruit buds forth but only to explain the things themselves. And here I shall first begin with the sa∣gacities of Faith. There hath been a great stir in the world about wisdom; Philosophers have hunted after it; the Jews have vainly cried up themselves, nos sapientes, we are the wise men, say they; but in truth the on∣ly Sage under the Sun is the believer. Upon Gods own survey it was found, that there is none that understandeth, Rom. 3.11. none but the believer only, his knowledge is divine, all Arts and Sciences are but toyes to it, which occasioned the worthy Pitiscus to say, that he played in Mathematicks with his rule and compass, but he sweat in Divinity; his design is the wisest, he seeks a crown, a kingdom of glory: the Primitive Christians were wont to talk so much of the kingdom, the kingdom, that the Pagan Emperors grew jealous of them; but alass, their aims were much higher, in comparison whereof earthly Monarchs do but play at push-pin about Crowns of dust, and spend their time like Domitian in catching flies; the believer lea∣ving the world behind his back, pitches up∣on heaven, and God, the heaven of heaven,
in him to enjoy mirrors of truths, Sabbaths of love, rivers of pleasures, and plenitudes of joy and bliss for ever; and what wiser design can enter into mans heart? surely none, as the last day will demonstrate, when it shall put an eternal blush on all other designs. And as his end is the wisest, so his way to it is the surest, he goes to it by Jesus Christ, whose merit as a golden key unlocks the doors of bliss to the believer, and whose spirit attires him with all graces to make him fit to enter in, and all this is not a fancy, a fools Paradise, but a truth, a real thing, founded on that infallible word, which stands faster then the pillars of heaven and earth. But to unfold the sagacities of faith more fully, I shall consider them with relation to several ob∣jects. As to God, the believer sees the invisible one, and that after another rate then meer Natu∣ralists and Notionalists do, he hath more then a bare notion, he hath the mystery of God in his heart, as the phrase is, Col. 2.2. he that hath but the meer notion sees him afar off, and knows not how to sanctifie such a Ma∣jesty in his heart, no more then Cardinal Perron did, who first in an excellent Oration before the French King proved there there was a God, and then being much applauded by the Auditory, offered the next day to prove the contrary, but he that hath the mystery, sees him neer at hand, and so prepares a room for him in his heart; a fear for his Majesty,
a love for his goodness, a faith for his truth and mercy, a joy for his salvation, putting each affection into a posture suteable to some one or other of his Divine Attributes: he that hath but a notion of Gods Omnipresence, can sport with his sins, as if there were no God in the place, but he that hath the myste∣ry of it, Abraham-like, walks before God, on to his faces, as the Original is, Gen, 17.1. eve∣ry where there is a face of God appearing, to deter him from sin, and excite him to holi∣ness; he that hath but a notion of Gods grace, hath no favour, no relish of the sweet∣ness thereof; which I suppose makes the con∣verse of some great Scholars as dry and sap∣less as Cardinal Pools Sermon about the Pall; but he that hath the mystery of it, tasts how gratious the Lord is, and is ravished, as if hea∣ven opened, and some drops from the rivers of pleasure there, were let down upon his heart; he that hath but a notion of Gods ju∣stice, can sit in his lusts before the sparks of his own kindling, and be no more afraid at the threatnings in Scripture, then Jehojakim was at the burning of the roll, Jer. 36.24. one lust or other consumes all the roll of Divine threatnings, but he that hath the mystery of it cannot do so; to him hell flames out in e∣very threatning, he trembles at the word, and saith, O my soul, be not deceived, if thou live after the flesh, thou wilt dye, if thou sow unto the flesh, thou must reap corruption. He that hath but a notion of Gods power, can de∣spise
Gods hand in small crosses, just as the proud Greeks, who when Callipolis was lost, said the Turks had taken but a bottle of wine; but he that hath the mystery of it dares not do so, well knowing that the lightest affli∣ctions come from Shaddai, the Almighty, and if need be, he can strike harder; he that hath but a notion of Gods All-sufficiency, hath his affections scattered up and down the earth, as the poor Israelites were over Egypt for straw, to gather, if it were possible, a happiness from the flowers of the creature; but he that hath the mystery of it, knows how by a compendious wisdom to have all in God; roll over all worlds, the world of thoughts wishes and desires in the heart, the world of riches honours and pleasures in na∣ture, the world of pardons graces and com∣forts in Saints, the world of joy glory and bea∣titudes in heaven; and after all this, the belie∣ver can tell you, all these are to be found in God, habet omnia, quihabet habentem omnid, after this manner the secret of the Lord is with the be∣liever. As to Jesus Christ, the believer hath the mystery of him in his heart. A man may have a notion of God manifest in the flesh, but un∣less he have an heart of flesh, an yielding re∣signing heart for God to manifest his spirit and graces in, that the heart may in some measure be made answerable to the spirit and graces in Christ, he wants the mystery of it. St. John, speaking of love, saith, which
thing is true in him and in you, 1 John 2.8. Why so? because, saith he, the darkness is past, and the true light now shineth; a man may tell the story of the meekness, humility, holiness, obedience, charity, patience it Christ; but if the true light do not shine in him by faith, if these graces be not true in Christ: and in him, he hath not the mystery thereof; the spyes coming back from Cana∣an, brought not only a bare report of the good Land, but clusters of grapes also; he that hath the mystery of Christ, hath not on∣ly a meer notion of the full treasures of grace in him, but clusters of graces from thence as so many real proofs thereof; the Apostle Paul doth notably decipher this sagacity, that I may know him, and the power of his re∣surrection, and the fellowship of his sufferings, being made conformable to his death, Phil 3.10. If a man hath only a notion of Christ crucified and Christ risen, we may character him as Erasmus did the Monastery he was in there is nihil Christi, nothing of Christ crucisied, where lusts are living and reigning, nothing of Christ risen, where the soul is dead in trespasses and sins; he only knows the fellowship of Christs sufferings, who hangs up his earthly members on the cross to dye and expire; the only knows the power of Christs resurrection, who hath felt the same Almigh∣ty power which raised up Christ, quick∣ning his soul to a heavenly life: this is the mystery, the so learning of Christ, as the ex∣pression
is, Eph. 4.20. learning him so, as to put off the old man with his corrupt lusts, and to put on the new man in true holiness, and so, as to be found in him, and count all dross and dung for him: It deeply concerns all Christians, nay, the greatest Clerks to un∣derstand this (so) which without faith no man doth, as being void of Christ and his spi∣rit. As to inherent grace, the believer knows it to be an excellent thing, an accident more worth then the substance of the soul it self, and yet withall he knows it to be a creature, and in it self defectible, he knows it to be an excellent thing excellent in its supernatu∣ral parentage, a thing not born of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God, an holy thing formed by the overshadowing of the blessed spirit, a beam of grace from the eternal grace in the heart of God, ex∣cellent again as it is the souls lostre, know∣ledge its glass, humility its vail, obedience its golden ear-ring, love the chain of its neck, righteousness its fine linnen, every grace its inward glory and beauty, elevating natu∣ral faculties above their own pitch, into a state congruous for communion with God, above all, excellent as it represents God him∣self; in every creature there is a print or foot∣step of God, but in grace there is his very image and resemblance. a believer can see more of God in an holy beam, then in the great Sun, in a little of heaven, then in all the
earth, intal poor meek spirit, then in all the Nimrods and mighty Potentates of the world; and yet after all this, the believer sees grace to be but a creature, and in it self defectible without a spiritual concourse from heaven, should God bid him stand alone, he would be in an agony, and pray as) Annas Burgus did at his Martyrdome, Deus mi, ne me de∣relinquas, ne ego te derelinquam, my God, forsake me not, lest I forsake thee. Should God offer him all the Angels in heaven to guard his little spark of grace in being, he would tremble and say, not so Lord, let me be kept by thine Almighty power unto salva∣tion, that is the only keeper I desire; he dares not say, my mountain is strong, now I am full, now I am rich, now I reign as a King by my self; were he full of grace, it would be but as a room is of light, no sooner could he shut the windows, and possess it in a self∣subsistence, but he would be in the dark, and experiment every beam to hang upon the Sun of righteousness; were he rich in grace, it would be but as a Merchant is in his trade, if the rich returns from heaven should fail, he would soon spend all his stock, and like a son of Adam, turn bankrupt; were he a spiritual King ruling over his lusts, he would and must confess himself under the king∣dom of Christ, and to hold all his power from thence, or else Mene, Mene, his king∣dom is numbred, and divided among lusts and devils. St. Paul saith, I live, but im∣mediately
he calls it back again, yet not I, but Christ liveth in me, Gal. 2.20. well knowing that all his grace had its being from the true Immanuel, Jesus Christ, and its continuance from the continual influxes of his spirit, which are in a sober sense a kind of Immanuel, God with us, strengthening graces where they are weak, quickning where they are dead, upholding where they are falling, and by an incessant spiration influencing Being into them, that they may not vanish into no∣thing. As to the opposite, sin, the believer sees more of the sinfulness of sin, and yet more of the holy God about it then others do. He sees more of the sinfulness of sin then others. Next to Christ, who weighed sin upon the cross, he of all men knows best how to weigh it; the natural man may put in the breach of the Law into the scale, but he puts in all the bloody aggravations, the suffocated light, and abused love, the quenchings of the spirit, and the rejections of Christ, the broken vows and lying promises of obedience, the stabs of conscience, and warning pieces of wrath, the measures of delight and obstinacy in sin, and the heaps of guilt in reiterated sinning, no man makes sin so sinful as he; the pure light of faith being up in the heart, every scarlet thread in the contexture thereof be∣comes visible; and yet after all this, the be∣liever sees more of the holy God about it then others do, and that whether he look on the
sins of others, or his own. As to other mens, we have many examples in Scripture; the messengers that came to Job, spake of the Sabeans and Chaldeans oppression, but the Lord hath taken away, saith holy Job, Job 1.21. when Shimei cursed David, Abishai looks no further then Shimei, why should this dead dog curse my Lord the King? saith he, but what saith heavenly David, the Lord hath said unto him, curse David, 2 Sam. 16.9, 10. In the crucifying of Christ, carnal men looked only at the instruments, such as Pilate and the Jews were, but the Saints saw Gods hand and Gods counsel in it, Acts 4.28. As to his own sins, there is a famous instance in the Churches complaint, O Lord, why hast thou made us to err from thy wayes? and hardned our heart from thy fear? Isa. 63.17. What? were they not sensible that the error and hardness were their own? yes doubtless, they were more sensible then others, as appears by their mourning and longing for the Lords return, yet they cry out, why hast thou made us to err? and why hast thou hardned us? the believer when he looks upon providence and sin, hath a spiritual sagacity to determine the matter. God is holy, while man is unclean; God wise, while man foolish; God merciful, while man cruel: the light is Gods, and the darkness mans; the order Gods, and the a∣taxy mans; the justice Gods, and the unrighte∣ousness mans. As to Satan, the believer knows him by the word more truly then all
the Magitians in the world; when Satan shews himself in Magical apparitions, he doth but mock the sense and delude the mind, but when God shews him forth in the word, he appears in his proper colours and true like∣ness; the believer knows him to be of very great power, a ruler of darkness, a Prince, nay a God of this world, one that can do great things without in the elements, and within in the passions, a mighty Leviathan, who can make the heart boil as a pot and foam out its own shame, and withall he knows that this roaring Lyon is in a chain, and can∣not go beyond his commission. Again, the believer knows him to be an old serpent full of methods and devises, turning every stone, waiting upon every occasion, complying with every temper, and putting on every shape; in his temptations, now in the dress and pomp of earthly things, and then in Sa∣muels Mantle, transforming himself into an Angel of light; sometimes carrying men up into the mountain of the world, and glorify∣ing vanity before them; and sometimes set∣ting them on a pinacle of the Temple, to cast them down by the pride of their own du∣ties; now speaking in the Language of Na∣ture, Master spare thy self, and anon in the Language of Scripture, it is written thus and thus, and all that he may devour, or, as it is in the Original, drink up, 1 Pet. 5.8. souls, as if he lived upon spirits, and no blood would serve him but that of souls: And
withall the believer knows, that the All∣wise God can wrap up Satan in his own nets, and countermine him in every plot, he can awaken us out of the snare, and make us see the methods and subtile postures of the devil, how he would charm us into pre∣sumption, or roar us into despair; how he stands at our right hand in holy duties, and at our left in earthly employments; what a murderer he is in stifling holy motions, and what a lyar in his false joyes and promises: Thus the believer knows more of Satan and his hellish depths then others do. As to things past, the believer hath a holy sagacity to make a good improvement of them, which is most evident in his appro∣priating Scripture-histories to himself, in such or such a state (saith he) God dealt so or so in a way of mercy or justice, and if I come into that state, I shall have the same mea∣sure, because God is ever the same, and his mercy and justice have the same aspects to∣wards men as heretofore; the believer ap∣propriates good states and good consequents: see in what way the goodness of God fol∣lowed such a man, in the very same way will it be with me, saith faith; if I can strive and wrestle with God in prayer, I am in Ja∣cobs state, and shall be a prince with God; the effectual fervent prayer. of the righteous man availeth much, James 5.16. if I am in Joshuaes state, fighting against lusts the true
Canaanites, God will never never leave me nor forsake me, that was a particular promise made to Joshua, yet is by the Apostle accommo∣dated to believers, as being in his state, Heb. 13.5. If a man suffer for the true God and his worship, he is in the fiery furnace, and the son of God is with him to comfort and support him, if he have a good conscience made so by the blood and spirit of Christ, he is in the Ark, and shall never drown in the common perdition, 1 Pet. 3.20, 21. there is a cloud of witnesses, in which faith observes righteousness going before, and mer∣cy following after. Again, the believer ap∣propriates bad states and bad consequents, see in what way Gods wrath brake out against such a man, in the same way will it break out against me, saith faith; if I am murmu∣ring and unbelieving, I am in the Israelites state, and without repentance I shall dye in the wilderness and never enter into rest; if I wallow in the mire of gross and sensual sins, I am in Sodome and Egypt, and may expect their line of plagues and eternal fire: if I love the wages of righteousness, I am in Balaams way, and may look for his end; if I sleep in my indulged lust, I am in Delilahs lap, and like to lose my own strength and Gods pre∣sence; these are our types or figures, as the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 10.6. in which we have a lively image and pourtraiture of punishments for sin, and from thence may by faith divine, that if such sins
goes before, such wrath will follow af∣ter. As to the present world, which is checker∣ed with good and evil things, and hath in it, as the Ark had of old, a rod and a pot of Manna, the believer hath a greater sagacity then others. As to the good things of the world, no man sees so much of their excel∣lency, and withall no man sees so much of their vanity as the believer doth; take the world in its own place and station, and thus it is a rare monument of the eternal power and Godhead, the invisible spirit renders him∣self visible, and as it were palpable in it, e∣very being in nature shews forth the Being of Beings, every beam of light points to the Fa∣ther of lights, every drop of goodness leads to the great Ocean, every harmony among the creatures tells of an infinite Artificer: this is the sense of the creation, which faith understands better then learning. Philoso∣phers and great Naturalists may see more of the creature then the believer, but the belie∣ver sees more of God in it then they; they gaze most on the fine letters and characters in nature, but he best knows the sense of all, which is God. On the other side, take the world into the heart, and there exalt it as the supream good of man, and thus it is a lye, a fancy, a dream, a shadow, my, a very nothing; after all its goodly promises, it is but a lye; after all its spreading pomp and glory, it is but much
fancy, it casts men into dreams and ap∣pearances of happiness in this and that crea∣ture, but as soon as faith awakens them, it is known to be but a dream, the day break∣ing in the heart, all the shadows flee away, it looks like somewhat of substance, but it is as all other Idols are, a meer nothing, nothing to make a God of, nothing as sepa∣rate from its Creator, just as letters with∣out sense, and beams without a Sun, perfect vanity, which (as a Learned man hath it) is in its true Idea made up of nothing as the matter, and a lye as the form thereof. A car∣nal man gazes upon riches, and forgets the thorn; clothes himself with the creature, and forgets the moth; drinks of the cup of pleasures, as if there were no poison in it, and sits under the gourd of worldly things as if there were no worm at the root; but the believer sees a vanity in the fairest pro∣spects of the world, before the rust appears visibly in the gold, faith sees it there; be∣fore the great Dooms-day dashes down the world actually, faith doth it mentally, ma∣king it as inconsiderable a nothing to mans happiness, as it will sensibly appear at last, when the whole shall be wrapt up in a winding-sheet of flames. Again, though the carnal man dote more on creature-com∣forts then the believer, yet the believer pries more curiously about them then he; the carnal man is all for the bulk, but the believer not so much for that, searches in∣to
the title, he would very fain have what he hath in Jesus Christ, and in the good will of God. Since sin blasted and forfeit∣ed the world, he dares not claim any thing upon meer creation, but all in and through Christ and free-grace, all are yours, and you are Christs, and Christ is Gods, 1 Cor. 3.22. there's his title; the carnal man looks on the world as a mountain of prey, and scrambles for as much of it as he can, but the believer would have every grain come through Josephs hands, and all his bread and wine set forth by the true Melchise∣deck, the King of righteousness; nay, such is his holy curiosity, that he is jealous of the least adherent guilt, which others never mind; the oppressing Merchant boasts and smooths up himself, yet I am become rich, I have found me out substance, in all my labours there is no iniquity, Hos. 12.7, 8. but let faith come in, and then the stone cryes out of the wall, and the rust of the gold and silver witnesses against him. There were in Saxony (as Thuanus relates) two sordid in∣humane wretches, who for filthy lucre in∣grossed a great quantity of corn, and af∣terwards opening their barn-doors to trans∣port it, the corn flew up into their eyes, driving them into horrid astonishment and desperation: should the believer oppress, it would flye in the face of conscience, and the curse of God would seize upon him; upon which account he is very curious about his
estate, to keep the moth of guilt from it. As to the evil things of the world, such as crosses and afflictions, whilest others pore only on the outward evil lying before the senses, the believer looks upward to God the supream Moderator, being richly content with crosses, as long as God governs the world. A story there is of a godly but sickly woman, who when an Angel came to her from God, proffering her as from him health in one hand, and sickness in the other, fell a weeping, that God should put her to her choice, and not himself chuse for her; such is the genius of faith, which would not chuse for it self, but refer all to God, kis∣sing every cross as a piece of his govern∣ment who rules the world. Again, the be∣liever looks inward to sin, as the black foun∣tain from whence all miseries issue forth in the world, well knowing that all Physical evils are but the pay of Moral; whilest others cry out of the plagues, he complains of the sins: Pharaoh cries out perii, but David pec∣cavi, Against thee, thee only have I sinned, Psal. 51.4. and there is great reason for it, because sin is the fontal evil, which powres out all other evils, and puts a desperate sting and venom into them. Moreover, the be∣liever looks forward to the issue of affliction, 'tis enough to others to come out of it, but he would come out of it as the Israelites did out of Egypt, with spinitual jewels and ear∣rings; whilest they tell over their outward
losses, he computes his inward gains. Oh! saith he, what hath God wrought by this cross? did not faith roll out as pure gold out of a furnace? hath not the fire dissolved some bands of corruption? how much of the rusty world hath been filed off from the heart? hath not the rod it self budded and blossomed with the peaceable fruits of righ∣teousness? what experiments have been made of the love and faithfulness of God in the af∣fliction? which of the Promises came in to me, and milked out its comforts in my heart? how warm were the heavenly affections with∣in, when the frost lay upon outward com∣forts? such enquiries as these doth the be∣liever make after the holy fruit of afflicti∣ons. As to things future and distant, the belie∣ver hath a notable sagacity; the men of this world are wrapt up in the vail of time, and see not so far as futurity and eternity; but as soon as faith comes, it rents off the vail, and gives a fair prospect into another world: if all the intermediate moments between this and the last day were cut off, dooms-day were actually upon us, faith can in a spiritual way put back all the middle time, and makes us see things as they will be, the heavens on fire, the elements melting with fervent heat, the last trumpet sounding, the dead rising out of the dust and gathering to the grand Tribunal, faith is the presentia∣lity of all these. Job looks through the worms
and dust upon a resurrection, my Redeemer liveth, saith he, Job 19.25. though I dye, my Redeemer liveth, and will fetch me up again; if there were an Engine made which could pull away all the intermediate bodies between us and the heaven of heavens, we might look into Paradise; faith doth the same thing spiritually, it puts by the world and time, and lies at the door of heaven and eternity. Thus the Apostle, we look not at the things temporal, but at the eternal, 2 Cor. 4.18. he puts by all temporal things, which as the lower heavens hold back the face of Gods throne, and so he looks into eternity. There is a story of an Oxford Monk, who by his skill in Magick conveyed himself into the Northern Regions, and there took a view of the Pole: the believer by the art of faith doth much more, in con∣veying himself out of this world, and taking a view of eternity; in the promises he sees heaven opening, and letting down some sparkles of glory; in the threatnings he sees hell flaming, and some of the fire unquench∣able breaking out, heaven and hell are no longer notions but sensations; in the raptures and joyes of faith he hath been caught up into Paradise, and there drunk of the wine of Angels, in convictions and deep humilia∣tions he hath been as it were at Gods barr, and hanging over the bottomless pit. As to seeming contradictions, the believer hath a rare dexterity to enucleate them.
Touching which I shall give some instances. God commanded Abraham, offer up thy son, thine only son Isaac, to offer up a son was a seeming contradiction to nature, to offer up an Isaac, a son of promise, was a seeming contradiction to Gods truth, who before had said, in Isaac shall thy seed be called, but faith unlocks all these difficulties, God is able to raise him up from the dead, saith Abraham, and from thence he received him in a figure, Heb. 11.19. a parallel to this we may find in all true believers, the children of Abraham; God calls upon them, mortifie the deeds of the body, and ye shall live; mortifie and live is a seeming contradiction, to offer up our only ones, our wills, our loves, our joys, to be slain, looks like a piece of unnaturalness; but what saith faith? it is no such matter, offer up your only ones, your wills, your loves, your joys, unto God, and you shall re∣ceive them again from the dead, raised up in the incorruption of the new-creature, that which was sown a natural will, natu∣ral love, and natural joy, shall be raised up a spiritual will, spiritual love, and spiritual joy, your souls before dead in sins, shall have the life of God in them, this is the first resurrection; such things as these nature laughs at as strange paradoxes, but faith embraces as rare mysteries. Again, Christ saith, take my yoke upon you, for my yoke is easie and my burden is light, Math. 11.29, 30. what is Christs yoke but the Commandements? and
are these portable by any meer man? so say the Romanists from this very place, but the mistake is so gross that the communis sen∣sus of Christians runs against it; faith can un∣riddle it another way, the impossibles of the Law, the sinless perfection unattainable by us were fulfilled by Christ, the heavy end of the Law, the dreadful curse unavoidable by us was born by Christ, the Covenant of grace is satisfied with uprightness in the wayes of God, which is easie to a renewed man: its true, while there is only the pressure of a Law without, and nothing but a natural heart of enmity within, the wayes of God are irksom and tedious, which occasioned a Di∣vine to say, that a man might take a carnal man, tye him to a table, and kill him with praying and preaching; but it is far other∣wise with the believer, who serves God not in the oldness of the letter, but in the newness of the spirit, who hath a Law within answer∣ing to the Law without, and a spirit with∣in prompting the same in the heart, which the spirit in the command doth outwardly dictate. Prayer is but the breathing of the new-creature, holy desires its pulse, holiness its element, obedience its common walk, alms but the opening of its hands, contem∣plation but the lifting up of its eyes, all na∣tural and easie, because from inward prin∣ciples of life and grace: My yoke is easie, is durus sermo, an hard saying to every man but to the believer, who does all sweetly and
in the easiness of the new-creature. More∣over, to give another instance, work out your salvation with fear and trembling, for it is God who worketh in you both to will and to do of his good pleasure, saith the Apostle, Phil. 2.12, 13. what strange language is here? work, and yet God worketh all, and all of his meer pleasure; how can these things be? if God work all, there seems to be no place left for virtue or vice, rewards or punish∣ments, because man can do nothing of him∣self. O what sweats have Learned brains been thrown into, whilest they have labour∣ed to tune free-grace and free-will into har∣mony? what craggy thorny Volumes of meer speculation have they put forth de concordiâ liberi arbitrii & gratiae? and after all is done, the believer understands it best of any man; his life of faith is a plain practical solution thereof, for he acts and moves, but under the first Agent and Mover; he works, but under the Master-workman; he is free, but under the free-making spirit; he spreads his sails, and withall looks up for the holy gales; he labours and sows precious seed, and at the same time waits for the spiritual dews and sun-beams; he hath graces in him, but layes all under that spirit that created them, that that spirit may touch upon his charity and draw out his soul in alms, and touch upon his devotion, and pour out his soul in prayer, and touch upon every grace, and make the spices thereof flow out; still he
waits for the touches of the spirit. Moral virtues, like the fabled cymbal of St. Teli∣an, may seem to ring alone by their own self-power and self-confidence, but spiritual graces, like Davids harp, must be awakened by divine influences; as it was in Christ on earth, the Humanity alwayes ministred to the Divinity, so it is with the believer, so far as his faith acts, all his faculties and graccs are but as it were so many gardens, aery rooms, and working-houses for the holy spirit to walk, breath, and work its pleasure in. Hence the believer is said in Scripture to walk in the spirit, pray in the spirit, live in the spirit, doing all under the conduct thereof: after some such sort as this doth the believer work out his salvation with fear and trembling, in a way of humi∣lity and holy dependance upon God, who worketh to will and to do of his own good pleasure. We have an eminent instance of this in holy David, see how he hangs upon God in the 119 Psal. thou hast commanded us to keep thy precepts, but O that my wayes were directed to do so, ver. 4, 5. I will keep thy statutes, but O forsake me not utterly, ver. 8. with my whole heart have I sought thee, but O let me not wander from thy com∣mandements, ver. 10. I will run the way of thy commandements, but do thou enlarge my heart, ver. 32. I love thy precepts, but quicken me O Lord according to thy loving kindness, ver. 159. I have chosen thy precepts, O let thine
hand help me, ver. 173. how working is Da∣vid, and how depending? how sweetly do mans obedience and Gods influence accord together? this a believer practically un∣derstands, and none but he: whilest others labour to fathome it by speculation, the mystery is too deep for them, but the belie∣ver hath it practically and in experience every day. As to spiritual extractions, the believer is very sagacious. Chymists by racking and torturing of nature, have forced her to a con∣fession of many secrets and choice mysteries, which made Paracelsus so triumph over Galen, vaunting proudly, that the least hair of his head had more learning then all the Ʋniver∣sities besides. The believer is the best of Chymists, no extractions are like those of faith, he extracts heaven out of earth; could a man extract gold out of base metals, it would be but earth out of earth, purer out of grosser; but the believer extracts hea∣ven out of earth. As Jacob saw more then meer Esau, he saw Gods face in Esaus, so the believer sees more then the meer crea∣ture-comfort, he sees the goodness of God in it, which is the sweetness of all. Carnal men are content with the bulk and gross matter of an earthly blessing, but the belie∣ver draws out the spirits and quintescence thereof; that is, the love of God, without which oil and wine and corn, and all other earthly things are but a caput mortuum, a
piece of dross and dead mattor in his eyes; earthly things are transient and perishing in themselves, but he hath an art to melt them down by charity into a fixed condition, though he cannot say, his house, yet he can, his charity shall continue for ever. Silver and gold will not go in speeie, in the upper world, but he knows how by the poor, which are Christs bankers, to return them thither for everlasting habitations, given in exchange by free-grace. Again, he extracts good out of evil. Car∣nal men see nothing in affliction but a lump of sorrow, but the believer knows that there is a blessing in it, the sharpness of it may let out his corruption, the suddenness of it may alarum his spiritual watch, the bitterness of it may wean him from the breast of the creature, the weight of it may try the back of his faith and patience; it is no longer meer trouble, but made out into fans to unchaff him of his vanity, into fur∣naces to resine his golden graces, into moulds to cast him into the image of a meek suffering Christ, into spiritual wings to ele∣vate the soul in devotions and heavenly af∣fections towards the everlasting rest which is above: much of the love and faithfulness; of God is to be seen in it, which made Mun∣ster sick of the pestilence, to shew the ul∣cers and plague-tokens on his arm ut armil∣las & preciosas Christi gemmas, as the brace∣lets and rich jewels of Christ; such noble ex∣tractions
can faith make out of sore afflicti∣ons, as if they were the only love-tokens to feal up a son of God; according to that old say∣ing, Qui excipitur à numero flagellatorum, excipi∣tur à numero siliorum. Again, he extracts strength out of weak∣ness. Satans shocks and the fluxes of in∣ward corruption may make him weak and ready to perish, but his faith tells him that the power of God, which can do all things, is perfected in weakness, and the weakness of man under which he groans, is a capaci∣ty for that power to shew forth it self in; when our power is gone, there is room for Gods, when there is no might, he increa∣seth strength, as it was in Christ, the weak∣ness, the humane flesh was anointed with the divinity; so it is in the believer, the weakness, the humane frailty is anointed with the power of grace; when he is weak in himself, then he is strong in God; when weak in the flesh, then strong in the spirit. The Psalmist hath some Psalms upon Ma∣chalath, that is, upon instruments Musical, say some, but upon infirmity, say others; the believer is able to glory and make Musick over his weaknesses, because his faith can fetch down the power of God upon him, wait on the Lord and he shall strengthen thine heart, Psal. 27.14. as faith goes up, so power comes down; hence the believer out of weak∣ness is made strong, as the Apostle expresses it, Heb. 11.34.
Again, he extracts grace out of unworthi∣ness, well knowing that the way of grace is to move it self into act from our un∣worthiness; a notable instance whereof we have, Hos. 2.13, 14. she went after her lovers, and forgate me, saith the Lord, therefore be∣hold, I will allure her, and bring her into the wilderness, and speak comfortably unto her; as if he had said, she is idolatrous, there∣fore behold, I will be gracious. Oh what a stupendious therefore is here? deservedly is it followed with a behold, a note of admi∣ration: So wonderful it is, that some Learn∣ed men among the Papists, not understand∣ing how such a connection could possibly be, have thought that it referrs not to that which immediately went before, but to some precedent words about the beginning of the Chapter; a parallel place to this we have, Isa. 57.17, 18. he went on frowardly in the way of his heart, I have seen his wayes and will heal him. Oh! what strange grace is here? one would have thought he would have said, he went on frowardly, I have seen his wayes, and will damn him, but it is, I have seen his wayes, and will heal him. Some Jewish Commentators gloss it thus, I have seen his repenting wayes and will heal him. I suppose not understanding how grace should immediately follow upon perversness, but the believer knows that this is the method of grace, and therefore by an holy art pres∣ses for it even from his own unworthiness,
Our Saviour Christ calls the Canaanitish woman, crying out for mercy, no better then dog, Math. 15.26. a word of reproach, such as the proud Jews put on all the Gentiles, such as made the Saracens revolt from the Emperour Heraclius his army, and set up for themselves, under their Captain Mahomet; but see how admirably her faith gathers up∣on him, and even from that word presses for mercy, truth Lord, yet the dogs eat of the crumbs that fall from their Masters table, ver. 27. ipsum Dominum in verbis capit, she takes the Lord in his own words, saith Ferus, pro∣ving her title to the crumbs from her be∣ing a dog: Holy David prayes, O Lord, pardon mine iniquity, for it is great, Psal. 25.11. a strange argument for pardon, for it is great, such as no malefactor would use to an earthly Prince, but the holy man knows that it will pass with God, who loves to make grace superabound there, where sin hath aboun∣ded. Again, he extracts hope out of despair. When he is ready to faint and swoon away in cold fits of spiritual deadness, faith revives and points him to the fountain of life, which runs over in quickning graces upon the whole Church; and if he scruple his ac∣cess to that fountain, faith tells him, that the Well is open to all comers, whosoever will may take of the water of life freely, whosoe∣ver hath the bucket of faith may draw out of it; and if he yet reply, true, whosoever
will may do so; but oh! I want a will, I want an heart for God and Christ and hea∣venly things, faith is able, if awakened, both to tell him, that these are living groans, and withall to drop some Scripture cordial into his heart, such as that is Prov. 9. where Christ, the wisdom of God, builds his house, the Church, kills his beasts, mingles his wine, furnishes his table, that is, provides all hea∣venly blessings, sends out his virgins, his ho∣ly ministers, and after all invites the simple, and him that wanteth understanding, to eat, of his bread and drink of his wine, in the Original it is, him that wanteth heart. Oh! if thou sensibly wantest an heart for spiri∣tual things, here thou art particularly called to the Gospel seast, where Christs flesh is meat indeed, and his blood wine indeed, able to make thee live for ever. Again, he extracts joy out of sorrow. The Apostle Paul rejoyced over the godly sorrow of the Corinthians, because they received no damage in it, 2 Cor. 7.9. when faith looks over all the tears and groans of the believer, it saith there is no damage in these, these tears are bottled in heaven, the holy spirit breaths in those groans, he that goeth forth and weepeth bearing precious seed, shall doubtless come again with rejoycing, bring∣ing his sheaves with him, Psal. 126.6. Oh! saith faith, observe the word, doubtless tears and sorrows in a godly sort are a
sure sign that the harvest of joy and com∣fort is nigh at hand, one may see the crop in the seed sown. When the Emperor Juli∣an banished Athanasius, he said, Nubecula est, & citò transibit, it is but a little cloud, and will soon be over; when the night of darkness and discomfort is upon the soul, faith is able to say, 'tis but a short night of sorrow, joyes come in the morning, Psal. 30.5. and for that morning, I will trust the sun of righteousness, O how soon can he make it day in the soul. Moreover, he extracts wisdome out of fol∣ly. There is not, there cannot be any thing in all the world so foolish as sin, and yet out of this he picks up wisdom, hereby he comes to know more of his own heart. There is a Mahometan fable, that the heart of Mahomet, being a child, was cut open, and a black grain, called the devils portion, taken out of the midst thereof. A believers sins make rents and holes in his heart, and through these the inward core and black∣ness thereof becomes visible. Good Heze∣kiah by his fall comes to know what was in his heart. Peter denying his Master, comes to understand the desperate deceitful∣ness of his own heart, which cheated him against his own resolutions, into so horrible an iniquity; every actual sin is to the belie∣ver a sad Commentary on his inward cor∣ruption. Again, hereby he comes to under∣stand
free-grace better then before, that God should melt as man hardens, heal as man falls and bruises himself afiesh, drop par∣dons as man doth sins, return the holy spi∣rit as man grieves it away, lengthen out pa∣tience as man abuses it, use lavers as fast as man runs into pollutions, evidently argues riches of immense superabounding grace to∣wards sinners. Moreover, hereby he comes to know the necessity of a continual depen∣dance on God, considering the heats and colds of his heart, the ups and downs of his life, and the interchangeable actings of Hetis and spirit, he plainly perceives that he falls of himself and stands from God, dies of his own spirit, and lives from Gods, sins of his own, and repents, believes, obeyes, of meer grace, and so understands the necessity of de∣pending on God; praying continually with the devout Psalmist, Hold up my go∣mgs in thy paths, that my footsteps slip not. Psal. 17.5. Lastly, to name no more, he extracts all out of nothing. Thus the Apostle, as having nothing, and yet possessing all things, 2 Cor. 6.10. all things in God, who is all in all. Zuichemus gave Erasmus a ring, which, when it was unfolded, represented a mundane sphear, with Astrological notes engraven upon it, telling him withall, that now he might wear the whole world on his finger: the conjugal ring, whereby the soul is mar∣ried
to God in Christ by faith, hath this po∣sie, I will be thy God, which, if it be un∣folded, is a sphear of all things; the be∣liever need not ask with Peter, what shall we have? Math. 19.27. for he hath all in God. It is storied of the Laudanum of Pa∣racelsus, that it was almost good in all cases; but however that might fail, faith well understands that all things may be made out of an interest in God the universal good; hence it can rationally part with all for him, because it knows, that there be fathers and mothers, and brothers and sisters, and chil∣dren, and houses, and lands, and infinitely more in God.
CHAP. VII. Of the second holy fruit of Faith in Ju∣stification, its growth upon Faith as a fruit thereof; with the manner, con∣tinuance, perfection, and various ex∣cellencies of the same. THUS much for the first fruit of faith, being the spiritual sagacities thereof; whereby it appears, that the believer is the only wise man, who hath eyes in his head, whilest all the rest of the world, be they what they will in notional knowledge, walk on in darkness. The second holy fruit of faith is Justifica∣tion, which is a very great blessing, so great that in Luthers phrase it is articulus stantis & cadentis Ecclesiae; and in Chemnitius, arx & propugnaculum religionis Christianae, a blessing that is pregnant with many more; which occasioned a good Divine to say, sin committed is every judgment radically, and pardon of sin is every mercy radically, you may cut out any blessing or comfort out of it; particular mercies are but pardon of sin specificated and individuated, brought in∣to this or that mercy; of all blessings you may say, this is pardon of sin, and that is
pardon of sin. Touching this precious fruit of faith, I shall endeavour to shew these things. First, That it grows upon faith as a fruit. Secondly, The manner how it grows there. Thirdly, The continuance of it. Fourthly, The perfection of it. Fifthly, The various excellencies of it. First, This holy fruit grows upon faith; in the very instant of believing a man is justified before God. The Antinomians indeed makes as if it came forth much sooner, even as ear∣ly as eternity it self, as if it were an im∣manent eternal act in God. But the error of this opinion may be easily made appear: For, First, An immanent act abides in God, and doth not, as the transient, make any change at all in the creature; but in justifi∣cation there is a great change made in man, though not a Physical one, such as is made in sanctification, yet as moral and a relative one: the sins which before cried at heaven gates for vengeance, are now cast into the depths of the sea; the soul, which was at the brink of hell, is now in the suburbs of hea∣ven; the pure beams of grace breaking forth upon it, the prison garments of guilt are changed, and the righteousness of God is upon the believer, the blood of the Lamb is upon his conscience, and the damning de∣stroying Law passes over him. Again, an
immanent act in God is the same with Gods es∣sence, and not as the transient, the same with the effect produced. Gods willing is but the divine essence, with an habitude to such an object; his decrees are himself decree∣ing, otherwise the simplicity of his nature would be overthrown: such an immanent act is the decree of justification, but justificati∣on it self is an effect in time, else Gods ju∣dicial act may be exercised about a non-ex∣isting creature, a non ens may be justified, a man that is not may be made righteous, fin may be remitted before it is committed, absolution may anticipate guilt, and righte∣ousness Law, all which are things hard to be swallowed. If any thing in justification look like an immanent act, it is either Gods complacential love, or the imputation of righteousness; but that neither of these are such, is clear in Scripture, which expresses the same as things future, he that loveth me shall be loved of my father, saith our Saviour, Joh. 14.21. righteousness shall be imputed to us, if we believe, Rom. 4.24. a shall be cannot be put upon an immanent act, futurity cannot be found in eterni∣ty. Secondly, If justification were an immanent eternal act, what means a Mediator? God and man were at one before; would the Lord of all be made under his own Law, to bring in righteousness into an already righteous world? would he shed his precious blood on
a cross to purge away sins eternally forgi∣ven? was his sweet-smelling sacrifice to atone a reconciled God? did he pay down so great a sum of merits to purchase a freedom for such as were free-born long before? doth he still intercede with God to save those from wrath, who before were secure from it by an eternal justification? this opinion seems to make void the whole satisfaction of Jesus Christ; what the Apostle said of the Law, if righteousness come by the Law, then Christ is dead in vain, Gal. 2.21. the same may be said here, if righteousness come any other way then by the death of Christ, if it come by an immanent eternal act, then Christ is dead in vain. Thirdly, No man can be at once in two contrary states, in a state of wrath, and in a state of love too: every man, whilest an un∣believer, is in a state of wrath, the wrath of God abides on him, Joh. 3.36. God is angry with him every day, Psal. 7.11. and whilest he is in a state of wrath, he cannot be in a state of love. Joseph, whilest he was in prison in his old cloaths, was not in change of rai∣ment in Pharaohs Court. St. Paul, reckon∣ing up a black Catalogue of sins, barring men from inheriting the kingdom of God, saith of the unconverted Corinthians, such were some of you, 1 Cor. 6.11. as yet they were in the chains of sin and wrath, and im∣mediately after speaking of them as convert∣ed, he saith, but ye are sanctified, but ye are
justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our God; then the prisoners were become favourites in the Court of heaven, and stood in their robes of grace and righ∣teousness: then and not before, as evident∣ly appears by the words, were and are, rela∣ting to two distinct states in two distinct times, they were not, could not be in both states at once, but if justification be eternal, a man may be at once in contrary states, as an unbeliever he may be under wrath, and yet as a justified one under love. I know a man under wrath may be under a love of benevolence, which is the purpose of God to bestow grace and glory, but he can∣not at the same time be under a love of com∣placence, which is directly contrary to a state of wrath, nevertheless eternal justifi∣cation makes a man capable of both at once. Fourthly, Justification and sanctification are inseparable companions, no more to be sun∣dred then the merits and spirit of Christ which are the respective causes thereof: where grace pardons, there it heals, where Christ is made righteousness, there he is made sancti∣fication, for he cannot be divided and taken by piece-meal, but if justification be an eter∣nal act, then these twins of grace may be parted, an unconverted man may be justi∣fied, because that is from eternity, and with∣all unsanctified, because unconverted; in which case he must needs be in a strange
posture, at once under two contrary reigns of grace and sin; partly in Christ, as justifi∣ed by his blood, and partly out of Christ, as void of his spirit; the light of Gods counte∣nance shines upon him, and yet within he wears the image of Satan, a blessed one he must needs be, because his iniquity is forgiven, and an anathema too, because no lover of Jesus Christ; he is a justified and accepted man, and yet a man in his sins, all which absurd consequences are unavoidable, if justification be an eternal act. Thus much may suffice to discover the er∣ror of this opinion, only there are two Quaeres which must be answered. First, The first Quaere is this, If justificati∣on be not an eternal immanent act, is not there a change in God? God displicentially hates all the workers of iniquity, and such are all men before conversion; if therefore before conversion he hate, and after it he love them, is there not a change in him? I answer, no, there is none. God, such is his infinite sanctity, cannot but complacential∣ly love righteousness, and displicentially hate iniquity: love and hatred are not in God, as sin and righteousness are in man, in man sin and righteousness succeed one the other, but in God love and hatred are eternal and si∣multaneous; the change therefore, which is where the succession is, and not where the e∣ternal sameness is, is in man only, and not in God; the man, who was in a state of sin,
and so the object of Gods displicential ha∣tred, is now in a state of righteousness, and so the object of Gods complacential love; thus the Apostle, you that were sometimes ali∣enated, and enemies in your mind by wicked works, yet now hath he reconciled, Col. 1.21. All the change was in the Colossians, none in God, the Lord loveth the righteous, saith the Psalmist, Psal. 146.8. as soon as a man be∣comes righteous, the divine complacence doth embrace him, which it did not, could not before, because there was no sutable ob∣ject. Secondly, The second Quaere is this, If justification be not an immanent eternal act, what is the transient act by which God justifieth a believer in this life? Unto this much is not spoken among Divines, some speak of a sentence before the Angels, as if God did declare before them who is righteous; but this I think is altogether un∣scriptural: others speak of a sentence in con∣science, but this is but the manifestation of justification. Let us first distinguish of justi∣fication, and then answer. There is a double justification, constitutive justification, where∣by God maketh us just in this life; sententi∣al justification, whereby God pronounces us just at death and judgment. Constitutive justification is the foundation of sentential, for the true God will not pronounce us just un∣less we are such, and sentential justification is the compleature of constitutive: For here
there is sententia judicis crowning us as righ∣teous; the Quaere then being touching con∣stitutive justification in this life, I conceive with worthy Mr. Baxter, that God justifies a believer by the moral agency of the Gospel, by which as by his Grand Charter and Law of grace, he doth make over Christ and his righ∣teousness to the believer, neither need this seem strange, every humane instrument doth, moraliter agere. A Princes pardon conveys an impunity, a Charter an estate, a Law a title or right, a Testament a Legacy, and shall not the Gospel do as much to believers? God doth constitutivè justifie the believer by making him righteous, and makes him righ∣teous by making over to him the righte∣ousness of Christ, and that he makes over by the Gospel, which is his Pardon, Charter, Law and Testament of grace, conveying the same upon believing: no sooner doth a man believe, but the conditional promise becomes absolute. As the old Covenant running, do this and live, would have justified upon per∣fect obedience, so the New running, believe and be saved, doth justifie upon believing, as man sinning is condemned by the Law of works, so man believing is justified by the Law of grace. Hence the Gospel is called, the ministration of righteousness as the Law is of condemnation, 2 Cor. 3.9. the power of God to salvation to the believer, Rom. 1.16. quia nos per Evangelium justisicat Deus, because God justifies us by the Gospel, as Reverend
Calvin hath it on the 17th. verse, Virga virtu∣tis, A rod of strength, Psal 110.2. that is, in the Justification of men, saith the excellent Dr. Reynolds; and the law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus making us free from the law of sin and death; as many Divines interpret that place, Rom. 8.2. Upon which Pareus doth observe, Liberatio à condemnatione legis, Deo, Christo, Evangelio tribuitur, Deo ut Authori, Christo ut Mediatori, Evangelio ut Organo: Freedom from the coudemnation of the Law is attributed to God as the Author, to Christ as the Mediatour, to the Gospel as the Instrument. God makes over Christ and his righteousness unto the Believer by the Gospel, as by his Charter and Law of grace. This is the tran∣sient act, by which God doth justifie us in this life. Having thus removed the Antinomian Error out of the way, I shall resume my first Proposition, That Justification is an holy fruit growing upon Faith; in the very instant of believing a man is justified; this doth ap∣pear several waies. First, In Justification there must be a mat∣ter or foundation; a Righteousness, and a perfect one, such as answers the law which man is under. The Law demands of us two things; perfect Obedience, due from us as ra∣tional Creatures, and penal Suffering, due from us as sinful Creatures. The first Gods holiness presses for in the Command, and the last Gods Justice calls for in the Threatning.
The Believer, who hath nothing in himself, hath enough in Christ to answer both. Christ fulfilled all the righteousness of the Com∣mand, and so satisfied Gods Holiness. Christ bore the curse of the Threatning, and so sa∣tisfied Gods Justice. Hence he is the end of the Law to the Believer, Rom. 10.4. as if the Apostle had said, Whatever the Law can ask, the total sum of it is in Christ, and from him redounding upon the Believer as a mem∣ber of his body. It was a lamentable moan which Joannes Seneca made upon his Death∣bed;Mel. A∣dam. in vi∣tis Jure∣consul. Germano∣rum. In vitâ nostrâ habuimus (said he) qui pro nobis chorum frequentarent, qui pro nobis agros colerent, qui pro nobis Missas celebrarent & horas canonicas orarent; sed ubi nunc unum reperiemus, qui pro nobis in Gehennam descen∣dat: In this life we have those that will go to the Quire for us, and plow for us, and say Mass and pray canonically for us; but where is there one that will go to Hell for us? But the Believer (blessed man that he is) need not say who will go to Hell for me? Christ was made a Curse for him, neither need he ask, Who will fulfil perfect obedience for me? Christ hath done every jot and tittle thereof. The Believer is a man in Christ, and so stands in the pure robes, woven all of Love and Holiness, by his Saviour; unless the Law can find a spot or a false thread in these, he will be, must be recius in Curiâ; if the Law offer to hale him down to hell, he will do as Tamar, when brought forth to
be burnt, shew forth the Bracelets and the Signet, the precious blood and merits of Christ, which God cannot but own, as the price of Redemption and Salvati∣on. Secondly, In justification there must be a Justifier. It is God that justifieth, and whom doth he justifie but the Believer in Jesus? unto him he makes over Christ and his righ∣teousness; unto him he seals an actual par∣don and remission; his sins are covered, never to appear more in their ugly hue; blotted out, never to be read more in their bloody chara∣cters; cast into the depths of the Sea, and who can fetch them up again? sought for and not found, and who can charge them afresh upon the Believer? St. Paul would have the debts of Onesimus put upon his account, Philem. v. 18. The Believers sins do not stand, as they did at first, upon his score, but upon Christs, who came to make an end of them. When the swarms of Flies were upon the Egyptians and not upon the Israelites, the Text saith, God made a division; or, as it is in the original, A redemption between them, Exod. 8.23. That swarms of Guilt slie about Unbelievers, and none about Believers, it is because the redemption is between them, on the one hand neglected, and on the other applied: We are justified freely by his grace through the redemp∣tion that is in Jesus Christ, Rom 3.24. The Believer is, as I may say, a part or portion of Christ, wrapped up in his Righteousness,
and washed in his Blood; an Object all-fair and lovely in the eyes of God, and accepted in the Beloved. Thirdly, Justification relates to the Law, which is norma judicii, the rule of Judgment. A Believer hath wherewithal to answer both Laws; as to the law of Works, he hath Christs Righteousness answering the demands of it; as to the law of Grace, he hath Faith answering the terms of it. Do this and live is answered by Christs Righteousness; Believe and be saved is answered by Faith. Christus est impletio legis, spiritus est impletio Evangelii. Christ by his pure Obedience fulfilled the Law, the Spirit by working Faith fulfils the Gospel. If the Believer be charged before God that he is a finner, he can plead the Righteousness of Christ, as a full discharge to the Law. If he be charged, that he is an Unbeliever, he can plead his faith as the con∣dition of the Gospel. If he be further char∣ged, that his very Faith is imperfect, he can again plead the Righteousness of Christ a∣gainst those imperfections. His imperfect Faith intitles him to the perfect Righteousness of Christ; and that perfect righteousness re∣moves the imperfections of his saith. Oh! happy Believer, whom God himself may search once and again by either Law, and find nothing of condemnation in him. If the Law come to him, it finds Christ the end and per∣fection of all holiness there: If the Gospel come, it finds Faith its own demand and
condition there; wherefore less than righteous he cannot be. Thus much touching the first thing, that this holy fruit grows upon Faith. Secondly, The next thing is the manner how it grows there; How we are said to be justified by Faith; unto which I shall An∣swer first Negatively, and then Affirmative∣ly. First, Negatively: Faith doth not justifie by its own intrinsecal value and and dignity. There is nothing in it commensurate to so great a blessing; nothing in it to measure with the pure Law; nothing in it to pay off divine Justice; nothing in it to weigh against the guilt of Sin; nothing in it to purchase the favour of God; nothing in it to cover a Soul withal; no, nor the nakedness of its own im∣perfections. It is a poor self-emptying, self-annihilating thing, which lives upon Alms, and goes up and down in the Gospel from one door of the Promises to another to beg a Spi∣ritual livelyhood: all that it hath is in a way of Receiving. It receives the atonement, re∣ceives the gift of righteousness, receives the spirit of Grace, receives remission of sins; but gives none of them out of its own. Hence it is well observed by Divines, that the Scrip∣ture never saith, Faith justifieth in an active sense; but alwaies, we are justified by Faith in a passive sense, because it receives all from Christ. This humble Grace, whose posture is to fall down and worship before the thrones
of Free-grace and of the Lamb: will not turn Free-grace off the throne, nor like Zim∣ri, slay its Master Jesus Christ in his merits and imputed righteousness, that it may reign in his room. Again, Faith doth not justifie as coming in the room of that perfect righteous∣ness which we owe unto the Law, for God is true, and judgeth according to truth; he doth not, cannot do as the unjust Steward, who for an hundred measures of oil bid write fifty, but he accounts of things as they are. Faith, which is but a piece of righteousness, and that very imperfect, will not go with him for a compleat universal righteousness, but only for what it is; neither will it salve the matter to say, as the Socinians use to do, That Faith, though it be not in it self a perfect righteous∣ness, is yet reckoned as such per gratiosam Dei acceptilationem, by the condescending grace of God; for in God, in whom there is perfect Unity, one Attribute doth not interfere with another. Free-grace will not justle out truth, by accepting a partial righteousness for a to∣tal, which indeed it is not; neither doth a divine Attribute ever clash against its own design. Free-grace will not so accept faith, as to frustrate its own design in the Media∣tour Jesus Christ; which, as appears in Scri∣pture, was, that Christ should be made our righ∣teousness, 1 Cor. 1.30. that we might be the righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5.21. that his blood may cleanse us from all sin, 1 Joh. 1.7. that his obedience might make many righteous,
Kom. 5.19. but what need all this if Faith be accepted for a compleat righteousness? what room for Christs righteousness, as long as Faiths will suffice? You will say perhaps, that Christ by his merits hath purchased this of God, that faith should be accepted for a perfect righteousness; but if that be so, then Christ died not properly for Persons, but for Graces: Christs righteousness was not to cloath poor souls in, but to advance faith above it self. Faith is become our immedi∣ate, material righteousness, and Christ only a remote cause of it. The Lord Christ walks a foot as a meer servant to Faith, and the ser∣vant Faith rides in his Masters robes as if it were the very matter of our righteousness; all which is to subvert the Gospel. True Faith will confess, as John did, I am not the Christ; I never was crucified for you; I ne∣ver fulfilled all righteousnes for you; I am but the Eccho to the Gospel-grace; I do but prepare a way in the heart for Christ and his righteousness, to receive all praise and glory there. Secondly, Affirmatively, And here Divines generally express themselves thus, That we are justified by faith as an instrument receiving Christ and his righteousness. Thus Reverend Calvin calls faith,Just. 1.3. cap. 11. Instrumentum justitiae perci∣piendae: The instrument of receiving the righ∣teousness of Christ offered in the Gospel.Exam. Conc. Tri∣dent. 163. Chem∣nitius stiles it, Manus nostra, quâ recipimus ea quae in Evangelio offeruntur: Our hand where∣by
we take the alms offered in the Promise. Musculus calls it,Loci Com. de Justi∣ficut. Medium quo gratiam justi∣ficationis in Christo apprehendimus: a Medi∣um by which we lay hold on the grace of Justi∣fication in Christ. Faith is the eye which looks up to the Mercy-seat, the hand which puts on the robe of Christs obedience, the ring which hath the Pearl of infinite price in it. Hence we are said in Scripture to be justified by faith and through faith, as it is the means whereby we receive Christ and his righteousness. And a late Divine speaks of a double instrument in Justification; on Gods part the Gospel is an instrument, and on mans, Faith: the Gos∣pel is manus offerentis, the hand offering, and Faith manus accipientis, the hand receiving Christ and his righteousness. And before him Calvin hath this passage,Comment. on Rom. ch. 3. Ʋt justificemur causa efficiens est misericordia Dei, Christus materia, verbum cum side instrumentum: In Justifica∣tion the efficient cause is Gods mercy, Christ the matter, the Word with Faith the instrument. Thus the generality of Divines conclude that we are justified by faith as an instrument; nevertheless some others express themselves thus, That we are justified by faith as  condition of the Gospel. Thus the profestors of Saumiar in France; Fide justificamu. non tanquam parte aliquâ justitiae,Thes Salm. de Justif. sed tanquam conditione foederis gratiae: We are justified by faith, not as it is a part of righteousness, but as it is the condition of the Covenant of Grace. Thus Learned Mr. Woodbridge,Method of Grace, 101. To believe
is a formal, vital act of the Soul in genere physico; but the use of it in justification is, to qualifie us passively, that we may be morally and orderly capable of being justified by God. Or though physically it be an act, yet morally it is but a passive condition, by which we are made capable of being justified according to the order and constitution of God. Thus worthy Mr. Baxter, Right to Christ and life being a moral effect,Confess. of faith, 295. and conveyed by a moral cause and way; that is, by a law of Grace, or conditional promise, or gift: therefore the for∣mal reason of faiths interest in our justification is, as it is the condition of that promise by us performed; and its essence or physical act, the acceptance of Christ and Life, commonly called its instrumentality; though it be the reason why it was chosen and preferred to this office of being the condition of the promise, yet is it but its aptitude to the office, and so the remote, and, as it were, material reason of its interest in our justification, and not the formal Rea∣son. Touching this matter I shall offer my thoughts in these Propositions: First, Faith is not strictly and properly the instrument of Justification: were it so, a man might justifie and forgive himself. For, as Dr. Ames well observes, as Sacraments are properly Gods instruments,Bellarm. Enter. Tom. 4. lib. 5. so Faith is proper∣ly mans. Deus nos baptizat & pascit, non nos∣metipsi; nos credimus in Christum, non Deus: God baptizes and feeds us, not we our selves;
we believe in Christ, not God. If then Faith, which is properly mans instrument, be pro∣perly the instrument of Justification, a Belie∣ver doth no less than justifie himself, which is harsh doctrine to me. Again, When we are said to be justified by Faith, I suppose the Scripture doth not intend the transient act, but the permanent habit; and if so, I can∣not conceive how that can be properly, strict∣ly an Instrument. Instrumenti causalitas est in usu & applicatione; when it is not in use and act, it ceases to be an instrument. The habit of faith is an habit still, even when its act ceases; but when its act ceases, what hath it of instrumentality. Secondly, Faith, though not properly, may yet in some sense be called an Instrument, be∣cause it hath a peculiar aptitude and recepti∣vity to accept of the free-gift made in the Gospel. Hence we are said by it to receive Jesus Christ, Col. 2.6. to receive the atonement, Rom. 5.11. to receive the gift of righteousness, Rom. 5.17. to receive forgiveness of sins, Acts 26.18. It hath a choice capacity to take in Christ with all his benefits. Thirdly, The proper formal reason, why we are justified by Faith, is, because it is the con∣dition of the Gospel, on which God, the Great Donor, gives out Christ with all his blessings. We are not justified by faith, as for any rea∣son intrinsecal, or in the nature of it, but as it doth inright and instate us into Christ and his righteousness; and how is that done?
the old Law-rule must be remembred, Vo∣luntas donatoris observetur: the Donors Will is the best guide; and what is that in this case? Clearly in the Gospel Christ and his righte∣ousness are given upon the condition of faith. Bellarmine asserting, that it did not please God to give justification upon the condition of faith alone: Dr. Ames answers him,Bell. Eve∣rum, Tom. 4. lib. 5. Vel maximè placuit boc Deo: It pleased him alto∣gether. We must take as God gives. God in the great charter gives out Christ and his righteousness, upon the condition of faith: Faith therefore instates and inrights us into these as it is the condition of that grant. And by consequence we are justified by it as such, as when a Prince grants a pardon, upon con∣dition the Traitor take it from him with his own hands; his taking it gives impunity, not because of the organical apprehensiveness in the hand, but because it is the modus dona∣tionis, the pardon runs upon those terms. So, when God grants justification upon con∣dition of believing, we are justified by faith; not because of its intrinsecal receptivity or ap∣prehensiveness, but because that faith, which stands in the Gospel as the condition of justi∣fication, is found in the heart. Thus much touching the manner, how this holy fruit grows upon Faith. Thirdly, The next thing considerable is the continuance of this holy fruit. Justification is a flower of Paradice which never dies; once justified, and ever justified. The righ∣teousness
of God, which is put upon the Be∣liever, is never taken off again. The par∣don, which is sealed in the Court of heaven, is never reversed. The cloud of Guiltiness, once scattered, never gathers together. The sins cast into the depth of Sea, never come up more.Camb. E∣liz. p. 384. When the Jesuite Chreicion, taken at Sea, tore and threw over-board certain papers of dangerous consequence, the torn pieces were by the wind blown back again into the Ship, and afterwards artificially put together, discovered the Popish design then on foot: but when God casts our sins into the depth of the Sea, all the breath of the infernal Spirits can never blow them up again, they shall be remembred no more. All things in Justification concur to make this good. Free-grace, which is the first mover in it, is a fountain ever flowing, and a Sun which knows no going down. The Righteousness of Christ, which is the matter of it, is a robe which can never wear out. The Gospel, which is the Charter of it, is a grant never out of date. Faith, which is the Medium to it, will, under the divine influences stirring up the nest of gracious principles, bud and blossom forth in fresh acts, and when the acts cease, it abides in the root, kept alive by the eternal Spirit breathed from the endless life of Merit in Christ: All which make the righteous man an everlasting foundation; only here is a Quaere to be resolved. Do not Believers fall into sin? and doth
not sin make a breach upon Justification? and if so, how doth it continue? I Answer, The sins of Believers are either sins of meer infirmity, and daily incursion, or sins of gross enormity, and conscience-wasting; such as Davids Murther and Adultery, and Peters denial of his Master: the first sort of these through the rich grace of the Gospel are pardoned, as I may so say, of course, and so make no breach at all upon justification:De peccate mortals & veniali. Non excludunt fideles à favore Dei, & à spe regni coele∣stis: They exclude not Believers from the favour of God, nor from the hope of the heavenly king∣dom, saith that eminent Divine Robert Baro∣nius. God, such is his infinite mercy, doth not impute these to them. Hence he bears witness of David, That he did that which was right in the eyes of the Lord, and turned not aside from any thing that he commanded him all the daies of his life, save only in the matter of Uriah, 1 Kings 15.5. Infirmities are not reckoned; the matter of Uriah is the only exception: The latter sort of sins in Believers are gross enormous ones; touch∣ing these our famous Divines at the Synod of Dort say, that these are not pardoned to the Believer, till he per excitatam fidem & poe∣nitentiam veniam impenetraverit: obtain re∣mission by a renewed act of faith and repen∣tance. His universal justification is not fru∣strated, and yet, till he renew his faith and repentance, his particular sin is not par∣doned; his right to the Kingdom of heaven
is not taken away, but only his aptitude. Just as the Leper, who whilst his leprosie was on him had a right to his house, but not a fit∣ness till his purgation. The seeds of faith and repentance are in him, but they must be stirred up into fresh acts.Wells of Salvation, pag. 184. Dr. Spurstowe saith, that a Believer under such sin may not immediately lay hold on the promise of For∣giveness, until he first renew his repen∣tance; till then to lay hold on the Promi∣ses, is not faith but presumption. Faith al∣waies proceeds according to Gods method, and that is, to give out pardon upon repen∣tance. God first hears Ephraim bemoaning himself, and then remembers him with mercy, Jer. 31.18.Treatise of Justifica∣tion. Mr. Burgess conceives, That a Believer under such a sin, without renewed re∣pentance, is under an actual guilt obliging him to eternal wrath: neither can he say, My God, and My Christ. For mine own part, I conceive that such gross sins, being the plain merits of eternal wrath, do stab the Believer at the very heart, and leave an hellish sting upon the Conscience. They lie as a dog at the door, ready to tear out his throat, and do, as it were, thrust off his Soul from Christ and Grace. They very much weaken the habits of faith, and other graces, so that these languish and are ready to die. Such dismal effects as these made David roar all the day, and cry out of bro∣ken bones; and Peter go out and weep bit∣terly, judging and condemning himself for
his soul denial of Christ, , Mark 14.72. which we translate, he thought thereon and wept; but others render it, ob∣velavit se, he covered his head and wept: As a condemned Malefactor he vailed his face in the sense of that sin which deserved no less than eternal death. Such sins make Be∣lievers in their return to their Father, ac∣knowledge, as the Prodigal did, that they are unworthy to be called the Sons of God. Nevertheless such gross sins of Believers are, as I take it, pardoned as soon as committed, even before actual faith and repentance re∣newed; I say before actual faith, for the habit of falth is still in the believer; I say, before repentance renewed afterwards, for the believer in the very commission of a known sin hath a kind of repentance; there is some renisus voluntatis; the regenerate part op∣poses it, the spirit lusteth against the flesh. Cum peccant, eâ tantùm parte quâ non sunt regeniti peccant, secundum verò interiorem partem nolunt, detestantur peccatum, ergò non plenâ voluntatate peccant:Epist. pag. 114. thus Learned Zan∣chy. My grounds, why such gross sins of believers are pardoned before the subse∣quent acts of Faith and Repentance, are these: First, The concessions of the above-named worthy Divines induce me to it. They say, the Believer, notwithstanding such sins, is still in a state of justification; and I see not, how the guilt of one sin
unpardoned, which obliges him to eternal wrath, can possibly consist with a justified state. Justificatio nullum locum relinquit con∣demnationi: They say, he hath a right to the kingdom of heaven, and I cannot imagine how an obnoxiousness to wrath resulting from one unpardoned sin can simul & semel, stand with a right to heaven: They say, the holy seed of regeneration abides in him still, and I believe regeneration and condemnation cannot be together. Secondly, The Scripture-expressions are very pregnant: The Believer, notwithstand∣ing such sins, is a believer still; and whilst such shall not come into condemnation, Joh. 5.24. He is a man in Christ, and to such there is no condemnation, Rom. 8.1. Neither do the subsequent words hinder, who walk not after the flesh; for those, as I conceive, intend not a step or a partionlar act of sin, but a walk and general trade of it, such as never is found in a believer; there is no condemnation to such. The Apostle saith not,Disp. The∣ol. de per∣severan∣tiâ. that there is nihil condemnabile; but there is, nulla condemnatio, saith Span∣hemius. He saith not, there is nothing dam∣nable in the believer, for sin in it self is al∣waies such; but there is no condemnation, for the pardon keeps the guilt from redoun∣ding upon the person; because he is a mem∣ber of Christ, the believer notwithstanding such sins, is a Son still; and if a son, then an heir, Rom. 8.17. and if a son, then a∣biding
in the house for ever, Joh. 8.35. He hath still a Well of water in him springing up to life everlasting, Joh. 4.14. And where the spirit of Christ is such a Well, there the Blood of Christ is a laver cleansing away all sin. Thirdly, It is considerable what the Scri∣pture means, when it saith, that we are justi∣fied by faith; doth it mean the act of faith, or the habit? if the act, there seem to be as many intercisions in justification, as there are cessations in the act of faith; upon which account I suppose that the vinculum unio∣nis, the bond of Union whereby the Believer is knit unto Christ, is not a transient thing, such as the act of faith is, but a permanent one, such as the habit; if then the habit be the thing, that abides in the believer, notwith∣standing his sin. Fourthly, It is to me very momentous, that though sins of infirmity and enormity differ in proportion as much as Gnats and Camels, yet the least of them deserves condemnation as well as the greatest, and the greatest of them may have pardon in the very same way as the least. There are not in the Gospel two distinct waies appointed for pardon; one way for the pardon of infirmities, and ano∣ther way for the pardon of gross sins: but there is one undivided way of faith and re∣pentance appointed for both. Which being so, it follows, that if the believers gross sins be not forgiven till after actual faith and repentance, then neither are his infirmities
forgiven till then; and by consequence the believer cannot continue justified no not for a minute; the multitudes of infirmities, which are ever swarming in him, would put him into a state of death every moment. Nay, as worthy Mr. Wall hath well observed, in ictu mortis,None but Christ, pag. 322. in the very last stroak of death he may perish, unless the last operation of his spirit be actual faith and repentance. These things perswade me, that the gross sins of believers are at least in some sense pardoned before their fresh acts of faith, and repentance; touching which Divines speak variously. Mr. Baxter saith, That Believers as soon as they sin have an imperfect pardon, though not plenary.Lect. 113. on the 51. Psalm. Mr. Hildersham saith, They have a pardon upon record in heaven; but not the comfort of it, till by faith and repentance they sue it out, and be able to shew and plead it in the Court of their own Consci∣ence. Mr. Burroughs saith, When any Soul is taken into Christ,Expos en Hos. p. 611. it hath not only all the sins it hath committed pardoned, but there is a pardon laid in for all sins to come: there is no instant of time wherein it can be said, that the Believer is under condemnation. What is the aptest expression, I shall not contend, but I conceive such sins in be∣lievers are in some sort pardoned before their fresh acts of faith and repentance. Neither doth this open a gap to licentiousness, for it concerns only Believers, whom the stings of Conscience, celipses of Gods face, lan∣guors
of inward graces, and foul blots upon their Evidences to heaven, will under the influences of the Spirit press to fresh acts of saith and repentance, as to duties very necessary and incumbent upon them. Thus much of the continuance of this holy fruit. Fourthly, The fourth thing considerable is the perfection of it: This holy fruit is ne∣ver fully ripe till the day of Judgment. Re∣pent that your sins may be blotted out, when the times of refreshing shall come from the pre∣sence of the Lord, saith St. Peter, Acts 3.19. The day of Judgment is to a believer a time of refreshing: then there will be no more scorches from the fiery Law, no more stings from the old Serpent, no more guilt in∣flaming the Conscience, no more frowns from the holy God; but a pure, sweet refrigera∣tion breathed out from his gracious presence. Caspar Olevian, in his last sickness,Mch. A∣um in vi∣ta ejus. was in in∣effable joyes, so that he seemed to be in prato elegantissimo rore perfusus coelesti: in a most sweet meadow, with an heavenly dew distilling down upon him. Such reviving re∣frigerations believers have sometimes here; much more transcendent will their divine re∣freshments be at the last day. The top-stone of Justification shall be then laid on to make it compleat, as may appear by the ensu∣ing Considerations. First, Here the Believer is justified pri∣vately by the Gospel, but then he shall be
justified openly by the solemn sentence of God before all the World; here he hath the white-stone of Absolution given in secret, but then it shall be brought forth to view, glittering in all the orient colours of Free-grace. It was a great honour done to Mordecai, to be arraied in Royal apparel, and to have it pro∣claimed before him, Thus shall it be done to the man whom the King delighteth to honour. But oh! what glory will be upon the Be∣liever at that day; when he shall stand in the glorious rightcousness of Christ, and hear it proclaimed before Men and Angels, This is a righteous man, when Christ shall confess him before his Father and the holy Angels, to be a piece of himself, of his flesh and of his bones? As it was with the Sons of Jesse passing before Samuel; Eliab came and was refused, Abinadab came and was resused; and so others; at last David came, and the Lord said, Arise, anoint him, for this is he, 1 Sam. 16th. Chapter: So it will be with the Sons of men, at the great day of Judgment. The great Potentate may come and be rejected as a vile person; the rich Dives may come and be put away as dross; the Learned Rabbi may come, and be turned off as a fool, only when the Believer comes, God will say, This is he; this must reign in glory for ever. This is a Justification before God after a most signal man∣ner.
Secondly, Here the Believer stands justified, but in the midst of briers and thorns; re∣maining Corruptions vex and tear his righ∣teous soul from day to day. He is in the Land of Promise, but the Canaanite is not quite driven out; the reliques of Sin inmates in the same heart with grace, like the Liers in wait for Samson, are ready to make an assault upon him. Hence the Jewish Doctors say, That God calls no man Saint, or Holy, till he be dead and in the grave; because,  the concupiscential frame is not quite out of him before death, but at that day there shall be nihil damnabile remaining in him. Sin shall be no more: no more tumors of Pride; no more boilings up of Concupiscence; no more spots or wrinckles, or dark shades of Infirmity; nothing but pure, spotless Ho∣liness. Insomuch that Divines say, that from henceforth our Justification shall be in another way than by imputed Righteousness; because having perfect inherent Righteousness in our selves we shall need no covering. If the A∣postle say of a Believer, that, , he is justified from his sins, in respect of Sanctifica∣tion begun, Rom. 6.7. how much more will it be true when Sin shall be no more. Thirdly, Here the Believer is Justified, but the dust of mortality hangs about him. It may be there is a Stone ready to drop into the Bladder, or an Imposthume ready to break in the Head; Mors latet in mediis abdita viseeribus, in one part of the body or other
Death is preparing his arrow upon the string, to shoot man down from the perch of this life into the grave. But at that day there shall be nihil corruptibile; Death shall be no more; Diseases, which use to sound an alarum to it, shall be utterly removed; Tears, which are Natures pay to Sorrows, shall be all wiped off; the corruptible shall put on in∣corruption; Mortality shall be swallowed up of Life. This is a day of redemption in∣deed. Fourthly, Here the Believer is Justified, but his comfort is not alwaies the same. Now the light of Gods Countenance breaks out like a clear Sun upon him, and anon there is a sad eclipse leaving him in darkness; one day a banquet of heavenly Comforts is let down in∣to his heart, and another all is drawn up into heaven again. His Evidences may be blurred; Satan may hold up his pardoned Sins, as it were, in their old guilt; the Arrows of God may stick fast in him, and bring qualms and sick-fits upon his Conscience: But at that day his Comforts shall be unvariable; a nightless Day, and a cloudless Horizon; an eternal feast upon God and all things in him; his Evidences all clear; and, after but this once shewing forth, an everlasting possession of the expected Hap∣piness. The Accuser, Satan, shall be struck dumb at the blessed sentence of pardon and acceptance pronounced by God before Men and Angels. God shall never frown or wound him any more, but wrap him up in the arms
of endless love and joy. This will be a day of refreshing indeed. Thus much of the perfection of this holy fruit. Fifthly, The last thing is the excellency of it. God himself writes upon the Justified, , the Blessed one: Blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven, whose sin is covered, Pal. 32.1. or, as the original, Blessednesses is he: there is not one single Happiness, but a cluster of Beatitudes in this estate. Some of these I shall gather off from this Vine. First, The Justified person hath God for his God: these two, I will be merciful to their unrighteousness, and, I will be their God; stand in conjunction in the Covenant of Grace, Hebr. 8.10, and 12 verses. God (say the Jewish Rabbins) hath the key of the Womb, the key of the Grave, the key of the Rain, and the key of the Heart; all that is in the Creation is at his dispose. The Justified man hath, as I may say, a key into God himself. He may unlock in∣finite Treasures, and say, These everlasting Arms, which bear up the World, are mine for protection: These All-seeing Eyes, which guide every wheel in Nature, are mine for direction: Those immense Bowels, which cover all the Creation, embrace and sold me up in special Love: Those two all-compri∣zing words, My God, are in truth utterable by none but such as he is. God is called, the God of Abraham, Isaack, and Jacob. Cujus omnes gentes sunt, quasi trium hominum Deus esset,
saith St. Austine: as if the Great Lord of all things were appropriated to those three Men. Such honour have all Justified ones: God is their own, and to make this sure, they have bonds and bills under Gods own hand; they can in one Promise shew a title to his Power, and in another to his Mercy, and in a third to his Wisdom; and in that, I will be their God. They can lay a just claim to all that is in him, which, what it amounts unto, is more than the tongue of Men and Angels can express. Secondly, The Justified person hath Christ for his own. When the covetous King of Egypt built an house for his great Treasures, the cunning Architect left a loose Stone in the building, that so he might have free access thereinto. What entrance he had by craft into the Egyptian Treasures, that Justified persons have by a fair grant into all the unsearchable riches of Christ, Merit, Spirit, Life, Death, Righteousness, Redemption, Fulness, Glory, all that is in Christ is their own. If his Righ∣teousness can stand before God, so will they. If his Blood can wash away sin, they shall be without spot or wrinckle at the Great day: If his glorious over-measure of the Spirit cannot fail, no more will their supplies of Grace: If he ascended up into Heaven, it was to pre∣pare a place for them: If he make Intercession above, they must have access to the Throne of Grace: If he sit at the Right-hand of Power and Majesty, all their enemies must be made their foot-stool. Oh! infinite enjoyment; Eye hath not
seen, nor Ear heard, neither can it enter into mans heart, what the total sum of this is. Thirdly, The Justified man hath a rare pri∣viledge in his Holy duties. He hath assistance from, access unto, and acceptance with the great God in these. He hath assistance from him. Whilest he stands offering up holy Ser∣vices, fire comes down from heaven upon the Sacrifice. The Holy Spirit inflames his heart towards God; opening it in Hearing, melting it in Alms, and pouring it out in Prayer: So that in some sence he offers up his Duties, as Christ did himself, through the eternal Spirit, enlivening and impowering him thereunto. His voyage to Heaven lies through a tract of various Duties; but it never fares with him in these, as it did with Sir Hugh Willoughby, in his Voyage to Moscovy, in which he was by extream Frosts frozen to death. The warm influences of Grace keep him from freezing in this divine enterprize. His heart, which seeks the Lord in his waies, shall live; and to make it sure, our Saviour saies expresly, because I live, ye shall live also, Joh. 14.19. His life is hid with Christ. As long as Christ the Head is alive above, the Members below shall never fail of quickening grace in their addresses to God. Again, he hath access unto God in them: A man under guilt cannot approach unto God, no more than fallen Origen, casting his eye upon that of the Psalmist, What but thou to do to declare my
Word? could tell how to Preach; but the Justified man may draw near unto him, be∣cause his heart is sprinckled from an evil Con∣science. The guilt, which would have made him shie of God, is done away in Christs blood. Whilst others are but in the outward Court, in the opus operatum, the work done, he may enter into the Holy of Holies, into communion with God; the Holy Spirit con∣ducts him thither through the vail of Christs flesh. Moreover, which is the crown of all, he hath acceptance with God. God had respect to Abel, and to his offering, Gen. 4.4. such a respect as to bear witness to his righteousness by some visible sign, as fire from heaven consuming the Sacrifice. The justified man is in his measure as Daniel, a man of Desires, and as the Blessed Virgin, gra∣ced or highly favoured. His Prayers make me∣lody in heaven; his Alms are the savour of a sweet-smell; he doth not lose so much as a cup of cold water, nor shut a door of sense against an approaching Temptation in vain. There is a well-pleasingness in all his Services, as being ushered forth from the heart into the hand of the Mediatour, and there richly per∣funed for the Father; though, as they lie in our hearts, there be much smoak and mixture of weakness in them, yet as they are in the hand of Christ, they are glorified duties, acceptable to God through Jesus Christ.
Fourthly, The Justified man hath more of the sweetness of life, and its outward Comforts, than others. He hath more of the sweetness of life than others. The Jewish Doctours treating about the estimation of Persons, men∣tioned Levit. 27. say, That if a man be adjudged to death for his transgression, he is not to be valued, because he is but a dead man, and there is no valuation of the dead. An un∣pardoned man is dead while he liveth, and as our Saviour saith, condemned already, Joh. 3.18. His life, save only as it is a space for repentance, and so for pardon, must be rated at little or nothing. Bajazet, the Great Em∣perour, valued not his life at all, when he was carried up and down in an Iron-cage: and what is a mans life, when he walks up and down in chains of sin and wrath? but as soon as the pardon comes, he lives indeed. His life, as little a vapour as it is in it self, glitters as a Jewel in the Sun, being irradiated with that precious favour of God, which is better than it self: Moreover, he hath more of the sweetness of outward Comforts than others. The unpardoned man may have Corn, and Wine, and all other Blessings flowing round about him; but if his eyes be open, he can take no more pleasure in them than Damocles did at the Tyrants table, spread with all Royal dainties, whilest the Sword with the point downward, hung over his head by an hair only: If he tasts sweetness in them,
it is an act of meer blindness and irrationality; because he seeth not the arrow of Gods wrath, which is upon the string, and ready in a moment to shoot him down to the lowest hell. Do but open his eyes upon the hand∣writing of Guilt, which is on the wall of Con∣science, and all his crackling Joyes are in a moment turned into fits of trembling and a∣stonishment; but as soon as the Pardon comes every thing relishes with him. Moses, pro∣nouncing a blessing on Joseph thus, Blessed of the Lord be his Land; for the precious things of beaven, for the dew, and for the deep that cometh beneath, and for the precious fruits brought forth by the Sun, and for the precious things put forth by the Moon, and for the chief things of the ancient Mountains, and for the precious things of the lasting Hills, and for the precious things of the Earth, and the fulness thereof, adds this as the crown of all, and for the good-will of him that dwelt in the Bush, Deut. 33.13, 14, 15, and 16 verses. The favour of God pours a sweetness into all out∣ward things: Then may he eat, and drink, and enjoy all his labours; for the light of Gods Providence, and the light of his Coun∣tenance are met in conjunction. Fifthly, The Justified man hath less evil in Asslictions than others. The unjustified man carries a double load; one of assliction, and another of unpardoned guilt, which lies as a talent of lead on the Conscience, and makes
the Cross lie heavy as a burthen on a sore-back: But the Justified man hath only the sin∣gle Cross, which the spirit of a man may bear. The Stoicks could shoulder-up their reason against it; Nos dicimus omnia ista, quae gemitus mugitusque exprimunt, levia esse: We say,Epist. 13. all these things, which extort cries and groans, are but light, said Seneca. And what then may the Believer say, who hath a serene Consci∣ence, made so by the pure beams of Divine favour? Feri, Domine, feri clementer; ego paratus sum, quia à peecatis absolutus: Strike, Lord, strike; I am ready, because I am ab∣solved from my sins, said Luther; when he was in fear of an Apoplexy. The pardon of sin wonderfully alleviated the Cross. Again, the unjustified man is a poor helpless Creature: Trouble comes, and there is no deliverer; he falls alone, and there is not a reconciled God to help him up; God walks contrary to him: or, as the original may be read, He walks at all adventures with him, Levit. 26.24. Perad∣venture he will deliver him, peradventure not: But the Justified man, being in Christ the true Immanuel, is sure to have God with him; God with him in the fire, and God with him in the water; whatever the Cross be, the Almighty Father puts under the everlasting arms; the Eternal Son walks with him in the midst of the Furnace; the Holy Spirit drops in heavenly cordials upon his heart; as it was with Christ, when he hung upon the Cross,
and drunk up the bitterest cup of wrath. The Divinity never left the Humanity, no not when he cried out of forsaking: So is it with the Believer, the man in Christ; when Troubles come like Jobs Messengers, one upon the neck of another, God never leaves nor forsakes him, which is a cordial high enough to make any adversity more eligible than all prosperity. Hence some good men have been loath to leave their Prisons, for fear of parting with those inward joyes, which had turned them into a paradice. Sixthly, The Justified man knows how to die, and go to judgment. He knows how to die, which is a lesson too hard for any other but such as himself. The Stoick may seem to vapour over death, as a thing of nothing; but whilest he doth so, it is but a piece of blind rashness, never considering the vast gulph of Eternity which is then to be shot, in the Chri∣stian World, where that Gulph is better known. Many great Rabbies and Sophies are nonplust at the approach of death. The great Cardinal Richelieu, a little before his end would have a play, called Europe triumphante to be acted, though he was not able to be a spectator; it seems his Soul, hanging about the mud walls, as loth to go off that stage where he had acted so many wise parts, knew not how to apply it self to that grand affair of death approaching. Only the justified man knows how to resign, and bespeak his parting
Soul as Monica did, Volemus in coelum: Let us flie to heaven; or with Hilarion, Egredere ani∣ma mea, egredere, quid times? quid dubitas? Go out my Soul, go out; what doest thou sear or doubt? And all this upon sure grounds. His sin is pardoned; his death unstung; heaven-gates stand open for him; a convoy of Angels are ready to conduct his Soul into Abrahams bosom. So little tremendous is death to such an one, that Zuinglius being mortally woun∣ded cried out, Ecquid hoc infortunii? Is this any misfortune? the Body only was slain, the Soul was untouched, and but a little the sooner let out into glory. Again, The justified man knows how to go to Judgment. When the Earl Montgomery was brought before the great Court at Paris, he ingeniously confessed, That, as many great Armies as he had seen without fear, yet he could not but tremble at the presence of those grave Judges. At the Great day, when the last Trump shall sound, and the dead rise out of the dust, and Jesus Christ shall come with all his glorious Angels to judge the World, there will be generally nothing but pale faces, and trembling hearts, and lamenta∣ble out-cries to the Rocks and Mountains, to fall upon them, and cover them from the pre∣sence of the Judge: Only the Justified man may lift up his head with joy, because his re∣demption draws nigh. Jesus Christ the Judge is his Head and Advocate, and will not, cannot condemn the Believer, being a piece of him∣self,
standing in his image and righteousness. Sin and Satan have nothing at all to say against him. The Law cannot object the breach of the least jot or tittle; he comes to the Judgment, only to be absolved before Men and Angels, and after an Enge of praise, to enter into the joy of his Lord; which is an happiness beyond all expression.
CHAP. VIII. Of Adoption the third fruit of Faith; the peculiar Priviledg of sound Belie∣vers. The Excellency thereof demon∣strated under several Considerations. THus far of the second fruit of Faith be∣ing Justification. The next fruit thereof is Adoption: Justifi∣cation and Adoption are twin-Graces, brought forth by Faith at once; only in order of nature, Justification goes first, and then follows Adoption, as presupposing the other; hence the new name is said to be written in the white stone, Rev. 2.17. Alexander the Great Con∣queror of the World, was by the flattering Oracle saluted as a Son of Jupiter; but the Be∣liever, who overcomes the World in a more noble Spiritual way, is by the true Oracle sti∣led a Son of God; As many as received him, to them he gave power to become the Sons of God, Joh. 1.12. The Believer in the instant of be∣lieving is no longer a meer Son of Adam, but a Son of God; he is in unity with the natural Son of God, and so becomes an Adopted one. The Human nature is in the natural Son by Hy∣postatical union, and so is taken into the natural Sonship; and the Believer is in him by a Mysti∣cal union, and so becomes a Son by Adoption: Neither is this a meer empty title, He is born not
of blood, in a way of carnal Generation, not of the will of the flesh, in a way of Concupiscence; not of the will of man, in the way of Moral Virtues and Excellencies; but he is born of God, he is one of the seed-Royal of Heaven, the blood of God runs in his Conscience, a Divine Spirit breaths in him; Christ is formed in his heart, and that in the very same manner as he was in the Womb; that is, by the overshadow∣ing power of the Holy Ghost. Nay further, as Aquinas observes,Tertia pars Quest. 23. Art. 2. Filiatio Adoptiva est quaedam similitudo filiationis aeternae; Adoptive Sonship is a shadow of the eternal one. The natural Son is the , or brightness of his Father; and in the Adopted there is a splendor of Grace resembling God in a measure: The natu∣ral Son was begotten from Eternity, and is still a begetting; and in the Adopted the holy thing is begotten: And yet in respect of the successive supplies of Grace afforded for its preservation, it is as it were still a begetting; hence the A∣dopted Son, as well as the Natural, abides for ever, Joh. 8.35. The Natural Son is the image of Gods Nature, and the Adopted the image of his Will; Of his own will begat he us with the word of truth, Jam. 1.18. The Excellencies of this Priviledg are unut∣terable: I shall express them only in some Considerations. First, Adoption is a very glorious thing; it re∣dounds to the glory of Free-grace, and puts a lustre upon the Believer; it re∣dounds to the glory of Free-grace: Behold, what manner of love the Father hath bestowed
upon us, that we should be called the Sons of God, 1 Joh. 3.1. That the indefectible God, who hath a Son of his own lying in his bosom as an eternal joy, should Adopt; that the great Creator, who as such hath all possible right to his Creature, should Adopt; that the Immor∣tal One, to whom by reason of his Immorta∣lity there can be no succession, should yet A∣dopt; that such a Majesty as he is should A∣dopt such as we are, worms and sinful dust, and Adopt us to such an Inheritance as Hea∣ven is; and by putting a new nature into us, make us meet for the same, is stupendious and wonderful beyond expression. Such Consi∣derations as these made the great School-man Durandus (as Medina relates) affirm, That God did not Adopt properly, but Secundum Transla∣tionem, in a Metaphorical way. But to pass that, these things signally demonstrate, that Divine Adoption is full of rich Grace, and in a tran∣scendent manner above Humane. Moreover, Adoption puts a lustre upon the Believer, such as is not to be found upon the Princes and Po∣tentates of the Earth.Par. Me∣dulla hist. The proud Sultan Ach∣met used in his Letters to arrogate these high Titles to himself; I Achmet head of Prophets, Emperour of Emperours, Lord of Europe, Asia, and Africa, Lord of the White, Black, and Red Seas, subjoining a long Enumeration of all the Provinces under him: But to be a Son of God is incomparably more than all these. All that train of Titles whereby Potentates spread out their Glory, is fumus seculi, the smoke of this lower World, and glitters only in the eyes of
flesh and blood; but Adoption is radius Caeli, a ray of Heavenly Glory, and makes the Be∣liever shine to the eyes of Angels; who, as they rejoice over a repenting Sinner, cannot but wonder to see such an one transfigured into a Son of God: Nay, Adoption puts such a glory upon the Believer as was not upon Adam in Paradise. Adam was a Son of God only by Creation, but the Believer is one by Mystical Union and Communion with Christ the Natu∣ral Son; hence Christ calls him Brother, Heb. 2.11. a Compellation not used to Angels; and he is one of the first-born, Heb. 12.23. a title in an eminent way given to Christ. Secondly, Adoption carries with it an excellent spirit of Prayer; Because ye are Sons, God hath sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying, Abba father, Gal. 4.6. This praying Spirit is the breath of the New-creature, and as much excels all meer modes and gifts of Prayer, as a pair of natural Lungs doth artifi∣cial ones; others may pray artificially, and as it were mechanically, but the Adopted man prays naturally; without this Spirit all words and expressions in Prayer are but poor low things; like the Ʋrim and Thummim made un∣der the second Temple, by which the Jews could not tell how to ask counsel of God, be∣cause the holy Spirit was not present with it: In the Adopted that Spirit makes the Prayer issue forth with life and power; when the Blood and Merits of Christ plead above, and the holy Spirit makes intercession in the heart for the
same blessings, there is such a Harmony, that the Almighty sloops and bows down his car to it. Thus the sweet Singer, In waiting I waited for the Lord, and he enclined unto me, and beard my cry, Psal. 40.1. God himself enclines and stoops down at the Prayer of Faith. Va∣cula Pater, that little word, Father, spoken in the heart is more than all the Eloquence of Ci∣cero and Demosthenes,Com. in Gal. cap. 4. saith Luther: No soo∣ner doth the Child of Grace cry, but God says, Here am I, Isa. 58.9. as if he were always at hand to answer the request. Thirdly, Adoption ushers in an Heavenly free∣dom; whilest the Law is only without in the let∣ter, and the terrors of Sinai flash in the Consci∣ence, the man with his old heart of enmity, drudges in the ways of God, and brings forth all his Duties as the Bond-woman did her Son, in the power of nature, in a dead, carnal ser∣vile manner: Moses with the cords of Hell and Death drags the outward man to this and that Duty; but old Adam with his lusts, reig∣ning within, holds back the love and the joy, and the delight from the work: all renders to bondage, till Adoption come, and spirit him for holy things: Because ye are Sons, God hath sent forth the spirit of his Son into your hearts, Gal. 4.6. The same Spirit which led the Hu∣mane Nature of Christ into all Sinless Obedi∣ence, leads the Adopted into a true willingness to all the Ways of God, that Spirit engraves a Law within answering the outward one, and inspires such a Divine Love, as casts out the
Bond woman and her Son, I mean the servile fears, and services; the Will is set upon the wheels of Faith and Love, and the Duties are brought forth in the power of Grace, and of the Promise; that Promise, I will put my Spi∣rit within you, and cause you to walk in my sta∣tutes, Ezek. 36.27. is sweetly experimented in every act of Obedience; this glorious and almost Angelical freedom grows upon Adop∣tion, and no where else; no will of man ever seemed out such a thing; should any man go about to strike it out of his own power, it would fare with him as it did with the person reported of by one of the Jewish Rabbies, who in the night lighted his Candle, and it went out, lighted it again and again, and still it went out; at last weary of such vain labours, he re∣solved with himself to wait for the Sun. Such an one may strike and strike again to fetch such a liberty out of his own will; but at last the Conclusion must be, If the Son make us free, we shall be free indeed, Joh. 8.36. and, Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty, 2 Cor. 3.17. Fourthly, Adoption brings us into sweet Com∣munion with God; thus the Apostle. I will dwell in them, and walk in them, and I will be their God, and they shall be my people, 2 Cor. 6.16. I will dwell in them, and walk in them, who can express it? In the Sons of God there is an Ark with the Tables of the Law in it, and a Sanctuary with the Shechinah, or Divine Majestly in it; Gods gracious presence is Spiritual shew-bread,
and his Love burns upon the heart, as the fire that came down from Heaven upon the Altar; when they are sacrificing in holy Duties, God doth wonderfully by his quickening, and elevating influences; and when they are suffering in the briers and flames of affliction, God is in the Bush supporting and preserving them; if Conscience breaths sweetness and peace, God is in the still voice; if their Graces be set forth, God is a supping with them; nay, if there be but a poor spirit and weak desires, God will sup with these; the holy light and in∣tegrity in their heart is a kind of Ʋrim and Thummim to direct them, and the Heavenly motions and inspirations are as it were a Bath Kol, a voice from Heaven for their instruction; in a word, all the appearances of God in the worldly Sanctuary, and outward Symbols of Glory under the Old Testament, are spiritu∣ally accomplished under the New in the A∣dopted, who are an habitation of God through the Spirit. Fifthly, Adoption assures protection and provisi∣on; Israel, Gods own People, had a Pillar of Cloud, and a Pillar of Fire to defend them, and these Pillars are still in the Church, though not always visible: God hath said it, That he will create upon her a cloud and smoke by day, and the shining of a flaming fire by night, upon all the glory shall be a defence, Isa. 4.5. Rather than his Adopted ones, who carry his Glory about them, shall want a defence he will put forth an act of Creation: Israel when in the Wil∣derness,
had Bread from Heaven, and Water out of the Rock; and to the upright, God saith, Their Bread shall be given them, and their Waters shall be sure, Isa. 33.16. Rather than fail, He will make rivers in the desert, to give drink to his People, Isa. 43.20. When there's a pinch in the Kingdom of Nature, his own Family and Houshold shall be provided for; The young Linons may lack and suffer hunger, but they that seek the Lord shall not want any good thing, Psal. 34.10. That Distich, Est Deus in coelo, qui providus omnia curat, Credentes nusquam deseruisse potest; Was a Cordial to Musculus in his streights. Faith fears no Famine, neither shall the A∣dopted feel any. Sixthly, Adoption carries with it Perseverance; Once a Son of God by Adoption and ever so. One of the Jewish Doctors Commenting on that excellent passage, With thee is the fountain of life, in thy light shall we see light, Psal. 36. saith, That the Israelites were made free by Mo∣ses, and then brought into bondage again, and made free by Barak and divers others, and yet brought into bondage again; at last they shall be saved by the Lord their God with an eternal Sal∣vation; that is, by the Messiah. If meer noti∣ons make us free, we shall be in bondage again; if Church-priviledges make us free, we shall be in bondage again; but if Adopting Grace make us free, we shall ever be so: God hath said, nay, sworn to Jesus Christ, His seed (and such are all the Adopted) shall endure for ever,
and his throne (part whereof is in their hearts) as the Sun before me, Psal. 89.36. and to make them endure, the holy Spirit is in them a well of water springing up to everlasting life, Joh. 4.14. and to secure the abode of the Spirit with them, Christ is a Priest after the power of an end∣less life, Heb. 7.16. Nay, though they break his statutes, and thereby bring the rod upon their backs, yet God hath promised, Not to take away his loving kindness, nor suffer his faithful∣ness to fail, Psal. 89.33. Upon such unshaken foundations do the Sons of God stand. Seventhly, Adoption makes them heirs of Heaven; Though they may lye among the pots, and in the eyes of the World be the refuse and off-scouring of all things, yet are they heirs of Glory; thus the Apostle, If children, then heirs, heirs of God, and joint-heirs with Christ, Rom. 8.17. That Glory which Christ hath purcha∣sed, shall they be brought into; that Heavenly Inheritance, which is sealed without in the Promise, is inwardly assured to them by the Seal of the Spirit; which by holy impresses marks them out for Heaven, and is a sure ear∣nest in their hearts, that the whole sum of glory shall be paid to them above: each of them may say as Quirinus Reuterus did on his Death-bed, Ego sum vitae filius, I am a child of life. Thus much for the third fruit of Faith be∣ing Adoption.
CHAP. IX. Of Sanctification the fourth fruit of Faith, and here of Mortification the first part thereof; the influence of Pre∣cious Faith therein. THe next fruit of Faith is Sanctification, which makes the Soul meet for Heaven; Justification and Adoption give a title to that blessed Inheritance, but Sanctification makes ready for it. No sooner doth a man believe, but the rivers of living water, the sanctifying Spirit with its Graces slow in the heart; and the reason is evident, Faith is the Souls Union with Christ, who hath the Spirit above measure in trust, to pour it out upon every part of his Mystical Body; in this day of Espousals the water is turned into wine, Nature elevated into Grace. There are, as I have before no∣ted, two parts of Sanctification, Mortification and Vivification. I shall speak to both as fruits of Faith. First, Mortification is a fruit of Faith, indeed none but a Believer is in a posture to reach it. Could a man which yet never falls out, im∣prove his Reason and Will to the utmost, he could not truly mortifie Sin: Reason and Will improved might in some measure triumph over the gross inordinations in the lower fa∣culties, but they would ever spare the corrup∣tions
in themselves as their own flesh; like politick Princes, who keep down mutinies a∣mong the common People, but lay the reins down to their own personal vices: It would fare with such an one, as it doth with frozen waters, which though broken in one place, will freez in another; should he break and dissolve his sensual Sins, he would freez in spi∣ritual; and if his eyes were open, he would see that it is desperate pride and presumption to attempt Mortification in any other way than that of Faith, which brings a general thaw upon the heart, melting it into a compli∣ance with the Divine Pleasure, and tracing the method of the Gospel, derives a power and spirit from Christ for the work. Mortifi∣cation must be done through the Spirit, Rom. 8.13. and none hath that but the Believer; it slows from an implantation into the death of Christ, and none is so but he; Faith purifies the heart, and without it there can be no such thing as Mortification. God doth not com∣mand Mortification immediately, but in its own place, first Faith, and then Mortification; Mortifie therefore your members which are upon the earth, saith the Apostle, Col. 3.5. There∣fore, wherefore? Because you are risen with Christ; because your life is hid with Christ; therefore mortifie; None but Believers, who are in Union with Christ, are capable to do it. When in Popery all sorts are driven to this work, as the poor Indians are to Baptism; they do but set up a Faithless, Christless Image of
Mortification in Penances and Satisfactions, void of the true spirit and principle requisite thereunto. In the pursuit of this Point I shall first speak to the Mortification of Original Sin; this is to lay the axe to the root, and cast salt into the fountain; without which to go about to mor∣tisie this or that particular lust, is as great a vanity, as for a man by outward applications to heal up a fore or ulcer in the body, without correcting the inward somes of peccant and corrupt humours, which bore those holes in the flesh and fill them with putrefaction. This is one choice work of Faith. Others may spend all upon Physicians and Humane reme∣dies; but the Believer gives such a touch up∣on a Crucified Christ, as in a good measure to stanch the bloody issue running down his nature. In this excellent work Faith proceeds on this wise; First, Faith gives a man a just sense of Origi∣nal Sin; Which, if the World be searched with Candles, can be found no-where but a∣mong the Believers: To search for it in the Pagan World, is to no purpose; indeed Plato saith, That the Soul hath broken her wings, and creeps basely upon these lower things. The Py∣thagoreans taught, That Souls having offended God, were turned into Bodies as into so many Prisons, there to look out of the grates of Sense. Trismegistus asserts, That man fell from Hea∣venly Contemplations into the sphear of Elements, and so became a bondslave to his Body. Hierocles
confesses, That man is carried downward, and fallen from the happy Region, of his own motion inclined to evil, and averse from good. In such passages as these there seem to be some glim∣merings and dark resemblances of Original Sin: But alas, poor Souls, they were sar from a just sense thereof; they did not understand the depth and venom of this wound, but thought there was Medicamentum in latere, enough in the , the self-power of the Soul, which Justin Martyr at his Conversion brought out of Plato's School into Christiani∣ty, to heal it self. Aristotle makes Mans Happi∣ness to be the Operation of the Rational Soul according to Virtue; and that Virtue he ranks among the , the things in our own power. Seneca tells us, 'Tis a foolish thing to wish for a good Soul, which without lifting thy hands to Heaven, thou maist have of thy self; whatsoever may make thee good, tecum est, intus est, it is with thee, and in thee. Hierocles saith, The Will is , mistress of it self, and can make it self better or worse: Or, as he speaks in another place, it can make the man a beast or a God. In a word, all the remedy they prescribe is but that which Epictetus saith, made Socrates to be so virtuous as he was, Obe∣dience to Reason. They never so much as drea∣med of any such thing as Regeneration, but thought they could do their own work them∣selves; neither did they understand the bredth and length of this natural wound, they thought it was only in the lower saculties of
the Soul, Reason and Will being free and pure; hence they generally cry out against the Body as a Prison, and the Senses as fetters and manacles to the Immortal Spirit. Theophrast was wont to say, That the Soul paid a dear rent for her dwelling in the Body, considering how much it suffered at the Bodies hand. The Stoicks declaim against the Passions, as the sicknesses and languors of the Soul; all the load is laid upon , the common people of the Soul, (as some call the Passions), as if the Princes, Reason and Will, were free, never consider∣ing the Spiritual wickednesses which are a∣mong them. Neither could it be expected, that they should know the latitude of Sin, see∣ing they had not the pure Law, but only some fragments of it in their hearts, by which they could no more discern the proportions of Sin, than a man can understand features by the broken pieces of a Picture. Leaving the Pagans, let us search among the Jews, a People to whom the Divine Ora∣cles were committed, there the Believers had a true sense of Original Sin; David senses it, in primo ardore, in the first warmth of Natural Conception, Psal. 51.5. But such among them as wanted Faith, wanted a sense thereof. Indeed they had the Law, but the veil being on their hearts, they understood it only as prohibiting manum, non animum, the outward act, not the Will; and, Non concupisces, Thou shalt not covet; was rather taken tor a Moral sentence, than a Divine precept among them.
This was the opinion of the Jewish Masters a∣bout our Saviours time, when Rabbinical Lear∣ning was at the height in the Schools of Hillel and Shammai; St. Paul a man brought up at the feet of Gamaliel, whom the Jews accoun∣ted the honour of the Law, while he was in his Pharifaism knew not concupiscence to be Sin, Rom. 7.7. And they that understood the Law no better, could understand but little of Ori∣ginal Sin. Their Circumcision was a memento of it, and so they understood it, casting the Prae∣putium thereby cut off into the dust, as a mor∣sel to feed the old Serpent withal. But alas, they were uncircumcised in heart, and upon that ac∣count reckoned up among Egyptians. Edomites, Ammonites, and Moabites, uncircumcised in flesh, Jer. 9.29. The Jewish Rabbins speak of the  the evil figment in mans heart, as an implacable enemy. One man (say they) walks with another but one hour, and they become friends, but this evil figment is born with man, and grows up with him all his days, and yet if it find an opportunity, will after 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80 years, precipitate and cast him down headlong. But they make it a very small matter at first. At first (say they) it is weak as a woman, afterwards strong as a man; at first it is as a small ahread, afterwards as the cable of a Ship; at first it is as a Viator, at last as a Lord. And withal they made it subject to the power of mans free will. Concupiscence (say they) would fain ruin thee, but thou maist, if thou wilt, rule over it, Gen. 4. And whosoever obeys the good figment,
that is, his own reason, shall be delivered from the evil one. They cried up Reason and Will, and understood little of Original Sin; Hence Re∣generation, the necessity whereof may be na∣turally deduced from a right knowledg of that Sin, was so unintelligible to them. Nicodemus, a Master in Israel, and one of the Judges in the great Sanhedrin, was startled at our Saviours. Doctrine, Except a man be born of water and of the spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, Joh. 3.5. That of being born of water, possibly he might understand, because the Jews did imitate their Proselytes, by washing or Baptism, and then counted them as new∣born and regenerate, as Learned men have ob∣served. But that of being born of the Spirit, he was totally ignorant of, which he could not have been had he had a true sense of Ori∣ginal Sin; which, where it is, makes the Do∣ctrine of Regeneration obvious, but looking on that Sin as no great matter, and corrigible by mans own Reason and Will, he stood as it were at a maze at our Saviours words, as if there had been no promise at all of a new heart, and a new spirit made in the Old Testa∣ment. Leaving the Jews, let us enquire among Christians for a true sense of Original Sin; here we must not expect it among Pelagians or So∣cinians, who deny the thing, as if the figment of the heart were but the figment of the brain: peccatum originis nullum prorsus est, saith the Racovian Catechism: Sine vitio nascimur, saith
Pelagius, placing Infants in the same state as Adam was before his Fall; neither must we look for it among those Popish Doctors, who mince and extenuate this Sin, Intensivè majus est peccatum actuale quam originale, saith Aqui∣nas: It is, Omnium peccatorum minimum, saith another. Hence many of them assert, That it is not properly Sin; neither may I find it a∣mong those Protestant Doctors, who though they use the word Grace, yet attribute much to the Reason and Will of man. That famous place, Joh. 3, of being born of the Spirit, is taken by a learned man for an undertaking the Law of Christ, an entring on a new pure Spiri∣tual life; as if Regeneration were Mans act. The fallen man (saith another) is not wholly de∣stitute of power, but as the man in the Parable half-dead. Sin is not so unruly, but that Cain, if he will do well, may master it; the desire of Sin shall be subject to him, saith God. When a Man came to Delphos with a live-Bird under his Cloak, and asked the Oracle, Whether he should bring forth a dead thing or living? in∣tending to put a trick upon it: Answer was made to him, In te est stulte: Fool, 'tis in thy power to do which thou wilt. So say such Do∣ctors. The Gospel is proposed to Men, and to embrace it is in their own power; 'tis Gods part to call, but Mans to be elect or not; that is, to be sincere Believers or not. These Men to me understand little of Original Sin. Pre∣termitting them, I come to those who have a right notion of Sin and Grace, but are void
of true Faith: These with all the Balms and sweet Odours of Truth which lie about their Heads, are yet Spiritually dead at Heart, and feel not their Wounds; they are as yet con∣tented with their old Heart, and with case carry a sink of Sin in their bosom: Oh how much unfelt, unbewailed blindness, hardness, enmity, unbelief, earthiness is there in them! All which fetch never a groan from them. It is somewhat strange that believing Abraham, when God made him so fair a promise of an Isaac, should yet let out his thoughts so much upon Ishmael, Oh that Ishmael might live before thee! But it is very natural for unregenerate men, even when the Promise of a new heart lies fair before them in the Scripture, to acqui∣esce in the old frame, as much of Hell and Death as they carry about with them. All's well and in peace; but when Faith comes, Ori∣ginal Sin is selt to the quick; God shines from Sinai, the Law is up in the heart in its pure Spirituality, and all the foul corners there, which before lay in the dark, discover them∣selves in their ugly hue; the Spirit of Life en∣ters into the Man, and the Wounds and Ulcers, which, whilest he was Spiritually dead, broke not his rest, breath out anguish in every part, and make him cry out, , Oh wretched man that I am! Rom. 7.24. Oh, this blind, rebellious, unbelieving, earthly Heart of mine! who shall deliver me from it! That corruption should be universal all over the Soul, like the Plagues of Egypt, all over the
Land, That the dead should be in every facul∣ty, the lusts every-where croaking, even in the Kings Chamber, in the noble faculties of Rea∣son and Will, and all the streams of the Heart, the Thoughts, Wishes, Resolves, Choices, Desires, and Delights there, should be smit∣ten and turned into bloody Iniquity, is an ama∣zing consideration; That a Rational Creature, with an Immortal spark in his bosom, whose natural instinct is after Happiness, should yet without a new Creation, not be able so much as by a holy thought to aspire after the great unspeakable blessedness in the Gospel, or to give a serious look towards the pure undefiled Religion leading thither; and after he is new made by Grace, that yet there should be a black sountain within ready to flow out at every sense, taint every work, and derive a damp, a deadness, a wretched indisposedness upon all his holy things, is an astonishing thought; That the holiest Man on Earth, who mourns and sighs over the horrible Wickednesses abroad, should be forced to lament at home; and say, there is aliquid intus, somewhat in my own heart answering to all these, were I but di∣missus libero arbitrio, left to my own self, I might fall into Jonabs pet against the Great God; or roll in Davids Adultery and Blood; or, Peter-like, deny my Lord, and do it cursing and damning of my self, as the Original imports; or turn a Julian, a total final Apostate, and art up my bloody blasphemies against Hea∣en at my dying hour; is wonderfully prodigi∣ous.
ous. Such Sentiments as these hath the Belie∣ver of Original Sin, which make him go groaning under the gravedo thereof, as an in∣tolerable burden; this Gemitus sanctorum, as St. Austin calls it, is the first step of this funda∣mental Mortification. Secondly, Faith ushers into the Soul a stock of gracious Principles, which conflict against the innate corruption, and labour to drive it out, as the Israelites did the Canaanites, by little and little; there is even in unregenerate Men, a conflict between Reason and the Sensi∣tive Affections.Arist. Eth, lib. 1. c. 13. Reason (saith the Philosopher) calls , to the best things; but the Affections repugn and refist; the Soul is, as it were Paralytick, whilest Reason would move one way to the right hand, Affection moves contrary to the left: Aliudque cupido, mens aliud suadet. Hence the Syllogism of an incon∣tinent man hath (as the Schoolmen observe out of Aristotle) four Propositions,Aquin. pr. secund. Medina. viz. two universal ones; one whereof is from Reason, That Fornication is not to be committed; ano∣ther from Passion, that Pleasure is to be pur∣sued; and Passion binds Reason, That it do not subsume and conclude under the first: And whilest it remains so, the Man subsumes and concludes under the second.Epist. 56. Seneca tells us Silentium regionis, is nothing, Si affectus fre∣munt; Reason must compose things, or else a will be in tumult in the Soul. In this natura conflict, Reason, if improved, to maintain it own grandeur and royalty, may by its Edict
hush the tumults and mutinies in the Affecti∣ons, and prevent many shames and turpitudes of Sensuality; but alas, there is nothing of true Mortification in all this, no, not in the Affections themselves, which are not inward∣ly changed, but only, as the Horse and Mule, held in with the rational bit or bridle; much less in the Reason, in which there is a great deal of vanity, dark ignorance, proud curi∣osity, fleshly wisdom, vain philosophy, hu∣mane folly, and perverse contradiction; in all which, Reason will rather indulge than crucifie it self; but Faith ushers in another manner of Conflict. In the Natural Conflict Reason is General, and manages the War; and as the Reason is, so is the strength in Battel, but Humane only: In the Spiritual Conflict, there is a greater than Reason, even Supernatural Grace; which being of Divine extraction, hath in it self a power more than Humane to oppose corruption; and which yet makes it stronger, it hath continual Auxiliaries from the Holy Spirit, which is always standing at the right hand of Grace, as Satan is of Corruption, to back and strengthen it. In the Natural Conflict the fight is in a Logical and Argumentative way only; and Reason being corrupt, like a cunning Sophister, turns about and stands ever and anon on the same side with Sin; but in the Spiritual Conflict, there can be no such compliances, the War is laid in nature, Grace in its very nature carries an enmity against corruption, and irreconcilably, interminably
opposes it, as long as Grace is Grace, and Sin Sin. In the Natural Conflict Reason fights but ex parte, only against the gross, carnal, sensual lusts, which stain Humanity; in the mean time the pride, perversness, and desperate contra∣diction, which dwell in the upper faculties, are altogether untouched. The Moralist stands upon bis own bottom, full of self-power and self-righteousness; and because he hath by his Reason conceived and brought forth some Mo∣ral Virtues, Free-grace and its progeny, born after the Spirit, are despised in his eyes; than which temper, there is nothing more diame∣trically opposite to the Gospel, which would have Men come in to Jesus Christ weary, heavy laden, hungry, thirsty, poor in spirit; lost in them∣selves, and sensibly wanting all things: But in the Spiritual Conflict, the War is universal, Grace sights against all Sin, not only against the gross carnal lusts which have more of the beast in them, but against the fine Spiritual ones, which have more of the Devil; nor only against those open Sins which face the World, but against those secret ones which lie hid in the Heart. So opposite it is, that as in the War against the Canaanites, it would destroy every thing that breaths. Sin in the first motions and titillations thereof, in the Natural Con∣flict, the fight is between distinct faculties, Reason and Passion, and so is at a distance, and as it were by missile arms; but in the Spiritual Conflict, the fight is close and immediate, there is something of Grace in every faculty to en∣counter
the corruption there. In the Under∣standing there is an Heavenly Wisdom which counterplots the Earthly, as Hushai did. Ahi∣thophel, whilest the one designs for Absalom, the rebellious lust in the Heart, the other stands up for the Kingdom of Christ, the true David. In the Will there is an holy Principle which bal∣linces the corrupt, and is as a counter-byass to the Heart, drawing it off from the false bea∣titudes to the true. In the Affections there is a Divine spark, which makes them aspire and elevate towards Heavenly things, whilest the earthly part clogs and presses them down∣wards. In a word, Grace is spread all over the Soul, as the Israelites were over Canaan, to drive out the old inhabitant, the corruption in every faculty. In the Natural Conflict, Man walks in his own Circle, the only desigu is for the, Kingdom of Reason; and which is the common blast upon Morality, nothing is done in ordine ad Deum. In the Spiritual Conflict, the aim is all for God and Christ, that their Throne may be in the Heart, and all their ene∣mies there, may be made their footstool. Thus Grace, ushered into the Soul by Faith, doth by little and little work out and extirpate Sin; as the day breaks upon the Heart, darkness goes off; as Holiness flows in, Corruption departs; the more of Heaven is there, the less of Earth. Thirdly, Faith discovers the great evil of Original Sin, and so raises up an hatred against it, and hatred is a murderer, and would, if it
could, annihilate its opposite; Faith shews it to be an All-evil, a Mother of abominations. Some particular Sins are such monsters in Morality, that when viewed only in the light of Nature, they appear very odious; such was the cruelty of Nero, Effeminacy of Sardanapalus, and the like; much more odious, when inspected by the light of Faith, must that appear which is All-sin in one, a , or universal Se∣minary of iniquity. Anthony holding Caesars bloody Coat up to the People, moved them against the Conspirators; Faith holding up the Murders, Adulteries, Blasphemies, Villanies in the World, unto the Believers eyes, stirs his Heart against the venemous root of all these. Faith shews it to be an universal evil, all over the Soul, breaking forth like the boyls of Egypt, upon man and upon beast, upon the intelle∣ctive and sensitive faculties, and all over the Believers duties; lying as the locusts there upon every herb and green thing, upon the ver∣dure and glory of every good work; it is a ble∣mish in the Believers eye, a plague in his Heart, an ataxy in his Affections, a damp on his Prayers, a cooler to his Charity and Zeal, and a dead fly in all the precious Oyntment of his duties and good works. Faith shews it to be an utter enemy to God, Antichrist-like, oppo∣sing every appearance of him in the Heart, quenching every good motion, trampling on every holy beam, slighting at the two great periods of Mankind, Heaven and Hell; and jeering at that holiness and iniquity which lead
thither: Faith shews it to be an evil always present; the Believer shakes himself, and it ad∣hers; flys, and it encompasses; mortifies, and it lives; prays, weeps, sweats, and fights, and yet the Canaanite is in the land; like a living man chained to a dead, he carries about his own loathsomness, a body of death all his days; this cleaves to him as the blackness to the Ethi∣opian, and as the fretting spreading Leprofie to the house; after all his washing and scraping of himself, it will yet be in him, till death dis∣solve him into dust: Such representations as these made by Faith, fill the Believer with shame and self-abhorrency, and raise up in him an irreconcileable hatred against it. Fourthly, Faith, so far as it is acted, though it make not a total riddance of it, doth yet im∣prison it, that it cannot go at large and riot in scandalous Sins. No, nor steal out in an evil thought, but it will be arrested in its passage to the Will for a consent; as it was Gods cau∣tion, beware that there be not a thought in thy Belial-heart against Charity, Deut. 15.9. So it is Faiths endeavour to stop corruption even in a thought; the flesh is still a lusting, and would have one piece of forbidden fruit or other in its mouth; but Faith opposes, and would, if it could, leave nothing of it to breath in the Believer: This is that the Scripture calls, The crucifying of the old man; Faith arraigns the old man as the Arch-malefactor in the World, condemns him as worthy to die; strips him of his veils and false coverings, and by
holy restraints nails him to the Cross, that un∣less in a slumber of Faith, he cannot move or stir himself, but dies away by little and little. As the light of Nature, being imprisoned in un∣righteousness, as the Apostle speaks, Rom. 1.18, is every day exhausted and weakned; so the corruption of Nature being thus restrained by Faith, gradually loses its life and vigor. Mar∣tinus Polonus tels of a terrible Dragon at Rome, who killed many daily with his poysonous breath, but was at last shut up with Brasen gates through the Prayers of Sylvester Bishop there. Were this Fable true, Faith doth a no∣bler work in restraining the inward Serpent of corruption, whose deadly poyson hath spread it self over all Men, and is eternally fatal to all but Believers. To conclude; In all this, Faith applies it self to a Crucified Christ, from thence it fetches its pattern: As the pure flesh of Christ, upon which, as an expiatory Sacrifice, the Sin of the World was laid, suffered on the Cross; so the corrupt flesh of Man, unto which, as the uni∣versal Seminary, the Sin of the World may be justly imputed, must suffer also: Hence Saint Peter, 1 Pet. 4.1. From the suffering of Christ in the flesh, exhorts Believers to suffer in their cor∣rupt flesh, ceasing from Sin, and from thence it derives a spirit for the work. Christ offered himself through the eternal Spirit on the Cross; and the Believer through the Spirit of Christ, offers up his corrupt self to be crucified. Hence St. Paul, Rom. 6.6. saith, Our old man is cru∣cified
with him; that is, by a secret virtue drawn from his Cross. Thus far of this Fundamental Mortification; I now come to particular Sins, which are but the foul issues of Original, breaking forth in this or that, as temper, education, place, custom, or other accidents give vent thereunto; these also doth Faith mortifie, and that in some such way as this. First, Faith doth restrain the outward acts of Sin; there may be many restraints in which yet there is nothing of Mortification; one Sin may restrain another, Vitia inter se contraria pugnant; in which case Satan casts out Satan, a predominant lust its opposite. The fiery Law with its threats may meet a man in his perverse way, as the Angel with his drawn Sword did Balaam, and turn him back from committing the act; nevertheless the unchanged Heart hankers and inwardly mourns after it, as Phal∣tiel did after Michal, when she was forced a∣way from him; and which is a better restraint, because meerly from an in ward principle, Mo∣ral Virtue may hold him back from it, as it did Abimelech from Sarah; yet this restraint is but partial, only from outward Sins of shame, and withal selfish, aiming at no higher thing than repute and self-excellency: But Faith restrains upon higher and nobler Motives, speaking to the temptation as Joseph to his Mistress, How can I do this great wickedness and sin against God? May I break his Law, which is more than the Interdicts of all the Princes and Po∣tentates
of the World? or stain his glory, which is more precious than the light of the Sun, Moon and Stars? or trample on that precious Blood, which paid my ransom from Hell and Death? or grieve away that Spirit which is the life of all my Graces and Comforts? or pol∣lute this Heart, which may be a Temple or Tabernacle for the Holy One to dwell in? or run my self again into the pangs of the New Birth, and forget the wormwood and gall of my old Sins, and eclypse the light of Gods Countenance towards me, and lye down in the dismal borders of Hell and Death? How can I do it? Such a restraint as this, is a degree of Mortification; Sin begins to die, when such chains and manacles as these are cast upon it. Secondly, Faith doth not only restrain the outward acts of Sin, but strikes at the life of it; that is, the love thereof; and to this end Faith clearly demonstrates, that Sin is not eli∣gible, or an object fit for an Humane Will; Sin shews it self as eligible many ways, but Faith destroys all those eligibilities. Take Sin as meer Sin in the abstract, and so it is evil and only evil; and as the Schools generally deter∣mine, Sub ratione mali, it is not, it cannot be eligible at all; and yet even in the notion of meer Sin, it becomes eligible, Sub ratione con∣venientiae, as it is congruous to the corrupt Heart of Man. The Socinian and Pelagian Errors are welcome meerly as Parasites to the pride of Reason and Will. In Sins of Omissi∣on,
the very neglect gratifies Mans aversness from good; in Sins of Commission, the very violation of the Law complies with his enmi∣ty thereunto. Saint Austin in his Confessions,Lib. 2: cap. 4. says, That he stole Apples, that he might, Frui non re ipsa, sed furto; that he was, Gratis malus, & amavit defectum suum; cast∣ing away the Apples, he feasted on the ini∣quity; or if he took any of them into his mouth, Condimentum facinus erat, Sin was the only fawce thereof. Man drinketh in iniquity like water; the very sinfulness is connatural. This eligibility before Faith must needs be very strong: for to Man in the pride and self-flattery of Nature, nothing is sweeter or dearer, than to walk in the way of his Heart, as absolute unaccountable Lord of all his Actions; but when Faith comes, then it clearly appears, that the corrupt Heart, into which Sin insinuates by congruity, is too vile a thing to be gratified; it steals a∣way from holy Duties, plays false after fair promises, hatches treason and rebellion a∣gainst God, and like a common Strumpet prostitutes it self to every temptation that passes by; to gratifie it, is to feed a disease, or vicious humour, satisfie a grave or gulf of inordinate desires; put the darling Soul into the mouth of Satan, and desperately leap into the bottomless pit: that corruption to which Sin is so grateful, is an accursed thing, destinated by the Gospel to be cruci∣fied and slain without mercy; and those re∣liques
of it, which after the greatest mortifi∣cations remain, are to be mourned and groan∣ed under as the heaviest burden in the world. What the Jewish fringes did typifie, that the Christians Faith operates, in keeping men from seeking after their own heart; but to go on, take sin not as meer sin, but in the dress of some apparent good; let it be , a well-circumstanced Sin, as a learned man takes that place, Heb. 12.1, flowing in riches, or rowling in sensual pleasures, or holding forth Crowns and Scepters, and all Mundane glory; nay, if it were possible, let it invest it self with a Creation, all the low∣er World cannot make it eligible to Faith. Set down a World, if Faith substract but a God or a Soul, what will remain but infinite damage? those treasures, which glitter so much to dark sense, are to Faith but poor rusty moth-eaten things; that which is sub∣stance to the World, is to Faith but a shadow, an apparition, a thing that is not, a mark too low for an Immortal Soul to fly at: These things at present and in the Now-World seem something; but if Faith look through the World unto the universal con∣flagration, and beyond it to the World to come, what will they signifie? Are they able to survive those last flames, or purchase any thing in the World to come? Surely just no∣thing; except only so much thereof as is ex∣changed thither in Charity and good Works: to Faith the whole inventory of them is but a
great cheat; the Riches are not the true ones; the Gold is not that tried in the fire; the Land doth not lie in the Country which Faith seeks after; there is nothing in them to feed or cloth, or enrich the inward man; and to ha∣zard a God or a Soul for them, must needs be an infinite loss. And what are the pleasures of this World to Faith? In carnal Sins, they are but the titillations of sense, in which the Rational faculties, were they not Spiritually incarnate and become flesh, would have no touch of delight: In Spiritual Sins, they are but the false gusts of a vitiated Reason and Will, which if made right by Faith, find no congruity but in what is true and good, nei∣ther of which can be in a Sin: In both, mo∣mentany as they are, they perish in the using, and die in the embraces; like the dead Son of the Emperour Basilius Macedo, who being Magi∣cally presented to his Father as alive, after a few touches and doting glances, disappeared; so they go off, only they leave a sting and a worm behind them in Conscience; and the poor Voluptary, without repentance, must lie down in eternal sorrow, a thought whereof is enough to imbitter all their sweetness: And are Mundane glories any better in Faiths account? Honour is but a blast, a little popu∣lar air; Monarchies have their periods; Hi∣story gives us a prospect of their vanity; and much more Faith, which translates the Soul into the everlasting Kingdom, and from thence looks on the Empires of the World
as the chaff of the Summer-floor, rolling away with the wind of time. To a man up among the Stars, the whole Earth would be but as a small thing, and such are Crowns and Scepters to one conversing in Heaven; in the midst of them a man may want true greatness; the Worlds Epiphanes may be but a vile person, a slave to his lusts, which is the greatest ser∣vitude; at death he may, like Adrian, moan over his little Soul, and at Judgment cry out to the rocks and mountains to fall upon him, and cover him from the presence of the Lord. But to proceed, and take Sin in another dress; let it come as a worldly Saviour, en∣tertain it, and you shall be delivered from losses, reproaches, racks, persecuting flames, and cruel deaths; it will not yet be eligible. Faith in the love of its espousals, and upon the first contract received a whole Christ, Cross and all, and so virtually and in purpose hath already swallowed down all persecutions which go along with the Go∣spel; and when the actual trial comes, Faith will not escape by iniquity, which is an evil transcendently greater than all the rest, and whilest it outwardly, temporally saves, inwardly, eternally destroys: To Faith there is no loss like that of a Soul, no reproach like Sins turpitude; no racks like those in Conscience; no flames or deaths like those in Hell: Which made those tormented Worthies not accept deliverance, Heb. 11.35. Sin is meer Sin, totally, perfectly evil; but suffering
for the Gospel is not meer suffering: In tem∣poral losses, there may be eternal gain; in re∣proaches, a spirit of glory; in outward racks, inward joys. In the Burning-bush God may dwell; and death may open a door to life ever∣lasting. Hence come the famous Triumphs of Martyrs; the Apostle rejoyced that they were counted worthy to suffer shame for Christ, Act. 5.41: In the Original it is, , That they were honoured to be disho∣noured for Christ. Others have stiled their Pri∣sons a Paradise; and their Iron-Chains a good∣ly Neck-kercher; and at last have kissed the Stake, and thanked the Executioner, accoun∣ting Suffering the only eligible thing in the World. Thus Faith destroys all Sins eligibili∣ties; and in so doing, as the Apostle speaks, overcomes the World, which is the purest of Victories. The great ones, who captivated the World outwardly and martially, were them∣selves captivated by it, in one lust or other, Not unlike Amaziah, who subdued the Edo∣mites, and was himself taken with their gods: But Faith, which overcomes inwardly and Spi∣ritually, subdues the lusts themselves. Further, yet Faith doth not only strike at the love of Sin, by destroying its eligibilities, but by surrendring the Heart to a better Ob∣ject; whilest the love and joy, and delight is in Sin, it lives as a body with a spirit in it; but when these are surrendred up to God and Christ, and Heavenly things, it becomes ina∣nimate as a dead Carcase. This was notably
deciphered in Christ crucified, the grand pat∣tern of our Mortification; he was not only stript and nailed, but commending his Spirit to God be gave up the Ghost. Answerably in Mor∣tification Sin is not only stript of its eligibili∣ties, and nailed by restraints, but it dies away in the surrenders of Faith; by which the Soul Enoch-like is translated into Heaven, and its affe∣ctions are not here below to animate Sin. Were this surrender in perfection, Sin could not so much as be, as is evident in Christs Humane Nature, upon which no spot could fall, be∣cause it ever was in perfect surrender to his Father. And proportionably, where it is but in truth only Sin is a-dying; because the love and joy, whilest in the raptures and triumphs of Faith, afford no quickning thereunto: hence the Apostle exhorts, Walk in the spirit, in the elevations of Faith and other Graces, and ye shall not fulfill the lust of the flesh, Gal. 5.16. Sin shall grow heartless, and be able to do little or nothing. Here we see how the dear intimate lusts come to die; they cease to be dear as Faith turns the stream of the Heart; and give up the Ghost, as the love and the joy go out to God. It was Luthers method in Re∣formation, that first the Images were to be removed out of the minds of Men, and then all would suceed; and it is Faiths method in Mortification, by holy surrenders to sever the Heart from its lusts, and so do the work. More∣over Faith casts out the love of Sin by con∣versing in the holy Word; after which the
Soul becomes pure and shining like Moses face after he had been with God; conversing with the Law, it sees a rectitude and pure splendor; and then to love Sin is to embrace crookedness and hellish darkness; and withal it sees wrath and vengeance threatned against transgressors: and then to love Sin is to take death and hell into our bosom. Conversing with the Gospel, it hath such a fair prospect of Grace and Christ, as renders Sin the most ungrateful and unnatu∣ral thing in the World: Shall God give up his Son, his eternal joy to die upon a cross; and a man, a worm, spare a lust, a brat of his corrupt Heart? Shall Christ pour out his Blood and very Soul to expiate Sin, and a Believer, a redeemed one, fall in love with the Crucifier? Shall the holy Spirit come down and dwell in Man as his Temple; and he, who is so honoured, embrace that which is the on∣ly offence and grievance to such a guest? Or shall the Kingdom of Heaven come down and offer it self; and that, which is the only bar and obstacle, be received? Surely a Believer with his eyes open will not do so; the more of converse he hath with the Word, the less of the love of Sin. As Sense, when it lies broo∣ding on the Creature, inflames the love of Sin: So Faith, when it dwells on the Word, abates it; that Concupiscence which at first crept in upon Eve in a slumber of Faith, while Sense was doting on the fruit, must be driven out again by Faith, fixing on the Word, and soa∣ting above sensible things.
Thus far how Faith strikes at the love of Sin. Thirdly, Faith mortifies Sin by watching a∣gainst all the occasions and inducements thereof. The Jews were not to name the Idol-gods; the Nazarite was to abstain from the very husk of the grape. Valentinian could not bear a little drop of Julians holy-water, acciden∣tally sprinkled on his garment without dete∣station. The Children of Samosatane would not play with their Ball after the Ass of the Here∣tical Bishop Lucius had trod on it, but burnt it in the Market-place as unclean. Faith is nice and curious, it will not go in with such a dissembler, nor come nigh the door of such an Harlot as Sin is; knowing that the Soul may soon be cheated and adulterated thereby. Ap∣prehensions of danger make men watch; and to Faith there is no danger like that of Sin: If the good man of the house had known when the thief would come, he would have watched, saith our Saviour, Mat. 24.43. Faith knows Sin to be a thief, and a murderer to the Soul; and therefore sets guards within and without, that it may not creep in by the ports of Sense, nor rise up out of the deep of the Heart. With∣in there is a watch over the Thoughts, and without over the sensible Objects. And if a snare appear, Faith cries out, as the suffering Martyr did, when a Box with a Pardon in it was set before him, Away with it, as you love my Soul. During this watch Sin pines and fa∣mishes away as in a Spiritual siege; the com∣mon
commerce between the Thoughts and the Objects fails, and with it those provisions which use to be made for the flesh. Hence our Saviour would have his Disciples, To watch and pray that they might not enter into temptati∣on: Temptations will offer themselves, but the watching Believer will not enter into them by a consent. Fourthly, Faith mortifies Sin by those act∣ings of Grace which it puts forth in the Believer. As Sin the more it is acted makes the fuller blot on the Soul; so Grace, the more it is act∣ed leaves the purer tincture there: You have purified your Souls in obeying the truth, saith St. Peter, 1 Epist. 1.22. Every act of Grace or Obedience doth in its measure purifie from Sin. The righteous holds on his way, and so grows stronger and stronger, Job 17.9. The exercise of Grace renders the inner man more strong and able to drive out Corruption; especially when that Grace is acted, which besides its purifying, strengthening nature in common with other Graces, is contrary to the Sin which is to be mortified; and so proper and apt to expel it, as one contrary doth another. Hence Daniel counsels Nebuchadnezzar to break off his sins by righteousness and mercy, Dan. 4.27: his Sins being Oppression and Cruelty, no∣thing was apter than Righteousness & Mercy to break them off. And our Saviour when his Disciples were fainting in the storm, calls for their Faith: And when aspiring after the Primacy, sets a little child before them, as an
emblem of Humility. Dying-Sardis he puts upon strengthening the things which remain; and Nentral Laodicea upon Zeal, to give her a fresh warmth in Religion. Still the advice runs upon the contrary Grace; the more that is actuated, the more it roots and spreads in the Soul, and the less room and place is left there for the contrary Sin: Which I suppose was the reason why the Presbyter Sulpitius Se∣verus, being guilty of too much Loquacity, ever after kept silence;Spondan. Annal. Ʋt peccatum, quod lo∣quendo contraxerat, tacendo emendaret, as the Historian expresses it. 'Tis a Precept of the Philosophers,Arist. Eth. lib. 2. c. 9. To observe what Vice we are most propense to, and then to bend our selves to the contrary extream, that we might come to the Vir∣tue in the middle. Faith, though it dares not touch upon one contrary Sin to cure another, would cast them both out by acting the con∣trary Grace. Lastly, Faith mortifies Sin in a way of de∣pendence upon the Power and Spirit of God in and through Jesus Christ. In the Covenant of Works, in which there was no Mediator, Man stood on his own bottom, and had all his stock in his own hands: But in the Covenant of Grace the Believer stands in the Power of God; and though he have a little Grace in himself, the main stock is above in a surer hand; his life is hid with Christ in God; there's the great treasure out of which Faith fetches supplies of the Spirit for every good work; hence in Scripture he is said, To love, live, pray,
walk, mortifie in the spirit: If ye through the spirit do mortifie the deeds of the body, ye shall live, Rom. 8.13. He saith, through the Spirit, because there is no other way of mortifying Sin; he that goes about this work in his own Power is but in a dream, he knows nothing of the life of Faith; as appears by that Antithesis which the Prophet makes between the Soul lifted up, and the life of Faith, Hab. 2.4. Such an one holds not the head Jesus Christ, no more than the worshippers of Angels spoken of, Col. 2.18, 19. Whatever he may do theoretically, he doth it not practically; whilest his fleshly mind presumes, that he can move about such a work, though the Head in Heaven stir not, his Mor∣tification must needs be weak and powerless; because without Christ the wisdom and power of God, he goes out against his lusts, as Samson did against the Philistines, with his hair off; or, as the Israelites did against the Canaanites when the Lord was not among them, Numb. 14.32, instead of success he meets with that curse and blast, which lights upon all Christlless persons and actions: The most charitable Prayer that can be made for him is that of the Psalmist, Fill their faces with shame, that they may seek thy name, O Lord, Psal. 83.16. St. Austin long struggled in his own strength against his Cor∣ruptions, and all in vain; at last a voice told him, In te stas & non stas: Thou fallest, O Au∣stin, by standing in thy self. True Faith goes about this work in the Power and Spirit of Christ; as under the Old Testament, when
Faith subdued outward Kingdoms, as the A∣postle speaks, Heb. 11.33, it was by the Spirit; the Spirit clothed upon Gideon, and he smote a mighty Host of Midianites. The Spirit came upon Samson, and he slew heaps upon heaps of the Philistines. So under the New, when Faith subdues the inward Kingdom of Sin, it is by the Spirit strengthening the Believer to over∣come it; the reign of Sin is broken, because he is under Grace. Here we see how old strong customary Sins, such as are a second nature in Men, come to be subdued; it would be an hard, nay almost impossible thing for a Mora∣list to unravel such a Sin, meerly by contrary acts, and those acts done by his own power, and that power emasculated by a long tract of Sin: But Faith draws down an Almighty Power and Spirit to the work; that hyperbole of Power which raised up Christ from the dead, is towards the Believer, Ephes. 1.19. That Spi∣rit of life which is in Christ, makes him free from the law of sin and death, Rom. 8.2, The bands of Sin can no more hold him than those of Death could Christ, when the glory of the Fa∣ther came to raise him up. In doing this great work Faith goes by these steps; first, Faith lays down this as a foundation, That there is Power enough in God to subdue Sin, or else he should not be an Infinite God; and that Sin is capable of being subdued, or else it would be an Infinite Monster. That Power which can dry up the Sea, or shake the Earth out of her place, or raise up the Dead out of
the dust, or annihilate the World in a moment, must be able to subdue Sin. In the Prophet it is but the turn of his hand, I will turn my hand upon thee, and purely purge away they dross, saith God, Isa. 1.25. And which comes nearer to us, Faith is sure, that this Power doth not stand off at a distance in the unapproa∣chable Deity; but is made over to Christ, coming in the flesh, He was anointed with the Holy Ghost and Power. The fulness of the God∣head dwelt in him bodily. And going up to Heaven, he sate down at the right hand of Pow∣er, all things being put under his feet. And which yet is nearer, this Power is made over to Christ as trustee and treaurer for his Church; his Unction is to run down upon all Believers: The fulness of the Godhead dwelt in him, that they might be filled with it. He sits at the right hand of Power, that his enemies, among which Sin is a chief one, may be made his footstool: All things are put under him, that he might be Head over all to the Church, letting down his vital influences and motions to it; his great design is, to make an end of Sin, and to dissolve the works of the Devil. And now nothing re∣mains to draw down this Power to the Be∣liever, but the acting of Faith; as Faith goes up, Power comes down; all things are pos∣sible to the Believer, he can do all through Christ strengthening him: It is but to look and be sa∣ved, believe and be established, wait and re∣new strength; hand upon Jesus Christ, and he who was Immanuel, God with us in his Incar∣nation,
will be Immanuel, God with us in such sufficient Grace as shall give us the victory o∣ver Sin; the success is as sure as the Spirit and Power of God can make it. When Christ was on Earth never any one came to him for bodi∣ly Cure, with a Faith that he was able to do it, but it was done for him. Now that he is in Heaven at the right hand of Power, such as go in Faith for Spiritual Cures cannot mis∣carry. What though the bloody issue of Sin have been long a-running? a touch upon Christ will heal. What if thou hast lay'n rot∣ting in thy Corruptions many years? believe and thou shalt see the glory of God raising thee up; a dependence on the Power and Spirit of Christ cannot fail of a victory over Sin. So vast is the difference between the state of Adam in Innocency, and the state of Be∣lievers in Christ; in him one Sin drove out a great stock of pure immaculate Grace in a mo∣ment, in them a little spark of Grace drives out a world of Sin; because their Grace, which Adams did not, depends on the Power and Spirit of Christ for the victory. This is a most noble and purely Evangelical act of Faith, in which Man is abased in a continual dependence, and God exalted in a continual supply of Grace. However, some Divines, falsly so called, have laughed at the depen∣dence of Faith as an idle lolling upon Christ; it is yet the only way in which the Spirit and Power of God communicates to our necessities, and does far more in the
Christians life than any thing else: Only we must remember, that this dependence is in the use of means; the Believer hears, reads, medi∣tates, prays, works, and in all depends upon the Spirit to render them effectual. CHAP. X. Of Spiritual Vivification, the second Part. Of Sanctification, the influence of Faith therein. THus far of Mortification as a fruit of Faith. I now proceed to Vivification, being the other part of Sanctification. In which the holy Spirit comes down with its Divine Gra∣ces into the Soul, and quickens it to a Spiri∣tual Life. These Graces may be considered ei∣their in their production into being, or in their actual exercise; and both ways they are fruits of Faith. As to their production into being, Divines differ about the order; some Divines, as Mr. Pemble, conceive, That all Graces are in∣fused at once, coming into us as light doth into the air, or as the Soul did into the body of La∣zarus, not piece-meal or by degrees, but all at once and together. Other set down this order, Vocation which worketh Faith and Repentance, is in order of nature before Justification, and Justi∣fication before Sanctification. Bishop Downham
distinguishes between our Spiritual conception of the incorruptible seed, and our new-birth in which Christ is formed in us in all his Graces; the former is done in our Vocation, and the latter in our Sanctification. I conceive that Faith, at least in order of Nature, is first, and then all other Graces follow upon it. The Ancient Fathers, as Bishop Downham hath observed, speak to the same purpose: In Clemens Alex∣andrinus, Faith is called , the first inclination to Salvation: In the so-called Ignatius Epistles, it is , the beginning of life; as it were the Punctum Sa∣liens in the New Creature, in which the first motion and course of Spiritual life begins. Vita sancta à fide sumit initium, saith Fulgentius. And Fides prima datur, ex quá extera impo∣trantur, saith St. Augustine: All other Graces are the fruits of Faith, not as if Faith did pro∣duce them radically or fontally out of it self, or its own virtue; but that it unites to Christ, and so derives the Spirit with its Graces unto the Believer. That Faith is, at least in nature, before other Graces, will appear very proba∣ble upon divers Congruities: First, It is congruous to the Majesty of God: He acts like himself, dispences Grace to the Creature in its lowest posture of resignation: Heaven is my throne, Earth my footstool, saith he; but as over-looking all this World, To this man will I look that is poor and of a contrite spi∣rit, Isa. 66.1, 2; To this man, there he sets a nobler creation than this outward one. When
Faith makes a man poor and contrite, sensibly lying in his own Nothingness and Unworthi∣ness, then creating Grace comes upon him. We may see this as in a glass in the Homane Na∣ture of Christ: That which had no natural Sub∣sistence of its own but subsisted in the Eternal Word; that had the Spirit poured out upon it above measure. When a man hath no Moral subsistence of his own; his very Hypostasis being a resignation; when his subsistence is in the Word of God according to that of the Apostle, , Have thy being in these things, 1 Tim. 4.15. Then the holy Spirit comes down and dwells in him. Secondly, It is congruous to Christ the Head: Union goes before Communion; first, Faith unites us to Christ, and then all Graces flow from him: hence Faith is called the Churches neck, Cant. 4.4. knitting to Christ the Head, and from thence deriving all Spiritual life into the body of Believers. This also is set before us in Christs Humane Nature, which had first, at least in nature, the Grace of Union, and then that of Unction; He that is in Christ is a new Creature, 2 Cor. 5.17. made so by his being in Christ; He that hath the Son, hath life, 1 Joh. 5.12. Hath it by having the Son. Indeed Faith and Repentance go before our Union with Christ, as being of necessity thereunto; but all other Graces follow after it, as most na∣turally flowing from Christ the Head, of whose fulness all Believers receive Grace for Grace. Thirdly, It is congruous to the way of the Spi∣rit
set forth in the Gospel: The Spirit moves on the Soul to bring forth Faith and Repen∣tance, but it dwells no-where but in the Be∣liever; Christ dwells in our hearts by Faith, Ephes. 3.17. There he hath perpetuum domi∣cilium,, Vide Bez. & Zanch. as the Greek word imports; He that believeth on me, saith our Saviour, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water, Joh. 7.38. And what these rivers are, the next verse tells us, This he spake of the Spirit, which they that believe on him should receive. Faith brings in the very fountain of Grace with all its streams into the Heart; The Holy Ghost is given to them that obey him, Act. 5.32; , to them that hear him, in the Gospel-command; that is, to them that believe; so Beza and Calvin expound it, and so the Syriack hath it. The Holy Ghost works before to produce Faith and Repentance; but it is not given to dwell in men until they believe. Fourthly, It is congruous to the order which is between Faith, Justification and Sanctification. Faith is in order before Justification, the Scrip∣ture is express in it; The righteousness of God is upon them that believe, Rom. 3.22. All that believe are justified, Act. 13.39. And we have believed that we might be justified, Gal. 2.16. And Justification is in order before Sanctifica∣tion: I suppose the Holy Spirit with its Graces will not dwell in an unreconciled Soul. Under the Law in cleansing the Leper, first the Priest put the blood on him, and then the holy oyl upon the place, where the blood was, Levit.
14.14, & 17. The Believer first in order hath the atoning Blood put on him, and then the holy Unction of the Spirit. According to this order Faith is first of all; But if Faith and all other Graces are infused at once and together, then either they are infused before Justification, and so Sanctification is before Justification; or else after it, and so Justification is before Faith. Fifthly, This way there will be a congruity between the old Creatiowand the new. In the old, Light was the first-born of the Creation, and then the other parts of the World were made; in the new, the first thing is the light of Faith, and then follow those Graces which make up the New Creature; Beholding as in a glass the glory of God, we are changed into his image, 2 Cor. 3.16. First the eye of Faith is opened, and then the Image of God drawn on the Soul; this congruity is the rather to be minded, be∣cause the Apostle, speaking of the Creation of Faith, doth it with an allusion to the Creation of Light. God who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, hath shined in our hearts, to give the light of the knowledg of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 4.6. As if he had said; Light in the old Creation, and Faith in the new answer one to another. Sixthly, This way there will be a congruity be∣tween Christ formed in the womb, and Christ for∣med in the beart. The blessed Virgin first be∣lieved, and then Christ was formed in her Womb: Concetio Christi facta fuit, simul ac
Maria in verba Angeli consentiens dixit; Ecce ancilla Domini,De Incar∣nat. lib. 2. Quest. 7. siat mihi secundum verbum tuum, Luk. 1.38. saith Zanchy. No sooner did she say an Amen of Faith to the Promise, but Christ was conceived in her; therefore after her Faith, the Angel immediately departed from her, as having his errand already dis∣patched: answerably the Christian first believes, and then Christ is formed in him in all those sanctifying Graces which make up the holy Image of Christ. The Apostles expressing those Graces under the notion of forming Christ in us, Gal. 4.19. seems to hint out this Con∣gruity. Seventhly, This way there will be a Congrui∣ty between the being of these Graces, and the act∣ing of them; whilest both proceed from Faith depending upon Christ the head of Grace. The Believers life is in Scripture called a life of Faith; not as if there were not Love, Meekness, Obedience, Patience, with all the other Graces in him, but because Faith is the grand princi∣ple which moves every one of them. Faith worketh by love, saith the Apostle, Gal. 5.6. and so it worketh by Meekness, Obedience, Pa∣tience, and all other Graces, being as it were blood and spirits running in every part of the New Creature. All Graces are set a working by Faith, and if they also receive their being through it, there is a Congruity between their being and working. Upon these Congruities I take it, that Faith is first in order, and then other Graces.
As to the actual exercise of Graces, It is Faith which sets them all a working. To this purpose it is observable, That all the worthy acts of Grace mentioned in the 11th. Chapter to the Hebrews, are there ascribed to Faith: so is Abels excellent Sacrifice. Enochs walking with God, Noahs holy fear of the deluge, Abrahams obedience in leaving his Country, Moses's self-denial as to the Egyptian Court, The valour of some Worthies in subduing Kingdoms; and the patience of others in suffering torments for the truth. The reason of which is, because Faith is the first mover, which sets all other Graces a-moving, the General under whose conduct all Graces come forth in their courses, therfore the honour of all is devolved upon it. Now, how Faith sets other Graces a-working, I shall first shew in a general way common to all of them, and then more particularly with respect to some special Graces. In general Faith sets other Graces in motion by such ways as these. First, It looks on the Command which in Scrip∣ture calls for these Graces, as the very Will of God: And so presses for Obedience many ways; as first from the Divine Authority of it, In the word of a King there is power, much more in the word of a God, when known to be such. In the Coun∣cil of Triburia a fancy touching an Episile come from Heaven made impression in some of them. Had it been really known to be so in∣deed, the impression would have been deeper. At the sound of the Command Faith knows,
that it is the Lord, that the voice is from the excellent glory; and in that Authority presses to Obedience. But this is not all, besides Gods Authority, it urges from his Love. It is (saith Faith) the voice of thy beloved, thy dear Father in Heaven, who hath cast his cords and bands of Love round about thee to draw thee to himself; and then the Heart must needs feel constraints and holy inflammations to Obedi∣ence, and be like St. Peter, who, when he knew it was the Lord, girt himself, and made towards him. Gods Love hath dropt sweet∣ness into the Command, and made all easie. Moreover, to make the stronger impulse on the Believer, Faith demonstrates, That the Com∣mand is just, and right, and good; that holy Love and Patience, and other Graces of the first Table are pure rectitudes wherein Man stands in his true posture towards God, his Goodness or Providence, or some other thing in him: And also that Justice and Temperance, and Charity are rectitudes wherein he stands in a true posture towards others, or himself for Gods sake. And a Command so known moves so strongly towards Obedience, that a man, who would pay his debts to God, or his Neighbour, or himself, cannot, must not re∣pugn. Secondly, Faith looks not only upon the letter of the Command, but upon the life of Christ. Where all Graces are set forth in lively and orient co∣lours, really and practically exemplified to our view. Precepts possibly may have more of
notion in them, but Examples have more of vivacity to attract the heart to imitation: above all the Example of Christ must be cogent to Believers, he went up and down doing of good; every step one odour of Grace or other brake from him; Subjection to Parents or Magi∣strates, or Zeal towards God in purging the Temple, or Humility in washing his Disciples feet, or Meekness under malicious accusations and blasphemies; or melting bowels, upon all occasions dropping Cures on the bodies, and Heavenly Truths on the Souls of Men; or admirable patience under great sorrows; and at last upon a tormenting Cross, where he drunk the bitter cup of wrath up to the bot∣tom; and over and above all the rest, sweet Love and Obedience run through them all, with a pure intention to his Fathers Will and Glory: And Oh! what a Samplar of Grace is here? and how strongly can Faith press for an imitation! what? shall I not tread in such pure steps, my Saviour being before? Of whom shall I learn if not of my Redeemer? Did he sweat and bleed, and die on a Cross for me, and shall I not follow him? Can I rest on his Merits and precious Obedience, and wave his holy Pattern? Was he to ful∣fill all Righteousness, and I none at all? If I abide in him, must I not walk as he walked? If I know the truth as it is in Jesus, must not those very Graces, which were true in him, be true in me also? Why doth the Spirit come and work those Graces in my Heart,
but that they should be actuated? Unto what was I created in Christ, if not to good works? I find nothing but vanity in my self and my own ways, and shall I not walk in Christ and his holy Graces? If I follow him fully, shall I not see the Heavenly Ca∣naan at last, and there receive a Crown of Life? Such a Pattern so pressed on a Belie∣ver must needs be a strong motive to the exer∣cise of Grace. The Apostle would have us run our race, looking unto Jesus, Heb. 12.1, & 2. Fancy, as Naturalists tell us, hath done strange things; a Woman much looking on a beautiful Picture brought forth her Child very like it, as Galen relates, to be sure: Faith looking un∣to Jesus brings forth his Image in the Heart and Life. Thirdly, Faith holds out the Promises as in∣centives to the work: The Believer is an Isaac, a Child of Promise; the new Creature with its Graces is born of the Covenant, and ever after lives upon it. Every Grace hath some Promise or other to feed on. Love hath God dwelling with it; Fear hath his secret; Meek∣ness his Salvation; Patience a crop of Com∣forts; and all of them have an entail of Eter∣nal Life. And when Graces are acted there is a Promise of encrease, To him that hath, that is, useth Grace, more shall be given, more of the same Grace; his Talent shall be doubled, his Path shineth more and more to the perfect day in Heaven; and withal more of the Divine In∣dwelling, Secret, Salvation, and Comfort pro∣mised;
and at last more of Glory. Thus St. Peter speaking of divers Graces, saith, That if they be and abound in us, we shall have an abun∣dant entrance into the Kingdom of Christ, 2 Pet. 1.8, & 11. Every Grace hath an entrance in∣to it, and abounding Grace an abundant en∣trance; and all these Promises are sure in them∣selves, sealed by Gods Veracity, and Christs Blood, and sure to the Believer, being realized by Faith; and therefore must needs be very attractive to Obedience. Faith in a meer Command will make a Man follow God, though like Abraham he know not whither he go. Much more impulsive is Faith in a Pro∣mise, when he knows in so following he is going into an abundance of Grace and Glory. The lying Promises of Sin received into a car∣nal fancy will draw out Corruption into act, as we see in Men, who are drawn into Sins car∣nal and spiritual, much as their Father Adam was, by some Apple of Sensual happiness, or appearance of Self-excellency; how much more attractive must the precious true Pro∣mises of God be, when entertained by Faith? at the sight of these the Believer, as old Jacob, at the sight of the Chariots, revives and puts himself forth in the exercise of Grace, that he may inherit the Promises, and the vast trea∣sures of good in them. Fourthly, Faith observes Seasons and Pro∣vidences, and stirs up Graces suitable thereunto. Insidels smother the greatest Works of God; some have said, That Sodom happened to sire
as standing on a Sulphureous soil. Others, that Moses did but take the advantage of a low-tide to carry the Israelites over the Washes. Nay, in the Jewish Church, the Pharisees and Sadducees, though great Rabbies, could not, because without Faith, discern the Signs of that glorious time, wherein the Messiah shewed himself on Earth in such excellent Doctrines and Miracles. But Faith where it is, under∣stands the language of Providence, and calls for suitable Graces: under a storm of Judg∣ments it calls for the mourning Graces of Re∣pentance and Humiliation, lamenting after the Lord; under a Sun of Prosperity it awakens the Psaltery and Harp, Praise and holy joy in God the Fountain of all. When Iniquity a∣bounds, it is for Davids rivers of tears to weep over it. When Gods Name or Worship, or Truth are at the Stake, it blows up the fire of Zeal; as we see in Paul's Paroxism at Athens, Epiphanius his renting the Veil, and Athanasi∣us's ardent adherence to the Truth against an Arrian World. As the Poor appear, Charity must come forth and scatter Alms. As Injuries and Reproaches fly abroad, Meekness must shew it self, and rather than revenge, turn the other cheek. In Asslictions Patience must have her perfect work. And in Desertions there must be an humble waiting on him that hides his face. As God comes forth in this or that Provi∣dence, so Faith meets him in this or that Grace. Every Grace is one time or other called out by a Providence; and every Providence hath some Grace to answer it.
Fifthly, Faith actuates Graces in a way of dependence on the Spirit of Christ: This is instar omnium; Commands, Patterns, Promises, Pro∣vidences, are ineffectual without it. The New Creature moves not but by influence from the Head; the holy Spirit must first stir up the nest of gracious Principles, and then Love and Joy, and all other Graces shew forth them∣selves. As the Humane Nature of Christ never acted in a separate way, but did all in Union with the Divine: So the Believers Graces do nothing apart, but all in Union with Christ. Those who think that gracious Powers or Principles may go alone and act themselves, know not the life of Faith; in which all Gra∣ces hang upon Christ as beams upon the Sun. The Milevitan Council pronounces an Aua∣thema on those that deny the Adjutorium gra∣tiae, which worketh to will and to do. And the Arausican speaking of that Adjutorium. saith, Quoties bona agimus, Deus in nobis atque nobiscum, ut operemur, operatur. When we do good, God works our works in us and with us. What the life of Faith is, St. Paul excellently describes, I live, yet not I, but Christ liveth in me, saith he, Gal. 2.20. And again, I labour, yet not I, but the grace of God with me, 1 Cor. 15.10. Faith is ever in dependence, leaning on its Beloved, and breathing after the holy Spirit, that the gales thereof may make the spicy Graces flow out; and upon this depen∣dence the Spirit comes down in auxiliary Grace, and there is an effectual working in
every part of the New Creature; Love in the Spirit, as it is called, Col. 1.8, and Joy in Spirit, and every other Grace in the Spirit, badding and blossoming, and filling the face of the life with holy fruits. Only it must be remembred, that this Dependence is in Gods way, where Christ is experimentally Immanuel, God with us; to stir up all holy Graces into act. Thus Faith actuates Graces in a general way common to them all. I now proceed to shew how Faith actuates this or that Grace in par∣ticular. And that I may not be too prolix in running over all Graces, I shall single some choice ones out instead of all. First, I shall begin with the Grace of Love. This is the great Command, the sum of the Law, a Divine Union with God, a bond of perfection among Men, a holy fire kindled by the Holy Ghost in the Heart, and the sweet∣ness and easiness of every good Duty. This Grace whether it respect God or Christ, or our Neighbour, is actuated by Faith. As touching our Love to God, it is so actua∣ted. The very light of Nature reveals a God, an excellent perfect Being, or the Being of Be∣ings; whose Love, as the Philosopher said, is the principle and knot of the World, and so cannot but raise up a kind of Love toward him; the Will being necessarily in some sort affected with such an Excellency, though seen but by a glimmering light. Not that this Love is a Grace, or a Love in sincerity, or a Love
sicut oportet, as an ancient Council speaks, or indeed in Scripture sense any love at all; because it loves not God above all, it must needs be inordinate, there being the same ataxy in loving God below the Creature, as in loving the Creature above God; But that there is a kind of Love, such as that dark light can raise up in faln man. But when the light of Faith comes, it raises up the Grace of Love towards God, and ever after moves it into act by the pure discoveries of him, which it lets into the Heart from Scripture. He is (saith Faith) an immense infinite Goodness; Crea∣tures are but drops of Being lying in the shell of Time, but he is the Ocean of all Perfecti∣ons. They may be good for this or that in particular according to their finite kinds and spheres, but he is , the All-things, as the Aposile calls him, 1 Cor. 15.28. And withal he is Love it self, as another Apostle hath it, 1 Joh. 4.16. Not shutting up his Allness in unapproachable Glory, but letting it out to Believers. His Love, though he ever had per∣fect Blessedness in himself, would yet pour out it self in making a world of good Crea∣tures; and after Mans fall in giving his only Son to take hold of our nature, and in it to bring us back again to himself, that he might be our God, and make over his Allness to us; and all this in pure Grace, without any Money or Merit on our part, and in rich Mercy to∣wards worms and forlorn Sinners; and to as∣sure it to us, a Gospel is let down from Hea∣ven
full of great and precious Promises; such as are the very counterpanes of that Grace and Mercy which flow in his Heart towards Sinners. Ʋnder such musings of Faith, Oh how the holy fire of Love kindles? What high rates and estimates are set upon him? How is the Heart inflamed towards Union, to be one spi∣rit with him? What Complacencies and Sab∣baths of rest doth it find in him? What little things are Worlds and Creatures? What an All is He, and an Heaven his Love? What tastes are there of his Goodness and surrenders to his Will and Glory? Our Love goes after him, as his is by Faith let in upon the Heart. Moreover, Faith excites the Love of him by every act which it sets about; in its recum∣bencies it enamours the Heart, that he should give us leave to lean on his Grace, and in so doing bear up our weakness with Promises, and sweetly answer us in Pardons and suitable Graces; in its Obedience it is very ravishing, that he should chalk out such pure ways for us, and take us by the hand and teach us to go, and at last crown our faultring Obedience with Eternal Life. Ordinances, which to Un∣belief are but dry things, are to Faith the love∣ly Chariots of the Spirit; Creatures, which are Idols to carnal sense, are to Faith fair mir∣rors of the infinite Goodness and Beauty in the Creator. Which way soever Faith turns it self, it meets with something or other inflam∣mative of our Love towards him, who is every-where, and all in all.
As touching our Love to Christ, it is actuated in the same manner. A meer notion of Christ raises up some Love towards him; as we see in those Temporaries, who receive the word with joy, Mat. 13.20, which though it be but fru∣ctus horarius, hints out a kind of Love. Such a story as that of Codrus the Athenian King's dying for his Country could not but affect his Subjects; much more must the History of Christ dying for a World do so. Only this Love to Christ raised up by meer Evangelical notion, as the Love to God raised up by natu∣ral, is not right, nor elevated to a Divine pitch, till Faith come and shew him forth by a light more congruous than all literal know∣ledg; and then there is, as the Church after an elegant description concludes, Totus desideria, all loves or desires, Cant. 5.16. Every thing in him is attractive; What a person is the E∣ternal Word, the brightness of the Fathers glo∣ry? What an Union, Immanuel, God and Man in one? Heaven and Earth admirably blended together, as a pledg that God would be at one with us? What a robe is his Righteousness made as broad as the Law, and woven all of Love from the top to the bottom? What a La∣ver his Blood able to expiate a world of Sins, and save a world of Sinners? What a treasure is his Fulness, where the Spirit is in over∣measure, and all its Graces in redundance run∣ning over into the vessels of Faith, and filling all its capacities? Who, that hath eyes of Faith, would not love him? To ask why we should
love him, is as the Philosopher told him who demanded, Why Beauty was so taking? , a blind mans question; nothing but blind unbelief can hold us from his Embra∣ces. Whatever posture Faith be in, whether contemplating him in the Mount, or leaning on the bosom of his Grace, or hiding in his Wounds, or sitting at his feet for Wisdom, or lying under his Scepter for power against Sin; still it stirs up an holy Love to him. It finds his Blood in every Pardon; his Spirit in eve∣ry Grace; his Wine-cellar in every Ordinance; his Seal in every Promise; and his Purchase in every Creature. No wonder if St. Paul count all things dung and dross for him. And St. Austin cry out, Sero te amavi Domine, Lord, 'twas late e're I loved thee. True Faith would have none but Christ loving him, as St. Bernard used to say, Plus quam mea, meos, me; More than all my goods, my friends, my self: And as another holy Man did, weeping that it can love Christ no more. As touching our Love to our Neighbour, it is also actuated by Faith. Reason and Huma∣nity raise up a Love towards Man; the Bar∣barians kindly received St. Paul and his Ship∣wracked Company, Act. 28.2. Titus Vespasian was called Amor & deliciae humani generis; the Love and delight of Mankind: Suffering none to go away sad from his Presence. Nay Herod himself in a Famine turned all his Plate and rich Houshold-stuff into Money, therewith to fetch Corn out of Egypt for the necessities of
the People. Only this Love for want of Super∣natural rectitude squints at Vain-glory, or moves upon some other selfish Principles; or at best rises up out of a simpathy of the com∣mon nature. True Love towards our Neigh∣bour, such as issues out of Faith unfeigned, 1 Tim. 1.5, is propter Deum, for Gods sake: And as the School-men say, There is but one root or habit of Love, whereby we love God and our Neighbour, because God as he is supream Good∣ness is the formal reason of Love to our Neigh∣bour; He only being to be loved for himself, and others but the material Objects of Love to be loved for him; hence also damned or irrational Creatures are not properly the Ob∣jects of Love, because not capable of Union with God in bliss. Unto this true Love Faith presses by some such Divine motives as these; is not Love a Command? nay, the sum of the second Table and must it not be obeyed? Can we wait for Promises, and not observe Com∣mands? Or may we have the Love of the first Table without that of the second? Hath not God loved us in an incomparable unparalleld way, and shall we not love our Brother? Shall infinite bowels open, and finite ones be shut? If any shut them, how dwelleth the love of God in him? saith the Apostle, 1 Joh. 3.17. A touch, a sense of his Love let in by Faith will make ours flow out towards our Neighbour. Such a sweet pressure of it was on Mr. Fox, That he never denied any that asked for Jesus sake. A Believer acting as a Believer cannot be hard
to his Neighbour, or say, Go and come again, as long as the Mercy-seat is open: And what is thy Neighbour? is he not thine own flesh? Nay, doth he not in a sense bear Gods Image; and is he not capable of eternal Blessedness? And who that hath a hope of singing Hosan∣na's in Heaven would not love such an one? And will not God be glorified thereby? Graces shew forth more of God than Creatures, and Love more than all the rest, because he is Love it self. The Primitive Christians told the World whose they were, by their one heart and one soul,Terrull. Apol. Act. 4.32. And afterward their Love was pointed at by the very Pagans, saying, Vide ut invicem se diligant, See how they love one another. And do we know what and how great a thing may be in acts of Love? Some entertaining strangers have entertained Angels, Heb. 13.2. But possibly we may do more, we may feed or cloth or visit Christ in his poor mem∣bers, and in the other World be repaid all a∣gain with usury. From such Divine Motives as these Faith actuates Love to our Neigh∣bour; but this is not all, Faith actuates it in a regular and congruous way according to relations and propinquities; giving out a Love of delight to the Saints, as having most of God in them; a Love of mercy to the poor, as being Christs Treasurers; a love of reverence to Pa∣rents, by whom we received our being; a Love of provision to Children, who are our selves mul∣tiplied; and a Love of benevolence to all; not ex∣cluding enemies; to love enemies, is, (as one
saith) inter mirabilia legis, one of the wonders of the Law; and yet Faith in the Gospel-grace will reach it. Hence it is observable, that when our Saviour bids his Disciples to forgive even such as trespass against them seven times in a day; They reply in a Prayer, Lord, encrease our faith, Luk. 17.5. because Faith will move Love into act even in the difficult duty of forgiving o∣thers. Another Grace actuated by Faith is holy Fear of God; the very light of Nature revealing some glimmerings of his Greatness and Ju∣stice raises up a Fear of him: The Barbarians seeing the Viper on St. Pauls hand cried out of a , a revenging justice; as if he had been a murderer, Act. 28.4. Pythagoras begins his Golden Verses with Veneration of the Gods. A∣mong all Nations there hath been a , a fearing of God. The ancient Gauls out of re∣verence to their gods would not touch the consecrated Gold lying in their Temples. Upon the same account there were among many Ethnicks, Nudipedalia sacra, barefooted devo∣tions. Only this Fear was in it self but servile, and further corrupted by false opinions of the Deity, and hence sprung all that , worship or superstition which was among the Heathens: The progeny of their ancient Dae∣mons, their Charms and Exorcisms, their Fe∣stivals and Purifications, their Lustrations and human inhuman Sacrifices, and all their strange Rites and Ceremonies of Adoration, whereby they endeavoured to flatter and compound
with their gods, and guilty Consciences. This servile Fear is further advanced when to the light of Nature is superadded that of the pure Law, which flashes in upon the Conscience and sets it on sire with reslections upon guilt, and expectations of wrath thereupon; but it is servile still, and chiefly looks at punishment. A man in such a state may forbear an act of Sin, but he is corrupt within, adbue vivit in eo peecandi voluntas, the love of Sin is in him still, as an Ancient hath it; His heart saith to his Sin as the Emperour Bassimus did to his beautiful Mother in Law, Quàm vellem, si li∣ceret; Oh that there were no Law against it, or punishment to follow after it: He may do good, but not well; Intus reus est, & in animo non facit; he is guilty within, and in mind doth it not, as St. Austin saith; there wants that love of righteousness, out of which true Obedience issues; but where Faith is, there is castus timor, a pure filial fear of God, such as reverences his Majesty as supream, and sears Sin as the greatest evil; and withal punishment in its due place, though not principally or in a servile way; and among punishments, chiefly that of loss and separation from God as a greater evil than the rest. And as Faith sees the invisible one more or less, so this holy Fear is more or less moved into act. Of old the appearances of God in outward Symbols of glory struck an a we upon men; the high Thrones with its train made Isaiah cry out as an undone man, Isa. 6. the voice out of the whirl-wind caused Job to ab∣hor
himself in dust and ashes, Job 42.6. The bright thining man turned Daniel's comeliness into corruption, Dan. 10.8. And what those outward appearances did in a sensible way, that Faith which is an inward Vision of God, doth in a Spiritual; looking on him by Faith, a dread falls on us from every Attribute or Work of his. His glorious Majesty makes us go and hide our selves in the dust of our own vileness and nothingness. His pure Holiness comparatively turns us and all our comely Graces into rottenness. His dreadful Justice sounds so loud in the threatning, that we can∣not but tremble at every word of it. Nay his very goodness and tender bowels lying all a∣bout us make us afraid to trample thereon by finning; even those in Nature do so, much more those richer ones in Grace. His very rain calls for out fear, Jer. 5.24. And what do those dews of the Spirit which are not common as the other? His bounding the Sea doth so, Jer. 5.22. and what doth his bounding cor∣ruption, which else would drown Soul and all in perdition? Oh how tremendous is our life! our Bodies living on the Blood of Crea∣tures, and our Souls on the Blood of God; our natural being lying in the arms of that Power which bears up the World, and our Spiritual in the arms of that Grace which saves it; Earth flowing round about us with Blessings, and Heaven it self coming down in Promises, and carrying back our Hopes thi∣ther. Who in such Visions of Faith would not
fear the Lord and his goodness? Who would not tremble at Sins indignity and ingratitude? After such mercies as these should we again transgress against him? If we wax wanton un∣der Goodness, how soon may Soveraignty come down and recover all from us as for∣feited! Heaven may shut up it self, and the dews of the Spirit cease, our Graces may all droop and wither, and our Hearts grow hard and stony; one lust or other may carry us into captivity, and our little remnant of Grace and Life may cry out as the Church doth, O Lord why hast thou made us to err from thy ways? and hardned our hearts from thy fear? return for thy servants sake, Isa. 63.17. After all our wantonness we shall be glad to come to holy Fear again; Soveraignty will make us fear him in every thing: such a fight of him by Faith as this makes him practically to us  the fear, as he is called, Psal. 76.11. Moreover Faith moves this Fear into act by shewing the great evil of Sin: Sense looks on penal evils which press on the outward man, but Faith on Sin as the greatest of evils, it be∣ing an opposite to God, a blot to the Soul, a blast to the World, a forfeiture of Heaven, and fuel for the flames of Hell; a thing not to be done, Pro quantiscunque bonis lucrandis, aut pro quantiscunque malis pracavendis; for the gain∣ing never so great a good, or for the avoiding ne∣ver so great an evil, as Bradwardine speaks. Hence St. Austin said, That a man must not tell a lie to save a world. And Henry Flander being a
Prisoner for the Protestant Religion, would not say, That his Wife was his Whore, no, not to save his life offered to him on those terms. Now Fear being a kind of flight from evil, the greater the evil is, the greater is the flight; and when an evil is the greatest of evils, such as Sin appears to Faith, the flight from it is as from Hell it self; and more if possible, according to the saying of Anselm, That if Sin were set before him on the one band, and Hell on the other, he would rather leap into Hell than fall into Sin. Another Grace actuated by Faith, is Zeal, which is an intense Love, or a mixture of Love and Anger, or rather the heat and boy∣ling up of all the affections in the concerns of God and his Glory: This is a coal from the Al∣tar, which warms Hearts and Lives, and spar∣kles out in every Grace and Duty; without it all is in spirituali gelicidio, cold and frozen, as in a Sunless World. Indeed without Faith Zeal is blind, as in the Jew, who in his heat for the Law opposes the Gospel and true Righ∣teousness; Or it runs out upon Humane things as in the Papist, who crys up Traditions as a second Oracle; or it moves upon selfish Prin∣ciples, as in the Pharisees, who did all thea∣trically to be seen of men. But when Faith comes, Zeal is according to the Word as its Rule, and for Divine things as the worthiest Object; and out of a pure intention to Gods Glory as the supream end. Faith brings us into Communion with God, and makes us one spi∣rit
with him; and hence it comes to pass, that those things which are dear to him are so to us; and those injuries which move his jea∣lousie above, stir up our Zeal here below. To Faith Gods name is nomen Majestativum, holy, reverend, fearful, glorious, precious, a name a∣bove every name, and therefore cannot be pro∣faned; but Zeal will break forth, the reproa∣ches cast on it fall more heavily on the Belie∣ver than those on himself or his near relations; Nay they press harder on him, than if he should hear one railing at Princes or Angels. Maris the blind Bishop of Chalcedon, being brought into the presence of the blasphemous Empe∣rour Julian, fell severely on him as upon an enemy of God; and when Julian told him, That he was blind, and his Galilean God would not cure him: Maris gave thanks to God, who had taken away his eyes, that he might not look on so wicked a wretch as Julian. Such a Zeal doth Faith put forth for Gods name. In like manner the Worship of God is to Faith, his Homage, honour on Earth, Crown of glo∣ry, Sanctuary of Presence, a thing too preci∣ous and pure to be allayed with Humane mix∣tures; if this be corrupted, our Zeal must needs kindle at it, and so much the more, because his facred jealousie hangs more over his Worship than over any thing else in all the World. To the other Commandments we find this annex∣ed, I am the Lord, Lev. 19; but to the second, I am a jealeus God, Exod. 20.5. Hence Moses at the light of the Calf forgets his Meekness,
and in a holy Passion brake the holy Tables. In the Constantinopolitan Council held about the year of our Lord 754, how hot were the Bi∣shops against Images as a meer Pagan custom! and when they were cast down, how trium∣phant was the Peoples Zeal crying out, Hodiè salus mundo, now is salvation come to the world! In the fifth Council of Carthage they would have the very reliques of Idolatry totally blot∣ted out. Nay, Leo Bishop of Rome, when the Manichees Worshipped the Sun, forbade the Christians to worship towards the East, that they might have nothing common with them. Such a Zeal doth Faith stir up for the Worship of God, and no less for the Truth of God: this is a precious jewel, a secret out of the Fa∣thers bosom, a beam come down from Heaven to light us thither; if this be subverted, Zeal will stand up and vindicate it. Secundus when he was commanded to deliver up his Bibles to be burnt, answered, Christianus sum & non traditor. In the first General Councils how earnest were the Fathers for the Faith? they would not exchange a letter or syllable of it: The Arrian , will not pass instead of ; nor the Nestorian , applied to Christ as man, instead of , applied to the blessed Virgin. With what an heroical and gallant spirit did Luther cleave to the E∣vangelical Truth? Pia est & sancta hac in re nostra pertinacia; in this ours is a pious and holy obstinacy, saith he. Such a Zeal for truth doth Faith ralse up. In sum Faith hath a single eye
at Gods Glory; and so endears all things ten∣ding thereunto, that upon the least violation thereof Zeal will be ready to break forth in that behalf. Moreover, Faith gives a further advance thereunto by looking on the unparal∣lelled Love of God. O what a Zeal hath he for our Salvation! Hath he not writ our poor names in the book of Life, and shall we neg∣lect his glorious one? Hath not he sent his own Son in the flesh to be the great Ordinance of our Salvation, and to fill all the under-Or∣dinances with his Spirit and Grace, and shall we not be zealous in and for his Worship? Are not his holy Truths the day-star in our bearts, seeds of the New Creature, and Cordials of rich Comfort, and shall we not earnestly con∣tend for them? Will he not glorifie us to all eternity above, and shall we not glorifie him in our little span of time here below? Whilest Faith is thus musing, the fire of Zeal must needs kindle in our Hearts. Another Grace actuated by Faith is Meek∣ness; which is as cool in our own cause as Zeal is hot in Gods. This is the great Mode∣ratrix of Anger, that it breaks not out Preter squum & bonum, not unjustly for a light oc∣casion; as that Pope's did, who raged upon the missing a cold Peacock; and blasphemously added If God was so angry for an Apple, he might justly be so for a Peacock: Nor upon a just cause excessively; as it did in that great Conqueror Stephen King of Poland, who was so angry with the Rigenses about the Gregorian Calendar.
that he sell into Epileptical sus and died. Na∣tural Meekness is a beautiful thing, and so is Moral, but neither is a Grace: Natural being but the result of a sweet temper of Body, and Moral but the improvement of Reason; nei∣ther levels so high as Gods Glory. In Natural we do but comply with our Temperament, and in Moral but sacrifice to our Reason: But the Grace of Meekness is a portion of that Dove∣like Spirit which rested upon Christ, and aims at his Glory whose Goodness is resembled thereby. Hence it is observable, that where the Meekness is only Natural or Moral, Men will be angerless and sintully meek even when Gods Glory lies at the Stake, their Meekness being as opposite to holy Zeal, as to rash An∣ger; but where the Grace of Meekness is, Men in their own concerns glorifie God by a cool converse, and in Gods call for Zeal to vindi∣cate his Glory. To promote this Grace Faith doth many things; as first, it looks at the infi∣nite Long-sufferance of God; O what doth he bear from Men! His Laws are violated, Bles∣sings abused, Name blasphemed, Glory stained, and all by his own Creatures, and in his own World, and day after day, year after year, nay, one age after another, and yet the axle-tree of his Patience breaks not under it; a look at this will much meeken us. Excellent Melincton un∣der great Calumnies was still of a cool spirit and when his Enemies said, That they would not leave him a footstep in Germany; all hi reply was, That he should have one in Heaven
And what made him so meek we may gather from his own words, Nullum hominem tantum sustinere malorum, quantum contumeliarum Deus; No man bears so many evils as God doth contume∣lies. And if we will be followers of God we must be meek; and as a further motive here∣unto, Faith looks unto Christ, in whom Meek∣ness is exemplified in our own Nature, that we may not say, flesh and blood cannot be so, un∣der reproaches, injuries contradictions, bloody sufferings. He was as a lamb, not opening his mouth, when he was reviled be reviled not again, when he suffered, he threatned not, 1 Pet. 2.23. And the Believer must follow him, and the ra∣ther because he hath a spirit of Meekness from him to do so. Such a spirit shewed it self in Beza who, when in a Dispute about the Eu∣charist, the Jesuits called him and his Col∣leagues Foxes and Serpents, only replied, Nos non magis credimns quàm Transubstantiationem; We believe it as much as we do Transubstantiati∣on. Again, this Grace is much advanced by Reslections: without Faith a man is a stranger at home, and knows every thing better than his own Heart, as St. Bernard faith of Petrus Abailardus, He knew every thing better than himself; but where Faith is, there is the true , then a Man looks in wardly in∣to his own Heart, and there finds such a black nest of Corruptions, that upon reproaches and injuries ostered he is ready to commune with himself and say, Are not such Sins with me, even with me, at least seminally, if not actu∣ally?
Have not I done worse to God, and may I not do so to Men? Aut sumus aut fuimus aut possumus esse quod hic est; such Reflections wonderfully meeken us. Hence St. Bernard saith, That he never saw another man sin, but he was jealous of his own Heart: Ille heri, & tu hodie, & ego cras, he did it yesterday, and thou to day, and I to morrow. St. Paul exhorts the Gàlatians in the Plural number to restore the lapsed in the spirit of Meekness, and adds the reason in the singular, considering thy self, Gal. 6.1. He changes the number, as the Judicious Interpreter observes, That every one in particu∣lar may deseend into himself, and there find an Argument for Meekness towards others. More∣over Faith promotes this Grace by viewing the Promises made thereunto, which are as large as heart can wish: Would we have the things of the World? The meek shall inherit the earth; and to sweeten it, They shall delight themselves in the abundance of peace, Psal. 37.11. Would we have the things of God? The meek shall be beautified with salvation, Psal. 149.4. And all the good tydings in the Gospel are to be preached to them, Isa. 61.1. For the true Way, They have God to teach them, and guide them in judgment. Psal. 25.9. And for a pure Comfort, They shall have joy in the Lord, and be every day increasing it, Isa. 29.19. Their meek and quiet spirit makes them beautiful in the eyes of God and Man; so rich a jewel proves them to be the elect of God, Col. 3.12. Such Promises as these are able to meeken us under any Injuries.
Cicero saying, Justitiae primum munus est, ut ne cui noceat; and adding as a salvo, nisi lacessi∣tus, Lactantius cried out, O quam simplicem sententiam duorum verborum adjectione corrupit! What a dainty sentence did he spoil with those two words! A Believer fixing his eyes on the Promises will not let go his Meekness; no, not for all the provocations in the World; the loss of such a Jewel would be more to him than all other sufferings. Another Grace actuated by Faith is Obedi∣ence: Two things in the Spouse did ravish the heart of Christ, her single eye of Faith, and the neck-chain of Obedience, Cant. 4.9. Obedience, as Samuel said, is better than Sacrisice: And as Luther, More eligible than doing Miracles. Faith, receiving Christ the Lord, is in it self Virtual Obedience to the Commands of God, and as an effect it produces actual. To this end it believes the Commands to be as they are; looking on the stamps of Majesty, Purity; Equity, Righte∣ousness therein, it falls down and confesses, that God is there of a truth; this and that is the very Will of God, and must be done, primo intuitu, without dispute, and by all persons even the greatest on Earth. Princes here are Subjects: Constantine and Theodosius, though Emperors, stiled themselves Vassals of Christ. Zedekiab the King should have humbled himself before Je∣remy the Prophet, 2 Chron. 36.12. Nay, the Kingdom of God, which is in every Com∣mand must be humbly received, though coming in the hand of a child or a servant, as a good
Divine noteth. Here all men, and all in men, even the Princely powers of Reason and Will, with all the progeny of Thoughts and Affecti∣ons must bow down before God: A famous instance of which we have in the Noble Ande∣lot in France, who being questioned for a Pro∣testant by his Soveraign Henry the second, bravely professed, That his Body, Estate, and Dignity was in his Majesty's power, but his Soul was only subject to God. From such a Supream Authority in the Command Faith presses strongly to Obedience; and for a sweet Prin∣ciple thereunto, it draws a free Spirit from Christ. Faith translates us into the Kingdom of Christ, and there by a singular Priviledg a∣bove other Kingdom, all the Subjects are ready to do the Commands of their Lord. Faith converses much about the Wounds and preci∣ous Sacrifice of Christ, and there the free Spi∣rit dwells, as the free bird in the Altar, Ps. 84.3. And being received by Faith, brings forth a numerous off-spring in acts of Obedience. Faith makes us parts and pieces of Christ, and so we are anointed with the Holy Ghost in some measure; as his Humane Nature was in a transcendent way. Faith dwells in the holy Truth, and that makes us free indeed. Whilest Precepts give the Rule, Promises afford the Power; such a Promise as that, I will cause you to walk in my statutes, Ezek. 36.27. be∣ing mixed with Faith will impower us to all Obedience. Hence the Service of God becomes a freedom, and Obedience easie and natural
moving upon the wheels of Love, and wings of the Spirit, which must needs be a very strong incentive to Obedience; and the ra∣ther because Faith ensures the acceptance thereof. Were we to obey under the Cove∣nant of Works, which will bate nothing of pure sinless Perfection, our Obedience might be bootless and heartless; because every act of it would vanish and come to nothing by the adherent Corruption; which made Calvin say, That if a man did cull out the most excellent work of all his life, he would find some corrupt flesh or other in it. And St. Austin, Vae vite landabili, Wo to a laudable life without mercy: But we are to obey under the Covenant of Grace, whence Sincerity is accepted, and frailty covered. God gives a Tostimonial of Righteousness to Noah, not withstanding his Infirmities; and of Per∣fectness to Asa, notwithstanding the high Places. Uprightness passes for absolute Per∣fection, and the main of the Heart for all of it; insomuch that it is said of Josiah, That he turned to the Lord with all his heart, and with all his soul, and with all his might, according to all the Law of Moses, 2 King. 23.25. his Since∣rity was taken as if all had been fulfilled;Retract. lib. 1. c. 19. accor∣ding to that of St. Austin, Omnia mandata facta deputantur, quando quicquid non sit ignos∣citur. There are Pardons ready sealed in Hea∣ven for Believers Insirmities; God forgives what is ours in a duty, and accepts what is his own. Our Duties are taken into the hand of Christ the Mediator, and there perfumed with
his sweet Merits; and though as they are in our hands they have dross and soil in them, yet as they are in his they are glorified Duties, and as sweet Odours to God. And upon such terms as these who would not obey? Every act of Obedience shall be accepted; and the light of Gods Countenance will irradiate our Duties. And to give a further advance to this Grace, Faith looks within the Veil to the great recompence in Heaven; there are Crowns of Life, rivers of Pleasures, and plenitudes of Joy for ever; there holy Souls see all Truths in their Original, drink all Good out of the Fountain, and have God for their All in All; and all this is the reward of our poor imper∣fect Obedience. And as such is outwardly se∣cured in the Promises, and inwardly realized by Faith, and therefore must needs move the Believer strongly to Obedience; no wonder if he burn in Devotions, or melt in Charity, or labour in other acts of Obedience, all these being but a sowing to the Spirit, will come up in a crop of Eternal Life; his Prayers will be turned into Hallelujahs, his Alms repaid in Everlasting Love, and all his good Works, which follow him into another World, shall be woven into a Crown of Immortality. And upon such an account who would not obey and live in perpetual resignation; as he did, who (as the story goes) always concluded his Pray∣ers thus, Domine, quid me vis facere; Lord, what wilt thou have me to do? And lived in such holy joys, as if he had been in Heaven already?
Another Grace actuated by Faith, is Pati∣ence. This is Meekness towards God, as Meek∣ness is Patience towards Man, and respecteth Gods Disposing Will as Obedience doth his Commanding: This is a Subjection to God, a Possession of our Selves, and an Admirati∣on to Others. Hence the Constancy of Annas Burgus a Senator of Paris, suffering for the Pro∣testant Cause, made many curious to know what Religion that was for which he so pati∣ently endured death. To promote this Grace, Faith in the first place looks up to God as sit∣ting at the stern and ruling all; every Affli∣ction is a piece of his Government; to mur∣mur against it is rebellion: in such a case no∣thing becomes us so much as with Aaron to hold our peace; or if we open our lips to do it with Job, Blessing the name of the great Gi∣ver and Taker. Is he not the Lord, and may he not do as he will in his own World, and a∣mong his own Creatures? Should not all flesh be silent before him? None but himself may or can be Rector of the World, and yet in every act of Impatience we aspire and virtu∣tually would be such our selves: and is he not Insinitely wise and just in all that he doth? Every Wheel hath an eye in it, and every Cross its just proportion, and to think that it might have been better is to blaspheme Pro∣vidence. This made that holy Man Mr. Dod in his Sickness after extream sits of pain say to his Servant, O think well of God for it, for it is most justly and wisely done whatsoever he doth.
And is he not gracious and mercisul, and doth not Mercy rejoyce against Judgment? The measire of Grace (as the Jewish Rabbins say) is ever larger than the measure of Judgment, for one Cross we have many Blessings. And shall we receive good, much good at his hand, and not a little evil? If we have his Heavenly Graces, how much may we bate of Earth and its Comforts? If Sin, the greatest burden of all be taken off in a Pardon, may we not easily bear the lesser ones? Thus Mr. Greenham told his Son in Law, complaining of his Crosses, When Affliction lyeth heavy, Sin lyeth light: If guilt press not, any thing may be born, nay, is not he gracious and merciful in the very Affliction? Doth he not support with one hand, whilest he smites with another? St. Paul glories in his Infirmites, That the power of Christ may rest upon him, 2 Cor. 12.9. And the No∣ble Potamenia being threatned to be cast into a Vessel of burning Pitch, begged,Spond. Annal. Ann. 310. That she might not be cast in all at once, but piece-meal, that they might see how much Patience the unknown Christ had given unto her; and doth he not make all work together for good? What are the issues of Affliction to Believers, but the purgation of Sins, trials of Grace, peaceable fruits of Righ∣teousness, and inward joys and experiences of Gods Goodness? Let Faith but cast up the reckoning, and it will appear, That he afflict us in Love and Faithfulness, and therefore it must needs be well taken; the wounds of such a Friend being better than the kisses of
the enemy-World. Again, to advance this Grace, Faith makes a right judgment of Affli∣ctions; to Sense these are grievous, but to Faith fit and congruous. The World in which the Believer lives, is a stage of Sin, and there∣fore fit to be a place of sorrow; how calm so∣ever it was before Sin entred, it is now a trou∣bled Sea, an Ocean of Evils, as Antoninus calls an Empire: Storms and tossing waves are proper in it, and to be expected by every Pas∣senger; as much a Paradise as it was before, it is now a Wilderness, thorns and thistles of trouble grow naturally in it, and give many a scratch and sting to the poor Pilgrim in his way to Heaven. The Believer himself as a Man is born to trouble, and altogether vanity, all-Adam is all-Abel, or vanity, as it is Psal. 39.5. He comes into the World weeping, and very fitly, because by his Sin he hath set the whole Creation a groaning until now: and as a Be∣liever he lives as a lilly among thorns, so is his person in the World among wicked ones, which are as pricking briars on every side, and so is the Grace in his heart among the re∣liques of Corruption, which are as thorns in the flesh: And whilest Sin is within, it is con∣grnous that trouble should be without; nay, more than congrnous, it is necessary upon many accounts. Affliction is purgative of Sin; it may be the Believers Heart may wax proud, and the tumor must be lanced, or light, and the vanity must be fanned away; it may be hard, and the furnace must melt it; or drow∣sie,
and the rod must awaken it. One ill hu∣mour or other is ready to grow upon us; and O felices tribulos tribulationum! Oh happy thorns of Affliction, which let them out! It Me∣dicine be necessary, so is Affliction, which is Spiritual Physick for our peceant Humours. Affliction is the way which Christ hath sancti∣fied by going in it himself to the Throne of Glory; and Believers must follow him whi∣thersoever he goes. Innocency it self suffering, lumps of dust and sin cannot but do so. He drinking up the full cup of Wrath, well may we take a few drops of it; especially seeing our sufferings are sweetned by his; and his Heaven will be ours at last, where the light mo∣mentany sufferings shall be remunerated with an eternal weight of hyperbolical Glory. Luther saith of himself, That looking on the Susser∣ings of Christ, he counted his own as no∣thing. And St. Bernard makes Christ, Et spe∣culum Patiendi & pretium Patientis, both a glass of Patience, and a reward of the Patient. Now we are tossing and toyling at Sea, but the port of Bliss is within ken, and anon we shall be there: In the interim we may tasie Heaven in the Joys of the holy Spirit, which sheds abroad the Love of God in our Hearts, and so gives us Praemium ante praemium, a lesser Heaven before a greater. Saint Paul saith, , I superabound or overflow in joy in all our tribulations, 2 Cor. 7.4. Philip Lant∣grave of Hesse being asked, How he could en∣dure his long tedious Imprisonment under the
Emperor Charles the fifth? professed, Se Di∣vinas Martyrum Consolationes sensisse; That be felt the Divine Consolations of Martyrs. The gracious Presence of God is able to sweeten Prisons, Eghten Chains, and make fire and wa∣ter paffable to Believers. Such things as these well digelled by Faith will make us keep a ho∣ly silence under all the Will of God. Not to name any more Particulars, I shall conclude this Point touching the actuating of Graces with one Observation more. Faith connects all Graces together as links in a Chain, and so by actuating one advances all in some measure. The School-men do many of them allow a Connexion of all Moral Virtues in Prudence, and yet commonly affirm, That Faith may be without Charity: As if Spiritu∣al Graces were not so well united as Moral Virtues. But the truth is, true Faith is never without Charity; true Faith makes us sons of God, Joh. 1.12. but without Charity we are spurious and Children of the Devil. By true Faith Christ dwells in the heart, Ephes. 3.17. and where he dwells, Charity cannot be absent; true Faith purisies the heart, Act. 15.9. and without Charity there can be no Purity. True Faith rests on the meer Grace of God in Christ, and that must needs in flame the Heart towards him, Tamum amamus quantum credimus. Hence Aquinas himself confesses, That though Faith and Hope may be without Charity, yet without Charity they are not properly Virtues. And Du∣randus saith, Credere in Deum non est praecise
actus fidei, sid actus fidei & charitatis simul; To believe in God is not precisely an act of Faith, but of Faith and Charity together. So Inseparable are these two Graces. But leaving the School∣men, I shall proceed. Faith connects all Graces together in a triple way; it connects them in the fontal cause, the boly Spirit, which it re∣ceives; all Graces are from the Spirit, and the Spirit is received by Faith; hence rivers of living water flow in the Believers heart, Joh. 7.38. that is, All Graces flow there as waters from a fountain; it connects them in the Rule, the Command of God, which it universally re∣spects. It is observed by Divines, That the five last Commands in Deut. 5. run thus, Thou shalt not kill, and thou shalt not commit Adulte∣ry, and thou shalt not Steal, and thou shalt not bear false Witness, and thou shalt not Govet. The word, And, points out to us, that all the Com∣mands are coupled together by God, like the Curtains of the Tabernacle; all are as it were one body, and Faith hath a respect to every one of them, and in every one owns the same stamp of Divine Authority. He that said, Love thy God, said also, Love thy Neigh∣bour: He that said, Be Zealous, said also, Be Meek, and Patient, and Obedient, and abun∣dant in all Grace. It connects them also in the end, the Glory of God, which it looks at in all things; all Graces tend to that Glory, and Faith is the single eye which guides them all thither. Bonum opus intentio facit,Enarr. in Psal. 31. in Pras. intentionem sides dirigis, saith St. Austin: Faith knows
what that is wherein God would be glorisied. All Graces being thus connected in Faith, which is a kind of , or firmament, (as the word is Col. 2.5.) to them all; it comes to pass, that Faith in actuating any one Grace, gives a strength and further growth to every other Grace. Thus it is in Graces respecting distinct Tables, the more we act our Love to God, the more will be our Love to our Neigh∣bour: this, though belonging to the second Table, flows ex fonte pietatis, out of that fountain of Piety, which respects the first. Thus it is in those Graces which are seemingly con∣trary, as in Zeal and Meekness; the more we act our Zeal for God, the more will be our Meekness towards Men. Hence in the Primi∣tive Christians, who were so hot for Christia∣nity, was found a very meek Spirit; and the reason is, because a Man cannot truly actuate one Grace, but he will have more of that Spi∣rit, which is fontally all Grace; and graciously multiplies Talents in the use of them: Neither can he truly obey one Command, but it will render his Heart more Obediential and ready to obey others also, as being enjoined by the same Authority: nor can he in one thing look at Gods Glory, but it will in some measure encline him to seek it in other things also; and so the New Creature grows in every part, and his Path shines more and more to the perfect day in Heaven.
CHAP. XI. Precious Faith considered in the Crowns and Statures thereof. The Divine Experiences of Faith, as it Experiments the Divinity of Scrip∣ture in the Precepts, Promises, Threatnings and Supernatural Truths thereof: Concerning the Blessed Tri∣nity of Persons in the Unity of the Divine Essence, Jesus Christ the Mc∣diator, and the Efficacy of Grace. HAVing treated of Justification, Adopti∣on and Sanctification, which are Fruits of Faith, and are more or less in all Believers; I now proceed to some other, which are The Crowns and Statures of Faith, and to be found not in all Believers, at least not at first; but in such as have made a good progress in Grace. Faith, have made a good progress in Grace. Faith, having obtained the Holy Spirit with all its Graces, doth now go on like The Bap∣tized Eunuch, rejoycing in the ways of God, glorying in Free Grace, triumphing in Jesus Christ, warring against Corruptions, actu∣ating Holy Graces, bowing down under the Commands of Heaven, sucking the Sweet-Breasts of the Promises, and waiting for the Heavenly Dews and Distillations of the Spirit; and in this holy Progress gathers up many
choice Experiments more worth than a World. All learned Men are for Experiments, and eve∣ry one would cry, , I have found it: the Sages of the Law are for tried Cases, which have been sub judice; the Physitian sets a pro∣batum est on approved Medicines; the Ana∣tomists hunts after the arcana of Nature by Dissection of Bodies, and the Chymist by Dissolution thereof. Experience is procreatrix Artium, the very Parent of Arts, whose uni∣versal Precepts are collected by an induction of particulars; but there are no Experiments like those of Faith. Dr. Dees Spirits made as if they would reveal great Mysteries to him, such as they called the Cabbala of Nature, the Numbers of the World, the linea Spiritus Sancti, the Mirabilia Dei, and the Nova terra bringing forth without Tillage, but all these were but Dreams and Impostures; and so I suppose are many things in Chymistry, like Helmonts Alkahest, wonderful, if true: But the Experiments of Faith are great Realities, and withal Divine, as much above those in the Sphear of Nature as Souls are above Bo∣dies, and Heaven is above Earth. God in the Prophet calls on his People to baing in the Tythes for his House, and so by their Obe∣dience to prove him, If he would not open the windows of Heaven, and pour out a blessing, that there should not be room enough to receive it, Mal. 3.10. When Faith goes on in a Tract of Obedience proving of God, Heaven opens in wonderful Experiences of him, the Manna
of holy Truth is then tasted, the Hony-combs of Free-Grace drop upon the Heart, Promi∣ses are realized & exemplified in Providences; Divine Helps and Salvations come down and call for Eben-Ezers to be set up for them; and Discoveries of heavenly things in their cer∣tainty and excellency are in a manner made, as if a Man could look into the Holy of Ho∣lies, and see God Face to Face. Some such Experiences I suppose the learned Rivet had in his last Sickness, in which he said of him∣self, In these ten days I have made a greater pro∣gress in Divinity, than in all my Life; but lea∣ving Generals I shall come to Particulars. One great Experiment of Faith is touching the Truths of God, a Believer in his holy Progress comes , unto all riches of the full assurance of under∣standing, as the Apostle speaks, Cal. 2.2. At the first he hath a Stock of Divine Knowledg, but after Experience Riches, and all Riches of it; at the first he hath a true perswasion of the things of God, but after Experience a Plerophory or full perswasion thereof. Here I shall Instance in that one Fundamental Com∣prehensive Truth, which is pregnant with all other, viz. that the holy Scriptures are the very Word of God, and so to be embraced by all Christians: The Papists say, That the Authority of the Scriptures depends, at least quoad nos, on the Definition of the Church, and that upon that account chiefly it is to be beloved by us. By the Church they mean the
Church of Pastors, and those gathered in a Council to desine the Canon of Scripture. Saint Paul speaks of a Church which is The Pillar and Ground of the Truth, 1 Tim. 3.15. But, as our learned Whitaker hath observed, That is not the Church of Pastors but of Be∣lievers; and in truth the Word of Life is more purely held forth in the Lives and Experiences of Believers, than in the Gifts of Pastors. This Thesis some of their Grandees have prosecuted even to Blasphemy, saying, That without the Judgment of the Church they would give no more credit to Matthew than to Livy, and va∣lue the Scriptures much as they do Esops Fables. That this Opinion is false is as clear as the Light: true Faith is a pure infusion, which hangs on the irradiating Spirit as a Beam on the Sun, and in Scripture sees, with the creden∣da, the reason of believing in the Divine Au∣thority stamped thercon. The Ministery used about it may be Mans, but the Authority on which it leans must be Gods,Theol. Nat. Tit. 209. Tota causa, tota radix, totum fundamentum credendi verbis Dei debet esse, quia ipse dicit, saith Raimundus De Sabunde. Unless we believe God for himself our Faith is not Divine; if the Fulciment of it be humane, it is such it self. Saint Paul would not have Our Faith stand in the wisdom of men,Com∣ment. in Mich. 7. 1 Cor. 2.5. Saint Jerom saith, In ho∣mine spes vana, vera in Deo est; and a little af∣ter, Nolite credere in ducibus, non in Episcopo, non in Presbytero, non in Diacono, non in quâ∣libet hominum dignitate. If Believers believe
the Scriptures upon the Authority of Pa∣stors, Pastors believe them upon their own; Or if they say, that they have the Testi∣mony of the Spirit, all Believers may say the same, and thereby believe as well as themselves, and without their Authority. The Thessalonians Received the Word as the Word of God without asking the Judgment of the Church, 1 Thess. 2.13. The Bercans Re∣ceived it with all readiness, and instead of con∣sulting the Church, Searched the Scriptures, Acts 17.11. The true Church cannot be known but by the Scriptures.De Uni Feel ca 3. & . Thus Saint Austin wri∣ting against the Donatists saith, Sunt certe libri Dominici, quorum Autoritati utrique consenti∣mus, utrique credimus, ibi queramus Eccl si∣am, ibi discutiamus cansam: And again, Ec∣clesiam suam demonstrent si possunt non in sermo∣nibus & rumoribus Afrorum, non in Conciliis Episcoporum, non in literis disputatorum, non in signis & prodigiis fallacibus, sed in preseript legis, in Prophetarum praedactis, in Psalmorum cantibus, in ipsius Pastoris vocibus, in Evangeli∣starum praedicationibus & laboribus, hoc est, in omnibus Canonicis Sanctorum Librorum Autori∣tatibus. And if I must know the Church by the Scripture, I must in all reason own the Scripture before I own the Church or its De∣cisions. The Church may bear witness to the Scripture, but in a subordinate Ministerial way: The supream adequate witness thereof is only that Spirit, which outwardly indited it in the letter, and inwardly imprints it on the
Heart. The Church may bear witness to the Scripture, but it can add no Authority to it. If the Church hath Authority to define the Canon, it must have it from Scripture, and then the Scripture must have Authority even quoad nos before that Definition; unless they will absurdly distinguish and say, That the Scripture-Authority before the Definition, is only as to Pastors, and not as to Believers till after it. All the Churches Authority is from Scripture, and How can the derivative Au∣thority add to the Primitive? The Scripture is Principium scientificum, and therefore to be received by its light without a quare, or rea∣son why it is so; the Scripture is a Foundation to the Church, Eph. 2.20. and such a one that the Church is no further a Church than as it is built thereon; and How can the Church be a Foundation to the Scripture? The Scrip∣ture is a Law to the Church, every Soul must be under it; and How can the Subject-Church give Authority to the Law which it Self is under? The Judgment of the Church hath been variable: in the Council of Carthage un∣der Cyprian, it was Decreed that those, which were baptized by Hereticks returning to the Church, should be rebaptized, the one Bap∣tisin being only in the Church, and none with∣out it, Ʋbi Ecclesia non est, Baptisma non est. Afterwards, the first Council of Carthage (cal∣led the First, not as if it had been first in time, but as omitting the first Cyprianical Council as antiquated) enacted that Baptism made in
the name of the Sacred Trinity should not be reiterated, all crying out, Absit, against reitera∣tion. In the seventh General Council of Con∣stantinople the 338 Bishops cried down Images might and main, Quomodo Dei matrem, quam obumbravit plenitudo Deitatis, vulgaris Gentilium ars pingere audet? non fas est Christianis, qui spem Resurrectionis babent, demonum culturae con∣suetudinibus uti; flagitium est, as Gregorius Theologus said, Fidem habere in coloribus non in corde. Quis gloriam & splendorem Christi effigiare posset mortuis coloriius? said Eusebius Pamphili, in his Letter to the Empress Constantia. One would have thought that the broken Images would never have been set together again; but within less than half a Century comes the second Council of Nice, and there the 350 Bi∣shops bring in Images again under the wings of the old Cherubims, and set them up upon Jacobs Pillar, and back them with Fathers and Miracles. They throw out Anathema's against the Iconoclasts, and reject with a Curse the Books of Eusebius as a Man delivered over in reprobum sensum. And are well perswaded that Angels are Corporeal, and may be pictured. A little after, and within the same half-Century comes the Council of Francford halting between both the former, speaking half in the Language of Ashdod, and half in the pure Language, allowing Images, but de∣nying any Worship to them. And as touching the Canon, it will afterwards appear, how the Council of Laodicea differs about that from
the third Council of Carthage; and how the fixth Council of Constantinople in confirming them both varies from it self. The Judgment of the Church hath been subject to Error; the famous Council of Nice had two lapses in it: in the twelfth Canon it forbids Christians, , to return to their Military Em∣ployment; and in the Ninteenth, it com∣mands Rebaptization of such as were Baptized by Hereticks. The Emperour Zeno being ex∣pulsed, the Tyrant Basiliscus by the perswasi∣on of Timotheus Aelurus wrote Letter in con∣demnation of the General Council of Chalce∣don; unto which as impious as they were, no less than five hundred Bishops subscribed at the Tyrants Command. And touching the Canon, if the Council of Laodicea be right in it, that of Carthage is not so; and conse∣quently that of Constantinople, which takes in both, must needs be in an Error. These things premised; Can the unvariable and infallible Scripture hang upon a variable and errable Authority such as Mans is? May all the pre∣cious Promises of Life and Salvation be pre∣carious and pendent on an Humane Arbitrium? Tertullian in his Apology speaking of that old Decree among the Romans, that no God should be consecrated without the approbation of the Senate, saith, Apud nos de humano arbi∣tratu divinitas pensitatur, nisi homini Deus pla∣cuerit, Deus non erit. If the Authority of Scrip∣ture depend on the Church, then we may say, Nisi homini Scriptura placuerit, Scriptura non
erit; and by consequence all the Faith of the Saints must be pendulous and hanging on un∣certainties. If the Churches desinition be so momentous to Scripture, let us see what the Church hath done in it; Hath it collected the Canonical Books into a body? 'Tis probable Ezra collected the Books of the Old Testa∣ment into a body, and so think many of the ancient Fathers. And I suppose St. John col∣lected the Books of the New Testament toge∣ther; for he lived after all the other Apostles, even unto the time of Trajan; that by his vi∣gilancy the Canon of the New Testament might be kept pure and unadulterate. When after St. Pauls death there was a Book called, Periodus Pauls & Teclae, spread abroad under the Name and Title of Paul; St. John disco∣vered it to be spurious, insomuch that the Author of it confessed that he did it amore Pauli. And I believe what was done in this collection of the Canon was not done by an ordinary Spirit, but by a Prophetical Spirit in Ezra, and an Apostolical one in St. John. In the mean time it appears not to have been done by an act of the Church: but leaving this par∣ticular, When and how did the Church define the Canon? Such a momentous thing should have been done by the Primo-primitive Church, in the first Century, whilest the Church of Christ was a pure Virgin, as Egesip∣pus said.Lib. 3. Dist. 21. Quest. 1. Thus the School-man Durandus lays it down, Hoc quod dictum est de approbatione Scripturae per Ecclesiam, intelligitur solum de
Ecclesiâ, que fuit tempore Apostolorum, qui sue∣runt repleti Spiritu sancto: No Church so fit to do it as that which had so much of the holy Spirit; but nothing was done in it in that Age. The so called Canons of the Apostles (which in the 85th. Canon take in three Books of Macchabees into the old Canon, and the Constitutions and Epistles of Clement into the new,) are clearly adulterate; these condemn second Marriages, deprive not a Clergy-man of communion for Fornication or Perjury, or Thest, and speak of Altars, Oblations, Vessels, of Gold and Silver sanctified, Cantors and Lectors, and many other such-like altogether unknown in those Apostolical times. About these Canons Mirè inter se digladiantur Pontisicii, saith one. Gelasius in a Roman Synod of seventy Bishops, declares them Apocryphal, in toto; Bellarmine rejects all but the first fifty, and I think all the Romanists cast away the 85th. Canon touching the Scripture as Supposititious. The first Virgin-Century doing nothing in this grand matter; one might have lookt for it in the second or third; but there is no foot-step of it. In the fourth Century about the year 320 came the famous Council of Nice, and then it might have been expected, as the aptest foun∣dation for their Orthodox Conclusions against Arrius, and withal for a stated Rule against all future Heresies; but there is a failure also, no∣thing was done in it. And into what Heart can it enter, that in all those 320 years there was no Canon, no Authority of Scripture, no foun∣dation
for the Primitive Christians to fix their Faith upon? In those days Paganism was strong, and Persecutions hot, and Divine Cor∣dials necessary; and yet the Scripture for want of the Churches Definition, was not of Autho∣rity as to the Christians then living; I say, ac∣cording to the Popish Thesis it was not. But to go on: Afterwards about the year of our Lord 368 came the Council of Laodicea, which in the 59th. Canon orders, That no Books should be read in the Church but the Canonical ones of the Old and New Testament; and enu∣merates as Canonical such as are received in the Reformed Church, only omitting the Apoca∣lypse: And now had not that Omission been, and had this Council been a General one, the work had been done. But afterwards in this very Century about the year 398, the third Council of Carthage in its 47th. Canon reckons up as Canonical, Tobit, Judith, two Books of Macchabees, and five Books of Solomon, accoun∣ting Wisdom and Ecclesiastious to be two of them. In this Council St. Austin was present, who yet in his Book de Civitate Dei, Lib. 17. cap. 20, saith, That Wisdom and Ecclesiasticus in the judgment of the more learned were not Solomens, and were chiefly received in the Western Church; it seems the Eastern received them not. In the end of the next Century a∣bout the year 494. Gelasius Bishop of Rome with seventy Bishops enumerates the same Books as Canonical which are reckoned so in the Council of Carthage, save only that he o∣mits
the Book of Nehemiah, and names but one of the Macchabees. These particular Provin∣cial Councils being of incompetent Authority to desine the Canon for the Universal Church, and withal variant, nay repugnant among themselves. Whither must we go but to a Ge∣neral Council? but Oh how late very late doth that come? How long will the Authority of Scripture and Faith of Christians be suspen∣ded? and to how little satisfaction will this desinition be? About the year 682 was the sixth General Council of Constantinople in Trullo, and as to this Point, what did it? It consirmed the Canons of the Apostles, the Council of Laodi∣cea, and the Council of Carthage; which three in this Point being totally inconsistent each with other, every one by the leave of these Fa∣thers who confirmed them all, may chuse what Canonical Books he will have, whether those in the Canons of the Apostles, or those in the Council of Laodicea, or those in that of Car∣thage; and what pitiful incertainties are here? And now it is to little purpose to fly over ma∣ny Centuries more till we come to the Coun∣cils of Florence and Trent, these are late ones; and as our Learned Whitaker saith, Non legiti∣ma Christianorum Concilia, sed Tyrannica Anti∣christi Conventicula, ad oppugnandam Evange∣hi veritatem instituta; and thus it appears even Historically that the Authority of Scripture depends not on the Church. But waving this Popish Thesis, in which I have by the way made this long, Digression: I proceed to the matter in hand.
True Faith being a beam or irradiation from the holy Spirit, discovers, That the Scrip∣tures in general are the Word of God; and which is to the Point in hand, in its holy pro∣gress it arrives at an experimental knowledg thereof; Peter Martyr wishes men to read the Bible seriously; and adds, Male sit mihi (ita enim in tantâ causâ jurare ausim) nisi tandem capiantur, sentient denique quantum divina haec ab humanis distent. Erasmus saith, Expertus sum in meipso; That there is little good in cursory reading it; do it duly and you shall find the Di∣vine efficacy. That a Progressive Faith may at∣tain an Experimental knowledg, that the Scrip∣tures are of God, will appear by the ensuing Considerations. One noble piece of Scripture is the Moral Law; upon every apex of it hangs a mountain of Sence, say the Rabbins; every jot or tittle of it stands faster than Heaven and Earth, saith our Saviour, Mat. 5.18. This is the Summary of all Duties; all the Moral Precepts in Scripture are but as so many Commentaries on it. That this is of God, Faith experiments several ways: First, Faith experiments it by the impresses and holy inclinations in the Believers heart, an∣swering, truly though not persectly, to the Law. A Progressive Believer finds by reflecti∣on, That the Law is written in his heart; That his Heart is the very Epistle of Christ written by the holy Spirit: And withal he knows, that it was not always so; Time was, when there were
no such characters or holy inclinations there, his Heart was worse than a meer empty Ta∣ble: And hence he surely gathers, that those characters or imprinted propensities are the writing of God himself; and so comes expe∣rimentally to know the Epistle of God in Scripture by that in his Heart, and the out∣ward literal Edition of the Law by the inward Spiritual one, which is a counterpane thereof, and answers thereunto as the stamp to the Seal, or one Tally to another. The mutual agree∣ment between them once discerned is a practi∣cal proof, that both are of God, and written by one and the same holy hand. But you will say, there needs no Faith to make this expe∣riment; the very Gentiles have the Law writ∣ten in their Heart, their natural implanted Principles comprize both Tables; the first in that they tell us, that there is a God to be wor∣shipped and reverenced; The second in that they tell us, That we must do as we would be done to; which Alexander Severus much de∣lighted in. Unto which I answer, That there is a vast disserence between the natural Writing the Law in the Heart, and the gracious; The first is a relique or broken fragment of the Di∣vine Image; its only or at least chief seat is in the Understanding, and there it stands in the dark in an abyss of black Ignorance; and in the mean while there is an hellish enmity in the carnal will against the Law of God. But the other is a pure perfect thing which stands in both faculties, being as an holy lamp in the
Understanding, and as a Divine inclination in the will to do the Commends of God. Hence it appears, That there is not that soundation for this experiment in the Natural Inscription of the Law, as in the Gracious; the Natural be∣ing to the Gracious but as a little glimmering is to splendor; or as the broken pieces of a Picture are to the intire Image. It is with a Believer in this case as it was with Bezalceel; the Word of God came forth for making the Tabernacle, but Bezaleel had a fractical proof of it in the spirit of Wisdom given him for the work: Or as it was with Saul, the Word came forth touching the Kingdom, but Saul had a Practical proof of it in the spirit of Go∣vernment vouchsafed unto him. And so it is with the Believer; The Divine Law is experi∣mented in the spirit of obedience, and each par∣ticular Command is proved by some inward aptness answering thereunto. A notable in∣stance of this Inscription we have in Maius the German Divine, who in his extream sick∣ness, having Consolatory Scriptures recited to him, bravely answered, Tace, tace, omnia cordi meo insixa tenco; hold your peace, I have all in my heart: Promises I suppose he meant; and without dispute the Precepts were there also. Secondly, Faith experiments it by the Di∣vine Presence helping and comforting the Believer in acts of Obedience. The Rabbins say, That if two sit together conserring of the Law, the Shechi∣mah is among them. And without doubt if but
one single Believer be not a talking meerly of the Law, but a doing of it, the Divine Pre∣sence is with him. Thus the Prophet to Asa, The Lord is with you, whilest you be with him, 2 Chron. 15.2. Thus our Saviour, If a man love him and keep his words, the Father and the Son will come and make their abode with such a one, Joh. 14.23. Such an one hath a Temple and Shechinah in his Heart; God will be there helping and comforting of him in his well-do∣ing. The Church prays for help from the San∣ctuary, Psal. 20.2. because that was a Symbol of Gods Presence: And the obeying Believer cannot want help, because he hath a Sanctuary within him. The way of the Lord is strength to him, and waiting in it he renews strength, and mounts up by Auxiliary Grace as upon Eagles-wings. Whilest he is a doing the will of God strength comes in, as it did to the Le∣vites that bare the Ark, 1 Chron. 15.26. and with strength holy comfort also; in keeping the Commands he hath great reward, inward peace, and joy unspeakable; some of the oyl of Joy which is upon Christ the great Doer of Gods Will, drops down on the Believer in his sincere Obedience. As all upright ones do, he dwels in Gods Presence, as if he were in the borders of Heaven already; the light of Gods Countenance irradiates his Duties. When therefore the Believer reflects on himself, and considers, what a dry Land rebellion dwells in, and what rivers of Peace and Joy water Obe∣dience; how weak and foolish his heart was
in doing his own will, and how help and strength came upon him in doing Gods; he comes experimentally to know the Com∣mand to be of God, whose Presence gave him such comforts and assistances therein: The good hand of God upon him is a proof that the way is right; the Peace growing on his work shews the righteousness of it. When in Elijahs time the question was, whether God or Baal should be God, the fire coming down from Heaven on the Sacrifice made the People fall down and confess, The Lord he is the God, the Lord he is the God, 1 King. 18.39. answer∣ably when the Believer in the doing of Gods Commands, feels the illapses of the holy Spirit inflaming and comforting his Heart, he sweet∣ly experiences that God is in the Command of a truth. Thirdly, Faith experiments it in that the hope of Heaven is enlarged and heightned in the doing of Gods will. The more a Believer doth it, the livelier is his Faith; the warmer his love, the stronger his other Graces; the meeter his Soul for Heaven, and the richer his entrance thereunto, 2 Pet. 1.11. He shall not go to Heaven poorly or with a seant wind, but with full gales and rich Plerophories; by successive acts of Obedience his Hope rises higher and higher, and so gives an experimental proof, That the Command is the very will of God, and way to Glory; otherwise Hope would not grow and flourish in it, but flag and wither; as it uses to do in us, when we pursue our
own ways. The Apostle would have men dili∣gent in good works, , to the full assurance of hope, Heb. 6.11. Ʋt plenissimè in animis vestris spes confirmetur, faith Beza. Immediately after the giving the Law God adds these words, Where ever I re∣cord my name, there will I come and bless you, Exod. 20.24. a blessing attends his Service. If God bless Obedience with an assurance of Hope, which is a fore-taste of Heaven, and pre∣sage of Glory; it is a full proof that his name is recorded in the Command. When a Believer walking therein comes to assurance, and so to be within ken of Heaven, he is sure that the way is right. Another excellent part of Scripture stands in the Promises: These are the Pearls of the Go∣spel, breasts of Consolation, and wells of Sal∣vation, flowing out to Believers in temporal, spiritual, and eternal good things; each of these Faith more or less experiments to be Divine. As touching Temporal Promises Faith expe∣riments them in every blessing which the Be∣liever hath. Indeed outward things are but the nether-springs, and blessings of the left hand, dispensed promiscuously as if they were ludibria fortunae, the sports of chance. Providence is still ringing the changes; here an Ishmael may have his portion and full cup; even Crowns and Kingdoms, which lie at the upper end of the World, may come to the basest of men, Dan. 4.17. All things come a∣like
to all; the Sun of Prosperity shines on the Bramble as well as on the Flower; the tem∣pest of Adversity falls on the Garden as well as on the Wilderness. Love or Hatred cannot be known by these things, not by them as they are in themselves, or meerly issuing out of Pro∣vidence: But the Believer hath them by a sin∣gular Priviledg, and in a way of Promise, and by reflection may know that he hath them so: When he doth not arrogate ought to himself, or like churlish Nabal, all in his Possessives say, My bread, my water, and my flesh; but really confess God to be supream Lord of all, and himself but an accountable Steward of them; When he can cast his goods on the waters, and as it were send them to Sea in a voyage of Charity, expecting no return but in the other World, where these Corruptibles so used will rise in the incorruption of eternal glory; When he can charge all outward things to stand with∣out in their own station, and not approach that heart which is a facred Temple or holy place for God to dwell in; When he looks on all the World as forfeited by Sin, and new founded by Christ the Mediator, and so tasts his precious blood in every good thing, and gathers all his comforts from his reconciling Cross; When upon a just call to Suffering he is willing to venture all his part in this life upon the meer Promise of a better, and had rather cast all his Mundane pearls over board than hazard a wrack of Faith or Conscience; When the purest sweetest Comforts here below do not
satisfic his Soul, as smelling of the cask and cha∣nel of Creature-vanity, but in the fullest afflu∣ence of them he crys out, Dulius ex ipso fonte; a single God is insinitely sweeter than all; and none but he can sill up the gaping chinks and chasmes of my Hear; Deus meus & omnia, My God, and my all: Then undoubtedly he hath outward blessings not upon the common title of Providence only, but in a way of Pro∣mise; and by reflection on such things as these he may know that he hath them so, and ar∣rive at a sweet experience of Temporal Pro∣mises. Such an experience multiplies the Loaves and wonderfully doubles and trebles the sweetness and comfort of every Blessing. Some learned Men have observed a difference be∣tween Jacobs Blessing and Esaus; Jacobs runs thus, God give thee of the dew of Heaven, and the fatness of the Earth, Gen. 27.28. Esaus thus, Thy dwelling shall be the fatness of the Earth, and of the dew of Heaven from above, ver. 39. In Jacobs the name of God is menti∣oned not in Esaus: its true all Blessings are from God, but his name is mentioned in the one not in the other. The experienced Belie∣ver hath more of God and his federal Love in every Blessing than other Men. The Jews by a pious custom used to say over their Bread, Blessed be God who brought Bread out of the Earth; over their Wine, Blessed be God who created the fruit of the Wine; over their Fruits, Blessed be God who created the Fruit of the Tree; nay, and over their Flowers, Blessed be God
who made the sweet smelling Herbs: and in ge∣neral they added this, Whosoever takes ought out of this World without a benediction is as it were a robber of God. But the experienced Believer, as he hath a sweeter title to these things; so he may raise up his Praises for them to an higher strain than other Men; not only saying, Bles∣sed be God and his Providence for such and such things, but blessed be God and his Promise also: All good things as well those of this life, as those of the other issue out of the Covenant of Grace. You will say, the Believer cannot yet make this experiment; for though he have some of the Temporal Blessings mentioned in the Promises, yet often and ordinarily he wants other of them. To which I answer, The Pro∣mises of Temporal Blessings are not absolute, but carry a tacit limitation of expediency. The main design of the Promises is Mans Salvation, and to this Temporals are not, as Spirituals are, simply necessary; but only have a remote tendency thereunto, and that not of them∣selves, but as they are over-ruled by God, who makes omnia cooperari in bonum, all things work together for good to them that love him. And hence the Believer expects from the Promises no other measure or proportion of outward things than what may conduce to his Salvati∣on; and because he knows not what that mea∣sure or proportion is, he refers himself to the Wisdom and Faithfulness of God to order all for his good: and hence God doth not fulfil Promises of Temporals as he doth those of
Spirituals: Promises of Spirituals he fulfils in specie, because they cannot otherwise be made good, a drop of Grace being more worth than a World; but those of Temporals he ful∣fils disjunctively, either in the Blessing it self, or in that which is equivalent by inward con∣tentation and supportation, compensating the absence of the thing it self. These things being so, the Believer in what he hath may experience the Promise in the true proportion and mean∣ing of it; and not withstanding his wants, may know, That in Christ he is so far heir of all things, that if he could want a world he should have it. As touching Spiritual Promises, these are either Promises of Grace, or Promises to Grace. As touching Promises of Grace, Faith may know these experimentally. The Believer reads in his Bible, That God hath promised to give an heart of flesh, to make a new heart, and a new spirit, to write his Law in the heart, to give an heart to know him, to circumcise the heart that it may love him; and many more such-like: and afterwards reading over his own Heart, he may find these precious Graces all there, and be able experimentally to say of these Promises, as Joshua did of those made to Israel, Not one thing hath failed of all the good things which the Lord hath spoken, all are come to pass, Josh. 23.14. In every holy melting he finds the heart of flesh; in every holy frame the new heart and spirit; in every holy inclination the in∣ward engraven Law; in every holy beam the Divine Teaching; in every holy affection
the Spiritual Circumcision; all the Promises are scaled and really exemplified in his Heart; and what an admirable experiment is this? To see a Work within answering to the Promise in the Word, is a greater sight than if a Man could have stood by and seen the light start forth into Being upon the Almighty fiat spo∣ken by God in the Creation; unto which the Apostle alludeth in setting forth the Divine light shining into the Heart in the face of Christ, 2 Cor. 4.6. The Magnalia of Grace are more wonderful than those of nature. Hence St. Chrysostom upon those words of the Apostle, We are his workmanship created in Christ Jesus, Ephes. 2.10. saith of Regeneration, That it is , really a Creation, and more noble than the old one; as adding a benè vivere to that life which came from the old one. The experienced Believer hath cause to say, what hath God wrought? how fearfully is the New Creature made? all its Graces were written in the Promise, and now are fashioned in the Heart, where before there were none of them; How precious are thy thoughts to me, O God? how great is the sum of them? This Experi∣ment was notably typed out in Isaac; he was by Promise; and as soon as he was born, the Promise was experimented notwithstanding the dead body and dead womb. The Believer the child of Promise is as Isaac was, saith the Apostle, Gal. 4.28. All the regenerating Gra∣ces are by Promise; and when these are brought forth, the Promise is made good maugre all
the deadness of nature. By the Promises we are made partakers of the Divine Nature, saith St. Peter, 2 Pet. 1.4. that is, we have those Divine Graces which as the Creature-module will admit, resemble the Holy One, and so we have the Promises sealed up to us in Graces. As touching Promises made to Grace, such as are fulfilled in this life, Faith also experiments them to be Divine. In the Scripture the Be∣liever meets with Promises of Pardon to such as repent and believe; of comfort to the mour∣ner, of filling to the hungry and thirsty, of the Divine secret to them that fear God, of encrease of Grace to the improver; and many more of the same nature. To experiment these the Believer by perusing the Scripture, and his own Heart, doth two things; first, He clears it up to himself, that the Graces in his Heart, to which such Promises are made, are true, through the irradiating Spirit vouchsa∣fed to him. He may discover them to be such by Scriptural Marks, he may find that his Faith purifies and works by Love; That his Repentance and Mourning are chiefly for Sin; That his Hunger and Thirst are humble and industrious in the use of means, That his Fear is of God and his Goodness in a filial way; That his improving of Talents is in a way of dependence and holy diligence; and so certainly knows that these Graces in his Heart are real things. This foun∣dation being first laid, then he proceeds to a second review of his Heart, and there he may find how Pardons have sensibly broke in upon
him in a way of Repenting and Believing, or how the Sheaves of Joy and Comfort have followed his Tears, or how Satisfactions Manna-like have dropped down on his hun∣gry Soul, or how Divine illuminations have come in and Crowned his Holy Fear, or how Talents have multiplied in the faithful using and actuating of them: And the Experiment thereupon will be compleat, every Grace sooner or later being in some good measure answered by the Promises, which let out their sweetness to it as God hath ordained them to do. Thus the Believer sensibly enters the Land of Promise, and eats of the Fruit there∣of, lifting up his Soul in The high Praises of him, who gave the Promises in the Scripture and fulfils them in the Heart. As touching Promises of eternal good things in Heaven, where there are Plenitudes of Joy and Rivers of Pleasure in the Presence of Him who is All in All, the completion of these is in another World; nevertheless the Believer hath an experimental taste thereof here. Whilest his Hope hangs upon them, he finds strength and comfort come into his Heart; whilst the weary World is tossing with troubles, O what a refreshing is it to look into Eternity! Hope, Eatring within the vail, is an Anchor to the Soul; and so stablishes it, that it doth not rowl about with the wheelings of this change∣able World, nor center its happiness in any or all the Creatures. Let the World come in all its Fancies and glittering appearances of
Good, it cannot call off the Believers Heart from Heaven, but it will be ready to point that way; or let it come with storms of ter∣ror and troubles, it cannot loosen the Anchor∣hold: the Believer will rather part with all the World, and his Life too, then let go his hold of Heaven: Ye took with joy the spoiling of your goods, knowing in your selves, that ye have in Heaven a better and an enduring sub∣stance, saith the Apostle, Hebr. 10.34. Or, as the Words are in the Original; Knowing that ye have in your selves a better and abiding sub∣stance in Heaven. He speaks as if they had car∣ried Heaven in and about them, and in part they did so; for as Beza hath it on this place, Fide possidemus quod est in Coelis, By Faith we possess that which is in Heaven. All our Graces are , Heb. 6.9. Things having or containing Salvation; No parts or pieces of this World, but such as Heaven dawns and begins here below. The holy Spirit is as the First Fruits to assure us of the whole Crop in Heaven, and as the earnest of the total Sum of Glory which shall be paid above. The Be∣liever here hath so much of Heaven as to make him strive, wrestle, run, work, watch and wait with his Loyns girt and Lamps burning; and as the twelve Tribes to serve God instantly, Acts 26.7. ; running with full speed, and stretching out himself in the Race, that he may come to the Crown of Life; and surely, his Hope, if fastned a∣bout a nullity, would not put forth such
strong and vigorous operations. Heaven must be a real thing indeed, which so carries away the Heart from all the World and engages it unto it self. Another considerable part of Scripture stands in threatnings against Sinners. Touching experimenting these, I need say very little: our Good God doth not give out Threatnings in the same manner as he doth give out Pro∣mises; he gives out Promises that they may be fulfilled and experimented; but he gives out Threatnings that they may not be fulfilled and experimented, but rather that by them Men may be warned in a way of Faith and Repentance To fly from the wrath to come. The applying of a Promise in a right manner makes it to belong to us, but the ap∣plying of a Threatning makes it not to be∣long to us: judging our selves we prevent the Judgment of God. The Believer even be∣fore Conversion more or less felt the Threat∣nings taking hold of him, and shutting of him up under Wrath, till Jesus Christ opened the Prison-dores and made him Free indeed: And if afte Conversion he forget the old Chains, and run into wilful Rebellion again, he will feel them a second time; The bones will be broken and Comforts lost, the Consci∣ence will be wounded, and the Wounds will Stink and be corrupt because of his foolishness. God may depart away, and leave the Graces withering, and the poor Soul all in the dark with Terrors round about it: This is a very
sad Experiment; and yet undeniably proves that the Threatnings are from God, his Ju∣stice appearing on the top of them like de∣vouring Fire. Passing over those three great Pillars of Scripture Precepts, Promises and Threatnings; I now proceed to the Sacred Truths, which lie therein, as Rich Veins of Gold and Silver do in a Mine: And to avoid Prolixity, I shall pick out of them some supernatural Ones, such as cannot be known by the mere Light of Na∣ture, but drop down from Heaven in a way of pure Revelation; concluding with my self, That if Faith can make an Experiment in these, it may much more do so in others. I shall first instance in that Sacred Truth of The blessed Trinity of Persons in Ʋnity of the God-head: This is, as one hath it, Fundamen∣tum Fundamentorum, The Foundation of Foun∣dations; unless this stand fast all Evangelical Truths fall to the Ground; we are no longer Christians then we acknowledg it. So sub∣lime is this Mystery, that as Saint Bernard saith, Scrutari haec temeritas est, credere pietas est, nos∣se vero vita aeterna est. And when Gregory Nazianzen was pressed to assign a disserence between those words, Begotten and Proceeding, he made this answer, Dic mihi, quid sit gene∣ratio, & ego dicam, quid sit processio, ut ambo insaniamus; distinguere inter processionem & ge∣nerationem nescio, non valeo, non sufficio. This Truth is totally supernatural; it could never without a Revelation enter into our Heart;
humane reason; no, not that of Adam could not reach it. Indeed there are strange passages touching it in Trismegistus and Plato: Tris∣megistus saith, God who is Mind begat , the Speech or Word which is another Mind, and with that Speech another which is the Fiery God and Spirit of the God-head. Plato speaks of a , A most Divine Word, and of the begotten Son of the Good; and the learned Grotius saith. Apud Platonicos reperias, , three Persons in one. But sure these men knew nothing of this Mystery; if they spake somewhat like, they spake not the same; or if the same, they borrowed it from Moses. Plato is called the Atticizing Mo∣ses; and his , one and many, is an old Tradition derived from the Jews; and his , is taken from Jehovah, or I am. Or, which is most probable, the notions of the Trinity in Plato and Trismegistus were foisted into their Works. How many Books have been put out under the names of the Apostles and ancient Fathers, which have not been truly such? Such imposture in the Primitive times was very ordinary: And if Men would be thus bold with Apostles and Fathers, what might they not do in Heathens? Besides, some think there are clearer notions of a Trinity in some of the Heathens, than in Moses's Books, and so by consequence the Heathens should know more of it than Israel; which is contrary to the Scriptures, which tell us, In Judah is God known, Ps. 76.1. and He hath not dealt so with
any Nation, Ps. 147.20. It is therfore likely that such passages in Heathens were inserted into their Books, by Christians, in a way of Pious Fraud, such as was anciently used. This Sacred Mystery was intimated in the Old-Te∣stament; Elohim in the plural, Created, Gen. 1.1. Let us make Man, saith God, Gen. 1.26. By the word of the Lord were the Heavens made, and all the Host of them by the Spirit of his Mouth, Ps. 33.6. Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of Hosts, I say 6.3. The ancient Jewish Rabbins (as Petrus Galatinus hath shewed) embraced this Doctrine. Rabbi Simeon on that in the Prophet, saith, Sanctus, hic est Pater, Sanctus, hic est Filius, Sanctus, hic est Spiritus Sanctus: the three Middoth, or Properties in Rabbinical Writers, are the three Persons in the Godhead. And the Cabbalists have these words, Pater Deus, Filius Deus, Spiritus San∣ctus Deus, Tres in Ʋno, Ʋnus in Tribus. In the New-Testament we have this Truth clearly laid down; in the Baptisin of Christ we have all the three Persons appearing, The Father in a Voice, the Son in the Flesh, the Holy Ghost in the Dove, Mat. 3.16, 17. The Primitive Christians used to say to any that doubted of the Trinity, Abi ad Jordanem & videbis, Go to Jordan and you will see it. Christ Commands. That Bap∣tism should be In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, Math. 28.19. Or, as the Greek Article imports, In the Name of that Father, that Son, and that Holy Ghost, which discovered themselvs at Christs Baptism.
There are three that bear Record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost; and these Three are One, 1 Joh. 5.7. This Truth hath had many Opposites, as the Arrians, Sa∣mosatenians, Sabellians, Photinians, and of late the Socinians, who have strained their subtile Wits to undermine it if possible: tell them, That Baptism is in the Name of the Trinity; They will reply, That The Israelites were Bap∣tized into Moses, 1 Cor. 10.2. Tell them, That There are Three that bear Record in Heaven, 1 Joh. 5.7. They will say, These Words are not to be found in the Ancient Greek Copies; nor in the Syriac; nor in the Ancient Latin Version,; but these are but Evasions. As for the first, They were Baptized, , unto Moses, there  is put for ; as Acts 7.53.  is there put for , as appears by comparing that place with Gal. 3.19. where Saint Paul of the same thing, saith, , and so To be Baptized unto Moses, is only to be Baptized by the Ministry of Moses, who led them through the Red Sea: Hence in the Syriack it is  in the hand of Moses. Again, it is one thing to be Baptized unto Moses, another to be Baptized in the name of Moses: Paul Baptized, but none in his own name, 1 Cor. 1.13. And again, the Israelites were improperly Baptized into Moses; they were not aspersed or immerged in water, neither was Baptism then an Ordinance of God as now it is. As for the se∣cond in St. John, that place undeniably proves
the Trinity. The learned Stephens saith, That place is wanting in seven Greek Copies, but it is found in nine more ancient. St. Cyprian de Ʋnitate Ecclesie, alledges this place for the Trinity. Athanasius urged this place against Arrius in the Council of Nice, and then no ex∣ception was made against it. Had it not then been in St. John, Arrius would have easily re∣jected it. I believe in the times of Constantius and Valens the Arrians blotted out these words as most pregnant against them, out of divers Copies. St. Jerom asserted the truth of our reading from the Greek Copies which he had; publickly contesting, That in those Copies where it was wanting, it was razed out by the fraud of Hereticks. And St. Ambrose saith, That the Hereticks did erade that place. This Truth stands fast in Scripture for ever and ever; and Faith embraces it. And which is more and to the Point in hand, Faith in its holy progress may, as I conceive, experience it. My reason is, the Church in all Ages down from the Apostles have worshipped the Sa∣cred Trinity; Their Baptism hath been in its Name; their Doxology and  pro∣claim it; their Creeds all publish it; their Ca∣techumeni were trained up in the knowledg of it; they ever worshipped, as Athanasius hath it in his Creed, one God in Trinity, and Trinity in Ʋnity; and that uno indiviso cultu, as Di∣vines speak. This in all Ages hath been the Christian Worship; and upon this Worship answers and returns have come down from
Heaven in abundance of Glorious Spiritual Blessings, such as are comprized in that Apo∣stolical Prayer, The Grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the Communion of the Holy Ghost be with you all, Amen, 2 Cor. 13.14. The whole Trinity is adored, and the whole Trinity vouchsafes Gracious returns; Gratia quae datur, in Trinitate datur, saith Atha∣nasius. Every Believer so worshipping hath re∣turns from Heaven; and the Progressive Be∣liever may know that he hath them; and in the experience thereof may experience That there is a Sacred Trinity of a truth. If the Tri∣nity be a nullity, or as Servetus blasphemously said, An Idol, or three-headed Cerberus; Or, as Socinus belched out his impiety, A ridiculous invention of humane curiosity: Then the Chri∣stian Worship is no other than strange fire, vain' Will-worship, and Idol-worship; nay, it is no Worship at all; none, because the Tri∣nity its supposed Object is a nullity; none, be∣cause God looks on it as none. As when the Samaritans feared the Lord and served their Idols, 2 King. 17.33. The Text saith in the very next ver. That they feared not the Lord; their fear was as none, because of the mixture of Idol-worship: So when Christians worship one God, and a Trinity which is not, their Worship is as none at all. Upon such a Worship God will not o∣pen his eyes unless to punish it, nor make any returns but those of Wrath. When the Israelites worshipped the Golden Calf, Gods Wrath waxed hot, and was ready to consume them;
much more may it do so, if Christians wor∣ship a Trinity which is not. In that of the Calf, as they meant it, there was only error in modo, for they intended not to terminate their Wor∣ship in the Calf but in God, as appears by their own words, To marrow is a feast to Jeho∣vah, Exod. 32.5. But in this of a Suppositi∣tious Trinity, there is error in objectio ultimo, which is more provoking to God. If the Tri∣nity be but the Idol of the brain, God will no more be enquired of by its Worshippers than he would by those who set up their Idols in their heart. Ezek. 14.3. no gracious returns are found in such a salfe way. A Believer there∣fore, who in Worshipping one God in Trinity, finds returns srequently and successively after Duties from the Mercy-scat, carries an inward seal and proof in his bosom, that there is a Trinity. This experimental proof of a Trinity seems to me evident in many places of Scrip∣ture. St. John saith, Truly our fellowship is with the Father and with his Son Jesus Christ, 1 Joh. 1.3. He saith not barely, Our fellowship is with God, but with the Father and the Son; neither doth he say it at peradventures, but as a sure known thing, such as hath the joy of the holy Spirit with it. St. Paul would have the Colos∣sians to be knit together in love, and unto all riches of the full assurance of understanding to the ac∣knowledgment of the Mystery of God, and of the Father and of Christ, Col. 2.2. Here is a Plero∣phory of understanding, nay, riches, and all riches of it: Here is , which is, as
one saith, Illustrior notitia rei prius cognitae; A further knowledg orpractical acknowledgment of a thing before known; and these must needs import somewhat of experience. Our Savi∣our saith, If a man love me and keep my words, my Father will love him, and we will come to him and make our abode with him, Joh. 14.23. In the 21. ver. he told them, That he would ma∣nifest himself to the obedient; , saith he, conspicuum meipsum exhibebo, I will exhibit my self though Spiritually, yet clearly as it were to eye, palam & in media luce, as Beza hath it. Hereupon Judas asks him, Lord how is it that thou wilt manifest thy self to us? unto which our Saviour answers, That the Father and him∣self would come and make their abode in such an one, ver. 23. The Abode of the Father and the Son in such an one is in a glorious manifesta∣tive way, such as gives an experience of their being there; and where the Father and the Son are, there also is the holy Spirit. Thus our Sa∣viour in the 16. and 17. verses of that Chap∣ter saith, That the Spirit should abide in them; and abide in them in a manifestative way: Ye know him, for he dwelleth with you, saith he. And in the 20th. verse he saith, At that day, that is, the day of the Spirits in-dwelling, Ye shall know that I am in the Father, and you in me, and I in you. Oh what rich glorious Experiences of the Sacred Trinity are here! and how hap∣py the Faith and Obedience which arrives at them! Godly Men should labour to perfect Holiness, to walk , that is,
, to get to the top of Godliness, and , as the Apostle speaks, Tit. 3.14. to be Masters and eminent Presidents in good Works, that they may arrive at this great Ex∣periment. Thus far touching that center of Divinity, the Sacred Trinity. In the next place I proceed to the rare Su∣pernatural Truths touching Jesus Christ; all which Faith may experiment. And here I shall begin with his Incarnation. Venit universitatis Creator, venit ad homines, venit propter homi∣nes, venit homo, saith St. Bernard. He was Im∣manuel, God with us; , God and Man in one Person; The Eternal Word was made flesh, 1 Joh. 1.14. God was manifest in the Flesh, 1 Tim. 3.16. And what say the Socinian Re∣bels to this Truth? Rationi sanae repugnat; duae substantiae proprietatibus adversae coire in unam personam nequeunt, ut sunt mortalem & immor∣talem esse, principium habere & principie carere, mutabilem & immutabilem existere, saith the Racovian Catechism: One and the same Person cannot be Mortal and Immortal, have a Begin∣ning and no Beginning, or be Mutable & Im∣mutable. But reason it self, though too low a bar for this Truth to appear at, will absolve this truth from repugnancy: Body and Soul meet in one Person, adverse in Properties; the one being Corporal, the other Spiritual; the one Visible, the other Invisible; the one Rational, the other Irrational; the one Mor∣tal, the other Immortal. This is done naturally,
how much more may it be done Supernatu∣rally? It would be against reason to say, That Christ were Secundum idem, Mortal and Im∣mortal, having a Beginning and none; Muta∣ble and Immutable; But it is not repugnant to say, That he is so in respect of the two Na∣tures Humane and Divine. Had not Christ been Man, he could not have suffered; had he not been God, he could not have satisfied: The Blood was from the Humane Nature, and the excellent Merit from the Di∣vine. He that disbelieves either, must cast away Scripture which asserts both. This Truth stands firm in Scripture, as might be shewed at large; but for the Point in hand, Faith may experiment it. The Believer may find in himself such fruits of Christs Incarna∣tion, as carry a resemblance thereunto, and are a kind of inward Seal thereof. The hu∣mane Nature of Christ was not brought forth of the blessed Virgin generatione sed jussione, not in an ordinary way by knowing a man, but in an extraordinary, by the power of the highest and overshadowing of the Holy Ghost: Answerably in the Believer, the new Creature is not born of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God, John 1.13. He that is such hath not known man nor his power in this great Work, but hath had the holy Spi∣rit and its gracious overshadowings on the heart. They that dwell  in his shadow shall return, saith the Prophet, Hos. 14.7. Un∣less the mighty Power of God come upon us
we shall have no hearts to return to him. This resemblance is excellently set forth by Fulgen∣tius; Forma praecessit in carne Christi, quam in nostrá side spiritualiter agnoseamus;De Incar∣nat. Chri∣sti cap. 20. ex eodem spiritu renati sumus, ex quo natus est Christas; eodem Spiritu Christus formatur secundum fidem in corde uniuscujus{que} credentis, quo Spiritu secundum carnem formatus est in utero Virginis; The very same Spirit which formed Christ in the womb, forms him in the heart. The Hu∣mane nature in Christ was united to the Di∣vine in an Hypostatical Union; God and Man met in one Person, that they might meet in the Covenant of Grace: Answerably the Be∣liever is united unto God in a spiritual Mysti∣cal Union, He is made one Spirit with the Lord, 1 Cor. 6.17. Christ was one flesh with us, and we are one Spirit with him; God is at one with us in Christ, and we may approach to God with holy boldness. The Humane Na∣ture of Christ had no natural Subsistence, but subsisted in the eternal Word; sutably the new Creature hath no spiritual Subsistence in it self, but subsists in God and his Grace; By the grace of God I am what I am, 1 Cor. 15.10. St. Paul looked on his spiritual Being to be only by Grace. In Christ God was manifested in the flesh, and tabernacled in it; nay, the ful∣ness of the Godhead dwelt in it, Col. 2.10. As low abject a thing as Humane nature is, the fulness of the Godhead dwelt in it, and will dwell in it for ever; sutably in Believers the Tabernacle of God is with men, he dwells and
walks in them, and they may be filled with all the fulness of God, Ephes. 3.19. that is, have abundance of his gracious Presence with them. A Believer may find that he hath these resembling fruits in himself, and withal that, unless the Son of God had been incarnate, none of them would have been; no new Creature, but all men lying in the old rubbish of the Fall; no Union, but an unpassable gulf such as is between Heaven and Hell; no spiritual Subsistence, but a corrupt one upon the dregs of Free-will; no heavenly Fulness, but a va∣cuity of all Grace: And from hence he may have an experimental proof of Christs Incar∣nation, the Mystical Union being a proof of the Hypostatical, and God manifest in the Spi∣rit of God manifest in the Flesh. St. John lays down this as a glorious Truth, That Jesus Christ is the Son of God, 1 John 5.5. and for proof of it he produces six Witnesses; Three in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, ver. 7. and Three on earth, the Spirit, and the Water, and the Blood, ver. 8. By the Spirit we may understand the holy Spirit breathing in the Scripture, and witnessing in the heart; by the Water the sanctifying Graces and those sealed in Baptism; and by the Blood the precious Sufferings of Christ which pacifie the Conscience: A Believer may experience all these three Witnesses on Earth, and so may experience the Incarnation of Christ. But to go on unto this of the Incarnation, I shall add two instances more touching Christ; the
one is his Death, and the other is his Resur∣rection: The experiment of both is emphati∣cally set forth by St. Paul, That I may know him, and the power of his Resurrection, and the fellowship of his Sufferings, being made conforma∣ble to his Death, Phil. 3.10. Tune recte cog∣noscitur Christus, saith Calvin, dum sentimus quid valeat Mors ejus & Resurrectio; Then we truly know Christ, when we feel the power of his Death and Resurrection in our own hearts. Jesus Christ died for us, His Soul was an offering for Sin, his Life , a Ransom for many; He sa∣tisfied Gods Justice, opened a door of Mercy, and procured the effusion of the holy Spirit; and all this Faith may experiment. In the calms of Conscience the Believer may feel the atoning Blood of Christ, purging his heart from dead works to serve the living God; In the mor∣tifying of Lusts he may find a secret virtue from Christ crucified, enabling him for the work; In all the sweet gales and operations of the holy Spirit he hath a proof of that meritori∣ous Passion which procured them; and when he stumbles and falls into sin and drives away that Spirit for a time, in its return he hath a proof, that Christ is a Priest after the Power of an endless life. The vexed grieved Spirit might utterly forsake such faultring backsliding Creatures as we are, and leave us desolate for an habitation of Devils and unclean spirits for ever; but the endless life of Merit in Christ causes it to return to us again, and thereby gives us a most precious experiment thereof. At Swerin in Germany, there was a little drop
of Blood included in a Jasper-stone, given out to be the very Blood of Christ: This every Fri∣day at a certain hour was shewn, and upon view seemed to open and draw out it self, as it were in three parts, and then to go together again: It was followed by great concourses of people, and esteemed very Sacred for 300 years. Had this Toy been true and genuine, I might yet say as Maius the German Divine did to one, who asked him, If it would not be a great Consolation to a poor Thief ready to die, to be told, That Christ according to the Flesh is so near him, that even in fune he may have him? At melius in corde, 'tis better having the Blood of Christ in the heart than any other way; such an having produces the glorious Experiments before spoken of. And as the Death of Christ is experimented, so is his Resurrection. In the Peace of God the Believer may read that the Debt is fully paid, and the Surety out of the prison of the Grave; In the inward spiritual Resurrecton he may find that Almighty power which raised up Jesus from the dead; In heavenly elevations and affections he may feel holy touches from Christ sitting at Gods right hand, and attracting his Heart into the upper world: In the excellent ministerial Gifts in the Church he may know that Christ is above, and lets drop these for the perfecting of the Saints; and in his lively hope of the incor∣ruptible Inheritance, he may prove the Resur∣rection of Christ by which he is begotten again unto it. Such Experiments as these wonderfully ra∣tifie
the Faith of Believers, oyl their Obedi∣ence, and multiply their Joy and Peace in Belie∣ving; and make each of them able to say in par∣ticular, Christ died for me, and Christ rose again for me; and lo here are the Witnesses of it in my heart. Unto these faced Truths of the Trinity and Christ, I shall only add one Instance more touching the efficacy of Grace in the hearts of men. The Pelagians, those Inimici gratiae, ascribe almost all to Free will, and little or nothing to Free-grace; making Grace rather to consist in the external Doctrine than in internal Opera∣tions: or if they admit any thing internal, it is rather in the illumination of the Understan∣ding than in the change of the Will. But the Scriptures tells us clean contrary, of opening the heart and new-making it; of working the Will, and a day of power causing it; of raising the spiritually dead and creating us again in Christ; of putting his Spirit into us, and causing us to walk in his Statutes: These and many more Scriptures loudly proclaim the power of Grace, and the Believer may experience it. This is the clearer, because the sensus communis of Christians hath in all Ages run this way. David upon the willing Offering utters his ex∣perience of Grace in a way of admiration; Who am I and what is my people, that we should be able to offer so willingly after this sort! For all things come of thee, 1 Chron. 29.14. All things come of thee, even willingness and All: In so Offering we do but give of thine own, as the Greek Christians use to say in their Oblati∣ons,
, thine from thine. St. Paul upon his experience ascribes all to Grace; I live, yet not I, but Christ liveth in me: And I labour, yet not I, but the Grace of God which was with me. He acknowledges no I-ness, but ascribes all his Spiritual Being to Grace; By the Grace of God I am what I am, saith he. St. Cy∣prian might find in himself what he so excel∣lently said, In nullo nobis gloriandum, quando nostrum nihil est. St. Ambrose speaking of Cain and Abel, saith; Cain, as his name is Possessi∣on, acquires and arrogates all to himself; but Abel who knew his own Vanity, and that he had nothing de suo nisi mendacium & peccatuni, referred all to God. The former he calls impro∣bum dogma, the latter bonum dogma; the good opinion which the just Abels are of and expe∣rience in themselves. And in the last Chapter of that Book he saith, Quicquid sancium cogi∣taveris, hoc Dei munus est, Dei inspiratio, Dei gratia; which I suppose was his own experi∣ence. Blessed St. Austin that noble assertor of Free-grace (of whom Prosper said, Dum nulla sibi tribuit bona, sit Deus illi omnia; Whilest he attributed no good to himself, God became all things to him,) could never have wrote so magniti∣cently of Grace, had he not had great expe∣rience of it. In his Book De Peccatorum Meri∣tis, he gives a caution, Ne putemus nastrum esse quod Dei; and adds, Qui error multum est Religioni pietatique contrarius; To attribute that to our selves which is Gods is an error much contrary to Religion and Piety: Christian sense is against it.
Prosper who came after St. Austin hath this passage, Non est devotionis dedisse prope totum Deo, sed fraudis retinuisse vel minimum; gratia Dei repellitur tota, nisi tota recipiatur; To give 999 parts to Grace, and reserve one only to Mans Will is too much; true Devotion will not bear it. Tutius vivimus si totum Deo da∣mus. Gotteschalcus preaching up the Doctrine of Grace according to St. Austin and Prosper, suffered a close Imprisonment for above twen∣ty years together for that Truth; and no question he experimented the power of Grace whilest he suffered for it. Bonaventura hath a notable passage, Hoc piarum mentium est, ut nihil sibi tribuant, sed totum Dei gratiae; It is the true genius of Believers to attribute nothing to themselves but all to Grace. And in the same place he saith, That holy Men know the influ∣ences of Grace; Potius experiendo quam ratio∣cinando; rather by experience than argument. The profound Bradwardine confesses, That at first Pelagius seemed to be in the right; it was more grateful to him to hear of Mans power in the Schools of Philosophers than of Gods Grace in the Church; But afterwards Gratiae radio visitatus, being visited by a beam of Grace from Heaven, What a second Austin and Champion for Grace did he prove? His Book de Causâ Dei, against Pelagius is a suf∣ficient witness thereof. After all, the great Luther saith in plain terms, That Liberum ar∣bitrium est merum mendacium; Mans Free-will is but a lie. And if any of the Fathers have
predicated it, certè ex carne ut fuerunt homines, non ex Spiritu Dei sunt locuti; they spoke according to the flesh as Men, not from the Spirit of God; and saith of himself, That he would not have any thing of Salvation left in his own hand; and glories in this, Deus salutem meam, extra meum arbitrium tollens, in suum receperit; All is in the hand of Free-grace: And a little after con∣cludes, Hec est gloriatio omnium Sanctorum in Deo suo. After this manner do all the Saints glory in their God, crying out over every. good thing in themselves, Grace, Grace. Many Books have been wrote touching Will and Grace: But were the experiences of Saints written and visible, there would appear such Magnalia or wonderful works of Grace, that every unbyassed person would say, Conclusum est contra Pelagianos; There is no doubt but the efficacy of Grace is very great and glorious in the Hearts of men. Thus much for a taste may sussice touching the experience of Scriptural Truths; Super∣natural Truths may be experimented; much more such as fall in with the Light of Na∣ture.
CHAP. XII. The Divine Experiments of Faith in Scripture-Ordinances, Baptism, Prea∣ching of the Word, Prayer, and the Lords Supper; and lastly in the great Works of Power recorded in Scrip∣ture. IN the next place I proceed to the Divine Ordinances in Scripture: These the Believer may experience to be Divine. God bare such a Testimony to the Typical Ordinances under the Law, that his People experimentally knew that they were from him. In Circumcision God set his Seal and Love-mark on his ancient Peo∣ple, and at the doing of it they blessed him, that a Child was brought into Covenant. In their Burnt-offerings fire from Heaven consu∣med them as a witness of their acceptation. Hence the Psalmist prays, The Lord accept thy Burnt-sacrisice, Psal. 20.3. , in cinerem vertat; let him turn it to ashes, thereby testi∣fying his acceptance thereof. In their first Tem∣ple they had many Symbols of Gods Presence, as the Ark with the Tables in it, and Propitia∣tory or Mercy-seat; by the Ʋrim and Thummin they could ask Counsel of God; the Shechinab,
the Glory or Majesty of God dwelt between the Cherubims; and acceptance in their Services and Sacrifices offered unto God. But preter∣mitting these as being but Shadows, and by Christians experimented in Jesus Christ the substance of them; I shall instance in the four great standing Ordinances in the Christian Church; and shew how the Believer may ex∣perience them to be from God, and in that experience prove the Scripture, which ap∣points them, to be from him also. The first Ordinance I shall instance in is that of Baptism: This by the Ancients was stiled , Illumination, as ushering in the E∣vangelical light. St. Basil calls it Vestimentum candidum & signaculum sancium, the white garment and holy sign. It is by St. Austin na∣med Porta Gratiae, the door of Grace, and first entrance into the Church. And by St. Bernard, Christianismi investitura, the first putting on Christianity. In Luther it is, Aqua non Creato∣ris sed Dei salvatoris, the water not of the Crea∣tor but of God the Saviour. Among the Jews the Proselyte of the Gates was only tyed to the seven Precepts of Noah, but the Proselyte of Righteousness was bound to all the Mosaical Ordinances, and was initiated into Judaisin by Circumcision and Baptism, and the blood of Oblation. The Jewish Rabbins built this Baptism of Proselytes on that Command of God, Exod. 19.10. That the people should san∣ctifie
themselves, and wash their clothes, in or∣der to the reception of the Law. Such as were Baptized they called, Renati, new-born, or regenerate; and reputed them to be Sub¦alis Divinae Majestatis, under the wings of the Divine Majesty. But as yet Baptism was no Di∣vine Ordinance but only a Jewish custom. Af∣terwards this custom was turned into a sacred Ordinance in John's Baptism, which was not of Men but from Heaven: He saith of himself, That he was sent to Baptize, Joh. 1.33. And by whom St. Luke tells us, The word of the Lord came , upon John, Luk. 3.2. as a Divine Warrant for the Work. His Bap∣tism is called, The Counsel of God, Luk. 7.30. And was sealed from Heaven by a wonderful Theophany, the whole Sacred Trinity mani∣festing themselves at Christs Baptism by him. Afterwards Christ gave a solemn charge about it, Go teach all Nations, Baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, Mat. 28.19. and adds a sweet Promise thereunto, Lo I am with you alway even to the end of the world, ver. 20. Thus Bap∣tism is firmly established in Scripture, and the Believer may experience it to be of God: He, though Baptized an Infant, wanting the use of Reason, and uncapable in himself to make any formal Vow or Covenant; yet finds a se∣cret bond or obligation lying upon his Con∣science, which remembers him of his Baptism in some such words as those of an Ancient; Abrenunciasti Diabolo & operibus suis, abrenun∣ciasti
seculo & voluptatibus ejus; Thou hast re∣nounced the Devil and his works, the World and its pleasures, forget not thy Baptism. And the reason of this bond is, because Baptism is an Ordinance of Stipulation, called by St. Peter , the stipulation or interrogation of a good Conscience towards God, 1 Pet. 3.21. It is an entry into Covenant with God, and binds the Conscience. Were it no Ordinance of God, there would be no Stipulation, and so no Ob∣ligation upon Conscience. But when the Be∣liever finds his Baptismal Vow pressing there, he knows that Baptism is of God. Again, he knows it by the inward strength and power which he receives from thence. The virtue of Baptism follows the Believer, as the water of the Rock did the Israelites, in all the travels of this World even to his dying hour; at which the oldest highest Saint may refresh himself by running back to his Baptism. When temptations come and assault the Believer, when Satan casts in his fiery darts to inflame the Corruption of the Heart, the Believer is the stronger to re∣pulse them, because of Baptism. A pious Vir∣gin, as Luther relates, used to oppose this to every Temptation, Baptizata sum, mhil facis Satan; I am Baptized, O Satan, thou canst do nothing. In the African Persecution under Hunericus, one Majoricus a fine young Man, be∣ing brought forth to suffer for the Truth, was thus confirmed therein by his Mother Dionysia; Memento, mi sili, nos in nomine Sacro-sanciae Tri∣adis in Ecclesia esse Baptizatos; ah! ne perda∣mus illud preciosissimum indumentum, ne veniens,
qui ad nuptias nos vocavit, non reperiat vestem nuptialem, & in tenebras exteriores ejiciamur; Remember, O my Son, that we were Baptized in the Name of the Sacred Trinity; let us not lose this precious Garment, lest when he comes who called us to the Wedding, he find no Wedding garment, and we be cast into utter darkness. This so strengthened the Young Man, that he suffered as a glorious Martyr for the Truth. In Baptism we are listed land enrolled into Christs Militia, and so go not to war at our own charge; but the great Captain of Salvati∣on is with us, and strengthens us against Temptation. About the year of our Lord 433, the Burgundiuns were grievously affli∣cted by the Huns and finding no relief among Mortals, they applied themselves to the gods; and there being a great crond of Numens, at last they pitched on the God of the Christians, as most potent and present in Perils, and were Baptized, giving up themselves to Christ; after their Baptism they went to fight with the Huns, and with a few overcome many thousands of them: And I suppose they fought as well and were as good Soldiers a∣gainst inward Temptations as against outward Enemies; for the Story saith, Ab eo tempore ardenti amore flagrabant in conservando Christi∣anismo; From that time they burned with ar∣dent love to Christianity. Thus they had a double signal proof of their Baptism, in the strength and Divine assistance afforded them
against outward and in ward Enemies. Moreover the Believer may find in himself those Divine Blessings which are sealed up in Baptism, and so prove it to be of God. Baptism seals up Regeneration, and is therefore called by the Apostle the Laver of Regeneration, Tit. 3.5. And the Believer may find the New-birth in himself, We know that we are of God, saith St. John, 1 Joh. 5.19. Baptism seals our Ʋnion with Christ; and hence we are said therein To put on Christ, Gal. 3 27. and To be buried with Christ, and risen with Christ, Col. 2.12. Which two are notably adumbrated in the Baptismal Immersion into the water, and Eduction out of it. And the Believer may know his Union with Christ; he may not only believe, That Christ is come in carne Mariae, but shew that he is come in carne sua, as Origen speaks; he may not only believe, That Christ died and rose a∣gain in the flesh which he took of Mary, but shew that he is dead and risen in the Believer; that is, Christs Death and Resurrection are selt in his Mortification and Vivification. Baptism seals Remission and divine Favour; hence we read of Baptising for the remission of sins, Act. 2.38. and the Believer may be able to read his Par∣don, and see Heaven as it were open to him in the gracious favour of God. Thus by experi∣encing the Divine Blessings sealed in Baptism, he may satisfactorily prove to himself, That Baptism is an Ordinance of God. In the next place I shall instance in the Prea∣ching of the Word. This (however slighted
of late, some Papists calling the Protestant Ministers in a scoff, Praedicantici; and some Protestants, such as they are, calling Preaching Prating,) is yet a great Ordinance of God such as hath had a standing in the Church in all Ages. God himself was the first Preacher, first promulgating to Man his solemn Command touching the forbidden fruit; and after the Fall, that Protevangelium in the Promise of the seed of the woman, that is, the Messias. Adam (as Franzius probably conjectures) was wont at his Sacrifices for nine hundred years to preach of the Messias promised. Enoch as early as he was in the World preached of the last day, Behold the Lord cometh with ten thousands of his Saints, Jude v. 14. Noah was a preacher of righteousness, 2 Pet. 2.5. and without doubt told them of the approaching Deluge. Abra∣ham had his  his Incipients or initiated Ones, whom he taught in the Divine Law as well as in arms. Afterwards in Moses's time there were Priests and Levites to expound the Law to the people. In Samuel's time there were Colledges of Prophets, and there the Word was preached to the people: In these Colledges was the first rise of Syna∣gogues, and that of Naioth in Ramah, 1 Sam. 19.18, 20. is translated by the Chaldee Paraphrast, Domus Doctrinae, the House of Learning, because there the Word of God was taught. The Great Solomon was a Co∣heleth or Preacher; his Ecclesiastes is a Peniten∣tial Sermon of the Vanity of all things. The
Prophets were Preachers of the Word, and so were the Scribes, who were therefore called Text-Men or Masters of the Text; and said to sit in Moses's Chair, because they expounded the Law. Also in the Jewish Church they did by the Imposition of hands called Semiea, or∣dain Presbyters; some of whom were for Ju∣dicature, and others for Teaching the Law: Thus Preaching came down successively to the Times of the Gospel, in which we have a solemn Command To Preach to every Creature; To be instant in season out of season, To labour in the Word and Doctrine; nay, To travail in birth till Christ be formed in men. The Apostles, after their Master Jesus Christ who was the great∣est of all Preachers, dispersed themselves up and down the world to propagate the Gospel. Paul went Preaching from Jerusalem to Illyri∣cum, Mark was in Egypt, Matthew in Ethio∣pia, Thomas in India, Simon Zelotes in Britam, and others in other places, all labouring in the same Work. After the Death of the Apostles, this Ordinance was much esteemed in succeeding ages. Anciently the very Bishops of Rome were wont to Preach; and in the supposed Epistle of Clement to James the Brother of the Lord, mention is made of quotidiana Praedicatio. Tertullian speaks of feeding the peoples Faith Sanctis Vocibus, with holy Words; And Origen saith, Omnes Episcapi erudiunt, all the Bishops Preach. In the Old, though not, as they are called, Apostolical Canons, we have this; Epis∣copus non docens deponatur, Let the not-preaching
Bishop be deposed: and in the Old, though not, as named, Apostolical Constitutions; the man∣ner was, first one Presbyter preached, then ano∣ther, and last of all the Bishop. At this time there was good store of Preaching. Damasus the First, Bishop of Rome, in his Epistle de Cho∣repiscopis, shews how unlike Christ they are who preach not; Ipse enim docuit, ipse ovem perditam quaesivit, ipse propriis humeris reportavit; Christ did all himself. St. Austin and St. Chry∣sostom preached every day; ye heard yesterday, ye shall hear to morrow, is common in their Homilies. Many of the Writings of Ambrose, Nazianzen, Basil and Cyril, were only their Sermons to the People; and therefore in Con∣cilio Vasensi held about the Year of our Lord 440, it was ordered, That if the Presbyter were sick and unable to Preach, Sanctorum Patrum Homiliae à Diaconis recitentur; The Dea∣cons should read the Homilies of the holy Fathers. Gregory the Great in his Pastoral, saith, Qui verbum praedicationis subtrabunt, animabus mo∣rientibus vitae remedia abscondunt; The un∣preaching Minister hides the Bread of Life from dying souls. The fourth Toletan Council, which was a little after Gregory, saith, Omne opus Sa∣cerdotum in praedicatione consistit, Preaching is a Ministers All. In the Council of Mentz under Charles the Great, It was Ordered, Can. 25. Nunquam desit diebus Dominicis qui Verbum Dei Praedicet; On Sabbath days a Preacher must not be wanting; No, though the Bisliop be sick it must not, as that Can. saith. In the Oxford Con∣stitutions
made by Archbishop Stephen, Preach∣ing is enjoined, ne canes muti merito judicen∣tur. Nay, the very Council of Trent, saith, that Preaching is praecipuum munus Episcopi, the chief work of a Bishop. Such an Ordinance is this, and so highly esteemed in all Ages, no wonder if Bishop Morton said, The custom of not-Preaching is but a Babe in Christianity, and the defence thereof a new point of Learning in Christs School. But to return to the Point in hand after this long digression; the Believer may experience this Ordinance to be of God. That it is so, is in part expermented before Con∣version. Whilest St. Paul but a Prisoner preached of Righteousness, Temperance and Judg∣ment to come, Felix though a Judg trembled, feeling moral bonds cast on his Conscience by the Power of that Word which is never bound. It is yet more fully experimented in Conversion, in which there is a wonderful change wrought; the dead being raised, new Creatures formed, Lyons turned into Lambs, and hearts of Stone into Flesh; all proclaiming that the Finger of God is in it of a Truth. Johannes Speicerus, as Scultetus relates, Preach∣ed so powerfully, That the very Strumpets, leaving their lewdness, returned home unto God. After Conversion the Experiment is yet more compleat; the Word works effectually in them that believe, 1 Thess. 2.13. The glory of the Divine Attributes break forth in this Ordi∣nance; out of the seeming weakness a Majesty appears in some sort, much as Christs Deity
sparkled out of his Humane Flesh. It is not the meer Voice of Man but of God, coming with an Authority more than Humane, and setting the heart, made like Josiah's tender by Faith, into an holy trembling at it, as a sig∣nal proof, that the Lord is the Speaker; One who hath the Keys of Heaven and Hell in his own hand, and upon Obedience or Rebellion is able to save or destroy. The Believer by the command and reverential awe put upon his Conscience, finds That there is a Divine Pre∣sence and Grandeur in it, which to oppose, is to strive and make War with God himself. Again, out of the seeming foolishness wis∣dom discovers it self. Whilest but a man is teaching outwardly to the ear, there is an in∣ward Teacher in the heart: The Spirit of Re∣velation uncovers the holy things, and brings forth this or that sacred Mystery to the View, Intus datur, intus coruscat, intus revelatur, as St. Austin expresses it. The Father of Lights shews himself there in sacred Revelations; Christ seals up the Ordinance by the dropping of the holy Unction. A Believer meets with such illuminations as are far more precious than all the Lights in Nature. Hence St. Chry∣sostom's Auditors, when he was like to be si∣lenced, cried out, Satius est ut Sol non luceat, quam ut Chrysostomus non doceat; It were bet∣ter to lose the Sun, than such a burning shining light as he was. The entrance or opening of thy words giveth Light, saith the Psalmist, Psal. 119.130. When the Word preached is
admitted into the heart by Faith, and there opened by the Holy Spirit, a celestial Light rises up, and bears Witness to the Ordinance. Again, in the midst of plainness Divine Omni∣science shews forth it self; the Minister stands without, but the Word enters in and anato∣mizes the heart. Elisha proved himself a Pro∣phet, in telling what the King of Syria spake in his Bed-chamber. Our Saviour manifested his Deity in answering to the thoughts of Men. When the Word preached penetrates into the retiring-rooms and inmost chambers of the heart, and there rifles the very thoughts and unriddles the purposes and inclinations; It is an infallible Sign that the Great Searcher of hearts hath sent a Beam of Omniscience along with it. The Believer, who above all other men studies himself most, desires much to know two things, viz. What of secret sin there is in him, and what of truth of Grace. And un∣der this searching Ordinance he comes to see many a mote or black spot in his heart, such as he never dream't of; and withal some marks and characters which to his comfort shew him his uprightness: and in such Discove∣ries he sees the Great Revealer of Secrets co-operating with the Word. Moreover, whilest the Minister is unfolding the Gospel, such are the ravishing savours of Christ and Grace, as if a box of Heavenly Spikenard were broken in the Believers Heart: Pardon and Peace smell out of the odours of Christs Me∣rits, and Heaven it self out of his pure Righ∣teousness:
Through this lattice (how con∣temptible soever it be to carnal Men) Christ shews his all-desirable self and full treasures; Free-Grace communicates pardons and love∣tokens; the Divine Spirit breaths life and pow∣er into Believers, quickning and awakening to answer the pure Commands with Obedi∣ence; and this and that Promise lets out its sweetness, and flows as a Conduit of Coele∣stial Wine, with admirable Suavities and Con∣solations. In such things as these Faith hath sweet Communion with God, and a sure seal set to this Ordinance. In the Preaching of the Gospel the Kingdom of Heaven comes nigh, even to rejecters, Luk. 10.11. Much more doth it do so unto Believers, who take the holy My∣steries and Promises into the bosom and com∣plex of Faith, and thereby inflame their Hearts with the Love of Christ and Grace, as a sure witness that this Ordinance which car∣ries so much of Heaven in it, is from thence. Next to the Preaching of the Word I shall set the Ordinance of Prayer: This is the ascent of the Soul unto God as the fountain of all Good. As in every lust there is a depression of the Heart to one Creature or other; so in every right Prayer there is an holy elevation of it to God. This gives great Glory to God; as it is humble, it reveres his Majesty; as up∣right, it owns his Omniscience; as believing, it glorifies his condescending Grace; and as im∣portunate, it overcomes the Almighty, and takes the Kingdom of Heaven by violence;
opening a door to that infinite mass or trea∣sure of Grace which is laid up for those that strive and wrestle with him for supplies out of it. This is a Catholick Duty, good in all pla∣ces. The Jews prayed in or towards the Temple, but now the whole World is consecrated for it; every where holy hands are to be lifted up; fit for all times, praying always, saith the Apostle, Ephes. 6.18. Not that we are to do nothing else, as the Euchitae or Messaliani of old drea∣med; but that there is no time wherein the Mercy-seat is shut, or Christ not interceding above, or the holy Spirit not ready in some measure to assist Believers: Neither is there any time in which we should not carry about with us a virtual confession in our sense of Sin, or a virtual Prayer in our sense of Wants, or a virtual Praise in our sense of Mercies. Conti∣nuum desiderium est continua oratio, as St. Austin hath it. Vita hominis, saith Luther, nibil aliud est, nisi oratio, gemitus, desiderium, suspirium ad misericordiam Dei; Mans life should be a per∣petual breathing after God. And withal it is in∣cumbent on all Men; the first Adam in Inno∣cency probably addressed himself to God in Prayer; and Jesus Christ the second Adam was much in it; the Ethnicks by the light of Nature used it. It was an old Gentile-Law, Ad divos adeunto, go to the gods. Socrates prayed that he might be Intus pulcher, inwardly fair with virtue. Plato saith, Every one who is com∣pos mentis, will in the beginning of any work in∣voke the gods. How much more must Christians
pray, who have before their eyes a Gospel, a Mercy-Seat, and an open way into the Holy of Holies through the Veil of Christs flesh! Unre∣gencrate persons are bound to this Duty, as we see in the Command to Simon Magus, being in the gall of bitterness and bond of iniquity, Act. 8.22; Much more Believers. Prayer is the breath of the new-creature, and badg of Christians; who are thus deciphered by the Apostle, All that call upon the name of the Lord Jesus, 1 Cor. 1.2. Such and so great is this Ordinance, that the Jews (who prayed stand∣ing, and therefore called Prayer Gnammuda, or Standing) used to say, Sine stationi∣bus non staret mundus, The world would not stand without Standing or Prayer. That this is an Ordinance of God, the Believer expe∣riments many ways: First, He experiments it in the Assistances of the Holy Spirit; which is as Gales to the Sails of Prayer in its Voyage to Heaven; and as holy Fire to the Incense of it, causing it to ascend to the Throne of Grace. The Spirit helpeth our infirmities, Rom. 8.26. , It lifts over against us, or helps us to lift up a Prayer, which else would be too heavy for us. Whilst the Believer is a-pray∣ing, O what heavenly meltings are there! The Believer is like Ephraim, bemoaning him∣self; or as the Children of Israel at Mizpeh, lamenting after the Lord, and pouring out wa∣ter, as if their eyes were turned into Foun∣tains of penitential tears; or as the man in
the Gospel, crying out with tears, Lord, I believe, help thou mine unbelief; Catching at Mercy with an hand trembling at his own Infirmity. Such meltings and spiritual mourn∣ings over Sin, plainly shew, That the Spirit of Grace and Supplication is poured out upon the Prayer; making it, like the bruised In∣cense, sull of fragrancy, breathing out from a broken heart, dissolved into tears by the beams of Gods Love. And in this Evange∣lical thaw, What Divine enlargements are there! The heart is no longer in the Straits of Sin and Earth, but opened and expanded towards Heaven. E're the praying Believer is a ware, his Soul sets him on the wheels, and his lips drop as the honey-comb; if not in the very entrance of the Duty, yet in the pro∣gress of it. The Psalmist in the beginning of the 38th Psalm, seems cold and frozen in Unbelief; Gods arrows stick fast in him, his hand presseth him sore, the iniquities are too heavy, the wounds stink and are corrupt; There are nothing but bowings, breaches, and misera∣ble roarings: But before he hath done pray∣ing, his heart recovers again, In thee, O Lord, do I hope; thou wilt hear, O Lord my God, ver. 15. Sometimes at first there is a Cloud and dark Eclipse upon the Prayer; and yet a little after, Grace breaks forth with its Sunny beams, and draws out the heart towards God, They look∣ed unto him and were lightned, as David speaks, Psal. 34.5; or as the words may be read, they looked unto him and flowed; their hearts were
as a River running out with spiritual fluency and enlargments; such as are a real proof that the free Spirit is in the Prayer; and withal, What an heavenly ardor is there? While I was musing the fire burned, saith David, Psal. 39.3. While the Believer is a-praying, the Holy Spirit is as fire upon the heart, inflaming it into religious ascents towards God. The Believer stirs up himself, and takes hold on God by some Promise or other; and Jacob∣like wrestles with him for Mercy, and will not let him go till there be a dawn or day-break of Grace. He prays in his Prayer, and urges the Attributes of God upon him, and presses hard upon him with an holy immodesty or im∣pudence, as the expression is, Luk. 11.8; and will not be said Nay. Much like Gorgonia, the pious Sister of Nazianzen, who lay at the Altar with Tears and Prayers, and said, That she would not depart, till she had her request; and accordingly obtain∣ed it of God. This is the . Jam. 5.16, the inwrought Prayer, or Prayer wrought by Gods Spirit in ours, and from thence poured out in an agony, or vehemence of holy Assections, panting and breaking with longings after God and his Grace. Luther ha∣ving prayed with great fervency, said, Ʋti∣nam eodem ardore orare possem, Would to God I could always pray with the like ardor; then should I always have this answer, Fiat quod velis, Be it unto thee as thou wilt. After this manuer doth the Holy Spirit come down on the Be∣lievers
Prayer, and bear witness to this Or∣dinance. Secondly, He experiments it in his Access to God. The Devils, who are in Chains of Dark∣ness, can make no approaches to God; there is an unpassable gulf between them and him. It is storied of a German Nobleman, that there was acted before him a Play of the five Wise and five Foolish Virgins; the Wise were St. Ma∣ry, St. Catbarine, St. Barbara, St. Dorothy, St. Mar∣garet, to these came the Foolish for Oyl; that is, as the Actor interpreted it, That they would intercede with God for their admission into Heaven; They knocked, and wept, and in∣stantly prayed, but the Wise denied, and bid them be gone: At this sight the Nobleman was astonished, crying out, What is the Chri∣stian Religion, if none of the Saints will hear and intercede for us? And soon after he died of an Apoplexy. 'Tis sad being shut out from the presence of God. The Believer is, as they say of the Rhodians, in sole positus. He is nigh unto God, and hath his Religion proved to him, in that he hath , access or manuduction unto God. The way into the Holy of Holies is open through the veil of Christs flesh; and the Holy Spirit doth conduct him in thi∣ther. He may come , with bold∣ness unto the throne of Grace; and there utter all his mind, as a Child doth to his Father. David, in the 13th Psalm, begins as if God were totally absent, How long wilt thou forget me, O Lord, for ever? How long wilt thou hide
thy face from me? But a little after we have him in the joy and triumph of Faith; I have trusted in thy mercy, my heart shall rejoice in thy salvation, saith he, ver. 5. The door of Mercy, which for a little time was shut up, soon o∣pened again, and gave him a free access unto God. Thirdly, He experiments it in the returns of Prayer; the Promises, by which God binds his own bowels above, are let down here be∣low in the Gospel. And as the Believer takes hold of them by Prayer, so God is touched with a compassionate feeling thereof. Whilst Ephraim was bemoaning himself in his Suppli∣cation, Gods bowels are troubled and fall a-sound∣ing at it, Jer. 31.18, 20. Coelum tundimus & misericordiam extorquemus, saith Tertullian; We knock at Heaven, and fetch down mercy from God. Prayer hath done Wonders in the world. At Abrahams Prayer. God stoops to such low terms, that he would have saved Sodom for ten righteous persons: Jacob by Prayer wrestles, and becomes a Prince with God; which is more than to have all the Monarchies of the World. Moses by it binds as it were the Almigh∣ty, and will not let him alone to consume Israel: Joshua stopt the Chariot of the Sun, and so made a long day for the improvement of his Victory: Elias locked up Heaven, and till he turned the Key of Prayer the contrary way there was no rain upon the Earth. In the time of Marcus Antoninus the Philosopher, the Christian Le∣gion by their Prayers, procured Water for the
Roman Army, and a scattering Tempest against their Enemies; and were therefore called Le∣gio fulminatrix, The thundring Legion. Prayer hath a kind of Omnipotence in it, and can do every thing. Sometimes the Prayer is retur∣ned in Specie, in the very thing desired, as Hannah's was in a Son; whom therefore she called Samuel; that is, Asked of God. In this case the Believer hath a double Blessing in one; over and above the common Provi∣dence he hath a pregnant proof of his Prayer in it. A Blessing, which is a meer Provi∣dence, comes up, as the Corn doth, with the husk or chaff of one vanity or other, as a Me∣mento of that blast which Sin brought upon the World: But that, which is a Fruit of Prayer, is as Manna from Heaven, pure and unmixt; a Blessing and no sorrow added to it; as being the Birth of the Promise and Cove∣nant. The Blessings of the former sort are gathe∣red up by Men as Acorns are by Swine with∣out looking up to that Grace, which as a Tree of Life bears all the good Fruit: But the lat∣ter raises up the Heart in the admirations and high-praises of the great Donor, as we see in Hannah, who returned back her Son, assoon as received, unto God in Praise and Dedica∣cation. Criticks have observed an elegant Paranomasia in those words ; therefore I have lent him to the Lord, 1 Sam. 1.28. Samuel was first Shaiil meel, Asked of God; and then Shaiil leel, lent or returned to God. Those Blessings, which are drawn down by
Prayer, lie not dead here below, but are sent back again in Praise. Sometimes the Prayer returns another way, though it be not heard ad voluntatem, it is ad utilitatem: The an∣swer is in some thing that profits us, though not to the express desire of our Hearts; it may be it is in the sweet composure of the Heart. Upon Prayer God comes in, and rebukes the Winds and Seas of Passion, and there is a calm and Divine serenity in the Soul. Hannab be∣fore Prayer was a Woman of a sorrowful spirit; but her Soul being poured out unto God, retur∣ned with a Divine sweetness; Her countenance was no more sad, 1 Sam. 1.18. It may be there is an inward support which is tantamount to the Blessing desired. Our Saviours Prayer against the Cup of Wrath was heard, in that he was enabled to drink and overcome it. And St. Paul's against the Thorn in the Flesh, in that he had sufficient Grace to withstand it. Preclarè nobiscum agitur, dum adest Dei Gratia quae nobis subveniat, saith Reverend Calvin. In the Supports of Grace there is a signal answer of Prayer; it may be, over and above the Support, the Beams of Gods Love break in upon the heart: This is a little Heaven here below, and richly transcends all this world. Bellarmin tells us a Story of an old Man, who used to rise from Duty with these words; Claudimini, Oculi mei, claudimini; nihil enim pulchrius jam videbitis: Be shut, O my Eyes, be shut; for I shall never behold a fairer Object than Gods Face, which I have now beheld. The
Love of God irradiating a Prayer is a ravish∣ing sight, far better than life and all its com∣forts. It may be there is a transmutation of the Blessing into another; such as God, who improves the stock of Prayer to the best ad∣vantage, knows to be better for us. David prayed earnestly for his sick Child, and the re∣turn of it was in a Solomon, a Jedidiah beloved of God. One way or other the Believers Prayer returns into his bosom, being answered at least secundum cardinem, according to the main hinge and scope of it, which is Gods glory and Mans comfort or happiness. Thus Moses's Prayer to go into Canaan was answe∣red according to the ground of it. Instead of the type God takes him up to Heaven the true Canaan, which was most for Mases's comfort; And instead of Moses a type of the Law, Joshua a type of Christ leads the people into Canaan, which was most for Gods Glory. Which way soever the Prayer returns to the Believer, it seals up the Ordinance for Divine. In the last Place I come to the Ordinance of the Lord Supper: The outward Elements of this Sacrament our Lord Christ took (as Lear∣ned Men conceive) from a custom observed among the Jews at the Passeover, at the end of the Celebration whereof, the Father of the Fa∣mily was wont to take a Cake of Bread, and after the blessing thereof to break and distri∣bute it to the Communicants; and also after that a Cup of Wine in like sort, unto which some refer that Cup of Salvation, Psal. 116.13.
The Bread and Wine among the Jews were but a Customary Rite, but Christ consecrated them into a Sacrament; saying of the Bread, This is my Body; and of the Wine, This Cup is the New Testament in my Blood, which could not before be said of them. In the Paschal Rite, it was only said of the Bread, This is , the bread of affliction; and of the Cup, This is  the Cup of the Hymn: But now, This is my Body, and this is my Blood. In this great Ordinance the Body and Blood of Christ are evidently figured out, and set forth before our eyes, as if he were Crucified among us. The seventh General Council at Constantinople, who knocked down all other Images, saith of this Sacrament, That it is Vera Christi Imago, the only true Crucifix or Image of Christ. And which is much more than an Image, the very Body and Blood of Christ are here truly and really, though Spiritually pre∣sent to our Faith, being exhibited ut epulum faederale, as a Covenant-feast, or Love-banquet, chearing the heart of God and Man. The same Body and Blood, which in the Sacrifice on the Cross were a sweet savour unto God, and satisfied his Justice, are set forth in the Sacrament as meat and drink for our Faith, feeding us to Life Eternal. Here is Epitome E∣vangelti, a compend of the Gospel, the whole Covenant and Contrivance of Salvation is sealed in a bit of Bread and drop of Wine: Here the Believer meets with many rich Ex∣periments, he feeds and lives upon a Crucifi∣ed
Christ, eating his Flesh and drinking his Blood; and what a Feast is this! 'tis much that our Bodies may live upon the Body and Blood of Creatures; but Oh incomparable Grace! Our Souls may live on the Body and Blood of God. One drop whereof, saith Luther, is more worth than Heaven and Earth. Cruci haere∣mus, sanguinem sugimus, & intra ipsa Redempto∣ris nostri vulnera figimus linguam, saith St. Cy∣prian. Haustu interiori in a Spiritual Mystical way, we do in this Ordinance cleave to Christs. Cross, suck his precious Blood, and as it were fa∣sten our Tongues within his healing Wounds. Whilest the Bread and Wine are Physically and Carnally united to us, we are Mystically and Hyperphysically united to Christ, becoming Members of his Body, of his Flesh, and of his Bones; Spiritually dwelling in him and he in us, The same holy Spirit, which is upon him in Heaven, falling down upon us on Earth; and the Faith which is in us here below, ascending up to clasp and embrace him. In sinu Christi recumbimus, in cor Christi introspicimus, saith Luther; We lie in his bosom, and look into his heart. In our Pardon sealed we taste the sweet∣ness of his atoning Blood, and in the effusion of the holy Spirit we drink at the sountain∣head of Grace sprung up in his Humane Na∣ture. We have here the whole Covenant or Charter of Grace sealed to us, and may believe not only ex promisso but ex pignore: Over and above the Promise we have a pawn or pledg of the Truth thereof. We saw not the inspired
Prophets and Apostles penning down the Promises, but Ecce Signum, lo here is a visi∣ble sign and seal set thereunto; and sense leads in Faith to claim and possess them for its own: Hence our Saviour calls the Cup, the New Testa∣ment in his Blood, Luk. 22.20. The Cup (saith Luther) contains the Wine, the Wine exhibits the Blood of Christ, the Blood of Christ natifies the New Govenant, and the New Covenant promises remission of Sins, and with it a vast treasure of Blessings. Again, we have here the rich anoin∣tings of the holy Spirit. Among the Oriental Nations, and in particular among the Jews, there was Ʋnctio convivalis, a Feastival Ʋncti∣on, which they used as a token of welcome to pour on the head of their Guests: Thus there came unto Christ a Woman having an Atabaster box of very precious Ointment, and poured it on his head as he sate at meat, Mat. 26.7. Whilest we are at the Lords-Table, we are anointed with fresh Oyl; the holy Spirit is poured out in richer measures of Grace and Comfort, than it was at first. As a Spirit of Grace and Suppli∣cation it melts the Heart into godly sorrows at the sight of a Crucisied Christ: Sin being in∣deed the Jew and Judas, the betrayer and mur∣derer of the Son of God; the Nails in his Cross, and Spear in his Side; the Gall and Wormwood in the Cup of Wrath which made him sweat drops of Blood, and under an horrid Eclipse of Gods favour to cry out of forsaking. To look upon a groaning World travelling under an universal vanity, would
stir up sorrow in any that had a sense of it; much more to look upon a Christ, a Creator bleeding and dying upon a Cross; to the least drop of whose Passion the dashing down of a World is a poor inconsiderable nothing. To look upon the broken Tables of a Law dearer to God than Heaven and Earth is very grie∣vous; but to stand and see God for our Sin bruising and breaking his own Son and Effen∣tial Image in our assumed Nature, is matter of amazing sorrow. Never was Sin set forth. in such bloody Colours as in his Passion; ne∣ver do repentant tears flow more purely than at such a spectacle. Here the Heart breaks in its closing with a broken Christ, and bleeds a∣fresh over his Wounds, and turns the Sacra∣ment of the Supper into a Baptism of Tears; and out of an holy hatred and revenge would have the violence done to Christ be put upon Sin the great Crucifier of him in the true Mortification thereof. As a Spirit of Faith it causes us to live upon Christ: Having no Righ∣teousness of our own to answer the Law with, we feast and satisfie our selves in the Righte∣ousness of Christ; as in that which satisfied the heart of God, and is here made over to satisfie ours. We may surely say, The Righte∣ousness of God is upon us; and as it hath no spot or wrinkle in it self, so it leaves no ground of scruple or jealousie in our Hearts in the midst of our Sins, which have Death and Hell virtually in them. We yet live upon the ato∣ning Sacrifice of Christ. His Blood which was
offered up to God through the Eternal Spirit, and by him accepted as a plenary Satisfaction for Sin, is now put into Promises and Sacra∣ments, as into so many Basins, and from thence sprinkled on our Conscience to purge away all our guilt; our Sins are pardoned, and our Pardon passed under the Seal of Heaven. In the midst of our Wants, Faith can triumph in the immense Treasures of Grace in Christ set open in this Ordinance to all comers. Here's Eye-salve for our Blindness; Strength for our Weakness; Melting for the hard Heart; Cor∣dials for Fainting-fits; quenching Grace a∣gainst the fiery darts of Satan; and Healing for the bloody issues of Sin. From this Table we go, saith Chrysostome, as Lions breathing fire terrible to the Devils themselves. Ante faciem Ʋnctionis Christi nullus omnino stare potest morbus animae, quamvis inveteratus, saith Bernard; Before the Ʋnction of Christ the most inveterate disease of the Soul will vanish away. When once the Venetians were boasting of their great Treasures, a Spanish Ambassador told them, That his Masters Treasure had a root in the Mines of America. However worldly Men may boast of outward things, the Belie∣vers joy is, That his Graces have a sure root in the Mines and rich Treasures of Christ; in whom dwells all fulness of abundance and re∣dundance running over in shares and measures upon all that are in him. As a spirit of Love it inflames the Heart towards Christ; Oh! what manner of Love is here set before us!
the Fathers own Son and Image, passing by Angels, assumed our frail Flesh, and in it stood in our room: Having, though the Holy One, the Sin of the World cast on him by a wonder∣ful Imputation; and though the beloved Son, the Wrath of God bruising and pressing him into a bloody Agony and Passion on our be∣half. The Fathers Eternal Joy and Splendor lay for a time in a dark Eclipse of Sorrow and Desertion, as one forsaken of God, that we might not be cast out into utter darkness; and bled and died on a Cross as one accursed of God, to keep us from bleeding in eternal flames, and to purchase a place in Glory for us. And all this in outward Elements is not only limmed out and figured to our senses, but sealed to our hearts, as that which we have a real share and interest in. And what attractives and inflammatives are here? Now, if ever, our Heart will breath out it self in holy Raptures after Christ, and faint and swoon away in Love∣sick desires, till it can catch hold and embrace him, and so taste the rare Delights and Com∣placencies of an Union with Him: And the greater those Complacencies are, the higher are the Desires, and reciprocally the higher the Desires, the greater the Complacencies; till at last the Believing Soul in rapes of Love breaks forth into Hosanna's and Hallelujahs, touching its great Redeemer. Such Experi∣ments as these prove this Ordinance to be Di∣vine.
Thus much touching the Ordinances in Scripture, and the Experimenting their Divi∣nity. In the last Place I shall mention The great Works of Power Recorded in Scripture: many of these are Types of the Magnalia or Spiritu∣al Wonders wrought in or for the Souls of Men. Thus the Ark which saved from the Deluge was a Type of Salvation from Wrath in and through Christ; Isaac, born of a dead Body and Womb, a Type of the New-crea∣ture brought forth by supernatural Grace; and The bringing Israel out of Egypt, a Type of the great Redemption wrought by Christ. These a Believer may Experiment in their Spiritual Imports and Mysteries, which are more great and glorious than the Things themselves. Not to be prolix in this; I shall only instance in two Things, viz. The Creation of the World, Historically set forth, Gen. 1. and The Miracles wrought by Christ, related in the Gospel. As touching Creation, as clear a Glass as it is of the Eternal Power and Godhead, the Philoso∣phers were much mistaken about it: Aristotle asserting, That the World was Eternal; as if it were possible, That there should be an infinite orderly Succession of Things, or a third, fourth, fifth, &c. without a first; or as if a World, a Creature, could be made as the Son of God was Begotten, or joyn Eternities with its Creator. The Stoicks dreaming at least of an Eternal Matter or Chaos; as if that Axiome, ex nihilo nihil fit, which runs true in Nature,
did reach God himself; or as if He, like our Mechanicks on Earth, could not work with∣out Tools or Materials: Or, as if the Gulf between Nothing and Being were so great, that Infinite Power could not fill it up, and setch over a Creature from Nullity into Being. The Epicureans fancying the World to be made by a fortuitous concourse of Atomes luckily meeting together in the framing of it; as if the blind Particles of Matter could range themselves into a World full of delicate Order and Harmony; or as if the various parts, re∣gular motions, and orderly dispositions in the great Universe could be but a chance; or as if the admirable consent and confederation of all the parts therein, in which contraries conspire and agree together for the good of the whole, were but a fortunate casualty. Such were the dreams of the Sophi; but the Believer by Faith understands, That the Worlds were framed by the Word of God, Hebr. 11.3. And over and a∣bove may experience a Creation, a pretious New-creation in his own Heart; We are his workmanship created in Christ Jesus, saith the Apostle, Eph. 2.10. In this Creation Almigh∣ty Power is as much laid out as in the Old; and the Products of it are much more excel∣lent than the other. Spiritual Light excels Na∣tural; and the Firmament of Faith the out∣ward One. The Living Water within exceeds the great Ocean; and Christ in the Heart, the Sun in the Heavens. Graces are transcendent Creatures, and surpass even the Immortal
Soul, which yet outweighs a World. The Be∣liever may look upon his Holy Faith, Fear, Love, Joy, Hope and Patience, which make up the New-Creature; and say, All these were created out of Nothing, and called into Being, when they were not: Here is dextra excelsi, The right hand of the most High, the very same which made the World, and Vestigia Spiritûs Sancti, The footsteps of that Holy Spirit which of old moved on the Face of the Waters: Now I know, That God is a Creator indeed, and have a practical proof of it in my own Heart; every part of the New-creature bearing witness thereunto. As to the Miracles of Christ related in the Gospel, these were so famous, That Josephus mentions them; Celsus and Ju∣lian in their Writings against Christians durst not deny them;Grot. de Ver. Relig. 44. Came∣ro de Verbo 441. Petr. Gal. de Arranis 447. The Jews in their Talmudical Books, nay, and the Mahometans in their Al∣choran confess them: And the Heathens moved with envy at them, caused the life of Apolloni∣us Thyanaeus and his lying Miracles, to be de∣scribed in meer opposition to Christ and his true ones. When John sent his Disciples on that errand, Art thou he that should come? that is, the Messias: Christ returns this answer, Go and tell John, the blind receive their sight, the lame walk, the lepers are cleansed, the deaf hear, and the dead are raised up: As much as to say, In such Wonders as these is my Glory manifested. For the right understanding of these we must note; Christ did not come only or chiefly to cure the Bodies of Men, no, those Miracles,
which in transitu cured their Bodies,Miracula christi, corporali∣ter facta, Spiritali∣ter intel∣ligenda snut. were ultimately levelled at their Souls, that by Out∣ward Cures they might be led to seek Inward ones from Christ. Neither did he do all his Miracles on Earth; no, being Ascended and Sitting at the Right Hand of Majesty in Hea∣ven he works , those Spiritual Miracles on the Souls of Men, which are incomparably greater than those on their Bodies. How ma∣ny blind Hearts (and those worse than blind Eyes) hath he cured by a Touch, as he passed by them in the Ordinances, causing them to see himself, the True light and Sun of Righ∣teousness, together with all the Heavenly My∣steries which stream as so many Beams or Rayes from him? How many deaf Souls have upon his Divine Ephatha been obedientially opened to the Commands of God; and though lame before, have Rose up, walked holily, and praised God? what Spiritual Lepers hath he by a Touch of his Spirit and Word cleansed? Quae enim immunditia, quae incredulitas, quae duritia, quod peccatum ad hunc contactum Christi consistere poterit? saith Ferus; No uncleanness, unbelief, hardness, sinfulness can stand against the Touch of Christ. What Sinners of all forts dead in Sins and Trespasses hath he raised up to a Divine Life? Saint Austin reciting that Christ had raised up three Persons, viz. The Maid in her Fathers House; the Young-Man carried out upon the Bier, and Lazarus four days dead and stinking in the Grave; adds, Ista tria genera mor∣tuorum sunt tria genera peccatorum quos suscitat
Christus; these three dead ones are three sorts of Sinners raised up by Christ. As the Maid in the house, so is the secret Sinner raised up intra la∣tebras conscientiae, within the doors of his own Heart. As the young Man carried out upon the Bier, so is the open Sinner raised up out of known Sins: And as Lazarus dead and stinking in the grave, so is the customary Sinner raised up out of his old putrified Sins. At the voice of Christ the strongest bonds of custom are broken, and the poor Sinner comes forth in∣to an holy life. These things being so, it ap∣pears, That the Believer may experiment the Spiritual Miracles of Christ; and from thence gather a proof in his own Heart, That the ve∣ry same hand wrought the Corporal ones; es∣pecially seeing these latter are but types and shadows of the other, which he finds verified in himself. Thus much touching this Fundamental Ex∣periment of the Scriptures: A Believer may experiment the Laws, Promises, Threatnings, Supernatural Truths, Sacred Ordinances, and Great Works in Scripture to be Divine, and so have a Practical proof that the Scripture is of God.
CHAP. XIII. Of the top and highest stature of Faith, the Believers Assurance of his good estate of Pardon and Salvation. That this Assurance is attainable, many ways demonstrated. HAving passed over the Believers Expe∣riment touching the Scripture; I shall now proceed to another touching his own Estate. He may certainly know, , as Dionysius speaks, That it is well with him, That he is in a good state of Pardon and Sal∣vation. This is apex fidei, the top and highest stature of Faith; a Priviledg which transcends Earth, and antedates Heaven to us. Here are those three things, Lumen, Laetitia, & Pax, Light, Joy, and Peace, which (as the School∣man Halensis saith) render the experiment of Grace in the Soul truly certain. Here are Coele∣stial Beams, unspeakable Joys, admirable Se∣renities, Sabbaths of Rest, Seas of Sweetness, and Beatitudes too great for the tongue of Men and Angels to express. Before the Be∣liever walked only with the single staff of Re∣cumbency and Resignation; but now he hath bands and troops of Comfort following after him from the Promises: His darling Soul is now richly provided for to all Eternity; Eternal Beanty is in his Eye, Infinite Goodness at hand
for his Embraces; the lines are fallen in a kind of Paradise; his Portion is no less than God himself; all his Blessings are dipt in Love: The World may brand him, but the Spirit seals; In the midst of sweeping Judgments he is still one of Gods Jewels; and as soon as Death dissolves him, Heaven receives him. Touching this great Experiment, I shall first prove, That it is attainable by a Believer; and then shew in what ways it is to be attained. The Romanists hold, That no Man without special Revelation can be certain of his Par∣don and Salvation; not with a certainty of Faith,Bellar. de Juslif. lib. 3. which is infallible, but only with a certainty of Hope which is conjectural. The Promises indeed are sure, say they, but our Dispositions are uncertain: The Promises run Conditionally, If they return to thee with all their heart, 2 Chron. 6.38. and who can be sure that he doth so? Who can say, I have made my heart clean? saith the Wise-man, Prov. 20.9. Who can understand his errors? saith David, Psal. 19.12. Some Scriptures put a perad∣venture upon Remission, Who can tell if God will turn and repent? Jon. 3.9. Repent, if per∣haps the thought of thy heart may be forgiven thee, Act. 8.22. And the reason is, because of the uncertainty of our Dispositions: Faith is not Faith unless it lean on the Divine Word; and no Word saith, Such or such an one hath true Faith and Repentance, or is truly pardon∣ed; Happy is the man that feareth always, Prov. 28.14. The heart of man is deceitful above all
things, who can know it? Jer. 17.9. Assurance if vouchsafed, would but puss up Pride, and open a door to Licentiousness. Thus the Pon∣tisicians. Their Divinity in this great Point is much like the Philosophy of the old Scepticks, those Patrons of all Uncertainty; who used to say, , Reason against Rea∣son puts all Propositions in aequilibrio; the Ba∣lance hangs even without Declension, this or that way, after all debates imaginable; still , perhaps it is so, perhaps not: It may be they do see and hear, it may be not; at least they doubt, whether they do it distinctly or no. After the same sort the Romanists do what they can to perswade Be∣lievers out of their Spiritual sense, out of which Assurance ariseth. It may be (will they say) thou repentest and believest, it may be not; or if thou dost them, it may be not sicut oportet, in such a manner as they ought to be done. Hence the Council of Trent Can. 9 calls the certainty of Remission, vain and remote from all Piety. This is that Doctrine of theirs which Luther calls, Monstrum dubitationis, the monster of doubting; and withal asserts, That if they erred only in this, it were a just eause for us to se∣parate from such an Infidel-Church. Learned Pareus stiles it, Desperationis ossicina, the shop of desperation. Adding moreover, That it is An∣tichrists proper work to weaken the Faith and Hope of Christians. Indeed this Doctrine doth dispirit and emasculate Religion, turn Faith and Hope into meer Meteors, and set the Con∣sciences
of Men a-fluctuating in perpetual doubts and labyrinths. But let us see what they say for it, first distinguishing between the certainty of Faith, and the certainty of Hope; they allow the latter to Believers: And what manner of Hope is this? Is it a fallible con∣jectural Hope only? such a Spiders web may be found in an Hypocrite, who hath no lot or part in this matter: Or is it a true Divine Hope sutable to a real Believer? This even the School-man Durandus will confess to be such, That non potest non evenire, it cannot but come to pass, this will not make ashamed, Rom. 5.5. by disappointing the Soul where it lodgeth. It is the Believers anchor, pure and stedfast, Heb. 6.19. Such as will never leave him to the courtesie of a wave or rock, for it enters in within the Veil, and is fastned in Heaven. Faith and Hope, which they here vainly distin∣guish, are coupled so together in a Believer, that Hope cannot fluctuate unless Faith do so; nei∣ther is Faith certain without an Hope congru∣ous thereunto. Faith is the Hypostasis or Subsist∣ence of things hoped for, saith the Apostle, Heb 11.1. And Hope (as an Ancient hath it) is , The very Blood of Faith. They say in∣deed, That the Promises are sure and infalli∣ble; but withal, they put such an uncertainty upon our Dispositions, as to evacuate the very drift and scope of the Promises; which is, That Believers might have strong consolation, Heb. 6.18. Streaming out from those two immu∣table Things, The Word and Oath of God
who cannot lie. But if the Believer must still be in doubt whether he have true Faith and Repentance; O how weak must his Comforts be, and how cold the Promises! He doth as it were but Tantalize at the pure fountain of Joy and Consolation. It's true, the Promises are Conditional; But are not those Conditions found in true Believers? May they not know that they turn unto God with all their heart, that is, seriously and sincerely? Remission and Salvation hang not on the degree of Faith and Repentance; but on the truth thereof: They cannot say, their Heart is clean with a sinless Sanctity; but they may, that it is so with a true Integrity, such as hath all the Promises entailed on it. A true Believer (saith St. Austin) may say, Sanctus sum, I am holy; and to say so, is not Pride but Grati∣tude: They cannot understand all the errors lying in the deep of the Heart; but they may the Graces brought in there by a new Crea∣tion. That Jm. 3. Who can tell if God will turn? Non tam dubitantis quam bene sperantis est; It speaks not so much doubting as hoping, that God would avert the imminent Judg∣ment. That Acts 8. Perhaps thy thoughts may be forgiven, puts not a scruple on Gods Mercy towards Penitents; but upon Simons Repen∣tance, whether he would truly repent or not. Happy is the man that feareth always, saith the Wiseman; Not he that feareth with a servile Fear, for the Spirit of Bondage makes not happy; but with a filial: And that well con∣sists
with Assurance; for we may rejoice with trembling, as the Psalmist hath it, Psal. 2.11. Nay, it is advanced thereby; For it fears the Lord and his Goodness. The heart of man is de∣ceitful, even the Believer's, so far as it is lea∣vened with the reliques of Sin; but as it is renewed with Principles of Grace, it is a true heart, as the Apostle calls it, Heb. 10.22. and so may pass a true judgment on its own estate: Though it cannot know all that is in its own abyss, yet it may know the general frame and byas of it self; and thereby discover its Sin∣cerity. Hence the Apostle saith, If our hearts condemn us not, then have we confidence towards God, 1 John 3.21. If natural Conscience be a thousand witnesses, inlightned is ten thousand. Faith (say the Romanists) leans on the Word; and there is no Word That such or such an one hath true Faith and Repentance, or that his sins are pardoned and remitted: Unto which I answer, As to that, That no Word saith, that such an one hath true Faith and Repentance; it is to be considered, That when one Proposition stands upon the Word, and another upon natural light or experience; The Conclusion is de Fide. When in the 6. Ge∣neral Council the Fathers proceeded against the Monothelites by this Argument: Whosoever is true God and true Man bath two Wills: But Christ is true God and true Man; Ergo he hath two Wills. The Major stood on the Light of Nature, and the Minor only on the Word; yet the Conclusion was de Fide.
And when the Believer thus communes with his own heart in a practical Syllogism: Whosoever believs and repents bath his Sins pardoned: But I believe and repent; Ergo I have my Sins pardoned. The Major stands on the Word, and the Minor on Experience; but the Conclusion is de Fide. If a Conclu∣sion drawn from two Propositions, one stand∣ing on the Word, and another on other Evi∣dence, be not de Fide, What will the Roma∣nists do for their darling the Popes Supremacy? To prove that such or such a Pope, suppose Gregory or Innocent were Supream in the Church, They must argue thus: Whoever is Peters Successor is Supream in the Church; But Gregory or Innocent were Peters Successors: Ergo, They were Supream in the Church. In which Argument, though they would fain set up the Major upon Scripture, yet the Minor stands only on Election. No Scripture saith, That Peters Successor must be a Gregory or an Innocent; nevertheless they would have the Conclusion de fide. But if a Conclusion drawn from such Propositions be de fide, then may the Believer, according to the practical Syllogism abovementioned, conclude in Faith, That his sins are pardoned, though no Word tell him, That he hath true Faith and Repen∣tance. It suffices, that Experience tells him so. But as a further answer: Neither is the Word altogether wanting herein; for it sets out Faith and Repentance by infallible marks
and characters, as common touchstones to try them by to the end of the World: And where those marks and characters are, it pronounces those Graces to be of the right stamp, and virtually tells Believers as much; and they being irradiated with the Holy Spirit, which shines upon both Scriptures and Evidences, may receive the saying, and considently say, as St. John doth, , We know that we know him. This is the Faith, and this the Repentance marked out in Scrip∣ture. Again, as to that, That no Word saith, That such or such an one in particular hath his sins pardoned. The answer is easie, Univer∣sals include Particulars: That 1 Joh. 4.3. Eve∣ry spirit that confesseth not that Christ is come in the flesh, is not of God, condemns the Mario∣nites as much as if they had been named. That 1 Tim. 4.3, forbidding to marry, condemns the Eustathians as much as if they had been named. That Threatning, Cursed is every one that continu∣eth not in all things, being general, speaks Wrath to every Transgressor as soon as he is such. And so that Promise, Whosoever believeth shall not perish, but have eternal life, being general, speaks Pardon and Salvation to every Belie∣ver as soon as he is such; All that believe are justified, Act. 13.39. No sooner doth this or that man believe, but the Promise speaks to him, Thy sins are forgiven thee; God saith to him, I am thy salvation. It may be he doth not understand it at first: However here is a
sure ground-work for him to believe that it is so; and so accordingly he doth, as soon as Assurance comes in to him. Moreover the Romanists urge, That the Doctrine of Assurance puffs up Pride, and opens a gap to Licentiousness. Unto which my answer is a flat Denial: If our Saviour had thought, that Assurance would make men like Devils in Pride, or Beasts in Licentiousness, he would never have said, as he did to the Para∣lytick, Thy sins be forgiven thee, Mat. 9.2. Had they told us, That such a Worm as Pride would breed out of the Doctrines of Merit and Su∣pererogatory Works, it might easily have been believed; but that it should drop from such an Honeycomb of Free-Grace, as the Doctrine of Assurance is, is not reasonably to be ima∣gined. Here's nothing of Merit, nothing of our own, all is pure meer Grace; the Belie∣vers Faith and Repentance is of Grace, and the Assurance of Pardon and Salvation is Grace upon Grace, Sealing-Grace upon Sanctifying: And whatever perverse abuse may be made of these, the natural tendency thereof is not to Pride; for a man after such Graces to forget the great Fountain, and set up an Idol of Self-excellency, is extreamly unreasonable. Just as if he should say, Now I am in the bosom of Grace, but I would be cast out, and be held afar off; Now I have the warm Beams of Gods Favour, but I would fain be in the Dark again; Who would argue thus? Will it not be much more proper, in an humble admira∣tion
to say as David did, Who am I? and what is my house, that thou hast brought me hitherto? 2 Sam. 7.18. Thy Love, O God, first made me a Vessel of Faith, and then filled me with the Oyl of Holy Joy; What am I to be such a Receiver? All that I am is too small a re∣turn; nothing of self may remain for an Idol. Had they said, That Licentiousness might have been fathered on the Sale of Pardons and In∣dulgences, it had been veryright; These made Germany and other parts groan with all man∣ner of wickedness: But to lay it at the door of Assurance, is abominable. Machiavel was out in his Politicks, when he would have Princes Rule by Fear; but he advised so, be∣cause he knew well enough, That following his Rules they could not be Loved, and there∣fore he would perswade them, that it was bet∣ter to be feared. The true Obedience (for I look not on that which a man is haled unto as such) springs out of Love, for that fulfils the Law; and our Love springs out of Gods, for We love him, because he first loved us, 1 Job. 4.19. And the more his Love is revealed, the more ours is inflamed towards Obedience. In Heaven the blessed Angels, who see Gods Face in Glory, are most intent upon the doing of his Will; on Earth holy men, who taste of his favour, walk the more accurately for it. The joyful sound of Pardon being in the Conscience makes the holy Walk easie, and a fair prospect of Heaven, sweetens every step. Obedience stands no-where so sure as in the Circle of Love, which
from Gods Love, as the first Point, is drawn through ours round about into it self. Gods Love coming down in Assurance, and ours re∣turning in Obedience; his being inflammative to ours, and ours resignative to him: in such cir∣culations of Love their is no room for Licen∣tiousness. It's true Saints after such Pleonasmes of Love may fall foully; but do they fall be∣cause assured? Do they turn Enemies to God, because they know themselves Friends? Can the Light of Gods Countenance dispose them to Works of Darkness? May the choice In∣fluences of Heaven make them earthly and sensual? Will the Prodigal once returned, run away the sooner from his Fathers House, be∣cause of the Kiss, and Robe, and Ring, and Fatted Calf freely bestowed upon him? Such things as these do involve many Paradoxes and Repugnancies in them; and withal cast dirt upon Heaven, and blaspheme the Witnessing Spirit: and therefore are justly abominable to the Saints, who experience the contrary in their own Hearts. Having thus far gone through the Enemies Camp, I come now to lay down my Thesis to be proved, viz. That a Believer may be certainly and infallibly assured of his Pardon and Salvation; I say a Believer may be assured: an Unbeliever while such is not a subject capable of Assurance; he hath Plague-Sores and Tokens of Wrath upon him, but as yet never a Beam of Grace or Love: the Justice and Holiness of God cannot suffer him
to be shined on; none of the Promises can speak kindly or comfortably to him; his stony Heart cannot receive the Seal and Impress of the Holy Spirit. Hence the Apostle saith, After ye believed, ye were sealed with the Holy Spirit of Promise, Ephes. 1.13. after, and not before. First, there must be a new Creature, and then a new Name. First, Gods Image is printed on the Heart, and then his Love. I say, a Believer may be assured, but not that all Believers are so. A man may be a Babe in Christ and not know it: a Child of Light, and yet walking in darkness. A Believer may live in crepusculo, in the twilight or mixt condi∣tion of Hope and Fear; and so, though sure of Heaven, not in his own sense assured of it: I mean not that he may be assured by an An∣gel or Voice from Heaven or extraordinary Revelation: This the Adversaries will admit, but in an ordinary way, in the diligent use of such Helps and Means as are common to all Believers. Thus the Apostle speaks in com∣mon to them all, These things have I written to you that believe; that ye may know that ye have eternal Life, 1 John 5.13. He doth not say, some may know it in an extraordinary way, but speaks of it as knowable by Believers in common: I mean not that he hath this Assu∣rance always or in every point of time; perpe∣tual Serenity is not here below: Earth is not as Heaven; the Sun may be eclipsed, the Seal of the Spirit may be clouded, Evidences may be blurred and hardly legible: It may be God
in Sovereignty withdraws, or Satan in envy buffets, or the Believer lets down his Spiri∣tual Watch, or a due estimate is not set on Heavenly Comforts, or there is some great Trausgression, which as an accursed thing, causes the Lord to depart. In such cases, though there be no intercision of Justification, yet there is an interruption of Consolation. These Things premised, I proceed to prove the Point, viz. That a Believer may attain Assu∣rance of Pardon and Salvation. In the first Place the Names and Titles given unto Faith in Scripture are remarkable. 'Tis called , The subsistence of things hoped for; Glory and Salvation are hoped for by us; but Faith maks them as certain, as if they were present to us. The Hebrews have a Van conversivum, which turns the Future into the Preter-tense; such a thing is Faith which presentiates future Things to the Belie∣ver, That ye may know that ye have eternal life, saith John: It is not , ye shall have it, but , ye have it in praesenti, it already subsists in your Faith. 'Tis called , the evi∣dence of things not seen: Eternal Life cannot be seen by corruptible Eyes, but Faith doth so point out and demonstrate it, as if it were visible or sensible; We know that we have pas∣sed from Death to Life, 1 John 3.14. As if the Apostle had said, We are indeed in the very Borders of Heaven, and we know it as it were sensibly, as we do our passage from one Place to another. 'Tis set out by , a strong
perswasion or considence; and , a liberty or holy boldness with God. The Apostle mentions both, In whom we have boldness and access with confidence by the Faith of him, Ephes. 3.12. Access to God imports that we are reconciled to him; but access with boldness and confidence imports that we know it also: Otherwise it would not be Faith, as the Apostle stiles it, but meer rashness and presumption; if we should do so upon Peradventures, Esther-like, not knowing, whether the golden Scepter would be held out to us or not. Nay, 'tis stiled , a full Assurance, carrying out the Soul with full Sails to the good things in the Pro∣mise. It is well observed by the acute Dr. Ar∣rowsmith, That in Scripture mention is made of a triple Plerophory, a Plerophory of Know∣ledg, Col. 2.2. a Plerophory of Faith, Heb. 10.22. and a Plerophory of Hope, Heb. 6.11. The Ge∣nius of each shews forth it self in the Believers Practical Syllogism: Whosoever believeth shall be saved; But I believe: Ergo, I shall be saved. In the Major we have a Plerophory of Know∣ledg: In the Minor a Plerophory of Faith; And in the Conclusion flowing from the Premises, a Plerophory of Hope. In the next place some Commands in the Gospel clearly import that Assurance is attain∣able; there God would have us To work out our Salvation, Phil. 2.12. To make our calling and election sure, 2 Pet. 1.10. To add to our
Faith virtue, one Grace upon another, and one degree of Grace upon another, That we may have an abundant entrance into the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 1.5, & 11. To walk by the Rule of the New Creature, that peace may be upon us, Galat. 6.16. To prove our own state, whether we be in the Faith, whether Christ be in us or not, 2 Corinth. 13.5. To prove our own work, that we may have rejoycing in our selves, and not in another, Gal. 6.4. If these things may be done Assurance is attain∣able; if they cannot, to what purpose are these Precepts? how vain and impossible are they? In that question, Whether we may per∣fectly fulfil the Moral Law; the Pontificians urge thus for the Affirmative; If we cannot fulfil it, the Law is impossible and void,De Justif. lib. 4. cap. 13. Si praecepta essent impossibilia, neminem obligarent, ac per hoc praecepta non essent praecepta, saith Bellarmine, If the Commands were impossible, they would oblige none, and so would become no Com∣mands. But in the Point of Assurance we may with much better reason say, if we cannot ful∣fill the Commands concerning it, they are then impossible and vain; the Law is an ex∣act Rule of Righteousness, a Copy of the pure Law engraven on Mans Heart at first, in the state of Innecency, unto which it was attem∣perated. It was not at all impossible, and that it is so now is only from Mans Apostacy: And withal, the very , the im∣possibility of the Law is admirably useful to drive us in a deep sence of our Impotence, to
Christ the Complement of it, that through his holy Spirit we may in a way of sincere though imperfect Obedience at last arrive at perfect Sanctity in Heaven. But if such Commands as are purely Evangelical be impossible, what can be said to it? what tolerable answer made? Were these at all accommodated to a state of Innocency? Was not their Original scope to raise up fallen Man to Salvation? If the Com∣mands of believing and repenting were im∣possible, what room would there be for Sal∣vation? And if the Commands of proving and ensuring our state of Grace be impossible, what room is left for the Joys of Faith, or the Sealings of the holy Spirit, or the Suavities of a good Conscience? And there being no se∣cond Christ or Gospel to fly to, whither doth this Impossibility drive but into the black gulf of Despair? Wherefore, as we would avoid such doleful consequences, we must conclude those Precepts practicable, and so Assurance possible: And as a sure seal thereof we have the sweet experience of Saints in all Ages. Holy Job, though God multiplied his Wounds, and his Friends raked in them by a very sharp charge of Hypocrisie, knew his own Integrity, and would not let it go, Job 27.5. And which reacheth beyond his present state of Grace, as sure of future Glory, he breaks out, I know that my Redeemer liveth; and maugre all the destructive worms, In my flesh and with these very eyes I shall see God, Job 19.25, 26. O how certain was his Faith! I know; How appropri∣ative?
My Redeemer liveth; and how sharp∣sighted? he could look through the dust to Immortality. David knew the truth of his Grace, and proved it to himself by infallible Marks; I have kept the ways of the Lord, I have not wickedly departed from my God; I did not put away his statutes from me, I kept my self from mine iniquity, Psal. 18.21, 22, & 23. ver. And for future Happiness, he saith without scruple, That at his waking in the Resurrecti∣on he should be satisfied with Gods likeness, Psal. 17.15. St. Paul speaks as one full sure of his present state and future hope, I have fought a good sight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith, henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, 2 Tim. 4.7, 8. The Martyr Agatha, having her Breasts cruelly cut off for Religion, told the Persecutor, That yet she had two Breasts remaining, such as he could not touch, the one of Faith, and the other of Hope; which afforded her great Comfort in her Torments. Caspar Olevian a German Divine, being asked by one, Whether he were certain of his Salvation? answered just at the brink of death, Certissimus, I am most sure of it. Mr. Bolton being near death expressed him∣self thus, My whole heart is filled with joy, I feel nothing within but Christ. Mr. Hieron said, His Soul was full of joy, as if be had seen Heaven open to receive him. Such Paradises of Joy, Sabbatisines of Spirit, and Prepossessions of Glory have the Saints found in their way to Heaven.
Again, there being an infallible Connexion between truth of Grace and Pardon, and also between Perseverance in Grace and Salvation, a Believer may be assured of the truth of his Graces, and so of his Pardon; and again he may be assured of his Perseverance in Grace, and so of his Salvation: These two demon∣strated will make good the Point. First I say, A Believer may be assured of the truth of his Gra∣ces, and so of his Pardon, which cannot but be where those are. And for the truth of Grace a double Testimony may be vouched, one from Conscience, the other from the holy Spirit; the Apostle mentions both; The spirit it self bear∣eth witness with our spirit, Rom. 8.16. , it co-witnesseth with ours, and in the mouth of two such Witnesses there must needs be establishment: Hence St. Chrysostome on these words breaks out, ? What scruple can remain after such a Testimony? I shall begin with the testimony of Conscience. Conscience is a spy in our bosom, which marks every thing; a spiritual Eccho, which returns our actions, and makes them sound again af∣ter they are past and gone from us: By it the Soul turns its eyes in ward, and becomes a Spe∣culum or Looking-glass to it self, representing to it self its own acts: By it it bends back the beams of general Truths, and applys them to Particulars. That Righteousness and Virtue should be followed is an universal Truth, but Conscience can reflect it back upon us and bids us do so in particular; and if we indeed do it,
Conscience will say Euge, this or that is well done by us. The Testimony of Conscience was of great repute among Pagans; Plato calls it his Daemon, and Menander a God, , saith he, Conscience is a God to Mor∣tals. And Seneca, Deus in humano corpore hos∣pitans, God dwelling in an humane body. Hence came Pythagoras's , or self-rever∣ence. And Sextius his parly with himself eve∣ry night, what Vice he had in the day resisted, and Virtue promoted. And the Satyrists com∣plaint touching the neglect of the reflexive faculty, Ʋt nemo in sese tentat descendere, nemo, few or none would descend into themselves. Among Christians the Testimony of Conseience must needs be sacred; their Consciences not lying, as the Pagans, in their blood or natural pollu∣tion, but being purified by the precious Blood and Spirit of Christ; their lamps of Reason not lying as the others in the damp and dark∣ness of the fall, but brought forth and new∣lighted at the Scripture, and Sun of Righteous∣ness shining therein as in its orb. Conscience in a Believer is, as St.Bernard hath it, Purum Religionis speculum, a pure glass of Religion: And as another, Major pars clavium, the grea∣test key in the Church; such an excellent Wit∣ness may well speak in this Point. In David it speaks thus, O Lord, I have walked in my in∣tegrity, Psal. 26.1. that is, in the exercise of Faith, Love, Obedience, and other Graces, which as so many Pearls make up Sincerity. In Hezekiah it speaks much after the same manner,
Remember, O Lord, how I have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart, Isa. 38.3. And it is the more to be noted, because Con∣science saith so in a way of appeal even to God himself; and by a right , holds up the truth of its Graces to so pure a Sun. This is such a Testimony as St. Paul joys and glories in, 2 Cor. 1.12. Est quidam modus in Conscientia gloriandi, ut noveris fidem tuam esse sinceram, spem tuam certam, caritatem tuam sine simula∣tione, saith St: Austin; There is a kind of glory∣ing in conscience, when thou knowest thy Faith sound, Hope certain, and Love undissem∣bled. A Man that repents, believes and loves, may by the pulse of Conscience, know that he doth so. True, saith Bellarmine, he may know that he doth them, but not that he doth them sicut oportet, as he ought to do them. Unto which I answer; Conscience according to its Light and Line of Principles can bear Wit∣ness to Integrity; natural Conscience to natu∣ral Integrity, and renewed Conscience to gra∣cious Integrity. An instance of the former we have in Abimelech, whose Conscience told him, That he meant not to take away ano∣ther mans Wise, Gen. 20.5. and of the latter in St. Paul, whose Conscience told him, That his Conversation was in simplicity and godly sincerity, 2 Cor. 1.12. Conscience, which Witnesses Integrity, must look beyond the meer matter of Acts into the modus; for there∣in, Integrity,especially such as is gracious, con∣sists more than in the Acts themselves. Unless
a man know that he repents, believes, and loves sicut oportet, he cannot know his own Sincerity; and if he know his Sincerity, he knows that he repents, believes, and loves a∣right, A Believer converses much between Scripture and Conscience, fetching his Notions from the one, and his Evidences from the o∣ther. In the Word he sees the Characters of Grace, and in the Conscience the state of his Soul. True Repentance mourns over sin as sin, hates it as the greatest evil, and casts it away as an accursed thing, saith the Word; and such is thy Repentance, saith Conscience. True Faith prizes Christ, overcomes the World and works by Love, saith the Word; and such a Faith is thine, saith Conscience. True Love is inflamed from Gods, sweetly acquiesces in him, and obedientially resignes to him, saith the Word; and such a Love is thine, saith Con∣science. Interroga cortuum, Ask thy heart, If Love be there, saith St. Austin: Ask again, If Faith and Repentance be there, thou hast an Oracle within, that can tell thee, what thou lovest most, trustest in most, and grievest for most; that can shew thee thy Uprightness, witness the Truth of thy Graces, and feast thee with Divine Comforts, such as pass understanding. It was a great Comfort to the Nobleman, when his Servants met him, and told him, Thy Son liveth, John 4.51. But oh! What is it to the Believer when such an one as Conscience comes and saith, Thy Faith liveth, or thy Love burneth towards
God, or thy Repentance is pure godly for∣row? Then the Oyl of Joy is upon every Grace, and the Cup of Consolations runneth over: Conscience becomes a banquetting-house, and Assurance, as Latimer calls it, is the Sweet-meats. We have heard one Witness, but the Supream, who drops all the Suavities, and dictates all the comfortable words in conscience is the Holy Spirit: The Spirit it self beareth witness with our spirit, that we are the children of God, saith the Apostle, Rom. 8.16. , not the Gifts or Graces, but the very Spirit it self beareth witness; & that not only out wardly in the Word, but in wardly in and with our spirit; and its Testimony is That we are the children of God: And the import of that Testimony, o∣ver and above the title of Sonship, is, That our Faith, which makes us his children, Gal. 3.26, is true; and our Love and other Graces, which manifest us such, are so also. And what a Testimony is this? To call it dubious, or o∣pinionative, or conjectural is blasphemy. Cor∣nelius a Lapide, as one under a necessity, confesses this Testimony certain in it self; but as a Salvo to the Doctrine of doubting, adds, That it is not certain to us. But this is to forget the A∣postles words, That the Spirit witnesseth it in and with our spirit; and withal absurdly to say, That the Spirit indeed witnesseth, but would not be believed; or rather, That it wit∣nesseth, and witnesseth not, because an un∣heard Testimony is as none. Bellarmine saith, The Spirit witnesseth not by an express word, but
by an Experiment of internal peace and suavity, which begets but a conjectural certainty. I an∣swer, It's true, that it is not by an express word; but, as Learned Dr. Ward well observes, The Question is not de modo Testandi, but de Re. It is certain, there is such a Testimony, and that proceeding from the Spirit of Truth must be infallible; and being made to our spirit must be known to us, and so beget a true certainty in our hearts. Nevertheless, to il∣lustrate this Point, I shall a little consider the Mo∣dus of it: The Spirit bears witness to ours, part∣ly by an application of the Promises to the heart, partly by an irradiation of the Graces there: These two make up the sealing of the Spirit of Promise given after believing, Ephes. 1.13. The Spirit applies the Promises to the Heart, that is, one part of the Seal. As the spirit of bondage applies threatnings, and thereby makes a kind of Hell in Conscience, so the Spirit of Adoption applies Promises, and by it makes a kind of Heaven there. The same Spirit, which endited the Promises of Pardon, and put them into Scripture; Seals and in a way of appro∣propriation puts them upon the Heart; as if it should say; This and that Promise is thine; like that in the Prophet, Speak to her heart, that her iniquity is pardoned, Isa. 40.2. Now, when the Promises come so close and pour out their sweetness into the heart, the Believer may not guess only, but know, that true Faith and Repentance are there. God and his Promise speak peace only to Saints, and not a comfor∣table
Word to impenitent sinners. I have read of one, who apostatized from his profession, and on his sick-bed began to apply the Pro∣mises to himself; but alas! after a little seeming ease, he cried out in despair, That the Plaister would not stick. God only can make it do so; and he makes it do so only to penitent Believers; and they may con∣clude the Truth of their Graces, when the Gospel and its Promises come to them in the Holy Ghost and in much Assurance, as the Expression is, 1 Thessal. 1.5. Again, as another part of he Seal, The Holy Spi∣rit irradiates the Graces in the Heart: The same Spirit which formed them there at first, comes and owns them as its own off-spring, bring∣ing in such a Divine light, and making such an efficacious representation thereof, that the Believers Conscience may, as the Apostle speak∣eth in another case, Rom. 9.1, Bear witness in the Holy Ghost, and say, This is sound Repentance indeed, and that is Love undissem∣bled, and the other is Faith unfeigned; and so of other Graces in the new Creature. These Graces carry in themselves a kind of heavenly light rendring them visible: But when the Spirit comes, it puts such a gloss and oriency on them, that the Believer may know them to be freely given to him of God, that this and that Grace are so given, and such and such are the sure marks of the truth thereof. Such a Testimony as this, made learned Rivet at his dying hour break forth into these words,
Expecto, credo, persevero, dimoveri nequeo, Dei Spiritus meo spiritui testatur me esse ex filiis suis; O amorem ineffabilem! I expect, believe, persevere, and cannot be moved, Gods Spirit wit∣nesseth to mine, That I am one of his Children; Oh ineffable Love! This anointing is truth and no lye, as St. John tells us, 1 Joh. 2.27. It manifests its testimony and it self together. The Believer cannot doubt who the Witness is, or what he speaketh; both are plain and satis∣factory. Our Saviour Christ, speaking of the Spirit of Truth, tells his Disciples, Ye know him, for he dwelleth with you, Joh. 14.17. If the Spirit do but pass by and drop in an ho∣ly motion into the heart, he may be known in it; much more when he dwells and wit∣nesses there.Cul. White-stone. The eloquent Culverwell com∣pares him to the Sun; The Sun (saith he) by its glorious Beams does Paraphrase and Com∣ment upon its own glittering Essence; and the Spirit Displays himself to the Soul, and gives a full Manifestation of his Presence: And a man may sooner take a Glow-worm for the Sun, than an experienced Christian can take a false Delu∣sion for the Light of the Spirit. We have heard the two Witnesses, the Holy Spirit by an application of Promises and irra∣diation of Graces witnessing to the Conscience, and the Conscience ecchoing and resounding that Testimony to the Believer. And hence it appears, That he may be assured of the truth of his Graces, and so of his Pardon. It remains to treat of the second thing,
that is, That he may be assured of his perse∣verance in Grace, and so of his Salvation. He knows, That his Graces are true, and with∣al, That they are , things having or containing Salvation. Heaven buds, and Eternal Life begins in them, He that believeth hath everlasting life, Joh. 5.24. He hath it in the first-fruits and irrevocable earnest of it. The Seed of God in him, will grow up into Immortality; the Well of living Water will spring up into everlast∣ing Life. Only it may be alledged, That these Graces may be lost: Unto which I answer, Ab∣stractively & in their meer creature-essence they may; but in their dependance they cannot. Their Standing, if on mans Will only, might fail; but their Foundation on the Covenant of Grace cannot. The Believer may not only see his own Graces, but beyond them, that Eternal Election which is the great Fountain thereof. Reflecting on the true Graces in his heart, he may say, Here is the Faith of Gods Elect, and, Here is the Love and Patience of Gods Elect. Spiritual Blessings are given ac∣cording to Election, Eph. 1.3.4; and I have those Blessings in me. Effectual Vocation hangs on Predestination, as the highest Link in the Chain of Grace, Rom. 8.30; and I am so cal∣led. This made St. Bernard,Epst. 10.7. speaking of effe∣ctual Vocation, say, Ad ortum solis justitiae Sa∣cramentum absconditum à seculis de praedestina∣tis beatificandis emergere quodammodo incipit ex abysso aeternitatis; When the Sun of Righteous∣ness
rises upon the Heart in an effectual Call, the secret mystery of Praedestination hid from Ages, breaks forth out of the abysse of Eternity. Here the Great Counsel of Eternal Love, which lay in Gods Bosom, shews forth it self to the Be∣liever through the Lattice of his Graces. Hence he may conclude on good grounds, That his Graces shall never fail, so long as the Founda∣tion of God standeth sure in Election. Conti∣nual supplies of Grace from the Fountain will keep his Lamp from going out. Its observa∣ble, that when God expresses his fresh Mer∣cies to his People, he doth it thus; I will yet chuse Israel, Isa. 14.1. Election is from all Eter∣nity, but it buds and blossoms in time in fresh supplies of Grace; as if he chose them again: When the Saints are droo, and as it were dying away; Election will give another visit, and make them live a second time. So unspeakable are the comforts of this Point, that, as I have read, one under the sweet sense of Electing Love, was for some days taken off from all the joys of Nature; and in an holy extasie cri∣ed out, Laudetur Dominus, Laudetur Dominus, as if he had been in Heaven already, bearing a part in the Church Triumphant. Again, The Believer looks not to his Graces only, but to the indwelling Spirit. Faith, and Love, and Obedience cannot fail in his Heart, whilst the Spirit of Grace is there; and there it will always be, because it is an abiding Ʋncti∣on, perpetually chearing every grace, and a well of water springing up into everlasting life, Con∣tinua
irrigatio coelestem in illis aeternitatem fovet, saith a judicious Divine on the place, a conti∣nual irrigation cherishes an heavenly eternity in them. Upon this account the Spirit is called the earnest of our Inheritance, not for a time, but until the redemption of the Church be compleat∣ed, Eph. 1.14; that is, till the whole Sum be paid in Glory. The Earnest going along with the Believer to Heaven, his Graces cannot pos∣sibly fail by the way. Our Saviour told his Disciples, and in them all Believers, That the Spirit should abide with them for ever, Joh. 14.16. And two things will make it good to them, I mean, their Union with him, and his Inter∣cession for them. Their Union with him will do it, they being mystical parts and pieces of him; the Holy Fourt will enliven them and their Graces; Because I live, ye shall live also, saith our Saviour, Joh. 14.19. The Members can∣not dye, as long as there is life in the Head. But may not the Union cease? No, by no means; God himself hath established it; thus the Apostle, Now he which stablisheth us with you in Christ, and hath anointed us, is God; who hath also sealed us, and given us the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts, 2 Cor. 1.21, 22. Believers are established in Christ, and to assure them of it the holy Spirit is an Un∣ction, a Seal and an Earnest in their Hearts. This establishment of Believers seems to me exemplified in Christs Humane Nature, that once assumed into the Word by an Hypostati∣cal Ʋnion was never separated from it, & those
once taken into Christ by a Mystical Ʋnion are never parted from him; the Apostle hints both to us, The God of Peace who brought again from the dead the Lord Jesus, make you perfect, Heb. 13.20, 21. That God who would lose nothing of Christs Humane Nature; no, not in the grave, will perfect Believers as Mystical parts of him, never suffering their Graces to see corruption in an utter decay, nor leaving their Souls in the hell of final Apostacy. Besides, Christs In∣tercession ratifies it; he in his solemn Prayer. on Earth, which as Arminius himself grants was the Canon and Pattern of his Intercessi∣on in Heaven, prays to his Father for all Be∣lievers, That they may be kept from evil, Joh. 17.15. If they are not kept, Christs Interces∣sion ceases or becomes powerless: Neither of which can be; Cease it cannot, because be ever lives to make Intercession; Become powerless it cannot, because he is a Priest after the power of an endless life; what he interceeds for shall be done. I will pray the Father, saith our Saviour, and what follows? The Comforter shall come and abide with you for ever, Joh. 14.16. As long as Christ pleads at the right hand of Power it must be so. This made St. Paul break out in∣to that gallant Triumph, , I am per∣swaded that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things pre∣sent, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature; No, not our own Wills unless more than Creatures. shall be able to sepa∣rate us from the love of God in Christ, Rom. 8.38,
39. from Gods Love to us, or ours to him. , we over-overcome all things in our way to Heaven; our Graces cannot fail below, as long as Christ is pleading above on our behalf. Moreover, the Believer looks not only to his Graces, but to the Pro∣mises, in which God is pleased to bind him∣self, that they shall be kept alive to the end. St. Paul praying for the Thessalonians, That their whole spirit and soul and body might be perserved blameless unto the coming of Christ; immediate∣ly adds a sweet Promise, Faithful is he that calleth you, who also will do it, 1 Thes. 5.23, 24. Believers and their Graces are taken into Gods own hand; And where can they be safer? But may they not be plucked from thence? No, None shall pluck them out of mine or my Fathers hand, saith our Saviour, Joh. 10.28, 29. But may they not of themselves fall out of it? No, though they fall out, yet they shall not be utterly cast down, for the Lord upholdeth them with his hand, Psal. 37.24. But will he always do so? Yes, He will confirm them unto the end, 1 Cor. 1.8. And how will he do it? He will put his fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart from him, Jer. 32.40. He will put his Spirit into them, and cause them to walk in his statutes, Ezek. 36.27. And what though their Fear and other Graces be defective, and want filling up; yet He which did begin the good work in them, , will perform it until the day of Christ, Phil. 1.6. And what if temptations and fiery darts fly about on
all sides, they are in garrison in the power of God, 1 Pet. 1.5. and there shall be a way to escape, 1 Cor. 10.13. In such Promises as these every way securing the Believers state of Grace, the Covenant of Grace lifts up it self in a transcen∣dent excellency above that of Works, which had no Promise of Perseverance annexed to it. Shall we now say, That all these Promises are Conditional, if we will persevere, and not otherwise? Is not this to turn the Covenant of Grace into that of Works, and a sure state in Christ into a lubricous Adamical one? Is it not to evacuate all those glorious and magni∣ficent Promises touching Perseverance, as if God in them spoke only in such cold Lan∣guage as this, I will preserve you from all evils and dangers, only for that greatest of all, which is in your own hearts and wills. I will not undertake: or in such contradictory terms as these; if you persevere, I will make you persevere; as if Per∣severance could be the condition of it self? After these Promises so interpreted Believers are but where they were before; before these Promises it would have been true, that if Be∣lievers persevere and continue in Grace, they do so; and after them so interpreted, What have they more? What do they contribute to Believers, when the main stress of Perseve∣rance is laid on Mans Will, and not on Gods Grace? But this obiter. The experienced Be∣liever knows better how to use Promises, and from them communes with his own Heart; Hath God promised Perseverance, and will
he not do it? is not his Covenant  an Everlasting Covenant, and are not his Mercies sure Mercies? Can his Faithful∣ness fail, or his words of Grace fall to the ground? Shall I trust him for Pardon and Salvation, and not for Perseverance? Will he give me Heaven, and shall I faint by the way? It cannot be; He will guide me with his counsel, and then receive me to glory. Till I come there I shall be supported by his hand, and supplied with his Spirit; Good∣ness and Mercy shall follow me all the days of my life. In such sort may the Believer be as∣sured of his Perseverance in Grace, and so of his Salvation. Again, the Believer may gather his Pardon and Salvation from that peace and joy which he finds in his own heart. There is a kind of Peace and Joy springing out of Moral Virtues, which because of their Congruity to Reason leave a serenity on the Soul where they are lodged: Mens sibi conscia recti is a great mat∣ter; a good Conscience is murus aheneus, a wall of brass to the owner. Seneca saith, Res severa est verum gaudium, True joy is in the se∣vere prosecution of Virtue. Hierocles tells us, That the pleasure of the Virtuous , imitates the joy of the gods. And it was a Point of ancient Philosophy, , Virtue is sufficient to Happi∣ness. But the Peace and Joy in believing is of an higher nature: Those in the Moralist come but from the face of Reason smiling on
the Congruity which is in Moral Virtues to it self; there is nothing of Grace or Christ in them: But these in the Believer come from the reconciled face of God shining upon the Heart in a Mediator. Those in the Moralist exceed not their own sphere of Reason; but these in the Believer pass all understanding, Phil. 4.7. and are full of glory, 1 Pet. 1.8. Heaven comes down in them, and puts a pure serenity on the Heart: The Believer now dwells in Paradise; the light of Gods Countenance shining as a clear Sun; Christ as a Tree of Life dropping down Pardons and Graces; the holy Spirit be∣ing as a perpetual spring of Virtues and Com∣forts; the fragrant Promises breathing out the odors of Love and Mercy; the sweet voice of Peace and Joy uttered from Heaven, ecchoing and making melody in Conscience: Nothing here but green pastures and still wa∣ters, and placid Heavens; not a cloud from the Law to darken the light, not an ach in Conscience to break the rest, not a spot of un∣remitted sin to stain the serenity. Oh what manner of Peace and Joy is here! A Stran∣ger, a Pagan Philosopher intermeddles not with them. These are to be found in the Raptures of a Cyprian, or in the Consolations of an Austin or Bernard. In such a state as this, what should the Believer do? May he not break out in the proper Idiom of Faith, My Lord and my God? May he not sinely conclude, My sins are forgiven me? Nay, Ought he not to do so, and with David, call upon all that is within him,
to bless the Lord for it? After such hansels of Heaven and Glory, should he yet doubt and say, I cannot enter, when he is there already in the beginnings and first-fruits thereof? No∣thing is more unreasonable. He knows in him∣self, by the Graces and Comforts in his own heart, That he hath a part in Heaven and Sal∣vation. In the last place, The Nature of the Sacra∣ments, which are Seals of the Covenant, evinces this Truth. In the Gospel we have Gods Hand, but in the Sacraments his Seal also. In the Gospel, Pardon and Salvation are set forth in general Promises; but in the Sacraments, they are Sealed up to this and that man in particu∣lar. Circumcision is called, The Seal of Righ∣teousness, Rom. 4.11; and by the Hebrew Do∣ctors, The Seal of the holy God: And Baptism, which succeeds, and as Evangelical transcends it, must be as much and more. So Sealing Pardon and Salvation to Believers, that there follows the answer of a good Conscience towards God, 1 Pet. 3.21; or such a Conscience, as can with an holy considence interrogate God him∣self in some such terms as these; Did not Christ purchase Pardon and Salvation for me? Have I not a share and interest in them? Yes assured∣ly, there is no doubt of it. The Passover fi∣gured out Christ the true Lamb, who was reasted in the Fire of his Fathers Wrath to take away Sin; and the sprinkling of the Blood on the Door-posts, pointed out the Applicati∣on of Christs Blood to the Consciences of Be∣lievers
in particular. The Lords Supper, which rose out of the Ashes of the Paschal Supper, and took its very Materials from thence, doth eminently Seal Christ with all his Benefits un∣to the Believer. Our Saviour delivering it to his Disciples, said, This is my body which is gi∣ven for you; this is my blood which is shed for you, Luk. 22.19, 20. Why for you, but to signifie the particular Application of his Passi∣on to them? By the Elements of Bread and Wine, as by turf and twig, God gives the Believer livery and seisin of Christ; as if he said to him expresly, Christ is thing, Pardon and Salvation are thine, thou hast my Seal for it, and mayst be as sure of it, as of the Bread and Wine in thine Hand and Mouth. Bellarmine himself confesses,De effect. Sacram. l. 1. c. 8. That Sacraments were instituted, Ʋt nos certos reddant remissionis & gratie, To make us certain of Pardon and Grace. Only he adds, 'Tis only a moral certain∣ty, not an infallible one. But how frivolous is this? What can make an Infallible certainty, if Gods Seal cannot do it? Among all Nations Seals are great Confirmatives. When Darius, but a man, Signed the Decree, though of Ini∣quity, it was unalterable by the Law of the Medes and Persians, Dan. 6.12. And what the Great God Seals in the Sacrament, in a way of Grace and Mercy, must much more be so, by the Law of his own Truth and Faithfulness. The Jews looking on the Rainbow, bless God who remembers his Covenant, and is faithful in his Promises, as being sure that the World
shall not be drowned again: Much more may the Believer, looking on the Bread and Wine, do so, as sure of Pardon and Salvation in and through Christ. But you will say, Gods Seal indeed is sure, but our Disposition is uncer∣tain; and how can we know that we are wor∣thy Receivers? I answer, Very well; The wor∣thiness required, is not that of condignity, but that of congruity. The least Grace, if true, though but a bruised reed and smoaking flax, a∣mounts to a capacity. May we not know, That we truly hunger and thirst after Christ, when we inwardly feel a pinching and pressing ne∣cessity of him, equal to, or rather more than any want in Nature? May we not find, That our Faith in God is right, when it assimilates us to his Holiness, as well as rests in his Grace, and puts forth Obedience to his Commands, as well as Affiance towards his Promises? May we not say, That we love him indeed, when the main stream of our hearts runs towards him, when at least in endeavour we obey him in every Command, seek him in every Ordinance, glorifie him in every Condition, and prize him in every Saint? Hath he not bid us welcom to the Sacrament? Hath he not anointed us with fresh Oyl of Grace and Joy whilst we have sat at his Table? Have we not been clothed with Power against our Corruptions? Have not our Hearts been enlarged and refreshed from the Presence of God there? How many melting and ravishing Prospects of a Crucified Christ have we there enjoyed? And what beams of
Heaven and Eternity have broke in upon us in the very Duty? These things to Believers, who have the exercise of their spiritual Senses, are so obvious, that they may easily and sure∣ly conclude, That God hath indeed welcomed them to his Table, and there Sealed Pardon and Salvation to them. In this rich estate a Believer may bid all Scruples be gone, and in an holy manner say to his Soul, Soul, take thy ease, thou hast much goods laid up for eternity. Thou art now secure of Pardon and Salvation. The Holy Spirit hath Sealed them to thy Heart, and the Sacraments to thy very Sense, and Con∣science witnesses to both as True and Infallible, and what can be more? Nothing remains, but to keep thy self in the Love of God, till he take thee up to the pure bliss above.
CHAP. XIV. Of the Ways in which the Assurance of Faith is attained. With the Conclu∣sion of the whole. THus much touching the first thing, That Assurance is attainable: I now proceed to the other, viz. The ways in which it is at∣tained. All which are as so many further Ar∣guments to prove it attainable. Were it not so, the All-wise God would not set down ways for the attaining thereof. Impossibles are not to be sought after. Assurance, how∣ever difficult, is not impossible: The Scrip∣ture hath chalked out a Method how to arrive at it; which I shall endeavour to open in the ensuing Discourse. In the first place: He who would attain Assu∣rance, must give Grace and Christ their due. All spiritual Blessings grow upon Grace as an eternal Root, and hang upon Christ as the Tree of Life. In particular, Assurance is a Blessing proper to the Covenant of Grace. In the Covenant of Works there was no Assu∣rance or Perseverance, because the whole ma∣nagery was left to Mans Will: But in the Cove∣nant of Grace these are to be found in Belie∣vers, because God undertakes the work. This is the rather to be marked, because man under the Covenant of Works was in a state of Inno∣cency
and perfect Holiness, and under the Cove∣nant of Grace is in a state of Weakness and Im∣perfection; and yet there through Faith he ar∣rives at Assurance and Perseverance, which were never reached under the First Covenant. Saint Paul, in the 10th Chapter to the Ro∣mans, notably distinguishes between the Righ∣teousness of the Law and the Righteousness of Faith: The Righteousness of the Law, is, That the man which doth those things shall live in them; No Life or Peace, but upon perfect Obedience, which is impossible, and beyond the line of man lapsed, nay, of man regenerate in this life. Hence the Conscience of those, who would enter into Peace at this Door, must needs be dubious, and full of trembling anxieties. But the Righteousness of Faith speaketh on this wise, Say not in thine heart, Who shall ascend into Heaven? Doubt not, whether thou shalt have a part there; this is to bring Christ down from above: He is gone to Heaven, and hath carried his Merits thither to prepare a place for thee there. Such a doubt denies his Ascension, and so, as it were, brings him down again: Neither say in thine heart, Who shall descend into the deep? Doubt not, as if thou shouldst be turned into Hell; this is to bring up Christ again from the dead: He is already risen, and hath triumphed over Death and Hell. Such a doubt denies his Death and Resurrection; and doth as it were bring him again from the dead. But what saith the Righteousness of Faith? The Word, the Pro∣mise
of Pardon and Salvation is nigh thee, O Believer, in thy mouth and in thy heart, con∣fessing and believing on the Lord Jesus thou shalt be saved: Thou in particular, thy Soul shall dwell at ease, thy Conscience shall enter into rest in the Covenant of Grace; To doubt of it, is to deny the Resurrection and Ascension of Christ: He therefore, who would have As∣surance, must give Grace and Christ their due. One would think that the Papists, who hold, That they may by perfect Obedience reach the apex of the Law, and go beyond it in works of Supererogaton, and climb Hea∣ven it self by their own Merits, might arrive at Assurance much rather than Protestants, who instead of exceeding the Law confess themselves much short of it; and instead of meriting Heaven acknowledg all their Righte∣ousnesses to be but a filthy rag: But it is far o∣therwise, the Papists generally do not so much as doctrinally hold it, save here and there a man among them; such as Antonius Marina∣rius, who in the Council of Trent asserted it; concluding his Speech thus; Si Coelum ruat, si Terra evanescat, si orbis illabatur praeceps, ego in Deum erectus ero; Much-like the Prophet Habakkuk, who in an universal languishment of nature would yet rejoice in the Lord the God of his Salvation: much less do they practically arrive at it. Bellarmine himself after his fair life, died not like a Bolton or a Rivet, not knowing whether he had a true Virtue in him or no, but seeming afraid of the Judgment-Seat;
unto some who begged his Prayers when in Heaven he made this Answer, The way thither is not so easie, I should esteem it a great Blessing from God, if I might obtain Pur∣gatory for many years. Into such labyrinths do their Principles lead them: The Reason whereof is; They espouse Hagar the Cove∣nant of Works, and that gendreth to bondage and servile fear: They corrupt the great Fountain of Peace and Joy; I mean free Ju∣stification by Christ and Grace; and their Com∣forts cannot run pure. They would com∣pound those two incompatibles of Grace and Merit, and patch together Christs Righteous∣ness and their own; which in the Apostle is to fall from Grace and make Christ of none effect, Gal. 5.4. And what Peace can follow? Whilst they look at the Law, Conscience will be still murmuring, Non recte sacrificasti, non recte orasti, as Luther hath it; This and that was omitted or not well done; The Levite and the Priest pass by their Wounds, the good Sa∣maritan will not come, but alone, and with∣out a co-partner, to make a Cure. If there∣fore thou wouldst have Assurance, thou must build on the right Foundation, and lie at the true Fountain of Comfort: Thy Love and thy Obedience are but Evidences, Christ and Grace are the only Foundation: Thy Faith is but a receiver, an empty vessel; Christ and Grace are the Fountain of Comfort: Expect no rest but in his bleeding Wounds; look for no comfortable words but from the Mercy-Seat:
Think not that thy Conscience shall be appeased, unless by that Blood of Atonement which appeased God himself; or that thy heart may be satisfied in a Righteousness less than that perfect one which satisfied Gods: Conscience is his Deputy, and cannot go off at lower terms than he himself doth: Fix thy heart on Christ and Grace, lay the whole stress of thy Soul and Salvation there; Lean on thy Beloved, appropriate his Merits and Righte∣ousness to thy self. Thus Luther tells the me∣nacing Law, O Lex! Immergo Conscientiam meam in Vulnera, Sanguinem, Mortem, Re∣surrectionem & Victoriam Christi, praeter hunc nibil plane videre & audire volo; O Law! I drown my Conscience in the Wounds, Blood, Death, Resurrection and Victory of Christ; besides him will I see and hear nothing; This is the true way of Peace. Jahannes a Berg a zealous Papist in his life, found it so at last by his own experience. When a Protestant-Friend ad∣monished him then lying on his sick-bed, That now he would by Faith apprehend the Me∣rit of his Saviour, and acquiesce in the full Expiation by him made for sin, he immedi∣ately swallowed it as the richest Comfort in the World, looking on those in Popery but as so many vain Fig-leaves. When Assurance, which is the top-stone of Faith is laid in our hearts, we have reason to cry out, Grace, Grace, Christ, Christ; These, whatever our Duties and Works have been, are the Fun∣damental Reason of all Peace and Comfort.
Again, He who would have Assurance, must not grieve or quench the Holy Spirit, but cherish and follow it. It cannot but be a great and marvelous thing in his eyes, that the holy Spirit should make his heart a Temple or Sanctuary for himself. To grieve it is unnatural, and to grieve it expecting comfort a contradiction. If thou wouldst be assured, grieve it in no∣thing, indulg not any lust: This is filthiness and to be carried out of the Sanctuary; this is an Idol and must not stand in the Temple: Bury thy excrements, thy superfluity of naugh∣tiness, that the holy one may walk in the midst of thee; Take away the accursed thing, lest his Presence depart: Away with thy vomits, thy sensual sins, lest he complain that there is no place for him left in thy heart. Pride not thy self in gifts or graces, this is as a smoak in his nose to force him away from thee; grieve not him, whereby thou mayst be sealed to the day of Redemption; He comes to seal Pardon, and Peace, and Heaven it self to thy Soul, why shouldst thou grieve him? If thou dost so, How canst thou expect to be sealed by him? Instead of Sealing, he will turn to be thine E∣nemy, as he did to those Rebels, Isa. 63.10. He will meet thee in some straits of Providence, and by one threatning or other, as by a drawn Sword, stop thee in thy perverse way. Oh! do not grieve him, gather out of thy heart and life every thing that offends, and his Kingdom of Righteousness, and Peace, and Joy shall be in thee. When an holy Truth appears to thee,
smother it not for a World; it comes from the pure Spirit to light thee to Heaven: Walk in the Light of it; Who knows but that, whilst thou art in the way, the Spirit may drop some heavenly Cordials upon thy Heart? Obedi∣ence is the true Road to Comfort. Excellent is that in the Prophet, Then shall we know, if we follow on to know the Lord, his going is prepa∣red as the morning, and he shall come to us as the rain, Hos. 6.3. Follow him in his Truths and thou shalt know him in his Comforts. Gods Face shall be as an aurora or morning lighter and lighter on thy Soul; and his Spirit as the dew or rain distilling Divine Consolations on it. Believe it, every ray of Truth, if fol∣lowed, leads to the Joy unspeakable. When an holy Motion comes, remember who is the Speaker: That Spirit, who can seal the Pro∣mises and print Gods Love on the Heart, now calls thee to one Duty or other; Hear and thy Soul shall live; open thy Sails, and the Gales will blow thee to the fair Haven of rest. I may say of the Spirits Motion, as he in the Prophet doth of the Wine in the Cluster; Destroy it not, for a Blessing; nay, the greatest of Bles∣sings; a Paraclete, a Divine Comforter is in it; Follow on, and thou shalt come to the Vin∣tage and Wine-cellar of pure Consolations, such as Earth assords not. The Holy Spirit can witness to thy Graces, and seal up Gods favour to thee, and be to thee an earnest of Heaven and eternal Life. As thou wouldst be assured, welcome every motion, close with
every dictate, cherish every illapse of this bles∣sed Monitor; let every inspiration find thee as the Seal doth the Wax, and the spark the Tin∣der; let thy Soul follow hard after him, pur∣suing him E vestigio, step by step, as near and close as thou canst possibly. This is the true way to rest. Again, if thou wouldest have Assurance, first make Conscience pure, and then walk after it: That Pardon and Salvation, which is founded in Christs Blood, and sealed by his Spirit, must be recorded and reported in Conscience, or else there can be no Assurance; If our heart condemn us not then have we confidence towards God, saith the Apostle, 1 Joh. 3.21. He al∣lows what his Deputy doth in us; I say, make thy Conscience pure. Two things chiesly impure it; Ignorance is as a cloud upon it, and Guilt as a wound in it. Make it as lightsome as thou canst from Scripture, that as a pure glass it may be fit to reflect the Gospel-Comforts on thy Soul. Get a through cure of thy old Wounds, or else sooner or later it will cry out against thee: Joseph started up in his Brethrens mind a good while after their unnatural sale of him. John the Baptist rose again in Herods Conscience upon the fame of Christs Miracles. Theodorick having cruelly murdred Boethius and Symmachus, was affrighted at the great head of a Fish at his own Table, as if it had been one of theirs whom he unjustly put to death. Apply therefore Christs Blood by Faith, that thy Wounds may be healed. David after his
great fall, prays first to be purged with hysop, and then for the joy of Gods salvation, Psal. 51. The Hysop which was used to sprinkle the Blood under the Law, figured out the office of Faith in sprinkling Christs Blood on the Conscience; that's a soveraign Balm to heal thy Wounds, and able to make Conscience give thee an an∣swer of Peace. I have read a notable story of a sick Man, who when Satan appeared and shewed him a long scrole of his Sins in writing, saying, Behold thy Virtues; replied, True, Satan, but thou hast not set down all, set down also, The Blood of Christ cleanseth us from all Sin. Such a purifier is this, that a Man may be able, as is said of St. Austin, to think of his former Evils without fear, as having no spot of unpardoned Sin in him; Thy Conscience be∣ing made pure, walk after it. A reciá Conscien∣tia ne latum quidem unguem discedendum, said the Orator. Leave it not, lest thou fall and wound thy self afresh. When Conscience sum∣mons thee to this or that Duty, up, be doing, God calls thee to it by thine own Heart: when it tells thee of such a snare in thy way, avoid it, pass by it as thou wouldst by Hell. God warns thee against it by thy self; Conscience will measure out Comforts or Terrors to thee, ac∣cording as thou behavest thy self well or ill to∣wards it. If like Saul thou force thy self, and rebel against light, and give stabs to Consci∣ence, what hast thou to do with Peace? Thy Heart will reproach thee, Conscience will strike
again and give thee wound for wound, thou shalt doom thy self, and like the Devils carry thy Chains, and Hell about with thee. Tiberius professed to the Senate, That he suffered death daily: he meant in the torments of his accu∣sing Conscience. On the other hand, if thou turn thine eyes inward, and observe Consci∣ence, and walk by the line and level of it, thy Heart shall be at rest, Conscience shall be a thousand witnesses for thee, thou shalt be thine own Comforter, and like the Angels car∣ry an Heaven and Paradise aboat with thee; Pauls joy shall be thine, the testimony of Consci∣ence, that thy conversation hath been in godly sin∣cerity; and what is this but Assurance? That Conscience which faith, That thou art sincere; tells thee also, That thy Sins are pardoned: These two are inseparable companions, and never part the one from the other. Again, If thou wouldst have Assurance, thou must be much in self-examination. Commune with thy own Heart, dive into the abyss of it, reckon with thy self, summon thy self to the Tribunal in thy own bosom. The Philosophers espied out this Rule. Pythagoras would not have us sleep till we had reviewed the day, asking our selves, , What have I transgressed, what done, and what omitted? This, though done by the candle-light of Nature, much promoted Vir∣tue, and the comfort of it. Quals ille som∣nus post recognitionem sui sequitur, quam tran∣quillus, altus, & liber? saith Sencea. After a re∣view
of ones self, Oh what manner of sleep is there, how still, deep, and free is it? Much more must such a search into ones own Heart conduce to the Christians Graces and Com∣forts, if done by the pure Sun-light of Scrip∣ture. Self-examination is a root which bears Self-knowledg, and at the top of it grows Assurance, which is the knowledg of gracious self. Awake therefore, O Believer, down in∣to thy own Heart, rifle the labyrinths, and break open the false bottoms there; see what of Sin is in thee: Is there any darling Sin, such as cogs with thy complexion, or falls in with thy calling, or any way steals away thy Heart and Affections from God? Be sure that this is an accursed thing, a Deliah; as the word im∣ports, an exhauster of thy peace and joy. How∣ever fair it may look to sense, it is virtually sor∣row and wrath. See again, what of Grace is there in thee, do thou repent of Sin, and be∣lieve on the Lord Jesus, and love God and his holy Ways? Are thy Graces genuine, such as act thee in the power of the Spirit, and square thee to the holy Canon of the Word, and level thy Thoughts and Intentions at the Glory of God? If thou thus search into thy Heart. and do it in truth and faithfulness to the holy Light; I dare say, thou art ready for the sealing of the Spirit, and the very frame of thy Heart is a real prayer for it. O how soon may the Spirit come, and by a Divine irradiation on thy Soul tell thee, That thy Repentance is a Repentance unto Life, and thy Faith precious Faith, and
thy Love Love in Sincerity? How soon may it apply and seal the Promises to thy Heart, as if it should say to thee, Thou repentest indeed, and the Mercy in the Promise is thine; Thou believest indeed, and the Salvation in the Pro∣mise is thine; Thou lovest indeed, and thine are the supersensual superintellectual good things prepared for the lovers of God. And now thou maist say much better than Seneca, Qualis somnus? O how sweet is the rest and repose which the self-searching Soul finds in the bosom of Christ and Grace? He that comes to that sealing Ordinance of the Lords Supper must prepare himself for the Sul by Self-exa∣mination, , Let a man examine himself, faith the Apostle, 1 Cor. 11.28. Examine as a man would do Gold or Silver by the fire, or by the Touchstone; in like manner must he do so, that he may fit him∣self for the Seal of Assurance, of which the Sa∣cramental Elements are Symbols. Again, If thou wouldst be assured, exercise thy Graces and grow therein. It much conduces to Assurance to render thy Graces as visible as thou canst. Grace, however it always carry a Divine lustre in it, is not so visible when dor∣mant in an habit or principle, as when it is put forth into act and exercise; neither is it so visi∣ble in its Initials in the smoking flax or bruised reed, as in its Progresses and statures in Christ. In point of Comfort talents not used are as none, Comforts lie dead in Believers as their Graces do; the holy sire raked up affords no
light to them: Awake therefore, O Believer, to the use of thy Talents; exercise thy self un∣to Godliness, that the Divine Life now latent in Principles may shew it self in acts; blow up the holy fire in thy bosom, that what was bu∣ried under ashes may revive into a flame; Be still a putting forth one Grace or other, melting in repenting tears, or clasping thy Faith about Promises, or kneeling down in obedience to Commands; or inflaming thy Love at Gods, or perfecting Patience under his hand, or drawing out thy Soul in Charity: As the sea∣son is, let one Grace or other be still a-budding and bearing holy fruit. Thy Graces thus exer∣cised will become radiant and visible; those which before lay hid like Saul among the stuff, as if they had been upon the common level of nature, will now come forth in their Super∣natural statures, and appear as the virtues of God: Thou maist now dsscern in thy self that which is more than Humane, a Divine Nature, which sparkles out of thy flesh in holy Opera∣rations; Another, an higher Spirit than thy own which follows God fully in holy walking: Thou maist now sit down under Christs sha∣dow, and reckon thy self in the very borders of Assurance, waiting the good hour, when the irradiating Spirit shall take thee by the hand, and lead thee into the full possession thereof. Moreover, unto the exercise of Grace add growth as a fruit thereof; Grow in Grace, and in the knowledg of Christ, 2 Pet. 3.18. A∣bound more and more, 1 Thes. 4.1. Let thy
Motto be Plus ultra, and thy Christian Arms like Josephs, a fruitful bough by a well. Thou hast Faith, but be strong in it, that thou maist wrestle with God, and not let him go till he bless thee with Assurance; be great in it, that he may condescend to thee, and say, Be it unto thee even as thou wilt. Thou hast a being in Christ, but be rooted in him by a more close adherence, and intimate Union within him, grow up in∣to him in statures of Grace till thou come to the oylof gladness upon his head. There is some holy Love in thee, but be rooted and grounded in it, that thou maist comprehend the breadth and length, and depth, and height, and know the love of Christ which passeth knowledg, and be filled with all the fulness of God, Ephes. 3.17, 18, 19. Through radicated and well-grown Gra∣ces, (as the Apostles assures us in that place,) admirable and wonderful things may be at∣tained: In a sober sense we may take Infinity, know Transcendencies, and be filled with a Deity. Labour to grow every way downward in Húmi∣lity and self-denial, upward in holy desires and raptures, inward in the vitals of Faith and Love, and outward in all holy fruits and good works: fill up the , that which is lack∣ing in Faith and other Graces; let Patience and all other Graces have , their per∣fect work, that thy path may be as the shining light, shining more and more to the perfect day: As an Heavenly Pilgrim go from faith to faith, and from strength to strength, travelling to meet the day coming towards thee in the light of
Gods Countenance. In such a growth as this as in a clear glass thou maist discover that thy Graces are vital and true feeds of Immortality: Statues and Pictures, such as Hypocrites are, grow not, Essentials and Vitals are Ʋltra peni∣cillum: Sincerity and Divine Vitality cannot be painted. Confider therefore with thy self how it hath been with thee, there was but a little dawn in thy Heart and now a pure morning. Thy Grace was but a little grain of Mustard∣seed, and now it is become a Tree. Thou wast but a little Embrio, a babe in Christ, and now a man of strength and spiritual stature; And what doth this argue but Life in thee? Con∣fider again, thou hast an ocean of Corruption in thy Heart, and yet thy little spark of Grace hath grown; thou hast stood in the midst of Satans winds and withering blasts, and yet thou growest; thou hast had many a sharp frost from the World to nip thy fruit in the bud, and yet thou growest: And what doth this speak but a seed and life of God in thee, such as will spring up into Life Eternal? Take this as an Earnest from God. that maugre Satan and all the power of Darkness, thou shalt grow and grow on, till thou art transplanted into the Heavenly Paradise. Again, If thou wouldst have Assurance, be much in mortifying of Sin. This is the great troubler. If thou indulg it, a cloud will come over thy Conscience & darken thy Evidences; thy Graces will all droop, and like a Candle in the socket, be ready to die, the Law will arm it self against thee,
and from one threatning or other will flash Hell in thy face: Satan will rake in thy old wounds of Guilt, and put thee into fresh torments; the holy Spirit will be gone, and carry away all his Cordials with him; the Promises will be as dry Breasts, and let out never a drop of sweetness to thee; thy Duties will hang the wing, and become dead and spiritless, and without comfort. In the end thou wilt ex∣perimentally find, That in crooked Paths Peace cannot be found. Awake therefore, O Believer, to the work of Mortification. Look upon sin, as it is an evil, an only evil, an hel∣lish abomination, infinitely more loathsom than the Dogs Vomit, or the Sow's Mire, or the menstruous Cloth, by which it is shadow∣ed out in Scripture. Arraign it as the great∣est Malefactor that ever was. Call in Death, and Hell, and a blasted World, and groaning Creatures, and the Ruins of Angels, and Souls of Men, and the bloody Passion of Christ, and the horrible Injuries done to God himself, To bear witness against it: Each of these can tell sad stories about it; and all of them cry out, Crucifie it, Crucifie it, It is worthy to dye. Pass therefore thy doom upon it, that it may do to. Strip it of all its veils, and false covers, and be∣witching appearances; pluck off its Golden Profit, and Silken Pleasures, and Purple of false Honour, that it may look as it is in its own ugly nakedness, sinful, out of measure sin∣ful. Nail it to the Cross by holy Restraints. if it start in a Thought, or creep in at a Sense,
or hide it self under thy Lawful things, have one holy Truth or other as a Nail ready to fasten it, that it move no further in thee. Pierce it, let out its vital blood, I mean the love and joy and delight of it. Surrender up thy Affections to God and Christ, and hea∣venly things, that it may give up the ghost; bury it out of thy sight; never give it a look or glance more; converse no more with it, than thou wouldst do with the dead; raise it not up again into any fresh embraces; no, not so much as the picture of it in a sinful thought or fancy. After this manner mortifie sin, and above all thy darling only one, which thy Heart hath been tender of, and could wish that it were no sin; spare it not, but cause it to dye, as a sure Pledg that all other sins shall do so. Believe it, This is  the path of life, or of those two lines of Holiness and Comfort. If ye mortifie the deeds of the body, ye shall live, saith the Apostle, Rom. 8.13; an eternal life in Heaven, and a comfortable one in the way thither. Who knows, but that whilst thou art mortifying thy sin, God may come and speak to thee, much as he did to Abraham when he was offering up his Isaac; Now I know that thou repentest indeed, and believest indeed, seeing thou hast not withheld thy Sin, thy Darling Sin from the work of Mortification: Surely, blessing I will bless thee, and multiplying I will multiply thee; Thy Com∣forts shall be as the Stars, and as the Sand. When thou hast been a-slaying thy Lusts, Je∣sus
Christ will meet thee (as Melchizedek did Abraham, when he came from the slaughter of the Kings), Bringing forth Bread and Wine, Supportations and Divine Consolations to thy Soul. Melchizedek's Bread and Wine were to Abraham Pawns of Canaan, the Land of Pro∣mise; and Christs Supports and Comforts shall be to thee Earnests of Heaven. See what pure strains of Grace flow in the precious Promises made to the Overcomer; To him that overcometh will I give to eat of the hidden Man∣na; and will give him a white stone, and in the stone a new name written, which no man know∣eth, saving he which receiveth it, Rev. 2.17. O what things are here! Comforts fall about the Overcomer, and are preserved in his heart; as the Manna fell about the Camp, and was preserved in the Golden Pot. Pardon is the white stone, and Adoption the new name; and all these, though secret to others, are well known to himself. But you'l say, These are promised to the Overcomer; and who can say, that he is such? Is not the Canaanite still in the land? Are there not reliques of Corrupti∣on in the best? Doth not the flesh still lust a∣gainst the spirit, and the body of Death send out its stench and rottenness? And who may call himself an Overcomer? I answer, The Ca∣naanite is in the land; but subdued: Reliques of Sin are in thee; but they do gravitare, press and lye heavy, as a thing out of its proper place, and force thee to groan and cry out, O wretched man! The flesh lusts against the spi∣rit,
but thou opposest might and main; and if it be ready to prevail, thou criest out, as the forced Damosel under the Law, for help a∣gainst it, as being too strong for thee. If there be in thee a nolle peccatum, a bent of heart against Sin, and thou doest in purpose and endeavour fight against it, and thou wouldst pursue it to death, and, if possible here, to utter extirpation; then assure thy self, (not withstanding the indwelling sin), That thou art an Overcomer in Gods account, who accepts the Will for the Deed; and in the Gos∣pels, all whose Promises are made not to sin∣less perfection, but sincerity. To this purpose the Original in that famous place is remarka∣ble, It is not to him that overcometh, but , to him that is overcoming, to him that is praying, striving, wrestling, fighting against Sin; to him that is in an overcoming posture, though the enemy be not quite out of the field, to him shall those great Comforts in the Promise be given. This made St. Paul (maugre all the reliques of Corruption) sound a Triumph to Free-Grace, I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord, Rom. 7.25; as being sure of compleat Victory at last. Again, If thou wouldst have Assurance, Be much in the holy use of Ordinances. These are vehicula Spiritus, the Chariots in which the Holy Spirit rides Circuit to do good to Souls. These are canales Gratie, the Conduit-pipes whereby Graces and Comforts are derived to us. There God records his Name, and com∣mands
the Blessing, even Life for ever-more. There he meets those that work righteousness, and remember him in his ways. David was so sensible of this, that it was his one only desire to dwell in Gods house, and behold  the beauties, or sweet Amenities, of the Lord, Psal. 27.4. If ever thou meetest with the Suavities and ravishing Beauties of Free-Grace, it must be in the Sanctuary of Ordinances. Christ, when here on Earth, was very ready to give a com∣fortable Testimony to those that came to him and brought their Graces with them; Seeing upright Nathanael, he said, Behold, an Israelite indeed, Joh. 1.47. Seing their Faith, he said to the poor Paralytick, Son, thy sins be for∣given thee, Mat. 9.2. Neither now, though in Heaven, is he wanting therein; he hath a secret way of testifying by his Spirit unto those who in an holy manner approach to him in Ordinances; Seeing thy holy fear at an Or∣dinance, he can tell thee, That thy Soul thall dwell at ease in the bosom of Mercy; Seeing thy Faith there, he can tell thee, That as a true Be∣liever thou hast everlasting life. Whatever Grace thou bringest into his presence, he can make one Promise or other drop sweet∣ness upon it. Wait on him in his own ways, that he may speak Peace to thee; more particularly, Converse much with the sacred Word. In the Gospel great things are set be∣fore us; there's a Glass of Gods Glory, The more thou lookest into it, the more thou wilt be transformed into the Divine Likeness;
there's a Mass, a Treasury of rich Grace; the more thou searchest into it, the more thou wilt taste how gracious the Lord is, till thou come to the highest gust of it in Assurance; there are the Breasts of Consolation, suck on, and thou shalt be satisfied as with marrow and fat∣ness; there thou hast the demonstration and mi∣nistration of the Spirit; get as much as thou canst of it that thou mayst be sealed by it: There the Righteousness of God is revealed from Faith to Faith, from a Faith of Adhe∣rence to a Faith of Assurance: There is the savour of Life unto Life, of a gracious Life unto a comfortable and glorious One. Be much in reading and hearing the Word, but do it in an holy manner, do it attentively; take heed to it, till the day dawn, and the day∣star arise in thy heart; do it desiring the Word as the Babe doth the Breast, that thou mayst grow into all the measures and statures of Christ; do it in faith, that the Word may profit and effectually work unto all Graces and Comforts; do it in love to Truth and Righteousness, that the oyl of gladness, which is upon Christ thy Head, may run down upon thee; do it obedientially, hearken to the Com∣mands, that thy Peace may be as a River flow∣ing in the joys of Faith: If thus thou wilt hear and open to Christ, who stands and knocks at the door of thy heart, He will come in to thee, and sup with thee, and thou with him, Revel. 3.20. He will come in to thee in intimate Communion, and sup with thee in
the acceptance of thy Graces, and thou shalt sup with him at a Banquet of Love: Thou mayst experimentally say, That the Gospel is come to thee in power, and in the holy Ghost, and in much Assurance, as the Apostle speaks, 1 Thess. 1.5. In Power in, the first work of Conver∣sion; in the holy Ghost, in the gracious in∣dwelling of it after Faith; and in much Assu∣rance, in the Sealins of Truth and Love upon the heart. Next to that of the Word, I re∣commend Prayer to thee; This is an excellent Ordinance, it wrestles with God, and like a Prince prevails with him; It unlocks the Trea∣sury of Grace, and fetches down all Blessings; it hath a king of Omnipotency in it; and, if with reverence I may so allude, As God brought forth all things by the breath of his mouth, so the Believer produces all Blessings by the breath of Prayer. Apollonius (as So∣zomen relates) never asked any thing of God but he obtained it. And of Luther it was said, Iste vir potuit apud Deum quod voluit; This man could do what he would with God. Ask, and thou shalt have: Ask the sealing Spirit, and thou shalt have it; ask in the Name of Je∣sus Christ; His Merits are as pure Incense a∣ble to perfume thy Prayers; and as a power∣ful Orator to perswade the Comforter to come down to thee: Ask in the holy Spirit, in the Grace and sweet Gales of it, That the Spirit may be an answer to it self; the Spirit as sealing Gods Love an answer to it self as in∣spiring thy Prayers: Ask in Faith; Hath not
God told thee of a witnessing Spirit? Hath he not said, That he will speak peace to his Saints? Are not his Promises as so many Bonds upon his Truth to make the things promised good? Prove him by Prayer, if he will be as good as his Word; see, if he will not own his own hand in the Promise; wrestle with him till the day break in the light of his Countenance lifted up upon thy heart; Ask in fervency, that whilst thy heart is burning with Love towards God, his Love which is the Fountain of thine, may reveal it self to thee. The old Token of acceptance was firing the Sacrifice, and it is still a pledg of success, when there is warmth in Prayer. Ask in sincerity, in a pure intention, not for self-ease, not that thou mayst fare deliciously upon the Love of God; but that thy Spirit may be the freer to his ser∣vice, that thy Zeal may be more inflamed towards his Glory; The prayer of the upright is his delight; in so praying. thou shalt meet the favour of God. It is very remarkable what posture Paul was in, when Ananias was sent to comfort him, Behold, he prayeth, saith God; go, let him be filled with the Holy Ghost. In the beginning of Psal. 13. Davids Faith run very low, How long wilt thou forget me O Lord for ever? how long wilt thou hide thy face from me? ver. 1. A while after it lifts up it self a little, Consider and hear me, O Lord my God, lighten mine eyes, lest I sleep the sleep of death, ver. 3. but praying on, it is in the alti∣tudes; I have trusted in thy mercy, my heart shall
rejoice in thy Salvation, ver. 5. Prayer is one of Gods sealing times; in it thou approachest and drawest nigh to him who is the fountain of Life and Joy. Whilest thou art opening and pouring out thy Heart to him, Who knows but he may open his Heart and incomparable Love to thee? the holy Spirit may come and tell thee, as the Angel Gabriel did Daniel in the same posture, That thou art greatly beloved, a man of desires with God. In the last place make use of the Lords Supper. There God makes a Royal feast, a feast of fat things full of marrow, of wines on the lees well resined; he sets forth Christ crucified, whose flesh is meat indeed, whose blood is drink indeed. Come, eat his flesh and drink his blood, that you may live for ever; Eat and let thy Soul de∣light it self in fatness; drink, yea, drink abun∣dantly, O beloved Soul, or as the Original Text may be read, Be drunk or happily inebria∣ted with the sweet Love of Christ; the same crucified Christ, which in the Sacrifice on the Cross satisfied Gods heart, at this Sacrament can satisfie thine. Never any Feast like this, which chears the Heart of God and Man; How will God manifest his Love here in Sa∣lutations, Kisses, and Unctions The Jews at their Feasts used many demonstrations of Love; such as Salutations, faying to their Guests, Peace be unto thee; Kisses; from whence afterwards Christians derived their Kiss of Charity; or as Tertullian calls it, Oscu∣culum Pacis, A Kifs of Peace; and Oyl poured
out upon the Head, called therefore Oleum lae∣titiae, The Oyl of gladness: And cannot God do much more at his Table? Cannot he sa∣lute thee, and say, Peace, Peace, to thee, be∣cause thou trustest in him? Cannot he kiss thee with the kisses of his mouth, and cause one Pro∣mise or other to drop sweetness into thy heart? Cannot he give thee the rich anointings of the holy Spirit, and sill thee with all joy and peace in believing? Let thy Spikenard, thy Faith, and Love, and other Graces send forth their smell, that he may break a Box of Spikenard in thy heart, and fill, and perfume it with the sweet odours of his Love: Wait upon him in this Ordinance, there he doth by outward and visible Elements, seal Pardon and Salvation to thee; and believe it, he that puts one Seal to thy Sense, can put another to thy Heart; unto the Seal of Elements, he can add the Seal of the Holy Spirit; with the outward Bread and Wine, thou mayst have the hid∣den Manna, and heavenly refreshments from Christ. Whilst thou art renewing thy Cove∣nant, and avouching the Lord to be thy God, he can own thee, and avouch thee to be one of his Children, and this will be more to thee than a World. Again, If thou wouldst be assured, walk in Ʋprightness, this is Gospel-perfection; the Believers Beauty, the soundness of all his Graces, the desire and delight of God him∣self, as being a Beam from his own Truth and Simplicity. In Scripture he seldom mentions
an upright man without setting some mark of Honour upon him. Enoch walked with God, as one familiar with him, Gen. 5.22; and as the Septuagint, and after them the Apostle, Heb. 11, hath it, , he pleased God; and how great a Character is this? Caleb followed God fully, and he is stiled a man of another Spirit, such as is above the rate of common Souls. Job was a perfect and upright man, and God calls him a none such in the Earth. The Jews say, That the Seventy Souls that went with Jacob into Egypt were worth as much as all the Seventy Nations in the World: I am sure, the upright, the Israelites indeed, are the Pearls and Excellent ones in the Earth. Now here I recommend three things to thee, To walk as in Gods presence, To have an uni∣versal respect to his Commands, and To carry a pure intention towards his Glory. All these have a great tendency to Assurance. Walk as in Gods Presence. Remember, that he is every∣where. Thou needest not a Vision, or Jacobs Ladder; where-ever thou art, thy Faith can tell thee, that God is in the place, and it is too dreadful to sin in. His Presence besets thee behind and before, and thou canst not break away from it; thy ways are all before him, nay thy very heart; He knows the make of it, and stands by the inward Frame and secret Springs thereof, seeing what is a forming there upon the Wheel, and what thoughts are taking their flight from thence. All is naked and
open as in an Anatomy before his Face. He is intimior intimo tuo, nearer to thee than thou art to thy self. Walk as in his Presence. Live as under his all-seeing Eye. Seneca would have us set a Cato or a Laelius before our eyes, and to compose our Lives as in their Presence; Magna pars peccatorum tollitur, si peccaturis testis assistat, saith he; A present witness would pre∣vent a great deal of sin. Think thus with thy self, Cave, Spectat Deus; Take heed, God seeth. Keep fresh apprehensions of him in thy thoughts. Think, purpose, speak, act, do eve∣ry thing , worthy of, and in an holy congruity to his Presence. Walk with him, that thou mayst be translated, though not as Enoch, corporally into Heaven, yet as a sin∣cere Believer, mentally into the Suburbs of it, in the Manifestations of Gods Favour. Look stedfastly, constantly unto him, that thou mayst have sweet Aspects and Love-glances from him. Thou mayst have his Favourable Pre∣sence, whilst thou livest under his Awful one. The upright shall dwell in thy presence, Psal. 140; that is, in thy gracious Presence. They set him before them, and he causes his Grace and Love to pass before them. In the next place, Have an universal respect to his Commands. It is a vulgar Rule among the Jewish Doctors, That men should single out some one Command out of the Law, and exercise themselves therein, that God may be their Frsend, and bear with them
other things. But this is to Indent and Article with God upon our own Terms. The Hypocrite, (as one elegantly expresses it), like a globous body, touches the Law in some one point, in some particular Command; but the Upright, at least in desire and endeavour, lies close and level to all the Will of God. The Pha∣risees seemed to be very much for the First Table; but after all their Fasting and Prayer they could swallow down Widows Houses, and so give the lye to all their Devotions. The Moralist seems to be as much for the Second Table; but, as fair as his Life is towards Man, he is very unjust to God, stealing away that heart which is infinitely more due to him, than the justest of Debts can be to our Neigh∣bour. If thou wouldst be assured, thou must have an universal respect to his Command; do not pick and chuse among them, but as David, be for , all the Wills of God; as Za∣chary and Elizabeth, walk in all his Command∣ments. Wherever the Divine stamp is, there let thy Obedience be, that thou mayst have a great Reward: Light is sown for the Righ∣teous, and gladness for the upright in heart, Psal. 97.11. Upon sincere Obedience a crop of Comfort comes up; and, because by Pro∣mise, much surer than that of the Husband∣man which is under Providence only: The righteous Lord loveth righteousness; his counte∣nance doth behold the upright, Psal. 11.7. In the Original it is ; Their faces behold the up∣right;
the , the Three Persons in the Sacred Trinity do all look with a loving Aspect upon such an one. Our Saviour hath told us as much, If a man sincerely keep the holy Words, The Father and the Son will come to him, and make their abode with him, John 14.23. And a little after follows a Pro∣mise of the Holy Spirit as a Comfor∣ter, verse 26. Walk uprightly, and thou art in a posture to receive sweet mani∣festations of Love from the whole Sacred Tri∣nity. In the last place carry a pure Intention towards Gods Glory. This is the single eye in the Body of Duties, all our good Works lie in the dark without it: the want of this was as a black line drawn over Amaziah's vertue; He did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, but not with a perfect heart, 2 Chron. 25.2. Jehu was anointed and appointed by God to destroy Ahabs House; and yet for want of a pure Intention, was reckoned as a Murderer for do∣ing so, Hos. 1.4. That which is true Prayer when it comes from Zeal, may be but howl∣ing when it comes from Lust, Hos. 7.14. Those Moral Vertues, which are very glossie in the Matter, may in the End be no better than splendid sins. The End is the purest off-spring of a rational Spirit, and a cardinal circum∣stance in every Action. The Soul conceives all its Thoughts before the End, as Labans Ewes did their young before the Rods. As the
End is earthly or heavenly, so is the Man and his Acting. Remember, O Believer, that thou wast not made a Man or a Saint; Thy Lamp of Reason was not set up at first or new-lighted afterwards by Grace that thou shouldst center on any thing less than God him∣self, or take thy aim lower than his Glory. Set thy heart on that great End; look right on it with a single eye; whether thou eatest or drink∣est, or prayest, or hearest, or whatever good work thou art about, carry on the great Design, That God in all may be glorified. How taking this is with Christ, He himself hath told us; Thou hast ravished my heart, my Sister, my Spouse; thou hast ravished my heart with one of thine eyes, with one chain of thy neck, faith he to his Church, Cant. 4.9. A pure Intention is that single eye, and Obedience that chain of the neck; which in Believers doth excordiate and ravish the heart of Christ himself; And what sweet returns will he make upon such taking Graces? Their Graces ravish his Heart, and his Com∣forts will ravish theirs: Their thoughts are up∣on Gods Glory, and Gods are upon their Peace. With the upright he will shew himself upright; with the pure he will shew himself pure. They are upright in Duties, and he will be upright in Promises; They give him pure Intention, and he will give them pure Mercy; such as is the sealing of his Love upon their Hearts. The pure in heart shall see him, not in the bliss∣making Vision only, but before in those Love∣glances,
which are the First-fruits of Heaven here below. Again, If thou wouldst be assured, be much in charity and doing good; As the Elect of God put on bowels of Mercy. Open thy heart to the poor in Pity, and thy hand in Charity; draw out thy Alms, and with them thy Soul; give outward Things, and which is more, thy Self in real compassion; Cast thy Bread upon the Waters, upon the Tears of the Poor, that it may be carried into the Ocean of Eternity, and there found again in a glorious Reward. When an Object of Charity meets thee, Say not, Go and come again; pass not by as the Priest and Levite did, but, as the good Sama∣ritan, immediately pour in thy Wine and Oyl into the Wounds of thy Brother; omit no Season of Charity: Now is thy Seed-time, scatter thy good Works, Sow upon Blessings, as the Phrase is, 2 Cor. 9.6. Now Christs Bank is open, put in thy Money upon holy Usury, and God himself will be thy Pay-Master; Be still a-doing of good, that in thy little sphere thou mayst resemble him who doth good in the great sphere of Nature: His Sun shines and Rain falls every-where; Be as like him as thou canst, shining in good Works, and drop∣ping in Charities upon all occasions. Give a Portion to seven and also to eight, saith the Preacher, Eccles. 11.2. From this Text the Jews ground a Custom to give an Alms to
seven or eight poor people every day. How∣ever that be, we should be much in Charity: Look on the Poor as Gods Altars erected on purpose, That upon their Backs and Bellies thou mayst offer up thy Charity as an Odour of a sweet smell, a Sacrifice acceptable, well-pleasing to God. Be rich in good Works, ready to distri∣bute, willing to communicate, laying up a good Foundation against the time to come. This is the way to Assurance: Works of Mercy and Charity make Faith visible, and withal put the Believer into a nearer capacity to have the Love of God manifested to him. They make Faith visible; no Assurance can be had, unless that Query, Whether we be in the Faith? be resolved in the Affirmative: That cannot be done, unless Faith become visible; and more visible it cannot be than in such good Works; which as the holy Blossoms of it prove that there is Life at the root. The Mercy and Charity, which hang upon it, may tell thee, That thou hast indeed closed by Faith with the infinite Love and Grace above, and from thence brought down all those drops and models of Goodness which thou sheddest forth in thy Conversation: The Fruit may prove thy standing in Christ the true Root of fatness and sweetness. The Image of Good∣ness limmed and drawn out upon thy Life, shews it self to be from the pure Spirit. St. John exhorting the little children to a real practical Love, adds this as a singular Comfort, ,
In this Love we know that we are of the Truth, and shall assure our hearts before him, 1 John 3.18, 19. It thou love thy Brother in Deed and in Truth, assure thy self, that thou art of the Truth; That the holy truth of the Gospel is mixed with faith in thy Heart, and there grows up into the Di∣vine life and likeness: Say not, That thy Faith is dead or idle, as long as it can shew forth the Coats and Garments, the Alms and good Works which it hath done; these shew the life and labour of it: Nay further, these put thee into a nearer capacity to have the Love of God manifested to thee. God in the Prophet commands them to deal their bread to the hungry, to cover the naked not to hide themselves from their own flesh; and immediately after lets out him∣self in sweet Promises to them, Thy righteous∣ness shall then go before thee, Isa. 58.8. that is, thy Graces shall visibly appear to thee. And a∣gain, Thou shalt call, and the Lord shall answer, thou shalt cry, and he shall say, here am I, ver. 9. that is, He will be very near and ready at hand to reveal himself to thee. And which is more, as St. John tells us, he will dwell in thee, He that dwelleth in love, dwelleth in God, and God in him, 1 Joh. 4.16. He dwells in the Divine Life, and the Divine Presence dwells in him: He hath a Shechinah, nay, and an Oracle in his own bosom. God will speak peace to his Saints, Psal. 85.8.  to his merciful ones, with them he will shew himself merciful; to them he will speak from the Mercy-seat; they give but
ordinary Bread, but receive from him hidden Manna; they draw out their Souls to their Bre∣thren, and he draws out his Soul to them. In the last place, if thou wouldst be assured, set thy heart on God, and Christ, and Heaven; stay no longer in the straits of this lower World, take thy flight by Faith and Love into the sphere of Infinity, where thy Soul may open and dilate it self for ever. Hang no longer a∣bout the drops and little particles of Being, put forth thy Soul might and main into the great ocean of Sweetness and Perfection, which is able to fill up thy two vast Capaci∣ties of Mind and Will with its unmeasurable Truth and Goodness. Warm thy Heart no more among the little sparks of Good here be∣low; soar up upon the wings of Desire and ar∣dent Affection to that pure immutable Sun of Love and Goodness; one of whose golden rays of favour will be more to thee than a World. Thou hast, O Believer, a Soul twice Heaven-born; once as it is in its own nature an immortal spark from above, and again as it bears the impress of Heaven in its Graces. And answerably thou hast a double impetus after Happiness; one in the instinct of nature thirsting after it, and another in the more Di∣vine impulses of Grace pressing towards it as its Center. Think not that such a Soul shall ever find rest, till it come back to the first point from whence it issued, and resign up it self to its Original in the bosom of God. Inflame thy
Heart with Love to Jesus Christ who is altoge∣ther lovely, and wholly desirable. In his Righ∣teousness thou maist stand and look up to the sweet reconciled face of God; In his bleeding wounds thou hast a passage into the infinite bowels of Mercy; through the veil of his flesh the way is open to the Holy of Holies; The oyl upon his head can fill thee with joy unspeakable and glorious. Lift up thine eyes, O Believer, to that wonder of wonders, God manifested in the flesh; from whence come all the admirable in∣dwellings of God in the spirits of Men. Set thy Heart upon that Infinite Mass and Trea∣sure of Merit, which paid off all the scores to Divine Justice, and over and above bought all the Glory of Heaven for poor worms. Ravish thy Soul in the rich redundancies and over∣measures of the Spirit upon him, which over∣flow and fill so many thousand precious Souls with Grace. Look stedfastly upon that pure mirrour of Love, Holiness, Meekness, Good∣ness, Obedience, Patience, which is in his flesh; look till thou shine with the same image or spiritual Idea of Grace; look till thou art captivated in raptures and flames of Love to∣wards him; count the whole World dross and dung for him; espouse him in the dearest and sweetest affections. Again, set thy heart upon Heaven; call back thy Affections from this vain World, where they have been scattered a-gathering up stubble, unto Heaven thy native Country, that thou
maist have a pregnant proof in thy self, that thou art born from thence, and a-going thi∣ther. Follow those attractions, which Heaven the great Center of Grace and Holiness put upon thy Faith and Love to draw thee up to it self. Long to be up in that pure region of Bliss where God is All in All: There are sinless Perfections, and tearless Comforts, rivers of Pleasures, and plenitudes of Joy for ever. Thou maist there read all Truths in the Original, and satiate thy self at the fountain of Goodness. Have thy Conversation above, drive on a con∣stant trade there by Prayers and good Works, that thou maist have rich returns of Grace and Love from thence. This is the true way to As∣surance. A notable instance we have in the Psalmist, O God, thou art my God, early will I seek thee; my soul thirsteth for thee, my flesh long∣eth for thee, in a dry and thirsty land where no wa∣ter is, Psal. 63.1. and what is the issue of it? his Soul which had so emptied out it self in holy Pantings and Anhelations after God, was soon satisfied with the marrow and fatness of his love, ver. 5. No sooner was the Spouse sick of love to Christ, Cant. 2.5. but his left hand is under her head in Supports, and his right hand embraces her, in the sweet manifestations of his Love to her, ver. 6. The more Heavenly the Believer is, the sitter he is for Assurance; which serves as a lesser Heaven for him till he come to the great one which is above.
Thus much touching the second thing, the ways in which Assurance is attained. To conclude all, the Believer having arrived at Assurance, which is the highest step on this side Heaven, may sit down with joy upon his head, and begin that Song of Free-grace and the Lamb; which is sung above, though in an higher tune, in the Heavenly quire of Angels and glorified Saints for ever and ever. Well may he say, Oh! what hath God wrought? what was he, a lump of dust and sin, to be brought hither? How did he lie in blood and death, till Grace came by and put in the breath of Spiritual life into him? Was not his Reason the lightest part in him, veiled and covered over with gross darkness, when the rosie morn and day-spring of Grace first broke out upon him in Spiritual illuminations? Was not his Will, though a free Principle, fast shut up in Hardness and Unbelief, when Grace o∣pened the Iron-gate, and made him free to his own Happiness? What a poor broken Man, and under what innumerable debts was he, when Grace came and paid off all by the Blood of the Covenant? How much of Earth and Hell was upon him before Grace made him a Son, and limmed out the Divine Image upon his Heart? What swarms and legions of Lusts kept possession in his Heart, when Grace set up its standard and drove them out to make room for the holy seed there? And after he became a Saint, what an hand had Grace with
him to cure his many weaknesses, and nurse up his infant-Graces? What a vast charge was it at in fresh anointings and supplies of the Spirit, to keep the holy lamp and fire from go∣ing out? And at last, how rich and glorious is Grace towards him, when it carries him up into the mount of Assurance, and there shews him the great things which it hath done, and will do for him; the true Graces and blossoms of Glory in his Heart, and a fair Heaven that lies beyond them, where Crowns and Robes of Happiness wait for his coming? Oh! Grace! infinite Grace! thou art the Origine of all Graces, and Center of all Praises. All the Saints owe their birth and safe conduct to Heaven to thee; and to every step of thine, from the first beams and drops of Mercy to the Bliss-making Vision and rivers of Plea∣sures above, Hosannabs and Halielujahs must be sung for ever and ever. FINIS.
The TABLE. A ADam Preacht of Christ. Pag. 376 Adoption a fruit of Faith, 241. Its Pri∣viledg, 242, to 249, hereby a greater Glory than in Adam. Pag. 244 Adriatick Sea, a Popish Fable about the calming of it. Pag. 104, 105. Albertus Magnus his Statue speaking articu∣lately. Pag. 164 Ambrose's saying of Cain and Abel. Pag. 367 Armas Burgus his Prayer at his Martyrdom. 176 His Patience. Pag. 318 Andelots brave answer when questioned, to Henry 2d. of France. Pag. 315 Anselm's Interrogatory and Counsel to a Man at the point of death. Pag. 80 Antinomians Error about Sin & the Law. Pag. 121 Assurance and Faith how differ. 137, to 149 That it is attainable 397. Of our good estate is attainable, 387. Names given to Faith shew it, 399, 410. Another ground, 404. Exam∣ples of it, 403: Popish errour about it, 388. Like the Sceptick Philosophers herein, 389. It puffs not up, 395, 396, Assurance of Par∣don, 397. Of Perseverance, 412. Ways by which it is attained, 424. It begins the Song of Free-Grace here. Pag. 460 Athanasius his saying when Banished by the Em∣perour. Pag. 198 Augustin's mistake about Faith retracted. 6
Strugling against Sin in his own strength, he heard a voice, 279. His Spiritual application of Christs raising up three from the dead. Pag. 385, 386 B Baptism, several Names given it by the Anci∣ents, 371. How a Jewish Custom then a Di∣vine Ordinance, 372. Though received in In∣fancy, yet hath a bond on Conscience, ibid. & 373. One confirmed in Martyrdom by it by his Mother, ibid. Burgundians Baptism, Pag. 374 Bellarmine died in doubt. Pag. 426, 427 Belief of the Divine Authority of the Scriptures, of what kind, 37 to 41. What the consequences of it in order to Resignation, 69, to 75. A Be∣liever keeps to the Written Word in all things, 122, to 126. The only wise man, 170. His knowledg of the Invisible God, 171, 172. The Presentiality of Things future, 186. Ʋnder∣stands seeming Contradictions, 187. Its spiritual extraction the best Chymist, 192, to 201. What he desires to know of himself. Pag. 381 Belial a son of Belial, what it imports. Pag. 160 Bernards reflection on himself when he saw an∣other Sin. Pag. 313 Bishop, no non-preaching Bishops of old. Pag. 377, 378 Blessing of Jacob and Esan differ, 344. Promise of Temporal Blessings not absolute. Pag. 345 Blood, a little drop given out to be the Blood of Jesus Christ. Pag. 364, 365 C Cardinal Cajetan's Commentaries on the Master of the Sentences extold by Papists above Lu∣ther, yet 200 Errors in it. Pag. 156 Christ & earthly things often in competition. 159
His Conception in the Womb and the Heart, compared, 288, 361, 362. He is the Samplar of our Graces, 291. How he died in his per∣son, and in the Believer. Pag. 373 Conditions of the Promises really in Believers. Pag. 391 Conflict, the Natural & Spiritual differenced. Pag. 261, 262, 263. Conscience its testimony of great repute among Pa∣gans, 405. Witnesseth integrity, 406. Belie∣vers converse with Scripture & Conscience. Pag. 407 Conviction of Sin manifold, 70, 71, 72. Several things ensue thereupon, to Pag. 75 Creation, the Philosophers misguess about it, 17, 18. New Creation in the Heart. Pag. 383, 384. Credere Deo, & in Deum. Pag. 131, 132 Cruciger, his Death-bed Prayer, and Faith. Pag. 138 Covenant of Grace and Works, difference of Men under them. Pag. 278 D Dr. Dees impostures by Spirits. Pag. 326 Delilah, the import of the word in Hebr. Pag. 150 Dragon poysonous shut up by Sylvester the Bi∣shops Prayers. Pag. 266 E Election though from eternity, yet buds in time. Pag. 413 Evagrius his gift to the poor to be paid in ano∣ther world. Pag. 113 Evidences confirm Assurance. Pag. 394 Experiments all learned men are for them. 326 Experiments of Faith, of Scripture-truth. 325, to 370. Where of Scripture Ordinances and great Works, to Pag. 386 Examination of our selves espied by the Philoso∣phers. Pag. 433, 434
Faith, the several acceptions of the word in Scripture, 1, 2. Considered in its measures, and in its lowest measure de∣scribed, ibid. Wherein it exceeds Moral Virtues, 8, 9. The difference between that and Reason alone, 12, 19. And Reason with Scripture, 19, 30. Faith explicite re∣quired in Fundamentals, 41, 46. It disciples the Soul to Christ, 86, 87. Yields to be ruled by Christ in all act∣ings, 109. Aspires after Heaven, and looks for pay there, 113. Where the seat of Faith is disputed be∣tween Protestants and Papists, 126. Though seems dead, yet may be alive, 129, 130. More than a waked assent, 131, to 136. Less than Assurance, to 149. Why former Divines desine it by a full perswasion, 136. Dif∣ference between Assurance and Faith justifying us, 140. Hangs on God in all its actings, 191. Fruits of Faith and several Conceptions of these, 270, 271. It is before all other Graces, 283 to 288. Sets them all on work, 289. Its foundation and infusion, 328. It wars against all en∣ticement to Sin, 276. Steps by which Faith goes in mor∣tifying it. Pag. 280 Fall of man total. Pag. 7 Father, its efficacy in Prayer. Pag. 245 Fear of God to be in all actions, 303. Servile and Filial shewed. Pag. 304 Mr. Fox never denied any that asked for Jesus sake. Pag. 301 Free-Grace, its presumption in unholy persons to expect it, 119, 120. Free-Will hath no Harmony with it, 190. Abused by Pelagians. Pag. 366 G God most glorious in his Word, 12. Confest by all Nations, 13. Cardinal Perron one day proved a God, the next would have proved the contrary, 171. Discovery of God in Grace, and in the Creatures how differs. Pag. 175 Good, 288. Sets about the chief good. Pag. 4
Graces spiritual are Creations, 8. All act in union with Christ, 295. All rooted in Christs Mines. Pag. 380 H Happiness all desire it, few hit it, 3, 4. What Aristotle makes it to be. Pag. 253 Heart, it includes Ʋnderstanding and Will. Pag. 126, 127 Hungarians Tradition. Pag. 92 I Jews, though they reject the Sacrifice of the Messiah, yet offer a real one, and why, 97. Their answer to the Que∣stion, where believe to be saved by Christs Righteousness, with their pious saying over Bread, Wine, Herbs, 344. Their saying of the seventy Souls that went down into Egypt, 449. A vulgar rule among them, 450. A custom of others about Alms. Pag. 454, 455 Illumination Supernatural described, 11. Wherein it excels Natural Reason, 12, 19. It's requisite to Faith. Pag. 30 31, 32. Images how at first crept in, 16. When cast out the people triumphed, 309. Their return again. Pag. 331, 332 Ingrossers of Corn, sore Judgments on them. Pag. 184 Instruction the true & false way of finding it. Pag. 118 Intercession of Christ powerful. Pag. 415 Johannes Seneca his Death-bed moan. Pag. 210 Israelites, the Men go not into Canaan but the little ones, its misery. Pag. 128, 129 Justification three acts required to it, 94, 98. Bellarmines. Conclusion about it, 102. How the ungodly may and may not be justified, 165. Its great importance. 201. It's not from eternity 202, 206. It is double, 207. How by Faith, 213, to 219. Not compleat till the day of Judgment, Pag. 227, to 231 K Kingdom, the Primitive Christians talk so much of it that the Pagan Emperours were jealous of them, though with∣out cause. Pag. 176
Kohathites, the derivation of the word. Pag. 5 L Law of God demands of us two things, 209. Enough in Christ to answer both, 210. Its writing in the heart by Nature and Grace differ, 338. Impossible to be fulfilled; but by the fiu't of man. Pag. 401 Legio fulminatrix. Pag. 373 Our life how tremendous every way. Pag. 305 Light natural improved to the utmost engaged not God to give Grace. Pag. 14 Love to God and our Neighbour hath but one root. Pag. 301 Luthers Method in Reformation, 274. An example of Faith in Mortification, his saying of Free-Will, 368, 369. His answer to the menacing Law. Pag. 428 M Mahalath, a title of some Psalms interpreted. Pag. 194 Mahomets Heart una child cut open. Pag. 193 Meris Bishop of Chalcedons Discourse with Julian. Pag. 308 Martyrs refusing Pardon. Pag. 276 Meekness Natural, Moral, Spiritual, 311. Examples. ib. & Pag. 312 Mortification, a Believer yields to Christ for it in a threefold respect, 103. Resemblance between it and Christs death, 104. False ways of seeking it, and the true pointed at, 117, 118. The fruit of Faith, 250. Degrees of Mortifica∣tion, of Original Sin, 260, 267. And of actual. ibid. Motions holy precious to a Believer. Pag. 88 Musculus's Distich in straits. Pag. 248 N Nazianzens saying about the difference between begotten and proceeding. Pag. 352 O Obedience actuated by Faith, 314, 315, 316. Obedience of the Law fulfilled in Christ, and of the Gospel by the Spirit in a Believer. Pag. 212 Ordination used by the Jews. Pag. 377
Origens saying of some Scriptures that did affect him. Pag. 144 P Papists and Hypocrites how they agree, 122. All points in Popery additions to the Word, 123. Its sandy foundation drawn from Bellarmine himself, 147. Natural Popery in every mans heart. Pag. 158 Paracelsus his proud boast of himself. Pag. 192 Patience its excellency, acted by Faith. Pag. 318 Pelagians put Free-Will for Grace, 6. Place Infants in the same state as Adam. Pag. 257 Perfection sinless not attainable in this life. Pag. 125, 126 Perseverance no condition of it self. Pag. 417 Philip Lantgrave's comfort in Imprisonment. Pag. 321, 322 Plague-sores lookt upon by Munster as Love-tokens. Pag. 193 Plerophory of three things in Scripture. Pag. 400 Pollio's dying-saying. Pag. 115 Polemenia her wish to be cast into a Vessel of burning-Pitch. Pag. 319 Providence, Reasons mistake about it. Pag. 18, 19 Popes blasphemous speech about the loss of a Peacock. Pag. 310 Promises of Grace, and to Grace. Pag. 346 Prayer, its continuance, 383. Its returns, 372. How heard and not heard. Pag. 374 Predicantici a nick-name for Preachers by Papists and some Protestants. Pag. 376 Preaching its efficacy. Pag. 379, 380, 381 Proving our estate not impossible, therefore Assurance not im∣possible. Pag. 402 Q Quakers Light within confuted. Pag. 67, 68, 69 Quirinus Reuteras his saying on his Death-bed. Pag. 249 R Rabbins saying of Grace and Judgment. Pag. 319 Reason and Divine Mysteries compared together, and how far these exceed that, 50. Its fallibility compared with infallibility of the Scriptures. Pag. 52
Remit, whether God may remit Sin without a Satisfaction? the Question may be spared, 116. It is granted before assurance of it is manifested. Pag. 139 Revelation to Apostles and Prophets, and to ordinary Belie∣vers how differ. Pag. 58 Resignation to Jesus Christ the third thing in Faith, and what it is, 79. Three things opened about it, 81. Made to Christ as Mediator, 82, 83. To the whole Trinity, 84. To the Word, 85. What the purposes of it, to 115. Ad∣juncis and properties of it to 131. In it is the Essential nature of Faith, to 16. It is a middle thing between Faith and Assurance, 149, to 155. How call'd in Old and New Testament, 154. Acts of Resignation made by Faith. Pag. 161, 162 Righteousness imputative justified and vindicated. Pag. 99, 100 Dr. Rivets Death-bed Experiences. Pag. 327 S Sacrament of the Supper set out livelily. Pag. 375, 376 Sacrifices by Gods appointment ever since the Fall, 42. And foreshewed the Messiah. Pag. 43 Samuel asked of and lent to God. Pag. 373 School-Divinity censured, 29. Schoolmens saying about Worship. Pag. 124 Scripture, inward marks whereby known to be the Word of God, 32, to 36. Several Sectaries that reject it menti∣oned, 55. Argued with, to 64. Their Allegations refu∣ted, to 69. That it is a dead letter refuted, 65. Dis∣cern'd by Faith without the Church, 328, 329. It is Principium scientificum. Pag. 330 Seculum spiritus sancti, refuted. Pag. 66 Self-denial as it precedes a Believers Resignation consists in divers things, 75, to 79. The Moralists and the Belie∣vers differ. Pag. 161, 162. Sick godly Woman would have God chuse health or sickness
for her, 183. Story of a sick-man to whom Satan appea∣red. Pag. 432 Sin, distinctions about it, 154. Divers senses of Original Sin with the true, 252, to 256. It hinders Faith, 157. How far they do not hinder Resignation, 155, to 161. Not Justification. Pag. 221 Socinus and Servetus their blasphemy about the Trinity, 357. Socinians mistake about Original Sin, 6. The ir∣rationality of their Faith, 47. And nullity, 53. Grace they speak of is a fancy. Pag. 117 Sokneus his dying-saying. Pag. 114 Son Natural and Adopted, their resemblance. Pag. 241, 242 Spirit & Word go together, 52. To say the Spirits Testimony is dubious is blasphemy, 408. It applys Promises, 409. Abides for ever with a Believer, two grounds of it. Pag. 414 Sulpitius Severus his Loquacity. Pag. 278 Sultan Achmet his proud arrogance. Pag. 243 Synagogue their first use. Pag. 376 T Talmud of the Jews magnified by them. Pag. 93 Taught of God, all ambitious of so great a privilege. Pag. 91, 93 Trinity of persons and unity of essence, the mystery of it not known by Human Reason, 352, 353. Acknowledged by Jewish Rabbins and Cabbalists with the Primitive Chri∣stians saying to them that doubt of it, 354. Enemies of it, 355. Worshipt by the Church in all Ages. Pag. 356 Fruebern's Death-bed saying. Pag. 126 V Vanity how described. Pag. 183 Virgins a Play acted about the five wise & five foolish. Pag. 371 Vivification, Faith yields up the Soul to Christ for it, and how. Pag. 105, 106, 107 Ʋnction Festival. Pag. 378 Ʋnion Hypostatical and Mystical. Pag. 241 Ʋniversal Promises and Threats include Particulars, Pag. 394.
Ʋprightness is Gospel-perfection, 448. Ʋpright persons mentioned always with some mark of honour, 419. How God is upright with the upright. Pag. 453 W Walking in all Places as in Gods Presence. Pag. 449, 450 Will, Christ as God and Man hath two Wills. Pag. 392 Wisdom, why Christ call'd the Wisdom of God, 89. A great stir in the World about Wisdom. Pag. 170 World, Epicureans fancy of the making of it, 383. The Believer understands better, ibid. Z Zeal what, 307. Examples of it for the truth. Pag. 308, 309 Zeno's Wife Ariadne would not suffer him to be taken up when buried in a sit of the Falling-sickness. Pag. 167 Zuinglius his answer suggested in a Dream. Pag. 94 Scriptures explained in this Treatise. 1 Sam. 15.25. 160 2 King. 17.33. 357 Job 19.25, 26. 402 Psal. 11.7. 421 Psal. 34.5. 369 Psal. 39.5. 320 Psal. 55.22. 107, 108 Psal. 62.1. 152 Psal. 63.1, 5. 459 Psal. 119, 160. 112 Prov. 3.21. 24, 25 & 9.1, 2, 3. 197 Cant. 4.9. 453 Isa. 57.17, 18. 195 Ezek. 43.2. 116 Dan. 4.27. 277 Hos. 2.13, 14. 195 Mat. 15.26, 27. 196 Mark 14.72. 223 Luk. 9.55. 61 Job. 3.12. 22, 23. & 14.23. 359 & 16.14. 120 Acts 5.41. 273 & 26.7. 350 1 Cor. 2.14. 20, 21 2 Cor. 9.6. 454 Gal. 6.1. 313 Ephes. 1.13. 144 & 5.10. 107 Col. 2.5. 28, 324 1 Thess. 1.5. 445 Heb. 12.1. 270 1 Job. 2.4. 25 1 Job. 3.6. 160 1 Job. 5.5, 7, 8. 363
Books Sold by Tho. Cockerill at the Atlas in Cornhil, near the Royal Exchange. THe Morning-Exercise at Cripplegate, or several Ca∣ses of Conscience practically resolved by sundry Ministers, in 4to. The Supplement to the Morning Exercise at Cripple∣gate, or several more Cases of Conscience practically resolved by sundry Ministers, in 4to. Precious Faith, considered in its Nature, Working and Growth. By Edward Polhill of Barwash in Sussex, Esq in 8o. The Faithfulness of God considered and clear'd in the great Events of his Word, 8o. The Nature, Power, Deceit and Prevalency of the remainder of In-dwelling-Sin in Believers, together with the ways of its working and means of Prevention. By John Owen D. D. in 8o. An Antidote against Distraction, or an endeavour to serve the Church in the daily Case of Wandring in the Worship of God. By Richard Steel, M. A. in 8o. The Reuniting of Christianity, or the Manner how to Rejoyn all Christians under one Confession of Faith, in 8o. God a Christians Choice, compleated by particular Covenanting with God, &c. in pursuit of a Design pro∣posed by Mr. R. A. in his Book Entituled, The Vindi∣cation of Godliness. And by Mr. Tho. Vincent in his Book called, Words whereby we may be saved. By Samuel Winney. FINIS.
