P3956 13618966 100817
The FIRST PART of a Brief Register, Kalendar and Survey of the several Kinds, Forms of all Parliamentary VVrits: COMPRISING In 3. Sections, all Writs, Forms of Summons to Great Councils, Parliaments, Convocations in the Tower, from the 5th of King Iohn (1203) till 23 Edw. 4. (1483) to all sorts of Spiritual and Temporal Lords, Great∣men (Members of,) and the Kings Counsil (Assistants to) THE HOUSE OF LORDS: With other Rare Writs, and 4. Exact Alphabetical, Chro∣nological Tables: 1. Of all Abbols, Priors, Masters of Orders, Clergy-men, (except Bishops:) 2. Of all Dukes, Earls, Forreign Kings, Marquesses, Princes of Wales: 3 Of all Lay-Barons, Lords, Vicounts, Great men: 4. Of all the Kings Counsil (Justices, Clerks, or other Officers) with the several numbers of each of them, and of Bishops, summoned to every Council, Parliament, and the Years, Rolls, Dorses in every Kings reign, wherein their names are recorded. Illustrated with choice, usefull Annotations, Observations concer∣ning these Writs differences, alterations, entries in the Clause Rolls: the Stiles, Titles, Additions of Patriarcha, Cardinalis, Electus, Confirmatus, Ma¦gister, &c. given in them to Spiritual; of Baro, Miles, Dominus, &c. to Temporal Lords; with their Baronies, Fealty, Homage, Oaths, right of Session, Iudicature: The Clergies forms of Procurations; Exemption from Taxes by the Laity: Our Kings Prerogative to call, prorogue, dissolve Parliaments, hold them by a Custos Regni, or Commissioners, by Patents (here cited;) to create Peers, Barons by Patent, special (not general) Writs (here registred;) to summon extraordinary Members, Assistants; Their proprie∣ty in Parliaments, dissolved by their deaths; The Power of their Counsil in, and out of them; The Constitution, Jurisdiction, Proceedings, Pri∣vileges, Ends, Duties of English Parliaments, Lords, Commons; Their in¦consistence with armed guards, seclusion of Members (by force, oathes, me∣naces) and with Scotish, or Irish Intruders; Their late differences from Councils. Parliamentum, when first used in Writs, Acts, Histories, &c. With other particulars. Publishing more Rarities, rectifying more Er∣rors in vulgar Writers, touching our Parliaments, than any former Trea∣tises of this Subject. By WILLIAM PRYNNE Esq a Bencher of Lincolnes Inne. Mercurius Trismegistus. In unaquaque arte tanta ducimur caecitatis caligine, ut maxima part eorum quae scimus, sit minima pars eorum quae ignoramus. LONDON Printed for the Author, and sold by Edward Thomas in Little Britain, and Henry Brome in Ivy Lane, 1659.
To the Ingenuous Readers, especi∣cially those of the Long Robe, and more Noble or Generous Eng∣lish Extraction. THere are 5. grand Defects of very publike concernment, highly ten∣ding if not to the dishonor, yet certainly to the great disservice, prejudice of our Kingdom, Par∣liaments, great Officers of State, Nobility, Gentry, Nation, and more especially of the Professors and Profession of the municipall Laws, which I have for many years last past, not only much admired at, and exceedingly de∣plored, but also used my best endeavors to get supplied, so farr as there was ny probability to effect it. The 1. is the irreparable losse of all the Par∣liament olls during the Reigns of our antientt Kings, from William the 1. till 5 E. 2.  the first
Roll of that kind now extant) and of many o∣ther of those Rolls since, during the Reigns of Edw. 2. and 3. with the not publishing in Print those Parliamentary Rolls and Records yet extant by pub∣like Order, for the benefit of Posterity, to prevent their suppression, destruction, Embe∣zelling by fire, warr, casualties, te negligence, or present malice of some Iesuitical Furies, or il∣litrate Animals, instigated thereunto by Hugh Peters his misintituled Pamphlet, Good work for a good Magistrate, printed 1651. p. 96. Where after his proposal of a short new Modell for the Law, he sub∣joyns, This being done, I IS VERY ADVISA∣BLE TO BURN ALL THE OLD RECORDS, YEA EVEN THOSE IN THE TOWER, THE MONVMENTS OF TYRANNY: Which des∣perate bedlam advise of his, I haveThe 2. prt of a short Deurrer to the lews long discontinued Remitter into England, p. 136, &c. elsewhere at large refuted, as most pernicious to the publike, and to all Corporations and Landed men. The 2. is the great want of an Exact Collection out of the Clause, Parliament, and Statu'e Rolls, of all Statutes, Ordinances and Acts of Parlia∣ment made before the use of Printing them im∣mediately after the Parliaments conclusion, or during their Sessions, came in fashion: all our Statutes at large, and the Abridgments of them, (even Ferdinando Pultons of Lincolns Inne Esq. the best & most refined) having sundrySee the Exact Abridg∣ment of the Records in the Tower, and my Table there, to Ti∣tle Sta∣tutes. Spuri∣ous Impostures printed in them, under the Titles of Acts, Statutes, and Ordinances of Parliament, which in verty are neither of them, but only particular Writs or Instuctions of the King to the Iustices and other Officers by advise of his Counl out of Parliament: Such are the St∣tutes,
De circumspecte agatis, said to be made in 13. E. 1. (resolved to be no Statute, but made by the Pre∣lates alone. M. 19. E. 3. Fitz. Jur. 28.) The Statutes of Protections, Champerty, and Conspirators, in 33 E. 1. De conjunctim feoffatis, in 34 E. 1. Ne rector prosternat arbores in caemiterio, in 35 E. 1. The Statute for Knights, 1 E. 2. of Gavelet, 10 E. 2. with sundry others, as the very form, words, & penning of them demonstrate, being transcribed only out of the Clause or Patents not Parliament or Statute Rolls. Besides these there are some forged Acts and Statutes printed in these Sta∣tute Books not extant in the Statute Rolls that remain intire: yea, there are sundry misprisions in printed Statutes, varying both in form & substance from the Statute Rolls wherein they are recorded, omitting some material words and clauses, adding and altering o∣thers; most of the publishers of our Statutes taking them upon meer trust, as they found them transcribed by others, but never examining them by the Statute Rolls & Original Records, as is most apparent by their See the fist part of my short Demur∣rer to the Iews long dis∣continued Re∣mitter into England, p. 36, 37, 49. 53, 54, &c. mistakes of the very times and dates of some Statutes, by their printing others of them without any date, as See Pul∣tons Statutes at large, Lond. 1618. p. 115. Rastals kalen∣dar of Sta∣tutes in the end of his A∣bridgment; and Tottles Magna Charta, out of which they transcribed them. made during the reign of King H. 3. Ed. the 1. or 2. BUTUNCERTAIN WHEN, ORIN WHICH OF THEIR TIMES, & by the manifold variances between their Printed Books, and the Statute Rolls, of which I have given you a particular account in my Table to the Eact. Abridgement of the Records in the Tower; the Compiler whereof was mistaken in this, That the Statute of 2 R. 2. c. 5. touching tellers of News (or Lyes) of Noblemen, or Counsellors, is not in the Record, nor any mention thereof; it being recorded at large in French in the Statute Roll of the first Par∣liament that year, wherein it is printed, though not in the second, as I can attest upon my own view
of the Statute Roll it self. Besides these Impostures, and Variances, there are many useful Acts in the Parliament and Clause Rolls totally omitted out of all our Printed Statute-Books, some whereof I have heretofore published in my Irenarches Redivivus. The 3. is the Grand deplorable Deficiency of such an Exact Chronological History of all the Great Councils, Synods, Parliaments of England, with their several Canons, Acts, Ordinances, Proceedings, as I have formerly mentioned in the Epistle to my Plea for the Lords, my Preface to an Exact Abridge∣ment of the Records in the Tower; and in a prin∣ted Title three year since, by which I endeavoured to promote it; which would supply all the three precedent Defects. The 4. is the great lack of diligent faithfull Collections and Publications of all the choicest Records, Proclamations, Writs, Letters, Char∣ters, Patents, Commissions, &c. in the Tower, or elsewhere, which concern the Liberties and Pro∣perties of the Subject; The just antient Duties, Customs, Revenues, Jurisdictions of the Kings and Crown of England in times of Warre and peace; the Coin, Merchandize, Manufactures, Trade, Government, Navy, Forts, Militia of En∣gland and Ireland; and the Negotiations, Leagues, Treaties with forein States: or at leastwise the want of an Exact Table, Repertory to them, whereby they might be readily found out, and made ue of upon all emergent occasions. The 5. is a Compleat Register or Kalendar of all Parliamentary Writs extant in our Records, which those who have formerly written Discour∣ses touching our English Parliaments, were either
totally ignorant of, or not well acquainted with, or else took no care or pains at all to communicate to others, though the very foundations of all our Parliaments and their proceedings; The omis∣sion or ignorance whereof hath made most of their Treatises of this subject very imperfect, un∣satisfactory, and full of gross misprisions, which pass for current Truths. It seemed very strange and monstrous to me, that none of our Kings, Parliaments, Great Offi∣cers of State, Nobles, but especially none of our reverend Iudges, learned Lawyes, nor any of the Msters of the Rolls (to whose beneficial Office, care, diligence, it most propely appertained) in so large a tract of time since Printing first grew common, have not hitherto put to their own helping hands, nor incouraged others by Honorary Salaries, to supply these deplrable, prejudicial Defects, (especially the 3. first) which so much concern the publike Government, Justice, Ho∣nor, welfare, Laws, Interest of the whole Eng∣lish Nation; when as forein Kings Parliaments, Statesmen, Lawyers, Advocates (especially in France, Spain, Germany, Denmark) have been very diligent and laborious in later ages, in searching out, transcribing, publishing to posterity all the Antiquities, Records, Councils, Parliaments, Laws, Edicts, Ordinances, Histories, Transacti∣ons of thir Predecessors, and encouraged their learnedest Scholars by great Offices, Honors, Sa∣laries, and bountiful rewards, to collections and publications of this Nature, to their eternal ho∣nor. VVhereupon I endeavoured the last long
Parliament by an Epistle to the Lords to excite them to contribute their best assistance towards the speedy Publication of all our Parliamentary Rolls and Records, profering my best endeavors to promote it; but I neither then nor since recei∣ved the least incouragement from them or others towards this beneficial publike undertaking, from which soon after I was both discouraged and disabled by near 3. years close Imprisonment in 3. remote Castles, under armed, strictest guards by Mr. Iohn Bradshaws and his Whitehall Associates warrant, without any accusation, hea∣ring, or particular cause either then or since ex∣pressed, of purpose to debarr me from publishing any thing of this Nature, or against their New Tyrannical usurpations, transcending all in former ages. After my enlargement from these 3. years expensive, as well as tedious restraints, (superad∣ded to my former Imprisonments and Losses un∣der the Prelates and Army-Officers,) I endeavored to revive this Heroick work, and to encourage all publike-Spirited Noblemen, Gentlemen, Lawyers to promote it; both by the publicati∣on of many unknown rare Records, in the second Part of my Demurrer to the Iews long discontinued Remitter into England; and Discoveries therein of the Vsefulness and excellency of our Records in general, and of those relating to our Parliaments, Laws, Liberties, Properties in particular: Since which, by a printed Paper, I proposed a way, how, in what manner, and by what time this usefull Design might probably be effected with no loss at all, but certain gain to those who
should contribute only 10  a piece towards it, for a year or two at most, and should then cer∣tainly receive their principal again, together with Books in the interval amounting to treble the interest; which, though some of my friends to whom I communicated these papers, highly ap∣proved of, seeming forwards to contribute to∣wards it, yet I found such a general lukewarnness, or rather absolute coldness (in others) really to advance it, as caused me totally to desist from any further prosecution thereof; Whereupon to supply those defects in some degree as much as in me lay, I did with no little pains and cost up∣on my own private account alone, (without the least assistance, contribution from any others) collect, compile, print and publish to the world, in the 3. First Parts of my Seasonable Historical Vin∣dication, and Chronological Collection of the good old Fundamental Liberties, Rights, Franchises, Laws all English Freemen; an Exquisite Epitome of all the Parliamentary Councils, Synods, and State-assem∣blies held within our Realms upon several Occasions, extant in our Historians, from the Britons first a∣rival therein, till the Coronation of King Willi∣am the first Anno 1066. conteining the space of 2390. years. Which though very usefull, sea∣sonable, profitable, containing sundry rarities in them; were looked upon by most men with con∣tempt, like old Almanacks, Clothes or Fashions quite out of dte; whence most of them lye moulding in Warehouses for want of sale. After which in pursute of these beginnings; I freely contributed my labors, to the publishing of Axact Abridg∣ment
of the Parliment Rolls and Records in the Tower of London; from King Edward the 2. till 1 R. 3. rectifying sundry mistakes, supplying divers de∣fects therein, adorning it with a necessary Pre∣face, usefull Tables and Marginal Notes, without which it had been in a manner altogether use∣less▪ Since which, I much enlarged and reprin∣ted pon my own Account alone (for want of as∣sistance by others) my Plea for the Lords and House of Peers; Wherein I have communicated to the world out of Records and Histories, more Presi∣dents, knowledge, touching the Judicature, Ju∣risdiction and Proceedings of our Great Coun∣cils and Parliaments in former ages, and more fully vindicated the just, antient Privilege and Hereditary right of the Lords and Barons of this Realm, to sit, vote, judge in all our English Parliaments, than any others have done in for∣mer ages, without the least incouragement, ayde, or retribution from any of their Lordships, not∣withstanding my manifold sufferings by, from, and under some of them and their ancesters here∣tofore both in person and estate, without the smallest voted recompence. These last publications, together with my Soveraign Power of Parliaments and Kingdoms, my Historical Collection of the Great Councils and Parlia∣ments of England; and new published Argument of the Case of the Lord Magwire, having in some measure (though not so fully as I desire) suppli∣ed the 4. first premised Deects, I have endeavo∣red by this present Brief Regist,  and Survey of the sveral ,
(the only Basis whereon Parliaments are foun∣ded, by which they are supported, directed, as well as convened) and by my usefull Observations on them, more compleatly to supply the 5. deect, than any of the former, so farr as my present leisure and ability will extend, without supplies from others; wherein I have with no little pains and diligence, given you a most exact and faith∣full Account of all the Writs of Summons to Parliaments, Great Councils, and most Convo∣cations in England, extant in the Clause Rolls and Records of the Tower, from the 5. year of King Iohn, till the 23. of Edward the 4th, that I have hitherto met with upon my best search after them, digested into several Sections in a Chro∣nological method, with usefull Observations on them; Wherein you have a compendious, yet full and satisfactory Account of all the several Forms and Varieties of writs of Summons du∣ring all this tract of time issued to Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Masters of Religious Orders, and all Spiritual Lords; to the Prince of Wales, Forein Kings, Dukes, Earls, Marquesses, Vi∣counts, Barons, Temporal Lords and Great men; to the Kings Counsil, Judges and other Assistants to the House of Lords; the Sheriffs of Counties, and particular Corporations made Counties, for electing Knights, Citizens and Burgesses to serve in Parliament, and to the Constable of Dover Castle, Warden of the Cinque-ports, and Ports themselves for electing Barons of those Ports; with the particular Rolls, membranaes, dorses, wherein every of these summons are re∣corded:
Together with a general Account in gross summ, how many Bishops, Abbots, Pri∣ors, Earls, Barons, Great men, and Assistants of the Kings Counsil were summoned to every of these Parliaments and Great Councils, & 4 most usefull, acurate, short Alphabetical & Chrono∣logical ables, inserted into my Observations on the 3. first Sections of these Different writs: 1. Of the Names of all the Abbots, Priors, Ma∣sters of Religious Orders, and other Clergymen (except Bishops) summoned to any Parliament or Great Council from 49 H. 3. till 23 E. 4. with the years, rolls, dorses in each Kings reign, wherein you shall find them summoned, and how oft any of them were summoned, and con∣sequently when omitted out of the lists of sum∣mons. 2ly. Of the Names of all the Dukes, Earls, Marquesses, and Princes of Wales. 3ly. Of all the Temporal Viscounts, Lords, Barons, Peers, and Great men. 4ly. Of all the Kings Counsil, Judges, Justices, and other Great Officers sum∣moned as Assistants to the Lords, in every Parlia∣ment and Great Council held in England from 49 H. 3. to 23 E. 4. with the particular Roll, year, dorse in every Kings reign, wherein you may find their names and summons entred, and when and how oft any of them or their posteri∣ty were thus summoned. Which Tables, as they were very painfull and troublesom to me ex∣actly to collect, being inforced to transcribe most of them three times over, before I could digest them into that form as here you find them, con∣sisting of very many figures (which I examined near five times over, to prevent mistakes in any
of them) so being thus compleated, will be the most usefull and delightfull Kalender to all An∣tiquaries, Heraulds, Lawers, Noblemen, Gen∣tlemen and others delighting in Antiquities, or Pedegrees, ever yet communicated to the English Nation; rectifying all those mistakes in names, & supplying those manifold defects in my Table of this nature to the Exact Abridgement of the Re∣cords in the Tower. If any Noblemen. Lawyers, Gentlemen, or others, would find out and know in a moment, when or how often, or in what Roll and dorse any of their Ancestors, Family, Name, were summoned to any Parliament or Great Council; or when or how often any Ab∣bot or Prior (whose lands they or their Clients now enjoy) were summoned to Parliaments, or of what Order they were, these Tables, com∣pared with the printed Lists before them, will presently resolve them, better than all the Ta∣bles and Kalendars to the Records in the Tower, which are very defective, and if they have cause to make use of the Records upon any occasion, these Tables will punctually direct them both to the Number Roll and Dorse too wherein they are recorded, without further search: So as I may conclude them to be greatly beneficial, as well to the Keepers of those Records, as to all those who shall have future occasion to make use of them in any kind. For the extraordinary writs of summons and others here published at large, I dare averr, that most of the Nobility, Gentry, Lawyers, and Parliament men of the English Nation▪ never
so much as once saw, or heard of most of them before this publication; and those few Antiqua∣ries, Lawyers, Gentlemen, who have gottena∣uy transcripts and Collections of the writs of summons in the Tower, shall meet with many memorable rare writs in this Abridgement, which are totally omitted out of their Folio Volumes, col∣lected to their hands by others; which I have here supplied by my own industry, and likewise digested into method: all those large Collcti∣ons of writs which I have yet seen, being both de∣fective, confused, fraught with a tedious repe∣tition of those names of Abbots, Priors, Dukes, Earls, Lords, Barons, which I have contracted into four short Tables in an orderly method. So as I may justly stile this Register, Kalendar and Survey, a rich Cabinet, and Compendious Treasury of the chiefest, and most precious Parliamentary Iewels, Rarities, Records, ever yet presented to the world in print. As for my Observations on, and Collections from these writs, I dare affirm without vain∣glory, they are for the most part such, as were never yet known nor communicated to the world; and will be of excellent use, not only for the searching, but understanding of Records, and of the true constitution, proceedings, Privileges, Affairs, Ends of the Great Councils and Parlia∣ments of England, and duties of their respective Members; wherein I have discovered, refuted many oversights and mistakes in Sir Edward Cook, and other pretended Antiquaries, who have writ∣ten of our English Parliaments, and given clearer
evidences of the original, beginning, use of the name Parliament in England; of the Authority, Power, use of the Kings Counsil, Iudges in Parlia∣ments; of the Kings general writs of Summons to Temporal as well as Spiritual persons who held not by Barony, not making themselves, nor their Successors, nor posterities, Lords or Barons, and of sundry other materiall particulars, rela∣ting to the Freedom, Fulness, Summons, Affairs & Proceedings of our Parliaments, than any hither∣to have done; out of an unfeigned desire of com∣municating more knowledg to the present & suc∣ceeding Generations, touching our Parliaments, and their affairs, than former times have been publikely acquainted with, that thereby I might restore our Parliaments to their primitive insti∣tution, use, splendor, freedom, Honor, that so the may be made medicinal Restoratives, Blessing not Grievances, or Diseases to our Church and State, or Physicians of no value. We read of a woman in the Gospel, which had a issue of bloud for 12 years, and had suffed many thigs of many Physicians, and spent all that she had upon them, even all her living, and yet was nothing better, but rather worse, and could not be heated by any of them. This woman is a true Emble of England, lyg for so many years, or more, sik of a bloudy issue under the hands of several Physicians, under the Name and Disguise of Parliaments of several Forms and Modells, who (with their armed sup∣porters) have put her to infinite expences, suffe∣rings, and exhausted all she hath; and yet they have neither healed nor amended her in any
kinde, but left her in a arr worse condition then they found her,er. 30. 13. for want of healing skil, or medicins; applying nothing but new corrosives & causticks of steel, instead of astringents and incarnatives to her bleeding wounds: yea those very Physici∣ans are now so full of manfold infirmities, di∣stempers, if not gross corruptions, that we may surely say unto them this Proverb,Lu. 4. 23. PHYSICIAN HEAL THY SELF, before we can possibly expect any publike healing from them either in Church or State. If these few leaves, through Gods bles∣sing on them, shall becomeRev. 22. 2. like to the leaves of the tree of life, for the healing of these Physicians, & our Nations, (one prime end of their publicati∣on) I shall bless God for it, and deem my cost and labour well bestowed; however this shall be my comfort;Propertius p. 134. In magnis et voluisse sat est: Pliny Praefatio in com. 1. Nat. Hist. Etiam non assecutis voluisse abunde pulchrum at∣que magnisicum est, in such a case as this. One chief means to make our future Parlia∣ments beneficial, medicinal and restorative to our Nation, is, to restore them to their antient freedom, and secure them and their Members from all future force and violence; which may be easily effected, 1.7 E. 1. Ra∣stal, Armor 1. By removing all armed Forces, and Souldiers a good distance from the places where they shall be kept, and prohibiting them under severest penalties, not to approach near unto them during their Sessions. 2ly.Cook 4. In∣stit. p. 14. By defending the wearing of any offensive arms or weapons in or near the Cities where the Parlia∣ments convene. 3ly. By inhibiting all tumul∣tuous popular addresses to them, under colour of
Petitions or otherwise, and ordering, that no Petitions or Addresses shal be tendred unto them from any County, City, Corporation, or Fraternity upon any occasion by above 12. grave selected persons at most, under pain of being que∣stioned and proceeded against as tumultuous. 4ly. By declaring and enacting all Persons what∣soever to be actual Traytors, and Enemies to the Nation, (as they are by4 E. 3. rot. Parl. n. 1. 21R. 2. c. 12. 31H. 6. c. 1. 3 ac. c. 1, 2. Exact Collection, p. 200. &c. A Collection, P. 201, 202. Law) and to be effectual∣ly proceeded against as such; who shall offer any force, violence, assault to the Parliament, or any Member or Members thereof during their attending therein, or in going to or returning from the same, or violently interrupt their pro∣ceeding. And that all who shall hereafter be peccant in this kind, &21 R. 2. c. . their heirs males shall be for ever hereafter disabled to sit in Parliament, or bear any Office whatsoever, Civil or military, or to purchase or re-ceive any Lands, Cha∣ttels, Gift, Legacy or bequest whatsoever, or to enjoy the privileges of an English Freeman. My chief design in this & other late publica∣tions, hath been to inform the English Nation of the true Original constitution, uses, ends, Rights, Privileges, Judicarure, and Proceedings of the Great Councils and Parliaments held within our Island, from its original plantation by the Britons, till the Normans ruling in it, which I have already published in a BriefIn my Sum∣mary Col∣lections, &c. and Breviate, Chrnological manner, and from thence to the end of King Ed∣ward the 4th his reign, which I have likewie in a good measure accomplished in my late inlar∣ged Plea for the Lords and House of Peers; where∣in
I have given the Readers a large account of most of the Great Councils held under King Henry the 1. and 2. proving, there were no Knights, Citizens or Burgesses summoned to them in their reigns, as they have been of later times; which may be further evidenced by these Histo∣rical Passages and Great Councils which I there omitted. In the year of Christ 1109. in aEadmerus Hist. Novor. l. 3. p. 67, 68. Great Council of the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, ET PRINCIPVM totius Regni, there was this Canon made amongst others; Vt nullus Archidiaconus Presbyter, Diaconus, Canonicus uxorem ducat, vel ductam retineat, &c. Vt Presbyter quamdiu illicitam conversationem mulieris habuerit, non sit legalis, nec missam celebret, nec si celebraverit, ejus miss a audiatur: After Anselms banishment very many Priests re∣teining or resuming their wives contrary to these Decrees,Eadmerus l. 4. p. 83, 84, 85. King Henry the 1. thereupon cau∣sed his Ministers to indict, and prosecute many Priests for this contempt, only to extort monies from them: but their fines not amounting to so great a summ as the King expected, there was a general Sentence given against all the Priests, as well innocent as nocent, and a fine set upon eve∣ry Parish Church, which the Priest thereof was to redeem; which some Priests having no mo∣ney, and others refusing to pay, because it was an unjust innovation, they were thereupon contu∣meliously seised upon by force, imprisoned and tortured; and when neer 200 of them in their Surplisses and Priests habits came all together to the Kings place in London barefoot, imploring
him with one voice to take pity on them, Ille ad preces orum nulla miseratione permotus est, vel saltem quavis eos, sicut homins omnis religionis expertes, re∣sponsi honestate dignatus, suis obtutibus festine abegi praecepit: whereupon they repaired to the Queen, who only wept in pity towards them, but could not relieve them. Anselm upon the other Bi∣shops Letter to him, writ an Epistle to the King touching this proceeding of his, as an innovati∣on, Quod hactenus inauditum et inusitatum est in Ec∣clesia Dei de ullo Rege, et de aliquo Principe. No enim pertinet secundum legem Dei hujusmodi culpam vindicare isi ad singulos Episcopos per suas parochias, ut si & ipsi Episcopi in hoc negligentes fuerint, ad Archiepiscopum & Primatem, &c. Adding, Dico enim vobis quod valde timere debetis, quod pecunia ta∣liter accepta, ut taceam quantum noceat animae, non tamen cum expendetur, adjuvabit terrena negoti, quantum postea perturbabit. To which the King returned this answer. Eadmeru . 4. p. 86. Henricus Dei gratia Rex Anglorum, Ansel∣mo Archiepiscopo Cantuariae salutem. In die Sancti Gregorii apud Tunebrigge, mihi fuerunt delatae literae repostae sub tuo sigillo. Et per a mihi mandasti talia unde multum miror, quia quod feci credo me per te fecisse. Et in die As∣censionis Domini HABEBO OMNES BARO∣NES MEOS (without Knights, Citizens or Burgesses) MECUM CONGREGATOS, & PER CONSILIUM EORUM ita convenien∣ter tibi respondebo quod cum tecum loquar non credo te me inde blasphematurum. Et quicquid fiat alias, scito quod tui, quicquid ipsi fecerint,
per omnes terras tuas in pace permanserint. Hoveden, Annal. pars psterior, p. 56, 567. Anno Gratiae 172. King Henry the 2d. Venit OXENFORD, & IN GENERALI CONCILIO ibidem celebrato CONSTITU∣IT Iohannem filium suum REGEM IN HY∣BERNIA, concessione & confirmatione Alexan∣dri summi pontificis. Et in eodem Concilio venerunt ad Regem Resus filius Griphini regulus de Suhwales, & David fils Oain regulus de North∣wales; qui sororem ejusdem regis Angliae in uxo∣rem duxerat, & Cadwelanus regulus de Delnain, & Owanus de Keuillian, & Giffinus de Brunfeld, & Madacus ilius Gervetrog: & alii multi de nobi∣lioribus Gualliae, et omnes devenerunt homines regis Angliae patris, & fidelitatem ei contra om∣nes homines, & pacem sibi & regno suo servan∣dam juraverunt. In eodem autem Concilio de∣dit dominu Rex Angliae praedicto Reso filio Grif∣sini terram de Meronith: & David filio Owain ter∣ram de Ellesmare. Deditque dominus ex Hugoni de Lasci (ut supradictum est) in Hybernia totam Midam cum pertinentiis suis pro servitio 100. militum, tenendam de ipso et Iohanne filio suo, & chartam suam ei inde fecit. Deditque ibidem Roberto filio Stephani & Miloni de Cogham regnum de Coch, pro servitio 60. militum, tenendum de ipso et Iohanne filio suo, excepta civitate de Corch, cum uno cantredo, quae dominus rex sibi et hae∣redibus suis retinuit. Deditque ibidem Hereber∣to filio Hereberti, et Willielmo fratri Comitis Re∣ginaldi, & Iollano de la Primerai nepoti eorum regnum de Limeric, pro servitio 60. militum, te∣nendum de ipso et Iohanne filio suo: excepta ci∣vitate
de Limeric, cum uno cantredo, quae domi∣nus sibi et haeredibus suis retinuit. Traddit au∣tem dominus rex Willielmo filio Aldelini dapifero suo civitatem Wesesordiae in custodia, cum omnbus pertinentiis suis; & statuit haec subscripta in posterum pertinenda ad servicium Wesefordiae: Harkelou cum pertinentiis suis, Glascarric cum pertinentiis suis; & terram Gilberti de Boisrohard, Ferneg Winal cum pertinentiis suis, Fernes cum pertinentiis suis: & totam terram de Hervei in∣ter Weseforde & aquam de Waterorde. Servitium Raimundi de Druna. Servitium de Frodrevelan. Servitium Vimothi de Leighlerin. Tenementum etiam Machtaloe cum pertinentiis suis. Et Leis terram Gaufridi de Costentin cum pertinentiis suis: & totam terram Orueldi. Tradidit etiam ibidem dominus rex Roberto le Poer marescallo suo in custodia civitatem Waterordiae: cum omnibus pertinentiis suis: et statuit haec subscripta in po∣sterum pertinenda ad servitium Waterfordiae: to∣tam terram quae est inter Waterforde & aquam quae est ultra Lismors, & totam terram de Oise∣ric cum pertinentiis suis. Tradidit etiam ibi∣dem dominus rex Hugoni de Laci civitatem Di∣veliniae cum omnibus pertinentiis suis in custo∣dia: & stait haec subscripta in posterum perti∣nenda ad Servitium Diveliniae; totam terram de Offelana cum pertinentiis suis, & Kildaran cum pertinentiis suis, & totam terram de Offalaia, cum pertinentiis suis, & Wikechelon cum pertinen∣tiis suis, & servitium de Mida, & servitium qua∣tuor militum, quod Robetus Poer debet de ca∣stello suo de Dunaver. Postquam autem domi∣nus
rex apud Oxeneford in praedicto modo terras Hyberniae, et earum servitia divisisset, secit om∣nes quibus earunemcustodias commisrat homi∣nes suos & Iohannis silii sui devenire: et jurare es ligantias et fidelitates de terris Hyberniae. Et iede m Concilio dedit dominus rex Richardo Priori de Kiteby abbatiam de Witebi. Et Benedicto Priori Ecclesiae sanctae Trinitatis Cantuariae, abbatiam de Burgo, & Richardus Cantuariensis Archiepiscopus benedixit cum in abbatem. Eo∣dem anno praedictus Vivianus Presbyter Cardi∣nalis & Apostolicae sedis legatus, peracta lega∣tione sua in Hybrnia, rediit in Angliam, & per conductum domini rgis rediit in Scotiam, & ce∣lebrato Concilio apu castellum puellarum, sus∣spendit a pontificali officio Christianum Episco∣pum Candidae casae, quia ad Concilium suum venire noluit; sed Episc. suspensionem illam non tenuit, septus munimine Rogeri Eboracensis Archi∣epise. cujus suffraganeus ipse erat. Deinde venit dominus Rex us{que} Merleberge: ubi Rex dedit Phi∣lippo de Brensa totum regnum de Limeric pro ser∣vitio sexaginta milium, tenendum de ipso & de Iohanne filio suo. Nam Herebertus & Willielmus fratres Reginaldi Comiis Cornubiae, & Ioslanus de la Pumerai nepos eorum, regnum illud habe∣re noluerunt, eo quod nondum perquisitum erat: nam occiso a regalibus rege Monodero, qui Rex erat de Limeric, & homo regis Angliae inde sue∣rat, quidam de progenie illius, vir potens et for∣tis, regnum de Limeric invasit, cepit, et potenter rexit, nullam subjectionem faciens Regi Angliae, nec suis obedire voluit propter infidelitatem eo∣rum, & mala quae faciebant populo Hyberniae si∣ne
merito. Rex vero Corcensis & alii multi di∣vites Hyberniae insurrexerunt in Regem Angliae, & suos: & erant novissima eorum pejora priori∣bus, & se mutuo interfecerunt. By which president it is evident; that King Henry by the advice of his Great Council of Pre∣lates and Nobles of & in England, disposed both of the Kingdoms, Crowns and Lands in Ireland to his Son, and other subjects of England. The same KingRdlph. de Diceto, Ymagines Histor. col. 613. Henry the 2. Anno Dom. 1182. aetatis annum inchoans quadragesimum nonum, dum mentis et corporis incolumitate vigeret, dum regnum suum undi∣que tranquillae pacis commoditatibus frueretur, apud Waltham Episcopi Winton, REGNI CON∣VOCAVIT MAJORES. Itaque prsentibus il∣lis et approbantibus quandam pecuniae partem in causas pias procurans, Quaraginta siquidem duo milia marcorum argenti, quingentas marcas auri distribuit, &c. After thisHov Anna.  P 68, 629. Pope Lucius An. 1185. sending a Letter to King Henry the 2d. to take the Cross upon him and succour the holy Land, by the P∣triarch and Master of the Hospital of Hierusalem, who presented it to him, together with the toy. al banner, and Keyes of the Lords Scpulcher, and of the Tower of David, and City of Ierusalem, on the behalf of the King and Princes of the Land, im∣portuning his answer to their requests: Domius Rex statuit eis terminum suae responsionis primam Do∣minicam Quadragesimae apud Londonias. Ad quam Dominicam, Dominus Rex & Patriarcha et E∣piscopi, et Abbates, et COMITES et BARONES ANGLIAE (but no Knights, Citizens or Bur∣gesses thereof, & Willielm. REX SCOTIAE, &
David frater ejus, CUM COMITIBUS ET BARONIBUS TERRAE SUAE Londoniis: et habito inde cum deliberatione consslio, PLACUIT VNIVERSIS, quod Dominus Rex con∣suleret inde Dominum suum Philippum Regem Fran∣ciae: et sic soluto CONCILIO, Dominus Rex dedit universis hominibus suis, tam Clericis quam Lacis, li∣centiam capiendi crucem. Unde factum est quod Bald∣winus Cantuariensis Archiepiscopus, et Ranulphus Iusticiarius Angliae, & Walterus Rothomagensis Ar∣chiepiscopus, et Hugo Dunelmensis Episcopus, et alii quamplures Episcopi transmarini et cismarini: et fere omnes Comites et Barones et Milites Angliae, & Nor∣manniae, & Aquitaniae, & Britanniae, & Ande∣gaviae, & Cenomanniae & Turoniae Crucem cepe∣runt. Deinde Dominus Rex venit usque Windle∣shoures et ibi in Dominica ubi cantatur, Laetare Je∣rusalm, fecit Johannem silium suum militem, & statim misit eum in Hyberniam, & INDE EVM REGEM CONSTITVIT. To pretermit the Parliamentary Councils un∣der King Richard the 1. of which I have given you some account in my Plea or the Lords, p. 234. to 242. I shall proceed to those in the beginning of King Iohns reign. In the 1. year of King Iohn Anno Dom. 1199. there was a Great Council of the Spiritual and Temporal Lords and Barons summoned to his Coronation, thus related byFlores Hst. pas 2. Anno 1199. p. Matthew Westmin∣ster, though there be no writs of Summons there∣unto extant on record; Dux Normanniae Johan∣nes in vigilia Ascensionis Domini London venit, ibi CONGREGATIS ANGLIAE NOBILIBVS, ab
Hbrto Cantuariensi Archiepiscopo coronatus est, die Ascensionis Domini; whichAnnalium pars posterior Ann. 119. p. 793. Roger de Hovden thus relates, Congregatis igitnr apud Lundo∣nias in advent praedicti ducis Huberto Cantu∣ariensi, Johanne Dublinensi, et de Raguse Ar∣chiepiscopus, Willielmo Lundoniensi, Gil∣berto Roffensi, Johanne Norwicensi, Hugone Lincolnensi, Eustachio Eliensi, Godfrido Wintoniensi, Henrico Exoniensi, Sefrido Ci∣cestrensi, Gaurido Coventrensi, Savarico Ba∣thoniensi, Hereberto Salesburiensi, Philippo Dunelmensi, Rogero de sancto Andrea in Sco∣tia, Henrico de Landas Episcopis, Roberto de Leicestre, Richardo de Clare, Willielmo de Tutesburie, Hamelino de Warenne, Williel∣mo de Salisbirie, Willielmo de Striguil, Wal∣ranno de Warewic, Rogero Bigot, Willielmo de Arundel, Ranulfo de Cestre Comitibus, & Baronibus multis: Hubertus Cantuariensis Archiepiscopus coronoavit, et consecravit in regem Angliae prefatum Johannem ducem Normanniae, in Ecclesia sancti Petri Apostoli Westminstriae, sexto Calen. Iunii, feria 5. die Ascensionis Domini; Philippo Dunelmen∣si Episcopo appellante, ne coronatio illa fieret in absentia Gaufridi Eboracensis Archiepisco∣pi, totius Angliae Primatis.Hst. Ag p. 19. 10. Matthew Paris thus records the manner of his Coronation more fully. CONGREGATIS ita que in adventu ejus, Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Comitibus et Baronibus atque aliis omnibus, qui ejus co∣ronationi interesse debuerant, Archiepisco∣pus staus in medio omnium, dixit; Audite u∣niversi.
Noverit discretio vestra, quod nullus praevia ratione alii succedere habet regnum, nisi ab universitate Regni unanimiter, invoca∣ta Spiritus gratia electus, & secundum morum suorum eminentiam praeelectus, ad exemplum et similitudinem Saul primi Regis inuncti, quem praeposuit Dominus populo suo, non Re∣gis filium, nec de Regali stirpe procreatum. Similiter post eum David Sem ei filium: hunc quia strenuum et aptum dignitati regiae, illum quia sanctum et humilem, ut sic qui cunctos in regno supereminet strenuitate, omnibus praesit et potestate et regimine. Ve∣rum si quis ex stirpe Regis defuncti aliis prae∣polleret, pronius et promptius in electionem ejus est consentiendum. Haec idcirco diximus pro inclyto Comite Iohanne, qui praesens est, frater illustrissimi Regis nostri Richardi jam defuncti, qui haerede caruit ab eo egrediente, qui providus et strenuus & manifeste nobilis, qnem nos, invocata Spiritus sanctigratia, ra∣tione tam meritorum quam sanguinis Regii unanimiter elegimus universi. Erat autem Ar∣chiepiscopus vir prosundi pectoris, et in regno singularis columna stabilicatis et sapientiae in∣comparabilis. Nec ausi erant alii super his ad∣huc ambigere; scientes quod sine causa hoc non sic diffiniverat. Verum Comes Iohannes et omnes hoc acceptaban, ipsumque Comitem in Regem eligentes et assumentes, exclamant dicentes: Vivat rex. Interrogatus autem postea Archiepiscopus Hubertus, quare haec dixisset? respondit se praesaga mente conjecturare, et
quibusdam oraculis edoctum & certificatum fuisse, quod ipse Johannes Regnum & Coro∣nam Angliae foret aliquando corrupturus, & in magnam confusionem precipitaturus. Et ne haberet liberas habenas hoc faciendi, ipsum electione non successione haereditaria, eligi de∣bere affirmabat. Archiepiscopus autem impo∣nens capiti ejus coronam, unxit eum in regem apd Westmor atrium, sc. in Ecclesia princi∣pis Apostolorum, Dominicae ascensionis die, sexto kalendas Junii, Philippo Dunelmensi E∣piscopo appellante, sed non obtinene, ne coro∣natio illa fieret in absentia G. Archiepiscopi Eboracensis. In hac coronatione Rex Iohannes triplici involutus est sacramento: Quod vide∣licet sanctam Ecclesiam et ejus ordinatos dili∣geret, et eam ab incursione malignantium in∣demnem conservaret: et quod perversis legibus destructis, bonas substitueret, et rectam justiti∣am in regno Angliae exerceret. Deinde adjura∣tus est ab eodem Archiepisc opo ex parte Dei, et districte prohibitus, ne honorem hunc acci∣pere praesumeret, nisi in mente habeat opere, quod juraverat, adimplere. Ad hoc ille respon∣dens, promisit se per auxilium Dei, bona fide, ea quae juraverat, servaturum. In crastino au∣tem, homagiis et fidelitatibus acceptis, beatum Albanum Protomartyrem Angliae, orationis gratia, devotus petivit. Et sic brevissimam in Anglia moram faciens, ea quae statuenda erant in regno, cum consilio Magnatum rite pere∣git. In the 2. year of (d) King Iohn, Anno 1200.
Hubrt Archbishop of Canterbury and Chancel∣lor of England, Generale celebravit Concilium Londini apud Westmona sterium, contra prohibitionem Gawfri∣di silii Petri, Comitis Essex, tunc temporis summi Iusticiarij Anglae; In which many Laws and Canons were made touching Ecclesiastical persons and businesses, recorded at large inAnnal. pars postrior P. 806. to 810. Roger de Hoveden. And in the same year the samePag. 803. Au∣thor writes, the long sue between William de Stu∣tevil, and William de Moubray, touching the Ba∣rony of Moubray, was compremised and ended by an agreement made between them CONSI∣LIO REGNI, & VOLVNTATE REGIS. In which Council of the Realm, it is most proba∣ble, Statuta quaedam Johannis Regis, concerning the prises of Wine, registred byIbid. p. 795, 796. Hoveden, were made. Sed hoc PRIMUM Regis STATU∣TUM vix inchoatum, statim est adnihilatum, quiae Mercatores hanc Assisam sustinere non poterunt, & data est eis licentia vendendi sextertium de vino albo pro octo denariis, & vini rubri pro sex denariis, & sic repleta est terra potu, & potatoribus. The Writs of Summons for these two General Councils of the Church and Realm this year, are not found extant on record. The Patent Roll in the 5 ofPat. 5. Johan Regis m. 1. n. 3. Seldens Title of Honor p. 707. King Iohn, makes mention of an Assise of Beer and Wine, made per Commune Consilium Baronum nostrorum, held the year before at Winchester. Rex, &c. sciatis, Nos Communi Conslio Ba∣ronum nostrorum constituisse, Quod albus pa∣nis factus in Civitate nostra Winton. fit ponde∣ris 3 c Sol. &c. Et unusquisque Pistor sigil∣lum
suum pani suo apponat, &c. Et volumus et firmiter praecipimus, quod haec constitutio firmiter teneatur. Facta est autem haec con∣stitutio ad Pascham proximam post obitum Alienorae Reginae matris nostrae, anno regni nostri quinto, Teste G. fil. Petri Com. Essex. apud Freitemnel 15 die Aprilis. This Ordinance for the Assise of Bread, with the Proclamation and proceedings thereupon, is more at large recorded in Matthew Paris Hist. Angl. Anno 1262, Editione Tyguri 1589. p. 200. where you may peruse it at leasure. In the 5th. year of his reign (asist. Ang. p. 204. Met. Paris relates) Rex Johannes in COMITES & BARO∣NES occasiones praetendens, quod ipsuminter hostes re∣liquerant in partibus transmarinis, unde Castella, & terras suas pro eorum defectu amiserat, caepit ab eis sep∣timam partem omnium mobilium suorum (by grant, as I conceive in a Parliamentary Council) nec etiam ab hac rapina in Ecclesiis conuentualibns manus coercuit violentas. Yet I find no Writ of Sum∣mons to this Council in the Rolls of this year. In the 6 year of his reign,Mat. Pa∣ris, p. 201. Ma. Westm. p. 83. An. 1204. In cra∣stino circumcisionis venerunt ad Colloquium apud Ox∣oniam Rex & MAGNATES Angliae, ubi con∣cessa sunt Regi auxilia militaria de quolibet scuto, scil∣cet duae marcae & dimidia. Nec etiam Episcopi & Abbates, sive Ecclesiasticae personae, sine promiss one recesserunt. In the 8 year of his Regality, asMat. Paris p. 204. Mt. Westm. p. 83. King Iohn celebrated the day of our Saviours Naivity at Oxford; So it appears he likewise held a Par∣liamentary
Council there, which granted him an ayd toward the recovery of his lands in France, and defence of the Realm of England, by these two Records that year. Claus. 8. Iohan. Regis dors. 2. Rex Iustic. auxilii assidendi & Vic. Berks salutem: Sciatis quod Ab∣bas de Abbendon finivit nobiscum pro sexties cent. mar. pro habenda quietantia de dominicis feodis & hominibus omnibus tenentibus suis in Balliva vestra de anxilio Nobis proviso PER CONCI∣LIUM NOSTRUM OXON: et ideo vobis man∣damus quod ipse inde quietus sit. Et si quid inde per Nos incoatum suerit, penitus relax. Tu autem Vic. videas quod securus sis quod habe∣amus unam medietatem finis illius ad proxi∣mum clausum Pasche: Et aliam meditatem ad ptoximum festum Sancti Iohannis Baptistae. Alio∣quin capietur de firma tua. Et Justitiariis man∣datum est & libere tenentibus suis in ballivia tua quod faciant ei praedictum auxilium. Et si quid inde cepisti, id ei sine dilatione reddi fac. T. Pat. 8. Iohan. Rs. m. 1. Rex Archidiacon, Of∣ficiali & toti Clero Archiepiscopatus Cantuar. Salutem. Notum satis, quod Archiepiscopi, Episcopi, Abbates, Priores, & Magnates regni nostri auxi∣lium Nobis fecerunt ad defensionem regni no∣stri & recuperationem terrarum nostrarum. Ve∣rum quia de vobis confidimns, quod Nos & o∣norem nostrum diligitis, & defensionem regni nostri, & recuperationem terrarum nostrarum affectatis, vos rogamus attentius, quatenus tale axilium Nobis exemplo accepto ex parte vestra faciatis, ut inde vobis gratias dare debeamus:
Et quod alii Rectores Ecclesiarum intuitu ve∣stri ad auxilium Nobis faciendum exempio ve∣stro facilius inuitentur: t quantitatm auxilii quod nobis quilibet ipsorum sacre voluer it, quilibet vestrum seperatim faciat. Ita quod per ipsos in octabis Sanctae circumcisionis inde possimus testificari. Teste me ipso apud Ebor. 26. die Maii. This same year the Arch-bishops, Bishops, Ab∣bots, Archdeacons, and Clergy of England by command from Pope Innocent, without the Kings Writ or consent, were called to, and resolved to hold a Council at Saint Albans, to pay Romescot in an unusual manner, and many other unaccustomed exactions, to the great pre∣judice of the Kingdom, and oppression of the people; whereupon the King upon the general complaint of the universality of the Earls, Ba∣rons, Knights, and other Subjects against those exactions & this Council, issued forth this memo∣rable Writ and Prohibirion, in preservation of the rights of the Crown, Kingdom, People, against this Papal usurpation and innovati∣on. Pat. 8. Iohan. Rs. m. 1. Rex Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abbatibus, Archidiaconis, & omni clero apud Sanctum Albanum AD CONCILIVM convocato salutem. Conquerente universitate Comitum Baronum, Militum, & aliorum-fidelium nostro∣rum, audivimus, quod non solum in laiorum grave praejudicium, sed etiam in totius Regni no∣stri intolerabile dispendium, super Romescotto praeter consuetudinem soluendo, & aliis pluribus
inconsuetis exacionibus, Autoritate summi Ponti∣sicis CONCILIUM inire, & CONCILIUM celebrare decrevistis. Nos vero licet ob honorem sidie nostrae & debitum reverentiae quod sanctae Romanae Ecclesiae impendere tenemur, voluntatem sancti Patris vestri Domini Papae Innocentiae obtemperare cupimus, tamen omittere non possumus quin quaerelis fide∣lium & subditorum nostrorum clamantium de jactura sua & timentium, prout necesse est, sibi subveniamus, & mergentibscausis quae indemp∣nitati pacis & unitati regni nostri obviare pos∣sunt, quanta decet celeritate & diligentia occur∣ramus. Vobis igitur praecise mandamus & ex∣presse prohibemus, ne super praedictis vel ali∣quibus aliis CONCILIUM ALIQUOD an∣thoritate aliqua in fide qua nobis tenemini te∣neatis, vel contra regni nostri consuetudinem aliquod novum statuatis, et sicut Nos & honorem nostrum, & communem regni tranquillitatem diligitis à celebratione hujusmodi CONCI∣LII & à praedictis taxationibus ad praesens super∣sedeatis, quousque cum universitate nostra super hoc COLLOQUIUM habuerimus. Scientes per certo, quod expediet honori sanctae Romanae Ec∣clesiae & domino Papae & Nobis & Vobis quod istud ad praesens negotium differatur, donec generalem ha∣buimus conferrentiam commodius & honestius explica∣ri. Et quod vobis hoc mandamus pro honore, & commodo sacrosanctae Ecclesiae, & vestri & regni nostri id feci∣mus: Quia talia audivimus quod hoc ita fieri necessa∣rio expedit, sicut vobis dicemus cum vobiscum locuti fuerimus. Teste me ipso apud Ebor. 26. die Maii.
Now because all Elections of Knights of Shiers, are and ought to be made in the next 7. H. 4. c. 15. 8. H. 4. Rot. Pal. 83. 139. County Court after the Writs for Elections come to the Sheriffs hands; I shall adde this memorable exposition of the Statute of Magna Charta, c. 35. made by the King and greater part of the Bishops, Earls, and Barons of the Realm without the Commons, touching the holding of Hundred Courts, Wapentakes, & Court Leets, omitted by Sir Edward Cook in his Commentary thereon, which it better explains than his Anno∣tations upon it. Claus. 18. H. 3. m. 10. Rex Vic. Linc. salu∣tem. Quia audivimus quod tu & Ballivi tui, & Ballivi aliorum qui Hundredum habent in Comitatu tuo, non intelligitis qualiter Hundre∣da & Wapentake teneri debeant in Com. tuo, post∣quam concessimus omnibus de Regno nostro Libertates in cartis nostris quas indo fecimus, dum fimus infra aetatem. Nos eandem Caam nu∣per legi fecimus in praesentia Dom. CANIU∣AR. ARCHIEP. & MAJORIS & SANIO∣RIS PARTIS OMNIUM EPISCOPORUM, COMITUM ET BARONUM TO TIUS REGNI NOSTRI, UT CORAM EIS ET PER EOS EXPONERETUR haec clausula contenta inMag Carta c. 35. Carta nostra de Libertatibus, viz. Quod nullus Vicecomes vel Ballivus faciat Turnum suum per Hundredum, nisi is in anno, & non nisi loco debito & consueto; viz. semel post Pascham, & iterum post festum sancti Michaelis. Ita scilicet quod qui libet habeat ibertates suas quas habuit & habere consuevit tempore H. Regis avi nostri, vel quas postea
perquisivit. Unde à multis ibi dictum suit, quod tpore H. Regis avi nostri tam Hundreda et Wapentac, quam curi Magnatum Angliae sole∣bant teneri de Quindena in Quindenam; Et licet multum placeret communi utilitati totius regni & indempnitati pauperum providere, quia ta∣men illi duo Turnii plene non sufficient ad pacem regni nostri conservandam, & ad excessus tam divi∣tibus quam pauperibus illatis corrigendos quae ad Hun∣dredum pertinent, De COMMVNI CONSI∣LIO praedict. Dom. CANTUAR. & OMNI∣UM praedict. EPISCOPORUM COMITUM, ET BARONUM, ET ALIORUM, ITA PRO∣VISUM EST. Quod inter praedictos duos Tur∣nos teneantur Hundredum & Wapentakia, & etiam curiae Magnatum de Tribus septimanis in Tres sep∣timanas, ubi prius teneri solent de Quindena in Quin∣denam. Ita tamen, quod ad illa Hundred a & VVapentakia & Curias non fiat generalis summo∣nitio, siut ad Turnos praedictos; set ad hujus∣modi illa VVapentakia & Curias convenient con∣querentes & adversarii sui, & illi qui sectas de∣bent, per quos teneantur placita & fiant judicia, nisi ita sit quod ad Hundreda illa & VVapentakia fieri debeat Inquisitio de placitis Coronae, sicut de morte hominis, Thesauro invento, & hujusmodi: ad quae inquirenda conveniant cum praedictis sectariis quatuor villatae proximae; scilicet om∣nes de illis villis qui necessarii fuerint ad Inquisi∣tiones illas faciendas. Et ideo tibi praecipimus, quod praedicta Hundreda VVapentakia & Curias tam Nostras quam aliorum teneri facias de ce∣tero secundum quod praedictum et de tribus
sepeimanis in tres septimanas, exceptis praedictis duobus Turnit, qui de caetero teneantur secun∣dum quod prius teneri solebant. T. R. apud VVestm. 11. Octobris. I shall only adde this one Record more, pro∣ving, that matters concerning Truces, were resol∣ved by King H. 3. the Spiritual and Temporal Lords in Parliamentary Councils, without any Knights, Citizens, or Burgesses. Claus. 19. H. 3. m. 20. Rex Roberto de Lan∣geton, Archidiacono Cant. & Abbati de sancta Radegunda, salute, Super sollicitudine & dili∣gentia laudabili simul & laboribus sumptuosis quas circa negotium nostrum expediendum quod vobis injunximus apposuistis, urrique vestrum copiosas referrimus gratiarum actiones, vobis quidem magister S. praecipuas & speciales, ut∣pote ei cujus fidelitatem & prudentiam plu∣rimum commendamus. Sciatis autem quod CONGREGATIS apud VVestmon. in octabis sancti Hillarii vener: patribus G. Cantuar Archiepis∣copo, EPISCOPIS, COMITIBUS, ET ALIIS FIDELIBUS NOSTRIS. (to wit, the Ba∣rons and Great men, not Commons, as the sub∣sequent clause attests.) Post diligentem tracta∣tum habitum CUM IPSIS DE NEGOTIO TREVGARVM inter Nos & Regem Franciae & aliis agendis nostris, visum fuit iisdem fideli∣bus nostris, quod nullo modo sine verecundia & op∣probrio nostris Insulam de Olerone  potuimus Comiti Marchiae pro cōsensu suo adhibendo ad treugas inter nos ineundas, nec in co consilium Nobis praestare vel consentire voluerint. Sic enim praeter verecun∣diam
quam inde consequeremus ab omnibus quibus factum nostrum innotesceret teneremur et pro re∣missis, et minus valentibus haberemur, et etiam pessimum & perniciosum exemplum aliis qui in casu consimili ad similia petenda per hoc moverentur. Vnde si per dcentas libras annuas Treugis du∣rantibus ad consensum Treugarum possitidem Comes induci pro Insula praedicta sicut alias lo∣cutum suit, bene placeret tam Nobis quam praedictis MAGNATIBVS NOSTRIS; et ad hoc laborare velitis, quia priori conditioni con∣sentire non esset honestum, vel expediens, &c. T. Rege apud Westm. 27. Januarii. I shall trouble you with no more Presidents or Records of this nature, by way of Preface to this first part of my Register, Kalender and Sur∣vey of Parliamentary Writs: In which I have pre∣sented you onely with the several Writs of Sum∣mons directed to the Spiritual and Temporal Lords, and Kings Counsil (their ordinary Assistants) in∣termixed with some other Writs, and several forms of Procurations, in my Observations on them; which relate wholly, or principally to the House of Lords, Convocations, and Clergy, a∣mounting to a just vendible Volume. The several forms, varieties of Writs issued to Sheriffs of Coun∣ties, Wardens, or Officers of the Cinque-Ports, Dukes of Lancaster, their Lieutenants, or Chancellors, and Sheriffs of particular Cities, Towns, Boroughs made Counties within emselves) for electing Knights, Citizens, Burgesses, and Barons of the Ports (pecu∣liar to the House of Commons) with all sorts of Writs for proroguing, continuing, adjourning
Parliaments, or superseding them after summons to them upon extraordinary occasions, (relating equally to both Houses of Parliament, and their Members) together with some special Writs of Summons to the Kings, Prelates, Nobles, Barons, Great Officers, and others of the Realms, Lands of Scotland and Ireland, to appear in, at, or be∣fore the Parliaments, Great Councils, Kings, or Privy Counsil in England, concerning the af∣fairs, or defence of Scotland and Ireland onely: as likewise to particular Merchants, Masters of Ships, Forresters, Lawyers, learned men of both Universities, and other Persons upon spe∣cial occasions, to attend the Parliament, King, Counsil; with my particular Observations on them, (which I at first intended to have publish∣ed in this Piece) I shall (if God send health, life, oportunity, and incouragement by a grate∣ful acceptance of these First-fruits) with all con∣venient speed, communicate to the World in A Second Part. After which, I shall in two or more distinct Volumes, present unto publick view several other kinds of Writs, relating to the Parliaments, Great Councils, Convocations and Clergy of England, to all sorts of proceedings in them, Cri∣minal, or Civil; the assessing, levying of the expences of Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of Parliament: of Dismes, Quidismes, Aids, Subsidies, Customs, Imposts, granted by them; with the disposing, releasing of them; the de∣fence of the Realm by Land or Sea in times of danger; the proclaming, observing of the Great Charters, Laws, and Liberties of England; and
of Acts and Ordinances of Parliament newly enacted; with sundry other Rarities, which all former Writers of our English Parliaments have either totally omitted, or but briefly touched, and that very slightly; though of excellent use, and most ne∣cessary to be insisted on, for the information of their Readers, and benefit of Posterity. Not to detain you with any longer Preface, I shall now leave you to the perusal of this First Part, distinct from those Parts I intend shall follow it; if embraced with that re∣spect, affection, and desire as it may justly ex∣pect and hope for from the Nobility, Gentry, Lawyers, Antiquaries and Heralds of the En∣glish nation. But if slighted, vilified, neglected, like old Almanacks or fashions grown quite out of use and request (though meer Novelties in their discovery & communication to the world, hither∣to unacquainted with them) I shall then resolve to cast no more such precious ancientMat. 7. 6. Pearls and Rarities beore swine; who wil neglect & trample them under their feet; but reserve them for my own private Cabinet, use, ornament, benefit, delight, and such learned Friends to whom I shal hereafter bequeath them, who will esti∣mate them according to their true intrinsecal worth, and prefer them before the most orient Pearls and Diamonds, which are only for shew, when as these are of greatest publick use, and will be so esteemed in future generations, how much soever slighted by the Athenians of this age, who like the old ones, Acts 17. 20, 21. spend their tie in nothing else but to tell or
hear some new thing; preferring new Gloworms, Ignes fatui, and Prodigious Comets, shining onely in the night, before the Sun, Moon, and fixed Pla∣nets, which ten thousand times outshine, tran∣scend them both in splendor, magnitude, use, ex∣cellency, and publick benefit. It isAd here∣nicum: p. 21. Cicero his observation of old, Solis exortus, cursus, occasus ne∣mo admiratur propterea quod quotidie iunt; at c∣clypses solis mirantur, quia raro accidunt. Nulla nisi rara aut admirabili re commovetur animus. Which Natural. quaest. l. 7. p. 933. Seneca thus seconds, Ita cōpositi sumus, ut nos quo∣tidiana, etiam si admiratione digna sunt, transeant: con∣tra, minimarum quoque rerum, si insolitae prodierunt, spectaculum dulce fiat. Hic quoque caetus astrorum, qui∣bus immensi corporis pulchritudo distringuitur, populum non convocat, sed cum aliquid ex more mutatum est, omnium vultus in coelo est. Nemo observat lunam nisi laborantem. Tunc urbes clamant, tunc pro se superstiti∣one vana trepidant. Quanta illa majora sunt, quod Sol totidem gradus quotidie habet & annum suo circuitu claudit; quod à solstitio diem inclinat, & noctibus spa∣cium dat, quod sydera abscondit, quod terras cum tanto major sit illis, non urit, sed calorem suum intentionibus & remissionibus temperando fovet; quod lunam nun∣quam implet, nisi adversam sibi, nec obscurat; haec ta∣men non annotamus quamdiu ordo servatur. Si quid turbatum est, aut praeter consuetudinem emicuit, specta∣mus, interrogamus, ostendimus. Idem in comae: is fit, &c. Adeo naturale est, nova, magis quā magna mirari: wch. is in truth both the sin & folly of our present fan∣tastick childish age, affecting, studying, delighting, admiring nothing but Novelties, as well in Theo∣logy, all kinds of Arts, Sciences, publick Govern∣ment,
and Parliaments themselves, as ell as Fashions or Apparel, though never so prodigi∣ous, Heterodox, ridiculous or destructive. But however vertiginous Scepticks, and fantastick Gallants having more hair than brains, are wholly enamor∣ed, infatuated with New-Nothings, yet all judici∣ous Christians, Lawyers, Statesmen, (with ho∣ly and prudent KingPsal. 77. 5. David (a man after Gods own heart) will consider the dayes of old, the years of ancient times: And according to Gods own pre∣cept, Jer. 6. 16. stand in the wayes and see, and ask for the old paths, where is the good way, and walk therein, that they may find ease for their souls: Concluding with holy Iob▪Job 12. 12. with the ancient is wisdom and understanding: And with our Saviours own resolution, wherwith I shall close up this Epistle,Luk. 5. 39. No man having drunk old wine, straitway desireth new; for he saith, THE OLD IS BETTER. Which is the experimental resolution of. Your unfeined Friend and Servant, as well in relation to private as publick good, WILL. PRYNNE. From my Study in Lincolns Inne, Ian. 26. 1658/1659.
A Brief Register, Kalendar, and Survey of the severall kinds of all Parliamentary Writs; with usefull Observations on them. THat all Great Councils of State, Parlia∣ments, Synods, Convocations held in Eng∣land, under the British, Saxon, Danish, Norman, English Kings successively reigning therein, were summoned by their Royal Writs, precepts, and held by their Authority alone, is a Truth irrefragable, which I haveAntiquity triumphing o∣ver Novelty, p. 8. to 109. The 2, & 3. Part of a Sea∣sonable, Hi∣storical & Le∣gal Vindicati∣on, &c. my Plea for the Lords, and House of Peers. A Bre∣viate of the antient Great Councils and Parliaments of England. elswhere abundantly evidenced by Histories and Records, though all the Writs whereby they were summo∣ned till the reign of King Iohn, be no where extant, be∣ing consumed by the all-devouring jawes of time. The Writs of Summons to Parliaments and Great Councils of State, being the Corner-stones whereon they are founded, and best discovering the causes, ends for which they were summoned; instead of that Folio Register of them at large which I once intended to have published, I shall present you only with a Brief Register and Kalendar of some of the antientest and rarest of them, full of excellent variety and delight; and such Observations on and from
them, as may best instruct the Readers, rectify the mi∣stakes of some pretended Antiquartes who have written of our English Parliaments, writs of summons to them, and supply their defects, especially concerning the several forms and various kinds of Parliamentary writs, which they have rather touched than handled, being all very maimed and incompleat in this particular. To avoid Confusion, I shall Marshall these Writs into several Squadrons, according to the quality of the per∣sons to whom they were directed, and that in a Chronolo∣gical Series, digesting them into distinct Sections, begin∣ning with those issued out to our Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors and Spiritual Lords or Barons of the Realm. SECTION I. Concerning Writs of Summons to Parliaments, Great Councils, Convocations, issued out to Archbishops, Bi∣shops, Abbots, Priors, and other Ecclestastical Barons of the Realm, who were Peers and Members of our Par∣liaments. THe first writ of Summons to Parliament of this (of any other) kind extant in History or Record, that I have seen, is in the 6. year of King Iohn, running in this Form of words. Claus. An. 6. Johann. Rs. m. 3 dorso. Mr. Seldens Titles of Ho∣nor, Book 2. ch. 5. §. 20. p. 708. Mandamus vobis Rogantes quatenus omni occasione & dilatione postposita, sicut nos & honorem nostrum diligitis, sitis ad nos apud London die Dominica proxima ante Ascen∣sionem Domini, nobiscum tractatur de magnis & arduis ne∣gotiis nostris & Communi regni utilitate. Quin super his quae à Rege Franciae per nuncios nostros & suos nobi mandatae sunt, unde per Dei gratiam bonum speramus provenire, ve∣strum expedit habere consilium et aliorū Magnatum terrrae
nostrae quos ad diem illum & locum feimus convocari. Vos tiam ex parte nostra & vestra Abbtes & Priores Conven∣tuales totius Diocaesis citari faciatis ut Concilio praeicto inter∣sint, sicut diligunt nos & communem regni utilitatem. T. &c. The 2. writ of this kinde extant on Record, is that in 26 H. 3. Claus. An. 26 H. 3. m. 13. dorso; Sel∣dens titles of Honor, p. 717. Henricus, &c. venrabili in Christo patri Walero Eboracensi Archiepiscopo salutem. Mandamus vobis qua∣tenus sicut nos & honorem nostrum paritèr & vestrum diligi tis, & in fide qua nobis temmini, omnibus aliis negotiis omissis, sitis ad no apud London à die sancti Hillarii in XV dies, ad tractandum nobiscum, una cum caeeris magnatibus nostris quos similiter fecimus convocar, de arduis negotiis nostris statum nostrum & totius Regni nostri specialitèr tangenti∣bus & hoc nullatenus omittatis. T. me ipso, apud Windle∣soram XIV die Decembris. There are some writs directed to the Archbishops, and Bishops in 38 H. 3. which seem much like a writ of Summons of the Clergy to a Convocation, which I shall here insert. Claus. An. 38 H. 3. m. 7. dorso. Rex, R. Cantuar. Archiepscopo, totius Angliae Primati, salutem. Cum Rex Castellae nullo jure sed potentiae sua confisus, terram nostram Wasconiae cum multitudine Christianorum et Saracenorum in aestate prox. futura hostiliter sit ingressurus, prout alias vobis significavimus, quam quidem terram in tanto peri∣culo constitutam contra tam potentem Principem sine communi Regni nostri Angliae auxilio defendere non va∣lemus; dolentes si regnum praedictum, quod inter caete∣ros mundi Principatus probitate gentium florere sole, propter virium impotentiam aut segnitiem propriam suis viribus destitutum succumeret. Paternitaem vestram omni qua possumus affectione rogamus, quatenus Nos et jura nostra taliter indeensa non deserentes, cum om∣ni celeritate convocetis coram vobi▪ Capitulum vestrum Cathedrale, Archidiaconos, viros religiosos et Clerum vobis subjectum. Inducentes eos modis omnibus qui∣bus
poteritis, quod Nobis in tanta necessitate liber ter sub∣veniant et gratiose ad praedictae terrae nostrae defensionem, quod in ipsorum honorem verteur sempiternum: cum ex contra∣rio, hujus negotii eventu non tantum nobis, sed singulis regni nostri, personarum et rerum dampnum manifeste immineat periculosum. Proviso, quod aliqui viri discreti ex parte prae∣dictorum certificent CONSILIUM NOSTRUM apud Westm. in quindena Pasch: prox. futur. de modo et quan∣titate subsidii memorati. Salvis nobis promissionibus tunc solvendis ibidem a viris religiosis vestrae Diocaesis nobis factis in quindena sancti Hilarii prox. praeteriti. Et quia ordinariam Jurisdictionem exerceatis vacante sede in Episcopatu Lincoln, vos requirimus affectuose, quate∣nus Officialibus vestris ejusdem Episcopatus sciais at∣tente, quod tempestive convocent coram eis Capitulum Cathedralis Lincoln. Archidiaconos, viros religiosos & Clerum ejusdem Episcopatus ad certos diem & locum. Inducentes eos modis omnibus quod in hac necessitate no∣stra consimilem Nobis faciant subventionem, et quod certifi∣cent CONSILIUM NOSTRUM apud Westm. in prae∣dicta Quindena Pasch. per viros discretos ejusdem Epis∣copatus de modo & quantitate praedicti subsidii. Salvis no∣bis promissionibus a viris religiosis praedicti Episcopatus nobis factis in quindena sancti Hillaerii prox. praeteriti si∣cut praedictum est. In cujus, &c. T. A. Regina nostra, & R. Com. Cornub. fratre nostro, apud Windlesor 11 die Febr. Eodem modo mandatum est Archiepiscopo Eborum, & singulis Episcopis totius Angliae, & Officialibus Bathon. & Wellen, Episcopi, nulla facta mentione de Episcopatu Linc. This writ is no summons either to a Parliament, Coun∣cil, or Convocation of the Clergy, as it may seem to some men, but a special writ directed to the Archbishops and Bishops in their several Diocess, to summon their Chap∣ters, Archdeacons, Clergy, and the religious persons in their respective Diocesse before them, and to excite them to a free, voluntary, and liberal contribution to sup∣ply
and elieve the Kings necessities, for the defence of Gasig, against the intended invasion of the King of Castell, as the whole frame thereof demonstrates, and their several certificates of the manner and quantity of their aids, and the sums they would contribute in this necessity, required to be certified from every Bishoprick and Dioces to the Kings Council at Westminster by cer∣tain discreet men; with distinct promises by religi∣ous persons mentioned therein, do manifest beyond contradiction; Every Bishop, with the Clergy, and re∣ligious in every distinct Diocesse, being to meet and act apart herein by themselves, and not summoned to meet all together to advise and resolve concerning this aid re∣quested from them: Therefore though a writ fit to be inserted into this Register, yet I shall not enumerate it amongst the writs of summons to a Parliament, Councel, or Convocation. The 3. Writ is that of 49 H. 3. Claus. 49 H. 3. dors. 11. in Scedula: Selden Ti. of Honor, p. 717. My plea for the Lords, p. 259. Henricus Degratia Rex Anglie, Dominus Hiber∣niae, & Dux Aquitaniae, veneraili in Christo pari R. E. piscopo Dunelmensi, salutem. Cum post gravia turbatio∣num discrimina dudum habita in regno nostro, Carissimus filius Edwardus primogenitus noster, pro pace in Regno nostro asscuranda & firmanda obses traditus extitisset, & jam se∣data (Benèdictus Deus) turbatione praedicta, super delibe∣ratione ejusdem salubritèr providenda & plena securitate & tranquillitate pacis ad honorem Dei & utilitatem totius Reg∣ni nostri firmanda, & totaliter complenda ac super quibusdam aliis Regni nostri negotiis quae sine Consilio vestro et alio∣rum Praelatorum et Magnatum nostrorum nolumus ex∣pediri, cum eisdem tractatum habere nos oporteat. Vobis man∣damus Rogantes in fide & dilectione quibus nobis tenemini, quod omni occasione postposita et negotiis aliis praetermissis, sitis ad nos Londoniis in octabis sancti Hillarii proximo fu∣turis, nobiscum et cum praedictis Praelatis & Magnatibus nostris, quos ibidem vocari fecimus, super praemissis tracta∣turiet Consilium impensuri; Et hoc sicut nos & honorem no∣rum & vestrum, Neonon et Commuem Regni nostri tran∣quillitatem
diligitis, nullatenus omittatis. Teste Rege apud Wigorn. 14. die Novembris. The like writs (as appears by the Roll) were direct∣ed to the Archbishop of York, and 11 more Bishops; to 101 Abbots and Priors, to the Master of the Knights of the Temple in England, and to the Deans of York, Exon, Wells, Sarum and Lincoln. The 4. writ is that of 23 E. 1. m. 9. Dorso.De Parliamen∣to tenendo. Edwar∣dus, &c. Venerabili in Christo Patri R. eadem gratia Can∣tar. Archiepiscopo, totius Angliae Primati salutem. Quia super quibusdam ar duis negoils Nos & regnum nostrum, ac vos caeterosque Praelatos de eodem Regno tangentibus, quae sine vestra et eorum praesentia nolumus expediri PARLIAMENTUM nostrum tenere, et vobiscum super hiis colloquium habere volumus et tractatum. Vobis man∣damus, quod in fide et dilectione quibus Nobis tenemini fimi∣ter injungentes, quenus sitis ad Nos apud Westm. primo die mensis Augusti prox. futur. vel saltem infra tertium di∣em subsequentem ad ultimum, Nobiscum super dictis negotiis tractaturi, vestrumque consilium impensuri. Et hoc nullo modo omittatis. Teste meipso apud Album Mo∣nasterium XXIIII. die Julii. Per Breve de Privato Sigillo. The like writs then issued to the Archbishop of York and 18. other Bishops; to the Master of the Order of Semplingham, the Master of the Knights of the Temple, the Prior of the Hospital of St. Iohns Ierusalem in England, and to 53. Abbots and Priors, whose names are recorded in the Rolls, over tedious to transcribe at large. The same year 23. E. 1. there was another Parlia¦ment summoned by this memorable writ, the 5. I find upon Record. Claus. 24 E. 1. m. 7. dors. DeParliamen∣to tenendo. Rex venerabili in Christo Patri R. eadem gratia Cantuar. Archiepiscopo totius Angliae Primati, salutem. Sicut lex justissima provida circumspectione sacrorum principum stabilita horratur, Ut quod omnes tangit ab omnibus approbetur; sic &  evienter: ut communibus periculis per remedia provisa communi∣ter
obvietur; Sane satis nostis et am est, ut credimus, per universa mundi climta divulgatum, qualiter Rex Franciae, de terra nostra asconiae, Nos fraudulenter & cautelose decepit, eam Nobis nequiter deinendo. Nunc vero praedictis fraude et nequitia non contentus, ad expugna∣tionem regni nostr, classe maxima et bellatorum copiosa mul∣titudie congregatis, cum quibus regnum nostrum & regni ejusdem incolas hostiliter jam invasi, linguam Anglicam, si concepae iniquitatis proposito detest abili potest as correspondeat, quod Deus aveat omnino de terra delere proponit. Quia igitur Pravisa. Provisa jacula minus laedunt, & res vestra si∣cut caeterorum ejusdem regni communiter agitur in hc parte, Vobis mandamus in fide et dilectione quibus nobis e∣nemini firmiter injungentes, quod die Dominica prox. post festum sancti Martini in hieme prox. futura, apud Westm. PERSONALITER INTERSITIS. Praemunien∣tes Priorem & Capitulum Ecclesiae vestrae, Archidiaconos totumque Clerum vestri Diocaesis, facientes quod iidem Pri∣or & Archidiac. IN PROPRIIS PERSONIS SUIS, & dictum Capitulum per unum, idemque Clerus per duos Procuratores idoneos, plenam et sufficientem potestatem ab ipsis Capitulo et Clero habentes, una vobiscum in∣tersint modis omnibus tunc ibidem; ad tract and, ordinand. & faciend. nobiscum, et cum caeteris Praelatis & Proceribus & aliis incolis regni nostri, qualiter sit hujusmodi periculis et excogitatis malitis obviandum. Teste Rege apud Wenge∣ham 30 die Septembris. The like Writs were then issued to the Arch Bishop of York, and 13 other Bishops there named, only with this diversity, Praemunientes Decanos et Capitula Ecclesia∣rum, Archidiaconos totumque Clerum suorum Dioc. facien∣tesque quod iidem Decani & Archidiaconi in propriis personis suis, & dict a Caepitula per unum, idemque Clrus per duos Pro∣curatores idoneos, plenam & sufficientem potestatem ab ipsis Capituis & Clero habentes, &c. as before. And with this peculiar different clase in the writ directed W. Bathon & Wellen. Episcopo. Praemunientes Priorem Bathon. & Ca∣pitulum & Decanum & Capitulum Wellen. Ec∣clesiarum
suarum, necnon Archidiaconos & Clerum, &c. And in the writ issued Coventr. & Lichf. Episcopo, Prae∣munientes Priorem & Capit. Coventr. & Decanum & Ca∣pitulum Lichf. necnon, &c. ut supra, Teste ut supra. The like Writs were then sent to 66 Abbots and Pri∣ors there named omitting the whole clause of Praemu∣nientes, &c.) and to the Masters of the Knights of the Temple, and of the order of Semplingham, and to the Pri∣or of the Hospital of St. Iohn Ierusalem in England. The 6 writ is that of Claus. 24. E. 1. m. 7. Dorso. Rex &c. R. &c. Cant. Arch. &c.See Walsing∣ham, Hist. Angl. An. 1297, 1298, p. 34, 35, 36. Clerus ob constitutio∣nem Bonifacii hoc anno edi∣am quae pro∣hibet sub poena ex com∣municationis ne talliae vel exactiones a Clero per se∣culares Prin∣cipes quocun∣que modo ex∣igantur, vel eis solvantur de rebus Ec∣clesiae, Rege pro werra sua petenti subsidium denegavit. Rex autem ut de meliori responso deliberarent negotium in aliud Parliamentum enendum Londoiis in crastino sancti Hilla∣rii distuli. Parliamentum coactum est Londoniis post estum sancti Hillarii, in quo clero persistente in denegatione subsidii, Rex ipsum a sua protectione exclu∣sit. Pro qua tamen redimendo, multi per se, multi vero per mediatores, regi bonorum suorum dederunt postea quintam partem. Rex Archiepiscopum rigi∣diorem comperiens, terras ejus omnes seisivit, & de bonis ejusdem debita in Rotulis Scaccarii inventa praecepit cum celeritate levari. Nam idem Archiepis∣copus de consensu Cleri procuraverat a Papa inhibitionem, ne quis Clericorum egem respiceret be bonis Ecclesiae. Vestra paternitas plane novit, qualiter vos & alii Praelati, & Clerus regni nostri apud Westm. ultimo congregati, in concessione pecuniae reddituum, & bene∣siciorum vestrorum ecclesiasticorum pro defensione regni e∣jusdem usque ad festum sancti Michaelis prox. futur. no∣bis facta, & sub spe ubrioris subsidii in futuro a vobis & aliis praestandi admissa, bonum et sufficiens nobis pro futuro tempore subsidium ob candem causam, nisi interim inter Re∣gem Franciae & nos Pacem reformari vel Treugas iniri con∣tingeret, dare promisistis unanimiter, liberaliter & libenter; cui quidem reformationi pacis vel initioni Treugarum dictus Rex Franciae hactenus non consensit. Quocirca vobis man∣damus in fide et dilectione quibus nobis te nemini fir∣miter injungentes, quod in crastino animarum prox. futur. apud sanctum Edmundum personaliter intersitis. Praemn∣nientes, &c. (as before) tunc ibidem, ad ordinandum de quantitate & modo subsidi memorati. Teste Rege apud Berewic. super Twede 26 die Augusti.
The like writs issued. Custodi Archiepiscopatus Ebo∣rum, sede vacante; Electo Menevensi, vel ejus vices geren∣ti ipso agente in partibus transmarinis: et Electo Landa∣vensi; and to 17. Bishops more: It being usual then, and in succeeding times, to issue out writs to Bishops elect, and so to Abbots and Priors elect, before their consecrations or installments; and to Bishops Vicars, or Vicegerents, in case of their absence in forein parts. The like writs were then directed to 68 Abbots, but not to one Prior, except of the Hospital of Ierusalem, and to the Masters of the Knights of the Temple, and Order of Semplingham: differing only in the Praemunientes, &c. and this close of the writs, Ad tractand. ordinand. & fa∣ciend. Nobiscum & cum caeteris Prelatis et Proceibus, et a∣liis Incolis regni nostri, qualiter sit hujusmodi periculis et excogitatis malitiis obviand. Teste ut supra. The 7. writ is this of Claus. An. 25. E. 1. m. 6. dorso. Rex venerabili in Christo Patri eadem gratia R. Can∣tuar. Archiepisc. &c. salutem.De Parlia∣mento tenen∣do. Quia super quibusdam arduis & urgentibus negotiis Nos et vos, ac totum reg∣num nostrum tangentibus, volumus, quod Edwardus filius nofler Karissimus, tenens locum nostrum in Ang∣lia, vobiscum colloquium habeat et tractatum. Vobis mandamus in fide et diectione quibus Nobis tenemini firmiter injungentes, quod in instante crastino Sancti Michaelis London: ad eundem filium nostrum modis omnibus personaliter intersitis, cum eodem et caeteris de Consilio nostro qui ibidem aderint, super dictis ne∣gotiis tractaturi vestrumque consilium impensuri. Et hoc sicut honorem et commodum nostrum diligitis nul∣latenus omit tatis. Teste Edwardo fil. Regis apud San∣ctum Paulum London 9. die Septembris. The like writs were directed to 6. other Bishops, 17. Abbots, 4. Priors, the Prior of the Hospital of St. Iohns of Ierusalem, and Mr. of the Templers. The 8. writ is thus recorded in Claus. 27 Ed. 1. m. 18. dorso.De Parlia∣mento tenen∣do. Rex venerabili in Christo Patri R. eadem gratia Cantu∣ar.
Arch. &c. slutem. Quia super negotiis nostris ultra∣marinis vobiscum, et cum caeteris Praelatis, ac Proceribus reg∣ni nostri, habere volumus colloquium et tractatum. Vo∣bis mandamus, &c. quod prima Dominica Quadragesimae ad Nos London. modis omnibus personaliter intersitis; Nobiscum ibidem, super dictis negotiis, &c. as in the next precedent writ. Teste Rege apud Pontem de Tayle 6. die Febr. The like writs were sent to the Archbishop of York Angliae Primai; to 17 other Bishops, 34 Abbots, and 5 Priors, and all others omitted, or not entred on the Roll. The 9. VVrit is this in Clause Anno 27 E. 1. m. 16. Dorso. Rex, venerabili in Christo Patri R. &c. Cantuar. Arch. &c.De Parlia∣mento tenen∣do. Propter quaedam specialia et ardua negotia nos, & statum regni nostri tangentia quae noviter emerserun, & quae sine praesentia vestra nolumus expedire; Vos affe∣ctuose requirimus et rogamus quatenus sitis ad nos apud Westm. in quindena Pachae prox. nunc ventur. omnibus praetermissis, ad tractandum nobiscum super eisdem nego∣tiis, ac etiam vestrum consilium impendend. prout Do∣minus inspirabit. Et hoc sicut de vobis confidimus et honorem nostrum diligitis nullatenus omittatis. T. Re∣ge apud Westm. 10 die Aprilis. The like writs are issued to 16 Bishops and 26 Ab∣bots, without any Priors or other Ecclesiastical per∣sons. The 10. is this writ, in Claus. 27 E. 1. m. 9. dorso. Rex venerabili, &c. R. Cantuar. Arch. &c.De Parlia∣mento tenen∣do. Propter quaedam ardua negotia Nos et vos de regno nostro, ejus{que} statum urgent. tangentia; Vos rogamus specialius scimus possumus, vobis nihilominus injungendo mandamus, quatenus in prox. festo Sancti Lucae Evangelistae apud Novum Templum London personaliter intersitis: ad ha∣bendum un cum aliis fidelibus nostris qui intererunt, deliberationem et consilium super praedictis negotiis vo∣bis tunc ibidem ex parte vestra (nostra rather) plenius ex∣ponend.
Et hoc amore nostri nullatenus omittatis. T. Rege apud Ledes 21 die Septembris. The like writs then issued to 4 more Bishops, 4 Earls, and 5 Lords only, and no more, without any other Bi∣shops, Abbots, Priors, or Temporal Lords mentioned in the Roll. Whence I conceive it rather a summons to a private Consultation, than a Common Council or Parlia∣ment, the frame of the whole writ importing as much, and that following it at the heels. The 11. is a writ of Summons to a Parliament, recor∣ded in the dorse of the same Membrana. Claus. 2 E. 1. dorso. Rex ven. in Christo Patri R. &c. Cantuar. Arch. &c. Quia ad salvationem Coron nostrae Regiae, et communē utili∣tatem populi regni nostri secunda Dominica Quadragesimae prox. futur. London. PARLIAMENTUM tenere, & vo∣biscum, et cum cteris Praelatis necnon Magnatibus & Pro∣ceribus ejusdem regni super negotiis nos et idem regnum nostrum contingentibus, speciale colloquium habere volumus et tractatum. Vobis mandamus in fide et dilectione quibus Nobis tenemini firmiter injungentes, quod ad dictos diem et locum person aliter intersitis Nobiscum, & cum caeteris Prae∣latis, Magnatibus et Proceribus praedictis, super dictis nego∣tiis tractauri, vestrumque consilum impensuri. Praemuni∣entes, &c. as before, p. 7, 8.) Ad faciendum et consenti∣endum hiis quae tunc de Communi Consilio Deo favnte ordi∣ar cntigerit, vel etiam pro utilitate dicti regni providere; Et hoc sicut honorem nostrum regnique praedicti commodum diligitis, nullatenus omittatis. T. Rege apud Berewicum super Twedam, 29 die Decembris. Writs of like form are directed to 17. Bishops more, and likewise Custodibus Episcopatus Lincoln. sede vacan∣te: et Capitulo Ecclesiae beati Petri Eborum, Custodibus spi∣rtuallum ejusdem Diocaes. sede vacants: with this special clause superadded; Quod ad praedictos diem et locum suffi∣cientem Procuratorem plenam a vobis potestatem habentem mittatis ad tractand. Nobiscum, et cum praedictis Praelatis, Magnatibus et Proceribus super negotiis antedictis, et prae∣bendum nomine vestro consilium et assensum hiis quae ibidem
tnc contigerit ordinari. Praemunientes Archidiac. in Ec∣clesia vestra, toumque Clerum Eboracnsis Diocaes. facien∣tes{que} &c. as in p. 7, 8, &c. The like writs then issued to 73 Abbots; but to no Prior, except of St. Iohns Ieru∣salem in England, & Fratribus et Magstro Militiae Tem∣pli in Anglia, et Mgistro de Semplingham. The 12. is the writ in Claus. 28 E. 1. m. 3. dorso. Rex, venerabili in Christo Patri R. eadem gratia Can∣tuar. Archiepiscopo, &c.De veniendo ad Parliamen∣tum. Cum nuper pro Communi utilitate populi regni nostri conesserimus, quod Carta de Foresta in singulis suis articulis firmiter observaretur, assignando quos∣dm de fidelibus nostris in singulis Comitatibus ejusdem reg∣ni in quibus Forestae nostrae existunt, ad perambulationem in eisdem Forestis faciendam. Ita quod per ambulationem il∣lam distincte et aperte factam ad Nes antequā aliqua execu∣tio vel aliquid aliud inde fieret reportarent, et quod jur amen∣tum nostrum, jus Coronae Angliae, rationes & calumpniae alio∣rum omnium salva forent. Nos licet dilects et fideles nostri nunc primò ad Nos detulerunt quod fecerint in negotiis me∣moratis, quia tamen Praelaci, Comites & caeteri Magnates dicti regni in quorum praesentia nostras, & aliorum proponi et audiri volumus rationes, et de quorum Consilio in eodem ne∣gotio, prout alias diximus, intendimus operari: maxime cum ip ad observandum et manutenendum ura Re∣gis et Coronae nostrae praedictae, una Nobiscum uramen∣ti vinculo sint astricti, Regni. a la, nostum tunc ten pis non fuerunt; ac pro eo scilicet quod illi qui suas rationes quaenus illud negotium illos ang it proponere habeant, inde praemuni non erant, eidem negotio sine ipsorum Consilio-inem imponere non potuimus BONO MODO. Et quia negotium illud quantum possumus cupmus maturare, ita quod per Nos non foret quin absque ulterioris dilationis incommodo effectum de∣bitum sortiri (posset.) Volentes cum Praelatis, Comiti∣bus, Baronibus ac Magnatibus supradictis ac aliis e Communitate dicti Regni super hoc, et quibudam aliis negotiis, Nos et Statum regni praedicti tangentibus, ha∣bere colloquium et tractatum. Vobis mandamus in fi∣de et dilectione quibus Nobis tenemini firmiter injun∣gentes,
quod sitis ad Nos ad PARLIAMENTUM NOS∣TRUM apud Lincoln. in Octabis sancti Hillarii prox. futur. Nobiscum ibidem, una cum caeeris Praelatis et Proceribus praedictis super praemissis tractaturi, vestrum∣que consilium imensuri. Et hoc sicut Nos, & commo∣dum regni nostri praedicti diligitis, nullatenus omittatis, Teste Rege apud le Rose. 26 die Septembris. The like writs were sent to the Archbishop of York, Angliae Primati, and to 17 Bishops more: to 80 Ab∣bots; but no Prior except Prior Hospitalis Sancti Johan∣nis Ierusalem in Anglia; Magistro Ordinis de Sempling∣ham, Magistro Milit. Templi in Anglia. The 13. and 14. writs are of this form registred in Clau∣so Ann. 30 E. 1. m. . 9. dorsi. Rex, &c. R. &c. Canuar. Archiepisc. &c.De Parlia∣mento tenen∣do. Quia su∣per quibudam arduis negotiis Nos & vos totumque reg∣num nostrum specialiter tangentibus quae sine vobis et caeteris Praelatis ac Proceribus dicti regni nostri nolumus expediri, vobiscum et cum eisdem Praelatis ac Proceti∣bus habere volumus Colloquium et tractatum. Vobis mandamus, &c. quod in Octabis Nativ. Sancti Iohannis Baptitae prox. futur. ad ultimum apud Westm. modis om∣nibus personaliter intersit is Nobiscum, et cum caeteris Praelatis ac Proceribus supradictis, super dicts negoiis tractaturi, &c. T. Rege apud Thurrock Grey 2. die Iu∣nii. Rex, &c. R. Archiepise, Cantuar. &c.De Iteratione Parliamenti. Licet vos non la∣teat, quod in Parliamento nostro, habito London hiis diebus extitit ordinatum, ut ad providendum consulcius & salubri∣us ordinandum super negotiis de quibus tract atum fuit in eo∣dem Parliamento et aliis, super quibus pro commodo et secu∣ritate rgni ostrs et colarum ejusdem tractandum, videi∣tur Parliamentum iteratum in prox. festo sancti Mïcha∣elis London habeatur; ex habundanti tamen vobis in fide et dilectione quibus nobis tenemini firmiter injungendo mandamus, quod edem futuro Parliamento aliis qui∣buscunque negotiis praetermissis personaliter intersitis. T. Re∣ge apud Westm. 24 die Julii.
Consimiles literae dirigunur subscriptis, viz. I. Karliol. Episcopo, &c. (with  more names of Bishops  Ab∣bots, temporal Lords) is written under both these writs. The 15. writ of Summons is thus framed: Claus. An. 33 E. 1. m. 8. dorso. Rex, &c. W. eadem gratia Episcopo Wigorniae salutem. Licet hactenus vobis mandavimus quod esseis ad No a∣pud Westm. ad Parliamentum nostrum quod in Octa∣bis nativitatis beatae Mariae virginis prox. futur. tenere volumus Deo dante. Vobis nihilominus iterato mandamus in fide, &c. quod die dictarum Octab. vel in crastino earun∣dem ad vltimum aliis omnibus praetermissis intersitis. Et hoc nullatenus omittatis. T. Rege apud Rothing 27 die Au∣gusti. Per Breve de privato sigillo. Consimiles literae dirigunur subscriptis, mutatis mu∣tandis. W: Coventr. & Lichf. Episcopo, Abbati W stm: Abbati de Waverle: and to 2. Earls, and 9. more there named. The 16. writ, varying in its recital from all the former in regard of the death of E. 1. and the new government, espousals, and coronation of King Edw. 2. is this. Claus. An. 1 E. 2. m. 19. dorso. De ve∣niendo ad Parliamentū Regis. Edwardus Deigratia Rex Angliae, Dominus Hiberniae, & Dux Aquitaniae, Ven. in Christo patri W. eadem gra∣tia Eborum Archiepiscopo Angliae Primati, salutem. Quia super quibusdam Negotiis nos in ista recenti susceptione re∣giminis regni nostri, tam videlicet super humatione corporis celebris memoriae Domini Edwardi quondam Regis Angliae genitoris nostri, cujus animae propitietur Dus, quam super solempnitate nostrorum Sponsalium, et Coronationis nostrae auctore Deo celebr and. aliis{que} arduis negotiis statum ejus∣dem regni contingentibus, vobiscum et cum caeeris Prae∣latis & Magnatibus de eodem regno habere volumus Colloquium speciale et tractatum. Vobis mandamus, &c. quod in Quindena sancti Michaelis prox. futur. &c. apud Northampton personaliter intersitis Nobiscum & cum aliis Praelatis & Magnatibus, &c. Praemunientes Decanum et Archidiaconos, &c. (as in former writs) ad
faciend. & consentiend, &c. T. meipso aqud Comenok, 26 die Augusti, Anno regni nostri primo. Eodem modo scribitur to 18 Bishops there named Abbots with other Ecclesi∣astical Barons. The 17. writ is this: Claus. Anno 1 E. 2. m. 11. dor∣so. Rex venerabili in Christo Patri W. Archiepiscopo Ebo∣rum Angliae Primati, salutem:Summoniio Parliamenti. Quia super diversis et arduis negotiis No et statum regni nostri tangentibus, &c cum caeteris Praelatis, Proceribus, et aliis fidelibus nostris de eodem regno Colloquium et tractatum habere, et PAR∣LIAMENTUM tenere proponimus Domino concedente. Vobis mandamus, &c. quod prima Dominica Quadra∣g simae prox. futur. apud Westm. &c. intersitis, Nobiscum ibidem et cum caeteris Praelatis et Magnatibus, &c. (as before) T. Rege apud Douorr. 19 die Januar. Eodem modo mandatum est subscriptis, viz. A. Patriarch. Jerusalem, et Episcopo Dunelm: and  Bishops more: the rest  Abbots  in the Roll. The 18. writ is in Claus. Anno 1 E. 2. m. . . dorso. Rex ven. &c. W. eadem gratia Archiepisc. Eborum, &c. Quia super diversis negotiis Nos et statum regni nostri tangentibus Parliamentum nostrum apud Westm. die Dominica in Quindena Paschae, prox. futur. tenere proponimus Do concedente. Vobis mandamus, &c. ibidem Nobiscum et cum Praelatis & caeteris Magnatibus et Proceribus de regno praedicto, &c. T. Rege apud West. 10 die Martii. Eodem modo mandatum est, to Bishops, with Abbots,  named particularly in this Roll. The 19. writ, is in Claus. Anno 2 E. 2. m. 20. Cedu∣la. Rex, ven. &c. R. eadem gratia Cantuar. Archiepiscopo &c.Summonit Parliameni Quia diversa negotia Nos et statum regni nostri tangen∣tia super quibus vobiscum et cum caeeris Praelatis et Mag∣natibus ejusdem regni in PARLIAMENTO NOSTRO
quod nuper post Coronationem nostram summoneri fecimus, tractare incepimus, propter aliquod impedimentum interveni∣ens quod, benedicto Altissimo, modo cessat, adhuc remanent pertractanda; per quod PARLIAMENTUM NOS∣TRVM apud Westm. à die Sancti Michaelis prox. futur. in tres Septimanas tenere disposuimus Domino concedente. Vobis mandamus, &c. (without a Praemunientes, &c.) et hoc sicut Nos et honorem nostrum atque vestrum, commodumque dicti regni diligitis nullatenus omitta∣tis. T. Rege apud Langele 16 die Augusti. Eodem modo mandatum est subscriptis, viz. W. Archi∣episcopo Eborum, Angliae Primati, A. Patriarch. Ierusa∣lem, et Episcopo Dunelm. &c. without more names of Bishops or Abbots in the Roll. The 20. writ is thus entred, Claus. Anno 2 E. 2. m. 14. Cedula. Rex, &c. A. eadem gratia Archiepisc. Cantuar. &c.De veniendo ad tractan∣dum cum Re∣ge. Quia super quibusdam arduis negotiis Nos et statum, &c. vobiscum et cum aliis Praelatis, Proceribus, et Magnati∣bus ejusdem regni habere volumus tractatum. Vobis mandamus, &c. quod suis ad Nos apud Westm. secunda Dominica Quadragesimae, &c. Nobiscum et cum caeteris &c. super praemissis Colloquium habituri, &c. T. Rege a∣pud Langeleye S die Ianuarii. Eodem modo mandatum est subscriptis, viz. W. Archiep. Eborum. Angliae Primati, A. Patriarchae Ierus. et Epis∣copo Dunelm. R. Electo Dublin. Episcopo, &c. without more names of Bishops or Abbots. The 21. writ is registred, Claus. 2 E. 2. m. 11. dors.Summonitio Parliamenti. directed to the Archbishop of Canterbury, in the same form as the last, with an addition only of Praemunientes Priorem, &c. (not in the former) a die Paschae prox. fu∣tur. in unum mensem apud Westm. &c. T. Rege apud Westm. 4. die Martii. Eodem modo scribitur subscriptis mutatis mutandis quoad Decanos et Capitula, et Priores et Capitula, viz. W. Arch. Ebor. A. Patriarch. Jerus. et Ep. Dunelm. J. Karlio, &c. without more names.
The 22. is Claus. 2. . 2. m. 0, dorso. Rex, &c. R. &c. Cantuar. Archiepsc. &c.De summoni∣tione Parlia∣menti▪ Quia Treu∣ga sive sufferentia quam ad requi sitionem magnifici Principis Domini Philippi Regis Francorum illustris Patris nostri carissimi, Scot is inimicis, et bellibus nostris usque ad certum tempus concessimus duratur. per ipsos Scotos qui nunc pejora quam ante captionem suffer  praedictae commiserant, com∣mittere non verentes, contra Nos t fideles nostros in illis par∣bus existentes, faudulenter & hostiliter insurgunt, castra, villas, terras, et tenmenta tam nostra quam fidelium nostro∣um ibidem nequier occupando necnon depraedationes, incen∣dia et homicidia multiplicilen perpetr ado, ullaetenus observa∣tur, quod vos et alios de rego nostro cred mus non latere; Nos dictorum Scotorum proterviam et nequitiam hujusmodi cum Dei uxilio depimere cupientes, et super hoc vobiscum et cum caeteris Praelatis et Proceribus regni nostri volentes habere Colloquium et tractatum. Vobis mandamus, quod die Dominica prox. post festum Sacti Jacobi Aposto∣li prox. futur. sitis ad Nos apud Staunford, Nobiscum, &c. Et hoc sicut Nos et honorem nostrum et vestrum ac co∣modum regni  deigitis nullatenus omittais. T. Rege apud Westm. 11 die Junii. The 23. writ is enrolled in Claus. Anno 3 E. 2. m. 17. dorso. Rex, &c. W. &c. Archiepiscopo Eborum. &c. Quan∣t au aciae quantaeque temeritatis sun hiis diebus opera Roberti de Brus, Inimici et Rebellis, et Proditoris nostri, suorumque Complicum et Fautorum, Nobis et dicto regno nostro dampnosa, quotiens hujusmodi Inimici no∣stri perturbaverint idem regnum, quot eiam malorum et machinationum genera Treugis ipsis ad requisiionem magniici Principis Domini Philippi Regis Francorum il∣lustr. Kaissimi Patris nostri concessis pendentibus, pro∣ditionibus solio sicut aslueta non relinquere volen∣tes erga No, praefatumque regnum minime perpetrare verebantur, Castra, villas, erras et tenementa tam no∣stra quam fidelium nostrorum ausu emerario invadendo et aliqua obsidendo, et (proh dolor!) pejora accmu∣lantes
prioribus, quibusdam fidelibus nostris nequiter in∣terfectis, depraedationes, rapinas, et alia enormia multi∣pliciter commiserunt, vos et alios de dicto Regno no∣stro credimus non latere. Volentes igitur super hiis, ac aliis arduis negotiis Nos et statum regni nostr tangentibus vobiscum, et cum caeteri Praelatis, Proceribus, et Magnati∣bus ejusdem regni habere Colloquium et tractaium. Vobis mandamus, &c. sitis personaliter ad Nos apud Eborum, die Dominica prox. post festum Purificationis beatae Mariae prox. futur. Nobiscum et cum caeteris Praelatis, Proceribus et Magntious, &c. (without any Praemunientes, &c.) T. Rege apud Eborum 26. die Octobris. In the Eodem modo mandatum est, &c. 3. Bishops on∣ly are named with an &c. The 24. writ I find in Claus. Anno 4 E. 2. m. 1. Dor∣so. Rex, &c.De. summoni∣tione Parlia∣menti. R. &c. Archiep. Cantuar. &c. Quia prop∣ter plura et ardua negotia Nos et statum regniostri tan∣gentia die Dominica prox. ante festum Sancti Laurenii prox. futur. ordinavimus, Deo propiti Lonn, Parlia∣mentum tenere, et vobiscum et cum  Praelatis et Proceribus, &c. habere Colloquium et tractatum. Vo∣bis mandamus, &c. Praemunientes Priorem et Capitu∣lum Ecclesiae vestrae, &c. T. Rege apud Berewic. super Tweam, 16 die Junii. Per Breve de privato sigillo. Eodem modo scribitur subscriptis mutatis mutandis quoad Decanos et Capitula, et Priores et Capitula, viz. Arch. Eborum, Angliae Primati, I. Karliol. Episcopo, &c. without more names. The 25. writ is registred in Claus. 5 E. 2. m. 17. Dor∣so. Rex, &c. R. Archiep. Cantur. &c. Quia i ultimo PAR∣LIAMENTO nostro apud Westm. habito propter solempni∣tatem festi Nativitatis Domni supervenientis diversa et ardua negotia Nos et statum regni nostri, aliarumque terrarum nostrarum multiplicite genia, non potuimus, si∣cut spor abamus expedire:  ALIUD PARLIA∣MENTVM apud Westm.  Dominica Quadragesi∣mae
prox. futur ,  vobiseum et cum caeteis Praela∣tis ac Procribus dicti regni super prssis  Domi∣no finaliter portract andis haber proponius Colloquium et tractatum. Vobis  , &c. Nobiscum et cum caeteris Praelatis, ac cum Proceribus praedictis, aliisque fidelibus nostris, super memortis nego tractat &c. Praemunienes Priom et Capi. &c. T. Rege apud Westm. 19 die Decembri Consimiles literae diriguntur Viari generali Aroio∣piscopi Eborum, ipso Archiepiscopo inmotis agete, &c. without more names of Bishops or Abbots. The 26. Writ is entred Claus. An. 5. E. 2. m. 11. 13. dors. Rex, &c. R. &c. Archiepisco to Cantuar. &c.De summoni∣tione Parlia∣menti. Quia prop∣ter plra et ardu Negoia, No &c. die Doinica prox. post festum beatae Mariae Magdalenae prox. futur. ordi∣navimus Deo propitio apud Lincol. Palimentum ene∣re, et vobiscum, cum caeteris Praelatis t Proceribus de dicto regno, &c. Praemuientes Priorem & Capit. T. Re∣ge apud Eborum. Eodem modo scribiur▪ subscriptis mutat. muandis quoad Decanos et Capit. &c. viz. Arch. Eborum Angliae Primati. Carliol Epise. without more names. The 27. Writ is recorded, Claus. An. 6. E. 2. m. 31. Dorso.De summoni∣tione Parlia∣menti. Rex, &c. R. &c. Archiepiscopo Cantuar. Qia tertia Dominica Quadragessimae prox. futur, ordinavimus Deo propitio apud Westm. Parliamentum teere et obiscum, ac cum caeteris praeltis et proeribus regni nostri, &c. Praemunientes, &c. T. Rege apud Windesor 8 die Ianu∣arii. Eodem modo sribitur, &c. Arch. Eborum. Angl. Prima∣ti, R. London, Episcopo, &c. without more names. The 28. is this memorable special writ of Summons to a special extraordinary Council held at London. Claus. An. 6. E. 2. m. 2. dorso. Rex vener. in Chri∣sto Patri R. eadm gratia Lond. Episcopo, slutem. Datum est nobis intelligi quod Scoti, inimici et rebelles nostri terram nostram Scotiae occupantes, Cstra, villas, et alia
loca usurparunt et devastarunt, et his similibus non con∣tenti Regnum nostrum Angliae in diversis partibus sunt ingressi, homicidia, depiaedationes, incendia, et alia damna innumera perpetrantes, Ecclessiae sacrae aut locis aliis Deo dedicatis non parcentes in hac parte; Et quia praemissa non solum in nostri dampnum▪ verum etiam in destructionem Ecclesiae, et locorum praedictorum et ani∣marum grave periculum, (ad quorum salvationem vos u∣na nobiscum oportunas vires decet extendere) dinoscun∣tur gravius redundare, per quod injunximus venerabili∣bus Patribus W. Wygorn. Episcopo, Custodi magni Sigilli nostri, et I. Bathon. & Wellen. Episcopo, et dilecto et fideli Nepoi nostro Gilberto de Clare Comiti Glouc. et Hereford. quaedam vobis et quibusdam aliis Praelatis de dicto regno nostro super praemissis; sitis in propria perso∣na vestra, vel per sufficientem Procuratorem à vobis ple∣nam potestatem habentem London. die Jovis prox. post festum Sanctae Trinitatis prox. futur. ad tractandum una cum praefat is Episcopis, et Comite, et aliis quae ibidem ex hac causa sunt vocati super negotiis antedictis, et ad consentiendum hiis quae tune in eisdem contigerit ordi∣nari. Et hoc sicut Dei et Ecclesiae suae, ac nostri ac ve∣stri honorem diligitis, et dampna hujusmodi in dicto reg∣no desideraveritis, evitari. T. Rege apud Door. 23 die Maii. Eodem modo mandatum est subscriptis, viz. Episcopo Winton, Episc. Excestr. Episc. Norwyc. Episc. Eliens. Ep. Sarum: Custodi Spiritualitatis Arch. Cant. quod sint personiliter: Episc. Roff. Episc. Lincoln. Per se, vel per Procurat. Episc. Meneven. personaliter. The 29. writ is registred Claus. An. 6 E. 2. m. 3. dorso. Rex, &c. W. &c. Archiepisc. Eborum, &c. Licet ad requisiionem Sanctissimi in Christo Patris Domini Cle∣mentis divina providentia Summi Pontificis, ncnon Domini Regis Franciae nostri Karssimi patris, jam sumus ad partes transmarinas profecturi, pro arduis negotiis statum Ducatus nostri praedicti diver simode contingentibus, quae sine nostra praesentia, ut per quosdam Magnates et Amicos nostros, et
Ministros nostros partium illarum intelleximus feliciter ex∣pedire non poterint reformandis. Quia tamen à partibus il∣lis in brevi Deo propitio in Angliam redire proponimus, et PARLIAMENTUM NOSTRUM in Quindena Nati∣vitatis S. Johannis Baptistae prox. futur. apud Westm. tenere, et vobiscum, et cum caeteris Praelatis et Proceribus regni nostri, super diversis negotiis Nos et statum dicti regni nostri, ac expeditionem guerrae nostrae Scotiae specialiter tan∣gentibus habere Colloquium et tractatum. Vobis mandamus, &c. Praemunientes, &c. T. Rege apud Douorr. 23. die Maii. Eodem modo scribitur, viz. Custodi Archiepiscopatus Canuar. sede vacante, R. London. I. Lincoln. &c. with∣out more names. The 30. writ in Claus. Anno 7. E. 2. m. 27. dorso, runs thus. Rex, &c. W. eadem gratia Archiepisc. Eborum, &c. Cum diversa et ardua negotia Nos, et statum regni nostri tangentia, super quibus in Parliamento quod apud Westm. in Quindena Nativitatis St. Johannis Baptistae prox: praeteri∣ta fecimus summoneri, proposueramus Vobiscum et cum cae∣teris Praelatis, Magnatibus et Proceribus regni nostri habu∣isse Colloquium et Tractatum, ob aliquas certas rationes adhuc remaneant indiscussa; per quod ordinavimus Parliamen∣tum nostrum apud Westm. die Dominica prox: post festum S. Mathaei Apostoli prox. futur. tenere; et vobiscum et cum caeteris Praelatis, &c. Vobis mandamus, &c. Praemunientes &c. T. Rege apud Westm. 26. die Iulii. Eodem modo mandatum est subscriptis, Custod. Archie∣piscopatus Cantuar. sede vacante, Custodi Episcopatus Lon∣don. sede vacante, J. Episcopo Lincoln. S. Episc. Sarum, &c. without more names paricularized. The 31. writ is this of Claus. Anno 7 E. 2. m. 16. dor∣so. Rex, &c. W. &c. Archiepiscopo Eborum, &c.De summoni∣tione Parlia∣menti. Quia super diversis negotiis Nos, &c. tangentibus, Parliamen∣tum nostrum apud Westm. die Dominica in Quindena Pasch.
prox. futur. tenre proponimus Domino concdente. Vobis mandamus, &c. Praemunientes, &c. T. Rege apud Westm. 6. die Decembris. Eodem modo mandatum subscriptis, viz. Custod. Spi∣ritualitatis Archiepiscopatus Cantuar. sede vacante, muta∣tis mutandis, London. Episcopo, I. Lincoln. Episcopo, &c. The 32. sort of writs, you may find in Claus. Anno 8 E. 2. m. 45. dorso. Rex, &c. W. eadem gratia Archipisc. Cantuar. &c.Summonitio Parliamenti. Quia super diversis et arduis negotiis Nos et statum regni nostri, et maxime Terrae nostrae Scotiae specialiter tangentibus, Parliamentum nostrum apud Eborum die Lu∣nae in crastino Nativitatis beatae Mariae virginis prox. futur▪ tenere, et vobiscm, ac cum caeteris Praelatis, Magnatibus et Proceribus dicti regni habere proponimus Colloquium et tractatum. Vobis mandamus, &c. Praemunientes, &c. T. Rege apud Eborum. 29 die Julii. Per Breve de pri∣vato sigillo. Eodem modo mandatum est Subscriptis, mutatis mutan∣dis, viz. W. Arch. Eborum, Angliae Primati, J. Lincoln. Episcopo, &c. The same writ verbatim, issued this year to the sme Archbishop; Claus. 8 E. 2. m. 29. dorso. Rex, &c. pre∣scribing Parliamentum nostrum apud Westm: in Octabi S. Hillarii prox. futur. tenere, et vobiscum, &c. habere proponimus Colloquium et tractatum, &c. T. Rege a∣pud Spalding 24 die Octobris: There being 3. Bishops only named in the Eodem modo mandatum est. The 33. writ I meet with in Claus. Ann. 9. E. 2. m. 22. dorso. Rex, &c.Summonitio Parliamenti. the same in terminis with the two last▪ but in the place and time of the Parliament, viz. Parlia∣mentum nostrum apud Lincoln, in Quindona Sancti Hilla∣rii prox. futur. tenere, et vobiscum, &c. Praemunientes, &c. T. meipso apud Empington, 16 die Octobris. The Archbishop of York, and Bishop of Lincol with an, &c. are only mentioned in the Eodem modo mandatum est. The 34. writ of summons runs in the ordinary form. Clas. Anno 12 E. 2. m. 29. in Cedula pendente.
Rex &c. W. &c. ant. Arch. &c.Summonitio Parliamenti. Quia, &c. Parliamen∣tum nostrum apud Eborum à die Sancti Michaelis prox. futur▪ in tres Septimanas tenere, et vobiscum, &c. T. Rege apud Notingham 25. Augusti: Per Regem et Consilium. There are but 4. Bishops specified with an &c. in the Eodem modo. The 35. is Claus. An. 12 E. 2. m. 11. dorso,De summoni∣tione Parlia∣menti. to W. Archbishop of York, the same verbatim with the last, but in Parliamentum nostrum apud Eboum à die Paschae in u∣num mensem tenere: T. Rege apud Eborum 28 die Martii, Per ipsum Regem. Five Bishops with an &c. are men∣tioned in the eodem modo. The 36. in Claus. 13 E. 2. m. 13. dorso.De summoni∣tione Parlia∣menti. agrees with these later writs: but in Statum Regni nostri, et Ducatus nostri praedicti specialiter tangentibus, Parliamentum no∣strum apud Eborum in Octabis Hillarii prox. futur. tenere, &c. T. Rege apud Eborum, 6 die Novembr. Per ipsum Regem et Consilium. In the eodem modo 5. Bishops are mentioned with an, &c. The 37. is Claus. 13. E. 2. m. 29. dorso. Rex, &c. W. Archiepisc. Cantuar. &c.De summoni∣tione Parlia∣menti. Parliamentum nostrum apud Westm. die Lunae in octabis S. Mich. prox. futur. teneri, &c. without Praemunientes, &c. T. Rege apud Westm. 5. die Augusti. Per ipsum Regem. In the eodem modo, 5 Bishops are nominated with, &c. The 38. writ I meet with is in Claus. 14 E. 2. m. 5. dorso. Rex, W. &c. Archiepisc. Cant. &c.De summoni∣tione Parlia∣menti. Parliamentum no∣strum apud Westm. a die Nativitatis S. Iohannis Baptistae, prox. futur. in tres Septimanas tenere, &c. with a Praemu∣nientes, &c. T. Rege apud Westm. 25 die Maii. Per ip∣sum Regem. In the eodem modo 5. Bishops with an &c. are specified. The 39. writ in Claus. 15 E. 2. m. 16. dorso, W. Ar∣chiep.De summoni∣tione Parlia∣menti. Cantuar. agrees verbatim with the last before; but in Parliamentum nostrum apud Ebotum, a die Paschae prox. futur, in tres Septimanas tenere, &c. T. meipso apud Dr∣by, 14. die Martii. Per ipsum Regem. There are
only 5. Bishops with &c. in the eodem modo. The 40. writ in Claus. 16 E. 2. m. 26. dorso, hath this recital. Rex, &c. W. &. Archiep. Eborum, &c.Summonitio Parliamenti. Cum jam re∣gressi sumus de partibus Scotiae, et in partibus Novi Ca∣stri super Tynam, ad refraenand. Scotorum inimicorum et rebellium nostrorum obstinatia et malitia, si forsan partes regni nostri hostiliter ingredi attentaverint isto tempore, hic malui cum manis potenti moram facere, et in instanti seisona aestivali ad easdem paries Scotiae ad ipsorum inimicorum no∣strorum proterviam cum Dei adjutorio finaliter conterend. proficisci proponimus; et super hiis et aliis arduis negotis Nos et statum regni nostri et dictam terram Scotiae tangen∣tibus, vobiscum ac cum caeteris Praelatis, Magnatibus et Proceribus dicti regni nostri apud Rippon, die Dominica prox. post festum S. Martini prox. futur. ordinavimus habe∣re colloquium et tractatum. Vobis mandamus, without a∣ny Praemunienes, &c. T. Rege apud Novm Castrum su∣per Tynam, 1. die Septembris. Per ipsum Regem. Eodem modo scribitur W. Arch. Cantuar. totius Angliae Primati: and 3. more there named with &c. The 41. wri, is this in Claus. 18. E. 2. m. 21. dorso. Rex, &c. W. &c. Archiepisc. Eborum, &c.De tractau cum Magnat. apud Winton. habend. Quia ad partes Ducatus nistri Aquitaniae, de quo Rex Franciae malitiose nos exhaerediare proponit, in succursum ejusdem Ducaus nostri passagū nostrum ordinavimus, Domino dispo∣nente, Vobiscum ac cum caeteris Praelatis, Magnatibus & Proceribus regni nostri super passagio nostro praedicto et aliis arduis negotiis, Nos, et statum regni nostri, et Ducatus prae∣dicti tangentibus habere volumus colloquium et tractatum. Vobis mandamus, &c. sitis ad nos apud Winton: secunda Dominica Quadragesimae prox. futur. Nobiscum, &c. Teste Rege apud Notingham 30. die Decembris. Per ipsum Regem. In the eodem modo, 5. Bishops only are particu∣larized with an &c. to the last of them. The 42. writ is in the ordinary form Claus. 18 E. 2. m. 5. dorso. Rex, &c. W. &c. Archiep. Cantuar. &c.Summonitio Parliamenti. Quia, &c.
Parliamentum nostrum apud Westm. crastino Nativitatis S. Iohannis Baptistae prox. futur. tenere, &c. Teste Rege apud Winton. 6 die Maii. Per ipsum Regem. The Eodem modo, &c. mentions the Archbishop of York, and 5. other Bishops, with &c. to the last. The 43. writ is entred, Claus. Anno 19 E. 2. m. 27. dorso. Rex, &c. W. Archiepiscopo Cantuar. &c.Pro Rege de tractatu ha∣bendo. apud Westm. in Octabis Sti. Martini prox. futur. Parliamentum no∣strum tenere, ac vobiscum et cum caeteris Praelatis, &c. Vobis mandamus, &c. Praemunientes, &c. T. Rege a∣pud VVestm. 10 die Octobris. Per ipsum Regem. Eodem modo mandatum est, &c. VV. Arch. Eborum, Angliae Primati, and 3 more Bishops with an &c. instead of the others names. The 44. writ is recorded in Claus. Anno 1 E. 3. parte 2. m. 16. dorso, being very memorable. Rex, &c. W. &c. Archiepisc. Cantuar. &c. Qualiter Scoti nostri et regni nostri inimici pacis tractatum cum nostris solempnibus Nunciis, quos nuper ea de causa ad partes Marchiae Sctiae destinavimus mire contemptibili∣ter recusarunt, et ruptis proditionaliter Treugarum vin∣culis tempore Dom. Edw. nuper Regis Angliae Patris no∣stri inter populos Angliae & Scotiae initis et juramento fir∣matis, congregato magno exercitu regnum nostrum ho∣stiliter plures sunt ingressi, homicidia, depraedationes, in∣cendia, et alia mala injuria perpendo, qualiter et ad refraenand. ipsorum audaciam ad partes Marchiae Scotiae praedictae, congregato magno exerciu declinavimus, ut ipsos inimicos potenter et viriliter prosequamur, vobis incognitum non existir. Et quia dicti Inimici dum per Nos et exercitum nostrum in parco de Stanhope, quatenus fieri poterint circumdati fuissent, noctanter et latenter ut devicti de parco praedicto evaserunt, et ad partes su∣as sunt regressi, nonnullis eorum per quosdam de exerci∣tu nostro insecutis et interfectis, et ut Nobis relatum est, iterato se congtegare, et regnum nostrum ingredi pro∣ponunt
ad mala quae poterunt perpetranda, propter quod tam super defensione et custodia regni nostri contra aggressus dictorum inimicorum, quam super aliis arduis negotiis Nos et Statum regni nostri tangentibus, vobis∣cum, et cum caeteris Praelatis, Magnatibus, et Proceribus regni nostri apud Lincoln. in crassino Exaltationis sanctae Crucis prox. futur. colloquium ordinavimus habere et tractatum. Vobis mandamus in fide et dilectione qui∣bus Nobis tenemini, &c. quod omnibus aliis praetermissis dictis die et loco personaliter intersitis ibidem, Nobis∣cum si interesse possumus, seu interveniente impedimen∣to depurandis a Nobis, super defensione et custodia ac aliis negotiis supradictis tractaturi, vestrumque consili∣um impensuri. Et praemuniatis Priorem et Capitulum Ecclesiae vestrae Cantuar. Archidiac. totumque Clerum vestrae Dioc: quod iidem Prior et Archidiac. in propriis personis suis, dictumque Capitulum per unum, idemque Clerus per duos Procuratores idoneos plenam et suffici∣entem potestatem ab ipsis Capitulo et Clero habentes dictis die ac loco intesint ad faciend. et consentiend. hiis quae tunc ibidem de Communi Consilio divina sa∣vente clementia ordinari contigerit super negotiis ante∣dicts; et hoc nullatenus omittatis. T. Rege apud Stan∣hope, 7. die Augusti, Anno regni nostri primo. Per ip∣sum Regem. Eodem modo mandatum est Arch: Eborum Angliae Primai, et Episcopis subscriptis, viz. H. Lincoln Epis∣copo, I. Karliol Episcopo, L. Dunolm. Episcopo, L. Lon∣don Episcopo, &c. The 45. writ, in Claus. Anno 1 Ed. 3. parte 2. m. 16. dorso, runs thus. Rex,Summonitio Parliamenti. &c. Archiepis. Cantuar. &c. Cum super reforma∣tione Pacis inter Nos et nostros subditos, ex una parte, et Ro∣bertum de Brus ac Magnates et alios de Scotia ex parte al∣tera, certis Nunciis ex utraque parte missis, nuper apud No∣vum Castrum super Tynam habitus fuisset tractatus, certi Articuli sunt expositi reformationem praedictam contingentes;
Super quibus et aliis Coronam nostram tangentibus Parlia∣mentum nostrum apud Eborum. die Dominica prox. post fe∣stum Purificationis beatae Mariae virginis prox. futur. tenere, ac vobiscum et cum caeteris Praelatis, Magnatibus, et Pro∣ceribus regni nostri Colloquium et Deliberationem habere volumus et tractatum. Vobis mandamus, &c. Praemuni∣entes, &c. (as before.) T. Rege apud Coventr. 10 die Decembris. Per ipsum Regem. Eodem modo mandatum est subscriptis mutatis mu∣tandis, viz. Custod. Spiritualitatis Archiepiscopatus Can∣tuar. sede vacante, &c. The 46. writ (very observable) I meet with in Claus. Anno 2 E. 3. m. 31. dorso.Summonitio Parliamenti. Rex, &c. W. &c. Archiepisc. Eborum, &c. Cum in Parliamento nostro nuper apud Eborum convocato magna & ardua negotia Nos et itatum regni nostri tangentia proposita fuissent, quae propter absentiam quorundam Praelatorum et aliorum Magnatum et Procerum regni nostri, tunc non po∣terunt terminari: Super quibus et aliis diversis negotiis de assensu omnium Praelatorum Magnatum et Procerum in eo∣dem Parliamento nostro tunc existentium apud Northam∣ton à die Paschae prox futur. intres Septimanas Parliamen∣tum tenere, et vobiscum ac OMNIBVS aliis Praelatis, Mag∣natibus et Proceribus dicti regni Colloquium habere ordina∣vimus et tractatum. Vobis mandamus, &c. vestrumque con∣silium impensuri. Scientes pro certo quod aliquem Procura∣torem pro vobis, seu pro aliquo Praelato vel Magnate ad prae∣sens propter arduitatem negotiorum praedictorum, admittere non intendimus quoquo modo; Et Praemuniatis Decanum et Capit. &c. (as in former writs) Et quia ante haec tempora negotia in hujusmodi Parliamentis tractanda impedita fue∣runt ex eo quodSee my Plea for the Lords, p. 278, 279, 280. Cooks 4 Institut. p. 14. nonnulli Magnates cum multitudine tumul∣tuosa hominum armatorum ad Parliamenta illa accesserunt, et populus partium ubi Parliamenta illa tenta fuerunt damp nificatus existit et gravatus; volumus et firmiter praecipi∣mus, quod omnes et singuli de regno nostro cujuscunque status seu conditionis fuerint qui ad dictum Parliamentum venire
voluerint, modo debito et absque aliqua multitudine, sub fo∣risfactura omnium quae Nobis forisfacere poterint, accedant. Ita quod per ipsorum adventum indebitum negotia nostra non retardentur, seu patria in hac parte oneretur indebitè quovis modo. T. Rege apud Eborum quinto die Martii. Eodem modo mandatum est subscriptis mutatis mu∣tandis, viz. Custod. Spiritualitatis Archiepiscopatus Can∣tuar. sede vacante. Th. Episcopo Hereford. I. Episcopo Exon. &c. The 47. writ is this in Claus. Anno 2 E. 3. m. 23. dorso. Rex,Summonitio Consilii. &c. W. &c. Archiepiscopo Eborum, &c. Cum post Parliamentum nostrum apud Northampton nuper tentum, quaedam magna et ardua negotia Nos et Statum regni nostri ac jura nostra intime contingentia emerse∣rint, super quibus vobiscum, ac cum caeteris Praelatis, Magnatibus et Proceribus dicti regni nostri &c. apud Eborum die Dominica proxima post festum Sancti Iacobi Apostoli prox. futur. consilium et deliberationem habe∣re ordinavimus et tractatum. Vobis mandamus, &c. Praemunientes, &c. T. Rege apud Wigorn. 15 die Iunii. Per ipsum Regem Eodem modo mandatum est, &c. Custod. Spirit. Archi∣episcopatus Cant. sede vacante. Thomae Episcopo He∣reford, &c. The 48 is this writ recorded in Claus. An. 2. E. 3. m. 15 Dorso. Rex,Summonitio Consilii. &c. W. &c. Archiepiscopo Eborum; Cum nuper post Parliamentum nostrum quod apud Northampton ultro tenuimus, quaedam ardua et magna negotia emersissent, quae statum nostrum, et statum regni nostri intime con∣tingere dinoscuntur, super quibus apud Eborum postmo∣dum tractatum habuimus, sed propter absentiam quo∣rundam Praelatorum, Magnatum et Procerum non potu∣erunt tunc dicta negotia non sine gravi nostri dispendio discuti et terminari; Propter quod or dinavimus Parlia∣mentum nostrum apud Novam Sarum die Dominica
proxima post Quindenam Sancti Michaelis prox. futur. tenere, et vobiscum et cum caeteris Praelatibus, Mag∣natibus et Proceribus super dictis Negotiis et aliis quae noviter emerserurt Colloquium habere et Tractatum. Vobis mandamus in fide et dilectione quibus Nobis te∣nemini firmiter injungentes quod omni Excusatione postposita sitis personaliter apud Novam Sarum dicto die Nobiscum & cum caeteris Praelacis, Magnatibus et Pro∣ceribus praedict. super dictis negotiis tractaturi, vestrum{que} consilium impensuri: Et hoc sicut nos et honor nostrum, & tranquillitatem regni nostri diligitis nullatenus omit∣tatis; Ne quod absit ob vestri absentram contingat dicta negotia ulterius protelari; unde nobis et toto regno no∣stro irreparabile dispendium possit de facile generari. Scientes pro certo quod aliquem Procuratorem pro vobis, seu pro aliquo Praelato vel Magnate ad praesens, propter arduitatem negotiorum praedictorum excepta causa ne∣cessaria, admitti non intendimus quoquo modo. Et prae∣muniatis Decanum et Capitulum, &c. T. R. apud Clipston, 28 die Augusti. Per ipsum Regem. Eodem modo mandatum est S. Arch. Cantuar. &c. sub data 19 die Septembris Rege apud Risinge existente. Tho∣ma Episcopo Hereford; I. Episcopo Exon. &c. The 49. Writ is extant in Claus. An. 3 E. 3. m. 19 dorso. Rex,De Tractatu  habendo. &c. S. &c. Archiepiscopo Cantuar. Cum super maximis & arduis negotiis nos, et statum regni nostri, ac tranquillitatem et quietem populi ejusdem regni intime contin∣gentibus vobiscum, & cum caeteris, &c. die Dominica in crastino sanctae Mariae Magdalenae prox futur. apud Win∣desor Colloquium habere ordinavimus et tractatum. Vobis mandamus, &c. (without Praemunientes, &c.) T. Rege apud Cantuar. 12 die Iunii. Per ipsum Regem. Eodem modo subscriptum est mutatis mutandis, viz. W. Eborum Archiep. Angl. Primati, Thomae Epis. Heref. &c. The 50 is in Claus. Anno 4. E. 3. m. 41, dorso.
Rex, &c. R. &c. Archiepisc. Cantuar. &c.Summonitio Parliamenti. Quta po magnis et arduis negotiis nos, &c. multipliciter contin∣gentibus Parliamentum nostrum apud Winton. die Domi∣nica prox. ante festum Sancti Gregorii Papae. prox. futur. tenere, &c. Vobis mandamus, &c. Praemunientes Pri∣orem et Capitulum, &c. Et hoc sicut nos, et honorem nostrum, et vestrum, ac salvationem regni nostri diligitis nullatenus omittatis. T. Rege apud Eltham. 25 die Ja∣nuar. Eodem modo, &c. As last before this. The 51 Writ is in Claus. 4 E. 3. m. 32 dorso. Rex, &c. S. &c. Arch. Cantnar. &c.De Tractatu apud Oseney habendo. Quia super mag∣nis et urgentibus negotiis noviter emersis, Nos et regnum no∣strum intime contingentibus vobiscum, &c. die Lunae prox. post festum tanslationis Sancti Thomae Martyris prox. fu∣tur. apud Abbathiam de Oseney colloquium habere ordinavi∣mus et tractatum. Vobis mandamus, &c. without Prae∣munientes, &c. Et hoc sicut nos & konorem nostrum et v∣strum diligitis, &c. T. Rege apud. Wodstoke 5 die Iunii. Per ipsum Regem. Eodem modo, &c. 3 Bishops only named; the last A. Episcopo Wigorn, &c. The 52 is the Writ of Claus. 4 E. 3. m. 23. dorso. Rex, &c. S. &c.De Tractatu apud Not∣tingham ha∣bendo. Cantuar. Archiepiscopo. Cum propter quaedam ardua negotia, Nos, et statum regni nostri, et ali∣arum terrarum ostrarum intime contingentia quae noviter e∣merserunt vobiscum, &c. die lunae prox. ante festum sancti Lucae Evangelistae prox. futur. apud Nottingham ordina∣vimus habere colloquium et tractatum. Vobis, &c. without Praemunientes, &c. Et hoc sicnt nos et honorem nostrum ac vestrum, et utilitatem et quietem ejusdem regni ac terrarum praedictarum diligitis nullatenus omittatis: Scituri quod si quod absit, proper absentiam vestram dicta negotia contigerit retardari, ad vos prout convenit, graviter capiemus. T. Rege. apud Nottingham 6 die Septemb. Per ipsum Re∣gem. The Eodem modo is to 3 Bishops, the same with the last.
The 53 is this memorable writ in Claus. Anno 4 E. 3. m. 13 dorso. Rex &c. S. &c. Archiepiscopo Cantuar. &c.Summonitio Parliamenti. Qualiter negotia nos et statum regni nostri contingentia postquam suscipimus gubernacula regni nostri huc que in nostri dampnum et dedecs,See the cause of this writ and Parlia∣ment in my Plea for the Lords. p. 277. 278, &c. ac depauperationem populi no∣stri deducta erant, vestram credimus prudentiam non latere: Propter quod, non volentes hoc urgente consci∣entia ulterius sustinere, et desiderantes toto corde sta∣tum et regimen regni nostri, secundum juris et rationis exigentiam, ad honorem Dei, et tranquillitatem et pa∣cem sanctae Ecclesiae, ac totius populi ejusdem regni re∣formari; ordinavimus de consiio et assensn Praelatorum & Magnatum nobis assistentium Parliamentum nostrum apud Westm. die lunae prox. post festum sanctae Katerinae virgi∣nis prox. futur. et vobiscum, ac cum caeteris Praelatis, Magnatibus et Proceribus dicti regni habere super prae∣missi cum deliberatione plenaria consilium et tractatum. Vobis in fide et dilectione, &c. mandamus, quatenus omni excusatione voluntaria cessante dictis die et loco personaliter intersitis, nobiscum, &c. Et hoc sicut Nos et honorem nostrum et tranquillitatem regni nostri prae∣dicti diligitis nullatenus omittatis. Scientes quod di∣em sommonitionis dicti Parliamenti ob intensum deside∣rium quod habemus ut negotia satum ipsius regni nostri contingentia feliciter disponantur, de assensu Praelatorum et Magnatum praedictorum abbreviavimus ista vice:Nota. Et nolumus quod abbreviatio hujusmodi cedat alicui in praejudicium vel trahatur in consequentiam in futur. Et praemuniari faciatis Priorem et Capitulum Ecclesiae vestrae, &c. T. Rege apud Leicest. 23 die Octob. Per ipsum regem et consilium. Eodem modo mandatum est Archiepiscopo et Episcopis sub∣scriptis, viz. 3 named, the last, I. Exon. Episcopo, &c. The 54 is the Writ entred in Claus. 5 E. 3. m. 25. dorso. Rex, &c. S. &c. Archiepisc. Cant. &c.Summonitio Parliament. Quia prop∣ter
quaedam magna et ardua negotia Nos et Ducatum no∣strum Aquitaniae, ac alias terras nostras in pattibus trans∣marinis, (pro quibus ad easdem partes nuper solempnes nuncios nostros destinavimus) contingentia, quae in ulti∣mo Parliamento nostro ob aliquas certas causas termina∣ri non potuerunt, Parliamentum nostrum apud Westm. die Lunae in Crastino Quindenae Pachae prox. utur. te∣nere, et vobiscum, &c. (in the ordinary form without Praemunientes, &c.) Et hoc sicut honorem nostrum, et tranquillitatem et quietem dicti regni diligitis, &c. T. Rege apud Wyndesore 18. die Feb. Per ipsum Regem. The 55. notable writ is in Claus. An. 5 E. 3. m. 7. dorso. Rex, &c. S. Archiepis. Cantuar. &c. Cum pro mag∣nis et arduis negotiis Nos et statum ac regimen regni no∣stri specialiter contingentibus, de consilio Praelaiorum et Magnatum Nobis assistentium ordinavimus Parliamen∣tum nostrum apud Westm. in crastino Sancti Michaelis prox. futur. tenere, et vobiscum ac cum caeteris, &c. with Praemunientes Priorem, &c.Nota. Et quia ante haec tempora com∣munia regni nostrinegotia propter aliqnorum Praelatorum et Magnatum absentiam, qui ad Convocationes at Parliamen∣ta hujusmodi non ad dis Statutos, set diu postmodum vene∣runt, frequenter retardata fuerunt, ad commune dampnum populi regni nostri. Volumus, et vobis injungimus et manda∣mus, quod dicto crastino omni modo sitis ad Nos ad locum praedictum; Et praemuniatis praefatos Priorem, Archidiaconos, parcatis populi nostri laboribus et expensis. T. Rege apud Lincoln. 12 die Iulii. Per ipsum Regem. Eodem modo mandatum est, &c. W. Archiepiscopo E∣borum: and to 19. Bishops more, Abbati S. Augustini Cantuar. and 26 Abbots, and 3. Priors more, with this Addition in the writs to the Abbots, Priors and Nobles: Quia intentionis nostrae, &c. ut supra. The 56. is the writ in Claus. 5 E. 3. parte 2. m. 7. dorso. Rex, &c. S. &c. Archiepisc. Cantuar.De summoni∣tione collo∣quii & tracta∣tus haband. Quia super di∣versis et arduis negotiis Nos ac statum regni nostri et a∣liarum terrarum nostrorum quae post ultimum Parliamentum
nostrum evenerunt intime contingentibus et aliis, ordi∣navimus vobiscum, &c. Octabis S. Mchaelis prox. fu∣tur. apud Westm. habere Colloquium et Tractatum. Vo∣bis, &c. without Praemunientes, &c. Et hoc sicut Nos et honorem nostrum, et tranquilitatem dicti regni ac terra∣ram nostrarum praedictarum diligitis, &c. T. Rege apud Gildeford. 20. die Novembr. Per isum Regem. Consimili Brevia diriguntur. W. Archiepisc. Eborum, &c. and to 19. more Bishops, Priori S. Iohan. Ierus. in Anglia, Abati Wesm: and 16 Abbots more. The 57. is the writ in Claus. Anno 6 E. 3. m. 36. dor∣so. Rex, &c. S. &c. Archiepiscopo Cantuar. Cum mag∣nificus Princeps Philippus Rex Franciae, Consanguineus noster, et complues alii Reges et Principes Catholici, zelo devotionis accensi, ad recuperandam haereditatem Dominicam de manibus Inimicorum Crucis Christi, ad terram Sanctam jam ordinaverint iter suum, et Nos in∣stanter requifierin, ut una cum ipsis ad dictas partes ex∣causa prae icta veimus prosicisci: Nos iter praedictum assumentes multum cordi, ordinavimus Parliamentum nostrum apud Westm. die Lunae prox. post festum S. Gre∣gori Papae prox: futur. tenere, et vobiscum ac cum caere∣ris Praelatis, Magnatibus et Proceribus regni nostri super dicto itinere, et aliisn gotiis Nos, et statum dicti regni nostri, et aliarum terrarum nostrarum specialiter tangen∣tibus habere Collquium et Tractatum. Vobis igitur, &c. et hoc sicut Nos et honorem nostrum ac tranquillita∣tem et quietam regni nostri diigitis nullatenus omitta∣tis. Sciences pro certo, quod nisi evidens et manifesta ne∣cessitas id exposat, non intendimus Procuratores seu Ex∣cusatores pro vobis admittere ea vice propter arduitatem negotiorum praedictorum. Et praemuniatis, &c. T. Rege apud Westm. 27 die Ianuar. Eodem modo mandatum est, &c. W. Archiepis. Eborum: and 19. Bishops: Abbati S. Augustin. &c. 27. Abbots, and 3. Priors more. After whose names is inserted in the Roll.
Istis Abatibus et Prioribus subscriptis non solebat scri∣i in als Parliamentis, viz. Abbati de Teukesbury, Ab∣bati de Bardeneye, Abbati de Barlinges, Abbati de Bello, Abbati de Pershore, Abbati de Hayles, Abbati de Sancta Ositha, Abbati de Langedon, Abbati de Tavestoke, Abbati de Stratford, Abbati de Burton super Trentam, Abbati de Ford, Abbati de Wardon. Abbati de Whalley, Abbati de Fontibus, Abbati de Fornays, Abbati de Ryevall, Abbati Sancti Augustini Bristoll, Abbati de Cestr. Abbati de Bogh∣land, Abbati de Thame, Abbati de Lesnes, Abbati de Ger∣veux, Magistro Ordinis de Sempyngham, Priori de Sem∣pyngham, Priori de Bridelington, Priori Ecclesiae Christi de Twynham, Priori de Gisburn. Yet I find most of these summoned to ormer Parlia∣ments, under H. 3. and Ed. 1, 2. but afterwards omitted in most summons to Parliaments, but some of them in∣serted into summons to Councils. After this in the same Roll there issued out a second writ (the 58. in number) to the Archbishop of Canter∣bury, agreeing verbatim with the ormer to impensuri, and then subjoyning this unusual clause of praemunition to the Clergy the second time. Et licet injunximus singu∣lis Episcopis praedictis, quod quilibet eorum praemuniri faciat Priores et Decanos et Capitula ecclesiarum suarum Cathe∣dralium, necnon Archidiaconos et Clerum suarum Dioc. quod idem Priores, Decani et Archidiac. propriis personis suis, et quodlibet Capitulorū dictorum per urum, Clerumque cujusibet Diocaes. per duos Procuratores idoneos susscientem potest atem ab ipsis Capitulo et Clero habentes, dictis die et loco inter sint; ad faciendum et consentiendum hiis quae tunc ibidem de Com∣muni consilio divina favente clementia et super premissis con∣tigerit ordinari. Nolentes tamen dicta negotia nostra pro de∣fectu praemunitionum praedict arum si for san minus recte factae fuerint aliqualiter retardari; Vbis mandamus rogantes▪ quatenus praemunire faciatis Priores, Decanos et Capi∣tula Ecclesiarum Cathedralium, ac etiam Arcaidiaco∣nos et totum Clerum vestrae Provinciae, quod iidem Priores Dcani et Archidiaconi in propriis personis suis, et quodlibet
Capitulorum paedictorum per unum, Clerumque cujuslibet Diocaes. per duos Pocuratores sufficientem potestatem ab ipsis Capitulo et Clero habentes, sint in dicto die apud dictum locum ad consentiendum hiis quae tunc ibidem de communi consilio regni nostri ordinari contigerit sicut praedictum est. Et hoc nullaenus omittatis. Teste Rege apud Westm. 28 die Ianuarii. Consimiles literae diriguntur W. Arch. Eborum. Ang∣liae Primati, teste ut supra. The 59. writ is that of Claus. An 6 E. 3. m. 19. dorso. Rex, &c. S. &c. Archiepiscopo Cantuar. &c.Summonitio Parliamenti. Quia super diversis et arduis negotiis nos et statum terrae no∣strae Hyberniae specialiter contingentibs, ordinavimus Parliamentum nostrum apud Westm, in crastino Nativi∣tatis beatae Mariae virginis prox. futur. tenere, &c. with∣out Praemunientes, &c. Et hoc sicut Nos et honorem no∣strum, necnon tranquiliitatem regni et terrae nostrorum praedictorum diligitis, nullatenus omittatis. Teste Rege apud Wodestock 20 die Iulii. Per ipsum Regem. Eodem modo mandatum est Archiep. Eborum. and 19. Bishops more; Abbati S. Augustini Cantuar. and 27 Abbots more, and Priori S. Iohannis Ierusalem in Anglia, Priori de Spalding, Priori de Lewes. The 60. writ is extant in Claus. 6 E. 3. m. 9. dorso. Rex, &c. S. &c. Archiepisc. Cantuar. &c. Cum post Parliamentum nostrum quod apud Westm. ultimo tenui∣mus, quaedam magna et ardua Negotia versus partes Bo∣reales quae statum regni nostri et Coronae nosirae regiae intime contingunt emerserunt, super quibus celere et festinum remedium cum deliberatione provida apponere Nos oportet, propter quod de Consisio Praelatorum et Magnatum Nobis assistentium Parliamentum nostrum a∣pud Eborum: die Veneris prox. ante festum S. Nicolai prox. futur. tenere, et vobiscum, &c. without Praemunien∣tes, &c. Et hoe sicut Nos et honorem nostrum ac salvatio∣nem Coronae nostrae regiae, et tranquillitatem partium dicti regni nostri diligitis, nullatenus omittatis. Sci∣entes quod propter arduitatem negotiorum praedicto∣rum,
ceslame impedimento legiimo praelentia vestra carere non posumus ista vice. Teste Rege apud Ebo∣rum 20 die Octobris, Per ipsum Regem et Consili∣um. Eodem modo mandatum est Archiepiscopo Eborum. to 19. Bishops, 29. Abbots, and 3. Priors last before na∣med. The 61 writ is that of Claus. Anno 7 E. 3. pars 2 m. 3. dorso. Rex dilecto sibi in Christo Priori Eclesiae Christi Cantu∣ar.Summoni∣tio Parlia∣menti. Custodi spiritualitatis Achiepiscopatus Cantuar. sede vaante, &c. Quia pro diversis et arduis negotiis Nos, &c. Parliamentum nostrum apud Eborum die Lunae prox. ante fesum sancti Petri in Catedra prox. futur. teneri, &c. (as in other summons) Teste Rege apud Walyngord 4 die Januarii Per Breve de privato sigillo. Eodem modo mandatum est Archiepiscopo Eborum. 19 Bishops, 27 Abbots, and 3 Priors forenemed. After which there iued out other writs to the said Gardian of the Spiritualties of Canterbury, and the Archbishop of York, dated the same day and place, verbatim agreeing with the former, with this addiional Clause in the close thereof. Et licet singulis Episcopis praedictis injunxerimus quod quilibet eoum praemunire faciat, Prioes, Decanos, &c. as in the 58 writ before cited. T. ut supra. The 62 is the writ of Claus. 8 E. 3. m. 18. doso. Rex, &c. I. &c. Archiepiscopo Cantuar.Summoni∣tio Parlia∣menti. Quia, &c. nos et statum regni nostri, et aliaum terra um nostrarum specialiter contingentibus Parliamentum nostrum apud Westm. die lune prox. post festum exaltationis sanctae Crucis prox utur. tenere, &c. Praemunientes, &c. Teste Rege apud Redinges 24 die Iulii. Per ipsum Regem. Eodem modo mandatum est Arch. Eborum. to 18. Bishops, 27 Abbots▪ and 3. Priots more. Then follows in the same Roll another special writ to the two Archbishops, agreeing with the former, except in this addition. Et licet singulis Episcopis praedictis in∣jnxerimus, &c. as in the 58. and 61. Teste ut supra. Per ipsum Regem.
The 63. writ is recorded in Claus. 9 E. 3. mem. 28. dorso. Rex, &c. I. &c. Archiep. Cantuar.Summoni∣tio Parlia∣menti. Quia, &c. Parli∣amentum nostrum apud Eborum in crastino Ascentionis Domini prox. futur. tenere, &c. Praemunientes, &c. Teste Rege apud Notingham 3. die Aprilis. Per ipsum Regem. Eodem modo mandatum est, Arch. Eborum. 18 other Bishops, 28. Abbots, 3. Priors. Then follows ano∣ther writ of the same Form and date to both the Arch∣bishops, with an Et licet, &c. as before, . 53. The 64. is in Claus. 9. E. 3. m. 8. dorso. Rex, &c. J. Archiep. Cantuar. Quia, &c. Parliamen∣tum nostrum apud Westm. die Lunae prox. post diem Do∣minicam in medio Quadragesimae prox. futur. &c. Prae∣munientes, &c. T. Rege apud Berewic. super Twedam 22. die Ianuarii. Per ipsum Regem. Eodem modo mandatum est, Archiep. Eborum 19. other Bishops, and 3. Priors. After which there issued writs to both the Archbishops of the same date, with Et licet. &c. superadded as before, n. 58. Peripsum Regem. The 65. writ is entred, Claus. Anno 10 E. 3. m. 5. doso. Rex, &c. J. &c. Archiepisc. Cantuar.Summonitio Parliamenti. Quia &c. Par∣liamentum nostrum apud Eborum▪ die Lunae in festo Sancti Hillarii prox. futur. tenere, &c. Teste Rege apud Botheuil 29. die Novembris. Per ipsum Regem. Eodem modo mandatum est, Archiepisc. Eborum. 18 other Bishops. Custodi Spn ualitatis Episcopatus Nor∣wic. sede vacante, Abbots 28. Priors 3. These writs are seconded with 2. other writs of the same date and form to both the Archbishops, with the addition of the Clause: Et licet singulis Episcopis praedictis injunxerimus quod quilibet eorum praemunire faciat Priores, &c. ut supra, n. 58. The 66. writ is registred Claus. 11 E. 3. pars 1. m. 15. dorso. Rex, &c. J. &c. Arch. Cant.De venicndo ad Consilium apud Staun. Quia super diversis et urgen∣tissimis negotiis Nos et statum regni nostri, et aliarum
terrarum nostrarum, &c. apud Staunf. die Veneris in cra∣stino Ascentionis Domini prox. futur. habere ordinavi∣mus colloquium et tractatum, &c. Vobis mandamus, &c. quod dictis die et loco personaliter intersitis Nobiscum, et cum caeteris Praelatis, Magnatibus et Proceribus prae∣dictis, super dictis negotiis tractaturi vestrumque consi∣lium impensuri. Et hoc sicut Nos et honorem nostrum et salvationem et tranquillitatem regni et terrarum no∣strarum praedictarum diligitis modis omnibus faciatis, ne per vestri absentiam expeditio negotiorum nostrorum it a urgentium retardaretur, sen aliquo modo quod absit, dif∣feratur. Teste Rege apud Westm. 24 die Aprilis. Per ipsum Regem. Edoem modo mandatum est Archiepisc. Eborum, et Episcopis, ac Comitibus et Magnatibus et aliis subscriptis DE CONSILIO REGIS existentibus mutatis mutandis: there being only the names of 8. Bishops subscribed, without any Abbots or Priors, and 10 Earls, 23 Lords and Barons, 5. Justices, and 3. others of the Kings Council: but no writs at all for electing Knights, Citizens, or Burgesses: So as this was no Summons to a Parliament, but rather to a Privy Council or Consultation. The 67. writ is extant in Claus. 11. E. 3. pars 1. m. 8. dorso. Rex, &c. I. &c. Archiep. Cantuar.De veniendo ad Consilium. Quia super qui∣busdam arduis et urgentissimis negotiis quae per solempnes Nuncios nostros quos ad partes transmarinas transmissimus Nobis jam sunt plenius intimata, et quae Nos, et statum reg∣ni nostri Coronaeque jura specialiter et intimis contingent, vobiscum et cum aliis Praelatis, Magnatibus et Proceribus ipsius regni nostri Westm. die Lunae prox post festum Sanctae Margaretae Virginis prox. futur. Colloquium habere volumus et tractatum; Vobis in fide et dilectione, &c. mandamus quod cessante excusatione quacunque dictis die et loco personaliter intersitis Nobiscum, et cum caeteris Praelatis, Magnatibus et Proceribus praedictis super dictis negotris tractaturi ve∣strumque consilium impensuri. Et hoc sicut Nos et honorem nostrum, et tranquillitatem et salvationem regni Coronaeque
nostrorum diligitis, nullatenus omucatis. Scientes quod propter arduitatem et magnitudinem negotiorum praedictorum absentiam vestram ad diem illum nequimus nec volumus a∣liqualiter excusare. Teste Rege apud Staunford 21 die Iu∣nii. Per ipsum Regem. Eodem modo mandatum est Episcopis, Abbatibus et Prioribus subscriptis, vz. 15 Bishops, 25 Abbots, 4 Priors (the last of Sempyngham oft omitted before) 10. Earls, 38 Nobles and great men. The 68. is this Notable writ in Claus. 11 E. 3. part 2. m. 40. dorso. Rex, &c. I. &. Archiepisc. Cantuar. &c.De Consilio summonito. Cum de assensu Praelatorum, Magnatum & Procerum regni nostri ac aliorum de Consilio nostro, ad partes transmarinas una cum nonullis Magnatibus et Proceribus, et aliis Pidelibus nostris, ex crtis et legitimis causis infra breve, Domino duce, ordinavimus Nos transfretare, et prae caeteris insideat Nobis cordi, quod pax nostra in regno nostro in nostra absenia in∣violabiliter observetur, et idem regnum nostrum ab hostium incursibus tueatur. Nos autem passagium nostrum praedictum ad dictas partes super custodia dicti regni nostri et conserva∣tione pacis nostrae in codem regno dum sic absentes fuermus, ct aliis arduis et urgentissimis negotiis, tam Nos et Statum ejusdem regni altarumque terrarum nostrarum, quam eun∣dem transitum nostrum spcialiter contingentibus, vobiscum et cum caeeris Praelatis et Magnatibus ipsius regni apud Westm. die Veneris prox. ante festum Sancti Michelis prox. futur: habore volumus Colloquium et tractatum. Et ideo vobis in fide et dilectione quibus nobis tenemini, sirmiter injungendo mandamus, quod pensatis tanta nostrorum et dict regni negotiorum arduitate et periculis imminentibus, absque excsatione qu cunque dictis die et loco personaliter inter sitis, Nbiscum et cum caeteris Praelatis, Magnatibus et Proce∣ribus praedictis super dictis negotiis tractauri, vestrumque consilium impensuri. Et hoc sicut honorem nostrum ac sal∣vationem et tranquillitatm dicti regni nostri et Ecclesiae san∣ctae diligitis modis omnibus faciatis. Ne, quod absit, per vestri absentiam expeditio negotiorum nostrorum praedicto∣rum
retardetur seu quomodolibet differetur. Et praemunien∣tes Priorem, &c. Teste Roge apud Westm. 18 die Augusti. Per ipsum Regem. Eodem modo mandatum est W. Arch. Eborum; to 15. Bishops more; Custod. Spiritualitatis Episcopatus Cicestr. sede vacante: 29. Abbots and 3. Priors. The 69. is the writ in the same Roll and membrana, to summon a Convocation of the Clergy at Pauls. Rex, &c. J. &c. Archiepisc. Cantuar. &c. Cum de as∣sensu Praelatorum, &c. usque imparturi (ut supra, et tunc sic.) Et quia negotia praedicta salvationem et quictem regni nostri et Ecclesiae sanctae, c universorum ac singulorum ipsi∣us regni specialiter contingunt; Vobis mandamus, rogantes, quod Episcopos, Praelatos & Clerum vestrae Provinciae apud Ecclesiam Sancti Pauli London, in crastino S. Michaelis prox. futur. convocari fac. Ita quod tam dicti Episcopi quam Decani, et Priores Ecclesiarum Catedralium, & Archidi a∣coni et Abbates exempti et non exempti quos expedire vide∣ritis personaliter, et quodlibet Capitulorum praedictarum Ec∣clesiarum Cathedralium per unum, et (lerici cuuslibet Dioc. per duos Procuratores sufficientem potestatem habentes, apud dictam Ecclesiam Sancti Pauli in praedicto crastino Sancti Michaelis intersint. ad tractandum et consulendum super prae∣missis una vobiscum et aliis per Nos tunc mittendis, et ad consentiendum hiis quae tunc ibidem pro communi defensione et utilitate divina favente clementia contigerit ordinari. Teste ut supra. Per ipsum Regem. Consimile Breve dirigitur W. Archiepiscopo Eborum Angliae Primati, quod convocare fac. Praelatos, &c. de Provincia sua apud Eorum die Iovis prox. post Octabis S. Michaelis prox. futur. Teste u supra. The 70. is this Notable writ in Claus. Anno 11 E. 3. pars 2. m 11. dorso. Rex, &c. J. &c. Archiep Cantuar. &c.Summonitio Parliamenti. Quia tam super urgentissimis negotiis Nos et statum regni nostri, ac aliarum terrarum nostrraum, ac jura nostra et Coronae nostrae tan∣genibus, quam etiam super expeditione quorundam altorum arduorum negotiorum, quae venerabiles Patres Sanctae Ro∣manae
Ecclesiae Cardinales, ad Nos jam in Angliam, per Do∣mium Summum Pontificem transmissi, Nobis ex parte ejusdem Summi Pontificis et dictae sedis specialiter nuncia∣runt, PARLIAMENTUM nostrum apud Westm. in crastino Purificationis beatae Mariae virginis prox, futur. te∣nere, ac ibidem vobiscum et cum caeteris Praelatis, &c. Et hoc sicut Nos et honorem nostrum, et tranquillitatem et quie∣tem dictorum regni et terrarum diligitis, nullatenus omitta∣tis. Praemunientes Priorem, &c. Scientes insuper, quod tam proper dictorum negotiorum arduitatem, quam pro co quod nonnulla alia nostri et regni nostri negotia in diversis Parliamentis nostris ante haec tempora tentis,Nota. propter absenti∣am Praelatorum et Magnatum ejusdem regni qui eisdem Par∣liamentis, una cum aliis ipsius regni Proceribus personaliter juxta mandata nostra eis inde directis interfuisse debuerant FUERUNT NON ABSQUE NOSTRI & REGNI NOSTRI INCOMMODO SAEPIUS RETARDATA, Procuratores, seu excusationem aliquam pro vobis ligitimo cessante impedimento, admittere nolumus ista vice. Teste Rege apud Westm. 20 die Decembris. Per ipsum Re∣gem. Eodem modo mandatum est Arch: Eborum. 16. Bishops more, and H. Episcopo Lincoln. vel ejus Vicario generali, ipso Episcopo in remotis agente: 28. Abbots, and 4. Priors. The 71. is this observable writ of Claus. 12 E. 3. pars 2. m. 32. dorso. Rex, &c. Archiepisc. Eborum, &c.De Consilio summonitio. Cum super defen∣sione et salvatione regni nostri ac jurium Coronae nostrae de assensu Praelatorum, Comitum, Baronum et Commu∣nitatis regni nostri sumus jam cum exercitu nostro ad partes transmarinas, annuente Domino, personaliter pro∣secturi: et dilectum et fidelem nostrum Edwardum Du∣cem Cornubiae er Comitem Cestriae, filium nostrum pri∣mogenitum Custodem dicti regni nostri, et locum no∣strum tenentem in eodem regno constituerimus, dum sic Nos absentare contigerit, vel alias nostrae placuerit vo∣luntari: ac intimius insidat cordi nostro, quod Pax nostra
in ipso regno tam in nostra absentia quam in praesentia il∣laesa firmius conservetur, et idem regnum et populus no∣ster ibidem ab hostium incursibus tueantur. Per quod de assensu Consilii nostri ordinavimus, quod super prae∣missis et aliis arduis et urgentibus negotiis nos et Statum regni nostri multipliciter contingntibus QUODDAM MAGNUM CONSILIUM apud Northmpton, in cra∣stino S. Iacobi Apostoli prox. futur. teneatur; Vobis in fide et dilectione quibus Nobis tenemini firmiter injun∣gendo mandamus, quod attentis praemissorum arduitate et imminentibus periculis, quacurque excusatione ces∣sante dictis die et loco personaliter intersitis, cum praefa∣to Custode et caeteris Praelatis, Magnatibus et Proceri∣bus regni nostri, quos ibidem ea de causa convocari feci∣mus, super negotiis praedictis tractaturi, vestrumque consilium impensuri. Et hoc sicut et honorem nostrum, ac salvationem et tranquillitatem dicti regni nostri et Ecclesiae sanctae, diligitis, modis omnibus faciatis; ne quod absir, per vestram absentiam expeditio negotiorum nostrorum praedictorum retardetur, seu quomodolibet differatur. Praemunientes Decanum et Capitulum Ec∣clesiae vestrae, &c. Teste Rege apud Walton. 15 die Iunii, Per ipsum Regem. Eodem modo mandatum est &c. to 15 Bishops more, H. Episcopo Lincoln. vel ejus Vicario generali, ipso E∣piscopo in remotis agenti, R. Electo London, confirma∣to. Then follows the like writ to J. Archbishop of Can∣terbury, as issued to Yorke: with this different clause af∣ter; Excusatione cessante; viz. vel Vicariis vestris gene∣ralibus, vobis in partibus transmarinis agentibus, dictis die et loco personaliter intersitis, &c. Et vos, vel dictus vicarius vester generalis, praemuniatis, &c. (ut supra, mutatis mutan∣dis) Teste ut supra. Consimile Breve dirititur R. Episcopo Dunolm, and to 28. Abbots, and 4. Priors. The 72. is the writ registred in Claus. 14 E. 3. parte 2. m. 28. dorso.
Rex, &c. I.Summonitio Parliamenti. &c. Archiepic. Cantuar. &c. vel ejus Vicario generali ipso Archiepiscopo in remotis agenti, Salu∣tem. Quia de avisamento Consilii nostri ordinavimus, quod super arduis et urgentibus negotiis, tam Nos et expeditionem guerrae nostrae, ac jura nostra et Coronae nostrae in partibus transmarinis, quam statum et defensionem, regni nostri, et aliarum terrarum nostrarum contingentibus Parliamentum apud Westm. ad Quindena S. Michaelis prox. futur. tenea∣tur: et ibidem vobiscum ac cum caeteris Praelatis, &c. Vo∣bis, &c. mandamus, quod consideratis dictorum negotiorum arduitate et periculis imminentibus, cessante quacunque ex∣cusatione dictis die et loco personaliter intersitis, Nobiscum, seu cum Custode regni nostri, si tunc contigerit Nos abesse, ac caeteris Praelatis, Magnatibus, &c. consilium impensuri. Et hoc sicut Nos & honorem nostrum, ac salvationem regni, ter∣rarum et jurium nostrorum praedictorum, ac Ecclesiae sanctae, expeditionemque dictorum negotiorum nostrorum diligitis, nullatenus omittatis. Ne quod absit, per vestram absentiam (quam cessante impedimento legitimo excusare aliqualiter nolumus ista vice) expeditio dictorum negotiorum nostrorum retardetur, seu quomodolibes differatur. Praemunientes, &c. Teste Custode praedicto apud Windesore, 25. die Aug. Per ipsum Regem ac dictum Custodem et Consilium. Eodem modo mandatum est Arch. Eborum, &c. and 16. Bishops more, R. Dunolm. Episcopo, vel ejus Vi∣cario generali ipso Episcopo in remotis agente: and so H. Lincoln Episcopo, T. Hereford Episcopo, vel ejus Vi∣cario generali, &c. Eodem modo mandatum est, to▪ 25 Abbots and 4. Priors. After which follow writs to the Archbishop of York, and to the Archbishop of Canterbury or his Vicar General in his absence of the like form: with an, Et licet singulis Episcopis regni nostri, &c. Nolentes tamen dicta negotia no∣stra pro defectu praemunitionum praedictarum si minus rectè factae fuerint, retardari, &c. (as n. 58.) Teste Custode apud Wyndesor. 26. die Augusti. Per ipsum Regem et dictum Custodem & Consilium.
The 73. is this remarkable writ, Claus. An. 13 E. 3. pars 2. m. 1. dorso. Rex,Summonitio Parliamenti. &c. I. &c. Archiepisc. Cantuar. &c. Cum quae∣dam ardua et urgentia Negotia, quae Nos et honorem nostrum, statumque regni nostri contingebant in Pariia∣mento nostro apud Westm. Quindena S. Michaelis prox. ptaeterito summonito, Praelatis, Proceribus et Commu∣nitate dicti regni ibidem existentibus exposita extitis∣sent; super quibus eadem Communitas tempus ad deli∣beandum petiit, supplicans aliud Parliamentum statim infra breve, ut tunc deliberatione hujusmodi habita va∣leret expositis maturius responderi. Per quod de avisa∣mento Praelatorum et Procerum praedictorum, necnon ad dictae Communitatis hujusmodi supplicationem, or∣dinavimus, quod super hiis et aliis urgentissimis negoti∣is, tam Nos et expeditionem guerrae nostrae in partibus transmarinis, quam defensionem ejusdem regni, jurium et terrarum nostrarum contingentibus, Parliamentum nostrum apud Westm. in Octabis S. Hillarii prox. futur. teneatur; Et ibidem vobiscum, &c. Vobis, &c. man∣damus, quod dictorum negotiorum arduitate, pericu∣lisque et necessitate imminentibus ponderatis, excusa∣tione quacunque cessante, dictis die et loco personaliter intersitis Nobiscum, seu cum Custode regni nostri, si tunc conigerit nos abesse, ac caeteris Praelatis, &c. (as in the last writ before) Praemunientes, &c. ad consenienum &c. Teste Custode praedicto apud Langele, 16 die No∣vembris. Per ipsum Regem, et dictum Custodm et Consilium. Eodem modo mandatum est Arch. Eborum, and to 18 Bishops more, 29 Abbots, and 4. Priors. After which follows two other writs dated 20 die Novembris, to both the Archbishops in the same form; with the clause of Et licet singulis Episcopis, &c. as before, n. 58. Per ipsum Regem, et dictum Custodem et Consilium. The 74. is this special writ different in one memorable clause from all the precedent in Claus.De Parlia∣mento sum∣onito. Anno 14 E. 3. pars 1. m. 33. dorso.
Rex, venerabili in Christo patri, I. eadem gratia Ar∣chiepiscopo Cantuar, totius Angliae Primati, Salutem. Quia super diversis arduissimis et urgentissimis Nego∣tis, Nos et statum ac etiam defensionem regni Angliae, quam expeditionem guerrae nostrae, ac jura Coronae no∣strae, terrasque et Dominica nostra in partibus transma∣rinis multipliciter contingentibus Parliamentum no∣strum apud Westm. di Mercrii prox. post diem Domi∣nicam in medio Quadragesimae prox. futur. tenere, et ibidem vobiscum, ac cum caeteris Praelatis, Magnatibus et Procetibus dicti regni Colloquium habere volumus et tractatum. Vobis in fide, &c. mandamus, quod con∣sideratis dictorum Negotiorum arduitate et periculis necessitate que imminentibus, cessane quacunque excu∣saione, dictis die et loco personaliter intersitis, Nobis∣cum, et cum caeteris Praelatis, Magnatibus et Proceribus praedictis super dictis Negotiis tractaturi, vestrumque Consilium impensri. Et hoc sicut Nos et honorem no∣strum ac salvationem ejusdem regni nostri Angliae caete∣ratumque terrarum ac jurium nostrorum praedictorum ac negotiorum expeditionem diligitis nullatenus omitatis. Et praemunentes Priorem, &c. Non mirantes ex hoc quod stilum nostrum consuetum mut vimus ET REGEM FRANCIAE NOS FACIAMUS nominari jam (in the beginning of this writ at large to the Archbishop, though omitted for brevity in the Clause Roll, beginning only with Rex, instead ofSee the St∣tute of 14 E. 3 Stat. 1. Prol. Stat. 2 c. 1. & Sta. 4. Cooks 1 Inst. f. 7. b. Edwardus Dei graa Rex Angiae et FRANCIAE, &c.) diversae subsunt causae per quas hoc facere necessarie nos oportet, et quas vobis et aliis Prae¦latis et Magnatibus necnon Communitatibus ejusdem regni nostri Angliae ad dictum Parliam. plenius expo∣nemus. Scientes insuper quod nolumus, nec intentio∣nis nostrae exisit, quod ex assumptione nominis et hono∣ris eorundem dicto regno ac terrae Angliae, aut statui seu juribus eorundem prae judicietur, aut aliqualiter dero∣getur, set quod eidem regno uberius subveniatur et re∣le vetur maturius, illud idem, et po securitate in hac par∣re ad dictum Parliamentum si opus fuerit, ordinabimus,
quod juxta consilium vestrum et aliorum Praelatorum, Magnatum caeterorum{que} ibidem convocatorum viderimus oportunum. Teste Rege apud Harwich. 21 die Februa∣rii. Per ipsum Regem. Eodem modomandatum est Arch. Eborum, and to 17. Bishops more. T. Episcopo Hereford, vel ejus Vicar. gene∣rali, ipso Episcopo in remotis agente, W. Electo London cn∣firmato, 29 Abbots, and 4. Priors. After which there are two writs of the self-same date and form directed to both the Archbishops; with this usual additional clause. Et licet singulis Episcopis, &c. as before, n. 58. The 75. writ of summons is that in Claus.De Parlia∣mento sum∣monito. Anno 14 E. 3. pars 1. m. 23. dorso. Rex, &c. I. &c. Archiepisc. Cantuar. &c. Cum pro defensione et salvatione regni nostri Angliae, ac recuperatio∣ne jurium nostrorum et Coronae nostrae sumus cum Magnati∣bus et aliis ejusdem regni ad partes transmarinas, annuente Domino personaliter profecturi; et per-dilectum et fidelem nostrum Edwardum Ducem Cornubiae, et Comitem Cestriae filium nostrum primogenitū CUSTODEM dicti regn nostri Angliae, et locū nostrū tenentē in eodem regno constituerimus dum Nos sie absentari contigerit, vel alias nostrae placuerit voluntati; ac intimius insideat cordi nostro quod pax nosra in ipso regno tam in absentia quā in praesetia illsafirma obser∣vetur, dem regnū et p pulis noster ibidem ab hostiū incursu tueantur; per quod de assensu Consilii nostri ordinavimus, quod super praemissis t aliis arduis et urgentibus negotiis Nos et Statum dicti regni nostri Angliae, et expeditionem diverso∣rum urgentissimorum negotiorum nostrorum multipliciter contingentibus, quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud Westm. ad diem Mercurii prox. post festum Translationis S. Thomae Martyris prox. futur. teneatur. Vobis in side, &c. personaliter intersitis, cum praefato Custode ac caeteris Praelatis, &c. quos ibidem ea de causa convocari mandavi∣mus, super dictis negotiis tractaturi vestrumque consilium impensuri. Et hoc sicut Nos et honorem nostrum, ac salva∣tionem et tranquillitatem regni nostri Angliae et Ecclesiae
sanctae diligitis modis omnibus faciatis; Ne quod absit, per vestri absentiam expeditio negotiorum nostrorum praedicto∣rum retardetur, seu quomodolibet differatur. Et praemunia∣tis, &c. Teste Rge apud Westm. 30 die Maii. Per ipsum Regem. Eodem modo mandatum est, A. Episcopo Winton, and 18. Bishops more, 29 Abbots, and 4. Priors. The 76. writ is recorded in Claus. 15 E. 3. pars 1. m. 37 dorso.De Parlia∣mento sum∣montio. Rex, &c. J. &c. Archiepisc. Cantuar. Quia super di∣versis et arduis negotiis tam Nos, statum et defensionem regni nostri Angliae, quam expeditionem guerrae nostrae, ac jura Coronae nostrae, et terras et Dominica nostra in partibus transmarinis multipliciter contingentibus, Par∣liamentum nostrum apud Westm. in die Lunae prox. post Quindena Paschae prox. futur. enere, et ibidem, &c. (a in the 73. precedent writ.) Teste Rege apud Wodestoke. Per ipsum Regem. Eodem modo mandatum est to 18. Bishops, 29 Ab∣bots, and 4. Priors. The 77. writ is in Claus. Ano. 16 E. 3. pars 1. m. 39. dorso.De Consilio Summonito. Rex, &c. J. &c. Archiepisc. Cantuar. &c. Quia super quibusdam arduis negotiis Nos et statum dicti regni Angliae ac aliarum terrarum nostrarum, ac etiam recupe∣rationem jurium nostrorum specialiter contingentibus, Vobiscum et cum caeteris Praelatis ac Magnatibus dicti regni nostri apud Westm. die Lunae in crstino Claus. Paschae prox. futur. colloquium habere volumus et tractatum. Vobis, &c. Et hoc sicut Nos et honorem nostrum, ac salvationem et defensionem dicti regni no∣stri diligitis nullatenus omittatis. Teste Rege apud Westm. 25 die Februarii. Per ipsum Regem. Eodem modo mandatum est to 7. Bishops, but no Ab∣bots, Priors, Sherifs, or Warden of the Cinqueports, and so no summons to a Parliament, but a Council, as the Margin stiles it. The 77. writ is entred in Claus. 16 Edw. 3. pars
2. m. 22. dorso; with one unusual clause. Rex,De Consilio summonito. &c. J. &c. Archiepisc. Cantuar. &c. Quia pro defensione et salvatione regni nostri Angliae, ac expediti∣one guerrae nostrae Franciae, passagium nostrum ad partes transmarinas duximus ordinandum. Nos de bono regi∣mine dicti regni, ac conservatione Pacis nostrae, ac dis∣cretione provida negotiorum nostrorum, ac aliorum pub∣licam utilitatem concernen. dum sic absentes furimus merito solliciti, quoddam CONSILIUM ET TRAC∣TATUM tenendum vobiscum, et cum aliis Praelatis, Magnatibus, et Communitatibus dicti regni nostri super hiis apud Westm. die Mercurii prox. post festum S. Ed∣wardi Confessors prox. futur. per Edw. Ducem Cornubiae, et Comitem Cestriae, filium nostrum carissimum, quem Custodem dicti regni constituimus, Nobis sic agentibus in remotis, ordinavimus. Et ideovobis, &c. dictis die et loco personaliter intersitis cum praefaro Custode, nomi∣ne nostro, et cum caeteris Praelatis, Magnatibus et Com∣munitatibus antedictis, super praemissis ractaturi, ve∣strumque consilium impensuri. Praemunientes, &c. et hoc sicut Nos et honorem nostrum, et salvationem et de∣fensionem dicti regni diligitis nullatenus omittatis. Sci∣turi quod gratitudinem et ingratitudinem quas Nobis in absentia nostra jam ostendi contigerit plus ponderabi∣mus, quam si fuerant dum praesentes essemus, et ea cura∣bimus juxta merita seu demerita compensare. Teste Re∣ge apud Gastry 12. die Sept. Per ipsum Regem et Con∣silium. Consimili Brevia diriguntur, mutatis mutandis sub ea∣dem data, unto 17. Bishops, 20. Abbots, and 2. Pri∣ors. The 79. is this notable writ recorded in Claus. 16 E. 3. parte 2. m.De veniendo ad Consilium. 13. Dorso. Rex, &c. J. &c. Archiep. Cantuar. &c. Quia jam super expeditione guerrae nostrae sub spe saelicis eventus agimus in remotis, et super quibusdam tam personam quam statum et bonum regimen regni nostri Angliae sum∣me concernentibus vestrum habere vellemus auxilium
et consilium providum et festium; intime vo rogantes mandamus, quod die Sabbato in crastino S. Luciae prox: futur. fitis personaliter apud Westm. ibidem cum Edward filio nostro carissimo Duce Cornubiae, CUSTODE Ang∣liae, ac aliis de Consilio nostro, super his tractaturi ve∣strumque consilium et auxilium, prout requiret dicto∣rum negotiorum qualitas, impensuri. Et hoc sicut Nos et honorem nostrum et expeditionem nostram diligitis nullatenus omittatis. Teste praefato Custode apud Ke∣nyngton 20. die Novembris. Per ipsum Regem et Con∣silium. Eodem modo mandatum est, to 5. more Bishops, 5. Earls, 17. Lords and Great men; without any Abbots, Priors, writs to Sherifs, Assistants, or Warden of the Cinque-ports. It being only a Council, not a Parlia∣ment. The 80. writ very observable in the recital, is regi∣stred in Claus. Anno 17 E. 3. parte 1. m. 25. dorso.Summonitio Parliamenti. Rex, &c. J. &c. Archiepisc. Cantuar. &c. Quia ob re∣verenam Domini Summi Pontificis et sedis Apostolicae, et instantiam venerabilium Patrum Dominorum Penestrini et Tusculani Episcoporum, sacrosanctae Ecclesiae Romanae Car∣dinales, et dictorum Summi Pontificis atque Sedis Nuncio∣rum, propter haec ad Nos specialiter transmissorum, quaedam Trenga, sub spe pacis honorabilis inter Nos et adversaris no∣stros Franciae jam est inita, et ad tractandum de dieta Pace iuxta conditionem super hoc habitam, solempnes Nuntios ci∣tra festum Nativitatis S. Johannis Baptistae habemus ad Romanam Curiam destinari, propter haec et alias causas vari∣as et arduas commodum publicum nostri et nostrorum fideli∣um concernentes, ordinavimus Parliamentum nostrum apud Westm. die Lunae prox. post Quindenam Pasch. prox. fu∣tur. tenere, et vobiscum, ac cum caeteris Praelatis, Magnati∣bu et Proceribus regni nostri Angliae Colloquium habere volumus et Tractatum. Vobis in fide, &c. mandamus, quod considerata dictorum negotiorum arduitae, quatenus excusa∣tione cessante dictis die et loco personaliter inter sitis Nobis∣cum, &c. Et praemuniatis, &c. Teste Custode praedicto
apud Byfleet 29 die Februarii. Per ipsum Regem et Consilium. Eodem modo mandatum est, to 19. Bishops, 26. Abbots, and 2. Priors. The 81. writ is thus recorded, Claus. Anno 18 E. 3. pars 1. m. 14. dorso. Rex, &c. I. &c. Archiep.Summonitio Parliamenti. Cantuar. &c. Quia pro quibudam arduis et urgentibus negotiis honorem Dei, et decus et defensionem Ecclesiae Anglicanae, ac necessa∣rium et salubre Regimen populiet regni nostri. Angliae summe concernentibus, ordinavimus Parliamentum no∣strum apud Westm. die Lunae prox. post Octab. S. Trini∣tatis prox. futur. tenere, ac vobiscum ibidem, ac cum cae∣teris, &c. firmiter injungimus et mandamus quatenus ex∣cusatione quacunque postposita, arditate negoti∣orum praedictorum considerata, dictis die et loco personaliter intersitis Nobiscum, si praesentes fuerimus ibidem, seu cum deputandis a Nobis si abesse Nos con∣tigerit, et cum caeteris Praelatis, &c. Et praemuniatis, &c. Teste Rege apud Westm. 30 die Aprilis. Per ip∣sum Regem et Consium. Eodem mdo mandatum est, Archiepisc. Eborum. I. Electo Hereford confirmato, and 18 Bishops, 26 Abots, and 2. Priors more. The 82. writ is thus entred in Claus. An. 20 E. 3. par. 2. m. 22. dorso. Rex, &c. J. &c. Archiep.Summoni∣tio Parlia∣menti. Cantuar. &c. Quia de avi∣samento Consilii nostri ordinavimus, quod super variis et arduis negotiis, tam Nos et expeditnem guerrae no∣strae, ac jura nostra et Coronae nostrae in partibus trans∣marinis, quam Statum et defensionem regni nostri Ang∣liae contingentibus, quoddam Parliamentum nostrum a∣pud Westm. die Lunae prox. post festum Nativitatis bea∣tae Mariae Virginis prox. futur. teneatur, et ibidem vo∣biscum, &c. Tractatus et Colloquium habeantur. Vobis in fide, &c. cessante quacunque eusatione dictis die et loco personaliter Nobiscum, seu cum Custode regni no∣stri, si tunc contigerit Nos abesse, ac caeteris Praelais,
&c. consilium impensuri. Et hoc cut honorem nostrum et salvationem regni, terrarum et jurium nostrorum ac Ecclefiae anctae, expeditionemque dictorum negotio∣rum nostrorum diligitis, nullatenus omittatis; Ne quod absi, per vestri absentiam (quam cessane impedimento legitimo nullo modo excusatam habere volumus) expe∣ditio negotiorum nostrorum praedictorum retardetur, seu aliqualiter differatur. Praemuniene, &c. Teste Custode praedicto apud Westm. 30 die Iulii Per ipsum Regem et dictum Custodem et Consilium. Eodem modo mandatum est, to 16. Bishops, Custodi Spiritualitis Episcopatus Assaven, 23. Abbots, and 2. Pri∣ors. The 83. (in the same Clause of Roll and Membr.) is this special writ of Summons issued to the Archbishop of York and others, varying from all the rest in some obser∣vable clauses concerning making Proxies in their ab∣sence. Rex, &c. W. &c. Archiepiscopo Eborum &c. Cum de avisamento, &c. ut supra, to habentur; then, Per quod mandaverimus diversis Praelatis, Comitibus, Baronibus, et aliis Proceibus regni nostri, quod consideratis dictorum ne∣gotiorum arduitate et periculis imminentibus, cessante excu∣satione quacunque, dictis die t loco personaliter intersitis No∣biscum, &c. (ut supra, to impensuri. Then comes in this special clause) Et quia modernis temporibus super salvatio∣ne et defensione Marchiae Scotiae estis multipliciter occupati: Vobis in fide et dilectione quibus Nobis tenemini firmiter in∣jungendo mandamus; quod dictis negotiis et periculis per vos debitè ponderatis, aliquem idoneum Procuratorem, in quo benè confiditis, de voluntate et intentione vestris plenius infor∣matum, in loco vestri, cum sufficienti potestate ad dictos diem et locum mittatis, ad consentiendum hiis quae tunc per dictos Praelatos. Comites, et alios Proceres ordinari contigerit super negotiis antedictis. Et hoc sicut de vobis confidimus, et Nos et honorem nostrum et vestrum, ac recuperationem urium nostrorum praedictorum, salvationemque et defensionem dicti regni nostri Angliae diligitis, nullatenus omittatis. T. ut supra.
Eodem modo mandatum est subscriptis sub eadem data, viz. Gilberto de Umfravill Comiti de Anegos, Thomae de Lucy, Hen. de Percy, Rad. de Nevill, Johan. de Har∣rington, Pet. de Malo-lacu, le quint, Joh. de Fauconberge, Thomae Wake de Lydell, Joh. de Moubray, Hen. Fitz Hugh, Rad. de Bulmere, Thomae Episcopo Dunolm. vel ejus Vicar. generali ipso Episcopo in remotis agente. J. Episcopo Carliol. Abbati beatae Mariae Eborum, Abba∣ti de Selbye. The 84. writ is thus transmitted to us, Claus. Anno 21 E. 3. pars 1. m. 28. dors.De veniendo ad Consilium. Rex, &c. R. eadem gratia Episcopo Cicestr. Salutem. Propter quaedam ardua negotia Nos statum et defensio∣nem regni nostri Angliae, ac expeditionem guerrarum nostrarum summe contingentia: Vobis in fide, &c. man∣damus quod omnibus aliis praetermissis, sitis apud Westm. tertio die Martii prox. futur. ibidem cum Praelatis, et caeteris Magnatibus, ac aliis de Confilio nostro super ne∣gotiis anedictis tractauri, vestrumque consilium im∣pensuri. Et hoc sicut Nos et honorem nostrum, ac cele∣rem expeditionem Guerrarum nostrarum praedictarum diligitis nullo modo omittatis. T. Custode praedicto apud Redinges, 18. die Februarii. Per ipsum Regem et Consilium. Consimilia Brevia diriguntur subscriptis, mutatis mutan∣dis, sub eadem data, viz. to 5. Bishops (one of them inser∣ted among the temporal Barons) 8. Earls, 8. Barons, 20 Abbots, and 5. Priors: without any writs to Sheriffs, Assistants, or Warden of the Cinque Ports. It being a Summons to a Council, not Parliament, which the next writ demonstrates. The 85. writ of Summons I finde in Claus. Anno 21 E. 3. part 2. m. 9. dorso, having a most observable clause to∣wards the end of it, which would be very acceptable now (as no doubt it was then) to the overlong uncessantly taxed, and almost exhausted people. Rex, &c.Summonitio Parliamenti. I. &c. Archiepiscopo Cantuar. &c. Quia pro quibusdam arduis negotiis tam Nos et Statum Regni nostri
Angliae, quam communem utilitatem populi ejusdem regni nostri contingentibus, Parliamentum nostrum apud Westm. in crastino S. Hillarii prox. futur. tenere, et vobiscum, &c. Et hoc sicut Nos et honorem nostrum, ac communem utilita∣tem populi praedicti diligis, ulltenus omttatis. Praemuntentes &c. Et scire vos volumus, Quod dictum Parliamentum non ad Auxilia seu Tallagia a populo dicti regni nostri petenda, vel alia onera eidem populo imponenda,Nota. set duntaxat pro justicia ipsi populo nostro super damnis et gravaminibus sibi illatis facienda (a very welcome clause in this exacting, oppresing, unrighteous age of manifold grievances and Injuries of all kinds fit to be thus redressed in a particular Parliament summoned for that end) Et pro tractatibus super dictis negotiis, ut prae∣mittitur habend. fecimus summoneri. Teste Rege apud Westm. 13. die Novemb. Per ipsum Regem. Eodem modo mandatum est Archepisc. Eborum, &c. and 19 Bishop, 24 Abbots, and 2. Priors. The 86. is this memorable writ of Summons I meet with in Claus. Anno 22 E. 3. parte 1. m. 32. dorso. Rex, &c.Summonitio Parliamenti. I. &. Archiepiscopo Cantuar. &c. Cum juxta formam Treugarum inter Nos et adversarium nostrum Frnciae apud Calesiam initarum, concordatum fuisset, quod nonnulli solempnes Nuncii durantibus dictis Treugis, tàm ex parte nostra, quàm dicti adversarii nostri ad sedem Aposto∣licam ad tractandum ibidem de finali Pace inter Nos et dic∣tum adversarium nostrum mitterentur; Et licet super hoc certos competentes Nunios ad sentiendam voluntatem Dom. Summi Pontificis super quibusdam praeparationis, tam dictum tactaum pacis, quammissionem hujusmodi majorum so∣lempnium Nunciorum concernentibus, ac aliis de causis mot∣vis plurimum ad dictam sedem circiter festum S. Andreae Apostoli prox. praeteritum duxerimus transmittends, tunc sperantes certam responsionem ab ipsis Nu ciis in ultimo Par∣liamento nostro apud Westm. tento veresimiliter habuisse, de quibus quidem Nuncis, seu eorum expedtione hactenus non recepimus quicquam certum: Propter quod missionem majo∣rum▪ Nunciorum nostrorum solempnium adhuc posuimus in
suspenso; Et quia Deo dante, de dictis Nunciis et eorum expeditione in proximo habere credimus certa nova, super quibus, ac etiam et super eo quod contra formam dictarum Treugarum ex parte ipsius adversarii nostri juratarum, quae∣dam notabiliter ponderanda, et in favorem nostri, et nostro∣rum fidelium ecallegatorum adimplenda, per partis adversae maliciam, minime sunt impleta, necnon super eo quod dictus noster adversarius contra bonam fidem, desperata pace pro parte sua promissa, maximam multitudinem hominum ad ar∣ma, ac aliorum, ac navium et galiarum, potentius quam hactonus auditum fuerat, procurat, ad dictum regnum no∣strum Angliae hostiliter invadendum, ac Nos et Dominium nostrum pro viribus subvertendum, prout ut haec per manife∣sta indicia satis liqueant, expedit, ut cum Praelatis, Magna∣tibus et Proceribus ejusdem regni, absque moris dispendio salubre consilium habeamus, per quod ex causis praedictis, et pro aliis gentem et terram Scotiae, necnon pro quibusdam variis negotiis multum arduis tam Nos quam Statum totius regni nostri praedicti specialiter contingentibus Parliamen∣tum nostrum apud Westm. ad diem Lunae prox. futur. te∣nere, vobiscumque ac cum caeteris Praelatis, Magnatibus & Proceribus praedictis colloquium habere volumus et tracta∣tum. Et ideo vobis in fide et dilectione quibus Nobis te∣nemini firmiter injungendo mandamus, quatenus cessante ex∣cusatione quacunque, dictis die et loco personaliter intersitis, Nobiscum, ac cum caetenis Praelatis, Magnatibus, et Pro∣ceribus dicti regni super negotiis praedictis tractaturi, ve∣strumque consilium impensuri. Praemunientes Priorem et Capitulum Ecclesiae vestrae Christi Cantuariae, ac Archi∣diaconos, totumque Clerum vestrae Dioc. quod idem Prior et Archidiaconi in propriis personis suis, ac dictum Capitu∣lum per unum, idemque Clerus per duos Procuratores idoneos, plenam et sufficientem potestatem ab ipsis Capitulo et Clero babentes praedictis die et loco personaliter inter sint, ad consen∣tiendum hiis quae tunc ibidem de Communt Consilio ipsius regni nostri, divina favente clementia contigerit ordina∣ri. Teste Rege apud Westm. 14. die Februarii. Per ipsum Regem.
Eodem modo mandatum est subscriptis sub eadem data, viz. Arch. Eborum, and 19. Bishops 24 Abbots, and 2. Priors more. The 87 writ is this of Claus. Anno 22. E. 3. parte 2. m. 7. dorso.Summonitio Parliamenti. Rex, &c. R. eadem gratia Episcopo London. Salutem. Quia pro magnis et arduis negotiis inter quosdam fide∣les nostros ex parte nostra, et quosdam Magnates et ali∣os ex parte adversariorum nostr. Franciae, quosdamque ex parte Comitis et Gentis Flandriae. jam noviter apud Cales. tractatis, necnon pro diversis aliis urgentibus Negotiis Nos et statum regni nostri Angliae summe con∣tingentibus, Parliamentum nostrum apud Westm. die Lunae prox. post festum S. Hillaru prox. futur. tenere, et vobiscum, &c. colloquium habere volumus et tracta∣tum Vobis in fide, &c. dictis die et loco in propria persona vestra absque Procuratore faciendo inter∣sitis Nobiscum, &c. Et hoc sicut Nos et honorem no∣strum, ac expeditionem negotiorum nostrorum, necnon utilitatem et commodum regni nostri Angliae diligitis, nullatenus omittatis. Praemunintes, &c. Scituri pro certo, quod attenta dictorum negotiorum arduitate Pro∣curatores aliquos pro vobis, seu ex parte vestra ad diem praedictum admittere, seu absentiam vestram excusatam habere nolumus ullo modo. Teste Rege apud Westm. 20 die Novemb. Per ipsum Regem. Consimilia Brevia diriguntur subscriptis sub eadem da∣ta, viz. J. de Ostord Decano Lincoln. Electo Cantuar. confirmato, W. Episcopo Winton, and 16. Bishops, 28. Abbots, and 3. Priors more. Besides there issued a writ to W. eadem gratia Episcopo Wigorn. in the same form to omittatis: and then thus: Quacunque concessione vobis pro immunitate vestra de non ventendo ad Parliamenta nostra prius concessa non obstante. Praemunientes, &c. Teste ut supra. After which follows another writ; Rex, &c. W. &c. Archiep. Eborum: in like form till tractatum; with this different clause from the other writs; Vobis in fide, &c.
mandamus, quod aliquem idoneum et sufficientem Procura∣torem pro vobis in quo confiditis ad dictos diem et locum, o quod vos propter corporis vestri debilitatem laborare non po∣ritis, quo praetextu personalem praesentiam vestram ist avice excusatam habere volumus, mittati, Nobiscum, ac cum cae∣teris Praelatis, Magnatibus et Proceribus dicti, &c. ut supra. Praemuntentes, &c. Teste ut supra. The 88. an ordinary writ is thus enrolled. Claus. An. 24 E. 3 par. 2. m. 3. dorso.Summoni∣tio Palia∣menti. Rex, &c. S. &c. Archep. Cantuar. &c. Quia pro quibusdam arduis et urgentibus negotiis Nos, et staum et bonum regimen regni nostri, et aliarum terrarum et Dominiorum nostrorum contingentibus, Parliamentum nostrum apud Westm. in Octabis Purificationis beatae Mariae virginis prox. futur. tenere, &c. Et hoc sicut Nos et honorem nostrum et commune commodum dicti regni nostri Angliae diligitis nullatenus omittatis. Praemu∣nientes, &c. Teste Rege apud Westm. 25 die Novemb. Per ipsum Regem et Consilium. Eodem modo mandatum est, sub eadem data. Arch. Eborum. and 18. Bishops, 25. Abbots, and 2. Priors more. The 89. writ is entred Claus. Anno 25 E. 3. part 1. m. 5. dorso.Summoni∣tio Parlia∣menti. Rex, &c. S. &c. Archiepisc. Catuar. &c. Quia pro quibusdam arduis et urgentibus negotiis Nos et statum regni nostri, et necessariam defensionem ejusdem regni contingentibus, Parliamentum nostrum apud Westm▪ die Veneris in crastino S. Hillarii prox. futur. tenere, & hoc (as before, writ 88.) Praemunientes, &c. Teste Rege a∣pud Westm. 15. die Novembr. Per ipsum Regem et Consilium. Eodem modo mandatum est Arch. Eborum. and 18. o∣ther Bishops, 24. Abbots, and 2. Priors: This special note is entred in the Roll and Lists of the Abbors mes then summoned after Abbati de Croyland. Abbas Leicestr, cancellatur, quia habet Cartam Regis quod non compellatur venire ad Parliamentum;Not. His Patent of Exemption is
entred in Rot. Pat. 26 E. 3. par 2. m. 22. Prited in Mr. Seldens Titles of Honor, Book 2. ch. 5. p. 734, 735, and in my Plea for the Lords, p. 155, 156. The 90. is this coniderable writ. with some unusual clauses in Claus. An. 26 E. 3. m. 14. dorso.De summoni∣tione Consilii. Rex, &c. S. &c. Arch. Cantuar. &c. Quia pro magnis∣et urgentibus negotiis, et novis subitis ad Nos perlatis Nos et statum ac jura regni nostri Angliae summe con∣cernentibus, super quibus festinum et providum oportet exhiberi remedium, uobiscum ac cum caeteris Praelatis, Magnatibus et Proceibus, et aliis fidelibus nostris dicti regni apud Westm. in crastino Assumptionis beaae Ma∣riae virginis prox. futur. collquium habere volumus et tractatum. Vobis, &c. Et hoc sicut Nos et honorem nostrum, ac salvationem et defensionem et commodum dicti regni nostri diligitis, et subversionem ejus viare volueriis, nullo moo omittatis. Nos de die receptio∣nis praesentium et per quem vobis dilatae fuerint certifi∣cantes tunc ibidem. Teste Rege apud Westm. 20 die Iul. Per ipsum Regem et Consilium. Consimlia Brevia diriguntur to 1. Bishops, Priori Hspitalis Ierusalem in Anglia, Abbati Westm. There being no more Priors or Abbots named in the Roll, but these 3. summoned by special writs. But the writs to the Bishops of Exon, Bath and Wells, Coventry and Litchfield, St Davids, Rochester, Bangor, Assaven. Landaff and Carliol. have this clause in them, in which they vary from the former: Dictis die et loco per vos vel per Procur atorem vestrum idoeum intersitis Nobis∣cum, &c. The 91. are these 3. special writs of Summons to ap∣pear before this Council, thus recorded in this Roll▪ (g) Rex d lecto sibi in Christo fratri Ranulpho Monacho Abbatiae Cestriae, Salutem.Claus. 26 E. . m. 14. dorso. Quibusdam certis de causis vobis mandamus firmiter injungentes, quod sitis personaliter coram Nobis et Consilio nostro apud estm. die Martis, prox. post festum Assumptionis beate Mariae virginis prox. futur. una cum omnibus Canonicis vestris, et quae sunt in Cstodia
vestra, ad loquendum et ractandum cum dicto Consilio super aliquibus quae tunc vobis expetuntur ex parte nostra. Et sub periculo quod incumbit nullatenus omittatis. Tete Rege apud Westm. 8 die Augusti. Et mandatum est Abbati Abbatiae praedictae, quod praefa∣um Ranulphum ad diem et locum praedictos habeat ex causa praedicta. Teste ut supra. Rex dilecto sibi in Chriso Priori Provinciali Ordinis Fra∣trum Praedicatorum in Anglia, salutem. Quibusdam certis de causis vobis mandamus firmiter injungentes, quod sitis personalter coram Nobis et Consilio nostro apud Westmon. die Martis prox. post festum Assumptionis beatae Mariae vir∣ginis prox: futur. ad loquendm et tractandum, &c. Teste ut supra. Eodem modo mandatum est Priori Provinciali Ordinis beatae Mariae de Monte Carmeli in Anglia, de essendo co∣ram dicto Consilio, die Iovis prox. post Assumptionem beatae Mariae virginis prox. futur. sub eadem data. These I conceive were all summoned rather as private informers, than Members of this Council; being to ap∣pear Coram Nobis et Consilio nostro: not to be Members thereof. The 92. is this writ, in Claus. Anno 27 E. 3. m. 12. dorso. Rex,Summonitio Consilii. &c. S. &c. Archiepisc. Canuar. &c. Quia pro magnis et urgentibus negoiis Nos et staum regni Ang∣liae summe concernentibus, vobiscum &c. et aliis fideli∣bus dicti regni apud Westm. die Lunae prox. post festum S. Matthaei Apostoli prox. futur. Colloquium habere vo∣lumus et tractatum. Vobis, &c. Et hoc sict Nos et honorem nostrum, ac salvationem et deensionem ac commodum dicti regni nostri diligitis nullatenus omit∣tatis. Nos de die receptionis praesentium et per quem vobis delatae fuerint certificantes tunc ibidem. Tese Rege apud Westm. 15. die Iulii. Per ipsum Regem et Consilium. Eodem modo mandatum est Arch. Eorum. et 19. Bishops, 25 Abbots, and 2. Priors.
The 93. is this writ in Claus. 28 E. 3. m. 26. dorso. Rex,Summonitio Prliamenti. &c. S. &c. Archiepiscopo Cantuar. &c. Quia pro magnis et urgentibus negotiis Nos et statum regni nostri Angliae, ac salvationem et defensionem ejusdem regni summe concernentibus Parliamentum nostrum a∣pud Westm. die Lune prox. post festum S. Marci Evange∣listae prox. futur. tenere, et vobiscum, &c. Praemunientes, &c. Teste Rege apud Westm. 15. die Martii. Per ipsum Regem. Consimilia Brevia diriguntur I. Arch. Eborum: to 19. other Bishops, 24 Abbots, 2. Priors. The 94. writ is thus entred, Claus. 29. E. 3. m. 8. dor∣so. Rex,Summonitio Parliamenti. &c. S. &c. Archiepiscopo Cantuar. &c. Quia pro quibusdam arduis et urgentibus negotiis Nos et Statum regni Angliae, ac necessariam defensioem ejusdem regni concernentibus Parliamentum nostrum apud Westm. die Jovis in crstino S. Martini prox. futur, teere, et vobis∣cum, &c. Et hoc sicut Nos et honorem nostrum, et com∣mune commodum et salvationem et defensionem dicti regni nostri Angliae diligitis, &c. Prmunientes, &c. Teste Re∣ge apud Portsmoth 20. die Septembris. Per ipsum gem. Consimilia Brevia diriguntur, I. Arch. Eborum. 18. Bishops, whereof one is Electo Elien. confirmato; 25 Ab∣bots, 2 Priors: One of the 25 Abbots was Abbati de Lei∣cestr. over against which is written in the Margin. Can∣cellatur Abbas Leicestriae quia habet Cartam Regis,Nota. quod non compellatur venire ad Parliamentum. After which in the same Roll followes this 95. writ to the Archbishop of Canterbury and another to York to summon a Convocation of the Clergy.De Clero convoando. Rex, &c. S. &c. Archiep. Cantuar. (just in the same form and words as before, to vesrumque Consilium im∣pensuri. Then follows this clause.) Et quia expedit quod negotia praedicta quae salvationem et defensionem dicti regni nostri sic contingunt, salubriter et efficaciter cum bona et ma∣tura deliberatione deducantur; Vobis mdamus rogantes
quatenus omnes Episcopos et Abbates, necnon Decanos et Prio∣res tam Ecclesiarum Cathedralium quam Collegiatarum, exemptos et non exemptos, Archidiaconos et totum Clerum vestrae Provincae apud Ecclesiam S. Pauli London. die Lu∣nae prox. post dictum festum S. Martini convocari faciatis. Ita quod dicti Episcopi, Decani, et Priores Ecclesiarum Ca∣thedralium, et Abbates exempti et non exempti, et Archidi∣coni personaliter, et quodlibet Capitulorum dictorum Ec∣clesiarum Cathedralium per unum, et Clerus cujuslibet Dioc∣per duos Procuratores sufficientem potestatem habenes apud dictam Ecclesiam S. Pauli dicto die Lunae intersint; ad trac∣tand. et conslend. super praemissis una vobiscum et aliis per Nos illuc mittendis; et ad consentiendum hiis qu tunc ibi∣dem super dictis negotiis divina favete clementia contigeri ordinari: Et hoc sicut Nos et honorem nostrum, ac salvatio∣nem et defensionem dicti regni nostri diligitis nullatenus o∣mittatis. Teste Rege apud Westm. 25 die Septembris. Per ipsum Regem. Consimiles literae diriguntur I. Archiepiscopo Ebo∣rm, Primati Angliae, de Clero suae Provinciae die Lunae in Crastino S. Nicholai prox. futur. apud Ecclesiam beai Petri Eborum, ex causa praedicta convoando. Teste ut supra. The 95. writ is that of Claus. Anno 31 E. 3. m. 21. dorso. very considerable.Summonitio Parliamenti. Rex▪ &c. S. &c. Archiepiscopo Cantuar. &c. Quia pro quibusdam arduis et urgentibus negotiis Nos et sta∣tum regni nostri Angliae, et necessariam desensionem e∣jusdem regni et ECCLELIAE ANGLICANAE contin∣gentibus, ordinavimus Parliamntum nostrum apud Westm. die Lunae prox. post Sepimanam Paschae prox. futur. tenere, et vobiscum, &c. Et hoc sicu Nos et ho∣orem nostrum, ac commune commodum, et salvationem t defensionem regni ac ECCLESIAE praedictorum dili∣gitis, nullatenus omittatis. Praemunientes, &c. Et quia propter arduitatem praedictorum negotiorum et ce∣leriorem expeditionem eorundem volumus primo die Parliamenti personaliter interesse; Nolumu nec inten∣dimus
vos, aut aliquem alium ad dictum Parliamentum summonitum, quin eodem primo die personaliter inter∣sitis habere ullo modo excusato, nec excusationem a vo∣bis admittere aliqualem. Teste Rege apud Westm. 15 die Februarii. Per ipsum Regem et Consilium: Consimilia brevia diriguntur subscriptis, mutatis mu∣tandis, sub eadem data, viz. I. Arch. Eborum, 18 Bi∣shops, 24 Abbots, and 1. Prior. After which follows this 97. memorable writ in the same Roll and dorso,Claus. 31 E. 3. dors. 21. De Convoca∣tione Cleri. to summon a Convocation of the Clergy. Rex, &c. S. &c. Cantuar. &c. (verbatim▪ a before, to vestrumque consilium impensuri. Then follows this clause;) Et quia praedicta negotia perquam ardua sine maxima deliberatione tam Praelatorum et Cleri, quam Magna∣tum et Communitatis ejusdem regni nullo modo expe∣diri poterunt, ad quorum expeditionem Auxilium et Consilium tam a vobis et Clero, quam a dictis Magnati∣bus et Communitate habere necessario Nos oportet; Vo∣bis rogamus mandantes, quatenus omnes Episcopos et Abbates, necnon Decanos et Priores, tam Ecclesiarum Cathedralium quam Collegiatarum exemptos et non exemptos, Archidiaconos et totum Clerum vestrae Pro∣vinciae apud Ecclesiam S. Pauli Lond. in crastino S. Georgii prox. sequent. Convocari faciatis. Ita quod dicti Epis∣cop, &c. (as before writ 95.) apud dictam Ecclesiam S. Pauli in crastino S. Georgii, cum continuatione et prorogatione dierum tunc sequentium quatenus dicta negoia id requirun, intersint, ad tractand. et consu∣lend▪ super praemis is una Nobiscum, et aliis per Nos illuc mittendis: Et hoc sicut nos et honorem nostrum, ac salvaionem et defensionem dicti regni nostri, ac EC∣CLESIAE ANGLICANAE diligitis, nullatenus omit∣tais. Teste Rege apud Westm. 22 die Februarii. Per i▪ sum Regem. The 98. writ is thus enrolled, Claus. Ann 31. Ed. 3. m. 2. dorso.Summonitio Parliamenti. Rex, &c. S. &c. Archie. Cantuar. &c. Quia pro
quibsdam arduis et urgentibus negotis Nos et Statum regni nostri Angliae, et necessariam defensionem ejusdem Regni et ECCLESIAE ANGLICANAE concernentibus, ordinavi∣mus Parliamentum nostrum apud Westm. die Lunae prox. post festum Purificationis beatae Mariae virginis prox. futur. tenere. Et vobiscm, &c. Et hoc sicut Nos et honorem no∣strum, ac commune commodum et salvationem et defensionem REGNI ET ECCLESIAE praedictae diligitis, nullatenus omitatis. Praemunietes, &c. Et quia propter arduitatem negotiorum praedictorum ac celeriorem expeditionem eorundē volumus primo die Parliamenti interesse, nolumus, nec inten∣dimus vos aut aliquem alium ad dictum Parliamentum sum∣monitum, quin eodem primo die personaliter intersitis habere ullo modo excusaos, nec excusationem à vobis admittere ali∣qualem. Teste Rege apud Westm. 15 die Septembris. Per ipsum Regem et Consilium. Consimilia Brevia diriguntur subscriptis, mutatis mutan∣dis, sub eadem data, viz. I. Arch. Eborum, &c. 18 Bi∣shops, 24 Abbots, and 1. Prior. The 99. writ you may find in Claus. Anno 32 E. 3. m. 14. dorso.De Consilio summonito. Rex, &c. S. &c. Archiep. Cant. &c. Quia pro qui∣busdam arduis et urgentibus negotis Nos et Statum Regni nostri Angliae, et jura Coronae nostrae Angliae summe con∣cernentibus, vobiscum, et cum caeteris Praelatis, &c. die Do∣minica prox. post festum S. Margaretae virginis prox. futur. apud Westm. Colloquium habere volumus et tractatum. Vobis mandamus in fide, &c. Et hoc sicut Nos et honore nostrum, ac salvaionem dicti regni nostri Angliae, ac juriū Coronae ejusdem regni diligitis nullo modo omittatis. Teste Rege apud Westm. 20 die Iunii. Per ipsum Regem et▪ Consilium. Consimilia Brevia diriguntur subscriptis sub eadem data; viz. to 6 Bishops, 6 Abbots, 2. Priors, and Decano wellensi; and none else of the Clergy; nor any writs to Assistants, Sheris, or the Warden of the Cinqueports for electing Knights, Citizens, Burgesses, or Barons of the Cinqueports: Therefore only a Council, not a Parlia∣ment;
as was this next ensuing: summoned by this 100 writ, Claus. Anno 33 E. 3. m. 10. dorso. Rex,De summoni∣tione Consili in absentia Regis. &c. S. &c. Archiepiscopo Cat. &c. Cum pro expeditione guerrae nostrae Franciae, ac savatione et de∣ensione regni nostri Angliae, sumus ad partes transmari∣nas in prox. Deo duce, personaliter profecturi: et Tho∣mam ilium nostrum carissimum Custodem dicti regni nostri Angliae, et locum nostri tenentem in eodem reg∣no, dum Nos sic absentari contigerit, vel alias nostrae placuerit voluntati constiuimus, ac intimum inideat cordi nostro, quod Pax noster in eodem regno inviola∣biliter conserveur, et idem regnum ab hostium incursi∣bus defendatur; per quod ordinavimus, quod super prae∣missis et alis arduis negotiis Nos et statum dicti regni nostri concernentibus quoddam Consilium Praelatorum et aliorum Magnatum et Procerum ejudem regni apud Westm. die Dominica prox. ante festum S. Martini in prox. futur. teneatur. Vobis in fide, &c. vestrumque conilium impensuri; Et hoc sicut Nos et honorem no∣strum, ac salvationem et defensionem dicti regni nostri, ac tranquillitaem pacis ejusdem diligitis nullo modo omittatis. Teste Rege apud Sandwicum, 10 die Octobris. Per ipsum Regem et Consilium. Consimilia Brevia diriguntur to 6. Bishops, 2. Priors, and 4. Abbots, more; 6. Earls, and 19 Lords or great men, without any writs to Assistants, Sherifs, or War∣den of the Cinque Ports. The 101. is this writ in Claus. Anno 34 E. 3. m. 35. dorso.De summoni∣tione Parlia∣menti. Rex, &c. S. &c. Archiepisc. Cantuar. &c. Quia pro quibusdam arduis et urgentibus negotiis Nos ac salva∣tionem et desensionem regni nostri▪ Angliae summe cou∣tingentibus, Parliamentum nostrum apud Westm. die Veneris in crasino Ascentionis Domini prox. futur. te∣nere volumus, et ibide vobiscum▪ &c. Mandamus, quod consideratis dictorum negotiorum arduitate et pe∣riculis imminentibus cessante excusatione quacunque dictis die et loco personaliter intersitis Nobiscum, seu
cum Custode dicti regni nostri si tune contigerit Nos abesse; ac caeteris Praelatis, &c. Ne quod absit, per vestri absentiam, quam cessnte impedimento legitimo et evidente, nullo modo excusatam habere volumus, ex∣peditio negotiorum nostrorum praedictorum retar etur, seu aliqualiter differatur. Praemunientes, &c. Teste Custode praedicto apud Wesm. 3 die Aprilis. Per ip∣sum Regem. Eodem modo mandatum est sub eadem data, I. Arch. Eborum, &c. 17 Bishops. Custodi Spiritualitatis Episco∣patus Covent. & Lihf. vacante et in mn Regis exstene, 22 Abbots, and the Prior of St. Iohns Hospital Ierusa∣lem. The 102. writ, you may peruse in Claus. Anno 34 E. 3. m. 4. dorso. Rex,Summonitio Parliamenti. &c. S. &c. Archiepiscopo Cantuar. &c. Quia pro quibusdam arduis et urgentibus negotiis Nos et sta∣tum, et bonum regimen regni nostri Angliae concernen∣tibus, ordinavimus Parliamentum nostrum apud Westm. die Dominica prox. ante festum Conversionis S. Pauli prox. futur. teneri, et vobiscum, &c. Et hoc sicut Nos et honorem nostrum, ac bonum regimen, ac commune commodum ejusdem regni diligitis, nullatenus omitta∣tis. Praemuniences, &c. Et quia propter arduitatem ne∣gotiorum praedictorum, ac ceeriorem expeditionem eo∣ruudem volumus primo die Parliamenti personalier in∣teresse, nolumus, &c. (as before writ 98.) Teste Rege apud Westm. 20 die Novembris. Per ipsum Regem et Consilium. Consimilia Brevia diriguntur I. Archiepiscopo Ebo∣rum, to 17. Bishops more, 24 Abbots, and the Prior of St Iohns Ierusalem. The 103. writ is inserted into Claus. Anno 36 E. 3. m. 16. dorso.De summoni∣tione Parlia∣menti. Rex, &c. S. &c. Archiep. Cntuar. &c. Quia super quibusdam arduis et urgentibus negotiis Nos et Statum regni nostri Angliae concernentibus, Parliamentum no∣strum apud Westm. in Quindena S. Michaelis prox. fu∣tur.
teneri ordinavimus, et vobiscum, &c. Et hoc sicut nos et honorem nostrum et expeditionem negotiorum diligitis nullaenus omittatis. Praemunientes, &c. Sci∣entes insue, quod propter arduitatem negotiorum praedictorum Procuratores, seu excusationem aliquam legitimo cessante impedimento pro vobis admittere no∣lumus ista vice. Teste Rege apud Windesor 14 die Au∣gusti. Per ipsum Regem. Consimilia Brevia diriguntur sub eadem data, I. Ar∣chiep. Eborum: to 17. other Bishops: Custodi Spiritua∣litatis Episcopatus Lincoln. and likewise Episcopaus Ci∣cestriae sede vacante, 22 Abbots, and 3. Priors. The 104. writ is extant, Claus. Anno 37 E. 3. m. 22. dorso.Summoniti Parliamenti. Rex, &c. S. &c. Archiepiscopo Cantuar. &c. Quia super quibusdam arduis, &c. (as next before) Parlia∣mentum nostrum apud Westm. in octabis S. Michaelis prox. futur. tenere ordinavimus, &c. Praemunientes, &c. Scientes insuper, &c. (as next before.) Teste Rege apud VVestm. 1. die Iunii. Per ipsum Regem et Consili∣um. Consimilia Brevia diiguntur I. Archiep. Eborum, to 18 other Bishops, 23 Abbots, and 3 Priors. The 105. writ is entred in Claus. An. 38 E. 3. m. 3. dorso.Summonitio Parliamenti. Rex, &c. I. &c. Archiepisc. Cantuar. &c. Quia su∣per quibusdam, &c. ac jure Coronae nostrae concernen∣tibus, Parliametum nostrum apud VVestm. in Octabis S. Hillarii prox. futur. tenere ordinavimus, &c. Praemu∣nientes, &c. Scientes insuper, &c. (as in 103. before.) Teste Rege apud VVestm. 4 die Decembris. Per ipsum Regem et Consilium. Consimilia Brevia diriguntur Iohanni Archiepiscopo Eborum. 15 Bishops more; Vicario generali Episcopo Ci∣cestr. ipso Episcopo in remotis agente. Custodi Spiritualita∣tis, Episcopatus Roffensis sede vaante, de praemuniend. ut supra. 23 Abbots, and 3. Priors. The 106. writ (having one special clause differing from Summonitio Parliamenti.
the former) is registred, Claus. Anno 39 E. 3. m. 2. dorso. Rex, &c. S. &c. Archiepiscopo Cantuar. &c. Quia, &c. ac jura Coronae nostrae concernentibus Parliamentum no∣strum apud VVestm. die Lunae in crastino Inventionis San∣ctae Crucis prox. futur. tenere ordinavimus, &c. Praemuni-entes, &c. Scientes insuper, &c. Et quia expeditio nego∣tiorum praedictorum multum insidet cordi nobis, vos attente rogamus quatenus die Dominica prox. ante dic∣um diem Lunae apud London esse velitis. Ita quod eo∣dem die Lunae mane apud VVestm. vos cum aliis Praela∣tis et Magnatibus illuc tunc venturi esse valeatis; quia eodem die Parliamentum praedictum inchoare, et ibiem personaliter ee volumus omni modo. Teste Rege apud VVestm. 20 die Ianuarii. Per ipsum Regem et Consili∣um. Consimilia Brevia diriguntur, &c. Archiepiscopo Ebo∣rum. 18 Bishops, 23 Abbots and 3. Priors. The 107. writ appears in Claus. 42 E. 3. m. 22. dor∣so.Summoni∣tio Parlia∣menti. Rex, &c. S. &c. Archiep. Cantuar. &c. Quia, &c. Parliamentum nostrum apud Westm. primo die Maii prox futur. tenere ordinavimus, &c. Praemunientes, &c. Scien∣tes insuper quod propter arduitatem, &c. Teste Rege apud Westm. 24 die Februarii. Per ipsum Regem et Con∣silium. Consimilia Brevia diriguntur, &c. Iohanni Archiep. Eborum, 19 Bishops, 23 Abbots, and 2 Priors. The 108. writ is to be found Claus. An 43 E. 3. m. 24. dorso.Summoni∣tio Parlia∣menti. Rex, &c. S. &c. Archiepiscopo Cantuar. &c. Quia, &c. Parliamentum nostrum apud Westm. in Octabis S. Trinitatis prox. futur. tenere ordinavimus, &c. Praemuni∣entes, &c. Scientes insuper, &c. Teste Rege apud Westm. 6 die Aprilis. Per ipsum Regem et Consilium. Consimilia Brevia, &c. Iohanni Archiepiscopo Eborum, 7 Bishops, 23 Abbots, and 2 Priors.
The 109. writ shews it self in Claus. Anno 44 E. 3. m. 1. dorso.Summonitio Parliamenti. Rex, &c. S. &c. Archiepisc. Cantuar. &c. Quia su∣per &c. Nos et Statum ac defensionem regni nostri Ang∣liae, ac jura Coronae nostrae concernentibus, Parliamen∣tum nostrum apud Westm. die Lunae in prima Septimana Quadragesimae, viz. in festo S. Matthaei Apostoli prox. fuur. tenere ordinavimus, &c. Praemunientes, &c. Sci∣etes insuper quod propter arduiatem, &c. Teste Rege apud Westm. 8. die Ianuarii. Per ipsum Regem. Consimilia Brevia, &c. J. Arch. Eborum: 18 Bishops, Custodi Spiritualitatis Episcopatus Bangor, side vacante, 24 Abbots, and 2 Priors. The 110. writ, is visible in Claus. Anno 46 E. 3. m. 11. dorso.Summonitio Parliamenti. Rex, &c. W. Archiepiscopo Cantur. Quia de avi∣samento Consilii nostri ordinavimus, quod super arduis et urgentibus negotiis tam Nos et-expeditionem guerrae nostrae ac juria nostra, et Coronae nostrae in partibus trans∣marinis, quam statum et defensionem regni nostri Ang∣liae et ECCLESIAE ANGLICANAE, contingenti∣us, quoddam Parliamentum apud Westm. in Quinde∣na S. Michaelis prox. futur. teneatur: et ibidem vobis∣cum, &c. Colloquium et tractatus habeantur. Vobis, &c. mandamus, quod consideratis dictorum negotiorum arduitate, et periculis imminentibus cessante quacunque excusatione dict is die et loco personaliter intersit is No∣biscum, seu cum Ricardo filio carissimi Primogeniti no∣stri Edwardi, Principis Aquitaniae et Walliae, CUSTODE regni nostri Angliae, et locum nostri tenente in eodem regno si tunc contigerit Nos abesse, ac caeteris Praelatis, Magnatibus et Proceribus, &c. Et hoc scut Nos et ho∣norem nostrum, ac salvationem regni terrarum et jurium nostrorum praedictorum ac ECCLESIAE SANCTAE, expeditionemque diorum negotiorum diligitis nullo modo omittatis. Ne quod absit, per vestri absentiam (quam cessante impedimento legiimo nullo modo ex∣cusatam habere volumus) expeditio negotiorum nostro∣rum
praedictorum retardetur, seu aliqualiter differatur, Praemunietes, &c. Teste Custode praedicto apud Walyng∣ford 1. die Septembris. Per ipsum Regem, ac dictum Custodem et Consilium. Consimilia Brevia diiguntur, &c. Archiepiscopo Ebo∣rum, 17 Episcopis, 25 Abbatibus, 2 Prioribus, particu∣larly named in the Roll. The like writ issued to Thomas Bishop of Durham; but with this different clause next after Consilium vestrum impensuri, viz. Et quia mdernis temporibus super salvatio∣ni et defensione Marehiae Scotiae istis mandato nostro multi∣plieiter occupati. Vobis in fide, &c. mandamus, quod dictis negotiis et periculis perv os debitè ponderatis, si videritis quod ad Parliamentum praedictum commodè pervenire non poteri∣tis, tunc aliquem idoneum Procuratorem in quo bene confiditis, de voluntate et intentione vestris plenius informatum loco ve∣stro cum sufficiente potestate ad dictos diem et locum mittatis, ad consentiendum hiis quae tunc per dictos Praelatos, Comites, et alios Proceres ordinari contigerit super negotiis antedictis. Et hoc sicut de vobis confidimus, et Nos et honorem nostrum et vestrum, recuperationem jurium nostrorum praedictorum, salvationemque et defensionem dicti regni nostri Angliae dili∣gitis nullatenus omittatis. Praemunientes, &c. Teste ut su∣pra. Per ipsum Regem, ac dictum Custodem ec Con∣silium. Consimile Breve dirigitur Thomae Episcopo Kar∣liol. The 111. writ is thus trunsmitted to posterity, Claus. Anno 47 E. 3. m. 13. dorso.De summoni∣tione Parlia∣menti. Rex, &c. W. &c. Archiepiscopo Cantuar. &c. Quia de avisameato Consilii nostri pro quibusdam arduis, &c. (as in the 110. writ before) quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud Westm. in crastino S. Edwardi Regis prox. futur. te∣nere ordinavimus, &c. Et hoc sicut Nos, &c. Ne quod ab∣sit, &c. Praemunientes, &c. (as in the said 110 writ) Te∣ste Rege apud Westm. 4 die Octobris. Per ipsum Regem et Consilium. Consimilia Brevia diriguntur, &c. I. Archiepiscopo
Eborum: 18. Episcopis, 25 Abbatibus, 2 Prioribus, na∣med in the Roll. The 112. writ is thus registred, Claus. Anno 49 E. 3. m. 6. dorso.De summoni∣tione Parlia∣menti. Rex, &c. S. &c. Archiepiscopo Cantuar. &c. Quia de avisamento Consilii nostri, pro quibusdam, &c. Nos et Statum et defensionem regni nostri Angliae, et ECCLESI∣AE ANGLICANAE contingentibus, quoddaem Parliamentum nostrum apud Westm. duodecimo die Februarii prox. fu∣tur. teneri ordinavimus, et ibidem vobiscum, &c. Et hoc si∣cut Nos et honorem nostrum, ac salvationem regni praedicti et ECCLESIAE SANCTAE, expeditionemque dictorum negotiorum diligitis nullatenus omitiatis. Ne quod absit, &c. Praemunientes, &c. Teste Rege apud Langele 28 die De∣cembris. Per ipsum Regem et Consilium. Consimilia Brevia diriguntur, &c. A. Archiep. Ebo∣rum, 19 Episcopis, 23 Abbatibus, and 2 Proceribus. The 113. writ is preserved in Claus. An. 50 E. 3. part 2. m. 6. dorso.De summoni∣tione Parlia∣menti. Rex, &c. S. &c. Archiepiscopo Cintuar. &c. Quia de avisamento, &c. (just as in 112. before) quoddam Par∣liamentum nostrum apud Westm. in Quindena S. Hilarii prox. futur. teneri ordinavimus, et ibidem vobiscum, &c. Et hoc sicut, &c. Ne quod absit, &c. Praemunientes, &c. (as next before.) Teste Rege apud Westm. primo die Decem∣bris. Per ipsum Regem et Consilium. Consimilia Brevia diriguntur, &c. Alex. Archiepiscopo Eborum, 17 Episcopis, 21 Abbatibus, Priori S. Johannis Jerusalem in Anglia, Priori de Coventr. The 114. is this memorable writ in Claus. 1. R. 2. m. 31. dorso.De Clero convocando. Rex, &c. S. &c. Archiepisc. Cantuar. &c. Cum ini∣mici nostri inter se allegati et undique hostiliter congregati regnum nostrum Angliae in pluribus locis per terram et per mare saepius invaserunt, mala quamplurima et intolerabilia nobis et ligeis nostris perpetrando, et non solum de hoc contenti, dictum regnum nostrum, ac Ecclesiam sanctam Nosque ac populum nostrum Angliae de die in diem separant totis viribus
subvertere et destruere, nisi orum malitiae adjuvante Deo fortius resistatur: unde in salvationem Status Ecclesiae sanctae et regni ac populi prdictorum necessariam defensionem sump∣tus ac census et expensas inaestimabiles, et aliquo tempore praeterito magis solito graviores effundere Nos oportet. Verum quia de copia the sauri vel bonorum in primordiis nostri regi∣minis nec mirum penitus alieni ad ipsorum onerum et sump∣tuum supportationem absque juvamine fidelium nostrorum non sufficimus sicut scitis. Vobis in fide et dlectione quibus nobis tenemini rogando mandamus▪ quatenus consideratis tam arduitate negotiorum praedictorum, quam grandibus periculis quae Ecclesiae et regno praedicto oculata fide, imminere con∣spicitis, attentis, et debite consider atis, Suffraganeos vestros, Decanos et Priores Cathedralium Ecclesiarum, Abbates, Priores et alios electivos, exemptos et non exemptos, necnon Archidiaconos, Capitula, Conventus, et Collegia, totumque Clerum cujuslibet Dioc. dictae vestrae Provinciae ad compa∣rend. coram vobis in Ecclesia S. Pauli London. vel alibi prout expedire videritis ad breviorem diem quam poteritis more solito convocari fac. et eis dictis negotiis et periculis ibi∣dem plenius expositis et declaratis, ipsos ad Subsidium in hoc casu competens et necessarium in supportationem dictorum one∣rum et sumptorum Nobis concedendi eo specialius et cum effi∣catia qua magis sciveritis vel poteritis tanta necessitate cau∣sante inducatis, et partes vestras ad hoc effectualiter appo∣natis; Nos in Cancellaria nostra de quantitate Subsidii illius certificantes. Et hoc sicut nos et honorem nostrum ac salva∣tionem et defensiontm Ecclesiae et regni praedictorum diligitis nullatenus omittatis. Teste meipso apud Westm. 29 die Septembris. Consimile breve dirigitur A. Arch. Eborum, Angliae Pri∣mati, de Clero convocando in Ecclesia beati Petri Ebor. The 114. writ,De veniendo ad Parlia∣mentum Re∣gis. is this of Claus. Anno 1 R. 2. dorso 37. running in the ordinary form except in one particu∣lar clause. Rex, ven. &c. S. Archiep. Cantuar. &c. Quia cum regni et populi nostri divina permissione suscepto regimine, de avisamento Consilii nostri pro quibusdam arduis et urgentibus
negotiis Nos et jura Coronae nostrae, ac Statum, salvationem et defensionem regni et populi praedicti ac Ecclesiae Anglicanae contingentibus, quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud West. in quindena S. Michaclis prox. futur. teneri ordinavimus; et ibidem vobiscum, &c. Ne quod absit, &c. Praemunientes &c. T. Rege apud Westm. 4 die Augusti. Per ipsum Re∣gem et Consilium. Consimilia Brevia diriguntur subscriptis sub eadem data vz. Alexandro Archiep. Eborum electo, &c. 19 Bishops and 23 Abbots, with the Priors of St Iohns Ierusalem, and Coventre. The 116. writ is thus entred in the ordinary usual form, Claus. Anno 2 R. 2. m. 3. dorso. Rex, &c. S. &c. Archiep. Cantuar. &c. Quia de avi∣samento, &c. Statum et defensionem regni nostri Angl. et Eccles. Anglicanae contingent. quoddam Parliamentum no∣strum apud Westm. in Quindena Paschae prox. futur. teneri ordinavimus &c. Ne quod absit per vestri absentiam (quam nisi tanta infirmitate tunc detenti sueritis quod aliqualiter illuc laborare non poteritis nullo modo excusatam habere vo∣lumus ista vice) expeditio. &c. Praemunientes, &c. T. R. apud Westmon. 17 die Febr. Per ipsum Regem et Con∣silium. Consimilia Brevia, &c. are issued Alex. Archiep. Ebo∣rum, and to 19. Bishops, 24. Abbots, and 2. Priors. The 117. is this memorable writ recorded Claus. 3 R. 2. m. 27 dorso.De Clero convocando. Rex, &c. S. &c. Archiep. Cantuar. &c. Qualiter ini∣mici nostri Franciae, et alii sibi cohaerentes inter se colli∣gati et undique hostiliter congregati regnum nostrum Angl. pertera et per mare saepius invaserunt, mala quam∣plurima et intollerabilia Nobis et legiis nostris inferen∣do, et non solum de hoc contenti dictum regnum nostrum et Ecclesiam sanctam, Nosque et totam linguam Angli∣canam subvertere et destruere de die in diem totis viri∣bus se conantur nisi eorum malitiae adjuvante Deo for∣tius resistatur, vos non credimus ignorare; unde in sal∣vationem, &c. (as Claus. 1 R. 2. m. 31. before, to o∣mittatis.)
Teste Rege apud Westm. 2. die Decembris. Consimiles literae dirigunt ur Alex. Archiep. Eborum, Angliae Primati ad convocandum Clerum in Ecclesiae be∣ati Petri Eborum. Teste ut supra. The 118. writ is thus recorded in the usual form, Claus. 3 R. 2. m. 32. dorso.De summoni∣tione Parlia∣menti. Rex, &c. S. &c. Archiepiscopo Cantuar. &c. Quia de avisamento &c. Quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud Westm. die Lunae prox. post festum S. Hilarii prox. futur. teneri ordinavimus, &c. Ne quod absit, as last before; Praemunientes, &c. Teste Rege apud Westm. 20 die Octobris. Consimiles literae diriguntur Alex. Arch. Eborum: 19 Episcopis, 23 Abbatibus, 2 Prioribus. The 119. writ is that in usual form of Claus. 4 R. 2.De summoni∣tione Parlia∣menti. Rex, &c. S. &c. Archiepiscopo Cant. &c. Quia, &c. quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud Northampton die Lunae prox. post festum Omnium Sanctorum prox. futur. te∣neri ordinavimus, &c. nullatenus omittatis. Ne quod absit pro vestri absentiam (quam nisi tanta infirmitate detenti fueritis quod aliqualiter illuc laborare non pote∣ritis nullo modo excusatam habere volumus ista vice) expeditio dictorum negotiorum nostrorum retardatur aut aliqualiter differatur. Praemunientes, &c. T. Rege apud Westm. 26 die Augusti. Per ipsum Regem et Con∣silium. Consimiles literae diriguntur subscriptis sub eadem data, viz. A. Arch. Eborum, &c. 19 Bishops, 25 Abbots, 2 Priors. The 120. is this observable writ in Claus. 5 R. 2. m. 12. dorso.Summonitio Parliamenti. Rex, &c. W. &c. Archiepiscopo Cant. &c. Satis est vo∣bis, sicut et caeteris Praelatis, Proceribus, aliisque Domi∣nis Subditis nostris regni nostri manifestum, qualiter in ultimo Parliamento nostro vos Domini, Magnates et Communitates regni nostri Angliae quoddam subsidium de lanis cariis et pellibus laniatis Nobis gratanter con∣cesserunt ad certum tempus futur. percipiend. ad effec∣tum
quod de denariis de Subsidio praedicto provenien∣tibus aliqua ordinatio, sive aliquod viagium pro defen∣sione terrae nostrae, et gravamine inimicis nostris publi∣cis inferend. et celeriori acceleratione finis guerrae ma∣gis expediens fieri ac parari possit, et effectualiter pro∣videri. Ac nos super executione effectus praedicti as∣sistentibus Nobis quibusdam Magnatibus, Dominis et peritis de Consilio nostro, efficacissime recolentes eo∣rum nunc propositum, ad partes exteras ex causis prae∣missis, volente Deo, cum sufficienti Comitiva persona∣liter transfretare; Nos advertentes hujusmodi propo∣tum nostrum absque Chevantia competenti ad optatum finem commode deduci non posse, et ut in absentia no∣nostra pro expedienti et necessario regimine regni no∣stri debitè provideatur, necnon qualiter dicta Chevan∣tia quietus et citius fieri, ac creditoribus nostris in hac parte melior & firmior securitas solutionum dari pote∣rit et vallari, volentes prospicere prout decet, disposui∣mus de avisamento Consilii nostri praedicti in crastino Sancti Iohannis ante portam latinam prox. futur. quod∣dam Parliamentum nostrum apud Westm. tenere, et vo∣biscum, &c. Ne quod absit, &c. (as next before.) Prae∣munientes, &c. T. Rege apud Westm. 24 die Martii. Per ipsum Regem et Consilium. Consimilia Brevia diriguntur, &c. A. Arch. Eborum, &c. 19 other Bishops mutatis mutandis, 24 Abbatibus, Priori de Coventre. The 121 writ I find in Claus. 5 R. 2. m. 40. dorso.De summoni∣tione Parlia∣menti. Rex, Custodi Spiritualitatis Archiepiscopatus Cantuar. sede vacante. Quia de avisamento, &c. quoddam Parlia∣mentum nostrum apud Westm. die Lunae prox. post Festum exaltationis sancta Crucis prox. futur. teneri ordinavimus, &c Ne quod absit, &c. (as before in the two last writs) Praemunicutes, &c. T. Rege apud Villam de S. Alban. 16 die Julii. Per ipsum Regem. Consimilia Brevia, &c. A. Arch. Eborum, &c. 18 E∣piscopis, Custodi Spiritualitatis Episcopatus Dunolm. sede vaante, 24 Abbatibus, Priori de Coventre.
The 122. is this memorable writ in Claus. 6 R. 2, part 1. m. 4. dorso.De summoni∣tione Parlia∣menti. Rex, W. Archiep. Cantuar. &c. Quia referente fama publica ad nostrum pervenit certitudinaliter intellec∣tum, quod Carolus, adversarius noster Franciae principa∣lis, subjugata sibi maxima parte Flandriae, quae de amici∣tia nostra existebat, ad obsidend. jam Villam nostram Cales, et alia mala, dampna et gravamina Nobis et regno nostro Angliae undique inferend. et fieri procurand. to∣tis viribus se festinat, omnique diligntia machinatur. Nos maliciae dicti adversarii nostri resistere, et hjus∣modi obidionem, si quae ibidem, quod absit, fieret in event, favente Domino removere, necnon circa recu∣perationem juris nostri quod ad Coronam et regnum Franciae notori obtinemus, ac circa defensionem dicti regni nori et Ecclesiae Anglicanae meliorem laborare e intendere, relevamenque et succursum amicis et fi∣delibus nostris circumquaque faere et praebere cupi∣entes, e consilio et assensu quamplurimoru Praelatorum, Procerum, Magnatum, Dominorum, Militum, Burgen∣sium e Mercaorum dicti regni nostri, ad Consilium nostrum ex hac causa evocatorum, sumus in proposito in propria perona nostra ad partes transmarinas cum co∣mitativa Procerum, Magnatum et Nobilium plurimo∣rum manu forti, volente Domino proficisci. Et ut hu∣jusmodi propositum nostrum felicem sortiatur effec∣tum, ac Nobis in remotis agentibus pro expedieni et necessario regimine dicti regni nostri debite providea∣tur; et interim tam inimicis nostris Ispann. quam aliis quibuscunque, si regnum nostrum praedictum hostiiter invadere praesum, serint, fortiter et viriliter ut Oportet, et prout maxime insidet cordi nostro resistatur; dispo∣suimus de consilio et assensu praedictis die Lunae in ter∣tia Septimana Quadragesimae prox. futur. quod dam Parliamentum nostrum apud Westm. tenere, et vobis∣cum, ac cum caeteris Praelatis, Proceribus, Dominis, et COMMUNITATE dicti regni nostri super praemissis et aliis urgenibus causis, statum, regnum et honorem nos∣tra
concernentibus Colloquium habere et tractatum: Vobis igitur in fide et dilectione, &c. quod considera∣ta dictorum negotiorum arduitate, cessante quacunque excusatione dictis die et loco personaliter intersitis Nobiscum, ac cum Praelatis, Proceribus, et Prioribus praedictis super dictis negotiis tractaturi, vestrumque consilium impensuri. Et hoc sicut Nos et honorem no∣strum, ac salvationem Regni et Ecclesiae praedictorum diligitis, nullatenus omittatis. Ne quod absit, &c. (as before.) Praemunientes, &c. T. R. apud Westm. 7. die Ianuarii. Per ipsum Regem et Consilium. Consimilia Brevia diriguntur, &c. A. Arch. Eborum. &c. 18 Bishops, Custodi Spiritualitatis Episcopatus Lan∣daven. sede vacante, 24. Abbatibus, 2. Prioribus. The 123. is this usual writ, I meet with in Claus. 6 R. 2. part. 1. m. 17. dorse. Rex, &c. W. Archiep.De summoni∣tione Parlia∣menti. Cant. &c. Quia de avisamento, &c. quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud Westm. die lunae in Octabis Sancti Mi∣chaelis prox. futur. teneri ordinavimus, &c. Ne quod absit, &c. Praemunientes, &c. T. R. apud Wodestock 9. die Augusti. Per ipsum Regem. Cons. Brevia diriguntur A. Arch. Ebrum. 18 Epis∣copis, Custodi Spirit. Episcopatus Assaven. sede vacan∣te, 23 Abbatibus, 2 Prioribus. The 124. writ is recorded in Claus. 7 R. 2. m. 10. dorso.De summoni∣tione Parlia∣menti, Rex, &c. W. &c. Archiepisc. Cantuar. Quia de avi∣samento, &c. quoddam Parliament▪ nostrum apud Novam Sarum die Veneris prox. post festum S. Marci Evangeli∣stae prox. futur. tenere ordinavimus, &c. Ne quod ab∣sit, &c. Praemunientes, &c. T. R. apud Westm. 3 die Marcii▪ Per ipsum Regem et Consilium. Consimilia Brevia, &c. A. Arch. Eborum, &c. 19 Episcopis, 24. Abbatibus, 2. Prioribus The 125. is this uncommon writ of Claus. An. 7 R. 2. m. 37. dorso.De summoni∣tione Parlia∣menti. Rex, &c. W. Archiepic. Cant. &c. Quia de assensu et deliberatione Consilii nostri pro certo Tractatu super
pace inter Nos, et regnum, terras, Dominia ac ubdi∣tos nostros ex una parte, et magnificum Principem Ro∣bertum consanguineum nostrum Scotae, et ejus terras, Dominia, et Subditos ex alia, favente Domino facienda, mediante Consilio et assens vestris, ac aliorum Praela∣torum, Procerum, Magnatum ac Communitatis regni nostri Angliae ineundo, ac pro aliis arduis et urgentibus negotiis, Nos, Statum et defensionem Regni nostri praedicti Ecclesiaeque Anglicanae multipliciter contin∣gentibus, disposuimus die Lunae prox. ante festum Om∣nium Sanctorum prox. futur. quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud Westm. tenere, &c. Ne quod absit, &c. Praemunientes, &c. T. R. apud Westm. 20. die Aug. Per ipsum Regem et Consilium. Consimilia Brevia diriguntur A. Archiep. Eborum. &c. 18. Episcopis, H. Episcopo Norwicen. vel ejus Vicario generali ipso in remotis agente, 24 Abbatibus, 2 Prioribus. The 126. writ is this of Claus. 7 R. 2. m. 33. which is observable.De Clero convocando. Rex, &c. W. &c. Archiep. Cantuar. &c. Qualitr inimici nostri Franciae, et alii sibi adherentes in se obligati et undique hostiliter congregati Regnum nostrum Angliae per terram et mare saepius invaserunt, mala quam pluima et intolerabilia nobis et ligeis nostris inferendo, et non solum de hoc contenti dictum Regnum nostrum et Ecclesiam sanc∣tm, Nósque et totam linguam Anglicanam subvertere et destruere de die in dim totis viribus se conantur, nisi corum maliciae adjuvante Deo fortius resistatur, vos non credimus ignorare. Unde in salvationem Status dictae Ecclesiae, ac regni ac populi nostrorum necessariam defensionem sumptus ac census, et expensas inestimabiles effundere nos oportet. Verum quia ad horum onerum et sumptuum supportationem absque juvamine fidelium nostrorum non sufficimus sicut scitis, vobis in fide et dilect ione quibus nobis tenemini rogan∣do mandamus, quatenus tam arduitate negotiorum praedicto∣rum, quam grandibus periculis quae Ecclesiae et regno prae∣dictis culata fide imminere conspicitis, attentis et debite con∣sider atis;
Suffraganeos vestros Decanos, et Priores Ecclesia∣rum Cathedralium▪ Abbates, Prires, et alios Electivos, exemptos et non exemptos, necnon Archidiaconos, Capitula, Conventus & Collegia totumque Clerum cujuslibet Diocaesis vestrae Provinciae ad comparend. coram Vobis in Ecclesia S. Pauli London, vel alibi prout vobis expedire videritis, in crastino S. Martini prox. futur. more solito convocari fac. et eis dictis negotiis et periculis ibidem plenius expositis, et declaratis, ipsos ad Subsidium in hoc casu competens et necessarium, in supportationem dictorum onerum et sump∣tuum Nobis concedend. cospecialius et cum efficacia qua mgis sciveritis vel poteritis tanta necessitate causante indu∣catis, et partes vestras ad hoc effectualiter apponatis; Nos in Cancellaria nostra de quantitate Subsidii illius, ac de ter∣minis solutionis ejusdem certificantes. Et hoc sicut Nos & honorem nostrum; et salvationem et defensionem Ecclesiae et regni praedictorum diligitis nullatenus omittatis. T. R. apud Westm. 8. die Octobris. Consimile Breve dirigitur Venerabili in Christo patri A. Arch. Eborum, Angliae Primat. T. ut supra. The 127. is this common writ in Claus. 8 R. 2. m. 35. dorso.De summoni∣tione Parlia∣menti. Rex, &c. W. &c. Archiepisc. Cant. &c. Quia de a∣visamento, &c. quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud Westm. in crastino S. Martini prox. futur. teneri ordina∣vimus, &c. Ne quod absit, &c. Praemunientes, &c. T. R. apud Westm. 28. die Septembris. Per ipsum Regem et Consilium. Consim. Brevia diriguntur, &c. A. Archiep. Eborum, 19 Episcopis, 25 Abbatibus, 2 Prioribus. The 128. writ is in Claus. 9 R. 2, m. 45. dorso. Rex,De summoni∣tione Parlia∣menti. &c. W. &c. Archiepisc. &c. Quia de avisamen∣to, &c. quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud Westm. die Venetis prox. post festum Sancti Lucae Evangelistae, prox. futur. teneri ordinavimus, &c. Ne quod absit, &c. Praemunientes, &c. T. R. apud Westm. 3. die Septem∣bris. Per ipsum Regem et Consilium. Consim. Brevia, &c. A. Archiep. Eborum, 17 Epis∣copis
Custod. Spiritualitatis Episcopat. Cicestr. et Co∣ventr. sede vacante, 24. Abbatibus, 2, Prioribus. The 129▪ is the writ in Claus. 10. R. 2. m. 42. dor∣so.De summoni∣tione Parlia∣menti. Rex, &c. W. &c. Archiep. Cant. &c. Quia de avi∣samento, &c. quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud Westm. primo die Octobris, prox. futur. teneri ordinavi∣mus, &c. Ne quod absit, &c. Praemunientes, &c. Te∣ste Rege apud Oseneye 8. die Augusti. Per ipsum Re∣gem et Consilium. Consimilia Brevia, &c. A. Archiepiscopo Eborum. 16 Episcopis, Custod. Episcopatus Landaven. et Bathon. et Wellen. sede vacante, 25 Abbatibus, 2 Prioribus. The 130. writ is that in Claus. 11 R. 2. m. 24. dorso.De summoni∣tione Parlia∣menti. Rex, &c. W. &c. Archiep. Cantuar. &c. Quia de avisa∣mento, &c. quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud Westm. crastino Purificationis beatae Mariae Virginis prox. futur. teneri ordinavimus, &c. Ne quod absit, &c. Praemunientes, &c. T. Rege apud Windesore, 17 die Decembris. Per ipsum Regem. Consim. Brevia, A. Archiep. Eborum. 19 Episcopis, 24 Abbatibus, Priori de Coventr. The 131. writ is that in Claus. Anno 12 R. 2. m. 42. dorso.De summoni∣tione Parlia∣menti. Rex, &c. W. &c. Archiepiscopo Cant. Quia de avi∣same no Consilii, &c. quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud Cantebrigg. in crastin. Nativitatis beae Mariae. prox. futur. teneri ordinavimu, &c. Ne quod absit, &c. Praemunientes, &c. T. Rege apud Oxon. 28 die Iulii. Per ipsum Regem et Consilium. Consimilia Brevia, &c. Custodi Spiritualitatis Aroh. Eborum, sede vacante, 18 Episcopis, 23 Abbatibus, 2 Prioribus. The 132. is the writ in Claus. 13 R. 2. parte 1. m. 6. dorso.De summoni∣tione Parlia∣menti. Rex, &c. W. &c. Archiepisc. Cantuar. &c. Quia de avisamento, &c. quoddam Parliamentum nostrum a∣apud
Westm. die Lunae prox. post festum S. Hillarii prox. futur. teneri ordinavimus, &c. Ne quod absit, &c. Praemunientes, &c. T. R. apud Redyng 6. die No∣vembr. Consimilia Brevia, &c. Th. Archiepisc. Eborum, 18 Episcopis. Custodi Spiritualitatis Episcopatus Cicestr. et Roffen. sede vacante. 24 Abbatibus, 2 Prioribus. The 133. is Claus. 14 R. 2. m. 42. dorso. Rex,De summoni∣tione Parlia∣menti. &c. W. &c. Archiepisc. Cant. Quia de avisa∣mento, &c. quoddam Parliamentum nosrum apud Westm. in crastino S. Martini prox. futur. teneri ordina∣vimus, &c. Ne quod absit, &c. Praemunientes, &c. T. R. apud Westm. 12 die Septembrs. Per ipsum Regem et Consilium. Consimilia Brevia Th. Arch. Eborum, 19 Episcopis, 23 Abbatibus, 2 Prioribus. The 134. writ is in Claus. 15 R. 2. m. 37. dorso. Rex,De summoni∣tione Parlia∣menti. &c. W. &c. Archiepisc. Cantuar, &c. Quia de avisamento, &c. quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud Westm. in crastino Animarum prox. futur. teneri ordi∣navimus, &c. Ne quod absit, &c. Praemunienes, &c. Teste R. apud Westm. 7 die Septembr. Per ipsum Re∣gem et Consilium. Consimilia Brevia, &c. Th. Arch. Eborum, 19 Epis∣copis, 24 Abbaibus, 2 Prioribus. The 135. is the writ in Claus. Anno 16 R. 2. m. 23. dorso.De summoni∣tione Parlia∣menti. Rex, &c. W. &c. Archiep. Cant. &c. Quia de avi∣samento, &c. quoddam Parliamentum nosrum, apud Wynton in Octabis S. Hillarii prox. futur. tenere ordina∣vimus, &c. Ne quod absi, &c. Praemunientes, &c. T. R. apud Eborum 23 die Novembris. Per ipsum Regem et Consilium. Consim. Brevia, &c. Th. Archiepisc. Eborum, 19 E∣piscopis, 24 Abbatibus, 2 Prioribus. The 136.De summoni∣tione Parlia∣menti. is that in Claus. An. 16 R. 2. m. 32. dor∣so. Rex, &c. W. &c. Archiepiscopo Cantuar. &c. Qui
de avisamento, &c. quoddm Parliamentum notrum apud Eborum. in crastino translationis S. Edwardi Regis tenere ordinavimus, &c. Ne quod absit, &c. Praemu∣nientes, &c. T. R. apud Wyndesore 23 die Iulli. Per ip∣sum Regem et Confilium. Consimilia Brevia, &c. Th. Archiepiscopo Eborum, 19 Episcopis, 24 Abbatibus, 2 Prioribus. The 137. is the usual writ entred in Claus. Anno 17 R. 2. m. 30. dorso.De summoni∣tione Parlia∣menti. Rex, &c. W. &c. Archiepiscopo Cantuar, &c. Quia de avisamento, &c. quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud Westm. in quindena S. Hillarii prox. futur. teneri ordinavimus, &c. Ne quod absit, &c. Praemunientes, &c. T. R. apud Westm. 13 die Novembris. Per ip∣sum Regem et Consilium. Consim. Brevia, Th. Archiepiscopo Eborum, 18 Epis∣copis, 24 Abbatibus, Priori de Coventre. The 138. common writ is registred in Claus. An. 18 R. 2. m. 23. dorso.De summoni∣tione Parlia∣menti. Rex, &c. W. &c. Archieisc. Cant. Quia de avisa∣mento, &c. quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud Westm. in quindena S. Hillarii prox. futur. teneri ordi∣navimus, &c. Ne quod absit, &c. Praemunientes, &c. T. Edmundo Duce Eborum Custod. Angliae apud West▪ 20 die Novembris. Per ipsum Regem et Consilium. Consim. Brevia Th. Archiep. Eborum, 16 Episcopis; Custodi Spirit. Episcopatus Assaven. 25 Abbatibus, 2. Prioribus. The 139. writ is registred in Claus. 20 R. 2. m. 15. dorso.De summoni∣tione Par∣liamenti. Rex Custodi Spiritualitis Archiepiscopatus Cantuar. sede vacante salutem. Quia de avisamento, &c. quod∣dam Parliamentum nostrum apud Westm in festo S. Vin∣centii prox. futur. teneri ordinavimus, &c. Ne quod ab∣sit, &c. Praemunientes, &c. T. R. apud Westm. 30. die Novembr. Per ipsum Regem. Consim. Breva diriguntur. &c. Thomae Arch. Ebo∣rum, &c. 19 Episcopis, 25 Abbatibus, 2 Prioribus.
The 140. writ is in Claus. 21 R. 2. m. 27. dorso. Rex,De summoni∣tione Parlia∣menti. &c. Thomae Arch. Cant. &c. Quia de avisamen∣to, &c. quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud Westm. die Lunae prox. post festum Exaltationis sanctae Crucis, prox. futur. teneri ordinavimu, &c. Ne quod absit, &c. Praemunientes, &c. T. R. apud Westm. 18 die Iulii. Per ipsum Regem et Consilium. Consim. Brevia diriguntur A. Archiepiscopo Ebo∣rum, 19 Episcopis, 25 Abbatibus, 2 Prioribus there named. The 141. is Claus. 23. R. 2. m. 3. dorso.De summoni∣tione Parlia∣menti. Rex, &c. Th. &c. Arch. Cant. &c. Quia, &c. Parlia∣mentum nostrum apud Westm. in crastino S. Michaelis, proz. futur. &c. Praemunientes, &c. T. Rege apud Cstre. 19 die Aug. Per ipsum Regem et Consili∣um. Consimilia Brevia Arch. Eborum. 18 Episcopis, 25 Abbatibus, 2 Prioribus. The 142. writ is enrolled in Claus. Anno 1 H. 4. m. 37. dorso.De summoni∣tione Parlia∣menti. Rex▪ &c. Thomae, &c. Cantuar. Archiepiscopo, &c. Quia de avisamento, &c. quoddam Parliamentum no∣strum apud Westm. in festo Sanctae Fidei Virginis prox. futur. teneri, &c. (in the usual form.) T. R. apud Westm. 30 die Decembris. Per ipsum Regem et Consilium. Consimilia Brevia diriguntur R. Archiep. Eborum. 18 Episcopis, 25 Abbatibus, 2 Prioribus, inserted a∣mong the Abbots names. The 143. writ is that of Claus. 3. H. 4. dors. 17. Rex,De summoni∣tioni Parlia∣menti. &c. Th. &c. Archiepiscopo Cantuar. &c. Quia &c. quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud Westm. die Lunae prox. ante estum Purificationis beatae Mariae prox. futur. teneri, &c, Praemunientes, &c. T. Rege apud Westm. 2 die Decembris. Per ipsum Regem. Consimilia Brevia Archiep. Ebor. 19 Episcopis, 23 Abbatibus, 2 Prioribus. The 144.De summoni∣tione Parlia∣menti. is in Claus. 5▪ H. 4. m. 28. dorso. Rex, &c. T. Archiepisc. Cant. &c. Quia, &c. quod∣dam
Parliamentum nostrum apud Coventre. 3 die De∣cembris prox. futur. teneri, &c. Praemunientes, &c. T. Rege apud Westm. 20 die Octobris. Consimilia Brevia Archiepiscopo Eborum, 19 Epis∣copis, 25 Abbatibus, 2 Prioribus. Te 145. is entred in Claus. 7 H. 4. m. 39. dorso. Rex,De summoni∣tione Parlia∣menti. &c. T. Archiepiscopo Cantuar. &c. Quia, &c. quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud Covent. 15 die Febr. prox. fuur. tenri, &c. Praemunientes, &c. T. Rege apud Westm. 21 die Decembris. Consimilia Brevia Custodi Spiritual. Archiepisco∣paus Eborum: et Episcopatus Roffen. sede vacante, 10 Episcopls, 24 Abbatibus, 2 Prioribus. The 146. writ is in Claus. 8 H. 4. m. 2. dorso: Rex,De summoni∣tione Parlia∣mentum. &c. Th. Arciepis. Cantuar. &c. Quia, &c. quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud Gloucestr. 20 die Octobris prox. futur. teneri, &c. Praemunientes, &c. T. Rege apud Westm. 26 die Augusti. Per breve de pri∣vato Sigillo. Consimilia Brevia Custodi Spiritual. Archiepis. E∣bor. Custodi Spirit. Episc. Norwi. Custodi Spirit. Episc. Meneven. sede vacante, 14 Episcopis, 25 Abbatibus, 2 Prioribus. The 147. writ is that of Claus. 11 H. 4. m. 32. dor∣so.De summoni∣tione Parlia∣menti. Rex, &c. Th. Archiepisc. Cantuar. Quia, &c. quod∣dam Parliamentum nostrum apud Bristoll in Quindena S. Hillarii prox' futur. teneri, &c. Praemunientes, &c. T. Rege apud Westm. 26 die Octobr. Consimilia Brevia H. Archiepiscopo Ebor: 18 Epis∣copis, 25 Abbatibus 2 Prioribus. The 148. writ is in Claus. 12 H. 4. m. 2. dorso. Rex,De summoni∣nitione Par∣liamenti. &c. Th. Archiepis. Cantuar. Quia, &c. quod∣dam Parliamentum nostrum apud Westm: in crastino A∣nimarum prox. futur. teneri, &c. Praemunientes, &c. T. Rege apud Westm: 21 die Septembris. Consimilia Brevia H. Arch. Ebor. 18 Episcopis, 25 Abbatibus, 2 Prioribus.
The 149. writ is that of Claus. 14 H. 4. dorso 22. Rex,De summoni∣tione Parlia∣menti. &c. Th. Arch. Cant. Quia, &c. quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud Westm. in crastino Purifica∣tionis beatae Mariae. prox. futur. teneri, &c. Praemuni∣eutes, &c. T. Rege apud Westm. . die Decembr. Per ipsum Regem et Consilium. Consimilia Brevia, H. Archiepisc. Ebor. 18 Episco∣pis, 25 Abbatibus, 2 Prioribus. The 150 writ is in Claus. 1 H. 5. m. 9. dorso. Rex,De summoni∣tione Parlia∣menti. &c. Thomae Archiep. Cantuar. &c. Quia de a∣visamento, &c. quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud Leicestr. 29 die Ianuarii prox. futur. teneri ordinavi∣mus, &c. Praemunientes, &c, T. Rege apud Westm. 1. die Decemris. Consimilia Brevia diriguntur H. Arch. Eborum, 19 Episcopis, 26 Abbatibus, 2 Prioribus. The 151 writ is extant in Claus. 1 H. 5. m. 37. dor∣so.De summoni∣tione Parlia∣men Rex, &c. Thomae, &c. Archiep. Cant. &c. Quia de avisamento &c. quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud VVestm. à die Paschae prox. futur. in tres Septimanas teneri ordinaimus, &c. Praemunientes, &c. T. R. a∣pud VVetm. 22 die Martii. Consimilia Brevia diriguntur, &c. H. Arch. Eborum. 18 Episcopis, 25 Abbatibus, 2 Prioribus. The 152. is registred Claus. 2 H. 5. m. 16 dorso. Rex,De summoni∣tione Parlia∣menti. &c. H. &c. Arch. Cantuar. Quia &c. quod∣dam Parliamentum nostrum apud VVestm. die Lunae prox. post Octab. S. Martini prox. futur. teneri, &c. Praemunientes, &c. T. Rege apud VVestm. 27 die Sep∣tembr. Consimilia brevia H. Archiep. Ebor. 18 Episcopis, Custodi Spiritual. Episcopatus Covent. et Litchf. 25 Ab∣bbus, 2 Prioribus. The 153. is in Claus. 3 H. 5. m. 15 dorso. Rex &c.De summoni∣tione Parlia∣menti. H. Archiep. Cantuar. Quia, &c. quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud Westm. die Lunae prox. post festum S. Lucae Evangeli prox. futur. teneri, &c.
Praemunintes, &c. Tee Iohanne Duce Beaf. Custod. Angliae apud Westm. 12 die Augusti. Consim. Brevia dirigntur H. Arch. Ebor. 15 Epis∣copis, N. Episcopo Bahon. et Wellen. ive ejus Vicario generali ipso Episcopo in remotis agente. The like R. Episcopo Norwicen. and R. Episcopo Sarum, vel ejus Vicar. generali, &c. Custodi Spiritual. Episcopatus Ci∣cestr. 25 Abbatibu, 2 Prioribu. The 154. is that of Claus. 4 H. 5. m. 16 dorso. Rex,De summoni∣tione Parlia∣menti. &c. H. Archiep. Cantuar. Quia quoddam Par∣liamentum nostrum apud Westm. 19 die Octobr. prox. fu∣tur. teneri ordinavimus, &c. Praemunienes, &c. T. Rege apud Sandwicum 3. die Septemb. Consimilia Brevia H. Archiepisc. Ebor. 13 Episcopis, 5 Episcopis London, Bath & Wells, Norwich, Sarum, Co∣ventre & Lichf. sive ejus Vicario generali ipso Episco∣po in remotis agente. Custodi Spiritual. Episcopatus Cicestr. sede vacante; 23 Abbatibus, 2 Prioribus. The 155. writ is in Claus. 5 H. 5. m. 11. dorso. Rex,De summoni∣tione Parlia∣menti. &c. H. Archiep. Cantuar. Quia, &c. quod∣dam Parliamentum nostrum apud Westm. 18 die No∣vembris prox. futur. teneri. Praemunientes, &c. Teste Iohanne Duce Bedford. Custode Angllae apud Westm. 5. die Octobr. Consimilia Brevia H. Archiepisc. Ebor. 11. Episco∣pis, 5 Episcopis, si eorum Viaio gen. (as before.) Custodi Spiritual. Episcopatus Cicestr. et. Sarum. 24 Abbatibus, Priori de Covntre. The 156. is Claus. 7 H. 5. m. 9. dorso. Rex,De summoni∣tione Parlia∣menti. H. Archiepiscopo Cant. Qui, &c. quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud Westm. 16 die Octob. prox. futur. teneri, &c. Praemunientes, &c. Teste Iohanne Duce Bedf. Custode Angl. apud Westm. 24 die Au∣gusti. Consim. Brevia H. Archiepisc. Ebor. 16 Episcopis, Custod. Spirit. Episcopatus Wigorn, et Roffen: I. Episc. Coventr. et Lichf. sive ejus Vicario generali, ipso Epis∣coo in remotis agente, 24 Abbatibus, Priori de Co∣ventre.
The 157. is in Claus. 8 H. 5. m. 2. dorso. Rex &c.De summoni∣tione Parlia∣menti. H. Archiep. Cantuar. Quia, &c. quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud Westm. 2. e May prox. futur. teneri, &c. Praemunienes, &c. T. Rege apud Westm. 26 die Febr. Cons. Brevia H. Arch. Ebor. 17 Episcopis. Custodi Spirituali. Episcopatus Cicestr. sede vacante. T. Episc. Hereford, vel ejus Vicario general ipso Epicopo in re∣motis agente, 23 Abbatibus, Priori de Coventre. The 158. is inrolled, Claus. 9 H. 5. nu. 13. dorso. Rex,De summoni∣tione Parlia∣menti. &c. H. Archiepisc. Cant. &c. Quia quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud Westm. 1. die Decembris, prox. futur. &c. Proemnnientes, &c. Teste Iohanni Du∣ce Bedf. Custode Angliae apud Westm. 20 die Octobris. Per ipsum Regem et Consilium. Consimilia Brevia H. Archiep. Ebor. 14 Episcopis, Custodi Spiritual. Episcopatus London. & Roffen. sede vacante, Episcopo Heref. et Cicestr. vel ejus Vicario generali ipso Episcopo in remotis agente, 25 Abbati∣bus, Priori de Coventre. The 159. writ in ordinary form, is registred in Claus. 1 H. 6. m. 22. dorso.De summoni∣tione Parlia∣menti. Rex, &c. H. Archiepisc. Cantuar. &c. Quia de avi∣samento, &c. quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud Westm. die Lunae prox. ante Festum S. Marti. prox. futur. teneri ordinavimus, &c. Praemunientes, &c. T. Rege apud Wyndesore 29 die Septembris. Per ipsum Re∣gem et Consilium. Consimilia Brevia diriguntur H. Arch. Eborum. 19 Episcopis, 24 Abbatibus, Priori de Coventre. The 160. is recorded in Claus. 2 H. 6. m. 18. dor∣so.De summoni∣tione Parlia∣menti. Rex, &c. H. Archiepisc. Cantuar. Quia, &c. quod∣dam Parliamentum nostrum apud Westm. 23. die Octob. prox. futur. teneri, &c. Premunientes, &c. T. Rege apud Westm. 1 die Septembris. Per breve de Privato Sigill. Consim. Brevia H. Archiepisc. Ebor. 15 Episcopis,
3 Episcopis, vel eorum Vicario generai, &c. Custod. Spiritual. Episc. Bangor. sede vacante, 24 Abbatibus, Priori de Coventre. The 161. writ is in Claus. 3 H. 6. m. 9. dorso. which hath some variation from the former.De summoni∣tione Parlia∣menti. Rex, &c. H. Archiepiscopo Cantuar. &c. salutem. Quia nos jam dum in annis degimus teneris an pax et justitia ubilibet inter Ligeos nostros regni nostri Angliae, sine quarum observatione regnum aliquod pro∣spicere (non pote) debie conserventur et exhibean∣tur necne, per avisamentum Consilii nostri decre∣vimus experiri; quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud West monast. ultimo die Aprilis prox, futur. te∣neri or inavimus, ac ibidem vobicum, accum caeteris Pralais, Magnatibus et Proceribus dicti regni nostri super praeissi, et quibusdam alijs arduis et urgenti∣bus ngoiis, No, statum, et defensionem dicti regni nostri ac Ecclesiae Anglicanae contingentibus, Colloqui∣u bere et tractatum. Vobis in fide et dilectione quibus Nobis tenemini sirmiter injungendo mandamus, qod consie rais dictorum negotiorum arduitare et periculis imminntibus, ce are quacunque xcula io∣n, dictis die et loco personaiter intersit is Nobiscu, accm caeeris Praelatis Magnatibu et Procerius prae∣dictis, super dictis negotiis tractaturi, vestrumque con∣silium impesri. Et hoc sicut No et honorem no∣strum, ac salvationem et defensionem regni e Eccle∣siae praedictorum, expeditionemqe dictorum negotio∣rum diligi is nuatenus omita is. Praemunientes, &c. T. Rege apud Westm. 24 die Febr. Consim. Brevia Custod. Spiritual. Archiepisc. Ebor. and so Episcopatus Bathon. et Wllen. Lncoln. et Bn∣gor. sede , 15. Episcopis. T. Episc. Cicestr. vel ejus Vicar. gen. &c. 25 Abbatibus, Priori de Co∣ventre. The 162. writ I finde in Claus. 4 H. 6. dorso. 15. Rex,De summoni∣tione Parlia∣menti. &c. H. Archie. Cant. &c. Quia de avisamen∣to, &c. quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud Lei∣cestr.
18 die Februar. prox. futur. teneri, &c. Praemu∣nientes, &c. T. Rege apud Westm. 4 die Ianuarii. Consim. Brevia Custod Spirit: Archiepisc, Ebor. E∣piscopatus Lincoln, Elien. Bangor. Norwic. ede vacante, 15 Episcopis, 25 Abbatibus, Priori de Coventre. The 163. is this of Claus. 5 H. 6. m. 4. dorso. Rex,De summoni∣tione Parlia∣menti. &c. H. Archiep. Cantuar. Quia, &c. quod∣dam Parliamentum nostrum apud Westm. in Quindena S. Michaelis prox. futur. teneri, &c. Praemunientes, &c. T. Rege apud Westm. 15 die Iulii. Per Consilium. Consimilia brevia I. Arch. Ebor. 16 Episcopis, 2 Custodibus Spirit. sede vacante H. Episc. Wynton, vel jus Vicar. gen. &c. 25. Abbatibus, Priori de Coven∣tre. The 164. is in Claus. 7 H. 6. m. 2. dorso. Rex,De summoni∣tione Parlia∣menti. &c. Archiepisc. Cant. Quia, &c. quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud Westm. in Quindena S. Mich. prox. futur. teneri, &c. Praemunientes, &c. T. R. apud Westm. 12 die Julii. Per Breve de Privato sigillo. Consim. Brevia I. Archiepisc. Ebor. 17 Episcopis, 1 Custodi Spirit. 2 Episc. vel eorum Vicar. Generali, &c. 24 Abbatibus, 2 Prioribus. The 165. writ is that of Claus. 9 H. 6. dorso 18. Rex,De summoni∣tione Parlia∣menti. &c. H. Archiepiscopo Cantuar. Quia, &c. quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud Westm. die Ve∣neris prox. ante festum S. Hillarii prox. futur. teneri, &c. Praemunientes, &c. Teste Humfrido Duce Gloucestr. Custodi Angliae apud Westm. 27 die Novembr. Per breve de privato sigillo. Consim. Brevia I. Archiepisc. Ebor. 17 Episcopis, Episcopo Winton. vel ejus Vic. gen. &c. Custodi Episc. Cicestr. sede vacante, 24 Abbatibus, 2 Prioribus. The 166. is in Claus. 10 H. 6. m. 10. dorso. Rex,De summoni∣tione Parlia∣menti. &c. H. Arch. Cant. Quia, &c. quoddam Par∣liamentum nostrum apud Westm. 12 die Maii prox. futur. teneri, &c. Praemunientes, &c. T. Rege apud Westm: 25 die Feb. Per Breve de Privato sigillo.
Consimilia Brevia, &c. I. Archiepiscopo Eborum, 17 Episcopis, 2 Episc. vel ejus Vic. Gen. &c. 25 Ab∣batibus, 2 Prioribus. The 167. is that of Claus. 11 H. 6. m. 10. dorso. Rex,De summoni∣tione Parlia∣menti. &c. H. Archiep. Cant. &c. Quia, &c. quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud Westm. 8 die Iulii. prox. futur. teneri, &c. Praemunientes, &c. T R. apud Westm. 24. die Maii. Per breve de privato sigillo. Consim. Brevia, I. Archiep. Eborum, 13 Episcopis, 5 Episc. vel ejus Vic. gen. &c. Custodi. Spirit. Episc. Assaven. sede vacante, 25 Abbatibus, 2 Prioribus. The 168. is that in Claus. 13 H. 6. m. 2. dorso. Rex,De summoni∣tione Par∣liamenti. &c. H. Archiepiscopo Cantuar, &c. Quia, &c. quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud Westm. die 10. Octobris, prox. futur. teneri, &c. Praemunientes, &c. T. R. apud Westm. 5 die Iulii. Consim. Brevia I. Archiep. Eborum, vel ejus Vicar. gen. &c. and so to 4. Bishops more, 15 Episcopis, 24 Abbatibus, 2 Prioribus. The 169. is that of Claus. 15 H. 6. dorso 18. Rex,De summoni∣tione Parlia∣menti. &c. H. Archiepisc. Cant. &c. Licet uper de avisamento et assens Consilii nostri pro quibusdam ar∣duis, &c. quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud Cant. 21. die Ianuarii, prox. futur. teneri ordinavimus, Quibusdam tam encertis de causis, nos intime coner∣nentibus Parliamentum praedict. &c. Praemunientes, &c. T. Rege apud West, 10 die Decemb. Per breve de privato Sigillo. Consim. Brevia 17 Episcopis, 2 Custod, Spirit. sede vacante, 25 Abbatibus, 2 Prioribus. The 170. is in Claus. 18 H. 6. mem. 33. dorso. Rex,De summoni∣tione Parlia∣menti. H. Archiepisc. Cant. Quia, &c. quoddam Par∣liamentum nostrum apud Westm. in crastino S. Martini, prox. futur. teneri, &c. Praemunientes, &c. T. Rege a∣pud Guildeford, 26 die Septemb. Per ipsum Regem. Consim. Brevia I. Archiep. Ebor. vel ejus Vic. gen. &c. H. Episcopo Winton, Crdinali Angliae vulgariter nuncupato, vel ejus Vic. gen. ipso Episcopo in remo∣tis
agente. Administratori Episcopatus Elien. vel ejus Vicar. gener. ipso Admininira. in remotis agente, 15 Episcopis, 25 Abbatibus, 2 Prioribus. The 171. is extant in Claus. 20 H. 6. m. 27. dorso. Rex,De summoni∣tione Parlia∣menti. &c. H. Archiepisc. Cant. &c. Quia pro quibus∣dam auis, &c. quoddam Parliamentum nostrum in die Conversionis S. Paul, prox. futur. teneri, &c. Praemuni∣entes, &c. T. R. apud Mnerium sum de Sheue, 3 die De∣cembris. Per ipsum Regem. Consimilia Brevia I. Cardinali et Archiep. Ebor. Angliae Primati; H. Cardinali Angliae, et Episcopo Wynton. 17 Episcopis, Administratori Episcopatus E∣lien. vel ejus Vicar. gener. ipso Administrat: in remo∣tis agente, 25 Abbatibus, Priori de Coventre. The 172 is that of Claus. 23 H. 6. m. 21. dorso. Rex,De summoni∣tione Parlia∣menti. &c. I. Archiep. Cantuar. &c. Quia pro qui∣busdam, &c. quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud Westm. 24 die Febr. prox. futur. teneri, &c. Praemu∣nientes, &c. T. Rege apud Westm. 13 die Ianuarii. Per ipsum Regem. Consim: Brevia I. Cardinali et Archiep. Eborum. Angliae Prima; H. Cardinali Angliae, et Episcopo Wynton. 18 Episcopis, 25 Abbatibus, 2 Prioribus. The 173. is in Claus. 25 H. 6. m. 24. dorso. Rex,De summoni∣tione Parlia∣menti. &c. I. Archiep. Cant. Quia de avisamento, &c. quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud Villam nostram Cantebrigg. in die Sanctae Scholasticae, viz. 10 die Febr. prox. futur' teneri, &c. Praemunientes, &c. T. R. apud Westm. 14 die Decembris. Per ipsum Regem et Con∣silium. Consim. Brevia I. Cardinali et Archiep Eborum: &c. H. Cardinali Angliae, et Episcopo Wynton, 17 Episcopis, Custodi Spirit. Episcop. Meneven. 25 Abbatibus, 2 Prioribus. The 174. is in Claus. 27 H. 6. m. 24. (26) dorso. Rex,De summoni∣tione Parlia∣menti. &c. I. Arch. Cant. &c. Quia de avisamento, &c. quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud Westm. 12. die Febr. prox. futur. teneri, &c. Praemunientes, &c.
T. R. apud Westm. 2 die Ianuarii. Consim. Brevia I. Cardinali et Archiepiscopo Ebo∣rum, &c. 18 Episcopis, 25 Abbatibus, Priori de Co∣ventre. The 175. is that of Claus. 20. H. 6. m. 26 dorso. Rex,De summoni∣tioni Parlia∣menti. &c. I. Arch. Cant. &c. Quia pro quibusdam, &c. quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud Westm. 6 die Novemb. prox. futur. &c. Praemunientes, &c. T. Re∣ge apud Shene, 23 die Septembris. Per ipsum Re∣gem. Consimilia Brevia I. Cardinali et Arch. Eborum. &c. 18 Episcopis, Custodi Spirit. London. sede vacante, 24 Abbatibus, 2 Prioribus. The 176. writ is in Claus. 29 H. 6. m. 41. dorso. Rex.De summoni∣tione Parlia∣menti. &c. I. Archiepiscopo Cantuar. Qui de avis∣mento, &c. quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud Westm. in festo Sancti Leonardi prox. futur. teneri, &c. Praemunientes, &c. T. R. apud Wesm. 5 die Septem∣bris. Per ipsum Regem Consimilia Brevia I. Cardinali er Archiep. Eborum &c. 18 Episcopis, Custodi Spiri. Episc. Sarum, ede vacante, 24 Abbatibus, 2 Prioribus. The 177. is entred Claus. 31 H. 6. m. 36. dorso. Rex,De summoni∣tione Parlia∣menti. &c. I. Archiepiscopo Cantuar. Quia de avisa∣mento, &c. quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud Re∣dynge 6 die Martii prox. futur. teneri, &c. Praemuni∣enes, &c. T. Rege apud Wesm. 10 die Ianuarii. Per ipsum Regem. Consimilia Brevi W. Archiep. Ebor. 18 Episcopis, Custodi Spirit. Episcopo Covent. et Litchf. 25 Abba∣tibus, 2 Prioribus. The 178. is in Claus. 33 H. 6. dorso. 36. Rex,De summoni∣tione Parlia∣menti. &c. Th. Archiepisc. Cant Quia de avisamento, &c. quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud Westm. 9. die Iulii prox. futur. teneri, &c. Praemunientes, &c. T. Rege apud Westm. 26 die Maii. Per breve de Privaro Sigillo. Cons. Brevia W. Arch. Ebor. 19 Episcopis. 25 Ab∣batibus, 2 Prioribus.
The 179. is extant in Claus. 38 H. 6. m. 30. dorso. Rex,De summoni∣tione Parlia∣menti. &c. Th. Archiepisc. Cant. Quia de avisamento, &c. quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud Coventre. 20 die Novembris prox. futur. teneri, &c. Praemunientes, &c. Teste Rege apud Westminster 19. die Octobris. Per ipsum Regem. Consimilia Brevia &c. W. Archiep. Ebor. 20 Epis∣copis, 25 Abbatibus, 2 Prioribus. The 180. is this summons to a Convocation, Claus. 38 H. 6. m. 29. dorso.De summoni∣tione Parlia∣menti. Rex venerab. in Christo Patri Tho. eadem gratia Ar∣chiep. Angliae Primati, salutem. Quibusdam arduis & urgentibus negociis Nos, Statum et defensionem regni no∣stri Angliae, et utilitatem Ecclesiae Anglicanae intimè con∣cernentibus; Vobis in fide et dilectione quibus Nobis tene∣mini rogantes mandamus, quatinus praemissis debito intuitu attentis et ponderatis, universos et singulos Episcopos vestrae Provinciae, ac Decanos, et Priores Ecclesiarum Cathedrali∣um, Abbates, et Prioes Electivos, exemptos et non exemp∣tos, necnon Archidiaconos, Capitula, Conventus & Collegia totumque Clerum cujuslibet Diocaesis ejusd. Provinciae, ad comparand. coram Vobis in Ecclesia S. Pauli London, vel alibi prout melius expedire videritis cum omni celeritate accommoda more debito convocari faciatis, ad tract and▪ con∣sentiend. et percludend. super praemissis et aliis, quae sibi clarius exponentur tunc ibidem ex parte nostra. Et hoc sicut Nos, et statum Regni nostri praedicti, ac honorem & utilitatem Ecclesiae praedictae diligitis nullatenus omittatis. T. R. apud Westm. 12 die Feb. Rex, Ven. in Christo Patri W. eadem gratia Archip. Eborum. Angliae Primati, &c. ut supra: usque ibi coram vobis: et tunc sic: in Ecclesia beati Petri Ebor. vel alibi prout melius expedire videritis. T. ut supra. The 181. writ is remaining in Claus. 49 H. 6. m. 6. dorso.De summoni∣tione Par∣liamenti. Rex, Th. Archiepisc. Cantuar. Quia de avisamento, et assensu Consilii nostri &c. quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud Westm. 26 die Novembr. prox. futur. te∣neri,
&c. Praemunientes, &c. T. Rege apud Westm. 15 die Octobris. Per ipsum Regem et Consilium. Consimilia Brevia G. Arch. Eborum. 19 Episcopis, 25 Abbatibu, 2 Prioribus. The 182 writ I shall remember, is that in Claus. 1 E. 4. m. 35 dorso.De veniendo ad Parliamen∣tum. Rex, &c. Th. &c. Archiepisc. Cantuar. &c. Quia de avisamento, &c. quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud Westm. 6. die Iulii prox. futur. teneri, &c. (in usual form.) Praemunientes, &c. T. Rege apud Westm. 23 die Maii. Consim. Brevia diriguntur W. Archiepisc. Ebor. &c. and to 19 Bishops, 25 Abbots, 2 Priors there mentio∣ned by name. The 183 is that in Claus. 2 E. 4. m. 3. dorso. Rex.De veniendo ad Parliamen∣tum. &c. Th. Archiep. Cantuar. Quia de avisamento et assensu Consilii nostri, &c. quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud Westm. 29 die Aprilis prox. futur. teneri, &c. Praemunientes, &c. T. Rege apud Westm. 28 die Febr. Per ipsum Regem. Consimilia Brevia W. Archiepisc. Ebor. 17 Episcopis, 25 Abbatibus, 2 Prioribus. The 184. writ is in Claus. 6 E. 4. m. 1. dorso. Rex,De veniendo ad Parliamen∣tum. &c. Th. Archiep. Cantua. Quia pro quibus∣dam arduis, &c. quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud Westm. 3. die Iunii. prox. futur. teneri, &c. Praemuni∣entes, &c. Teste Rege apud Westm. 28 die Febr, Per breve de Privato Sigillo. Consimilia Brevia Archiepisc. Ebor. 18 Episcopis, 25 Abbatibus, 2 Prioribus. The 185. is Claus. 12 E. 4. m. 2. dorso. Rex,De summoni∣tione Parlia∣menti. &c. Archiepiscopo Cant. Quia de avisamento et assers, &c. quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud Westm. 6 die Octob. prox. futur. teneri, &c. Praemuni∣entes, &c. Teste Rege apud Westm. 9 die Augusti. Per breve de privato Sigillo. Consim. Brvia 17 Episcopis, Vicario gen. Archie∣piscopatus Ebor, in remotis agente, Custod. Spirit. E∣piscopat.
Norwicen. & Assaven. 24 Abbatibus, 2 Pri∣oribus. The 186. is that of Claus. Anno 22, & 23 Edw. 4. m. 11. dorso. Rex, &c. Th. Archiep. Cant. Quia de avisamento et assensu Consilii nostri,Pro Parlia∣mento. &c. quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud Westm. 10 die Ianuarii prox. futur. te∣neri ordinavimus, &c. Praemunientes, &c. T R. apud Westm. 15 die Novemb. Consim. Brevia, I. Archiep. Eborum, 19 Episcopis, 25 Abbatibus, 2 Prioribus. The 187. is in Claus. 22, & 23 E. 4. m. 11. dorso, for a Convocation.De Convoca∣tione. Rex Reverendissimo in Christo Patri Th. eadem gra∣tia Archiepiscopo Cant. totius Angliae Primati, consan∣guneo nostro carissimo, slutem. Quibusdam arduis & urgentibus Negotii, Nos, securitatem et defensionem Ec∣clesiae Anglicanae, c pacm, r anquillitatem, bonum publicū, et defensionem Rgni nostri, & Subdiorum nostrorum eus∣dem concernentibus, Vobis in fide et dilectione quibus Nobis tenmini rogando mandamus, quatenus praemissis dbito intuito attentis & ponderatis universs, &c. (ut supra, num. 180.) coram Vobis in Ecclesi Sanct Pali London, vel alibi prout vobis expelire viderits cumom cleritae accommoda modo debito covocari faciatis, ac tractand▪ consentiend. & concludnd. super praemiss et aliis quae bi clarius exponentu tunc ibidem ex parte nostra. Et hoc si∣cut Nos, et Statum egi nosti, et honorem et utilitaem Ecclesiae praedictae diligitis nullatenus omittatis. T. Rege a∣pud Westm. 3 de Februarii. Per ipsm Regem. This is the last writ in the Clause  in the Tow∣er of this Naure, which extend only to the end of King Edward the h. his reign. The writs of Summons o Parliaments, and Convoca∣tions under R. 3. H. 7. 8. Ed. 6. Q. Mary Q. Eliz. K. Iames, and King Charles, are not in the Tower, but reserved in the Ros and Chancery, where those who please may peruse them, they running for the most part in the self∣same
ordinary form, without any notable variety. I shall close up this Section with the last writ of this Nature under our late King Charls. Carolus Dei gratia, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, & H∣berniae Rex,See My Anti∣quity trium∣phing over Novelty, p. 25. Fidei defensor, &c. Reverendissimo in Christo patri ac fideli Consilario Nostro Gulielmo, ea∣dem gratia Cantuar. Archiepisc. totius Angliae Primati & Metropolitan, salutem. Quibam arduis et urgen∣tibus negotiis Nos, securitatem & defensionem Eccle∣siae Anglicanae, ac pacem & tranquillitatem, bonum pub∣licum & defensionem regni Nostri & subditorum No∣strorum ejusdem concernentibus; Vobis in fide & di∣lectione quibus Nobis tenemini rogando mandamus, quatenus praemissis debito intuitu attentis et pondera∣tis, universos & singulos Episcopos vestrae Provinciae, ac Decanos Ecclesiarum Cathedralium, necnon Archi∣diaconos, Capitula et Collegia, totumque Clerum cu∣juslibet Diocaesios ejusdem Provinciae, ad comparandum coram Vobis in Ecclesia CatholicaCathedrali. Sancti Pauli London, decimo quarto die Aprilis proxim, futur. vel alibi, prout melius expedire videritis, cum omni celeritate accommoda modo deito convocari facias, ad tractan∣dum, consentiendum, & concludendum super premissis, & aliis quae tibi clarius exponentur tunc ibidē ex parte Nostra: Et hoc sicut Nos, et Statum regni Nostri, ac honorem et utilitatem Ecclesiae praedictae diligitis nul∣latenus omittatis. Teste meipso apud Westmonast. vi∣cesimo die Februarii, Anno regni nostri quintodeci∣mo. Before I proceed to my Observations on the prece∣dent writs, I shall crave leave to inform and satisfie the ingenuous Readers in 2. particulars, to prevent their causelesse censures. 1. That the usual writs in some Clause Rolls to the Spi∣ritual Lords were for Brevitie sake purposely omitted, and in the Consimiles literae, and eodem modo, &c. after the transcripts of the writs of Summons here inserted (especially those of King Edward the 2.) the paticular
Numbers of the Bishops, Abbots, Priors, and Spiritual Lords then summoned to those Parliaments mentioned in the Eodem modo &c. were casually left out (though en∣tred by their names in the Clause Rols) by reason of an, &c. and vacant spaces in the written Copy for their numbers; through hast forgotten to be filled up, before they were printed off; which caused some Errors and Omissions of the true number of Bishops, Abbots & Priors in the Eodem modo, &c. from p. 14. to 32. which I think necessary here to rectifie and supply, rather than in an Errata at the end of this Breviate; and that in this brief manner. Claus. 30 E. 1. m. 12. dorso. Consim: literae diriguntur I: Karliol: Episc. 14 Bishops more, and 44 Abbati∣bus. Claus. 30 E. 1. m. 9. dorso. Consim: literae, &c. Io∣hanni Karliol. Episcopo, to 14 other Bishops, 44 Ab∣bots; Magistro Militiae Templi in Angl. Magistro Or∣dine de Semplingham, Priori Hosp: Sancti Iohannis  Ie∣rusalem. in Anglia. In both these Rolls there is a writ, Thomae Arch. E∣borum: with this special clause after impensuri; Vos sal∣tem Procuratorem idoneum cum sufficienti potestate ad dic∣tos diem et locum, et vestro nomine designatis. Et hoc nul∣latenus omittatis. Anno 32 E. 1. m. 2. dorso. Rex, &c. Archiepiscopo Cant. &c. Quia pro quibusdam negotiis, &c. (as in that of this Roll in the next Section to the Lords) Praemu∣nientes, &c. T. Rege apud Brustwike 12 die Novembr. Eodem modo, &c. 18 Episcopis, besides Electo Lon∣don. vel ejus Vices gernti ipso agente in partibus transma∣rinis, Decano et Capit: beati Petri Ebor. Custodibus Spi∣ritualitatis Archiepiscopatus Eborum sede vacante, 74 Ab∣batibus, Magistro Mil. Templi & Smplingham, Priori Hosp: S. Iohan: Ierus. Claus. 34 E. 1. m. 2. dors. Rex, &c. W. &c. Arch. Ebor. Quia super ordinatione et stabilimento terrae nostrae
Scotia, &c. (as in the next Section to the Prince) Praemunientes, &c. Teste ut ib. Eodem modo scribitur, (mucatis mutandis) 18 Epis∣copis, 28 Abbatibus. Claus. 1 E. 2. dors. 19. Eodem modo scribitur. 18 Episcopis, 55 Abbatibus, Priori Hosp. S, Johan. Jerus: Magistro Mil: Templi. Claus. 1 E. 2. dors. 11. Eodem modo mandatum est 15 Episcopis, 12 Abbatibus, 3 Prioribus; And dors. 8. 12 Episcopis, 14 Abbatibus, 2 Prioribus. Claus. 2 E. 2. dors. 11. Eodem modo scribitur Ar∣chiepisc. Ebor. 16 Episcopis, Custodi Spirit. Episc. Ba∣thon: et Wellen: sede vacante, 51 Abbatibus, 1 Prio∣ri. Claus. 3 E. 2. dors. 17. Eodem modo mandatum est, W: Archiepisc. Ebor. A. Patriarch: Ierus: et Episcopo Dunelm: 15 Episcopis, L. Bathon: et Wellen: electo et confirmato, electo et confirmato Bangoren: without Abbots or Priors in the Roll. Claus. 4 E. 2. dors. 2. Eodem modo scribitur (mu∣tatis mutandis) quoad Decanos et Capit: et Priores et Capit: Archiepiscopo Ebor: 16 Episcopis, 52 Abbati∣bus, 1 Priori. Claus. 5 E. 2. dors. 17. Consim: literae diriguntur 11 Episcopis, 3 Vic. Gen. Episc. in remotis agente, 29 Abbatibus. Claus. 7 E. 2. dors. 27. Eodem modo mandatum est, Custod: Archiep: Cantuar. et London: sede vacante, 16 Episcopis, 45 Abbatibus, 3 Prioribus, Magistr. Ord. d Sempringham; And dors. 15. Custod: Arch: Cant: 16 Episcopis, 41 Abbatibus, 3 Prioribus, Mag. Ordinis de Sempr. Claus. 8 E. 2. dors. 29. Eodem modo mandatum est Arch. Ebor. 18 Episcopis, A. Assaven: electo confir∣mato, 46 Abbatibus, 2 Prioribus, Magist: Ord. de Sempr. Claus. 9 E. 2. dors. 22. Eodem modo mandatum est Arch: Ebor: 19 Episc. 46 Abbatibus, 3 Prioribus.
Claus. 11 E. 2. m. 14 dors. Rex,De summo∣nitione Par∣liamenti. &c. W. &c. Ar∣chiepisc. Cantuar. &c. Quia super diversis et arduis ne∣gotiis Nos, &c. Parliamentum nostrum apud Lincoln: tenere, et vobiscum, &c. Praemunientes, &c. T. Rege a∣pud Westm. 20 die Novembr. Eodem modo mandatum est Arch: Ebor 17 Episco∣pis, D. Dublin: Archiepiscopo, 45 Abbatibus, 3 Priori∣bus, Mag. Ord. de. Sempr. And dors. 8. W. Arch: Ebor: 17 Episcopis, D. Dublin: Archiepiscopo, 45 Abbati∣bus, 3 Prioribus, & Mag: Ord: de Semp. Claus. 12 E. 2. dors. 29. Eodem modo mandatum est W. Arch: Ebor: 8 Episcopis, D. Dublin. Arch. 42 Abbatibus, 3 Prioribus, Mag: Ord: de Sempr. And dors. 11. W. Arch: Ebor. 17 Episcopis, 51 Abbatibus, 3 Prioribus, Mag: Ord: de Sempr. Claus. 13 E. 2. dors. 13. Eodem modo mandatum Arch. Ebor: 16 Episcopis, 28 Abbatibus, 3 Prioribus, Mag Ord. de Sempr. Claus. 14 E. 2. dorse 23.De summoni∣tione Parlia∣menti. Rex. &c. W. &c. Archi∣episc. Cant: &c. Quia super diversis, &c. Parliamentum nostrum apud Westm: die Lunae in Octab. S. Michaelis, prox. futur. teneri, &c. without any Praemunientes, &c. T. R. apud Westm. 5 die Augusti. Per ipsum Regem. Eodem modo mand: W. Arch. Ebor: 18 Episcopis, I. Winton: electo confirmato, 28 Abbatibus, Mag: Ord. de Sempr. 3 Prioribus; And dorso 5. Archiepiscopo Ebor. 19 Episcopis, 51 Abbatibus, 2 Prioribus, Mag: Ord: de Sempr. Claus. 16 E. 2. dors. 26. Eodem modo scribitur, W. Archiepisc. Cant: &c. 19 Episcopis, 28 Abbatibus, 4 Prioribus. Claus. 17 E. 2. dors. 27. Rex, &c. W. &c. Cantuar: Archiepisc. &c. Quia super diversis, &c. apud Westm. à die Purificationis beatae Mariae Virginis prox. futur. i tres Septimanas Parliamentum nostrum tenere, et Vobiscum &c. Praemunientes, &c. T. Rege apud Kenilworth, 26 die Decemb. Per ipsum Regem. Eodem modo scribitur Archiepiscopo Eborum, 17
Abbatibus, 4 Prioribus. There are 3. other writs to both the Archbishops re∣citing the first writ▪ unto ordinari contigeri super ne∣gotiis antedictis; and then subjoyning: Decanos et Priores Ecclesiarum Cathedralium, et Archidiac. totius Provinciae vestrae in propriis personis sis, Capitula etiam singula dictarum Ecclesiarum Ca∣the dralium  ad dictos diem et. locum venire facis, ad tractand. et consentiend. hiis qu in praemissis tunc ibi∣dem contigerit ordineri. Et hoc nullatenus omittatis. T. Rege ut supra. Claus. 18 E. 2. dors. 5. Eodem. modo scribitur Ar∣chiep. Ebor. 15 Episcopis, 28 Abbatibus, 4 Prioribus, Magistro Gilberto Midleton Archidiac. Nonthampton, Officiali Curiae Cant. Magist. Roberto de. S. Albano, De∣cano de Arcubus London. Claus. 19 F. 2. dors. 27. Eodem modo mandatum est W. Arch. Ebir. 17 Episcopis: 27 Abbatibus 3 Pri∣oribus,Nota. with this addition to one of them, Prior de Brid∣lington Nihil tenet de Rege. Claus. 20 E. 2. dors. 4. Eodem modo mandatum est Archiepiscopis Cant. et Ebor. 16 Episcopis, and 19 Abbatibus only, and no Prior. Claus. 1 E. 3. pars 2. dorso 16. Eodem modo man∣datum est Arch. Ebor. 16 Episcopis, Custodi Episc. Exon ( mutindis) Norwic. & Heref. Episc. vel ejus Vicar. gen. ipso Episc. in remotis agente, 19 Abbatibus only: After which follow two Writs to both the Archbishops reciting, the former, with an Et licet singulis Episcopis, &c. Nolentes tamen ngotia nostra, &c. like that forecited, p. 34, 35. mandatum est Custod Spirit. Archiep. Ebor. Episco∣pat.
Heref. et Exon. sede vacante, reciting the first writ with an Et licet singulis Episcopis praedictis, &c. Nolentes tamen, &c. Teste ut supra. Claus. 2. E. 3. m. 31. dorso. Eodem modo mandat. est Custodi Archiep. Cantur. et Episcopatus Bangor. sede vacante, 18 Episcopis, 17 Abbatibus only, and no Prior. Claus. 2 E. 3. dorso. 15. Eodem modo mandatum est Custodi Spirit. Archiepiscopatus Cant. 19 Episcopis, 1 Abbatibus, Priori Hop. S. Johan. Jerus. in Anglia: After which ensue 2 writs to the Archbishop of York, et Custod. Spirit. Archiepisc. Cant. rehearing the first; with an Et licet singulis Episcopis, &c. Nolentes tamen, &c., Teste ut supra. Claus. 4 E. 3. dors. 41. Eodem modo mandatum est, Archiep. Ebor. 19 Episcopis, 27 Abbatibus, 3 Prioribus. After that ensues a writ to both the Archbishops, rela∣ting the first with an Et licet singulis Episcopis, &c. No∣lentes tamen, &c. Teste apud Odiham, 1 die Febraa∣rii. Claus. 4 E. 3. dors. 19. Eodem modo mandatum est Archiep. Ebor. 19 Episcopis, 27 Abbatibus, 3 Pri∣oribus. Claus. 6 E, 3. dorso. 4. Eodem modo mandat. est 17 Episcopis, 25 Abbatibus, 2 Prioribus. Claus. 9 E. 3. dorso 8. There is a second writ to both the Archbishops, reciing the first with an Et licet sin∣gulis, &c. Nolentes tamen, &c. T. Rege apud Notting∣ham 3 die Aprilis. Per ipsum Regem. And Dorso 2.De summoni∣tione Parlia∣menti. there is au Ordinary writ of Summons Archiepisc. Cant. to a Parliament apud Westm. prox. post diem Do∣minicam in medio Quadragesimae prox. futur. with a Prae∣munientes, &c. T. Rege apud Berewic. super Twedam, 22 die Ian: Per ipsum Regem. Eodem modo mandatum est Arch. Ebor. 19 Episco∣pis, 27 Abbatibus, 3 Prioribus: And 2 writs to the Archbishops only with an Et licet, &c. Nolentes tamen, &c. T. ut supra. Per ipsum Regem.
These are the only Omissions, in the writs to the Bishops, Abbots, Priors and Spiritual Lords, and mi∣stakes in the numbers of them in the Eodem modo, Consi∣miles literae, and Consimilia Brevia, omitted casually in the premises. The 2. thing I shall acquaint the Readers with, are the reasons inducing me to recite so many writs to the Archbishops and Prelates, running all in the self-same form; which may seem to many a meer Tautology and superuity, which might have been better expunged, than inserted into this Breviat, though in truth not so. For I recited them all in this manner upon these consi∣derations. 1. To inform the Readers in what Clause Rolls in the Tower all the writs of Summons are ex∣tant, and in what Membranaes and dorses they may readily find them upon all occasions; A very usefull, & hitherto unpublished, yea generally unknown part of Antiquity and learning. 2ly. To inform the Readers of the exact numbers of these writs of Summons, their several dates, and the particular places, days of all Parliaments and great Councils meetings extant on Record, from 49 H. 3. to 23 E. 4. and the numbers of the Spiritual Lords and Prelates of all sorts summoned to them, not hither∣to published by any. 3ly. Because the beginnings and recitals of all or most writs in these Rolls to the Tem∣poral Lords, Sherifs, Council of the King, and Warden of the inqueports, cited by me in the ensuing Secti∣ons, referr for the most part to the writs to the Arch∣bishops and Bishops, (usually entred at large in every Roll) and to their respective dates, with an, &c. ut supra, Teste ut supra, and the like, and must be compared with them by the Readers to make them compleat. 4ly. Because the stiles of some Bishops who were Patriarchs, Cardinals, Bishops elect, or elected and confirmed; and the writs to such; yea, to the Gardi∣ans of Bishops Spiritualties during the vacancy of their Bishopricks, and to their Vicar Generals during their absence in forrein parts; and to the Administrators of
Bishopricks, are for the most part recorded only in the Eodem modo, Consimiles literae, or Consimilia brevia, sub∣joyned to those usual writs here abbreviated; there∣fore it was absolutely necessary to repeat them, to evi∣dence and clear up those hitherto unknown, uncommon particulars and rarities. All which reasons duely pondered, will, I hope, absolve me from the guilt of a∣ny Tautologies, or super fluous recitals in the premised Writs, and adjuncts annexed to them. Vsefull Annotations and Observati∣ons upon the precedent Writs to the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Ecclesiastical Barons, and Clergy. FRom the precedent Writs of Summons issu∣ed to the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors. Ecclesiastical Barons, and Clergy, wherewith I have presented you in a Chro∣nological Series according to their Antiqui∣ties, I shall here, for the information of such Lawyers, Gentlemen, and other Readers unversed in Records of this nature, recommend these ensuing parti∣cular Observations to them, before I proceed to the Writs of Summons to the Temporal Lords; reserving my General Annotations and Observations concerning Parliamentary writs for the Close of the first Part of this Brief Register, Kalendar and Survey; when they have taken a full view of all the several kindes and varieties of Parliamentary writs of Summons, whereon they must be grounded.
1. That as the Spiritual Lords and Barons, are men∣tioned in allSee Spel∣mann Conci∣lia, Ingulphi Historia, The Prologues to the printed Statutes of H. 3. Ed. 1, 2, 3, 4. R. 2. H. 4. 5, 6, 7, 8. Great Councils, Parliaments, Prologues, and Acts of Parliament before the Temporal Lords and Barons: So generally for the most part, the writs of Summons directed to them are first entred, recorded in the Dorse of the Clause Rolls, before the writs to the Temporal Lords, though now and then the writs to the Prince of Wales, and some other Temporal Peers, are first enrolled, but yet very rarely. 2. That when there was an Archbishop of Canter∣bury in being, the first writ of Summons to, or Proroga∣tion of Parliaments entred in the Rolls, is generally that which issued unto him, as Primate of all England; if within the Realm, or to his  ab∣sence out of it; But when there was no Archbishop of Canterbury living; the first writ  in the Ros issued to the Archbishop of ▪ as Primate of England: yetHere, p. 28, 29 36. now and then the first writ of Sum∣mons entred, is directed to the Archbishop of York, when both are living; and the writ to the Gardian of the Spiritualties of Canterbury  of that See is someimes first entred before the writ to the Archbishop of York: Yea, if the Archbishop of York was a Cardinal▪ and Canterbury none ye of Summons, as appears by Cls 25 H. 6. m. 16. & 24 dorso, and 29 H. 6. m.  orso, and other Rolls. 3. That when both Sees of Canterbury and York were void, the first writ entred was directed to theHere, p. 55. Bi∣shop of London (as in 22 E. 3. where the Archbishop of Canterbury was elected and confirmed, but not in∣stalled, and York quite void) and sometimes to some other Bishop, without any certain method therein ob∣served. 4. That in Claus.Here, p. 3. 6 Iohannis (the first writ of Sum∣mons extant) there is only one single writ of Summons without the Bishops name to whom it was issued, and in Claus. 26 H. 3. only one single writ of Summons to
the Archbishop of York, without mention of any writs to other Bishops, which yet no doubt had writs of Sum∣mons as well as he, though not entred, as some clauses in the bodies of both these writs do intimate. 5. That in the Summons of 49 H.Here, p. 5, 6. 3. the first, and only writ registred is directed to the Bishop of Dur∣ham, and 18 Abbots and Priors are listed in the Eodem modo mandatum est, before the Archbishop of York and other Bishops. 6. That the writs directed to the Archbishops of Canterbury always stiled them▪ Venerabili in Christo Patri eadem gratia Cantuariae Archiepiscopo, totius Angliae Primati: That the writs issued to the Archbishops of York ever use this stile; Venerabili in Christo Patri ea∣dem gratia Eborum, Archiepiscopo, Angliae Primati, lea∣ving out totius: And the writs sent to all other Bishops run thus, Venerabili in Christo Patri eadem gratia Epis∣copo, &c. (But i any Archbishop or Bishop were made a Cardinal, then the stile was, Cardinali et Archiepisco∣po Eborum, et Cardinali et Episcopo Wynton: as in Claus. 25 H. 6. m. 16, 24 dorso. 29 H. 6. m. 21. dorso, and other Clause Rolls of Hen. 6. when York and Winchester were both Cardinals; and Winchester is still placed whiles a Cardinal next after York. The writs to Abbots, Priors, Gardians of Spiritualties of Bishops, and other Ecclesiastical persons, usually run in this form, Dilecto sibi in Christo Abbati Sancti Augustini, &c, or Priori de Lewes, &c. which I have here omitted in their writs for the most part, with an, &c. to avoid frequent Re∣petitions, and polixity. 7. That in the Eodem modo, and Kalendar of the Bi∣shops names to whom writs were directed, the Arch∣bishop of York is for the most part first named, yet som∣times he and his Suffragans are listed after all the Bi∣shops of the Province of Canterbury, sometimes before them, sometimes intermixed with them. In the en∣tring of the Bishops names, there is no certain order or method observed; for sometimes the Bishop of Dur∣ham
is first named, other times the Bishop of London, elewhere the Bishop of Winchester: sometimes the Bi∣shop of Rochester, otherwhiles Chichester: Now and then all the Welsh Bishops are named together after all the rest of the Province of Canterbury, yet in some Rolls they are named promiscuously, & intermixed with the English Prelates, as the writs came first to the Regi∣sters hands, and not according to the Antiquity of their Sees or consecrations, for ought I can discern by com∣paring their entries; Only it is observable, that An∣thonySee God∣wins Cata∣logue of Bi∣shops, p. 520, 521. Seldens Titles of Ho∣nor, p. 720. Beak Bishop of Durham (a very wealthy Prelat) procuring himself to be made Patriarch of Ie∣rusalem by the Pope, was summoned by the Title of A. Patriarch. Ierusalem. et Episc. Dunolm. in the Summons of 1, 2, 13 of Edward 2. Here, p. 15, 16. and entred next after the Archbishop of York in the Rolls. 8. That the Bishops for the most part are named in the Rolls, and entred by themselves before the Abbots and Priors, yet now and then (but very rarely) they are intermixed with the Abbots and Priors, as in 49 H. 3. dors. 11. 9. That all the Archbishops and Bishops were usu∣ally summoned to all our Parliaments, but not to Coun∣cils of State, and that in person, if in England, or alive. But when anyHere, p. 11, 19, 20, 21, 22, 27, 28, 37, 40, 41, 42, 43. 46, 51, 64, 65. &c. 95, 96, 97. Archbishop or Bishop was absent in forein parts, the King usually sent writs of Summons to their Vicars Generals: and when their Bishopricks were void by their deaths, or translations to another Bishoprick, to the Guardians of their Spiritualties, to supply their places. 10. That when any Archbishop, Bishop, or Abbot, was elected only,Here, p. 9. 16. 42, 46, 50, 55▪ 59, 71. 96, 97. before his confirmation or install∣ment; the writ of Summons issued to him by the name of I. Electo Cantuanae, electo Hereford, &c. If elected and confirmed, but not installed; then Electo Cantua∣riae, or Hereford▪ confirmato: By which it is evident, that Archbishops, Bishops, and Abbots only elected, or elected or confirmed, might be and were usually summo∣ned
to  likewise in their absence beyond the Seas; Yea, in 2 E. 2. dors. 14. There is a writ issued R. Electo Dublin Episcopo, in the Eodem modo, registred amongst the Bi∣shops of England, next after the Patriarch of Ierusalem, and Bishop of Durham: 12. That the chief reason why sometimes there are more Bishops summoned to one Parliament than ano∣ther, is only the vacation of their Sees by their deaths or translations: what the number of them was summo∣ned to each Parliament, I have mentioned in the grosse where I find them entred in the Rolle at large, to avoid the repetition of their names, which those who please may peruse in the rolls themselves. 1 That the first writs to the Archbishops of Can∣terbury, York, or any other Bishop in the Clause Rolls, be they writs either of Summons to a Parliament, Council, or Convocation, or of Adjournment, or Pro∣rogation, are usually entred at large: which I have abbreviated with an, &c. where the form and clauses are the same with those I transcribe at large. And the writs which follow the first issued to the rest of the Bi∣shops, are but briefly entred for the most part, with an Eodem modo mandatum est subscriptis, or Consimiles Literae, or Consimilia Brvia diriguntur subscriptis, viz. &c. unless it be where there are different Clauses in some of the writs varying from those to the first Bishops; which Clauses (recited at large) I have here print∣ed, when they occurre in the Rolls. 13. That the writs of Summons to Parliaments di∣rected to the Archbishops and Bishops are of various forms, differing very often one from the other, not only in their recitals of the particular causes of summoning them; but in sundry special and unusual clauses, as I have touched in the recital of them, and shall more largely insist on in my General Obsrvations in the close of this Part of my Register. That the writs of
Summons to Councils and Convocations, issued to the Archbishops and Bishops are usually different one from another, not only in form and special Clauses, but likewise from the writs of Summons to Parliaments, unless where the word Concilium is used for a Parlia∣ment: There being no Praemunintes, &c. in any writs of Summons to Councils of State, but only to Parlia∣ments, and that not alwayes, but a the Kings pleasure: and no general Summons of all the Archbishops, Bish∣ops, Abbots, and Priors holding by Barony to all Coun∣cils of State; but only of such and so many of them as the King and his Counsil thought meet, when as they were usually all summoned to Parliaments. 14. That the writs of Summons to Convocations of the Clergy, were directed only to the two Archbi∣shops or their Vicars Generals, to summon all the Bi∣shops, Abbots, Priors and Clergy of their respective Provinces to them, not alwayes on a certain day or place as in writs for Parliaments and Great Councils, but at such time (or place) as they deemed most convenient, without any particular writs at all issued to any other Bishops, Abbots, Priors, or Clergy men, as in Summons to Parlia∣ments and Great Councils: where though they had all particular writs of Summons, yet the King oft times issued special writs to the two Archbishops, to summon all the Bishops, Abbots, Priors and Clergy, within the several Diocesses of their Provinces to appear at the Parliaments, Councils, and Convocations, to prevent all negligence, defects, or faylers in their Summon, and excuses for not appearing, whereby the affairs of the King and kigdom might be prejudiced. 15. That he number of Abbots and Priors summo∣ned to our Parliaments, was somtimes more, somtimes less, as I have briefly touched, relating their number in the grosse for brevity sake; where I find them parti∣cularly mentioned in the Rolls. The names of those Abbots and Priorr who were ordinarily or extraordina∣rily summoned to Parliaments and Parliamentary
Councils, with the reasons of this incertainty in their numbers by subsequent exemptions, because they held no Lands by Barony or Knights service from the King, but only in Frankalmoigne, or by act of special grace, or through vacancy by death, or otherwise; those who please may read at large in Mr. Seldens Titles of Honor, Book 2. ch. 5. Sect. 22, 23, 25. p. 732. to 735. and more particu∣larly in the ensuing Alphabetical Table of their names and Summons. I shall here only present the Readers with 3. Kalen∣dars of their names out of the Clause Rolls, as I finde them there recorded. The 1. List is that in the Clause Roll of 49 H. 3. m. 11▪ dorso in Cedula. where the writ at large being di∣rected to R. &c. Episcopo Dunolm, &c. (as it is here tran∣scribed, p. 5, 6.) immediately after the writ, this Cata∣logue of the Bishops, Abbots, Priors, and Deans names summoned to it follows, in this form. Eodem modo mandatum est Episcopo Karliol. Abbati Sanctae Mariae E∣borum. Priori Dunolm. Priori Sanctae Trinitatis Eborum. Abbati de Seleby. Abbati de Furness: Abbati de Fontibus. Abbati de Royvall. Abbati de Melsa▪ Archiepiscopo Eborum. Priori de Parco. Abbati de Rup. Abbati de Bella Lauda. Priori de Bridlington. Priori S. Oswaldi. Abbati de Rufford. Priori de Blida. Priori de Thurgarton. Priori Karliol: Abbati de Wyteby. Priori de Giseborne. Decano Eborum.
Eodem modo mandatum est subscriptis. Episcopo London. Episcopo Wynton. Episcopo Exon. Episcopo Wygorn. Episcopo Lincoln. Decano Exon. Decano de Well. Episcopo Elien. Episcopo Sarum. Episcopo Coventr. et Litchf. Episcopo Cicstr. Elect Bath. et Wellen. Decano Srum. Decano Lincoln. In forma praedict a scribitur Abbatibus, Prioribus sub∣scriptis sub hac data. Teste Rege apud Wodest. XXIIII. die Decembr. Abbati Sancti Edmundi. Abbati de Wautham. Abbati de Sancto Albano. Abbati de Glaston. Abbati de Rading. Abbati de Cirencestr. Priori de Merton. Abbati de Oseney. Priori Sanctae Fresewid: Oxon. Abbati de Missenden. Abbati de Waverle. Priori Elien. Priori Norwicen. Abbati Cestr. Abbati Salop. Abbati de Hulmo. Abbati de Bardene. Priori de Lenton. Abbati de Bello. Priori Ordinis de Sem∣pligham. Priori de Watton. Electo de Evesham. Abbati Westm. Priori Hospitalis Sancti Iohannis Ierusalem in Anglia. Magistro Militis Templi in Anglia. Abbati de Ramesey. Abbati de Burgo. Abbati de Thorn. Abbati de Crouland. Abbati Colecestr. Priori de Dunstaple. Abbati de Bello loco. Abbati de Parco Lude. Abbati de Stanlegh. Abbati de Lilleshull. Abbati de Buttlesden. Priori de Betuver. Priori de Lews. Abbati de Clervaus. Priori de Stodley.
Abbati S. Augustin. Can∣tuar. Abbati de Cercesey. Priori Sanctae Trinitatis Cantuar. Abbati de Hida Winton. Abbati de Middleton. Abbati de Cerne. Abbati de Abbotisbury. Abbati de Tavistocks. Priori de Huntingdon. Abbati de Sulebey. Abbati S. Augustini Bristol. Abbati de Malmesbery. Abbati de Milchene. Abbati de Abingdon. Abbati S. Petri Gloucestr. Abbati de Persour. Abbati de Winchecombe. Priori de Coventr. Abbati de O elveston. Abbati de Teukesbury. Priori de Swinesheued. Priori de S. Neoto. Abbati de Wardon. Abbati Sancti Iacobi Nor∣thampt. Abbati de Leicestr. Abbati de Kirkested. Priori de Eton. Priori de Cruceroys. Abbati de Kirkestall. Abbati de Tame. Abbati de Bermundesy. Priori de Barnewell. Abbati de Meryvall. Priori Sancti Swithin Win∣ton. Abbati de Lesenes. Priori de Ledes. Priori de Lauda. Priori de Spalding. Priori Sancti Barthol. Lon∣don. Priori de Kenelworth. Priori de Nuttell. Abbati de Vlle Dei. Abbati de Croxton. Here you see 36 Priors, inermixed promiscuously with 65 Abbots, (one of them only Abbot Elect, but not installed) the Bishops and Deans inerposed be∣tween them, most of which Priors, and some of which Abbots, were never after summoned to any other Par∣liaments, nor yet these Deans in this manner. The 2. is that of Clause 23 E. 1. m. 4. dorso, and 24 E. 1. m. 7. dorso: where the Abbots and Priors sum∣moned to those 2. Parliaments are thus registred and distinguished by their several Orders in both these rolls alike, and in no Summons else besides these: though they are again all summoned and entred almost in this
Order in Claue 28 E. 1. dors. 17. and 3. and some Rolls in E. 2. Abbati de S. Edmundo.Exempti. Abbati de Waltham. Abbati de Alnewik.Premonstra∣cen. Abbati de Egleston. Abbati de Sta. Agatha. Abbati de Barlinge. Abbati de Tupholme. Abbati de Byley. Abbati de la Dale. Abbati de Newhus. Abbati de Cokirsand. Abbati de Croxton. Abbati de Kirkested. Abbati de S. Radegunda. Abbati de Heppe. Abbati de Fureyes.Cisterc. Abbati de Sallaye. Abbati de Holmecoltram. Abbati de Novo Monaste∣rio. Abbati de Iornall (or) Ie∣reval. Abbati de Fontibus. Abbati de Bella Lauda. Abbati de Melsa. Abbati de Kirkestede. Abbati de Rupe. Abbati de Rughford. Abbati de Valle Dei. Abbati de Gerndon. Abbati de Stanley in Ar∣dern. Abbati de Pippewell. Abbati de Combe. Abbati de S. Albano. Abbati de Evesham. Abbati de Tichefeld. Abbati de Suleye. Abbati de Lavendox. Abbati de Torre. Abbati de Wellebecks. Abbati de Hales. Abbati de Bello capite. Magistro Militiae Templi in Anglia. Priori Hospitalis Ioh. Ie∣rus. in Anglia. Magistro Ordinis de Sem∣plingham. Abbati deGlauca in 24. E. 1. m. 7. Blanca Lauda. Abbati de Basingwerk. Abbati de Cumbermere. Abbati de Crokesden. Abbati de Valle Regali. Abbati de Deulacresse. Abbati de Mira Valle. Abbati de Stanlawe. Abbati de Byldewas. Abbati de Stanle in Wiltes. Abbati de Swynesheued. Abbati de Wardon. Abbati de Boxle. Abbati de Stratford. Abbati de Tyletye. Abbati de Binedon. Abbati de Quarrera. Abbati de Leteley. Abbati de Dunkeswell.
Abbati de Bell loc Regis. Abbati de Strata florida. Abbati de Flaxele. Abbati de Tntrn. Abbati de Kingswode. Abbati de Waverle. Abbati de Revesbye. Abbati de Parco Lude. 16. That in the writs of Summons to Abbots and Pri∣ors, the writs are very seldom recited at large to any of them, unless in 27 E. 1. d. 9. and towards the latter end of the reign of King Edward the 3. where some writs to the first Abbot named in the lists of Summons, are entred at large; the rest only recited with an, &c. or not mentioned at all, but only thus, Eodem modo mandatum est, &c. or Consimiles Literae, or Consimilia Brevia diriguntur Abbatibus et Prioribus subscriptis; entred in the Roll, with a Catalogue of their names subscribed under it. 17. In antient times the first writ that is entred, for the most part issued to the Abbot of S. Augustines in Canterbury, (in which Rolls there is no certain order observed in the Abbots and Priors names and summons.) sometimes the Abbot of S. Albans, now and then the Abbot of Glastonbury; sometimes some other Abbots are first named in the List of Summons, and one name frequently praeponed, & then postponed after another, as the Register was pleased to enter them in the Rolls: But from 1 H. 4. to the end of King Ed. 4. the first writ entred is, Abbati de Burgo Sancti Petri. As for the Priors, they are for the most part registred after the Abbots; now and then but rarely, before the Abbots, and frequently intermixed with them: sometimes one Prior is placed before another in some Summons, which was named last in other Lists: few Lists agreeing in the order of their names, unlesse that of 23 E. 1. d. 4. and 24 E. 1. d. 7. which exactly accord in all things, from which that of 28 E. 1. d. 3. & 17. doth somwhat vary in the order, though not in the number of their names.
18. That the absence of the Archbishops, Bishops or other Great men from, and no coming to Parliaments an Great Council when summoned, did many times hinder the procedings in them, and caus them to be prorogued or adjourned, to the publike prejudice▪ yet upon particular necssary occsions for the kingdomes defence and afety, their personal presence was dispen∣sed wih, and their Summons superseded; winesse this memorable writ to the Bishop of Durham, Claus. 6 E. 2. m. 12. dorso. Rex, Venerabili in Christo Patri R. eadem gratia Du∣nolm. Epsopo salutm. Lit nuper Vobis mandaver∣mus quod omnbus aliis praetermissis essetis ad Nos tertia Dominica Quadragesimae prox▪ fuur, apud Westm, ibidens Nobiscum t cum Praelatis t Proceribus Regni nostri super diversis negotiis Nos et Statum ejusdm Regni nostri tan∣gentibus tractaturi, vest umque consilium impensur▪ Pre securitate tamen Custodiae et majr tuitione partum vestra∣rum contr Scotos inimicos t Rebeles nostros, vobis man▪ damu, quod à partibus praedictis vos nuatenus anf∣ratis, sed Procuratorem vestrum sufflonter instructum ad¦dictos diem et locum mittatis, ad consent nd, his qu tun ibdem per Nos t dictos Prlatos, t Procre ngeris or∣dinari. Teste Rege apud Westm, 20 di Feb. Eodem modo mandatum est Episcopo Karliol. T. ut supra. And this other observable writ of Supersedeas to the Bishops of Durham, and Karliol, with other Lords and Great men summoned to Parlimnt, thus recorded, in Claus. 12 R. 2. m. 42. dorso. De non venl∣endo ad Par∣liamentum.
Vobis mandamus▪ quod propr rsistetiam inimicorum nostrorum prdictorum meliori et fortiori mod quo poteri∣tis, in propriis partibus vestris, aut alibi ubi in hac parte me∣lius videritis expedire, expectetis, mandato nostro non ob∣stante. Ita quod semper dilctis et fidelibus Henr. de Per∣cy Comiti Northum: & Johanni ae Nevil de Raby quos ad supervidend: et gubernand: Marchias Scotiae assignavi∣mus, obedientes, intendentes sitis et auxiliantes quotns et qando per ipsos, seu orum alterum fueritis rationabiliter praemuniti. Teste Rege apud Northampton 20 die Augu∣sti. Per ipsum Regem et Consilium. Consimilia Brevia diriguntur subscriptis sub eadem data, viz. Th. Episcopo Karliol, Rogero de Clifford, Johan∣ni de Roos de Hamlake, Rado▪ Baroni de Graystock, Philippo Darcy, Henr. Fitz Hugh; Willielmo de Da∣cre. Consimilia Brevia diriguntur Henr. de Percy Comi∣ti Northumb. Iohanni de Nevill de Raby, excepto ulti∣mo Clauso. Ita semper. Of which see more in my Observations on the next Section, and here p. 51, 52. 19. That some writs to particular Bishops, varied in certain special clauses now and then from those issu∣ed to other Bishops at the self same time, upon special occasions, and in theSee p. 7, 8. 51, 52. form of the Praemunientes, &c. 20. That as there are some single writs of Summons to Bishops, or Archbishops entred in the Clause Rolls now and then, without any to the Temporal Lords or Barons registred together with them; So there are some writs of Summons to and prorogations of Parliaments issed to Temporal Lords in some Rolls, without any to Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors or Ecclesiasti∣cal Lords entred with them, though no doubt they had the like writs of Summons and Prorogations, although not registred, as the bodies of the writs do manifest. 21. That the writs issued to the Archbishops, Bi∣shops
Abbots, Priors and Clergy, run usually in this form▪ Vobis mandamus quod in fide et dilectione quibus nobis tenemini, &c. not in fide et homagio. But the writs to the Earls, Barons and Temporal Lords: though they sometimes retain the self same words in fide et diloctio∣ne, yet for the most part they run thus; quod in fide & homagio, or ligeantia, quibus nobis tnmini, &c. or in ho∣magio, id et dilectione: or in homago et ligentia; ho∣magio, or ligeantia being put in the place of dilection, or added to fide et dilectione quibus nobis tenemini. 22. That the writs to the Archbishops, Bishops, Ab∣bots and Priors, for the most part, observe this stile; Vobiscum, ac cum caeteris Praelatis, Magnatibus et Proce∣ribus, &c. in all clauses of the writ; The writs to the Earls, & Temporal Lords, Vobiscum, ac cum Praelatis et cae∣teris Magnatibus et Proceribus, or caeteris Magnatibus, or Proceribus, only: caeeris being evr placed before Praela∣tis, in the writs to the Bishops, Abbots, but after Praelatis, and before Magnatibus or Procribus, in all writs to the Temoral Lords, because of different Orders▪ the Pre∣lates no being Magnates or Procrs by birth, or in their own right, but only the Temporal Lords; and they being not Praelati, or Ecclsastical Peers by order or function, but only the Bishops, Abbots, Priors, and other Ecclesiastical▪ Barons. 23. That the number of Archbishops, Bishops, Ab∣bots, Priors and Ecclesiastical persons summoned by writs to our Parliaments, was for the most part equall to, and many times farr exceeding the number of the Temporal Lords, & Barons; as you may easily discern by computing and comparing their numbers in this, with those of the Temporal Lord in the ensuing Section. In the Parliamvnt of 49 H. 3. the number of the Prelates, Abbots, and Spiritual persons summoned by writ, was 120. the number of Temporal Lords, but 23. Anno 23 E. 1. d. 9. the number of the Spiritual Lords sum∣moned was 77; of the Temporal Lords but 63. And dors. 3, 4. the Spiritual Lords summoned to another
Parliament that year, amounts to 90. the Temporal Lords only to 50. In 24 E. 1. d. 7. the Spiritual Lords summoned, were in all 91. the Temporal but 43. yet in other Parliaments the Temporal Lords exceeded the Spiritual, as in 27 E. 1. d. 18. the Spiritual Lords were 58. the Temporal 90. but in the next Parliament 28 E. 1. m. 3. the Spiritual Lords summoned were 102. the Temporal only 89. Their differences in number in other Parliaments I shall for brevity sake omit, only in most summons under King H. 4, 5, & 6. during these Kings absence and wars in France, (when most of the Earls and Temporal Lords were in actual service in the wars) the Spiritual Lords were neer double to the Tem∣poral. 24. That the first writ wherein I finde any mention of, and provision for the Defence of the Church of Eng∣land, is in 6 E. 2. here, p. 20. the next is in 11 E. 3. p. 39, & 40. 12 E. 3. p. 42. & 14 E. 3. p. 46. After which in the writs of 18 E. 3. p. 50. 31 E 3. p. 60, 61, 62. 46 E. 3. p. 67. 49 E. 3. p. 69. 1 R. 2. p. 69, 70, 72. and in most succeding them, Defensionem Ecclesiae An∣glicanae, Salvationem et defensionem Ecclesiae Sanctae; Et oc sicut salvationem et defensionem Ecclesiae Sanctae diligi∣tis, were usually inserted into the writs of Summons, as well to Parliaments as Convocations, and in writs to the Temporal Lords and Sherifs, as they were in writs to the Clergy, it being one principal end of sum∣moning Parliaments and Convocations. 25. That sometimes the Archbishops, Bishops, Ab∣bots, Priors wereHere, p. 20, 27, 29, 33, 35, 36, 41, 55, 56, 62, 64, 65, 71, 72, &c. authorized by the writs themselves to make Proctors, or Proxies to supply their places; other times prohibited to make any Proctors or Proxies at all, but peremptorily injoyned to appear in person, without any excuse, or Proctor to supply their absence. But the Deans, Chapters, Archdeacons, Priors and Cler∣gy of every Diocess by a special clause of Praemunientes, &c. in the writs to the Archbishops and Bishops, and by second writs to the Archbishops, were summoned
the Deans, Prirs and Archdeacons by themselves, their Chapters by one, and the Clergy of each Diocess, Quod per duos Procuratores idonos penam et sufficientē potestatē ab ipsis Capitulis et Clero habentes, dictis die et loco inter∣sint, ad facend. & consentiend. hiis, quae tun ibidem de Com: Consilio regni nostri, divina favent clementia cotig∣rit ordinari. Amongst others, the Bishop ofHere p. 7, 8. Bath and Wells was particularly injoyned Praemunientes Priorem et Capitulum Bathon. et Decanum et Capitulum Wellen▪ Ecclesiarum suarum, &c. quod idem Prior et Dcanus in propriis personis suis, & dicta Capitula per unum Procura∣torem idoneum, &c. una nobiscum inter sint, ad▪ &c. Here∣upon the Prior of Bath when sick appeared not in per∣son, but by a Proctor, and the Chapter of Bath by one or more Prctors, specially chosen and authorized by their Letters of Procuration under their Seals; Which Let∣ters of Procuration, I find entred in the antient Parch∣ment Leiger Book of the Priory of Bath in sundry forms in the reign of King Edward the 1. which I shall here in∣sert, for their rarity; and because they will inform us, what ull and sufficient power other Priors, Deanes, Chapters, and the Clergy of each Diocess, (as also the Spirial Lords when absent, and authorized to make Proxies,) gave to their Procurators; and in what forms other Letters of Procuration were made in former times, of which I find only one printed inTiles of Honor, p. 731, 73. Mr. Selden. The first of these Procurations runs in this manner, being directed to the King himself: Serenissimo Domino suo, Domino Edwardo, Dei gra∣tia, illustri Regi Angliae, Domino Hiberniae, et Duci A∣quitanae, sui devoti Thomas Prior, et Capi: Bathoniensis Ecclesiae, salutem, et debitam cum orationibus assiduis reverentiam et fidelitatem. Ad tractandum▪ ordinan∣dum et faciendum una Vobiscum et caerers Praelatis et Proceribus, et aliis Regni incolis, in praesenti Convo∣catione Generali apd Westm. die Dominica proxima post festum S. Martini, pro diversis Regni negotiis con∣venientibus, dilectum in Christo Conratrem, et Con∣professum
nostrum Frarem W. de Hamptn, ostrum faci∣mus, ordinamus, et constituimu PROCURATO∣REM per praesentes, plenam et liberam poestatem ei∣dem in hac parte concedenes. In cujus rei testimo∣nium sigillum, Capituli nostri praesentibus est appensum. Datum in Capitulo nostro Bathon: die Mercurii prox. ante festum S. Martini. Anno grat. 1295. (A. 23 Ed. 1.) There is another Letter of Procuration to this W. d Hampton, made by the Sub Prior and Chapter of Bath the same year in the same words with the former, ex∣cept in this variation and addition; Et aliis Regni in∣colis in hac instanti Convocatione generali apud Westm. die Dominica prox. ante festum Sancti Andreae Apo∣li, &c. PROCURATOREM LEGITIMUM per prae∣sentes: Danes eidem, &c. (as before) omnia nostro nomin facienda quae Nos faceremus si in Convocatione memoraa praesentes esse possemus. In cjs, &c. ut supra. Datum in Capit. nostro Bathon: die Sanctae Celi∣ciae Virginis & Martyris. Anno gr. 1295. Anno 24 E. 1. I find this form of Procuration by the Sub-Prior and Chapter of Bath directed to the Archbi∣shop of Canterbury. Reverendae Sanctitatis Patri in Christo, Domino C. Dei patientia Cantuar: Archiepiscopo, totius Angliae Primati, sui filii humiles et devoti Frater Philippus Sub∣prior. et Capitulum Bathoninsis Ecclesiae Cathedralis devotos obedientiae et reverentiae Spiritus cum salute. Ad tractandum una cum caeteris Religiosis in Convoca∣tione vestra praesenti London. convenientibus die Do∣minica qua cantatur Laetare Ierusalem, cum continua∣tione diei, siopus fuerit seu dirum, et ad faciendum omnia quae Nos ipse faceremus si praesentes ibidem esse possemus, dilecto Confratri nosro, et Conmonacho Will: de Hampshire PROCURATORI NOSTRO ple∣nariam per praesentes contedimus facultaem: Ra∣tum habentes stabile et fimum quicquid per eundem nomine nostro in Convocatione praedicta actum fuerit
sen concessum. In cujus rei testimonium Sigillo Capi∣tuli nostri fignari fecimus hanc Indenturam. Datum in Capiulo nostro Bathon: die Sancti Cuthberti. Anno Dom. 1296. In the 27. year of King Edward 1. there is this Pro∣curation made in another form. Sancto Patri ac Domino, Domino C. Dei gratia Ar∣chiepiscopo Cantuar. totius Angliae Primati, Frater Thomas, Prior Ecclesiae Bathon. salutem, subjectionem, honorem et reverentiam debitam tanto Patri. Sanctae Congregationi Patrum Reverendorum Dominorum E∣piscoporum, Abbatum, Priorum, caeterorumque Praela∣torum ac Cleri Provinciae Cantuar. in vestra praesentia reverenda post instantem commemorationem Anima∣rum London faciendae, ob debilitatem nimiam nostri cor∣poris, non valenes personaliter interesse; vestrae Pa∣ternitati supplicamus attente, quatinus tunc ibidem hanc noram excusationem habere dignemini benignius excusatam. Ad tractandum vero providendum e or∣dinendum super utilitatibus Ecclesiae promovendis, et aliis articulis de quibus in vestrae Paternitatis manda∣to plenior it menio, ac consentendum hiis quae opor∣tuna et expedientia videbuntur, dilectum nobis in Chri∣sto fratrem Hugonem Godmer nostrum Commonachum, NOSTRUM PROCURATOREM facimus et consti∣tuimus loco nostri, ad faciendum omnia ac singula quae Nos faceremus, seu facere deberemus si personalier praesentes essems. Ratum habituri et gratum, quic∣quid idem Procurator noster cum unanimi Sanctorum Patrum et Cleri praedictorum assensu in praemissis duxe∣rit faciendum. Valeat vestra Sncta Paternicas reveren∣da in Christo per tempora longiora. Datum Bathon. 4 to. Kal. Novembr. Anno Dom: 1299. There is another Procuration of the self-same date made by the Sub-Prior and Chapter of Bath, directed to the said Archbishop with the self-same Preface, to tanto Patri: and then Vestrae Sanctae Paternitati notum famus per praesentes, quod Nos ad tractandum, providen∣dum,
ordinandum super utlitatibus Ecclesiae promovendis, e aliis rtioulis de quibus in vestrae Paternitatis mandato plenior fit mento, et ad consentiendum hiis quae oportuna et expedientia videbuntur; dilectum nobis in Christo Frarem Roberum de Clapcote nostrum Commonachum nostrum Procuratorem facimus et constituimus loco nostri, ad facien∣dum omnia  singula quae verus et legitimus Procurator facr dbet et consuevit. Ratum habiuri et graum, quic∣quid idem Proourator, &c. (as in the next before.) Da∣tum in Capitulo nostro Bathon: 4 Kal. Novembr. Anno Dom. 1299. The same year on the first Lords day in Lent, I meet with another Procuration of this Prior in a different form from the precedent. Universis sanctae Matris Ecclesiae iliis rater Thomas Prior Eclesiae Bathon: salutem in Domino sempiternam. Quia IN PARLIAMENTO DOMINI REGIS HA∣BENDO LONDON secunda die Dominica Quada∣gesimae OB NIMIAM CORPORIS NOSTRI DE∣BILITATEM ADESSE PERSONALITER NON VALEMUS, dilectum Nobis in Chrio Frarem Wil∣lielmum de Hampton, nostrum Commonacum, NOS∣TRUM PROCURATOREM FACIMUS ET CON∣STITUIMUS, ad faciendum pro Nobis ibidem quae∣cunque facere deberemus, secundum tenorem mandati Regis si in propria nostra persona tunc praesentes esse∣mus, et consentiendm sicut justum fuerit et canonicum hiis quae de Communi Consilio pro utilitate Domini Regis et Regni, favente Domino tunc ordinand. coni∣gerit, vel tiam provideri. Ratum habituri et gratum quicquid idem Frater Willielmus NOSTER PROCU∣RATOR cum unanimi Praelatorum Ecclesiasticorum, Procerum ac Magnatum, et Cleri assensu in praemissis sic duxerit faciendum. Datum Bthon: die Dominica pri∣ma Quadragesimae. Anno Dom. 1299. There is the like Procuration of the sme date made to him by the Prior and Chapter of Bath in all their names, and in the same words.
About the same year, the Sub Prior and Chapter of Bath made this form of Procutation, entred in their Leger Book. Paeat universis per praesentes, quod Nos Prior et Capitulum Ecclesiae Bathon. dilectos nobis in Christo William de Sywnham Clericum, et Ihannem de Merston PROCVRATORES NOSTROS VEROS ET LE∣GITIMOS, conjunctim et divisim, et quemlibet eo∣rum in solidum, ita quod non sit melior conditio occu∣pantis, ad infra scripta fecimus, ordinavimus et consti∣tuimus per praesentes. Dantes eisdem et eorum alteri nomine nostro potestatem IN PARLIAMENTO DOMINI NOSTRI REGIS apud Wstm. in crastino S. Hillarii prox futur. per Dei gratiam celebrando, cum continuatione et prorogatione dierum sequentium, us∣que ad nalem dicti Parliamenti expeditionem, compa∣rendi cum caeteris Religiosis, et aliis de Clero Regni Angliae Proceribus et Magnatibus dicti regni, caulas et negoci quas vel quae habuerint in Parliamento trac∣tandi, proponendi, necnon super tractandis et propo∣nendis ibidem Statum dicti Domini Regis, e regni sui, ac etiam STATUM ECCLESIAE ANGLICANAE concernentibs: nostrumque deliberatum consensum et consiium hiis quae mediante Domino ibidem con∣tigerit utiliter ordinari una cum aliis impendendi. Ul∣teriusque faciendi in praemissis et eà concernentibus quod juris fueri et rationis. Promittentes Nos ratum, firmum et gratum sub Ypotheca reum quos et ligare posumus, habituri, quicquid dicti PROCURATO∣RES NOSTRI VEL EORUM ALTER in praemissi et ea contingentibus duxerint, vel duxerit faciend. In cujus rei estimonium igillum nostrum commune praesentibus est appensum. Dat. in Domo nostro Ca∣pitulari Bathon. 26. That it appears by theHere, p. 3, 4, 78. 34, 35. 40. 54, 62, 70, 72, 73. Clauses and contents of sundry Praemised Writs, as likewise by theSee an Exact Abridg∣ment, p. 18. 189. Prote∣stations of the Clergy, and their Distinct Aydes, and Subsidies from the Temporalty granted in Parliaments
to our Kings by derent Acts of Parliamen, exant in our PrintedRastalls Abridgment Taxes and Tenths. Statute Books, as well as Parliament, and Statte Rolls; that the King and Temporal Lords and Commons in Parliament could not legally impose any Aydes, Subsidies or Taxes whatsoever on the Archbi∣shops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Deans, Chapers, Arch∣deacons, and inferiour Clergy o England, without their own special Grants and Consents in their Covocati∣ons; it being contrary to the Great Charters of Henry the 1. King John, and Henry the 3. Chap. 1. yea to the Freedom, Rights, Liberties of the Church confirmed by them, and to all other Acts confirming Magna Charta, and to a particular Act, Rot. Parl. anno 8 H. 4. . 36. exempting them from making Contributions with the Laity. Therefore they cannot do it now, upon the self same grounds, they having as full, as large an interest in their Rights, freedoms, Libeties, and those Grand Charers, Sta∣tutes confirming them, as any of the Laity have in theirs: Yet when they obstinately refused to grant▪ King Ed∣ward the first a necessary Ayde for the defence of the Realm in two successive Parliaments one after the other, against their allegiance and duty,Walsig∣ham, Hist. Angl. p. 34, 35, 36. See before, p. 8. See my Plea for the Lords, p. 262, 263. only because Pope Boniface by his Constitution had prohibited under pain of ex∣communication, Ne Talliae vel Exactiones à Clero per seculares Principes quocunque modo exigentur, vel eis solvantur de rebus Ecclesiae: the King thereupon did put them out of his protection: to redeem which, many of the Clergy by themselves, and many of them by Mediators gave the King the fifth part of their goods, notwithstanding the Popes Inhibition; which is thus related by Matthew Westminster, Anno 1296. p. 407, 408. Die Sancti Hillarii, celebravit Archiepiscopus Con∣cilium suum cum Coepiscopis suis Suffraganeis Londini in Ecclesia Sancti Pauli. Quibus tractantibus per dies octo super postulatione regia, non invenerunt iter rec∣tum, nec modum exclusivae sententiae, si aliqui vel quae∣ito colore, vel aliquo titulo quippiam contulissent, eti∣am
si plurimi clerici, aulici, curialeque accessient, qui postulatis consilium dederan & favorem. Quae omnia Regi per Episcopos, aliósve nuncios, funt relata. Qui statim mutatus in crudelem, perversa regali aequalita∣te in tyrannidem, licentiatis suis famulis, obviantium cleicorum religiosorumque virorum, quasi modo hosti∣li, equitaturas ibi arripere meliores, prohibitis insuper placitatoribu, in lege sua peritis, coram Baronibus de Scaccario, seu ante quemvis lium Justiciarium secu∣larem, pro personis Ecclesiasticis allegare, Ecclesiasti∣cos ministros censuit sua pace inignos. Mandavit eti∣am singulis ordinatis, sponte offerre sibi suorum proven∣tuum quintam partem, at invitè cedere omnibus bonis suis. Huic mandato primitus obtemperaverunt qui∣dam onsorati, in curia regali praelati, in cura verò ani∣marum Pilati manifesti, ut inducerent pari modo ani∣mos caeterorum. Quo facto, seisita sunt protinus per manus Vicecomitum omnia bona clericorum mobilia & immobilia, super laicum feodum inventa, aqu fisco re∣gio titulata, cum superabundanti molestia suis ablatis libertatibus, qas praedecessores reges, Christianitatis conservatores, Ecclesiis contulerant, authores bonorum. Et quod nequius est ferendum, appreciabantur ipsorum facultates, emptoribus quantocius expoendae, nec se∣curi audebant clerici equitare, nisi in majori conventu propter militum in clricos violentiam, à rege licentia data. Sed & omni bona Archiepiscopi, mobilia & immobiia, capta sunt in manu regis. Ipse quidem sus∣tinuit patientè. Igur Clero siut supradictum est passo in corpore, pasus est & Rex in animo. Hinc do∣lor et metus omnium Praelatorum. Himque in per∣plexitate maxima constituti sunt, ut si quicquam conce∣derent, sententiam excommunicationis incurrerent ip∣so facto, et si non darent, non effugerent immisericor∣des manus ipsorum praedonum. His madefacti adversi∣tatibus, pro se ipsis anxii, pro grege sibi commisso in∣cosolabiliter moestificati, tanquam non habente alimo∣niam,
ingruente fame, necessario seculum reperere quaesierunt, protectionem regis facultatibus suis, ratio∣ciio magno, redemptis. Yet notwithstanding all the Clergy procured special Absolutions from this Poe, from that Excommunica∣tion they conceived they had incurred by this their Ayd granted to the King against his Constitution, though done only through force, and such fear as might hap∣pen even to a constant man, as I observe by certain In∣struments of Absolution, remembred by none of our Hi∣storians, but registred in the Leiger Book of the Priory of Bath; out of which I have transcribed them, as not unworthy publike knowledge. Venerabili in Christo Patri, Dei gratia Archiepsopo Cantuar. vel ejus Vicario in Spiritualibus, Frater Genti∣lis, miseratione divin, Ecclesiae Sancti Martini in Mon∣tibus Presbyter Cardinalis, salutem, et synceram in Domi∣no caritatem. Ex parte Johnnis de Godmer perpetui Vi∣carii Ecclesiae de Chedern. Bathon. & Wellen. Diocaes. Nobis oblata pettio continebat, Quod ipse olim per vim & metum qui cadere posset in constantem, invitus Ministris se Collectoribu illustris Regis Angliae, contra novae Con∣stitutionts tenorem Sanctissimi Patris Domini Bonefacii, divina providentia Papae , Tallias sive Collec tas per sol∣vit; per quod sententiam Excommunicationis incurrit, in tales generaliter promulgataem, et sic ligatius, non tamen in contemptum Clavium, in suis Ordinibus ministravit, et alias se ingressit divinis. Super quibus, supplicari feit humili∣ter sii de absolutionis beneficio et dispensationis gratia per sedem Apostolicam salubriter provideri. Nos igitur, auc∣toritate Domini Papae, cujus Penitentiariae curam gerimus, circumspectioni vestrae committimus, quatenus si ita est, ip∣sum Vicarium à dictae excommunicationis Sententia uxtae formam Ecclesiae absolvatis. Proviso attentè, quod idem Vicarius super hoc mandatis Domini Papae, et Romanae Ecclesiae semper parebit, et faciet illam poenitentiam quam sibi duxerit injungendm, eoque ad tempus prout expedire
videris a suorum Ornum executione suspenso. Demum Suffraganibus ei meriis alioque Canonico non obstante su∣per irregularitate dicto modo contracta cum eo misericorditer auctoritate dispensetis predicta. Datum Agnan: 6to I∣dus Augusti. Pontiicatus Domini Papae Bonefacii 8. Anno sexto. Sancto Patri in Christo et Domino reverendo R. Dei gratia Cantuar. Archiepiscopo totius Angliae Pri∣mati, sui filii humiles et devoti Thomas Prior et Con∣ventus Bathon. salutem, et devotus obedientiae et reve∣rentiae Spiritus cum omni honore debito tanto Patri. Ad petend. et recipiend. à vestrae clementia sanctitatis beneficium absolutionis, super excommunicationis sen∣tentia quàm incurrisse veremur, ex eo quod contra Con∣stitutionem sanctissimi Patris et Domini Bonifacii di∣vina providentia Papae octavi editam, contra omnes qui Collectas et exactiones sibi à Ministris, Nunciis seu Collectoribus illustris Regis Angliae persolverut no∣lentes vel inviti, Protectionem Domini Regis super hoc impetrantes et recipientes; dilectum Nobis in Chri∣sto fratrem Hugonem Godmer, praecentorem Ecclesiae no∣strae Bathoniae Conmonacum nostrum, nostrum in hiis constitimus Procuratorem. Dantes eidem liberam et plenam potestatem estra in hac parte recipien∣di mandata quae secundum Deum ad salutem animarum nostrarum juxta tenorem, formam, vim et effectum man∣dati Apostolici super hoc vobis directi, nobis duxeritis injungenda, una cum potestate jurandi in animas no∣stras secundum quod postulaverit ordo Juris. In cu∣jus rei testimonium Sigillo nostro communi signari feci∣mus hanc scripturam. Datum Capitulo nostro Bathon: 5 Idus Novemb. Anno dom. 1300. Universis praesentes literas inspecturis pateat eviden∣ter, Quod nos Thomas Prior Bathon. et ejusdem loi Conventus Ordinis S. Benedicti, Bathoniensis et Wellensis Diocaes. bona side promittimus et sub ypotheca omnium bonorum Monasterii nostri cavemus, quod nos semper
Romanae Ecclesiae et Domini Papae mandatis parbi∣mus, super excommunicationis et interdicti sententiis quas incurrimus, pro eo quod dudum contra Constitu∣tionis tenorem Sanctissimi Patris nostri Domini Boni∣fati Papae octavi, Nunciis, seu Ministris Domini Regis Angliae Subsidium de bonis nostris Ecclesiasicis con∣tribuimus propter vim et metum qui cadere poterit in constantes. In cujus rei testimonium, &c. Datum in Capitulo nostro Bathon. 5 Idus Novembr. Anno Dom. 1300. Universis praesentes Literas inspecturis Robertus per∣missine divina Cantuar. Archiepiscopus totius Angliae Primas, aeternam in Domino salutem. Literas Vene∣rabilis Patris Domini Matthaei Dei gratia Portuensis, et Sanctae Rufinae Episcopi sanctissimi Patris Domini Bo∣nifacii Papae 8vi. Paenitentiarii recepimus, tenorem qui sequitur continentes. Venerabili in Christo Pati Dei gratia Archiepiscopo Cantuar. vel ejus Vicario in Spi∣ritualibus, Frter Matthaeus miseratione divina Portu∣ensis, ac Sanctae Rufinae Episcopus, salutem, et sempiter∣nam in Domino caritatem. Ex parte Prioris et Con∣ventus Monasterii Bathoniensis Ordinis Sancti Benedicti fuit propositum coram Nobis, quod ipsi olim viet meu qui cadere poerit in constantem, Ministris, Nunciis, eu Collectoribus illustris Regis Angliae contra Consti∣tutionem et tenorem Sanctissimi Patris et Domini, Do∣mini Bonifacii divina Providentia Papae octavi noviter ditae contra Tallias, Collectas et Exactiones sibi impo∣sitas persolverunt, propter quod Excommunicationis incurrunt sententiam ex ipsius Constitutionis tenore in omnes et singulos contra facientes generaliter promul∣gatam: Et sic ligati in suis, non tamen in contemp∣tum Clavium, ministraverunt Ordinibus, et aliis divinis se ingesserint Officiis sicut prius; Verum cum parati sint Sanctae Romanae Ecclesiae in omnibus obedire man∣datis, supplicri fecerunt humiliter eis per sedem Apo∣stolicam salubriter provideri. Nos igitu ipsorum sup∣plicationibus
quantum cum Deo poumus favorabiiter annuents, auctoritate et mandato Domini Papae cujus Paenitentiariae curam gerimus, providentiae vestrae prae∣sentium tenore committimus, quatinus i est ita, ipsos et eorum quemlibet a reatu excesus hujusmodi et ex∣communicatione quam propter hac incurrerunt absol∣vatis juxta formam Ecclesiae consuetam; Interdictum ab ipso Monasterio amovendo, et injunca eorum cui∣libet pro culpae modo paenientia salutari, et alia quae talibus debent et consueverunt injungi; quodque ta∣bunt mandatis Ecclesiae, et facient illam poenitentiam quam sedes Apostolica eis duxerit injungendam▪ Super iregularitate ex praemissis contracta dispensetis auc∣toritae et mandato praedictis, alio non obstante cano∣nico, misericorditer eisdem prout secundum Deum ani∣marum ipsorum salui ideriis expedire. Datum La∣teran. 3. Nona Martii. Pontificatus Domini Papae Bo∣nifacii octavi Anno sexto. Nos igitur dictos Priorem et Conventum Monasterii Bathon. et eorum quemlibet in peror a Fratris Hugonis Godomer, Procuratoris ip∣sius Ecclesiae Bathon. Commonachi et Procuratoris sui, à majoris Excommunicationis sententia memorata, prae∣stita nobis primitus ab eisdem idonea cautione quod stabunt Mandatis Ecclesiae, efacient illam poenitenti∣am quam sedes Apostolica eis dixeit injungendam, auc∣toritate nobis in ha parte, commissa, juxta formam no∣bis in hac parte commissa juxta formam Ecclesiae absol∣vimus, et eis injunximus poenitentiam salutarem. In∣terdictum de ipso suo Monasterio amovendo. Et super irregularitate quam ea occasione sic ligai in suis Ordi∣nibus ministrando, et alias se divinis Officiis inmiscen∣do contraxerant, cum eisdem et eorum quolibet miseri∣corditer auctoritate dispensamus praelibata, prout se∣cundum Deum animarum ipsorum saluti vidimus expe∣dire. In testimonium vero praemissorum Sigillum no∣strum praesentibus est appensum. Datum apud Lyminge 17 Kal. December. Anno Dom. 1300. Consecrationis nostrae septimo.
There is another absolution from this excommuni∣cation granted almost in the like form and words by the Archbishop of Cant. to Iordanus Vicar of Wston, who made a Procuration to another Clerk to request and receive it in his behalf; quia gravi corporis agritu∣dine perpetua detentus ad vstram venerabilm praesentiam accedere non valens. By which it is evident, that every Clergyman and religious person whatsoever from the highest to the lowest, who through force or fear contri∣bued any aid to the King, against this Antimonarchical Constitution of Pope Boniface the 8. was excommunicated, interdicted for it, and forced to Petiion the Pope and his Penitentiaries, to be absolved from the same; and that only upon their Oaths and caution given to yeeld obedi∣ence alwayes to the Popes and Church of Romes mandaes for the future, and to undergo such penance as the Pope should please to iflict upon them for what was past; yet thi is sti∣led, a dealing mercifully with them. After which Oath ad absolution, An. 1300, when as the Temporal Lords and Commons granted the King the 15. part of their goods for the Confirmation of the Great Charer and their Liberties;Mar. Westm. Anno 1300. 1301. p. 416▪ Robertus Archiepiscopus Cantuar. pro Clero nihil voluit concedere, neque de temporalitate an∣nexa Ecclasiae, sine licentiasummi Pontificis special; yet the Pope the next year usurped and received from him & them the Tenth of all their Ecclesiastical goods for 3. years, against their wills and the Kings too. Such vassals then were the English Clergy to the Popes; as of late years they have been in another kind to all arbitrary Commi∣tees, New Tax-masters and Governors, who not only tax them at their pleasures without their consents, but e∣ject, suspend, silence thē frō preaching, administring the Sacraments, or instructing children as Schoolmasters, in Publike or Private, without any legal cause, tryal, or proceedings, against all the Great Charters and Sa∣tutes for maintenance of their Liberties and Freeholds in their Benefices, they being meer tenants at will both
of their Ministry and Livings, the only means to make themGal. 1. 10. 1 The. 2. 4. 2 Cor. 2. 27. Ezech. 13. 10, 11, 12. time-servers, Men-pleasers, Corupters of the Gospel▪ and Daubers with untempered morter, instead of sincere Ministers of the Gospel, and real Servants of Iesus Christ; Therefore fit to be timely redressed for the fu∣ture; as this Papal Constituion was timely opposed by King Edward the first, as is evident by Pat. 25 E. 1. pars 1. m. 9. 11. pars 2. m. 5. 6▪ & Claus. 30 E. 1. m. 13. which I shall hereafter recie at large in their due place. And this Passage of Mat. Westm▪ An. 1297. p. 408. Anno Gratiae 1297. congregatis Archipraesule Can∣tuar. & quibusdam aliis coepiscopis suffraganeis suis apud snctum Paulum Londint. 26 die Martii, iterum prostat ecclesiae consulturis, insurgentes protiniss duo causidici, & duo de ordine Praedicatorum fratres, regalem & tempora∣lem favorem aucupantes, conati sunt argumentis probare clerum ipsi regi, in tempore belli, non obstante prohibitione a∣postolica, de suis facultatibus posse licit subvenire. Insu∣per prohibitio sub poena incarerationis, ne quis contra ipsum regem et eos, qui jam pridem suam protectionem quaesierant, excommunicationis sententiam promulgart, provocatione facta pro se ad Romanam curiam & pro ipsis. Recesserunt igitur omnes oneratis suis conscientiis per Archipiscopum sic dicentem, salvet suam animam unusquisque.
A most rare, usefull Alphabetical Table of all the Abbots, Maters, and Priors of Religi∣ous Orders, to whom any particular Writs of Sum∣mons to our Parliaments or Great Councils issued from Anno 49 H. 3. to 23 E. 4. extant in the Clause Rolls and Lists of Summons in the Tower of London, with the several years of each Kings reign wherein they were summoned: If they (or others) were twice or oftner sum∣moned in any year before R. 2. then the several dorses of the Clause Rolls that year, are expressed after the year d. for dorse, and the number of it next ensuing it in a pa∣renthesis, if but once, the figure for that year is only men∣tioned; the dorse of the Clause Roll for that year, you may readily find in the writs thereof mentioned in the pre∣cedent Section; and where were 2. Writs of Summons in one year under R. 2. H. 4, 5, & 6. there the Abbots and Priors were all twic summoned, in the Rolls and dorses, mentioned in the Writs of Summons here cited. (A) ABbotesbury, 49 H. 3. Abingdon, 49 H. 3. 23, 25, 27, 28, 30. (d. 9. 12.) E. 1. 5, 6, 7. (d. 15. 27.) 8, 9, 11. (d. 8. 14.) 12. (d. 11. 29.) 13, 14▪ (d. 5. 23.) 16, 17, 18, 19, 20 E. 2. 1. (d. 3. 16.) 2 (d. 15. 31.) 4 (d. 19. 41.) 5. (d. 7. 25.) 6. (d. 4. 9. 19. 36.) 7, 8, 9. (d. 2. 28.) 10. (d. 1. 5.) 11. (d. 8. 11. 40.) 12. 13. (d. 1. 28.) 14. (d. 23. 33.) 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21. (d. 9, 28.) 22. (d. 7. 32.) 24, 25, 27, 28, 29. (d. 7, 8.) 31. (d. 2. 21.)
34, (d. 4. 35.) 36, 37, 38, 39, 42, 43, 44, 46, (d. 9. 11.) 47, 50 E. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 21, 23 R. 2. 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 8, 11, 12, 14 H▪ 4. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9 H. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 9, 10, 11, 13, 15, 18, 20, 23, 25 27, 28, 29, 31, 33, 38, 49 H. 6. 1, 2, 6, 12. 22, & 3 E. 4. Agatha 23, 24, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 32 E. 1. Albans 49 H. 3. 23, (d. 4. 9.) 24, 25, 27, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 32, 34 E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 11. 19.) 5, 6, 7, (d. 15, 27.) 8, 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, 14, (d. 5. 23.) 16, 17, 18, 19▪ 20 E. 2. 1, (d. 3. 16.) 2, (d. 15. 31.) 4, (d. 19. 41.) 5, (d. 7. 25.) 6, (d. 4. 9. 19. 36.) 7, 8, 9, (d. 2. 28.) 13, (d. 1. 28.) 14, (d. 23. 33.) 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21, (d. 9. 28.) 22, (d. 7. 32.) 23, 24, 25, 28, 29, (d. 7. 8.) 31, (d. 2. 21.) 32, 33, 34, (d. 4. 35.) 38, 39, 42, 43. 44▪ 46, (d. 11.) 47, 49, (d. 4. 6.) 50 E. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21, 23 R. 2. 1, 2, 5, 7, 8, 11, 12, 14 H. 4. 1, 2. 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9 H. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 9, 10, 11, 13, 15, 18. 20, 23, 25, 27, 28, 29, 31, 33, 38, 49 H. 6. 1, 2, 6, 12. 22, & 23 E. 4 Alnewick 23, 24, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 32, 34, E. 1. 1, (d. 19.) E. 2. Augustines Bristoll 49 H. 3. 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 9. 12.) E. 1. 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11, (d. 11. 40.) 12, 13, (d. 1. 28.) 14, (d. 23. 33.) 15, 17 E. 3. Augustines Canterbury 49 H. 3. 23, (d. 4. 9.) 25, 27, (d. 17, 18.) 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 9.) 32, 34 E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 11. 19.) 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, (d. 15. 27.) 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d 11. 29.) 13, 14, (d. 23. 33.) 16, 17, 18, 19, 20 E. 2. 1 (d. 3. 16.) 2, (d. 15. 31.) 4, (d. 19. 41.) 5, (d. 7. 25.) 6, (d. 4, 9 19. 36.) 7, 8, 9, (d. 2. 18.) 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11, (d. 8. 11. 40.) 12, 13, (d. 1. 28) 14, (d. 23. 33.) 15, 17, 18, 20, 21, 27, 28, 29, (d. 7, 8.) 31, (d. 2. 21.) 32, 33, 34. (d. 4. 35.) 36, 37, 38, 39, 42, 43, 44. 46. (d. 9. 11.) 47, 49, (d. 4. 6.) 50 E. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11,
14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21, 23 R. 2. 12, 14 H. 4. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9 H. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 9, 10, 11, 13, 15, 18. 20, 23, 25, 27, 28, 29, 31, 33, 38, 49 H. 6. 1, 6, 12, 22 & 23 E. 4. (B) BArdny, or Bardnay 49 H. 3. 23. d. (9.) 25, 27, (d. 17, 18) 30 (d. 9. 12.) E 1. 6. (d. 4. 9. 19. 36.) 7, 8, 9, (d. 8. 18. 12, 13. (d. 1. 28.) 14, (d. 23. 33.) 15, 17, 18, 20, 22, (d. 7. 32.) 23, 24, 25, 27, 28, 29, (d. 7, 8.) 31, (d. 2. 21.) 34, (d. 4. 35.) 36, 37, 38, 39, 42, 43, 44, 46, (d. 9. 11.) 47. 49. (d. 4. 6.) 50 E. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9. 10, 11, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21, 23 R. 2. 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 8, 11, 12, 14 H. 4. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 9, 10, H. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 7, 11, 13, 15, 18, 20, 23, 25, 27, 28, 29, 31, 33, 38, 49 H. 6. 1, 2, 6, 12, 22 & 23 E. 4. Barlinge 49 H. 3. 23, (d. 4.) 24, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30▪ (d. 9. 12.) 32, 34 E. 1. 1, d. 19.) 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, (d. 15. 27.) 8, 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, 14, (d. 5. 23.) E 2. Basingwerk 23, (d. 4.) 24, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 3. 34 E. 1. 1, (d. 19.) 2, 4, 6 E. 2. Bella Lauda 23, (d. 4.) 24, 28. (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 9. 12.) 32. 34 E. 1. 1. (d. 19.) 2,  E. 2. Bllo, Bello loco, Bello loco Regis, & Bello Campo Regis, 49 H. 3. 23, (d. 4.) 24, 27, (d. 17. 18.) 28, (d. 3. 17.) 32 E. 1. 1, (d. 3. 16. 19.) 2, (d. 31.) 4, 5, 6, 7, (d. 15. 27.) 8, 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 16, 17, 18, 19▪ 20 E. 2. 4. (d. 19. 41.) 6, (d▪ 4. 9. 19. 36.) 7, 8, 9▪ (d. 18.) 10, (d. 1, 5.) 11, (d. 8. 11. 40.) 12, 13, (d. 1. 28.) 14, (d. 23. 33.) 15, 22, (d. 7.) 23, 24 E. 3. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21, 23 R. 2. 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 8, 11, 12, 14 H. 4. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9 H. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 9, 10, 11, 13, 15. 27, 28, 29, 31, 33, 38. 49 H. 6. 1, 2, 6, 12. 22 & 23 E. 4.
Bello Capite, 23. (d. 4.) 24. E. 1. Scti Benedicti de Hulmo 43 H. 3. 23, 27. (d. 17, 18.) 30. (d. 9. 12.) E. 1. 1. (d. 19.) 2, 4, 5, 6, 7. (d. 15. 27.) 8, 9, 10. (d. 8. 13.) 12. (d. 11. 29.) 13, 14. (d. 5. 23.) 16, 17, 18, 19 E. 2. 2. (d. 15.) 4. (d. 19. 41.) 5. (d. 7. 25.) 6. (d. 4. 9. 19. 36) 7, 8, 9. (d. 2. 28.) 10. (d. 1. 5.) 11. (d. 8. 11. 40.) 12, 13. (d. 1. 18.) 14. (d. 23. 33.) 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 22. (d. 7. 32.) 23, 24, 25, 27, 28, 29, (d. 7, 8.) 31. (d. 2. 21.) 34. (d. 4. 35.) 36, 37, 38, 39. 42, 43, 44, 46. (d. 9. 11.) 47. 49. (d. 4, 6.) 50 E. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. 16, 17, 18, 20, 21, 23 R. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 11, 12, 14 H. 4. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9 H. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5▪ 7, 9, 10, 11, 13, 15, 18, 20, 23, 25, 27, 28, 29, 31, 33, 38, 39 H. 6. 1, 2, 6, 12, 22, & 23, E. 4. Bildewas 23. (d. 4.) 24. 28. (d. 3. 17.) 30. (d. 9. 12.) 32 E. 1. Blanca, or Glauca Lauda 23. (d. 4.) 24 E. 1. Bocland 12. (d. 11.) 14, (d. 5.) E. 2. Boxle 23. (d. 4.) 24. 28. (d. 3. 17.) E. 1. Burgo, & Burgo Sancti Petri 49 H. 3. 23, 25, 27, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30. (d. 9. 12.) 32, 34 E. 1. 1. (d. 8. 11. 19.) 2. 4, 6, 7. (d. 15. 27.) 8, 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12. (d. 11. 29.) 13, 14. (d. 5. 23.) 16, 17, 18, 19, 20 E. 2. 1. (d. 3. 16.) 2. (d. 15. 31.) 4. (d. 19, 41.) 5. (d. 7. 25.) 6. (d. 4. 9. 19. 36.) 7, 8, 9, (d. 8. 18.) 10. (d. 1. 5.) 11. (d. 8. 11, 40.) 12, 13, (d. 1. 28.) 14. (d. 23. 33.) 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21. (d. 9. 28.) 22. (d. 7. 32.) 23, 24, 25, 27, 28, 29 (d. 7, 8.) 31. (d. 2. 21.) 34. (d. 4. 35.) 36. 42, 43, 44, 46, (d. 9, 11.) 47, 49, (d. 4, 6.) 50 E. 3. 1, 2, 3▪ 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 22, 23 R. 2. 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 8, 11, 12, 14 H. 4. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9 H. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 9, 10, 11, 13, 15, 18, 20, 23, 25, 27, 28, 29. 31, 33, 38. 49 H. 6. 1, 2, 6, 12, 22, & 23 E. 4.
Burton Super Trent 23, 27. (d. 3. 18.) 30. (d. 9. 12.) E. 1. 8, 9, 11. (d. 8. 14.) 12. (d. 11. 29.) 14 (d. 5.) E. 2. Butlesden 49 H. 3. Byly 23 (d. 4.) 24. 28. (d. 3. 7.) 32. 34 E. 1. Bynedon 23. (d. 4.) 24. 28. (d. 3. 17.) 32 E. 1. (C) CErcesey, or Certeseye 49 H. 3. 23. 27 E. 1. 22. (d. 7.) 23 E. 3. Cerne 49 H. 3. Cestriae (S. Werburge) 49 H. 3. 28. (d. 3. 17.) 32 E. 1. Crencester 49 H. 3. 23. 27. (d. 17, 18.) 30. (d. 3. 12.) 32, 34 E. 1. 1, (d. 19.) 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, (d. 15. 27.) 8, 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, 14, (d. 5. 23.) 16, 17, 18, 19, 20 E. 2. 1. (d. 3. 16.) 2. (d. 15. 31) 4, (d. 19. 41.) 5▪ (d. 7. 25.) 6, (d. 4. 9. 19, 36.) 7, 8, 9, (d. 2. 18.) 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11, (d. 8. 11, 40.) 12, 13, (d. 1. 28.) 14, (d. 23. 33.) 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21, (d. 28, 29.) 22, (d. 7. 32.) 23, 24, 25, 27, 28, 29, (d. 7, 8.) 31, (d. 2. 21.) 34, (d. 4. 35.) 36, 39, 46. (d. 9. 11.) 47, 49, (d. 4, 6.) 50 E. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 18, 20, 21, 23 R. 2. 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 8, 11, 14 H. 4. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9▪ H. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 9, 10, 11, 13, 15, 18, 20, 23, 25, 27, 28, 29, 31, 33, 38, 49 H. 6. 1, 2, 6, 12, 22, & 23 E. 4. Clervax 49 H. 3. Cokersand, Crokersand 23, 24, 28 (d. 3. 17.) 32 E 1. 1, (d. 19.) 2, 4, 6 E. 2. Colecester 49 H. 3. 23, 27, (d. 17, 18.) E. 1. 1, (d. 19.) 2, 4, 5, 6, 7. (d. 27.) 8, 9, 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, 14, (d. 5, 23.) 16, 17, 18, 19 E. 2. 4, (d. 19. 41.) 5, (d. 7. 25.) 6. (d. 4. 9. 19, 36.) 7, 8, 9, (d. 2. 18.) 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11. (d. 8. 11. 40.) 12, 13, (d. 1. 28) 14, (d. 23. 33.) 15, 16, 17▪ 18, 20, 21, (d. 9.) 23,
24, 25, 27, 28, 29, (d. 7, 8,) 31, (d. 2. 21.) 36, 37, 38. 39, 42, 43, 44▪ 46, (d. 9. 11.) 47, 49, (d. 4. 6.) 50 E. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21, 23 R. 2. 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 8, 11, 12, 14 H. 4. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9 H. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 9, 10, 11, 13, 15, 18, 20, 23, 25, 27, 28, 29, 31, 33, 38, 49 H. 6, 1, 2, 6, 12. 22 & 23 E. 4. Combe, or Cumbe 23. (d. 4.) 24▪ 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (9, 12.) 32, 34 E. 1. 1, (d. 19.) 2, 4, 6, 7, (d. 15. 27.) 8, 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 14, (d. 5.) E. 2. Crokesden 23 (d. 9.) 24, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 32, 34 E. 1. Croyland, or Crowland 49 H. 3. 23, (d. 9.) 25, 27, 28, (d. 3.) 30, (d. 9. 12.) E. 1. 2, 4, 6, 7, (d. 15.) 8, 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, 14, (d. 5. 23.) 16, 17. 18, 19, E, 2. 4, (d. 19. 41.) 5, (d. 7. 25.) 6, (d, 4. 9, 19, 36.) 7, 8, 9, (d. 2. 18.) 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11. (d. 8. 9. 40.) 12, 13, (d. 1. 28.) 14, (d. 23. 33.), 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21, (d. 9. 28.) 22, (d. 7. 32.) 23, 24, 25, 27, 28, 29, (d. 7, 8.) 31, (d. 2. 21.) 34, (d. 4. 35.) 36, 37, 38. 44, 46, (d. 9. 11.) 47, 49, (d. 4. 6.) 50 E. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21, 23 R. 2. 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 8, 11, 12, 14 H, 4. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9 H. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 9, 10, 11, 13, 15, 18, 20, 23, 25, 27, 28, 29, 31, 33, 38, 49 H. 6. 1, 2, 6, 12, 22 & 23 E. 4. Croxton 49 H. 3. 23, (d. 4.) 25, 28▪ (d. 3. 17.) 30. (9. 12.) 32, 34 E. 1. 1, (d. 1▪) 2, 4, 6, 7, (d. 15. 27.) 8, 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d.   29.) 14, (d. 5.) E. 2. Cumbermere 23, (d. 4.) 24, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 32 E. 1. (D) DE la Dale 23, (d. 4.) 24, 28, (3. 17.) 30, (d. 9. 12.) 32, 34 E. 1. 1, (d. 19.) 2, 4, 6 E. 2. Deuacresse 23, (d. 4.) 24, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 32 E. 1.
Dunkeswell 23, (d. 4.) 24, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 32 E. 1. (E) EDmunds d Bury 49 H. 3. 23▪ (d. 4. 9.) 24, 25, 27, (d. 3. 17. 18) 32, 34 E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 11. 19.) 2, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, 14, (d. 5. 23.) 16, 17, 18, 19, 20 E. 2. 1. (d. 3. 16.) 2, (d. 15. 31.) 4, (d. 19. 41.) 5, (d. 7. 25.) 6, (d. 4. 9. 19. 36.) 7, 8, 9, (d. 2. 18.) 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11, (d. 8. 11. 40.) 12, 13, (d. 1. 28.) 14, (d. 23, 33.) 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21. (d. 9. 28.) 22, (d. 7. 32.) 23, 24, 25, 28, 29. (d. 7, 8.) 31, (d. 2. 21.) 34. (d. 4. 35.) 36, 37, 38, 39, 42, 43, 44, 46, (d, 9. 11.) 47, 49, (d. 4. 6.) 50 E. 3. 1, 2, 3, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21, 23 R. 2. 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 8, 11, 12, 14 H. 4. 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 8, 9 H. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 9, 10, 11, 13, 15, 18, 20, 23, 25, 27, 31, 33, 38, 49 H. 6. 1, 2, 6, 12. 22 & 23 E. 4. Egleston 23▪ (d. 4.) 24, 28 E. 1. Evesham 49 H. 3. 23, (d. 4. 9.) 24, 25, 27, (d. 3. 17, 18.) 30, (d. 9. 12.) 32, 34 E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 11. 19.) 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, (d. 15. 27.) 8, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, 14, (d. 5. 23.) 16, 17, 18, 19, 20 E. 2. 1, (d. 3. 16.) 2, (d. 15. 31.) 4. (d. 19. 41.) 5, (d. 7. 25.) 6, (d. 4. 9. 19. 36.) 7, 8. 9, (d. 2. 18.) 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11, (d. 8. 11. 40.) 12, 13, (d. 1. 28.) 14, (d. 23. 33.) 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21, (d. 9. 28.) 22, (d. 7. 32.) 23, 24, 25, 28, 29, (d. 7. 8.) 31, (d. 2. 21) 32, 34, (d. 4. 35.) 36, 37, 38, 39, 42, 43, 44, 46, (d. 9. 11.) 47, E. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21, 23 R. 2. 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 8, 11, 12, 14 H. 4. 1, 2, 3, 4. 5, 7, 8, 9 H. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 9, 10, 11, 13, 15, 18, 20, 23, 25, 27, 28, 29, 31, 33, 38, 49 H. 6. 1, 2, 6, 12, 22 & 23 E. 4. Eynesham 27, (d. 17, 18.) 30, (d. 9. 12.) E. 1. 36, 37, 38, 39, 42, 4, 44 E. 3. 1 R. 2.
(F) FEversham 23, 27 E. 1. 6. 7, (d. 15. 27.) 8, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 14, (d. 5.) 17, 18 E. 2. 21. (d. 28.) E. 3. Flxle, or Flaxley 23. (d. 4.) 24. 28. (d. 3. 17.) 32 E. 1. Fontibus 49 H. 3. 23, (d. 4.) 24, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 9. 12.) 32, 34 E. 1. 1. (d. 19.) 2, 4, 6, 7, (d. 15. 27.) 8▪ 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, 14, (d. 5. 23.) 16 E. 2. Forneyes, or Furneys 49 H. 3. 23, (d. 4.) 24, 28, (d. 4. 17.) 30, (d. 9. 12.) 32, 34 E. 1. 1 (d. 19.) 2, 4, 6, 7, (d. 15. 27.) 8, 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, 14 (d. 5.) E. 2. (G) GErndon, Grendon, Gerwedon 23, (d. 4.) 24, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 32, 34 E. 1. 1, (d. 19.) 2, 4, 6, 7, (d. 15. 27.) 8, 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12▪ (d. 11. 29.) 14 (d. 5.) E. 2. Glaston 49 H. 3. 23, 25, 27, (d. 17, 18.) 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 9. 12.) 32, 34 E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 11. 19.) 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, (d. 15. 27.) 8, 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, 14, (d. 5. 23.) 16, 17, 18, 19, 20 E. 2. 1, (d. 3. 16.) 2, (d. 15. 31.) 4, (d. 19. 41.) 5, (d. 7. 25.) 6 (d. 4. 9. 19. 36.) 7, 8, 9, (d. 2. 18.) 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11, (d. 8. 11. 40.) 12, 13, (d. 1. 28.) 14, (d. 23. 33.) 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21, (d. 9. 28.) 22▪ (d. 7. 32.) 23, 24, 25, 27, 28, 29, (d. 7, 8.) 31, (d. 2. 24.) 34, (d. 4, 35.) 36, 37, 38, 39, 42, 43, 44, 46. (d. 9. 11.) 47, 49, (d. 4. 6.) 50 E. 3. 1, 2, 3▪ 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21, 23 R. 2. 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 8, 11, 12, 14 H. 4. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9 H. 5. 1, 4, 5, 7, 9, 10, 11, 13, 15, 18, 20, 21, 23, 25, 27, 28, 29, 31, 33, 38,
49 H. 6. 1, 2, 6, 12, 22 & 23 E. 4. Glocester Sancti Petri 49 H. 3. 23, 25, 27, (d. 3. 17, 18.) 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 9. 12.) 32, 34 E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 11. 19.) 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, (d. 15. 27.) 8, 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29) 13, 14, (d. 5. 23.) 16, 17, 18, 19, 20 E, 2. 1, (d. 3. 16.) 2, (d. 15. 31.) 4, (d. 19. 41.) 5, (d. 7. 25.) 6, (d. 4. 9, 19. 36.) 7, 8, 9, (d. 2. 18,) 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11. (d. 8. 11. 40.) 12, 13, (d. 1. 28.) 14, 23. 33.) 15, 16, 18, 20, 21, (d. 9. 28.) 22, (d. 7. 32.) 23, 24, 25, 27, 28, 29, (d. 7, 8.) 31, (d. 2. 21.) 34, (d. 4. 35.) 36, 37, 38, 39, 42, 43, 44, 46, (d. 9. 11.) 47, 49, (d. 4. 6.) 50 E. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, (d. 10. 37.) 8, 9, 10, 11, (d. 13. 24.) 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21, 23 R. 2. 1, 2, 3, 5, (p. 1. d. 28. p. . d. 4.) 7, 8, 11, 12, 14 H. 4. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9 H. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 9, 10, 11, 13, 15, 18, 20, 23, 25, 27, 28, 29, 31, 33, 38, 49 H. 6. 1, 2, 6, 12, 22 & 23 E. 4. (H) HAles, or Hayles (2. distinct Abbots usually sum∣moned together) 23 (d. 4. 9.) 24, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 32, 34 E. 1. 1, (d. 19.) 2, 4, 5 6, 7, (d. 15. 27.) 8, 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 14, (d. 5.) E. 2. Heppe 23 E. 1. (d. 4.) Hid juxt Winton 49 H. 3. 23, 27, (d. 3. 17. 18,) 30, (d. 9. 12.) E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 11. 19.) 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, (d. 15. 27.) 8, 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, 14, (d. 5. 23.) 16, 17, 18, 19, 20 E. 2. 1, (d. 3. 16.) 2, (d. 15. 31.) 4. (d. 19. 41.) 5, (d. 7. 25.) 6, (d. 4. 9. 19. 36.) 7, 8, 9, (d. 2. 18.) 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11▪ (d. 8. 11. 40.) 12, 13, (d. 1. 28.) 14, (d. 23. 33.) 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21, (d. 9.) 22, (d. 7. 32.) 23, 24, 25, 27, 28, 29, (d. 7. 8.) 31, (d. 2. 21.) 34, (d. 4. 35.) 36, 37,, 38, 39, 42, 43, 44, 46. (d. 9. 11.) 47, 50 E. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, (d. 10. 37.) 8, 9, 10, 11, 12 (d. 13. 24.) 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21 R. 2. 1, 3, 5, (p. 1. d. 28. p. 2. d. 4.) 7, 8, 11, 12, 14, H. 4. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9 H. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 9, 10, 11. 13, 15
18, 20, 23▪ 25, 27, 28, 29, 31, 33, 38, 49 H. 6. 1, 2, 6, 12, 22 & 23 E. 4. Holmencoltram 23, (d. 4) 24, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 32, 34 E. 1. 1, (d. 19.) 2, 4 E. 2. Hulme, See Benedict. (I) IAmes (See Northampton.) Ierevall, Iornal, Irval, Gereval, Gervaux, 23 (d. 4.) 24, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 9. 12.) 32, 34 E. 1. 1, (d. 19.) 2, 4, 6, 7, (d. 27.) E. 2. (K) KI geswode 23, (d. 4.) 24, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 32 E. 1. Kirksted 49 H. 3. 23, (d. 4. 9.) 24, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 32, 34 E. 1. 1, (d. 19.) 2, 4, 6, 7, (d. 15. 27.) 8, 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 14, (d. 5.) E. 2▪ Krkestall 49 H. 3. (L) LAvedon, Lanedon 23 (d. 4.) 24, 28. (d. 3. 17.) 32 E. 1. Lesenes 49 H. 3. 23 E. 1. Leicester 49 H. 3. 23, 27, (d. 17, 18.) E. 1. 12. (d. 11.) 13, 14, (d. 5. 23.) 16, 17, 18, 19, 20 E. 2. 1, (d. 3 16.) 2, (d. 15. 31.) 4, (d. 19. 41.) 5, (d. 7. 25.) 6, (d. 4. 9. 19. 36.) 7, 8, 9, (d. 2. 18.) 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11. (d. 8. 11. 40.) 12, 13, (d. 1. 28. 14, (d. 23. 33.) 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21, (d. 9. 28.) 22, (d. 7. 32.) 23, 24. (25. cancellatur) 27, (summoned again) & 29, d. 7. E. 3. cancellatur. Lilleshull 49 H. 3. Litely, Letely, 23, (d. 4.) 24, 28. (d. 3. 17.) 32 E. 1.
(M) MAlmeshury 49 H. 3. 23, 25, 27, (d. 3. 17, 18) 28, 30, (d. 9. 12.) 32, 34 E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 11. 19.) 6, 7, (d. 15. 27.) 8, 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 16, 17, 18, 19, 20▪ E, 2. 1, (d. 3. 16.) 2, (d. 11. 31.) 4, (d. 19. 41.) 5, (d. 7. 25.) 6, (d. 4. 9. 19. 36.) 7, 8, 9, (d. 2. 18,) 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11. (d. 8. 1. 40.) 12, 13, (d. 1. 28.) 14, (d. 23. 33.) 15, 16, 18, 20, 21, (d. 9. 28.) 22, (d. 7. 32.) 23, 24, 25, 27, 28, 29, (d. 7, 8.) 31, (d. 2. 21.) 34, (d. 4. 35.) 36, 37, 38, 39, 42, 43, 44, 46, (d. 9. 11.) 47, 49, (d. 4. 6.) 50 E. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, (d. 10. 37.) 8, 9, 10, 11, (d. 13. 24.) 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21, 23 R. 2. 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, (d. 28. . . d. 4.) 8, 11, 12, 14 H. 4. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9 H. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 9▪ 10, 11, 13, 15, 18, 20, 23, 25, 27, 28, 29, 31, 33, 38, 49 H. 6. 1, 2, 6, 12, 22 & 23. E. 4. Mary Eborum 49 H. 3. 23, 27, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 32, 34 E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 11. 19.) 2, 4, 5, 6▪ 7, (d. 15, 27.) 8, 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 14, (d. 5. 23.) 16. 17, 18, 19, 20. E. 2. 1, (d. 3. 16.) 2, (d. 11. 31.) 4. (d. 19. 41.) 5, (d. 7. 25.) 6, (d. 9. 19. 36.) 7, 8▪ 9, (d. 2. 18.) 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11, (d. 8. 11. 40.) 12, 13, (d. 1. 28.) 14, (d. 23. 33.) 15, 17, 18, 21. (d. 9.) 22, (d. 7. 32.) 23, 24, 25, 27, 28, 29, (d. 7. 8.) 31, (d. 2. 21.) 37, 38, 39, 42, 43, 44, 46, (d. 9. 11.) 47, 49, (d. 4. 6.) 50 E. 3. Melsa 49 H. 3. 23, (d. 4.) 24, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 9. 12.) 32, 34 E. 1. 1, (d. 19.) 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, (d. 15. 27.) 8, 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 14, (d. 5.) E. 2. Meryval, Mira Valle 49 H. 3. 23, (d. 4.) 24, 28▪ (d. 3. 17.) 30. (9. 12.) 32 E. 1. 1, (d. 19.) 2,▪ 4, 6, 7, (d. 15. 27.) 8, 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 14, (d. 5.) E. 2. Middleton 49 H. 3. 12, (d. 11.) 14, (d. 5.) E. 2. 22, (d. 7.) 23 E. 3.
49 H. 3. Muchelnye 22, (d. 7.) 23 E. 3. (N) NEwhus 23, (d. 4.) 24, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 32, 34 E. 1▪ 1, (d. 19.) 2, 4, 6, 7, (d. 15. 27.) E. 2. Nsom 23 E. . (d. 4.) Northampton, Iames 49 H. 3. 12, (d. 11.) 14, (d. 5.) E. 2. Novo Monasterio 23 (d. 4.) 24, 28. (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 9, 12.) 32, 34 E. 1. Nuttel 49 H. 3. Nywenham 2, 5, 6 E. 2. (O) OSelveston 49 H. 3. Osney 49 H. 3. 23, 27, (d. 17, 18.) 30, (d. 9. 12.) E. 1. 12. (d. 11.) 14, (d. 5.) 16, 17, 18, 19 E. 2. 4, (d. 19. 41.) 5, (d. 7. 25.) 6, (d. 4. 9. 19. 36.) 7, 8, 9, (d. 8. 18.) 1, (d. 1. 5.) 11, (d. 8. 11. 40.) 14, (d. 23. 33.) 15, 17, 18, 21, (d. 28.) 23, 46, (d. 9. 11.) 47 E. 3. Osytha 23, 32 E. 1. 1, (d. 19.) 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, (d. 15. 27.) 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) E. 2. (P) PArco Lude 49 H. 3. 23, (d. 4.) 24, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 32 E. 1. Sancti Petri Bristoll 32, 34, E. 1. 1, (d▪ 19.) E. 2. 32 E. 3. Pershor, Persour, Pershor 49 H. 3. 23. 27. (d. 17, 18.) E. 1. 8, 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 14, (d. 5.) E. 2. Pippewell 23, (d. 4▪) 24, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 32, 34 E. 1. 1, (d. 19.) 2, 4, 6, 7, (d. 15. 27.) E. 2.
(Q) QUrrera, Quarrere 23, (d. 4.) 24, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 9. 12.) 32 E. 1. (R) RAdegunde 23, (d. 4. 9.) 24, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 9. 12.) 32, 34, E. 1. 1, (d. 19.) 2, 4, E. 2. Ring, Reding, Redings 49 H. 3. 23, 25, 27, (d. 17, 18.) 28, 30, (d. 9. 12.) 32, 34 E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 19.) 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, (d. 15. 27.) 8, 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12 (d. 11. 29.) 13, 14, (d. 5. 23.) 16, 17, 18, 19, 20 E. 2. 1, (d. 3. 16.) 2, (d. 15, 31.) 4, (d. 19. 41.) 6,▪ (d. 4. 9. 19. 36.) 7, 8, 9, (d. 2. 18.) 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11, (d. 8, 11. 40.) 12, 13, (d. 1. 28.) 14, (d. 23. 33.) 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 2, (d. 9. 28.) 22, (d. 7. 32.) 23, 24, 25, 27, 28, 29, 31, (d. 2. 21.) 34, (d. 4. 35.) 36, 37, 38. 39, 42, 43, 44, 46. (d. 9. 11.) 47, 49, (d. 4, 6,) 50 E. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, (d. 10. 37.) 8, 9, 10, 11, (d. 13. 24.) 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21, 23 R. 2. 1, 2, 3, 5, (p. 1. d. 28. p. 2. d. 4.) 7, 8, 11, 12, 14 H. 4. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9 H. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 10, 11, 13, 15, 18, 20, 23, 25, 27, 28, 29, 31, 33, 38, 49 H. 6. 1, 2, 6, 12, 22 & 23 E. 4. Rmsy Ramsey 49 H. 3. 23, 25, 27, (d. 17. 18.) 28, 30, (d. 9. 12.) 32, 34 E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 11▪ 19.) 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, (d. 15. 27.) 8, 9, 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, 14,) (d. 5. 23.) 16, 17, 18, 19, 20 E. 2. 1, (d. 3. 16.) 2, (d. 15. 31) 4, (d. 19. 41.) 6, (d. 4. 9. 19. 36.) 7, 8, 9, (d. 2. 18.) 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11, (d. 8. 15. 40.) 12, 13, (d. 1. 28.) 14, (d. 23. 33.) 15, 17, 18, 20, 21, (d. 9. 28.) 22, (d. 32.) 23, 25, 27, 28, 29, (d. 7. 8.) 31, (d. 2. 21.) 34, (d. 4. 35.) 36, 37, 38, 39, 42, 43, 44, 46, (d. 9. 11.) 47, 49, (d. 4. 6.) 50 E. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, (d. 10. 37.) 8, 9, 10, 11, (d. 13. 24.) 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21 R. 2, 1, 2, 3,
5, 7, 8, 11, 12, 14 . 4. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9 . 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 9, 10, 11, 13, 15, 18, 20, 23, 25, 27, 28, 29, 31, 33, 38, 49 H. 6. & 6, 12, 22, & 23 E. Revesbye 23, (d. 4.) 24, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 32 E. 1. 14 (d. 5.) E. 2. Ryevall, Ryaval, Rival 49 H. 3. 4, 6, 7, (d. 15. 27.) 8, 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, 14, (d. 5. 23.) E. 2. Rufford, Rughford 49 H. 3. 23, (d. 4.) 24, 28, (d. 3. 17) 32, 34 E. 1. 1, (d. 19.) 2. 4, 6, 7, (d. 15. 27.) E. 2. Rupe 49 H. 3. 23, (d. 4.) 24, 48, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 3. 12.) 32, 34 E. 1. 1, (d. 19.) 2, 4. 6, 7, (d. 27.) E. 2. Roucster. 12 E. 2. (d. 11.) (S) SAllay 23, (d. 4.) 24, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 9. 12.) 34, E. 1. 1, (d. 19.) 2, 4, 6, 7, (d. 27.) E. 2. Salop 49 H. 3. 23, 27, (d. 17, 18.) 32 E. 1. 5, 12 (d. 11.) 13, 14, (d. 5. 23.) 16, 17, 18 E. 2. 4, (d. 19. 41.) 5, (d. 7. 25.) 6, (d. 4. 9. 19. 36.) 7, 8, 9, (d. 18.) 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11, (d. 8, 11. 40.) 12, 13, (d. 1. 28.) 14, (d. 23. 33.) 15, 17, 18, 20, 21, (d. 9.) 22, (d. 7. 32.) 2. 24, 25, 27, 29, (d. 7, 8,) 31, (d. 2. 21.) 34, (d. 4. 35.) 38. 39, 42, 43, 44, 46, (d. 9. 11.) 47, 50 E. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, (d. 10. 37.) 8, 9, 10, 11, (d. 13. 24.) 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21, 23 R. 2. 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, (d. 28. p. 2. d. 4.) 8, 11, 12, 14 H. 4. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9 H. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 9, 10, 11, 13, 15, 18, 20, 23, 25, 27, 28, 29, 31, 33, 38, 49 H. 6. 1, 2, 6, 12, 22 & 23 E. 4. Selebey, Selby, Suleby 49 H. 3. 23, 24, 30, (d. 9. 12.) 32, 34 E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 19.) 2, 4, 6, 7, (d. 27.) 8, 9, 11, (d. 8. 4.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, 14, (d. 5. 23.) 16, 17, 18, 19, 20 E. 2. 1, (d. 3. 16.) 2, (d. 15. 31.) 4, (d. 19. 41.) 5, (d. 7. 25.) 6, (d. 9. 19. 36.) 7, 8, 9, (d. 2. 18.) 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11, (d. 8. 11.) 12, 13▪ (d. 1. 28.) 14, (d. 23. 33.) 15, 17, 18, 21, (d. 9.) 22, (d. 7. 32.) 23, 24, 25, 27, 28, 29, (d. 7, 8.)
34, (d. 4.) 36, 37, 38, 39, 44, 46, (d. 9. 11.) 49, (d. 4. 6.) 50 E. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, (d. 10. 37.) 8, 9, 10, 11, (d. 13. 24.) 12, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21, 23 R. 2. 1, 2, 3, 5, (d. 28. & 1. d. 4.) 7, 8, 10, 12, 14 H. 4. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9 H. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 9, 10, 11, 13, 15, 18, 20, 23, 25, 27, 28, 29, 31, 33, 38, 49 H. 6. 1, 2, 6, 12, 22 & 23 E. 4. Sherburne 23, 27, (d. 18.) E. 1. 8, 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, 14, (d. 5. 23.) E. 2. Stanley in Arderne 23, 24, (d. 1. 17.) 32, 34 E. 1. 1, (d. 19.) 2, 4, 6, 7, (d. 15. 27.) 8, 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) E. 2. Stanlawe 23, (d. 4.) 28, (d. . 17.) 32 E. 1. Stonely, Stanley, Stanlegh in Wilts 23 (d. 4.) 24, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 32 E. 1. 5, 8, 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) E. 2. Strata florida 23, (d. 4.) 24, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 9. 12.) 2 E. 1. Stratford at Bogh 23, (d. 4.) 24, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 9. 12.) 32 E. 1. 1, (d. 19. 8, 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) E. 2. Swynesheued 23, (d. 4.) 24, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 32 E. 1. (T) TAme 49 H. 3 Tavistoke 49 H. 3. 30, (d. 9. 12.) E. 1. 22, (d. 7.) 23 E. 3. Teukesbury 49 H. 3. 23, 27, (d. 17. 18.) E. 1. 1, (d. 19.) E. 2. Thorney 49 H. 3. 23, 25, 27, (d. 3. 18.) 30, (d. 9. 12.) E. 1. 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, (d. 16. 17.) 8, 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, 4, (d. 5. 2.) 16, 17, 18, 19 E. 2. 4, (d. 19. 4. 5, (d. 7. 5.) 6, (d. 4. 9. 19. 36.) 7, 8, 9, (d. 2. 18.) 11, (d. 8. 11. 40.) 12, 13, (d. 1. 28.) 14, (d. 23. 33.) 15, 17, 18, 20, 1, (d. 9. 28.) 22, (d. 32.) 23, 25, 27, 28, 29, (d. . 8.) 1, (d. 2. 1.) 34, (d. 4. 35.) 36, 7, 38, 39, 42, 43, 44, 46, (d. 9. 11.) 47, 49, (d. 4. 6.) 50 . 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, (d. 10. 37.) 8, 9, 10, 11, (d. 13. 24.) 12, 13,
14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21, 23 R. 2. 1, 2, 3, 5, (p. 1. d. 28. p. 2. d. 4.) 7, 8, 11, 12, 14 H. 4. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9 H. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 9, 10, 11, 13, 15, 18, 20, 23, 25, 27, 28, 29, 31, 33, 38, 49 H. 6. 1, 2, 6, 12, 22 & 23 E. 4. Thornton super Humber 23, (d. 4.) 27 E. 1. 5, 8, 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, 14, (d. 5. 23.) 16, 17, 18, 19, 20 E. 2. 2, (d. 3. 16.) 4, (d. 19. 41.) 5, (d. 7. 25.) 6, (d. 4. 9. 19. 36.) 7, 8, 9, (d. 8. 18.) 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11, (d. 8. 11. 40.) 12, 13, (d. 1. 28.) 14, (d. 23. 33.) 15. 23 E. 3. Ticheielde 23, (d. 4.) 24, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 32, 34 E. 1. 1, (d. 19.) E. 2. Tintrne 23 (d. 4.) 24, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 32 E. 1. Torre 23, (d. 4.) 24, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 32, 34 E. 1. 1, (d. 19.) 2, 4, 6 E. 2. Tupholme 23, (d. 4.) 24, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 32, 34 E. 1. 1, (d. 19.) 2, 4, 6, 7, (d. 27.) E. 2. Tyletye 23, (d. 4.) 24, 28, (d. 3. 17.) E. 1. (V) VAlle Di 49 H. 3. 23) (d. 4.) 24. 28. (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 9. 12.) 32, 34 E. 1. 1, (d. 19.) 2, 4, 6, 7, (d. 15. 27.) 8, 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 14, (d. 5.) E. 2. Valle Rgali 23, (d. 4.) 24, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 32, E. 1. (W.) Altham & Wautham Sanctae Crucis 49 H. 3. 23 (d. 4. 9.) 24, 25, 27, (d. 17, 18.) 28, (d. 3. 17) 32, 34 E. 1. 1, (d. 19.) 2. 4, 5, 6, 7, (d. 15. 27.) 8. 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, 14, (d. 5. 23.) 16, 17, 18, 19 E. 2. 2, (d. 15.) 4, (d. 19. 41.) 5, (d. 7. 25.) 6, (d. 4. 9. 19. 36.) 7, 8, 9, (d. 2. 34.) 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11, (d. 8. 11. 40.) 12, 13, (d. 1. 28.) 14, (d. 23. 33.) 15, 16 17, 18, 20, 21, (d. 9. 28.) 22, (d. 7. 32.) 23, 24, 25, 27, 28
29, (d. 7. 8.) 31, (d. 2. 21.) 33. 34, (d. 4. 35.) 36, 38, 39, 42, 43, 44, 46, (d. 9. 11.) 47, 49, (d. 4. 6.) 50 E. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 13, 15. 16, 17, 18, 20, 21, 23 R. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 11, 12, 14 H. 4. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9 H. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 9, 10, 11, 13, 15, 18, 20, 21, 23, 25, 27, 28, 29, 31, 33, 38, 49 H. 6. 1, 2, 6, 12, 22 & 23 E. 4. Warden, Wardon de Boxle 49 H. 3, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 32 E. 1. Waverly, Waverle 49 H. 3. 23. 25, 27, (d. 3. 17,) 28, 30, (d. 9. 12.) 32 E. 1. Wellebeck 23, (d. 4.) 24, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 9. 12.) 32, 34 E. 1. 1, (d. 19.) 2, 4, 6, 7, (d. 15. 27.) 8, 9. 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 14, (d. 5.) E. 2. Westminster Sancti Petri 49 H. 3. 23, 25, 27, (d. 3. 17, 18) 28, 30, (d. 9. 12.) 32, 34 E. 1. 1. (d. 19.) 5, 6, 7, (d. 15. 27.) 8, 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, 14, (d. 5. 23.) 16, 17, 18, 19, 20 E, 2. 1, (d. 3. 16.) 2, (d. 15, 31.) 4, (d. 19. 41.) 5, (d. 7. 25.) 6, (d. 4. 9, 19. 36.) 7, 8, 9, (d. 8. 18,) 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11. (d. (d. 8. 11. 40.) 12, 13, (d. 1. 28.) 14, (d. 23. 33.) 15, 17, 18, 21, 21, (d. 9. 28.) 22, (d. 7. 32.) 23, 24; 25, 27, 28, 29, (d. 7, 8.) 31, (d. 2. 21.) 33, 34, (d. 4. 35.) 38, 39, 42, 43, 44, 46, (d. 9. 11.) 47, 49, (d. 4. 6.) 50 E. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21, 23 R. 2. 1, 2, 5, 7, 8, 11, 12, 14 H, 4. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9 H. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 9, 10, 11, 13, 15, 18, 20, 23, 25, 27, 28, 29, 31, 33, 38, 49 H. 6. 1, 2, 6, 12, 22 & 23 E. 4. Whiteby, Wyteby 49 H. 3. 23, 27, (d. 18.) E. 1. 12. (d. 11.) 14, (d. 5.) E. 2. Winchecombe 49 H. 3. 23, 27, (d. 17. 18) 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 9. 12.) 32, 34 E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 11. 19.) 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, (d. 15, 27.) 8, 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 14, (d. 5.) 16, 17, 18, 19, E. 2. 4. (d. 19. 41.) 5, (d. 7. 25.) 6, (d. 4. 9. 19. 36.) 7, 8, 9, (d. 2. 18.)
10, (d. 1. 5.) 11, (d. 8. 11. 40.) 12, 13, (d. 1. 28.) 14, (d. 23. 33.) 16, 17, 20, 21, (d. 9.) 22. (d. 7. 32.) 23, 24, 25, 27, 28, 29, (d. 7, 8.) 31, (d. 2. 21.) 34, (d. 4. 35.) 46, (d. 9. 11.) 47, 49, (d. 4. 6.) E. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14▪ 15. 16, 17, 18, 20, 21, 23. R 2. 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 8, 11, 12, 14 H. 4. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9 H. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9. 10, 11, 12, 13, 15, 18, 20, 23, 25, 27, 28, 29, 31, 33, 38. 49 H. 6. 1, 2, 6, 12, 22 & 23 E. 4. The total number of the Abbots summoned at se∣veral times, (taking Hales and Hayles as di∣stinct,) is 22. An Alphabetical Catalogue of the Priors and Masters of Religious Orders summoned to the Parliaments and Great Councils of England. BArtholmew London 49 H. 3. Bath 23 E. 1. Bermundesey 49 H. 3. Bernewell, 49 H. 3. Blida 49 H. 3. Bridlington 49 H. 3. 1. (d. 11.) 12, (d. 11.) 14, (d. 5.) 16, 17, 18, 19 E. 2. Bouver, or Beuver 49 H. 3. Christ-Church Canterbury 23, 25, 27, (d. 18.) E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 11.) E. 2. 21, (d. 28.) 22, (d. 7,) 32, 33 E. 3. Coventre 49 H. 3. 13, 14, (d. 23.) E. 2. 36, 37, 38, 39, 42, 43, 44, 46, (d. 9. 11.) 47, 49, (d. 4. 6.) 50 E. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21, 23 R. 2. 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 8, 11, 12, 14 H. 4. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9 H. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 9, 10, 11, 13, 15, 18, 20, 23, 25, 27, 28, 29, 31, 33, 38, 49 H. 6. 1, 2, 6, 12, 22 & 23 E. 4. Cruceroyes 49 H. 3. Dunolme 49 H. 3. 29 E. 1. Dunstaple 49 H. 3.
Ely 49 H. 3. 23, 25 E. 1. 21 E. 3. d. 28. Eton 49 H. 3. Finneshued 49 H. 3. Friswid Oxon 49 H. 3. Giseburn 49 H. 3. 23, 27 (d. 18.) E. 1. Huntingdon 49 H. 3. Iohn Ierusalem in Anglia 49 H. 3. 23, 25, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 9.) 32 E. 1. 1, (d. 19.) 2, 4, 6, 7, (d. 15. 27.) 8, 9, 11. (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, 14, (d. 5. 23.) 16, 17, 18, 19 E. 2. 2, (d. 15.) 4, (d. 19. 41.) 5, (d. 7. 25.) 6, (d. 9. 19. 36.) 7, 8, 9, (d. 2. 18.) 10, d. (1, 5.) 11, (d. 8. 11. 40.) 12, 13, (d. 1. 28.) 14, (d. 23. 33.) 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21, (d. 9. 28.) 22. (d. 7. 32.) 23, 24, 25, 28; 29, (d. 7, 8.) 31, (d. 2. 21.) 32, 33, 34, (d. 4. 35.) 36, 37, 38, 42, 43, 44. 46, (d. 9. 11.) 47, 49, (d. 4. 6.) 50 E. 3. 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21, 23, R. 2. 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 8, 11, 12, 14 H. 4. 1, 2, 3, 4 H. 5. 5, 7, 9, 10, 11, 13, 15, 18, 23, 25, 28, 31, 33, 38, 49 H. 6. 1, 2, 6, 12. 22 & 23 E. 4. Karliol 49 H. 3. Kinleworth 49 H. 3. Lauda 49 H. 3. Ledes 49 H. 3. Lenton 49. H. 3. Lews, or Lewes 49 H. 3. 1, (d. 8. 11. 19.) 2. 4. 5, 6, 7, (d. 15. 27.) 8, 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, 14, (d. 5. 23.) 16, 17, 18, 19 E. 2. 4. (d. 19. 41.) 5, (d. 7. 25.) 6, (d. 4. 9. 19. 36.) 7, 8, 9, (d. 2. 18.) 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11, (d. 8. 11. 40.) 12, 13, (d. 1. 28.) 14, (d. 23, 33.) 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21, (d. 9. 28.) 22, (d. 7. 32.) 23, 24, 25, 27, 36, 37, 38 E. 3. Merton 49 H. 3. 23, (d. 9.) 27, (d. 18.) E. 1. Nots 49 H. 3. Nrwich 49 H. 3. 23, 25 E. 1. Oswald 49 H. 3. Parco 49 H. 3. Roffen. 21 E. 3. d. 28.
Magist Ordinis de Smpingham, Semplingham, and Sem∣pringham, sometimes written Prior 49 H. 3. 24, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30. (d. 9.) 32 E. 1. 6, 7. (d. 15. 27.) 8, 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, 14, (d. 5. 23.) E. 2. 10. (d. 1. 5.) 11, (d. 8. 11. 40.) 12, 13, (d. 1. 28.) 14, (d. 23. 33.) 15 E. 3. Stodley 49 H. 3. Spalding 49 H. 3. 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, (d. 15. 27.) 8, 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 14, (d. 5.) 16, 17, 18, 19, E. 2. 4, (d. 19. 41.) 5, (d. 7. 25.) 6, (d. 4. 9. 19, 36.) 7, 8, 9, (d. 2. 18.) 10, (d. 5.) 11, (d. 8. 11. 40.) 12, 13, (d. 1. 28.) 14, (d. 23. 33.) 15 E. 3. Swithe Winton 49 H. 3. 23, 25 E. 1. 21 E. 3. Magister Militiae Templi in Anglia 49 H. 3. 23, 24, 27, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30. (d. 9.) 32 E. 1. 1 (d. 19.) E. 2. This Order of the Templars was dissolved under King Edward the 2. and their Lands scheated, setled on the Hospitallers by the Statute of 17 E. 2. So that the Mr. of the Templars was never after summoned. Thurgarton 49 H. 3. Trinity Cant. 49 H. 3. Trinity Ebor. 49 H. 3. Watton 49 H. 3. Wigorne 23 E. 1. The total of the Priors and Masters of Orders 41. Deans and other particular Clergy-men summoned. Decan. Ebor. Decan. Sarum, Decan. Lincoln, Decan. Exon, Decan. de Well: 49 H. 3. Magistro Gilberto Middleton Archid. Northampton Offic. Cur. Cantuar. Magistr. Roberto de Sanct. Albano Decano de Arcubus London: 18 E. 2. dors, 5. Decano Wellen. 32 E. 3. dors. 14.
By this Alphabetical exact Table it is apparent, 1. That the total Number of the Abbots at any times summoned to Parliaments and Great Councils of State by special Writs and Memorials entred in the Clause Rolls, was 122. And the total summ of Priors and Masters of Religious Orders thus summoned, 41. in all 163. besides the 5 Deans, and the Official of the Court of Canterbury and Dean of the Arches. 2. That of all this numerous multitude of Abbots, Priors, and Masters of Religious Orders thus summo∣ned at several times upon particular reasons and occasi∣ons, there were only 25 Abbots constantly summoned towards the latter end of King Edward the 3. his reign, and the begning of Richard the 2d. to the end of King Edward the 4th, and the dissolution of Monasteries; to wit, the Abbots of Abingdon, St. Albans, St. Augustines Canterbury, Bardeny, de Bello, de Burgo Sancti Petri, Ciren∣cester, Colecester, Croyland, St. Edmonds Bury, Evesham, Glaston, Gloucester, Hida, Hulmo, Malmesbury, St. Ma∣ries of York, Rading, Ramesy, Salop, Seleby, Thorney, Wal∣tham, Westminster and Winchecombe; And two Priors only, namely of Coventre, and of the Hospitall of S. Iohn of Ierusalem in England. 3. That 13. of these 122. Abbots, and 27. of these Priors, were summoned only but once; 4. of these Ab∣bots and 1. of these Priors but twice; 3. of these Ab∣bots and 3. Priors only thrice; 6. Abbots and 2. Pri∣ors but 4. times; 17. Abbots but 5. times, others 6. 7. 8. 9. or 10. times summoned, and no more, then totally omitted out of the Summons ever after. 4ly, That some Abbots and Priors summoned to ve∣ry many Parliaments, and Great Councils, were yet afterwards omitted out of the Summons, and never called by writ unto them afterwards. For instance, the Abbots of St. Augustines Bristoll were summoned to 16. of Barlinges to 25. of Cumbe to 21. the Abbots of Crox∣ton
to 22. D ontibus to 25. Of urneyes to 23. Of Hales to 21. Of Melsa to 23. Of Mira Valle to 21. Of Osency to 39. Of Thornton to 43. the Master and Prior of the Order of Semplingham to 29. the Prior of Lews or Lewes to 61. and the Prior of Spalding to 41 Parlia∣ments and Great Councils under Henry the 3. Edward 1. 2. or 3. and yet they were never summoned to any Parliaments after King Edward the 3. The Prior of St. Iames Northampton summoned once under Henry the 3d. being Summoned Ann. 12 E. 2. was (upon his Petition prosecuted by his Proctor) discharged from any future summons, and lest out of the Rolls after 14 E. 2. because Non tenet de Rege per Baroniam, nec  Capite; sed tantum in puram et perpetuam eleemosynam, nec praede∣cessores sui unquam in Cancellaria i rotulati fuerunt, nisi ad stimulationem aliquorum malignorum▪ possent alias, pr casum irrotulari, et per consequens citari▪ as you may read at large inTitles of Honor. p. 731. to 735. Mr. Sclden. The Prior of Bridlington was summoned 9. times under Henry the 3. and Edward 2. and then in 14 Ed: 2. there was this entry made in the Roll, Nihil tenet de Rege, and no future Summons issued to him afterwards: The Abbot of Leicester was summoned to no less than 50 Parliaments and Great Councils under Henry 3. and Ed. 1, 2, 3. before 25 E. 3. yet after all these Summons there is this entry made upon his 51 summons, Ann. 25 E. 3. (Here, p. 6.) Abbas Leicestr, cancellatur, quia habet Cartam Regis quod non compellatur venira ad Parliamentum: The Grounds of which discharge are thus expressed in the Charter of his exemption from future summons gran∣ted upon his Petition in Parliament. Pat. 26 E. 3. pars 1. m, , Seldens Titles of Ho∣nor, p. 734. 735. Rex omnibus ad quos, &c. Salutem. Supplicavit nobis dilectus nobis in Christo Abbas de Lecestria, ut, cum Abbatia sua praedicta per Robertum Fitz Robert de Mkan, dudum Comitem Leycestriae, fundata fuisset in puram & perpetuam elemosinam, & advocatio ive pa∣tronatus ejusdem ad manus Domini H. quondam Re∣gis Angliae proavi nostri, per forisfactum Simonis d
Mont orti tune Comitis Leycestriae & paoni ejusdem devenerir, idemque Abbas aliqua terras seu tenementa de nobis per Baroniam seu alio modo non teneat, per quod ad Parliamenta sen Consilia nostra venire tenea∣tur, nec aliquis Praedecessorum suorum ante quadragesi∣mum nonum annum dicti proavi nostri, post orisfactu∣ram praedicti Simonis (quo anno omnes Abbates et Pri∣ores Regni nostri Angliae, ad Parliamentum ejusdem proavi nostri tune tentum, voluntarie summoniti fue∣runt) summonitus extiterit, velimus ipsum Abbarem de hujusmodi adventu ad Parliamentum factae exonerari; Et quia visis cartis & confirmationibus de erris & te∣nementis eidem Abbatiae datis et concessis in Cancel∣lariae nostrae irrot ulatis compertum est, quod dicta Ab∣batia per praedictum Robert Fitz Robert de Mekan, tunc Comitem Leycestriae, fundata erat in puram et perpetu∣am Elemosinam, et non invenitur in rotulis praedictis, quod prae dictus Abbas aliqua erras seu tenementa de nobis tenet per Baroniam seu aliquo alio servitio, nec quod Praedecessores sui Abbates loci praedicti ad aliqua Parliamenta progenitorum nostrorum ante praedictum quadragesimum nonum annum dicti proavi nostri aut postmodum continu, sed vicibus interpolais, summo∣niti fuerint; Nolentes ipsum Abbatem indebirè sic vexa∣ri, concessimus pro nobis et haeredibus nostris, quod idem Abbas et successores sui de veniendo ad Parlia∣menta et Consilia nostra vel haeredum nostrorum de cae∣tero quieti sint & exonerati imperpetuum. Ita semper quod dictus Abbas & succeores sui in Procuratores ad hujusmodi Parliamenta & Consilia per Clerum mitten∣dos consentiant & ut moris est expensis contribuant eo∣rundem. In cujus, &c. Teste Rege apud West monaste∣rium XV. die Februar. Per petitionem de Parlia∣mento. After which Patent and entry this Abbot being sum∣moned again in the lists of 27. & 29 E. 3. upon com∣plaint thereof, there was this Memorandum made in the Clause Roll of 29 E. 3. Cancellaur Abbas Leycestriae,
quia hab Cartam Regis, quod Non Compellatur vnir ad Parliamntum. The Abbot of Tavistock was summoned to 5 Parlia∣ments and Parliamentary Councils under H. 3. Ed. 1. and Ed. 3. the last whereof was in 23 E. 3. but never after; yet King Henry the 8. in the 5. year of his reign, created Richard Banham Abbot of Tavistocke and his successors, to be one of the Spiritual and Religious Lords of the Parliament, of himself his heirs and successors; yet withall pardoned their absence at any time from Par∣liament, by reason of their great distance from it, pay∣ing only the fine of 5. marks for every time they should be personally absent into the Kings Exchequer, as this Patent manifests. Henricus, &c.Par. 5 H. 8. pars 2. m. 22. Seldens Titles of Ho∣nor, p. 750, 751, Sciatis quod certis considerationibu nos specialitè moventibus, & o specialem devotio∣nem quam ad Beatam Virginem Mariam matrem Christi, sanctumque Rumonum, in quorum Honore Ab∣batia de Tavistocke, quae de fundatione nobilium proge∣nitorum nostroum quondam Regum Angliae & nostro patronatu dedicata existir; gerimus et habemus, hinc est, quod de gratia nostra speciali ac ex certa scientia & mero motu nostris, volumus candem Abbatiam sive Monasterium nostrum gaudere honore, priuilegio, ac li∣berratibus spiritualium Dominorum Parliamenti nostri Haeredum & successorum nostrorum. Ideo concessimus & per praesentes concedimus, pro nobis haeredibus & successoribus nostris quantum in nobis est, dilecto nobis in Christo Richardo Banha Abbati de Tavistocke prae∣dicto & successoribus suis, ut eorum quilibet qui pro tempore ibidem fuerit Abbas, sit et erit unus de spiri∣tualibus & Religiosis Dominis Parliamenti nostri Hae∣redum & successorum nostrorum, gaudendo honore, pri∣vilegio ac libertatibus ejusdem; Et insuper, de uberi∣ori gratia nostra, actando utilitatem dicti nostri Mo∣nasterii, considerando ejus distantiam, Ita quod si con∣tingat aliquem Abbatem qui pro tempore fuerit fore vel esse absentem propter praedicti Monasterii utilita∣tem
in non veniendo ad Parliamentum praedictum Hae∣redum vel successorum nostrum, quam quidem absenti∣am eidem Abbati perdonamus per praesentes; Ita tamen quod tune solve pro hujusmodi abentia cujuslibet Par∣liamenti integri in nostro Scaccario, suum per Attorna∣tum quinque Marcas nobis, haeredibus sive succeoribus nostris, totiens quotiens, ho infuturum contigerit. In cujus, &c. Teste, &c. Vicesimo terio die Ianuarii, &c. Sir Edward Cooke in his 4. Institutes, p. 45. affirms this Patent to be void in Law; but upon such a poor rea∣son, as will made all Temporal Lords, Barons, Earles, and Dukes Patents likewise void, if they hold not by Barony; and I conceive it to be good in Law, upon consideration of the premises, that our Kings did at their pleasure, without any special Patents of Creation, summon what Abbots and Priors they thought meet to their Parliaments, and omitted, discharged them at their pleasures, as the premises plentifully manifest be∣yond contradiction. 5. It is most demonstratively and experimentally evi∣dent by this Table: That the Kings bare writs of sum∣mons of Abbots, Priors, Masters of Religious Orders, Deans, and other Clergymen not holding by Barony, and their sitting in Parliaments and Great Councils, and debating, consulting, advising with the King and the rest of the Abbots, Priors, Bishops, Earls, Lords and Barons of the Realm in Parliament according to the tenor of the writs of Summons (issued to them all in the self-same form) did neither really or actually ennoble either them, nor their successors (for then by4 Instir. p. 1. Sir Edward Cooks own doctrine) they ought, ex debito justitiae, to have been summoned constantly during life, and their Successors after them, when they had been called by writ, actually sate in one, two, much more if in three or four Parliaments; when most of them who were summoned sate only in 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, or 8.
Parliaments and no more; and neither they nor their Successors were ever after summoned; yea some of hem after above 20, 30, 40, 50, and 60. summons to, and Sessions in Parliaments under several Kings, have been afterwards discharged, or left out of the writs of Sum∣mons, as no Barons nor Peers of the Realm, because they held not by Barony of the King: Therefore their writs of Summons and Session did only make them but momentany and quasi temporary Peers, or Spiritual Lords pro hac vice only, when and whiles they were summoned to, and sate in any particular Parliament or great Concil amongst the rest of the Prelates and Lords, not after they were dissolved, when both their temporaie. Pege and Lordships (if their writ and Session made them Lords or Peer pro tempore,) expired with the Parliaments: And by the self-same ground, reason, the Kings summons of any Knights, Es∣quires, or other Laymen to Parliament by a general wri, who held not by Barony, without any special Clause creating them Barons by writs or Parents, and their actual sitting in Parliament, can neither ennoble themselves, nor make them Lords, Barons, or Peers of the Realm for life, much lesse their heirs males in fee, or for perpetity after their deceases, but onely make them quasi Peers, or Great men, or rather Assistants to, and joynt Consellors with the Lords in Parliament pro tempore, so long as the Parliaments to which they are summoned and in which they sit continue, but no longer; as I haveIn my Plea for the Lords, Epist. to the Rea∣der, & p. 147. to 161. elsewher proved, and shall further demon∣stratively evidence in the next Section, against Sir Ed∣ward Cookes and others mistakes therein. 8. That our Kings by their Prerogative and royall Authority alone did upon all extraordinary occasions summon what Abbots, Priors, Religious and Ecclesi∣astical persons they thought meet, in the self same manner, and by the self same forms of writs, as they summoned the Bishops, Abbots, Peers and other Lords
who were actual Peers and Barons of the Realm, in greater or smaller numbers as they and their Council thought meeest; who sate, consulted, advised in Parlia∣ment, together with the King and the rest of the Lords: which royal Prerogative and Jurisdiction was never questioned, oppugned, complained or voted against in any antient Parliaments to my knowledge; which be∣ing our Kings Parliaments, yea the Grand Councils both of the King and kingdom, (as the writs of Sum∣mons and all Prologues and Acts of Parliament stile them) they might thereupon lawfully summon to them what persons they deemed most fit and able to advise, assist them, and to promote, dispatch their publike affairs, for their own and the kingdomes benefit, safety, defence, and common welfare; though no actual Peers, Lords, or Barons of the Realm by Patent, or Tenure; as will more fully appear by the two next Sections. 7. This Table doth undeniably convince the foreci∣ted Memorandum (p. 34.) entred in Cl. 6 E. 3. m. 36. Istis Abbatibus et Prioribus subscriptis, non solebat scribi in aliis Parliamentis; viz. Abbati de Teukesbury, with 26 Abbots and Priors there named to be full of gross mistakes: For I find the Abbot of St. Augustines Bri∣stol summoned no less than 5. times before, and 11. times after 6 E. 3. and the Abbot of Bardenay no less than 33. times sommoned before, and 80. times after it, being one of the Abbots constantly summoned till the 23 E. 4. and dissolution of Monasteries: the Abbot of Barlinges 25. times before it: the Abbot de Bello 30. times before, and 70. after it, being one of the 25 Ab∣bots constantly summoned as a Baron: the Abbot of Burton upon Trent 12 times: the Prior of Bridlington 8. times, the Prior of Chester 4. times, the Abbot de Fon∣tibus 26. the Abbot of Furneyes 23. times: the Abbot of Gerveux (Gervall, or Iorvall) 13. times: the Prior of Gisurn thrice: the Abbot of Hayles 21 times: the Abbot of Lnes twice: the Abbot of St. Ositha 12.
time, the Abbot of Perhore 11. times the Abbot of Ryevall 14. times: the Master and Prior of the Order of Sempingham 29. times, the Abbot of Stratford 12. times, all of them before 6 E. 3. the Abbot of Tavistock. thrice before, and twice after i: the Abbot of Tham once, the Abbot of Teukesbury 5. times, and the Abbot of Wardon 4. times before it: Only to the Abbots of Boghland, Langedon and Walley therein mentioned I finde no writs of Summons in any Rolls, unless Boghland, be meant of Bocland (as I conceive it is) who was twice summoned; and Langedon for Lavedon who was 5. times; and Whalley for Wave ley, who was 9. times summoned by writ before this Memorandum; entred by some ig∣norant Clerk, who had not well examined the former Clause rols and lists of Summons. 8. That the Bishops, Abbots and Priors summoned constantly and of right to our Parliaments and Great Councils by writ, were thus summoned to them, not as they were Bishops, Abbots, or Priors, but in respect of theirModus te∣nendi Parlia∣mentum, Cooks 4 In∣stit. c. 1. Baronies, which they held of, by, from and un∣der our Kings; as is evident by the Recognition made in the Great Parliamentary Council atChon. Gervasii, col. 1133. Mat. Pa∣r, p. 96, 97. Clarindon, Ann. 1164.Bbl. Pa∣trum, tom. 12. pars 2. p. 942, 944. by Petrus Blesensis his Treatise De Institu∣tione Episcop: dedicated to King Henry the 2d; by the Judgement given against Thomas Becket Archbishop of Canterbury in a Council at Northamton Anno 1165. (11 H. 2.) recorded bySeldens Titles of Ho∣nor, p. 705, 706. William Fitz-Stephens;Mat. Pa∣ris, p. 246, 247. by the Great Charter of King Iohn, Anno 1215. (15 Io∣hanis) by thatHist. Ang. p. 354, 355. of Matthew Paris Anno 1231. Sep∣timo Calendas Februarii, convenerunt ad Colloquium apud Westmonasterium Rex, cum Praelatis et aliis Mag∣natibus, ubi exegit idem Rex Scutagium, de quolibet Scuto tres marcas▪ ab omnibus qui Baronas tenebant tam Laicis quam Praelatis: ui Richardus Canuarien∣sis Archiepicopus, et quidam Episcopi cum eo, audc∣ter resistentes, dixerunt. Quod non tenentur viri Eccle∣siastici judicio subjici Laicorum, cum absque  con∣cessum
uit, Scutagium in finibus ransminis. Tan∣dem et post mustas inde disceptationes, negotium quanm ad Praelatos reclamantes pertinebat usque 15. dies post Pascha dilationem acpit;Edi. Tigu∣ri, 1589. p. 970, 971. And by this no∣tible passage of the Continuer of Matthew Paris Anno 1267. (51 H. 3.) Rex citati fcit Comites et Barones, Archiepiscopos, Episcopos et Abbates, omnesque com∣muniter militare servitium sibi debenter, ut apud Sanc∣tum Edmundum, equis et amis sufficienter instructi convenirent, ad impeendum os, qui contra pacem Re∣giam occupaverunt Inslm Eljensem, &c. Abadunais qui ad Parliamentum citati suerant, praeter rebelles, pri∣mo principaliter Rex et Legarus subscriptos Articulos exigebant; Ut omnes Praelati & rectores Ecclesiarum decimas sibi concederent, de tribus annis sequentibus, & de anno prximo praeeito▪ quantum dabunt Baroni∣bus ad custodiendum mare contra alienigena. Re∣sponsio. Ad hoc responderunt, quod bellum inceptum fuerat per iniquam cupiditatem, & durat in praesens, & necessarium esset, hujusmodi petitiones pessimas praeter∣ire, & de pace regni tractare,Nota. et Parliamentum suum ad utilitatem Ecclesiae et regni convertere, non ad denati∣orum extorsionem: praecipue quum terra in tantum de∣structa sit per bellum, quod nunquam, vel saltem sero poterit respirate. Secundu. Item petitum est, ut Ec∣clesiae taxarentur per manus Laicorum, justa et alta taxa∣tione, ad valorem omnium bonorum spectantium ad e∣asdem. Responsio. Ad hoc respondebatur, quod non est ratio, sed omnino contra justiciam,Nota. ut Laici de deci∣mis colligendis se intromittant, nec in hoc unquam consentirent communiter, sed tantum ut taxaio anti∣qua staret. Tertius. Item, ut Episcopi & Abbates, &c. decimam suam darent DE BARONIIS SUIS plena∣rie, et de Laico feudo recta & alta taxatione. Respon∣sio. Ad hoc respondebatur, quod depraedationibus sunt depauperati, et sequuti sunt Regem in expeditione, & tanta pecuniarum effusione, quod omnino pauperes sunt
effecti, e etiam errae eorum incultae acbant propter bellum. Quartus. Item petirum est, ut Clerus com∣muniter daret domino Regi, ad relevandum staum su∣um, triginta millia marcarum, propter ante dictas deci∣mas, quas quidem Legat us vendicabat ad opus Romanae curiae, propter debita Siciliae, Apuliae, et Calabriae con∣tracta, in nomine domini Edmundi filii Regis modo prae∣sentis. Responsio. Ad hoc respondebatur, quod ihil darent, quia omnes hujusmodi taxationes & extorsiones per Regem factae prius, nunquam in Regis utilitatem vel regni sunt conversae. Quiutus. Item petitum est, ut omnes Clerici TENENTES BARONIAS, vel Lai∣cum feudum, personaliter armati procederent contra regios adversarios, vel tantum servirium in expeditio∣ne Regis invenirent, quantum pertineret ad tantam terram, vel tenementum. Responsio. Ad hoc responde∣batur, quod non debent pugnare cum gladio materiali, sed spitiuali, scilicet cum lachrymis & orationibus hu∣milibus & devotis.Nota. Et quod propter beneficia sua te∣nentur pacem manu tenere, non bellum. Et quod BA∣RONIAE EORUM ab eleemosynis puris stabiliuntur: unde servitium militare non debent, nisi certum, nec novum incipient. Sextus. Item petitum est, ut Clerus communiter aquietaret novem millia marcarum, quas Episcopus Roffensis Laurentius, Episcopus Bathonien∣sis Willielmus, & Abbas Westmonasterii Richardus, mutuo receperunt à mercatoribus domini Papae in curia Romana, quando fuerunt ibidem, pro Regiis negotiis exediendis. Responsio. Ad hoc respondebatur, quod nunquam consentiebant mutuationi tanti debiti, nec unquam inde sciebnt, unde in nullo tenentur illud ad∣quietare. Septimus. Item petitum est ex parte Papae, ut firet praedicatio in omni festinatione de cruce per totum regnum, ad expugnandm populum, quem curia providere, vel ad crucem perpetam redimendum. Re∣sponsio. Ad hoc respondebatur, quod populus trrae per bellum in magna parte perimitur, & si modo cruce sig∣narentur,
pauci vel nulli ad defensionem patriae rema∣nerent. Unde manifestum est, quod Legatus vellet naturalem terrae progeniem exulare, ut alienigenae li∣berius conquirere possint terram. Octavus. Item di∣cebatur, quod Praelati tenebantur ad omnes petitiones, vellent nollent, propter juramentum de Coventre, ubi juraverunt quod domino Regi auxiliarentur modis om∣nibus, quibus possent. Responsio. Ad hoc responderunt, quod quando juramentum fecerunt, non intelligebant de alio auxilio quam Spirituali, consilioque salubri. By which demands and answers (not unsutable nor unseasonable for the consideration of our present times) it is apparent; that the Clergy ought not to be taxed by the Laity for their Ecclesiasticall Baronies and Tem∣poral Lands in Parliament, but only by themselves, much less then for their Spiritualties and Benefices; and that their BARONIES held of the King, obliged them to sit and serve in Parliaments, yet did not bind them to serve the King in person in his wars; nor to foment any wars between him and his Subjects, but rather to advise him to maintain peace not wars. By Matthew WestminstersFlores Hi∣stor. pars 2. p. 409. relation, That the Archbishop of Can∣terbury who the year before had all his Temporalties and goods seised into the Kings hands for refusing to grant a Subsidy to the King, for fear of Pope Boniface the 8. his Constitution to the contrary; together with the rest of the Clergy being put out of the Kings protection upon this occasion, was this year restored to the Kings grace and fa∣vor, atque REDDITA SIBI BARONIA SUA. And by this Protestation of the Bishops, Abbots, Priors and Clergy in theSee An Exact Abridg∣ment, p. 322. Parliament of 11 Rich. the 2. Rotul. Parliamenti parte 1. nu. 2. Artic. 34. De Iure et consuetudine Regni Angliae ad Archiepiscopum Cantuariensem qui pro tempore fue∣ri, nnon caeteros Suffraganeos, Comfraires & Compa∣tres ABBATES ET PRIORES, ALIOS∣QVE PRAELATOS QVOSCUNQVE
PER BARONIAM DE DOMINO RE∣GE TENENTES, PERTINET IN PAR∣LIAMENTIS REGIIS QUIBUS CUN∣QUE UT PARES REGNI PRAEDICTI PERSONALITER INTERESS. ibi∣demque de Regni Negotiis ac aliis tractari cum caeteris decti Regni Paribus, et aliis I INTERESSENDI , consulere et tractare, ordinare, statuere et diffini∣re, ac caetera facere quae Parliamenti tempore ibide invenient facienda. Of which, those who please may finde many other Testimonies, in my Plea for the Lords, p. 151. to 158. 221. to 290. and in Mr: Sel∣dens Titles of Honor, Part. 2. Chapter 5. Section 17. to 26. 27, It is observable, that when any Archbishop di∣ed, after the writ of Summons to Parliament issued to him with a Praemunientes, &c. and before the return and execution thereof; the King thereupon issued a new Writ of Summons to the Guardian of the Spiritu∣alties of the Archbishoprick, with a Praemunientes to summon the Dean, Chapter, Archdeacon and Clergy of the Province, with a particular writ to the Dean and Chapter of his Church to appear at the said Parlia∣ment; as is evident by these two memorable writs in Claus. 9 E. 2. m. 20. dorso. Rex Custodi Spiritualitatis Archiepiscopatus Eborum. sede vacante, salutem. Quia nupr tempore quo Parliamentum nostrum usque Lincoln. in Quindena Sncti Hillarii prox. futur. summoneri mandavimus bonae memoriae W. pro tunc Archie piscopo loci praedicti jam de uncto, quod in propria persona sua dicto Parlia∣mento nostro interesser, ac quod praemuniri faciet Deca∣num et Capitulum Ecclesiae suae beti Petri Ebor. to∣tumque Clerum suae Dioc: quod dicti Decanus et Ar∣chidiaconi in propriis persnis suis, dictumque Capitu∣lum per unnm, et dictus Clerus per duos Procuratores
idoneos dicto Parliamento similiter interestent, ad trac∣tandum ibidem Noblcum super negotiis Nos et Sta∣tum Regni nostri ngtibus pro quibus dictum Parlia∣mentum mandavimus Convocari. Nos nolentes per mortem praefati Archiepiscopi dicta mandata nostra dif∣ferri, set ea potius per vos executioni debito demanda∣ri, Vobis mandamus, quod Vos in propria persona ve∣stra dictis die et loco intersitis. Praemunientes praedic∣tos Decanum et Capitulum, Archidiaconos, totumque Clerum praedictum, quod iidem Decanus et Archidi∣diaconi in propriis personis suis, dictumque Capitulum per unum, ac dictus Clerus per duos Procuratores dic∣to Parliamento nostro in Quindena praedicta intersint. Ad tractandum ibidem Nobiscum super Negotiis prae∣dictis in forma supradicta, et ad consentiendum hiis quae unc ibidem de Communi Consilio contigerit or∣dinari. Et hoc nullatenus omittatis. T. Rege apud Clipston 17 die Januarii, Per ipsum Regem. Rex dilectis sibi in Christo Decano et Capitulo Ec∣clesiae beati Petri Ebor: salutem. Quia nuper, &c. (ut supra;) Et quod praemuniri faciet vos, Archidiaconos, totumque Clerum suae Diocaes. quod praefati Deca∣nus et Archidiaconi in propriis personis vestris, dictum∣que Capitulum per um, et praedictus Clerus per du∣os Procuratores dicto Parliamento nostro similiter in∣teressetis, ad tractandum ibidem, &c. Nos nolentes, &c. Vobis mandamus, quod vos praefatus Decanus in propria persona vestra dicto Parliamento in Quindena praedicta intersitis, Et vos dictum Capitulum per unum Procuratorem sufficientem sitis similiter, ad trctan∣dum ibidem, &c. Teste ut supra. Per ipsum Re∣gem. 28 That no private Prelates and Clergy men could grant a Subsidy to binde the rest of the Cler∣gy for the necessary defence of the Church, King, kingdom, against invading Enemies, without the ge∣neral Consent of the Archbishops, and all the Cler∣gy
summoned in Convocation within their respective Provinces; as is most apparent by this memorable writ to the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the like to the Gardian of the Spiritualties of the Archbishoprick of York,De Convoca∣tione Clerifacta pro Sub∣siio Regri po guea fac. wherewith I shall close up this Section, and my Observations on it. Claus. 9 E. 2. m. 17. Rex venerabil in Christo Pa∣tri. W. eadem gratia Archiepiscopo Cantuar. &c. salu∣tem. Pro firmo credimus et tenemus, quod ad ea quae regni nostri salva ionem et opul Nobis commissi tranquillitatem et quietem respiiunt cum Dei adjutorio feliciter promovenda mauus velitis extendere liberalitr adjuvantes. Quidam itaque Praelati et alii de Clero Provinciae vestre convocai, quos ad interessendum Parliamento nostro apud Lincoln. fimus summoneri, ibidem, ex parte nostra super Subsidio nobis pro guerra nostra Scotiae fanda requisiti ad urgen∣tem necessitatem in hac parte, & inevitabile periculum quod tam Ecclesiae Anglicanae quam Nobis et toti po∣puto nostro ex Scotorum inimicorum et rebellium nos∣trorum, (qui pluries Rgnum nostrum hostiliter sunt in∣gressi, depraedationes, inondia, homicidia at alla dampna quamplunima intulrunt perpetrando) obstinat a malitia pot∣rit imminere, nisi orum nequitiae citius et potencus cum Dei adjutorio resistatur, suae considerationis intuitum dirigentes ad Subsidium Nobis ex causa praedicts faciendum, quate∣nus vois absentibus cui subsu, t in quorundam aliorum tam Praelatorum, quam Religiosorum et caeterorum de Cle∣ro dictae Provinciae absentia potuerunt, unanimiter consense∣runt: Ita tamen quod tam ipsi quam alii de Clero vestrae Provinciae qui in dicto Parliamento praentes non fuerunt coram vobis ad tractandum et consentiendum vestra aucto∣ritate interveniente de certo Subsidio Nobis, ut praemittitur, faciendo, in loco debito convocentur. Vestram igur Pa∣ternitatem reverendam, de qua fiduciam gerimus plni∣rem requirimus et rogamus, quatinus omnes Pralatos, tam Religiosos quam alios, caterosque de Clero Provinciae vestrae supradictae, quod sint coram Vobis apud Londn die Mr∣curii
prox. post Quindenam Pasch. prox. futur. ad ulti∣mum, ad tractand. in vestra praesentia, et una vobiscum consentiend. super Subsidio memorato, convocari faciatis. Sub∣sidio nomine nostro audiendam, it nobis post modū reportan∣dam. Teste Rege apud Lincoln. 17 die Febr. Eodem modo mandatum est Custodi Spiritualitatis Ar∣chiepiscopatus Eborum. sede vacante mutatis competenter mutandis, excepto quod Clerum Eborae. Provinciae veni∣r ipso apud Eborum à di Paschae in unm mensem▪ &c. Teste ut supra. What ever else concerns the Prelates, Abbots, Pri∣ors, Convocation and Clry; is reserved for its pro∣per plac in subsequent Sections.
SECTION II. Of the several writs of Summons to Parliaments and Great Councils, directed to the Tempo∣ral Lords; as The King of Castel, the Prince of Wales, Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts, Lords, Barons, and other Great men of the Lords House; whereof there are several forms and varieties; with Observations on them. SOme pretended Antiquaries, not well versed in our Records, in their late printed Discourses of The Antiquity of the Parliaments of England, p. 22. 24. 88. 89. meeting with a Transcript of ancient writs issued to Earls, Barons and Great men holding lands of the King by Knight service, to repair to him at a certain time and place, cum equis et armis, for his de∣fence against Enemies or Rebels in times of warrs, in∣surrection, or danger, have injudiciously conceived these writs, to be Writs of Summons to Parliaments, or confounded them promiscuously with them; affirming; That they find these writs recorded AMONG THE PAR∣LIAMENT ROLLS of 14. (or 15.) E. 3. and there∣fore thought good to remember them. When as there are
o such writs extant in any Parliament Rolls in the Tower; nor any Writs of Summons to Parliaments or Great Councils, entred in our Parliament Rolls (as they ignorantly publish) but only in the Dorse of the Clause Rolls, quite different and distinct from the Rolls of our Parliaments, as the meanest Novice in Records can ascer∣tain them. Upon the like mistake some have conceited these ensuing writs of Claus. 45 & 47 H. 3. to be writs of Summons to Parliaments and Great Councils, when as the writs themselves declare the contrary, that they were only Summons, to assist the King against Enemies and Rebells, with horses and arms, and all their power; not to counsel, advise, or grant any aydes of money to him in Parliament. Claus. 45 H. 3. m. 3. dorso. Rex Willielmo de Bello Campo de Aumel, salutem. Mandamus Vobis in fide et homagio quibus Nobis te∣nemini firmiter injungentes, quod omnibus aliis praeter∣missis ad Nos sitis London in craftino Apostolorum Simo∣nis et Iudae absque dilatione ulteriori, CUM EQUIS ET ARMIS, ET CUM POSSE VESTRO, tam de servitio vestro Nobis dbito, quam de subventione a∣micorum vestrorum, pro quibusdam urgentibus ego∣tiis personam nostram specialiter et Statum Coronae no∣strae tangentibus. Et hoc sicut de vestra fidlitate et di∣lectione confidentiam gerimus speciale ullatenus omittatis. Quia SUBVENTIONEM qum Nobis et Coronae nostrae praeter servicium Nobis debitum ad praesens feceritis, in consequentiam trahi nolumus, nec vobis per hoc ullo tempore derogari. Taliter vos habe∣atis in hac parte quod dicto die absque defalta ad Nos sitis, ita quod vobis exinde in perpetuo teneamus ad grates. Teste Rege apud Turrim London 18 die Octobris. Eodem modo mandatum est Phil: Basset, and 107. Barons and great men holding by knights service, there registred by name. After which this writ ensues in the same Dorse. Rex Abbati de Burgo Sancti Petri, salutem. Manda∣mus
vobis in fide et dilectione quibus Nobis tenemini firmiter injungentes, quod omnibus aliis praetermissis mittaris Nobis Servitium vestrum quod Nobis debetis; ita quod sitis ad Nos in crastino Sancti Martini absque defalto, pro quibusdam urgentibus negotiis personam nostram specialiter et statum regni nostri tangentibus. Et hoc sub debito fidelitatis qua Nobis enemini nul∣latenus omittatis. Teste ut supra. Eodem modo mandatum est, to 36 Abbots more, whose names are there listed in the Roll: Then fol∣lows this entry. Isti subscripti vocati sunt ad crastinum Apostolorum Simonis & Iudae CUM EQUIS ET ARMIS; Tho∣mas de Chauro: with 16. more there named after him. Mandatnm est Vicecomiti Essex, quod summoneri faciat omnes illos de Honoribus de Redleg et Castro Baynard, et de Hundredo de Rochford, quod veniant ad Regem ad undem diem cum servicio suo Regi debi∣to. The like writs issued to divers others in this and o∣ther Membranas of this Roll of 45 H. 3. to ayde the King against the Barons then in rebellion against him, and reduce them to their obedience, as is evident by this writ to the Earl of Flanders, though not particular∣ly expressed in the precedent writs. Claus. 45. H. 3. m. 8. dorso. Rex Comiti Flandriae, salutem. Quiae Magnates nostri NOBIS ALIQUANDIU REBELLES EX∣TITERINI, propter quod, nisi citius resipiscant, aliud consilium Nos opponere oportebit, dilectionem vestram requi∣rimus et rogamus, quatinus taliter vobis providere velitis, quod ad Nos centum Milites et tot servientes ad arma bene munitos Nobis mitere possitis: Taliter vos habentes in hac parte, quod specialiter vobis teneamur ad gratias. Teste Rege apud Windesor. 22 die Augusti. In 47 H. 3. there issued these ensuing writs to sundry Noblemen and others to aid the King against the Welsh∣men then in rebellion against him, to suppress their Re∣bellion, and reduce them to obedience.
Claus. 47 H. 3. m. 7. dorso. Rex, Rogeto de Bigot, Comiti Nor: & Maris∣callo Angliae, salutem. Mandamus vobis sub debito fide∣litatis et homagii quibus Nobis tenemini et sicut ea quae de nbis tntis, diligitis, quod in festo beati Petri ad Vincula prox. futur. sitis apud Wigorn. CUM EQVIS & AR∣MIS, et cum servitio vestro Nobis debito: parati exinde Nobiscum proficisci in expeditionem nostram contra Lew∣ellinum filium Griffini et complices suos REBELLES NOSTROS, et ita decenter in hac necessitate nostra ibidem vniatis, ut dictorum NOSTRORUM REBELLIVM versutia adeò potenter reprimatur, quod Nobis et Vobis ce∣dat ad honorem, et exinde vobis ad grates teneamur specia∣les. Teste Rege apud Westm. 25. die Maii. Eodem modo mandaium est to 133. Nobles and o∣thers, whose names are there recorded. TheSee claus. 24 H. 1. d. 2. cl. 25 E. 1. d. 3. 7, 8, 14. Schedula. cl. 28 E. 1. d. 11. 15. claus. 29 E. 3. d. 11, 12, 13, 16. claus. 8 R. 2. d. 3. like writs of Summons against the Scots, Welsh, French and other Enemies and Rebels, frequently oc∣curre in the Clause Rolls of King Iohn, Henry 3. and Ed∣ward 1, 2, 3. Rich. 2. and other Kings: which have no Analogy with writs of Summons to Parliaments or Great Councils, wherewith some Ignorant Antiquaries would conjoyn them as Homogeneal; which I thought it to premise, to avoid all mistakes of this kinde. It is evident by this Clause in the writs iued to the Bishops, Claus. An. 6. Iohannis Regis m. 3. dorso. (ore∣cited, p. 2, 3.) vestrum expedit habere consilium et ALIORUM MAGNATUM terrae nostrae QUOS AD DIEM ILLVM ET LOCUM FECIMVS CONVOCARI: that King Iohn issued forth writs of Summons to the Temporal as well as Spiritual Lords, to summon them to the Parliamentary Council then held at London, though neither the form of the writs by which they were then summoned, nor any list of their names be entred in that or any other Roll now extant. And by this Clause in the writ of Summons to the Archbi∣shop of York Claus. 26 H. 3. m. 13. dorso: ad tractandum Nobiscum una cum CAETERIS MAGNATIBUS NOSTRIS QUOS SIMILITER FECIMUS CON∣VOCARI;
it is most apparent, that the Temporal Lords and great men were likewise called to the Par∣liamentary Great Council then assembled at London by writ, though there be no entry of those writs, nor ca∣talogue of their names in that or any other Rolls to be found, but only the single writ to one Archbishop. All the antientest writs of Summons of our Tempo∣ral Lords to Great Councils being utterly lost through negligence, or perished through the rust or consumpti∣on of time, the very first writ of Summons to them, and Kalendar of their names now remaining, is that of 49 H. 3. dors. 11. Cedula already recited at large, p. 5, 6. one and the self-same form of writ verbatim, being then directed both to the Temporal and Spiritual Lords, though they usually differed in after times in some spe∣cial clauses. After the Eodem modo mandatum est; and Catalogue of the Bishops, bbots, Priors, Deans, and Ec∣clesiastical persons names then summoned to that Par∣liamentary Council by the self-same writs, there followed this list of the Temporal Lords and Barons. Item in forma praedicta mandatum est COMITIBUS et aliis subscriptis: dat: de Wodestok. Comiti Leicestr. Comiti Gloucestr. Com. Norff: & Mariscallo Angliae, Comiti Oxon. Comiti Drby, Radulpho Cameys, Rogero de Sancto Iohanne, Hugoni le Despencer Justic. Angliae, Iohanni Filio Iohannis, Willo. de Munchensey, Nicho. de Se∣grave, Iohi, de Vescy, Rado: Basset de Drayton, Henr. de Hasting. Galfrido de Lucy, Roberto de Ros. Iohanni de Ey∣vil, Ade de Novo-Mercato, Waltero de Colevyll, Willielmo Maryun, Rogero Bertram, Rado. Basset de Sapcote, Gil∣berto de Gaunt. This Parliamentary Council was summoned soon af∣ter the great bloudy battel at Evesham (wherein the Mat. Paris, Mat. Westm. Walsingham, Holinshed, Daniel, Speed, Poly∣chronicon, Grafton Ann. 1265. My Plea for the Lods, p. 258, 259, 260. Barons who opposed K. Henry were totally routed, Simon de Montford their General, and many others of of them slain in the field, and the rest scattered) to set∣tle the peace and tranquillity of the Realm as the writ informs us; the most of the Barons and Great men up∣on
on this occasion being omitted out of the Summons, though many more Abbots, Priors, and Clergymen were summoned to it, than to any other succeeding Parliament whatsoever, to supply the places of the Ba∣rons then in actual rebellion, and give the greater re∣putation to this Assembly, as I apprehnd. The 2. writ of summons to the Earls and Temporal Lords, is this of Claus. 23 E. 1. m. 9. dorso. which I shall transcribe at large: though entred with an &c. in the Roll, with reference to the Bishops writs, ut su∣pra. Rex, dilecto et fideli suo Edmundo fratri suo Com. Lanc. salutem. Quia super quibusdam arduis negotiis Nos et Regnum nostrum, ac Vos caeterosque Procetes et Magnates de eodem regno, quae sine vestra et orum praesentia nolumus expediri, Parliamentum nostrum te∣nere, et vobiscum super hiis colloquium habere vo∣lumus et tractatum; Vobis mandamus in fide et homagio quibus Nobis tenemini firmiter injungentes, quod sitis ad Nos apud Westm. primo die mensis Au∣gusti prox, futuro, vel saltem infra tercium diem subse∣quentem ad ultimum, nobiscum super dictis negotiis tractaturi, et vestrum consilium impensuri. Et hoc nullo modo omittatis. Teste me ipso apud Album Mo∣nasterium 24 die Iulii. Per Breve de Privato Sigillo. Eodem modo mandatum est singillatim per Brevia Clau∣sa Comitibus & Baronibus subscriptis, viz. 12 Earls, and 53 Barons, and Great men of the Temporalty; whose names, because tedious to repeat after every writ, I shall present you with in a short Table in the Observati∣ons, for brevity sake. The 3. writ is that recorded in Clause Anno 23 E. 1. m. 3. dorso.Summonitio Parliamenti. Rex dilecto Consanguineo et fideli suo Edmundo Comiti Cornub. salutem. Quia super remediis contra pericula quae toto Regno nostro hiis diebus imminent providendis, Vobiscum et cum caeteris Regni nostri Pro∣ceribus habere volumus Colloquium et Tractatum:
Vobis mandamus in fide et dilectione quibus Nobis te∣nemini firmiter injungentes, quod die Dominica prox. post festum Sancti Martini in hieme prox. futur. apud Westm: personaliter intersitis, ad tractnd. ordinand. et faciend. Nobiscum et cum Praelatis, et caeteris Proceri∣bus, et aliis Incolis Regni nostri, qualiter sit hujusmo∣di periculis obviand: Teste rege apud Cantuar. primo die Octobris. Consimiles Literae diriguntur subscriptis, viz. 8 Earls and 41 Barons and others Great men of the Lai∣ty: This writ differs in the Prologue and date from that to the Archbishop, Bishops, Abbots and Priors, Claus. 23 E. 1. dors. 4. summoned to the same Parliament, (Hre, p. 6, 7.) as you may discern by comparing them. The 4. writ is recorded in Clause 24 E. 1. m. 7. dorso. Rex dilecto Consanguineo et fideli suo, Edmundo Comiti Cornub. salutem: Quia super remediis contra pericula, &c. (as before writ 3.) Vobis, &c. injungentes, quod in crastino Animarum prox. utur. apud S. Edmun∣dum personaliter intersitis, ad tractand. ordinand. et fa∣ciend. Nobiscum, et cum aliis Regni nostri Magnatibus &c. qualiter sit hujusmodi periculis obviand. et satui ejusdem Regni tutius et utilius consulend. Teste Re∣ge apud Berewic. super Twede 26 die Augusti. Consimiles literae diriguntur subscriptis, viz. 5. Earls and 37 Barons and Great men. The 5. writ is thus registred, Claus. 25 E. 1. m. 25. dorso. Rex, &c. Edmundo Comiti Cornub: salutem.De Parlia∣mento tenen∣do apud Sa∣rm. Quia super quibusdam arduis negotiis Nos et Vos ac Regnum nostrum contingentibus vobiscum, una cum quibusdam aliis Proceribus et Magnatibus ejusdem Regni habere volumus Colloquium et tractatum; Vobis mandamus in homagio, fide et dilectione quibus Nobis tenemini firmiter injungentes, quod modis omnibus sitisad Nos apud Sarum, die Dominica in festo Sancti Matthaei
Apostoli prox. sutur. ad ultimum; Nobiscum super dictis Negotiis Colloquium et Tractatum specialiter habituri, vestrumque consilium impensuri; Et hoc si∣cut Nos et honorem nostrum, ac salvationem Regni no∣stri, et incolarum ejusdem diligitis, nullatenus omitta∣tis. Teste Rege apud Wetings 26 die Januarii. Consimile mandatum habent siuguli Comites, Barones, et MILITES subscripti, viz. 5 Earls, 65 Barons, 13 Knights. The word Milites being written over a∣gainst the Judges, and those of the Kings Council in the Margin of the Roll. The 6. writ I finde extant in Claus. 27 E. 1. m. 18. dorso. Rex, &c. Edmundo Comiti Cornub: salutem, Quia super negotiis nostris ultramarinis, &c. (ut supra, p. 9. 10. in the writ to the Archbishop.) Vobis mandamus in fide et homgio quibus Nobis tenemini, &c. ut supra: Teste ut supra. Eodem modo mandatum est subscriptis, viz. 10 Comiti∣bus; After which followes, the beginning of a writ, Henrico Percy, &c. and then Consimiles literae dirigun∣tur BARONIBUS subscriptis, being 79 more in par∣ticular. The 7. writ is entred in Claus. 27 E. 1. m. 16. dor∣so. Rex, &c. Edmundo Comiti Cornub: salurem. Prop∣ter quaedam specialia et ardua negotia Nos et statum regni nostri tangent ia, &c. (as in the writ to the Arch∣bishop, p. 10.) Vobis mandamus in fide et homagio qui∣bus Nobis tenemini firmitet injungentes, quatinus sitis ad Nos apud Westm. in quindena Paschae prox. nunc ventur. omnibus praetermissis d tractand. &c. Teste ut supra. Consmiles literae diriguntur, viz. 10. Comitibus, et Baronibus et Militibus subscriptis, viz. Iohanni de Ha∣stings, and 45. more. The 8. is in Claus. 27 E. 1. m. 9. dorso; (the same verbatim with that to the Archbishop, p. 10, 11.) di∣rected
onely to 3 Earls and 5 Barons entred on the Roll. The 9. is recorded in Clause 28 E. 1. m. 16. & 17. dors. Rex, &c. dilecto Consangnineo et fratri suo Edmun∣do Comiti Cornub: salutem. Quia ad salvationem Co∣ronae nosrae et communem tilitatem populi Regni no∣stri Sancta die Dominica Quadragesimae prox. futur. Lndon. Parliamentum enere, et vobiscum ac cum cae∣teris Magnatibus et Proceribus ejusdem Regni super negotiis No, et idem Regnum contingentibus speciale Colioquium habere volumus et tractatum. Vobis man∣damus in fide et homagio quibus Nobis tenemini fir∣miter injungentes, quod ad praedictos diem et locum personaliter intersiis Nobiscum, ac cum caeteris Mag∣natibus et Proceribus praedictis, super dictis negotiis tractauri, et vestrum consilium impensuri. Et hoc si∣cut Nos et honorem nostrum diligitis nullatenus omit∣tatis. Teste Rege apud Barwicum super Twede 29 die Decembris. Consimiles literae diriguntur subscriptis; viz. 10 Comiti∣bus, 99 other Barons and Great men: entred on the Roll before the writs to the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, and their lists of names. The 10. is registred in Clause 28 E. 1. m. 2. & 3 dorso. Rex dilecto et fideli suo, Iohanni de Warrena Comiti Surr: salutem. Cum nuper pro communi utilitate, &c. (as in the writ to the Archbishop, p. 12, 13.) Vobis man∣damus in fide et homagio quibus Nobis tenemini, &c. Teste ut supra. Consimiles Literae diriguntur Comitibus, Baronibus et Milibus subscriptis, viz. 8 Earls, and 80 others. The 11. is thus filed in Claus. Anno 30. E. 1. m. 7. & 9. dorso. Rex, Edwardo Princip Walliae et Comiti Cestriae filio suo carissimo, salutem. Licet vos non lateat qualiter in Parliamento nostro habito London: his diebus extitit ordi∣natum;
ut ad providendum consultius et salubrius ordinand. &c. (as in the writ to the Archbishop, p. 13.) Ex abun∣danti tamen vobis in fide et homagio quibus Nobis tenemini firmiter injungendo mandamus, quod eidem futuro Parlia∣mento aliis quibuscunque negotiis omissis personaliter inter∣sitis. Teste ut supra. Consimiles literae diriguntur subscriptis, viz. 9▪ Comiti∣bus, and 88 Lords and Great men. The 12. is that in Claus. 30 E. 1. m. 12. dorso. Rex Edwardo Principi Walliae, &c. (ut supra) Quia super quibusdam ardnis negotiis nos et vos totumque Regnum nostrum specialiter tangentibus, quae fine vobis et Praelatis ac caeteris Magnatibus dicti Regni nostri nolumus expediri, vobiscum et cum Praelatis et Magnatibus habere volumus colloquium et tractatum. Vobis in fide et homagio quibus Nobis tenemini mandamus firmiter injungentes, quod in Octabis Nativitatis S. Johannis Baptistae prox. futur. ad ultimum apud Westm. modis omnibus personaliter intersitis, Nobiscum et cum Praelatis a Magnatibus supradictis, su∣per dictis negotiis tractaturi, vestrumque Consilium impen∣suri. Et hoc nullatenus omittatis. Teste Rege apud Thur∣rock Grey 2. die Iunii. Consimiles Literae diriguntur subscriptis, viz. 9▪ Comi∣tibus, and 82 other Lords and Great men. The 13 is registred in this form; Claus. Ann. 32 E. 1. m. 2. dorso. Rex Edwardo Principi Walliae et Comiti Cestriae, filio suo Karissimo, salutem. Quia pro quibusdam negotiis quae Regnum nostrum Angliae specialiter tangent, necnon stabi∣limentum terrae nostrae Scotiae, et etiam pro aliis diversis negotiis quae disponere proponimus Deo dante, die Martis in quindena Purificationis beatae Mariae Virginis prox. futur. apud Westm. Parliamentum tenere, et vobiscum ac cum caeteris Magnatibus et Proceribus ejusdem Regni super ne∣gotiis illis speciale colloquium haber volumus et tractatum. Vobis mandamus, quod ad praedictos diem et locum persona∣liter intersitis Nobiscum et cum caeteris Magnatibus et Pro∣ceribus praedictis super dictis negotiis tractaturi, vestrum∣que
consilium impensuri. Et hoc nullatenus omutatis. Teste Rege apud Brustwyk 12 die Novembr. The like writ issued, Dilecto & fideli suo Henr. de Lacy Comiti Lincoln. &c. ut supra, with Vobis mandamus in fide et homagio quibus Nobis tenemini: &c. Et hoc sicut Nos et honorem, dictique Regni nostri commodum diligitis (omitted in the writ to the Prince) nullatenus omitta∣tis. Teste ut supra. Consimiles literae diriguntur subscriptis, viz. 7 Comiti∣bus more, and 92 Barons and Great men. The 14. is inserted into Clause Anno 33 E. 1. m. 8. dorso.De veniendo ad Parliamen∣tum. Rex dilecto & fideli suo Henr. de Lacy Comiti Lin∣coln. salutem. Licet nuper vobis mandaverimus quod essetis apud Westm. ad Parliamentum nostum quod or∣dinavimus tenend. in Octabis Nativitatis beatae Ma∣riae Virginis prox. futur. Nobiscum et cum caeteris de Consilio nostro, super negotiis Nos et statum Regni no∣stri specialiter tangentibus tractaturi. Nihilominus exhabundanti vobis iterato mandavimus in fide et homa∣gio quibus Nobis tenemini firmiter injungentes, quod omni excusatione postposita apud Westm. in dictis Oc∣tabis modis omnibus personaliter intersitis tractaturi Nobiscum et cm caeteris de Consilio nostro de nego∣tiis antedictis; Et hoc nullatenus omittatis. T. Rege apud Boxle 30 die Iulii. Eodem modo mandatum est subscriptis, viz. W. Epis∣copo Winton. Humfredo de Bohun. Com. Heres. & Essex, Gilberto de Roubiry, Magistro Regin, de Bran∣don, Hugoni le Despencer, Johanni de Hastings, Jo∣hanni de Botetourte, Abbati Westm. Willielmo Mar∣tyn, Abbati de Waverle, Magistro Pho. Martyn, Fratri Hugoni de Manicestr. Rogero Brabazon, Radulpho de Hengham. Dors. 8. in the same Roll the like writs issued to the same persons, and to the Bishops of Wigorn. Coventre and Lichf: with this variation: Licet hactenus vobis mandavimus quod essetis ad Nos apud Westm. ad Par∣liamentum
nostrum quod in Octab. Nativita. beatae Mariae Virginis prox. futur. tenere volumus Deo dante. Vobis nihlominus iterato mandamus in fide et dilec∣tione quis Nobis tenemini firmiter injungentes, quod die dictarum Octab. vel in crastino eorundem ad ulti∣mum aliis omnibus praetermissis intersits. Et hoc nul∣latenus omittatis. T. Rege apud Rothinge 27. die Au∣gusti. Per Breve de Privato Sigillo. After which follows this single writ, varying some∣what from these two preceeding. Rex dilecto et fideli suo Henrico de Percy salutem. Quia Parliamentum nostrum apud Westm. in Octabis Nativitais beatae Mariae Virginis prox. futur. tenere proponimus Deo dante. Vobis mandamus in fide et homagio quibus, &c. quod die dictaum Octab. vel in crastino earundem ibidem ad ultimum aliis praetermis∣sis omnibus intersitis Nobiscum, et cum caeteris Mag∣natibus Regni nostri ibidem tunc ventur. sper nego∣tiis Nos et statum ejusdem Regni specialiter tangenti∣bus, tractaturi: Et hoc nullo modo omittatis. T. Re∣ge ut supra. The 15. is endorsed on Claus. Anno 34 E. 1. m. 2. dorso. Rex Edwardo Principi Walliae, &c. (as before in 13.) Quia super ordinatione et stabilimento terrae nostrae Scotiae, necnon et aliis negotiis Nos et statum Regni nostri specialiter tangentibus apud Karliol. in Octabis S. Hillarii prox, futur. Parliamentum tenee, et vobis∣cum ac cum caeeris Magnatibus de eodem Regno ha∣bere volumus Colloquium et Tractatum. Vobis man∣damus quod omnibus aliis praetermissis ad praedictos di∣em et locum dicto Parliamento personaliter intersitis Nobiscum, ac cum caeteris Magnatibus de dicto Regno, super ordinatione et stabilimento, et negotiis praedic∣tis tractaturi vestrumque Consilium impensuri. Et hoc nullo modo omittatis. T. Rege apud Lauretof 3. die Novemb. Anno Regni si 34. Rex dilecto et fideli suo Henr. de Lacy Comiti Lin∣coln.
autem. Quia, &c. ut supra; Vobis mandamus in fide et homagio quibus Nobis enemini, &c. ut su∣pra. Consimiles literae diriguntur subscriptis, viz. 10 Co∣mitibus: 86 Lords and Great men, besides Assistants of the Kings Counsil. The 16. I meet with is Clause 35 E. 1. m. 13. dor∣so.De Parlia∣mento tenen∣do. Rex dilecto et fideli suo, Thomae Comiti Lancastr. Cum nuper vobis mandaverimus, quod in Octabis Sancti Hillari prox. praeterit. essetis apud Parliamen∣tum, Nobiscum super quibusdam arduis negotiis Nos et Statum Regni nostri tangentibus, pro quibus vene∣rabilis Patr Dom. Petrus Sabinen. Episc. Sanctae Roma∣nae Ecclesiae Cardinalis, ad Nos ex parte Domini Sum∣mi Pontiicis est venturus, ut quem ante Octab. praedict. ad Nos venisse credebamus, colloquium habitur. Et i∣dem Cardinalis non erit ad Nos apud Karliol. ante di∣em Dominicam prox. post mediam Quadragesimae, viz. primam Dominicam in Passione Domini quae jam instat. Vobis mandamus in fide et dilectione quibus Nobis tenemini firmiter injungentes, quod dictis die et loco modis omnibus personaliter intersitis Nobiscum super praemissis habitur. Colloquium et Tractatum, vestrum∣que Consilium impensur. et hoc sub forisfactura omni∣um quae nobis forisfacere poteritis nullatenus omitta∣tis. T. Rege apud Lavercost. 22 die Febr. Consimiles literae diriguntur subscriptis, viz. 2 Co∣mitibus, and 24 Barons. The 17 writ is thus registred, Claus. Anno 1 E. 2 m. 19 dors. Rex dilecto et fideli suo Hen. de Lacy Com. Lincoln. salutem. Quia super quibusdam arduis negotiis Nos in ista recenti susceptione regiminis Regni nostri, &c. (as here to the Archbishop, p. 14.) Vobiscum et cum caeteris Magnatibus de eodem regno, &c. Vobis mandamus in fide et homagio quibus, &c. Nobiscum et cum aliis Magnatibus ejusdem Regni ibidem super dictis nego∣tiis
tractaturi, vestrum{que} consilium et auxilium impen∣ur. Et hoc sicut Nos et honorem nostrum ac commo∣dum dicti Regni diligitis nullatenus omittatis. T. Re∣ge ut supra. (p. 15.) Eodem modo scribitur subcriptis, viz. 8 Comitibus, and 69 others. The 18. is in Clause 1 E. 2. m. 11. dorso. Rex dilecto et fideli suo Iohanni de Warrena Com. Surr. salutem. Quia super diversis arduis negotiis Nos et statum regni nostri tangentibus, vobiscum et cum caeteris Praelatis, Proceribus, et aliis fide∣libus nostris de eodem Regno Colloquium et tractaum habere et Parliamentum tenere proponimus, Domino concedente. Vobis mandamus in fide et homagio quibus &c. quod prima Dominica quadragesimae prox. futur. apud Westm. omnibus aliis praeermissis personaliter in∣tersitis, Nobiscum ibidem et cum caeteris Praelatis ac Magnatibus de regno praedicto super praefatis negotiis tractatur. vestrumque consilium impensur. Et hoc nul∣latenus omittatis. T. ut supra (p. 15.) Eodem modo mandatum est subscriptis, viz. 10 Co∣mitibus, and 46 other Great men. The 19 is Claus. 1 E. 2. dors. 8. Rex dilecto et fideli suo Henr. de Lacy Com. Lincoln. salutem; Quia super diversis, &c. (as p. 15.) Vobis mandamus in fide et ho∣magio, &c. Teste ut supra, p. 15. Eodem modo mandatum est subscriptis, viz. 9 Co∣mitibus, and 46 others. The 20. is in Clause 2 E. 2. m. 20. cedula. Rex di∣lecto et fideli suo Gilberto de Clare Com. Glouc. & He∣ref. salutem. Quia &c. ut supra p. 15, 16. Vobis man∣damus in fide et homagio, &c. Nobiscum et cum caete∣ris Magnatibus et Proceribus de regno praedicto, &c. (as p. 15. 16.) Eodem modo mandatum est, viz. 7. Comitibus, and 57 more. The 21. is in Claus. 2 E. 2. m. 14. Cedula. Rex di∣lecto Nepoti et fideli suo, Gilberto de Clare Com. Glouc.
et Hertf. Quia, &c. vobiscum et cum aliis Proceribus et Magnatibus▪ &c. Vobis mandamus firmiter injun∣gentes, &c. as p. 16. Eodem modo mandatum est, viz. 8 Comitibus, and 41 other Lords and Great men. The 22. is entred in Claus. 2 E. 2. m. 1. dors. Rex dilecto Nepoti et fideli suo Gilberto de Clare Com. Glouc. et Hertf. Quia, &c. vobiscum et cum aliis Proceribus et Magnatibus ejusdem Regni, &c. Vobis in fide et homagio quibus Nobis tenemini firmiter in∣jungendo mandamus, &c. as p. 16. Eodem modo scribitur subscriptis, viz. 8 Comitibus; and 81 Great men more. The 23. is that of Claus. 2 E. 2. m. 20. dors. Rex dilecto Nepoti et fideli suo Gilberto de Clare, &c. Vobis mandamus in fide et homagio, &c. sitis ad Nos apud Stamford, nobiscum et cum Praelatis et Proceribus praedictis super praemissis tractatum et colloquium habi∣turi, &c. Et hoc sicut Nos et honorem nostrum, ac¦commodum regni nostri diligitis nullatenus omittatis. T. ut supra. p. 17. Eodem modo scribitur subscriptis, viz. 8 Comitibus, and 70 other Great men. The 24. is the writ of Anno 3 E. 2. m. 17. dorso. Rex dilecto et fideli suo Gilberto de Clare, Com. Glouc. et Hertf. salutem; Quantae audaciae, &c. (as p. 17, 18.) Vobis mandamus in fide et homagio, &c. T. ut supra. Eodem modo mandatum est subscriptis, viz. xi. Co∣mitibus, and 84 other Lords and Great me. The 25. is that of 4 E. 2. m. 2. dorso. Rex dilecto Consanguineo et fideli suo Thomae Com. Lancast. salutem. Qui propter plura, &c. (as p. 18.) Vobis mandamus in fide et homagio, &c. T. ut supra. Per breve de Privato sigillo. Eodem modo scribitur subscriptis, viz. 5. Comitibus and 54 others. The 26. is in Claus. 5 E. 2. m. 17. dorso. Rex dilecto Consanguineo et fideli suo Thomae Co∣miti
Lancastr. salutem. Quia in ultimo Parliamento, &c. as p. 18, 19. Vobis mandamus in fide et homagio, &c. quod praedicto die Veneris sitis apd Westm. in propria persona vestra, Nobiscum, et cum caeteris Prae∣latis, Proceribus et fidelibus nostris supradictis, super dictis negotiis tractaturi, vestrumque consilium impen∣suri: et hoc sicut de vobis conidimus nullatenus omit∣tatis. T. ut supra. Consimiles literae diriguntur Comitibus et Baroni∣bus subscriptis, viz. 7. Comitibus, & 60 other Grandees. The 27. is the writ in Claus. 5 E. 2. m. 11. (or 13.) dorso. Rex dilecto Consanguineo et fideli suo Thomae Comi∣ti Lancastr. salutem. Quia propter plura et ardua ne∣goti Nos et Statum regni nostri tangentia die Domi∣nica prox. post sesum beatae Mariae Magdalenae prox. futur. ordinavimus Deo propitio apud Lincoln. Parlia∣mentum tenere, et vobiscum, ac cum caeteris Praelatis et Proctribus de dicto Regno nostro super dictis nego∣tiis habere Colloquium et Tractatum. Vobis manda∣mus in fide et homagio, &c. ibidem, nobiscum et cum Praelatis et Proceribus supradictis super dictis negotiis tractaturi vestrumque consilium impensuri. Et hoc nullatenus omittatis. T. Rege apud Ebor. Eodem modo scribitur subscriptis, viz. 8 Comitibus, 42 others: and 16 more, over against whose names is written in the margin Cleriis Consilii; and 16 others stiled Iusticiar' in the margin. The 28. is that of Claus. 6 E. 2. m. 31. dorso. Rex dilecto et fideli suo Thomae de Brotherton Comiti Norff. salutem: Quia tertia Dominica, &c. (as p. 19.) Vobis mandamus in fide et homagio, &c. quod omnibus aliis praetermissis sitis ad Nos in proptia persona vestra ad di∣em et locum praedictos, Nobiscum, &c. T. ut supra. Eodem modo scribitur subscriptis, viz. 9 Comitibus, and 88. other Lords and Great men. The 29. is the writ in Clause 6 E. 2. m. 3. dorso. Rex dilecto sibi Thomae de Brotherton Comiti Norff.
salutem. Licet ad requisitionem, &c. (as p. 20, 21.) Vobis mandamus in fide et homagio, &c. T. ut su∣pra. Eodem modo scribitur subscriptis, viz. 9 Comitibus and 88 others. The 30. is that of Claus. 7 E. 2. m. 27. dorso. Rex dilecto et fideli suo Thomae de Brotherton Comi∣ti Norff. salutem. Cum diversa, &c. (as p. 21,) Vo∣biscum et cum Praelatis, et caeteris Magatibus, &c. Vobis man damus in fide et homagio, &c. Teste ut su∣pra. Eodem modo mandatum est subscriptis, viz. 9 Co∣mitibus, and 99 other Lords and Great men. The 31. is that in Claus. 7 E. 2. m. 15. dorso. Rex dilecto et fideli suo Thomae de Brotherton, &c. (as p. 21, 22.) Vobis mandamus in fide et homagio, &c. T. ut supra. Eodem modo mandatum est subscriptis, viz. 9 Co∣mitibus, and 88 others. The 32. is Claus. 8 E. 2. m. 35 dorso. Rex dilecto Consanguineo et fideli suo Thomae Com. Lancastr. saluem. Quia super, &c. as p. 22. Vobis mandamus in fide et homagio, &c. T. ut supra. Eodem modo mandatum est subscriptis, viz. 8 Comi∣tibus, and 93 others, besides 8 Judges and Assistants intermixed with them. The 33. is Claus. Ann. 8 E. 2. m. 29. dorso. Rex dilecto Consanguineo et fideli suo Thomae Co∣miti Lancastr. salutem. Quia, &c. Vobis mandams in fide et homagio, &c. T. ut supra, p. 22. & 23. Eodem modo mandatum est subscriptis, viz. 8 Co∣mitibus, and 85 more, besides Officers, Judges, Assistants, joyned together with them without distinction. The 34. is Claus. 9 E. 2. m. 22 dorso. Rex dilecto Consanguineo et fideli suo Thomae Com. Lanc. &c. T. ut supra. p. 22. Eodem modo mandatum est subscriptis, viz. 7 Co∣mitibus, 83. Greatmen, and 34. others, with a lines di∣stance
only between their names, summoned ormerly as the Kings Counsil, and as assistants. The 35. is Claus. 11 E. 2. d. 14. Rex, &c. Th. Com. Lancastr. &c. (as here, p. 97,) Eodem modo scribitur 17, Comitibus, and 118 o∣thers, with those of the Kings Counsil intermixed with the Lords and Barons. The 36. is Claus. 12 E. 2. m. 29. in cedula penden∣te. Rex dilecto Consanguineo et fideli suo Thomae, Com. Lanc. &c. (as in 33.) Teste ut supra p. 23. Eodem modo scribitur subscriptis, viz. 8 Comitibus, 79 Great men, and 24 more with a lines space▪ be∣tween them usually summoned as Assistants, and the Kings Counsil. The 37. is Claus. 12 E. 2. m. 11. dorso. Rex dilecto consanguineo. &c. Thomae Com. Lancast. (as 33.) T. ut supra. p. 23. Eodem modo scribitur subscriptis, viz. 8 Comitibus, 79 Great men, and 25 more with a lines distance, for∣merly summoned as the Kings Counsil. The 38. is in Claus. 13 E. 2. m. 13. dorso. Rex dilecto Consanguineo▪ &c. Thomae, Com. Lanc. &c. (as 33.) T. ut supra, p. 23. Eodem modo scribitur subscriptis▪ viz. 8 Comibus, 72 more, and 25 of the Counsil, with a lines space from the former. The 39. is in Claus. 14 E. 2. m 23. dorso. Rex Edwardo Comiti Cestriae filio nostro carissimo, salutem. Quia super diversis et ardis negoiis, &c. Vobis mandamus in fide et homagio quibus Nobis te∣nemini, &c. T. ut supra, p. 23. Eodem modo scribitur subscriptis, viz. 9 Comitibus, 74 others, and 32 more of the Kings Counsil, with a lines distance from the former. The 40. is Claus. 14 E. 2. m. 5. dorso. Rex dilecto Consanguineo e fideli suo Thomae Com. Lancastr. salutem. Vobis mandamus in fide et homa∣gio,
&c. T. ut supra, p. 23. Per ipsum Regem. Eodem modo scribitur subscriptis, viz. 8 Comitibus, and 88 others, besides Assistants of the Counsil. The 41. is Claus. 15 E. 2. m. 16. dorso. Rex Edwardo Comiti Cestriae filio suo carissimo, salu∣tem. Quia super diversis, &c. Vobis mandamus in fide et homagio, &c. T. ut supra, p. 23. Per ipsum Regem. Eodem modo mandatum est subscriptis, viz. 8 Co∣mitibus, and 72 others besides the Counsil. The 42. is Claus. 16 E. 2. m. 26. dorso. Rex Edwardo Comiti Cestriae, &c. (just as in 40.) T. ut supra, p. 24. Per ipsum Regem. Eodem modo scribitur subscriptis, viz. 9 Comitibus▪ and 52 other Lords and Great men. The 43. is in Claus. 18 E. 2. m. 34. dorso. Rex dilecto et fideli suo Edwardo Comiti Cestriae filio suo carissimo, salutem.Summonitio Magnatum de Tactatu cum eisdem habend. Quia super diversis arduis ne∣gotiis Nos et statum Regni, ac terrarum nostrorum Sub∣ditorum et populorum eorundem specialiter tangenti∣bus, vobiscum ac cum caeteris Magnatibus et Proceribus dicti Regni apud Sarum, à die Sancti Michaelis prox. futur. in tres Septimanas colloquium habere volumus et tractatum. Vobis mandamus in fide et dilectione quibus Nobis tenemini firmiter injungentes, quod om∣nibus aliis praetermissis dictis die et loco person liter intersitis Nobiscum, et cum caeteris Magnatibus et Proceribus praedictis super praemissis tractatur. vestrum∣que consilium impensur. Et hoc sicut Nos et honorem nostrum, et Regni et terrarum praedictarum diligitis nullatenus omittatis. T. Rege apud Porcestr 13 die Septembris. Per ipsum Regem. Eodem modo scribitur subscriptis, viz. 8 Comitibus, 48 others. The 2. Archbishops, and 2 Bishops more, with &c. follow them, and 2 only de consilio. The 44. is the writ in Claus. 18 E. 2. m. 21. dorso. Rex dilecto et fideli suo Thomae Comiti Norff. et Mariscalo Angliae frari suo carissimo, salutem.De Tractatu cum Magnat. apud Winton. habend. Quia ad partes Ducatus nostri Aquitaniae, de quo Rex Franciae
malitiose nos exhaereditare proponit, in succurs ejus∣dem Ducatus nostri passagium nostrum ordinavimus Domino disponente, et vobiscum ac cum Praelatis, et caeteris Magnatibus et Proceribus regni nostri super passagio nostro praedicto, et aliis arduis negotiis Nos et staum Regni nostri et Ducatus praedicti tangentibus, habere volumus colloquium et tractatum. Vobis man∣damus firmiter injungentes, quod omnibus aliis praeter∣missis sitis ad nos apud Winton. secunda Dominica Qua∣dragesimae prox. futur. Nobiscum et cum Praelatis, et caeteris Magnatibus et Proceribus regni nostri super praemissis tractaturi, vestrumque consilium impensuri. Et hoc sicut Nos et honorem ac commodum dicti regni nostri diligitis nullo modo omittatis. T. Rege apud Notingh. 30 die Decembr. Per ipsum Regem. Eodem modo scribitur subscriptis, viz. Edwardo Co∣miti Cestriae filio Regis, 7 Earls more, and 50. o∣thers: After which follows a short recital of this writ to the Archbishop of Yorke, and Eodem odo to Canter∣bury, and the other Bishops. The 45. is that of Claus. 18 E. 2. m. 5. dorso.Summonitio Parliamen. Rex dilecto & fideli suo Edwardi Comiti Cestriae fili suo catissimo, salutem. Quia pro quibusdam arduis ne∣gotiis nos et statum regni nostri, ac Ducatum nostrum praedictum (Aquitaniae) speciliter coningentibus, Par∣liamentum nostrum apud Westm. in craino Natviatis Sancti Iohannis Baptistae prox. futur▪ tenere, et Vobis∣cum ac cum Praelatis, Magnatibus et Proceribus dicti regni super negotiis praedictis colloquium habere volu∣mus et tractaum. Vobis mandamus in fide et homa∣gio quibus Nobis tenemini firmiter inungentes, quod omnibus aliis praetermissis ad dictos diem et locum in Parliamento praedicto personaliter intersis; Nobiscum ac cum Praelatis, Magnaibus et Proceribus praedictis, super dictis negotiis tracari vestrumque consilium impensuri. Et hoc nullo modo omittatis. T. Rege apud Winton. 6 die Maii. Per ipsum Regem. Eodem modo mandatm est subscriptis, viz. 4 Co∣mitius,
39 others: after which followes a brief reci∣tal of the writ to the Archbishops, Bishops, &c. The 46. is in Claus. 19 E. 2. m. 27. dorso. Rex dilecto et fideli suo Thomae Comiti Norff. et Marescallo Angl. fratri suo catissimo salutem. Qia super &c. T. ut supra, p. 25. Eodem modo mandatum est subscriptis, viz. 3 Co∣mitibus, and 39 Great men more. The 47. is Claus. 20 E. 2. dorso 4. Rex, &c. Th. Com: Norff. et Marescallo Angl. &c. Licet nuper, &c. Eodem modo mandatum est Magnatibus subscriptis, viz. 6 Comitibus, and 46 others▪ The 48 is the writ i Claus. 1 E. 3. parte 2. m. 16. dorso. Rex dilecto et fideli suo, Thomae Comiti Norff: Ma∣rescallo Angl. salutem. Qualiter Scoti, &c. (as p. 25.) Vobis mandamus in ide et homagio, &c. dictis die et loco personaliter intersitis Nobiscum, si interesse possumus, seu interveniente impedimento deputandis a Nois super deensione ac custodia, ac aliis negotiis su∣pradiis tractatur. vesirumque consium impensur. Et hoc nullatenus omittatis. T. ut supra, p. 26. Eodem modo mandatum est Edmundo Comiti Kan. Avunculo Regis, and 5. Comitibus besides, 47 other Lords and Great men. The 49 is Claus. 1 E 3. pars 2. m. 3. dorso. Rex dilecto et fideli suo Thomae Com. Norff. &c. Cum super reformatione pacis, &c. (as p. 26, 27.) Vo∣bis mandamus in fide et homagio, &c. T. ut supra. Eodem modo mandatum est subscriptis, viz. 4 Comi∣tibus, and 49 more. The 50. is in Claus. 2 E. 3. m. 31 dorso. Rex dilecto et fideli suo Thomae Com. Norff. et Ma∣rescallo Angliae Avunculo suo carissimo falutem. Cum Parliamentum nostrum nuper apud Eborum, &c. (as p. 27.) Vobis mandamus in fide et homagio, &c. quod omni excusatione postposita dictis die et loco persona∣liter
intersitis Nobiscum, et cum Praelatis, Magnatibus &c. Scientes pro certo quod aliquem Procuratorem pro Vobis, seu pro aliquo Praelato vel Magnati ad prae∣sens propter arduitatem negotiorum praedictorum, ad∣mitere non intendimus quoquo modo. Et quia ante haec tempora negotia in hujusmodi Parliamentis trac∣tanda impedita fuerunt,Nota. eo quod nonnulli Magnates cum multitudine tumulcuosa hominum armatorum ad Parliamenta illa accesserunt, et populus partium ubi Parliamenta illa tenta fuerunt dampnificatus existit et graatus; per quod per Nos et Consilium nostrum con∣cordatum existit, quod omnes et singuli de regno nostro cujuscunque status seu conditionis fuerint, qui ad dic∣tum Parliamenū venire voluerint, modo debio, et abs∣que aliqua multitudine, sub orisfactura omnium quae Nobis forisacere poterint, accedant. Ita quod per ip∣sorum adventum indebitum negotia nostra non retar∣dentur, seu patria in aliqua parte oneretur indbite quo∣vis modo. Vobis mandamus firmiter injungentes sub forisfactura praedicta, quod ad Parliamentum praedictum cum decenti comitiva de hominibus bonae discretionis et consilii, ET NON CUM HOMINIBUS AD AR∣MA ACCEDATIS, in forma praedicta. Et hoc nulla∣tenus omittatis. T. ut supra. p. 28. Eodem modo mandatum est subscriptis, viz. 6 Co∣mitibus, and 49 other Lords and Great men. In the Clause Rolls following (throughout the reign of King Edward the 3.) the writs directed to the Temporal Lords are the same (mutatis mutandis) with those issued to the Archbishops and Bishops forecited Sect. 1. wherefore I shall present you with this Brevi∣ate of them, entred after the writs to the Bishops. The 1. writ til the later end of 11 E. 3. is thus directed Claus. 2 E. 3. dors. 23. Rex, &c. dilecto et fideli suo Thomae Comiti Norff: et Marescallo Angliae, &c. Vobis mandamus in fide et homagio, &c. Eodem modo man∣datum est to 6 Earls more, and 50 others, Claus. 2 E. 2. m. 15. dors. to 6 Earls more, and 48 others: Claus.
3 E. 3. m. 19. dorso, 8 Earls more, and 59 others, Ba∣rons, Lords, Judges and Assistants mixed together, (whereof the Dean of Lincoln, the Archdeacons of Rich∣mond and Northampton are three) Claus. 4 E. 3. m. 41. dorso, 10 Earls more, and 50 others, Claus. 4 E. 3. dors. 32. 8 Earls more, and 53. others, whereof 5. are Judges and Assistants, Claus. 4 E. 3. m. 23. 8 Earls more, and 45 others, Claus. 4 E. 3. m. 13. dors. 8 Earls more, and 47 others, Claus. 5 E. 3. dors. 25. 9 Earls more, and 48 others, Claus. 5 E. 3. m. 7. dorso 9 Earls more, and 47 others, Cl. 5 E. 3. pars 2. dors. 7. 9 Earls more, and 46 others (whereof some were Judges) Cl. 6 E. 3. m. 36. d. 11 Earls more, and 66 others, Cl. 6 E. 3. m. 19. dors. 10 Earls more, and 66 others, Cl. 6 E. 3. m. 9. dors. 10 Earls more, and 65 others, Cl. 7 E. 3. pars 2. dors. 3. 12 Earls more, and 62 others, Cl. 8 E. 3. m. 18. dors. 11 Earls more, and 60 others, Cl. 9 E. 3. dors. 28. 10 Earls more, and 60 others, Cl. 9 E. 3. dors. 8. 10 Earls more, and 61 other, Cl. 10 E. 3. dors. 5. 9 Earls more, and 47 others, Cl. 11 E. 3. pars 1. dors. 15. 8 Earls more, and 23 others: And dors. 8. 10 Earls more, and 39 others: where the writ Iohanni de Sutton de Holdernesse (vac. quia non fuit summonitus.) The first writs after those to the Archbishops and Bishops, in these ensuing Rolls issued Dilecto t fideli suo Henr. Comiti Lanc. &c. being the same (mutatis mu∣tandis) with those to the Bishops forecited, Claus. 11 E. 3. pars 2. dors. 4. Eodem modo, &c. to 12 Earls more, and 33 others: And dors. 11. 8 Earls more, and 37 o∣thers: Claus. 12 E. 3. pars 2. dors. 32. 11 Earls more, (a vacat being entred against Humfrido de Bohun Co∣miti Hereford.) and 45 others, Cl. 13 E. 3. pars 2. dors. 28. 9 Earls more, and 44 others, Claus. 13 E. 3. pars 2. dors. 1. 10 Earls more, and 45 others, Claus. 14 E. 3. pars 1. dors. 33. 12 Earls more, and 44 others. Dors. 23. 7 Earls more, and 44 others, Cl. 15 E. 3 pars 1. d. 37. 7 Earls more, and 45 others. In Claus. 16 E. 3. pars 1. dors. 39. the first writ to
the Temporal Lords entred in the roll issued, Dilecto & fideli suo Laurentio de Hastings Com. Pembroch. &c. Eodem modo, &c. to 9 Earls more, and 94 others, Claus. 16 E. 3. pars 2. dors. 22. (and so following) the first writ to the Nobility issued Henr. Com. Lancastr. 2 Earls more, and 20 others. Dors. 13. 4 Earls more, and 17. o∣thers. Claus. 17 E. 3. pars 1. dors. 25. 11 Earls more, and 40 others. Cl. 18 E. 3. pars 1. dors. 14. 13 Earls more, and 40 others, Claus. 20 E. 3. pars 2. dors. 22. (Iohanni de Warenna Com. Surr.) 4 Earls more, and 12. others. Dors. 28. to him and 7 Earls more, and 9 o∣thers. Dors. 9. Henr. Com. Lancastr. 10 Earls more, and 30 others, Cl. 22 E. 3. pars 1. dors. 32. 10 Earls more, and 30 others, Claus. 22 E. 3. pars 2. dors. 7. 9 Earls more, and 56 others, Claus. 24 E. 3. pars 2. d. . Henr. Comiti Lancastr. Edwardo Principi Walliae, Duci Cornubiae, et Comiti Cestriae, 10 Earls more, and 50 others, whereof the 16 last are Assistants, and 4 of them stiled the Kings Serjeants. The writ Claus. 25. pars 1. dors. 5. is Rex dilecto et fideli suo Edwardo Principi Walliae, Duci Cornubiae & Comiti Cestriae, &c. Vobis in fide et li∣geantia quibus Nobis tenemini, &c. Eodem modo, &c Henrico Duci Lancastr. 11 Earls, 52 others, Claus. 26. E. 3. dors. 14. Edwardo Principi Walliae, &c. Henrico Duci Lanc. 11 Earls, 24 others, Cl. 27. E. 3. d. 32. to them, 11 Earls more, & 43 other Great men, Cl. 28 E. 3. dors. 26, Edwardo Principi Walliae, &c. Henrico Duci Lancast. 11 Earls. 48 others, Claus. 29 E. 3. dors. 8. Henrico Duci Lancast. 7 Earls, and 41 others, Claus. 31 E. 3. dors. 21. Dilecto Consanguineo et fideli suo Humfrido de Bohun. Com: Hereford. Vobis mandamus in fide et ligean∣tia, &c. 6 Earls more, and 38 others, Claus. 31 E. 3. dors. 2. Edwardo Principi Walliae filio suo carissimo, &c. in fide et ligeantia, &c, Consimilia Brevia Henrico Duci Lancastr. 11 Comitibus, and 50 others Claus. 32 E. 3. dors. 14. Dilecto & fideli suo, Thomae de Bello Campo Comiti Warr. in fide et homagio, 6 Earls more, and 101 others. Cl. 33 . d. 7. Ricardo Comiti Arundel, 3 Earls more, and 19 others; Claus. 34 E. 3. d. 35. Hum∣frido
de Bohun Com. Hertf. et Essex, 3 Earls more, and 20 others. Dors. 4. Edwardo Principi Walliae, ilio suo ca∣rissimo, in fide et ligeantia: Henrico Duci Lancast. 11 Earls more (Leonel Com. Uton, the Kings Son, not an Irish Lord, being one of them) and 48 others, Claus. 36 E. 3. dors. 16. Carissimo filio suo Johan. Com: Lan∣castr. in fide et homagio, &c. 8 Earls more, and 29 others, Claus. 37 E. 3. d. 22. Carissimo Filio suo Johanni &c. as next before, 9 Earls more, and 40 others; Claus. 38 E. 3. dors. 3. Caissimo filio suo Johanni, &c. 5 Earls more, and 41 others, Claus. 39 E. 3. d. 2. Carissimo filio suo Johanni, &c. 10 Earls more, and 41 others. In Claus. 42 E. 3. d. 22. the first writ to the Temporal Lords issued Carissimo Primogenito filio suo Edwardo Principi Aquitaniae & Walliae: Vobis in fide et homagio, &c▪ Con∣similia Bevia Johanni Duci Lancastriae, 10 Comitibus, and 41 others, Claus. 43 E. 3. dors. 24. Carissimo filio suo Johanni Duci Lancast. in fide et homagio, &c. 10 Co∣mitibus, and 35 others, Claus. 44 E. 3. dors. . Carissi∣mo Primogenito nostro Edwardo Principi Aquitaniae et Walliae, in fide et ligeantia, 11 Comitibus, and 49 o∣thers, Claus. 46 E. 3. dors. 11. Dilecto et fideli suo Ri∣cardo Com: Arundel in fide et ligeantia, 1 Earl more, and 18 others, But in the writs of Prorogation and Resum∣mons, dors. 9, 10. writs issued to Edward Prince of Wales, Iohanni Regi Castellae et Legionis, Duci Lancastr. 7 Earls more, & 18 others besides those in the first sum∣mons, Claus. 47 E. 3. dors. 13. Ricardo Com. Aundell in fide at ligeantia, 5 Earls more, and 33 others, Claus. 49 E. 3. dors. 6. Carissimo filio suo Iohanni Regi Ca∣stellae & Legionis, Duci Lancastr: in fide & ligeantia, 9 Earls, and 38 others, after which follows a writ to the Prince of Wales, Claus. 50 E. 3. pars 2. dors. 6. Carissi∣mo filio suo (stiled his Son, though in truth his Grand∣child only, not Son) Ricardo Principi Walliae, Duci Cornub. et Comiti Cestriae in fide et ligeantia. Consimilia Brevia, Johannni Regi Castellae & Legionis, Duci Lan∣castr. 10 Comitibus, and 35 others: whereof Micha∣eli
de la Pole, (Admirallo Flte Navium versus partes Briales) is one. All the Writs of Summons to Parliament issued to the Temporal Lords under King Richard the 2. have the self∣same Prologues, recitals, dates with those to the Archbi∣shops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors in the precedent Section, being entred next after them, of which I shall give you this brief Epitome. In Claus.  R. 2. dors. 37. the first writs to the Temporal Lords issued Carissimo Avuncu∣l suo Iohanni Regi Castellae et Legionis, Duci Lanca∣striae, &c▪ Consimiles Literae to 12 Earls, 47 Lords, Ba∣rons and Great men, Cl. 2 R. 2. dors. 3. 29. The first writs issued to him, and Consim. Literae to 14 Earls, 48 Lords, Barons, and Great men, Cl. 3 R. 2. d. 32. the first writ was directed to him, Consim. lit: to 13 Earls, 47 Lords and Great men, Cl. 4 R. 2. d. 32. the first writ is to him, Cons. Lit. to  Earls, 44 Lords and Great men, Cl. 5 R. 2. d. 32. 40. the first writs issued to him, Cons. Lit. to 10 Earls, 47 Lords and Great men, Cl. 6 R. 2. d. 37. the first writ issued to him, Cons. Lit. to 9 Earls, and 45 Lords and Great men, Cl. 7 R. 2. d. 37. the first writ is directed to him, Cons. Lit. to 11 Earls, 48 Lords and Great men, Cl. 7 R. 2. d. 10. the first writ is to him, Cons. Lit. to 11 Earls, and 48 Lords and Gran∣dees, Cl. 8 R. 2. d. 35. is to him, Cons. Lit. to 11 Earls, and 50 Lords and Great men, Cl. 9 R. 2. d. 45. is to him, Cons. Lit. to 2 Dukes, 11 Earls, and 46 Lords and Great men, Cl. 10 R. 2. d. 42. the first writ issued Carissimo A∣vunculo suo Edwardo Duci Ebor▪ &c. Cons. Lit. to 1 Duke, 1 Marquess, 9 Earls, 44 Lords and Great men, Cl. 11 R. 2. d. 24. the first writ is to this Duke, Consim. Lit. to 2 Dukes 8 Earls, 47 Lords and Great men, Cl. R. 2. d. 13. to him, Cons. Lit. to  Duke, 8 Earls, 34 Lords and Great men, Cl. 12 R. 2. d. 42. to him, Cons. Lit. to 1 Duke, 9 Earls, 42 Lords and Great men, Cl. 13 R. 2. d. 5. the first writ entred is Iohanni Duce Lan∣castr. Cons. Lit. to a Dukes, 9 Earls, 46 Lords and Gran∣dees, Claus. 14 R. 2. d. 42. the first writ is to the same
Duke, Cons. Lit. to 2 Dukes, 10 Earls, 4 Lords and Great men; Cl. 15 R. 2. d. 37. the first writ entred is, Iohanni Duci Aquitaniae et Lancastriae, &c. Cons. Lit. to 2 Dukes, 10 Earls, 41 Lords and Grandees, Cl. 16 R. 2. d. 23. the writ is to him, Cons. Lit. to 2 Dukes, 10 Earls, 42 Lords and Great men, Cl. 17 R. 2. d. 30. to him, Cons. Lit. to 2 Dukes, 11 Earls, 40 Lords and Grandees, Cl. 18 R. 2 d. 23. the first writ entred is Hen. Com. Darbi, Cons. Lit. to 6 Earls, 29 Lords and Great men, Cl. 20 R. 2. pars 1. dors. 15. the first writ issued Carissimo Avunculo suo Iohanni Duci Aquitaniae & Lancastriae, Cons. Lit. to 2 Dukes, 11 Earls, 38 Lords and Great men, Cl. 21 R. 2. parte 1. d. 27. the writ en∣tred is to him, Conim. Lit. to 3 Dukes, 1 Marquess, 6 Earls, 33 Lords and Great men, Cl. 23 R. 2. dors. 3. the writ entred issued Henrico Duci Lancast. &c. Cons. Lit. to 4 Dukes, one Marquess, 10 Earls, 34 Lords and Great men. The writs of Summons to the Temporal Lords all the reign of Henry the 4th. are entred next after those to the Spiritual Lords, having the same recitals and dates, with them forecited in the 1. Section: Of which take this ensuing short account. Cl. . H. 4. dorso 37. the writ entred issued, Henrico Duci Lancastriae, Cons. Lit. to 4 Dukes, 1 Marquess, 10 Earls, 34 Lords and Nobles, Cl. 1 H. 4. d. & Claus. 2 H. 4. parte 1. d. 3. the first writ entred is, Carissimo filio suo Henric Principi Walliae, et Duci Cornubiae, &c. 1 Duke, 10 Earls, 35 Lords and Great men Cl. 3 H. 4 d. 17. the like writ to the Prince of Wales, 1 Duke, 8 Earls, 32 Lords and Grandees, Cl. 5 H. 4. part 1. d. 28. & parte 2. d. 4. the first writ issued to the same Prnce, Cons. Lit. to 1. Duke, 7 Earls, 3 Lords and Great men, Cl. 7 H. 4. d. 30. t the Prince, 1 Duke, 7 Earls, 33 Lords, Barons and Great men, Cl. 8 H. 4. d. 2. the like writ to the Prince, 1 Duke, 8 Earls, 33 Lords and Grandees, Cl. 9. & 11 H. 4. d. 32. the writ entred issued to the Prince of Wales, Cons. Lit. to 1 Duke 8 Eals, 32 Lords and
Great men, Cl. 13. H. 4. d. 2. the writ is to the Prince of Wals. 1 Duke, 6 Earls, 32 Lords and Great Persons, Cl. 14 H. 4. dors. 22. the writ issued to Henry Prince of Wales, 5 Earls, 35 Lords and Great men. The writs of Summns under King Henry the 5th to the Temporal Lords, have the self-ame recitals, Pro∣logues, dates, with those to the Archbishops, and other Prelates forecited Section 1. The first writ entred Cl. 1 H. 5. dorse 9. issued, Carissimo fratri Regis Thomae Du∣ci Clarentiae, Cons. Lit. to 1 Duke, 9 Earls, 29 Lords and Grandees, Cl. 1 H. 5. d. 37. the writ entred issued, Ed¦ward Courteney Com. Devon. 6 Earls, 32 Lords and No∣bles, Cl. 2 H. 5. d. 16. the writ recorded at large is di∣rected, Thomae Duci Clarentiae & Com. Albemarliae, Cons. Lit. to 3 Dukes, 11 Earls, 28 Lords and Great men, Cl. 3 H 5. d. 15. the first writ entred issued Ra∣dulpho Com. Westmerland, 1 Earl, 17 Lords and Great men, Cl. 4 H. 5. d. 16. the writ recorded is directed Carissimo fratri suo Thomae Duci Clarentiae, &c. Cons. Lit. to 2 Dukes, 10 Earls, 24 Lords and Great men, Cl. 5 H. 5. d. 11. the writ registred is directed Caris∣simo Avunculo suo Thomae Duci Exon. Cons. Lit. to 3. Earls, 14 Lords and Great men, 7 H. 5. d. 9. the writ recorded is Carissimo Avunoulo suo Henrico Percy Com. Northumb. Cons. Lit. to 2 Earls, 13 Lords and Great men, Cl. 8. H. 5. d. 2. the writ entred issued Carissi∣mo fratri suo Johanni Duci Bedford, &c. Cons. Lit. to 1 Duke 6 Earls, 20 Lords and Great men, Cl. 9 H. 5. d. 13. the writ registred issued, Carissimo Consanguine suo Henrico de Percy Com. Northumb▪ 2 Earls, and but 13 Lords and Great men. All the writs to the temporal Lords during the reign of Henry the 6. are the same in the Prefaces and dates with those to the Bishops and Spiritual Lords, and en∣tred after them, being thus directed Cl. 1 H. 6. dors. 22. Carissimo Avunoulo suo Humfrido Duci Glouce∣striae, Cons. lit. to 1 Duke, 5 Earls, 16 Lords and Great men, Cl. 2 H. 6. d. 18. Humfrido Duci Gloucestr. 1
1 Duke, 5 Earls, 15 Lords and Grandees, Cl. 3 H 6. d. 9. Carissimo Avuncul suo Thomae Duci Exon. 1 Duke, 6 Earls, 22 Lord and Grandees, Cl. 4 H. 6. d. 15. Carissimo Avunculo suo Johani Duci Bedfordiae to 3 Dukes more, 2 Elarls, 23 Lords and Great men, Cl. 5 H. 6. d. 4. Carissimo Anculo su Humfrido Duci Gloucestriae, 1 Duke more, 4 Earls, 22 Lords and Great men, Cl. 7 H. 6. d. 2 Humfrido Duci Gloucestr. 1 Duke besides, 7 Earls, 26 Lords and Grandees, Cl. 9 H. 6. 18. Humfrido Duci Gloucestr. 5 Earls, 21 Lords and Great men, Cl. 10 H. 6. d. 10. Humfrido Duci Glou∣cestriae, 1 Duke, 6 Earls, 25 Lords ad Grandees, Cl, 11 H. 6. d. 10. Johanni Duci Bedfordiae, 2 Dukes more, 6 Earls, 26 Lords and Great men, Cl. 13 H. 6. d. 2. Caris, Avunculo suo Johanni Duci Bedfordiae, 2 other Dukes, 8 Earls, 26 Lords and Great men, Cl. 15 H. 6. d. 18. Humfrido Duci Gloucestriae, 1 Duke more, 7 Earls, 27 Lords and Great men, Cl. 18 H. 6. d. 33. Humfrido Duci Gloucestriae, 2 other Dukes, 6 Earls, 26 Lords and Great men, Cl. 20 H. 6. d. 27. Humfrido Duci Gloucestriae, 2 Dukes more, 11 Earls, 28 Lords and Great men, Cl. 23 H. 6. d. 2 Humfrido Duci Glou∣cestriae, 4 Dukes besides, 2 Marquesses, 7 Earles, 1 Vi∣count, 30 Lords and Noblemen, Cl. 25 H. 6. d. 24. & 26. Humfrido Duci Gloucestriae, 4 other Dukes, 2 Marquesses, 7 Earls,  Vicount, 32 Lords and Great men, Cl. 27 H. 6. d. 24. Ricardo Duci Ebor. 3 other Dukes, 6 Earls, 1 Vicount, 39 Lords and Great men, Cl. 28 H. 6. d. 26. Willielmo Duci Suffolciae, 3 Dukes more, 7 Earles, 1 Vicount, 35 Lords and Great men; Cl. 29 H. 6. dors. 41. Ricardo Duci Eborum, 4 Dukes more, 9 Earls, 1 Vicount, 40 Lords and Great men, Cl. 31 H. 6. d. 36. Edwardo Duci Eborum, 4 Dukes besides, 12 Earls, 3 Vicounts, 36 Lords and Great men, Cl. 33 H. 6. d. 36. Ricardo Duci Eborum, 3 Dukes more, 11 Earls, 2 Vicounts, 35 Lord and Great men, Cl. 38 H. 6. d. 30. Henrico Duci Exoniae, 2 other Dukes, 9 Earls, 2 Vicounts, 35 Lords and Great men, Cl. 49 H. 6. d. 6.
Carissimo consanguineo suo Georgio Duci Clareniae, 3 Dukes more, 7 Earls, 1 Marquess, 23 Lords and Great men. The writs of Summons to Parliament issued by King Edward the 4th to the Temporal Lords, agree in Pro∣logues, forms, and dates, (except in the Praemunientes, &c. with those to the Archbishops and Spiriual Lords in the 1. Section, and are thus directed, Cl. 1 E. 4. d. 35. Johanni Duci Norfolciae 4 Earl, 1 Vicount, 31 Lords and Great men Cl. 2 E. 4. d. 3. Dilcto & fi∣deli suo Ricardo Comii▪ Wrwici, 4 Ear, 37 Lords and Great men, C. 6. E. 4. d. 1. Carssimo Fratri suo Geo∣gio Duci Clareniae, 2 Dukes more, 10 Earls, 1 Mar∣quess, 36 Lords and Great men, Cl. 9 E. 4. d. 3. Ca∣rissimo, fratri suo Georgio Duci Clarentiae, 9 other Dukes 8 Earls, 23 Lords and Great men, Cl. 11 E. 4. d. 41 Carssimo fratri suo Georgio Duci Clarentiae, 3 Dukes more, 8 Earls, 25 Lords and Great men, Cl. 22 & 23 E. 4. d. 10. Carissimo suo filio Primogenito d∣wardo Principi Walliae, 4 Dkes more, 1 Marquee, 7 Earls, 32 Lords. Having presented you with this Breviate of all the generall writs of Summons to Parliaments and Great Councils issued to the Temporal Lords from 49 H. 3. to 23 E. 4. I shall now give you a view of some extra∣ordinary special writs to some Temporal Lords and o∣thers, reducible to, and proper for this Section. I shall begin within this Memorable writ to Roger de Mortymer, Claus: 9 E 2▪ m. 20 dorsoDe interes∣sendo Parlia∣mento. Rex dilecto et fideli suo Rogero de Mortuo-Mare de Wygmore, salutem; Cum vos tempore quo Parliamen∣tum nostrum usque Lincoln: in Quindna Sancti Hil∣larie prox futur: summoneri fecimus in partibus Hiber∣niae fuissetis, per quod Nos vobis non  simus ad in∣teressendum dicto Parliamento; ac vos a dictis paribus Hiberniae usque regnum nostrum jam, ut accepimus, ac∣cessistis; ideo vobis mandamus in fide et homagio qui∣bus nobis tenemini firmiter injungentes, quod si ad
dictas partes Hibeniae citra▪ dictum Parliamentum non essetis regressuri, tunc eidem Parliamento nostro dictis die et loco modis omnibus personaliter intersiti, super negotiis Nos et statum Regni nostri rangntibus, pro quibus Parliamentum nostrum mandavimus convoari, Nobiscum et cum Magnatibus et Proceribus regni nostri tractaturi, vestrumque consilium impensuri. Et hoc nullo modo omittatis. T. Rege apud Clipston 17 die Januarii. This Roger de Mortymer (a Baron of this Realm, as is evident by former Summons to him) being absent in Ireland when the writs of Summons to this Parliament first issued, was thereupon left out of the original writs and Lists of Summons; but the King being informed that he was returned into England, thereupon sent this special writ of Summons to him bearing date the 17 of Ianuary, (full 3. moneths after the first writs of Sum∣mons dated the 16 of October before) entred in another dorse apart from the other writs: His absence in Ire∣land, yea and return thither, about the publike affairs after this writ issued, before this Parliament sat, in the Kings and his Counsils opinions, being a sufficient ground to excuse his absence from Parliament, and to send no writ of Summons to him into Ireland. And if English Peers absence or residence in Ireland, be a just, legal ground to exempt them from summons to a Parlia∣ment held in England, much more then must Irish Peers and Lords, who are no Lords or Barons at all in Eng∣land, be totally exempted from all writs of Summons to the Parliaments of England, both in respect of their re∣moteness from England, of the great charge and dan∣ger in crossing the Seas to repair to them, and because they are obliged neither by their tenures, nor Patents, to resort to any English Parliaments, but only to the Parliaments held in Ireland, where only they are Peers and Lords of Parliament, and because they cannot at∣tend in two places at once, if a Parliament should be summoned in England and Ireland on or near the self∣same
time: Of which more hereafter in its proper place. The next writ of this kinde I shall communicate to you, is this I meet with Claus. Ann. 35 E. 3. m. 36. dorso.De Consili summonitio. Rex dilecto et fideli suo Humfrido d Bohun Comiti Northampton: salutem. Qia terra nostra Hiberniae per molestationes a diu Hibernicorum inimicorum nostro∣rum (et) incursus propter impotentiam fideliū nostrorū habitantium in eodem regno, et pro eo quod Magna∣tes et alii de regno nostro Angliae terras in ea habentes, commodum dictarum terrarum suarum ab eadem terra capiunt, et defensionem aliquam non faciunt, jam tan∣tae vasticatis et destructionis miseriae subjicicur, quod nisi Deus averta, et celerius succurratur eidem ad to∣talem perditionem in prox. deducetur; per quod pro salvatione ejusdem ordinavimus, quod Leonellus Comes Vlton. filius noster carissimus, cum ingenti exercitu ad terram praedictam cum omni festinatione transmittaur, et quod omnes Magnates et alii de dicto regno nostro, terras in dicta terra Hiborniae habentes, qunto poten∣tius poterunt, in Comitiva dicti filii nostri proficiscen∣tur, vel si debiles in corpore existant  alios suf∣ficientes ibidem mittant pro repulsion orum ini∣micorum, et salvatione et defensione terrarum suarum et succursu terrae supradictae; Et pro dicto negotio ac∣celerando, volumus vobiscum, et cum aliis de eodem regno terras in dicta terra habentibus Colloquium ha∣bere et tractatum. Vobis in fide et ligeantia quibus No∣bis renemini firmiter injungentes mandamus, quod om∣nibus aliis intermissis, sitis personaliter apud West. in Quindena Pasch. prox. futur▪ adloquendum Nobiscum et Consilio nostro super dictis Negotiis, e illud concer∣nentibus, et ad faciend. et consentiend. super hoc quod ibidem contigerit ordinari. Et interim vos et homines vestros, quanto potencius et decentius poteritis ad ar∣ma paretis. Ita quod in vestri defectum progressus dicti filii nostri et exercitus sui non retardetur, nec dicta ter∣ra
amissionis periculo non subjaceat  causa. Et hoc sicut Nos et honorem nostrum, ac salvationem et desensionem terrae praedictae diligitis nuaenus omit∣atis. Et habea is ibi hoc breve. Teste Rege apd Wesm, 15 die Martii. Per ipsum Rgem et Cosilim. Consimilia Brevia dirig subscriptis de effedo coram Rege et Consilio suo ad dies subscriptos, viz, Rado. Com. Staff. Thomae Com. Oxen. David. de Strabol∣gi Com. Athol. Edw. le Despenser, 31 more. Abbati de Forneux, 3 Abbots and 5 Priors, Magistr. Thomae de Nevill, and 10 others, (whereof two were Prehends in Ireland: Adres Septimanas Paschae: All of them ha∣ving lands in Ireland. The writs to the Abbots, Priors Prebends, and some others, had this special clause ad∣ded to them, not in the writs issued to the Earls and o∣thers of the Laity. Sitis personaliter apud Westm. n tribus Septimanis Pasche prox. futur. vel si personaliter tunc ibidem interesse non commode possitis, tunc aliquem vel aliquos de quibus confiditis, ad diem et locum praedictos mit∣tatis, ad loquend. Nobiscum et Consilio nostro (ut supra.) Et interim homines vestros, &c. (ut supra us{que} nullatenus o∣mittatis, (tunc) Nos in Cancellariams nostram de nominibus illorum qu us{que} Westm. ex causa praedict a duxeritis desti∣nand. diem praedictum distinctè et apertc certio∣res. Et habeats ibi tunc hoc Breve. Teste ut supra. Rex dilecto sibi Mariae Comitissae Norff. alutem. Quia, &c. ut supra usque ibi, accelerando: et tunc sic) Volumus cum Magnatibus et aliis de eodem Regno terras in dicta terra Hiberniae habentibus, Colloquium habere et Tractatum. Vobis in ide et ligeantia quibus Nobis tenemini firmiter injungendo mandamus, quod omnibus aliis praetermissis, aliquem vel aliquos de qui∣bus confiditis apud Westm. mittatis. It a quod sit ibi in Tribus Septimanis Pasche prox. futur. ad loquend. Nobiscum et Consilio nostro super dictis Negotiis, et illud concernentibus, et ad faciend, et consentiend. no∣mine vestro suer hoc quod ibidem contigerit ordinari. Et interim homines vestros, &c. (ut supra usque) nul∣latenus
omittati. (Et tunc sic) Nos in Cancellarim no∣stram de hominibus illorm quos que Westm. ex cau∣sa praedicta dxeritis  reddentes ad diem prae∣dictm et aperte ceriores. Et habeatis ibi tunc  Breve  supra. Consimilia Bre dirignur subscripris sub eadem data de essendo coram Rege et  ad dies sub∣scriptos, viz. Alianorae Comiissae Dormond, Annae le Depenser, ad Quindenam Paschae, Philippae Comitisae de la March, Agnets Comitissae Pmbroc, Mariae de Sancto Paulo Comitissae Pembroc, Matildae Comitissae Oxon. Katherinae Comitissae Ahol, Iohannae Fitz Wauter, Margeriae de Ros. Ad tres Septimanas Pasche. The next writ is Claus. 36 E. 3. m. 42. dorso. very sutable to the next preceeding.De veniendo ad Consilium, ad tractand. de statu terrae Hiberniae. Rex dilecto et fideli suo Thom de Furnyvall falutem. Cum nuper in succursum terrae nostrae Hiberniae quae pro magna parte per potentiam Hibernicorum Inimicorum nostrorum quibus Fideles nostri in partibus illis resiste∣re non poterant, occupara et deructa suit, ad resistend. malitiae eorundem Inimicorum nostrorum, et ad ipsos expugnand. et debelland. Leonellum Comitem Ulton. fi∣lium nostrum carissimum cum non modico armatorum nmero destinavimus, qui ibidem a diu super salvatione terrae praedictae ad sumptus excessivos in isdem parti∣bus moratus est, et quamplures hominum suorum ex variis eventibus decesserunt, sic quia idem filius noster et fideles nostri cum ipso commorantes per potentiam dictorum Inimicorum nostrorum indies invalescente in maximo periculo sunt constituti. Et licet vobis sicut a∣liis fidelibus nostris de Regno nostro Angliae terras in dicta terra Hibrniae habentibus, per diverta Brevia man∣daverimus, quod vos cum hominibus ad arma armatis et agittariis quanto potentius possecis parere, et cum dicto filio nostro et aliis fidelibus nostris ad ter∣ram praedictam pro defenione ejusdem et terrarum ve∣strarum ibidem transiretis: Vos tamen ad terram il∣lam accedere, vel homines aliquos ibidem mittee non
, in no contemptum, t dict hii notri et a∣liorum fidelium nostrorum in Comitiva sua existentium, terrae praedictae amissionis periculum manise∣stum, unde plurimum conturbamur, nec immerico, ac movemur, Vobis igitur in fide t ligeania quibus nobi nmini, et sub forisfactione omnium quae Nobis forisfacere poteritis, mandamus firmiter injungentes; quod attentis periculis praedictis, omnibus dilationibus et excusationibus cessantibus, Vos et homines vestros quanto potentius, juxta flatus vestri decentiam poteri∣tis paretis, et arraietis ad transfretand. ad dictum fi∣lium nostrum ad dictas partes Hiberniae, cum eodem filio nostro, ac aliis fidelibus nostris ibidem existenti∣bus super salvatione et defensione terrae praeditae et terrarum vestrarum propriarum in parribus illis mora∣turi. ta quo  sitis in dictis partibus Hiberniae in Quin∣dena Pasche prox. fuur. ad ultimum, prompti et parati ad terram praedictam, una cum aliis fidelibus nostris contra dictos Inimicos nostros defendend, et ipsos Ini∣micos nostros cum Dei adjutorio expugnand, et debel∣land. et malitiam corum propulsand. Et vos ipsi sitis coram Nobis et Consilio nostro apud Westm. die Vene∣ris in secunda Septimana Quadragesimae prox. futur. ad loquend. et tractand. super progressu vestro ad dictas partes Hibrniae, et ad aciend. quod vobis tune injun∣getur ex parte nostra. Et hoc sub forisfactur praedicta nullatenus omittatis. Teste Rege apud Westm. 10 die Febr. Per ipsum Regem. Consimilia Brevia diriguntur subscriptis, de essendo coram Rege et Consilio suo ad diem praedictum sub ea∣dem data, Thomae Comii Oxon. and 41 Earls, Barons, Gentlemen, Abbots, Priors, and Clergymen more, who had lands in Irl. After whose names this writ follows. Rex dilecto sibi Mara▪ Comitissae Norff. salutem, Cum in succursum, &c. (just as in the writ before) usque exnsationibus cessantibus; homines ad arma armatos et sagittarios ee munitos quanto potentius juxta status vestri decentiam poteritis, paretis et arraia∣tos
ad trans and. &c. (ut supra usque) expuland. Et aliquos vel aliquem de quibus, vel de quo specialiter confiditis, mittatis apud Westm. Ita quod sint ibidem die Veneris in secunda Septimana Quadragesimae prox. futur. ad loquend. et tractand. super progressu homi∣num vestrorum praedictorum ad dictas partes Hibernae, et ad faciend. quod tunc ibidem per Nos et Conlium nostrum conigerit ordinari. Teste Rege apud Westm. 10 die Februarii. Consimilia Brevia diriguntur subscriptis de essendo coram Rege et Consilio suo ad diem praedictum sub ea∣dem data, viz. Alianorae Comiissae Dormond, Philippae Comitissae Marchlae, Agneti Comitissae Pembroc. Ma∣riae de Sancto Paulo Comitissae Pembroc. Matildae Co∣mitissae Oxon. Katherinae Comitissae Athol, Annae le Dis∣penser, Iohannae Fitz-Wauter, Margaretae de Roos. The next I shall transcribe, is this special writ of sum∣mons to the Prince of Wales, entred at large in Claus. 49 E. 3. m. 6. dorso. after the writs to the Archbi∣shops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Temporal Lords and Sheriffs to elect Knights and Burgesses, but before the writ to the Warden of the Cinque ports. Rex carissimo Primogenito suo Edwardo Principi Wal∣liae, salutem. Cum super arduis et urgentibus negotiis Nos, et statum et defensionem Regni nostri, ac Ecclesiae Anglicanae contingentibus Parliamentum nostrum apud Westm. duodecimo die Februarii prox. futur. teneri or∣dinavimus; per quod per diversa Brevia nostra manda∣vimus singulis Prael▪ tis, Magnatibus, et Proceribus dic∣ti regni nostri quod ad dictum Parliamentum nostrum summoneri fecimus, quod ad dictum locum Westm. 12 die Febr. intersint super negotiis praedictis tractaturi suumque consilium impensuri. Et quia nolumus quod tam ardua negotia dicti regni absque avisamento et consilio vesro tract entur, et drigantur; Vobis man∣damus quod apud dictum locum Westm, ad dictum duo∣decimum diem Februar. in propria persona vestra, n∣tersits Nobiscum, ac cum Praelatis, Magnaibus, t
praedics super dictis negoi, vestrumque consilium impensuri. Teste ut supra. The next writ wherewith I shall here present you is that of Clause, 21 R. 2. m. 9. dorso. which is very ob∣servable.De veniendo ad Parliamen∣tum. Rex carissimo Avunculo suo Iohanni Duci Aquitaniae et Lancastriae, salutem. Quia de assensu Praeatorum, Procerum et Magnatum regni nostri Angliae in Parlia∣mento nostro apud Westm di Lunae prox. post festum Exaltationis Sanctae Crucis prox. praeterito summoneri fecimus existentium, pro quibusdam arduis et urgenti∣bus negotiis et materiis in eodem Parliamento adhuc pendentibus, quae adhuc commode terminari non ac aliis causis sais evidentibus, dictum Parlia∣mentum usque Quindenam Sancti Hillarii prox, futur▪ apud Salop, in stat quo nunc fuit duximus prorogand. et continand. Vobis in fide et ligeantia quibus Nobis tenemini firmiter injungendo mandamus, quod apud Salop in Qnindena praedicta cum familia et  sta∣ vestro congruis, et non cum multidine genium, nec alio modo quam tempore Domini Edwardi nuper Regis Angliae Avi nostri et nostro, aniquitus et com∣muni er fieri consuevi, personaliter intersiis, Nobiscum et  Praelatis, Proceribus, et Magnatibus dicti regni no  super causis, negotiis, et materiis antedictis fina∣lier tractaturi, vestrumque Consilium impensuri, abin∣de abque licentia nosra speciali minime recessuri. T. R. apud Westm. 5. die Novembris. Consimi Brevia sub eadem data, issued to 5. Dukes more, one Marquess, 6 Earls, and 33 Lords, Barons, and Great men. I shall end this Section with this remarkable writ of Summons and Resummons recorded in Claus. 1 R. 2. m. 13. dors. (after the List of the Lords names) isued to William de Dacre. Rex dilecto et fideli suo Willielmo de Dacre salutem. Cum nuper de avisam nto Consilii nostri pro quibusdam arduis et urgentibus negotiis Nos, statum et defensio∣nem
Rega nostra Agli et Eccle Anglicanae concer∣nentibs quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud West. in crastino Purificationis beatae Mariae pro. futur. ordinavimus. Et licet per breve nostrum vobis in fide et ligeantia qibus Nobis tene mini firmiter in∣jungendo mandavemu, quod cessan exusaione quaunque dictis die et loco personaliter inter No∣biscum, ac cum Praelatis, Magnatibus, et Procebus Regni nostri praedicti super negotiis praedictis tractatu∣ri, vestrumque consilim impensi. Vos tamen man∣dato nostro praedicto minime parentes, ad Parliamentum praedictum dictis die et loco,  huca que vene non curas▪ in nosta contemptum manifeum. Et quia Parliamentum praedictum usqe in dem Lunae in Quin  Paschae prox. futur. duximus contin∣and. Vobis in fide et ligeania vestris praedictis injun∣gimus et mandamus, quod excusatione quacunque ces∣sane ad locum praedictum in Quindea praedict perlo∣nalter intersiis Nobiscum, et cum Praelatis, Magnati∣bus▪ et Proceribus dicti Regni nostri super negotiis praedictis tractaturi, vestrumque Consilium impensuri, ABINDE ABSQUE LICENTIA NOSTRA SPE∣CIALI MINIME RECESSURI. ET HOC SUB GRAVI PAENA, PER [NOS] ET DOMINOS IBIDEM TUNC PRAESENTES LIMITAND NUL∣LATENUS OMITTATIS. Teste nt supra. Per ipsum Regem et Consilium. Consimilia Brevia diriguntur subscriptis sub adem data viz. Iohi. de Welle Chr. Iohi. Gray de Codonore, Willo. Botreaux Chr. Iohi le Warre, Chr. Iohi. de Montea∣cuto Chr. Philpo le Dispenser Chr. By which writ it is apparent, 1. That if any Lord neglect or refuse to appear upon the first writ of Sum∣mons issued to him, that the King may resummon him by a second writ, as here he did these Lords. 2ly, That the not appearing in Parliament upon the first writ of Summons, through negligence, wilfulness, or without lawful excuse made for it, is a manifest contempt to the
King; That no Peers summoned to Parliaments ought to depart whiles the Parliament coninues, without the Kings special license; 4ly, That the not appearing of any Peer when summoned, or his departure from Par∣liament, without the Kings special license, is to be pu∣nished with such a heavy and deserved penalty as the other Lords sitting in Parliament shall limit and inflict, not the King himself without the Lords. Usefull Annotations and Observations upon the precedent Writs to the Prince of Wales, King of Castel and Leon, Dukes, and other Temporal Lords and Barons, and the lists of their names recorded after them. 1. I Observe, and must inform the Readers, that in some few Clause Rolls, there are writs of Summons entred only to Earls, and other secular Lords, without any writs to Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots and Spiritu∣al Lords, who no doubt had like writs then isued to them, though not registred in the Rolls, as the Lords writs attest. 2. That in the Rolls where in they both are registred, the writs to the Temporal Lords are now and then en∣tred, before those to the Archbishops, Bishops and Spi∣ritual Lords; but most usually they follow them. 3. That they are commonly entred both together on the self-same dorse▪ or membrana, & their recials, cla∣ses for the most part the same in terminis; except in the Praemunentes, &c. which is peculiar to the Archbishops and Bishops writs; or in the clauses, or Homagio et li∣geantia quibu, Nobi tenemini; which is peculiar to the Temporal Lords; and never used in the writs to the Bishops, Abbots, and Eclesiastical Lords; but in fide
&  quibus Nobis tnmini, only; which is oft times inserted into the writs to the Temporal Lords, and others of the Laity, not peculiar only to the Clergy; as in homagio & ligantia are to the Temporlly. The reason whereof I conceive to be gronded on that of Littleton in his Chapter of Homage, Sect. 86. If an Ab∣bot or Prior, or other man of Religion (which extends to all Archbishops, Bishops, Den, Parsons, Prebends and other Ecclesiastical bodies Politick) shall do homage to his Lord, he shall not say, IEO DEVEIGNE VOSTR & HOME (whence Homage hath its name and derivation, as all Temporal Lords and Laymen ought to doe, when they do their homage to the King or other Lords) be∣cause he hath professed himself, PUR ESTRE TANT SOLEMENT LE HOME DE DEU; But he shall say, I do Homage unto you, and to you I shall be true and faithfull, and faith to you bear for the Tenements which I hold of you; In which respect, Glanvil lib. 9. c. 1, 2. Bracton . 78. F. Britton cap. 68. & . 3 cap. 16. resolve. Sendum st quod  liber  as∣culus quam famina, Clericus et Laicus, major & minor, dum tamen electi in Episcopos; POST CONSER ATIO∣NEM HOMAGIUM NON FACIUNT, quicquid ecerunt anie, sed TANTUM FIDELITATEM. Con∣ventus atm HOMAGIUM nec faciet de Iure, sicu NE ABBAS, NEC PRIOR, o quod tenent nomine alieno, scilicet nomine Ecclesiarum: as Sir Ed. Cook like∣wise observes in his 1. Institutes, f. 65. b. So that they doing no homage properly so stiled to the King, after their consecrations, nor using the words (I become your man, if we credit Lttleton) in making their homage as the Temporal Lords do. Therupon (I conjecture) the writs of Summons command the Temporal Lords and Laity to appear, &c. in fide t homagio, et in ide et lige∣antia quibus Nobis tenemini; but the Prelates, Spiritual Lords, and other Clergy, only in fide et dilectione, they being bound to swear fealty and Allegiance to our Kings for the Freehold Lands and Temporaties they held of
him xcept only those that hold in Frankalmigne, as 29 E. 3. f. 38. a. Littleton Sect. 91, 92, 93. Sir Edw. Cook in hi 1. Instiutes on these Sections, and other Law-books resolve. For this I shall produce one me∣morable Record; auring us, that all the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbos, Priors and Clergy both in England and Ireland, did, and of right ought to swear fealty to the King, as well as the Temporal Lords and Commons, and prescribing Commissioners in Ireland to receive it from them;Pa. 1 E. 1. m. 20. Venerabiii in Christo Patri edem gratia Midden. Episcopo, et dilectis et fidelibus su∣is Mauricio filio Mauricii Justiciario suo Hiberniae, et Mgistro Iohanni de Smford Escheatori suo Hiberniae salutem. Cum defuncto jam celebris memoriae Do∣mino Henrico Rege patre nostro (cujus animae propi∣cietur Alissimus) ad Nos regni Angliae gubernacu∣lum, et errae Hiberniae Dominium pertineant, ob quod PRAELATI, Comites et Proceres, et Com∣munitas Regni nostri Nobis, tanquam Domino suo ligio et Regi, FIDELITATIS JURAMENTUM, et omnia alia quae Nobis ratione Coronae et Dignitatis Regiae ab ipsis fieri et praestari Nobis in absentia no∣stra poterun, plenariè et sine omissione aliqua prom∣pto et libenti animo PRAESTITERINT; AC, AR∣CHIEPISCOPI, EPISCOPI, ABBATES, PRIO∣RES, Comites, Barones, Miites, liberè tenentes, ac tota Communitas terrae nostrae HIBERNIAE, NOBIS tanquam REGI ET DOMINO SUO IGIO, CONSIMILE SACRAMENTUM FIDELITATIS PRAESTARE TENEANTUR; Dedimus obis po∣testatem recipiendi nomine nostro FIDELITATEM IPSORUM. Ia tamen quod si vos; omns interesse ne quiveritis, tunc duo velus vestrum qui prae ens¦u rit nihilominus plenaim hab at potestatem reci∣piendi nomine nostro FIDELITATEM IPSORUM in forma praedicta. Et id o vobi mandamus quod FIDELITATEM PRAEDICTAM nomine nostro recipiatis, prout, melius videbiis expedire. In cu∣jus
&c. Westm. 7 die Sept. An. 1 E 1. Hence I finde this IURAMENTVM EPISCOPORVM; in Tttles Magna Charta, printed London 1556. f. 164. b. being nothig else but the form of the Oth of Fealty, which the Bishops took to our Kings before they received their Temporalties out of their hands, being the same in substance, which the King ofWalsing∣hm Hist. Agl. p 32. Hen. de Knyghton de Event. Agl.  c. 3. col. 2482. Sots an his Tempora Lords, and English Barons and Laymen, usually made to King Edward the 1. and his Successors coninued these later times. Ieo serra soall et loyall, et oy et lo∣altie porray AV ROY & A SES HIRES, ROYS DE ANGLITERRE, de vie et de, membres, et de ter∣rene honour contre tout gentz qui pyent vivre et mounir. Et loyament monstray, et loyalment ferray les services qui appendent a la temporaltie de Levesque de M. la quelle eo claimor de tenir de vous, et laquelle vous me rendes. Si moy ayde Dieu et ses Saints. This Oath of Felty, as 7 Rep. f. 6, 7 Calvis, case, 4 Istit. f 60. b. Lam∣bardi Archai∣on, f. 135, 13. Sir Edward Cook and others affirm, was first invent∣ed, and generally prescribed to all persons above 12 years of age, by our famous British King Arthur; who by vertue thereof, ex pulit SARACENOS et Inimices egno. But this certainly is a meer fable, and gross mis∣take; (which I admire Mr. Lambard. and Sir Edward Cook observed not;) for the Saxacens never invaded Eng∣land in any age, neither were they expelled the Realm by King Arthur; but the Saxons, who had then and formerly possessed themselves of a great part of Britain, were vanquished and expelled by him in the years of grace 518, 520, 522, as Matt. Westminster,Hist. l. 9, 10. Geoffry Man∣mouth, Tho. Walsingham, andGrafton, Holinshed, & others in his Life. other of our Histori∣ans relate; yet not by vertue of this Oath, (which no Historian mention) but of his arms and ; this Oath (as I concive) being rath rinvented by our Saxon Kings, than Kig Arthur; and first prescribed by this Law of King Edmund son of Adelstan (made atChron. Johannis Bromton, col 859. Cu∣linton by advice of his Bishops and wise men, about the year 944. Lex 1.) Ut omnes jurent in nomine Domini &c.
FIDELII ATEM Edmundo Reg., SICVT HOMO DEBET ESSE FIDELIS DOMINO SUO; sine om∣ni controversia et seditione in manifesto et occulto, &c. Et quod ANTEQVAM IURAMENTUM HOC DA∣BITUR, ut nemo concelet hoc in fratre vel proximo suo plus quam in extraneo. This Oath thus instituted, wasLambardi Archaion. Spelm. Gloss. Tit. Fidelitas. backed by the Laws of Edw. the Confessor, & of Will, the Conq. (Lex 78, 79.) published byIohannis Selden ad Eadmerum, & Notae & Spicilegium, p. 191. Mr. Selden: in whose reign all Bishops before their Consecrations did Homage to the K. as well as Fealty for their Temporalties; Which though Archbishop Anselm opposed, yet at last it was Eadmerus Hist. Novor. l. 4. p. 91. 92. Mat. Paris, p. 60. Mat. Westm. p. 25, 26. Hoveden, p. 471. My Plea for the Lords, p. 171, 173. agreed between King Henry the first and him, by assent of the Bshops, Abbots, Lords and Great men in a Parliamentary Council held in August Anno 107. Vt nullus ad Praelattonem electus PRO HOMAGIO QUOD REGI FACERET consecratione suscepti honoris priva∣etur. Which Law and usage continued under King Henry the second, as is evident by this passage of Glan∣vil, l. 9. c. 1. who writ and was chief Justice under him. Electi vero in Episcopos ante consecrationem HOMAGIA SVA FACERE SOLENT. What solemn publike Oathes of Allegiance and Fidelity Bishops and other Clergymen, as well as the Temporal Lords & Commons, have heretofore and of late years made to our Kings and their heirs, you may read at leasure in the Exact Abridgement of the Records in the Tower, p. 427, 657, 663, 25 H. 8. c. 20. 22. 26 H. 8. c. 7. 10. 35 H. 8. c. 1. 1 Eliz. c. 2, 3. 5 Eliz. c. 1. 3 Jac. c. 3. 5. 7. Jac. c. 6. I shall only present you with one more thus record∣ed in the Clause Roll of 11 E. 4. m. 1. dorso. Memorand, quod tertio die Iulii Anno regni Regis Ed∣wardi Quarti undecimo apud Westm. in Camera Parlia∣menti, Venerabilis Pater Thomas Cardinalis Archiepisco∣pius Cantuar, ac alii Domini Spirituales et Temporales, ac etiam quidam Milites quorum nomina subscribuntur, fece∣runt Recognitionem, Iuramentumque praestiterunt Edwar∣do primogenito dicti Domini nostri Regis Edwardi Quarti, illustri Principi Walliae, Duci Cornub, & Comiti Cestriae
in forma sequenti, & ad corroborationem praemissrum sin∣guli corum manibus propries scripserunt sua Nomina. I Thomas Cardinal Archbishop of Canterbury know∣ledge, take and repute you Edward Prince of Wallys, Duke of Cornwall, and Earl of Chester, first begotten so of our Soveraign Lord Edward the fourth, King of Eng∣land, and of France, and Lord of Ireland, to be very and undoubted heir to our said Soveraign Lord as to the Crowns of England and France; and Lordship of Irland; and promie and swear, that in case hereafter it hap∣pen you by Gods disposition to overlive our said So∣veraign Lord, I shall then bear, and in all things truly and faithfully behave me towards you and your heirs, as a true and  Subject ought to behave  to his Soveraign Lord and right wy King of England, &c. So help me God and holy domes, and the Evange∣lists. T. G. T. London Episc. Her. Dunlm. W. Episc. Winton. G. Clrence. R. Gloucester. Norff. H. Buckyngham. I. uff. Arundell. H. Essex. E. Kent. Riverirs. I. Wiltshire. W. , Prior Hospt. S Iohannis. E. Arundall Mautravers. A. Gray. I. Fenis. R. Esc. Sarum. W. T. R. Bathonien. E. Carliol. R. Beauchamp. Sir Robrt Fenys. Bourgchier. T. Bourchier. W. Par. I. Dudley. I. Audley. Dace. Edwdo Bergaveny. I. Strange. I. Scrop. W. Ferrers. Berners. Hasting.
Moutjoy. Dynham. Howard. Duras. I. Pilkngton. W. Beadon. W. Courtenay. T. Mullineux. Raulf Ashto. The first who brought Homage into England for ought I can finde, was William the Conqueror, and his Normans, who equally imposed it, on all Bishops, Abbos and Clergymensas well as on the Laity, in the self-same words and form for ought appears. How Bish∣ops & Abbots came to be exempred from doing homage for their Temporalties to our Kings after their conse∣craons I have already touched & shall here further de∣clare for the informaion of those of my own profession: AbbotHistoriae, P. 896. Ingulphs records,  mulcis armis retroactis (even from King Ehleds reig) ulla e∣lectio Praelatorum erat merè iera canonica, ed omnes divnitaes tam Episcoporum quam Abba∣tum per Annulum et Baculnm Regis curia pro sna complacentia conferebat; his  King William the Conquerot, who first bought theSee the Customs of Normandy, Chapter of Homage, & Britton ch. 68. de Homages, p. 171. b. word and service of HOMAGE out of Normandy into England, and at his Coronation at Lo∣don Ann. 1067. HOMAGIIS à Magnatibus (as well of the Clergy as Laity) acceptis, cum FIDELITA∣TIS JURAMENTO, obsidibusque acceptis, in reg∣no confirmatus, omnibus qui ad regnum aspiraverant factus est terrori, as Matthew Paris, p. 4. and Mat∣thew Westminster p. 1. relate.Mat Pars p. 4. 10. Mat. Westm. p. 78. Ann. 1072. He re∣ceived homage from the King of Scots. And Anno 1079 He entred Wales with a numerous Army, sub∣dued it, et a Regnlis  ditionis HOMAGIA & FIDELITATES ACCEPT. Anno 1083. Ce∣pit HOMAGIA Ordinum totius Angliae, et JURAMENTUM FIDELITATIS, cu∣jusunque essent endi el senementi; And apud Londonias HOMINIUM SIBI FACERE, et contra omnes homines FIDELITATEM JURARE OM∣NEM
ANGLIAE INCOLAM IMPERANS (there∣fore Bishops, Abbots and Clocks, as well as Laymen) totam terram descripsit, &c. asHistoria, p. 908. Ingulphus in∣forms us flourishing in that age. The Pope being much offended that Kings should thus conferre Bisho∣pricks, Abbies, and other Ecclesiastical dignities Per Annulum et Baculum, and that Bishops, and Abbots should thus doe Homage and Felty to them, and be∣come their men, as well as Lick, (as being a grand im∣pediment to their Supreme Authority over Emperors, Kings and Princes of the earth, strenuosly attempted by Pope Hil lebrand;) thereupon Pope Urban the 2d. Ans. 1095. in aMat. Paris p. 20. Council held at Claremount ordained, Ut Episcopi, vel Abbates, vel aliquis de Clero ali∣quam Ecclesiasticam dignitatem de manu Principum, vel quorumliber Laicorum, non recipiant. And this not prevailing, in another Council held by this Hoveden; Annal, pars 1. p. 467. Mat. Parker, An∣tiqu. Eccl. Brit. p. 103. 107. Malmsb. de Gestis Pon∣tif. p. 224. Pope at Rome, Anno 1099. Urbanus Papa ex∣communicavit omnes Laicos investituras Ecclearum dantes, et omnes easdem investituras de manibs Laicorum accipientes, necnon omnes in officium sic dati honoris consecrantes. Excommunicavit etiam eos, qui pro Ecclesiasticis Honoribus LAICORUM HOMINES FIUNT id est, HOMAGIUM INE∣UNT as learnedGlossari∣um, p. 357. Sir Hen. Spelman truly expounds it.) Dicens minus execrabile videri, ut manus quae in tantam eminentiam excreerant, ut quod nulli Angelorum concessumest, ut Deum cuncta creantem suo signaculo CREANT (mark the blasphemy and contradiction) et eundem ipsum pro salute totius mundi Dei Patris obtutibus offerant, in hanc igna∣viam vel stulitiam detrudantur; ut ancillae fiant eorum manuum quae diebus et noctibus obscenis con∣tactibus inquinantur, sive rapinis et injustae sanguinis effusione addictae maculantur. Et ab omnibus est cla∣matum, fiat, fiat, et in his consummatum est concii∣um. HereuponEadmerus Hist. Novor, 1. 2, 3, 4 Mar. Parker, Antiq. Eccles. Brit. p. 105, 106. 107, &c. Malmb de Gestis Potif. l. 1. p. 215. &c. 224, 225. Godwin in the life of An∣selm. Anselm Archbishop of Canterbury, a Burgundian by birth, and great Creature of the Popes,
peremptorily refused to consecrate any Bishops, who received their Investiures per annulum baculum from the King, or to have any communion with those who were thus invested and consecrated by the Archbishop of Yorke in his absence; denying to do any homage or fealty to King Henry the 1. after his revocation by him from his exile under Will. Rufus, without the Popes license; affirming, Volente DEO NVLLIVS MOR∣TALIS HOMOFIAM, nec per Sacramenū alicui FIDEM PROMITTAM. Hereupon Rex, Regni∣que Proceres, Episcopi, et cujuscunque generis aulici praeter Regni consuetudinem ab Anselmo factiatum indignè ferentes asserebant sese nunquam tam iniquo Papae decreto assensos vel assensuros, et potius tam Anselmum regno exterminaturos et ab Ecclesia Ro∣mana penitus discesuros, quam hanc Papae sententiam A IURE REGIO, REGNIQUE CONSUETUDI∣NE PRORSUS ALIENAM, ratam haberent. After many publike meetings and debates between the King, Prelates, Nobles and Anselm about this business, it was agreed, that Anselm, and William Werelast the Kings Ambassadour, should goe to Rome to Pope Pas∣chal the 2. and debate this business before him; where the said William appearing, and vehemently urging be∣fore the Pope in the Kings behalf; Dedecus ei, et videri et esse, si Antecessorum suorum jura perderet, quos ipse et animi magniudine, et opum affluentia longe praerivit, &c. Adding in the close; Quod Do∣minus meus nec pro amissione Regni patietur sibi Ec∣clesiarum investituras auferri. To which the inso∣lent Pope presently replied with a stern countenance. Nec ego pro capitis sui redemptione eum investitu∣ras permittam impune habere; Whereupon they decreed the cause for Anselm against the King; and in a Synod at Lateran, ratified the former Decree of Pope Urban in the Council at Rome; which this Pope by his consolatory Epistle toEadmeri Hist. Nov. l. 3. p. 63, 64.) Anselm informed him of, in∣couraging him openly and boldly to appear and speak in
this cause for the Churches divine Liberty. Anselm hereupon wrote thus to King Henry (inviting him to return into England, and to doe him that service as his predecessors had done to his Ancestors)Eadmer. l. 3. p. 76. Ut au∣tem sim vobiscum ita ut Antecessor meus erat cum patre vestro, facere non possum, quia NEC VOBIS HOMAGIVMFACERE, nec accipientibus de manu vestra Investituras Ecclesiarum propter praedictam (Pa∣pae) Prohibitionem me audiente factam, audeo commu∣nicare. But thoughSpelmanni Glossarium, p. 357. Ludovicus Crassus K. of France was so pusillanimous, as by his Charter, dated An. 1137. to exempt his Archbishops, Bishops and Clergy from doing any Homage or Fealty to him for their temporalties be∣fore, or after their Consecrations, granting them, Quod canonicam omnino gauderent libertatem ABSQVE HOMAGII, IURAMENTI, seu fidei primum da∣tae, obligatione; Yet K. Hen. the first, though he were contented at last to part with his investitures to Bisho∣pricks and Abbies, yet he would upon no terms exempt any Bishops or Abbots from the homage due unto him for their temporalties, after their elections, and before their Consecrations, not from the Oath of Fealty; they alwayes doing homage to him and his Succes∣sors, at least wise before their consecrations, though seldom after them, and that in the self-same form as Laymen did, (without omitting this Clause, I become your man) as appears by Glanvil, l. 9. c. 1. Bracton, l. 2. c. 35. Fleta, l. 3. c. 16. Britton, ch. 66 of Homages; and 17 E. 2. Of the manner of doing Homage and Fealty; prescribing only one and the self-same form of homage as well to the Clergy as Laity, as well as the same Oath of Fealty, which they equally performed, though Littleton (and he alone) makes a difference between their forms of Homage. Hence in the Parliament at Salisbury, Anno Dom. 1116. Comites & Barones CUM CLERO TOTIUS REGNI in praesentia Re∣gis Henrici 1. sibi et Willielmo filio suo HOMAGIUM FECERUNT & FIDELITATEM IURAVERUNT,
as theCol. 1005. Chronicle of Bromton, andSlm. Du∣nlm. Hist. col. 237. Mat. Paris p. 63. Mat. Westm. p. 28. Eadmerus, l. 5. p. 131. Hove∣den, p. 473. Holi shed, Speed, & o∣thers in Hen∣ry the 1. other of our Historians record. I shall illustrate this discourse tou∣ching Homage and Fealty, with these memorable clauses in the Charter of King Stephen, touching the agreement made between him and Henry Duke of Normandy, &c. in aChroni∣con Johannis Bromton, col. 1038, 1039. See Hoveden, Mat. Paris, Mat. Westm. Holinshed, Stow, Speed, & others. An∣no 1153. Parliamentary Assembly of the Bishops and o∣thers of the Realm at Wallingford. Anno Gratiae 1153. wherein King Stephen declaring him the right heredita∣ry heir to the Crown of England after his death; and he reciprocally agreeing, that Stephen should enjoy the Crown and Kingdom quietly, without interruption by him during his life; thereupon, Dux propter hunc honorem et donationem et confirmationem sib à me factam, HOMAGIUM michi, et Sacramento securi∣tatem fecit, scilicet, quod fidelis michi erit, et vitam et honorem meum pro suo pose custodier, per con∣ventiones inter Nos praelocutas, Ego etiam secui∣tatem Sacramento Duci feci, quod vitam et honorem ei pro posse meo custodiam, et sicut fiium & hae∣redem meum in omnibus in quibus potero eum ma∣nuenebo, et custodiam contra omnes quos poero. Willielms autem filius meus HOMAGIUM et secu∣ritatem Duci fecit, &c. Comites & Barones Ducis qui homines mei nunquam fuerunt, pro honore quem Domino suo fci, Homagium et Sacramentum michi fecerunt, salvis conventionibus inter me et Ducem factis. Coeteri vero qui ante Homagium michi fece∣rant, fideliatem michi fecerunt sicut Domino. Et si Dux à praemissis receerit, omnino a servicio ipsius cessarent, quousque errara corrigeret, &c. Comites etiam et Barones mei LIGIUM HOMAGIUM DUCI FECERUNT, salva mea fidelitate quamdiu vixero, et regnum tenuero. Simili lege, quod si go à praedictis recederem, omnino à servicio meo cesta∣rent quousque errata corrigerem. Cives etiam Civia∣tum et homines Castrorum quae in Dominio meo ha∣beo ex praecepto meo homagium et securitatem Duci fecerunt, salva fidelitate mea quamdiu vixero et reg∣num tenuero. Archiepiscopi, Episcopi atque Abba∣tes
de regno Angliae ex praecepto meo FIDELITATEM SACRAMENTO DUCI FECERUNT. Illi quo∣que qui in regno Angliae Episcopi deinceps fint vel Abbates, IDEM FACIENT. In the Recognition of the antient Customs of theMat. Paris, Hist. p. 96, 97. See Simeon Dunelmenss, Hoveden, Holinshed, & others, Anno. 1164. Realm of England used in the reign of King Henry the 1. and his Ancestors, quae observari debebant in regno & ab omnibus teneri; drawen up and agreed upon Febr. 8. Anno Dom. 1164. in the famous Parliamentary Coun∣cil of Clarindon, in the presence of the King, and of all the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Earls, Barons and Great men of the Realm; who all juraverunt & fir∣miter in verbo veritatis promiserunt viva voce, tenendas et observandas Domino Regi et HAEREDIBUS SVIS, bona fide et absque malo ingenio in perpetuum; I finde these Articles pertinent to my purpose, Archiepiscopi, Episcopi, et universae personae regni, qui de Rege te∣nent in capite, habeant possessiones suas de Rege sicut Baroniam, et inde respondeant Justiciariis et Mini∣stris Regiis, et fequentur et faciant OMNES CON∣SUETUDINES REGIAS; et sicut caeteri Barones debent interesse judiciis Curiae regis cum Baronibus quousque pervenitur ad diminutionem membrorum, vel ad mortem. Cum vacaverit Archieplscopatus, Episcopatus vel Abbatia, vel Prioratus in dominio Regi, esse debet in manu ipsius, et inde percipiet omnes reditus et exitus, sicut Dominicos reditus su∣os. Et cum ventum fuerit ad consulendum Ecclesiam, debet Dominus Rex mandare poiores personas Ec∣clesiae, et in Capella ipsius Regis debet fieri electio, assensu ipsius Regis et Concilio personarum regni, quas ad haec faciendum advocaverit, et IBIDEM FACIET ELECTUS HOMAGIVM & FIDELI∣TATEM REGI, SICVT LIGIO DO MINO SVO., de vita sua et de membris, et de honore terreno, sal∣vo ordine suo, priusquam consecretur. Indeed An∣gelus de Clavasio in his Summa Angelica Tit. Homagi∣um, and other Canonists hold it to be Symonie and un∣lawfull,
prore' spirituali, puia Beneficio Ecclesiastico HO∣MAGIUM EXIGERE: But our Lawes resolve it an antient Legal duty and Service: Of which see more in Spelmanni Glossarium, Tit. Fidelitas & Homagium, in William Somners Glossarium, Tit. Homagium, and in Bracton, Britton and Fleta. 4. That this clause in the writs to the Temporal Lords in fide & homagio, implies they were all (or most) Barons by tenure. And whereas4 Instit. p. 5. Sir Ed. Cook, and 5 Glossa∣rium, p. 80. Sir Henry Spelman assert, That of antient time, the temporal Lords were commanded by the Kings writ thus to appear, In fide et homagio quibus Nobis tenemini, and in the reign of Edward 3. in fide et ligeantia, and sometimes in fide et homagio, but at this day constantly, in fide et ligeantia; because at this day there are no feu∣dal Baronies, in respect whereof Homage is to be done; which in 21 E. 3. was the true cause of this alteration: If this observation of theirs, That in fide et homagio, feodales propriè respiciat Barones, denoting only such Barons who were Barons by tenure, or Barony, for which they did their Homage and swore Fealty and Allegiance to the King: then this is a most convincing argument, that all the Lords and Barons summoned before 11 E. 3. were Barons only by tenure, not by writ alone, because they were all regularly summoned to appear in fide et homa∣gio, not in fide et ligeantia: 2ly. It is a clear mistake, that this alteration of homagio into ligeantia, was made in 21 E▪ 3. for it was not till 25 E. 3. pars 1. dors. 5. in fide et homagio, being used both in the writs of 21, 22, 23, & 24 E. 3. 3ly. The reason of this alteration could not be this they rendr, because all or most of the Lords and Barons then summoned, did not hold of the King by Barony; but were Barons only by writ, not tenure; First, because all the writs to the Prince of Wales, and Earls then summoned (who held of the King by Homage and Barony) issued in this form in fide et ligeantia to them, as well as to the inferiour Lords and Barons. 2ly, Be∣cause the self-same Prince, Earls, Lords summoned in
this form in 25 E. 3. in the very next years of 26 E. 3. d. 14. and 27 E. 3. d. 12. were twice summoned again, i fide, homagio et ligeantia quibus Nobis tenemini, and 28 E. 3. d. 26. in fide et homagio; after in 29 E. 3. d. 8. 7. 31 E. 3. d. 21. & 1. they are summoned in fide et ligean∣tia; but yet in 32 E. 3. d. 14. 36 E. 3. d. 16. 37 E. 3. d. 22. 38 E. 3. d. 3. 39 E. 3. d. 2. 42 E. 3. d. 22. 43 E. 3. d. 24. 46 E. 3. d. 9. all the writs to the Prince, Earls, Lords and Barons, run again in fide et homagio only: and some between and after them in fide et ligeantia only, though issued to the self-same persons, or their heirs: There∣fore ligeantia, in these and subsequent writs, is put only as a Synonima, signifying only Homagium; as the cou∣pling them together in two writs, in fide, homagio et ligeantia, and the placing of Homagio thus interchangea∣bly for ligeantia, and ligeancia for homagio, evidence be∣yond contradiction: The rather, because there is the highest promise and bond of Allegiance expressed in the very words, and form of homage done to the King (as the words,Littl. §. 85. I become your man from this day forwards of life and member, and of earthly worship, and unto you shall be true and faithfull, and bear you faith, and this clause, saving the faith that I owe unto our Soveraign Lord the King, when done to a common person) import: and Glanvil l. 9. c. 1. Bracton l. 2. c. 35. Fleta l. 3. c. 16. Sir Edward Cook in his 1 Institutes on Littletons Chapter of Homage, Sir Hen. Spelman, and Somner in their Glos∣saries Tit. Homagium & Fidelitas, at large demonstrate; Therefore homage may be properly stiled ligeantia, and be put in lien of homagio, as doubtless it is in all those writs that use it. 3ly. I findSee An Exact Abridg∣ment of the Records in the Tower, p. 332, 370, 545, 576, 625, 626. sundry Homages for Dutchies, Earldoms and Baronies, done to our Kings by the Duke of Aquitain, the Dke of Hereford, Henry Percy, the Duke of Norfolk, and other Peers, who were then and afterwards summoned in fide et ligeantia, not homagio; and I doubt Sir Edward Cooke and those of his opinion, can hardly name any Dukes, Earls, Vicounts, Lords or Barons, summoned to Parliament under Henry
the 3. R. 2. H. 4, 5, 9. or E. 4. who was not a Lord by Tenure or Barony, as well as by Patent, or a special writ of creation, the very names of their Baronies as 4 Instit. p. 5. Sir Edward Cooke, andTitles of Honor, p. 720. Mr. Selden inform us, be∣ing usually expressed in all later writs of Summon: Therefore this their conjecture of altering the writs from homagio to ligeantia, because they held not by ho∣mage, must needs be erronious, and groundless in my judgemen, and the assertions of such who hold, that the Kings bare general writs of summons, issued to those who held not by Barony, did create them and their is∣sues Barons, if they sate in Parliament without any special creation by some Clauses in the writs, or by Pa∣ent, grounded on this mistake, must vanish into smoke; else that Clause of creation in the writ to Sir Henry Bromfleet, Cl. 27 H. 6. d. 24. would have been both superfluous and ridiculous. 5ly. That this clause, in fide et homagio; or, in fide & ligeantia quibus Nobis tenemini, is sometimes omitted out of the writs of Summons to the Prince of Wales, and other times inserted into them. 6ly. That the Prince of Wales in the writs of Sum∣mons and adjournment, is sometimes stiled Princeps Walliae only; sometimes, Princeps Aquitaniae et Walliae; other times, Princeps Walliae, Dux Cornubiae, et Comes Cstriae; when all these titles were conferred on him by the King. 7ly▪ That in the writs issued to Dukes, Earls, and Temporal Lords of the Kings Progeny, royal bloud and alliance, they are usually stiled; Carissimo filio nostro; Fratri Regis; Fratri nostro; Avunculo Regis; Avun∣culo nostro; Nepoti nostro; Consanguineo nostro, &c. and the other Earls and Temporal Lords, Dilecto et fideli nostro, only; and that those of the bloud royal are for the most part, though not alwayes, first entred in the Rolls of summons. 81y. That when a Duke or Earl of England was made a real or titular King of any forein Realm, his Royal ti∣tle
was alwayes mentioned in the writ: Thus Iohn Duke of Lancaster King of Castell and Leon, in all writs of summons to him after his forein Kingship., was sti∣led, Carssimo filio suo Iohanni Regi Castellae et Lgionis Duci Lancastriae, in the summons of 46. 49, 50 . And Carissimo Avunculo suo Iohanni Regi Castell & Le∣gionis, Duci Lancastriae: in all the writs issued to him under King Richrd the 2d. So if any Earl or Baron of England, was created a Duke or Earl in Scotland, France, or Ireland, his forein Titles were inserted in∣to the writs, as the Title of Cardinal, or Patriarch of Ie∣rusalem was inserted into the English Bishops writs created Cardinls and Patriarchs beyond the Seas. Thus Gilbrt de Vinf. an l an English Baron being made Earl of Anegos, and David de Stràbolgi, Earl of A∣thol in Scotland, Leonell the Kings son Earl of Vlster in Ireland; the black Prince made Prince of Aquitain as well as of Wales, and Iohn Duke of Lancaster, Duke of Aquitan, under Richard the 2d. the were thereup∣on stiledSee p. 2 12, 213. Comiti Anegos, Comiti Athol, Comiti Vlton, Principi Aquitani & Walliae, Duci Aquitaniae & Lan∣castriae, in the writs directed to them: and if these their forein Titles were omitted in any Writs against them at the Common Law, the writs would abate, be∣cause they were English Peers, and had these Titles in∣serted into their writs of Summons to Parliament, where they sate in their Princes, Dukes and Earls Robes, amongst the rest of the Dukes and Earls. But if any forein Duke, Earl, Lord, or Baron of France, Ireland, Spain or Germany, who was no English Ba∣ron, Lord or Peer of Parliament, was sued in the Kings Court by writ, he might be stiled only a Knight or Es∣quire, and needed not to be sued by the Title of Duke, Earl, Lord or Baron; because he was no Duke, Earl, Lord orSee my Argu∣ment of the case of the Lord Mag∣wire. Baron at all in England; but only in his own Country, and should be tried upon an Indictment of Trea∣son, Murder or Felony, only by an ordinary Iury, and not by English Peers. By which differences the Books
of 39 E. 3. 3. Brooks Nosme de dignity, 9. 59. & Parl. 4. 11 E. 3. Fizh. Brief. 473. 8 R. 2. Fitzh. Proces. 224. 20 E. 4. 6. Brooks Nosme de Dignity. 49. Dyer, 60. b. Cook 7▪ rep. Calvins case, f. 15, 16. 9. rep. nchers case, f. 117. 3. Instit. p. 20. & 4. Instit. p. 47. are fully reconciled. 9. That if any Earl, Baron or Lord was Marshal, Consta∣ble, Steward, Admiral, Chancellor, Treasurer, or other great Officer of England, or Warden of the Cinque ports; his Title of Office was commonly inserted into the writs of Summons. As, Rogero, or Thomae Comiti Naff. & Marescallo Angliae, Avunculo suo carissimo, Thomae de Wodestoke Constaulario Augliae, Willo de Clnton co∣miti Haigdon, Constabulario Castri Dover. et Custodi quinque Portuum suorum, &c. What precedency these Officers had of other Earls, Lords and Barons, in Par∣liament, you may read in the Statute of 31 H. 8. c. 10. and Mr. Sldens Titles of Honor. p. 901, &c. 10. That in the lists of the Dukes, Earls, Lords, and Ba∣rons names there is no certain order observed accor∣ding to their Antiquity or Precedency, but in some Rolls one is first entred, in other Rolls others listed before them, and they again postponed in succeeding lists: Yt generally for the most part, hough not always, the Prince of Wales is first entred before the rest; the Dukes before the Earls; the Earls & Vicounts before the Lords and Barons; and they before the Iudges or Kings Counsil; and the Earl who was Marshal of England, before the other Earls; the Clerks entring their names promiscuously for the most part as the Writs came to their hands. Some times the first Writs entred at large issued to one Earl, Lord, Duke, Baron, other times the Writs go to others, without observing the Laws of Heraldry, though in the reing of Edward the 3d. and afterwards, their names are more methodically entred then before that time; oft times in the selfsame order, or with some small variations and transpositions. So as the Precedency of the Earls or Barons, and their pla∣ces
of sitting in the Parliament House cannot be cer∣tainly collected from, or defined by the entry of their Writs of Summons or liting in the Eodem modo manda∣tum est, or Consimiles litrae; but by custom, and the Sta∣tute of 31 H. 8. cap. 10. 11ly. That in some Clause Rolls there is one Writ to the Archbishop, or some other Bishop first entred at large, and another Writ at large, to some one Earl or temporal Lord; with an Eodem modo, or Consimiles li∣terae, only entred to the rest there listed: but most u∣sually, there is only but one Writ entred at large to one of the Archbishops, or some other Bishops; and then a short recital of some part of that Writ to one tempo∣ral Lord, with an &c. Teste ut supra, and the like, for brevity sake: and an Eodem modo, and Consimiles literae; or some short entries of some special clauses of the Writ, to all the other temporal Lords. 12ly. That in the Eodem modo, and Consimiles Lite∣rae; first the Bishops, Abbots, Priors and spiritual Lords, then the Dukes, Earls, Temporal Lords, Barons, Justices, Kings Counsils names, are entred successively one af∣ter another, after the first Writ, which is singly en∣tred in sundry Rolls, without any Writ or part of Writ interposed between their names; as if they had all the selfsame Writs in terminis issued to them. But in most Rolls, there is either a distinct Writ, or part of Writ; or an Eodem modo mandatum est &c. mutatis mutandis; interposed between the names of the Bi∣shops, Abbots, Priors, and Earls and Lay Lords; & like∣wise between the Temporal Lords, and the Kings Counsil and Justices summoned to Parliaments: with the usual clauses wherin the writs differ one frō another inserted into them; which different clauses no doubt were in most of the Writs issued to them in those Rolls where they are all entred promiscuously together in the Eodem modo, and Consimiles Literae; without any Writ or part of a Writ, or mtatis mutandis interposed be∣tween thē, omitted only for brevity sake by the Clerks;
who ingrossed the Rolls. 13ly. That the English Barons, who were titlary Earls in Scotland under the Kings Jurisdiction and Alle∣gance were alwayes summoned and lied among the Earls of England in the Rolls of Summons, not amongst the English Lords aud Barons who were no Earls: wit∣nesse Gilbert, and Robert de Vmfranil, Earls of Anegos in Scotland, and David de Stabolgi, Earl of Athol, al∣wayes summoned to the Parliaments by the Titles of these their Scotish Earldms, and lited amongst the En¦lish Earls, not Barons, in the Clause Rolls. Gilbert de Vmfranil being summoned by Writ as Earl of Angos, to no lesse than 12. Robert de Vmfranil to 63. Gilbert Vmfranl his Son, to 50. English Parliaments, & David de Sirabolgi to 21. Parliaments and great Councils, as Earl of Athol (as the ensuing Table will inform you) amongst the other Earls of England: but no other Earls of Scotland besides these two. The reason whereof was only this, because they were English Barons, and held lands by Barony in England, though the Titles of their Earldoms were not English but Scotish, yt they were under the Kings Subjection Allegiance; and their Re∣sidence when thus summoned, was upon their Ba∣ronies in England. That Gilbert de Vmfranil, was an English Baron and Lord of Parliament, before he be∣came Earl of Anegos, is clear by the Clause Rolls of 23 E. 1. d. 4. 9. & 24 E. 1. d. 7.See Cooks 4. Insti. p. 47. wherein he was summo∣ned to 3. Parliaments amongst the English Lords and Barons; but then being Earl of Anegos by discent from his Mother, he, was in Cl. 25 E. 1. d. 25. & sundry Parlia∣ments after, alwayes summoned by the name of Earl of Anegos, and listed amongst the Earls of England, as the ensuing Table demonstrates. So Rob. de Umfranil, summo∣ned to Parliament amongst the English Barons, Claus. 2. E. 2. d. 20. was in Claus. 2. E. 2. d. 11. and all suc∣ceeding Parliaments under Edward the 2. & 3. summo∣ned to Parliament as Earl of Anegos among the Earls of England, with whom he is still entred in the Rolls.
The like may be said of David de Straolgi, who though originally a Scotish Earl, was yet afterwards made an English Lord by the King, and held Lnds in England by Barony, and upon that account summoned to sun∣dry Parliaments and great Councils by e Title of Earl of Athol, and registred amongst the English Earls in the Clause Rols. Which I thought meet to touch, both to rectifie and clear that dobe mistake in the Antiquity of the Parliaments of England (newly printed) p. 46. That Peers of Scotland were wont to come and be summoned to the Parliament. And that the Peers of Scot∣land came to the Parliament for Iustice: which the Author indeavours to prove by 39 F. 3. 35. in a writ of Rvshment de Gard, against Gilbert Vmfravi; who demanded judg∣mnt of the writ, because he was Earl of Anguish, and not so named in the writ, &c. When as he was not sum∣moned to our Parliament as a Peer of Scoland, but on∣ly as an English Baron dignified with the Title of a Sco∣tlsh Earldome; and came not to our English Parliament for Iustice; but was summoned to it by Spel writs, as a Peer and Member thereof; as the Clause Rols resolve, and the very year Book likewise. Of which more here∣after in its proper place. 14ly. That no Forein Prelates, Earls, Nobles, Ba∣rons of Ireland, Scotland or France were formerly sum∣moned to the Parliaments of England, as proer Mem∣bers thereof or Lords of Parliament, to make Laws or impose Taxes, or give Iudgment, or Counsel in any matters relating to England, but only our English Pre∣lates, Earls, Lords and Barons; as is most apparent by these special clauses in the writs of Summons. Ibidem Vobiscum, ac cum caeteris Praelatis, Magnatibus, & Proceribus DICTIREGNI ANGLIAE (never Scotiae Franciae, or Hiberniae in any writs whatsoever) collo∣quium habere volumus & tractatum. And Dictis die et loco personater intersitis Nobiscum, & cum caeteris Praelatis, Magnatibus et Proceribus, PRAE∣DICTIS (or DICTI REGNI NOSTRI) super di∣cs
negots tractari, verumque consilium im∣pensui. And ad consentiendum his quae unc ibidem de Communi consilio DICTI (or EJUSDEM) REGNI NOSTRI, CONTIGERIT ORDINARI: And by this usual clause in the Patents of creation of all our English Earls, Lords, and Barons of Parliament; Seldens Titles of Ho∣nor. p, 663. 665. 747▪ 748▪ 763. 751. 757. My Plea for the Lords, p. 40. Volentes & concedentes pro Nobis haeredibus & successoribus nostris, quod praefatus, A. Comes B. or C. Baro, or Dominus, D. et haeredes sui masculi, et eorum quilibet habeat, teneat & possideat sedem & locum in PARLIAMENTIS nostris, haeredum & luccessorum nostrorum infra REGNUM NOSTRUM ANGLIAE inter ALIOS COMITES, & BARONES EJUSDEM REGNI, ut COMES, or BARO: compared with theSeldens Titles of Ho∣nor, p. 840. 841, 848. 849, My Argu∣ment of the case of the Lord Mag∣wire, p. 42. Patents of creation of Irish and Scotish Earls, Lords Barons, & Boroughs, which constitute them only Earls, Lords, Barons or Boroughs; in terra & Dominio nostro Hiberniae, or Scotiae; or infra Regnum nostrum Sco∣tiae, or Hiberuiae; and Vnum Comitem, Dominum vel Baronem omnium & singulorum Parliamentorum & Magnorum Conciliorum nostrorum, &c. in terra (or Regno) nostro HIBERNIAE, or SCOTIAE, e∣nendorum; and grant them only, sedem et locum, in Parliamentis nostris HIBERNIAE, or SCOTIAE, in∣ter alios Comites, Dominos & Barones ejusdem Regni; As the Kings Patents toSir Hen. Ho∣berts Reports p. 14. 15. Burroughs in Irel. gave them plenā potestatē & authoritatē eligendi, mit∣tendi & retornendi duos discretos & idoneos viros, ad inser∣viendum & attendendum in quolibt Parliamento in dicto regno nostro Hiberniae (not Angliae) in posterum tenend. But no Place or Voyce at all to their Peers or Burges∣ses in the Parliaments of England, amongst the Earls, Lords or Barons of England; who have no seat, Place, or Voyce at all in the Parliaments of Scotland or Ireland, as they are English Peers (though subordinat Kingdoms to England.) Which I shall farther clear in some ensuing Sections. 15ly. That there is a great diversity between writs of Summons to Parliaments, or General Parliamenta∣ry
Councils; and to particular Councils upon emergent occasions which are not properly Parliaments; all the Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Earls, Lords, Barons, together with the Judges and Kings Counsil, Citizens, Burges∣ses of Parliament, and Barons of the Cique ports, being usually summoned to the one; but some few Spi∣ritual and Temporal Lords only, without any Judges, Assistants, Knights, Citizens Burgesses or Barons of the Cinque-ports, or some few of them only, and divers who were no usual Lords, Barons of Parliament (as in 32 E. 3. d. 14. and other Rolls) summoned to the other, as the Clause Rolls atest. Which difference some ignorant Antiquaries not observing, have confoun∣ded them both together as one and the same, and mis∣taken some writs of Summons only to a Council, or to a conference with the King & his Privy Counsil upon extra∣ordinary dangers & occasions, for writs of Summons to a Parliament. Such amongst other forecited writs, are these ofHere, p. 187, to 192. 35 E. 3. dors. 36. & 36. E. 3. d. 42. Where all those Earls, Lords, Abbots, Peers, Great men, Gen∣tlemen, Countees, Ladies and Dowagers who had Lands in Ireland (and none else but they alone) were summoned, the Temporal Lords and great men, to ap∣pear in proper Person, the Clergymen, Countesses, La∣dies and Dowagers, to send one or more Proxies or De∣puties in whom they specially confided, to the King and his Counsil at Westminster (not to the Parliament) there to confer and treat with them concerning the relief of Ireland, and their passage to, or sending men of Arms speedily into Ireland, to resist, suppress the Irish Rebels, who much infested, wasted, and endangered it; as the whole frame and contents of the writs themselves, and the marginal Notes in the Rolls, De Consillo Sum∣monito: De Veniendo ad Consilium, &c. resolve beyond all contradiction. Which Ioseph Holland and others not considering, in their Antiquity of the Parliaments of England, p. 23. 88. have published these two grosse mistakes together, viz. That in the time of Edward the
th, ther was a writ then in use; De admittendo ide dignas ad colloquium, &c. It is recorded amongst the Summons of Parliament, 35 E. 3. that there is a writ, De admittendo fide dignos ad Colloquium. And amongst the Earls and Barons there is retorned. Mry Countesse de Norff: Alianoxa Countesse de Ormond▪ Philippa Coun∣tesse de March, Agnes Countesse de Pembroke, and Katherine Countesse of Athol. When as these Coun∣tesses were not recorded nor retorned amongst the Earls and Barons in any Summons to Parliament, nor were they required to send or come to any Parliament or Parliamentary Council; nor is thre any writ, in this or any other Roll; De admittendo fide dignas, or dignos ad Colloquium; as they confidently affirme. But they were only summoned by writ to send men of Arms into Ireland with other Lords, Gentlemen, Clergymen, who had Lands and Possessions there, as these Countesses all had, for to defend and recover the same from the Irish Enemies; and commanded;See here p. 88, 189, 190, 191. Ali∣quos vel aliquem de quibus, vel de quo specialiter confidi∣tis MITTATIS apud Westm. &c. Which MITTA∣TIS these Pseudo-Antiquaries, have metamorphosed into a writ, DE ADMITTENDO fide dignas ad Collo∣quium. By which grosse perversion they have eviden∣ced themselves and their Treatises, not to be fide dig∣ni, in these and other particulars relaing to our Par∣liaments, wherewith they have deceived both them∣selves and others, who adore these their Oversights for Oracles. 16ly. That when any of the Earls, Lords or Nobles were imployed in the Wars in France, Scotland, Ire∣land, or any other service for the King in forein parts, they were omitted out of the lists of Summons to Par∣liaments, and Parliamentary Councils; and if any writs in such cases issued to them they were usually re∣voked & cancelled, and entries thereof made upon the Clause Rolls: This is evident by Claus. 11 E. 3. 25. dors. 11. where I find these 2. Presidents in the lists
of the Lords and Barons names. Thomae Wake de Lydett, VACAT QUIA IN OBSEQUIO REGIS. Henry de Grey, VACAT, QUIA IN OBSEQUIO RE∣GIS. After which, at the end of all the writs of Summons to the Sheriffs, Warden of the Cinque∣ports, and Kings Counsel, follows this entry of writs to some Earls, Lords and Gentlemen, besides those first mentioned after the Spiritual Lords then summo∣ned. Rex dilecto & fideli suo Willo. de Bohun, Com. Nor∣thamton, salutem; Quia tam super urgentissimis, &c. ut supra in brevi directo Hent. Com. Lncastr. usque in finem. Eodem modo mandatum est subscriptis, viz. Thomae Com. Norffer Mariscallo Angliae, Avunculo Regis, Wil∣lielmo de Monteacuto Comit Sarum, Rico. Comiti A∣rundell, Hugoni de Audle Comiti Gloucestr. Roberto de Ufford Comiti Suff. Gilberto de Umfravill, Comiti de Anegos, Ranulpho de Dacre, Bartho, de Burghersh, Johanni de Segrave, Egidio de Badlesmere, Rado. de Nevill, Johanni de Tybtofte, Rico. Talebot, Henr. de Percey, Rado de Stafford, Thomae de Berkele, Anto∣nio de Lucy. Et Memorand. quod Brevia istis Magnatibus immediate praescriptis directa, de essendo ad PARLIAMENTUM praedictum, remissa fuerunt Cancellar; ET PRO EO QVOD QVIDAM EX EIS IN PARTIBUS SCOTIAE, QUIDAM EX EIS IN PARTIBUS TRANSMARINIS IN OBSEQUIO REGIS EX∣ISTVNT, ADNULAND. So Claus. An. 12 E. 2. pars. 2. dors. 32. There is this entry made in the lists of Summons. Humfrido de Bohun Comiti Hereford, VACAT QUIA IN OBSE∣QUIO REGIS. And Cl. 2. R. 2. d. 29. Iohi de Nevill de Raby (in partibus Aquitan.) If any Baron or Lords name were in the list of Sum∣mons, and he not actually summoned; there was then a Vacat entred in the Roll; as in Claus. 11. E. 3. p. 1. dors. 8. Iohi de Sutton de Holdernesse (VACAT
QUIA NON FUIT SUMMONITUS) And if he died before the Parliament, then his death was entred upon the Roll, as Claus, 9. E. 3. d. 28. Iohi de Clynton, MORTUUS EST. 17ly. That when any Temporal Lords or Prelates had writs of Summons to Parliament issued to them in times of warr and danger, whilst they were imployed in the Warrs against the Scots in the North, or parts of Scotland; if they could not desert the Warrs and at∣tend personally in Parliament without danger and pre∣judice to the Publike, they had then writs of coun∣termand sent them, not to recede from the parts where they were in Service, notwithstanding their Sum∣mons to Parliament. For which I find this memora∣ble president in Claus. 30 E. 1. d. 7. De non recedendo à partibus Scotiae, Rex dilecto & sideli suo Iohanni Segrave salutem. Li∣cet uper vobis mandavimus quod omnibus aliis prae∣termissis ad Parliamentum quod apud London in prox. festo Sancti Michaelis duximus Statend. PERSONA∣LITER INTERSITIS, NOLUMUS TAMEN quod praetextu mandati praedicti & partibus Scotiae,, seu Marchiae ejus, in quibus estis in obsequio nostro consti∣tuti ALIQUALITER RECEDATIS. T. Rege apud Losele XI die Septembris. Consimiles literae diriguntur Alexandro Balliolo, Ed∣mundo de Hastinges, Willo de Lu, Seniori, Walte∣ro de Huntercumbe. Eodem modo mandatum est Roberto de Clifford, quod, a partibus in quibus nunc est NULLATENUS RE∣CEDATIS. To which I shall subjoyn this later▪ President of Cl. 6. E. 2. d. 12. Rex dilecto & fideli suo Waltero de Fau∣conberg, salutem. Licet nuper vobis mandaverimus, quod omnibus aliis praetermissis essetis ad Nos tertia Dominica Quadragesimae prox. futur. apud Westm. ibi∣dem Nobiscum & cum Magnatibus & Proceribs reg∣ni nostri super diversis negotiis, Nos et statum ejus∣dem
Regni tangenibs tractaturi vetrumque consili∣um impensuri, pro securiori tamen custodia et majori tuitione partium vestrarum contra Scotos inimicos et Rebelles nostros, vobis mandamus, quod a partibus praedictis sine mandato nostro vos nullatenus transfera∣tis. Teste Rege apud Westm. 20 die Febr. Eodem modo mandatum est subscriptis, viz. Ranul∣pho de Nevill, Willo de Vavasour, Willo de Ros de Hamlake, Marmiduco de Twenge, Nicho. de Meivill, Ade de Everingham, Thomae de Multon de Egremond, Thomae de Multon de Gillesland, Ingelramo de Gynes. As for the Bishops in such cases, they were by other special writs authorized to make Proctors to supply their places; though summoned by the original writs to appear personally in Parliament, and not by Proxies; as in Claus. 20 E. 3. pars 2. d. 22. and Claus. 46 E. 6. d. 11. forecited p. 51. 52. 58. 18ly. That if the King either Summoned or proro∣gued a Parliament to a certain day and place by his writs, commanding the Earls, Lords and other great men personally to appear in Parliament at that day and place; and then by reason of other emergent occasions could not meet them, or hold the Parliament at the time and place prefixed, he then usually discharged them all from their attendance by a subsequent wrir; Of which we have this pregnant example, Claus. 5. E. 2. d. 17. Rex dilecto consanguineo & fideli suo Thomae Comiti Lancast. salutem. Licet nuper Vobiscum volentes ac cum Praelatis caeterisque Magnatibus Regni nostri supra Negotiis Nos & statum, dicti Regni tangentibus habe∣re Colloquium & Tractatum, ordinassemus Parliamen∣tum nostrum tenere apud Westm. prima Dominica Quadragesimae prox, fuur, Vobisque mandassemus, quod dictis die & loco PERSONALITER INTER∣ESSETIS, ad tractand. Nobiscum, & cum Praelatis & Magnatibus praedictis super negotiis antedictis,
Quia tamen PROPTER ALIQUAS CAUSAS ad lo∣cum praedictum dicto die ACCEDERE NON VA∣LEMUS, Vobis significamus, QUOD AD DIC∣TOS DIEM ET LOCUM PRAEMISSA OCCASIO∣NE VOS ACCEDERE NON OPORTET. Teste Rege apud Eborum, 20. die January. Consimiles Literae dirigunter subscriptis: viz. to 6. Earls more, and the rest of the Lords summoned with them to appear personally at this Parliament. 19ly. That sometimes the Temporal Lords as well as Prelates, were more strictly and peremptorily requi∣red, and adjured with greater earnestnesse to appear Personally in Parliaments and Parliamentary Coun∣cils, then they were at other seasons, without admit∣ting any excuses or making any Proxies; because through their absence and want of their personal pre∣sence when summoned, the Parliaments were oft ad∣journed to some other time, the businesse of the King and Kingdoms retarded, delayed to the publike prae∣judice, and the Parliaments sometimes dissolved without concluding any thing, the Lords and Com∣mons there assembled refusing to do or grant any thing, when any of the chief Lords and Prelates were ab∣sent, 20. That no Spiritual or Temporal Lords could absent themselves from Parliaments when duly sum∣moned thereunto without a reasonble and just excuse, nor make any Proxies or Proctors to supply their pla∣ces, but when specially authorized and licensed to do it in or by the writs of Summons, or other special writs, much lee than could they be forcibly secluded the House when summoned by writ; as some of late times have most violently been by those who were rai∣sed to defend both their persons and the privileges of Parliament. 21. That armed Guards, Forces, and Troops of Soldiers in or near the Places where Parliaments are assembled and kept, are altogether inconsistent with
the Customs, Vsage, Freedom and Privileges of Par∣liament; prejudicial obstructions to their proceed∣ings, and a great oppression to the people; Vpon which account not only the Earls, Lords and Barons, are sometimes in the writs of Summons specially pro∣hibited under grievous forfitures and penalties to re∣pair to the Parliament,See here, p. 27, 28▪ 177. With men of Arms, and multitudes of people; and to come only cum dicenti co∣mitiva de hominibus bonae discretionis et consilii, et NON CUM HOMINIBUS AD ARMA, sub foris∣factura omnium quae Nobis forisfacere poteritis. Claus. 2 E. 3. m. 31. dorso; But our Kings likewise by speci∣al writs and Proclamations at the very first meeting of their Parliaments usually prohibited all sorts of men, under pain of forfeiing all they might forfeit, not to wear any privy Coat of plate, or go Armed, or carry any Warlike weapons within any City or Suburbs thereof where their Parliaments sae, du∣ring all the time of their Session, that so the Parlia∣ments and Members might not be thereby distur∣bed, interrupted, over awed or terrified; as those who please may read at large in the Statute of 7 E. 1. Rastals Abridgment, Armour 1. 1 E. 2. c. 3. 6 E. 3. rot. Parl. n. 3. Parl. 2. n. 2. Parl. 3. at York. n. 3. 415. . 3 E. 3. Parl. 1. n. 2. Parl. 2. n. 2. 14 E. 3. n. 2. 15 E. 3. n. 2. 17 E. 3. n. 3. 18 E. 3 n. 2. 20. E. 3. n. 1. 2 E. 3. n. 1. 25 E. 3. Parl. 1. n. 58. Parl. 2. n. 4. and Cook 4. Instit. p. 14. Such a Proclamation as this issued before the Parliament held at New Sarum, An. 2. E. 3. as is e∣vident by the Articles of improachmnt against Roger Mortymer Earl of March, in the Parliament of 4E. 3. Rot. Parl. n. 1, 2. and 28 E. 3. n. 9, 10 Who amongst othe. Articles was impeached condemned and executed as a Traytor, for commingHenry de Knyghton de Eventibus Anglae, l. 3. c. 16. col. 2557, &c. My Plea for the Lords, p. 278, 279, 28. armed to the Parliamen at Salsbury, against the Kings Proclamation; with di∣vers of his confederates, whereby sundry of the No∣bles were so terrified, that they came not to the Parliament, and the Bishops there assebled had the
dores of the house wherein they sate in Counsel broke open upon them by armed men, and were there threatned to lose both life and members if they should be so hardy to say or do any thing against his will and ordinances; whereby he procured himself to be made Earl of March; caused the King to give him many Lands and Tenements, to the disinherison of his Crown; and excited him to ride armed against the Earl of Lancaster and other Peers of the Realm to Winchester, as they were comming towards the King to the said Parliament at Salisbury; whereupon they were inforced to reire to their own Countries to eschue the perils that might happen; which much greived them that they could not speak with their king, not counsel him as they ought. After which the Parliament of 5 R. 2. as appears by n. 1. was in∣terrupted and adjourned because the Duke of Lancast∣er, and Earl of Northumberland being at variance, re∣sorted to i with multitudes of men armed in warlike manner, of which great complaint was made; and the Parliament deferred till the King, his Counsil and o∣ther Lords had examined and reconciled the differen∣ces between them, and removed their forces. Fit pre∣sidents for future times to imitate, after so many out∣rages and forcible assaults upon the Parliament and their Members by Souldiers and others of late times, beyond all presedents in former ages, to the totall dis∣solution both of our Parliaments and their privileges, unlesse carefully regained, reestablished by strictest Laws, exemplary Punishments, and severest pro∣hibitions of all armed forces in or near unto the places where future Parliaments shall assemble; who by the just judgment of God upon the former Parliament, (which against the Custom, Freedom and Privilege of Parlia∣ments making use of armed mercenary Guards and Soldiers for their defence, hath been unexpectedly af∣fronted, assaulted, forced, dissipated, yea destroyed by them, and made their basest Slaves and Captives)
may learn to avoid all such extravagances and over∣sights in succeeding ages. 22. It is observable and most evident by comparing the births of our Princes ofWalsinghm Grafon, Speed, Holin∣shed, Daniel Baker, How Martin. Wales and Earls of Chester recorded in our Histories, wih the dates of their first wits of Summons to Parliamnt; that Ed∣ward of Carnarvan, the first Prince of Wales was first sum¦moned by writ to Parliament when he was but 19. years old; that Edward the eldest Son of King Edward the second, as Earl of Chestēr, was first summoned by writ to Parliament when he was scarce 9. years of age; that Edward the black Prince of Wales, was summoned when he was not 20. and Richard his Son Prince of Wales called by writ to Parliament when he was not full 9. years old: The Kings eldest and youngest ons being usually summoned to Parliaments during their Minorities, (though others areSee my Mi∣nors no sena∣tors. seldom summoned till their full age) even as King Henry the 6. rode trium∣phantly to,Speed Chro∣nicle, p. 828. 829. and sate in State in Parliament in his Queen-mothers lap, before he was full 12. months old. 23. I observe, that in Claus. 27 E. 1. d. 6. 16. Ado∣marus de Valencia, was summoned and listed among the Earls, without the Title of Earl annexed to his name, being then, as I conceive, Earl of Pmbroc, and so stiled in succeeding Summons: And in Claus. 50 E. 3. pars. 2. d.(See the Ta∣ble of Earls, ensuing,) 6. Thomas de Wodestoke Constabularius Angliae, and Henry de Percy Marescallus Angliae, are listed amongst the Earls without any Title of Earls; yet in the next writ of Summons, Claus. 1. R. 2. d. 31. 37. Thomas de Wodestoke, is stiled Com▪ de Buck: et Constab. Angliae: and Henry de Percy, Com. Northumb. in the list of the Earls; and therefore I apprehend they were Earls in 50 E. 3. (as our Histories & Heraulds report them) though not so stiled n-the Roll of Summons. 24. That the names of the Kings Counsil, Justices, and other Officers, ummoned to Parliaments only as Assistants, are sometimes inserted into the Eodem mo∣do
mandatum est; and Confimiles literae next after the the Lords and Barons name without any space, line or distinction between them, sometimes with a lines di∣stance, or small space only from them; sometimes they are distinguished from the Lords and Barons by the words Milites, or Clricis Consilii, & Istiar▪ added in the Margin and a small space between them, as in Claus. 5 E. 2. d. 17. Cl. 2 E. 1. and sometimes they are inexmixed with the Lords and Barons names, and listed amongst them, as in Claus. 8 E. 2. d. 35. Roger de Brabazon and 7 others of them are named amongsth Lords and Barons, and so in Claus. 3 E. 3. d. 19. Claus.  E. 3. p. 2. d. 7. In the Clause Roll of 25 E. 1. d. 25. the word Mi∣lites is inserted in the Margin over aainst the Names of the Judges and Kings Counsil, in the Eodem modo, and in Claus. 5 E. 2. d. 17. Clericis consilii, & Iusti∣ciar. is written in the Margin, to distinguish them from the Lords, and Barons, (but in no Rolls besides) with∣out the word Barones superadded to the Barons and Greatmen in the catalogue of their names. 24. That although the word BARO and BARO∣NES in the Clause Rolls of King Iohn, Henry the 3d Edward 1. 2. & Histories,See My plea for the Lords, p. 60. to 303. 506. 507. Magna Char∣ta Preface, c. 2. 14. 31. 37. Chaa Fore∣stae, c. 4. 11. 26. 3 H. 3. c. 10. 3 E. 1. Pologue. Great Charters and Statutes in their reigns be frequently used, applied to all the Temporal Lords of Parliament, yet in all the Clause Rolls and Writs of Summons I have seen, no particular persons amongst them are summoned by the Title of Barons, but only the Barons of Greystok, Graystoke, or Craystoke, and the Barons of Stafford: In the Clause Rolls of Ed. 1, & 3, so of Rich. 2. H. 4. 5. and 6. writs are frequently issued Iohanni BARONI de Greystoke, Willo. BARONI de Greystoke, Rado. BARONI de Greystoke, as they are siled in the Eodem modo; yet in other writs, lists, rolls in the Eodem modo, the direction to these very Barons, is many times Iohanni de Craystoke, or Greystoke, Willo. & Rado. de Greystoke, without the ad∣dition of BARONI annexed to them; which Title is
totally omitted in all the Ros of Edw. the 4th. as the ensuing Alphabetical and Chronological Table, with my Table to the Exact Abridgement of the Records in the Tow∣er, will more particularly inform you. So in the Rolls of King E. 1. & 3. (mentioned in the following Table) the directions in sundry writs in the odm modo are, Edmundo, & Rado. BARONI de Stafford; and in o∣ther writs to the one of them, he is stiled only Rado. de Stafford, BARONI being omitted in his Ti∣tle, BARO, being given o none (for ought I can find) in any lists of summons, but to these 2. Barons of Greystoke and Stafford alone. 25. That in my best observation  the Title or Ad∣dition of MILES or CHIVALER, was not given to any Temporal Lords or Barons in any writs or lists of Summons to Parliament before Claus. 49 E. 3. dorse 4. 6. & 50 E. 3. pars 2. d. 6. wherein summons issued Willielmo le Morle Chivaler, Willielmo de Aldeburgh Chivaler, Iohanni de Well. Chivaler, Hugoni de Dacre Chivaler; after which it grew more common under King Rich. the 2. Henry 4. and 5. when many of the Temporal Lords and Baons had this addition given them sooner or later; those who wanted it in one, two, three, four or more writs of Summons at first, before they were Knighted, receiving it in subsequent writs after they were Knighted. After the beginning of King Henry the 6. and during the reign of Edw. the 4th. there was scarce any Temporal Lord in the lists of sum∣mons but was stiledSee Cokes 4 Instit. p. 5. Chivaler, or Miles, being all genetally Knighted for their greater honour. Of all the Temporal Lords, I find onely one namely Tho. de la Ware, constantly stiled MAGISTER Tho. de la Ware in all writs of summons to him from 23 R. 2. 05 H. 6. as the enuing Table will inform you; the true and only rea∣son whereof I apprehend to be this, that before the temporal Dignity of a Lord or Baron descended to him, See Co  4 Instit. p. 5. he had been a Clergyman in sacred Orders; this Title Magister being alwayes prefixed before the Names of
all of the Kings Council who were Clergy-men, in their summons to Parliament as Assistats to the Lords House, as the writs and Table in the next Section will inform you not to distinguish him from the Lords who were Knights, as some mistake, because none of the other Lords who were not Knights, had this Title Magister given to them, but he alone: Now whereas in the summons of 1 E. 4. Iohn de Audley, isCook, ib. stiled Armiger, I conceive it mistaken by the Clerks for Chlr. he being ever iled Chivaler, not Armiger, in the sum∣mons of 49 H. 6. d. 6. 2 E. 4. d. 3. 6 E. 4. d. 1. and all other summons else; and not one Baron or Lord Armiger, but he alone, though unknighted; Armiger being a petty inferior Title, not suitable to his Lord∣ship or Perage. 26. That the Prince of Wales, Dukes, Earls and Mar∣quesses, are regularly stiled by their Christian names, and Titles or Places of their Dignities, and very rarely (yet now and then) by theirSeldens titles of Ho∣nor, p. 722. Cook 4 Instit. p. p. Sirnames; but the emporal Lords and Barons till the end of King Rich. the 2. his reign, in the writs of summons directed to them, are for the most part stiled by their Christian names and Surnames, or by their Baronies supplying Surnames and sometimes both by their Surnames and Baronies. That the Tile DOMINUS, was not usu∣ally given to any of them, except two, before the reign of King Henry the 6. The first in my observation to whom this itle was given in any writ of summons, was Iohn de Moubray, who in Claus. 16 E. 3. par. 2. d. 13. and so in other succeeding writs (though not in all) is stiled Iohn de Moubray DOMINUS Insulae de Axholm: none else having this Title till afer the reign of Rich. the 2. The next so stiled is in Claus. 11 H. 4. d. 32. where a writ issued Iohanni Talbot DOMINO de Fur∣vall; which though omitted in some summons af∣ter, is again used in the summons to him Cl. 4 H. 5. d. 16. and Cl. 8H. 5. d. 2. Afte which I finde none so stiled till Cl. 23 H. 6. d. 21. where Robert Hungerford
Chivaler, is stiled DOMINUS de Mollins; as he is in Cl. 25 H. 6. d. 24. which gives the title of DOMINUS de Poynings to Hnry Peircy. In Cl. 27 H. 6. d. 24. this title DOMINUS is given to Hungerford, Percy, and 4 more; in Cl. 28 H. 6. d. 26. it is added to 8. In Cl. 29 H. 6. d. 41. to 16. after which it grew more common to them and most others who were summoned; as the ensuing Table will more particularly inform you. But though the temporal Lords in the writs of summons issued to them, were seldom stiled Lords or Barons be∣fore 23 H. 6. yet it is observable, that when any of them are particularly mentioned in theSee Exact Abridgement, p. 18. to 25. 121, to 124. Parliament Rolls, Acts of Parliament, Commissions or Patents, they are usually stiled BARONS or LORDS, as in the Progue of Magna Charta 9 H. 3. &c. 2. 14. 37. Charta de Foresta, c. 11. 20 H. 3. c. 9. 51 H. 3. 1. 10. Dictum de Kenelworth 51 H. 3. 3 E. 1. the Prologue, and c. 23. 13 E. 1. c. 42. 18 E. 1. The Statute of Quo Warrauto, 25 E. 1. c. 6. 34 E. 1. c. 5. The Prologues to the Satutes of E. 3. 14 E. 3. c. 5. and the Commission therupon, Pa. 18 E. 3. p. 2. m. 39. 36 E. 3. c. 6. 20 R. 2. c. 3. and other Acts. How fearfull Christians were to give this Ttle of DOMINUS to the Greatest Emperors, and how unwilling Augustus, and the greatest Christian Emperors were to receive or make use of i, unless with the diminution of DOMNUS and DOMPNUS, not Dominus, you may read in Sir Henry Spelmans Glossary, p. 225, 226. it being a TitlePsal 110. 1. Acts 2. 36, Rom. 14. 8. 9. 1 Cor. 8 5 6 peculiar to God and Christ: & DEI NO MEN, asApologia . 34. Terulli liles it; whereas now it is usurped by, and given to every up∣start of the most ignoble extraction, to bring Nobility it self, and the House of Lords into contempt. 27. That it is the inseparable incommunicable Pre∣rogative, and Supream Royal Jurisdiction of the Kings of England (underivable to, and inusurpable by any other person or persons) by their special Patents, Writs of Creation, Charters and Solemn Invchiures, to make and create Princes of Wales, Dukes, Earls, Marquesses,
Vicounts, Lords, Barons and Peeres of the Ralm, and to give them and their posterities a place, seat, voyce in the Par∣liament and Great Councils of England, the Supreamest Judicature and highest Court of all others, wherein they See my Plea for the Lords, and House of Peers. sit as Iudges, and all others Iudges in the Courts of West∣minster, sit only as their Assistants, not as Associates or their fellow Iudges. This is evident, not only by all writs of summons issued to the Lords, but likewise by the express Resolution of all the Nobles and Parliaments of 50 E. 3. rot. Parl. n. 41. 51 E. 3. rot. Parl. n. 9. 36 E. 3. rot. Parl. n. 94. 40 E. 3. rot. Parl. n. 13. 9 R. 2. rot. Parl. n. 14, 15, 16, 17. 11 R. 2. rot. Parl. n. 44.An Exact Abridgement, p. 123, 124, 145, 103, 310, 325, 326, 332, 363, 370, 391, 392, 405, 550, 576, 578, 659, 702, 703. 13 R. 2. rot. Parl. n. 21, 22, 23, 20 R. 2. rot. Par. n. 30, 31, 32. 21 R. 2. rot. Parl. n. 33. 1 H. 4. rot. Parl. n. 76, 78, 82. 9 H. 4. rot. Parl. n. 25. 4 H. 5. rot. Parl. n. 13. 3 H. 6. (the case of Iohn Earl Marshal,) rot. Parl. n. 11, 12, 13. 11 H. 6. rot. Parl. n. 31. to 36. 33 H. 6. rot. Parl. n. 42, 43, 50. 1, 2 E. 4. rot. Parl. n. 12, 13, 14. 14 E. 4. rot. Parl. n. 24, 25. 17 E. 4. rot. Parl. n. 16. by all Patents, presidents of creating any Princes, Dukes, Earls, Marquesses, Vicounts, Lords, Peers and Barons of Parliament, collected by Mr. Iohn Selden in his Titles of Honor, Book 2. Chap. 5, 6, 7. Mr. William Martyn, Camden, Mills his Catalogue of Honor, Book his Catalogue of Nobility; Augustine Vincent his Dis∣covery of Errours therein, Iames York his Union of Ho∣nour, with others who have written of our English Peers, & Nobility, and Sir Henry Splmas his Glossary, Title Baro, p. 81, 82, 83. & Comes, p. 177, 178. Hence is it, that King Henry the 1. King Iohn, Henry the 3. and Edw. 1. in theirMag. Char∣a, c. 2. Rich. Hagustadien∣sis Historia, col. 310, 311. Mat. Paris, p. 55, 56, 256, 257. Great Charters, and other wriing▪ usually stile them, OMITES & BARONES NOS∣TRI, & MEI; Si quis BARONUM MEORUM vl COMITVM, or DE BARONIBUS MEIS, or NOSTRIS; and Glanvil, l. 8. c. 11. l. 9. c. 1. Huntin∣don Historiarum, l. 5. The Leiger Book of Ramsay, sect. 171. Pope Ncholas in his Epistle to King Ed. the Con∣fessor, with our Lawbooks &Henry de Knighton, de Eventib. Ang. l. 2. c. 4. col. 2354  Hve∣den Annal. pars poerior Mr. Selden ad Eadmerum Notae, p. 171. 199. Historians usually stile
them, BARONES REGIS & REGII, & BARONES VESTRI, BARONES SVI, speaking of the King; Rex de IURE BARONIBUS SUIS; And hence we read Ann. 3. H. 3. Fitzh. Prescription 50. this Custem plead∣ed in Barr of a Nuper obiit; Quod si aliquis BARO DO∣MINI REGIS tenens de Rege obisset, et non haberet hae∣redem nisi filias, et primogenita filiae maritatae sunt in vita patris, Dominus Re daret postnatam filiam quae remaneret in haeredtate Paris alicui Militum suorum, cum tota haere∣ditat Patris sui de qua obiisset seseitus, i a quod aliae filiae nihil recprent versus postnatam filiam in vta sua: et om∣nes Reges habuerunt hanc dignitatem à Conquestu. Yea this is such an incommunicable Prerogve incident to our Kings alone, that neither the Emperour himself, nor Pope could ever create an English Earl, Baron or Lord of Parliament, nor give him any precedency before o∣ther Lords in England; of which we have a late me∣morable president, in (m) Thomas Arundel of Wardour,M. Seldens Titles of Ho∣nor, p. 413, 417, 418, 419. Mr Cambden Elizabetha, An. 1596. p. 126, 127, 128. William Mar∣tins History, p. 809, 810. who being created by the Charter of the Emperour Ro∣dolph the 2. COMES SACRI IMPERII, una cum universa prole atque posteritate legitima mascula et faemi∣nea in infinitum; both for his eminent service in the wars against the Turks and the Nobleness of his. Fami∣ly; yet it was with this special saving in his Paten, Serenissimae tamen Principis et Dominae Elizabethae Reginae Angliae, &c. IURIBUS AC SVPERIORIT ATIBUS SEMPER ILLAESIS ET SALVIS; yet the Queen with the English Barons, would not acknowledg him for an Earl nor Baron in England upon any terms; the Queen resolving; That she would by no means permit any of her sheep, or subjects, to wear the badge, or follow the whistle of any forein Shepherd or Prince, but only her own. In the dbate of which case, it was alleged by the English PeersCamdeni Elizabetha, p. . 127, 128. Soius Principis esse (& NON ALTE∣RIUS CUIUSCUNQUE) suis Subditis dignitates destribuere, juxta illud Valeriani Imperatoris; Ea sit tantum dignitas, quae nobis jubentibus sustinetur. E∣jusmodi titulos honorarios nec à Subditis accipiendos,
nec à Principe admittendos. Principis enim Maje∣stati et Subditorum obsequio multum detrahi, si hono∣res ab exteris accipere permittantur; tacitum enim sidei pactum inter honorantem et honoratum inter∣cedere videri. Hujusmodi titulos illecebras esse oc∣cultas ad animos subditorum à suis principibus ab∣strahendos, &c. That Reginald Mohun (created Earl of Somerset by the Pope in the reign of Henry the 3.) was never acknowledged to be an Earl by the King and Lords; nor Robert Curson created a Baron of the sacred Empire by Maximilian the Emperor, acknowledged to be a Baron in England by King Henry the 8. or his No∣bles, till he created him a Baron himself by his Charter, without giving him a voice in Parliament, (as King Iames created this Thomas Arundel such a Baron by Pa∣tent) ut unbratlem Baronis et Comitis Sacri Imperii titu∣lum maturè obrueret Some say the Queen committed Arundel for receiving this dignity from the Emperor;Page 80 but William Maryn assures us, that Sir Nicholas Clifford and Sir Anth: Shirley, (whom the French King for their Service in the wars, received into the Order of S. Mi∣chael,) were laid in prison at their coming home, char∣ged to resign their robes, and see that their names were blotted out of the French Commentaries. It is the general received opinion of allCassanaeus Catalog Glo∣r aemundi, pars 1. Con∣id 4. pars 5. Confid. 15, 18, 61, 123, 168. pars 7. Consid. 1. pars 8, Consid: 4. Bonus de Curteli, de Nobilitate, pars 3. n. 200, 201. Baldus in Consilio 129. Lucas de Penna, in l. Nemini de Consulibus, l. 12. Andraeas de Isernia, in D. tit. Quae sunt Re∣galia, Calvini Lexicon Juridicum, tit: Baro, Comes, Regalia. Lawyers: Civil, Ca∣non, Common Heraulds, and others who have written of Nobility, that none but Emperors, or Kings, can create Dukes, Earls, Marquesses, Lords, Barons and Peers, and that only within their own Dominions: A Rege enim¦eman it origo Dgitaum Temporalium; A Rege et Prin∣cipe prostut t derivantur tanquam a fonte, om es Magi∣stratus et Dignitates, qia in eo sunt omnes dignitatum the∣sauri recondi. Ad Regem solum spect at creare Comites & Barones; Princeps solus magnas Dignitates confer at. Non
dicur vera Nobilitas, vel Baro ex infudation, nisi Principe; as they all unanimously resolve. Hence Ad cap. Innotuit Extrav: tit. De Electione. Baldus, andDe Singu∣lai Certami∣ne, cap. 32. Seldens titles of Honor, p. 416. Alciat define a Baron to be one, who hath merum, justumqu imperium in aliquo Castro, Oppidione CONCESSIONE PRINCIPIS. In Bh∣mia, Moravia, ilesia, Lusatia, and other Provin∣ces icorporated to it; Summam ptestem obtinet Rex, et non solum NOBILES,  ET BA∣RONES CREAT, quemadmodum in Silesia ad quatuor primarios BARONATUS nmo admittitur nisi vel ab IM∣PERATORE VEL REGE BOHEMIAE BARO CREATUS VERIT, writesNolden: de Statu. Nobil. c. 2. §. 86. Nolden: andHist. l. 6. Seldens titles of Honor, p. 469, 470. Du∣bravius informs as, that one Honora, primum inter BA∣RONES autoritate. Caesaris Henici (H. the 1.) ad¦um PROCERUM gradum proveb batur, quae nunc BA∣RONES a quercu in Bohemia, appellantur.Ad Ru∣bric de Baro∣nibus et coū Officio, sect. 22 & 32, et ad Pragm. 5. num. 63. Franciscus Capiblancus resolves; BARONUM nomine Comites a∣lisque Titularios compraehendi nos dicimus; Nam istud verbum BARO, est scala et caput DIGNITAIV M¦REGALIUM: And thence he inferrs, Dignitas Super Rubic, de Baobus, et eorum Offi∣ciis, Sect: 12, 13, 14, 34. BARONALIS cum sit Dignitas et caput dignitatum, sp. cificè est tribuenda A PRINCIPE, cujus est eas con∣fre, cum ab eo fluant et refluant. In France, such Feiffs as are at the Kings pleasure, and by his license erected into Baronies, are the only Territories that give the Title of a BARON: and the Lord thereof is stiled A BARON per le Conge du Prince, asSeld. p. 47, 473, 57, 539, 540, 541. Mr. Selden proves out of Simon Marion Poydey 9 who addes, That when A BARONY came to the King of France by escheat or otherwise, the Kings git of the BARONY by Charter, made the Patentee A BARON, without other Rules of Creation: After which he proves by theA Tho∣ma Camerio Edi l. 8. tit: 2. Code of King Henry the 4. that the Titles and Ho∣nours of a Duke, Marquess, Earls and BARONY, and their prerogatve, A SOLO REGE TRII POS¦SVNT. And inSelden Titles of Honor, part 2. c. 4. Spain all their great Dignitie
and Titles of Nobility are not only originally derived from the King; but most of them upon every death, are receivedSal. de Mendoza, l. 3. c, 8. 13. Maria∣na de Rebus Hisp. l: 8. c. 2. Selden. p. 575. again FROM THE KING, though not by any Charter of new Creation, yet by the Kings ac∣knowledgement of them, by adding the titular Name to the heir, who by his own name only, without the addition of his Title, signifies to the King the death of his Ancestor. Therefore doubtless, none but our Kings and Queens alone can create Earls, Lords, or Ba∣ron of Parliament in England, there being no one pre∣sidnt in Aniquity, nor in any Emire or Kingdom in the world (that I remember) to the contrary; and this I conceive to be most clearly resolved in and by the Sta∣tues f 27 H. c. 24 & 31 H. 8. c. 10. 28. That one of the first Brons created by Patent, whose Patent is yet exant, wa Ihn de Beauchamp Stewrd of the Houshold to King Rchard the 2. whose Patent runs in this form. Richardus, &c. Sciatis quod pro bonis et gratuitis servitiis quae dilectus et fidelis Mles noster Iohannes de Beauchamp de HOLT,Parents 11 R: 2 parte 1. n: 12. Seldens titles of Ho∣nor, p. 747. Spelmanniin Gloium, p. 80, 81. Senescallus hospitii nostri no∣bis impendit, ac loco per ipsum tempore Coronationis nostrae hucusque impensis, et quem pro Nobis tenere poterit in fururum IN NOSTRIS CONSILIIS & PARLIAMENTIS, necnon pro Nobili et fideli ge∣nere unde dscendi, et pro suis magnisicis sensu et cir∣cumspectione, ipsum Iohannem INUNUM PARIUM A BARONVM REGNI NOSTRI ANGLIAE PRAEFECIMUS. Volentes quod IDEM IOHAN∣NES & HAEREDES MASCULI DE CORPORE SUO EXEUNTES, STATVM BARONIS SVSTI∣NEANT & DOMINI DE BEAUCHAMP, & BARONES DE KIDERMINSTER NUNCUPEN∣TUR. In cujus &c. datum 10 Octobris. I finde this Iohn Beauchamp only once mentioned in the List of Summons in Claus. 11 R. 2. dors 24. dated 27 die Decembris, within 3. moneths of his creation; where he is stiled only Iohanni Beauchamp de Kider∣minster,
but neither Dominus de Beauchamp, nor BA∣RO de Kiderminster: After which in the summons of 27 H. 6. till 12 E. 4. one of his posterity was summo∣ned by the stile of Iohn Beauchamp Miles, DOMINUS DE BEAUCHAMP, without the Title of BARO de Kiderminster, expressed in any of the Rolls. For the various significations of the word Baro, and the several kinds or degrees of Barons, you may at leisure consult Bartholomeus Cassanaeus, his Catalogus Gloriae mundi, pars 8. Consid. 15. Calvini Lexicon Juridicum, tit. Ba∣ro; Sir Henry Spelmans Glossarium, De Baronibus Dia∣tribe; William Somners Glossarium, tit. Baro & Baronia, and Mr. Seldens Titles of Honour, part. 2. ch. 5. sect. 51, 52, ch. 2. sect. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. ch. 1. sect. 21, 22. ch. 4. sect. 6, 7. ch. 5. sect. 5. ch. 6. sect. 2. ch. 7. sect. 2. and the several Authors there quoted. 29. That I finde no president of any person created a Baron by special writ, but only one; whereby Henry Bromfleet Knight and the heir males of his body were created Barons of Vescy, by this writ entred after the Names of the Temporal Lords in the summons of Claus. 27 H. 6. m. 26. dorso. See the Exact Abridg∣ment of the ment of the Records in the Tower, p. p. 637. Mr. Seldens Titles of Honor, p. 541. and My Plea for the Lords, p. 153. Rex dilecto et fidelissimo Henrico Bromseet Mili∣i, salutem. Cum, &c. (ut supra, usque ibi) Tractatum: (et tum sic) Vobis in fide et ligeantia quibus Nobis tene∣mini, &c. ut supra.) nullatenus omittatis. Volumus enim VOS & HAEREDES VESTROS MASCULOS de corpore vestro legitimè exeuntes BARONES DE VES∣CEY EXISTERE. T. ege apud Westm. vicesimo quarto die Januarii; of a different date from that in the other summons, This special writ and clause of crea∣tion had been meerly void and nugatory, had the gene∣ral writ alone ennobled him and his Posteritie, and them Lords and Barons of Parliament. Yet notwihstanding this special writ creating him BARON of Vescy; it is observable, that in all the sub∣sequent writs of summons of 28, 29, 31, 33, 38 H. 6. nd 1, 3, 7 E 4. he is alwaies stiled DOMINUS, but ne∣ver
BARO de VESCY; in any one List or Roll. I find in the Cl. Rolls of 49 H. 3. 23 E. 1. & 6. 7. 8 E. 2. Iohn de Vescy first, and after him William de Vescy sum∣moned amongst other temporal Lords. By which it is evident, that there were Lords and Barons of Vescy (though not so stiled in the Rolls) under these 3. Kings who were summoned to Parliaments; But after the summons of 8 E. 2. there is no mention of them in any Rolls (the Barony escheating for want of issue male, or by attainder, as is probable) till Sir Henry Bromfleet and his issu males were created Barons thereof, by the pre∣mised writ. A sufficient evidence, tht no general writ of summons created any Gentlemen who were summo∣ned to Parliaments, Barons, unless they held Lands by Barony and were Barons by Tenure; there being no Clause or words in the general ordinary writs of Sum∣mons, creating any persons summoned, Earls, Lords or Barons, or giving them these Titles, unless they were Earls, Lords and Barons by Patent or Tenure before their Summons; the writs fliing them onely such as they were when issued to them, and conferring no new Dig∣nity or Title on them; as I have (1) elswhere proved at large. 30. That the most ordinary writs of Summons boh to the Spiritual and Temporal Lords,My Plea for the Lords E∣pistle to the Reader, and p. 127 to 162. Sherifs, and others use only the words Magnates, or Proceres, Magna ibus & Proceribus jointly, or one of them alone without the other, to expresse the Temporal Lords and Nobles, without the word Barones, or Baronibus, which very rarely occur in any writs, except only in the wits to the Sherifs, Caus. 24 E. 3. d. 7. and the writs of Cl. 28 E. 1. d. 3. Claus. 5 E. 3. d. 25. & 12 E. 3. pars 2. d. 32. wherein the word BARONES is mentioned in some of them, and this Clause Cum Comitibus, BARO∣NIBUS, & caeteris Proceribus, or Magnatibus Regni nostri, used in others of them, upon extraordinary occasions; bu in no writs besides to my best remem∣brance; which run usually; Cum Praelatis et caeteris Pro∣ceribus,
or Magnatibus, or Proceribus et Magnatibus di∣cti regni tractaturi, vestrumque Consilium impensuri; without the word BARONIBUS. Which being not so much as once mentioned in these ordinary (but only in 2. or 3. extraordinary) writs, it is most evident to all, that the issuing of such writs to any Knights, Esquires, or Gentlemen, to summon them to Parliaments, can neither create nor constitute them Barons by writ; be∣cause they neither stile them (nor any of the Lords and Nobles, (but those two forementioned) arons, nor use the word BARO at all; but only Proceres, or Mag∣nates. 31. It is evident by all these writs, That the antient temporal Earls, Lords, Barons, are most essential necessa∣ry constitutive Members of our English Parliaments and Great Councils, to which they alwaies were, and ought of right to be summoned; and that no Parlia∣ment may or ought to be summoned or held without them, since both the writs to themselves, as likewise to the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Sherifs of Counties, and Particular Cities and Corporations which are Counties within themselves, the Wardens of the Cinque Ports, Justices and other Assistants, in the bodies and essential parts of them, at least once, twice, or more frequently thus recite; Quia, &c. ordinayimus quoddam Parliamentum apud Wem. &c. CUM PROCERIBUS, or MAGNATIBUS, or MAGNATIBUS ET PROCERIBUS dicti regni nostri tenere, &c. personaliter intersitis Nobiscum, et cum caeteris, or cum PROCERIBUS, MAGNA∣TIBUS, or MAGNATIBUS & PROCERIBUS, prae∣dictis super dictis negoiis tractaturi, vestrum{que} Con∣silium impensuri: Which I having more largely e∣videnced in my Plea for the Lords, and House of Peers, shall here no further insist on. 32. That sometimes the King summoned some par∣ticular Bishops and Lords to treat with him about pub∣like businesses by writ, much like to a summons to
Parliament, without summoning other Lords, for which take this president in lieu of more. Cl. 6 E. 2. d. 5. Rex venerabili in Christo Patri ea∣dem gratia Bathon. et Wellen. Episcopo salutem. Quia pro diversis arduis negotiis Nos et terram Vasconiae tangentibus in brevie ad partes Franciae, concedente Domino, sumus profecturi, ac vobiscum super aliqui∣bus quae Nos tangunt ante passagium nostrū ad partes praedictas habere volumus Colloquium et tractatum. Vobis mandamus in fide et dilectione quibus Nobis tenemini firmiter injungentes, quod omnibus aliis praetermissis sitis ad Nos apud Cant. die Jovis prox. ante festum Ascensionis Domini prox. futur. super praemis∣sis Nobiscum tractaturi. Et hoc sicut Nos et hono∣rem nostrum diligitis et indignationem nostram vita∣re volueritis nullatenus omittatis. T. Rege apud Westm. 3. die Maii. Consim. Breve dirigitur Dom. H. Wynton Episcopo. The like Episcopo Norwich, Wal∣tero de Thorp, Gilberto de Middleton. T. ut supra, to come to the King apud Dover, another day. 33 It is most apparent by these respective Clauses twice recited in all antient and modern writs of sum∣mons to the Spiritual & Temporal Lords, & 4 or 5 times in the writs of Prorogation & Resummons to them (here∣after cited Section 7.) Vobiscum & cum caeteris Praelatis (or) cum Praelatis et caeteris Magnatibus et Proceribus dicti regni habere volumus (or proponimus) Colloquium & Tractatum. Vobis mandamus, &c. quod personaliter ad dictos diem & locum intersitis, Nobiscum et cum caeteris Praelatis, Magnatibus et Proceribus dicti regni super dictis negotiis tractaturi, vestrumque Consilium impensuri: which make not the least mention of their sitting, treating, or consulting with the Knights, Citizens, Burgesses or Commons of the Realm, or of theirs with the Lords. And by the like Clauses in the writs of Summons to the Kings Counsil, and in the writs issued to Sheriffs for electing Knights, Citizens and Burgesses: The first part whereof recites, Quia nos de avisamento et assensu Con∣silii
nostr, &c. quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud W. &c. tneri ordinavimus, et ibidem cum Praelatis, Magnati∣bus & Proceribus dicti regni nostri Colloquiū abere et Tra∣ctatu (without mentioning any Conference or Treaty at all of the Commons jointly with the Prelats, Lords & Great men in the Parliament) who by the writ are to be elected, reurned, summoned, impowred only; Ad faciendum et consentiendum hiis, quae tunc ibidem de Com∣muni Consilio regni nostri, or Praelatorum, Magnatum & Procerum dicti regni nostri (divina favente Clementia, con∣tigerit ordinari. That the Lords and Commons nevr sate and consulted together as one intire House in the Parliaments of England, since their first Summons to our Parliaments, but that the alwaies sate and consul∣ted asunder one from the other: Therfore Sir Edw. Cook his over-confident Assertion (without any real ground of Authority or reason) in his 4. Institutes, p. 4. Certain it is, that at the first both Houses ate together; as it appea∣reth by Modus tenendi Parliamentum (which directly avers the contrary, Sect. 15, 16▪ 17, 27.) and by 5 E. 3. n. 3. other places of the same Roll, and in 6 E. 3. in divers places it appeareth, that the Lords and Commons sate together; (when as both those Parliament Rolls and o∣thers uner Ed. 3. expresly evidence the contrary, as I haveIn my Pre∣face to an Ex∣act Abridge∣ment of the Records of the Tower. elsewhere fully evidenced) must be exploded as Apochryphal, and enumerated amongst his other mi∣stakes. 34 That the Temporal Lords could not impose any Tax, Aid or Subsidy upon the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors and Spiritual Lords or Clergy without or against their particular grants or assents in Convocation, no more than the Spiritual Lords and Clergy could impose any Aids or Taxes upon the Temporal Lords and Com∣mons; as I have formerly evidenced (p. 113. to 120. 148, 149, 153, 154, 155.) For further evidence where∣of I shall hereunto subjoyn this ensuing memorable writ, casuall omitted out of the first Section, pag. 31. where it should have been placed.
Clau. 4 d. 3. m. 3. dorso.Pro Reg de Auxilio ha∣bendo dCle∣ro pro resi∣stentia terrae Franciae, Rex venerabili in Christo Pari S. eadem gratia Archiepiscopo Cantuar. totius Angliae Primati, salutem. A vestra memoria non excidit, ut speramus, qualiter nuper apud Elham in prae∣sentia vestra et aliorum Praelatorum et Procerum de regno nostro, quos tunc ibidem pro magnis et arduis nego iis nostris fecimus congregari, exposita uerunt inter alia, negotia contingentia Nos et Regem Franciae; et post diligentem tractatum inde habitum, tam vobis quam ipsis videbatur, quod pro pace habenda cum ipso Rege, esset omnibus modis et viis quibus posumus ex∣haeredtionis periculo (obviare) insistend. Et si foran idē Rex vias Pacis rationabiles recusart, et ad exhaere∣dationem nostram quoad Ducatum praedictum, et alias terras quas habemus subDominio suo, nieretur, quod ad defensionem nostram contra ipsū cū Dei adjutorio vires nostras opponere deberemu. E ad hoc, tam vos, quam ceri Praelai  Magnates, tunc ibidem existen. prae∣buistis consilium, et promisistis opem et auxilium op∣ponere oportunium. Et suer hoc concordatum existi, quod Pariamentum nostrum apud Wynton, ad diem Do∣minicam prox. ante festum Sancti Gregori Papae prox. prae erium summoneri fcerimus. Verum, quia in eo∣dem Prliamento expositis negotiis supradictis, habita∣que deliberaione super modo et forma defensionis contra potentiam ipsius Regis, si forsan dictas terras no∣stras invadere voluerit, apponendo petitoque sigillatim a qliber Praelto et Magnate, CUIVSMODI SUB∣SIDIUM NOBIS IN EODEM EVENU FACERE VOLEBAT, ac Comitibus et BARONIBUS volun∣tatem in ea parte Nobis benevole exponenibus, dicti Praelati responderu, quod proper absentiam vestram eorum responsum tunc facere nequiverunt, sed IN CONVOCATIONE ea de causa facienda taliter face∣re volebant, quod inde contentari deberemus. Nos igitur ad pericula et dampna quae non solum nobis, sed etiam vobis, et toto regno nostro evenire poterunt, si praefatus Rex Nobis guerram movere voluerit, ut est
dictum, nisi de bona et forti resistenia providau, ∣bitae considerationis inuitum diigentes, attendenes quoque quod ad hoc non solum ex Ligeantiae debio, sed etiam pro tantis et tam ineimabi ibus evitandis periculis, Vos et caeteri Praelati atuqe Clerus regni nostri manus apponere tenemini adjurices; Vobis mandamus rogantes, quainus ad diem Lunae prox. post sestum Sanctorum Tiburt & Valeriani prox futur: con∣venire fac. omnes Praelatos, tam Religiosos, quam ali∣os, totumqu Cerum vestrum Cantuar. Provinciae co∣ram Vobis, eisque dicta negotia et peicula imminen∣tia seriosius exponere studeatis. Inducentes eos modis et viis quibus expedire videiis, quod tantae necessi∣tatis articulo TALE NOBIS SUBSIDIVM FA∣CIANT, pro tantis periculis evitandis, quod per vestrum et ipsorum subventionem, jura et honorem nostri et totius regni nostri conservare, ipsosque et to∣tum populum nostrum ab hostium incrsibus ueri, et protegere valeamus domino nobis assistente. Mitte∣mus autem ad vos ad iem et locum praedictos quosdam de fidelibus nostris, ad praemi sa prosequenda & ieri curanda prout eis tunc ex parte nostra injungetur. Teste Rege apud Winton, 18 die Marcii. Anno Regni nostri quarto. 35. That the Lords in Prliament were the usual See my Plea for the Lods. Here, p. 12, 13. Iudges not only in all Crminal, and Civil Causes and writs of Error, but likewise in all cases of Precedency, and Controversies concrning Peers and Peerage, as is e∣vident not only by the memorble prsidents of 3 H. 6. rot Parl. n. 10. to 14. 27 H. 6. rot. Parl. n. 19. 14 E. 4. rot. Par. n. 25. in Controversies of this Nature there recorded; but by these two presidents of laer times re∣membred by Mr. Cambde. In theCambdeni Elizabetha, p. 144, 145. Parliament of 39 Eliz. Anno 1597. Thomas Baron de la Ware peiioned the Queen to be restored to his ancint place and eat in Parliamen, whose case was this. His father, William, by judgement of Parli∣ment in the reign of Edward the 6. for endeavouring to
poyson his Unkle the Lord de la Ware, to gain his inhe∣ritance and honour; was disabled to enjoy any inheri∣tance or honour that might descend to him by his Un∣kles death: Afterwards in Queen Maries reign he was condemned of High Treason; and not long after intirely restored, as if he had not been condemned. Being disabled by his first Sentence to inherit his Unkles ho∣nor, upon his death, he was by Queen Elizabths special Favour and Letters Patents, created Baron de la Ware de novo, and sat only as a younger Baron then newly crea∣ted, during his life; After his death, his son petitioning, to enjoy the place of his Ancestors in Parliament, the Queen referred the business to the Lords in Parliament; who fin∣ding the judgement against William his Father, to be only personal, and not to bind his children, and that the judgement given against him under Queen Mary, was no obstacle, both because he could not lose that Digni∣ty and Honor by it, which then he had not (his Unkle being then alive) and because he was soon after intirely restored; and for that the anient Dignity and Barony was not extinct by his new Creation, but only suspended during his life, being not vested in him at the time of his late Creation; the Lords thereupon, locum i avi∣tum ADJUDICAVERUNT inter Barones Willough∣beium de Eresby, & Berkleium, in quo ritè locatur. In the same Parliament, it was resolved by the Lords in the case of Thomas Howard Baron of Walden, Knight of the Grter; who being sick and unable to come to the House himself, Baron Scroop, as his Proxy, was brought into the Lords House in his Parliamentary Robes be∣tween two Barons, the chief King of Arms going before him; where presenting his Patent and Creation, when the Lord Keeper of the Great Seal had read it, he was placed below all the rest of the Barons, though he were the younger son of a Duke, whose sons by an Order of Parliament made in the 6. year of King Henry the 8. ought to take place of all Viscounts, and other Barons, which the Lords then resolved, to be intended out of
Prliament, but they ought to sit in the Parliament house only according to the time of their being created Barons; as Mr. Cambden relates out of the Lords Iurnal. 36. That the Prelates, Earls, Barons and Great men of the Realm,See here, p: 12. See my plea for the Lords. are the Proper Iudges of all Causes and Controversies there debaed between the King and his peo∣ple, and are all bound by Oath, as well as the King, to ob∣serve, defend and maintain the rights of the Realm and Crown of England; and that more especially by their Oath of Fealty and Homage, whereby they were tied to the King, and charged to appear when summoned in the writs of summons, as you may read more at large P. 194 to 208. before, in Spelmans Glossarium, Tit. Fidelitas, Homagi∣um, & ligeantia, and inP. 218, 219, 220. Mat. Paris, who records, A. 1209. that K. Iohn caepit HOMAGIA de omnibus homi∣nibus liberè tenentibus et etiam duodecim annorum pueris, quos omnes post FIDELIT ATEM FACTAM in osculum pacis recepit ac demsit. Et Wallenses (quod anteactis tem∣poribus fura inauditum) venientes ad Regem HOMAGIA fecerunt ibidem, licet tam divitibus, quam pauperibus es∣set oerosum. Then passing into Ireland with a great Army, there came to Dublin to meet him, plus quàm viginti Reguli illius regionis, qui omnes timore maximo perter iti HOMAGIUM ILLI ET FIDELITATEM FECERUNT, as theSee Hove∣den, p. 533, 534, 540, 541, 545, 546. highest Obligation of their future Loyalty, fidelity and subjection to him. Upon which Account, Homage is frequently stiled HOMAGIUM LIGEUM, LIGEANTIA & LIGANIA, by Bracton, l. 2. c. 35. f. 79. Glanvil, l. 7. c. 10. Guliclmus Neubrigensis, Hist. l. 2. c. 37. Chron.Here, p. 204 Iohannis Brom∣ton, col. 1005. Fleta, l. 3. c. 16. Britton, ch, 68. De Ho∣mages, Custumar. Vetus Normanniae, c. 43. Cooks 7 Rep. Calvins case, f. 7. 1. Instit. f. 65. a. Hornes Myrrour des Iustices, ch. 35, 36, 37, 38. Spelmans Glossarium, Homagium & Ligeantia; because i most strictly unites and binds the King and his Subjects together, hunc, ad protectionm & justum Regimen; illos, ad reverentiam, tributa et dbitam Subjectionem, t obedntiam, as they
resolve; whereupon the Lords are enjoyned in their writs of summons personlly to appear in Parliaments and Great Councils, in fide & homagio QUIBUS NOBIS TENEMINI, as I formerly observed. 37. That the nmbers of Earls, Barons, Temporal Lords and Great men summoed to our Parliaments and Great Councils, andentred after the Eodem modo, and Consimiles literae in the Rolls and Lits of Summons are oft times very various and different; there be∣ing many more of them summoned to some Parlia∣ments and Great Council than to others, as you may easily discern by comparing their Numbers, which I have here presented you with in the grosse after eve∣ry writ; the Prince of Wales himself, the Duke of Lan∣caster, and other Dukes, and Earls, as well as inferior Lords, Barons and Great men, being left out of some Lists of Summons, one, two, or three Parliaments and Great Councils together, or more; and then inserted again into others; the true reasons whereof I appre∣hend to be these ensuing. 1. Their absence in forein parts or elswhere in the warrs, or pon other special services of the King; in which cases no wrts of Summons issued to them; and if their names were entred in the Lists of the summons, they were usually cancelled or rased out of them; wit∣ness theHere p. 217, 218. forecited entrys, in the Lists o Claus. 11 E. 3. pars 2. dors. 11. And Claus. 12 E. 3. pars 3. dors. 32. 2ly. Their abodeHere p. 185, 186. beyond the Seas upon their own particular occasions, Both which causes frequently happened during the wars with France, Scotland, and Ireland; and whiles our Kings and Nobles had any Lands and Possessions in France, Aquitain, Normandy, Anjow, Picardy, and other parts beyond the Seas. Ma∣ny of the Earls, Lords, Barons, Great men, and our Kings themselves being oft times by reason of Warrs, Treaties, Embassies, and defence of their Inheritances, absent in forein parts, when Parliaments were summo∣ned and held in England by the Custos Regni, or Com∣missioners;
at which times I generally finde there were fewer Earls, Barons and Noblemen summoned to our Parliaments and Great Councils, than in times of Peace, or when our Kings were personally present in England, most of the Earls and Temporal Lords attending on them in person in their wrrs and voyages into forein parts, as on Ed. 3 H. 4 5, & 6. 3ly. The Civil wars hapning now and then between the King, Lords and Barons: upon which occasion some of the Temporal Lords whiles in open hostility and re∣bellion against the King, were now and then (as I con∣jecture) left out of the Lists of Summons, because they could not be conveniently summoned, or would not ap∣pear upon any summons if sent them. 4ly. The attainders, or Outlawries of some Earls, Lords and Barons of High Treason for their wars, In∣surrections, Rebellions, or other Treasons against the King; which disabled themselves and their Posterities to be summoned to Parliaments, till pardoned▪ or re∣stored by the King to thei honours, bloud, Lordships, Baronies and Lnds. 5ly. The Alieation of some Baronies by teure, by sales, gifts, marriages, escheats, or otherwise from one person, name, family to another, whereby the former Barons only by Tenure, were no more summoned after such Alienations, but the new Tenants who purchased or possessed them. 6ly. The deceases of some Earls, Lords and Barons without heirs males of their Bodies, or the Infancy or nonage of their heirs males at the time of their death, who usually had no writs of summons till theirCook 4. In∣stir. p. 1. full age; though the Prince of Wales, and Kings own sons were sometimes summoned to Parliaments during their Mi∣nority, as will appear by comparing the dates of their wris with the time of their births mentioned in our Historians, but few Nobles else were summoned during their Minority, for ought appears,See My Mi∣nors no Sena∣tors. Minors being unfi to be Senators, Counselors, Judges in the Supremest
Council▪ Judicaure of the Realm, as I haveIn my plea for the Lords. elsewhere proved. 7ly. Our Kings Liberty and Prerogative; who though obliged by the anient Laws and customs of the Realm, the Coniutions of Clarindon, the Great Charter of King Iohn, (See my Plea for the Lord, p. 21, 22 35. , p. 217. Ad habendum COMMUNE CONSILIUM REGNI a Auxiliis assidendis et de Scutagiis assidendis, faciemus Archiepiscopos, Episcopos, Abbates, COMITES & MAIORES BARONES REGNI SINGILLATIM PER LITER AS NOSTRAS, &c.) & ex debito Iustitiae (as4 lust. p. 1. Sir Edward Cook informs us,) to summon EVERY ONE OF THE TEMPORAL LORDS BY DESCENT OR CREATION being of full age, by writs to our Parliaments when held; yet they have likewise a Freedom and Prerogative to create New Earls, Lords, Barons by special Writs or Patents, or to Summon what particular Gentlemen and others of Parts and Abilities they please to their Parliaments and Great Councils, to counsel and advise them, as the exi∣gency of their affairs shall require, and they and their Counsel shall think necessary, pro hac vice tantum, or so oft as they deem necessary, without creating them Earls, Lords, or Barons for life or inheritance, by their general writs of Summons, as I haveSee my Plea for the Lords Epistle to the Reader, and p. 147. to 161 elswhere eviden∣ced. 38. That the Eodem mod mandatum est, &c. And Con∣similes literae diriguntur subscriptis, in the Clause Rolls, are for the most part general, without defining the De∣grees and Qualities of the persons underwritten, except Dukes and Earls (specified by their Titles) but few else besides them. And sometimes special: As Eodem modo mandatum est Comitibus et Baronibus subscriptis,Here p. 163, 164, 171, &c. Consi∣mile mandatum habent singuli Comites, BARONES, & MILITES subscripti. Consimiles Literae diriguntur Co∣mibus, BARONIBUS & MILITIBUS SUBSRIP∣TIS. So as it is a difficult matter certainly to define by the large list of names, which of them were real Lords and Barons of Parliament, and which not, except
those only who were usually summoned and listed in the Rolls amongst the Lords and Barons, and their po∣sterity after them; or such who are expresly stiled ei∣ther Barons or Lords in the writs or lists of names, of which I shall give you one instance. In the summons of Claus. 5 E. 2. m. 25. dorso. in the Eod modo man∣datum est Comitibus et Baronibus subscriptis, there is this List of names, with a particular distinction made of their Degrees in the Margin; declaring all in that Catalogue, to be Earls and Barons; and in no Roll else upon my best observation. Guidoni de Bello Campo Comiti Warr. Adamaro de Valen. Comiti Pembr. Hmfrido de Bohun. Comiti Heref. & Essex.Comitibus. Iohanni de Warenna Comiti surr. Edmundo Comiti Arundel. Roberto de Veer Comiti Oxon. Hugoni de Veer Hugoni le Dispenser Iohanni de Hastings. Ioh. de Gifford de Brimes∣feld Willo Martyn Iohanni de Ferrar. Willo. de Mareschall. Roberto de Clifford. Iohanni de Somery. Roberto Fil. Pagan. Iohanni Botetourte. Roberto fil. Walteri. Pagano Tybetot. Bartho. de Badlesere. Iohanni de Segrave: Pho. de Kye. Edmundo Deincourt. Iohanni de Grey. Rico. de Grey. Iohanni la Ware. Willo. de Echingham. Thomae de Furnivall.aronibus. Iohanni de Clavering. Peero Corbet. Rado. Basset de Draiton. Iohanni Dengaine (Engayne) Fulconi Lestrange. Willo. le Latymer. Fulconi fil. Warrini. Roberto de Ufford.Boronibu. Iohanni de Bello Campo de Somerset. Hugoni de Courtenay. Rado. de Gorges. Henr. de Lancastr. Mauricio de Berkele. Thomae Bardolfe Roberto de Monte alt. Iohanni de Moh.
An exact Alphabetical and Chronological Table of all Dukes, Earls, Marquesses, Princes of Wales, and forein Kings summoned to the Great Councils and Parliaments of England, from 49 H. 3. to 23 E. 4. with the numbers of the Parliaments, years, and dorses of the clause Rolls of each King (when there were two or more Parliaments in one year) to which they were summoned, or re∣summoned by Writs of Prorogation; p. in the pa∣rentheis signifying the part, d. the dorse, and the next figures, the membranaes of the dorse or dorses wherein they are recorded. The other dorses you may find in the forecited Writs. A ALbemariae, Thomas Duke of Albemarl, or Au∣marle (Uncle to K. R. d 2.) summoned to Parl. 9 R. 2. Edward Duke thereof, 21, 23, R. 2. & 1 H. 4. Thomas Duke of Clarence, Earl of Albemarle, so stiled in his summons, 1, 2, 3, 4 H. 5. Agos, Angos, Danego, or Anguish, Gilbert de Vm∣fravil, Earl thereof summoned to Parl. An. 25 (d. 25.) 27, (d. 16, 18.) 28 (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 9. 12.) 33, 4, 5, Ed. 1. 1 (d. 11. 19.) Ed. 2. Robert de Earl thereof summoned, 2, 3. 12, (d. 11. 29.) 1, 14, (d. 5. 2.) 15, 16, 17, 18. (d. 5. 21, 23. 34▪) . 2. Gilbt de Umfrvil 6, (d. 4, 9, 19. 36.) 7, 8, 9. (d 8. 28.) 10, (d. 1, 5.) 12, 13, (d. 1. 28.) 14, (d. 23, 33.) 15. 16, (d. 13, 39) 17, 18▪ 20, 21, 22, (d. , 7. .) 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, (d. 7, 8.) 1, (d. 2. 21.) 32, 33, 34, (d. 4. 35.) 36, 37, 38, 39, 42, 43, 44, 46, 47, 49, (d. 4, 6.) 50 E. 3. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (d. 13, 29.) 3,
(d. 13, 29.) 3. (d. 32) R. 2. All these, 3 Umfra∣vils, though the Title of their Earldom was Scotish, were all originally English Barons of Prodhow & Kime in Lancashire, and summoned to Parliament as Ba∣rons, though listed amongst the Earls, by reason of their Scotish Dignity; as you may read at large in Augustin Vincns Discovery of Errors in Mr. Brook his Catalogue of Noblity, p. 10, 11, 12. Mr. Cambden, Scotland, p. 45. and here p. 21 2. which will rectifie the mistake in Brooks Abridgement, Title Parlia∣ment, 84. The last of them dying without Heirs males in 4 R. 2. they ceased to be summoned. Aquitain, Ioh Duke theref, and of Lancaster, summoned by that Title, Cl. 15, 16, 17, 20, 21 R. 2. See Lancaster. Arundel, Rich. Fitz▪ Alan. Earle thereof summoned 23, (d. 9.) 25, (d. 25.) 27, (d. 16, 18,) 28, (d. 3, 17.) E. 1. Edmund Earl of Arundel summoned, 34 E. 1. 1, (d. 8, 9, 11, 19.) 2, (d. 11, 14, 20,) 3, (d. 16, 17.) 4, 5, (d. 11, 17, 25.) 6, (d, 3.) 7, (d. 16, 27.) 8, (d. 19. 35.) 9, (d. 22.) 11, (d. 8, 14.) 12, (d. 11, 29.) 13, (d. 13.) 14, (d. 5, 29.) 15, (d. 16.) 16, (d. 20.) 17, (d. 27.) 18, (d. 5, 15, 21, 34,.) 19, (d. 27.) E. 2. Richard 5 E, 3. (d. 7, 25. pars 2. (d. 7.) 6, (d. 4, 9, 19, 36.) 7, (d. 3.) 8, (d. 18.) 9, (d. 8. 28.) 10, (d. 1, 5.) 11, (p. 1. d. 8. 15. p. 2. d. 40.) 12, (d. 32.) 13, (d. 3. 28.) 14, (d. 33.) 16, (p. 1. d. 39. p. 2. d. 13.) 18, (d. 14.) 21, (p. 1. d. 28. p. 2. d. 9.) 22. (p. 1. d. 32. p. 2. d. 3, 7.) 23, (d. 23.) 24, (d. 3.) 25, (d. 5.) 26, (d. 14.) 27, (d. 12.) 28. (d. 26.) 29, (d. 7, 8.) 31, (d. 2. 21.) 33, (d. 10.) 34, (d. (d. 4. 35,) 36, (d. 16.) 37, (d. 22.) 38, (d. (d. 3.) 39, (d. 2.) 42, (d. 22.) 43, (d. 24.) 44, (d. 1.) 46, (d. 9, 10, 11.) 47 (d. 15.) 50, (d. 6.) Ed. 3. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (d. 13, 29.) 3, (d. 32.) 4, (d. 12.) 5, (d. 40.) 6, (d. 37.) 7, (d. 10, 37.) 8, 9, 10, 11, (d. 13, 24.) 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17,
19, 20 R. 2. homas, 1, 2, 3, 5, (p. 1. d. 28. p. 2. d. 4.  6, 7, 9, 11, 12, 14 H. 4. 1, 2, 3 H. 5. Iohn 4 H. 5. Richard 1, 2. 3 H. 6. William summoned, 20, 23, 25, 27, 28, 29, 31, 33, 38, 49 H. 6. 7, 9, 12, 22, & 23 E. 4. Athol. A. Writ, Iohanni Comiti Athol. Custoditerrae Re∣gis Scotiae ultra mare, to summon others in Scotland, 33 (d. 0.) E 1. David de Strabolgi Earl of Athol, summoned to Parliaments, 15, (d. 16.) 16, (d. 26.) 17, (d. 27.) 18, (d. 15, 21, 34.) 20 (d. 2.) E. 2. 4, (d. 13, 38, 41.) 5, (p. 1. d. 7. 25. p. 2. d. 7.) 6, (d. 4. 9, 19. 36.) 7, (p. 2. d. 3.) 8, (d. 14.) E. 3. David 35, (d. 36) 39, (d. 2.) 42, (d. 22.) 43, (d. 24.) Ed. 3. These Davids de Strabol, were Barons of Mitford in England, though the Title of their Earldom was Sco∣tish, and summoned thus to Parliaments in respect of this English Barony, though listed amongst the Earls, as you may read in Mr. Brook his Catalogue of Nobi∣lity, and Augustin Vincent his Discovery of the Errors therein, p. 36, 37, 38. to whom I refer you, both for their pedigre and death, without heirs males. B BEdford, Ingeram de Couy Earl thereof summoned to Parl. 43 E. 3. d, 24. Iohn Duke of Bedford summoned, 2, 3, 4, 5, H. 5. 4, 11, 13 H. 6. Boughan (in Scotland) Henry de Bellomone, (Beau∣mont) Earl thereof summoned, 7, (p. 2. d. 3.) 8, (d. 8. 18.) 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11, (p. 1. d. 8, 15. p. 2. d. 11. 40.) 12, (p. 2. d. 32.) 13, (p. 2. d. 1. 28.) 14 (p. 1. d. 23.) E. 3. See Vincent, p. 5. Buckingham, Thomas de Wodestoke Earl thereof, and Constable of England summoned, 1, (d. 37.) 2, (d. 13, 29.) 3, (d. 32.) 4, (d. 12.) 5, (d. 40.) 6, (d. 37.) 7, (d. 10. 37.) 8, (d. 35) R. 2. Humfrey Duke thereof summoned, 23, 25, 27, 28, 29. 31, 33, 38 H. 6. Henry Duke thereof summoned, 22 & 23 (d. 10.) E. 4.
C CAmbridge (Cantabrigiae) Edmund (Son to King Edward 3.) Earl thereof summoned, 37, (d. 22.) 38, (d. 3.) 39, (d. 2.) 42, (d. 22.) 46, (d. 9.) 47, (d. 13.) 49, (d. 4, 6.) 50, (p. 2. d. 6,) E. 3. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (d. 13, 29.) 3, (d. 32.) 7, (d. 10, 37.) 8, (d. 35.) R. 2. Richard Earl thereof summo∣ned, 2 (d. 16,) H. 5. Cantiae. See Kent. Cestriae (Chester) Edward Pince of Wales, (eldest Son of K. . 1.) Earl of Chester, and so stiled in the Writs of Summons, 30 (d. 8. 13.) E. 1. (Edward eldest Son of K. E. 2. Prince of Wles, Earl thereof summoned, 14 (d. 23.) 15, (d. 16.) 16, (d. 26.) 17, (d. 27.) 18, (d. 5, 15, 21, 24.) E. 2. Edward Son of Edward 3. Prince of Wales, 25, (p. 1. d. 5.) 26, (d. 14.) 27, (d. 12.) 28 (d. 6.) E. 3. Richard Prince of Wales, 50 (p. 2. d. 6.) E. 3. See Prince of Wales. Clarence, Thomas Duke thereof summoned, 1. (d. 9. 37.) 2, (d. 16.) 3, (d. 15.) 4, (d. 26. H. 5.) George Duke thereof summouned, 49 H. 6. (d. 6.) 7, (d. 1.) 9, (d. 3.) 12, (d. 41.) E. 4. Cornwall, Edmun arl thereof summoned, 23, (d. 3, 9.) 24, (d. 7.) 25, (d. 25.) 17, (d. 9. 16, 18.) 28, (d. 17.) . 1. Pter de Gaveston, Earl thereof summoned, 1, (d. 8. 11.) 3, (d. 16, 17.) E. 2. Iohn de Eltham  the Kings Brother) Earl thereof summoned, 4 (d. 1, 32, 41.) 5, (p. 1. d. 7. 25. p. 2. d. 7.) 6, (d. 4, 9, 19, 36.) 7▪ (p. 2. d. 3.) 8, (d. 18.) 9, (d. 8, 18.) E. 3. Ed∣ward Prince of Wales, Duke of Conwall summoned, 24, (p. 2. d. 33.) 25, (p. 1. d. 5.) 26, (d. 14.) 27, (d. 12.) 28 (d. 16.) E. 3. Richard Prince of Wales, and Duke of Cornwall summoned, 50 (p. 2. d. 6.) . See Prince of Wales.
D DErby, the Earl thereof summoned, 49 (d. 11.) d. 3. Henry de Lancaster, Earl thereof summoned, 11, (p. 1. d. 8. 15, p. 2. d. 11, 40.) 14, (p. 2. d. 33.) 16, (p. 1. d. 30.) 17, (p. 1. d. 25.) 18 (p. 1. d. 14.) E. 3. Henry de Lancaster, Earl thereof summoned, 9, (d. 45,) 10, (d. 42.) 11. (d. 13, 24.) 12, (d. 42.) 13, (d. 5.) 14, (d. 42.) 15. (d. 37.) 16, (d. 23.) 17 (d. 0.) 18, (d. 23.) 20, (p. 1. d. 15.) 1, (p. 1. d. 27.) R. 2. Devon. Hugh de Countenay Earl thereof summoned, 9 (d. 8, 28.) 10, (d. 1, 5.) 11, (p. 1. d. 8. 15. p. 2. d. 11, 40) 12, (p. 2. d. 1. 28.) 14, (p. 1. d. 23, 33.) 15, p. 1. d 37.) 17, (p. 1. d. 25.) 18, (p. 1. d. 14.) 20, (p. 2, d. 22.) 21, (p. 1. d. 28. p. 2. d. 9.) 22, (p. 1. d. 32. p. 2. d. 3, 7.) 23, (p. 1. d. 23.) 24, (p. 1. d. 3.) 25, (p. 1. d. 5.) 26, (d. 14.) 27, (d, 12.) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d. 7, 8.) 31, (d. 2. 21.) 32, (d. 14.) 33, (d. 10.) 34, (d. 4, 35.) 36, (d. 16) 38, (d. 3.) 39, (d. 2.) 4. (d. 23.) 43, (d. 24.) 44, (d. 1.) 46, (d. 9▪ 10, 11.) 47, (d. 13.) 49, (d. 4. 6.) 50 (p. 2. d. 6.) . 3. Edward de Courteney, Earl of Devon. summoned, 2, (d. 13, 29.) 3, (d. 32.) 4▪ (d. 32.) 5, (d. 40.) 6, (d. 37.) 7, (d. 37, 40.) 8, (d. 35.) 9, (d. 45.) 10, (d. 42.) 11, (d. 13. 24.) 12, (d. 42.) 13, (d. 5.) 14, (d. 42.) 15, (d. 37.) 16, (d. 23.) 17, (d. 31.) 20, (p. 1. d. 15.) 21, (p. 1. d. 27.) 23 (d. 3.) R. 2. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (p. 1. d. 3.) 3▪ (d. 17.) 5▪ (d. 28.) 7, (d. 30.) 8, (d. 2.) 11, (d. 32.) 12, (d. .) 14 (d. 22.) H. 4. 1, (d. 9.) 2, (d. 16.) 3, (d. 15.) 4, (d. 16.) 5, (d. 11.) 7 (d. 9.) H. 5. Hugh Courteny Earl thereof summoned, 8, (d. 2.) 9 (d. 13.) H. 5. Thomas Earl thereof summo∣ned, 15, (d. 18.) 18, (d. 33.) 20, (d. 27.) 23, (d. 21.) 25, (d. 24.) 27, (d. 24.) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d. 41.) 31▪ (d. 36.) 33 (d. 30.) H. 6. Henry Earl thereof summoned, 38▪ (d. 30.) H. 6. Dorset, Iohn Beauford, created Marquess Dorset,
summoned by this Tile, 21, (p. 1. d. 27.) 23 (d. 3.) R. 2. 1 (d. 37.) H. 4. Thomas Beauford Earl there∣of summoned, 2 (d. 16.) 4, (d. 1, 6.) H. 5. Edward Earl thereof summoned, 20, (d. 17.) made Marqess Dorset, and thus summoned, 22 (d. 21.) H. 6. Thomas Marquess Dorset summoned, 22, & 23 (d. 10.) E. 4. Dublin, Iohn de Vere Marquess thereof summoned, 10. (d. 42.) R. 2. E EBor. See York. Essex, Humfry and Iohn Bohun, successively Earls of Hereford and Essex summoned. See Hereford, Henry Earl of Essex summoned, 49 (d. 6.) H. 6. 2, (d. 3.) 9, (d. 3.) 12, (d. 41.) 22 & 23 (d. 10.) E. 4. Ewe in Normandy, Henry Bourgchier, Earl thereof summo∣ned, 13 (d. 2.) H. 6. See Brook and Vincent p. 149. &c. in E. We. Exeter, Iohn Holland Duke thereof summoned, 21, (p. 1. d. 17.) 23 (d. 3.) R. 2. 1, (d. 37.) 2 (d. .) H. 4. Thomas Duke of Exeter summoned, 5, (d. 11.) H. 5, 1, (d. 22.) 2, (d. 18.) 3, (d. 9.) 4, (d. 15.) H. 6. Hen∣ry Duke thereof summoned, 29, (d. 41.) 31, (d▪ 16.) 33, (d. 36.) 38, (d. 39.) H. 6. G GLoucester, Gilb, de Clare, Comes Gloucestr. & Hert∣ord, summoned, 23 (d. 9.) E. 1. Radulphus de Monte Hermerii, Comes Gloucestriae, summoned, 27, (d. 16, 18.) 28, (d. 3, 17.) 30, (d. 8, 13.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 21.) 34 (d. 2.) E. 1. Gilbert de Clare Com. Gloucestr. & Heref. summoned, 1. (d. 8, 11.) 2, (d. 11. 14, 26.) 3, (d. 16, 17.) 4, (d 11.) 5, (d. 11, 17, 25.) 6, (d. 3, 31.) 7, (d. 16
27.) E. 2. Hugo de Audele, Audeley, Comes Glouce∣stiae, summoned, 11, (p. 1. d. 8, 15. p. 2. d. 40.) 12, (p. 2. d, 32.) 13, (d. 2. d. 28.) 14, (p. 1. d. 2, 33.) 15, (p. 1. d. 37.) 16, (p, 1. d. 39.) 17, (p. 1. d. 25.) 18, (p. 1. d. 14.) 20, (p. 2. d. 22.) E. 3. Thomas Dux Gloucestriae, the Kings Uncle, sum∣moned, 10, (d. 42.) 11, (d. 13, 24.) 12, (d. 42.) 13, (d. 5.) 14, (d. 42.) 15, (d. 37.) 16, (d. 23.) 17, (d. 30.) 20, (p. 1. d. 15.) R. 2. Thomas de Le Spencer, Coms Gloucestr. summoned, 21, (p. 1. d. 27.) 23 (d. 3.) R. 2. 1 (d. 37.) H. 4. Hum∣frey Dux Gloucestriae, summoned, 2, (d. 11.) 3, (d. 15) 4 (d. 16.) H. 5. 1, (d. 22.) 2, (d. 18.) 3, (d. 9.) 4, (d. 15.) 5, (d. 4.) 7, (d. 2.) 9, (d. 18.) 10, (d. 10.) 11, (d. 10.) 14, (d. 2.) 15, d. 18.) 16, (d. 33.) 18, (d. 33.) 20, (d. 27.) 23, (d. 21.) 25 (d. 24.) H. 6. Richard Dux Glou∣cestriae, summoned, 9, (d. 3.) 12. (d. 41.) 22, & 23 (d. 10.) E. 4. H HEreford, Humfry de Bohun. Earl of Hereford, and Essex sumoned, 23, (d. 3, 9.) 24, (d. 7.) 25, (d. 6.)  (d. 3, 17.) 30, (d. 8. 13.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. ▪ 21.) 34 d. 2.) E. 1. 1, (d. 8, 11, 1.) 2, (d. , 14, 20.) 3, (d. 16, 17.) 4, (d. 3.) 5, (d. 11 17, 25.) 6, (d. 3, 1.) 7, (d. 16, 27.) 8, (d. 9, 35.) 9 (d. 22.) 11, (d. 8, 12, 19.) 1, (d. 11, 9.) 13, (d. 17.) 14 (d. 5, 29.) E. 2. John de Bohn. Earl o Hereford and Essex, summoned, 20, (d. 4) E. 2, 1 (p. 2. d. 11, 16.) 2, (d. 15, 23, 31.) 4, (d. 13, 32, 41.) 5, (p. 1. d. 7, 25. p. 2. d. 7.) 6, (d. 4, 9, 19, 6.) 7, (p. 2. d. 3.) 8, (d. 28.) 9, (d. 8. 28.) E. 3. Humfry de Bohun. Earl of Hereford and Essex, and of Hereford and Northampton, 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11, (p. 1. d. 8, 15. p. 2. d. 11, 40.) 12, (p. 2. d. 32.) 16, (p. 2, d. 22.) 20, (p. 2.) 22.
21, (p. 1. d. 28. p. 2. d. 9.) 22, (p. 2. d. 32. p. 2. d. 3, 7.) 23, (p. 1. d. 23.) 24, (p. 2. d. 3.) 25, (p. 1. d. 6.) 26, (d. 14.) 27, (d. 12.) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d. 7, 8.) 31, (d. 2. 21.) 34, (d. 4. 35.) 37, (d. 22.) 38, (d. 3.) 39, (d. 2.) 44, (d. 1.) 46, (d. 9.) E. 3. Hertford, Earls thereof. See Gloucester. Huntingdon, William de lynon, Earl thereof summoned, 11. (p. 2. d. 11, 40.) 12, (p. 2. d. 32.) 14, (p. 1. d. 23, 33.) 15, (p. 1. d. 37.) 16, (p. 1. d. 39. p. 2. d. 13.) 17, (p. 1. d. 25.) 18, (p. 1. d. 14,) 20, (p. 2. d. 22.) 21, (p. 1. d. 28. p. 2. d. 9.) 22, (p. 1. d 32. p. 2. d. 3, 7.) 23, (p. 1. d. 23.) 24, (p. 2. d. 3.) 25, (p. 1. d. 5.) 26, (d. 14.) 27. (d. 12.) 28, (d. 26.) E. 3. Guiscard de Angle, Or D'angle Earl there∣of summoned, 1, (d. 37.) 2, (d. 13, 29.) 3, (d. 32.) R. 2. Iohn de Holland. Earl thereof summoned, 12, (d. 42.) 13, (d. 5.) 14, (d. 42.) 15, (d. 37.) 16, (d. 23.) 17, (d. 30.) 20, (p. 1. d. 25.) 21, (p. 1. d. 27.) R. 2. Iohn de Holland, Earl thereof sum∣moned, 7, (d. 2.) 13, (d. 2.) 15, (d. 18.) 20, (d. 27.) H. 6. William, Earl thereof summoned, 22, & 23 (d. 10.) E. 4. I IReland, Robert de Vere, Duke of Ireland summoned, 11; (d. 24.) R. 2. K KArliol Andrew de Harcla, Earl thereof; summoned 16, (d. 11. 26.) E. 2. Kendal, Iohn Duke of Bedford, Earl thereof summoned, 2, (d. 16) H. 5. Kent, (Cantiae.) Edmond (the Kings Brother,) Earl there∣of summoned, 15, (d. 16.) 16, (d. 36.) 17, (d. 27.) 20. (d. 4) E. 2. (The Kings Uncle) 1.
(p 2.  11. 1.) 2. (d. 15. 23. 31.) 4. (d. 41. E. 3. John Earl thereof summoned▪ 22. (p. 2. d. 3.) 25. (p. 1. d. 5.) 26. (d. 14.) E. 3. Thomas Earl thereof sum∣moned. 34. (d. 4.) E. 3. Thomas de Holland Earl thereof (Brother to the King) summoned, 4. (d. 32.) 5, (d. 40.) 6. (d. 37.) 7, (d. 10. 37.) 8, (d. 35.) 9, (d. 45.) 10, (d. 42.) 11, (d. 24.) 12, (d. 42.) 13, (d. 5.) 14, (d. 42.) 15, (d. 37.) 16, (d. 23.) 17, (d. 30.) 18, (d. 9.) 20▪ (p. 1. d. 15.) 21, (p. 1. d. 27.) (R. 2. Edward, Earl thereof summoned, 7, (d. 30.) 8, (d. 2.) H. 4. Edward Earl of Kent summoned, 49, (d. 6.) H. 6. 6, (d. 1.) 9, (d. 3.) 12, (d. 41) 22, and 23, (d. 10.) E. 4. King of Castil, Leon and Arragon (Iohn Duke of Lan∣caster:) See Lancaster. King of Scots, Edward de Balliolo, King thereof summon∣ed, 22, (p. 2. d. 3.) (p. 1. d. 19. E 3. L LAncaster, Edmund Earl thereof (the Kings Brother) summoned, 23, (d. 9.) E: 1. Thomas, Earl thereof summoned: 27, (d. 16. 18.) 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 8, 9.) 33, (d. 21.) 34, (d. 2.) 35, (d. 2.) Ed. . 1, (d. 8. 11. 19.) 2, (d. 11. 14. 20.) 3, (d. 16. 17.) 4. (d. 1.) 5, (d. 11. 17. 25.) 6, (d. 30.) 7, (d. 16. 27.) 8, (d. 29. 35.) 9, (d. 22.) 11, (d. 8. 12.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, (d. 13.) 14, (d. 5. 29.) Ed. 2. Henry de Lancastria, Earl thereof summoned, 18, (d. 5. 21. 34.) 22, (d. 4.) E. 2. 1, (p. 2. d. 11. 16.) 2, (d. 15. 23.) 3, (d. 19.) 4, (d. 13. 32. 41.) 5, (p. 1. d. 7. 25. p. 2. d. 7.) 6, (d. 4. 9. 19. 36.) 7, (p. 2. d. 3.) 8, (d. 18.) 9, (d. 8. 28.) 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11, (p. 2. d. 11. 40.) 12, (p. 2. d. 32) 13, (p. 2. d. 1. 28.) 14, (p. 1. d. 23. 33.) 15, (p. 1. d. 17.) 16, (p. 1. 33. p. 2. d. 13. 22.) 17, (p. 1. d. 25.) 18, (p. 1. d. 14.) 21. (p. 1. d. 28. p. 2. d. 9.) 22, (p. 1. d. 32. p. 2. d. 3. 7.) 23, (p. 1. d. 23.) 24, (p. 2. d. 3.) Ed. 3. Henry created Duke of Lancaster sum∣moned,
25, (p. 1. d. 15.) 26, (d. 14.) 27, (d. 12.) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d. 7. 8.) 31, (d. 2.) 34, (d. 4.) E: 3. Iohn, Earl thereof summoned, 36, (d. 16.) E. 3. made Duke of Lancaster, and so summoned) 37, (d. 22.) 38, (d. 3.) 39▪ (d. 2.) 42▪ (d. 22.) 43, (d. 24.) King of Castel, Legion, and Duke of Lancaster, sum∣moned by all these Titles.) 46, (d. 9. 10.) 49, (d. 4. 6.) 50, (p: 2. d. 6.) E. 3. (the Kings Uncle) 1, (d: 37.) 2, (d: 13. 29.) 3▪ (d: 32.) 4, (d: 32.) 5, (d: 40.) 6, (d. 37.) 7, (d. 10. 37.) 8, (d. 35.) 9, (d. 35.) 13, (d. 5.) 14, (d: 42.) R. 2. Iohn, Duke of Aqui∣tain and Lancaster summoned, 15, (d. 37.) 16, (d. 23.) 17, (d: 30.) 20, (p: 1. d: 15.) 21, (p: 1. d: 27.) R. 2. Henry, Duke thereof summoned, 23, (d: 3.) R. 2. 1, (d: 37.) H: 4. Leicester; the Earl thereof summoned, 43, (d. 11.) H. 3. Lincoln; Henry de Lacy, Earl thereof summoned, 23, (d. 9.) 27, (d: 9. 6. 18.) 28, (d: 17.) 30, (d: 8. 13.) 32, (d: 2.) 33, (d. 10.) 34, (d. 2.) Ed: 1. 1, (d: 8. 11. 19.) 2, (d. 11. 14. 20.) 3, (d. 16. 17.) Ed. 2. M MArch: Roger de Mortuomari (Mortimer) Earl thereof summoned, 4, (d: 32. 41.) E: 3, Roger de Mortuomari (summoned, 29, (d: 7. 8.) 31, (d: 2. 21.) E▪ 3. Edmund de Mortuomari, Earl thereof summoned, 44, (d: 1.) 46, (d: 9.) 47, (d: 13.) 49, (d: 4. 6.) 50, (p. 2. d. 6.) E: 3. 1, (d: 27.) 2, (d: 29.) 3, (d. 32.) R: 2. Edward, Earl of March, sum∣moned, 1, (d: 37.) 2, (d: 16.) 3, (d: 15.) 4, (d: 16.) 8, (d: 2.) H. 5. 1, (d: 22.) 2, (d: 18.) H: 6: Marshal, Marescallus, Iohn, Earl Marshal summoned, 1, (d: 9.) 2, (d. 16.) 3, (d. 15.) 4, (d. 16) H. 5. Thomas, Earl Marshal, 1, (d. 22) 2, (d. 18.) H. 6. Iohn, Earl Marshal, 3, (d: 9.) H: 6. See Norfolk & Nortingham
Mountacute, Iohn Marquess thereof, 49, (d. 6.) H. 6. N NOrfolk: Com. Norf. & Marescal. Angliae summoned, 49 (d: 11.) H. 3. Roger de Bigd, Comes Norfolk, & Marescallus Angliae, summoned, 23, (d. 1. 9.) 24, (d. 7.) 25, (d: 6. 25.) 27, (d: 9. 16. 28.) 28, (d: 3. 17.) 30, (d: 8. 13.) 32, (d: 2.) 33, (d: 21.) 34, (d: 2.) E. 1. Thomas de Brotherton Com. Norfolk, & Marescallus Angliae, summoned, 6, (d: 3. 31.) 7, (d: 16. 27.) 8, (d. 29. 31.) 9, (d. 22.) 11, (d: 8. 12. 14.) 12, (d: 11. 29) 13, (d: 13.) 14, (d: 29▪) 15, (d: 16) 16, (d. 26.) 17, (d. 27.) 18, (d: 5. 15. 21. 34.) 19, (d: 27.) 20, (d: 4.) E. 2. 1, (p: 2. d: 11. 16.) 2, (d. 15. 23. 31.) 4 (d: 13. 32. 41.) 5 (p: 1. d: 7. 25. p: 2. d: 7.) 6, (d. 4. 9. 19. 36.) 7, (p. 2. d. 3.) 8. (d. 18.) 9, (d. 8. 28.) 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11, (p: 1. d: 8. 15.) 12, (p: 2. d: 32.) E: 3. Thomas Duke of Norfolk summoned, 21, (p. 1. d: 27.) R. 2. Iohn Duke of Norfolk summoned, 4, (d: 15.) 5, (d: 4.) 7, (d: 7.) 10, (d: 10.) H: 6, Iohn (his Son) Duke of Norf. sum∣moned, 15, (d: 8.) 18, (d: 33.) 20, (d. 27.) 23, (d. 21) 25, (d: 24.) 27, (d: 21.) 28, (d. 26.) 29. (d: 41.) 31, (d: 36.) 33, (d. 36.) 38, (d. 30.) 49, d. 6.) H: 6. 1, (d: 35.) 6, (d: 1.) 9, (d. 3.) 12, (d: 41.) E: 4. Northampton, William de Bohum Earl thereof summon∣ed, 11, (p. 1. d. 15. p. 2. d. 40.) 14, (p. 1. d. 23. 33.) 15, (p: 1. d: 37.) 17, (p. 1. d. 25.) 18, (p. 1. d. 14.) 21, (p. 2. d. 9.) 22, (p. 1. d. 32. p. 2. d. 3. 7.) 23, (p. 1. d. 23.) 24, (p. 2. d. 3.) 25, (p. 1. d. 5.) 26, (d. 14.) 27, (d. 12.) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d. 7. 8.) 31, (d. 2. 21.) E. 3. Humphrey de Bohun, Earl thereof summoned, 37, (d. 22.) 38, (d. 3.) 39, (d. 2.) E. 3, See Hereford, Iohn Newel Earl thereof sum∣moned, 6, (d. 1.) E. 4.
Northumberland, Henry de Percy, Earl thereof summon∣ed, 1, (d. 37.) 2▪ (d. 13. 29) 3, (d. 32.) 4, (d. 32.) 5, (d. 40.) 6 (d. 37.) 7, (d: 12. 37.) 8, (d: 35.) 9, (d. 45.) 10, (d. 42.) 11, (d. 13. 24.) 12. (d. 42.) 13, (d. 5.) 1, (d. 42.) 15, (d. 43.) 16, (d: 23.) 17, (d. 30) 18, (d: 23.) 20, (p: 1▪ d: 15▪) 21, (p: 1 d. 27.) 23, (d: 3.) R: 2. 1, (d. 37) 2, (p: 1. d: 3) 3, (d: 17.) 5, (p: 1. d: 28. p: 2. d: 4.) H. 4. Henry Percy (Earl thereof) summoned, 4, (d. 16.) 5, (d: 11.) 7, (d. 9.) 8, (d. 2.) 9, (d: 13.) H: 5. 1, (d: 22.) 2, (d: 18.) 3, (d: 9) 9▪ (d: 18.) 10, (d. 10,) 11, (d: 10.) 13, (d: 2.) 15, (d: 18.) 18, (d: 33.) 20, (d: 27.) 23, (d: 21.) 25, (d: 24.) 27, (d. 24.) 28, (d: 26.) 29, (d: 41.) 31, (d. 36.) 38, (d. 30) H. 6. Iohn, Earl thereof summoned, 6, (d. 1.) 9, (d: 3.) E: 4. Henry, Earl thereof summoned, 12, (d: 41.) 22. & 23, (d. 10.) E: 4. Nottingham, Iohn de Mowbray, Earl thereof summoned, 1, (d. 37.) 2, (d: 13. 29.) 3, (d: 32.) 4, (d: 33.) 5, (d: 40.) 6, (d: 37.) R. 2. Thomas de Mowbray, Earl thereof summoned, 7, (d: 10. 37.) 8, (d: 35.) 9, (d: 45.) 10, (d: 42.) Marescallus Angliae, 11, (d: 13. 24.) 12, (d: 42.) 13, (d: 5.) 14, (d: 42.) 15, (d: 37.) 16, (d: 23.) 17, (d: 30.) 20, (p. 1. d: 15.) 21, (p. 1. d: 17.) O OXford; Oxon, the Earl thereof summoned, 49, (d: 11.) H. 3. Robert de Veer, Earl thereof summoned; 23, (d: 3. 9.) 24, (d: 7.) 25, (d: 25.) 27, (d: 16. 18.) 28, (d: 3. 17.) 30, (d. 8. 13.) 32, (d: 2.) 33, (d. 21.) 34, (d: 2.) E: 1. 1, (d: 8. 11. 19) 2, (d: 11, 20) 3, (d: 16. 17.) 4, (d: 5.) 5, (d: 11. 17. 25.) 6, (d: 3. 31.) 7, (d: 16. 27.) 8, (d: 29. 35.) 9, (d: 22.) 11, (d: 8. 12. 14.) 12, (d: 11, 29.) 14, (d: 5. 29.) 17, (d: 27.) 18, (d: 5. 15. 21. 34.) 19, (d: 27.) 20, (d: .) E: 2. 1, (p: 2. d: 11. 16.) 3, (d: 15. 23. 31.) 4,
(13. 32. 41.) 5, (p. 1. d. 25.) E. 3. Iohn de Veer, Earl thereof summoned, 5, (p. 1. d: 7. p. 2. d: 7.) 6, (d: 4. 13. 19. 36.) 7, (p: 2. d: 3.) 8, (d: 18.) 9, (d: 8. 28.) 10, (d: 1. 5.) 11, (p. 1. d: 8, 15. p: 2. d: 11. 40.) 12, (p: 2. d: 32.) 13, (p: 2. d: 1. 28.) 14, (p: 1. d: 33.) 17, (p: 1. d: 21.) 18, (p: 1. d: 14. 21, (p: 1. d: 28. p: 2. d: 9.) 22, (p: 1. d: 32. p: 2. d: 3. 7.) 23, (p. 1. d: 23.) 24, (p: 2. d: 5.) 25, (p: 1. d: 5.) 26, (d, 14) 27, (d: 12.) 28, (d: 26.) 31, (d: 2.) 32, (d: 14.) 33, (d: 10.) E: 3. Thomas de Veer, Earl thereof summoned, 35, (d. 36.) 36, (d. 16. 42.) 37, (d: 22.) 38, (d: 39.) 39, (d: 2.) 43, (d: 24) 44, (d: 1.) Ed. 3. Robert de Veer, Earl thereof summoned, 7, (d: 10. 37) 8, (d: 35.) 9, (d: 45.) Marquess of Dublin, 10, (d: 42.) Duke of Ireland, 11, (d: 24.) R. 2. Albric, or Albert Earl of Oxon sum∣moned, 17, (d: 30.) 18, (d. 23.) 20, (p: 1. d: 15.) 21, (p: 1. d: 27.) 23, (d: 3.) R: 2. 1 (d: 37.) H. 4. Richard, Earl thereof summoned, 9, 11, (d: 32.) 12▪ (d: 2.) H: 4. 1, (d: 9. 37.) 2, (d: 16.) 3, (d. 15.) 4, (d. 16. H. . Iohn de Veer, Earl thereof summoned, 7, (d: 2.) 9, (d: 18.) 10, (d: 10,) 11, (d: 10.) 13, (d: 2.) 15, (d: 18.) 18, (d: 33.) 20, (d: 27.) 23, (d: 21.) 25, (d: 24.) 27, (d. 24.) 28. (d: 26.) 29 (d: 4.) 31, (d: 36,) 33, (d: 36.) 38, (d: 30.) 49, (d: 6.) H: 6. 1, (d. 35.) 6, (d: 1.) 9, (d: 3.) E. 4. P PEmbroc, William de Valencia, Earl thereof summon∣ed, 23, (d. 3. 9.) E: 1. Adamarus de Valencia, Earl thereof summoned, 27, (d: 8. 16.) E: 1. 1, (d: 8. 11.) 2, (d: 4. 20.) 3, (d: 16. 17.) 5, (d. 17. 25.) 6, (d: 3. 31.) 7, (d: 16, 27.) 8, (d. 29. 35.) 9, (d. 22.) 11, (d. 8. 12. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, (d. 13.) 14, (d. 5. 29.) 15, (d. 16.) 16, (d. 26.) 17, (d. 27.) E: 2. Laurence Hastings, Earl thereof summoned, 13, (p. 2. d. 1.)
14, (p. 2. d. 23. 33.) 15, (p. 1. d. 37.) 16, (p. 1. d. 39.) 17, (p. 1. d. 25.) 21, (p. 1. d: 28.) p. 2. d. 9. 22, (p. 1. d. 32.) E. 3. Iohn de Hastings, Earl thereof summoned, 54, (d. 1.) H. 5. Humphrey Du. of Glo∣cestr Earl thereof summoned, 2, H. 5. d. 16. Ias∣per thereof summoned, 31, (d. 36.) 33, (d. 36) 38, (d. 30.) H. 6. R RIchmond. Iohn de Britannia, Earl thereof sum∣moned, 34, (d. 2.) E: 1. 1, (d: 19.) 2, (d. 20.) 3, (d. 16. 17.) 5, (d. 11.) 6, (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d. 16. 27.) 8, (d 29. 35.) 3, (d. 22.) 11, (d. 8. 12. 14,) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, (d. 13.) 14, (d: 5. 29.) E. 2. 2, (d. 15. 23. 31.) 4, (d. 13. 41.) 5, (d. 7. 25.) 6, (d. 4. 9.) 19. 36.) 7. (p. 2. d. 3.) 8, (d. 13.) 9, (d. 8. 28.) E. 3. Iohn, Earl of Lanc. and Richmond summoned, 34, (d. 9) 36, (d. 16.) E. 3. Iohn Duke of Brittain, Earl thereof summoned, 2. (d. 13. 29.) R. 2. Edmond, Earl thereof summoned, 31. (d. 36.) H. 6. Rivers, Richard, Earl thereof summoned, 6, (d. 1.) E: 4. Autony Earl thereof summoned, 12, (d. 41.) 22, & 23. (d. 10.) E. 4. Rotland, Edward, Earl thereof summoned, 14, (d. 42.) 15, (d. 37.) 16, (d. 23.) 17, (d. 30.) 20, (p. 1. d. 15.) 21, (p. 2. d. 27) R. 2. 1, (d. 37) 2, (p. 1. d. 3.) H. 4. S SArum, Salisbury, William de Monteacute (Monteacute) Earl thereof summoned, 11, (p. 2. d. 40.) 24, (p 2. d. 3.) 25, (p. 1. d. 5.) 26, (d. 14.) 27, (d. 12.) 28, (d. 26.) 31, (d. 2.) 32, (d. 14.) 34, (d. 4.) 36, (d. 16.) 37, (d. 22.) 38, (d. 3.) 39, (d: 2.) 42, (d. 22.) 43, (d: 24.) 44, (d. 3.) 44, (d. 9.) 47, (d: 13.) 49, (d: 6.) 50, p. 2. d. 6.) E. 3. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (d. 13. 29.) 3, (d. 32.) 4, (d. 32.) 5, (d. 40.) 6, (d. 47.) 7, (d. 10. 37.) 8, (d.
35.) 9, (d. 45.) 10, (d. 42.) 11, (d. 13. 24.) 12, (d. 42.) 13, (d. 5.) 14, (d. 42.) 15, (d. 37.) 16, (d. 23.) 17. (d. 30.) 18, (d. 23.) 20, (p. 1. d. 15.) R. 2. Iohn de Monteacut, Earl thereof summoned, 21, (p. 1. d: 27.) 23, (d. 3.) R. 2. 1, (d. 37. .) H. 4. homas Earl thereof summoned, 1, (d. 9. 37.) 2, (.) 3, (d. .) 4, (d. 16.) H. 5. 5, (d. 4.) H. 6. Richard Earl thereof summoned, 9, (d. 18.) 10, (d. 10.) 11, (d. 10.) 13, (d. 2.) 20, (d. 27.) 23, (d. 21.) 25, (d. 24) 27, (d: 24.) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d. 41.) 31, (d. 36) 33, (d. 30.) Com. Warwic. & Sam. 49, (d. 6.) H. 6. 6, (d. 1.) 9, (d. 3.) E. 4. Salop. Shrewsbury, Iohn, Earl thereof summoned, 23, (d. 21) 25, (d. 24.) 31, (d. 36.) 33, (d. 36.) 38, (d. 30.) 9, (d. 3.) 12, (d. 41.) E. 4. Somerset, Iohn Beauford, Earl thereof summoned, 2, (p. 1. d. 27.) 3, (d: 17.) 5, (d. 28. p. 2. d. 4.) 7, (d: 30.) 8, (d. 2.) 11, (d. 32) H. 4. Edward Duke of Somerset, 29, (d. 41.) 31, (d. 36.) H. 6. Stafford, Ralph, Earl thereof summoned, 27, (d. 12.) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d. 7. 8.) 31, (d, 2. 21.) 32, (d 14.) 34, (d: 4.) 35, (d. 36.) 36▪ (d: 16) 37, (d. 22.) 38, (d. 3.) 39, (d. 2.) 42, (d. 22.) 43, (d. 24.) 44, (d. 1.) E. 3. Hugh, Earl thereof summoned, 46, (d. 9.) 49, (d. 4. 6.) 50, (p. 2. d. 6.) E. 3. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (d. 13. 29.) 3, (d. 32.) 4, (d. 32.) 5, (d. 40.) 6, (d. 37.) 7, (d. 10. 37.) 8, (d. 35.) 9, (d. 45.) R. 2. Thomas, Earl thereof summoned, 15, (d. 37.) R. 2. Edward, Earl thereof summoned, 23, (d. 3.) R. 2. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (p. 1. d. 3.) 3, (d. 17.) H. 4. Humphrey, Earl thereof summoned, 3, (d. 9) 4, (d. 15.) 5, (d. 4.) 7, (d. 2.) 15, (d. 8.) 18, (d. 33.) 20, (d. 27.) H. 6. Suffolk, Robert d Ufford, Earl thereof summoned, 13, (p. 1. d. 8. 15. p. 2. d. 40.) 16, (p. 1 d. 33.) 17, (p. 1. d. 25.) 18, (p. 1. d. 14.) 21, (p. 2. d. 9.) 22, (p. 1. d. 32. p. 2. d. 3. 7) 23, (p. 1. d, 13.) 24, (p. 2. d. 3.) 25, (p. 1. d. 6.) 26, (d. 14.) 27, (d. 12.) 28, (d. 26.) 31, (d. 2.) 32, (d. 14.) 34, (d. 4.) 36,
(d. 36.) 37▪ (d: 22.) 38, (d. 3.) 39, (d. 2.) 42, (d. 22.) 43, (d. 24.) E. 3. William de Ufford Earl there∣of summoned, 44, (d. 1:) 46, (d. 9.) 47, (d: 46.) 50, (p. 1. d: 6.) E. 3. 1, (d: 37.) 2, (d. 13. 29.) 3▪ (d. 32.) R. 2. Michael de la Pool, Earl thereof summoned, 9, (d: 45.) 10, (d. 42.) 23, (d. 3.) R: 2. 1, (d: 37.) 2, (p. 1. d. 3.) 3, (d. 17.) 5, (p: 1. d: 28. p: 2. d: 4.) 7, (d: 30.) 8, (d: 2.) 11, (d. 32.) 12, (d: 2.) H. 4. 1, (d: 9. 37.) 2, (d: 16.) H. 5. William de la Pool, Earl thereof summoned, 9, (d: 18,) 10, (d: 10.) 11, (d: 16.) 13, (d: 2.) 20, (d: 27.) Made and summoned as Marquess of Suffolk, 23, (d. 21.) 25, (d. 24.) summoned, as Duke of Suffolk, 27, (d: 24.) 28, (d. 26.) H. 6. Iohn, Duke thereof summon∣ed, 49, (d: 6.) H. 6. 6, (d: 1.) 9, (d: 3.) 12, (d: 41.) 22, & 23, (d: 10.) E. 4. Surrey, Iohn de Warrenna, Earl thereof summoned, 23, (d: 9.) 27, (d: 9. 16. 18.) 28, (d: 3. 17) 30, (d: 8. 13.) 34, (d: 2.) E. 1. 1, (d: 8. 11. 19.) 2, (d: 11. 14. 20.) 3, (d: 16. 17.) 5, (d: 11. 17. 25.) 6, (d: 3. 31.) 7, (d: 16, 27.) 8, (d: 29. 35.) 9, (d: 22.) 11, (d: 8. 12. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, (d: 13.) 14, (d: 5. 29.) 15, (d: 16.) 17, (d: 27.) 18, (d: 15. 21. 34.) 20, (d: 4.) E. 2. 1, (p. 2. d: 11. 16.) 2, (d: 11. 15. 23. 31.) 4, (d: 13. 32. 42.) 5, (d: 7. 25.) 6, (d: 4. 9. 19. 36.) 7, (p: 2. d: 3.) 8, (d: 18.) 9, (d: 8. 28.) 10, (d: 1. 5.) 11, (p: 1. d: 8. 15. p: 2. d: 11. 40.) 13, (p: 2. d: 1. 28.) 14, (p. 1. d. 23. 33.) 15, (p. 1. d. 37.) 16, (p. 1. d. 39. p. 2. d. 13. 22.) 17, (p. 1. d. 25.) 18, (p. 1, d. 14.) 20, (p. 1. d. 22.) 21, (p. 1. d. 28.) E. 3. Thomas Holland, Duke of Surry, summoned, 21, (p. 1. d. 27.) 23. (d. 3.) R. 2. 1, (d. 37.) H. 4. V ULon, Lil (the Kings Son) Earl thereof sum∣moned, 34, (d. 4.) E. 3. sent into Ireland with an Army, 35, E. 3. d. 33. 36. E. 3. d. 42.
W WAles. Edward (eldest Son of Ed. 2.) Prince of Wales, &c. summoned, 30, (d, 8. 13.) 32, (d. 2.) 33▪ (d. 10. 31.) 34, (d. 2.) E. 1. Edward (eldest Son of Ed. 3.) Prince of Wales, &c.) summoned, 24, (p. 2. d. 3.) 25, (p. 1. d. 5.) 26, (d. 14.) 27, (d. 12.) 28, (d. 26.) 31, (d. 2.) 34, (d. 4.) 42, (d. 22.) 44. (d. 1.) 46, (d. 9. 10.) 47, (d. 13.) E. 3. Richard, `Prince of Wales (stiled the Kings Son, though his Grand∣child onely) summoned, 50, (p. 2. d. 6.) E. 3. Henry Prince of Wales, &c. summoned 1 2, (p. 1. d. 3.) 3. (d. 17.) 5, (p. 1. d. 28. p. 2. d. 4.) 7, (d. 30.) 9, 11, (d. 32.) 12, (d. 2.) 14, (d. 22.) H. 4. Edward (eldest Son of E. 4.) Prince of Wales summoned, 22, & 23. (d. 10.) E. 4. Warenne, Iohn, Earl thereof summoned, 23, (d. 3.) 24, (d. 7.) E. 1. Warwick; William de Bello-campo (Beauchamp, Earl thereof summoned, 23, (d. 3. 9.) 24, (d. 7.) 25, (d. 25. E. 1. Guido de Bello Campo, Earl thereof summon∣ed, 27, (d. 16. 18.) 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 8. 13.) 32, (d. 2) 33, (d. 21.) 35, (d. 13.) E. 1. 1, (d. 11. 19) 2, (d. 11. 14. 20) 3, (d. 16. 17.) 4, (d. 1▪) 5, (d. 11. 17. 25.) 6, (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d. 16. 17.) 8, (d. 35. E. 2. Thomas de Bello-campo, Earl thereof summoned, 4, (d. 13. 32. 41.) 5, (p. 1. d. 7. 25. p. 2. d. 7.) 6, (d. 9. 19. 24 36. 7, (p. 2. d. 32.) 1, (p. 2. d. 1. 28.) 14, (p. 1. d. 33.) 16, (p. 1. d. 39.) 17, (p. 1. d. 14.) 21, (p. 1. d. 32. p. 2. d. 3. 7.) 23, (p. 1. d. 23.) 24, (p. 2. d. 3.) 25, (p. 1. d. 5.) 26, (p. 1. d. 14.) 27, (d. 12.) 28, (d. 26.) 31, (d. 21.) 32, (d. 14.) 34, (d. 4.) 36, (d. 16.) 42, (d. 22. 34, (d. 24.) 44, (d. 1.) 46, (d. 4.) 49, (d. 4. 6.) 50, (p. 2. d. 6.) E. 3. 1. (d. 37.) 2, (d. 13. 29.) 3, (d. 32.) 4, (d. 32.) 5, (d. 40.) 6, (d. 37.) 7, (d. 10. 37.) 8, (d. 35.) 9, (d. 46.) 10. (d. 42.) 11, (d. 13. 24.) 12, (d. 42.) 13, (d. 5.) 14, (d. 42. 15, (d.
37.) 16, (d. 23.) 17, (d 30.) 18, (d. 23.) 20, (p. 1 d. 15.) 23▪ (d. 3.) R. 2. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (p. 1. d. 3.) H. 4. Richard, Earl thereof summoned▪ 5, (p. 1. d. 28. p▪ 2. d. 4.) 6, 7, (d. 30.) 9, (d. .) 11, (d. 32.) 12, (d. 2.) 14, (d. 22.) H. 4. 1, (d. 9, 37) 2, (d. 16.) 4, (d, 16.) 8, (d. 2.) H. 5. 1, (d. 22.) 2, (d. 18,) 3, (d. 3.) 6, (d. 4.) 7, (d. 2.) 10, (d. 10.) 11, (d. 10.) 13, (d. 2.) 15, (d. 18.) 29, (d. 41.) 31, (d. 36.) 33, (d. 36.) 49, (d. 6.) H. 6. 1, (d. 31.) 2, (d. 3.) 6, (d. 1.) 9, (d. 3.) E. 4. Westmerland, Ralf de Nevil, Earl thereof summoned, 21, (p. 1. d. 27.) 23, (d. 3.) R. 2. 1, (d. 37.) 2, p. 1. d. 3.) 3, (d. 17.) 5, (p. 1, 28. p. 2. d. 4.) 6, 7, (d. 30.) 8, (d. 2.) 11, (d. 32.) 12, (d. 2.) 14, (d. 22.) H. 4. 1, (d. 5. 37.) 2, (d. 16.) 3 (d. 15.) 4, (d. 16.) 5, (d. 11.) 7, (d. 9.) 8, (d. 2.) 9, (d. 13.) H. 5. 1. (d. 22) 2, (d. 26.) 3, (d. 9) 7, (d. 2.) 9, (d. 18,) 10, (10.) 11, (d. 10.) 12, (d. 1.) 13, (d. 2.) 15, (d. 18) 18, (d. 33.) 20, (d. 27.) 23, (d. 21.) 25, (d. 24.) 27, (d. 24.) 28, (d, 26.) 29, (d. 41.) 31, (d. 36.) 33, (d. 36.) 38, (d. 30.) 49, (d. 6.) H. 6. 1, (d. 35.) 2, (d. 3.) 6, (d. 1.) 9, (d. 3.) 12, (d. 41.) 22, & 23, (d. 16.) E. 4. Wigorne, Worcester, Thomas de Percy, Earl thereof sum∣moned, 23, (d. 3.) R. 2.) 1, (d. 37.) 2, (p. 1. d. 3.) 3, (d. 17.) Richard, Earl thereof summoned, 8, (d. 2.) H. 5. Iohn, Earl thereof summoned, 28, (d. 26.) 29. (d. 41.) 31, (d. 36.) 33, (d. 36.) H. 6. 2, (d. 3.) E. 4. Edward Tibetot, Earl thereof sum∣moned, 6, (d. 4.) E. 4. Wilts, Wiltshire, Wiltes, Iames, Earl thereof summon∣ed, 28. (d. 26.) 29, (d. 41.) 31, (d. 36.) 33, (d. 36.) 38, (d. 30.) H. 6. Iohn, Earl thereof summoned, 12, (d. 41.) E. 4. Winton, Winchester, Hugh le Dispencer, Earl thereof summoned, 16, (d. 26.) 17, (d. 27.) 18, (d. 5. 15. 21. 34.) 19, (d. 27.) E. 2.
Y YOrk, Edmond, Duke thereof summoned, 9, (d. 45.) 10, (d. 42.) 11, (d. 13. 24.) 12, (d. 42.) 13, (d. 5.) 14, (d. 42.) 15▪ (d. 37.) 16, (d. 23.) 17, (d. 3. 30.) 20, (p. 1. d. 15.) 21, (p. 1. d. 27.) 23, (d. 3.) R. 2. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (p. 1. d. 3.) 3, (d. 17.) 5, (p. 1. d. 28. p. 2. d. 4.) 7, (d. 30.) 8, (d. 2.) H. 4. Edward, Duke thereof summoned, 9, (d. .) 11, (d. 26.) 12, (d. 3.) H. 4. 1, (d. 9. 37.) 2, (d. 16.) H. 5. Richard Duke thereof summoned, 11, (d. 10) 13, (d. 2.) 18, (d. 3.) 20, (d. 27.) 23, (d. 21.) 25, (d. 24.) 27, (d. 24.) 29, (d. 41.) 31, (d. 36.) 33, (d. 36) H. 6.
An Exact Alphabetical and Chronological Table of all the Temporal Lords, Baons, Viscounts and Great Men summoned to Parliaments and Great Councils in England, from 49. H. 3. till 23. E. 4. with the years, dorses of the Clause Rolls in each Kings Reign, and Numbers of the Parliaments to which they were summoned; p. in the Parenthesis, signifying the part of the Clause Roll of the year next before it, d. the dorse, and the figures fol∣lowing it the membrances and dorses wherein they are registred. A Gllbert de Acton summond, 16, (p. 1. d. 39.) E. 3. William de Acton, 33, (d. 10.) E. 3. Iohn ab Adam, 25, (d. 25.) 27, (d. 6. 18.) 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 8. 13.) 32, (d. 2.) 33. (d. 21.) 34, (d, 2.) E. 1. 1, (d. 19.) 2, (d. 11. 14. 20.) 3, (d. 16. 17.) E. 2. Elias de Albiniac, 23, (d. 3. 9.) 24, (d. 7.) 25, (d. 25.) E. 1. Richard de Aldeburgh, summoned, 6, (d. 4.) E. 3. William de Aldeburge, Aldeburgh, 44, (d. 12.) Chivalr, 49, (d. 4. 6.) 50, (p. 2. d. 6.) E. 3. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (d. 13. 29.) 3, (d. 32.) 4, (d. 32.) 5, (d. 40.) 6, (d. (d. 37.) 7, (d. 10. 37.) 8, (d. 35.) 9, (d. 45.) 10, (d. 42.) 11, (d. 24.) Aldthleg, Aldthleg,  See Andeley. Almaric de Sancto Amando (St. Amand) summoned, 28, (d. 3. 7.) 30, (d. 8. 13.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 21.) 34, (d. 2.) 35, (d. 13.) E. 1. 1, (d. 11, 13. 20.) 3, (d. 5. 16.) 4, (d. 1.) E: 2. Iohn de Sancto Amando, sum∣moned, 6, (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d. 16. 27.) 8, (d. 29. 35.) 9, (d. 22,) 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, (d.
13.) 14, (d. 5. 29.) 15, (d. 16.) 16, (d. 26.) 17, (d. 27.) 18, (d. 5. 21. 34.) 19, (d. 27.) E. 2. Alma∣ri de Sancto Amando, 44, (d. 12.) 46, (d. 9. 10. 11.) 47, (d. 13.) 49 (d. 4. 6.) 50, (p. 2. d. 6.) E. 3. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (d. 13. 29.) 3, (d. 32.) 5, (d. 40.) 6, (d. 37.) 13, (d. 5.) 14, (d. 42.) 15, (d. 37.) 16, (d. 23.) 17, (d. 30.) 18, (d. 23.) 20, (p. 1. d. 15.) 21, (p. 1. d. 27.) 23, (d. 3.) R. 2. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (p. 1. d.) 3, (d. 17.) H. 4. Aabert de Arcedekne (Archedeacon) Ercdekn, Lerce∣dekne, summoned, 14, (d. 5.) 15, (d. 16.) 16, (d. 26.) 18, (d. 34.) E. 2. Thomas de Arcedekne, &c. sum∣moned, 15, (d. 16.) 16, (d. 26.) 17, (d. 27.) 18, (d. 34) E. 2. Iohn Arcedekne, Lercedekne, summoned, 16, (p. 1. d. 39.) E. 3. Philip de Arcy, summoned, 28, (d. 17.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 21.) E. 1. See Darcy. Rgniald de Argentine, summoned, 25, (d. 25.) E. 1. Iohn de Arundel, summoned, 1, (d. 37,) 2, (d. 13. 29.) 3, (d. 32.) R. 2. Iohn de Arundel, de Arundel Chivaer▪ summoned, 7, (d. 2.) H. 6. Thomas Arundel de Mountravers, Chivalr▪ summond, 22, and 23, (d. 10.) E. 4. Nicholas de Astele, or Asteley, summoned, 30▪ (d. 8.) E. 1. 2, (d. 11. 20.) 3, (d. 17.) E. 2. Thomas de Aste∣le, summoned, 16, (p. 1. d. 39.) 23, (p. 1. d. 23.) 33, (d. 10.) E. 3. Gilbert de Aton, summoned, 18, (d. 21.) E. 2. William de Aton, 45, (d. 3.) E. 3. Nicholas de Aldithlegh, Aldethly, Adels, Adely, Dau∣dele (thus variously written)▪ summoned, 25, (d. 25.) E. 1. 6, (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d. 16. 27.) 8, (d. 29. 35.) 9, (d. 22.) Iunior, 11, (d. 8. 14.) E. 2. Hugh de Adely Daudeley, senior, summoned, 11, (d. 12.) 14, (d. 5.) 22, (d. 4.) E. 2. Hugh de Adele, (Daudely) Iunior, and without addition) 11, (d. 8. 12. (d. 11. 29.) 13, (d. 13.) 14, (d, 5. 29.) E. 2. 1, (p. 2. d. 11. 16.) 2, (d. 15. 23. 31.) 3, (d: 19.) 4,
(d. 11. 23. 33. 41.) 5, (p. 1. d. 7. 25. p. 2. d. 7.) 6, (d. 9. 19 36.) 7, (p. 2. d. 3.) 8, (d. 18.) 9, (d. 8. 28.) E. 3. Iames de Adele, Daudeley, summoned, 4, (d. 13. 41.) 5, (d. 7. 25.) 6, (d. 9. 19. 36.) 7, (p: 2. d: 9.) 9, (d. 8. 28.) 10, (d: 1. 5.) 11, (p: 2. d: 11. 40.) 12, (p: 2. d: 32.) 13, (p: 2. d: 1. 28.) 14, (p: 2. d: 23. 33.) 15, (p. 1: d: 37.) 16, (p: 1. d: 39.) 17, (p: 1. d: 25.) 18, (p: 1. d: 14.) 24, (p: 1. d: 3.) 25, (p: 1. d. 5.) 26, (d: 14.) 27, (d: 12.) (de Helegh) 33, (d: 10.) 34, (d: 35.) 36, (d. 16.) 37, (d. 22.) 38, (d. 3.) 39, (d: 2.) 44, (d: 1.) 46, (d: 9. 10. 11.) 47, (d. 13.) E. 3. 1, (d: 37.) 2, (d: 13. 29) 3, (d: 32.) 4, (d: 32.) 5, (d: 40.) 6, (d: 44.) 7, (d: 37,) 8, (d: 35.) 9, (d: 45.) 10, (d: 42.) 11, (d: 24.) R: 2. Nicholas de Audeley (de Helegh) 11, (d: 13.) R: 2. Richard de Audeley de Helegh, 12, (d: 42.) 13, (d: 5.) 4, (d: 42.) 15, (d: 37.) R. 2. Iames de A∣deley 8, (d: 2.) H. 5.) 1, (d: 22.) 2, (d. 18.) Chi∣valer, 3, (d: 9.) 4, (d: 15.) 5. (d: 4.) 7. (d: 2.) 9, (d. 18.) 10, (d: 10.) 11, (d: 10) 12, 13, (d: 2.) 15, (d: 18.) 18, (d▪ 33.) 20. (d: 37.) 23, (d: 21.) 25, (d: 24.) 27, (d: 24.) 28, (d: 26.) 29, (d: 41.) 31, (d: 36) 33, (d: 36.) H. 6. Iohn de Audeley Chivaler, 49, (d: 6.) H: 6. Armiger, 1, (d: 35.) Chivaler, 2, (d: 3.) 6▪ (d: 1.) 12, (d: 41.) 22, & 23. (d: 10.) E. 4. B THomas Bacon, summoned, 6, (d: 4.) E. 3. Bartholomew de Badlesmore, summoned, 3, (d: 17.) 5▪ (d: 11. 17. 25.) 6, (d: 3. 31.) 7, (d: 27.) 8, (d. 23. 35.) 9, (d: 22.) 11, (d: 8. 14.) 12, (d: 12. 29.) 13, (d: 13.) 14, (d: 5. 29.) E. 2. Giles de Badles∣more, summoned, 9▪ (d: 8.) 10, (d: 1. 5.) 11, (p: 1. d: 8. p: 2. d: 40.) E. 3. Alexander de Balliolo, summoned, 28, (d: 3. 17.) 30, (d: 8. 13.) 32, (d▪ 2.) 33, (d. 21.) 34▪ (d: 2.) E. 1.
Roger de Banet, Banet, summoned, 6, (d: 3. 31.) 7, (d. 16. 27.) 8, (d: 29. 35.) 9, (d: 22.) 10, (d: 11. 29.) 11, (d: 8. 14.) 13, (d: 13.) 14, (d: 5. 29.) 15, (d. 16.) E. 2. 6, (d: 49. 19. 36.) 7, (p: 2. d. 3.) 8, (d: 18.) 9, (d: 28.) E. 3. Hugh Bardolfe, 27, (d: 16. 18.) 28, (d: 3.) 30, (d: 8. 13.) E. 1. Thomas Bardolfe, 1, (d. 8. 11. 19.) 2, (d: 11. 20.) 3, (d: 16. 17.) 4, (d: 1.) 5, (d: 11. 17. 25.) 6, (d: 3. 31.) 7, (d. 16. 27.) 8, (d: 29. 35.) 9, (d: 32.) 11, (d: 8. 14.) 12, (d: 11. 29.) 13, (d: 13.) 14, (d: 5. 29.) 19, (d. 29.) 20, (d: 4.) E. 2. 1, (p: 2. d. 11. 16.) 2, (d: 15. 23. 31.) 3, (d: 19.) 4, (d: 13. 32. 41.) Iohn Bardolfe, 9, (d. 8. 28.) 10, (d: 1. 5.) 11, (p. 1. d: 8. 15. p. 2. d. 11. 40.) 12, (p. 2. d. 32.) 13, (p. 2. d. 1. 28.) 14, (p. 1. d: 23. 33.) 15, (p. 1. d. 37.) 17, (p 1. d. 25.) 18, (p. 1. d. 14.) 20, (p. 2. d. 22.) 21, (p. 2. d. 9.) 23, (p. 1. d. 23.) 24, (p. 1. d. 3.) 25, (p. 1. d. 5.) 26, (d. 14.) 27, (d. 12.) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d. 7. 8.) 31, (d. 2. 31.) 32, (d. 14.) 34, (d. 4▪) E. 3. Iohn Bardolfe de Wyrnegen, 33, (d. 10.) 34 (d. 35.) 36, (d. 16.) 37, (d. 22.) E. 3. William de Bardolfe, 49, (d. 4. 6.) 50, (p. 3. d. 6.) E. 3. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (d. 13. 29.) 3, (d: 32.) 4, (d: 32.) 5, (d: 40.) 6, (d: 37.) 7, (d: 10. 37.) 8, (d: 35.) 9, (d: 45.) R. 2. Thomas Bardolfe de Wy∣nisgy, 14, (d. 42.) 15, (d. 37.) 16, (d. 23.) 17, (d. 30.) 20, (p. 1. d. 17.) 21, (p. 1. d. 27.) 23, (d. 3.) R. 2. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (p. 1. d. 3.) 3, (d. 17.) 5, (p. 1. d. 28. p. 2. d. 4.) H. 4. Mr. John Barnet, 32, (d. 14.) E. 3. Ralph Basset de Sapcote, 49, (d. 11). H. 3. Richard Basset de Wilden, Wileden, 25, (d. 25.) 27. (d. 18.) E. 1. Ralph Basset de Drayton (sometimes stiled Senior, 23, (d. 9.) 27, (d. 16. 18.) 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 8. 13.) 32, (d. 2.) 33. (d. 21.) 34, (d. 2.) 35, (d. 13.) E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 11. 19.) 2, (d. 11. 14. 20.) 3, (d. 16. 17.) 4, (d. 1.) 5, (d. 11. 17. 25.) 6, (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d. 26. 27.)
8, (d. 29. 35.) , (d. 22.) 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, (d. 13.) 14, (d. 5. 29.) 15, (d. 16.) 16, (d. 26.) 17, (d. 27) 20, (d. 4.) E. 2. 1, (p. 1. d. 6. 11.) 2, (d. 15. 23. 31.) 3, d. 19.) 4, (d. 13. 23. 32. 41.) 5, (p. 1. d. 7. 25. p. 2. d. 7.) 6, (d. 49. 19. 36.) 7, p. 2. d. 3.) 8, (d. 18.) 9, (d. 8▪ 28) 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11, (p. 1. d. 8. 15. p. 2. d. 11. 40.) 12, (p. 2. d. 32.) 13, (p. 2. d. 1. 28.) 14, (p. 2. d. 23. 33.) 15, (p. 1. d. 37.) 16, (p. 1. d. 39. P. 2. d. 13. 22.) E. 3. Ralph Basset de Drayton, 31, (d. 2.) 32, (d. 14.) 34, (d. 4.) 37, (d. 32.) 38▪ (d. 3.) 39, (d. 2.) 42▪ (d. 22.) 43, (d. 24.) 44▪ (d. 1.) 46, (d. 9.) E. 3. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (d. 13. 29) 3, (d. 32.) 4, (d. 32.) 5, (d. 40.) 6, (d. 37.) 7, (d. 10. 37.) 8, (d. 35.) 9. (d. 45.) 10, (d. 42.) 11, (d. 13. 24.) 12, (d. 42.) 13, (d. 5.) R. 2. Sinon Basset, 32, (d. 14.) E. 3. Ralph Basset de Sapcoe, 44, (d. 1.) 46, (d. 9.) E. 3. Robert Baynard, 6, (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d. 27.) E. 2. 3, (d. 19.) E. 3. Nicholas de Beche, 16. (p. 1. d. 36.) 49, (d. 6.) E. 3. Iohn de Bee, 23, (d. 4. 9.) 24, (d. 7.) E. 1. Iohn de Beke-campo, (Beauchamp) usually stiled de So∣merset, 25, (d. 25.) 27, (d. 16▪ 18.) 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d 8. 13.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 21.) 34, (d. 2.) E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 11. 19.) 2, (d. 11. 26.) 3, (d. 16. 17.) 4, (d. 1.) 5, (d. 11. 17. 25.) 6, (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d. 16. 27.) 8, (d. 24. 35.) 9, (d. 22.) 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, (d. 13.) 14, (d. 5. 29.) 15, (d. 16.) 16. (d. 26.) 17, (d. 27.) 18, (d. 5. 21. 34.) 19, (d. 27.) 20, (d. 4.) E. 2. 1, (p. 2. d. 6. 11.) 2▪ (d. 15. 23. 31.) 4, (d. 13. 23. 32. 41.) 5, (p. 1. d. 7. 25. p. 2. d. 7.) 6, (d. 9. 19. 36.) 7, (p. 2. d. 3.) 8, (d. 12.) 9, (d. 8. 28.) 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11, (p. 1. d. 8.) 15. (p. 2. d. 11. 40.) 12, (p. 2. d. 32.) 13, (p. 2. d. 1. 28.) 14. (p. 2. d. 23. 33.) 15, (p. 1. d. 37.) 16, (p. 1. d. 39.) 17, (p. 1. d, 25.) 21, (p. 1. d. 5.) 26, (d. 14.) 27, (d. 12.) 28, (d. 25.) 29, (d. 8.) 31, (d. 2. 21.) 33, (d. 10▪) 34, (d. 4.) E. 3.
Giles de Bello-campo, 20, (d. 4.) E. 2. Iohn de Bello-campo de Warwick, 24, (p. 2. d. 3.) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d. 8.) 31, (d. 21.) E. 3. Roger de Bello-campo, 37, (d. 22.) 38, (d. 3.) 39, (d. 2.) 42, (d. 22.) 43, (d. 24.) 44, (d. 1.) 49, (d. 4. 6.) 50, (p. 2. d. 6.) E. 3. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (d. 13. 29.) 3, (d. 32.) R. 2. Iohn Beauchamp de Kiderminster 11, (d. 24.) R. 2. William Beauchamp de Burgavenny, 16, (d. 23.) 17, (d. 30.) 18, (d. 23.) 20, (p. 1. d. 15.) 21, (p. 1. d. 27.) 23, (d. 3.) R. 2. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (p. 1. d. 3.) 3, (d. 17.) 5, (p. 1. d. 28. p. 2. d. 4.) 7, (d. 30.) 8, (d. 2.) 9, (d.) 11, (d. 32.) H. 4. William Beauchamp DOMINUS de Sto. Amando, 27, (d. 24.) Miles 29, (d. 41.) 31, (d. 36.) 33, (d. 36) H. 6. John Beauchamp Miles, Dominus de Beauchamp, 27, (d. 24.) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d. 41.) 31, (d. 36.) 33, (d. 36.) 38, (d. 36.) 49, (d. 6.) H. 6. 1, (d. 35.) 2, (d. 3.) 6, (d. 1.) 9, (d. 4.) 12, (d. 41.) E. 4. Richard Beauchamp de Beauchamp Miles, 22, and 23, (d. 10.) E. 4. Henry de Bello-monte (Beaumont) sum. 2, (d. 11. 20.) 3, (d. 16. 17.) 4▪ (d. 1.) 5, (d. 11.) 6, (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d. 18. 27.) 8, (d. 29. 35.) 9, (d. 22.) 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12▪ (d. 11. 29.) 13, (d. 13.) 14, (d. 5. 29.) 15, (d. 16.) 16, (d. 26.) 17, (d. 27.) 18, (d. 5. 21. 34.) 20, (d. 4.) E. 2. 1, (p. 2. d. 11. 16.) 2. (d. 15. 23. 31.) 5, (p. 1. d. 7. 25.) 6, (d. 9. 19. 36.) E. 3. Iohn de Bellomonte, 16, (p. 1. d. 39.) E. 3. Henry de Bellomon∣te, 36, (d. 16.) 37, (d. 22.) 38, (d. 3.) 39, (d. 2.) E. 3. Iohn de Bellomonte, 7, (d. 10. 37.) 8, (d. 35.) 9, (d. 46.) 10, (d. 42.) 11, (d. 13. 24.) 12, (d. 42.) 13, (d. 5.) 14, (d. 42.) 15, (d. 37.) 16, (d. 23.) 17, (d. 30.) R. 2. Henry de Bellomonte, 7, (d. 30.) 8, (d. 8.) 11, (d. 32.) 12, (d. 2.) 14, (d. 22.) H. 4. 1, (d. 37.) Iohn Beamont, Miles 10, (d. 10.) 11, (d. 10.) 13, (d. 2.) 14, 15, (d. 18.) 18, (d. 33.) Vicont de Bea∣mond,
20, (d. 27.) 23, (d. 21.) 25, (d. 24.) 27, (d. 24.) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d. 41) 31, (d. 36.) 33, (d. 36.) 38, (d. 30.) H. 6. Robert de Benhall, 33, (d. 10.) 34, (d. 3.) E. 3. William de Berisford, 8, (d. 35.) E. 2. Thomas de Berkelegh, Berkele, Berkeley, Berkely (thus variously written) 23, (d. 4. 9.) 24, (d. 7.) 25, (d. 25.) 27, (d. 16 18.) 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 8. 13.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 10. 21.) 34, (d. 2.) 35, (d. 13.) E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 19.) 2, (d. 11. 14. 26.) 3, (d. 16. 17.) 4 (d. 1.) 5, (d. 11. 17.) 6, (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d. 16. 17.) 8 (d. 29. 35.) 9, (d. 22.) 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, (d. 13.) 14, (d. 5. 29.) E. 2. Thomas de Berkele, Berkeley, 3, (d. 19.) 4, (d. 9. 23. 32. p. 2. d. 7.) 9, (d. 8. 28.) 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11, (p. 1. d. 8. 15. p. 2. d. 40.) 12, (p. 2. d. 32.) 13, (p. 2. d. 1. 28.) 14 (p. 1. d. 23. 43.) 15, (p. 1. d. 37.) 16, (p. 1. d. 39.) 17, (p. 1. d. 25.) 18, (p. 1. d. 14.) 20▪ (p. 2. d. 22.) 21, (p. 2. d. 9.) 22, (p. 1. d. 32. p. 2. d. 7.) 23, (p. 1. d. 23.) 24, (p. 2. d. 3.) 25, (p. 1. d. 5.) 26, (d. 14.) 27, (d. 12.) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d. 8.) 31, (d. 2.) 34, (d. 4. 35.) E. 3. Maurice de Berkeley, 2, (d. 1. 20.) 3, (d. 16. 17.) 4, (d. 19.) 5, (d. 25.) 6, (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d. 16, 27) 8, (d. 23. 35.) 9, (d. 32.) 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, (d. 13.) 14, (d. 5. 29.) E. 2. Maurice de Ber∣kele, Berkeley, 16, (p. 1. d. 36.) 36, (d. 16.) 37, (d. 22.) 38, (d. 3.) 39, (d. 2.) 42, (d. 22.) E. 3. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (d. 13. 29.) 3, (d. 32.) 4, (d. 32.) R. 2. Thomas de Berkeley, Barkeley. 4, (d. 32.) 5, (d. 40.) 6, (d. 37.) 7, (d. 37.) 8, (d. 35.) 10, (d. 42.) 11, (d. 13. 24.) Chivaler:) 12, (d. 42.) 13, (d. 5.) 14, (d 42.) 15, (d. 37.) 16, (d. 23.) 17, (d. 30.) 18, (d. 23.) 20, (p. 1. d. 15.) de Berkeley, 21, (p. 1. d. 27.) 23, (d. 3.) R. 2. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (p. 1. d. 3.) 5, (p. 1. d. 28. p. 2. d. 4.) 7, (d. 30.) 8, (d. 2.) 11, (d. 32.) 12, (d. 2.) 14, (d. 22.) H. 4. 1, (d. 33.) 2, (d. 16.) 3, (d. 15.) 4, (d. 16.) H. 5.
Iames de Berkele, Berkely, 9, (d. 13.) H. 5. 1, (d. 22.) Chivaler, 3, (d: 9.) 4▪ (d: 15.) 5, (d: 4.) 7, (d: .) 9▪ (d: 18.) 10, (d: 10.) 11, (d. 10.) 13, (d. 2.) 15, (d: 18.) 18, (d. 33.) 20, (d. 27.) 23, (d. 21.) 25, (d. 24.) 27, (d. 24.) 28, (d. 26.) 29▪ (d. 41.) 31, (d. 38.) 33, (d. 36.) 38, (d. 30.) H. 6. 1, (d. 35.) 2, (d. 3.) E. 4. Richard Berkeley, 3, (d. 9.) H. 6. William de Berkeley, Chivaler, 49, (d. 6.) H. 6. 6, (d. 1.) 12, (d. 14.) Vi∣cou Berkeley, 22, and 23, (d. 10.) E. 4. Iohn de Berners, Chivaler. 49, (d. 6.) H. 6. 7▪ (d. 3.) 8, (d. 1.) 9, (d. 3.) . 4. Roger Bertram, 49. (d. 11.) H. 3. Thomas le Blote, Blount, 1, (p: 2. d. 11. 16.) 2, (d. 23. 31.) E. 3. William le Blount, Blunt, 4, (d. 13. 41.) 5, (d. 7. 25.) 6, (d. 4. 19. 36.) 7, (p: 2. d. 3.) 8, (d. 18.) 9, (d. 8, 28.) 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11, (p. 1. d. 8. 11. 2. d. 40.) E. 3. Walter Blunt de Mountjoy, Chivaler, 6, (d. 1.) 9, (d. 3.) 12, (d. 41.) E. 4. Iohn Blount de Mount∣joy, 22, & 23, Chivaler (d. 10.) E. 4. Henry de Bodrigan, 3, (d. 17.) E. 2. Iohn de Bohn, 33, (d. 10.) de Midurst, 37, (d. 22.) 38, (d. 3.) 39, (d. 2.) E. 2. William Boneville, Bonevile, DOMINUS de Bonevile & de Chaton Miles, 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d. 41.) 31, (d. 36.) 33, (d. 36.) 38, (d. 3.) H. 6. William de Bterax, Botreaux, 43, (d. 22.) 44, (d. 1.) 46, (d. 9.) 47, (d. 13.) 49, (d. 4. 6.) 50, (p. 1. d. 6.) E. 3. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (d. 13. 29.) 3, (d. 32.) Chir. 7, (d. 10. 37.) 8, (d. 35.) 9, (d. 45.) 10, (d. 42.) 11, (d. 24.) 12, (d. 42.) 13, (d. 5.) 14, (d. 42.) 15, (d. 37.) R. 2. Iohn de , 8, (d. 35.) R. 2. William de Botreaux 14, (d. 22.) H. 4. 1, (d. 9. 37.) 2, (d. 16.) 3, (d.) 4, (d. 16.) 5, (d. 11.) 7, (d. 9.) 8, (d. 2.) 9, (d. 13.) H. 5. 1, (d. 22.) 2, (d. 1.) Chivaler, 3, (d. 9.) 4, (d. 15.) 5, (d. 4.) 7, (d. 2.) , (d. 18.) 10, (d. 10.) 11, (d. 10.) 13, (d. 2.) 15, (d. 1.) 18, (d.
33.) 20, (d▪ 27.) 23, (d. 21.) 25, (d. 24.) 27, (d. 24.) 28. (d. 26.) 29, (d. 41.) 31, (d. 36.) 33, (d. 36.) 38, (d. 30.) H. 6. 1, (d. 35.) E. 4. Iohn Botourte, Buteturte, , 33, (d. 3. 8.) E. 1. 1, (d. 8.) 2, (d. 11. 14. 20.) 3, (d. 16. 17.) 4, (d. 1.) 5, (d. 11. 17. 25.) , (d. 3. 3.) 7, (d. 16. 27.) 8, (d. 29. 31.) 9, (d. 22.) 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 2) 13, (d. 13.) 14. (d. 5. 29.) 15, (d. 16.) 16, (d. 26.) 17▪ (d. 27.) 18, (d. 34.) 20, (d. 4) E. 2. Iohn , 16, (p. 1. d. 39.) de Byley, 32, (d. 14.) 42, (d. 22.) 44, (d. 1.) 46, (d. 9, 10. 11.) 47, (d. 13.) 49, (d. 6.) 50, (p. 2. d. 6.) E. 3. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (d. 13. 29.) 3, (d. 32.) 4, (d. 32.) 5, (d. 40.) 6, (d. 37.) 7, (d. 10. 37.) 8, (d. 35.) 9, (d. 45.) R. 2. William de Botiler, Botiller, Butiller, Butiler, 23, (d. 4. .) 24, (d. 7.) de Wrington, 25, (d. 25.) 27, (d. 18.) E. 1. De , 1, (d. 8.) 2, (d. 11. 20.) 3, (d. 16. 17.) 4, (d. 1.) 5, (d. 11. 17.) 6, (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d. 16. 27.) 8, (d. 29. 35.) 9, (d. 22.) 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, (d. 13.) 14▪ (d. 5. 29.) 15, (d. 16.) 16, (d. 26.) 17, (d. 27.) 18, (d. 5. 21. 34.) 19, (d. 27.) E. 2. William Botiller de , 42, (d. 22.) 43, (d. 24.) E. 3. Radlph de Botiler, Chivaler, 20, (d. 27.) de Sutley, de sudely, 23, (d. 21.) 25, (d. 24.) 27, (d. 24.) 28, (d. 28.) 29, (d. 41.) 31, (d. 36.) 33, (d. 36.) 38, (d. 30.) 49, (d. 6.) H. 6. 1, (d. 35.) 2, (d. 3.) 6, (d. 1.) 9, (d. 3.) 12, (d. 41.) E. 4. Iohn Burgohier, Bourghhier, 4, (d. 32.) 5, (d. 40.) 6, (d. 37.) 7, (d. 10. 37.) 8, (d: 35.) 9, (d. 45.) 10, (d. 42.) 11, (d. 13. 24.) 12, (d. 42.) 13, (d. 3.) 14, (d. 42.) 15▪ (d. 37.) 16, (d. 23.) 17, (d. 30.) 18, (d. 23.) 20, (p: 1. d: 15.) 21, (p. 1. d. 27.) 21, (p. 1. d▪ 3.) R. 2. 1▪ (d: 37.) H: 4. .
2.) 15▪ (d. 18.) 18, (d. 33.) de Bourghchier Chi∣valer, 23, (d. 31.) Vicount Burghehier, (yet still lifted towards the end of the Barons, for the most part) 25, (d. 24.) 27, (d. 24.) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d. 41.) 31, (d. 36.) 33, (d. 36.) 38, (d. 30.) H. 6. Henry Bourghchier de Crumwel Chivaler, 49, (d. 8.) H. 6. William Bourghchier, Miles Dominus Fitzwarren, 27, (d. 24.) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d. 41.) 31, (d. 36.) 33, (d. 36.) 38, (d. 30.) H. 6. 1, (d. 35.) 2, (d. 3.) 6, (d. 1.) 9, (d. 3.) E. 4. Fulco Bourghchier, de Fitz∣warren Chivaler, 12, (d. 41.) E. 4. Iohn Bourghchier de Bruers Chivaler, 33, (d. 36.) 38, (d. 30.) 49, (d. 6.) H. 6. 1, (d. 35.) 2, (d. 3.) 6, (d. 1.) 9, (d. 3.) 12, (d. 41.) E. 4. See Berners. Humfrey Bourghchier de Cromwel Chivaler, 9, (d. 3.) E. 4. Thomas de Bradeston, 16, (p. 1. d. 39.) 21, (p. 2. d. 9.) 22, (p. 1. d. 32. p. 2. d. 7.) 23, (p. 1. d. 23.) 25, (p. 1. d. 5.) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d. 7. 8.) 31, (d. 2. 29.) 34, (d. 35.) E. 3. Gerard Braybrook, 32, (d. 14.) E. 3. William de Brewosa, Brenosa, Brewes, 25, (d. 25.) 28, (d. 9. 17.) 30, (d. 8. 12.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 31.) 34, (d. 2.) E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 11▪ 19.) 2, (d. 11. 14. 21.) 3, (d. 10.) 6, (d. 11. 31.) 7, (d. 16. 27.) 8, (d. 29. 35.) 9, (d. 22.) 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11, 29.) 13, (d. 13.) 14, (d. 5. 29.) 15, (d. 16.) 16, (d. 26.) E. 2. Thomas de Brewosa, de Brewes, 16, (p. 1. d, 39. p. 2. d. 13.) 22, (p. 2. d. 7.) 23, (p. 1. d. 23.) 26, (d. 14.) 27, (d. 12.) 32, (d. 14.) 33, (d. 10.) E. 3. Guido de Brian, Bryan, 24, (p. 1. d. 3.) 25, (p. 1. d. 5.) 26, (d. 14.) 27, (d. 12.) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d. 7. 8.) 31, (d: 2. 21.) 34, (d. 4.) 36, (d. 16.) 37, (d. 22.) 38, (d. 3.) 39, (d. 2.) 42. (d. 22.) 43, (d. 24.) 44, (d. 1.) 46. (d. 3.) 47, (d. 13.) 49, (d. 4. 5.) 50, (p. 2. d. 6.) E. 3. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (d. 13. 29.) 3, (d. 32.) 4, (d. 32.) 5, (d. 40.) 6, (d. 37.)
7, (d. 10. 37.) 8, (d. 35.) 9, (d. 45.) 10, (d. 42.) 11, (d. 13. 24.) 12▪ (d. 42.) R. 2. Henry Bronfleet, Miles, BARO de Vesey, Vessy, 27, (d. 24.) Dominus de Vesey, Vessey, 28, (d. 26) 29, (d. 41.) 31, (d. 36.) 33, (d. 36.) 38, (d. 30.) H. 6. 1, (d. 35.) 2, (d. 3.) 6, (d. 1.) E. 4. Edward Brook de Cobham, Chivaler, 23, (d. 21.) 25, (d. 24.) 27, (d. 24.) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d. 41.) 31, (d: 36.) 33, (d. 36.) 38, (d. 30.) H. 6. 1, (d. 35.) 2. (d. 3.) E. 4. Iohn Brook de Cobham, Chivaler, 12, (d. 41.) 22, & 23, (d. 10.) E. 4. Maurice de Brun, Brunne, 6, (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d. 16, 27.) 8, (d. 29. 35.) 9, (d. 22.) 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, (d. 13.) 14, (d. 5. 29.) 15, (d. 16.) E. 2. Rbert de Brus, 23, (d. 4. 9.) 24, (d. 7.) 25, (d. 25.) E. 1. Iohn Bucton, 49, (d. 4.) E. 3. Ralph de Bulmer, Bulmere, 16, (p. 2. d. 39.) 18, (p. 1. d: 14.) 21, (p. 2. (d. 9.) 22, (p. 1. d. 32. p. 2. d. 7.) 23, (p. 1. d. 23.) E. 3. William de Burgh, 1, (p. 2. d. 11.) 2, (d. 31.) E. 3. Robert de Burghershe, 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 21.) 34, (d. 2.) E. 1. Bartholomew de Burghershe, 4, (d. 13. 23. 32. 41.) 5, (d. 7. 25. p. 2. d. 7.) 6, (d. 4. 9. 19. 36.) 7, (p. 2. d. 3.) 8, (d. 18.) 9, (d: 8. 18.) 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11, (p. 1. d. 8. 15. p. 2. d. 40.) 16, (p. 1. d. 39.) 18, (p. 1. d. 14.) 22, (p. 1. d: 32. p: 2. d. 7.) 23, (p: 1. d. 23.) Senior, 24, (p. 2. d: 3.) 25, (p: 1. d: 5.) 26, (d. 16.) 27, (d: 12.) 28, (d: 26.) 31, (d: 2.) 34, (d: 4.) 36, (d: 16. 42.) 37, (d. 22.) 38, (d. 3.) 39, (d. 2.) 42, (d. 22.) E. 3. Robert Burghersh, 16, (p: 1. d: 39.) 22, (p. 2. d. 7.) 23, (p. 1. d: 23.) E. 3. Edmund Burnel, 5, (d. 17.) 6, (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d. 16. 27.) 8, (d. 29. 35.) E. 2. Nicholas Burnel, 24, (p: 2. d: 3.) 25, (p: 1. d. 5.) 28, (d. 28.) 29, (d. 7. 8.) 31, (d: 2. 21.) 36, (d. 10.) 37, (d. 32.) 38, (d. 22.)
39, (d. 2.) 44, (d. 1.) 46, (d. 9.) 47, (d. 13.) 49, (d. 4. 6.) 50, (p. 2. d. 9.) E. 3. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (d. 13. 29.) 3, (d. 32.) 4, (d. 32.) 5, (d. 40.) 6, (d. 37.) R. 2. Hugh Burnel, 7, (d. 10. 37.) 8, (d. 35.) 10, (d. 42.) 11, (d. 13. 24.) 12, (d. 42.) 13, (d. 5.) 14, (d 42.) 15▪ (d. 37.) 16, (d. 23.) 17▪ (d. 31.) 18, (. 23.) 20, (p. 1. d. 15.) 21, (p. 1. d. 27.) 23, (d. 3.) R. 2. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (p. 1. d. 3.) 3, (d. 17.) 5, (p. 1. d. 28. p. 2. d. 4.) 7, (d. 30.) 8, (d. 2.) 11, (d. 32.) 12, (d. 2.) 14, (d. 22.) H. 4. 1, (d. 9. 37.) 2, (d. 16.) 3, (d. 15.) 4, (d. 16.) 5▪ (d. 11.) 7, (d. 9.) H. 5. William de Burton, 32, (d. 14.) E. 3. C THomas de Cailly, 2, (d. 11. 20.) 3, (d. 17.) 4, (d. 1.) E. 2. Ralph Camys, Camoyes de Camoyes, 49, (d. 11.) H. 3. Ralph de Cameyes, Canoyes, 7, (d. 16. 27.) 8. (d. 29. 35.) 9, (d. 22.) 11. (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d 11. 29.) 13▪ (d. 13.) 14, (d. 5. 29.) 15, (d. 16.) 16, (d. 26.) 17, (d. 27.) 18, (d. 21. 34.) 19, (d. 27,) 20, (d. 4) E. 2. 1, (p. 2. d. 11. 16.) 2, (d. 15. 23. 31) 3. (d. 19.) 4, (d. 13. 23. 32. 41.) 5, (p. 1. d. 7. 25. p. 2. d. 7.) 6, (d. 4. 9. 19. 36) 7▪ (p. 2. d. 3) 8, (d. 18.) 9, (d. 18.) E. 3. Iohn de Camoyes, 33. (d. 10.) E. 3. Thomas Camoyes, Chivaler, 7, (d. 10. 37.) 8, (d. 35.) 9, 45.) 10, (d. 42.) 11, (d. 13 24.) 1, (d. 42.) 13, (d. 3.) 14, (d. 42.) 15, (d. 37.) 16, (d. 23.) 17, (. 30.) 18, (d. 23.) 20, (p. 1, d. 15.) 21, (p. 1. d. 27.) 23, (p. 1. d. 3.) R. . 1, (d. 37.) 2, (p. 1. d. 3.) 3, (d. 17.) 5, (p. 1. d. 28. p. 2. d. 4.) 7, (d. 30.) 8, (d. 2.) 11, (d. 32.) 12, (d. 2.) 14, (d. 22) H. 4. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (d. 16.) 3▪ (d. 15.) 4, (d. 16.) 5, (d. 11.) 7, (d. 9) 8, (d. 2.) H. 5. 23, (d. 4. 9:) 24, (d. 7.) 25, (d. 25.)
28, (d: 3.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 21.) 34, (d. 3.) E. 1. William de Camvil, 2, (d: 11.) 4, (d. 1.) E. 2. William de Cantilupo, 28, (d: 3.) 30, (d▪ 8. 13.) 32, (d. 21.) 3, (d: 23.) 34, (d: 2.) 35, (d. 13.) E: 1. 1, (d: 8. 11. 19.) 2, (d. 2.) E: 2. Nicholas de Canti lu∣po, 9, (d. 8.) 11, (p: 1. d: 8. 15. p: 2. d: 11. 42.) 12, (p. 2. d: 3) 13, (p: 2. d. 1.) 14, (p: 1. d. 23. 33.) 15, (p: 1. d: 37.) 16, (p: 1. d. 39.) 17, (p: 1. d. 25.) 18, (p: 2. d. 14.) 20▪ (p: 2. d: 22.) 21, (p: 2. d. 9.) 22, (p: 1. d: 32. p: 2. d: 7.) 23, (p: 1. d. 23.) 24, (p: 2. d: 3.) 25, (p: 1. d: 5.) 28, (d. 26.) E. 3. Robert de Causton, 32, (d. 14.) 33, (d. 10.) E. 3. Hugh de Chasteldon, 32, (d. 14.) E. 3. Peter de Channet, Champne, 28, (d. 3. 17,)  1. Iohn Chaundos, 11▪ (p. 1. d. 15.) E. 3.  Chaun∣dos de Chaundos, 11, (p. 1. d. 8. p. 2. d. 40.) 12, (p. 2. d: 32.) 13, (p. 2. d. 3.) 14, (p. 1. d. 23. 33.) 15, (p. 1. d. 37.) 16, (p. 1 d. 39. 2. d. 22.) 17, (p. 1. d. 25.) 18, (p. 1. d. 14.) 20, (p. 1. d. 22.) 22, (p. 1. d. 32. p. 2. d. 7.) 23, (p. 1. d. 23.) 24, (p. 1. d. .) 25, (p. 1. d. 5.) 27, (d. 12.) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d. 7. 8.) E. 3. Thomas de Chaworth, 25, (d. 25.) 27, (d. 18.) E. 1. Iohn de Charleton, (Charleton) 7, (d. 16. 27.) 8, (d: 29. 35.) 9, (p. 22.) 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (11. 29.) 13, (d. 13.) 14, (d. 5. 29.) 15, (d. 16.) 16, (d. 26.) 17, (d. 27.) 18, (d. 5. 21. 34.) 19. (d. 27.) 20, (d. 4.) E. 2. 1, (p. 2. d. 11. 16.) 2, (d. 15. 23. 31.) 3, (d. 19.) 4, (d. 13. 23. 32. 41.) 5, (p. 1. d. 7. 25: p. . d. 7.) 6, (d. 4. 9. 19. 36.) 7, (p. 2. d: 3.) 8, (d. 18.) 9, (d: 28.) 10, (d: 15.) 11, (p: 1. d: 8. 15.) Senior, 13▪ (p. 2. d: 1. 28.) 14, (p: 1. d: 23. 33.) 15, (p: 1. d: 37.) 16, (p: 1. d: 39.) 17, (p: 1. d: 25.) 18, (p: 1. d: 14.) 20, (p: 2. d: 22.) 21, (p: 2. d: 9.) 22, (p: 1. d: 32. p. 2. d. 7.) 23, (d: 23.) 24, (p. 2. d: 3.) 25, (p: 1. d: 5.) 27, (d. 12.) 28, (d. .) 29, (d: 7. 8.) 31, (d. 2. 21) 34, (d: 4.) E. 3. Iohn de Charleton de Powi, 36, (d: 16.) 37, (d. 22.) 38,
(d: 3.) 39, (d: 2.) 42, (d: 22.) 44, (d: 1.) 46, (d. 9.) 47, (d: 13.) E. 3. Iohn de Charleton de Powys, 6, (d: 37.) 7, (d. 10. 37.) 8, (d. 35.) 9, (d: 45.) 10, (d: 42.) 11, (d: 13. 24.) 12, (d. 42.) 13, (d. 3.) 14, (d. 42) 15, (d: 37.) 16, (d. 23.) 17, (d. 30.) 18, (d: 23.) 20, (p: 1. d. 15.) 21, (p: 1. d: 27.) 23, (p: 1. (d. 3.) R: 2. 1, (d: 37.) 2, (p: 2. d. 3.) H: 4. Ed∣ward Charleton de Powys, 3, (d. 17.) 5, (p. 1. d. 28. p. 2. d: 4.) 7, (d: 30.) 8, (d. 7.) 11, (d: 32.) 12, (d. 2.) 14, (d: 2.) H. 4. 1, (d. 9. 37.) 2, (d. 6.) 3, (d. 15.) 4, (d: 16.) 5, (d. 11.) 7, (d: 9.) 8, (d: 2.) H. 5. Richard de Clare, 3 (d: 17.) E. 2. John de Clavering, Claverings, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d: 8. 13.) 32▪ (d. 2.) 34, (d. 2.) E. 1. 3, (d: 16. 17.) 5, (d: 11. 17. 25.) 6, (d: 3. 31.) 7, (d. 16. 27.) 8, (d. 29, 35.) 9, (d: 2.) 11, (d: 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 14, (d. 5. 29.) 15, (d. 16.) 16, (d. 26.) 17, (d: 27.) 18, (d. 5. 21. 34.) 19, (d. 27.) 20, (d. 4.) E. 2. 1, (p. 2. d. 11. 16.) 2, (d. 15. 23. 31.) 3, (d. 19.) 4, (d. 13. 23. 32.) 5, (p. 1. d. 7. 25. p. 2. d. 7.) E. 3. Robert de Clifford, de Clyfford, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 8. 13.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 21.) 34, (d. 2.) E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 11. 19.) 2, (d. 11. 14. 20.) 3, (d. 16. 17.) 5, (d. 17.) 6, (d. 3. 11. 31.) 7, (d. 16. 27.) E 2. Roger de Clifford, 13, (d: 12.) 14, (d. 5. 29.) E. 2. Robert de Clifford, 1, (p. 2. d. 11.) 2, (d. 23. 31.) 4, (d. 13. 23. 32. 41.) 5, (p. 1. d: 7. 25. p: 2. d. 7.) 6, (d 9. 19. 36.) 7, (p. 2. d. 3.) 8, (d. 18.) 9▪ (d. 8. 18.) 16, (p. 1. d: 39.) 18, (p. 1. d: 14.) 31, (d: 2.) E: 3. Ro∣ger de Clifford, 32, (d: 14.) 34, (d: 4.) 37, (d: 22.) 38, (d: 2.) 39, (d. 2.) 42, (d: 22.) 43, (d: 24.) 44, (d: 1.) 46, (d: 9.) 47, (d: 13.) 49, (d 4. 6.) 50, (p. 1. d: 6.) E. 3. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (d: 13. 29.) 3, (d: 32.) 4. (d: 32.) 5, (d: 40.) 6, (d. 37.) 7, (d. 10. 37.) 8, (d. 5) 9, (d: 45.) 10, (d. 42.) 11, (d. 13. 24.) 12, (d: 42.) R. 2. Thomas Clifford, 13, (d: 5.) 14, (d. 42.) 15, (d. 37.) R. 2 Iohn Clifford, 12, (d 2.) 14, (d: 22.) H. 4. 1, (d. 9. 37.) 2, (d. 16.) 3, (d: 15.) 4, (d.
16.) 8, (d. 2.) H. 5. Iohn de Clifford, Chivaler, 20, (d▪ 27.) H. 6. Thomas de Clifford Chivaler, 23, (d. 21.) 25, (d: 24.) 27, (d: 24.) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d: 41.) 31, (d: 36.) H. 6. William de Clifford Dominus de Clifford, 38, (d. 30.) H. 6. Iohn de Clifton, Clyften, 50, (p. 2. d. 6.) E. 3. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (d: 13. 29.) 3, (d: 32.) 4, (d. 32.) 5, (d. 40.) 6, (d: 37.) 7, (d: 37.) 8, (d: 35.) 9, (d: 45.) 10, (d. 42.) 11, (d: 24.) 12, (d: 42.) R. 2. Constantine de Clifton, 16, (d. 23.) 17, (d: 30.) 18, (d: 23.) R. 2. Iohn de Clinton, 27, (d: 18.) E. 1. William de Clinton, Clynton, 4, (d: 23.) 5, (d: 7. 25. p. 2. d. 7.) 6, (d: 9. 19. 36.) 7, (p: 2. d. 3.) 8, (d: 18.) 9, (d: 8. 18.) 10, (d: 1. 5.) E. 3. Iohn de Clynton, 6, (d. 4. 9. 19. 36.) 7, (p: 2. d: 3.) 8, (d. 18.) E. 3. Iohn de Clynton, 31, (d: 2.) 32, (d: 14.) 34, (d: 4.) 42, (d. 22.) 43, (d. 24.) 44, (d. 1.) 46, (d. 9.) 47, (d. 13.) 49, (d: 4. 6.) 50, (p. 2. d. 6.) E. 3. 1, (d: 37.) 2, (d: 13. 29.) 3, (d. 32.) 4, (d: 32.) 5, (d: 40.) 6, (d: 37.) 7, (d. 10. 37.) 8, (d: 35.) (9, d: 45.) 10, (d. 42.) 11, (d: 13. 24.) 12, (d: 42.) 13, (d: 5.) 14, (d. 42.) 15, (d. 37.) 16, (d. 23.) 17, (d. 30.) 18, (d. 23.) 20, (p. 1. d: 15.) 21, (p. 1. d. 27.) R. 2. William de Clinton, 23, (d. 3.) R. 2. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (p. 1. d. 3.) 3, (d: 17.) 5, (p. 1. d. 28. p. 2. d. 4.) 7, (d: 30.) 8, (d. 2.) 11, (d. 32.) 12, (d. 2.) 14, (d. 22.) H. 4. 1, (d. 9. 37.) 2, (d. 16.) 4, (d. 16.) 8, (d: 2.) 9, (d: 13.) H: 5. 1, (d: 22.) 2, (d: 18.) 3, (d. 9.) 4, (d. 15.) Chivaler, 9, (d. 18,) H. 6. Iohn DOMINUS de Clinton, 29, (d: 41.) 33, (d: 36.) H. 6. Chivaler, 1, (d. 35.) 2, (d. 3.) E. 4. Henry de Cobeham, Cobbeham, Cobham, 6, (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d. 16. 27) 8, (d. 29. 35.) 9, (d. 22.) 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, (d. 13.) 14, (d. 5. 29.) 15, (d. 16.) 16, (d: 26.) 17, (d. 27.) 18, (d. 5. 21. 34.) 19, (d. 27.) 20, (d. 4:) E. 2. 1, (p. 2. d. 11. 16.) 2, (d. 15. 23. 31.) 3, (d. 19.) 4, (d. 13. 23. 32. 41.) 5, (d. 7. 25.) 6, (d. 9. 19. 36.) 7, (p. 2. d. 3)
8, (d. 18.) 9, (d: 8. 18.) 1, (p. 1. d. 7.) E. 3. Stephen de Cobbeham, 10, (d. 4.) E. 2. . (p: . d. 1.) 2, (d. 15. 23. 31.) 3, (d. 19.) 4, (d. 3. 23.) 5, (d. 7. 25.) 6, (d. 4. 9. 19. 36.) , (p. 2. d. 3.) E. 3. ∣ginald de Cobbeham, Cobham, 16, (p. 1. d. 39.) 11, (p. 2. d. 9.) 22, (p. 1. d. 32. p. 2. d. 7.) 23, (p. 1. d. 23.) 24, (p. 2. d. 3.) 25, (p. 1. d. 5.) 27, (d. 12.) 28, (d. 6.) 3, (d. 2.) 32, (d. 14.) 34, (d. 4.) 44, (d. ▪) 46, (d. 9.) E. 3. Iohn de Cobbeham, 6, (d. 4.) 16, (p. 2. d. 13. 22.) 24, (p. 2. d. 3.) 25, (p. 1. d. 5.) 27, (d. 14.) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d. 7. 8.) 31, (d. 2. 21. 29.) E. 3. Iohn de Cobbeham de Kent, 42, (d. 22.) 43, (d. 24) 44, (d. 1.) 46, (d. 11.) 47, (d. 6.) 49, (d. 4. 8.) E. 3. , (d. 37.) 2, (d. 13. 29.) 3, (d. 32.) 4, (d. 32.) 5, (d. 40.) 6, (d. 37) 7, (d. 10. 37.) 8, (d. 35.) 9, (d. 45.) 10, (d. 4.) 11, (d. 13. 24.) 12, (d. 42.) 13, (d. 5.) 14, (d. 42.) 15, (d. 37.) 16, (d. 23.) 17, (d. 30.) 18, (d. 23.) 20, (p. 1. d. 15.) 21, (p. 1. d. 27.) Chivaler, 23, (d. 3.) R. 2. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (p. 1. d. 3.) 8, (d. 17.) 5, (p. 1. d. 28. p. 2. d. 4.) 7, (d. 0.) 8, (d. 2.) H. 4. See Old astle. John Coggeshall, 32, (d. 14.) E. 3. Iohn Cokdyn, 32, (d. 14.) E. 3. Walter de Colvyll, 49, (d. 11.) H. 3. Robert de Colevil, Colvil, Colvile, 16, (p. 1. d. 39. p. 2. d. 22.) 22, (p. 2. d. 7.) 23, (p. 1. d. 23.) 24, (p. 2. d. 3.) 25, (p. 1. d. 5.) 27, (d. 12.) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d. 8.) 31, (d. 2. 21.) 32, (d. 14.) 33, (d. 10.) 34, (d. 4. 35.) 36, (d. 16.) 37, (d. 22.) 38, (d. 3.) 39, (d. 2.) E. 3. Philip de Columbariis, 8, (d. 29. 35.) 9, (d. 22.) 11, (d. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, (d. 13.) 14, (d. 5. 29.) 15, (d. 16.) 16, (d. 26.) 17, (d. 27.) 18, (d. 5. 21. 34.) 19, (d. 27.) 20, (d. 4.) E. 2. 1, (p. 1. d. 11. 16.) 2, (d. 15. 23. 37.) 3, (d. 19.) 4, (d. 13. 23. 32. 41.) 5, (d. 7. 25.) 6, (d. 4. 9. 19. 36.) 8, (d. 18.) 9, (d. 8. 18.) 11, (p. 1. d. 8. 15. p. 2. d. 11.
40.) 12, (p. 2. d. 32.) 13, (p. 2. d. 1. 28.) 14, (p. 2. d. 23. 33.) E. 3. Peter Corbet, de Corbet, 23, (d. 9.) 25, (d. 25.) 27, (d. 16. 28.) 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 8. 13.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 31.) 34, (d. 2.) E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 11. 19.) 2, (d. 11. 20.) 3, (d. 16. 17.) 4, (d. 1.) 5, (d. 11. 17. 25.) 6, (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d. 16. 27.) 8, (d. 29. 35.) 9, (d. 22.) 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, (d. 13.) 14, (d. 7. 29.) 16, (d. 16.) E. 3. Robert Corbet, 32, (d. 14.) E. 3. Iohn Cornwal, Chivaler, 11, (d. 10.) 13, (d. 2.) 15, (d. 18.) 18, (d. 33.) 20, (d. 27.) H. 6. Hugh de Courtenay, 27, (d. 16. 18.) 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 8. 13.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 22.) 34, (d. 2.) E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 11. 19.) 2, (d. 11. 14. 20.) 3, (d. 16. 17.) 5, (d. 11. 17. 25.) 6, (d. 11. 31.) 7, (d. 16. 27.) 8, (d. 29. 35.) 9, (d. 22.) 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, (d. 13.) 14, (d. 5. 29.) 15, (d. 16.) 16, (d. 26.) 17, (d. 27.) 18, (d. 5. 21. 34.) 19, (d. 27.): 20, (d. 4.) E. 2. 1, (p. 2. d. 11. 16.) 2, (d. 15. 23. 31.) 3, (d. 19.) 4, (d. 13. 23. 32. 41.) 5, (p. 1. d. 7. 25. p. 2. d. 7) 6, (d. 4. 9. 19. 36.) 7, (p. 2. d. 3.) 8, (d. 28.) E. 3.) Hugh de Courtenay Iunior, 11, (p. 1. d. 8. 15.) E. 3. Hugh de Courtenay le Fitz. 44, (d. 4.) E. 3. Craystocke, See Graystocke. William de Cressey, 15, (d. 25.) E. 1. Iohn de Cretings, 6, (d. 4. 9. 19. 36.) E. 3. Iohn de Crombewel, Crumbewel, Crumwel, 1, (d. 8) 2, (d. 11. 14. 20.) 3, (d. 16. 17.) 5, (d. 11. 15.) 14, (d. 5.) 15, (d. 16.) 16, (d. 26.) 17, (d. 27.) 18, (d. 5. 21. 34.) 20, (d. 4.) E. 2. 1, (p: 2. d. 11. 16.) 2, (d. 15. 23. 31.) 3, (d: 19.) 4, (d: 13. 23, 32. 41.) 5, (p. 1. d. 7. 25. p. 2. d. 7.) 6, (d. 9. 13. 36.) 7, (p: 2. d. 7.) 8, (d: 18.) 9, (d. 18.) E. 3. Ralph de Crumbewel, Chivaler, 49, (d. 4. 6.) 50, (p. 2. d. 6.) E. 3. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (d. 13. 29.) 3, (d: 32.) 4, (d. 32.) 5, (d. 40.) 6, (d: 37.) 7, (d: 10. 37.) 8, (d: 35.) 9, (d:
45.) 10, (d: 42.) 11, (d. 13. 24.) 12, (d: 42.) 13, (d: 5.) 14, (d: 42.) 15, (d: 37.) 16, (d: 23.) 17, (d: 30.) 18, (d: 23.) 20, (p. 1. d: 15.) 21, (p. 1. d: 27) 23, (d. 3.) R. 2. 1, (d: 37.) 2, (p. 1. d: 3.) 3, (d. 17.) 5, (p. 1. d. 28. p: 2. d: 4.) 7, (d. 30.) 8, (d. 2.) 11, (d. 32.) 12, (d: 2.) 14, (d. 22.) H. 4. 1, (d: 9. 37.) 2, (d. 16.) 3, (d. 15.) 4, (d: 16.) H. 5. Ralph Crombewel, Chivaler, 1, (d: 22.) 2, (d: 18.) 3, (d: 9.) 4, (d. 15.) 5, (d. 4.) 7, (d: 2.) 9, (d. 18) 10, (d. 10.) 11, (d. 10.) 13, (d: 2.) 15, (d: 18.) 18, (d: 33.) 20, (d. 27.) 23, (d. 21.) 25, (d: 24.) 27, (d: 23.) 28, (d: 26.) 29, (d: 41.) 31, (d: 36.) 33, (d: 36.) H. 6. Humfrey, Dominus Crombewel, 2, (d: 3.) 6, (d: 1.) E. 4. Nicholas de Cryoll, 25, (d. 25.) E. 1. Simon de Cudington, 32, (d. 14.) E. 3. D RAnulph, Ralph de Dacre, 14, (d. 5.) 15, (d. 16.) 16, (d. 26.) 17, (d. 27.) 18, (d. 21. 34.) 20, (d: 4.) E. 2. 1, (p. 2. d. 16.) 2, (d: 15. 23. 31.) 3, (d. 19.) 4, (d: 23. 32. 41.) 5, (p: 1. d. 7. 25. p: 2. d. 7.) 6, (d. 9. 19. 36.) 7 (p. 2. d. 3.) 8, (d. 18.) 9, (d. 8. 18.) 10, (d: 1. 5.) 12, (p: 2. d. 32.) E. 3. William de Dacre, 24, (p. 2. d. 3.) 25, (p. 1. d. 5.) 27, (d. 12.) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d. 7. 8.) 31, (d. 2. 21.) 34, (d: 4.) E. 3. Ralph de Dacre 34, (d: 16.) 37, (d. 22.) 38, (d: 3.) 39, (d. 2.) 42, (d. 22.) 43, (d. 24.) 44, (d. 1.) 46, (d. 9.) 47, (d. 13.) E. 3. Hugh de Dacre, Chivaler, 50, (p: 2. d. 6) E. 3. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (d. 13. 29.) 3, (d. 32.) 4, (d. 32.) 5, (d. 40.) 6, (d. 37.) 7, (d. 27.) R. 2. William de Dacre, 7, (d. 10. 31.) 8, (d. 35.) 9, (d. 45.) 10, (d. 42.) 11, (d. 13. 24) 12, (d. 42) 13, (d. 5.) 14, (d. 42.) 15, (d. 37.) 16, (d. 23.) 17, (d. 30.) 18, (d. 23.) 20, (p. 1. d. 15.) 21, (p. 1. d. 27.) 23, (d. 3.) R. 2. 1, (d: 37.) 2, (p. 1. d. 3.) 3, (d. 17.) 5,
(p. 1. d. 28. p. 2. d. 4.) H. 4. Thomas de Dacre de Gisland, 1, (d. 9. 37.) 2, (d. 16.) 3, (d. 15.) 4, (d. 10.) 5, (d. 11.) 7, (d. 9.) 8, (d. 2.) 9, (d. 14.) H. 5. 1, (d. 22.) 2, (d. 18.) 3, (d. 9.) 4, (d. 16.) 5, (d. 4.) 7, (d. 2.) Chivaler, 9, (d. 18.) 10, (d. 10.) 11, (d. 10.) 13, (d. 2.) 15, (d. 18.) 18, (d. 33.) 20, (d. 27.) 23, (d. 21.) 25, (d. 20.) 27, (d. 24.) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d. 41.) 31, (d: 36.) 33, (d: 31.) H. 6. Reginald Dacre de Gisland, Chivaler, 38, (d. 30.) H. 6. Humfrey Dacre de Gisland, 22, and 23, (d. 10.) E. 4. Thomas de Dagworth, 21, (p. 2. d. 9.) 22, (p. 1. d. 32.) E. 3. Roger Damory, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, (d. 13.) 14, (d. 15. 29.) E: 2. Richard Damory, 20, (d. 4.) E. 2. 1, (p. 2. d. 11. 16.) 2, (d. 15, 23. 31.) 3, (d. 19.) 4, (d. 13. 32. 41.) E. 3. Philip de Darcy (de. Arcy) See Arcy, 25, (d. 25.) 28, (d. 3.) 30, (d. 8. 13.) 32, (d. 2.) E. 1. Philip Darcy, 20, (d. 4.) E. 2. 1, (p. 2. d. 11. 16.) 2, (d. 5. 23. 31.) 4, (d. 13. 41.) 5, (d. 7. 25.) 6, (d. 4.) 7, (d. 9. 19, 36.) Iohn Darcy de Cosin, 6▪ (d. 9. 19. 36.) 7, (p. 2. d. 3.) 16, (p. 1. d. 39.) de Knayth, 22, (p. 2. d. 7.) 23, (p. 1. d. 23.) 24, (p. 2. d. 3.) 25, (p. 1. d. 5.) 27, (d. 1. 5.) 28, (d. 26.) E. 3. Philip de Darcy, 1, (d. 37.) 2, (d. 13. 29.) 3, (d. 32.) 4, (d. 32.) 5, (d. 40.) R. 2. Thomas Darcy, 6, (d. 37.) 7, (d: 10. 37.) 8, (d: 35.) R. 2. Philip Darcy, 3, (d: 45.) 10, (d: 42.) 11. (d: 13. 24.) 12, (d: 42.) 13, (d. 5.) 14, (d. 42.) 15, (d. 37) 16▪ (d. 23.) 17, (d. 30.) 20, (p. 1. d: 15.) 21, (p. 1. d. 27.) R. 2. Iohn Darcy, 23, (d. 3.) R. 2. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (p. 1. d. 3.) 3, (d. 17.) 5, (p. 1. d. 28. p: 2. d: 4.) 7, (d. 30.) 8, (d. 2.) 11, (d. 32.) 12, (d: 2.) 14, (d. 22.) H. 4. Elie Daubeny, 28, (d: 3. 17.) 30, (d: 8. 13.) 32, (d: 2.) 33, (d, 21.) E. 1. Ralph Daubeny, 16, (p. 1. d. 39.) E. 3. William Danmarle, 32, (d. 14.) E. 3.
Rowland Davoyes, 32, (d. 14. E. 3. Dadl, See Audeley. Descales, See Sles. Hugh le Dispensor, Justicias Angliae, 49, (d. 11.) H. 3. Hugh le Dispenser, 23, (d. 4. 9.) 24, (d: 7.) 25, (d: 25.) 27, (d: 16. 18.) 28, (d: 17.) 30, (d: 8. 13.) 32, (d. 2.) 33▪ (d: 21.) 34, (d: 2.) E: 1. 1, (d: 8. 11. 19.) 2, (d: 11. 14. 20.) 3, (d: 16. 17.) 4, (d: 1.) 5, (d: 11. 17. 25.) 6, (d: 3. 31.) 7▪ (d: 16. 27.) 8, (d: 29. 35.) stiled Senior, 9, (d: 22.) 11, (d: 8. 14▪) 12, (d: 11. 29.) 13, (d: 13.) 14. (d: 15. 29.) 15, (d: 16.) E. 2. Hugh le Dispenser Iunior, 8, (d: 29. 35.) 9, (d: 22.) 11, (d: 8. 14.) 12, (d: 11. 29.) 13, (d: 13.) 14, (d: 5. 29.) 15, (d: 16.) 16, (d: 26.) 17, (d: 27.) 18, (d: 5. 21. 34.) 19, (d: 27.) E: 2. Hugh le Dispenser, 13, (p: 2. d: 1. 28.) 14, (p: 1. d: 23. 33.) 15, (p: 1. d: 37.) 16, (p: 1. d: 39.) 17, (p: 1. d: 25.) 18, (p: 1. d: 14.) 22, (p: 1. d. 7.) E: 3. Edward le Dispenser, 31, (d: 2.) 32, (d: 14.) 34, (d: 4.) 38, (d: 3.) 39, (d: 2.) 46, (d: 9.) E: 3. Philip le Dispen∣ser, 11, (d: 24.) 12, (d: 42.) 13, (d: 5.) 14, (d: 42.) 15, (d: 37.) 16, (d: 23.) 17, (d: 30.) 18, (d: 23.) 20, (p: 1. d: 15.) 21, (p: 1. d: 7.) 23, (d: 3.) R. 2. 1, (d: 37.) H. 4. Iohn Devereux, 8, (d: 37.) 9, (d: 45.) 10, (d: 42.) 11, (d: 13. 24.) 12, (d: 42.) 13, (d: 5.) 14, (d: 42.) 15, (d: 37.) 16, (d: 23.) R. 2. Walter Devereux de Feriers, Chivaler, 49, (d: 6.) H: 6. Dominus de Fer∣riers, 2, (d: 3.) 6, (d: 1.) 9, (d: 3.) 12, (d: 41.) 22, and 23, (d: 10.) E. 4. Edward Deyncourt, de Eyncourt, 27, (d: 16. 18.) 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 8. 13.) 32, (d: 2.) 33, (d. 21.) 34, (d: 2.) Ed. 1. 1, (d: 8. 11 19.) 2, (d: 11. 14. 20.) 3, (d: 16. 17.) 4, (d: 1.) 5, (d: 11. 17. 25.) 6, (d: 3. 31.) 7, (d: 16. 27.) 8, (d: 29. 35.) 9, (d: 22.) 11, (d: 8. 14.) 12, (d: 11. 29.) 13, (d: 13.) 14, (d: 5. 29.) 15, (d: 16.) 16, (d: 26.) 17, (d: 27.) 18, (d:
5. 21. 34.) 19, (d. 27.) 20, (d: 4.) E. 2. William de Eyncourt, 6, (d: 9. 19. 36.) 7, (p: 2. d: 3.) 8, (d: 18.) 9, (d: 8. 18.) 10, (d: 1. 5.) 11, (p: 1. d: 8. 15. p: 2. d: 11. 40.) 12, (p. 2. d. 30.) 13, (p: 2. d. 1. 28.) 14, (p▪ . d: 23. 33.) 15, (p. 1. d: 37.) 16, (p: 1. d: 39.) 17, (p: 1. d: 25.) 18, (p: 1. d: 14.) 22, (p: 2. d: 7.) 23, (p: 1. d: 23.) 24, (p: 1. d. 3.) 25, (p: 1. d: 5.) 27, (d: 12.) 28, (d: 26.) 29, (d: 2. 28.) 31, (d. 2. 21.) 32, (d: 14.) 34, (d: 14. 35.) 36, (d: 16.) 37, (d: 22.) E. 3. Iohn Dyncourt, 39, (d: 2.) E. 3. Iohn Dinham, Dynham, de Caredinham, Chivaler, 2, (d: 1.) 3, (d. 3.) 12, (d: 41.) 22, and 23, (d. 10.) E. 4. Richard de Draycot, 35, (d: 25.) E. 1. Dufford, See Ufford. Oliver Dynat, 23, (d: 4. 9.) 25, (d: 25.) 28, (d. 17.) E. 1. E WIlliam de Ebricis, 27, (d. 18.) E. 1. William de Echingham, 5, (d. 17, 25.) 6, (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d. 16. 17.) 8, (d. 29. 35.) 9, (d. 22.) 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, (d. 19.) 14, (d. 5. 29.) 15, (d: 16.) E: 2. Iohn de Eganie, Egayne, Degayne, 25, (d: 25.) 27, (d. 16. 17.) 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 8. 13.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 21.) 34. (d. 2.) E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 11. 19.) 2, (d. 11. 14. 21.) 3▪ (d. 16. 17.) 4▪ (d. 1.) 5, (d. 11. 17. 25.) 6, (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d. 16. 27.) 8, (d. 29. 35.) 9, (d. 12.) 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29) 13, (d. 13.) 14, (d: 5. 29.) E. 2. Iohn de Egaine, 16 (p: 1. d. 39. p. 2. d. 22.) 22, (p. 1. d. . 8.) 31, (d. 2. 21.) 32, (d. 14.) 34, (d. 4.) E. 3. Thomas D'engaine, 32, (d. 14.) E. . Henry de Erdington, 9, (d. .) E. . Nicholas de Estle, 30, (d. 8. 13.) E. 1.
Andrew de Astle, Estlegh, Estlye, Estelye, 23, (d. 4. 9.) 24, (d. 7.) 27, (d. 18.) 28, (d. 3. 7.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 21.) 34, (d. 2.) E. 1. Thomas de Estelye, 22, (p. 2. d. 7.) E. 3. Adam de Everingham, 2, (d: 11. 20.)  (d. 17.) 4, (d. 1.) 6, (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d. 16. 27.) 8, (d. 19, 35) 9, (d. 12.) E. 2. Adam de Everingham de Laxton, 44, (d. 1.) E. 3. Roger de Extrnoo (Lstrange) 23, (d. 4. 9.) 24, (d: 7.) 25, (d. 25.) 30, (d. 13.) E. 1. Iohn de Extran, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 8. 13.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 21.) 34, (d. 2.) E. 1. 1, (d: 8. 11. 19.) 2, (d. 19.) E. 2, See Le∣strange. De Eyncourt, See Deyncourt. Iohn de Eyvil, 49, (d. 11▪) H. 3. F IOhn de Fasle, Falsley, Chivaler, 7, (d. 10. 37) 8, (d. 3. 5) 9, (d. 45.) 10, (d. 42.) 11, (d. 13. 24.) 12, (d. 42. 13, (d. 5) 14, (d. 42.) 15, (d. 37.) R: 2. Iohn de Falewesle, 16, (d. 23.) R. 2. Wlter de Faonberge, Faucomberge, 23, (d. 4. 9.) 24, d. 7.) 25, (d. 25.) 27 (d. 16.) 28, (d. 8. 13.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d: 21.) 34, (d. 2.) 35, (d. 8. 13.) E. 1. 1, (d. 19.) 2, (d. 11. 20.) 3, (d. 16. 17.) 6, (d. 11. 31.) 7, (d: 16. 27.) 8, (d: 29. 35.) 9, (d. 22.) 11, (d: 8. 14.) 12, (d: 11. 29.) E. 2. Iohn de Faucomberge, 9, (d. 8.) 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11, (p. 1. d: 8. p. 2. d. 11 (40.) 12, (p. 2. (d. 32.) 13, (p. 2. d. 1. 28.) 14. (p. 1. d. 23. 33.) 15, (p. 1. d. 37.) 16, (p. 1. d. 39.) 17, (p. 1. d. 25.) 18, (p: 1. d: 14.) 20, (p. 2, d. 22.) 21, (p: 2. d. 9.) 22, (p. 1. d. 32. p. 2. d. 7.) 23, (p: 1. d. 19.) 29, (d. 7.) E. 3. Walter Faucomberge, 24, (p. 1. d. 3.) 25, (p. 1. d. 5.) 27▪ (d. 12.) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d: 7, 8.) 31, (d. 2. 21.) 34, (d: 4. 35.) 36, (d. 16.) E. 3. Robert de Felton, 6, (d. 3.) 7, (d. 16. 27.) E. 2. William de Felton, 16, (p. 1. d. 39.) E. 3.
Thomas de Fencotes, 23, (p. 1. d: 19.) E. 3. Fennys, See Fynes. William de errariis, (Frrers) 25, (d. 25.) 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 8. 13.) 33, (d. 21.) 34, (d. 2.) E. 1. 1, (d. 19.) E. 2. Iohn de Ferrarii, 27, (d. 16. 17.) 28, (d: 3. 17.) 30, (d. 8. 13.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 21.) 34, (d: 2.) E. 1. 1, (d: 11, 19.) 2, (d. 11. 14. 20.) 3, (d. 16. 17.) 4, (d: 1.) 5, (d: 17. 25.) 7, (d. 16.) 12, (d: 12. 29.) E: 2. William de Ferrariis, 6, (d. 3. 3.) 7, (d. 16. 7.) 8, (d. 23. 35.) 9, (d. 22.) 11, (d. 8. 14) 13, (d. 13.) 15, (d: 16.) 16, (d. 21, 26) 17, (d: 27.) E: 2. Henry de Ferrariis, 4, (d: 13. 23. 32. 41.) 5, (p: 1. d: 7. 25. p. 2. d. 7.) 6, (d. 9. 19. 38.) 7, (p: 2. d: 3.) 8, (d, 18.) 9, (d: 8. 28.) 10, (d: p. 5.) 11, (p: 1. d: 8. 15. p: 2, d: 11. 40.) 12, (p: 2. d: 32.) 16, (p: 1. d. 39. p: 2. d. 13.) E. 3. Robert de Ferrariis, 16, (p. 1. d. 39.) E: 3. William de Fer∣rers, 28, (d: 26.) 42, (d. 22.) 43, (d. 24.) E: 3. Ro∣bert de Ferrers, de Wemme, 49 (d. 4. 6.) 50, (p. 2. d. 6.) E. 3. 1. (d. 37.) 2, (d. 13. 29.) 3. (d. 32.) R. 2. Henry de Ferrari, Ferrers de Groby, 1, (d. 37.) 2, (d. 13. 29.) 3, (d: 32.) 5, (d: 40.) 6, (d: 37.) 7▪ (d. 10. 37.) 8, (d. 35.) 9, (d. 45.) 10, (d. 42.) 11, (d: 24.) R. 2. William de Ferrariis de Grby, 20, (p: 1. d. 15.) 21, (p. 1. d. 27) 23, (d: 3.) R: 2. , (d: 37.) 2, (p. 1. d. 3.) 3, (d: 17.) 5, (p: 1. d: 28. p. 2. d: 4.) 7, (d: 30.) 8, (d: 2.) 11, (d: 32.) 12, (d: 2.) 14, (d. 22.) H. 4. 1, (d: 9. 37.) 2, (d. 6.) 3, (d▪ 16.) 4, (d. 16.) 5, (d. 11.) 7, (d. 9.) 8, (d: 2.) 9, (d. 13.) H: 5. 1, (d. 22.) Chivaler, 2. (d: 18.) 3, (d. 9.) 4, (d. 15.) 5, (d. 4.) 7, (d. 2.) 9, (d. 18.) 10, (d. 10.) 11, (d. 10.) 12, (d: 2.) 15, (d: 18.) 18, (d. 33.) 20, (d. 27.) 23, (d. 21.) Dominus de Ferrariis de Gre∣by, 25, (d. 24.) 27, (d. 24.) H. 6. Brian Fil, Alni, (Fitz-Alan) 23, (d: 4. 9.) 24▪ (d. 7.) 25, (d. 25.) 27, (d: 18.) 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d: 8. 13.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 21.) E. 1. Thomas Fil. Bernardi (Fitz-Bernard) 6, (d. 3. 31:) 7,
(d: 16. 27.) 8, (d. 29. 31.) 9, (d. 22.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 14, (d. 5.) 15, (d. 16.) E. 2. Archerus Fil. Henrici, (Fitz-Henry, 2, (d. 1.) 4, (d. 11.) 6, (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d. 16. 27.) 8, (d: 29. 35.) 9, (d. 22.) 11, (d: 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, (d. 12.) 14, (d. 15.) 15▪ (d: 16.) 16, (d. 26.) 18, (d. 5. 21. 34.) 19, (d. 27.) E. 2. Henry Fil. Hugh (Fitz-Hugh) 14 (d: 5.) 15, (d. 16.) 16, (d. 26.) 17, (d. 27.) 18, (d. 5. 34.) 19, (d. 27.) 20, (d. 4.) E. 2. 1, (p. 2. d. 11. 16.) 3, (d. 19.) 4, (d. 23.) 5, (d: 7. 25.) 6, (d. 9. 19 36.) 7, (p. 2. d. 3.) 8, (d. 18.) 9, (d: 8. 18:) 10, (d. 1. 5.) 12, (p. 2. d. 32.) 13, (p. 2. d. 1. 28.) 14, (p. 1. d. 23. 33.) 15, (p. 1. d. 37.) 16, (p. 1. d. 39) 17, (p. 1. d. 25.) 18, (p. 1. d. 14.) 20, (p. 2. d. 22.) 21, (p. 2. d. 9.) 22, (p. 1. d. 32. p. 2. d. 7.) 23, (p: 1. d: 23.) 25. (p: 1. (d: 5.) E. 3. Henry Fitz-Hugh, 1, (d: 37.) 2, (d: 13. 29.) 3, (d. 32.) 4, (d. 32.) 5, (d. 40.) 6, (d. 37.) 7, (d: 16. 37.) 8, (d. 35.) 9, (d. 45.) 10, (d: 42.) 11, (d. 13. 24.) 12, (d. 42.) 13, (d. 5.) 14, (d. 42.) 15, (d: 37.) 16, (d: 23.) 17, (d. 30.) 18, (d. 23.) 20, (p. 1. d. 15) 21, (p. 1. d. 27.) 23, (d: 3.) R. 2. 1, (d: 37.) 2, (p. 1. d. 3.) 3, (d. 17.) 5, (p. 1. d. 28. p. 2. d. 4.) 7, (d: 30.) 8, (d. 2.) 11. (d. 32.) 12, (d. 2.) 14, (d. 2, 2.) H. 4. 1, (d. 9. 37.) 2, (d. 16.) 4, (d. 16.) 8, (d: 2.) H. 5. 1, (d. 22.) H. 6. William Fitz Hugh Chivaler, 7, (d. 2.) 9, (d. 18.) 10, (d: 10.) 11, (d. 10.) 13, (d. 2.) 15, (d. 18.) 18, (d. 33.) 20, (d: 27.) 23, (d: 21.) 25, (d: 24.) 27, (d: 24.) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d. 41.) H: 6. Henry Fitz Hugh Chivaler, 33, (d: 38.) 38, (d: 30.) 49, (d. 6.) H: 6. 1, (d: 35.) 2, (d: 3.) 6, (d: 1.) 9, (d: 3.) E: 4. Richard Fitz-Hugh, Chivaler, 22, and 23, (d: 10.) E. 4. Iohn Fil. Iohanuis (Fitz-Iohn) 49, (d: 11.) H: 3. Richard Fil. Iohannis, 23, (d: 9.) E: 1.) Matthew Fil. Iohannis, 25, (d: 25.) E. 1. Robert Fil. Pagani, (Fitz-Pagan, Fitz-Payn) 25, (d: 25.)
27, (d: 16. 18.) 28, (d: 3. 17.) 30, (d: 8. 13.) 32, (d: 2.) 33, (d: 21.) 34, (d: 2.) E: 1. 1, (d: 8. 11. 19.) 2, (d: 14. 21.) 3, (d: 17.) 5, (d: 11. 17. 25.) 6, (d: 31.) 7, (d: 16. 27.) 9, (d. 29. 35.) E: 2. Robert le Fitz-Payn, 20, (d. 4.) E. 2. 1, (p: 2. d. 11. 16.) 2, (d. 15. 23. 31) 3, (d: 19.) 4, (d. 23. 32.) 5 (p: 2. d: 7.) 6, (d: 4. 9. 19. 38.) 7, (p: 2. d: 3.) 8, (: 18.) 9, (d: 8. 28.) 10, (d: 1. 5.) 11, (p: 1. d: 8. p. 2. d: 11. 40.) 12, (p: 2. d: 32.) 13, (p: 2. d. 1. 28.) 14, (p: 1. d: 23. 33.) 15, (p: 1. d: 37.) 16, (p: 1. d: 39.) 17, (p: 1. d: 25.) 24 (p: 2. d: 3.) 25, (p: 1. d. 5.) E. 3. Iohn Fitz-Rauph, 31, (d. 14.) E. 1. Iohn Fitz-Reginald, 25, (d: 25.) 28, (d: 3. 17.) E. 1. Robert Fil. Rogeri, (Fitz-Roger) 23, (d: 4. 9.) 24, (d: 7.) 25, (d: 6. 25.) 27, (d: 18.) 28, (d: 17.) 30, (d: 8▪ 1.) 32, (d: 2.) 33, (d: 21.) 34, (d: 2.) 35, (d. 13.) E: 1. 1, (d: 8. 11. 19.) 2, (d: 14. 20.) 3, (d. 16. 17.) E: 2. Iohn Fil. Rogeri, 27, (d: 18.) E: 1. Andrew Fil. Rogeri, 27▪ (d: 16.) E. 1. Robert Fil-Walteri, (Fitz-Wanter,) 23, (d: 4. 9.) 24, (d: 7.) de Dauntre, 25, (d: 25.) 27, (d: 16. 18.) 28, (d: 3. 17.) 30, (d. 8. 13.) 32, (d: 2.) 33, (d: 21.) 34, (d: 2.) E. 1. 1, (d: 8. 11. 19.) 2, (d. 14. 20.) 3, (: 16. 17.) 5, (d, 17. 25.) 6, (d: 31.) 8, (d: 29. 35.) 9, (d: 22.) 13, (d: 13.) 14, (d: 1. 29.) 15, (d: 16.) 17, (d: 27.) 18, (d: 5. 21. 34.) 19, (d. 27) E: 2. Iohn Fitz-Water, 15, (p: 1. d. 37.) 16, (p: 1. d: 39.) 17, (p: 1. d: 25.) 18, (p: 1. d: 14.) 22, (p: 1. d. 7.) 23, (p: 1. d: 23.) 24, (p: 1. d. 3.) 25, (p. 1. d. 5.) 26, (d. 14.) 27, (d: 12.) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d: 8.) 31, (d: 2. 21.) (34, (d: 4.) E. 3. Walter, Fitz-Water, 43, (d. 24.) 49, (d: 4. 6.) 50, (p. 2. d. 6.) E. 3. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (d: 13. 29.) 3, (d: 32.) 4, (d: 32.) 5, (d: 40.) 6, (d: 37.) 7, (d: 10. 37.) 8, (d: 35.) 9, (d: 15.) R. 2. Walter, Fitz-Waulter, 14, (d: 42.) 15, (d: 37.) 16) d: 23) 17, (d. 30.) 20, (p. 1. d. 15.) 21, (p. 1. d. 27.) 23, (d. 3.) R. 2. 1, (d: 37.) 2, (p. 1. d. 3.) 3, (d. 17.) 5. (p. 1. d. 28. p. 2. d. 4.) H. 4. Walter, Fitz-Wa∣ter,
Chivaler, 7, (d. 2.) 9, (d. 18.) H. 6. Fulco Fil. Warini, (Fitz-Waren) 23, (d: 4. 9.) 24, (d. 7.) 25, (d, 6. 25.) 27, (d: 16. 18.) 28, (d. 3. 17) 30, (d. 8. 13.) 32, (d. 2) 33, (d. 21.) 34, (d. 2.) 35, (d. 13.) E. 1. 1, (d. 19.) 2, (d: 20.) 4, (d. 1.) 5, (d. 25.) 6, (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d. 16. 27.) 8, (d. 24. 35.) Senior, 9, (d. 22.) 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 39.) 13, (d. 13.) 14, (d. 5. 29.) 15, (d. 16.) 16, (d. 26.) 18, (d. 5. 34.) . 2. 5, (p. 1. d. 7. 2. p. 2. d. 7.) 6, (d. 9. 19. 36.) 7, (p. 2. d. 3.) 8, (d. 18.) 9, (d. 8. 28.) E. 3. William Fil. Warini, 16, (p. 1. d. 39.) E. 3. Ralph Fil. Willielmi (Fitz-William) 23, (d. 4. 9.) 24, (d. 7) 25, (d. 25.) 27, (d. 18.) 28, (d. 17.) 32, (d. 2.) E. 1. 4, (d. 3.) 7, (d. 27.) 8, (d. 29. 35.) E. 2. Ro∣bert Fil. Willielmi, (Fitz William) 30, (d. 8. 13.) 33, (d. 21.) 34, (d. 2.) 35, (d. 13.) E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 19.) 2, (d. 14. 20.) 3, (d. 16. 17.) E. 2. Godfry de olecumbe, 32, (d. 14.) E. 3. Iohn de Folevil, 32, (d. 14.) E. 3. Iordan Foliot, 23, (d. 4. 9.) 25, (d. 25.) E. 1. 9, (d. 22.) E. 2. Hugh de Frene, 10▪ (d. 1. 5.) E. 3. Ralph de Freschevil, 25, (d. 25.) E. 1. Thomas de Frowike, 32, (d. 14.) E. 3. Baldwin de Fryvil, 32, (d. 14.) E. 3. Thomas de Fulnatly, 32, (d. 14.) E. 3. Thomas de Furnivall, sometimes stiled senior, 23, (d. 4. 9.) 24 (d. 7.) 25, (d. 25.) 26, (d. 18.) 28, (d. 13. 17.) 30, (d. 8. 13.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 21.) 34, (d. 2.) 35, (d. 13.) E. 1. 1▪ (d. 8. 11. 19.) 2▪ (d. 14. 20.) 3, (d. 16▪ 17.) 5, (d. 11. 17. 25.) 6, (d: 2. 31.) 7, (d. 16. 27.) 8, (d. 23. 35.) 9, (d. 26.) 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 33.) 13, (d. 13.) 14, (d. 5. 29.) 15, (d. 16.) 16, (d. 26.) 17▪ (d. 27.) 18, (d. 5. 21. 34.) 19, (d. 27.) 20, (d. 4.) E. 2. 1, (p. 2. d. 11. 16.) 2, (d. 15. 23. 31.) 3, (d. 19.) 4, (d. 13. 23. 32. 41.) 5, (d. 7. 25. p. 2. d. 7.) 8, (d. 18.) 9, (d. 8. 18.) 11, (p. 2. d. 11, p. 1. d. 32.) 13, (p. 2. d. 28) E. 3.
Thoma de Furnival, Iunior, 1, (d. 11▪ 29.) 13, (d. 13.) 14, (d. 5. 29.) 15, (d. 16.) 16, (d. 26.) 17, (d. 27.) 18, (d. 21. 34.) E. 2. 1, (p. 2. d. 11.) 2, (d. 15. 23. 31.) 3, (d: 19.) 4, (d. 13. 23.) 5, (d. 7. 25. p. 2. d. 7.) 6, (d. 30.) E. 3. Thomas de Furnivl, 22, (p. 2. d. 7.) 23, (p. 1. d. 22.) 24, (p. 2. d. 7.) 25, (p. 1. d. 5) 26, (d: 26.) 28, (d. 8.) 29, (d. 19.) 31, (d. 2. 21.) 32, (d: 14.) 33, (d. 10.) 34, (d. 4. 35.) 35, (d: 36.) 36, (d: 16.) 37, (d. 22.) 38, (d. 3.) 39, (d. 2.) E. . William de Furnival, 42, (d. 22.) 43, (d. 24.) 44, (d. 1.) 46, (d. 9. 10. 11.) 49, (d. 4. 6.) 50, (p. 1. d. 6.) E. 3. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (d. 13. 29.) 3, (d. 32.) 4, (d. 32.) 5, (d. 37.) 6, (d. 37.) R. 2. Iames Fyenes, Fennys, Miles, Dominus de Say et Seal, 27, (d. 24.) 28, (d. 26.) William Fennys, Dominus de Say et Seal, Chivaler, 29, (d. 41.) 33, (d. 36.) 38, (d. 30.) H. 6. 1, (d. 35.) 2, (d. 3.) 6, (d. 1.) 9, (d. 3.) E. 4. Richard Fennys, (Fynes) Dominus de Dacre, Chivaler, 38, (d. 30.) 49, (d. 6.) H. 6. 1, (d. 35.) 2, (d. 3.) 6, d. 1.) 9, (d. 3.) 12, (d. 41.) 22, and 23, (d. 10.) E. 4. G GIlbert de Gandano, or de Gaunt, 49, (d. 11.) H. 3. 23, (d. 4. 9.) 24, (d. 7.) 5, (d. 25.) E. 1. Geoffry de Genvil, Genevil, Geynvil, 27, (d. 18.) 28, (d. 17.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 21.) 34, (d. 2.) E. 1. Iohn Giffard, Gifford, de Gifford, 23, (d. 4. 9.) 25, (d. 25.) 27, (d. 16. 18.) E. 1. Obertus Gifford, 25, (d. 25.) E. 1. Iohn Gifford de Borinesfeld, 5, (d. 11. 17. 25.) 6, (d. 3. 31.) 8, (d. 29. 35.) 9▪ (d. 22.) 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12▪ (d. 11. 29.) 13, (d. 13.) 14, (d. 5. 29.) E. 2. Iohn Gifford de Beof, 32, (d. 14.) E. 3. Iohn Golafre, 32, (d. 14.) E. 3. Raduph de Gorge, 2, (d. 11. 20.) 3, (d. 16. 17.) 4, (d. 1.) 5, (d. 11. 17. 25.) 6, (d. 3. 31▪) 7, (d. 27.) 8, (d. 29. 35.) 9, (d. 22.) 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, (d. 13.) 14, (d. 5. 29.) 15, (d. 16.) 16, (d. 26.) E. 2.
Ralph de Gorge, 13, (d. 13.) 14, (d. . 29.) E. 2. William de Grandisson, (Grandison) 27, (d. 16. 18.) 28, (d: 3. 17.) 30, (d. 8. 13.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 21.) 34, (d. 2.) E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 11. 19▪) 2, (d. 11. 14. 20.) 3, (d. 16.) 4, (d. 1.) 5, (d. 11.) 6, (d. 11. 31.) 7, (d. 16.) 8, (d. 29. 35.) 9, (d. 22.) 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11.) 13, (d. 13.) 14, (d. 5. 29.) 15, (d. 16.) 16, (d. 26) 17, (d. 27.) 18, (d. 5. 21▪ 34.) 19, (d. 27.) E. 2. Os∣berne de Grandissono, 28, (d. 17.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 21. E. 1. Peter de Grandisson, 11, (p. 1. d. 8. 15.) 22, (p. 2. d. 7.) 23, (p. 1. d. 23.) E. 3. Thomas de Gran∣disson, 24, (p. 2. d. 3.) E. 3. Thomas de Grelly, de Gresly, 1, (d. 8.) 2, (d. 2. 20.) 3, (d. 16. 17.) 4, (d. 1.) E. 2. Ralph de Grendon, 28, (d. 17.) E. 1. Robert (de Grendon) 33, (d. 21.) 34, (d. 2.) E, 1. Iohn, Baro de Greystoke, Graystoke, 23, (d. 4. 9.) 24. (d. 7.) 25, (d. 25.) E. 1. The same (as I conceive) sum∣moned by the name of Iohn de Craystoke, and Gray∣stoke only, 28, (d. 17.) 30, (d. 8.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 2.) E. 1. Ralph de Creystoke, Creystoke, 14, (d. 5.) 15, (d. 16.) 16, (d. 26.) E. 2. William de Greystoke, 22, (p. 2. d. 7.) 23, (p. 1. d. 23.) E. 3. stiled Baro de Greystoke, 24, (p. 2. d. 3.) 25, (p. 1. d. 5.) 27, (d. 12.) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d. 7. 8.) 31, (d. 2. 21.) E. 3. Ralph, Baro de Grey∣stoke, Creystoke, 49, (d. 4. 6.) 50, (p. 2. d. 6.) E. 3. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (d. 13. 29.) 3, (d. 32.) 4, (d▪ 32.) 5, (d. 40.) 6, (d. 37.) 7, (d: 10. 37.) 8, (d. 35.) 9, (d: 45.) 10, (d. 42.) 11, (d. 13. 24.) 12, (d. 42.) 13, (d: 5.) 14, (d: 42.) 15, (d. 37) 16, (d. 23.) 17, (d: 30) 18, (d: 23.) 20, (p▪ 1. d. 15.) 21, (p: 1. d. 27.) 23, (d: 3.) R. 2. 1, (d: 37.) 2, (p: 1. d. 3.) 3, (d: 17.) 5, (p: 1. d. 28. p: 2. d. 4.) 7, (d: 30.) 8, (d: 2.) 11, (d. 32.) 12, (d. 2.) 14, (d. 22.) H. 4. 1, (d. 9. 37.) 2, (d. 16.) 3, (d. 15.) 4, (d. 16▪) 5, (d. 11.) H. 5. Iohn, Baro de Greystoke, 7, (d. 9.) 8, (d. 2.) 9, (d. 13.) H. 5. 1, (d. 22.) 2, (d. 18.) Chivaler, 3, (d: 9.) 4, (d: 15.) 5, (d: 4.) 7, (d. 2.) 9, (d: 18.) 10,
(d: 10.) 11, (d: 10.) 13, (d: 2.) H. 6. Ralph, Baro de Greystoke, Chivaler, 15, (d. 18.) 18, (d. 33.) H. 6. summoned without the addition of Baro, as Chiva∣ler onely, 20, (d. 27.) 23, (d. 21.) 25, (d. 25.) 27, (d. 24.) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d. 41.) 31, (d. 36.) 33, (d. 36.) 38, (d. 30.) 49, (d. 6.) H. 6. 1, (d. 35.) 2, (d. 3.) 6, (d. 1.) 9, (d. 3.) 12, (d. 41.) 22, and 23, (d. 10.) E. 4. Reginald de Grey, 23, (d. 4. 9.) 24, (d. 7.) 25, (d. 25.) 27, (d. 16.) 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 8. 13.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d: 21.) 34, (d: 2.) E. 1. Iohn de Grey, 25, (d. 25.) E. 1. Henry de Grey, 27, (d. 16. 18.) E. 1. 1, (d. 8.) 2, (d. 20.) E. 2. Iohn de Grey, 2, (d. 11. 14. 20.) 3, (d. 16. 17.) 5, (d. 11. 17. 25.) 6, (d: 3. 31.) 7, (d. 16. 27.) 8, (d. 29. 35.) 9, (d. 22.) 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, (d. 13.) 14, (d. 5. 29.) 15, (d. 16.) 16, (d. 26.) 17, (d. 27.) 18, (d. 21. 34.) E. 2. Richard de Grey, 2, (d. 11. 20.) 3, (d. 16. 17.) 5, (d. 11. 17. 25.) 6, (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d. 16. 27.) 8, (d. 29. 31.) 9, (d. 22.) 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, (d. 13.) 14, (d. 5. 29.) 15, (d. 16.) 16, (d: 26.) 17, (d. 27.) 18, (d. 5. 21. 34.) 19, (d. 27.) E. 2. 1, (p. 1. d. 11. 16.) 2, (d: 15. 23. 31.) 3, (d. 19.) 4, (d. 13. 23. 32. 41.) 5, (d. 7. 25. p. 2. d. 7.) 6, (d. 9. 19. 36.) 7, (p. 2. d. 3.) 8, (d. 18.) 9, (d. 8.) 17, (p. 1. d. 25.) E. 3. Henry de Grey, 19, (d: 27.) 20, (d: 4.) E. 2. 1, (p: 2. d: 11. 16.) 2, (d. 15. 23. 31.) 3, (d: 19.) 4, (d: 13. 23. 32. 41.) 5, (d: 7. 25. p: 2. d: 7.) 6, (d: 4. 9. 19. 36.) 7, (p: 2. d: 3.) 8, (d: 18.) 9, (d: 8. 18.) 10, (d: 1. 5.) 11, (p: 1. d: 8. 15. p: 2. d: 11. 40.) 12, (p: 2. d: 32.) 13, (p: 2. d. 1. 28.) 14, (p: 2. d: 23. 33.) 15, (p: 1. d: 37.) 16, (p: 1. d. 39. p. 2. d. 13. 22.) 17, (p. 1. d: 25.) 18, (p: 1. d. 14) 20, (p: 2. d: 22.) 21, (p: 2. d: 9.) 22, (p: 1. d: 22. p: 2. d: 7.) 23; (p: 1. d: 23.) 25, (p: 1. d: 5.) E. 3. Iohn de Grey de Codenore, 9, (d: 8. 28.) 13, (p: 2. d. 1.
28.) 14, (p: 1. d: 23. 33.) 15, (p. 1. d. 37.) 16, (p. 1. d: 39.) 17, (p. 1. d. 25.) 18, (p. 1. d: 14.) 22, (p. 2. d: 7.) 23, (p: 1 d. 23.) 24, (p: 2. d. 3.) 25, (p: 1. d: 5.) 27, (d: 12.) 28, (d: 26.) 29, (d: 8.) 31, (d. 2.) 32, (d: 8. 14.) 34, (d: 4.) 37, (d: 22.) 38, (d: 3.) 39, (d: 2.) 42, (d: 22.) 43, (d: 24.) 44, (d. 1.) 46, (d: 8. 9. 10. 11.) 47, (d: 13.) 49, (d: 4. 6.) 50, (p. 2. d. 6.) E: 3. 1, (d: 37.) 2, (d: 13. 29.) 3, (d: 32.) 4, (d. 32.) 5, (d. 40.) 6, (d. 37) 7, (d. 10. 37.) 8, (d: 35.) 9, (d: 45.) 10, (d: 42.) 11, (d. 13. 24.) 12, (d. 42.) 13, (d. 5.) 14, (d: 42.) 15, (d: 37.) R. 2. Iohn Grey de Rotherford, Rotherfield, 13, (p. 2. d. 1. 28.) 14, (p: 1. d: 23. 33.) 15, (p: 1. d: 37.) 16, (p: 1. d: 39. p. 2. d: 13.) 17, (p: 1. d: 25.) 18, (p: 1. d: 14.) 22, (p: 2. d. 7.) 23, (p. 1. d: 23.) 24, (p: 2. d: 3.) 25, (p: 1. d: 5.) 27, (d. 12.) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d: 7. 8.) 31, (d: 2. 21.) 34, (d: 4.) 38, (d: 3.) 39, (d: 2.) 42, (d. 22.) 43, (d. 24.) 44, (d. 1.) 46, (d: 9. 10. 11.) 47, (d. 13.) E. 3. Reginald de Grey, 17, (p: 1. d. 25.) 18, (p. 1. d. 14.) 20, (p: 2. d. 22.) 21▪ (p. 2. d. 9.) 22, (p. 1. d. 32. p: 2. d. 7.) 23, (p. 1. d: 23.) Senior, 25, (p: 1. d. 5.) 27, (d. 12.) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d: 7. 8.) 31, (d. 2. 21.) 34, (d: 4.) E. 3. Reginald Grey de Ruthyn, 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d: 7. 8.) 31, (d: 2. 21.) 32, (d: 14.) 34, (d. 4.) 37, (d: 22.) 38, (d: 3.) 39, (d: 2.) 42, (d. 22.) 43, (d. 24.) 44, (d: 1.) 46, (d. 9 10 11.) 47, (d. 13.) 49, (d. 4. 6.) 50, (p: 1. d: 6.) E. 3. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (d. 13. 29.) 3, (d. 32.) 4, (d. 32.) 5, (d: 40.) 6, (d. 37.) 7, (d. 10, 37.) 8, (d: 35.) 9, (d: 45.) 10, (d: 42.) 11, (d. 24.) R. 2. Ralph de Grey, 32, (d. 14.) 34, (d: 14.) E. 3. Henry Grey de Shorland, 50, (p. 2. d. 6.) E. 3. Henry Grey de Wilton, 1, (d. 37.) 2, (d: 13. 29.) 3, (d. 32.) 4, (d: 32.) 5, (d: 40.) 6, (d: 37.) 7, (d: 10. 37.) 8, (d. 35.) 9, (d: 45.) 10, (d: 42.) 11, (d: 13. 24.) 12, (d: 42.) 13, (d. 5.) 14, (d: 42.) 15, (d: 37.) 16, (d. 23.) 17, (d: 30.) 18, (d: 23.) R. 2.
Roger Grey de Ruthyn, 11, (d. 13.) R. 2. Reginald Grey de Ruthyn, 13, (d: 5.) 14, (d. 42.) 15, (d. 37.) 16, (d. 23.) 17, (d. 30.) 18, (d. 23.) 20, (p. 1. d. 3.) 21, (p: 1. d: 27.) 23, (d: 3.) R. 2. 1, (d: 37.) 2, (p: 1. d: 3.) 3, (d. 17.) 5, (p. 1. d. 28. p: 2. d. 4.) 7, (d. 30.) 8, (d. 2.) 11, (d. 32.) 12, (d: 2.) 14, (d. 22.) H. 4. 1, (d: 9. 37.) 2, (d. 16.) 3, (d: 15.) 4, (d: 16.) 5, (d: 11.) 7, (d. 9.) 8, (d: 2.) 9, (d. 13.) H. 5. 1, (d. 22.) Chivaler, 2, (d: 18.) 3, (: 9.) 4, (d. 14.) 5, (d. 4.) 7, (d. 2.) 9, (d. 18.) 10, (d. 10.) 11, (d: 10.) 13, (d. 2.) 15, (d: 18.) 18, (d. 33.) H. 6. Richard Grey de Codenore, 16, (d. 23.) 17, (d. 30.) 20, (p: 1. d: 15.) 21, (p. 1. d. 27.) 23, (d. 3.) R. 2. 1, (d: 37.) 2, (p. 1. d. 3.) 3, (d. 17.) 4, (p: 1. d: 28. p. 2. d. 4.) 7, (d: 30.) 8, (d: 2.) 11, (d: 32.) 12, (d. 2.) 14, (d. 22.) H. 4. 1, (d. 9. 37.) 2, (d. 6.) 3, (d. 15.) 4, (d. 16.) H. 5. Ralph Grey de Raby, 20, (p: 1. d. 15.) R. 2. Iohn Grey de , 8, (d. 2.) H. 5. Chivaler, 3, (d. 9.) 7, (d. 2.) H.  Henry Grey de Codenore, Chivaler, 9, (d▪ 18.) 10, (d. 10.) 11, (d. 10.) 13, (d. 2.) 15, (d. 18.) 18, (d. 33.) H. 6. Reginald Grey de Ruthin, Chivaler, 18, (d. 33.) H. 6. Edward Grey de Ruthin, Chivaler, 20, (d. 27.) 23, (d: 21.) 25, (d: 24.) 27, (d. 12.) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d. 41.) 31, (d: 36.) 33, (d: 36.) 38, (d. 30.) H. 6. 1, (d. 35.) 2, (d. 3.) E. 4. Reginald Grey de Wilton, Chivaler, 23, (d. 21.) 25, (d. 24.) 27, (d. 12.) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d. 41.) 31, (d. 36.) 33, (d. 36.) 38, (d. 30.) 49, (d. 6.) H. 6. 1, (d. 35.) 2, (d: 3.) 6, (d. 1.) 9, (d. 3.) 12, (d. 41.) 22, and 23, (d. 10.) E. 4. Edward Grey, Miles, 25, (d. 24.) 27, (d. 24.) Dominus de Grby, 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d. 41.) 31, (d. 36.) 33, (d. 36.) H. 6. Thomas Grey, Dominus de Richmond, 29 (d. 41.) Miles, 31, (d. 36.) 33, (d: 36.) 38, (d. 30.) H. 6. 1, (d. 35.) E. 4. Henry Grey, Chivaler, 38, (d: 30.) 1, (d. 35.) 2, (d.
3.) 12, (d: 41.) 22, and 23, (d. 10.) E. 4. Edward Grey de Lisle, 22, and 23, (d: 10.) E. 4. Iohn Grey de Powis, 22, and 23, (d. 10.) E. 4. Ingelram de Gynes, 23, (d: 4. 9.) 24, (d: 7.) 25, (d: 25.) 27, (d. 16. 18.) E. 1. Reginald de Gynes, 27, (d: 18.) E. 1. Ingelram de Gynes, 6, (d. 3.) 7, (d: 27.) 8, (d: 29. 35.) 9, (d. 22.) 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d: 11. 29.) 13, (d. 13.) 14, (d: 5. 29.) 15, (d: 7.) E. 2. H EUstace de Hacche, 27, (d: 16. 28.) 28, (d: 3. 17.) 30, (d: 8. 13.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 21.) E. 1. Iohn de Hale, 32, (d. 14.) E. 3. Iohn de Hanndlo, 16, (p: 1. d. 39.) E. 3. Andrew de Harcla, 14, (d. 5.) 15, (d. 16.) E. 2. Iohn de Hardreshull, 16, (p: 1. d: 39.) E. 3. Henry de Hastings, 49, (d: 11.) H. 3. Iohn de Hastings, de Hastinges, 23, (d. 4. 9.) 24, (d. 7.) 27, (d: 16. 18.) 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 8. 13.) 33, (d. 8. 19. 21.) 34, (d: 2.) E. 1. 1, (d: 11. 19.) 2, (d. 11. 14.) 5, (d: 1. 25.) 6, (d: 3. 31.) 7, (d: 16. 27.) 8, (d: 29. 35.) 9, (d: 22.) 11, (d: 8. 14.) 12, (d: 11. 29.) 13, (d: 13.) 14, (d: 5. 29.) 15, (d. 16.) 16, (d. 26.) 17, (d. 27.) 18, (d. 21. 34.) E. 2. Edmund de Hastings, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 8. 13.) 32, (d: 2.) 33, (d. 31.) 34, (d. 2.) E. 1. 6, (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d: 16. 27.) E. 2. Robert de Hastings, 5, (d: 17.) E. 2. Hugh Hastings, 6, (p: 1. d. 39.) E. 3. Thomas de Hastinges, (Hastings) 16, (p: 1. d: 39. p. 2: d. 13.) E. 3. William Hastinges, Chivaler, 2, (d. 3.) de Hastings, 6, (d. 1.) 9, (d. 3.) 12, (d: 41.) 22, and 23, (d. 10.) E. 4. Richard Hastings de Welles, 22, and 23, (d. 10.) E. 4. Edmund Hastings de Hungerford, 22, and 23, (d: 10.) E. 4. William de Htton, 32, (d: 14.) E. 3. Iohn de Haverings, 27, (d: 16. 18.) E. 1.
Iohn de Haverington, (Harrington) 18, (d. 21.) 20, (d. 4.) E. 2. 1, (p: 2. d. 11. 16.) 2, (d: 15. 23. 31.) 3, (d: 19.) 4, (d: 13. 23. 32. 41.) 5, (d: 7. 25.) 6, (d. 9. 19. 36.) 7, (p: 2. d: 3.) 8, (d. 18.) 9, (d: 8. 28.) 10▪ (d: 1. 5.) 11, (p. 2. d. 11.) 12, (p: 2. d: 32.) 13, (p: 2. d: 1. 28.) 14, (p: 2. d: 23. 33.) 15▪ (p: 1. d: 37.) 16, (p: 1. d: 39.) 17, (p: 1. d: 25.) 18, (p: 1. d: 14▪) 20, (p: 2. d: 22.) 21, (p: 2. d: 9.) 22, (p: 1. d: 32. p: 2. d. 7.) 23, (p: 1. d. 23.) 32, (d: 14.) E. 3. Robert de Haverington, Harrington, , (d: 37.) 2, (d. 13. 29.) 3, (d: 32.) 4, (d: 32.) 5▪ (d. 40.) 6, (d: 37.) 7 (d. 10. 37.) 8, (d: 35.) 9▪ (d. 8.) 10, (d: 42.) 11, (d: 13. 24.) 12, (d: 42.) 13, (d: 5.) 14, (d. 42.) 15, (d. 37.) 16, (d. 23) 17 (d. 38.) 18, (d: 23.) 20, (p: 1. d: 15.) 21, (p: 1. d: 37.) 23, (d. 3.) R. 2. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (p. 1. d: 3.) 3, (d. 17.) 5, (p. 1. d. 28. p: 2. d. 4.)▪ 7, (d: 9.) 8, (d: 2.) 11, (d: 32.) 12, (d: 2.) 14, (d: 22.) H. 4. 1, (d. 9. 37.) 2, (d: 16.) 3, (d: 15.) 4, (d: 19.) H. 5. William de Harrington, 8, (d: 23.) 9, (d: 13.) H. 5. 1, (d. 22.) 2, (d: 18) 3, (d: 9.) Chivaler, 4, (d. 15.) 5, (d. 4.) 7, (d. 2.) 9, (d: 18.) 11, (d. 10.) 13, (d: 2.) 15, (d. 18.) 18, (d. 33.) H. 6. Iohn de Haustede, 6, (d: 4. 9. 19. 36.) 7, (p: 2. d: 3.) 8, (d: 18.) 9, (d: 8. 28.) E: . Ralph de Hemenhale, 32, (d: 14▪) E. 3. William Herbert, Chivaler, 6, (d: 1.) E. 4. Robert de Herle, 32, (d: 14.) E. 3. William Hern, 44, (d: 1.) E. 3. 17, (d: 30.) 20, (p: 1. (d: 13.) 21▪ (p. 1. d: 27.) R. 2. Chivaler, 2, (p: 1. d: 3.) 3, (d: 17) 5 (p: 1. d: 28. p: 2. d: 4.) H. 4. Robert de Hibernia, 23, (d: 4.) E. 1. Robert de Hilton, 23, (d. 9.) 24, (d: 7) 25, (d. 25.) E. 1. Alexander de Hilton, 6, (d. 4. 9. 19. 36.) 7, (p. 2. d. 3.) 8, (d. 18.) 9, (d. 8. 28.) E. 3. Thomas Hoe, H, 32, (d: 14.) E. 3. Thomas Hoe, Hoo, Chivaler, 27, (d. 24.) 28, (d: 26.) 29, (d: 42.) 31, (d: 36.) H. 6. Robert de Holand, 8, (d. 29. 35.) 9, (d. 22.) 11, (d. 8.
14.) 12, (d: 11. 29.) 13, (d: 13.) 14, (d: 5. 29.) E. 2. Robert de Holand, 16, (p: 1. d: 33.) E. 3. Thomas de Holand, 27, (d: 14.) 28, (d. 26.) 31, (d: 2. 21.) E. 3. Robert de Holand, 37, (d: 22.) 38, (d: 3.) 39, (d: 2.) 42, (d. 22.) 44, (d: 1.) 46, (d▪ 8. 9. 10. 11.) E. 3. Iohn de Holand, 43, (d. 24.) E. 3. Walter de Hopton, 32, (d. 14.) E. 3. Iohn de Hotham, 8, (d. 35.) E. 2. Mr. Adam de Houghton, 32, (d: 14.) E. 3. Iohn Howard, de Howard, Miles, 49, (d. 6.) H. 6. 12, (d. 41.) 22, and 23, (d: 10.) E. 4. Walter Hungerford, 4, (d. 15.) Chivaler, 5, (d: 4.) 7, (d: 2.) 9 (d. 18.) 10, (d: 10.) 11, (d. 10.) 13, (d. 2.) 15, (d. 18.) 18, (d. 33.) 20, (d. 27.) 23, (d. 21.) 25, (d. 24.) 27, (d. 24.) H. 6. Robert Hungerford, Chivaler▪ 23, (d. 21.) ominus de Mollins, 25, (d. 24.) 27, (d. 24.) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d. 41.) 31, (d. 36.) H. 6. Robert Hungerford, Senior, Miles, 31, (d. 36.) H. 6. Robert Hungerford, Miles, 33, (d. 36.) H. 6. Walter de Huntercombe, Huntercumbe, 23, (d. 4. 9.) 27, (d. 18.) 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 8. 13.) 33, (d: 21.) 34, (d. 2.) E. 1. 1, (d. 19.) 2, (d. 11.) 3, (d. 17.) 4, (d. 1.) E. 2. Roger de Huntingfield, 25, (d. 25.) E. 1. William de Huntingfield, 25, (p. 1. d. 5.) 27, (d. 12.) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d. 7. 8.) 31, (d. 2.) 34, (d. 4.) 46, (d. 11.) 47, (d. 13.) 49, (d. 4. 6.) E. 3. Iohn de Hunting∣field, 36, (d. 16.) 37, (d. 22.) 38, (d. 3.) 39, (d. 2.) 42, (d. 22.) 43, (d. 24.) E. 3. Henry Huse, Husee, Husie, 23, (d. 4. 9.) 27, (d. 18.) 28. (d. 8. 17.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 22.) 34, (d. 2.) 35, (d. 13.) E. 1. 2, (d. 11. 20.) 3, (d. 17.) 4, (d. 1.) 6, (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d. 16. 27.) 8, (d. 29. 35.) 9, (d. 22.) 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, (d. 13.) 14, (d. 5. 29.) 15, (d. 16.) 16, (d. 26.) 17, (d. 27.) 18, (d: 15. 34.) 19, (d. 27.) E. 2. Henry Huse, Husee, 11▪ (p. 1. d. 8. 15. p. 2. d. 11. 30) 12, (p. 2. d. 32.) 14, (p. 1. d.
23. 33.) 15, (p. 1. d. 37.) 16, (p. 1. d. 39. p. 2. d. 13. 32.) 17, (p. 2. d. 25.) 18, (p. 1. d. 14.) 20, (p. 2. d. 22.) 21, (p. 2. d. 9.) 22, (p. 1. d. 32. p. 2. d. 7.) 23, (p. 1. d. 23.) E. 3. Roger Husee, 22, (p. 2. d. 7.) 23, (p. 1. d. 23.) 32, (d. 14.) E. 3. I ANdrew Ideverel, 32, (d. 14.) E. 3. Oliver de Igham, 2, (d. 15. 23.) 3, (d. 19.) 4, (d. 23. 32. 41.) 6, (p. 1. d. 39.) E. 3. Iohn de Insula, de Insula Vectae, de Isle, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 8. 13.) 32, (d: 8.) 33, (d. 21.) 34, (d. 2.) E. 1. 1, (d. 19.) 2, (d. 11.) 4, (d. 1.) 5, (d. 17.) 11, (d. 8. 14.) 17, (d. 27.) E. 2. Robert de Insula, de Isle, 7, (d. 16. 27.) 8, (d. 29. 35.) 9. (d. 22.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13. (d. 13.) 14, (d. 5. 29.) 15, (d. 16.) 16, (d. 26.) 17, (d. 27.) 18, (d. 5. 21. 34.) 19, (d. 27.) 20, (d. 4) E. 2. 1, (p. 2. d. 11. 16.) 2, (d. 15. 23. 31.) 3, (d. 19.) 4, (d. 15. 23. 32. 41.) 5, (p. 1. d. 7. 25. p. 2. d. 7.) 6, (d. 4. 9. 19. 36.) 7, (p. 2. d. 3.) 8, (d. 18.) 9, (d: 8. 18.) 10▪ (d. 1. 5.) 11, (p. 2. d. 11. 40.) 12, (p. 2. d. 32.) 13, (p. 2. d. 1. 28.) 14, (p. 1. d. 23. 33.) 15, (p. 1. d. 37.) 16, (p. 1. d. 39.) E. 3. Robert de Insula, de Rube-monte, 24, (p. 1. d. 3.) 25, (p. 1. d. 5.) 26, (d. 13.) 28, (d. 26.) 31, (d. 2.) 34, (d. 4.) E. 3. Gerard de Insula, 31, (d: 2.) 32, (d. 14.) E. 3. Warin de Insula, 43, (d. 24.) 44, (d. 1.) 46, (d. 9.) 47, (d. 13.) 49, (d. 4. 6) E. 3. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (d. 13. 29.) 3, (d. 32.) 4, (d. 32.) 5, (d. 40) R. 2. G EDward de Kendale, 32▪ (d. 14.) E. 3. Roger de Kerdeston, 6, (d. 49. 19▪ 36.) 7, (p. 2. d. 3.) 8, (d. 18.) 9, (d, 8. 28.) 10, (d. 5.) 11, (p. 1. d. 8.) E. 3. William de Kerdeston, 11, (p. 2. d. 11.) 12, (p. 2. d. 32.) 13, (p. 2. d. 1. 28.) 14, (p. 1. d. 23. 33.) 15, (p. 1. d. 37.) 16, (p. 1. d. 39.) 17, (p. 1. d. 25.) 18, (p. 1. d.
14.) Senior, 33, (d. 10.) 34, (d. 35.) E. 3. Thomas de Kerdeston, 27, (d. 12.) E. 3. Thomas de Kirketon, 16, (p. 1. d. 39.) E. 3. Iohn de Kirke∣ton, 36, (d. 16.) 37, (d. 32.) E. 3. Iohn Kiriel, 32, (d. 14.) E. 3. Bago, (Drago) de Knovil, 23, (d. 4. 9.) 24, (d. 7.) 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 8. 13.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 21.) 34, (d. 2.) E. 1. 1, (d. 19.) E. 2. Philip de Kyme, 23, (d. 9.) 27, (d. 16. 18.) 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 8. 13.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 21.) 34, (d. 2.) E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 11. 19.) 2, (d. 11. 14. 20.) 3, (d. 16. 17.) 4, (d. 1.) 5, (d. 11. 17. 25.) 6, (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d. 16. 27▪) E. 2. William de Kyme, 17, (d. 27.) 18, (d. 5. 21. 34.) 19, (d. 27.) 20, (d▪ 4.) E. 2. , (p. 2. d. 11. 16.) 2, (d. 16. 23. 32.) 3, (d. 13.) 4, (d. 13. 23. 32. 41.) 5, (p. 1. d. 7. 29. p. 2. d. 7.) 6, (d. 19.) 7, (p. 2. d. 3.) 8, (d. 18.) 9, (d, 8. 18.) E. 3. L IOhn de Lancastria, (Lancaster) 25, (d. 25) 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 8. 13.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 21.) 34, (d. 2.) 35, (d. 13.) E. 1. 1. (d. 19.) 2, (d. 11. 20.) 9, (d. 16. 17.) E. 2. Henry de Lancastria, (stiled Nepos Regis in some Writs) 27, (d. 16. 18.) 28. (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 8. 13.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 21.) 34, (d. 2.) 35, (d. 13.) E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 11. 19) 2, (d: 11. 14. 20.) 3, (d. 16. 17.) 4 (d. 1.) 5, (d. 11. 17. 25.) 6, (d. . 31.) 7, (d. 16, 27, 8, (d. 29. 35.) 9, (d. 22.) 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, (d. 13.) 14, (d. 5. 29.) 15, (d. 16.) 16, (d: 26.) 17, (d.) 27.) 18, (d: 5.) 19, (d. 27.) E. 2. Thomas de Langele, 32, (d. 14) E. 3. Roger de Lascel, Lasceles, 23, (d. 4. 9.) 24, (d. 7.) E. 1. Thomas le Latymer, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 8. 13.) 32, (d. 2) 33, (d. 21.) E. 1. William le Latymer, Iunior, 27, (d. 18.) 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 8.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 21.) E. 1. William le Latymer, Senior, 28, (d. 17.) 30, (d. 8.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 21.) 34, (d. 2.) E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 11. 19.) 2,
(d: 11. 14.) 3, (d. 16. 17.) 4, (d. 1.) , (d: 17. 25.) 6, (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d: 16. 27.) 8, (d: 29. 35.) 9, (d: 22.) 11, (d: 8. 14.) 2, (d: 11. 29.) 13, (d: 13.) 14, (d: 5. 29.) 15▪ (d. 16.) 16, (d: 16) 17, (d: 27.) 18, (d. 21. 34.) 20, (d: 4.) E. 2.) 1, (p: 2. d. 11. 16.) 2, (d. 15. 23. 31.) 3, (d: 13.) 4, (d. 13. 23. 32. 41.) 5, (p: 1. d. 7. 25. p: 2. d. 7.) 6, (d. 9. 19. 26.) 7, (p. 2. d. 3.) 8, (d: 13.) 9, (d. 28.) E. 3. William de Laymer, 42, (d. 22.) 43, (d: 24.) 44, (d. 1.) 46, (d. 9.) 47, (d. 13.) 49, (d. 4. 6.) E. 3. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (d. 13. 29▪) 3, (d. 32.) R. 2. Iohn de Latymer, 7, (d. 30.) 8, (d. 2.) 11, (d: 32.) 12, (d: 2.) 14, (d: 22.) H. 4. 1, (d. 9. 37.) , (d: 16.) 3, (d. 15.) 4, (d. 16.) 5, (d. 11.) 7, (d. 9.) 8, (d. 2.) 9, (d: 13.) H. 5. 1, (d. 22.) Chivaler, 2, (d. 18.) 3, (d. 9.) 4, (d. 15.) 5, (d. 4.) 7, (d. 2.) 9, (d. 18.) H. 6. George Latymer, Chivaler, 10, (d: 10.) 11, (d. 10.) 13, (d: 2.) 15, (d. 18.) 18, (d. 33.) 20, (d. 27.) 23, (d. 21.) 25, (d: 24.) 27, (d: 24.) 28 (d: 26.) 31. (d: 36.) 33, (d. 30.) H. 6. 1, (d. 35.) 2, (d. 3.) 6, (d. 1.) 9, (d. 3.) E. 4. Iohn At Lee, 32, (d. 14.) E. 3. Mr. ohn Leech, 32, (d. 14.) E. 3. Iohn Lestrange de Knokyn, 2, (d. 11. 20.) 3, (d. 16. 17.) 4, (d. 1.) 6, (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d. 16. 27.) E. 2. Ful∣co Lstrange, 2, (d. 11. 14. 20.) 3, (d. 16. 17.) 4, (d. 1.) 5, (d. 11. 17. 25.) 6, (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d. 6. 27.) 8, (d. 29. 35.) 9, (d. 22.) 11, (d: 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, (d: 13.) 14, (d: 5. 29.) 15, (d: 16.) 17, (d: 27.) 18, (d: 34.) 20, (d: 4.) E. 2. Ebul. Lestrange, Strange, 1, (p. 1. d: 11. 16.) 2, (d: 15. 23. 3.) 3, (d. 19.) 4, (d: 13. 23. 32. 41.) 5, (p. 1. d: 7 25. p. 2. d. 7.) 6, (d: 9. 19. 36.) 7, (p. 2. d: 3.) 8, (d: 18.) 9, (d. 26.) E: 3. Iohn le Strange; Straung, 4, (d. 13. 23. 32. 41.) 5, (d. 7. 25.) 6, (d. 9. 19. 36) 7 (p: 2. d. 3.) 9, (d: 28.) 10, (d: 1. 5.) 11, (d: 1. d: 8. 15. p. 2. d 11. 40.) 12, (p. 2. d: 30.) 13, (p: 2. d: 1. 28.) 14, (p: 2. d. 23. 33.) 15, (p: 1. d. 37.) 16, (p: 2. d: 39.) 17, (p: 1. d: 25.) 18, (p: 1. d: 14.) E. 3. Ro∣ger Lestrange, Straung, 16, (p: 1. d. 39.) 22, (p. 2. d. 7.) 23, (p: 1. d. 23.) 29, (d: 3.) 31, (d: 2. 21.) 32, (d: 4.) 33, (d: 24.) de Knokyn, 44, (d. 1.) 46, (d: 9 10. 11.) 47, (d: 13.) 49▪ (d▪ 4. 6.) E. 3. 1, (d: 37.) 2, (d: 13. 29.) 3, (d: 32.) 4, (d: 32.) 5, (d: 40.) 6, (d: 37.) R. 2.
Iohn Lestrange, de Knokyn, 7, (d: 10. 37.) 8, (d: 35.) 9, (d. 45.) 10, (d: 42.) 11, (d: 13. 24.) 12, (d: 42.) 13, (d: 5) 14, (d: 42.) 15, (d. 37.) 16, (d: 27.) 17, (d: 30.) 18, (d: 23.) 20, (p: 1. d: 27.) R. 2. Richard Le Strange, 7, (d: 35.) 8, (d: 2,) 11, (d. 32) 12, (d: 2.) 14, (d: 22.) H. 4. 1, (d. 9. 37.) 2, (d: 16.) 3, (d: 15.) 4, (d: 16.) 5, (d: 11.) 7 (d: 9.) 8, (d. 2.) 9, (d: 13.) H. 5. 1, (d: 22.) 2, (d: 18.) Chivaler, 4, (d: 15.) 5, (d: 4.) 7, (d: 2.) 9, (d: 18.) 10, (d. 10.) 11, (d: 10.) 13, (d: 2.) 15, (d: 18) 18, (d: 33.) 20, (d: 27.) 23, (d: 21.) 25, (d. 24.) 27, (d: 24) H. 6. Iohn le Strange, Chivaler, 49, (d: 6.) H. 6. 6, (d: 1.) 9, (d: 3.) 12, (d: 41.) E. 4. William de Leybourne, 27, (d: 16. 18) 28, (d: 3. 17.) 30, (d. 8. 13.) 32, (d: 2.) 33, (d: 21.) 34, (d: 2.) E: 1. 1, (d. 8. 11, 19.) 2, (d: 11. 14. 20.) 3, (d: 16. 17.) 4, (d: 1.) E. 2. Iohn de Leybourne, 11, (p. 1. d: 8. p. 2. d. 11. 40.) 12, (p. 2. d. 32.) 13, (p. 2. d: 1. 28.) 14, (p: 1. d: 23. 33.) 15, (p. 1. d. 37.) 16, (p. 1. d. 39.) 17, (p. 1. d: 25.) 18, (p. 1. d: 14.) 20, (p. 1. d. 22.) 21, (p: 1: d: 9.) E. 3. Henry de Lorty, 19, (d: 27.) E. 2. Iohn Lovel, Luvel, de Tichemersh, 25, (d. 25.) 27, (d. 16. 18.) 28, (d: 3. 17) 30, (d: 8. 13.) 32, (d: 2.) 33. (d: 21.) 34, (d. 2.) 35, (d: 13.) E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 11. 19.) 2, (d: 11. 14. 20) 3, (d. 16. 17.) 5, (d. 17) 6, (d. 13. 31) 7, (d. 6. 27.) 8, (d. 29. 35.) E. 2. Thomas Lovel, 16, (p. 2. d. 32.) E. 3. Richard Lovel, 22, (p. 2. d. 9.) 23, (p: 1. d. 23.) 24, (p. 2. d. 3.) E: 3. Iohn Lovel 49, (d. 4. 6.) 50, (p. 2. d. 6.) E. 3. de Tishemersh, 1, (d. 37.) 2, (d. 13. 29.) 3, (d. 32.) 4, (d: 32.) 5, (d. 40.) 6, (d. 37.) 7▪ (d. 37.) 8, (d. 35.) 9, (d. 45.) 10, (d. 42.) 11, (d: 13. 24.) 12, (d: 42.) 13, (d. 5.) 14, (d. 32.) 15, (d. 37.) 16, (d. 27.) 17, (d: 30.) 20, (p. 1. d. 15.) 21, (p. 1. d. 27.) 23, (d. 3.) R. 2. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (p. 2. d. 3.) 3, (d. 28.) 5, (p. 1. d. 28. p. 2. d. 4.) 7 (d. 30) 8, (d. 2.) 11, (d. 32.) 12, (d. 2.) 14, (d. 22.) H. 4. 1, (d. 9. 37.) 2. (d. 6.) H. 5. Thomas Lovel de Helmshire, 16, (d: 23.) 17, (d: 30.) 20, (p. 1. d. 15.) R. 2. William Lovel de Tichemersh, Chivaler, 3, (d: 9.) 4, (d. 15.) 5, (d. 4.) 7, (d. 2.) 10, (d. 10.) 11, (d 10.) 13, (d: 2.) 15,
(d. 18.) 18, (d: 33.) 20, (d. 27.) 23, (d. 21.) 25, (d. 24.) 27, (d 24.) 28, (d: 26.) 29 (d. 41.) 31, (d. 36.) 33, (d. 30.) H. 6. Iohn Lovel, Chiv. 38, (d. 30) H. 6. 1, (d. 35.) 2, (d. 3.) E. 4. William Lovel de Morley, Chiv. 49 (d. 6.) H. 6. 9, (d. 3.) 12, (d. 41:) E. 4. Francis Lovel de Lovel, Chivaler, 22, and 23, (d: 10.) E. 4. Robert de Loundres, 32, (d. 14.) E. 3. Thomas de Lonvillers, 16, (p. 2. d. 22.) E. 3. Iohn de Longevilliers, 32, (d. 14) E. 3. Geoffry de Lucy, 49, (d. 11.) H. 3. 25, (d. 5.) E. 1. Antony de Lucy, 14, (d. 5.) 15, (d. 16.) 16, (d. 26.) 17, (d. 27.) 18, (d: 5. 34.) 19. (d. 27.) 20, (d. 4.) E. 2 1, (p. 2. d. 11. 16.) 2, (d. 16. 23. 31) 3, (d. 19.) 4, (d. 13, 23. 32. 41.) 5, (d. 7. 25.) 7, (p. 2. d. 3.) 9 (d. 8. 18.) 10, (d. 1. 5.) 12, (p. 2. d. 32.) 13, (p. 2. d. 32. p. 2. d. 1. 18.) 14, (p. 2. d. 23. 33.) 15, (p. 1. d. 37.) 16, (p. 1. d. 39.) 17, (p. 1. d. 25.) Thomas de Lucy, 16, (p. 1. d. 39.) 18, (p. 1. d. 14.) 20, (p. 2. d. 22.) 21, (p. 2. d: 6.) 22, (p. 1. d. 32. p. 2. d. 7.) 23, (p: 2. d. 23.) 25, (p. 1. d. 5.) 27, (d. 13.) 28, (d. 36.) 29 (d. 7. 8.) 31, (d. 2. 21.) 34▪ (d. 4. 35.) 35, (d. 36.) 36, (d. 26. 42.) 37, (d. 22.) 38, (d. 3.) E. 3. Ralph de Lumley, 8, (d. 35.) 9, (d. 45.) 10. (d. 42.) 11, (d. 13. 24.) 12, (d. 42.) 13, (d: 5) 14, (d. 42.) 15, (d. 37.) 16, (d. 23.) 17, (d. 30.) 18, (d. 23.) 20, (p. 1. d. 15.) 21. (p. 1, d. 27) 23, (p. 1.) R. 2. 1. (d. 37.) H. 4. Thomas Lumley, Chivaler, 49, (d. 6) H. 6 Dominus Lumley, 2, (d. 3.) 6, (d. 1.) 9 (d. 3.) 12 (d: 41.) 22, and 23, (d. 10.) E. 4. Robert Lutterel, 23, (d. 4. 9.) E. 1. Iohn de Lyonns, 32, (d. 14.) E. 3. M PEter de Malo-lacu, 23, (d. 9.) 27, (d. 13.) 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 8. 15.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 21) 34, (d. 2.) E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 11. 19.) 2, (d. 11. 20.) 3. (d. 16. 17) 5, (d. 17.) 6, (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d: 16. 27.) 8, (. 29. 35.) 9, (d. 22.) 11, (d▪ 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, (d: 13.) 14 (d. 5. 29.) 15, (d. 16.) 16, (d: 26.) 17, (d: 27.) 18, (d. 5. 21. 34.) E. 2. 9, (d. 2.) E. 3. Peter de Malo-lacu le Quint, 10, (d: 1. 5.) 11, (p. 2. d. 11.) 12, (p. 2. d. 32.) 13, (p. 1. d. 1. 28.) 14, (p. 1. d. 23. 33.) 15 (p. 1. d. 37.) 16, (p. 1. d. 29.) 17, (p. 1. d. 29.) 18, (p. 1. d. 14.) 20, (p. 2. d. 22.) 21, (p. 1. d. 9) 22, (p. 1. d. 32. p. . d. 7) 23, (p.
1. (d. 23.) 24, (p. 2. d. 3.) 25, (p. 1. d. 5.) 27, (d. 12.) 28, (d. 16.) 29, (d. 18.) E. 3. Peter de Malo-lacu le Sisme, 31 (d. 2. 21.) 34, (d. 4.) 47, (d: 13.) 49, (d: 4. 6.) 50, (p. 2. d. 6.) E. 3. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (d. 13. 29.) 3, (d. 32.) 4, (d. 32.) 5, (d. 4.) 6, (d. 37.) R. 2. Peter de Malo-lacu, 23, (d: 3.) R. 2. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (p. 2. d. 3.) 3, (d. 28.) 5, (p. 1. d. 28. p. 2. d. 4.) 7, (d. 30.) 8, (d. 2.) 11, (d. 32.) 12, (d. 2.) 14, (d. 22.) H. 4. 1, (d. 9. 37.) 2, (d. 16.) 3, (d. 15.) H. 5. Thomas Malesore, 32, (d. 14.) E. 3. Baldwin de Maneriis, 3, (d. 17.) E. 2. Walter de Manny, 21, (p. 2. d. 9.) 22, (p. 1. d. 32.) 23, (p. 1. d. 23.) 24, (p. 2. d. 3.) 25, (p. 1. d. 5.) 26, (d. 14.) 27, (d. 12.) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d. 7. 8.) 31, (d. 2. 21.) 34, (d. 4.) 36, (d. 16) 37, (d. 22.) 39, (d. 2.) 42, (d. 22.) 43, (d. 24.) 44, (d. 1.) E. 3. Iohn de la Mare, 27, (d. 18.) 28, (d. 37.) 30, (d. 13.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 21.) 34, (d. 2.) 35, (d. 13.) E. 1. 1, (d. 11. 19) 6, (d. 3. 31.) 7 (d. 27.) E. 2. William de Marescal (Marshal) 2, (d. 11. 14. 20.) 3, (d. 16. 17.) 4, (d. 1.) 5, (d. 11. 17. 25.) 6▪ (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d. 16. 27.) E. 2. Robert Markamote, 32, (d. 14.) E. 3. William Marmyon, 43, (d. 11.) E. 3. Iohn de Marmyon, 25, (d. 25.) E. 1. , (d. 27.) 14, (d. 5.) 15, (d. 16) 20, (d. 4.) E. 2. 1, (p. 2. d. 10. 16.) 2, (d. 15. 23. 31.) 3, (d. 19.) 4, (d. 13. 23. 32. 41.) 5, (p. 1. d. 7. 25. p. 2. d. 7.) 6, (d. 9. 19. 36.) 7, (p. 2. d. 13.) 8, (d. 18.) 9, (d. 8.) E. 3. William de Marmyon, 32, (d. 14. E. 3. Robert Martyn, 32, (d. 4.) E. 3. William Martin, 23, (d. 9.) 27, (d. 16. 18.) 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 8. 13.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 9. 21.) 34, (d. 2.) E. 1. 1, (d. 19.) 2, (d. 11. 14. 20.) 3, (d. 16. 17.) 4, (d. 1.) 5, (d. 11. 17. 25.) 6, (d. 3. 3.) 8, (d. 29. 35.) 9, (d. 22.) 11, (d. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, (d. 13.) 14, (d. 5. 29.) 13, (d. 13.) 14, (d. 5. 29.) 15, (d. 16.) 16, (d. 26.) 17, (d. 27.) 8, (d. 5. 11. 34.) 19, (d. 27.) E. 2. Iohn Mauduit, 16, (p. 2. d. 22.) E. 3. Peter de Maule; Mauley, 37, (d. 32.) 38, (d. 3.) 42, (d. 12.) 43, (d. 24.) 44, (d. 1.) E. 3. Nicholas de Sancto Mauro (Symore) 8, (d. 29. 35.) 9, (d. 22.) William de Sancto Mauro, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 14, (d. 5.) 15, (d. 16.) E. 2. Nichoas de Sancto Mauro, 25, (p. 1. d. 5.) 27, (d. 12.) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d. 7. 8.) 31, (d. 2. 21.) 34, (d. 4.) E. 3. Iohn Mautravrs, (stiled in some Rolls Iunior,) 4, (d. 13. 23. 32. 41.) 25, (p. 1. d. 5.) E. 3. Nicholas de Meivil, Mignell, Meynill, Mervile, Morvie, 23, (d. 9.) 27, (d. ▪18.) E. 1. 6, (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d. 16. 27.) 8, (d. 29. 35.) 9, (d. 22.) 11, (d. 8. 14.
12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, (d. 13.) 14, (d. 5. 29.) 15, (d. 16.) E. 2. 9,(d. 8.) 10, (d. 15.) 11, (p. 2. d. 11.) 12, (p. 2. d. 32.) 13, (. 2. d. 1. 28.) 14, (p. 1. d. 23. 33.) 15, (p. 1. d. 37.) 16, (p. 1. d. 39.) E. 3. Richard de Merton 32, (d. 14.) E. 3. Thomas de Metha 32, (d. 14.) E. 3. Ion de Moiles, 25, (d. 25.) 27, (d. 16. 18.) E. 1. 2, (d. 11. 20.) 3, (d. 16. 17.) 4, (d. 1.) 5, (d. 7.) E. 2. Ni∣cholas de Moiles 8, (d. 29. 35.) 9, (d. 22.) E. 2. Robert de Mohaunt, Morhaunt 20, (d. 4.) E. 2. 1, (p. 2. d. 11. 16. 2, (d. 15. 23. 31.) 3, (d. 19.) E. 3. Iohn de Mohun, Moun 27, (d. 18.) 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, d. 8. 13.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 21.) 34, (d. 2.) E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 11. 19) 2, (d. 11. 14. 20.) 3, (d. 16. 17.) 5, (d. 25.) 6, (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d. 16. 27) 8 (d. 29. 35.) 9, (d. 22.) 10, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, d. 13.) 14, (d. 5. 29.) 15, (d. 16.) 18, (d. 21.) 19, (d. 17.) E. 2. 1, (p. 2. d. 11. 16.) 2, (d. 15. 24. 31.) 3, d. 13.) 4, (d. 13. 31. 41.) 16, (p. 1. d. 39.) E. 3. Iohn de Mohun de Dunste, 22, (p. . d. 7.) 23, (p. 1. d. 23.) 37, (d. 22.) 38, (d. 3.) 39 (d. 2.) 42, (d. 22.) 43, (d. 24.) 46, (d. 9, 10, 11.) 47, (d. 13.) E. 3. William Moigne 32, (d. 14.) E. 3. Simon de Monte acuto, Montecute, Montegue) 28, (d. 17.) 30, (d. 8.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, d. (21.) 34, (d. 2.) E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 11. 19.) 2, (d. 20.) 3, (d. 17.) 6, (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d. 10. 27.) 8, (d. 29. 35.) 9, (d. 22.) E. 2. William de Monte acuto, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) E. 2. 4, (d. 23. 32.) 5, (p. 1. d. 7. 15. p. 2. d. 7.) 6, (d. 9. 19. 36.) 7, (p. 2. d. 3.) 8, (d. 18.) 9, (d. 8. 28.) 10, (d. 1. 5. 22, p. 2. d. 7.) 23, (p. 1. d. 23.) E. 3. Edward de Monte acuto 18, (p. 1. d. 39.) 22, (p. 2. d. 7.) 23, (p. 1. d. 23.) 24, (p. 2. d. 3.) 25, (p. 1. d. 5.) 27, (d. 12.) 28, (d. 26.) 31, (d. 2.) 32, (d.  4.) 34, (d. 4. 35.) E. 3. Iohn de Monte acuto 31, [d. 2.] 44, (d. 1.) 46, (d. 9.) 47, (d. 13.) 49, (d. 4. 6.) E. 3. 5, (d. 40.) 6, (d. 37.)▪ 7, (d. 10. 37) 8, (d. 35.) 9, (d. 45.) 10, (d. 24.) 1. 1, (d. 42.) 12, (d. 42.) 13, (d. 5.) 16, (d. 23.) 17, (d. 30.) 18, (d. 23.) 20, (p. 1. d. 15.) R. 2.
Roger de Monte alto 23, (d. 9.) E. 1. Robert de Monte alto, 27, (d. 18.) 28, (d. 3.) 30, (d. 8. 13.) E. 1. 9, (d. 22.) 11, (d. 14.) 17, (d. 27.) E. 2. Simon de Monte alto 28, (d. 3.) 30, (d. 13.) E. 1. Iohn de Monte forti, (Mountfort, Momford) 23, (d. 4. 9.) E. 1. 7, (d. 27.) E. 2. Peter de Monteforti 9, (d. 8.) 16, (p. 1. d. 39. p. 2. d. 23.) 22, (p. 2. d. 7.) 23, (p. 1. d. 23.) E. 3. Iohn de Monte Gomeri, [Mountgomery] 16, (p. 1. d. 39) E. 3. Ralph de Monte Hermerii, 2, (d. 11. 20.) 3, (d. 16. 17.) 6, (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d. 16. 23.) 8, (d. 29. 35.) 9, (d. 22.) 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, (d. 13.) 14, (d. 5. 29.) 15, (d. 16.) 16, (d. 26.) 17, (d. 27.) 18, (d. 21. 34) E. 2. Edward de Monte Hermerii, 11, (p. 1. d. 8. 15.) E. 3. William de Morle, Morley 28, (d. 17.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 21) 34, (d. 2.) E. 1. Robert de Morle, Morley, Mallory, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, (d. 13.) 14, (d. 5. 29.) 15, (d. 16.) 16, (d. 26.) 17, (d. 27.) 18, (d. 21. 34) 20, (d. 4.) E. 2. 1, (p. 2. d. 11. 16.) 2 (d. 15. 23. 31.) 3, (d. 19.) 4, (d. 13. 23. 32. 41.) 5, (p. 1. d. 7. 25. p. 2. d. 7.) 6, (d. 19. 36.) 7, (p: 2. d. 3.) 8, (d. 18.) 9, (d. 8. 28.) 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11, (p. 2. d. 11.) 12, (p. 2. d. 32.) 13, (p. 2. d. 1. 28.) 14, (p. 1. d. 23. 33.) 15, (p. 1. d. 23) 16, (p. 1. d. 39. p. 2. d. 22.) 17, (p. 1. d. 25.) 18, (p. 1. d. 14.) 21, (p. 2. d. 9.) 22, (p. 1. d. 32. p. 2. d. 7.) 23, (p. 1. d. 23.) , (p. 2. d. 3.) 25, (p. 1. d. 5.) 26, (d. 14.) 27, (d. 12.) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d. 7. 8.) 31, (d. 2. 21.) 32, (d. 14.) E. 3. Iohn de Morle 6, (d. 9.) E. 3. Willi∣am de Morle, Morley 38, (d. 3.) 39, (d. 2.) 42, (d. 22) 43, (d. 24.) Chivaler 49, (d. 4. 6.) 50, (p. 2. d. 6.) E. 3. 1. (d. 37.) 2, (d. 13. 29.) R. 2. Thomas de Morle, Morley 3, (d. 32.) 4, (d. 32.) 5, (d. 40.) 6, (d. 37.) 7, (d. 10. 37.) 8, (d. 35.) 9, (d. 45.) 10, (d. 42.) 11, (d. 13. 24.) 12, (d. 42.) 13, (d. 5.) 14, (d. 42.) Chivaler 15, (d. 32.) 16, (d. 23.) 17, (d. 30) 20, (p. 1. d. 15.) 21, (p. 1. d. 27.) 23 (d. 3.) R. 2. 1,
(d. 37.) 2, (p. 1. d. 3.) 3, (d. 17.) 5, (p. 1. d. 28. p. 2. (d. 4.) 7, (d. 30.) 8, (d. 2.) 11, (d. 32.) 1, (d. 2.) 14, (d. 22.) H. 4. 1, (d. 9. 37.) 2, (d. 16.) 3, (d. 15.) 4, (d. 16.) H. 5. Thomas de Morle, Chivaler, 4, (d. 15.) 5, (d. 4.) H. 6. Ralph de Morle, Chivaler, 7, (d. 2.) H. 6. Iohn de Morley, Chivaler, 10, (d. 10.) 11, d. 10.) H. 6. Thomas de Morley, Chivaler, 13, (d. 2.) H. 6.) Robert Morley, Chivaler 20, (d. 27.) H. 6. Edward de Mortuo-mari, (Mortymer) 23. (d. 9.) 27, (d. 16. 18.) 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 8. 13.) E. 1. Simon Mortymer, 24, (d. 7.) E. 1.) Edward de Mortuo-mari, 25, (d. 25) E. 1. Hugh de Mortuo-mari, 25, (d. 25.) 27, (d. 16. 18,) E. 1. William de Mortuo-mari de Atteleburge, 25, (d. 25.) E. 1. Roger de Mortuomari de Wigmore 27, (d. 16. 18.) 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 8. 13.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 25.) 34, (d. 2.) 35, (d. 13.) E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 11. 19.) 2, (d. 11. 14. 20.) 3, (d. 16. 17.) 4, (d. 1.) 6, (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d. 16. 27.) 8, (d. 29. 35.) 9, (d. 22.) 14, (d. 5.) 20, (d. 4.) E. 2. Roger de Mortuo-mar de Chirke, Chirkes, 1, (d. 11. 19.) 3, (d. 16. 17.) 5, (d. 11. 17.) 6, (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d. 16. 27.) 8, (d. 29. 35.) 9, (d. 22.) 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, (d. 13.) 14, (d. 5. 29.) 17, (d. 27.) E. 2. Edmund de Mortuo-mari 5, (p. 2. d. 7.) E. 3. Constantine de Mortuo mari, 16, (p. 1. d. 39. p. 2. d. 22.) E. 3. Roger de Mortuo-mari de Wigmore 22, (p. 2. d. 7.) 23, (p. 1. d. 25.) 24, (p. 2. d. 3.) 25, (p. 1. d. 5.) 26, (d. 14.) 27, (d. 12.) 28, (d. 26.) E. 3. Roger de Moubray, Mubray 23, (d. 4. 9.) 24, (d. 7.) 25, (d. 25.) E. 1. Iohn de Moubray 1, (d. 8. 11. 19.) 2, (d. 11. 20.) 3, (d. 16. 17.) 5, (d. 7. 11.) 6, (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d. 16. 27.) 8, (d. 29. 35.) 9, (d. 22.) 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29▪) 13, (d. 13.) 14, (d. 5. 24.) E. 2. 1, (p. 2. d. 11.) 2, (d. 31.) 3, (d. 19.) 4, (d. 13. 23. 32. 41) 5, (p. 1. d. 7. 25. p. 2. d. 7. 6, (d. 9. 19. 36.) 7, (p. 2. d. 3.) 8, (d. 18.) 9, (d. 8. 28.) 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11, (p. 2. d.
11,) 12. (p. 2. d. 32.) 13, (p. 2. d. 1. 28.) 14, (p. 1. d. 23. 33) 15 (p. 1. d, 37.) 16. (p. 1. d. 39. p. 2. d. 13) DOMINUS Insulae de Axolme d. 22) 17, (p 1. d. 25.) 18, (p. 1. d. 14,) 20, (p 2. d. 2.) 22, (p. 1. d. 22. p. 2. d. 3. 7.) 23, (p. 1. d. 23.) 24, (p. 2. d. 3.) 25, (p. 1. d. 5.) 26, (d. 14.) 27, (d. 12.) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d. 7. 8.) 31, (d. 2. 21.) 32, (d. 14.) 33, (d. 10) 34, (d 35.) 36, (d. 16.) 37, (d. 22.) 38, (d. 3.) 39, (d. 2.) E. 3. Thomas de Multon, 25, (d. 25.) 27, (d. 18.) 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30 (d. 8. 13.) 32, (d. 2.) E. 1. 8, (d. 11. 29.) 9, (d. 9. 22.) 13, (d. 13.) 14, (d. 5. 29.) E. 2. Thomas de Multon de Egresmond 1, (d. 19. 2, (d. 11. 20.) 3, (d. 16. 17.) 5, (d. 17.) 6, (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d. 18. 27.) 11, (d. 8. 14) 12, (d. 11. 29.) E. 2. Tho: de Multon de Gillesland 1, (d. 19.) 2, (d. 11. 20.) 3, (d. 16. 17.) 5, (d. 17.) 7, (d. 18. 27.) E. 2. Iohn de Multon 6, (d. 4. 9. 19. 36.) 7, (p. 2. d. 3.) 8, (d. 18.) E. 3. William de Munchensey 49, (d. 11.) H. 3. Walter de Muncy 27, (d. 18.) 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 8. 13.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 21.) 34, (d. 2.) E. 1. Iohn Musard 32, (d. 14.) E. 3. Thomas de Musgrave, 24, (p. 2. d. 3.) 25, (p. 1. d. 5.) 27, (d. 12.) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d. 7, 8.) 31, (d. 2. 21) 32, (d. 14.) 34 (d. 4. 35.) 36, (d. 16.) 37, (d. 22.) 38, (d. 3.) 39, (d. 2.) 42, (d. 22.) 43, (d. 24.) 44, (d. 1.) 46, (d. 3.) 47, (d. 13.) E. 3. N SErlo de Nausadron 28, (d. 17.) 30, (d. 8.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 21.) 34, (d. 2.) E. 1. Ralph de Nevill 23, (d. 4. 9.) 24, (d. 7.) 25, (d. 25.) 27, (d. 18.) E. 1. Ralph de Nevill 5, (d. 7. 11.) 6, (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d. 16. 27) 14, (d. 5.) 15, (d 16.) 16, (d. 26.) 17, (d. 27.) 18, (d. 5. 21. 34.) 19, (d. 17.) 20, (d. 4.) E. 2. 1, (p. 2. d. 11. 16.) 2, (d. 15. 23. 31.) 3, (d. 19.) 4, (d. 13. 23. 32. 41) 5, (p. 1. d. 7. 25. p. 2. d. 7.) 6, (d. 9. 19. 36.) 8, (d. 18.) 9, (d. 8. 18.) 10, (d. 1. 5.) 12, (p. 2. d. 32.) 13, (p. 2. d. 1.
28,) 14, (p. 2. d. 23. 33.) 15, (p. 1. d. 37.) 16, (p. 1. d. 39.) 17, (p. 1. d. 25.) 18, (p. 1. d. 14) 20, (. 2. d. 22.) 21, (p. 2. d. 9.) 22, (d. 1. d. 32. p. 2. d. 7.) 23, (p. 1. d. 23.) 24, (p. 2. d. 3.) 25, (p. 1. d. 5.) 26, (d. 14.) 27, (d. 12.) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d. 7. 8.) 31, (d. 2. 21.) 32, (d. 14.) 33, (d. 10.) 34, (. 4. 35.) 36, (d. 13.) 37, (d. 22.) 38, (d. 3.) 39, (d. 2.) E. 3. Hugh de Nevill 5, (d. 7.) 5, (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d. 16, 27.) 8, (d. 29. 35.) 9, (d. 22.) 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, (d. 13.) 14, (d. 5. 29.) 15, (d. 16.) 16, (d. 26.) 17▪ (d. 27.) 18, (d. 5. 21. 34.) E, 2. 6, (d. 49. 19. 36.) 7, (p. 2. d. 3.) 8, (d. 28.) 9, (d. 28.) E. 3. Gilhert de Nevill 4, (d. 23.) E. 3. Iohn de Nevill de Essex 9, (d. 8.) 10, (d. 5.) 11, (p. 1. d. 18. p. 2. d. 11. 40.) 12, (p. 2. d. 32) 13, (p. 2. d. 1. 28.) 14, (p. 1. d. 23. 33.) 15, (p. 2. d. 37.) 16, (p. 1. d. 39.) 17, (p. 1. d. 35.) 18, (p. 2. d. 14.) 22, (p. 2. d. 7.) 23, (p. 1. d. 23) E. . Robert de Nevill 16, (p. 1. d. 39.) E. 3. Iohe de Nevil de Raby 42 (d. 22.) 43, (d. 24.) 44, (d. 1) 50▪ (p. 2. d 6.) E. 3. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (d. 13. 29.) 3, (d. 32.) 4, (d. 32.) 5. (d. 40.) 6, (d. 37.) 7, (d. 10. 37.) 8, (d. 35.) 9, (d. 45.) 10, (d. 42.) 11, (d. 13. 24.) 12, (d. 42.) R. 2. Thomas de Nevill de Halmshire, Halumshire, 7, (d. 10. 37) 8, (d. 35.) 9, (d. 45.) 10, (d. 42.) 11, (d. 13. 24.) 12, (d. 42.) 13, (d. 5.) 14, (d. 42.) 15, (d. 37.) 18, (d. 23) 20, (p. 1. d. 15.) 21, (p. 1. d. 23.) 23, (d. 3.) R. 2. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (p. 2. d. 3.) 3, (d. 17.) 5, (p. 1. d. 28. p. 2. d. 4.) 7, (d. 30.) 8, (d. .) 11, (d. 32.) 12, (. 2.) 14, (d. 22.) H. 4. Ralph Nevill de Raby 12, (d. 42.) 14, (d. 42.) 15, (d. 37) 16, (d. 23) 17, (d. 30.) 20, (p. 1. d. 25.) 21, (p. 1. d. 27.) R. 2. William de Nevill Chivaler, 9, (d. 18.) 10, (d. 10.) 11, (d. 10.) 13, (d. 2.) 15, (d. 18.) 18, (d. 33.) 20, (d. 27.) 25, (d. 24.) H. 6. Edward Nevill DOMINVS de Bergavenney 29, (d. 41) Chivaler, 31, (d. 36.) 33, (d. 36.) 38, (d. 30.) 39, (d. 6.)
H. 6. 1, (d. 35.) 2, (d. 3) 6, (d. 1.) 9, (d. 3.) 12. (d. 41) E. 4. William Nevill de Fauconbridge Chivaler, 33, (d. 36.) 38, (d 30) H 6. 1, (d. 35.) E. 4. Iohn Nevill DOMINVS de Mounjoy [Mountague] Chi∣valer, 1, (d. 35.) 2, (d. 3.) E. 4. George Nevill Chivaler 22, 23 (d. 10.) E. 4. William de Neyrford 25, (d. 25.) E. 1. Waler de Norwico (Norwich) 8, (d. 35.) E. 2. Iohn de Norwico, 16, (p. 1. d. 39.) 32, (d. 14.) 33, (d. 10.) 34, d. 35,) E. 3. Irhn de Norwode, Northwode 6, (d. 9. 31.) 7, (d. 16. 17.) 8, (d. 29. 36.) 9, (d. 22. 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29) E. 2. Roger de Northwode 33, (d. 10.) 34, (d. 35.) E. 3. Iohn de Northwode, 37, (d. 22.) 38, (d. 3.) 39, (d. 2.) 42. (d. 22) 43, (d. 24.) 44, (d. 12.) 46, (d. 11.) 47, (d. 13.) 49, (d. 6.) E. 3. Adam de Novo Mercato, 49, (d. 11.) H. 3. Thomas de Novo Mercato 32, (d. 14.) E. 3. O RObert de Ogle DOMINUS de Ogle Chivaler 2, (d. 3.) 6, (. 1.) 9, (d. 3.) E. 4. Owen Ogle, de Ogle Chivaler, 22 & 23 (d. 10.) E. 1. Iohn de Oldcastle Chivaler 11, (d. 32.) 12, (d. 2.) 14, (d. 2) H. 4. 1, (d. 37) H. 5. Iohn de Orreby 2, (d. 11. 20.) 3, (d: 17.) 4 (d. 1.) E. 2. P IOhn de Palton 32. (d. 14.) E. 3. Iohn de Pateshull 26, (p. 1. d. 29.) E. 3. Iohn de Paynell 28, (d. 3. 17. 30, (d. 8. 13.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 21.) 34, (d. 2.) E. 1. 1, (d. 19.) 3, (d. 17.) 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29) E. 2. William Paynell, Paig∣nell, 2, (d. 11. 20.) 3, d. 16. 17.) 4, (d. 1.) 5, (d. 11. 17.) 6, (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d. 16. 27.) 8, (d. 35.) 9. (d. 22) E. 2. Iohn de Payure 27, (d. 16. 18.) E. 1. 11, (d. 14.) E. 2.
Gilbert Pecche, de Petche 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 8. 1.) 32, (d. 23.) 4, (d. 2.) E. 1. 15 E. 2, d. 16. Robert Petche, 25, (d. 25.) E. 1. 14, (d. 5.) E. 2. Iohn Pecche, Petche, de Petche 14, (d. 5.) 15, (d. 16.) 16, d. 26,) 17, (d. 27.) 18, (d. 5. 21. 34.) 19, (d, 27.) 20, (d. 4.) E. 2. 1, (. 2. d. 11. 16.) 2, (d. 15. 23. 31.) 3, (d. 19.) 4, (d. 13. 32. 41.) 5, (d. 7. 23.) 6, (d. 9. 19. 38.) 7, (p. 2. d. 3.) 8, (d. 18) 9, (d. 8. 28.) 32, (d. 14.) E. 3. Iohn de Peitz 11, (d. 8.) E. 2. Henry de Percy 27, d. 8. 18.) 28, (d. 3. 7.) 30, (d. 8. 13.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 8. 21.) 34, (d. 2.) E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 11. 19.) 2, (d. 11. 14. 20.) 3, (d. 16. 17.) 4, (d. 1.) 5, (d. 17.) 6, (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d. 16. 27.) 8, (d. 35.) E. 2. Henry de Percy 15, (d. 16.) 16, (d. 26.) 17, (d. 27.) 18, (d. 5. 21. 34.) 19, (d. 27.) 20, (d. 4.) E. 2. 1. (p. 2. d. 11. 16.) 2 (d. 15. 23. 31.) 3, (d. 19.) 4, (d. 13. 23. 32. 41.) 5, (p. 1. d. 7. 25. p. 2. d. 7.) 6, (d. 9. 19. 36.) 7, (p. 2. d. 3.) 8, (d. 18.) 9, (d. 8. 28.) 10, (d. 1. 5.) 12. (p. 2. d. 32.) 13, (p. 2. d. 28.) 14, (p. 1. d. 23. 33.) 15, (p. 1. d. 37.) 16, (p. 1. d. 39. 17, (p. 1. d. 25.) 18, (p. 1. d. 14.) 20, (p. 2. d. 22.) 21, (p. 2. d. 9.) 22, (p. 1. d. 32. p. 2. d. 7.) 23, (p. 1. d. 23.) 24, (p. 2. d. 3.) 25, (p. 1. d. 5.) 26, (d. 14.) 27, (d. 12.) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d. 7. 8.) 31, (d. 2. 21.) 32, (d. 14.) 34, (d. 4.) 36, (d. 16.) 37, (d. 22.) 38, (d. 3.) 42, (d. 22. (Le Percey) 43, (d. 24.) 44, (d. 1.) 46, (d. 3.) 49, (d. 4. 6) E. . Henry Percey DOMINVS de Poynings, Chivaler, 27, (d. 24.) 28, (d. 26. 29, (d. 41.) 31, (d. 36.) 33, (d. 6.) H. 6. Thomas Percey DOMINVS de Egremont, Gremont, 29, (d. 41.) 31, (d. 36.) 38, (d. 30.) H. 6. Ralph Pert, 25, (d. 25.) E. 1. Henry Peverell 32▪ (d. 14.) E. 3.
Hugh de Peyngn 23. (d. 9.) E. 1, Hugh de Sancto Phileberto, 27 (d. 18.) E. 1. Hugh de Sancto Philberto 22, (p. 2. d. 7,) 23, (p. 1. d. 23.) E 3. Henry Picard 32, (d. 14.) E. 3. Henry de Pinkeney 25, (d. 25.) 27, (d. 16. 18.) 28, (d. 17) E. 1. Ralph Pipard, Pypard, Pipart 25, (d. 25.) 27, (d. 16. 18.) 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 8. 13.) E. 1. Robert de Playez 11, (d. 14.) E. 2. Giles de Playez 25, (d. 25.) E. 1. Richard de Plaiez, Playez, 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, (d. 13.) 14, (d. 5. 29.) 15, (d. 10.) E. 2. Magister Richard de Plescy 32, (d. 14.) E. 3. Hugh de Plessetis 25, (d. 25.) 27, (d. 18.) E. 1. Alan de Pluckenet, Ploukenet, Plugenet 23, (d. 4. 9.) 24, (d. 7.) 25, (d. 25.) E. 1. 5, (d. 11.) E. 2. Michael de la Pole 39, (d. 2.) 42, (d. 22.) 43, (d. 24.) 46, (d. 9.) 49, (d. 4. 6.) Admirallus Flote Navium versus partes Boriales, 50, (p. 2. d. 6.) E. 3. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (d. 13. 29.) 3, (d. 32.) 4, (d. 31.) 5, (d. 40) 6, (d. 37.) 7, (d. 10. 37.) 8, (d. 35.) R. 2. Michael de Ponitz, Pointz 23, (d. 4.) 24, (d. 7.) 25, (d. 25.) 27, (d. 18.) 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 8. 19.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 21.) 34, (d. 2.) E. 1. 1, (d. 19.) E. 2. Nicholas de Pointz 2, (d. 11. 20.) 3, (d. 16. 17.) 4, (d. 1.) E. 2. Hugh de Pointz, 11, (d. 8, 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, (d. 13.) 14, (d. 5. 29.) 15, (d. 16.) 18, (d. 21.) 20, (d. 4.) E. 2. 1, (p. 2. d. 11. 16.) 2, (d. 23. 31.) 4, (d. 13. 23. 32. 41.) 5, (p. 2. d. 7. 25. p. 2. d. 7.) 6, (d. 19. 36.) 7, (p. 2. d. 3.) 8, (d. 18.) 9, (d. 8. 28.) 10, (d, 1. 5.) 11, (p. 1. d. 8. p. 2. d. 11.) 12, (p. 2. d. 32.) 13, (p. 2. d. 1. 28.) 14, (p. 2. d. 23, 33.) 15, (p. 1. d. 37.) 16, (p. 1. d. 39.) 17, (p. 1. d. 25.) E. 3. Robert de Pointz 1, (p. 2. d. 16.) E. 3.
Thomas de Poynings, 11, (p. 1. d. 8. 15.) E. 3. Michael de Poynings, 16, (p. 1. d. 39. 22, (. 2. d. 7.) 23, (p. 1. d. 23.) 24, (p. 2. d. 3.) 25, (p. 1. d. 5.) 26, (d. 14.) 27, (d. 12.) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d. 7, 8.) 31, (d. 2. 21.) 32, (d. 14.) 34, (d. 4.) 36, (d. 16.) 37, (d. 22.) 38, (d. 3.) 39, (d. 2.) 42, (d. 22.) E. 3. Luke de Poynings, 42, (d. 22.) 43, (d. 24.) 44, (d. 1.) 46, (d. 9, 11.) 47, (d. 13.) 49, (d. 4. 6.) E. 3. Richard de Poynings 7, (d. 37.) 8, (d. 35.) 9, (d. 45.) R. 2. Robert Poynings 7, (d. 30.) 8, (d. 2.) 11, (d. 32.) 12, (d. 2.) 14, (d. 22.) H. 4. 1, (d. 9. 37.) 2, (d. 16) 3, (d. 15.) 4, (d. 16.) 5, (d. 11.) 17, (d. 9.) 8, (d. 2.) 9, (d. 14.) H. 5. 1, (d. 22.) 2, (d. 18.) Chivaler, 3, (d. 9.) 4, (d. 15.) 5, (d. 4. 7, (d. 2.) 9, (d. 18.) 10, (d. 10.) 11, (d. 10.) 13, (d. 2.) 15, (d. 18.) 18, (d. 33.) 20, (d. 27) 23, (d. 21.) H. 6. R. THomas de Reynes 32, (d. 14.) E. 3. Iohn de Ripariis 27, (d. 18.) 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 8. 13.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 21.) 34, (d. 2.) E. 1. 1, (d. 19.) 6, (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d. 16. 27.) 8, (d. 29. 35.) 9, (d. 22.) E. 2. Ludowic Robesart Chivaler, 3, (d. 9.) 4, (d. 15.) 5, (d. 4.) 7, (d. 2.) H. 6. Thomas de la Roche 28 (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 8. 13.) 32, ((d. 2.) 33, (d. 21.) 34, (d. 2.) E. 1. Sayerus de Rocheford, 32. (d. 14.) E. 3. Robert de Ros, 49, (d. 11.) H. 3. Robert de Ros de Werke 23, (d. 4. 9.) E. 1. William de Ros, Roos de Helmeslake, Hamelake 23, (d. 9.) 27, (d. 16. 18.) 30, (d. 8. 13.) E. 1. 1, (d. 11.) 2, (d. 20.) 3, (d. 16. 17.) 5, (d. 17.) 6, (d. 3. 17.)
7, (d. 6. 27.) 8, (d. 29. 35.) 9, (d. 22.) 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, (d. 15.) 14, (d. 5. 29.) 15, (d. 16.) 16, (d. 26.) 17, (d. 27.) 18, (d. 5. 21. 34.) 20, (d. 4.) E. 2. 1, (p. 1. d. 11. 16.) 2, (d. 15. 23. 31.) 3, (d. 10.) 4, (d. 13. 23. 32. 41.) 5, (p. 1. d. 7. 25. p. 2. d. 7.) 6, (d. 9. 19. 36.) 7, (p. 2. d. 3.) 8, (d. 18.) 9, (d. 8. 28.) 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11, (p. 1. d. 11. 40.) 12, (p. 2. d. 32.) 13, (p. 2. d. 1. 28.) 14, (p. 1. d. 23. 33.) 15, (p. 1. d. 37.) 16, (p. 1. d. 29. p. 2. d. 13. 22.) 23, (p. 2. d. 3.) 25, (p. 1. d. 5.) E. 3. Iohn de Ros, Roos, 6, (d. 9. 19. 36.) 7, (p. 2. d. 3.) 8, (d. 18.) 9, (d. 8. 28.) 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11, (p. 1. d. 15. p. 2. d. 11. 40.) 12, (p. 2. d. 32.) E. 3. Thomas de Ros, Roos de Hamelake, 35, (d. 36.) 36, (d. 16. 32.) 37, (d. 22.) 38, (d. 3.) 39, (d. 2.) 42, (d. 22.) 43 (d. 24.) 49, (d. 4.) E. 3. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (d. 13. 29.) 3, (d. 32.) 4, (d. 32.) 5, (d. 40.) 6, (d. 37,) 7, (d. 10. 37.) 8, (d. 35) R. 2. Iohn Roos de Hamelake, 10 (d. 42.) 11, (d. 13. 24.) 12, (d. 42.) 13, (d. 5.) 14, (d. 42) 15, (d. 32.) 16, (d. 23.) 17, (d. 30.) R. 2. William Roos de Hamlake 18, (d. 23.) 20, (p. 2. d. 15.) 21, (p. 1. d. 27.) 23, (d. 3) R. 2. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (p. 1. d. 3.) 3, (d. 17.) 5, (p. 1. d. 28. p. 2. d. 4.) 7, (d. 30.) 8, (d. 2.) 11, (d. 32.) 12, (d. 2.) 14, (d. 22) H. 4. 1, (d. 9. 37.) H. 5, Thomas Roos de Hamelake Chi∣valer, 7, (d. 2.) H. 6. Thomas DOMINUS de Roos, 27, (d. 24.) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d. 41.) Miles, 31, (d. 36.) 33, (d. 36.) 38, (d. 30.) H. 6. Thomas de Rous 32 (d. 14.) E. 3. William de Ryther, Rithre, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 8.) 13.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 21.) 34, (d. 2.) E. 1. 1, (d. 19.) E. 2. William Ryvill 32, (d. 14.) E. 3. S WIlliam Sampson 28, (d. 17.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 21) 34, (d. 2.) E. 1.
Roger de Sancto Iohanne (Seint-Iohn) 49, (d. 11.) H. 3. Iohn de Sancto Iohanne de Lageham 25, (d. 25.) 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 8, 13.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 21.) 34, (d. 2.) E. 1. 1, (d. 19.) 2, (d. 11. 20.) 3, (d. 16. 17.) 4, (d. 1.) 5, (d. 11. 17.) 6, (d. 3. 31) 7, (d. 16. 27.) 8, (d. 29. 35.) 9, (d. 22.) 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, (d. 13.) 14, (d. 5.) 15, (d. 16.) 16, (d. 28) E. 2. Iohn de Sancto Iohanne (usually stiled Iunior) 28, (d. 17) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 21.) 34, (d. 2.) E. 1. 6, (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d. 27.) 8, (d. 29. 35.) 9, (d. 22.) 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, (d. 13.) 14, (d. 5. 29.) E. 2. Iohn de Sancto Iohanne de Basinges 15, (d. 16.) 16, (d. 26.) 17, (d. 27.) 18, (d. 5. 21, 34.) 19, (d. 27.) E. 2. Iohn de Sancto Iohanne 20, (d. 20.) E. 2. 1, (p. 2. d. 11. 16,) 6, (d. 15. 23. 31.) 4, (d. 13. 41.) 5, (d. 25.) E. 3. Iohn de Sandall 6, (d. 35.) E. 2. Arnold Sauvage 32, (d. 14.) E. 3. Geofry de Say 7, (d. 16. 27.) 8, (d. 29. 35.) 9, (d. 22) 11, (d. 8. 14) 12, (d. 11. 19.) 13, (d. 13) 14, (d. 5. 29.) E. 2. Geofry de Say 16, (p. 1. d. 29.) 22, (p. 2. d. 9.) 23, (p. 1. d. 23.) 26, (d. 14.) 27, d. 12.) E. 3. William de Say 36, (d. 13.) 37, (d. 20.) 38, (d. 3.) 39, (d. 2) 42. (d. 22.) 43 (d. 24.) 44, (d. 1.) 46, (d. 9, 10, 11.) 47, (d. 13.) E. 3. Rober de Scales, D'escales, 27, (d. 16. 18.) 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 8. 13.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 21.) 34, (d. 2.) E. 1. 1, (d. 11. 19.) 6, (d. 3. 31.  7, (d. 16. 27.) 8, (d. 29. 35) 9, (d. 22.) 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29,) 13, (d. 3. 13.) 14, (d. 5. 29.) 15, (d. 16.) E. 2. Robert de Scales, 16, (p. 1. d. 39.) 24, (p. 2. d. 3.) 25, p. 1. d. 5.) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d. 7, 8.) 38, (d. 3.) 39, (d. 2.) 42, (d. 22.) 43, (d. 24.) 50, (p. 2. d. 6.) E. 3.
Roger de Scales, Skales 49, (d. 4. 6.) E. 3. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (d. 13. 29.) 3, (d. 32.) 4, (d. 32.) 5, (d. 40.) 6, (d. 37.) 7, (d. 10. 37.) 8, (d. 35.) 9, (d. 45.) R. 2. Robert de Scales 20, (p. 1. d. 15.) 21, (p. 1. d. 27.) 23, (d. 3.) R. 2▪ 1, (d. 37.) 2, (p. 1. d. 3.) H. 4. Thomas de Scales, Miles 23, (d. 21.) 25, (d. 24.) 27, (d. 24.) 28, (d. 26) 29, (d. 41.) 31, (d. 36.) 33, (d. 36.) 38, (d. 30) H. 6. Henry le Scrop 8, (d. 35.) E. 2. Henry le Scrop, 3, (d. 19.) 6, (d. 4.) 16, (p. 1. d. 39.) 24, (p. 2. d. 3.) 25, (p. 1. d. 5.) 26, (d. 14.) 27, (d. 12.) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d. 8.) 31, (d. 2. 21.) 34, (d. 4.) 44, (d. 1.) 46, (d 9.) 47, (d. 13.) 50, (p. 2. d. 6.) E. 3. 1, (d. 37) 2, (d. 13. 29.) 3, (d. 32.) 4, (d. 32.) Chivaler, 5, (d. 40.) 6, (d. 37.) 7, (d. 10. 37.) 8, (d. 35.) 9, (d. 45▪) 10, (d. 42.) 11, (d. 37.) 12, (d. 42.) 13, (d. 5.) 14, (d. 42.) 15, (d. 37.) R. 2. Richard le Scrop 1, (d. 37.) 2, (d. 13. 39.) 3, (d. 32) 4, (d. 32.) 4, (d. 32.) 5, (d. 40.) 6, (d. 37.) 7, (d. 10. 37.) 8, (d. 35.) 9, (d. 45.) 10, (d. 42.) 11, (d. 13. 24.) 12, (d. 42.) 13, (d. 5.) 14, (d. 42.) 15, (d. 37.) 16, (d. 23.) 17, (d. 30.) 18, (d. 23.) 20, (p. 1. d. 15.) 21, (p. 1. d. 27.) 23, (d. 3.) R. 2. 1, (d, 37.) 2, (p. 2. d. 3.) 3, (d. 17.) 5, (p. 1. d. 25.) H. 4. Stephen de Scrop de Masham 16, (d. 23.) 17, (d. 30.) 20, (p. 1. d. 15.) 21, (p. 1. d. 27.) 23, (d. 3.) R. 2. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (p. 2. d. 3.) 3, (d. 17.) 5, (p. 1. d. 28. p. 2. d. 4.) 7, (d. 30.) 8, (d. 2.) H. 4. Henry le Scrop de Masham, 11, (d. 32.) 12, (d. 2.) 14, (d. 22.) H. 4. 1, (d. 9. ) 2, (d. 16.) H. 5. Iohn le Scrop de Masham, Chter, 4, (d. 15.) 5, (d. 4.) 7, (d. 2.) 9, (d. 18.) 10, (d. 10.) 11, (d. 10.) 13, (d. 2.) 15, (d. 18.) 18, (d. 33.) 20, (d. 27.) 23, (d. 21.) 25, (d. 24.) 27, (d. 24.) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d. 41.) 31, [d. 36.] 33, [d. 36.] H. 6. Henry le Scrop de Bolton, Chivaler 20, [d. 27.] 23, [d. 21.] 25, [d. 24.] 27, [d. 24.] 28, [d. 26.] 29, [d. 41.] 31, [d. 36.] 33, [d. 30.] H. 6. Iohn de Scrop de Bolton, Chi∣valer
38, (d. 30.) 49, (d. 6.) H. 6. 1, (d. 35.) 2, (d. 3.) 6, (d. 1.) 9, (d. 33.) 12, (d. 41.) 22 & 23 (d. 10.) E. 4. Thomas le Scrop de Masham Chivaler 38, (d. 30.) 49, (d. 6) H. 6. 1, (d. 35.) 2, (d. 3.) 6, (d. 1.) 9, (d. 33) 12, (d. 41.) 22 & 23, (d. 10,) E. 4. Nicholas de Segrave 49, (d. 11.) H. 3. Nicholas de Se∣grave senior 23, (d. 9.) 25, (d. 6. 25.) 27, (d. 18.) 28, (d. 3.) 30, (d. 8. 13.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 10. 21) 34, (d. 2.) 35, (d. 13.) E. 1. 1, (d. 11▪ 19,) 2, (d▪ 14. 20.) 3, (d. 16. 17.) 5, (d. 17.) 6, (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d. 16. 27.) 8, (d. 29. 35.) 9, (d. 22.) 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, (d. 13.) 14, (d. 5. 29) E. 2. Ni∣cholas de Segrave Iunior 23, (d, 4. 9.) 24, (d. 7.) E. 1. Iohn de Segrave 24, (d. 7.) 25, (d. 6. 25.) 27, (d. 16, 18.) 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 8. 13.) 32, (d. 2.) 34, (d. 2.) E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 11. 19.) 2, (d. 14. 20) 5, (d. 11. 17. 25) 6, (d. 3. 13.) 7, (d. 16. 27.) 8, (d. 29.) 9, (d. 22.) 11, (d. 8. 14. 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, (d. 13.) 14, (d. 5. 29.) 15, (d. 16.) 16, (d. 26.) 17, (d. 27.) 18, (d. 5, 34.) E. 2. Iohn de Segrave 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11. (p. 1. d. 8. 15, p. 2. d. 40.) 12, (p. 2. d 32.) 13, (p. 2. d. 1. 28) 14, (p. 2. d. 23. 33) 15, (p. 1. d. 37.) 16, (p, 1, d. 39. p. 2. d. 13.) 17. (p. 1. d 25.) 18, (p. 1. d. 14.) 20, (p. 1. d. 22.) 21, (p. 2. d. 9.) 22, (p. 1. d. 32. p. 2. d. 7.) 23, (p. 1. d. 23) 24, (p. 2. d. 3.) 21, (p. 1. d. 5.) E. 3. Thomas Seymor 32, (d. 14.) E. 3. Richard Seymour, Seymore, 4, (d. 32.) 5, (d. 40.) 6, (d. 37.) 7, (d. 10. 33.) 8, (d. 35.) 9, (d. 45.) 10, (d. 42.) 11, (d. 10. 37.) 12, (d. 42.) 13, (d. 5.) 14, (d. 42.) 15, (d. 37.) 16, (d. 23.) 17, (d. 30.) 18, (d. 23.) 20, (p. 1. d. 15.) 21, (p. 1. d. 27.) 23 (d. 3.) R. 2. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (p. 2. d. 3.) 5, (p. 1. d. 28. p. 2. d. 4.) 7, (d. 30.) 8, (d. 2.) H. 4.
William de Shareshall 6, (d. 4.) E. 3. Edmond de Sleye 25, (d. 25.) E. 1. Iohn de Somery 1, (d. 8.) 2, (d. 11, 14. 20.) 3, (d. 16, 17) 4, (d. 1.) 5, (d. 11. 17. 25.) 6, (d. 16. 27.) 8, (d. 29, 35) 9, (d. 22.) 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29) 13, (d. 13.) 14, (d. 5. 29.) 15, (d. 16.) E. 2. William Spenser 32, (d. 14.) E. 3. Edward BARO de Stafford 27, (d. 16. 28.) 28, (d. 3. 17) 30, (d. 8. 13.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 20.) 34, (d. 2) E. 1. 1, (d. 11. E. 2. Ralph de Stafford 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11, (p. 2. d. 40.) 12, p. 2. d. 32.) 13, (p. 2. d. 1. 28.) 14, (p. 2. d. 23. 33.) 15, (p. 1. d. 37.) 16, (p. 1. d. 39.) 17, (p. 1. d. 25) 21, (p. 2. d. 9.) 22, (p. 1. d. 32.) E. 3. BARO de Stafford (listed amongst the Earls) 18, (p. 1. d. 14) and then amongst the Lords by this title BARO de Stafford, 22, p. 2. d. 7.) 23, (p. 1. d. 23.) 24, (p. 2. d. 7.) 23, (p. 1. d. 23) 24, (p. 2. d. 3.) E. 3. Richard de Stafford, 32, (d. 14.) 46, (d. 9, 10, 11.) 47, (d. 13.) 49 (d. 4. 6.) 50, (p. 2. d. 6.) E. 3. 1, (d. 37) 2, (d 13. 29.) 3, (d. 32.) R. 2. Hugh de Stafford 44, (d. 1.) E. 3. Hugh Stafford 12, (d. 2.) 14, (d. 22) H. 4. Humfry Stafford de Southwick Chivaler 2, (d. 3.) 6, (d. 1.) E. 4. Thomas de Stanley Chivaler 38, (d. 6.) 49, (d. 6.) H. 6. 1. (d. 35.) DOMINUS Stanley 2, (d. 3.) 6, (d. 1.) 9, (d. 3.) 12, (d. 31.) 22 & 23▪ (d. 10.) E. 4. George Stanley de Lestrange Chivaler 22 & 23, (d. 10.) E. 4. Nicholas de Stapleton 6, (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d. 16, 27.) E. 2. Nicholas de Stapleton 16, (p. 1. d. 39.) E. 3.) Miles de Stapleton 32, (d. 34.) E. 3. Henricus de Staunton 8, (d. 29. 35.) 9, (d. 22.) E. 2. Straunge, See Lestrang, de Extrane. Iohn de Strivelin, 16, (p. 2. d. 39) 37, (d. 22.) 38, (d. 3.) 39, (d. 2.) 42, (d. 22.) 44, (d. 1.) E. 3. Iohn Stourton Miles, DOMINUS de Sturton 28, (d. 26)
29, (d. 41.) 31, (d. 36.) 33, (d. 36,) 38, (d. 30.) H. 6. 1, (d. 35) E. 4. William Stourton de Stourton Chivaler 49, (d. 6.) H. 6. 9 (d. 3.) 12, (d. 41.) E. 4. Iohn Stourton Chivaler 22 & 23 (d. 10.) E. 4. Iohn de Suby, Sudeley, Sudele, Sully, Sudle 28, (d. 3.) 17.) 30, (d. 8. 13.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 21.) 34, (d. 2.) E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 11. 19.) 2, (d. 11. 20.) 3, (d. 17.) 4, (d. 1.) 5, (d. 11.) 6, (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d. 16. 27.) 8, (d. 29. 35.) 9, (d. 22.) 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, (d. 13.) 14, (d. 5. 29) E. 2. Iohn de Sutton 18, (d. 21.) E. 2. Iohn Sutton de Holder∣ness 6, (d. 9. 19. 36.) 7, (p. 2. d. 3.) 8, (d. 18.) 9, (d. 8.) 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11, (p. 1. d. 8. p. 2. d. 11. 40.) 12, (p. 2. d. 32.) 13, (p. 2. d. 1. 28.) 14, (p. 1. d. 23. 33.) 15, (p. 1. d. 37.) 16▪ (p. 1. d. 39.) 17, (p. 1. d. 25.) 18, (p. 1. d. 14.) E. 3. Iohn de Sutton de Duddele 16, (p. 1. d. 39.) E. 3. Iohn de Sutton de Essex 33, (d. 10.) 34, (d. 35.) E. 3. Iohn Sutton de Duddeley Chivaler 20, (d. 27) 23, (d. 21) 25, (d. 24.) 27, (d. 24.) 29, (d. 41.) 31, (d. 36) 33, (d. 36.) 38, (d. 30.) H. 6. 1, (d. 35) 2, (d. 3.) 6, (d. 1.) 9, (d. 3.) 12, (d. 41.) 22, & 23, (d. 10) E. 4. Adam de Swyllington 20, (d. 4.) E. 2. 1, (p. 2. d. 11. 16.) 2, (d. 31) E. 3. Roger de Swynerton 11, (p. 1. d. 8. 15. p. 2. d. 11. 40.) E. 3. T GIlbert Talbot, Talebot 4, (d. 32.) 5, (p. 2. d. 7.) 6, (d. 4. 9. 19. 36.) 7, (p. 2. d. 3.) 8, (d. 18.) 9, (d, 8. 18.) 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11, (p. 2. d. 11. 40.) 12, (p. 2. d. 32.) 13. (p. 2. d. 1. 28.) 14, (p. 1. d. 23. 33.) 15, (p. 1. d. 37.) 16, (p. 1. d. 39. p. 2. d. 22.) 17, (p. 1. d. 25.) 18, (p. 1. d. 14.) 22, (p. 1. d. 32. p. 2. d. 7.) 38, (d. 3.) 39, (d. 2.) 42, (d. 22.) 44, (d. 1.) 47, (d. 13,) 49, (d. 4. 6.) 50, (p. 2. d. 6.) E. 3. 1, (d.
35.) 2, (d. 13. 29.) 3▪ (d. 32.) 4, (d. 32.) 5, (d. 40) 6, (d. 37.) 7, (d. 10. 37.) 8, (d. 35.) 9, (d. 45.) 10 (d. 42.) R. 2. Richard Talbot 4, (d. 23. 33) 6, (d. 9. 19.) 7, (p. 2. d. 3.) 8, (d. 18.) 9, (d. 8. 28.) 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11, (p. 1. d. 8.) 12, (p. 2. d. 32.) 13, (p. 2. d. 1. 28.) 14, (p. 1. d. 23. 33.) 15, (p. 1. d. 37.) 16, (p. 1. d. 39.) 18, (p 1. d. 14.) 21, (p. 2. d. 9.) 2, (p. 1. d. 23) 24. p. 2. d. 3.) 25, (p. 1. d. 5.) 26, (d. 14.) 27, (d. 12.) 28▪ (d. 26.) 29, (d. 7, 8.) 36, (d. 16.) 37, (d. 22.) E. 3. Thomas Talbot de Blackmore 7, (d. 10.) R. 2. Richard Talbot de Blackmore 8, (d. 35.) 9, (d. 45.) 10, (d. 42.) Chivaler 11, (d. 24.) R. 2. Richard Talbot de Goderich-Castle 11, (d. 13.) 12, (d. 42.) 13, (d. 5.) 14, (d. 42.) 15, (d. 37.) 16, (d. 23.) 17, (d. 30.) R. 2. Gilbert Talbot 7, (d. 30.) 8, (d. 2.) 11, (d. 32.) 12, (d. 2) 14. (d. 22.) H. 4. 1, (d. 9. 37.) 2, (d. 16.) 3, (d. 15.) 4, (d. 16.) 5, (d. 11.) H. 5. Iohn Talbot DOMINVS de Furnival 11, (d. 32.) 12, (d. 2.) 14, (d. 22.) H. 4. 1, (d. 9. 37.) 2, (d. 6.) 4, (d. 16) 8, (d. 2.) H. 5. Iohn Talbot Chivaler 4, (d. 15.) 11, (d. 10.) 13, (d. 2.) H. 6. Iohn Talbot de Lisle Chivaler 23, (d. 21,) 25, (d. 24▪) 27, (d. 24) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d. 41.) Vicount de Lisle, 31, (d. 36.) H. 6. Robert de Tateshall 22, (d. 4.) 24, (d. 7.) 25, (d. 6. 25) 27. (d. 16. 18.) 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 8. 13.) E. 1. Walter de Tey 27, (d. 16. 28.) 18, (d. 17.) 32, (d. 2.) 33. d. 21.) 34, (d. 2.) E. 1. 1, (d. 19.) E. 2. Henry de Teyes, Teyeys, Teyers, Tryes, 27, (d. 18) 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 8, 13.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 21.) 34, (d. 2.) 35, (d. 13.) E. 1. 1, (d. 29.) 6, (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d. 16, 27.) 8, (d. 29. 35.) 9, (d. 22.) 11, (d. 8, 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, (d. 13.) 14, (d. 5. 29) E. 2. Iohn de Thorpe 2, (d. 11. 20.) 3, (d. 16, 17.) 4, (d. 1.) 5, (d. 11. 17.) 6, (d, 3. 31.) 7, (d. 16. 27) 8, (d. 29. 35.) 9,
(d. 22.) 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 14, (d. 15.) 15 (d. 26.) 17, (d. 27.) 18, (d. 5. 34.) 19, (d. 27.) E. 2. William de Thorpe 4, (d. 32.) 5, (d. 40.) 6, (d. 37.) 7, (d. 10. 37.) 8, (d. 35.) 9, (d. 4.) 10, (d. 42.) 11, (d. 13. 24.) 12, (d. 42.) 13, (d. 5.) 14, (d. 42.) R. 2. Pagan de Tibetot, Tibetorte 1, (d. 8.) 2, (d. 11. 14. 20.) 3, (d. 16, 17.) 5, (d. 11. 17. 25.) 6, (d. 3. 31) 7, (d. 16. 27) E. 2 Iohn de Tibetot, Tibetorte, Tibetote, Tipetote, Tiptoft, 9, (d. 8. 28.) 10. (d. 1. 5.) 11. (p. 1. d. 8. p. 2. d. 40.) 13. (p. 2. d. 1.) 14, (p. 2. d 23, 33.) 15, (p. 1. d. 37.) 17, (p. 1. d. 35.) 18, (p. 1. d. 14.) 22, (p. 2. d. 7.) 23, (p. 1. d. 23.) 24, (p. 2. d. 3.) 25, (p. 1. d. 5.) 27, (d. 12.) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d. 7. 8.) 31, (d. 2. 21.) 32, (d. 14.) 34, (d▪ 4.) 36, (d. 16. 42.) 37, (d. 22.) 38, (d. 3.) 39, (d. 2.) E. 3. Ro∣bert Tibetot. 42, (d. 22.) 44, (d. 1.) E. 3. Iohn Tibetot, Tibetoft, Tiptoft, Chiveler. 4, (d. 15.) 5, (d. 4.) 7, (d. 2.) 9, (d. 18.) 10, (d. 10.) 11, (d. 10.) 13, (d. 2.) 15, (d. 18.) 18, (d. 33,) 20, (d. 27.) H. 6. Iohn Traverse 3, (d. 19.) E. 3. Iohn Tregoz, Tregoitz 25, (d. 25.) 27, (d. 16. 18) E. 1. Henry Tregoz, Tregoitz 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 21.) 34, (d. 2.) 35, (d. 13) E. 1. 1, (d. 19.) 2, (d. 11. 20.) 3, (d. 16, 17.) 4, (d. 1.) 7, (d. 16. 27.) 8, (d. 29. 35.) 9, (d. 22.) 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, (d. 13) 14 (d. 5. 29.) 15, (d. 16.) E. 2. Thomas Tregoz 6, (d. 4. 9. 19. 36) 7, (p. 2. d. 3.) 8, (d. 18) 9, (d. 28.) E. 3. Iohn Trouett 32, (d. 14) E. 3. William Trussell 16, (p. 1. d. 39.) E. 3. Theobald Trussell 32 (d. 14.) E. 3. William Tuchet, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 8. 13.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 21.) 34, (d. 2.) E. 1. Iohn Tuchet 5, (p. 1. d. 28. p. 2. d. 4.) 7, (d. 30.) 8, (d. 2.) H. 4. Marmaduke Twenge, Thwenge 35, (d. 13.) E. 1. 2, (d. 11. 20.) 3, (d. 16, 17.) 6, (d. 3. 31.) 7, d. 16. 27.) 8, (d. 29. 35.) 9, (d. 22.) 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11.
29) 13, (d. 13.) 14, (d. 5. 27.) 15, (d. 16.) 16, (d. 26) E. 2. William de Twenge 18, (d. 22.) E. 2. V ADomaru, Eimerus de Valentia 25, (d. 25.) 28, (d. 3. 17,) 30, (d. 8. 13.) 32, (d. 2.) 34, [d. 2] E. 1. William la Vavasour, Vavassor 27, (d. 28.) 28, (d. 3. 17) 30, (d. 8. 13.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 21.) 34, (d. 2.) E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 19.) 2, (d. 11. 20.) 3, (d. 17.) 4, (d. 1.) 5, (d. 11.) 6, (d. 31) E. 2. Walter le Va∣vassour 7▪ (d. 27) E. 2. Peter de Veel 16, (p. 1. d. 39.) 32, (d. 14.) E. 3. Hugh de Veer 27, (d. 16▪ 28.) 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 8. 13,) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 21.) 34, (d. 2.) 35, (d. 13) E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 11. 29.) 2, (d. 11. 14. 20.) , (d. 11.) 4, (d. 1.) 5, (d. 11. 17. 25.) 6, (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d. 16. 27.) 8, (d. 25. 29.) E. 2. Robert de Veer 9, (d. 22) 11, (d. 8. 14) E. 2. Theobald de Verden, Verdon, Verdun, Verdoun 23, (d. 4. 9.) 25, (d. 25.) Senior. 28, (d. 17.) 30, (d. 8.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 21.) 34, (d. 2.) E. 1. 2, (d. 11. 19) 3, (d. 16, 17.) 5, (d. 17.) 6, (d. 11. 31.) 7, (d. 16. 27.) 8, (d. 29. 35.) 9, (d. 32,) E. 2. Theobald de Verdun Iunior 28, (d. 17) 30, (d. 8.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 21.) 34, (d. 2.) 35, (d. 1.) E. 1. Iohn de Verdon 6, (d. 4. 9. 19. 36.) 7, (p. 2. d. 3.) 8, (d. 18.) 9, (d. 8▪ 28.) 16, (p. 1. d. 9.) E. . Iohn de Vescy 49, (d. 11.) H. 3. William de Vescy 23, (d. 4. 9.) E. 1. 6, (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d. 16. 27.) 8, (d. 29. 35.) E. 2. Kobert de Vfford, D'ufford 2, (d. 11. 20.) 3, (d. 16, 17) 4, (d. 1.) 5, (d. 17. 25.) E. 2. Robert de Vfford 6, (d. 9. 19. 36.) 7, p. 2. d. 3.) 8, (d. 18.) 9, (d. 8. 28.) 10, (d. 1. 5.) 16, (p. 1. d. 39.) E. . Iohn de Vfford 33, (d. 10.) 34, (d. 35.) E. 3. William de Vfford 38, (d. 3.) 39, (d. 2.) E. 3▪ Thomas Vghtred, de Vghtred 18, (p. 1. d. 14.) 22, (p. 2.
d. 7.) 23, (p. 1. d. 23.) 24, p. 2. d. 3.) 25, (p. 1▪ d. 5.) 26, (d. 14.) 27, (d. 12.) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d. 7, 8.) 31, (d. 2. 21.) 32, (d. 14.) 34, (d. 4.) 36, (d. 16.) 37, (d. 22.) 38, (d. 3.) E. 3. Gilbert de Vmfravill 23, (d. 4. 9.) 24, (d. 7.) E. 1. Ro∣bert de Vmfravil 2, (d. 20.) E. 2. Henry de Vrtiaco 25, (d. 25.) 27, (d. 18.) E. 1. Peter de Vvedale, 6, (d. 4. 9. 19. 36.) 7, (p. 2. d. 3.) 8, (d. 18.) 9, (d. 18. 28.) E. 3. W THomas de Waull 25, (d. 25,) E. 1. Iohn de Wake 23, (d. 4. 9.) 24, (d. 7.) 25, (d. 25.) 27, (d. 18.) 28, (d. 17.) E. 1. Thomas de Wake 11▪ (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 14, (d. 5. 29.) 15▪ (d. 16) 16, (d. 26.) 17, (d. 27.) 18, (d. 5. 34.) 19, (d. 27.) 20, (d. 4.) E. 2. 1, (p. 2. d. 11. 16.) 2, (d. 15. 23. 31.) 3, (d. 19.) 4, (d. 41) 5, (p. 1. d. 7. 25. p. 2. d. 7.) 6, (d. 9. 19. 31.) 7, (p. 2. d. 3.) 8, (d. 18.) de Ly∣dell, 9, (d. 8. 28.) 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11, (p. 2. d. 11. vacat) 12, (p. 2. d. 32.) 13, (p. 2. d. 1. 28) 14, (p. 1. d. 2. 33) 15, (p. 1. d. 37.) 16, (p. 1. d. 39 p. 2. d. 13. 22.) 1, (p. 1. d. 25.) 18, (p. 1. d. 14.) 20, (p. 2. d. 22.) 21, (p▪ 2. d. 9.) 22, (p. 1. d. 3, p. 2. d. 7.) 23, (p. 1. d. 23.) E. 3. Richard Walkefore 32 (d. 14.) E. 3. Thomas Walkefore 32, (d. 14.) E. 3. Richard Walleyes 14, (d. 5.) E. 2. Ralph de Ward 28, (d. 27.) E. 1. Robert de la Warde 28 (d. 3.) 30, (d. 8. 13.) 32, (d. 2.) E. 1. Simon de Ward▪ 18, (d. 21.) 20, (d. 4.) E. 2. 1, (p. 2. d. 11. 16.) 2, (d. 15. 29. 31,) 4, (d. 13. 23. 32. 41.) 5, (d▪ 7. 15) 6, (p. 2. d. 3.) 8, (d. 18.) E. 3. Richard Ward Chivaler, 49, (d. 6.) H. 6. Roger la Warre▪ 27, (d. 16. 18 28, (d. 3. 17.) 31, (d. 8. 13.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 10. 21.) 34, (d. 2.) E. 1. 1. (d. 19.) 2, (d. 11. 20.) 3, (d. 17) 4, (d. 1.) E. 2.
Robert la Warre 33, (d. 21.) E. 1. Iohn la Warre 1, (d. 8 11. 19.) 2, (d. 11. 14. 20.) 3, (d. 16, 17.) 5, (d. 11. 17. 25.) 6, (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d. 16. 27.) 8, (d. 29. 35.) 9, (d. 22.) 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 29.) E. 2. Iohn la Warre 16, (p. 1. d. 39.) E. 3. Rich: de la Warre 32, (d. 14) E. 3. Roger de la Warre, 36, (d. 16.) 37, (d. 22.) E. 3. Iohn la Warre, 44, (d. 1.) 46, (d. 9▪) 47, (d. 13.) 49, (d. 4. 6.) 50. (p. 2. d. 6.) E. 3. 1, (d 35.) 2, (13, 29.) 3, (32.) 4, (d. 3 2.) 5, (d. 40.) 6, (d. 37.) 7, (d. 10. 37) 8, (d. 35.) 9, (d. 45.) 10, (d. 42.) 11, (d. 37.) 12, (d. 42.) 11, (d. 37.) 12, (d. 42.) 13, (d. 5.) 14, (d. 42.) 15, (d. 37.) 16, (d. 29.) 17, (d. 30.) 18, (d. 23.) 20, (p. 1. d. 15. (21, p. 1. d. 27) R. 2. Magister Tho. de la Warre, 23, (d. 33.) R. 2. 1. (d. 37.) 2, (p. 1. d. 3.) 3, (d. 17.) 5, (p. 1. d. 28▪ p. 2. d. 4.) 7, (d. 30.) 8, (d. 2.) 11, (d. 32.) 12, (d. 2.) 14, (d. 22.) H. 4. 1, (d. 9. 37.) 2, (d. 16.) 3, (d. 15.) 4, (d. 16.) 5, (d. 11.) 7, (d. 9.) 8, (d, 2.) 9, (d. 13.) H. 5. 1, (d. 22.) 2, (d. 18.) 3, (d. 9.) 4, (d. 15.) 5, (d. 14.) H. 6. Reginald la Warre Chivaler 5, (d. 4.) 7, (d. 2.) H. 6. Robert de Watevill, 20, (d. 3.) E. 2. 1, (p. 2. d. 11. 16.) 2, (d. 11. 23. 31.) 3, (d. 19.) 4, (d. 41.) E. 3. Adam de Welle, Welles, 27 (d. 16. 18.) 28, (d. 3. 17.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 21) 34, (d. 2.) E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 11.) 2, (d. 11. 14. 20.) 3, (d. 16. 17.) 4, (d. 1) E. 2. Adam de Welles, de Welle, 6, (d. 49. 23. 36.) 7, (p. 2. d. 3.) 8, (d. 18.) 9, (d. 8. 18.) 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11, (p. 1. d. 8. p. 2. d. 11▪ 40.) 12, (p. 2. d. 32.) 13, (p. 2. d. 1. 28) 14, (p. 1. d. 23. 33.) 15, (p. 1. d. 37.) 16, (p. 1. d. 39. p. 2. d. 13. 22.) 17, (p. 1. d. 25.) 18, (p. 1 d. 14.) E. 3. Iohn de Welles 31, (d. 2.) 34, (d. 4.) Chivaler, 49, (d. 4.) 50, (p. 2. d. 6.) E. 3. 1, (d. 35.) 2, (d. 13. 29.) 3, (d. 32.) 5, (d. 40.) 11, (d. 24.) 12, (d. 42.) 13, (d. 5.) 14, (d. 42.) 15, (d. 37,) 16, (d. 23.) 17, (d. 30.) 18, (d. 23.) 20, (p. 1.
d. 15.) 21, (p. 1. d. 27.) 23, (d. 3.) R. 2. 1, (d. 37,) 2, (p. 1. d. 3.) 3, (d. 17.) 5, (p. 1. d. 28. p. 2. d. 4.) 7, (d. 30.) 8, (d. 2.) 11, (d. 32.) 12, (d. 2.) 14, (d. 22) H. 4. 1, (d. 9. 37.) 2, (d. 16.) 3, (d. 15.) 4, (d. 16) 5, (d. 11.) 7, (d. 9.) 8, (d. 2.) H. 5. 1, (d. 22.) , (d. 18.) 3, (d. 9.) 4, (d. 15.) 5, (d. 4.) 7, (d. 2.) H. 6. Leonel, Leonard de Welles, Chivaler 10, (d. 10.) 11, (d. 10.) 13, (d. 2.) 15, (d. 18.) 18, (d. 33.) 20, (d. 27.) 23, (d. 21.) 25, (d. 24.) 27, (d. 24.) 28, (d. 26) 29, (d. 41.) 31, (d. 36) H. 6. Richard Welles DOMINVS de Willoughby, Miles 33, (d. 36.) 38, (d. 30) H. 6. 1, (d. 35.) 2, (d. 3.) 6. (d. 1,) 9, (d. 3) E, 4. Iohn Wenlock de Wenlock Chivaler, 3, (d. 3.) 6, (d. 1.) 9, (d. 3.) E. 4▪ Thomas de West 16, (p. 1. d. 39,) E. 3. Thomas West Chivaler 5, (p. 1. d. 28. p. 2. d. 4.) H. 4. Reginald West Chivaler, 10, (d. 10.) 11, (d. 10.) 13, (d. 2.) 15, (d. 18.) 18, (d. 33.) 25, (d. 24,) 27, (d. 24.) 28, (d. 26.) H. 6. Richard West Chivaler 38, (d. 30.) H. 6, 1, (d. 35▪) 2, (d. 3.) 6, (d. 1.) 9, (d. 3.) 12, (d. 41) 22 & 23 (d. 10.) E. 4. Iohn de Whitingdon 25, (d. 25) E. 1. Thomas de Wodestoke 14, (d. 19.) E 2. Richard Woodvill, Wodevill, Miles, DOMINVS de Ri∣vers 27, (d. 24.) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d. 41.) 31, (d. 36.) 38, (d. 30.) H. 6. 2, (d. 3.) E 4. Anthony Wodevill, DOMINVS de Scales 2, (d. 3.) Chi∣valer 6, (d. 1.) H. 6. Iohn de Wylington, Wyllington 3, (d. 19) 4, (d▪ 23. 31.) 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11, (p. 1. d. 8. p. 2. d▪ 11. 40.) 12, (p. 2. d. 32.) 13, (p. 2. d. 1. 28) E. 3. Ralph de Wylington, 16, (p. 1, d. 29.) E. 3. Adomar de Wylington 32, (d. 14.) E. 3. Robert de Wilghby (Wylugby 7, (d. 16. 27.) E. 2. Iohn de Wyloughby Wiloughby, Willoughby 6, (d. 9. 19. 37) 7, (p. 2. d. 3.) 8, (d. 18.) 9, (d. 8. 28.) 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11, (p. 2. d. 11. 40) 12, (p. 2. d. 32) 13, (p. 2. d. 1.
28) 14, (p. 1. d. 23, 33) 15, (p. 1. d. 27.) 16, (p. 1. d. 39. p. 2. d. 13. 22) 17, (p. 1. d. 25.) 18, (p. 1. d. 14) 20, (p. 2. d. 22.) 21, (p. 2, d. 9.) 22, (p. 1. d. 31. p. 2. d. 7.) 23, (. 1. d. 23) de Eresby 24, (p. 2. d. 3.) 25, (p. 1. d. 6) 27, (d. 12.) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d. 6, 7.) 31, (d. 2. 21) 34▪ (d. 4.) 36, d. 16.) 37, (d. 22) 38, (d. 3.) 39, (d. 2.) 42, (d. 22) 43, (d. 24) 44, (d. 1.) 46, (d. 9.) E. 3. William de Wylughby, 32 d. 14. E. 3. Robert de Wyloughby 49 (d. 4.) 50, (p. 2. d. 6.) E. 3. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (d. 13. 29.) 3, (d. 32.) 4, (d. 32.) 5, (d. 40.) 6, (d. 37. 7, (d. 10. 37.) 8, (d. 35.) 9, (d. 45.) 10, (d. 42.) 11, (d. 13. 37.) 12, (d. 42) 13, (d. 5.) 14, (d. 42.) 15, (d. 37) 16, (d. 23) 17, (d. 30) 18, (d. 23.) R. 2. William de Wyloughby 20, (p. 1. d. 15.) 21, (p. 1. d. 27.) 23, (d. 3. R. 2. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (p. 1. d. 3.) 3, (d. 17) 5, (p. 1. d. 28. p. 2. d. 4.) 7, d. 30.) 8, (d. 2.) 11, (d, 32) H. 4.) Robert de Willoughby 12, (d. 2) 14, (d. 22) H. 4. 1, (d. 9. 37.) 2, (d. 16.) 4, [d. 16] 8, (d. 2.) H. 5. Robert Wyloughby Chivaler 15, (d. 18.) 18, (d. 33.) 20, (d. 27.) 23, (d. 21) 25, (d. 24) 27, (d. 24.) 28 (d. 26.) 29, (d. 41) H. 6. William de Wyndesore 5, (d. 40.) 6, (d. 37.) 7, (d. 10. 37) R. 2. Z ALan de la Zusche, Zousche, Zouche, 25, (d. 6.) 26, (d. 16, 18), 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 8. 13.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 21.)▪ 34, (d. 2.) 35, (d. 13.) E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 11. 19.) 2, (d. 11. 14. 20.) 3, (d. 16, 17.) 5, (d. 17) 6, (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d. 15. 27) E. 2. Will: la Zousche (another, not of Haringworth) 2, (d. 11. 20) 3. (d. 16, 17.) 6, (d. 3. 31) 7, (d. 16, 27.) 8, (d. 29. 35.) 9, (d. 22.) 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, (d. 13.) 14, (d. 5. 29.) 15, (d. 16.) 16, (d. 26.) 17, (d. 27.) 18, (d. 5. 21. 34) 19, (d. 27.) E. 2.
William la Zousche de Haringworth 17. (d. 27.) 18, (d. 5. 21. 34.) 19, (d. 27.) 20, (d. 4.) E. 2. 1, (p. . d. 11. 16.) 2, (d. 23. 31) 3, (d. 19.) 4, (d. 13. 23, 32, 41,) 5, (p. 1. d. 7. 25. p. 2. d. 7.) 6, (d. 4. 9. 19. 36.) 7, (p. 2. d. 3.) 8, (d. 18.) 9, (d. 8. 28.) 10. (d. 1. 5.) 11, p. 2. d. 21. 40.) 12, (p. 2. d. 32.) 13, (p. 2. d. 1. 28.) 14, (p. 1. d. 23, 33,) 15, (p. 1. d. 37.) 16, (p. 1. d. 39, p. 2. d. 13.) 17, (p. 1. d. 25.) 18, (p. 1. d. 14.) 20, (p. 2. d. 22.) 21, (p. 2. d. 9.) 22, (p. 1. d. 32. p. 2. d. 7.) E. 3. William la Zousche de Castro Rici 19 (d. 27.) E. 2. 1, (p. 2. d. 11. 16) 2, (d. 31) E 3. William la Zousche de Mortuomari, Mortymer 2, (d. 15. 23) 3, (d. 19) 4, (d. 13. 28. 32. 41) 5, (d. 7. 25. p. 2. d. 7) 6, (d. 4. 9. 19. 36) 7, (p. 2. d. 3) 8, (d. 18) 9, (d. 8) 10, (d. 1. 5.) E. 3. William la Zouche de Asheby 9, (d. 28.) E. 3. William la Zousche de Haringworth Iunior 23, (p. 1. d. 23) 24, (p. 2. d. 3) 25, (p. 1. d. 5) 26, (d. 14.) 27, (d. 12) 28, (d. 26) 29, (d. 7, 8) 31, (d. 2. 21) 32, (d. 14) 34. (d. 4) 35, (d. 30) 36, (d. 42) 37, (d. 22) 38, (d. 3) 39. (d. 2) 42, (d. 22) 43, (d. 24) 44, (d. 1) 46, (d. 9) 47, (d. 13) 49, (d. 4. 6) 50, (p. 2. d. 6.) E. 3. 1, (d. 37) 2, (d. 13. 29) 3, (d. 32) 4, (d. 32) 5, (d. 40) 6, (d. 37) 7, (d, 10. 37) 8, (d. 35) 9, (d. 45.) 10, (d. 42) 11, (d. 13. 37) 12, (d. 42) 13, (d. 5) 14, (d. 42) 15, (d. 37) 16, (d. 23) 17, (d. 30) 18, (d. 23) 20, (p. 1. d. 15) R. 2. William la Zouche de Haringworth 2, (p. 1. d. 3) 3, (d. 17) 5, (p. 1. d. 18. p. 2. d. 4.) 7, (d. 30) 8, (d. 2) 11, (d. 32) 12, (d. 2) 14, (d. 22) H. 4. 1, (d. 9. 37) 2, (d. 16) H. 5. William la Zouche de Haringworth, 4, (d. 15) 5, (d. 4) Chivaler, 7 (d. 2) 9, (d. 18) 10, (d. 10) 13 (d. 2) 15 (d. 18) 18, (d. 33) 20, (d. 27) 25, (d. 24) 27, (d. 24) 28, (d. 26) 29, (d. 41) 31, (d. 36) 33▪ (d. 36) 38, d. 30.) H. 6. 1, (d. 35.) 2, (d. 3) 6, (d. 1.) E. 4.
As these last Alphabeticall, Chronologicall Tables will be very usefull to all Heraulds, and the ancient Nobility of the Realme, and adde much luster to Mr. Brookes his Catalogue of Nobilitie; Mr. Vincent his Discovery of the Errours therein, Iames York his Union of Honours, William Martyn his succession of the Nobility of Eng∣land at the end of his History, and other Writers of our Nobility; (who wereSeldens Ti∣tles of Honor. pars 2. ch. 4. sect. 3. 4. 5. 6. to 20. originally hereditary for the major part) so by the serious perusal of the later of them, you may clearly discern beyond all contradiction, 1. That there are at least 98. Laymen in the later Catalogue summoned only once, and no more hui once, by our Kings at sundry times, to several Parliaments andSee Claus. 32 E 3. do. 14. Great Councels of the Realm, by the self same general Writs of Summons as the Earles, Peers, and Barons of the land were summoned, and enrolled a∣mongst them in the Lists of Summons and Resum∣mons; and specially commanded by their Writs, Quod personaliter intersitis Nobiscum, ac cum Praelatis, & caeteris Magnatibus & Proceribus dicti Regni nosti, super negotiis praedictis tractaturi, Vestrum{que} Consilium impensuri, &c. yet neither themselves, nor any of their Name or Posteri∣ty were ever summoned afterwards to any other Par∣liament or Great Councill, for ought appears by the Clause Rolls, and Lists of persons summoned. 2. That there are at least 50. others of them, thu summoned by general Writs, and listed amongst the names of the temporal Lords, Barons, and Great men, some of them only, to 2. others of them, to 3. others, to 4. others, to 5. or 6. Parliaments and great Councils at several times; yet not one of them, or their Progenie afterwards called by Writ to any suc∣ceeding Parliaments or Councils. 3. Tht Iohn ap Adam was called by Writ to no lesse then 16. successive Parliaments and Grand Councils of the Realme, under King Ed. 1. 2. and 3. Roger de Ba∣nent to 22. under Ed. 2. and 3. Guido de Bryan to 37. under E. 3. and R. 2. Iohn de Claverings to 45. under
E. 1. 2. and 3. Philip de Columbariis to 44. under E. 2. and 3. Sir William Herne to 8. under E. 3. R. 2. and H. 4. as likewise Walter de Manny, Iohn de la Mare, Ni∣cholas de Meyvill, Thomas de Musgrave, Iohn Somery, Hen∣ry de Teyez, Thomas Vhtred, and some others, summon∣ed by general Writs, to sundry Parliaments and Coun∣cils, by one or more of our Kings; yet they and their Posterities of the same name, were afterwards totally omitted out of the Writs, and lists of Summons, and never summoned again in succeeding times. 4. That Gilbert and William de Acton, Richard and William de Aldeburge, Gilbert and William de Aton, (perchance the same with Acton) Robert and Willi∣am de Felton, John, Richard, and Matthew Fitz Iohn, Ralph and Robert de Grendon, Robert and Alexander de Hilton, Adam and Thomas de Novo Mercato, Hugh and Hugh de Sancto Phileberto, Giles and Richard de Playez, Miles and Nicholas de Stapleton, William and Theobald Trussell, William and John Tuchet, to omit others, were successively summoned to one, two, or three Parliaments, Great Councils, not immediately succeeding each o∣ther, but some good distance of years and time after the other, (during which, many Parliaments and Councils intervened, to which none of them were called by Writ) and then totally omitted▪ none of their name or posteritie (for ought appeares) being ever summoned again, as the last Table visibly demon∣strates. From which 4. particulars, I conceive it experi∣mentally evident beyond dispute, That as the Kings Writs to his Counsell, Justices, and other Assistants (mentioned in the next Section) did neither constitute them nor their issues, Peers or Barons of the Realm, nor Assistants for life, though they sat, advised with the King & Lords upon all weighty occasions in the Lords House:) and as the elections, retornes of Knights, Ci∣tizens, Burgesses, Barons of Ports, by the Kings Writs of summons to Parliaments, and their sitting, voting in the
Commons House in one or more Parliaments, for which they are elected; (though seconded with the Kings Writs for levying their expences after the Par∣liaments ended) do neither create them Knights, Ci∣tizens, Burgesses, Barons of Ports, nor Members of the Commons House, during their own lives, much lesse their issue Males in succession after them, but only du∣ring the session and continuance of these particular Parliaments and Councils for which they are elected and retorned; which being once▪ determined, they pre∣sently ceased to be Knights, Citizens, Burgesses, Barons, in any succeeding Parliaments or Councils, unlesse newly elected and retorned to serve in them by the Kings new Writs, as our4 E 4 f 4 . Book▪ Offi∣cer. 25. 34 II. 8. c. 24. Law books and experience resolve: so, the Kings generall Writs of summons directed to Knights, Gentlemen, and other Laicks, who held not by Ba∣rony, and are no Lords nor Barons by special creati∣ons, or Descent from their Ancestors, to treat with the King and the rest of the Lords and Great men in the Lords House, and their sitting therein once, twice, or oftener, by Vertue of such Writs, doth in truth and reality neither make, nor create themselves, nor their heires Males after them, in point of law or right, either Peers, Lords or Barons of the Realm for life, or inheritance, nor give them (much lesse their issues after them) a right of summons to, or voice amongst those who are reall Peers and Lords by Tenure, Crea∣tion or Descent, in all succeeding Parliaments; but only a temporary right to treat and advise with the King and other Lords in those Parliaments and Coun∣cills to which they are particularly summoned, and not in any others; as it did in the cases of Abbots, Priors, and other ecclesiastical persons thus summoned to, and sitting now and then in the Lords House, but holding no Lands by Barony, whose general Writs of summons to, and session in Parliaments and Councils made neither themselves during their lives, nor their successors after them, actuall Peers or Barons of the
Realm, as4. Insti∣tutes p. 44. 45. Sr Ed: Cook, &Mr. Sel∣dens Titles of Honor. p. 370▪ to 376. Spelmanni Glostarium, p. 3. 4. others acknowleg, and I haveMy Plea for the Lords▪ p. 151. to 160. elsewhere proved, there being the self same reason, and by consequence the self same Law in both cases; Else our Kings (byInstit. p. 1. Sir Edwards own doctrin) had been and should be bound Ex debito Iustitiae to sum∣mon every one of those Knights and Laymen once summoned to, and sitting in any of their Parliaments, and Great Coun∣cils (by vertue of their general Writs, without any other creation) during their natural lives, and their beires males being of full age after their deaths, to all succeeding Par∣liaments and Councils, and ought not to have omitted them out of the lists of summons at their pleasures, and their posterities after them in all succeeding Par∣liaments, as we experimentally find they did, without the least question, claim or complaint made by them or their heirs, for ought I find in Records or Histo∣ries. Whereas not only the Earles and Barons in the Parliamentary Great Council at London under King Mat. Paris. p 884 See my Plea for the Lords, p. 21. 22. 23. 24. 25. &c. Henry the 3. Ann. 1255. refused to grant any aid, or act any thing therein, because All the Barons were not at that time summoned to Parliament, as they ought to be by the te∣nour of Magna Charta; but even other succeeding Par∣liaments have done the like; And in the Parliament of 2. CaroliSee Mr. Iohn Rush∣worth his Hi∣storicall Col∣lections. p. 240. 241. &c. An. 1626. the Earle of Bristoll, being a Peer of this Realme, and not receiving a summons to Parliament, according to the Priviledge of his Peerage: thereupon com∣piained thereof to the Lords House: who referring the buisnesse to their Committee of Priviledges; Vpon the Earl of Hertfords report from the Committee; The Lords resolved it necessary for them to beseech his Majesty, that a Writ of Summons might be sent to this Earl, and also TO SUCH OTHER LORDS WHOSE WRITS ARE STOP∣PED; except such as are made uncapable BY JUDG∣MENT OF PARLIAMENT, or some other legal judg∣ment. Whereupon writs were issued to them; It being a great intrenchment upon the Liberty, Priviledges, and Safety of the Peers of the Land, and of dangerous consequence for the King at his pleasure to omit any of them out of the Writs
of summons, keep back their Writs, or restrain them from the Parliament after their receit; as they then resolved in his case, and theMr. Rush∣worths Histo∣rical Collecti∣ons, p. 361. to 375. Earl of Arundels like∣wise the same Parliament. 5. From this Table we may discern the observation of learned SirGlossarium. p▪ 80. Hery Spelman in his Glossary, touch∣ing the summons of the Greater English Barons to Parliaments, to be in a great measure justifiable. Denuo autem crebra bella & simultates, quas Reges veteres ali∣quando habuere cum his ipsis MAIORIBVS SVIS BARONIBVS, alios etiam eorum interdum omitterent, alios vero NON BARONES, ad Parliamenta evocarent, habitique sunt deinceps PERPETVO OMISSI PRO NON BARONIBVS, evocati contra BARONVM Ti∣tulo salutantur. Aegrè hoc ferentes Proceres, Johannem adigere sub magno sigillo Angliae pacisci; Vt Archiepis∣copos, Episcopos, Abbates, & MAJORES BARO∣NES REGNI, sigillatim per literas sommoniri fa∣ceret. Quod autem adeo neglexit Henricus 3. Vt cum ipsemet (Anno Regni sui 41.) ducentas quinquaginta Baronias in Anglia Numerasset, vocaretque ad Parliamen∣tum Ano 49. regni sui. 120. Praelatos Ecclesiae, Laicos tantum, Barones. 29. accersivit (the rest were newly slain in the Battle of Evesham, or in actual rebellion, which was the true cause hereof) ut è Schedis constat ejusdem Parliamenti. Neglexit utique Edovardus I. multos quos vocasst Hen. 3. etiam silios plures, quorum ipse partes 1 ad∣misissit, aliis interim introductis. Sic antiqua illa Baronum dignitas, secessit sensim in titularem & arbitrariam, RE∣GIOQUE TANDEM DIPLOMATE IDIRCO DISPENSATA EST; to wit, by his speciallSeldens Ti∣tles of Honor. p. 663. 665. 747. 748, 751. 757. 763. Pa∣tents of creation, with particular Clauses granting them and their heires Males, ut eorum quilibet Sedem et Locum in Parliamentis Nostris et Hredum et Successorum Nostrorum, infra Regnum nostrum Angliae tenendis, inter ALIOS BARONES, VT BA∣RO, &c. not by any generall Writs of Summons, which have not the word BARO in them.
6. That although some of our ancienter Kings, as Henry the third (to settle Peace after the battle of Lewes, and Barons Wars) Claus. 49. H. 3. d. 10. 11. Cedula, King Edward the 1. and 2. in some of their Parliaments, and King Edward the 3d. in his Great Councill, cl. 32. E. 3. d. 1 4. did upon extraordinary Oc∣casions and Necessities, summon not only sundry Abbots, Priors, and Ecclesiasticall Persons, but likewise divers Laymen (of Great estates, Wisdome, Parts and abi∣lities) who were no Peers, Lords nor Barons of the Realme, by Tenure, Patent or Descent, by the self same form of generall Writs as they summoned the Bishops, Abbotis, Spiritual and Temporal Lords, who were reall Peers and Barons of the Realme; Vobiscum, &c. & Nobiscum, & cum caeteris Praelatis, Magnatibus, & Proceribus super dictis negotiis ractaturi, Vestrumque Consi∣lium impensuri, &c. and that only once, twice, thrice, or perchance oftener, never summoning them nor their heires or successors afterwards, or very rarely: so it is observable, 1. That they did it very seldome, upon extraordinary emergent necessities; not customa∣rily, or frequently. 2ly. That they did it not out of any affront or opposition to the antient Hereditary, reall, spiritual or temporal Lords, Peers and Barons of the Realm, to seclude, overvote, baffle, disparage all or any of them; but by their advise, consents and approbation, as the Writs, Rolls, attest, 3ly. That their numbers usually, (except in 49 H. 3. whenSee here p. 160. 161. most of the Barons were slain at Evesham, or in actual armes a∣gainst the King; or when some extraordinary aid, ad∣vise or assistance was required of them) were not very great nor considerable; the antient spiritual, and temporal Lords and Barons, being usually double, treble, quadruple to them; and for the most part, six or ten to one, as you may easily discerne by comparing their names in every list of summons. 4ly. That there are very few Presidents under King Edward the 3. of an coniderable numbers of such spiritual or tem∣poral persons called to his Parliaments, but only to one
general Councill, in 32 E. 3. d. 14. 5ly. That after King Edward the 3d. his reigne, there is not one presi∣dent of any Archbishop, Bishop, Abbot, Prior or re∣ligious persons, summoned to any Parliament to my remembrance, but only of those who held by Barony, and were constantly summoned as Spiritual Peers to all our Parliaments. And very few Presidents, if any, of a Knight, Gentleman, or other Layman whatso∣ever, summoned by any general Writs to the Lords House, to treat and consult together with them, un∣lesse they were ancient Earles, Lords, or Barons of the Realm, or newly created such by special Patents, before their summons, or by special clauses of creation in the Wris by which they were summoned, as all the lists of summons in the Clause Rolls, the precedent Table, the Statutes of 5 R. 2. Stat. 2. c. 4. 31 H. 8. c▪ 10. and Mr. Martyns Catalogue of them at the end of his History, clearly manifest. 6ly. That in my best observation there is no president from 49 H. 3. till the last Parlia∣ment of King Charles, nor in any age before, where any of the ancient Nobility, Peers, Lords or Barons of the Realme, at least any considerable number of them, (unlesse such who were actually outlawed, or attainted of High Treason, orSee here p. 217. 218. 219. absent in forreign parts, or in actual service in the Wars, or under age) were omitted out of the Writs of summous, or secluded from sitting in the Lords House in any Parliament by force or frand, (unless bySee here p. 221. 222. My Plea for the Lords. p. 278. 279. 282. Morimer, in the Parliament at Salisbury, An. 2. E. 3. and in 21 R. 2.) nor of o∣thers, who were no real Lords, Peers by Patent, Te∣nure, or other legal creation, summoned to the Lords House out of England (much lesse out of Scotland and Ireland) to supplant them, or supply their places, un∣der any name, notion, or pretext whatsoever. Neither were they or any of them, secluded, disinherited of their seats, Votes, Peerage in Parliament,See Mr. Rshworhs Hstorical Col∣lections p▪ 40 41. 242. 243. 44. 67. to 376. without or be∣fore the least legal hearing, trial, impeachment, or con∣viction whatsoever, of any capital crime which might foreit their Peerage, against all the Great Charters,
Statutes, Records, Declarations, Orders, Ordinances, Votes, Protestations, Oathts, Covenants, (mentioned in my Plea for the Lords, and House of Peers) which ratifie and perpetuate this their Birthright to them and their Po∣sterities, and the very law of all Nations. 6ly. It is very observable, that both Houses of Parliament in their Propositions sent to King Charles at their last Treaty with him in the Isle of Weight, to prevent the creation and introduction of any New Lords into future Parlia∣ments, to the prejudice, seclusion, or overvoting of the Ancient Nobility, or Commons house, did amongst other things propound.See the Proposirins & my Speech in Parliament. p. 43. 44. That BY ACT OF PARLIAMENT, all LORDS and PEERS made by the King since Edward Lord Littleton deserted the Parliament, and carried away the Great Seal the 21. of May, 1642. should be unlorded, unpeered, set by, and their Titles of Honour, Patents, revo∣ked, declared null and void to all intents, and never hereafter put in use. And that NO PEER WHICH SHOULD BE HEREAFTER MADE BY THE KING, HIS HEIRES OR SUCCESSORS (who have onely and solely a just, legal power to create them, and none else, as they hereby declare) SHALL SIT IN THE PARLIAMENT OF ENGLAND WITH∣OUT CONSENT OF BOTH HOUSES OF PAR∣LIAMENT. Which the King then fully and freely consented to without any limitation or exception whatsoever. Since which Proposition of both Houses, and concession by the King, how any person or per∣sons who assented to, or approved thereof in any kind▪ as reasonable, or beneficial to the publick; with∣out any special Patent or creation from the King, his heires or successors; and without the consent of the House of Lords, and ancient Peers of the Realme (the only proper members of &As King Iames ac∣knowledged. See Mr. Rsh∣worths Histo∣rical Collecti∣ons p. 25. to 34. Iudges in it) & of the Commons House, (yea against both their consents and approbations) can justly, by any other authority, Patent, Writ, or instrument whatsoever, assume unto themselves the Titles of Lords or Barons of the Realme, or of the Lords House it self; to the disseasing, disinheriting, sup∣pressing
of the ancient undoubted Peers and House of Lords: Or how any who have Voted down, declared against, and abolished the Lords and Lords House, in sundryFebr. 6. March 17. 19▪ An. 1648. printed Papers, as Uselesse, Dangerous, In∣convenient, Oppressive to the People, obstructive to the Proceedings in Parliament, and the like; and afterwards by several Votes, and printedIanuary 2 An. 1649. New Knacks, took and subscribed themselves, and prescribed to all others under severest penalties, a publick Engagement, To be rue and faithfull to the Commonwealth of England▪ as it was then established, (as they thought by themselves, though the event soon after proved the contrary) Without a King or House of Lords; can or dare become this very Selfsame Vselesse, dangerous, oppressive, obstructive, grievance, &c. themselves; and against their own Votes, Declarations, Acts, Subscriptions, Engagements, stile or assert themselves to be either real Lords, or an House of Lords, without the greatest Praevarication, Contradi∣ction to, and Apostacy from their own former Princi∣ples; or how they can ever probably expect that either the ancient Lords or Commons of England should sub∣mit unto them as such, let their own judgments, con∣sciences and reasons resolve them. The rather, because divers of the Earles, Nobles made by King Stephen were stiled, yea deposed as meer Imaginary, false Earles and Lords, (Quosdam Imaginarios et Pseudo-Comites) and both their Titles and Crown lands given them by Stephen (though King de facto) resumed by King Henry the 2. right heir to the crown, because Stephen was an Usurper; & Chartae Invasoris praejudicium legitimo Principi minime facere deberent, as the Chronicle of Normandy, the Book of the Abby of Waverly,Titles of Honor. p. 650. Mr. Selden out of them; Hist. l. 2. c. 2. Gulielmus Neubrigensis, and Chronicle of Bromton. Col. 1046. inform us. Whose President may justly deterre them from any unjust disseisin of the ancient Lords, and setting themselves in their Places. And thus much for my Observations on, and from the Writs in this second Section.
SECTION 3. Of Writs of Summons to the Kings Counsil and other Ordinary Assistants to the Lords in Parliaments and Parliamentary Councils; with annotations on them. THe next Writs of Summons after those to the Spiritual and Temporal Lords entred in the antient Clause Rolls, are those to the Kings Counsil, different only in one or two Clauses from the former, in which else they usually ac∣corded. These persons commonly summoned to Parlia∣ments as the Kings Counsil by distinct writs from the Lords, as ordinary Assistants both to the King and them in all causes, controversies, Questions of Mo∣ment, were mostly the Kings Great Officers, as well Clergymen as Secular persons, who were no Lords nor Barons of the Realm; as namely his Treasurer, Chan∣cellor of the Eschequer, Judges of his Courts at West∣minster, Justices in Eyre, Iustices assignes, Barons of his Eschequer, Clerks, Secretaries of his Counsil, and sometimes his Serjeants at Law, with such other Officers and Persons whom our Kings thought me o summon. The first writ of this kinde I yet find extant in our Records is thus entred in Clause 23 E. I. dorso 9. Rex dilecto & fideli suo Gilberto de Thornton, salu∣tem: Quia super quibusdam arduis negotiis, Nos & Regnum
nostrum, ac Vos, coeterosque de Consilio nostro tangenti∣bus, quae sine, &c. (ut supra▪ p. 6.) Vobis mandmus in ide & dilectione quibus Nobis tenemini, &c. (ut supra, in Mandato Episcoporum, p. 6. usque in finem) Teste ut ibi. Eodem modo mandatum est, Justiciariis de utroque Ban∣co, & de Itinere, Justic. assignatis, Justiciar, juratis de Consilio, Baronibus de Scaccario, et aliis Clericis de Consilio, quorum nomina inferius annotantur, viz. Gilb de Thornion, ut supra Rogero Brahazon Magistro Iohanni Lovell Iohanni de Metingham Willielmo de Bereford Petro Malorre Hugoni de Cressingham Willielmo de Ormesby Willielmo de Mortuo Mari Roberto de Swillington Roberto de Ratford. Iohanni de Insula Iohanni de Cobham Willielmo de Carleton Petro de Leycestr. Magistro Iohanni de Lacy Philippo de Willughby Deca∣no Lincoln Magistro H. de Newwerke Decano Ebor. Magistro I. de Derby, De∣cano Lihf. Roberto de Hertford Iohanni de Berewik Iohanni de Lichegreyns Hugoni de Cave Ade de Crokedayk Willielmo Inge Henr. de Enfeld Iohanni de Bosco Iohanni de Batford Willielmo Haward Osberto de Spaldingon Rogero de Burton Magist. Gerard de Wyspayn Archid. Richm. Magistro I. de Crancumb, Archid. Estrid Magist. Rob: de Redeswell Magist. W. de Grenefeld Magist. Regi. de Brandon Magist. W. de Kilkenny Gilberto de Roubury Magistro Petro de Dene. In Clause 25 E. 1. d. 25. there is no writ at all to the Counsil; But after the writ at large to the Earl of Corn∣wall, followes, Consimile mandatum habent singuli Comites, Barones, et Milites subscripti, viz. &c. And after the
Earls and Barons names with a lines space between them, the Justices names follow, with MilitsMilits▪ in the Margin, in this order. Rogerus Brabazun Willielmus de Bereford Petrus Malorie Iohannes de Leithgreines Iohanneo de Cobham Adam de Crokedak Henr. de Euefeld Iohannes de Bosco▪ Bogo de Knouill Willielmus Iuge Iohannes de Insula Willielmus Haward Henr. Spigurnel; without any others of the Clergy. The next writ on Record is this of Claus. 27. E. . d. 18. Rex dilecto & fideli suo Rogero de Brabazon, salutem; Quia super negotiis nostris ultramarinis vobiscume et cum cae∣terls de Consilio nostro habere volumus Colloquiunt et Tractatum. Vobis mandamus in fide e dilectione quibus Nobis tenemini firmiter injungentes, uod prima Dominica, &c. ut supra (to the Archbishop, p. 9, 10.) Teste ut supra. Consimiles lierae diriguntur subscriptis, viz. 20 more▪ Justices and others, most of them the same as in the 2. former lists. The 4. writ is this of Claus. 28 E. 1. dors. 17. Rex dilecto et fideli suo Philippo de Wyllughby Can∣cellar. Scaccarii sui, salutem. Quia ad salvationem Coronae nostrae & communem utilitatem popul regni nostri scunda die Dominica Quadragesimae prox. futur. Londini Parliamentum tenere, & vobiscum, et cum caeteris de Consilio nostro, super Negotiis Nos et idem Regnum nostrum contingentibus speciale Colloquium habere volumus et tractatum. Vobis ma∣damus firmiter injungentes, quod ad praedictos diem & locu &c. (ut supra, p. 164. to the Earl of Cornwall.) T. ut supra. Consimiles literae diriguntur subscriptis, viz. Rogero Bra∣bazun, and 22 Justices and Lay-men more, whereof
Iohanni de Havering Justic. Northwalliae, and Hugoni de Leominster Thesaur. de Karnarvan, are two; and to 24 Clergymen, 3 of them Archdeacons, and 2 of them Deans. The total number of them being 38. The 4th and 5th writs of this nature are thus regi∣stred one after the other, Clause 28 E. 1. d. 3.De veniendo ad Parliamen∣um▪ Rex dilecto Clerico suo Magistro Reginaldo de Braun∣don, salutem. Quia super jure et dominio quae Nobis in Regno Scotiae competit, & quae Antecessores nostri Reges Angliae in eodem Regno Scotiae habuerunt temporii bus retroactis, cum Iurisperitis, et cum caeteris de Consilio nostro speciale Colloquium habere volumus et tractatum. Vobis mandamus firmiter injungentes, quod modis omnibus sitis ad Nos apud Lincoln. in Octabis Sancti Hillar. prox. futur. Nobiscum, et cum caeteris de Con∣silio nostro super praemissis tractatur. vestrumque Consili∣um impensur. Et hoc sicut Nos et Honorem ac commodum Regni nostri diligitis nullatenus omittatis▪ T. Rege apud le Rose 28 die Septembris. Consimiles literae diriguntur subscriptis, videlicet. Magistro Willo. de Grenfeld Decano Cicestr. Magistro R. Decano Sancti Pauli London. Magistro Willo. de Sardene Offic, Cantuar. Magistro Roberto de Radeswell Archid. Cestr. Magistro Petro de Insula Decano Wellen. Magistro Iobanni de Derby Decano Lichf. Magistro Iohanni de Crancumbe Archid. Estriding. Magistro Pho. Martell. Magistro Willo. Pikering Magistro Robert Pikering Magistro Willo de Kilkenny Magistro Rico. de Plumpsted Magistro Thomae de Lugore Magistro Petro de Dene. Magistro Iohanni de Lacy. Rex dilecto & fideli suo Johanni de Metingham, salu∣tem. Quia nuper de quibusdam arduis Negotiis Nos et sta∣tum Regni nostri tangentibus in Octabis Sancti Hillarii prox. futur. apud Lincoln. speciale Colloquium abere volumus, & ractatum. Vobis mandamus firmiter injungentes, quod ad praedictos diem & locum modis omnibus personaliter intersitis, Nobiscum, & cum caeteris de Consilio nostro super
dictis negotiis tractatur. vestrumque consilium impensur. Et oc nullatenus omittatis. T. Rege apud le Rose, 26 die Sep∣tembris. Consimiles literae diriguntur subscriptis, viz. Rogero Brabazon Willo. de Ormesby Gilberto de Roubyry Willo de Bereford Elie de Beckingham Willo: Haward Petro Mallore Willo: de Carleton Pho: Willughby Canc. Scac. Petro de Leicestr. Johanni de Insula. Ade de Crokedayk Joh: Lovel de Snotescumb Willo: Juge Henr: de Gildeford Rogero de Hegham Johanni de Betesford Henr: Spigurnell Hugoni de Leominster Thesaur. de Karnarvan. Roberto de Retford J: de Havering Iusti. Wall. Immediately after which followes this writ to the Chancellor and University of Oxford. Rex dilecto sibi in Christo Cancellario et Universia∣ti Oxon.De mittendis Jurisperitis ad Parliamen∣tum. salutem. Quia super jure et dominio quae Nois in Regno Scotiae competit, & quae Antecessores nostri Re∣ges Angliae in eodem Regno Scotiae habuerunt, temporibus retroactis cum Iurisperitis et ceteris de Consilio no∣stro Colloquium habere volumus et tractatum. Vo∣bis mandamus firmiter injungentes, quod Quatuor vel quin∣que de discretioribus et in ure scripto magis exper∣tis Universitatis praedictae ad Parliamentum no∣strum apud Lincoln mittatis. Ita quod sint ibi in Octa∣bis Sancti Hillarii prox. futur. ad ultimum, Nobiscum & cum caeteris de Consilio nostro super praemissis trac∣taturi, suumque consilium impensuri; Et hoc sicu Nos & honorem ac commodum Regni nostri diligitis nullatenus o∣mittatis. T. Rege ut supra. Eodem modo mandatum est Cancellar. et Universitati Cantebr. quod mittant ad dictum Parliamentum duo vel tres de discretioribus et magis in ure scripto exper∣tis, &c. Then follows a writ to sundry Abbots, Priors, Deans and Chapters, (with the same recital) Quia su∣per
Iure & Dominio, &c. (as in the last) De mittendi Chronic ad Parliamentum &c. of which in its due place, more fully. The occasion and result whereof, and of sending these Lawyers from the Universities to the Parliament, you may read at large in Matthew Westmin∣ster. Anno 1302. p. 419. to 438. and in Thomas de Wal∣singham. Hist. Angl. p. 32. to 58. Before I proceed to the ensuing Writs, I shall here observe, 1. That this recital, Quia super jure & Dominio quae Nohis in regno Scotiae competit, &c. is not mentioned at all in the Writs of Summons to the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, temporal Lords, Justices, or Sheriffs of Counties; but only to the Clergy-men of the Kings Counsil, Vniversities, and to those Abbots, Priors, Deanes and Chapters, who were to search and send their Chronicles to the Parliament, that had any thing in them concerning the Kings right to Scotland. 2ly. That (for the Honour of my Quondam nursing Mo∣ther the University of Oxford) she is here preferred be∣fore the Vniversity of Cambridge; and her Chancellor and she enjoyned to send 4. or 5. of the discretest and most exact Lawyers of the said University to the Parliament, to treat with the King and the rest of his Counsil, concerning his ancient right and dominion to the Realme of Scotland; whereas the Chancellour and Vni∣versity of Cambridge, are commanded to send only 2. or 3. such Lawyers of it for that purpose. 3ly. That these Lawyers sent from the Universities upon this special occasion, were only extraordinary assistants, there being no such president of any thus sent to succeeding Parliaments. The 6. Writ of this kind is in Claus. 30. E. 1. d. 13. Rex dilecto & fidelissimo suo Rogero la Brabazun, salutem. Quia super quibusdam arduis negotiis, Nos & totum Regnum nostrum specialiter tangentibus, Vobiscum & Cum caeteris de Consilio Nostro habere Volumus colloquium & tracta∣tum, Vobis mandamus firmiter injungentes, quod in Octabis Nativitatis Sancti Johannis Baptistae prox. futur. ad ul∣timum
apud Westm. omnibus modis personaliter intersis (Without, & cum caeteris de Consilio nostro.) Nobiscum, superdictis negotis tractatur▪ vestrumque consilium impensur. & hoc nullatenus omittatis. T. Rege ut supra. p. 13. Consimiles literae diriguntur subscriptis, viz. 33. more Judges and others, mentioned in the former Ca∣talogues. Anno. 34. E. 1. dors. 2. There is no Writ to the Assistants entred in the Roll: but 16. of them only (Justices and Clergy-men) are named in the Eodem modo, after the Lords and great men, with alittle space between their names for distinction sake. The next Writ of this kind is thus briefly registred, Claus. 1. E. 2. dors. 19. Rex dilecto & fideli suo Rogero le Brabazun, salutem. Quia super quibusdam, &c. ut supra, usqu ibi vobiscum & cum caeteris fidelibus nostris &c. & Magnatibus, &c. Teste Rege ut supra. p. 14. 15. eodem modo scribitur subscri∣ptis. viz. 29. more Justices, Clerks, and others. In Claus. 1. E. 2. d. 9. There is no Writ: but after the Earles and Barons Writ and names, followes this entry, Eodem modo mandatum est subscriptis. viz. Williel∣mo Iuge and 36. others, whereof 2. only were Clergy-men. The next Writ is in Claus. 1. E. 2. dors. 8. Rex di∣lecto & fideli suo Rogero de Brabazon, salutem. Quia &c. ut supra (p. 15.) Vobis mandamus firmiter injungentes, quod dictis die & loco omnibus aliis praetermissis personaliter intersitis ibidem, Nobiscum & Cum caeteris de Consilio Nostro super dictis negotiis tractatur. vestrumque consilium impensur. & hoc nullatenus omttatis. T. R. apud Westm. x. Die Martii. Consimiles literae diriguntur, to 35. others, Justi∣ces, and Lay-men, and but to 2. Clerks. In Claus. 2. E. 2. d. 14. 11. 20 Schedula, there are 4. Writs of the same forme with the last.With cum caeteris de Consi∣lio nostro, twice recied in 2. of them, and bu∣once in the o∣ther. The 1. to Roger de Brabazon, and 34. others, whereof one only was a Clerk. the 2. to him, and 16. others, whereof 7.
were Clerks: the 3d. to him and 22. others, whereof 6. were Clerks; and two others Escheators, the one ultra Trentam, the other citra Trentam; The 4th. to him and 6. more, the one of them a Clerk. The next Writ is in Claus. 4. E. 2. dors. 1. some∣what different from the former. Rex dilecto & fideli suo Willielmo de Bereford, salu∣tem. Quia super diversis & arduis negotiis Nos & Statum Regni nostri specialiter tangentibus in instanti Parliamento nostro die Dominica prox. ante festum Sancti Laurentii prox. futur. fecimus summoneri, Vobiscum, & cum caeteris de Consilio nostro Colloquium habere volumus & tractatum, Vobis mandamus firmiter injungentes, quod omnibus aliis praeter∣missis dictis die & loco personaliter intersitis, Nobiscum & cum caeteris de Consilio nostro super praemissis tractaturi, Ve∣strumque consilium impensur. Et hoc nullatenus omittatis. T. ut supra. (p. Eodem modo scribitur subscriptis. viz. 16. Lay-men more. Claus. 5. E. 2. d. 17. The Kings Counsill, Clerks and Judges, are thus entred in the eodem modo scribitur subscriptis, after the Earles and Lords, with a lines space between them, and this distinction made between them in the margin of the Roll. Iohanni de Sandale Iohanni de Merkingfeld Waltero de NorwicoClericis. Iohanni AbellConsilii. Magistro Ricardo de Abyndon Magistro Iohan. de Everdon Magistr. Roberto de Pickering Magistro Iohanni de Nas∣sington senior; Rogero Brabazon Willielmo de Bereford Gilberto de Rouburyusticar. Stephano de Malo Lacu Waltero de Thorp. Magistro Tho. de▪ Cobham. Magistro Golberto de Mid∣dleton Magistro Tho. de Loggore Willielmo de Goldington. Iohan. de Chaynell Roberto de Cliderhow Iohan. de Foxle Roberto de Reford. Willielmo de Ormesby
Henrico de Stourton Henr. le Scroop Iohan. de Benstede Iohan. de Insula Lamberto de Trikingham Iohan. de Miford Henr. de Guldeford Iohan. de Doncastr. Willielmo Inge Henr. Spigurnel. In Claus. 6. E. 2. d. 31. There is such a Writ to Roger le Brabazon, as the fore rehearsed; with Vobiscum & caeteris de Consilio nostro, &c. twice repeated▪ in it, and an eodem mdo mandatum est, to 42 besides; (most of them in the preceding Catalogues) subdata pud Windesore, 14. die Februar. when as the writs to the spiritual and temporal Lords bear date thence. 8. die Januar. Claus. Anno 7. E. 2. d. 27. There is a like writ issued to Roger le Brabazon and 29 others. I find this memorable writ issued to Willielmo de Bereford Chief Justice of the Common Bench, Claus. 9. E. 2. d. 20. varying from the first there issued to him and the rest of the Counill. Rex dilecto & fideli suo Willielmo de Bereford.De veniend ad Regem. Quia Volumus Vobiscum una cum caeteris de Consilio no∣stro, in Parliamento nostro quod apud Lincoln. in Quindena Sancti Hillarii prox. futur. secimus summo∣eri super Negotiis Nos tangentibus habere Collo∣quium & Tractatum; Vobis mandamus firmiter injun∣gentes▪ quod magis ardua negotia coram Vobis & sociis vestris, in instanti termino Sancti Hillarii, cum omni deliberatione qua poteritis expediatis, Ita quod sitis in dicto Parliamento nostro, viz. sexto die post Quindenam supradictam, ad tractandum ibidem no∣biscum & cum caeteris de Consilio nostro, super nego∣tiis antedictis. Onerantes dilectos & fideles nostros Lambertum de Trikingham, & Iohannem Bacun Justicia∣rios nostros, & Socios vestros de Banco praedicto, quod residua negotia in Banco preaedicto expediant, cum festinatione qua poterunt, sucundum legem & consue∣tudinem Regni nostri. Et hoc nullatenus omittatis. T. Rege apud Clipston. 27. die Decembris.
I find this memorable Writ recorded in Claus. 7. E. 2. dors. 25.De interessen∣do Parliamen∣to. Rex dilecto & fideli suo Iohanni de Insula, salutem. Cum pro diversis & arduis negotiis Nos & Statum Regni nostri tangentibus ordinavimus Parliamentum nostrum apud Westm. die Dominica prox. post festum Sancti Matthei Aposteli prox. futur. tenere, & Vobiscum & cum caeteris de Consilio no∣stro super dictis negotiis habere Colloquium & Tractatum, per quod vobis mandavimus, quod dictis die & loco interlitis Nobiscum, & cum caeteris de Consilio nostro super dictis negotiis tractatur▪ Ac jam intelligimus, quod vos unà cum quibusdam aliis ad Assisas tam in Episcopatu Dunolm. quam in diversis Com. versus partes boriales capiend. certos dies sta∣tim post dictam diem Dominicam praefixistis, unde plurimum miramur; praesertim cum per captiones Assisarum si durante dicto Parliamento nostro pro∣cederent, negotia nostra in eodem tractanda possent non mediocriter perturbari. Vobis mandamus fir∣miter injungentes, quod omnibus hujusmodi capti∣onibus Assisarum, & omnibus aliis praetermissis, dicta die Dominica apud Westm. modis omnibus intersitis Nobiscum & cum caeteris de Consilio nostro super negotiis praedictis tractatur. Et hoc sicut indignatio∣nem nostram, & grave dampnum vestrum vitare volueritis, nullo modo omittatis. T. Rege apud Windesore, sexto die Septembris. Per Breve de Privato Sigillo. Eodem modo scribitur subscriptis, viz. Thomae de Fisheburn Hugoni de Louthre Ricardo de Berningham Ade de Middleton Iohanni de Dancastr. exceptis illis Verbis, tam in Episcopatu Dunolmens. quam. From which writ is apparent; 1. That the Justices of Assises were usually summoned by writ to Parlia∣ments, as Members of the Kings Counsil; as the words cum caeteris de Consilio nostro, thrice repeated in it
and in other writs, demonstrate. 2ly. That their summons by writ to attend and counsell the King in Parliament; was a super sedeas to them to take Assises during the Parliament; and their proceeding to take Assises notwithstanding, inconsistent with their atten∣dance in Parliament, yea a contempt and offence puni∣shable by the King. 3ly. That theSee Cookes 4 Instit. p. 24. Assises and Suits of private persons ought to give place to publick affaires of the King and kingdome in Parliament, and to be deferred, when they may hinder or disturbe the af∣faires of Parliament, or keep any Members or Assistants from their personal attendance in them, when sum∣moned to them. In the Clause Roll of 8. E. 2. dors. 35. There is no Writ at all to the Kings Justices and Counsill; but in the Eodem modo, I find sundry of them here and there promiscuously inserted amongst the Barons names, and not after them, as usually in other Rolls, sc. Iohanni de Hotham, Waltero de Norwico, Iohanni de Foxle, Rogero la Brabazon, Gilberto de Roubery, Willielmo Ige, Iohanni de Insula, Henr. le Scrop, Henr. Spigurnel, Io∣hanni Benstede, Lamberto de Trikingham; alwayes listed amongst the Justices, and Kings Counsil in precedent Rolls, and in 7 E. 2. d. 27. the very next before this, and those succeeding it. In Cl. 8. E. 2. d. 29. the Counsil are coupled together with the Barons in the Eodem modo mandatum est, without any writ, with a space of distin∣ction between them, all of them after the Lords, with∣out intermixture with them, being in all 33. In Cl. 9. E. 2. d. 22. They are named only in the eodem modo, with a small distance after the Lords, being in all 34. without any special writ entred. In Claus. 12. E. 2. d. 29. in Cedula, There is no special writ to any of the Counsil entred, but only a list of their names in the Eodem modo, being 24. in number, 2. of them escheators, Vltra & citra Tren∣tam; others of them Deacons, Archdeacons, Clergy∣men and Iustices, with Magistro Iohan de Walewayn The∣saur.
Regis. And likewise in Claus. 12. d. 11. they are listed in the same manner, being but 25. whereof two were the Escheators fore-named. And in Claus. 13 E. 2. dors. 13. they are listed in the same form being 25. and in Claus. 14 E. 2. d. 29. where they are 32. Claus. 14. E. 2. d. 5. there issued a writ in the usual form, Willielmo de Bereford, and 37 others, whereof 2. were Escheators, and the Dean and a Canon of Yorke two others; Cl. 15 E. 3. d. 16. there is the like writ sent to him, and 33. more. Cl. 16. E 2. d. 26. the like writ to him and 22. others. And Cl. 19 E. 2. d. 7. the like writ to him and 22. besides; the Dean of Yorke being one of them, as in most of the precedent lists. Cl. 20 E. 2. d. 4. the writ issued Waltero de Norwico, and 22. more. In Clause 1 E. 3. pars 2. d. 16. there is this writ issued, somewhat different from the precedent. Rex dilecto et fideli suo Waltero de Norwico, salutem. Quia super magnis et arduis negotiis Nos et statum Regni nostri tangentibus, Vobiscum, et cum Praelatis, Magnatibus et Proceribus, ac cum caeteris de Consilio nostro apud Lincoln. in crastino Exaltationis Sanctae Crucis prox. futur. Colloquium habere ordinavimus et Tractatum. Vobis mandamus firmiter injungentes, quod omnibus aliis praetermissis dictis die et loco perso∣naliter intersitis Nobiscum, si interesse possumus, seu interveniente impedimento, deputandis à Nobis, super dictis negotiis tractatur. vestrumque consilium impen sur. Et hoc nullatenus omittatis. Teste Rege apud Stanhope, 7, die Augusti. Eodem modo mandatum est subscriptis, viz. 33. 0thers there named. And in the same Roll, dors. 3. there is the like writ to him, and 7. more only. The writ Claus. 2 E. 3. dorse 31. thus varies from the former. Rex dilecto et sideli suo Waltero de Norwico, salutem. Cum in Parliamento nuper apud Eborum convocato magna et ardua negotia proposita fuerunt, quae pro∣pter
absentiam quorundam Praelatorum, Magnatum, et Procerum Regni nostri tunc non poterunt termina∣ri; super quibus et aliis diversis Negotiis de assensu Praelatorum, ac Magnatum et Procerum in eodem Par∣liamento nostro tunc existentium, apud Northhampton, à die Paschae prox. futur. in tres Septimanas Parliamen∣tum tenere, et Vobiscum, ac cum Praelatis, Magnatibus, et Proceribus Regni nostri, et eum caeteris de Con silio nostro Colloquium et Deliberationem habere vo∣lumus. Vobis mandamus firmiter injungentes, quod omnibus aliis praetermissis dictis die et loco personaliter intersitis, Nobiscum super dictis Negotiis tractatur: vestrumque Consilium impensur. Et hoc sicut Nos ac honorem nostrum, ac salvationem Regni nostri diligitis nullo modo omittatis. Teste Rege ut su∣pra. Eodem modo mandatum est, to x. more: the first of them Magistro Gilberto de Middleton Archid: North∣hampton. Clause 23: of the same Roll, there is the like writ (different only in the recital, as to the Archbish∣op, p. 28.) to x. Justices and Assistants, the same with the former; and so in dorse 15. In Claus. 3 E. 3. d. 19. there is no writ entred to the Justices and Counsil, but I finde them promiscu∣ously inserted amongst the Lords in the Eodem modo mandatum est; where I meet with Magist: Rico: Erinm, (perchance Ermin) Magist: Antonio de Bek, Decano Ecclesiae beatae Mariae Lincolne, Galfro: le Scrop, Wil: le Herle, Roberto de Malberthorp, Rico: de Willugby, Iohi: de Traverse, Ade de Herewinton, Henry le Scrop, Roberto de Wodehouse, Archid: Richmond, Willo: le Dennie, Ioi: de Canterigg Rico: de Aldeburge, Magist. Gilberto de Middleton, Archid: Northampton, and Rob., Baynard; in∣serted into the List of the Lords, being usually listed amongst the Justices and Counsil, in precendent and sub∣sequent Rolls. Clause 4 E. 3. d. 41. the writ runs in this most usual form, except in the recital.
Rex dilecto et fideli fuo Roberto de Wodehouss Archid. Richmond. Thesaurar. suo, salutem. Quia pro magnis et arduis negotiis Nos et statum Regni nostri multi∣pliciter contingentibus, Parliamentum nostrum apud Winton die Dominica prox. ante festum Sancti Gregorii Papae prox. futur. tenere; et Vobiscum, ac cum caeete∣ris de Consilio nostro habere Colloquium disposui∣mus et tractatum. Vobis mandamus firmiter injungen∣tes, quod omnibus aliis praetermissis dictis die et loco personaliter intersitis Nobiscum, ac cum caeteris de Consilio nostro, super dictis negotiis tractatur. ves∣trumque consilium impensur. Et hoc nullatenu omit∣tatis. T. ut supra, p. 30. Eodem modo mandatum est subscriptis, viz. 8. more: Ibidem, dors. 13. the like Writ (except in the Pro∣logue, Qualiter, &c. as p. 31.) issued to this Treasurer, and the same 8. persons more: But in dorso 23. there is no writ entred, but only the names of 5. of the Coun∣sil, in the Eodem modo after the Lords, with a space for distinction. Claus. 5 E. 3. dors. 25. the Writ issues; Dilect & fideli suo Galfrido Le Scrop, Capitali Iusticiario suo, &c. (as p. 32.) in the recital, and then in the usual form, as the precedent writ in the later Clause: there being 12 more names in the Eodem modo: Dorse 7. the like writ issued to him and x. more: both of them entred after the Writs to the Sheriffs and Warden of the Cinque-ports, (usually registred before them, next after the writs to the Lords in all precedent Rolls, but fre∣quently after them in most Rolls after this.) Clause 6 E. 3. d. 9. 19. & 36. there are three writs of this na∣ture entred after those to the Sheriffs and Wardens of the Cinque-ports, issued to this Chief Justice Scrop, the first to 7, the second to 30, the third to 9 more, Justices and others. Claus. 7 E. 2. pars 2. dors. 3. the writ entred is to him, and 20. besides, after all the rest of the Writs but one, (as in many more ensuing Rolls) and so Claus, 8 E. 3. d. 18. to him and 22. more,
whereof the Chancellor of the Exchequer is one, and the Kings Treasurer another. Claus: 9 E. 3. d. 8. the Writ entred is to to the same Geoffry Le Scrop, and 15 others; and Dorse 28. to him and 22 more: But in Claus. 10. dors. 1, & 5. the Writs enrolled issued, Magistro Roberto de Stratford, Archid. Cantuar: and 14 more in both lists, whereof Ro∣berto Parnings, Willo: Scot, Simoni Trewosa, Servienti∣bus Regis, are 3. These are the two first Eodem modo mandatum est I meet with, wherein the Kings Serjeants at Law were summoned to Parliaments, who are last na∣med in both these Lists. Clause 11 E. 3. pars 1. d. 15. After the Lords, 5 are registred, with Iustic: added to them, and 3 besides. In d. 8. there is only this entry, Eodem mode mandatum est dilecto Cler. suo Mro: Joh: de Ufford, mutatis mutandis after the Lords names: to which 9. of the Counsils & Justices names are conjoyned without distinction, before this entry. But in Clause 11 E. 3. part 2. dorse 40. the writ entred is directed Rob: de Stratford Electo Cicestr. different in the recital from the writs to the Temporal and Spiritual Lords in this Membrana, and agreeing with that in Claus. 11. pars 1. m, 8. to which it should refer: upon which Account I shall transcribe it. Rex dilecto Clerico fuo Mro. Rob: de Stratford, Ele∣cto Cicestr. salutem. Quia super certis responsionibus solennibus Nunciis nostris per Nos ad partes Franciae ultimo pro quibusdā negotiis nostris ibidē expediendis transmissis datis, necnon pro quibusdā aliis negotiis ur∣gentislimis, Nos et statum Regni nostri, ac aliarum ter∣rarum nostrarum intimè contingentibus, cum Praelatis, Magnatibus, et Proceribus regni nostri apud Westm. die Veneris prox. ante festum Sancti Michaelis prox. futur. ordinavimus habere Colloquium et Tractatum. Vobis mandamus firmiter injungentes, quod omnibus aliis praetermissis dictis die et loco personaliter intersitis Nobiseum, &c. ut supra. T. ut supra. Eodem modo mandatum est, &c. to 10. more, most of them Justices, and the Chancellor of the Eschequer.
Here a Bishop elect is summoned as one of the Counsil; though usually summoned as a Spiritual Peer; and the Gardian of the Spiritualties of the Bi∣shoprick of Chichester, sede vacante, summoned in the list amongst the Bishops, not this Bishop elect, who is summoned as a Bishop the next year and Parliament; Claus. 12 E. 3. d. 11. the Writ issued Galfrido Lescrop and 12. more, wherof the Kings Treasurer, and Chan∣cellor of the Exchequer, were two. Claus. 12 E. 3. pars 2. d. 32. the writ entred, issued Iohanni de Stonre, with the same recital as p. 41, 42. and then Quod omnibus aliis praetermissis intersitis cum dicto Custoe, et cum caeteris de Consilio praedicto, super dictis negotiis tractatur. &c. Eodem modo mandatum est to 13 others, whereof the Kings Treasurer, and Chancellor of the Exchequer are two▪ and the last Robto: de Sadyngton Capitali Ba∣dni de Scaccario: the first I observe summoned by this Title. Claus. 13 E. 3. pars 2. d. 28. the writ entred is of the self-same form with the last: and to the same 13 persons, though not listed in the same order; and with this addition of Regis, after Staccario, to the Chief Baron. Claus. 13 E. 3. pars 2. d. 1. we have the same form of writ to Stonore and 13 more, the very same as in the two former lists: Claus. 14 E. 3. pars 1. d. 33. the like to him, those 13, and one more: and Pars 1. d. 23. to him and 14 more. The Writ in Claus. 15. E. 3. pars 1. d. 37. issued in usual form, Dilcto et fideli suo Roberto de Parnings Thesaurar: suo, and 9. others. Claus. 17 E. 3. pars 1. d. 25. Roberto de Sadington, and only 6. more. Claus. 18 E. 3. pars 1. d. 14. Willo: Scot, and but 4. more, Cl. 20 E. 3. pars 2. d. 22. Willo: Scot, Quod personaler intersi∣tis Nabisum si praesentes fuorimus ibidem▪ seu cum Custode dicti Regni nostri si abesse nos contigerit, & cum caeteris de Consilio nostro, super dictis negotiis, &c. and 14 others, the two last Roberto de Thorpe Servienti Regis, Henry de Grene, Servienti Regis. Claus. 21 E. 3. pars 2.
d. 9. Willielmo de Thorpe (with the same recital, as to the Archbishop, Here, p. 52, 53. and the same Seire vos volu∣mus, quod dictum Parliamentum non ad auxilia, &c. as in that writ:) Eodem modo mandatum est to 16 others, the 4 last the Kings Serjeants at Law: namely Roberto de Thorpe Servienti Regis, Henr: de Grene Servienti Re∣gis, Willo: de Notton Servienti Regis, Thomae de Seton Servienti Regis. Claus. 22 E. 3. pars 1. d. 32. the writ issued Willo: de Thorpe, and 16 more, the 4 last the Kings Serjeants forenamed. This writ is registred next after the Lords: As is that in Clause 22 E. 3. pars 2. d. 7. issued to Iudge Thorpe, and 15 more, the 4. last the Kings Serjeants forenamed. In Claus. 24 E. 3. pars 2. d. 3. the writ runs in this form. Rex dilecto et fideli suo Willo: de Shareshull, salut: Quia pro quibusdam arduis et urgenibus negotiis, Nos, & statum, et bonum regimen Regni nostri Angliae, et aliarū terram̄, et Do∣miniorum nostrorum Parl: nostrum apud Westm. in Octabis Purificationis beatae Mariae Virginis prox. futur. tenere; & cum Praelatis, Magnatibus, et Proceribus dicti Regni nostri Angliae, & aliis de Consilio nostro, Colloquium habere volu∣mus & tractatum. Vobis mandamus, &c. personaliter intersi∣tis Nobiscum, & cum dictis Praelatis, Magnasibus et Pro∣ceribus dicti regni, Super dictis negotiis tractatur. &c. Eodem modo mandatum est to 12. more, the 4 last are the Kings forecited Serjeants at Law: Claus. 25 E. 3. pars 1. d. 5. the same form of writ as the last, issued to William Shareshull, and 13 others, whereof the last are the 4. Serjeants. Claus. 26 E. 3. d. 14. there are two writs registred one after another; the first to Share∣shull, and 7 Justices more: The 2. Dilecto Clerico suo Magistro Iohanni de Leech, and 8 Masters more. So Claus. 27 E. 3. d. 12. there are two distinct writs to the same parties, and to 6 Justices, and 3. more Ma∣sters. In Claus. 28 E. 3. d. 26. There is only one Writ to William de Shareshull, of the same form with that of
24 E. 3. and to 11 more, whereof 4 are the Kings Serjeants; namely, Thorp and Notton forecited, Willo: de Skipwith, Servienti Regis, Ioh: Mowbrey Servienti Regis, last named. The same form of writ to him, & 13 others is registred Claus. 29 E. 3. d. 8. wherein the Kings said Serjeants are last listed. Claus. 31 E. 3. d 21. there is the like writ to him and 14 others; where Notton, Skipwith, and Mowbrey are listed without the addition of Kings Serjeants: Claus. 31 E. 3, d. 2. the like writ is entred to him, and 15 others, without the addition of Serjeants to those so stiled in former lists. The writ in Claus. 34 E. 3. d. 4. to William de Share∣shull and 13 others, is only, & cum Praelatis et caeteris Magnatibus et Proceribus dicti Regni Colloquium habere, &c. Dictis die et loco personaliter intersitis Nobiscum, et cum dictis Praelatis, Magntibus et Proceribus dicti Regni, &c. with∣out the clause, & caeteris de Consilio nostro, in either place, or any other part of the writ. So is the writ Claus. 36 E. 3. d. 16. Henr: Grene, and 8 others: and Claus: 37 E. 3. d. 22. to him and 8. more; and Claus: 38 E. 3. d. 3. to him, and but 5 besides: and Claus: 39 E. 3. d. 2. Iohi: Knyvet, and 13 more, wherof Mro: Thomae Young Offic: Cur: Cancell. is one the first I find so stiled in the Rolls: The like writ Iohanni Knyvet, is in Claus: 42 E. 3. d. 22. and 8 others: and Claus: 43 E. 3. d. 24.  Claus: 44 E. 3. d. 1. the same in forme, persons, number, without any Clause cum caeteris de Con∣silio nostro, in them. There is this form of writ in Claus: 46 E. 3. d. 11. different from the precedent. Rex dilecto et fideli suo Iohi: de Cavendish, Capita∣li Justiciario suo, salutem. Qui pro quibusdam ar∣duis, &c. (ut supra, p. 67:) teneatnr, et cum Praelatis, Magnatibus et Proceribus Regni nostri Angliae trac∣tatus et Colloquium habeantur. Vobis mandamus firmiter injungentes, quod omnibus aliis praeter∣missis, dictis die et loco personaliter intersitis Nobis∣cum, si praesentes fuerimus ibidem, seu cum Ricardo
filio Carissimi Primogeniti nostri Edwardi Principis Aquitaniae & Walliae Custode Regni nostri Angliae, et locum nostrum tenente in eodem Regno, si abesse Nos contigerit, et CUM CAETERIS DE CONSI∣LIO NOSTRO, super dictis Negotiis tractaturi, vestrumque consilium impensuri; et hoc nullatenus omittatis. Teste ut supra. Without any Eodem mo∣do to others. Claus. 47 E. 3. d. 13. there is a writ is∣sued to him, with a different recitall (as p. 67.) and a personaliter intersitis Nobiscum, et cum caeteris de Con∣silio nostro, with Consimilia Brevia to 6 more Justices: The like writ to him is in Clause 48 E. 3. dors. 24. with Consimilia Brevia to 8 others, whereof two are Masters: These writs are entred after those to the Sheriffs, and before the writs to the Warden of the Cinque-ports; as the like writ to him is, Claus. 50 E. 3. pars 2. dors. 6. with Consimilia Brevia to 8 moe; the two last Mro: Iohanni Barnet, and Mro: Nicho de Chaddeston, as in the last before. The next writs of this nature, are in Claus: 1 R. 2. dors: 37: Claus: 2 R. 2. d: 13. both directed Iohanni Cavendish, Capitali Justiciar: suo, and 11 others in both Rolls, with a personaliter intersitis Nobiscum, & cum caeteris de Consilio nostro super dictis negotiis tractaturi, &c. But that of Claus: 3 R: 2 dors; 32. runs thus: Quod omnibus aliis praetermissis dictiss die & loco personaliter inter∣sitis Nobiscum, & CUM CAETERIS PRAELATIS, MAGNATIBUS, ET PROCERIBVS Regni▪ nostri DE CONSILIO NOSTRO tractaturi, vestrumque Consilium impensuri, &c. The like Ordinary writ is∣sued to Cavendish and 9 others: Claus: 4 R: 2: dor∣so 32: After which this form of writ is registred. Rex dilecto Servienti suo David Hannemere, salu∣tem: Quia de avisamento, &c. usque tractatum; tunc, Mandamus firmiter injungentes, &c: quod ditis die et loco personaliter intersitis ad faciendum pro Nobis et expeditione negotiorum nostrorum quod ad tunc ibidem fuerit faciend: et hoc Nullatenus
omittatis. Teste Rege apud Westm, 26 die Augusti. In the Clause Roll of 5. R. 2. dorso 40. The writ entred is directed Roberto Tresilian Capitali Justic suo, and 7 more. Claus. 6 R▪ 2. pars 1. d. 4. & 7. to him and 8 others in both dorses. Claus. 7 R. 2. d. 10. & 17. to him and 7. others in both. Claus. 8 R. 2. d. 35. to him and 10. besides, Claus. 9 R. 2. d. 45. to him and 9 more. Claus. 10 R. 2. d, 42. to him and 12 others. Claus. 11 R. 2. d. 24. to him and 11 more. Claus. 12 E. 3. d. 42. the writ issued Waltero Clopton Capitali Iustic. suo, and 7 others. Claus. 13 R. 2. pars 1. d. 6. & Cl. 14 R. 2, d. 42. to him and 12 more. Cl. 16 R: 2. d. 37. to him and 12 others, whereof the chief Baron of the Exchequer was one. Clause 16 R. 2. d, 23. to him and 11 others: and d: 32 to him and 12. more. Claus. 17 R. 2. d. 30. to him and 12 others. Cl. 18 R. 2. d: 23. to him and 10 besides. Claus. 20 R. 2. d. 11. to him and 11 more. Cl. 21 R 2. d. 27. and Cl. 23 R. 2. d. 3. to him, and 11 others. The writ in Claus: 1 H: 4: d. 37. is directed Waltero Clopton Capitali Iustic: suo, and 12 others: and still to the Chief Justice for the time being throughout his reign; all or most of the rest of the Assistants being Ju∣stices, whose names you may find in the ensning Table. The writ in Claus: 1 H: 5: dors: 9. issued Willielmo Hankeford Capitali Iustic: suo, &c. But that in dors: 37: Willielmo Gascoyne, Capitali Iusticiario suo, and 11 others, most, or all Justices, and so throughout his reign. In Henry the 6. his reign, Claus. 1 H. 6. dors. 22. the writ is directed Willo: Hankeford Capitali Iustic: suo, and 10 more Justices; and so in other years to the Chief Justice for the time being, and other Justices. In Cl. 1 E: 4. d. 34. the writ issued Iohi: Markham and 12 Justices and Lawyers besides; and so through∣out his reign to the Chief Justice and Justices for the time being, and few else besides them. Of later times both the Chief Justices, Chief Baron, and all the Kings Justices, Barons of the Eschequer,
Serjeants at Law, the Mr: of the Rolls, & some Masters of the Chancery, have been usually summoned as Assi∣stants, to counsell and advise both the King and Lords in all matters of Law and difficulty, wherein their ad∣vice is necessary, as also to carry messages, Bills and Or∣ders from the Lords to the Commons House, and re∣turn answers from them upon such occasions, when they please to return answers by them, and not by Mes∣sengers of their own. Usefull Observations upon the precedent Writs to, and concerning the Kings Counsil summo∣ned to Parliaments and Parliamentary Coun∣cils. IT is observable, 1. That in many antient Rolls and Lists of Summons to Parliaments and Parliamenta∣ry Councils, there is no mention of any writs or sum∣mons at all to any of the Kings Counsil, Justices, Offi∣cers, or others, as there is in those forecited; as name∣ly in the summons in Claus: 49 H. 3. d: 11. 23 E: 1. d. 2, 3, 4. 24 E. 1. d. 7. 25 E. 1. d. 6. 27 E. 1. d. 9. 16. 28 E. 1. d. 16, 17. 30 E. 1. d. 9. 32 E. 1. d. 2. Cl. 33 E. 1. d. 8. Cl. 35 E. 1. d. 13. Cl. 3 E. 2. d. 16, 17. 7 E. 2. d. 16. 9 E. 2. d. 22, 18 E. 2. d. 5. 21, 34. 20 E. 2. d. 4. Cl. 5 E 3. pars 2. d. 7. 1 E. 3. p. 1. d. 15. 16 E. 3. pars 1. d. 39. 16 E. 3. pars 2. d, 13. 29 E 3. d. 7. 32 E. 3. d. 14. 33 E. 3 d. 10. 34 E. 3. d. 35. & 49 E. 3. d. 4. to omit others: Which Parliaments it seemes were held without any of the Kings Counsil, or Justices summoned to them; or else the Clerks through neg∣ligence or slothfullness omitted the entries of their Writs or names in all these Rolls of Summons: Therefore they are no essential Members of the Parlia∣ments or Great Councils of England, which may be held without them, being none of the 3. Estates.
2ly, That there is no mention at all made of them in the usual ordinary writs to the Spiritual or Temporal Lords, Sheriffs, and Wardens of Cinque∣ports; in these most material clauses, Parliamentum nostrum tenere, & Voiscum ac um Praelatis, Magna∣tibus & Proceribus dicti regni nostri Angliae Colloquium ha bere volumus & tractatum: Or the personaliter intersis Nobiscum, ac cum dictis Praelatis, Magnatibus et Proceri∣bus dicti Regni super dictis Negotiis tractaturi, vestrumque consilium impensuri, which have never this Clause, & cum aeteris de Consilio nostro, inserted into them: Therefore they are no essentiall constitutive Members of our Par∣liaments or Great Councils, butCookes 4 In∣sit. p. 4. Assistants only to the King and Lords, as there is occasion. 3ly, That those of the Kings Counsil summoned to Parliaments and Great Councils by the precedent writs, were sometimes very many in number, somtimes very few, and alwaies more or less, at the Kings meer plea∣sure. In the first writ and list of summons extant, they were no less thanSec ▪ 341, 342. 40, in some others above 30, in most under 20, usually in later times but 10, 11, 12, 13, or 14, sometimes but 4, 5, 6, or 7; once or twice but one. Sometimes most of them were Deans, Archdeacons, and other Clerks or Clergymen who had alwaies▪ the Title MAGISTRO, praefixed to their names both in the writs and lists of their names; other times the ma∣jor number were Justices, Laymen, and but two or three Clerks: In later times the Clergymen, were wholly omitted, or very rarely inserted, and that when they were Treasurers, or Temporal Officers to the King: An unanswerable apparent Argument and demonstra∣on, that they were no essential Members of our Par∣liaments or Great Councills, since the King might thus summon more or fewer of them, or which of them he thought fittest, and omit all or any, or as many of them as he would at his pleasure out of the summons. 4ly. That in all lists of Summons of this kinde, the
Kings Chief Justices, and other Justices of his Courts at Westm: and Chief Baron, were constantly summo∣ned in more or less numbers, and the Kings Serjeants very frequently: yea the writs of Summons entred in the Rolls, were, for the most part, issued to the Kings Chief Justice; because there was most use of the Justi∣ces and learned Lawyers advice and counsel in Parlia∣ments in all matters of Law there debated, inwrits of Error there pending, in the penning of New, and al∣tering, explaining, or repealing of former Statutes; in Pleas of the Crown, and other cases criminal or civil heard and determined in Parliaments, than there was of inferiour Clergymen of the Counsil; the Archbi∣shops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors and Spiritual Lords there present as Members, being sufficiently able to advise the King and Temporal Lords in all Ecclesi∣astical matters there debated or treated of; especially when assisted with the Clerks of the Convocation usu∣ally summoned, without any Clergymen of the Kings Counsil. 5ly, That by the King and his Counsil, Vs and Our Counsil,See my Ta∣ble to An Ex∣act Abridge∣ment, Title Councils and Counsellors. Vs and the rest of our Counsil, aliis ac caeteris de Con∣silio nostro, in the precedent and other writs in the Clause Rols, the Rolls of Parliament, the afetrcited Statutes, and other Acts of Parliament; the Kings Justices and others summoned to Parliaments and Great Councils as his Counsil, not as Spiritual or Temporal Lords; are properly meant and intended, not the Lords of the Kings Privy or continual Council, nor yet the Lords in Parliament, or Parliament it self; the Parliament in the writs of Summons to the Bishops, in the Clause of Praemunientes Decanum, Capitulum, Archidiaconos, to∣tumque Clerum vestrae Dioc: &c. and in the writs to the Sheriffs & Wardens of the Cinqueports, being usually stiled, Commune Consilium Regni nostri, as the Clause, Ad consentiendum hiis quae tunc ihidem de Commu∣ni Consilio regni nostri contigerit ordinari: inser∣ted into the last part of these Writs, informes us:
And so is it stiled in the writ prescribed by the Statute, De non ponendis in Assiss, Anno 21 E. 1. & in other Writs grounded upon Acts of Parliament in the Register of Writs and Natura Brevium: Or the Kings Common or General Council, as in the Stat: of Vouchers 18 E. 1. in the Statutes of Wast, & de Defensione Iuris, An: 20 E: 1. and other printed Acts; and long before this, in Pat. 1 Joh: R: m. 3 n. 3. Pat. 1 H: 3. m. 3. Pat. 3 H, 3. ps. 2. m. 6. and sundry other writs and Patents in his reign 6ly, That although Sir4 Instit. p. 4. Edward Cooke and others make this the chief or sole distinguishing Clase, or proprium quarto modo, between the writs of Summons to the Lords and Members of the Lords House, and Assist∣ants; that the one are always summoned, quod in propria persona intersitis Nobiscum, ac cum dictis, or caeteris Praela∣tis, Magnatibus, et Proceribus dicti regni nostri, super dictis negotiis tractaturi, vestrumque consilium impensuri: The o∣thers only summoned; quod personaliter intersitis Nobis∣cnm, et cum caeteris de Consilio nostro, super dictis ne∣gotiis tractaturi, vestrumque consilium impensuri; Yet this is not a general truth: For 1. in sundry forecited writs to the Kings Counsil, Justices, and Assistants; this clause, Et cum caeteris de Consilio nostro, &c. is totally o∣mitted, though it be in most of them: and intersitis No∣biscum only, or, intersitis Nobiscum, et cumSee p: 357: dictis Praelatis, Magnatibus, et Proceribus super dictis negotiis tractaturi vestrumque consilium impensuri; (without any & cum cae∣teris de Consilio nostro,) inserted in lieu thereof; yet with this distinction, (not formerly observed by any to my knowledge) that in the writs to the Spiritual and Temporal Lords, the words alwayes run thus in the first Clause of the writs; Vobiscum, ac cum CAETERIS Praelatis, Magnatibus & Proceribus dicti Regni nostri, to a Spiritual Lord: and, Vobiscum, & cum Praelatis, ac CAE∣TERIS Magnatibus et Proceribus, &c: to a Temporal Lord: and thus in the mandatory part; dictis die et l∣co personaliter intersitis Nobiscum, ac cum CAETERIS Prae∣latis, Magnatibus & Proceribus, if to a Prelate: and if
to a Temporal Lord, Nobiscum, ac cum Praelatis, et CAE∣TERIS Magnatibus et Proceribus Praedictis super dictis ne∣gotiis tractaturi, &c. the word Caeteris is alwaies omit∣ted in the writs to the Justices, and other Assistants of the Counsil in both these clauses; because they are no Spiritual nor Temporal Lords of Parliament, nor sum∣moned as such; and, cum Praelatis, Magnatibus & Proce∣ribus, without caeteris, being only used in their writs; both where & cum caeteris de Consilio nostro is inserted in∣to their writs after the word Proceribus, or elsewhere; and where it is totally omitted: So that the omission of the word caeteris in this place and manner in all writs to the Justices and other Assistants, and the inserting it as aforesaid, into the writs of the Spiritual and Tem∣poral Lords, is the principal distinguishing word that puts a difference between them, not this Clause alone, Nobiscum, & cum aliis de Consilio nostro, twice inserted into the writs of Prorogation and Resummons both to the Temporal and Spiritual Lords, as well as to the Justi∣ces and Assistants, Claus: 33 E. 1. d. 9, 10. which I shall recite at large in its due Section. 7ly, That in the writs of Summons to the Kings Counsil, they are never licensed to appear by Proxies, or Attorneys, as the Spiritual and Temporal Lords sometimes are; but in proper person alone. 8ly, That such of them who were Deans, Archdea∣cons, or Clergymen have alwaies the Title MAGI∣TRO prefixed to their names both in the writs and lists of summons, by which they are distinguished from the Laymen mentioned in those writs and lists. And that one Bishop elect summoned amongst the Bish∣ops to Parliament, was yet summoned as one of the Kings Counsil by an other writ. What ever else is worthy Observation touching these writs, or lists of persons summoned, I have noted already in the prece∣dent recitals of them. 9ly, That though the Kings Justices and others of his Counsil summoned to our Parliaments, were no real
essential Members of them, but rather Assistants to the King and Lords, yet they had a very great hand, pow∣er, authority, not only in making Ordinances, Procla∣mations, desciding all weighty controversies, regu¦lating most publike abuses, and punishing all Exorbi¦tant Offences out of Parliament in the Star-chamber and elsewhere, Coram Rege et CONSILIO SVO, as is evi∣dent by 19 E. 3. Fitzh: Judgement 24. 20 As. 14. Br. Dures 12. 39 E. 3. f. 14. b. Brook Judges 13. Judg∣ment 117. 43 Ass. 15. 38. Register pars 1. f. 191. b. pars 2. f. 124. b. 125. a. 13 E. 4. f. 9, 10. 27 H. 6. 5. b. 2 R. 3. f. 2. 10, 11. 1 H. 7. f. 3. 4. Brooke Parlia∣ment 37. 105. Fitz. Parl. 2. 135. An Exact Abridge∣ment of the Records in the Tower, p. 157, 169, 197, 426, 428, 459, 460, 560, 591, 638, 641, 651. Lambardi Ar∣chaion, p. 108. to 116. and the records there cited, tran∣scribed by Sir Edward Cook in his 4 Institutes, c. 5, Cromp∣tons Jurisdiction of Courts, f. 29. &c. de Court de Starr-chamber, et matters avant LE COVNSELL LE ROY, Ashes Tables, Courts 2. and the Lawbooks, Statutes, there cited, with others anon remembred; but likewise in receiving, answering all sorts of Petitions, determi∣ning, adjudging all weighty doubtfull cases, pleas, yea in making Acts, Ordinances, Statutes, and transact∣ing all weighty affaires concerning the King or kingdome, even in Parliaments themselves, when summoned to them by the premised writs; which being not commonly known to the Kings Coun∣sill, or others, nor insisted on, nor cleared up by Sir Edward Cooke, or any others who have written of our PARLIAMENTS, I shall briefly and satisfactorily illustrate by these four following par∣ticulars. 1. By sundry Petitions upon several complaints and occasions presented and directed to the King and HIS COUNSELL,See my Ta∣ble to the Ex∣act Abridge∣ment of the Records of the Tower, Title Coun∣ell. OR SAGE, OR GOOD COUN∣SEL in sundry of our antient Parliaments, entred in the Clause and Parliament rolls, more especially in Claus.
Anno 1. E. 3. pars 1. & 2. Where multitudes of Petiti∣ons are thus directed; A nostre Signur. le Roy, et ASON COVNCILL, Au BON COVNCIEL nostre Signior le Roy, &c. Which Petitions were usually answered and determined, sometimes By the KING and His COVN∣SELL, joyntly, other times by His COVNSEL alone; and sometimes by the King with the assent or advice of his COVNSEL, as these entries; Coram Rege & CON∣SILIO concessum est & emendatum: per agard de toute LE COVNSELL: soit le COVNCIEL certifie; Coram CON∣SILIO NOSTRO in praesenti Parliament venire faciatis scriptum praedictum; ad faciend. inde ulterius, quod per idem CONSILIVM NOSTRVM ibidem CONTIGERIT ORDINARI▪ Videtur CONSILIO: Il semble AV COVN∣CIEL que ce est bone affaire▪ Veniat Inquisitio CORAM CON∣SILIO. Place at Dom. Regi & CONSILIO SVO ordinare: with the like, most frequently occurring in these Petiti∣ons, and the answers to the proceedings and resolu∣tions upon them, abundantly evidence. 2. By this subscription or addition to many Writs, Patents, Charters, in the Clause, Patent, Charter, and Parliament Rolls, per ipsum Regem & Consilium in Parliamento, being all made, issued, granted, approved, entred by Order of the King and those of His COUN∣SIL in Parliament. 3. By the Placita coram ipso DOMINO REGE ET EJUS CONSILIO AD PARLIAMENTA SUA, &. AD PARLIAMENTUM SUUM, &c. recor∣ded in the Parchment Book of Pleas in the Tower of London.. Wherein, the Proceedings, and the Judgments on them, were given sometimes by the Kings COVNSELL alone; sometimes by the King and his COUNSELL, and other times by the King, with the advice of the Arch∣bishops, Bishops, Abbots, Barons, and others, or the rest of His COUNSELL; and sometimes Fines and Recognizances were acknow∣ledged before the COUNSELL in Parliament.
To instance in some particulars. In the Placita coram ip∣so Domino Rege et ejus Consilio, ad Parliamenta sua post festum Sancti Hillarii, et etiam post Pascha, Anno 18 E. 1. Willielmus de Wasthull quaeritur Domino Regi et ejus Consilio, per quandam petitionem, against a deceit and covin in levying a fine: Iohannes Comes de Dewe venit coram Rege et ejus Consilio, ad Parliamentum suum post Pascha, &c. & petiit, &c. So Domino Regi et ejus Con∣silio Johannes Episcopus Wynton. alias coram Auditori∣bus quaerelarum monstavit, &c. Petrus Maulore, venit co∣ram Domino Rege et ejus Consilio, ad Parliamentum, &c. et petiir, &c. Dominum Regem et ejus Consilium certiorari faciant Querela Willielmi de Valentia Consi∣lio Domini Regis in Anglia, dum Rex suit in Vasconia. Macolomus de Harlegh monstravit Consilio Regis per quandam petitionem, &c. So Placita Parliamenti apud Clip∣ston & Asherugg, &c. Anno 18 E. 1. Margeria de Mose uxor Thomae de Weyland, & Ricardus filius ejusdem Thomae monstraverunt Domino Regi, et ejus Consilio, &c. coram ipso Domino Rege et ejus Consilio venerunt praedicti Cemites Gloucestr. & Hereford: Quod ipsi habeant corpora eorundem Comium coram ipso Domino Rege et Consilio suo, &c. ad faciendum et recifiendum id quod Dominus Rex de Consilio suo duxerit ordinandum. Prior de Goldelyne queritur Domino Regi et ejus Consilio, de hoc, &c. Me∣morandum quod Recordum, quod Episcopus Wynton et socii sui miserunt coram Consilio de magno placito Abbatis de Rupl. &c. Robertus Bardolph habet diem per adjorna∣mentum in pleno consilio, &c. Maria quae fuijuxor Wil∣lielmo de Brewosa petiit coram Domino Rege et ejus Con∣silio versus Willielmum, &c. medietatem manerii de Wyke∣ham, &c. Placita coram Rege et Consilio suo ad Par∣liamentum suum post Pascha apud London. Anno 21 E. 1. Willielmus de Mere, &c. et Reginaldus do Legh coram ipso Domino Rege et ejus Consilio allocuti, ad rationem positi de hoc, &c. Stephanus Rabez Viceco∣mes Leicestr. & Warwic: coram ipso Domino Rege et ejus Consilio arrenatus, ad rationem positus de hoc, &c. Placi∣ta
coram ipso Domino Rege et Consilio suo ad Par∣liamentum suum post festum Sancti Michaelis, Ann. 21 E. 1. Malcolinus de Harley Eschaetor Domini Regis ci∣tra Trentam monstravit Domino Regi et ejus Consilio, &c. et super hoc vocatis coram domino Rege et ejus Consilio: Decano de Wellen▪ &c. Placita coram ipso Domino Re∣ge et ejus Consilia apud Cantuar. &c. Anno 21 E. 1. The Judgements and Orders upon such Petitions and complaints, were somtimes given by the Counsil alone. As in the case of Theobaldus de Verdun coram ipso Rege et ejus Consilio apud Bergaveny, de diversis Transgressi∣onibus et inobedientiis factis Domino Regi, arenatus; and found guilty of them by Inquisition, returned and read Cram ipso Domino Rege et ejus Consilio, in the Parliament of 20 E. 1. praedictus Theobaldus de Verdun per considerationem et Iudicium totius Consilii committe∣batur Goalae, et exhaeredatus fuit de tota libertate sua Regali, quam habuit in terris suis de Ewyas Lacy, pro so et hoeredi∣bus suis imperpetuum; But mostly by the King & Counsil: Witness these Clauses in Plac. Parl. Anno 18 E. 1. Lo∣quela inter Johannem de Sancto Johanne, & Williel∣mum de Valentia ponitur in respectum usque in Octabis San∣cti Johannis Baptistae, eo quod per Consilium Domini Regis et Iusticiarios suos judicium certum in loquela illa non∣dum est provisum, &c. Postea ad diem illum Dominus Rex et ejus Consilium in praesentia praedictrum partium habito con∣silio de procedendo ad judicium, &c. The Summons to Theo∣bald de Verdun; ad faciendum et recipiendum qud Dominus Rex de Consilio ordinaret; And the acquittal of the Ser∣vants of Thebald de Lacy, upon the returns of the Inqui∣sitions against them, lecta et audita coram dom. Rege et ejus Consilio. In the Plea between the King and the Bishop of Winchest. de Custod: Hospitii S. Juliani Southampton, upon full hearing and examining of the cause, Uide∣tur Domino Kegi et ejus Consilio, quod Iusticiarii se∣cundum quod in recordo suo praedicto continetur, debito modo & secunduin consuetudinem Regni ad captionem praedictae In∣quisitionis processerunt, &c. In the case of the Earl of
Ewe in Normandy petitioning for the restitution of the Castles of Hastings and Tikehall belonging to his Gran∣mother Alicia, whose heir he was, and by her delivered into the Custody and protection of King Henry the III. Et quia Domino Regi et ejus Consilio manifestè constat, quod praedicto Comii alias responsum fuit ad consimilem Peti∣tionem, &c. Nec videtur Domino Regi aut ejus Con∣silio, quod ratione aliquarum literarum praedictarum praedi∣cto Comiti aliud responsum dare debeat, &c. In the Parlia∣ment of 0 E. 1. The case of the Prior of Gis∣burn, Coram Rege et ejus Consilio apud Norham. Anno 19 E. 1. where per ipsum Regem & CONSI∣LIVM suum ordinatum et concordatum est, that a Re∣cognisance of 600 marks acknowledged in Chancery by the Prior should be cancelled. In the case of the differences between the Citizens of London and Mer∣chants of Gascoigne, both cited Coram ipso Domino Rege & CONSILIO SVO. Anno 20 E. 1. Vt auditis coram ipso Domino Rege et CONSILIO SUO allegationibus et disputationibus, rationibusque quibuscunque per praedictas partes porrectis, fieret in hac parte quod Dominus Rex de Con∣silio decreverit, &c. et contentio praedicta finem debitum per ipsum Dominum Regem et CONSILIUM SUUM sortietur; who then made an Order and peace between them, and likewise in the Parl. of 21 E. 1. In the case between Iohn Gifford, and Robert Tybetot touching the Commot of Hysk ynny, the King at Berwick Anno 21 E. 1. Cartam praedictam coram se & CONSILIO suo legi fecit, et ad ambiguitatem quorundam verborum in prae∣dicta Garta contentorum de caetero auferendam, eadem ver∣ba declaravit in hun modum. &c. An. 21 E. 1. The Bi∣shop of Durham (having his liberties unjustly seised by the award of the Justices in Eyr,) Supplicavit ipsi Do∣mino Regi et CONSILIO SUO instanter, quod praedicta processus et Recordum coram eis recitarentur et exa∣minarentur, et errores in eisdem contenti pro se & Ec∣clesia sua Dunolm. prout justum fuerit, & secundum legem et consuetudinem Regni emendarentur. Which
being accordingly done, and the cause fully heard and debated before them; consideratum est per ipsum Regem & Consilium, quod judicium praedictum revo∣cetur, & adnulletur, et quod omnes libertates praedicti Episcopi, Ecclestae suae & hominum suorum, quae per considerationem Justiciariorum tinerantium, in ma∣num Domini Regis captae fuerunt, eidem Episco∣po, Ecclesae & hominibus suis plenarie & integre re∣stituentur. I shall instance only in three more memorable cases at large. The 1. is in the Placita coram ipso Rege & Consilio suo, ad Parliamentum suum post Pascha apud London. in Ma∣nerio Archiepiscopi Eborum; Anno regni Regis Ed∣wardi 1. 21. De Petentibus arreragiis de tempore Iudae∣rum. Quia plures Capitales Domini, de quibus Iu∣daei ante Exilium suum de Regno isto tenementa sua tenuerunt, diversa arreragia petunt, de servitiis orun∣dem tenementorum ibi detentis, tempore quo tenemen∣ta illa in manu Domini Regis, ut Eschaeta sua per Exilium eorundem Iudeorum devenerunt, & similiter à tempore postquam tenementa illa per concessionem & donationem suam, in manus nunc tenentium deve∣nerunt, quod per eosdem tenentes aut eorum haeredes, aut assignatos plenarie satisfiat, capitalibus Dominis de quibus tenementa illa tenentur, de omnibus servi∣ciis & consuetudinibus eisdem Dominis capitalibus feodi debitis & consuetis, & quae servicia Iudaei ante Exilium suum; dum tamen sibi facere consueverunt & debuerunt, & secundum quod iidem Domini capitales legitime verificare poterunt, servicia illa & consue∣tudines sibi deberi, & quod Iudaei dum tenementa illa tenuerunt pro tenementis illis sibi acere consueverunt, cum singulis Cartis Domini Regis de talibus tenementis cuicunque concessis semper contineatur, quod servicia debita & consueta inde faciant capitalibus Dominis feodi il∣lius. Et de toto illo tempore quo tenementa illa in se∣ina Domini Regis remanserunt postquam per Exili∣um
orundem Iudeorum eisita fuerint usque diem quo eadem tenementa per concessionem ipsius Domini Regis in seisinam aliorum devenerunt respondatur, satisfiat Capitalibus Dominis ac Scaccarium per ipsum Dominum Regem, singulis pro sua portione, et secun∣dum quod verificare poterunt prout superius dicitur; cum quilibet de suo tempore tantummodo teneatur re∣spondere, et de isto tempore quo Rex tenebitur respon∣dere satisfaciant ipsi modo tenentes Capitalibus Domi∣nus, et ipsis allocetur in pacatione sua facienda, aut redditu suo, vel secundum quod The saurarius et Barones de Scaccario, melius viderint expedire. De tempore au∣tem Iudeorum quo ipsi tenementa illa tenuerunt, non videtur Domino Regi, aut ejus consilio, quod alicui petenti debet responderi, cum iidem Capitales Domini semper suerant et esse debuerant sufficientes et potentes ad servitia et consuetudines sibi debita petenda, et pro eisdem distringenda si quid aretro fuit, vel cum ipsi Iudei fortè satisfecerunt de hoc quod modo petitur, et inde habeant acquietancias. Et si quid a retro fuerit hoc fuit per negligentiam et stultitiam eorundem Domino∣rum Capitalium, quorum negligentia merito ibi ipis imputanda, et cum dicitur, Vigilantibus et non dormi∣entibus jura subveniunt. 21 E. 1. ro. 4. 22 E. 1. rot. 5. Cooks 2 Instit p. 508. The 2d. Part of my Demurrer, p. 123. The second is the case of the Prior of Bridlington, before the King and his Counsil the same Parliament. Prior de Bridelington allocutus coram ipso Domino Rege et consilio suo de hoc, quod cum quidam Bona∣my nuper Iudeus Eborum: mutuasset eidem Priori Tres∣centa Lìbras Sterlingorum, solvendas eidem Iudeo ad Gulas Augusti, Anno regni Regis nunc vicessimo, Et idem Iudeus ante terminum praedictum; Per commune Exilium Iudeorum de regno isto exularet, per quod praedictum debitum simul cum omnibus aliis bonis quae fuerant ejusdem Iudei in Anglia, et quae in regno re∣manserunt post eorum Exilium, in quorumcunque manus fuerunt ipsius Domini Regis Catalla fuerunt, et ipsi Domino Regi reddi debuissent; Praedictus Prior
debitum praedictum quod fuit &c. esse Catall. Dom. Regis, ad terminum statutum ipso Domino Regi non solvit, nec ipsum Dominum Regem aut suos inde pre∣munit; Immo totaliter concelavit, detinuit▪ & adhuc detinet, in lesionem fidei sui qua Domino Regi tene∣tur, & ad grave dampnum ipsius Domini Regis, &c. Et Prior bene cognoscit, quod Praedecessor suus imme∣diatus pecuniam praedictam de praedicto Iudeo mutua∣vit termino praedicto solvendam, & quod ipse ratione mutui illius, adhuc ad solutionem pecuniae illius tene∣tur. Set dicit; quod Iohannes Archiepiscopus Eborum qui nuncest, in tertia septimana Quadragesima proxi∣mò praeterito ad domum suam de Bridelington, prout ad officium suum pertinet, visitavit, & inter caetera in visitatione sua ibidem inventa, quaesivit de debitis do∣mus in quibus idem Prior, & quibus, & pro quo teneba∣tur? ita quod tunc inuenit, quod domus praedicta praedicto Iudeo indebitabatur in pecunia praedicta; et statim in Capitulo ipso Priori injunxit, quod pecu∣niam illam solveret ejusdem valecto tunc ibidem prae∣senti ad festum Nativitatis Sanctae Mariae proximum, quem valectū idem Archiepiscopus dicebat esse Attor∣natum praedicti Iudaei. Et ipse Prior prout ratione obe∣dientiae suae tenetur; praecepto praefati Archiepiscopi obedivit, & eandem pecuniam tunc solvere promisit. Et quia idem Prior cognoscit, quod praedicta pecunia praedicto Iudeo debebatur, nec ei solvebatur. ante exili∣um Iudeorum, & quicquid remansit de eorum debitis & catallis in Regno post eorum exilium, Domini Re∣gis fuit. Consideratum est, quod Dominus Rex recu∣peret praedictam pecuniam, ut Catalla sua versus prae∣dictum Priorem. Et dictum est praedicto Priori, quod non exeat è villa, priusquam Domino Regi, de prae∣dicta pecunia satisfecerit. Et quia praedictus Archie∣piscopus praedicto Priori injunxit; quod catalla Do∣mini Regis praedicto vallecto solveret, ad dampnum Domini Regis, & similiter quia Dominus Rex intel∣lexit, quod Archiepiscopus praedictus quoddam scrip∣tum
obligatorium, per quod praefatus Prior praedicto Iudaeo tenebatur in debito praedicto, contra fidem Domino Regi debitam, & Sacramentum fidelitatis suae à praedicto Iudo emit aut perquisivit, ad elongandum Dominum Regem de Catallis suis praedictis, & ibi appropriando malitiosè: Praeceptum est Vicecomiti Eborum, quod ve∣nire faciat praedictum Archiepiscopum coram Domino Rege, à die Sancti Michaelis, in Quindecim dies, ubi∣cunque, &c. ad respondendum Domino Regi de receptione praedicta. Et similiter quod praedictum scriptum, ut dicitur, remanet in custodia Abbatis Sanctae Mariae Eborum aut Prioris Sancti Andre Eborum, ideo praeceptum est Vicecomiti praedicto, quod venire faciat eosdem Abbatem & Priorem, ad terminum praedictum, ad respondendum de eodem scripto. Hereupon the Sheriff summoned the Archbishop; Ad respondendum Domino Regi de hoc, quod nunc Prior de Bridelington et ejusdem loci conventus per scriptum suum obligatorium tenebatur cuidam Bon∣amy quondam Iudeo Eborum, in Trescentis libris ster∣lingorum certis terminis solvendorum: et idem Iudeus Per Commune Exilium Iudeorum de Regno isto, ante solutionem praedictae pecuniae sibi factā Exuleret; praedictus Archiepiscopus de Curia Romana rediens apud Paris cum praedicto Iudaeo conventionem & mer∣catum faciens, praedictum debitum, quod fuit & est Catalla Domini Regis ab eo emit, & post in visitatione sua ad Prioratum praedictum facta, eidem Priori et Con∣ventui per obedientam injungit, quod pecuniam prae∣dictam cuidam Valecto ipsius Archiepiscopi, aut nun∣cio praefati Iudaei, certo termino solverent; contra fide∣litatem in qua Domino Regi tenentur, & in alienationem pecuniae Domini Regis▪ ad dampnum Domini Regis mille librarum &c. Et praedictus Archiepiscopus modo venit, & super hoc facto praedicto CORAM DOMINO REGE ET CONSILIO SUO arenatus, expresse dicit; Quod nunquam cum praedicto Iudaeo aliquam
conventionem fecit, seu mercatum de pecunia praedi∣dicta sibi adquirenda; set revera dicit, quod in visita∣tione sua ad domum praedictam invenit, et per Prio∣em et Conventum ejusdem domus sibi ostensus fuit, quod domus illa indebitabatur praedicto Iudeo de prae∣icta pecunia. Et idem ad salvationem animarum sua∣um prout tenebatur, eidem Priori et Conventui dixit, quod pecuniam illam salva conscientia retinere non possent, et quod sic facerent quod animas suas salva∣rent: set quod nunquam eis injunxit, quod pecuniam illam sibi aut ali nomine praedicti Iudei solverent, pa∣ratus est se acquietare, si placuerit DOMINO REGI¦ET EJUS CONSILIO. Et Dominus Rex super hoc, de gratia sua speciali, et ad instantium MAGNATUM DE CONSILIO SUO, licet per patriam de jure in∣quirere posset veritatem praemissorum, concessit praedi∣cto Archiepiscopo, quod in fide in qua ei tenetur, veri∣tatem praemissorum fatetur et cognosca. Et idem Archiepiscopus in fide, &c. fatetur et dicit, quod in veniendo de Curia Romana apud Paris: bene audivit & intellexit per praedictum Iudeum quod praedicta pecunia ei debebatur, et quod idem Iudeus eum rogavit, ut ei pro Deo esset in auxilium ad praedictam pecuniam suam ecuperandam. Et postea, ut praedictum est, in visita∣tione sua ad domum praedictam hoc idem invenit per confessionem praedictorum Prioris et Conventus; et eis dixit, quod ic facerent, quod animas suas salvarent. Et quia idem Archiepiscopus bene cognoscit, quod POST EXILIUM DICTI JUDAE, & ALIORUM JUDAEORUM DE REGNO ISTO, à praedicto Iu∣deo intellexit, quod pecunia praedicta ibi in regno isto debebatur, et POST EORUM EXILIUM, omnia quae sua fuerunt, et in regno isto remanserunt, tam de∣bita quam alia bona quaecunque ipsi Domino Regi re∣manserunt, et Catalla sua fuerunt, et super hoc incon∣tinenti POST EORUM EXILIUM solempnis Pro∣clamatio siebat per totum regnum, et quod omnes qui debita aliqua alicui Iudeo debebant, aut de eorum debi∣is
tis, bonis & catallis aliquid sciebant Domino Regi, aut alicui de Consilio suo scire facerent, de qua quidem Proclamatione nullus dedicere potest, quin scivit, a scivisse debuit. Et idem Archiepiscopus de debito prae∣dicto scivit, prout fatetur, tam per Iudeum, quam per Priorem & Conventum, nec de hoc Domino Regi, aut alieui de suìs constare fecit; Immo debitum illud concelando, et à Domino Rege alienando contra fidem qua Regi teneur, injunxit praefato Priori et Conventui, quod animas suus-salvarent, quod tantum valuit, quan∣tum si dixisset; quod Iudeo satisfacerent, concordatum est, quod praedictus Archiepiscopus remaneat in mi∣sericordia Domini Regis, pro concelamento & trans∣gressione praedicto, &c. et idem Dominus Rex sibi ipsi reservat Tax ationem illius misericordiae. From these 2. Records I shall observe, That the General Banish∣ment of the Iewes out of England, and the escheat and forfeiture of their Lands, Goods, and Debts to the King, by this their generall exile, is no lesse then 10. severall times precisely mentioned in these 2 Records, and the very groundwork of them; besides some hun∣dreds of other Records and Authors cited by me in the 1. and 2. Part of my Demurrer to the Iewes long discontinued Remitter into England: And therefore I must admire2. Institutes p. 106. 707. 568. Sir Edward Cooks peremptory denyal of it in print, in his Commentary on the Statute de Iudaismo, in the very date whereof he is mistaken, as well as in most of his Comments thereupon, as I have largely proved in my Demurrer. 2. That it is a breach of the Oath of Fealty and Allegiance in any Subject, and an offence for which he is punishable, to conceal from, or defraud the King of any of his just debts and rights, especially when engaged by Procla∣mation to discover them. 3ly. That the King and his Counsell gave judgment in these causes; and that in the later of them the King reserves the taxing of the Amerciament of the Archbishop for an offence against him, wholly to himself.
The 3. case is that of Iohn Saveyn, his wife and her sister, in the Placita coram ipso Domino Rege apud West∣monasterium in Parliamento suo in Octabis Nativitatis be∣atae Mariae, Anno regni Regis Edwardi filii Regis Hen∣rici 33. which is very memorable, and thus recor∣ded. Iohannes Salveyn, Margareta uxor ejus, Isabello soro ejusdem Margaretae, filiae & haeredes Roberti de Ros de Werk, per Petitionem suam in forma sequenti osten∣dunt Domino Regi, et petunt, quod cum Dominus Rex de gratia sua speciali concessit et ordinavit, Quod omnes gentes de regno Seotiae, cujuscunque fuerint, et quae ad pacem suam venerint, exceptis aliquibus per∣sonis in eademSee this Or∣dinance inrol∣led at large, Claus. Ann. 33 E. 1. m. 13. dorso in Ce∣dula, and re∣membred by Mat. Westm. pars 2. p. 451, 452. Ordinatione nominatis, admittantur secundum conditiones subsequentes; videlicet, quod salva sit eis vita et membra, et quod quieti sint de im∣prisonamento, et quod non exhaeredantur. Ita quod de eorum exemptione et emendis de Transgressionibus, qnas ipsi Domino Regi solummodo fecerint, et de esta∣bilamento terrae Scotiae staret ordinationi suae, sicut plenius continetur in Ordinatione supradicta. Et in super Dominus Rex concessit omnibus qui secuti fuerint seisinam de terris quas ipsi et eorum Antecessores tenuerunt in principio Guerrae In quorum manus terr illae devenissent; quod ipsi Iohannes, Margareta, & Isa∣bella, uti possent et gaudere concessione et Ordinatione praedictis, quoad terras quae dictus Robertus tenuit in Anglia & Scotia in principio guerrae. Ita quod non sin exhaeredati. Et Willielmus de Ros de Hamlake, qui tenet praedictum Manerium de Werk, ex dono et concessione Domini Regis, per praemunitionem sibi factam venit, et tam pro seipso tanquam tenenti dictum Manerium, quā pro Domino Rege quo ad alias terras et tenementa quae fuerunt dicti Roberti, tam in regno Angliae quam in terra Scoiae, dicit; Quod praedicti petentes nichil in eisdem per medium praedicti Roberti clamare possunt ut ipsius haeredes, nec ad illa petenda, seu aliquam partem earundem audiri debent, prout petunt. Dicit enim,
quod ipsi petunt tenementa praedicta ut haeredes praedi∣cti Roberti, et virtute cjusd m Ordinations, quam Do∣mnus Rex nuper fecitet concessit illis hominibus de terra Scotiae, qui in ultima guerra in eadem terra ad pa∣cem suam venerunt et admissi suerunt; et per illa ver∣a videlizet, [quod non xaeredentur,] Et etiam pe∣tunt, quod ipsi uti possunt, et gaudere concessione et Ordinatione praedictis quo ad terras quas dictus Rober∣tus tenuit in Anglia & in Scotia in principio guerrae, Ita quod non sint exhaeredati, prout in sua petitione con∣tinetur, quod nullo modo admitti debent. Quia dicit, quod praedictus Robertus diù ante principium istius gueriae, ad quod tempus Ordinationi praedicta reddito terrarum et concessio se extendunt, Inimicus Domini Regis devenit maniestus, parti Scotorum Contra Homa∣gium et Filelitatem suam felonice et traditiose ad∣hrendo, et sic omnes terras et tenementa sua ubicun{que} infra Dominium et potestatem Domini Regis existen∣tia, simul cum aliis bonis suis quibuscunque totaliter forisfecit; nec unquam postea in vita sua ad pacem Domini Regis rediit, set in inimicitia sua ut Felo et Traditor obiit. Occasione cujus Inimicitiae sic commissae Dominus Rex terras illas et tenementa statim in manū suam seisivit; et postea ipsum Manerium de Werk ipsi Willielmo dedit. Et hoc paratus est verisicare, tam po Domino Rege quam pro seipso, si petentes praedicti in petitione sua praedicta audiri debent, &c. Et quia habito super praemissis diligenti tractatu per ipsum Dominum Regem et totum Consilum, expressè re∣cordatum est, quod dictus Robertus de Ros, per multa tempora ante principium istius ultimae guerrae contra Homagium, Fidelitatem et Ligeantiam suam, de ipso Domino Rege traditiosè et felonicè se elongavit, et Inimicus ipsius Domini Regis manifestè devenit parti Scotorum adhaerendo tunc Inimicorum et Rebel∣lionum Domini Regis existentium, nec unquam postea in vita sua ad pacem Domini Regis rediit, set inimicus s obiit, visisque articulis et conditionibus contentis
in Ordinatione per ipsum Dominum Regem facta in eadem ultima guerra hominibus de terra Scotia, et con∣cessione de redditione terrarum suarū eisdem facienda, quam de aliis in eadem Ordinatione contentis, et virtute cujus Ordinationis petentes praedicti modo tenementa praedicta petunt: Uidetur Domino Regi et Consilio suo, quod petentes praedicti ratione illius Ordinatio∣nis seu redditionis in Petitione sua praedicta audiri non debent. Propter quod Concordatum est et conside∣ratum per ipsum Dominum Regem et Consilium su∣um, quod praedictus Willielmus eat inde sine die, &c. Et quod praedicti petentes nichil capiant per Petitio∣nem suam praedictam, &c. After which, upon the suit of the Petitioners to King Edward the 2. in the 4. year of his reign, being in Scotland, there issued two several writs to Gilbert de Roubyry, to search theThen in be∣ing, but since not extant. Rolls of Parl. and certify the Tenor of the Petitions aforesaid, and the Answers given thereunto, and proceedings there∣upon coram dicto Patre nostro (Edw. 1.) et Con∣silio suo in Parliamentis suis fata; because this Iohn Salven coram Nobis et Consilio nostro prosecu∣tus fuerit petenda, &c. that the King would receive his homage for the moity of the lands descended to his wife, as one of the Coheirs of Robert de Ros, and re∣store the same unto him. For Judgements given in Parliament upon Petiti∣ons or Complaints by the King, Lords, and Kings Coun∣sil joyntly, you may perusePlacita in Parl. Anno 33 E. 1. ro. 17. 2. Nicholas de Segraves case, in Cooks 3 Instit. p. 7, 8. and My Plea for the Lords, p. 361. with others there cited: I shall here for brevity recite only two Memorable ones. The 1. in the Placita in Parliamento apud London in crastino Epiphaniae, Anno regni Edwardi 1. vicesimo, the long, great and famous case between Humfry de Bohun Earl of Hereford and Essex, and Gilbert de Clare Earl of Gloucester and Hertford, who invaded one anothers lands by force and arms in a warlike manner, and committed many rapines, burnings, murders and enormities against
the Kings peace and prohibition: after many Inquisi∣sitions and debates touching this business before Justi∣ces assigned, and afterwards before the Kings Counsil, and then before the King and his Counsil, by these passages often mentioned in the record; Concordatm est per DOMINUM REGEM & CONSILIUM, De∣cretum est PER CONSILIUM, Videtur CONSILIO DOMINI REGIS, per dictum DOMINUM REGEM & CONSILIUM, &c. evidentr compertum est (twice repeated) Quod corpora eorum habeat coram. DOMI∣NO REGE & EJUS CONSILIO, ad voluntatem ipsius Domini Regis audiendam et faciendam, et reci∣piendum id quod DOMINUS REX DE CONSILIO SUO DUXERIT ORDINANDUM) fully evi∣dence. At last both the Earls. Voluntati Domini Regis se omnino submiserunt, ut de eorumque liber∣tatibus faciat quod sibi placuerit. Whereupon Do∣minus Rex super hoc non voluntariè tantumniodo, imo prot de jure et secundum legem et consuetudinem reg∣ni fuerit faciendum, et etiam per Consilium Archie-piscoporum, Cpiscoporun; Comitum et Baronum caeterorumque De Consilio suo existentium facere volens in praemissis, et ut voluntas sua justa sit et ratio∣nabilis prot decet, eorumque Assensum in praemissis petiit et Consilium. Propter quod habito tractatu oram ipso Domino Rege et Consilio suo super prae∣dictis, tam ipso Domino Regi, quam caeteris Prae∣latis et Magnatibus et singulis de Consilio suo vi∣deur, quoad Comitem Gloucestriae, quod libertas sua praedicti, &c. pro se et haeredibus suis forisfacta est ra∣tione delicti praedicti, &c. Dictum est eidem Comiti Gloucestriae per considerationem et Iudicium Archie∣piscoru, Episcoporum, Comitum, Baronum, et to∣tius consilit Domini Regis, quod libertas sua prae∣dicta, &c. totumque regale in eisdem terris remaneânt Domino Regi et haeredibus suis ut forisfacta tota vita ipsius Comitis Gloucestriae, et idem Comes retoretur prisonae, et inde redimetur ad voluntatem domini Re∣gis▪
et etiam quod praedictus Comes Hereford recuperet versus eum Centum libras pro dampnis praedictis. Et similiter quoad praedictum Comitem Hereford, o quod videtur Domino Regi, et ejus Consilio habito su∣per hoc tracta diligenti, quod libertas sua in terris suis de Brekenno, &c. ratione delicti praedicti forisfac∣ta esset. Dictum est eidem Comiti Hereford, per consi∣derationem et judicium Archiepiscoporum, Episco∣porum, Comitum et Baronum, et totius Consilii Domini Regis, quo libertas sua praedicta remaneat Domino Regi et haeredibus suis forisfacta de ipso Co∣mite Hereford et haeredibus suis imperpetuum, et corpus suum prisonae retornetur et inde redimetur ad volunta∣tem Domini Regis; Et quia videtur Domino Regi et ejus Consilio, quod transgressio de qua idem Co∣mes Hereford convictus est, non est ita carcans, nec tan∣tam poenam requirit quantum et facta transgressio prae∣dicta de qua praedictus Comes Gloucestriae convincitur: and because he had espoused the Queens kinswoman; therefore the forfeiture was mitigated, and ordered to continue to the King and his heirs during the Earls life only: After these Earls had continued in prison for some time; the Earl of Gloucester, finem fecit Domi∣no Regi pro Decem Mille Marc. pro Transgre sione praedic∣ta, and put in 5 Noble men for his pledge; And the Earl of Hereford likewise, finem fecit Domino Regi pro Tansgressione praedicta, pro Mille Marcis, et reipitur per plegios, who are named in the Record: After which Io de Crepinghes, and others of the Earls Assistants in these riotous Misdemeanors, ad instantiam Praelato∣rum, Comitum & Baronum, et aliorum de Consilio sus, who moved the King to shew mercy to them▪ were put to several fines. The 2. is in the Placita coamipso Rege & Consilio suo ad Parliamentum suum, post Pascha apud London, Anno 21 E. 1. the Archbishop of Yorkes case. Johannes Ar∣chiepiscopus Eborum attachitus fuit ad respondendum Da∣mino Regi de plaio quare cum placita de Imprisonamento
et aliis Transgressionibus in regno Regi contra pacem Regis factis ad Regem & coronam et dignitatem suam specialiter pertineant. Idem Archiepiscopus per Johannem Prio∣rem de Bolton in Cravene Commissarium suum in venerabilem Patrem Antonium Episcopum Dunolm: dum nuper in partibus Borialibns in obsequio Regis juxta laus suum per praeceptum ipsius Regis sub protectione extitit, pro eo quod Ballivi esusdem Episcopi Willielmum de Wrleton Johannem Roman apud Dnolm. inventos ceporunt et imprisonavernt, Excommunicationis sententim in Regis contemptum et Coronae & dignitatis suae laesionem, & contra reverentiam Regis in hac parte debitam, in dispectum ipsius Regis viginti Mille librarum, fecit fulminari, et illam Excommunicationem demandari. Propter quod idem Rex taum contemptum & tantum irreverenti  sibi illatamran∣sire impunitam sustinere non valens, maxime cum tam ipse Rex quam praellictus Episcopus quanium in ipso suit, praefato Willielmo & Johanni de imprisonamento praedicto celeris justitiae complementum juxta regni consueudinem semper fue∣runt parati exhibere, &c. After the Archbishops Plea thereto, and a long debate of the business in Parlia∣ment; Videtur Domino Regi in pleno Parliamento prae∣dicto, Comitibus, Baronibus, Iusticiariis, & similiter toti Consilio ipsius Domini Regis, quod praedictus Ar∣chiepiscopus quantum in ipso fuit nitebaur occupare & usurpare super Coronam Regiam et Dignitatem, in casuisto deliberationes imprisonatorum, contra legem et consuetudinem regni, et Contra dem in qua idem Archiepiscopus Domino Regiet Coronae suae astringitur, ad exhaeredationem Doni Regis et haeredum suorum manifestam. Propter quod per Comites, Barones et Iusticiarios, et dinnes alios de Constlio ipsius Domini Regis concordatum est, quod praedictus Archiepiscopus committatur prisonae, pro offensa & transgressione praedictis. Et super hoc ante Iudicium pro∣nunnciatum licet unanimiter de consilio praedictorum Magnatum et aliorum concordatum fuisset tenendum in hoc casu, et similiter in casibus consimilibus imperpetuum, praedictus Archiepiscopus Maguates et alios de Consilio
ipstus Domini Regis rogavit, quod pro eo Domi∣num Regem requirerent, ut Ante Pronuntiationem Judicit ipsum ad gratiam suam admitteret. Et Domi∣nus Rex ad instantiam eorundem Magnatum, de gra∣tia sua speciali hoc idem ipso Archiepiscopo concessit. Et idem Archiepiscopus humiliter supplicavit, quod possit de omnibus praemissis alto & basso Voluntati Domini Regis se submittere. Which the King assen∣ting to at the Lords request, Dictum est eidem Archiepis∣copo sub gravi forisfactura, quod non recedat à Parliamento isto onec super praemissis Domini Regis audivit voluntatem. Postea venit praedictus Archiepiscopus, et fecit finem Domino Regi pro Transgressione praedicta, pro quatuor millibus mar∣carum, per scriptum suum obligatorium: 5 others being bound with him for due payment thereof to the King. It is observable, that in all these Pleas, Proceedings & Judgments, there is no mention at all of the Knights, Citizens, Burgesses, or Commons in Parliament, (no sharrs in them) but only of the King, Archbishops, Bishops, Earles, Barons, Justices, and Kings Counsell. 4ly. The power of the Kings Counsell and Judges in Parliament, is evident by sundry Prefaces to, and passages in our printed Acts of Parliament: as namely by the preface of the printed Statute of Bigamie, 4. Octo. An. 4. Ed. 1. In the presence of certain Reverend Fathers, Bishops of England, and OTHERS OF THE KINGS COVNSELL, the Constitutions underwritten were recited, after heard, and published before the King and HIS COVNSELL: forasmuch as ALL THE KINGS COVNSELL, AS WELL IVSTICES AS OTHERS DID AGREE that they should be put in writing for a perpetual memory, and that they should be stedfastly observed.See Poultons Statutes at large. p. 39, 43, 44. &c. By the exposition of the Statute of Gloucester An. 6. E. 1. made by the King and HIS IVSTICES. By the Statute of Mormain An. 7. E. 1. which recites. Wee by the advice of our Prelates, Lords, Barons, and other our Sub∣jects, BEING OF OVR COVNSELL, have provided, made and ordained, &c. By the Statute of Acton
Bnrnell. 13. E. 2. Forasmuch as Merchants &c. The King for himself, and BY HIS COVNSELL hath ordained and established, &c. The Prologue to the Statute of Wesm. 2. An. 13. E 1. Whereas of late our Lord the King the 6. year of his reigne calling together the Earles, Prelates, Ba∣rons, and HIS COVNCELL at Glocester, &c. (so as there were writs of summons then issued to them all, though not entred in the Clause Rolls of 6. Ed. 1. nor any other now extant.) By the Statute of Merchants, An. 13. E. 1. The King and HIS COVNSELL at his Par∣liament holden at Acton Burnell, the 11. year of his reigne, ath Ordained establishments thereupon, for the remedy of such Merchants: which Ordinances and establishments, the King commandeth, that they shall be firmly kept throughout the Realme. By the Statute of Wast. Anno 20. E. 1. Other Instices with the more part OF THE KINGS COVN∣SELL, were of the contrary opinion, &c. Wherefore our Lord the King in his full Parliament, in the 20th. year of his reigne, by A GENERALL COVNSELL, hath or∣dained, &c. Articuli super Chartas, An. 28. E. 1. c. 2. Neverthelesse the King and HIS COVNSELL do not in∣tend by reason of this estatute to diminish the Kings Right, for the ancient Prises due and accustomed And ch. 20. Notwithstanding all these things, &c. both the King and HIS COUNSELL, and all they that were present at the making of this Ordinance, will and intend, that the right and prerogative of his Crown, shall be saved to him in all things. The Statute for Escheators. Anno 29. E. 1. At the Parliament of our sovereign Lord the King, By his Counsell it was agreed, and also commanded by the King himself, &c. according to advice of &c. Treasurer to the King, Chancellor, and other of the Counsell there present before the King, &c. By the New Statute of Quo War∣ranto, 30 E. 1. Cum nuper in Parliamento nostro au Westm. per Nos et Consilium nostrum provisum sic et Proclamatum, quod Praelati, Comites, Barones, & alii &c. By the Ordinance for Inquests, 33. E. 1. It is agreed and ordained by the King aud all his Counsell, &c. By
Ordinatio pro statu Hyberniae, An. 17. E. 1. made and agreed on at Nottingham, By the assent of our Counsell there being. By the Preface to Articuli Cle∣ri, 9. E. 2. In our Parliament holden at Lincoln the 9th. of our reigne, We caused the Articles underwritten, with cer∣tain Answers made to some of them, to be rehearsed before Our Counsell, and made certain Answers to be corrected; and to the residue of the Articles underwritten, answers were made By us and our Counsell, of which Articles and Answers the tenours here ensue. By the Statute of Gavelet, An. 10. E. 2. It is provided by our Lord the King, and His Iustices, &c. By the Statute De Terris Templario∣rum, 17. E. 2. It was moved in Parliament in the presence of the Prelates, Barons, Nobles, and Great men of the Realm, and others there present; Whether the Order of the Tem∣plers being dissolved, the King and other Lords of the fees might retain them by the Law of the Realme, and with safe conscience? Whereupon the Greater part of the Kings Counsell, as well the Iustices as other Lay-Persons being assembled together, the said Iustices affir∣med precisely; That our Lord the King, and other Lords of the fees aforesaid, might well and lawfully by the lawes of the Realme retain the foresaid Lands as their Escheats, in regard of the ceasing and dissolution of the Order aforesaid. But upon other grounds of Conscience, they setled them on the Hospitall of S. Iohns of Ierusalem by this Statute. 1. E. 3. c. 3. But it is not the mind of the King nor of His COUNSELL, that they who have sold ther Lands, &c. should have any benefit of this Statute. The Prologue of the printed Statute of 1. E. 3. Parl 2. At the request of the Commonally by their Petition made before the King and HIS CONSELL in Parliament, by assent of the Prelates, Earles and Barons, &c. 9. E. 3. c. 1. Our Sovereign Lord the King, desiring the profit of his people, by the assent of his Prelates, Earles, Barons, and other Nobles of his Realm, summoned at his pre∣sent Parliament, and By the avice of his Counsell, being there, &c. hath ordained and established the Statte
of Money 9. E. 3. c. 7. When and where it shall please us and OVR COVNSELL to make Exchanges. 11. E. 3. c. 1. Till by the King and his COVNSELL i he otherwise provided. 14. E. 3. c. 5. The Chancellor, Treasurer, the Justices of the one Bench, and of the other, and other OF THE KINGS COUNSELL. 14. E 3. Stat. 3. Of the Clergy. Prologue. Wherefore Wee their pe∣tition seen and regarded, and there upon deliberation with the Peers of the Realme, and other of OVR COVNSELL, and of the Realm, &c. have granted, &c. And ch. 5. Our Chancellour and Treasurer taking to them other of our Counsell, &c. 20. E. 3. Prologue. By the assent of the Great men, and other wise men of Our Counsell, We have ordained these things following. And c. 5. We have ordained to come be∣fore us at a certain day, or before them whom we shall depute of Our Counsell. 23. E. 3. c. 8. should be converted to a publick and common profit, by ad∣vise of His Counsell. And alwayes it is the intent of the King, and of His Counsell, that according to the first Ordinance, it should be lawfull, and shall be lawfull for every man, &c. 25. E. 3. of Labourers. Pro∣logue. It was ordained by our Sovereign Lord the King, and by assent of the Prelates, Earles, Barons, and other of His Counsell. 25 E. 2. Stat. 2. Of those born beyond the Seas. Our Sovereign Lord the King. willing that all doubts and ambiguities should be put away, and the Law in this case declared, and put in a certainty, hath charged the said Prelates, Earles, Barons, and other wise men of his Coun∣sell, assembled in this Parliament, to deliberate upon this point; which of one assent have said, That the Law of the Crown of England is, and alwayes hath been such, &c. 25. E. 3. Parl. 5. c 2. of Treasons. And if percase any men of this Realme endeavour covertly or secretly against any other, to slea him, or to rob him, or take him, or retein, till he hath made fine or ransome, or to have his deliverance, it is not
the mind of the King, Nor His Counsell, that in such cases it shall be judged Treason; but shall be judged Felony or Trespasse, according to the Laws of the Land of old time used, and according as the case requireth. And chap. 4. It is accorded, assented and stablished, that from henceforth none shall be taken by petition or suggestion made to our Sove∣reign Lord the King, or to his Counsell, unlesse it be by Inditement or presentment of his good and lawfull neighbours. 25. E. 3. Parl. 6. Statute of Pro∣visors. Whereas in the Parliament of Edward King of England, Grandfather of the King that now is, the 25. of his reigne holden at Carlile, the Petition heard, put before the said Grandfather and HIS COUNSELL by the Commonalty of his Realm &c. 27. E. 3. c. 1. Provisors shall have day containing the space of two moneths, by warning to be made to them, &c. to be before the King and HIS COUN∣SELL, or in his Chancery, or before the Kings Ju∣stices, in his places of the one Bench or the other, or before other the Kings Justices which shall be depu∣ted to the same, to answer in their proper persons to the King of the contempt done in this behalf. ch. 2. It is assented by the King and all his Counsell. 27. E. 3. of the Staple. ch. 21. That the same Mayor and Consta∣bles do not ordain any thing contrary to these Ordi∣nances, nor make interpretation, nor exceptions to them, otherwise then the words purport, but if there be any thing that is doubtfull, it shall be shewed unto Our Counsell, and there declared by good advise. ch. 23. And in case that debates arise betwixt them, upon the discussing of any plea or quarrell, the t∣nour of the said Plea or quarrell shall be sent before the Chancellor, and other of Our Counsell, to be by them determined without delay▪ ch. 25. And now late it is done Us and our Counsell, to un∣derstand by the complaint of the said Merchants. ch. 28. And in case any thing be to be amended, ad∣ded,
changed, or withdrawn of any of the said points in time to come, by a true cause. we will that the same be done by deliberation, and advice of the Great men, and Other of our Counsell in Parlia∣ment. 31. E. 3. Stat. 2. c. 3. It is accorded by our Sovereign Lord the King, the Great men, and all the Commons in this present Parliament, that the Chancellor and Treasurer taking unto them the JUSTICES and OTHER THE KINGS COUN∣SEL, such as to them shall seem meet, shall have power to ordain remedy of the buying and selling of Stockfish of St. Botulfs, and Salmon of Barwick, and of Wines and Fish of Bristow, and elsewhere; and that the Ordinances by them made in this party be firmly holden. The offenders against the Ordi∣nance of Fish, made in 31. E. 3. c. 2. are to be at∣tached and detained in Prison as Rebels and Trans∣gressors, till the King and HIS COUNSEL have ordained of them, that right requireth after the quality of their Trespasse. 34. E. 3. c. 21. By assent of the King and of HIS COUNSEL, passage was granted of Wools and other Merchandises of the Staple to Denizens, contrary to the Ordinance of the Staple, that only Merchants Aliens, and no Merchants Denizens, should transport them; which passage was confirmed by Parliament, and this Act. 35 E. 3. Upon doing us and OUR COUNSELL TO UNDERSTAND, &c. It was adjudged by US AND OUR COUNSEL, that the Fishers of her∣rings at Great Yermouth should be free to sell their herrings to all people that will come to the faire of Yermouth, without disturbance of their host or any other, and accordingly enacted by this Parliament. The printed Pardon granted by the King in Parlia∣ment, An. 36. E. 3. was prayed by the Commons to be shewed to the Kig and to HIS COVNSELL, and to the other Lords, ere passed, according to the tenour of the Commons Petition. 37 E. 3. c. 15. Clot ma∣kers
and Drapers, shall be constrained by any manner, way that best shall seem to the King and his Counsel, that the Ordinance of new Apparell be in no point bro∣ken. 37 E. 3. c. 18. enacts, That those who make false suggestions to the King, be sent with the said suggesti∣ons before the Chancellor, Treasurer and His Counsil, and that they there finde surety to pursue their suggestions and incurr the same pein that the other should have had, if he were attainted, in case that his suggestion be found evil. 38 E. 3. c. 11. e∣nacts, That all Merchants Denizens may pass into Gascoigne, and bring in Wines from thence without any disturbance, or impeachment. Alwayes provi∣ded to the King, that it may be lawful to him, when∣soever it is advised to him or to His Counsil, to or∣dain of this article in the manner as best shall seem to him for the profit of him and his Commons: 38 E. 3. c, 3. Provisors and Offendors against this Act, who do not present themselves before the King or His Counsil within two moneths after that they are thereunto warned, &c. shall be punished accord∣ing to the Statute of 27 E. 3, and otherwise as to the King and His Counsil shall best seem to be done, without any grace, pardon, or remission. And Cap. 5. if any person maliciously or falsly make any pur∣sute against any person (as a Provisour) and be thereof duly attainted, he shall be duly punished at the Ordinance of the King and His Counsil, and nevertheless he shall make gree and amends to the party grieved. The Statute of 42 Edward 3. c. 3. made upon a Petition of the Commons in Parlia∣ment beginning thus. Plese a nostre Seigneur le Roy & son BON COVNSEL pur droyt governement de son peuple Ordeigner: Which complains that diverse up∣on false and malicious suggestions have been taken and caused to come before the Kings Counsil by writ and other command of the King upon grievous pein against the Law.
To these I might superadd the Statutes of 1 R. 2. c. 4. 3 R. 2. c 3. 5 R. 2. c. 2. Stat: 2. 6 R. 2. Stat. 2. c. 1. 8 R. 2. c. 4, 10 R. 2. c. 11. 11 R. 2. c. 2, 6, 7, 12. 12 R. 2. c. 1, 2, 10. 13 R. 2. c. 2. 18. Parl. 2. c. 3. 16 R. 2. c. 5, 17 R. 2. c. 5, 6, 7. 1 H. 4. c. 6, 7, 9, 13. 4 H. 4. c. 4, 23, 30. 1 H. 5. c. 6. 2 H. 5. c. 8. Parl. 2. c. 2. 9 H. 5. c. 3, 5. 1 H. 6. c. 1, 5. 2 H. 6. c. 6. 4 H. 6. c. 5. 8 H. 6. c. 13, 27. 10 H. 6. c. 3, 4. 14 H. 6. c. 2. 27 H. 6. c. 11. 31 H. 6. c. 1. 3 H. 6. c 3. 14 E. 4. c. 1, 2. 17 E. 4. c. 1. 3 H. 7. c. 1. & 4. 4 H. 7. c. 4. 11 H. 7. c. 7. 25. 19 H. 7. c. 1. 13, 18. By all which and other Acts, as likewise by Mr. William Lambards Archaion, p. 118. to 216. com∣pared with Cooks 4 Institutes, c. 5. and the records in My Plea for the Lords, p. 273, 330, 331, 385, 390, 398, 399, 418, 419, 420, 505, 507. the Authority, Power, Jurisdiction, use, proceedings of the Kings Counsil and Justices both in and out of Parliaments, is fully explained, declared; to which I shall subjoyn two me∣morable records for a Conclusion hereof. Claus:See Claus. 38 11. 3. dors. 13. 37 H. 3. dors. 7. Rex Ricardo Comiti Cornu∣biae, salutem: Alias allocuti sumus Episcopum Sarum, quod intenderet Consilio nostro, & praebuit se difficilem, propter quod ad praesens nolumus habere alios Consiarios quàm ordi∣navimus, sicut scitis; sed cum aliqua difficultas emerserit super Iudicium reddendum, vel aliis communibus negotiis ta gentibus legem terrae, bene placet Nobis quod ad hoc in∣tendat cum à Vobis interpellatus: & ad ipsum vocandum cum hujusmodi necessitas evenerit, plenam Vobis concedimus pote∣statem. Teste Rege apud Portsmouth 7 die Augusti. By this record it is evident, That the Kings Counsil in those dayes usually gave judgement in cases of diffi∣culty, and other common cases concerning the Law of the realm, calling those who were learned in the Laws for Assistants therein. Of which amongst many others we have a memorable president in the Pleas of Mich. 53 & 54 H. 3. rot: 37. in the case of Assise of Mortdaun∣cester brought by Alexander King of Scots against Iohn de Burgo, for the Mannor of Westlye with its appurte∣nances
before G. de Preston, and other Justices in Eyre, who determining nothing therein; thereupon King Hen: writ to the Justices to proceed to a speedy deter∣mination, or else to adjourn it coram Nobis et Consi∣lio nostro in Quindena Michaelis; which they did. When the King of Scots appearing by his Attorney, and Iohn de Burgo in person before S. de Litlebyr & Sociis suis Iusticiariis de Banco, Rich: de Middleton then the Kings Chancellor, Thomas Basset, Robert Augulon, and Mr. Ri∣chard Stane, they resolved, that the writ of Mortdance∣ster would not lie in that case, claiming both as heirs to one Ancestor; but because the King of Scots title to it was as heir to Margaret wife of Hubert de Burgo, they said to Iohn de Burgo, that he should shew cause, Quare praedictus Rex Scotiae praedictū Manerium habere non debeat: And so much touching the Counsils power and juris∣diction in former times. Whose excessive power in later ages incroaching upon the Ordinary Courts of Justice, Freeholds, Liberties, Properties of the Subjects to their great oppression and vexation: thereupon in the late Parliament of 16 Caroli, Cap. 10. there was an excellent Act made, For Regulating the Privy Counsill, and for taking away the Court commonly called the Starr-chamber, fit to be put in vigorous execution against the transcendent infringers of it. By all which it appears, that the Kings Iustices, and Counsil in Parliaments (as well as out of them) had formerly a principal hand in making Laws, Ordinances; and resolving points, questi∣ons of Law, and other matters of moment. I shall close up my Observations on this Section with these 4. memorable Records, relating to the Kings Counsell, and the Nobles, in Scotland and Ire∣land, as distinct from his Counsell and Parliamentary Assemblies in England. Cl. 37. H. 3. d. 9. Rex mandat quod Abbas Westm.-moretur in Anglin de Consilio Reginae, propter reces∣sum Regis ad partes Vasconiae. Et mandatum est ei∣dem Reginae quod ipsum ad hoc admittat, accepto ab
eo prius corporali Sacramento, quod officium illud fi∣deliter intendat. T. ut supra. Cl. 38. H. 3. dors. 13. Rex H. Cantuar.De Magnati∣bus Vocatis ad Consilium. Archiepiscopo salutem. Cum quaedam ardua & urgentia negotia Sta∣tum nostrum & Regni nostri tangentia, habeamus Vo∣bis communicanda, quae sine consilio Vestro & aliorum Magnatum nostrorum noluimus expediri, Vobis man∣damus in fide quia Nobis tenemini firmiter injungentes, quatinus sicut Nos & honorem nostrum diligitis, nul∣latenus omittatis, quin à die Sancti Hillarii proximo futuri in quindecim dies, sitis apud Westm. coram Regina nostra & R. Com. Cornub. fratre nostro, & aliis de Con∣silio nostro, super dictis negotiis tractaturi, nec retardetis adventum vestrum quin sitis ad dictum diem tempe∣stive. Teste A. Regina & R. Com. Cornub. apud Westm. The cause of this meeting is at large related in another Writ to this Archbishop, forecited. p. 3. 4. Upon the same occasion the King issued this Writ to the King of Scots, entred in the same Roll and dorse. Claus. 38 H. 3. dors. 13. Rex Regi Scotiae salutem. Quia ratio Vinculi & foederis inter nos contracti requirit, quod Vobis & fidelibus Vestris ardua & urgentia negotia Statum no∣strum & terrae nostrae tangentia communicemus, & Vos Nobis vice versa; Serenitatem vestram ex toto corde re∣quirimus, quatinus in Quindena Purificationis bea∣tae Mariae prox. futur. apud Castrum puellarum de E∣denburgh personaliter interesse velitis; convocantes & inducentes Praelatos & Magnates Regni Vestri, ut ad di∣ctos diem & locum representent se coram Vobis modis omnibus. Nullo enim modo expediret honori & proficuo nostro & vestro, quin modo praedicto ad prae∣dictos diem & locum compareatis; audituri per nuncios nostros qui de Vasconia Vobis ibidem occurrent, praedi∣cta negotia arduissima & urgentissima, in quibus necesse est, quod vos & fideles vestri consilium vestrum pariter & auxilium apponatis. T. ut supra, per Reginam & Co∣mitem.
It is observable, that the King by this Writ doth not summon the King of Scots and his Nobles to his Par∣liament, or Counsell of England, as members thereof, to advise and assist him in this necessitie, notwithstanding the strict alliance and league between them, but to assemble together at Edenburgh in their own country, by themselves alone, as the Officers and Nobles of Ire∣land were then also required to meet in Ireland by themselves, by this ensuing Writ of the same date with the former. Claus. 3 H. 3. dors. 13. Rex Mauricio filio Giraldi salutem. Quia Rex Castell cum multitudine Exercitus Christianorum & Saracenorum terram nostram Vasconiae in Quindena Pasche prox. futur. ingressurus est hostiliter, non so∣lum ad eandem terram destruendam & occupandam, set & ad terras nostras Angliae & Hiberniae, per in∣troitum dictae terrae, si eam optineret, quod ab∣sit, invadendas aspirat, & Nos in propria per∣sona nostra cum eodem Rege bellum campestre ag∣gredi proposuimus; de universa fidelitate vestra, quam in agendis nostris fructuosam semper invenimus, ple∣nam gerentes fiduciam, vos requirimus, & in fide qua Nobis tenemini affectuosè rogamus, quatinus sict Nos & honorem nostrum & indempnitatem corporis nostri diligitis, in hac necessitate nostra non parcentes personae aut rebus vestris, nulla ratione seu occasione differatis quin poteritis vos praeparare ad veniendum ad nos in Vasconiam, omnes amicos vestros ad hoc idem inducentes. Ita quod sitis apud Waterford in Octabis Pasche prox. futur. cum equis & armis & bona gente, prompti & parati statim naves ascendere ad transfretandum ad Nos in terram praedictam. Sci∣tote indubitanter qui Nobis in hac parte subvene∣rint, eorum amici erimus & benevoli imperpetuum; & qui Nos in hac urgenti & inexuperabii necessi∣ate relinquerint, de eis alias minus confidere poteri∣mus, & eis minus grati erimus. Nunquam etiam futuris temporibus tanta Nobis imminebit necessi∣tas
consilii & auxilii sicut in presenti negotio. Et ad regerendum vobis plenius pericula nostrorum Ini∣micorum, Iohannem filium Galfridi, Justiciarium no∣strum Hiberniae, ad partes illas (misimus) cui apud Dub∣linum ad in stantem mediam Quadragesimam; una cum aliis Magnatibus nostris Hiberniae quibusid mandavi∣mus accedatis, audituri voluntatem nostram, & cum ip∣o super praemissis, plenius tractaturi. T. ut supra.
An Exact Alphabetical Table of all the Kings Counsil, whether Judges, Serjeants at Law, Officers of State, Deans, Archdeacons, other Clergy men or Laymen, from 22 E. 1. till 23 E. 4. with the Yeares, Rolls, Dorses of each King wherein they were summoned to Parlia∣ments. By which you may finde, who were Chief Justices, Judges, Officers, in each Kings reign. A IOhn Abell 5, (d. 17.) 6, (d. 31.) 7, (d. 27.) 8, (d. 29.) 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 14, (d. 23.) E. 2. Magister Richard de Abyngdon 1, (d. 8. 11. 19.) 2, (d. 11. 20.) 5, (d. 17.) 6, (d. 31. 16.) 7, (d. 2.) 8, (d. 29.) 9 (d. 22.) E. 2. Magister Robert de Aileston, Archidiac: Berks, 6, (d. 9. 19.) Thesaurarius Regis, 7 E. 3. Richard de Aldeburge 3, (d. 19.) 7, 8, E. 3. Peter Arderne, 23, 25, 27, 29, 31, 33, (twice) 38 H. 6. 1, 2, 6 E. 4. Magister Robert de Ashton, 1, 2, 3 (d. 13. 19.) R. 2. Henry Asty, and Astee, 49, 50 E. 3. 1, , 3, (d. 13. 19.) 4, 5, 6 R. 2. William de Ayremine 6, (d. 16.) 7, (d. 11. 27.) E. 2. William Ayscogh 20, 23, 25, 27, 28, 29, 31 H. 6. William Ayshton 23, 25, 27, 28, 29, 31, 33, 38 H. 6. 1, 2 E. 4. B VVIlliam Babington 7 H. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 9, 10, 11, 13 H. 6.
Iohn Bacun, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 14, (d. 23.) E. 2. Thomas Bacoun, 7 (p. 2. d. 3.) 8, (d. 18.) E. 3. Magister Robert de Baldock, 11, (d. 11. 19.) Archidiac: Midd. 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, (d▪ 13.) 14 (d. 23.) E. 2. Iohn de Banquell 1, (d. 11.) E. 2. Magister William de Bardelby 6 E. 2. (d. 16.) Robert de Bardelby 7, (d. 27.) E. 2. Magister Iohn Barnet 29, 31, (d. 2. 21) 50 E. 3. (Cle∣ricus) 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21, 23 R. 2. 1, 2, 3, 5 H. 4. Robert de Bartermine 7, (d. 27.) E. 2. Mr. Thomas de Barton Cleric, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12 R. 2. William Basset 20, 21, 22, (d. 7. 12.) 23, 24, 25 E. 3. William Batford 23 (d. 9.) E. 1. Iohn de Batesford 28, (d. 9. 17.) 30, (d. 9. 12.) 32 E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 11▪ 19.) 2, (d. 20.) 4, 8, (d. 29.) 9, 11, (d. 14) E. 2. Roger de Bukwell 20, 21, 22, (d. 7. 32.) 23 (p. 1. d. 18) E. 3. Robert de Baynard 2, (d. 15. 29. 31.) 3, (d. 19.) E. 3. Robert de Bealknap 49, 50 E. 3. 1. 2, 3, (d. 13. 29.) 4. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 R. 2. Magister Robert de Bedeswell 23 (d. 9.) E. 1. Magister Antony de Bek Dean of Lincoln 3 (d. 9.) E. 3. Ely de Bekingham 27, 28, 30, (d. 9.) 32 E. 1. Roger Beler 17, 19 E. 2. Robert de Bellofago 1, (d. 8. 11. 19.) 2, (d. 20.) E. 2. Iohn de Benstede 2, 4, 5, (d. 17.) 6, (d. 31. 16.) 7, (d. 27.) 8, (d. 29.) 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 29. 11.) 14, (d. 5.) E. 2. William de Bereford 23, (d. 9.) 27, 28, (d. 17.) 30, (d. 9. 12.) 32, 34 E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 11. 19.) 2, (d. 11. 14. 20.) 4, 5, (d. 17.) 6, (d. 31.) 7, (d. 27.) 8, (d. 29.) 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 14, (d. 5. 23.) 15, 16, 17, 19 E. 2. Richard de Bermingham 8, (d. 9.) 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, 14, (d. 23.) E. 2. Iohn de Berwike 23, (d. 9.) 27, 34 E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 11, 19.) 2, (d. 11. 14. 20.) F. 2. Robert de Betford 28 (d. 3.) E. 1. See Retford. Thomas Billing 38, 49 H. 6▪ 1, 2, 6, 9, 12 E. 4. Nicholas de Bolingbroke 8, (d. 29.) 9 (d. 22.) E. 2.
Iohn de Bosco 23 (d. 11.) E. 1. Iohn de Bowsser, Bousser 14, (d. 5.) 15, 16, 17, 19 E. 2. 1, (d. 3. 16.) E. 3. Roger Babazon 23, (d. 9.) 27, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 9. 12.) 32, (d. 2.) 34 E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 19.) 2, d. 11. 14. 20.) 4, 5, (d. 17.) 6, (d. 31.) 7, (d. 27.) 8, (d. 29.) 9 E. 2. Magister Reginald de Brandon 23, (d. 9.) 27, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 9. 12.) 32 E. 2. William Brenchesle 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 21, 23 R. 2. 1, 2, 3, 5, 7 H. 4. Iohn de Breton, Bretton, 1, (d. 8. 11. 19.) 2, (d. 20.) E. 2. Most likely the Author of Britton. Adam de Brom 20 (d. 4.) E. 2. Magistro Andrew de Bruges 14, (d. 5.) 15 E. 2. Thomas Bryan 12 (Miles) 22 & 23 (d. 10.) E. 4. Magister Thomas de Buckton 34, (d. 4.) 36, 37, 38, 39 E. 3. William de Burgh 8, 9, 10 R. 2. Roger de Burton 23, (d. 9.) E. 1. Richard de Burton 14, (d. 5.) 15 E. 2. William de Burne 8 (d. 2, 9.) 9, 11, (d. 8. 14) E. 2. Richard Byngham 25, 27, 28, 29, 31, 33, 38, (Miles) 49 H. 6. 1, 2, 6, 9 E. 4. C MAgister Iohn de Cadamo 28, (d. 17.) 30, (d. 9. 12) 32, 34 E. 1. 1. (d. 8. 11. 19.) 2, (d. 20.) 11, 14 E. 2. Thomas de Cantebrig. 1, (d. 8. 11. 19.) 2, (d. 11. 20.) E. 2. Iohn de Cantebrig. 3, (d. 19.) 5, (d. 7. 25,) 6, (d. 36,) 7, 8, E. 3. William de Carleton, Charleton, 23 (d. 3.) 27, 28, (d. 37.) 30, (d. 9. 11.) 32 E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 11. 19.) 2, (d. 11. 20.) E. 2. Magister Thomas de Carleton, or Charleton, 14, (d. 5.) E. 2. 34, (d. 4.) 36 E. 3.
Magister Iohn de Carleton, 29 (Dean of Wells) 31, (d. 2. 21.) 37, 38, 39 . 3. Iohn de Carleton, or Cherleton, Capitalis Iusticiarius Regis de Com: Banco, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, (d. 23. 30.) 18 R. 2. Iohn Cassy, Capitalis Baro de Scaccario Regis, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, (d. 23. 30.) 18, 20, 21, 23 R. 2. 1 H. 4. Iohn Catesby 49 H. 6. 9, 12, 22 & 23 (d. 10.) E. 4. Hugh de Cave 23 (d. 9.) E. 1. Iohn de Cavendish, Capitalis Justiciarius Regis, 46, (d. 11.) 47, 49, 50 . 3. 1, 2, (d. 13. 29.) 3, 4 R. 2. Magister Henry Chadesden, written also Chaddeston, 20, 21, 22, 24, 25, 28 E. 3. Mag: Nicholas de Chadesdon, & Chaddeston, 42, 43, 44, 47, 49, 50 E. 3. (Clericus) 1, 2, (d. 13. 29.) 3. 4, 5 R. 2. Iohn de Chaynnel 5, (d. 17.) 6, (d. 16. 31.) 8, (d. 29.) 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12. (d. 11. 29.) 13, 14, (d. 23.) E. 2. William Cbeyne 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, H. 5. 1, 2. (Capitalis Justiciarius Regis) 3, 4, 5, 7, 9, 10▪ 11, 13 H. 6. Richard Chikle, or Chicke, 33, 38, (Miles) 49 H. 6. 1, 2, 9, 12, 22 & 23 (d. 10.) E. 4. Richard de Clare Escheator beyond Trent: 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, 14, (d. 23.) E. 2. Robert de Cliderhow 5, (d. 17.) E. 2. Walter Clopton 11, (Capitalis Justiciarius Regis,) 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. 20, 21, 23 R. 2. 1, 2 H. 4. Iohn de Cobeham, Cobham 23, (d. 9.) 27, 28, (d. 3, 17.) E. 1. Magister Thomas de Cobham 5, (d. 17,) 6, (d. 31.) 7, d. 27.) E, 2. Iohn de Cobham 14, (d. 23.) E. 2. Iohn de Cokeyn 11, 12, 14 H. 4. 1, 2. 3, 4, 5, 7 9 H. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4. 5 (d. 4.) H. 6. Iohn Colepepper 5. 7, 8, 11, 12, 14 H. 4. 1 (d. 9. 37) H. 5. William de Colneye 1, (d 8. 11. 19.) 2, (d, 20.) E. 2. William de Cornish 28 (d. 17.) E. 1. Iohn Cottesmore (unus Servientium Regis ad legem,)
2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 9, 10, 11, 13 H. 6. Magister Iohn de Crancombe, or Crancumbe, Archidiac: Estrid. 23, (d. 9.) 28, (d, 3. 17.) 30, (d. 9. 10.) 32 E. 1. Hugh de Cressingham 23 (d. 9.) E. 1. Adam de Crokedaykes 23, (d. 9.) 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 9. 12.) 32 E. 1. Ralph de Crophill Escheator citra Trentam 12, (d. 11.) 13, 14, (d. 23.) E. 2. D MAgister Peter Damory 31, (d. 12.) E. 1, Robert Danby 28, 29, 31, 33, 38, 49 H. 6. 1, 2, 6 (d. 1.) E. 4. Robert Danver 29, 31, 33, 38 H. 6, 1, 2, 6, (d. 1.) E. 4. Magister Peter de Dene, or Denny 23, (d. 9.) 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 9. 10.) 32, 34 E. 1. 8, (d. 29.) 10, (d. 5.) 11, (d. 8. 29.) 13, 14, (d. 23. 33.) 15 E. 2. William de Dennie 3 (d. 19.) E. 3. Iohn de Dennom, or Dennum 14, (d. 5.) 15, 16, 17, 19▪ 20 E. 2. 1, (p. 2. d. 16.) E. 3. William de Dennum 7, 8 E. 3. Magister Iohn de Derby Decanus Litchf. 23, (d. 9.) 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 9. 12.) 32 E. 1. Edmond Deyncourt 1, (d. 8. 11. 19.) 2, (d. 20.) E. 2. Iohn de Donecaster 1, (d. 8. 11.) 2, (d. 20.) 4, 5, (d. 17.) 6, (d. 16. 31.) 8, (d. 29.) 9, 11, d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29) 13, 14, (d. 23.) E. 2. E GEofry de Edenham 5, (d. 7. 25.) 6, (d. 36.) E. 3. Henry de Enfeld 23 (d. 9.) E. 1. Magister Rich: de Erymn 19 (d. 27.) E. 2. 3, (d. 19.) E. 3. Geoffry de Eton 17, 19, (d. 7.) 20 (d. 4) E. 2. Magister Iohn de Everdon, and Everden, 1, (d. 11.) 2, (d. 11.) 5, (d. 17.) 6, (d. 31.) 7, (d. 27.) 8▪ (d. 29.) 9,
11, (d. 8. 14.) 14, (d. 23.) 15, 20 (d. 4.) E. 2. William de Everdon, 7, 8, 9, (Cancellarius Scaccar.) 15 E. 2. Iohn de Eure 8, (d. 29.) 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) . 2. William Exon Episcopus; Thesaurarius Regis 17, (d. 27.) E. 2. summoned both as a Bishop, and as one of the Counsil besides, in this Roll. F GVido Fairfax 49 H. 6. 6, 9, 12, (Miles) 22 & 23 (d. 10.) E. 4. Thomas de Fencotes, 22, (d. 7.) 23, 24, 25 E. 3. Nicholas Fernibaud 1, (d. 19.) E. 2. William de Finchenden, and Fincheden 39, 43, 44, 47, 49 E. 3. William Fishride 31, (d. 2. 21.) E. 3. Iohn Fortescue 20, (Miles) 23, 25, 27, 28, 29, 31, 33, 38 H. 6. Iohn de Foxle, or Foxley 1, (d. 11.) 2, (d. 11.) 4, 5, (d. 17) 6, (d. 16. 31) 7, (d. 27.) 8, (d. 29.) 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 13, 14, (d. 5. 23.) 15 E. 2. Magister Iohn Fraunceis 6, (d. 16.) 7, (d. 27.) E. 2. Iohn de Fresingfeld, Tresingfeld 6, (d. 16. 31.) 7, (d. 2. 27.) E. 2. Walter de Freskemy 14, (d. 5.) 15, 16, 17, 19, 20 E. 2. 1, (d. 16.) 2, (d. 15. 23. 31.) E. 3. William de Fulburne 17, 19 E. 2. Roger de Fulthorpe 49, 50 E. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 R. 2. Thomas Fulthorp 13, 18, 20, 23, (Miles) 25, 27, 28, 29, 31, 33 H. 6. G WIlliam Goscoigne 20, 21, 23 R. 2. 1, 2, (Capi∣talis Justiciarius Regis) 3, 5, 7, 8, 11, 12, 14 H. 4. 1 H. 5.
Walter de Gloucester 1, (d. 8. 11. 19.) 2, (d. 11. 20.) 4 E. 2. Richard de Gloucester 20 E. 2. 1, (d 2,) 2, (d. 3.) E. 3. William Goderede 5, 7, 9, 10, 11, 13, 18, 20, 23 H. 6. William de Goldington 5, (d. 17.) 6, (d. 16. 31.) 7, (d. 27.) 8, (d. 29.) 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) E. 2. Magister Peter de Granvill 2, (d. 14.) E. 2. Henry de Green (the Kings Serjeant at Law, afterwards a Judge) 20, 21, 22, (d. 7. 22.) 23, 24, 25, 26, 28, 29, 31, (d. 2. 31.) 34, 37, 38, 39 E. 3. Magister William de Grenfeld 23, (d. 1.) 27, (Dean of Chichester) 28, (d. 3.) 31, (d. 12.) E. 1. Henry de Guldeford, Gildeford, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 9.) 32 E. 1. 4, 5, (d. 17.) 6, (d. 3.) E. 2. H DAvid de Hannemere 7, 8, 10 R. 2. William Hankford 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21 23 R. 2. 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 8, 11, 12, 14 H. 4. 1, (Capi∣talis Justiciarius Regis) 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9 H. 5. 1, 2 H. 6. Magister Michael de Harcla, 14, (d. 5.) 15, 16 E. 2. William Havely 23 (d. 3.) R. 2. 1,  H. 4. Iohn de Havering, Justiciarius Northwalliae, 28, (d. 3. 17.) E. 1. Magist: Rich. de Haverings 8, (d. 29.) 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) E. . William Haward 23, (d. 7.) 27, 28, (d. 3. 13) 30, (d. 9.) 32 E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 11. 19) E. 2. Roger de Hegham 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 9.) 32 E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 11.) 2, (d. 11. 20.) E. 2. Ralph de Hengham 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 9.) 32 E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 11. 19.) 2, (d. 11. 20.) E. 2. Adam de Herewinton 14, (d. 5.) 15, E. 2, 3, (d. 19. 23.) 10 E. 3. William de Herle 6, (d. 16.) 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11, 29.) 13, 14, (d. 5. 23.) 15, 16, 17, 19, 20 E. 2. 1, (d. 3. 16.) 2, (d, 15. 23. 33) 3, (d. 19.) 4, (d. 19. 23. 43.) 5, (d. 7. 25.) 6, (d. 9. 19. 36.) 7, 8, 9, 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11, (d. 11. 15. 40) 12, 13, (d. 1. 28.) 14, (d. 23. 33.) E 3.
William de Herleston 20 (d. 4.) E. 2. Geoffry de Hertelpole 1, (d. 8. 15.) 2, (d. 20.) 6, (d. 16.) 14, (d. 5.) 15, 16, 17, 19 E. 2. Robert de Hertford 23, (d. 9.) E. 1. Robert Hill 11, 12, 14 H. 4. 1. 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9 H. 5. 1 H. 6. Magister Iohn de Hildersle, or Hildesle 14, (d. 5.) 15 E. 2. (Cancellarius Scaccarii) 9, 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11, (d. 11. 40.) 12, 13, (d. 1. 28.) 14, (d. 23. 33.) E. 3. Roger Hillary 15, 18, 20, 21, 22, (d. 7. 32.) 23, 24, 25, 28, 29 E. 3. Iohn Hody 18, (Miles, & Capitalis Justiciarius Regis) 20 (d. 27.) H. 6. Iohn Holt 8, 9, 10 R. 2. Roger Horton 4, 5, 7, 8, 9 H. 5. 1 H. 6. Robert Hoter 3 (d. 15.) H. 5. Iohn de Hotham, Hothnm 6, (d. 16.) 7, (d. 27.) 8, (d. 29) 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) E. 2. William Huddessend 22 & 23 (d. 10.) E. 4. Hugh Hulls, Herle, Hales 18, 20, 21, 23 R. 2. 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 8, 11, 12 H. 4. 1, 2, H. 5. Iohn Hulls 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, (one of the Kings Serjeants at Law) 9 H. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 9, 10, 11 H. 6. William Hussce 12, (Miles) 22 & 23 (d. 10.) E. 4. William Hynderston 33 (d. 36.) H. 6. I MAgister Henry de Iddesworth 20 E. 2. 1, (d. 16.) 4, (d. 19. 41.) 5, (d. 7. 25.) 6, (d. 9. 19. 36.) 7, , 9, 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11, (d. 11. 15. 41.) 15, 17 E. 3. William Ienny 22 & 23 (d. 10.) E. 4. William Inge, or Iuge 27, 28, (d. 3.) 29, 30, (d. 3. 12.) 32, 34 E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 11. 19.) 2, (d. . 11. 14. 20.) 5, (d. 17.) 6, (d. 31.) 7, (d. 27.) 8, (d. 29.) 9, 14, (d. 5.) 15, 16 E. 2. Iohn Inge, or Iuge 5, (d. 7. 25.) 6, (d. 19. 30.) 7, 8, 9, 11 (d. 11.) 12, 13, (d. 11. 28.) 14, (d. 23. 33) E. .
Thomas de Ingleby 34, (d. 4.) 35, 37, 38, 39, 42, 43, 44, 47, 49, 50 E. 3. 1. (Breve nou fuit signatum) 2 R. 2. Iohn de Insula 23 (d. 9.) 27, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 9. 12.) 32, 34 E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 19.) 2, (d. 20.) 4, 5, (. 17.) 6, (d. 16. 31.) 7, (d. 27.) 8, (d. 29.) 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) E. 2. Magister Simon de Islep 17, 20, 21, 22, (d. 32.) E. 3. Iohn Iuyn 3, 4, 5, 7, 9. 10, 11, 13, (Capitalis Justi∣ciarius Regis) 18 (d. 3.) H. 6. K RIchard de Kelleshull 20, 21, 22. (d. 7. 32.) 23, 24, 25 E. 3. Magister William de Kilkeny, or Kilkenny 23, (d. 9.) 27, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 9. 12.) 32 E. 1. Iohn de Kirkeby 1, (d. 11.) E. 2. Roger de Kirketon 47, (d. 13.) 49 (d. 6.) E. 3. Magister William de Knapton 2, (d. 14.) E. 2. Gilbert de Knouill 1,, (d. 8. 11. 19.) 2, (d. 20.) E. 2. Iohn Knyvet 31, (d. 2. 21.) 34, (d. 4.) 36, 37, 38, 39, 42, 43, 44 E. 3. (Chivaler) 1, 2, (d. 13. 29.) 3, 4 R. 2. L MAgister Iohn de Lacy 23, (d. 9.) 27, 28, (d. 3. 17.) E. 1. Iohn de Lancaster 8, (d. 29.) E. 2. William Layton 49 (d. 6.) H. 6. Magister Iohn de Leech 22, (d. 7,) 23, 25, 28, 29, 31, (d. 2. 21.) E. 3. Peter de Leicestr. 23, (d. 9.) 28, (d. 3.) 30, (d. 13.) . 1. Hugh de Leminster, Thesaurarius de Carnarvan 28 (d. 3. 17.) E. 1. Iohn de Lichegreins 25, (d. 25.) E. 1. Thomas Littleton 23, 38, 49 H. 6. 1, 2, 6, 9, 12 (d. 41) E. 4.
Thomas de Lodelowe 39, 42, 43, 44 E. 3, William Lodington 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7 H. 5. Iohn de Lockton 10 (d. 42.) R. 2. William Lockton 6, 9, 12 R. 2. Magister Iohn Lovell, Luvel, de Snotescombe 23, (d. 9.) 27, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 9. 12.) 32 E. 1. 6, (d. 16.) E. 2. Hugh de Louthre 2, (d. 19.) E. 2. Thomas de Louthre 5, (d. 25.) E. 3. Thomas de Louche 5, (d. 7.) E. 3. Magister Thomas de Lugore, Lugorre 27, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 9. 12.) 32, 34 E. 1. 5, (d. 17.) 6, (d. 16. 31.) 7, (d. 27.) E. 2. Adam de Lymberge 20 (d. 4.) E. 2. L RObert de Madingle, Maddingle 8, (d. 29.) 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) E. 2. Robert de Malberthorpe (Babthorp) 4, d. 5.) 15 16, 17, 19, 20 (d. 4.) E. 2. 1, (d, 3. 16.) 2, (d. 15. 23. 31.) 3, (d. 19.) E. 3. Peter Malorre 23, (d. 9.) 27, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 9.) 32, 34 E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 11. 19.) E. 2. Stephen de Malo-lau 5, (d. 17.) 6, (d. 16. 31.) 7, (d. 27) E. 2. Iohn Markham 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21, 23 R. 2. 1, 2, 5, 7, 8 H. 4. Iohn Markam 23, 25, 27, 28, 29, 31. 33, 38 H. 6, 1, 2, 6 E. 4. Magister Philip Martell 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 9. 12.) 32 E. 1. Iohn Martyn 8, 9 H. 5. 1, 2, 4, 5, 7, 9, 10, 11, 13 H. 6. Roger de Meres, Merkes, 50 (d. 6.) E. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4 R. 2. Iohn de Merkingfeld 5, (d. 17) 6, (d. 16. 31.) 7, (d. 27) E. 2. Iohn de Metingham 23 (d. 9.) 27, 28, (d. 3. 17.) E. 1.
Adam de Middleton 1, (d. 19.) E. 2. Magister Gilbert de Middleton 5, (d. 17.) 6, (d. 16. 31.) 7, (d. 27.) 14, (d. 5.) 15, 17, 19, 20 E. 2. 1, (d. 3. 16.) (Archidiaconus Northampton) 2, (d. 15. 23. 31.) 3, (d. 19.) 4, (d. 19. 41.) E. 3. Magister Thomas de Middleton 6, (d. 17.) E. 2. Magister Adam de Mirymouth, Merymouth 8, 9. 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11, (d. 11. 40.) 12, 13, (d. 1. 28.) 14, (d. 23. 33) 15 E. 3. Iohn de Mitford, Mutford 1, (d. 8. 19.) 2, (d. 20.) 4, 5, (d. 17.) 6, (d. 16. 31.) 7, (d. 27.) 8, (d. 20.) 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 14, (d. 5. 23.) 15, 16, 17, 19 E. 2. , (d. 3. 16.) 3 E. 3. Magister Iordan Morant, Menaunt 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, 14, (d. 23.) E. 2. William de Mortuo-mari 23, (d. 9.) 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 9.) 32 E. 1. 1, (d. 8, 11. 19 2, (d. 20.) 8 (d. 29.) 9 E. 2. Henry de Motelowe 31, (d. 2. 21. E. 3. Iohn de Moubray (the Kings Serjeant at Law) 28, 29, 30, 31. (d. 2. 21.) 34, (d. 4.) 36, 37, 38, 39, 42, 44 E. 3. Walter Moyle 23, 25, 27, 28, 29, 31, 33, 38 (Miles) 49 H. 6. 1, 2, 6 E. 4. N MAgister Iohn de Nassington 2, (d. 14.) Senior. 5, d. 17.) 6, (d. 16. 31.) 7, (d. 27.) Canoni∣cus Ebor. 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, 14, (d. 5. 23.) E. 2. Iohn Nedeham 38, (Miles) 49 H. 6. 1, 2, 6, 9, 12 E. 4. Richard Neel 49 H. 6. 9, 12, 22 (d. 6.) & 23 (d. 10.) E. 4. Magister H. de Newarkes Decanus Ebor. 23, (d. 9.) . 1. Richard Newton 9, 10, 11, 13, 18, (Miles) 20, 23, 25 H. 6. Magister Robert de Norton 20 (d. 4.) E. 2.
Walter de Norwich 5, (d. 17) 6, (d. 16. 31.) 7, (d. 27.) 8, (d. 29.) 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, 14, (d. 5. 23.) 15 16, 17, 20 E. 2. 1, (d. 3. 16.) 2, (d. 15. 23. 33.) E. 3. Robert de Nottingham 20 (d. 4.) E. 2. William Nottingham 31, 33, 38 H. 6. William de Notton (Serviens Regis ad legem) 21, 22, (d. 7. 32.) 23, 24, 25, 26, 28, 29, 31, (d. 2. 21) E. 3. Richard Notton, written oft Norton 8, 11, 12, 14 H. 4. 1, (Capitalis Justiciarius Regis de Com. Banco) 2, 3, 4, 5, 7 H. 5. O IOhn de Ockam (Cobeham) 11, (d. 8. 14.) 14, (d. 5. 23.) 15 E. 2. Magister Iohn de Offord, Vfford 4, (d. 19. 41.) 5, (d. 7. 25.) 7, 8, 9, 10, (d. 1. 5.) (Serviens Regis) 11, (d. 11. 40.) 15 E. 3. William de Ormesby 23, (d. 9.) 28, (d. 3.) 30, (d. 9. 12) 32, 34 E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 19.) 2, (d. 11. 14. 20.) 4, 5, (d. 17.) 6, (d. 16. 31.) 8, (d. 27) 9, 10, (d. 14.) E. 2. Adam de Osgoteby 6, (d. 16.) 7, (d. 27.) E. 2. P MAgister Roger Page, Clericus 13, 14, 15 R. 2. Robert Parnings 7, 8, 9, 10, (d. 1. 5.) Serviens Re∣gis 10, 11, 12, 14, (d. 23. 33.) Thesaurarius Re∣gis 15 E. 3. Edmund de Passeleiwe 14, (d. 5.) 15, 16, 17, 20, E. 2. William Paston 5, 7, 9, 10, 11, 13, 18, 20 H. 6. Iohn de Sancto Paulo 20, 21, 22, (d. 32.) E. 3. Henry Percehay 2, 3 R. 2. Richard de Pere 13 E. 2. 6 E. 3. Magister Robert de Pickering 28, (d. 3.) 30, (d. 9. 12.)
32, 34 E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 11, 19.) 2, (d. 11. 20.) 5, (d. 17.) 6, d. 16. 31.) (Decanus Ebor.) 12, (d. 11. 29) 13, 14, (d. 5. 23.) 15, 16, 17, 19 E. 2. Magister William Pickering 28, (d. 3.) Archidiaconus Nottingham, 0, (d. 9. 12.) 32, 34 E. 2. Richard Pigot 49 H. 6. 9, 12, 22 & 23 (d. 10.) E. 4. Thomas Pinchebecke (Capitalis Baro Scac. Regis) 11, 12 R. 2. Magister Richard de Plescy 29, 31, (d. 2. 21.) E. 3. Robert de Plesington Capitalis Baro de Scaccar. Regis, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 R. 2. Magister Richard de Plumsted, writ Plumstoke. 28, (d. 3.) 30, (d. 9. 12. 22.) 34 E. 1. 8, (d. 29.) 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) E. 2. Ralph Pole 33, 38 H. 6. Iohn Portington 20, 23, 25, 27, 28, 29, 31 H. 6. Iohn Preston 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9 H. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, H. 6. Iohn Prysot 23, 25, 27, 28, 29, 31, 33 (Miles) 38 H. 6. R. MAgister R. Decanus Sancti Pauli London 28, (d. 9. 30, (d. 32.) E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 11. 19) E. 2. Magister Iohn de Radeswell 20 (d. 4.) E. 2. Magister Richard de Radeswell Archidiac. Cestr. 27, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 9. 12.) 32 E. 1. Magister Robert de Radeswell, Redeswell 23, (d. 9.) E. 1. 2, (d. 14.) E. 2. Iohn Randolfe 1, (d. 8. 9.) 2, (d. 20.) E. 2. Robert de Ratford, or Retford 23, (d. 6.) 28, (d. 3.) 30, (d. 9. 12.) 32 E. 1. 1, (d. 4. 11. 19.) 2, (d. . 11. 14. 20.) 4, 5, (d. 17.) 6, (d. 16.) 8, d. 29.) 9, (d. 11, 12.) 11. d. 8. 14.) E. 2. See Batford. Robert de Reinford 6, (d. 31.) E. 2. Richard de Rodeway 6, (d. 16.) 7, (d. 27.) 8, (d. 9.) 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) Eschaetor citra Trentam 14, (d. 5.) 15 E. 2.
Gilbert de Roubury, Rubery 23, (d. 9.) 27, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 9. 12.) 32, 34 E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 11. 19.) 2, (d. 11, 14. 28.) 4, 5, (d. 17.) 6, (16. 31.) 7, (d. 27.) 8, (d. 29) 11, (d. 8. 14.) 14, (d. 23.) E. 2. William Rykill 10, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21, 23 R. 2. 1, 2, 3, 5, 7 H. 4. S RObert de Sadington, Capitalis Baro Scac. Regis, 12, 13, (d. 1. 28.) 14, (d. 23, 33.) 15, 17, 21, 22 (d. 32.) 23 E. 3. Gerard de Salvayne Eschaetor ultra Trentam 1, (d. 11.) 2, (d. 11.) E, 2. Magister Boniface de Saluciis 1, (d. 11.) 2, (d. 11. 14) E. 2. Magister Thomas Sampson 7, 8, 9, 10. (d. 1. 5.) 11, (d. 11. 15. 40.) 12, 13, (d. 1, 28.) 17, 18 E. 3. Iohn de Sandale 1, (d. 8. 11.) 2, (11, 14, 20.) 5, (d. 17.) E. 2. Robert de Sapy Eschaetor citra Trentam, 12, (d. 29,) E. 2, Magister William de Sardene Offic: Cantuar. 28, (d. 3.) 30, (d. 9. 12.) E. 1, Roger Savage, Sauvage 1, (d. 8. 19.) 2, (11.) E. 2. William Scot 10, (d. 1, 5.) Serviens Regis 15, 18, 20 E. 3, Roger le Scoter 4, (d. 2.) E. 2. William Screne 11, 12, 14 H. 4. 1, 2, 3 H. 5. Geoffry le Scroope 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, 14, (d. 5. 23.) 15, 16, 17, 19, 20 E. 2. 1, (d. 3. 16.) 2, (d. 15. 23. 31.) 3, (d. 9.) 4, (d. 19, 23. 41.) Capitalis Justi∣ciarius 5, (d. 7. 25.) 6, (d. 9. 19. 36.) 7, 8, 9, 10, (d. 1, 5.) 11, (d. 11. 15. 40.) 14, (d. 23. 33.) E. 3. Henry le Scroope 1, (d. 11.) 2, (d. 11. 14.) 4, 5, (d. 17,) 6, (d. 16.) 7, (d. 27) 8, (d. 7. 29.) 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, 14, (d. 5. 23.) 15, 16, 17, 19 E. 2. 3, (d. 19. 23. 41.) 4, (d. 19. 23. 31) 5, (d. 7. 25.) 6, (d. 36.) 8, 9 E. 3.
Iohn de Seton Serviens Regis 21, 22, (d. 7. 22,) 23, 24, 25, 28, 29, 31, (d. 2. 21.) E. 3. Magister Iohn de Silveston, Selveston 27, 28, (d. 17.) E. 1. Thomas de Sinterton 1, (d. 19.) E. 2. Iohn de Shardelowe 7, 8, 9 E. 3. William de Shareshull 6; (d. 9. 19.) 7, 8, 9, 10, (d. 19.) 11, (d. 11. 15. 40) 13, (d. 4. 28.) 14, (d. 23. 33.) 18, 20, 21, 22, (d. 7. 32.) 23, 24, 25, 26, 28, 29, 31, (d. 2, 21.) 34, (d. 4.) E. 3. Iohn de Shoredike, Shordich 8, 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11, (d. 11. 15. 40) 12, 13, (d. 1. 28.) 14, (d. 23. 33.) E. 3. William de Skipwith Serviens Regis 28, 29, 31, (d. 2. 21) 34, (d. 4.) 36, 37, 38, 50 E. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 R. 2. Osbert de Spaldington 23 (d. 9.) E. 1. Henry Spigurnell 28 (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 12.) 32, 34 E, 1. 1, (d. 8. 11. 19.) 2, (d. 11. 42. 26.) 5, (d. 17.) 6, (d. 11. 16.) 8, (d. 27.) 9, 11. (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, 14, (d. 5. 23.) 15, 16, 17, 19 E. 2. Richard de Stanford 13 (d. 13.) E. 2. Henry de Stanton 1, (d. 8. 11.) 2, (d. 11. 20.) 4, 5, (d. 17.) 6, (d. 16. 31.) 7, (d. 27.) 8, (d. 29.) 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, 14, (d. 5. 23.) 15, 16, 17, 20 (d. 4.) E. 2, (d. 16.) E. 3. Gilbert de Stapleton Escheator citra Trent 14, (d. 4.) E. 2 Iohn de Stoner, Stonore, Stonnore, 6, (d. 16.) 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 1. 29.) 13, 14, (d. 5. 23.) 15, 16, 17, 19 E. 2. 3, (d. 15. 23. 31.) 4, (d. 19. 23. 41.) 5, (d. 7. 25.) 6, (d. 9. 19. 36) 7, 8, 9, 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11, (d. 11. 15. 40.) 12, 13, (d. 1. 28) 14, (d. 23. 33.) 16, 17, 18, 20, 21, 22, (d. 7. 32.) 23, 24, 25, 26 E. 3. Iohn de Stonford Sonford 13, (d. 1. 28) 14, (d. 23. 33.) 15, (d. 26.) 21, 22, (d. 7. 32.) 23, 24, 25, 26, 28, 29, 31, (d. 2. 21.) E. 3. Henry Stotehill 49 (d. 6.) H. 6. 1, 2, 6, Miles 9 E. 4. Iames Strangeways 4, 5, 7, 8, (Unus Servientium Re∣gis ad legem) 9 H. 5▪ 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 9, 11 H. 6. Mr Iohn de Stratford 12, (d. 11.) 13, 14, (d. 5. 23) 15 E. 2.
Magister Robert de Stratford Archidiaconus Cantuar. Cancellarius de Scaccario 7, 8, 9, 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11, (d. 11. 15. 40.) E. 3. Magister Iohn Strecche Decanus Lincoln 39, (d 2.) E. 3. Herincus de Sutton 1, (d. 8. 19.) 2, (d. 20.) E. 2. Robert de Swillington 23, (d. 9.) E. 1. Richard de Sydenham 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 8 R. 2. T GIlbert de Thornton 23, (d. 9.) E. 1. William de Thorpe 15, 20, 21, 22, (d. 7. 32.) 23. 31, (d. 2. 21.) E. 3. Magister Walter de Thorpe 2, (d. 14.) 5 (d. .) 11, (d. 8. 14) E. 2. Robert de Thorpe Serviens Regis 20. 21, 22, (d. 7. 22.) 23, 24, 25, 26, 28, 29, 31, (d. 2. 21.) 33, 34, (d. 4.) 36, 37, 38, 39, 42, 43, 44 E. 3. William Thurning 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, Capitalis Justiciarius de Com. Banco 21, 23 R. 2. 1, 2, 3, 7, 8, 11, 12, 14 H. 4. 1 H. 5. William de Toudeby, Tontheby 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, 14, (d. 5, 23.) 15, 16, 17. 19, 20 E. 2. 1, (d. 3. 16.) 2, (d. 15. 23. 31.) E. 3. Roger Townsend 22 & 23 (d. 10.) E. 4. Iohn Traverse 3, (d. 19.) 5, (d. 25.) E. 3. Thomas Tremoyle 22 & 23 (d. 10.) E. 4. Robert Tresylian 2, 3, 4, Capit: Justiciarius Regis 5, 6, 8, 9, 10 R. 2. Iohn de Trevaignon 7 (p. 2. d. 3.) E. 3. Iohn de Trewosa 8, 10, (d. 1. 5.) E. 3. Simon de Trewechosa 11, (d. 11. 40.) 12 E. 3. Lambert de Trikenham 1, (d. 8. 11.) 2, (d. 11, 20.) 4, 5. (d. 17.) 6, (d. 16. 31.) 7, (d. 27.) 8, (d. 29.) 9, 11, (d. 8. 19.) 12, (d. 11, 29.) 13, 14, (d. 5, 21.) 15, 16 E. 2. Thomas Tyldeslye 5, 7, 8, 11 H. 4.
Magister William Tingewykes 39 (d. 2.) E. 3. Robert Tyrwhite 23 R. 2. 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 8, 11, 12, 14 H. 4. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9 H. 5. 1, 2, 3, 5 H. 6. V IOhn Vampage 23, 25, 27, 28, 29 H. 6. William la Vavassor 1, (d. 8. 19.) 2, (d. 20.) E. 2. Magister Gerard de Vippeins Archidiac. Richmond. 28, (d. 17.) E. 3. W IOhn Wadham 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21 R. 2. Humfry de Waledon 20 E. 2. 1, (p. 2. d. 16.) E. 3. Magister Iohn Walewayne 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11.) Thesaurarius Regis (d. 29.) 13, 24, (d. 5,) E. 2. Magister Iohn de Waltham 39 E. 3. 7, 8, R. 2. Ingelard de Warle 11, (d. 8. 14.) E. 2. Nicholas de Warre 1, (d. 8. 19.) 2. (d. 20.) E. 2. Magister Henry la Warre 12, 14 H. 4. 1 H. 5. William Westbury 5, 7, 9, 10, 13. 18, 20, 23 H. 6. Iohn de Westcote 6, (d. 17.) E. 2. William de Weston 17, 19, E. 2. 2, (d. 23. 31.) E. 3. Philip de Willoughby Decan. Lincoln. 23, (d. 9.) Cancell. Scac. Regis 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 9, 10.) 32 E. 1. Richard de Willoughby, Willughby 3, (d. 19.) 4, (d. 19. 41.) 5. (d. 7. 25.) 6, (d. 9, 10, 30.) 7, 8, 9, 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11, (d. 11. 40.) 12, 13, (d. 1. 28.) 14, (d. 23. 33.) 20, 22, (d. 7. 32.) 23, 24, 25, 26, 31, (d. 2. 21) E. 3. Robert de Wodehouse 14, (d. 5. 23.) 15, 16, E. 2. (Ar∣chidiac, Richmond) 3, (d. 19.) (Thesaurarius Re∣gis) 4, (d. 19. 41.) 5, (d. 7. 25.) 12, 13, (d. 1. 28.) 14, (d. 23. 33.) 16, 17 E. 3. William de Wychyngham 42, 43, 44, 47, 49, 50 E. 3. 1, 2 R. 2.
Magister Gerrard de Wyspanes Archidiac, Richmond 2, (d. 9.) 28 E. 1. X WIlliam Yelverton 23, 25, 27, 28, 29, 31. 33, 38 (Miles) 49 H. 6, 1, 2, 6, 9 E. 4. Magister Thomas Younge 34, (d. 4.) 36, 37. Offic. Cur. Cancellar. 39, 42, 43, 44, 47, 49 E. 3. Thomas Younge 49 (d. 6.) . 6. 6, 9 E. 4. Z MAgister William de la Zousche Decanus Ecclesiae be∣atae Mariae Ebor. Thesaurarius Regis 11, (d. 11.) 12, 13, (d. 1. 28.) 14, (d. 23. 33.) E. 3. Where the Dorses are for brevity omitted in any years of this or any the precedent Tables after a particular name you may readily find them in the precedent Sections, in the writs to the Prelats, Temporal Lords and Counsil, which are all entred together in the self-same Rolls, and Dorses, when they all occurr.
General useful Observations on and from the precedent Writs of Summons, mentioned in the premised Sections; and the 7. Sections next ensuing in the second part following them. HAving thus presented you with 3▪ distinct Secti∣ons or Squadrons of Writs of Summons, to our Parliaments, Great Councils and Convocations, is∣sued to Arch-bishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, and other Ecclesiastical Lords; the P. of Wales, Dukes, Earls, Barons Temporal Lords, and great men of the Realm, the Kings Counsil, Iustices, with some useful particular Observa∣tions on them in each Section, I shall for a close of this first part of my breif Register, Kalender, and Survey of them, superadd some general necessary Observations on, and Conclusions from them, and the 7. next follow∣ing Sections (which I intended to have annexed to this first part of my Register, but now shall reserve for the second,) for the further information of the Readers, the benefit of Posterity, and rectifying some Oversights in sundry printed trivial Discourses of our English Par∣liaments. First, From the manifold rare, delightful Varieties, Forms, Diversities, and distinct kinds of Writs of Som∣mons, transcribed out of the Clause Rolls, in a Chro∣nological method; Vaied from time to time by our Kings, their Chancellors, Counsellors, and Officers, who formed them, as there was occasion, without the privity or direction of their Parliaments, before the Sta∣tutes
of 7. H. 4. c. 15. 6. H. 6. c. 4. 8. H. 6. c. 7. 23. H. 6. c. 11. 15. which ordered some new clauses to be insert∣ed only into the VVrits for Election of Knights of Shires, (and none else) for preventing and rectifying abuses in such elections, but prescribed no set unalterable future form, for those or any other Writs of Sommons, leaving the King and his Counsil at Free Liberty as before, to vary and alter them as they saw just cause; The Judicious Readers may clearly discern, what little credit is to be given to Reverend Sir Edward Cookes obervation, in his slight4. Institutes p. 10. discourse, Touching the VVrits of Som∣mons of Parliament, which are to be found in the close Rolls from time to time; Which begins thus. Ad it is to be Ob∣served, that the substance of the VVrits, ought to continue in their Original Essence, without any Alteration or Ad∣dition, unlesse it be by Act of Parliament. For ifBractan. l. 5. f. 413. Brit∣ton. 122. 227. Fleta. l. 2. c. 12 West. 2. c. 23. 1. part of the nsti. Sect. 101 f. 73. b. Original VVrits at the Common Law can receive no Altera∣tion or Addition, but by Act of Parliament, A multo For∣tiori, The Writs of the Sommons of the Highest Court of Parliament, can receive no Alteration or Addition but by Act of Parliament, &c. But had this great Oracle of the Law, diligently considered the mani∣fold varieties of the Writs of Sommons to Parliaments, With their several Alteraions and Additions, made from time to time upon emergent occasions, without any Act or Order of Parliament; Or, had he remembred old Lib. 5. f. 413. Bractons, and his own distinction of these two dif∣ferent sorts of Original VVrits, in the places he refers us to in his margin, viz. Brevia Originalia, quaedam sunt formata sub suis casibus, & de cursu, & De communi Concilio to∣tius Regni concessa et Approbata; quae quadem Nulla∣tenus mutari poterint, absque consensu et voluntate orum: & quaedam Magistralia, et saepe variantur se∣cundum varietatem casuum, factorum et quaerelarum, and that by the Masters and Clarks of the Chancery them∣selves, according to the variety of every Mans case; as Instis. f. 3. b. himself, and the Statute of VVestm. 2. c. 23. resolve us, without any Act, or common consent in Parliament,
And then judiciously pondered, that Writs of Sommons to Parliaments, are all of this latter kind, only Migistra∣li, and frequently varied according to the several varie∣ties of the causes, Publick grievances Dangers, E∣mergences, Businesses, Complaints, occasiōing their Som∣moning, expressed usually in these Writs different Pro∣logues; he would certainly never have made such a strange erronious Observation as this upon these Writs, contradi∣cted by so many Presidents on record in all former ages; nor alleaged such a pittiful mistaken Argument a multo Fortiori, and such Authorities to justifie it; Which di∣ametrically contradict both his reason and observation, the Writs of Sommons being all of them Magistralia, not Formata sub suis Casibus, (as the miserably mistook them to be.) Therefore if such Magistral Writs are of imes varied, according to the variety of cases, facts and complaints in particular mens cases, by the Clerks of Chancery, and Cursitors themselves, without Act of Parliament, a multo fortiori, may Writs of Sommons to Parliaments of the self same kind, which concern the great weighty affairs of the King, Kingdom and Church of England, be varied, altered by the King himself, with the Advise of his Great Officers, Judges, Council, ac∣cording to the variety of emergent occasions, requiring Parliaments to be called, without any Act or consent of Parliament authorizing it, notwithstanding Sir Ed∣wards groundlesse Assertion to the contrary, though pre∣faced with and it is to be observed; as I conceive it will henceforth be for a great mistake, although formerly believed as an undoubted Truth, upon his Ipse dixit; whose venerable reputation hath canonized many of his Apochryphal conceipts, which have dangerously seduced most Students and Professors of the Law, with others who peruse his Institutes; for whose better Information, and Vindication of the truth alone, I have upon all just occasions both detected and corrected his formerly un∣discerned Errors; and this here insisted on, I hope with∣out just offence to any of his surviving Friends or Pro∣geny;
if they consider the duty and protestation of eve∣ry ingenuous Christian, and Chronographer thus briefly expressed by St. Paul, 2 Cor. 13. 8.See the 2. and 3. part of my Historical Collection and Vindication. My Abridge∣ment of the an∣cient Councils and Parlia∣ments of Eng. We can do nothing a∣gainst the truth, but for the truth. Secondly, It is observable, that the word Parlia∣mentum, is but once used or mentioned in any Writ of Sommons, Act, Statute, Charter, Patent, or other Re∣cord that I have yet seen, either before or during the Reigns of King Iohn or Henry the 3d. but only the word Concilium, Commune Concilium, Colloquium, Tra∣ctatum; placitum magnum, &c. which frequently occur, and are alwayes used in them to expresse that Assem∣bly of the States by, which in after times, and now is usu∣ally called Parliamentum. The very first mention, and use of this word, in any Writ or Record I have perused, is in the Writ of Sommons to the Cinqueports, Cl. 49. H. 3. d. 11. sōmoning thē ad instans Parliamentum nostrum, The next is in the Writ of Prorogation of the Parlia∣ment. Cl. 3. E. 1. 20. in dor. where it is twice thus mētioned in the Writ; Generale Parliamentum nostrum, eodem Parliamento, and once in the Margin, Do veniendo ad Parliamentum; And this Writ assures us that it was used in the Original Writs of Sommons to this Parlia∣ment, though not extant, compared with the printed Prologue to the Acts therin established. The Writs of Som∣mons from 3. to 23. E. 1. being not extant in the Rolls; the next use of this word I find, is in the Writ of Som∣mons & Prorogation, in Clau. 23. E. 1. dorse 9. Cl. 28. E. 1. d. 3. 17. Cl. 30. E. 1d. 7. 9. Cl. 32. E. 1. d. 1. Cl. 33. E. 1. d. 9. 10. 21. Claus. 34. E. 1. d. 2. and Claus. 35. E. 1. d. 13. In all which Writs under King Edward the first, not onely. Colloquium & Tractatum, but also the word Par∣liamentum is mentioned, and also thus expressed in the Margin of the Rolls. De Parliamento tenendo, De∣veniendo ad Parliamentum, De Parliamento Proro∣gando. And so is it likewise in the Writs de expensis Militum qui venerunt ad Parliamentum Regis, clau. 28. E. 1. dors. 12. cl. 29. E. 1. d. 17. cl. 33. E. 1. d. 15. cl. 34. E.
E. 1. d. 11. and cl. 35. E. 1. d. 14. In the Writs and Rolls of Sommons, and De expensis Militum & Burgensium, under Edward the 2d. it is commonly used and mention∣ed, as the premises evidence; Yet I find Parliamentum to∣tally omitted again in sundry other Writs of Sommons and Prorogations, and the words Colloquium, Tractatum, & Commune Consilium, only made use of in them; as in cl. 23. E. 1. d. 2. 4. cl. 24. E. 1. d. 7. cl. 25. E. 1. d. 25. cl. 27. E. 1. d. 9. 16. 28. cl. 28. E. 1. d. 3. cl. 1. E. 2. d. 11. 19. cl. 2. E. 2. d. 11. 13. 14. 20. cl. 9. E. 2. d. 17. and in some other succeeding Rolls; yet in the Margin o∣ver against these Writs, I find in divers of these Rolls, De Parliamento tenendo; De veniendo ad Parliamen∣tum, Summonitio & Prorogatio Parliamenti, written, though the words Parliamentum, be not extant in the Writs themselves. The first use of the word Parliamentum, in any Act or Statute in my Observation, is in the Prologu to the Statutes of Westminster, 1. An. 3. E. 1. which it stiles, Son Primer Parliament general apres Son coronement. The next usage of it is in 7. E. 1. Rastal Armour 1. Wherein it is twice mentioned: After which I find it used in the Prologue of Westminster, 2. 13. E. 1. and c. 24. In the Statute of Merchants, 13. E. 1. The Statutes De Quo warranto; De terris vendendis & emendis, 18. E. 1. The Statute of Waste for Heirs, end of Defending Rights, 20. E. 1. The Statutes De non ponendis in Assisis, and De Ma∣lefactoribus i parcis, 21. E. 1. The Statute of Persons appealed, 28. E. 1. And the Prologue to Articuli super car∣tas the same year: The Statutes De Escheatoribus, 29. E. 1. The New Statutes of Quo warranto, 30. E. 1. Ordinatio Fo∣restae, 33. E. 1. De asportatis Religiosorum, c. 1. In most succeeding Prologues to all Statutes and divers Acts, ever since King Edward the 1. it is commonly and frequently used; (as also in ourMatth. Westminster, 2. p. 363, 264, 387, 321, 405, 411, 415, 438, 439, 463, 464, col. 1965, 1977. Historians in that age) In the Pro∣logue to Articuli Cleri, An. 9. E. 2. there is this observable Recital. Sciatis quod cum Dubum temporibus Progenitorum nostrorum Regum Angliae, in diver sis Parliamentis su∣is,
& similiter postquam Regni gubernacula suscipimus, In Parliamentis nostris, &c. Ac nuper in Parliamento nostro apud Lincoln, &c. Attributing this title of Parli∣amentum, not only to the Parliament held under Edward the 2d. and first, but to General Councils of State, and Conferences held by our Kings, Lords, & great Men, in the Reigns of their Progenitors, who were totally un∣acquainted with this Word, and never used it for ought I can yet discover. It is agreed by all who have written of theCookes 1. Instit. p. 109, 110, 4. Instit, c. 1. Antiquity, or use of our English Par∣liaments, that the word Parliamentum, is no proper Latin word,Cromtons Jurisdiction of Courts, Ch. 1. The Antiquity of the Parlia∣ments of Eng∣land, by Justice Dodridge and others, p. 43. 65, 66. for that we call a Parliament, but Colloqui∣um, Tractatus, & commune Concilium Regni nostri, still reteined in the Writs of Sommon, as well since the use of the word Parliamentum grew common, as before in was inserted into such Writs: That it is originally a meer French Word, first introduced amongst us by the Norman Monkes, or being taken from the French, who stiled the publick conventions of their Kings and Princes a Parliament, in their own Language, and coyned this new Latin word Parliamentm out of it. But when, and by whom it was first introduced and used in England, is a great dispute amongst truly judicious Antiquaries. Many there are who conceive it to be used in the Sxons time, andThe Antiquity of the Parlia∣ment of Eng∣land, p. 78, 79. writes, that this word was first brought into this Realm by the French Monkes and first used by the Statists in the time of H. 1. & that Abbot Ingulphus, first used it, who dyed in the year 1109. long before the reign of King Henry the 3d, because many Latin and English Historians and Chronolo∣gers, who (have written since the Reign of King Hen∣ry the 3d.) do sometimes give the title of Parliamen∣tum, & Parliament, to our great Councils and Assemblies of the King, and of the spiritual and temporal Lords in those ancient times, in their relations of them: But this questionless is a gross mistake; since not one of all their great Councils in any of their Titles, Prologues, Laws, Cannons, Edicts, Acts, recorded by Brompton, Lambard, Sir Henry Spelman, Whelock, Fox, and others; nor a∣ny of our Historians living and writing in those times, before the later end of King Henry the 3d. (as Gildas, Beda, Ahelwerdus, Asser Menevensis, Ingulphus, Wil∣lielmus,
Malmes buriensis, Eadmerus, Florentius Wigorniensis, Simeon Dunlmensis, Aelredus Abbas, Henry de Huntindon, Sylvester Gyraldhes, Gulielmus Neubrigeusis, Simeon & Richardus Hagustaldensis, Radulphus de Diceto, Roger VVendover, Thomas Spotte, Gervasius Doroberniensis, & Tilburiensis, VVillielmus Stephanides, Gualterus Mapes, Gualterus Coventriensis, Richardus Heliensis, Thomas Stubs, & Petrus Henam) nor yet Glanvill, Bracton, Andrew Horn, and other Lawyers flourishing under H. the 2. and 3. do once use, or apply this word Parlia∣mentum, to any one Grand parliamentary Council, which they alwayes call by other Names, for ought I can yet discover upon my best search and inquiry. The very first of all our Writers or Historians in my Observation, who made use of this word, and applyed it to the Common Councils of our Realm, is Matthew Paris See Balae∣us. Script. Brit. cens. 4. c. 26. p 315, 316. flourishing about the midsts, and dying before the end of King Henry the 3d. Anno. 1259. the 43. of his Reign. He in his Historia Angliae, from the beginning of the Conquerors Reign, till the year 1246. (the 30th. of Henry the 3d.) alwayes made use of the words Conci∣lium, Concilium magnum, Colloquium Tractatus, and the like, to expresse all Parliamentary Great Coun∣cils, and State Assemblies held in England; near the space of 200. years before he Writ, and never of Parlia∣mentum. But in Anno gratiae, 1246. and 1247. and in no other years before or after, he useth this word five or six times only, in these insuing passagesEdit. Ti∣grui. 1589. p. 674. 677. 686. 687. Anno 1246. Convenit ad Parliamentum Generalissimum totius Regni Angliae totalis Nobilitas Londini. &c, Over a∣gainst which the Publisher, not he, adds in the Margin Parliamentum habitum Londini, After which he sub∣joynes Convenientibus igitur ad Parliamentum mmo∣ratum totius Regni Magnatibus: Then followes, Et postea in Anglia in Parliamento Regis ubi congregata fuerat totius Regni tam Cleri quam Militiae Generalis Vni∣versitas, deliberatum, &c. Yet in the very next page, he returns to his old term again. Die vero translationis
Thomae Martyris habitum est magnum Concilium, inter Regem & Regni Magnates, apud VVintoniam. Over against which, his continuer or publisher hath placed this marginal Note. Parliamentum habitum apud VVinton. The like he doth in p. 560. 561, 687, 714. and elsewere, inserting in the Margin, Parliamentum Generale, &c. When as Matthew Paris useth it not, but Concilium only, or the like in his Text. In hisIbidem p. 702. 707. History of the next yeer 147. He proceeds thus. Dominus Rex Francorum Regni sui Nobiles tam Cleri quam Populi generaliter Edicto Regio fecit convocari, ut Ad Parliamentum communiter convenientes, ardu ne∣gocia Regni sui statum contingentia, diligenter, deliberan∣do, contrectarent. And Five pages after, Dominus Rex (H. 3.) jussit omnem totius Regni Nobilitatem convoca∣ri, &c. Oxoniis: Praelatosautem maxime Ad hoc Parlia∣mentum vocavit arctius. Applying the word Parlia∣mentum, to these Assemblies of the King, Lords and Nobles, both in France and England, held this year, about the weighty affairs of their respective Kingdoms. In his Additamenta to the last Addition of his History printed at London, p. 170. he useth the word Parlia∣mentum only once, and that in another sense; For the conference and discourse of Monkes with one another af∣ter their repasts, then prohibited the black Monkes by special Order, as an impediment to their contemplations and prayers. In no places else of his History or other print∣ed pieces, do I find he made use of this word. Indeed, the continuer of his History from the yeer 1258. to the end of King Henries Reign 1273. (whomScripto∣rum Brit. Cen. 4. c. 94. Iohn Bale inform us to be VVilliam Rishanger) flourishing under King Edward the 1. & 2. (when this word Parliamentum grew cōmon both in Writs of Sommons, Statutes, & vulgar Speech) makes frequent use thereof in his History, ap∣plying it to great Councils of the Realm, in the latter end of Henry the 3d. both in the Text and Margin; as in Page 788, 933. 935. 938. 940. 948. 960. 967. 974. of his continuation, Editione Tiguri, 1589, and so doth
Matthew Westminster (who continued the History of Matthew Paris) flourishing under the Reign of King Edward the third,See the Praeface to Mat Paris, and Mat Westm,  Script. Brit. Cent. 6. c. 31. when this word Parliamentum was commonly used in all Writs of Summons, Statutes, Writers and Vulgar speech) makes frequent use there∣of, applying it to the Great Councils of State towards the latter end of King Henry the third, in his Flores Histo∣riarum, Londini 1570. pars 2. p. 206, 207, 223, 254. 261. 280, 296, 300, 317, 345. and in subsequent Pages to the Parliaments held under King Edward the first. Henry de Knyghton a Canon of Leicester flourishing under King Richard the 2. de Eventibus Angliae, l. 1. c. 3. l. 2. c. 10, 12, 15. Col. 2318, 2387, 3446, 2455. applies this word to the Great Councils held under the Danish and other Kings, before the Reign of Edward the 1. Canutus vixit per 20. annos, & postea celebravit Parliamentum apud Ox∣oniam, &c. Ranulfus Consul Cestriae cum Rege (Stephano) concordatus est, Set tito post, in Parliamento apud Nor∣thamptoniam delose captus est, &c. Anno 1261. Rex (Hen. 3.) convocato Parliamento suo Oxoniae, questionem movit Magnatibus suis. Tenuit Rex (H. 3.) Parlia∣mentum suum apud Merleberg. Anno Regni sui 52. & ad exhibitionem communis justitiae multa fecit statuta, quae dicuntur statuta de Marleberg. The Author of the Chronicle of Brompton (whoMr. Sel∣dens Praeface, Historiae Ang∣licanae Scripto∣re X. Londi∣ni. 1652. writ after the beginning of King Edward the 3.) doth the like in these passages, ac∣cording to the language of the age wherein hee writ.Chron. Jo∣hannis Bromp∣ton. Col. 866. l. 50. 908. l. 36, 937. l. 28. 1005. l. 65. 1066. l. 62. 1058. l. 66. 1282. l. 66. Edgarvis Rex Parliamentum suum apud Salisbiriam con∣vocavit. Post haec (Canutus) apud Oxoniam Parliamen∣tum tnuit, &c. cito post in Parliamento suo apud Win∣toniam. Rex (Edwardus Confessor) & omnes Magna∣tes ad Parliamentum tunc fuerunt, Anno 1164. Rex (Henricus 2.) Parliamentum apud Westinst tenuit. Rex Angliae (Richardus 1.) congregatus Episcopis, Comitibus & Baronibus Regni sui Parliamentum Londo∣niae super hoc habuit & Tractatum. Rex (Johannes) Par∣liamentum suum usque Lincolniam convocaverat. So doth Polychron. l. 7. c. 38. Radulphus Cicestrensis,Ypodigma Neustriae, Lon∣dini. 1574. p. 61, 62. Thomas of Walngham (who
writ under K. Henry the 6.) and after them Fabian, Cax∣ton, Polydor Virgil, Grafton, Speed, Stow, Holinshed, Daniel, Baker, and other of our late Historians; Whereupon their injudicious credulous Readers of all sorts, conceit not onely the words Parliamentum & Parliament, but even the thing it self (as since constituted of Knights, Ci∣tizens and Burgesses, as well as of the King, spiritual and temporal Lords, Nobles, Barons, and Great Men) to have been in common use both under our Saxon, Danish, Norman, and English Kings, long before the Reign or 49. year of King Henry the 3. when as neither the name nor thing it self (as now compacted) was either known to, or used by any Aniquaries, Councils, Re∣cords, Historians, or English Writers before Mat. Paris, that I have yet seen or heard of. From whence (to omit other Arguments, with the Writs de Expensis Militum & Burgensium levandis, mentioned in the Modus tenendi Parlamentum, though in no Records before, Claus. 28. E. 1.) it indeniably appears, that this absurd ridicu∣lous Modus, so much magnified, followed, relied upon by4 Inst. p. 12. 341. 1. Instit. f. 10. 2. Instit. p. 7, 8. Sir Edward Cook, in sundry of his Books, as a most ancient authentick Record, both known, and used in Ed∣ward the Confessors time; For Certain rehearsed before William the Conqueror, by the discreet men of the Realm, and by him approved, and used, who kept a Parliament ac∣cording to its Prescription, (which the Book of 21. E. 3. f. 60. hee cites to prove it, directly contradicts) After which King H. the 2. fitted and transcribed this Modus in∣to Ireland in a Parchment Roll for the holding of Parlia∣ments there. Which no doubt hee did by the advice of his Iudges, &c. That this Modus was seen by the makers of Magna Charta, Anno 9. H. 3. c. 2. concerning the redu∣cing of ancient Reliefs of intire Earldemos, Baronies & Knights fees, according to such proportions as is contained in the Modus, which they could not have done so punctual∣ly if they had not seen the same: (all which hee asserts with so much confidence, as if hee had been an eye-wit∣ness thereof himself, though most gross untruths) is in
verity a late spurious Imposture: written long after the Reign of King Henry the 3. and Edward the 1. himself confessing that some part thereof is cited in (he should have said taken out of) the Parliament Roll of Anno 11. R. 2. and other Records of Parliament, and not compiled before the latter end of King R. the 2.See Spel∣mani Conci∣lia, p. 534. The word Parliamen∣tum being not onely used many hundred times, almost in every line throughout this Modus, and not the words Concilium or Collequium, but likewise intituling and de∣nominating the very Treatise it self, which grew not in∣to such Vulgar use, till after the Reign of King Henry the 3. under King Edward the 3. and succeeding Kings, as appears by Thomas Walsingham, Hist, Angliae. p. 5, 8, 12, 13, 17, 25, 28, 32, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 40, 41, 42, 44, 45, 46, 70, 71, 76, 77, 78, 81, 82, 83, 88, 96, 105, 110. Ypodigma Neustriae. p. 68, 69, 71, 72, 73, 82, 83, 87, 88, 98. &De Eventi∣bus Angliae. Col. 2463, 2491, 2528, 2549. Henry de Knyghton, and was totally unknown to, and not used by any Lawyers, States-men, Clerks, Writers of our English Annals before the Reign of King Henry the 3. Which I much wonder Sir Edward Cook (who writes, that after diligent search hee could finde nothing against this Modus, and demands, Quis vituperait?) and someGul. Lam∣bardi Archi∣von. The Anti∣quity of the Parliaments of England. p. 28, 29. others of ou Antiquaries observed not, being so palpable an Imposture, asTitles of Honour. p. 613. 738, to 745. Mr. Selden,In his Let∣ter Mr. Wil∣liam Hackwel. Archbishop usher, and others, have discovered it to be. Indeed I found one Roll in the Tower, Anno 9. E. 2. stiled Modus Parliamenti, which upon its first view I conceited might have some affinity with, or at least give some colour to this forged Modus; but upon per∣usal it proved onely a Roll of the Proceedings in the Par∣liament of 9. E. 2. farre different from this Modus, and having no affinity with it, yet peradventure the Author of this Imposture, borrowed his Title from it. Besides the late introduction of the word Parliamen∣tum into England, doth likewise discoverPreface to the 9. Reproof. Sir Edward Cooks other pretended ancient Manuscript of the Mona∣stery. of St. Edmonds (which hee much cried up, yet ne∣ver would send judiciousSpelmanni Concil. p. 534. Sr. Henry Spelman to per∣use,
perchance lest hee should detect its Novelty and Im∣posture) to be of no such Antiquity (as hee conceited it to be, written,See my seasonable Le∣gal Historical Vindication. part. 3. p. 231, 232, 233. in King Cnutes Reign, or not long af∣ter it) but after Henry the 3. his Reign; since the words Parliamentum, in suo public Parliamento, tunc in eodem Parliamento personaliter existentibus were not grown in use till Edward the 1, 2, & 3. and the whole clause hee prints out of it in his Preface to his 9. Reports, prove it to be written under one of these three Kings Reigns, if not after them, as the Modus was: By both which you may easily discern, how little insight this great Lawyer had in Histories, Antiquities, or Records, as to be cheated, be∣sotted with such Impostures, and bottom his Discourses of our Parliaments upon such spurious rotten Foundations as these. 3. That no Oath nor Engagement whatsoever was antiently imposed on the Members of the Lords or Com∣mons House,. 11. p. 40. to debar or seclude any of them from sit∣ting or voting, much less were any of them suspended or forcibly kept out of either House till they had taken a∣ny new-invented Oath, prescribed them onely by a pre∣vailing party, without a Legal Act of Parliament ratified both by the Kings, Lords, and Commons in an orderly manner; such inforced seclusive Oaths, being inconsistent both with the Freedome, Priviledges, Rights of old English Parliaments. The Parliament of 1. Eliz. c. 1. upon the abolishing of Popery, and restitution of the Protestant Religion, having by unanimous consent of the three States, made and prescribed an Oath of suprema∣cy (for the preservation of the ancient Rights and Royalties of the Crown of England, and of the persons of the Queen, her heirs and successors, against the usurpations, claimes, practices of the Bishop, of Rome, and his confederates) on all Arch-Bishops, Bishops, Arch-Deacons, Clergy-men, and temporal officers: By reason of the manifold Plots and Treasons of the Pope and Papists against the Queens per∣son, Crown, and Realm, the Parliament of 5. Eliz. c. 1. thought fit to prescribe this Oath, for the better detection
of persons popishly affected, not onely to all Readers, Bar∣resters, Graduates in the Universities, Schoolmasters, She∣riffs, and other inferiour Officers, but likewise to all future Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of Parliament; enacting, That every person who shall bee hereafter elected or appointed a Knight, Citizen, Burgess, or Baron of the five Ports, for any Parliament or Parliaments hereafter to be holden, shall from henceforth, before hee shall enter into the Parliament House, or have any voice there, openly receive and pronounce the said Oath before the Lord Steward for the time being, or his Deputy or Deputies for that time to be appointed. And that hee which shall enter into the Parliament, House, without taking the said Oath, shall be deemed no Knight, Citizen, Burgess, nor Baron for that Parliament, nor shall have any voice, but shall be to all intents, constructions, and purposes, as if hee had never been returned or elected Knight, Citizen, Burgess or Baron for the Parliament, and shall suffer such pains and penalties, as if hee had presumed to sit in the same without Election, return, or authority. Provided, that this Act, nor any thing therein shall not extend to compel any temporal person of or above the degree of A Baron of the Realm, to take or pronounce the Oath abovesaid, nor to incur any penalty limited by this Act for not taking or refusing the same. This is the first Act ever imposing an Oath up∣on any Members before their sitting and voting in the Parliament House: wherein five things are ob∣servable. 1. That this Oath was made by unanimous consent of the Queen, Lords and Commons in Parliament. 2. That it was five years a probationer, and appro∣ved, ratified by two successive Parliaments, before it was imposed upon any Members, and not actually ad∣ministred to any till the Parliament of 8. Elizabeth. 3. That it was imposed onely upon the Members of the Commons House, not upon any temporal Lords or Barons of the Realm. 4. That the principal end of prescribing it was, to abo∣lish
the Popes usurped supremacy, and prevent his and his instruments Traiterous attempts against the Queens per∣son, Crown, Kingdome, discover persons popishly affect∣ed, and seclude them from sitting or voting in the Com∣mons House if elected, returned, unless they should first take this Oath: Not to debar or exclude any real Pro∣testants, when duly elected, from entring into the Parlia∣ment house to discharge their trusts and duties. 5. That it appoints no Officers or armed Guards for∣cibly to seclude any Knight, Citizen, Burgess, or Baron of the Ports till hee hath openly taken and pronounced this Oath, but onely layes 2 particular inhibition upon every such Member himself, not to enter the House without taking it, under the disabilities and penalties therein mentioned: leaving every Member a liberty to seclude himself in case hee were unsatisfied, or could not in conscience or prudence take this Oath, but authori∣zing none else to keep him perforce out of the House, if hee had a mind to rush into it without taking it. After this the Pariament of 3. Iacobi. c. 4. upon the detection and prevention of the inernal Gunpowder Treason of the Pope, Iesuites and Papists, to blow up the King, Queen, Prince, Lords, Commons, and Parliament, when all assem∣bled together in the Lords House, November 5 Anno 1605. by unanimous consent of the three Estates, made and prescribed a New Oath of Allegianoe to all persons, except Péers of the Realm, who actually were, or should be su∣spected to be Papists, for their better discovery and con∣viction, without imposing it upon any Members of either House. Which Oath many Papists oppugning with false and unsound Arguments,7. Jac. c. 6. though tending onely to the declaration of such duty, as every true, well-affected sub∣ject, not onely by his bond of Allegiance, but also by the commandement of Almighty God ought to bear to the Kings Majesty, his Heirs and Successors; Thereupon the Lords and Commons in the Parliament of 7. Iacobs: (when this Oath had been approved four years space) not onely enacted, ch. 2. that every person who should henceforth
be naturalized or restored in blood, should first take this oath; but to shew their great approbation thereof, humbly prostrating themselves at his Majesties feet, did earnestly beseech him, that the same Oath might be administred to all his Subjects what soever; And thereupon it was enacted, ch. 6. That all and every Knights, Citizens, Burgees, and Barons of the Five-Ports of the Commons House of Par∣liament, before hee or they shall be permitted to eter the said House, shall make, take, and renew the said corpo∣ral Oath upon the Evangelists before the Lord Steward for the time being, or his Deputy or Deputies, without impo∣sing any disability or penalty, or appointing any Offi∣cers forcibly to seclude those from entring who refused it. Since these recited Acts, all Members of the Commons House have constantly taken these two Oaths voluntarily, without coercion or forcible seclusion, before they en∣tred or sate as Members in the House. The last Parlia∣ment of 16. Caroli in their first Act, for preventing the inconveniences happening by the long intermission of Parlia∣ments, enacted: That all and every the Members that shall be elected to serve in any Parliament hereafter to be assembled by virtue of this Act, shall assemble and enter into the Com∣mons House of Parliament, and shall enter into the same, and shall have voices in Parliament, before and without the taking of the several Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, or either of them, any Law or Statute to the contrary there∣of in any wise notwithstanding. Provided alwaies, that if the Kings Majesty, his Heirs or Successors, shall at any time during any Parliament hereafter to be assembled by vertue of this Act, award or direct any Commission to any person or persons whatsoever to take or receive the said Oaths, of all or any Members of the Commons House of Parliament, and any Members of the House being duly required thereunto, shall refuse or neglect to take and pronounce the same, that from thenceforth such person so refusing or neglecting shall bee deemed no Member of that House, nor shall have any voice therein, and shall suffer such pains and penalties, as if hee had presumed to sit in the same House without Election,
return or authority. These Statutes being all in their full force, never legally repealed, & authorizing no Officers nor Souldiers whatsoever forcibly to seclude or punish any Member of the Commons House, for not taking both or either of these two Legal Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance ratified by so many indubitable Parlia∣ments one after another, and backed by theA Colle∣ction of Ordi∣nance. p. 420. K. 430. solemn League, Covenant, and Protestation; it is neither in the power of the King himself, or his Counsil, nor of the House of Lords, or any other persons whatsoever (much less of the Commons House alone, or any prevailing par∣ty in it, who never in any age had the least Legal right or authority to administer an Oath in any case to any witness or person whatsoever, much less to impose any New Oaths upon their fellow-Members sitting with them, or secluded by them, and on all succeeding Mem∣bers of that House in future Parliaments) to enforce any New Oath or Engagement whatsoever, inconsistent with, or repugnant to these two Legal Parliamentary Oaths, or to suspend, exclude, or eject any Knight, Citizen, Burgess, or Baron of the Ports duly elected and returned, from sitting or voting with them in the Commons House, for refusing such new Ingagement or Oath; it be∣ing directly contrary not only to the Freedome, Priviledge of our English Parliaments, Laws, Liberties, but to the very letter of the3 Caroli. Petition of Right ratified by K. Charles himself, which complained of, and provides against the administring of any Oath not warranted by the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, and enacts, That no Man hereaf∣ter shall be called to take such Oath (as being repugnant to their Rights, Liberties, the Laws and Statutes of the Land (much less then no Members of Parliament en∣forced by their fellow-Members to take such an Oath, or else be suspended, secluded the House of Commons) Mr. Rush∣worths Histo¦rical Collecti∣ons. p. 423. & that former proceedings of this kind (in the case of Loanes, wherein such an oath was prescribed, exacted) should not be drawn hereafter into consequence or example; Yea contrary to the House of CommonsExact Col∣ection. p. 8. Remonstrants of
the State of the Kingdome, 15. Decemb. 1641. who there∣in charge the Kings evil Counsellors, That New Oaths have been enforced upon the Subjects against Law, and new Iudicatures erected without Law (which some who thus remonstrated have since that actually done, to the secluding of sundry Members of their own new-model'd Parliaments, for refusing to take new illegal Oaths, and Engagements, repugnant to their old ones of Supremacy and Allegiance) if not the very third Article of the late Petition and Advice, viz. That the ancient and undoubted Liberties and Priviledges of Parliament (which are the Birth-right and Inheritance of the people, and wherein eve∣ry man it interessed) bee preserved and maintained, and that you will not break nor interrupt the same, nor suffer them to be broken or interrupted. And particularly, that those persons who are legally chosen by a free Election of the people to serve in Parliament, may not be secluded from sit∣ting in Parliament to do their duties, but by judgement and assent of that House whereof they are Members. There∣fore not by any armed Guards without any hearing or judgement whatsoever: Which had some of those Ar∣my-Officers and Swordmen well considered, who assent∣ed to this Article and Petition; they would never have forcibly secluded, secured, imprisoned my self, and sun∣dry other Members of the late Parliament, onely for the faithful discharge of our Oaths, Duties, without, yea a∣gainst the judgement of the House whereof they were Members, which God in judgement hath repaid on some of them since that, with a suitable Retaliation, Seclusion, Restraint, by some of their own confederates in that un∣righteous Anti-parliamentary action. 4 That there is no one President exstant in our Histo∣ries or Records in former Ages, nor from 49. Henry 3. till the end of King Charles his Reign, of any Writs issued to Sheriffs or other Officers in Ireland, or Scotland (though subordinate and subject to our English Kings and Par∣liaments) for electing Knights, Citizens, Burgesses, or Commissioners to sit or vote as Members of the Commons∣house
in any Parliaments or great Councils of England; nor yet for any Knights, Citizens, Burgesses out of Ger∣sy, Gernsey, Alderny, Serke, Man, Silly, or other Islands belonging to England.37. H. 8. c. 26. 34 H. 8. c. 26. Yea the Principality of Wales it self (though ever subjected and united to England as part thereof) never sent any Knights, Citizens, or Burgesses to the Parliaments of England, as Members thereof, till enabled by special Acts of Parliament, Anno 27. H. 8. c. 26. & 35. H. 8. c. 11. Nor yet the County Palatine of Chester, though a part and member of England, till specially enabled by the Statute of 34. H. 8. c. 13. nei∣ther did, much less then can or ought any Counties, Ci∣ties, Burroughs in Scotland, or Ireland, to claim or pre∣tend the least colour of Right, Law, or Reason, to send any Knights, Citizens, Burgesses, (or Peers) to sit or vote in the Parliaments of England, neither ought any such if elected, returned to be of right admitted into our English Parliaments. 1. Because they never enjoyed this priviledge hereto∣fore in any Age, nor pretended to it. 2. Because they are very remote from the places where our English Parliaments are held, and it will not be onely extraordinarily troublesome, expensive, vexa∣tious, inconvenient for them, when elected, to re∣sort so far to our English Parliaments, but dangerous, (especially to cross the Seas out of Ireland in the Winter season) and mischievous. Thirdly, Because if any of them be unduly elected, returned (as is most probable the most of them will be so) it must necessarily put them to intollerable expen∣ces, trouble, vexation, and almost an impossibility to examine, determine the legality or illegality of such Elections, and returns from Scotland and Ireland. The Parliaments being likely to be determined, or adjour∣ned before the Sheriffs and other Officers, who unduly returned them, can be summoned, and witnesses pro∣duced thence to prove the abuses or injustice of such E∣lections: so that any persons thence returned by those in
power, though never elected, or very unduly through favour, power, or corruption of Officers, shall sit and vote as Members, whilst those who were duly chosen and entrusted by the people, shall be secluded and left without relief. 4 Because Scotland and Ireland,See my Ar∣gument of the case of the Lord Ma∣guire. though united to England, alwaies were, and yet are distinct Realms and Republicks, never incorporated into England, or its Par∣liament, as natural proper Members thereof: they all having by their own Fundamental Laws, Statutes, Cu∣stomes, Rights, Priviledges, their peculiar proper Par∣liaments, Peers, Knights, Citizens, Burgesses, Courts, Iudicatures, Councils, and Iudges distinct, divi∣ded from, and not intercommoning with one another. The Peers, Lords, Knights, Citizens, Burgesses of Eng∣land having no place, voice, nor right of Session in the Parliaments of Scotland or Ireland, though in many things subordinate to the Parliaments of England, and subject to Acts of Parliament made in them, and the Lords, Peers, Citizens, Burgesses of the Parliaments of Scotland, and Ireland, being no Lords, Peers, Knights, Citizens or Burgesses at all in England or its Parliaments, being distinct from theirs, and summoned unto their own Parliament onely, as I shall hereafter manifest in its due place. This is evident not onely by the distinct printed Laws and Statutes of England, Scotland, and Ire∣land, and those Historians, who have written of them (especially Holinshed, Bucana, and Mr. Cambden) but likewise by Mr. Seldens Titles of Honour, p. 2. c. 5, 6, 7, Cooks 4 Institutes, ch. 1. 75, 76. Cooks 7 Reports, Cal∣vins case. The Statute of 1 Iacobi, ch. 1, 2, 3. Iacobi, c. 3, 4. Iacobi, ch. 1. 7. Iacobi, ch. 1. which fully confirm and establish the distinct Parliaments, Rights, Laws, Li∣berties, Customes, Iurisdictions, Iudicatures of the Realm of England, and Scotland. 5. Because the calling and admission of Scotish Knights, Citizens, Burgesses, or Peers unto the Parlia∣ments of England, and giving them a voice and Legisla∣tive
power therein, both in Relation to England, Scot∣land and Ireland, though united under one King and Soveraign Lord, is diametrically contrary, First, to all these recited Acts, and the Propositions, proceedings men∣tioned in them, referred to the consideration and deter∣mination of the Parliaments of both Realms, as separate and distinct from each other, and not incorporated into one body, Realm, or Parliament; whose peculiar di∣stinct Rights, Jurisdictions, Powers, Parliaments, are since that in precise terms confirmed and perpetuated, without any union or incorporation into one undivided body politique. Secondly, Because it is expresly contra∣dictory to the late Act of 17. Caroli, passed, ratified in and by the Parliaments of both Kingdome, for the con∣firmation of the Treaty of Pacification between the two Kingdomes of England and Scotland. Wherein the Com∣missioners deputed by the Parliament of Scotland, to treat with the Commissioners appointed by the King and Parliament of England, for the saving of the Rights of Scotland, that the English might not claim any joynt right or interest with the Scots, in the things that con∣cerned their Parliaments, or Kingdome, in their papers of the 7. of August 1641. did declare and make known, that although they were fully assured that the Kingdome and Parliament of England, was for the present far from any thought of usurpation over the Kingdome and Parlia∣ment of Scotland, or their Laws and Liberties, yet for preventing the misunderstanding of posterity, and of strangers, and for satisfying the scruples of others not acquainted with the nature of this Treaty, and the manner of their proceedings, which may arise upon their comming into England, and their treating in time of Parliament: That neither by our treaties with the English,, nor by seeking our Peace to be established in Parliament, nor any other action of ours, do wee acknowledge any dependence up∣on them, or make them Iudges to us or our Laws, or any things that may import the smallest prejudice to our Liber∣ties. But that wee come in a free and brotherly way, by our
Informations to remove all doubts that may arise concerning the proceedings of our Parliament, and to joyn our endea∣vours in what may conduce for the peace and good of both Kingdomes, no otherwise than if by occasion of the Kings Re∣sidence in Scotland, Commissioners in the like Exigence, should be sent thither from England. Thirdly, It is point∣blank against the solemn League and Covenant, ratified and confirmed in the most sacred and publick manner, The 3 Article whereof, taken with hands lifted up to heaven, and subscribed by the Parliaments of both Kingdomes, and all others well-affected in both Realms, doth thus preserve the distinct Priviledges of the Parliaments of both Realms, in these words. We shall with the same sinceri∣ty, reality, and constancy in our several vocations, endeavour with our estates and lives, mutually to preserve the Rights and Priviledges of the Parliaments, and the Liberties of the Kingdomes of England and Scotland; which are like∣wise distinguished from each other in every other Ar∣ticle, the Prologue and Conclusion of the League and Co∣venat, and all Ordinances that confirm it. 4. As if this were not sufficient; it is directly contrary to theA Collection of Ordinances, p. 877, 878. Declaration of the Commons of England assembled in Parliament, 17, April, 1646. of their true intention inviolably to main∣tain the Ancient and Fundamental Government of the Kingdome, by King, Lords and Commons, the Govern∣ment of the Church, securing the people against all ar∣bitrary Government, and maintaining a right understand∣ing between the two Kingdomes of England, and Scotland, according to the Covenant and Treaties; To the Com∣mons printed Answers to the Scots Commissioners Papers 28 of November 1646. Yea to the Lords and Commons Houses joynt Declaration, the 29. of Iune 1646. In all which theySee the In∣dependency of England, by Henry Martin, 1628. do professedly declare, assert, argue, resolve, the absolute Independency, distinct Rights, Iurisdictions of the Kingdomes and Parliaments of England and Scotland, from the very Articles of the solemn League and Cove∣nant, and Treaties between both Kingdomes, and other E∣vidences, grounds, reasons, positively asserting, That the
Parliament and Kingdome of England is, and ought to bee the sole and proper Iudge of what may bee for the good of this Kingdome; and that the Kingdome and Parliament of Scotland, neither have, nor ought to have any joynt-concur∣rent share or interest with them therein, nor right of joynt-exercise of interest in disposing the person of the King in the Kingdome of England. And that the self-same liberty and priviledge alwaies had been admitted, and ever shall bee carefully and duly observed by them and the Parliament and Kingdome of England, to the Kingdome and Parlia∣ment of Scotland in all things that concern that Kingdome; And that it was not the intention of the Lords and Commons in the Parliament of England, nor of the Commissioners of the Parliament of Scotland, in sending Propositions to the King, in the name, and in the behalf of both Kingdomes, by joynt-consent, that any construction should be made there∣from, as if either Kingdome had any interest in each others Propositions, or in the Legislative Power of each other con∣cerning any of the said Propositions; but that it remaineth distinct in each Kingdome and Parliament respectively. And that notwithstanding any joynt-proceedings upon the said Propositions, either Kingdome hath power of themselves to continue, repeal, or alter any Law that shall be made upon the said Propositions for the good and government of either King∣dome respectively. And both Houses did therein declare, that they are fully resolved to maintain, and preserve in∣violable the solemn League and Covenant, and the Trea∣ties between the Kingdomes of England and Scotland. Now the calling and incorporating of Scotish and Irish Peers, Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses into the Parliaments of England, as Members, Voters, Legislators, together with the English, to oblige both England, Scotland, and Ireland, against the ancient, unquestionable, distinct, fundamental Rights, Priviledges of the Kingdomes, Parliaments, people, both of England, Scotland, and Ireland (all whose Parliaments, Rights, Priviledges, Li∣berties, will be totally subverted by it as well as our Eng∣lish) is so contradictory, so repugnant to, and inconsistent
with all and every of these recited Acts, Ordinances, De∣clarations, clauses of the solemn League and Covenant, to the Great Charter of King Iohn, all ancient Writs of Summons to English, Irish or Scotish Parliaments, all Acts for Electing Knghts, Burgesses, and concerning Parlia∣ments formerly established in all these three Kingdomes, as distinct, that no conscientious Heroick Englishman, Scot, or Inhabitant of Ireland, who cordially affects the honour, maintenance, preservation of his own native Countries, Kingdomes, or Parliaments fundamental Rights, Priviledges, Liberties, or makes conscience of violating the Articles of this solemn League and Covenant hee hath formerly taken, and subscribed in the presence of Almighty God, Angels and Men, with this protestation; wee shall not suffer our selves directly or indirectly by what∣soever combinatien, perswasion or terror to be divided or withdrawn from it, either by making defection to the contra∣ry part, or by giving our selves to a detestable indifferency or neutrality; but shall all the daies of our lives constantly continue therein against all opposition, and promote the same according to our Power against all Lets and Impe∣diments whatsoever; and this wee shall do in the sight and presence of Almighty God, the searcher of all hearts, with a true intention to perform the same, as wee shall answer the contrary at the great day, when the secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed; can ever in conscience, justice, reason, policy or prudence submit thereto, but is bound to oppose and resist with all his power, for the premised Rea∣sons. 6. Because the proportioning and distribution of the thirty persons to be elected for Scotland, and the thirty others for Ireland, and incorporating of these sixty Scotish and Irish Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses into the Par∣liaments of England, was not projected, effected, ap∣proved, ratified by the free, full, and joynt-consents of the respective Parliaments of England, Scotland, and Ire∣land, but onely by about twenty or thirty Army-Officers, in a private Cabinet Conventicle, at Whitehall, without
yea against their privities, and consents, by their Instru∣ment of Government, which they then published, 16 De∣cemb. 1653. Artic. 9, 10, 11. having not the least sha∣dow of any Legal Power or Authority, to oblige our 3 distinct Kingdomes, Nations, Parliaments, much less to subvert and abolish them, by new melting them into one body, contrary to their very fundamental Laws, Con∣stitutions, Rights, Priviledges, to their grand prejudice and dishonour. Therefore there is no reason for either of them to submit and conform thereto. The rather, because this Instrument was never ratified by any, but opposed by every publick Convention, since its publication, yea totally set aside (if ever valid) by the last of them, in and by this clause of their humble Petition and Advice, Artic. 3, 4. That the number of persons to be elected and chosen to sit and serve in Parliament for England, Scotland, and Ire∣land, and distribution of the persons so chosen, within the Counties, Cities, and Burroughs of them respectively, may be according to such proportions as shall be agreed in this pre∣sent Parliament: which agreed nothing concerning the same: And both the Instrument and Advice being now set aside by those in present power, by issuing Writs for e∣lecting Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses throughout England, according to the ancient Laws, Usage, Cu∣stome, and not according to the Instrument or Advice, by which the English and Commons House are now remit∣ted to their old Parliamentary Rights & Priviledges. They are obliged upon all these Reasons, Authorities, and Con∣siderations, henceforth to seclude all Scotish and Irish Knights, Citizens, Burgesses, or Peers, from sitting or vo∣ting amongst them as Members, and ought to treat with them onely as Delegates or Commissioners sent from both Nations touching such affairs as particularly relate to Scotland and Ireland, according toOrdinatio, pro stabilitate terrae Scotiae, cl. 33. E. 1. dorse 13. Cedu∣la. Rustal Par∣tition. 2. 1. Jac. c. 2. 16. Caroli. here p. 414, 415, 416. ancient and late Presidents, but not to permit them any place or vote at all in the Commons or Lords House, as joynt-Members, Legislators with the English, in the Parliaments of Eng∣land.
7. Because the thrity persons to be chosen for Scotland, and the other thirty for Ireland, and the several Coun∣ties, Cities, and Borroughs within the same, to repre∣sent and oblige both these Kingdomes and Nations, as their Representativees and Attornies, are not to be elected by the generality of both Kingdomes, as in justice, rea∣son, equity they ought to be, but by such as the Major part of the Council at Whitehall shall prescribe, as the 9th. Article in the Instrument declares, some whole Counties, and eminent Cities in both Kingdomes, hav∣ing no voices at all in the Elections of these Members, and therefore not to be obliged by them, as 44. E. 3. f. 19. 11. H. 7. 14. 21. H. 7. 40. 23, H. 8. Br. Lert. 27. 7. H. 6. 35. 6. Dyer 373. b. resolve. This being a general Rule in Law, Justice, Reason, inserted into the very Writs of Summons to Parliament, Claus. 24. E. 1. m. 7. dorso (here) p. 6. Ut quod omnes tangit ab omnibus approb∣tur. And the sole reason why Acts of Parliament oblige all those who send Knights and Burgesses to them, and not tenants in Ancient Demesn, is onely this, because they assent unto them, in and by their representatives, as the Statute of 1 Iac. c. 1. 4. H. 7. 10. Brooke Parliament, 25. 27. 41. Ash Parliament, 10. and Proclamation, 39. and the Law-books Authorities there collected to this purpose determine. 8. In theSee Mr. Rushworths Historical Collections. p. 237. Parliament of a Caroli, the Lords Spiri∣tual and Temporal then in Parliament assembled, exhibited this Petition to the King: That whereas they heretofore in civility as to strangers yeelded precedency according to their several degrees unto such Nobles of Scotland and Ireland, as being in Titles above them, have resorted hither; Now divers of the natural born Subjects of these Kingdomes re∣sident here with their families, and having their estates a∣mong us, do by reason of some late created dignities in those Kingdomes of Scotland and Ireland, claim precedency of the Peers of this Realm, which tends both to the disservice of your Majesty, ad to the diparagement of the English No∣ility, as by these Reasons may appear.
1. It is a nobelty without President, that men should in∣herit honours where they possess nothing else. 2. It is injurious to those Countries from whence their Titles are derived, that they should have a voe in Parlia∣ment where they have not a foot of Land, &c. Upon the con∣sideration of which inconveniencies they humbly beseeched his Majesty, that an order might be timely setled therein to prevent the inconvenience to his Majesty, and redress the prejudice and disparagement to the Peers and Nobility of this Kingdome occasioned thereby, which the King promi∣sed to do. And is it not a far greater inconvenience, pre∣judice and disparagement to the Nobility, Gentry, and Parliaments of England, yea a greater Novelty and In∣jury than this they then petitioned against, not only for the Nobility, but for the very Knights, Citizens, Burges∣ses, of Scotland, and Ireland, to sit with, and take place of the ancient Peers, Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of England, according to their several Titles, and to enjoy an equal vote, judicature, priviledge with them in every particular, in the very Parliaments of England, which they never formerly did, though they have not one foot of Land in England, nor the English any vote of place in their Parliaments? No doubt it is. There∣fore as fit to be timely redressed, as that grievance, upon the self-same grounds, being more universal, prejudicial and dishonourable to the whole English Peerage, Parlia∣ment and Nation, than this which concerned the Eng∣lish Peers alone, and that onely out of Parliament. 9. This number of Members sent from Scotland and Ireland to the Parliaments of England, holds no just not equal proportion or distribution with the numbers of Members, which they formerly elected and sent to their own respective Parliaments, in Scotland and Ireland, as is evident by the Irish Statutes of 18, E. 4. c. 2. 10. H. 7. c. 16, 38. H. 8. c. 12. 33. H. 8. c. 1. Cookes 4. Iustit. c. 75, 76. and Regiam Majestatem, nor yet in reference to the number of the Members and Parliament-men in Eng∣land, being near ten to one to the Members of both these
Nations conjoyned, which inequality upon all occasi∣ons may prove very prejudicial to them both. 10. It will be an extraordinary grievance, oppression, expence, vexation, mischief, delay and obstruction of Justice to all the Inhabitants of Scotland and Ireland, not onely to bear the Expences of all the Members they send to the Parliaments of England, but to be enforced to re∣sort unto them in person, together with their Witnesses, Evidences, and Council, for all grievances, oppressions, injuries, errors, complains and misdemeans in Officers or Courts of Justice formerly redressed, and remediable onely in their own proper Parliaments, much nearer home, and now only to be heard, examined, redressed, determined in the Parliaments of England, as the Claus. Roll. of 39. E. 3. M. 12. De erroribus corrigendis in Par∣liament is tenend is in Hibernia (printed in my Epistle to my Argument of the case of the Lord Magre) most fully and excellently resolves: And the multitudes of com∣plaints, out of all three Kingdomes will prove so great in every Parliament, that it will be impossible to hear and determine the moity of them at any one Session or Par∣liament, and the attendance will prove so tedious to all or most, that it will become a greater grievance to them than any they complain of, and if they gain any relief, it will be in effect, a Remedy as bad or worse, as the dis∣eas it cures: Yea an express violation of Magna Charta. ch. 29. Nulli negabimus, nulli differemus justitiam aut rectum: Finally, This patching of New Scotish and Irish Members into our old English Parliament, will be so farre from uniting and contenting the three Nations and Par∣liaments in one, that it will discontent and disunite them more than before, and make the rent the greater upon every occasion, as Christ himself resolves, with whose words I shall close up this observation:Mark. 2. 21. No man seweth or putteth a peece of new Cloth upon an old Garment,Luk. 5. 36. else the new peece that filleth it up, taketh away from the old, and agreeth not with the old, and the rent is made worse. 5. That as the Writs of the Common Law, are the
foundations whereon the whole Law, and subsequent pro∣ceedings do depend, asDe Legi∣bus & consue∣tudini, Regni Angliae. Glanvil,Lib. 5. Bracton,Cap. 48. Britton, Lib 2. c. 12. Fleta heretofore,Praeace to Na. Brevium. Fitzherbert,Dgest of Writs. Thelwell,1. Instit. f. 73. b. Sir Edward Cook, and others of later times resolve; upon which account if the Writs be vicious, erronious, invalid, illegal, or null in Law, they abate, vitiate, and annihilate the whole Process, Declarations, and Struotures grounded on them, asBritton. c. 48. Statham. Fitzherbert, Brock, Thelwel, Ash Title, Brief, Abate∣ment de Brief & Errour. all our Law-Books assert; So the Writs of Summons to Parliaments and Great Councils are the very foundations, and corner-stones whereon our Par∣liaments, Great Councils, and all their Votes, Judge∣ments, Proceedings, Acts, Ordinances do depend. Therefore if they be defective, erronious, invalid, ille∣gal, insufficient, or null in themselves, the Parliaments and Great Councils convened by, founded on them, with all their Iudgements, Proceedings, Acts, Ordinances, must of necessity be so likewise, as the Statutes of 1. Hen. 4. c. 3. 21. R. 2. c. 1. 39. 8. H. 6. c. 1. H. 8. c. 1. 17. E. 4. 5. 7. 1. H. 4. rot. Parl. n. 1. 66. 1. E. 4. rot. Parl. n. 8: to 17. 1. H. 7. c. 9. 27. H. 8. c. 24. in England, largely evidence, and the Statute of 10. H. 7. c. 27. in Ireland, determines; repealing a Parliament holden at Drogheda before Sir Ro∣bert Preston, decreed and deemed void to all Intents, by the Kings Council in Ireland. 1. Because the Duke of Bedford, Lieutenant of Ireland, (by whose Deputy it was summoned and held) surren∣dred his Patent of Lieutenancy before the said Parliament summoned. 2. Because there was no general summons of the said Parliament, to all the Shires, but onely to four Shires. 3. Because the said Deputy had no mnner of Power by his Commission to summon or kéep a Parliament: For the which causes it was ordained and enacted, that the Parlia∣ment to holden be deemed void, and of none effect, by the whole Parliament of Ireland, Anno 10. H. 7. And the Parliament of 18. E. 4. ch. 2. in Ireland, touching the Election of Knights and Brgesses, further manifests it. 6. That the summoning (as likewise proguing,
adjourning, dissolving) of all Parliaments and Great Councils in England and Ireland, is a peculiar inseparable royal Prerogative, belonging onely to the Kings of England, and incommunicable to any other person or persons, yea to Parliaments themselves, which cannot appoint a succeed∣ing Parliament to be called but by the Kings consent, and that (though appointed to be held at a prefixed day and place) to beHere p. 3. summoned only by the Kings Writ. That all Writs of Summons and Prorogation alwaies issued, and of right ought to be issed onely in the Kings name, stile, autho∣rity, whether absent out of, or present within the Realm, whether within age, or of ripe years, and that by his special Commands alone, or his and his Councils joynt precept, as the stile, name, contents of all prece∣dent and subsequent Writs; the subscriptions under them, Per ipsum Regem, per ipsum Regem & Consilium, per ipsum Regem, Custodem & Consilium (in the Kings absence) per breve de privato sigio, &c. the stile, tenor of all Writs, De expensis Militum & Burgen sium, the Statutes of 5. R. 2. Parl. 2. c. 4. 7. H. 4. c. 14. 6. H. 6. c. 4. 23. H. 6. c. 11. 27. H. 8. c. 24. 31. H▪ 8. c. 10. most Acts of late times for the subsidies of the Clergy and Temporalty, Tonage, Foundage; the Prologues to our ancient and mo∣dern printed Statutes, the Kings Chancellors and others speeches upon the convention of most Parliaments, in Parliament Rolls, together with the Act of 16. Caroli, for preventing of inconveniences happening by the long inter∣mission of Parliaments, Cooks 4. Institutes, ch. 1. and all who have written of our English Parliaments, abun∣dantly evidence and resolve beyond contradiction. Hence our lateSee Mr. Rushworth his Historical Col∣lections, p. 4 10, &c. King Charles, in his Declaration of the causes of assembling and disslving the two last Parlia∣ments, Iune 13. 2. Caroli, affirms, That the calling, ad∣journing, proroguing, and dissolving of Parliaments, do pe∣culiarly belong unto himself by an undoubted Prerogative inseparably uniied to his impertal Crown, and the Statute of 16. Caroli. c. 1. made by the unanimous consent of both Houses declares, That by the Laws and Statutes
of this Realm, the appointment of the time and place for the holding of Parliaments, and the summoning of them (by Writ in the Kings Name) hath alwaies belonged, as it ought, to his Majesty, and his royal Progenitors, and none else. 7. That the Kings of England, have as true, full, re∣al and legal an haereditary right, Title, Interest, Propriety in and to the Parliament, as they have in and to the Kingdome and Crown of England, as these Clauses in all their Writs of Summons, Prorogations of Parlia∣ments, issued to the spiritual and temporal Lords, Kings Counsil, Sheriffs, and Warden of the Cinque∣ports resolve; Ordinavimus quoddam Parliamentum no∣strum, &c. tenere: In ultimo Parliamento nostro; post ultimum Parliamentum nostrum, sitis ad nos ad Parliamentum no∣strum, and the like; compared with Statum Regni nostri Angliae: Et cum Praelatis & Proceribus Regni nostris sicut commodum Regni nostri Diligitis: Iura Coronae no∣strae, &c. in the same Writs: The Writs de expensi: Militum & Burgensium; The Titles and Prologues of most printed Acts of Parliament: The Statutes of 8. H. 6. c. 7. 23. H. 6. c. 11. 23. H. 8. c. 3. 27. H. 8. c. 24. 31. H. 8. c. 10. 1. Iac. c. 1. and sundry Writs in the Register, stiling the Parliament, the Kings Parliament, his Parliament, our Parliament in relation to the King, andSeldens Titles of Ho∣nour. p 663, 665, 747, 748, 751, 757, 764, &c. his Patents for creating Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Peers and Barons of the Realm, granting them and their Heirs males, Sedem & locum in Parliamentis no∣stris, Haeredum & successorum nostrorum inra Regnum nostrum Angliae. Therefore the Parliaments of England can no more exist or subsist without the King, than the Kingdome or Crown of England, the King being both Ca∣put, Principium & finis Parliamenti, as Modus tenendi Par∣liamentum, 4 Inst p. 3. Sir Edward Cooke and others resolve, our Parliaments living and dying with our Kings, and determining when summoned and sitting by the Kings decease (since they can neither treat nor confer with him of any businesses concerning him or his Kingdome, nor be his Parliament after his death) as the Parliaments of
1. H. 4. rot. Parl. n. 1. 2. 3. 1. H. 5. rot. Parl. n. 16. 4. E. 4. f. 44. Cooks 4. Instit. p. 46. adjudge: the Parliament of 23. R. 2. dissolving by this resignation of the Crown, and the Parliaments of 14 H. 4.King Chales his De∣claration, 13. June 2. Car. Mr. Rush∣worths Histo∣rical Cole∣ctiods, p. 411. and 24. Iacobi being dissol∣ved by their respective deaths, as their Judges and Par∣liaments resolved, and the Parliament of 18. Caroli by the self same reason, as I haveMy Legal Vindication a∣gainst illegal Taxes. elsewhere evidenced, seeing hee could neither vobiscum & cum caeteris Magna∣tibus & Proceribius Regni nostri colloqaium habere & Tra∣ctatum, super diversis & arduis negocis Nos & Regnum nostrum cotingentibus, nor the Commons do and assent hiis quae tunc ibidem per Ns, &c. ordinari contigerit super negotiis antedictis, as the Writs of Summons and Pro∣rogation prescribe. 8. That when ever there was aHere p. 43, 44, 46, 50, 51, 52, 67, 68, 80, 84, 85, 86, 87, &c An exact Abridgement of the Records in the Tower, p. 542, 543, 552, 561, 597. Custos Regni, du∣ring the Kings absence in forraign parts, or a Protector during his Minority, the Writs of Summons and Proro∣gation issued alwaies in the Kings stile, name, and by his authority and direction, and the Teste onely in the Cu∣stos, or Protectors name, with a per ipsum Regens, per ip∣sum Regem & Consilium, or, per ipsum Regem, Custodem & consilium subjoyned. 9. That when our Kings could not be personally pre∣sent at any Parliament by reason of their wars, sickness, extraordinary occasions, absence in forraign Parts, or minority, they held them by aHere p. 9. 41, 42, 44, 46, 48, 49, 50, 93, 64. Custos Regni, or Commissioners authorized by special Commissions issued to them in the Kings name under his Great Seal, to hold these Parliaments in his Name and Stead, which were publickly read at the beginning of the Parliament, and entred in the Parliaments Rolls; for which I shall present you with these presidents onely, omitting all others of this kind, agreeing with them, or varying little from them, in form or substance. The first is this. Anno 13. E. 3. Rot. Parl. n. 4. Edwards Dei gratia Rex Angliae, Dominus Hiberniae, & Dux, Aquitaniae, Ar∣chiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abbatibus, Prioribus, Comitibus, Baronibus & omnibus aliis ad instans Parliamentum no∣strum
apud Westm. summonitum conventuris salu∣tm. Cum dilectus & fidelis noster Edwardus Dux Cor∣nubiae, Comes Cestr. filius noster carissimus Custos. Reg∣ni nostri, propter quaedam negocia sibi incumbentia sit ad praesens Parliamentum praepeditus, quo minus isto die Iovis in Octabis Sti. Hillarii apud locum praedictum vale at perso∣naliter interesse: de circumspectionis & industriae magni∣tudine venerabilis Patris Iohannis Archiepiscopi Cantuar. totius Angliae Primatis, & discretorum virorum Magistri Willieli de le Zouche Decani Ecclesiae beati Petri Ebor, Thesaurarii nostri Ricardi de Willoughby, Iohannis de Sto∣nore, & Iohannis Decani Sti. Pauli plenam fiduciam reportantes; ipsos quatuor, tres aut duos eorum ad incho∣and. & continuandm Parliamentum praedictum, nostri, & dicti filii nostri nomine; & ad faciend. ea quae Pro Nobis per praedictum filium nostrum facienda fuerint, usque adventum filii nostri ibidem, Deputamus & Assignamus. Et ideo vobis mandamus, quod iisdem Archiepiscopo, The sau∣rario, Rico. Iohi. & Iohi. quatuor, tribus & duobus eo∣rum intendentes sit is in praemissis in forma praedicta. Teste Edwardo Duc Cornub. & Comite Cestr. filio nostro ca∣rissimo Custode Angliae, apud Langle XIX. die Ianua∣rii, Anno Regni nostri tertio decimo. The second is thus registred, Ann 25. E. 3. Rot. Parl. n. 1. 2. Edwardus Dei gratia Rex Angliae, & Franciae, & Do∣minus Hiberniae, Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abbatibus, Prioribus, Comitibus, Baronibus, Militibus, & omni∣bus aliis ad instans Parliamentum nostrum apud Westm Summonitum conventuris, salutem; Cum Nos ex certis ca∣sis sumus ad partes transmarias profectri, per quod ad primum diem dicti Parlimenti forte non poterimus interesse, Nos in casu quod citra dictum diem non redeamus Leonel∣lo filio nostro carissimo ad inchoand: Nomine nostro Par∣liamentum praedictam, & ad faciend. ea quae pro Nobis & per Nos facind fuerint, usque adventum nostrum ibidem, plenam tenore praesentiu committimus potestatem. Et ideo Vobis mandamus quod eidem filio nostro intendentes
sitis in praemissis, in forma praedicta: In cujus rei testimonium has literas nostras fieri ecimus patentes. Teste mipso apud Turrim London. 20. die Januarii. An∣no Regni nostri Angli, 24. Regni vero nostri Franciae undecimo. Per ipsum Regem. The third is thus recorded in the Parliament Roll of 51. E. 3. n. 1. with this Prologue. Enle 15a. sint Hilar, &c. que fuist le primer jour de ce present Parlement, trz nobles & pissent Sir Richard Prince de Gales, Duc de Cornwelle, & Coute de Cestr. & auxint les Prelets, Seigneurs, Justices, Comenes, & auters que fu∣erent venuz per Sommons de ce present Parlement, sesemble∣rent en le palayes de Westm. en le Chambre de peinte; & illoeques en lour presence le dit Prince alos seent in my lieu de uly, Cestassavir en la place du Roy meses, nostre le dit Seigieur le Roy esteant meismes benemont, venier en sa proper persone, envoy ast en dit Parlement returnes ses Li∣teres patents oz son grant Seale enseales, en la form que ensuant. Edwardus Dei gratia, &c. Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abbatibus, Prioribus, Ducibus, Comitibus, Baronibus, militibus, & omnibus aliis in instanti Parliamento con∣venturis salutem. Cum ex certis cansu sums ad prsns praepditi, ita quod ad primum diem Parliamenti praedicti ad locum praedictum personaliter non poterims interesse; de circumspectionis & industriae magnitudine carissimi filii nostri Ricardi, Principis Wallia, Duci Cornubiae, & Comitis Cestr, plenam fiduiam reportantes, eidem filio nostro ad Parliamentum praedictum nostro nomine inchoand. & ad faciend.  quae pro Nobis. & per os ibidem faciend. fu∣runt, plenm tenors praesentium committimus poestatm. Et ideo vobis mandamus, quod eidem Principi, intendentes fitis in praemissis in forma praedicta. In cujus Rei, &c. Teste meipso apud Havering. 26. die Jan. Anno Regni nostri Agliae, 51. & Franciae, 38. The fourth is thus entred, Rot. Parl. An. 1. H. 6. n. 1. Fait assavoir  commncment del Parlement tenuz le Lundy prochein de at le feste de Seint Martyn, I'a del
regne du Roy Henry Sisme, pis le conquest; primerement un Commission du Roy fait desoutz son grande Seal, & directz al Honorable & puissent Prince, Humphry Duc de Glocestre, son-Uncle, per la quell le Roy avi done poiar a mesme son Uncle a tenit le dit Parlement en le nom du Roy, folon laffect & la contenuz de mesme la Com∣mission; en la preseuc de'l dit Duc seant en la Chambre de peinte, deinz In Palayes de Westm. & anxy de les Seignieurs espuelz & temperelz, & les Chivalers des Countees, & des Citeins, & Burgeois del Roialme, De∣ingleterre pur toute lay Comme de mesme la Rolalm au dit Parlement tenuzilleoqes alors esteantz, uit over∣tement le ez, dont le tenure-cy ensuyt. Heritus Dei gratia Rex Angliae, & Franciae, & Domi∣nus Hiberniae, omnibus ad quos praesentes litetrae pervene∣rint, salutem, Sciatis, quod cum de avisamento Conci∣lii nostri pro quibusdam arduis & urgentibus negociis nos, & statum & defensionem Regni nostri Angliae, ac Ecclesiae Anglicanae▪ contingentibus, quoddam Parlia∣mentum nostrum, apud Westm. Die Lunae prox: ante se∣stum Sti. Martini prox. futur. teneri ordinavimus, Et quia vero propter certas causas ad Parliamentum Praedi∣ctum personaliter non poterimus interesse; Nos de circum∣spectione & industria carissimi Avuncui nostri Hum∣fredi Ducs Gloucestr. plenam fiduciam reportantes, ei∣dem Avunculo nostro ad Parliamentum praedict. nomine nostro ichoand & in eo procedend. & ad facienda omnia, & singula quae pro Nobis, & per Nos, pro bono regimi∣e & gubernatione Rgni nostripraedicti, ac aliorum Uomi∣niorum nostrorum eidens Regno nestro pertinentum; ibdem suerint faciend. Nec non ad Parliamentum illud ien∣dum & dissolvendum, de assensu Concilii nostri, plenam te∣nore praesentium, committimus potestaes. Dantes ultrus, de assensu ejusdem Concilii nostri, tam universis & sin∣gulis Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abbatibus, Prioribus, Du∣sibus, Comitibus, Baronibus & Militibus; quam omnibus aliis quorum interest ad Parliamentum nostrum praedict conventuris, similiter tenore prsentum in mundatis▪ quod ei∣de
Avculo nostr intendant praemissi forma supra dict. In cujus rei testimonium has literas nostras fieri fecimus patentes. T. mipsa apud Westm. 6 dis No∣vembris. Anno Regni nostri primo. The like Commission I finde made to the same, Duke in the Parliamant Roll of 2. H. 6. n. 1. word for word, except in those additional words and clauses in the Commission it self. Nos de circumspectione, fidelitate & industria, &c. Eidem Avunculo nostro ad Parliamentum praedict. nomine nostro inchoand. negociaque praedicta ex∣ponend. ac declarand. ac exponi & declarari faciend. necnon in negociis illis, & Parliamento praedicto, ac omnibus & singulis in eo emergentibus proceded, &c. Nenon ad Parliamentum illud si necesse fuerit continu∣and. & prorogand▪ ac ad idem Parliamentum finiend, &c. plenam committimus potestatem; quam in eventu praedicto Parliamento nostro & tempore aliquo forsan in perso∣na nostra adess contigerit revocare intendimus. Dantes, &c. Ut supra: with the like in other Parliaments, during this Kings Minority, and in 33 H. 6. rot. Parl. n. 30. It is observeable, that none of these Custodes Regni, or Protectors, had any power given them to summon or hold Parliaments in their own Names, or by their own inherent Authority as Protectors; nor to create new Peers or Barons of the Realm, by Writs or Patents, for ought I finde, the very words of their Patents, and theExact A∣bridgement of the Records in the Tower, p. 564, 568, 869, 592, 658. Par∣liaments of 1. H. 4. rot. Parl. n. 24, 25, 26, 2 H. 6. rot. Parl. n. 15, 16. 6 H. 6, rot. Parl. n. 22, 23, 24. (a no∣table Record.) 8 H. 6. rot. Parl. . 13. 33 H. 6. rot. Parl. n. 30. to 42. resolving the contrary. By all these forecited Commissions, Patents, and the Patent to the Protectors themselves during the Kings Mi∣noritie, enrolled in the Parliament Roll of 1. H. 6. Num. 24, (which I haveIn the second part of my so∣veraign power of Parliaments & Kingdomes, p 67, 68. elsewhere published) it is most ap∣parent; That as the1 Pet 2. 13, 14. 1 Tim. 2. 2. Prov. 8. 2. 4 Dan, 2. 37, 38. Scripture and New Testament it self, in express terms resolve; The King alone, to be the Supream Magistrate: So the Common and Statute
Laws, Lawyers, Writs, Records, and Parliaments of England, have alwaies hitherto, resolved, declared, pro∣claimed (as Bracton, l. 1. c. 8. l. 3. c. 16. f. 134. l. 3. c. 3. 9. Fleta. l. 1. c. 5. 17. TheWalsingham. Hist, Angl. p. 55, 56, Mat. Westm. p. 435, 536. Henry de Knyghton de e∣ventibus. Angl. l. 3. c. 13. Col. 3529. Parliament of Lincolne. 29 E. 1. 16 R. 2. . 5. 25. H. 8. c. 19, 21. 22. 26 H. 8. c. 1. 27. H. 8. c. 15. 28 H. 8. c. 7, 10. 31 H. 8. c. 10, 15. 32 H. 8. c. 22, 24, 26. 33 H. 8. c. 29. 35 H. 8. c. 1. 3, 27, 19, 37 H. 8. c. 15. 1. E. 6. c. 2. 1. Eliz. 5. 1. 3. 4. 5 Eliz. c. 1. 8 Eliz. c. 1. 1 Iac. c. 1. 2. 3. Iac. c. 4. 7 Iac. c. 6. The Prologues of all ancient Par∣liaments, and the very words of the Oathes of Suprema∣cy and Allegiance, (prescribed to all Members of the Common House, Judges, Justices, Officers, Barristers, Attornies, Sheriffs, Graduates, Ministers and School∣Masters by our Parliaments) abundantly evidence;) The King of England alone (not the Custos Regni, Protector, nor any other person whatsoever, nor the Pope himself) to be the onely Supream Governour, Head, Magistrate of the Realm of England, and the Dominions thereunto an∣nexed, and that in and over all spiritual and ecclesiasti∣cal persons, things, causes, as well as temporal, without recognizing any other Soveraign Lord, Governour, Ma∣gistrate, for ought I finde in History or Record. 10. That the causes of summoning and proroging all Parliaments ought to be generally or particularly ex∣pressed in the Writs of Summons and Prorogation, to∣gether with the precise daies whereon, and places where∣in they are to meet upon the Summons or Prorogation; that so all may know ertainly at what time and place to meet. That the daies and places of their meeting and prorogation, were absolutely in the power of our Kings, who varied them according to emergent occa∣sions, and the places of their necessary residence. For in∣stance; When the wars or affairs of Scotland drew our Kings and Nobles towards the Northern parts, they u∣sually summoned or prorogued their Parliaments to York, Karlisle, Newcastle, Stanford, Lincolne, Leycester, Northampton, Cambridge, Stainford, Conventry, Not∣tingham.
When the wars and businesses of France cal∣led them towards the South, they frequently summon∣ed their Parliaments, to Winton, Salisbury, Southampton, Canterbury. When the wars or negotiations of Wales or Ireland occasioned their removal towards them, they convened their Parliaments at Gloucester, Worce∣ster, Salop, Hereford, Bristol, Oxford, or Malborough. But most usually they were summoned and prorogued to Westminster or London, as the center and Metropolis of the Realm, and the most indifferent and convenient place of meeting, as the Writs of Summons and Proro∣gation attest. 11. That for the most part all Writs of Summons and Prorogation both to the spiritual and temporal Lords, Kings Counsil, Sheriffs of Counties, and War∣dens of the Cinque-ports, have the self-same Teste, date, Prologues; yet now and then some of them, are diffe∣rent in their dates, yet very rarely in their recitals. That there is frequently a different space of daies and times be∣tween the dates of the Writs of Summons and Resum∣mons upon Writs of Prorogation, and the daies of the first meeting of the Parliaments, and Great Councils to which they are summoned and elected, as you may ea∣sily discern by comparing them; there being sometimes two months space or more, sometimes fifty daies, but usually forty daies, or more (according to the Charter of King Iohn) between the date of the Writs and daies of appearance in Parliaments, and Grand Councils. Yet in cases of extream necessity, upon sudden unexpected dangers, I finde two Parliaments summoned to meet within the space of forty daies; as inHen. p. 31. Claus. 4 E. 3. d. 19. Where there was onely two and thirty daies between the date of the Writ and Parliament, which being un∣usual, there is an express clause in the Writs, that it should not be drawn into consequence for the future: So in 28 Eliz. the Writ bore date the 15th. of September, and the Parliament was to begin the 15th. of October following, but thirty daies after. All other Writs (to
my best remembrance) these two excepted, having at least forty daies between the Teste, and daies of ap∣pearance, that so the Members might have competent time to prepare themselves to repair to Parliaments and Great Councils after their Summons and Elections. 12. That in ancient times our Parliaments and Great Councils were more frequently summoned to meet and See p, 7, 10, 11, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 21, 24, 27, 30, 63, 64, 162, 164, 168, 169, 171. 343, 348, &c. appear on the Lords Day, than on any other day of the week; which abuse in succeeding times was reformed and quite discontinued even in times of Popery, as well as since the reformation of Religion. 13. That our Kings upon extraordinary publick dangers, and other occasions, may summon Parliaments, Great Councils, Convocations as often as they think meet: That they were anciently summoned once or twice every year at least (and some times thrice, four or five times in one year) according to the ancient Constitution in the.Beda Ec∣cles. Hist. l. 4. c 5. Spelman∣ni Concil. p. 153. Council at Hereford, Anno 673. Can. 7. The Law ofHorne Myrrour. p. 1. Cooks 1. In∣stit. f. 110. . King Alfred, Rotul. Ordinationum, 5 E. 2. n. 31. 4 E. 3. c. 14. Rot. Parl. n. 14. 36. E. 3. cap. 10. 50. E. 3. Rot. Parl. n. 181. 1 R. 2. rot. Parl. n. 95. 2. R. 2. rot. Parl. n. 4. 5. & 16 Carol. cap. 1. 14. That the more weighty, difficult, pressing, ur∣gent the occasions and dangers were of summoning Par∣liaments theSee p. 13, 14, 19, 21, 27, 28, 44, 177. more importunate, vehement, urgent, mandatory, minatory, and compulsary, were the expres∣sions, mandates, clauses in the Writs of Summens for the Lords and Commons personal appearance and atten∣dance, without admitting any excuses, or procurations, and not to depart from them without special licence. 15. That when any publick weighty businesses in∣tended to be propounded, dispatched in one Parlia∣ment or Great Council, by reason of other businesses, or shortness of time, could not be propounded or con∣cluded, therein; thereuponSee p. 27, 28, 29, 32, 41, 43, 177. another Parliament or Council was soon after called to dispatch it, the day and place whereof was sometimes appointed in and by the Parliament next preceding before its dissolution.
16. That though anciently before the word Parlia∣mentum came in use among our Ancestors, Great Councils were the same in substance with Parliaments; yet since the summoning of Knights, Citizens, Bu∣gesses and Barons of the Ports to Parliaments, and the insertion of Parliamentum, into the Writs of Summons and Statutes, you may oberve some differencesSee p. 19, 20, 4, 30, 38, 39, 40, 4, 48, 52, 57, 62, 63, 174, 187, to 192. be∣tween Parliaments and Councils, and the Writs of Sum∣mons to them, which are frequently distinguished in the margin of the Clause Rolls; by this different entry; Summunitio Parliamenti, De veniendo ad Parliamentum, &c. & Summonitio Concllil, de veniendo ad Concilium, &c. The principal differences between them are these. 1. That many Bishops, Abbots and Nobles are usu∣ally omitted in the Summons to Councils, which were u∣sually summoned to Parliaments, and seldome omitted in the summons to them, unless absent in forraign parts. 2. That many persons were summoned to Councils, which wee never finde summoned to Parliaments. 3. That there is no Clause of Praemunientes in the Writs of Summons to Councils issued to Archbishops, and Bishops, to summon their Chapters, Deans, Archdea∣cons, and Clergy of their Diocess; as there is usually in their Writs of Summons to Parliaments. 4. That Writs of Summons to Councils, issued to the Lords & Great men are seldome accompanied with any Writs of Election for Knights, Citizens, Burgesses and Barons of Ports issued to Sheriffs, or the Warden of the Cinqueports; as Writs of Summons to Parliaments are; and if any Knights, Citizens or Burgesses be summoned to them, it is in a different manner and number, than when they were summoned to Parliaments. 5. Writs of Summons to Parliaments are usually accompanied with Writs of Summons to the Kings Counsils, but those to Councils are never attended with such Writs, distinct from those is∣sued to the spiritual and temporal Lords, as Writs of
Summons to Parliaments are. Which differences some injudicious Writers and Antiquaries not observ∣ing; have both confounded those Writs together as one, and mistaken one of them frequently for the other. 17. That the principal end,See p. 11, 12, 13, 29, 45, 48, 49, 53, 54, 56, 59, 63, 64, 67, 74, 88, 93. Hons Myr∣rour, ch. 5. sect 11. p. 282. scope of summoning Parliaments ought to be the common benefit, ease, pro∣fit, welfare of the people, the execution, promotion of publick Justice, the Peace and good Government of the Realm, the reformation of all publick grievances, and oppressions, the enacting of wholesome Laws, the maintenance of the Great Charters and Liberties of the people, and freeing them from all unjust exactions, impositions, taxes, not granted by Parliament, nor warranted by Law; the necessary defence of the Realm by common consent against forraign enemies; and not to exact and impose unnecessary, insupportable, excessive, endless Aids and Taxes on the people. 18. That no publick war ought to be undertaken,See p. 6, 7, 8, 12. 17, 45, 46, 6, 68, 70. 71, 72, 73, 74, 76, 77, 131, to 24, 232, 233, 234. nor no Aids, Taxes, Imposts, Customes or Tallages im∣posed on, or exacted, levyed on the people by our Kings, or any other, but onely by common consent, and Grant of the Lords and Commons in a full and free Parliament, though it be for the necessary defence of the Kingdome by Land or Sea, the defence or regain∣ing of the Lands and Rights of the Crown in forraign parts; and that onely in moderate and just proportions, granted onely for a short season, and leavyed in a legal manner. Nor no mens Rights precluded or forejudg∣ed in Parliament by any general Act, before they bee heard. Nor the Clergy taxed by the Lords and Com∣mons, but onely by themselves in their convoca∣tions. 19. That the Writs of Summons to Parliaments en∣joyning all the temporal Earls, Peers, Lords, and Barons of the Realm, and commanding them upon and in the Love, Faith, Homage, Allegiance they owe unto the King, to appear in proper person in their Parliaments, and that with a Quanunque excusation cessant;
& salvationem Regni nostri & Ecclesiae Anglicanae & expeditionem dictorum negotiorum diligitis, Nullatenus omittatis, &c. as the Writs enjoyn them. And the Writs de23 H. 6. c. 12. 6. H. 8. c. 16. Register 192 Cooks 4. In∣stit. p. 46. 1 H. 5. Rot. Parl. n. 26. Expensis Militum, & Burgensium levandis (issued only after each Parliament ended, not before) allow∣ing every Knight, Citizen, Burgesse, and Baron of the Ports his wages, In Ueniendo, Morando, et Rede∣undo; both in coming to, continuing at, and retur∣ning from the Parliament when dissolved; (for∣feited by his departure thence without special license:) It must needs be the highest contempt against the Kings authority, the greatest injury, affront to the persons summoned, and those for whom they serve as Trustees or Attornies, the most audacious, apparent vio∣lation of the Priviledges and Freedome of Parliaments, for any person or persons whatsoever, by meer armed force, or other Machiavillian practises, to suspend or seclude any Lord, or other Member duly summoned, elected, retorned from sitting, voting, and discharging his trust in the Parliament House: Which the King and all his loyal subjects are bound in publick Justice carefully to prevent; as is evident not only by the forecited passages and Records, (p. 27. 28 177. 219. to 222.) but by these two memorable Writs and Pa∣tents purposely issued for this purpose, in the case of the Archbishop of York. There happeningMat. Far∣ker. Antiq. Eccles. Brit. tan. p. 113. 114. 124. 125 198. 333. Godwins Ca∣talogue of Bishops in Canterbury and York. many differences between the Arch∣bishops of Canterbury and York in former times, about carrying up their Crosses before them in one anothers Pro∣vinces, when summoned to Councils and Parliaments, to the great disturbance of the publick peace and pro∣ceedings in Parliament, oft interrupted, prorogued, ad∣journed by this meanes, and their absenting themselves from them, when summond out of their own Provi∣nces, the Parliament at York (as some others before it) being adjourned upon this occasion. Anno. 6. E. 3. as the Writ of Prorogation to the Archbishop of Can∣terbury, Claus. 6. E. 3. m. 4. dorso recites; hereupon
the King to prevent the like inconveniencies and Archbishops absence, issued this special writ to the Archbishop of Canterbury, not to prejudice or inter∣rupt the Archbishop of York or his servants, for car∣rying his Crosse before him within his Province, nor to enforce them to lay it down in coming to, conti∣nuing at, and returning from this Parliament at West∣minster to which he was summoned. Claus. 6. E. 3. m. 13. dorso. Rex Venerabili in Christo Patri eadem gratia Ar∣chiepiscopo Cantuariensi, totius Angliae Primati, Salu∣tem. Cum dudum tempore celebris memoriae Domini Ed∣wardi nuper Regis Angliae patris nostri, inter tunc Ar∣chiepiscopum Cantuar. praedecessorem vestrum, & Vene∣rabilem Patrem Willielmum Archiepiscopum Ebor-Angliae Primatem, pro malis & dissensonibus quae saepius ex bajulatione Crucis Praedecessorum vestrorum in Eboracensi Provincia, & Cruci Archiepiscoporum Eborum, in Provincia Cantuariensi oriebantur, sedandis & pacifi∣candis, fuisset in praesentia ipsius Paris nostri & Praelatorum & aliorum Magnatum de Regno nostro plurimorum, ut pro certo dedicimus, ordinatum; Quod praefatus Praedecessor vester & successores sui ad Parliamenta & Tractatus dicti Patris nostri & Haeredum suorum quae infra di∣ctam Ebor. Provinciam teneri contigerint, & praefatus Eboracensis Archiepiscopus & ipsius successores ad hujus∣modi Parliamenta & Tractatus infra dictam Camuar. Provinciam tenenda, ad mandatum ipsius Patris nostri & haeredum suorum venientes Cruces suas ante se ere∣ctas portarent absque perturbatione inibi facienda, NE REGIA ET COMMUNIA REGNI N. GO∣TIA EA OCCASIONE IMPEDIENTUR: ac prae∣fatus Archiepiscopus Eborum ad Parliamentum nostrum quod apud Westmon. in crastino Nativitatis Mariae Virgi∣nis prox. futur. tenere ordinavimus, ad tractandum Nobiscum, ac cum Praelatis & Magnatibus Regni nostri super diversis & arduis negotiis Nos & Statum Regni nostri contingenti∣bus, jam de mandato nostro sit venturus: Nos nolentes nostra & Regni nostri negotia occasione dissensionum hujus∣modi
aliqualiter retardari, sed volentes concordiam praedictam quantum ad Nos attinet firmiter observari; Vobis injungendo mandamu, quod eidem Archiepiscopo Eborum seu hominibus suis super bajulatione Crucis ejusdem Archiepiscopi ante se infra vestram Provinciam in veniendo ad dictum Parliamentum, ibidem moran do & exinde ad propria redeundo, non inferatis, seu¦per alios inferri vel procurari aliqualiter faciatis damp∣num, vituperium, impedimentum aliquod, seu grava∣men, contra formam concordiae memoratae. Teste Rege apud Kyderminster. xviil, die Augusti, Anno Regni sui sexio. And lest any others by the Archbishop of Canterbu∣ries instigation, and menaces of excommunication should instigate any Officers or others (as hisAutiquita∣tes Eccles. Brit. p. 18. 333. Pre∣decessors had done) to interrupt the Archbishop of York or his servants, and deny them meat, drink or lodging for their monies, for carrying his Crosse erected before him within the Province of Canterbury, the King di∣rected this special Inhibition and Mandate to them, of the same tenour and date with the Writ to the Archbi∣shop by these Letters Patents. Patent. An. 6. E. 3. part. 2. m. 15. Rex, Vicecomitibus, Majoribus, Ballivis, & omnibus aliis fidelibus suis tam infra libertates quam extra ad quos &c. salutem. Cum Venerabilis Pater Willielmus Archie∣piscopus Ebor. Angliae Primas, ad Parliamentum no∣strum quod apud Westm. in crastino Nativitatis beatae Mariae Virginis prox. futur. tenere ordinavimus de mandato nostro sit venturus, Vobis mandumus, quod eidm Archiepiscopo aut hominibus suis in personis aut rebus eorum super bajula∣tione Crucis ipsius Archiepiscopi ante se in veniendo ad dictum Parliamentum nostrum, ibidem morando, & exinde ad propria redeundo non inferatis, seu quan∣tum in vobis est ab aliis inferri permittatis dampnum, impedimentum aliquod, seu gravamen, sed eis potius salvum & securum conductum cum per destrictum ve∣strorum local transitum fecerint, suis sumptibus habere faciatis, quotiens & quando per ipsos, seu eorum ali∣quo
super hoc ex parte nostra fueritis requisiti. In cu∣jus rei &c. (has literas fieri fecimus Patentes) usque ad festum Omnium Sanctorum prox. futur. duraturas. Teste Rege apud Kyderminster. 18. die Augusti, Anno Regni sui sexto. Per Breve de Privato Sigillo. If our Kings had then so great a care, that neither of these two Prelates, nor their successors, nor any other of his officers or subjects by their instigation, should interrupt or disturbe each other about this great controversie of Crosse-bearing within each others Pro∣vince, in coming to, residing at, or returning to any Parliaments to which our Kings and their heires should legally summon them; nor seclude each other from sitting in them upon any pretence or difference between them; Then by the self same reason, all other lawfull Members both of the Lords and Commons House, ought to enjoy the self same Protection, Privi∣ledge, Freedome, immunity, and no wayes to be inter∣rupted, molested, disturbed by any other Officers, Sub∣jects, Persons or Members whatsoever from freely repai∣ring to, residing in, or returning from our Parliaments; much lesse to be forcibly secluded out of them by ar∣med guards, new oaths, or popular tumults; Neither may, can, ought the House of Commons alone, nor any prevailing party in it, to exclude, eject any duly ele∣cted, returned Member, once admitted, without any Legall accusation, tryal, cause at all; nor yet for be∣traying of his trust, or misdemeaning himself as a Member after his election, nor for any real offence as a Member, without and against the Kings and Lords concurrent Judgments and assents, (in whom alone the power of Iudicature resides in such as well as in all other causes, as I haveMy Plea for the Lords, p. 371. to 419. elsewhere evidenced by unanswe∣rable Presidents and the rules of right reason) he be∣ing summoned only by the Kings Writ and authority, impowred, trusted by his electors only, as their peculiar Trustee, Atturney (not his fellow Knights, Citizens, Burgesses) to do and assent to such things as shall be ordain∣ed
by the King, Nobles and Common Counsell of the Realme, touching the weighty publike affairs of the King and King∣doms, and obliged antiently by Manucaptors, and since by their Indentures of retorn,See Cooks 4. Instit. p. 15. to 21. 5 R. 2. Sat. 2. c. 4. My Plea for the Lords, p. 29. 9. H. 8. c. 16. and our Laws, not to depart from the Parliament, without the Kings special li∣cense, under pein of his indignation, and other penalties: Therefore no more to be suspended, secluded, ejected, imprisoned by his fellow-Commoners, without the Kings and Lords concurrent Judgements and Assents, than one Judge or Justice on the Bench can unjustice, unjudge, uncommission another; one Trustee, Execu∣tor or Attorny discharge his fellow Trustees, Execu∣tors, Attornies of their trusts; one Grand-Jury man thrust another out of the panell without the Judges consent; or one Common Counsel man of a City, or Livery man of a CompanyJames Baggs case, Cooks 11 Reports, f. 93. t 100. disfranchise and discom∣mon another, without the consent or judgement of the Mayor and Aldermen of the City, or Master and Wardens of the Company whereof they are Members; Whatever ex∣orbitant irregular practices have of late times been u∣surped by, or presidents made in the Commons House to the contrarie, almost to the total, if not final sub∣version of all future Parliaments and their privileges; It being aBracton, l. 5. c. 5. f 412. See my Ardua Regni. Maxim in Law and Reason; Par in pa∣rem nonhabet Imperium, multo minus Superioritatem, es∣pecially in the Kings own Parliament, and Supreme Court of Justice, whereinSee my Plea for the Lords. himself and his-Nobles only sit as supreme Iudges, not the Commons, as a di∣stinct Court and independent Judicature of them∣selves, as some would fancy them in their Utopian brains and practises; much less can they eude, vote down any Members of the House of Peers, or the whole antient House of Lords, or dishinherit them of their Birthrights, as some furious Bedlam Members of a dis∣membred, dissolved House of Commons have most insolently and injuriously, without hearing, trial, (a∣gainst their own Acts, Declarations, Protestations, Vowes, Covenants, Commissions, Trusts,) attempted
to intrude themselves into their places and Tribunals, and make themselves more than Lords and Caesars, not only over their Fellow-Commoners, but our Kings, Peers, Parliaments and Kingdomes, which they have tram∣pled under their Papall feet, and metamorphosed at their pleasures, into sundry mishapen, mutable, unsetled new models, to our apparent approaching ruine, if God of his infinite mercy prevent it not by their reestablish∣ment upon their ancient bases and foundations. 20. That if the forcible seclusion or disturbance of any Lord, or Member of the Lords House duly sum∣moned, who ought of right to sit, vote in the Lords House, be so great a breach of Priviledge, Injury, as I have evidenced, then the forcible suppression, se∣clusion of all the ancient Peers and House of Lords, by any real or pretended Members of the late House of Commons, contrary to the expresse Clauses, Formes of all ancient Writs, and the very writs in 16. Caro∣li, without any legal jurisdiction, hearing, triall, must needs be a greater breach of trust, Priviledge, In∣justice in them, fit to be redressed for the future peace, Justice, settlement of our distracted Nations, and restoring our Parliaments to their pristine Splen∣dour, Honour, ends, uses, for the redressing of all pub∣lick Grievances. If any Republicans,Objection. Army Officers, New Grandees, or others, here object, as some now do; That it will be both perillous and inconvenient to the Subjects, the House of Commons and its Members, to restore the an∣cient Lords and House of Peers to their pristine Rights, Priviledges, Jurisdiction, Judicature over them, in that latitude I have asserted, evidenced it by Histories and Records in my Plea for them, without prescribing some new just bounds and regulations unto them by the Commons House. I answer.Answer. 1. That the Lords being the only original ancient Members of our Great Councils, Parliaments, ma∣ny hundreds of years before any Knights, Citizens,
Burgesses, or House of Commons were called, admitted to them by the King and House of Lords, and receiving no power, Judicature or Jurisdiction at all from the Commons, but what they have of right enjoyed, exer∣cised in all precedent ages, without the least complaint, opposition or contradiction of the Commons in any former Parliaments before 17. Caroli; The Commons have no more authority, right, reason, urisdiction to limit, or restrain this their ancient right, Judicature, Priviledge (much lesse to abrogate) then the Grand or Petty Jury have to limit, regulate the Judges or Justices Commissions, Authority on the Bench; or the Tenants the Jurisdiction of their Lords Courts, or every Committee of the Commons House, the Ex∣cesses of the House it self; or the Unparliamentary Iuncto, which voted them down and engaged against them, without the least colour of Jurisdiction, Law, reason, hearing, impeachment, triall, had to usurp such a transcendent power over them, not to be para∣lelld in any age, nor now approved by assenting to it. 2ly. That the old Lords and House of Peers in no cases ever exercised such an exorbitant, arbitrary, ty∣rannicall Jurisdiction, Illegall power in all kinds, as the Commons House, and every of their Committees and Sub-Committees of Examinations, Sequestrations, Composi∣tions, Sale of Delinquents estates, Crown Lands, Obstru∣ctions, Appeales, Scandalous Ministers, and High Courts of Iustice have done, without the least Report to the House it self of their proceedings, both over the King and his Posteritie; the Peers of the Realme, their fellow Members, (secluded, secured, imprisoned, close imprisoned, ejected, exiled by them without any cause or hearing at all) and their fellow Com∣moners of all sortsExact Collection, p. 321. deprived of their Inheri∣tances, Estates, Offices, Liberties, Callings, Lives, and the benefit of the Lawes themselves, for not taking their new Oathes and Engagements, contrary to Law, and their former legall Oathes, Leagues and
Solemn Covenant and Protestation, whout a legal Indictment, or trial by a Jurie of their equalls, or wit∣nesses viva voce upon Oath, since their slighting, sup∣pressing of the old House of Lords; who should have restrained, reformed these their unparallelld extrava∣gancies, which I could prove by hundreds of sad In∣stances, and have briefly hinted in my lea for the old Lords, page 413. to 419. For which very reason they ought now to be restored;Exact Col∣lection, p. 321. being an excellent Bank and Screen between the Prince and People, to assist each against any encroachments on the other, and by just judgements to preserve that Law, which ought to be the Rule between every one of the three, and trusted with a Iudicatory power to this very end. 3ly. Some of those very Members of the late Commons House, Army, and Whitehall, who would disseise them of their House, Privileges, Birthrights, and antient Iuris∣diction, before they took upon them the Title of Lords, or of the House of Lords, as pretended Members of the Commons House, a little before and since their votes a∣gainst the old House of Lords; as Committees of that House; or Commissioners in their new rected High Courts of Iustice, Members of the Counsil of State at White-Hall, or Counsil of Army-Officers; or Major Generals, and De∣puty Major Generals, have acted a thousand, times more exorbitantly, arbitrarily, tyrannically to the sub∣version of the Fundamental Laws, Liberties, proper∣ties, Government, Justice of the Nation, oppressing, improverishing, vexing, dishinheriting, destroying, en∣slaving of the Freemen of England, than ever any old Lords, or House of Lords, or Kings of England in Parlia∣ment heretofore did in any age whatsoever; Witness their usurpations of a more than absolute Parliamen∣tarie power to themselves, by their own Votes, Or∣ers, Declarations alone, to alter, new model (over and over) the whole frame of our Parliaments, Laws, and publike Government; their electing Knights, Citi∣zens, Burgesses for what they stiled a Parliament, with∣out
the least privity or election of the people; their dissolving, & declaring the long Parliament to be dissol∣ved, against an expresse Act of Parliament; their repealing many old Lawes, Acts, Oathes, enacting new Lawes contrary to them; creating New Treasons and misprision of Treasons; yea imposing heavy, exces∣sive New Taxes, Customes,See their Whitehall Or∣dinance of 24. Decemb. 17. March 1653. and May 4. Iune 8. 1654. The first part of my Season∣able Legall, Historicall Vindication. London. 1655 p 67. to 100. The Instructi∣ons to the Ma∣jor Generalls; My Summary Collection of the Funda∣mental Rights Liberties, Pro∣perties of all English Free∣men. p. 53. to 64. Excises of all sorts, on the three Nations, not only in their private Westminster con∣ventions, but by their Armie and Whitehall Ordinances (amounting to a large Folio Volume) without any Parliament or legall Act of Parliament; ordering them to be levyed, by fines, forfeitures, sales of the refusers reall and personal esates, imprisonments, soldiers quartering, and the like; Injoysing All Courts of Iustice, Iudges, Iustices, Sheriffs, Officers of this Commonwealth, Counsellors, Attornies, and other Persons, to con∣form themselves accordingly without any opposition or dispute whatsoever; and committing their very Counsel to the Tower as Traytors or Grand Delinquents, only for arguing their Cases upon an Habeas Corpus in Westminster Hall, according to Law and their Du∣ties; Their taking away the lives, liberties or estates, freeholds of thousands, without any legall Triall, or Indictment of their Peers; their banishing, confi∣ning, imprisoning, close imprisoning hundreds, yea thousands at a time, upon meer fears and jealousies; and binding them and all their servants in excessive bonds with sureties; their disfranchising Maiors, Bailiffs, Aldermen, others in corporations; enforcing divers to release their legall actions, Judgements, Executions, and committing them at their pleasures till they did it, against the expresse tenour not only of the Grand Charter, Petition of Right, and other. Acts, but the very letter of the late Act; For preventing of Inconveniences, happening by the long intermission of Par∣liaments, The Acts for the 3. first subsidies of Tonnage and Poundage; The Act for regulating the Privy Counsell, For declaring unlawfull and void the late proceedings touch∣ing
Ship-mony, and other Acts passed by some of their own Votes, in the Parliament of 16. and 17. Caroli, of which, or the like exorbitances, no ancient Peers, or House of Lords, were ever yet guilty. And if some of those persons who would usurp, or abridg the old Lords power have been so arbitrarie & tyrannical in all kinds, before they claimed the Title of Lords, or House of Lords, how exorbitant, in all probability, are they likely to grow in a short time, (having Command in the Armie, and other Courts) if they should be esta∣blished in their new Lordly Power, and the old House of Lords put by, who should correct, restrain these their unparalelld Excesses for the whole Nations ease and benefit. 4. If these new Peers, be in truth, Law, Herauldry, no true or real Lords, Barons, Peers of the Realm by their Writs of Summons, for the premised reasons (but See p. 240. meerly imaginary, Titular and false ones, like those crea∣ted by the usurper King Stephen;) then the House of Commons can neither in Law nor verity agree or assent to any thing that shall be ordained by them, ac∣cording to the tenour of the Writs of Summons; nor establish any settlement that can be reputed legal or ob∣ligatory to Posteritie, in a Parliamentary Way, if the ancient reall Peers and legal House of Lords be set aside and disowned. And therefore they must of necessity own, close with them alone, and remit them to their old hereditary right, else they can never make nor ex∣pect any real lasting settlement of our distracted State and Government; and all they vote will quickly prove abortive, illegitimate; as the late New-models, Instru∣ments, and Advices have done. 5ly. The setting aside the ancient Lords and House of Peers, and establishing their very Disseisors in their places, as the only future Lords and House of Peers: will both justifie all their recited Exorbitances, Excesses, Violences, & Tyrannical proceedings against the old Lords, their Fellow Commons, & others, (transcending Straffords, Caterburies and the worst old Counsel-Ta∣ble
Lords excesses by many degrees) & ratifie, yea reward, crown them with the highest publick Honour, Trust, Power they are capable of, even in Parliaments them∣selves. Which will not onlie probably excite, encou∣rage others in succeeding times, to the like dangerous extravagancies, excesses, to the publick prejudice and desolation; but animate them, when setled in their new Lordly Authority, to pursue their former practises, and turn greater Tyrants, Oppressors in all kinds then formerly they have been, to the utter ensla∣ving of our Nations, and embroyling them in new Tumults. Yea, how farre it may tend to the Total and Final suppression of the Commons House it self in succeeding times, is worthy sad and serious consi∣deration. For if the Commons House shall not onlie silently connive at, but openly approve and assent to the dissolving, suppressing of the old Lords and their House, by pretext of former illegall, unrighteous Votes (Ea quae contra leges siunt non so∣lum inutilia, sed etiam pro infectis ha∣benda sunt. Justin. Cod. l. 1. Tit. 22. Gratian, Caus. 25. qu. 2. meer nullities by all Lawes) made by a Fragment of a dissolved House of Commons, sitting under a force, not having the least Jurisdiction or power of Judicature over them, against all rules of Justice, the very fundamental Lawes of the Land, the undoubted Rights and Priviledges of Parliament, Prescription time out of mind, all old & late Acts, Records of Parl. their very Solemn League, Covenant, Protestation, and hundreds of late Declarations and Remonstrances to the contrary: They may justly fear, and well ex∣pect by way of divine and human retaliation, that their very New erected House of Lords when once established, having the power of Judicature (if not of the Army) in them, to preserve themselves from the like Usurpations of the Commons over them in after ages, will upon the first opportunity, Vote down (by this their pre∣sident) the whole House of Commons, and quite suppresse it for the future, as Vselesse, dangerous, factious, Tumul∣uous, seditious, arbitrary, Tyrannicall, oppressive to the people, degenerated from its ancient duty, bounds moderation;
as not onlyMr. John Rushworths Historical Collections, p. 43, 44, 47, 50, 51, 53, 57, 140, 151, 195, 360, 362, 365, 410, to 417, 643, 631, 672, &c. Ap∣pendix, p. 1, 2, &c. some of our late Kings, but of those new intended Lords have publickly branded, proclaimed it to be, inThe De∣claration of the General Officers of the Army, 22 Au∣gust 1653 p. 4, 5, 6. A true State of the Common∣wealth of England, p. 2. to 14. late printed Declarations; and constitute all future Parliaments only of a House of Lords and Great men of the Realme, (assisted with the Counsell and Iusti∣ces) without any Knights, Citizens, Burgesses, Ba∣rons of Ports, or House of Commons, according to all ancient long continued Presidents in former ages, be∣fore 49. H. 3. when (for ought appeares) the Commons were first admitted, and called unto Parliaments out of meer grace by the Kings Writs: Or at least the disinhe∣rited ancient Nobility (in case they regain their pristine Rights of Session, Judicature in Parliament, without the Commons assistance, of which there is no abso∣lute future improbability) may by way of Justice and retaliation, set the Commons House quite aside, for their late transcendent breaches, abuses of their Trusts to∣wards them, in secluding, and voting them quite down, against their Writs, Indentures, Duties, Oathes; by which they have legally forfeited all their Priviledges and right of Parliamentary session, according to this received Maxime in all Lawes,Gratian, Causa 25. qu. 2. f. 493. See Littleon, sect. 178. Cooks 1 In∣stit. f. 23. 11 Report, f. 98. 9 H 6. 55. Brook Officer 44, 48, 51. Here, p 450. Privilegium amittat qui im∣probabili temeritate quod non accepit usurpat; & sua authori∣tate non legitime utitur, sed abutitur potestate. Which weighty consideration (though seconded with none else) should engage all Commoners to pursue the gol∣den rule, precept of Christ himself, as well in point of prudence, conscience, Justice, as morality towards the old Lords: Matth. 7. 12. Therefore all things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them; for this is the Law and the Prophets: For with the same measure that ye meat withall, it shall be measured to you again, as Luk. 6. 38. Iudg. 1. 6. 7. Psal. 137. 8. Rev. 13. 10. c. 16. 5. 6. Ezek. 35, 10. 11. 14. 15. Obad. 15. 16. Ioel. 3. 6. 7. 8. Gen. 9. 6. Mat. 26. 52. Iam. 2. 13. do all infallibly resolve us, as well as late experiments. 21. That the first and principle things specified in the Writs of summons, as the prime ends for which
Parliaments are summoned, is to debate and consult of quaedam specialia & ardua negotia Nos, et Statum reg∣ni nostri, et etiam Iura, Salvationem, et De∣fensionem Coronae nostrae Regiae (as well as Regni nostri et Ecclesie Anglicanae) specialiter & intime contingentibs. And all Knights, Citizens, Burgesses, Barons of Ports elected, returned to serve in Parlia∣ment in the Commons House, receive plenam & sufficien∣tem potestatem pro se, et Communitate Comitatuum, Civita∣tum, Burgorum et Portuum, from those Commonalties who elect them, only ad faciendum & consentiendum his quae tunc ibidem de communi Consilio Comitum, Baronum, or dicti Regni nostri contigerit ordinari super Negotiis ante∣dictis, quod hoc breve, or, prout breve illud in se exigit & requirit; as the express words of theSee Retorna Brevium, Cromptons Jurisdict. of Courts, f. 2. Daltons Office of Sheriffs, & the Returns & Indentures in the Tower, & Rolls. Sheriffs returns and their Indentures evidence: Therefore their enact∣ing any thing by themselves alone, without the Earls, Barons and Lords House; or Majoritie of their Fellow Commoners; or against their Counsell, Votes, advice, to the prejudice, destruction, subversion of the Kings Person, State, Kingdom, and the Preroga∣tive, Rights of his Royal Crown and Dignity.▪ which they were purposely summoned by the King, and au∣thorized, intrusted only by their Electors, Commo∣nalties, people, to preserve, support, and defend; and to do and consent to nothing else inconsistent with, or repug∣nant to these ends; is the highest prevarication, trea∣cherie, violation of their Trusts, Duties, that can pos∣sibly be imagined, deserving the most exemplarie pu∣nishments: And those Republicans who lately acted in this kind, to the destruction of the King, kingdom, the prerogatives, Rights of the Crown, Parliament, Lords and Monarchie of England, upon this pretext,See their Declaration Votes of Jan. 2. Feb. 6. March 17. 19. 1648. The 2. Part of the Hi∣story of Inde∣pendency. that they were intrusted, impowred thus to doe by the people, and those who did elect them; are the most notorious Impostors, Prevaricators, Infringers, Peruerters, Falsifiers of their trusts and power in this kinde that ever England yet produced; as all the forecited Writs, compared with their
their retorns, unanimously resolve, against their false absurd pretences to the contrarie, wherewith they have endeavoured to blinde and cheat the people; in whom they verbally voted, placed the Soveraign power, only by this forged, hypocritical pretext, actually to usurp, appropriate it to themselves, as their Trustees, and Representatives; presently thereupon in all their new published Knacks, Papers, intitling themselves alone, (not the people) the SUPREAM AUTHORITY OF THE NATION, making the people greater Slaves and Uassalls to them in respect of their Lawes, Lives, Mem∣bers, Liberties, Freeholds, Franchises, Properties, E∣states, than ever they were in any age, under Beheaded King Charles, or the worst of all our Kings and Lords; who never acted half so arbitrarily, tyrannically in eve∣rie kinde, as they, theirSee A true State of the Common∣wealth of England, p. 8. to 16. Committees, High Courts of Iu∣stice, Counsils of State, Major Generals, Excise-men, and other Officers have done; since their late Exorbitant Anti-parliamentary Vsurpations, Innovations, Proceedings, under the disguise and Notion of the Parliament of Eng∣land, without A KING, & HOUSE OF LORDS, or the secluded MAIORITY OF THE COMMONS HOUSE it self; the forced absence, seclusion of all and everie of which 3. made them no real Parliament at all, but an Anti-Parliamentary Conventicle, and all their miintit∣led Acts, Ordinances, meer Nullities both in Law and Conscience, fit to be enternally exploded by the whole English Nation, and all future new Parliaments, to prevent the like pernicious Extravagances in after ages, which have involved us in so manie various Mi∣series, Warrs, Perplexities, Fears, Dangers, Oppres∣sions, Factions, Troubles, Changes, Unsettlements, and Confusions, which, without Gods insinite mer∣cie, presage nought else but total and final Desolation both to our Church, State, and Nations. OurDyer, f. 60. a. Cooks 4 In∣stit. p. 1. 3. Law-books resolve the Parliament to be a Corporati∣on, consisting of the King as thief head, the Lords as the Superi∣or, and the Commons as inferior Members, who ought mutually to preserve each others interests, and unite their counsells for the
publike good, without any seisure or encroachment upon one ano∣ther. For as there is nothing but giddiness, torture, distemper, consumption, restlesness, sickness, inactivity, maimedness, & confusion in the body natural, whiles the head, or chief joints, bones, parts of it are inverted, dislocated, fractured, severed, and kept out of joynt; and no other means left when thus di∣storted, to restore it to rest, health, soundness, activitie, and prevent its dissolution by death, but with all speed and cate to restore every Member, bone, joynt to its proper place, po∣sture, office, and preserve them from subsequent dislocations and fractures. So it hath been and will be with this body Politick: It will never be reduced to its pristine health, soundness, vigor, use, ends; or become medicinal, to settle or advance the publike weal of the Nation, till all its dislo∣cated broken Members be restored to their due places and power in it, without which it will soon come to utter desola∣tion, as 1. Cor. 12. 12, to 31. Gal. 5. 15. Mat. 12. 25. Isa 19. 2. 14, 15. Prov. 30. 21. 22, will assure all carnal Politicians who think the contrarie, 22. That as it was the prudence, policie, justice of our Parliaments, Nobles, Great men in former ages, not to vote, conclude, or enact any thing in Parliament, when any of their chief MembersSee Here, p. 28, 29, 31, 41, 43, 177. My Plea for the Lords, p. 23. to 30. 49 to 55. were absent, or not summoned, or re∣strained from them, and to determine all Great Affairs in FULL PARLIAMENT: So it was also their special care to preserve the Jurisdiction of the Kings Courts of Common Law, as a chief right and flower of the Crown, and the antient Lawes and Customs of the Realm, against all incroachments upon them by Popes, Bishops, or anie others, as is evident by2 H. 3. c. 9. An Exact Abridgment of the Records in the Tower, 1. Table, Law, Old and Com∣mon Law. sundry instances elsewhere cited; and by this memorable Writ of Prohibition, isiued in King. H. 3 his name, on the behalf of the Nobles of England to the Bishop of Durbam; Proving the interpretation of the Laws and Customs of the Realm, (in anie doubt∣full cases of publike concernment) to belong only to the King and his Nobles, (See Here, p. 366. to 394. assisted with the Iudges and Coun∣sil) not to the Clergy, Commons, or anie other person or persons. Claus. 43, H. 3. 4. dorso. Rx Waltero Episcopo Dunolm: salutem. Cum se∣cundum Leges et Consuetudines regni nostri, quaetio
de Jure Patronatus Ecclesiarum Regni ejusdem, adjus & dignitatem Coronae nostrae pertineat, et de soro nostro, vel eorum qui Regalia jura de nostravel Prae∣decessorum nostrorum largitione susceperunt, de pla∣no existunt. Ac de COMMUNI CONSILIO PRO∣CERUM NOSTRORUM DUXIMUS PROVI∣DENDUM ET FIRMITER STATUENDUM, ut leges t consuetudines Regni nostri super hiis et aliis, ab omnibus observentur qui concessis fibi rega∣libus, et aliis Libertatibus gaudent, vel de unitate ac pace nostra et regni nostri censeri voluerint. Cum∣que interpraetationes Legum et Consuetudinum prae∣dictarum AD NOS ET PROCERES NOSTROS PERTINEANT, NEC AD ALIVM VEL ALIOS ipsas leges vel consuetudines declarare vel interpretari possit aut debeat pertinere: Vobis DE CONSILIO PROCERVM NOSTRORVM PROHIBEMVS, ne icut usum Regalium libertatum quas vos habere praetenditis gaudere volueritis, alicui interpraetatio∣ni per quemcunque alium factae vel faciendae innitami∣ni, vel aliquid per eam fieri procuretis, vel fieri pronun∣ciatis, contra leges et consuetudines in regno nostro usitatas, et hactenus observatas. Maxime cum secun∣dum leges et consutudines supradictas judicari debeat ad quos vel quem, et per cujusmodi assignationes seu concessiones debeat jus Patronatus cum Maneriis vel Feodalibus in Regno nostro, ad alios transire. Quod si super re praedicta aliter fieri seu judicari contigerit, ipsas libertates regales praenotatas ad Nos per vestrum abusum censemus devolvendas. Teste Rege apud Westin. 11. die Septembris. Per Comitem Gloucestriae, & Hug. le Bigod Justic. Angliae, EX PARTE MAGNATUM. What else is worthie Observation, from or concer∣ning these, or other Parliamentarie Writs, I shall ad∣journ to the succeeding Parts of this Register, Kalen∣dar and Survey; till whose publications, Horatius,  p. 200. Dimidium facti qui benè caepit, habet. FINIS.
