P4282 12758131 93453
A SPEECH Delivered at a Conference with the Lords, January 25. MDCXLII. By occasion of the PETITIONS from the Citie of London, and the Counties of Middlesex, Essex, and Hertford. By JOHN PYM, Esquire. Published by Order of the house of Commons. Printed at Edinburgh, 1642.
JANUARY 25. 1642. At a Conference betwixt both Houses, concer∣ning divers Petitions presented &c. My LORDS, I Am commanded by the Knights, Citizens, and Bur∣gesses, assembled in Parliament, to present to your Lordships divers Petitions, which they have received from severall parts concerning the State of the Kingdom: whereunto they are chiefly moved by that constant Affe∣ction, which they have alwayes exprest, of maintaining a firme Union and good correspondence with your Lord∣ships, wherein they have ever found much advantage, and contentment; but never held it more important and neces∣sary, then at this time, wherein the Wisedome and Reso∣lution of Parliament, have as many great Dangers and dif∣ficulties to passe through, as ever heretofore. We are united in the publique trust, which is derived from the Common-wealth in the common dutie and ob∣ligation whereby God doth binde us to the discharge of that trust: and the Commons desire to impart to your Lordships whatsoever Information or Intelligence, what∣soever encouragement or assistance they have received from those several Countries, which they represent, that so likewise we may be united in the same intentions and endeavours of improving all to the service of his Majesty, and the common good of the Kingdome. The Petitions which I am directed to communicate to your Lordships, are four: from London, Middlesex, Essex, and Hertfordshire. We have received many more, but it would take up too much time, & be too great a trouble to peruse all; & in these foure, you may perceive the effect & sense of all: First, I am to desire your Lordships to heare them read, and then I shall pursue my Instructions in pro∣pounding some Observations out of them.
The Petitions being read by foure several Mem∣bers of the House, M. PYM reassumed his Discourse. My LORDS, IN these foure Petitions you may heare the voice, or rather the cry of all England, and you cannot wonder if the vrgency, the extremity of the condition wherein we are, do produce some earnestnesse and vehemency of expression more than ordinary; the agony, terrour, and perplexity in which the Kingdome labours, is universall, all parts are affected with it; and therefore in these you may observe the groanes and miserable complaints of all. Divers reasons may be given why those diseases which are Epidemicall, are more dangerous then others. The cause of such diseases is universall and supernall, not from an evill constitution, or evill diet, or any other accident: and such causes work with more vigour and efficacy, than those which are particular and inferiour. 2. In such disea∣ses there is a communicative quality, whereby the malig∣nity of them is multiplied and enforced. 3. They have a converting, transforming power that turnes other disea∣ses and evill affections of mens bodies into their owne na∣ture. The common and Epidemicall disease wherein this Commonwealth lies now gasping, hath a superiour and universall cause from the evill Counsells and designes of those, who under his Majesty beare the greatest sway in Government. 2. It hath a contagious and infectious qua∣lity, whereby it is diffused and dispersed through all parts of the Kingdome. 3. It is apt to take in the discontents, e∣vill affections, and designes of particular persons, to en∣crease and fortifie it self.
I shall take occasion from severall branches of those Pe∣titions which your Lordships have heard, to observe. 1. The variety of Dangers to which this Kingdome is now subject. 2. The manifold distempers which is the cause of those Dangers. 3. The multiplicity of those evill Influences which are the causes of that distemper. The first danger is from enemies abroad; this may seem a causelesse and impertinent observation at this time, see∣ing wee are in peace with all Nations about us: But (my Lords) you may bee pleased to consider that the safety of the Kingdome ought not to depend upon the will and disposition of our Neighbours, but upon our own strength and provision; Betwixt States there are often changes, from peace to war, according to occasion and advantage. All the States of Christendome are now armed, and wee have no reason to believe but that those of greatest power have an evill eye upon us in respect of our Religion: And if their private Differences should bee composed, how dangerously, how speedily might those great Armies, and other preparations now ready, be applyed to some enter∣prise and attempt against us? and if there were no other cause, this were sufficient to make us stand upon our guard; but there are divers more especiall symptomes of dangers of this kind. We may perceive by severall Advertisements from a∣broad, that they did fore-see our dangers many moneths before they broke out; They could fore-tell the time and manner of them, which is a clear evidence, they held In∣telligence with those which were the Contrivers & work∣ers of the present troubles. Wee have many dangerous Traytours and Fugitives
now in other parts, who can discover the weaknesse and distemper of the Kingdome; who hold Intelligence with the ill-affected party here, and by all cunning and subtle practices endeavour to encite and provoke other Princes against us. Some of the Ministers of our neighbour Princes may be justly suspected to have had a more immediate hand and operation in the Insurrection and Rebellion of Ire∣land, many of the Commanders, and most of the Souldi∣ers levied for the service of Spain are now joyned with the Rebells there: and those Irish Friars, which were em∣ployed by the Spanish Ambassadour for the making of those Levies, are known to have been chief Incendiaries to this Rebellion, and are still very active in the prosecu∣tion and encouragement of it. The Rebels have a ready and speedy supply from some of our Neighbours. Two Convoyes of Munition and Armes we are certainly enformed of: one from Dunkirk, the other from Nantes in Britany: and certainly, those that are so forward to enable others to hurt us, will not forbear to hurt us themselves, assoon as they shall have meanes and opportunity to doe it. Another danger is from the Papists and ill affected Partie at home. The Papists here, are acted by the same Principles, with those in Ireland; many of the most active of them have lately been there; which argues an intercourse and communication of Councels. They have still store of Armes and Munition at their disposing, notwithstanding all our endeavours to disarm them, they have a free resort to the City and to the Court, they want no opportunities to consult together; they have the same or greater encouragements from above, and from about them, than ever, in respect of the example &
successe of the Rebels in Ireland, and the great confusions and divisions which by their cunning and subtile practi∣ses, are raised and fomented amongst our selves at home. 3 A third Danger is of Tumults and Insurrections of the meaner sort of people: by reason of their ill vent of Cloth and other Manufactures, whereby great multitudes are set on work, who live for the most upon their daily get∣tings, and will in a very short time be brought to great ex∣treamitie, if not employed; Nothing is more sharp and pressing then necessitie and want; what they cannot buy they wil take; and from them the like necessitie wil quick∣ly be derived to the Farmours and Husband-men; and so, grow higher, and involve all in an equality of miserie and distresse, if it be not prevented. And at this time such Tumults will be dangerous, because the Kingdome is full of disbanded Souldiers and Officers which will be rea∣dy to head and to animate the Multitude to commit vio∣lence with more strength and advantage, and if they once grow into a Body, it will be much more difficult to re∣duce them into order again, because necessitie and want, which are the causes of this disturbance, will still encrease as the effects do encrease. A fourth Danger is from the Rebels in Ireland, not only in respect of that Kingdome, but in respect of this: They have seized upon the body of that Kingdome alrea∣dy, they abound in men of very able bodies, they encrease in Armes and Munition, they have great hopes of sup∣plies from abroad, of encouragement here, and are sure of good entertainment from the Popish party, so that they begin to speak already of the transporting themselves hither, and making this Kingdome the seat of the warre. The Distemper which hath produced these Dangers
is various and exceeding violent. Whensoever nature is hindred in her proper operations and faculties, distem∣pers, will necessarily follow. The obstructions which have brought us into this di∣stemper, are very many, so that we cannot wonder at the strength and malignity of it. Some of the chiefest of these obstructions, I shall endeavour to remem∣ber. 1. The obstruction of Reformation in matters of Re∣ligion: no Grievances are sharper than those that presse upon the tender consciences of men; and there was ne∣ver Church or State afflicted with more Grievances of this kind, then we have been. And though they are by the wisedome of this Parliament partly eased and dimi∣nished, yet many still remain: and as long as the Bishops and the corrupt part of the Clergie continue in their Power, there will be little hope of Freedome either from the sence of those which continue, or the fear of those which are removed. And of this obstruction, (my Lords) I must clear the Commons, we are in no part guilty of it: some good Bils have past us, and others are in preparati∣on, which might have been past before this, if we had not found such ill successe in the other. Whatsoever mischief this obstruction shal produce, we are free from it: we may have our part of the Misery, we can have no part in the guilt or dishonour. 2. An obstruction in Trade; it is the Trade that brings food and nourishment to the Kingdome. It is that which preserves and encreaseth the stock of the whole, and di∣stributes a convenient Portion of maintenance to every part of it: therefore such an obstruction as this must needs be dangerous; the Freedome of Trades being so necessa∣ry, the benefit so important, as that it gives life, strength,
and beauty to the whole Body of the Common-wealth: but I must protest, the House of Commons hath given no Cause to this Obstruction, we have eased Trade of many Burthens, and heavie Taxes which are taken off, we have freed it from many hard restraints by Pattents and Mo∣nopolies, we have been willing to part with our own Pri∣viledges, to give it encouragement, we have sought to put the Merchants into Securitie and confidence in respect of the Tower of London, that so they might bee invited to bring in their Bullion to the Mint as heretofore they have done, and we are no way guilty of the Troubles, the fears, and publique dangers which make men withdraw their Stocks, and to keep their money by them, to be ready for such sudden Exigents, as in these great distractions we have too much Cause to expect. 3. The obstruction in the Relief of Ireland. It must needs be accompted a great shame and dishonour to this Kingdome that our Neighbours have shewed themselves more forward to supply the Rebels, than we have been to relieve our distressed brethren and fellow-Subjects. But I must declare that we are altogether innocent of any neg∣lect herein. As soon as the first newes of the Rebellion came over, we undertook the Warre, not by way of Sup∣ply and Ayde, as informer Rebellions the Subjects have used to do, but we undertook the whose charge of it, and we suffered not 24 houres to passe, before wee agreed to a great Leavie of Money and Men, to be employed against the Rebells, even in a larger proportion, than the Lord Justices & Councell there did desire: & from time to time wee have done all for the furtherance thereof, though in the midst of many distractions and diversions; but the want of Commissions for leavying Men, for issuing Armes, and divers other Impediments, have beene the
Causes of that Obstruction; and I wish we had not onely found Impediments to our selves, but also Encourage∣ments to them. Many of the chiefe Commanders, now in the Head of the Rebells, after we had with your Lord∣ships concurrence stopt the Ports against all Irish Papists, have been suffered to passe by his Majesties immediate Warrant, much to the discouragement of the Lord Justi∣ces and Councell there; and, this procured, as wee beleeve, by some evill Instruments, too neere his Re∣gall Person, without his Majesties knowledge and inten∣tion. 4. The Obstruction in prosecution of Delinquents: many we have already brought up to your Lordships: divers others we have been discouraged to transmit; such difficult proceedings have we met withall: such terrors and discountenance have been cast upon our selves and our witnesses, and those who have shewed themselves their friends Patrons, have found it the most ready way to preferment, yea, his Majesties own hand hath been ob∣tained, his Majesties Ships employed for the transporting of divers of those who have fled from the Justice of the Parliament. 5 A generall Obstruction and interruption of the pro∣ceedings of Parliament, by those manifold designes of vi∣olence (which through GODS mercy we have escaped,) by the great and frequent breaches of Priviledge, by subtill endeavours to raise parties in our House, and jea∣lousies betwixt the two Houses. 6. The Obstruction in providing for the Defence of the Kingdome, that we might be enabled to resist a forrain E∣nemy, to suppresse all Civill Insurrections: and what a pressing necessity there is of this, the exceeding great de∣cayes in the Navy, in the Forts, in the power of ordering
the Militia of the Kingdome, and Means of furnishing them with Munition, are sufficient evidences, known to none better than to your Lordships, and what endeavour we have used to remove them (but hitherto without that successe and concurrence which we expected:) and where the stop hath been, and upon what good grounds we may claim our own innocency, and faithfulnesse in this, we de∣sire no other Witnesses but your selves. Lastly, I come to the evill Influences which have caused this distemper, and I shall content my selfe to mention some few of those which are most Apparent and Important. 1. In the first place, I shall remember the evill Coun∣cells about the King, whereof we have often complained. Diseases of the Braine are most dangerous, because from thence Sense and Motion are derived to the whole Body The malignity of evill Councells will quickly be infused into all parts of the State. None can doubt but wee have exceedingly laboured under most dangerous and mischie∣vous Councells. This evill Influence hath been the cause of the preparation of Warre with Scotland, of the procu∣ring a Rebellion in Ireland, of corrupting Religion, sup∣pressing the Liberty of this Kingdome, and of many fear∣full and horrid Attempts, to the subverting the very be∣ing of Parliament, which was the onely hopefull Meanes of opposing and preventing all the rest: And this doth ap∣pear to be a most predominant evill of the Time: where∣at wee need not wonder, when we consider how Coun∣sellours have been preferred and prepared. And I appeal to your Lordships owne Consciences, whether the giving, and the countenancing of evill Councell, hath not been almost the onely way to favour and advancement. 2. The discouragement of good Councell: divers honest
and approved Councellours have been put from their places: others so discountenanced, as that the way of fa∣vour hath been shut against them, and that of danger and destruction onely open to them. 3. The great power that an interessed & faction party hath in the Parliament, by the continuance of the Votes of the Bishops and Popish Lords in your Lordships House, and the taking in of others both out of the House of Commons, and otherwise, to encrease their strength. 4. The fomenting and cherishing of a malignant party throughout the whole Kingdome. 5. The manifold jealousies betwixt the King, his Parlia∣ment, and good subjects, whereby his protection & favor hath in a great measure beene withheld from them: their inclination and resolution to serve and assist him, hath been very much hindred and interrupted. We have often suffered under the misinterpretation of good Actions, and false importation of evill which we never intended. So that we may justly purge our selves from all guilt of be∣ing Authors of this jealousie and misunderstanding: We have beene, and are still ready to serve his Majestie with our lives and fortunes, with much cheerefulnesse and ear∣nestnesse of affection as ever any Subjects were; and wee doubt not but our proceedings will so manifest this, that we shall be as clear in the apprehension of the world, as we are in the testimony of our own Consciences I am now come to a conclusion, and I have nothing to propound to your Lordships by the way of Request, or desire from the House of Commons, I doubt not but your judgements will tell you, what is to be done, your Con∣sciences, your Honours, your Interests will call upon you for the doing of it, The Commons will be glad to
have your help and concurrence in saving of the King∣dome, but if they should faile of it, it should not discou∣rage them in doing their duty. And whether the King∣dome be lost or saved (as through GODS blessing I hope it will be) they shal be sorry that the story of this present Parliament should tell Posterity, that in so great a Danger and Extremity, the house of Commons should be enfor∣ced to save the Kingdome alone, and that the House of Peeres should have no part in the Honour of the preserva∣tion of it, you having so great an Interest in the good suc∣cesse of those endeavours, in respect of your great Estates, and high degrees of Nobility. FINIS.
