Q7 R24482 8203348 41082
QƲADRIENNIƲM JACOBI: OR, THE HISTORY OF THE REIGN of KING James II. From his first Coming to the CROWN TO HIS DESERTION. The Second EDITION. Licensed and Entred according to Order. LONDON, Printed for James Knapton, at the Crown in St. Paul's Church-yard; and sold by Randal Taylor, near Stationers-Hall. 1689.
portrait of King James II IAMES ye IId.
THE PREFACE. HISTORY abounds with Examples of those who have omitted nothing, with which their Ambition inspired them, even through the greatest difficulties and dangers to gain a Crown. But seldom do we find a President of any Prince that laboured, against all the Com∣mon Rules of Policy, so industriously to lose one when he had once fix'd it on his Head, as James II. Henry IV. turn'd Roman Catholick, to obtain of France a single Sceptre; But James II. turn'd Roman Ca∣tholick, to lose no less than three Imperial Crowns at once. A short Reign 'tis true, but full of strange and surprizing Circumstances: While a Popish Prince ascends the Throne to rule a Protestant People; and takes a
Coronation Oath to defend those Laws, which he had stedfastly resolv'd to dispence with. Nor did he gradually and insensibly endeavour to intro∣duce his Innovations of Popery and Slavery, but rush'd and broke in like a Torrent with open and armed vio∣lence upon the Ancient Constitutions of the Nation; as one that growing old, was to make great steps, and by consequence if he should dye, must leave the Papists worse than he found them. And therefore to per∣fect the work, he also set up a Pre∣tended Prince of Wales for his Suc∣cessour, to defeat the Inheritance of his own Lawful Issue; the Labour'd Con∣trivance of an Italian Stepdame. These were those Irregular Motions, that brought down that suddain Revolution upon the late King's Head, which put an End to his violent Reign, and verified the Ancient Maxim of Philosophy. A Revolution not to be parallel'd in History; but sea∣sonable
to the British Monarchy, the Glory whereof was almost brought to utter Ruin and Destruction. And therefore we must all acknowledge what His present Majesty has done for these Kingdoms, who next un∣der God, has wrought such a delive∣rance as never ought to be forgotten, and can never be sufficiently requited. He will certainly be always men∣tion'd with Honour and Gratitude by Posterity enjoying the Benefit of his noble Enterprise, so long as the Protestant Name shall endure. For He came not like the Ancient Ro∣mans and Saxons, to conquer and lead in Triumph after Him our Re∣ligion and Laws, our Lives and Li∣berties, but to defend, preserve and secure them to us. To this End he undertook so hazardous and chargea∣ble an Expedition, which has prov'd not less to our Advantage, than to his Everlasting Honour.
This is the Sum of what is con∣tracted in these few Sheets, suffi∣cient to shew the Reader the Violent Designs of Popery and Arbitrary Do∣minion, and how much we are oblig'd to our Generous Preserver.
THE HISTORY OF THE REIGN OF THE Late KING JAMES II. From the time of his coming to the Crown, to his Deser∣tion of it. UPON Munday Morning, being the second of February, 1684. Charles the Second was sud∣denly seiz'd with a violent fit of an Apoplexy; by which his Speech and Senses were for some time taken from him; but upon the immediate Applica∣tion
of fitting Remedies, he return'd to such a Condition, as gave some hopes of his Recovery, till Wednesday Night, at which time the Distemper returning upon him with greater Violence, he expired up∣on the Friday following about Noon. Immediately such of the Lords of the deceased King's Privy-Council, together with such other of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, as were in Town, as∣sembled together, and signed a Procla∣mation for proclaiming his Brother the Duke of York and Albany, by the Name of James the Second. And indeed such Expedition was us'd for the Performance of this Ceremony, that the Afternoon of the same day the King dy'd, all suitable decencies were got ready, and the Proclamation was Pro∣claim'd in all the most usual Places of the City. And in regard that by the Death of the deceased King, the most part of the Offices and Places of Jurisdiction and Go∣vernment within the Realms of England and Ireland, did cease and sall; therefore the King reserving to his own Judgment hereafter the Reformation and Redress of any Abuses by Misgovernment, upon Knowledge and Examination thereof,
was pleased to declare, That all Persons, who at the Decease of the late King were duly and lawfully possess'd of, or invested in any Office whether Civil or Military, within the Realms of England or Ireland, or in any other of his Dominions there to belonging, particularly all Presidents, Lieu∣tenants, Vice-presidents, Justices of the Peace, Sheriffs, and all others in place of Government either Meaner or Superior; and all other Officers and Ministers, whose Interests and Estates in their Offices, were determined by the occasion before-men∣tioned, should be, and should hold them∣selves continued in the said Places and Offices, as formerly they held and enjoy'd the same, until the King's Pleasure should be further known. And that in the mean while, for the preservation of the Peace, and necessary Proceedings in matters of Justice, and for the Safety and Service of the State, all the said Persons of whatsoever De∣gree or Condition, should not fail, eve∣ry one according to his Place, Office, or Charge, to proceed in the Performance and Execution of all Duties thereto be∣longing, as formerly appertained to them while the late King was living.
And farther, That all the King's Sub∣jects of what Estate, Dignity, or De∣gree whatsoever, should be aiding and assisting, and at the Command of the said Officers and Ministers in the Per∣formance and Execution of their said Offices and Places, upon Pain of the King's Displeasure. Moreover, That all Orders and Di∣rections made or given by the Lords of the Privy-Council of the late King, in his life time, should be obey'd and per∣form'd by all and every Person; and that every thing done thereupon, should proceed as fully, and as amply as the same should have been obey'd or done in the life of the late King. And the same care was also taken for the Foreign Plantati∣ons. This done, upon the King's first sit∣ting in his Privy-Council, he was pleas'd to declare himself to this effect. That since it had pleas'd Almighty God to place him in that Station, and that he was now to succeed so good and gracious a King, as well as so kind a Brother, he thought fit to declare, That he would endeavour to follow his Ex∣ample, and more especially in that of his great Clemency and Tenderness to his
People: That he had been reported to be a man for Arbitrary Power, tho' that had not been the only Story which had been made of him, yet he should make it his endeavour to preserve the Govern∣ment both in Church and State, as it was by Law Establish'd. That he knew the Principles of the Church of England were for Monarchy, and that the Members of it had shewn themselves good and Loyal Subjects, and therefore he should always take care to defend and support it. That he likewise knew, that the Laws of England were sufficient to make the King as great a Monarch as he could wish; and therefore as he should never depart from the just Rights and Prerogatives of the Crown, so he would never invade any Man's Property. Lastly, That he had often ventured his Life in defence of the Nation, and would go as far as any Man in preserving it in all its just Rights and Liberties. Upon which the Lords of the Council were humble Suitors to him, that these his Gracious Expressions might be made publick, which he ordered accordingly. And in regard the maintenance of the Navy for defence of the Kingdom, and
Advantages of Trade, requir'd, that the Collection of the Customs, Subsidies of Tunnage and Poundage, and other Sums of Money payable upon Merchandizes imported and exported, should be con∣tinued, as in the time of the Deceased King, a Proclamation was issued forth ac∣cordingly, that the said Duties should be collected by the several Officers and Col∣lectors in all the Ports of the Kings Domi∣nions, till the Parliament, which was to be speedily assembled, should take care for the setling a sufficient Revenue on the Crown for the Support of the Government. In the next place, in regard the King had given Command to his Grace the Duke of Norfolk to give orders that the Mourning for the Deceased King might be performed with that Decency, which became so great and solemn an Occasion, Publick Information was given to all Per∣sons concern'd by his Grace the Earl Mar∣shal of England, That it was expected they should put themselves into the Deepest Mourning that was possible, long Clokes excepted. And that as well all Lords as Privy Councellors, and Officers as well of His late, as present Majesties Houshold, should cover their Coaches and Chairs,
and cloath their Livery-Servants with black Cloth. And that none should presume to use any Varnish'd or Bullion Nails to be seen on their Coaches or Chairs, except the King, the Queen Consort, the Queen Dowager, and their Royal Highnesses. And from this time, for several Weeks together, there was nothing hardly to be seen in the publick Gazetts, swelled up upon that occasion, but great num∣bers of Addresses from all parts of the Kingdom, declaring the general Joy of the whole Nation for the new Kings coming to the Crown, and their humble Acknow∣ledgment of his Grace and Favour in his Gracious Declaration before his Pri∣vy Council; assuring him withal of their ready obedience to his Commands, and their Resolutions to devote their Lives and Fortunes to maintain his Rights, and defend his Sacred Person and Royal Prerogative. Upon the Fourteenth of February in the Evening the Funeral of the Decea∣sed King was privately solemnized from the Painted Chamber in the Pa∣lace of Westminster, to the Abbey-Church. The Body was carried under a Velvet Canopy, born by the Gentle∣men
of the Privy-Chamber, six Earls upporting the Pall. The Proceeding began with the Servants to the Nobi∣lity, their Royal Highnesses, their pre∣sent Majesties, the Queen Dowagers, and the late King's Servants. After whom follow'd Barons, Bishops, and others of the Nobility according to their Respective Degrees, together with the Great Officers, and the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury. His Royal Highness the Prince of Denmark was Chief Mourner, his Train being born by the Lord Corn∣bury. The Supporters to the Chief Mourner were the Dukes of Somerset and Beaufort, wearing their Collars of the Order, as the other Knights of the Garter there present did; and the As∣sistants to the Chief Mourner were sixteen Earls. One of the Kings at Arms carried the Crown and Cushion, the rest of the Officers at Arms attend∣ing and directing the Ceremony, which was closed with his Majesties Band of Pensioners, and the Yeoman of the Guard. At the entrance into the Church the Deans and Prebends of Westminster, attended by the Quoir, met the Body,
and proceeded to King Hen. the Se∣venth's Chappel, where it was enterr'd in a Vault under the East end of the South Isle. Service being ended, and the Officers of his Majesties Houshold having broken their Staves, the Royal Stile was proclaim'd by another of the Kings at Arms, according to Cu∣stom. The next day the Duke of Ormond was made Lord High Steward; the Earl of Arlington, Lord Chamberlain; the Lord Viscount Newport, Treasurer: and the Lord Mainard, Comptroller of the Houshold; and Henry Savil Esq Vice-Chamberlain; in which Offices they had respectively served the deceased King. By this time arrived Intelligence from Scotland, that upon news of the Death of Charles the Second, the Earl of Perth Lord High Chancellor, and the Duke of Queensberry, Lord High Treasurer, immediately caused the Privy-Council to meet, and after they had express'd their just Grief for the loss of so good a King and Master, they resolv'd unanimously the next Morning to proclaim James VII. Ac∣cordingly by Eight of the Clock in the
Forenoon the Privy-Council met again, and having read the King's Letter di∣rected to them, the Lord Chancellor first took the Oath of Allegiance, the Oath of Privy-Counsellor, and the Test, and then administred the same to the rest of the Counsellors. Which done, they all sign'd the Proclamation for Pro∣claiming the new King, and so went all to assist at the Solemnity it self. The Lord Provost of Edenburgh, to∣gether with the Magistrates and Town-Council in their Formalities, proceed∣ed first bare-headed: Next Lyon King at Arms, and the rest of the Heralds in their Coats of Arms display'd; then followed the Lord Chancellor, the Lord Treasurer, with the rest of the Officers of State and Counsellors, and other Lords both Spiritual and Temporal; and behind them the Lords of the Ses∣sion in their Robes, the Trained-Bands standing on both sides of the Streets. Being thus come to the Cross, and as∣cending it, the Lord Chancellor pro∣claimed the King, and upon his con∣cluding with God save the King, was seconded with the Shouts and Ac∣clamations of an infinite Number of
all Ranks of People there present. Which being perform'd with all the Decency and Circumstances befitting so great a Ceremony, the Privy-Council dispatch'd away a Letter to the King, to give His Majesty an Account of what they had done; withal, declaring how they had bound themselves by a Solemn Oath to hazard their Lives and For∣tunes in defence of His Majesties Title and Person. The Bishops also and Archbishops sent an Address to the King in the fol∣lowing words. Most Sacred Sovereign, OUR deep and just Sorrow for the Death of our late Blessed and Gra∣cious King would certainly swallow us up, did not the Righteous and Peace∣able Succession of your Majesty sup∣port us under our unexpressible Af∣fliction. Had we the Honour and Happiness to prostrate our selves at your Royal Feet, our Tears would prove our best Orators for the former, as our Prayers and Thanksgivings to the only Ruler of
Princes, and our best and most faithful Endeavours to serve your Majesty, shall always express our Joy and Zeal for the latter, Your pious Zeal for the Honour and Interest of your Royal Brother, our late Sovereign now in Glory, and for this your ancient Kingdom, while we enjoy∣ed the Happiness of your Presence among us, as it did then demonstrate you to be the best, and most obedient of Subjects, so did it prognosticate your being the kindest, and most Paternal of Sovereign Princes to your People. At this distance from your Royal Presence, we are able in our present Circumstances, to do no more than humbly to address to your Majesty in Paper, to pay that Duty which we owe upon so solemn an Occasion; but are resolv'd, if your Sacred Majesty shall allow, to desire the Archbishop of St. Andrews, who is most desirous and ambitious to congratulate your most righteous Succession to the Thrones of your Royal Ancestors, and address him∣self to your Royal Presence, more ful∣ly to express our Sence and Duty, than a Letter can allow; and humbly
to desire your Majesties Protection and Favour to this National Church, and to our Order and Persons; which we are humbly confident to obtain, when we reflect upon your Piety and Zeal for all these Interests during your abode in this Kingdom. With equal Grandeur was the King proclaim'd about the same time in Ire∣land, where the Duke of Ormond was not wanting in any thing that could ad∣vance the Splendor of the Ceremony. But to return back into England, we find several Alterations at Court, where the Right Honourable Laurence Earl of Rochester, Lord President of the Coun∣cil, was made Lord High Treasurer of England; and the Right Honourable the Lord Marquiss of Hallifax was in his room made Lord President of the Council; the Earl of Clarendon, Lord Privy-Seal, and the Duke of Beaufort Lord President of Wales. Also the Lord Godolphin was made Chamberlain to the Queen; and at the same time His Majesty was pleas'd to appoint Henry Bulkley, Esquire, to be Master of the Houshold; Sir Stephen
Fox eldest Clerk of the Green-Cloth; Sir William Boremau second Clerk of the same; Sir William Churchil eldest Clerk-Comptroller, and Sir Richard Mason youngest Clerk-Comptroller; in which Places they serv'd the deceased King before. Among the Foreign Ambassadors that were sent from Foreign States and Prin∣ces to condole the Death of the late King, and congratulate his Majesties Accession to the Crown, the first that led the way, was the Count Serclaes de Tilly, Envoy from the Marquiss of Gra∣na, Governour-General of the Spanish Netherlands. The next that appear'd was the Mar∣shal de l'Orge, and the Marquiss d' Estam∣pes; the first sent by the King of France, the latter by the Duke of Orleance. These were followed by Monsieur d' Ebrenschell from the King of Denmark, upon the same account; and the latter also at the same time gave notice of the Death of the Queen-Mother. Other Extraordinary Envoys were likewise dispatch'd away upon the same Errand: as Monsieur de Laundy from the Duke of Zell; Monsieur Spanhem from
the Elector of Brandenburgh; the Count de la Trinitè from the Duke of Savoy; the Baron of Croseck from the Duke of Brunswick, and Monsieur de la Rovere, Count de St. Ange from the Dutchess of Modena. But the greatest Honour which the King received, was from the States of Holland, who upon the same occasion sent a splendid Embassy into England, in which were employ'd the Heer Van Duyvenvourde, the Heer Van Citters, and the Heer Dyckvelt, who being receiv'd at Greenwich by Sir Charles Cotterel, and brought by water in the King's Barge to the Tower, at their Landing were received by the Lord Tenham, saluted with the usual Discharge of Cannon, and from thence conducted in the King's Coach at∣tended by five Coaches of their own, and a great many others, with six Horses apiece, to their House in St. James's Square; and after some few days had their publick Audience of both their Majesties, and the Queen Dowager. Toward the beginning of March, the King issued forth a Proclamation, Decla∣ring his Pleasure touching his Coronation,
and the Solemnity to be observed therein, setting forth; That whereas he had re∣solved by the favour and blessing of God to Celebrate the Solemnity of his Royal Coronation; as also the Coronation of the Queen, upon the Twenty third of April next ensuing; and forasmuch as by the ancient Customs and usage of the Realm, as also in regard of divers Tenures of sundry Mannors, Lands and other Hereditaments, many of his Lo∣ving Subjects did claim, and were bound to perform several Services on that Day, and at the Time of the Coro∣nation, as in former times their Ance∣stors, and they from whom they claim, had done at the Coronations of his Pre∣decessors; Therefore, for the preserva∣tion of the Rights and Claims of his Loving Subjects, whom it might con∣cern, He thought fit to signifie, that he had authorised and appointed by Com∣mission, under the Great Seal, Francis Lord Guilford, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal; Laurence Earl of Rochester, Lord High Treasurer; George Marquiss of Halifax, President of the Council; Hen∣ry Earl of Clarendon, Lord Privy Seal; Henry Duke of Norfolk, Earl Marshal;
James Duke of Ormond; Henry Duke of Beaufort, Lord President of Wales; Ro∣bert Earl of Lindsey, Lord Great Cham∣berlain of England; Henry Earl of Ar∣lington, Lord Chamberlain of the Hous∣hold; Aubrey Earl of Oxford, Theophilus Earl of Huntington, Robert Earl of Sun∣derland, Robert Earl of Alisbury, John Earl of Radnor, George Lord Dartmouth, Sidney Lord Godolphin, Sir George Jefferies, Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, and Sir Thomas Jones Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, or any Three or more of them to receive, hear, and determine the Petitions and Claims which would be exhibited to them, concerning the Ser∣vices to be by them performed at the said Coronation; straightly charging and commanding all Persons, of what Rank or Quality soever they were, to give their attendance according to the Summons to them directed. In the mean time the King, having re∣solv'd to make some Alterations in Ireland, new Orders were sent to Dublin; in pur∣suance of which, upon the 27 of March, his Grace the Duke of Ormond deliver'd up the Sword to the Lord Archbishop of Armagh, Lord Primate and Chancellor of
that Kingdom, and Arthur Earl of Gra∣nard, under the Title of Lords Justices; and the next Morning the Council being conven'd, in pursuance of the Kings Or∣ders to that purpose, was dissolv'd, and a new Council appointed, consisting of the Lord Primate, the Archbishop of Dublin, the Lord High-Treasurer, the two Chief Justices of the Kings Bench and Common Pleas, the Lieutenant General of the Ar∣my, the Collonel of the Guards, the Duke of Ormond; the Earls of Thomond, Roscommon, Arglass, Drogheda, and Long∣ford; the Lords Fitzharding and Blefing∣ton, Robert Fitzgerald Esq Sir Charles Fielding, Sir Richard Reynolds, Sir Tho∣mas Newcomen, Sir Robert Hamilton; Adam Loftus, and Lemuel Kingdon Esquires. After which the Duke of Ormond came o∣ver loaden with Addresses from almost all parts of Ireland, of which it would be too tedious here to give a particular Bedroll. Much about the same time came forth two Proclamations, the one to prohibit any Persons whatever to trade within the Limits assign'd to the Royal African Com∣pany, excepting only such as were Members of the said Society; the other to restrain all
Persons but the Members and Agents of the East India Company to Trade in the East Indies, and to recal such as were there without permission of the Company in London. Nor must we here omit a pretty kind of passage that happen'd about this time: For the Earl of Peterborough having com∣menc'd an Action against one Samuel Hey∣rick a Bookseller of London, upon the Sta∣tute of Scandalum Magnatum, for Printing and Publishing a scandalous Libel, as it was then suggested, call'd Dangerfield's Particular Narrative, containing, as it was averr'd, several Scandalous Expres∣sions in derogation of his Lordships Ho∣nour, had recover'd at the Assizes at Northampton Five thousand Pound Dama∣ges. But such was the Clemency of his Lordship, that being certifi'd of the Loy∣alty and Honesty of the said Samuel Hey∣rick, upon his humble submission, his Lordship remitted the said Damages for a much smaller Acknowledgment, and stopt all farther Proceedings. But now the Twenty third of April being come, the Coronation of the King and Queen was perform'd at Westminster after the following manner.
The King and Queen being come from White-Hall to the Palace at West∣minster, where the Nobility and others, who were to go into the Proceeding were met, came down in State from the Lords House into Westminster Hall, about Eleven of the Clock in the Forenoon; and being seated upon the Throne there, the Sword of State, the Sword Curtana, and the two Pointed Swords, together with the Gold Spurs, were presented to the King, and laid upon the Table be∣fore him. Then the Dean and Prebends of West∣minster, having before brought the Crown and other Regalia in solemn Procession from the Collegiate Church, came into the Hall, and presented them severally to the King; after which being laid upon the Table, they were deliver'd, together with the four Swords and Spurs, to the Lords appointed to car∣ry them in the Procession; which began in this manner. First Drums and Trumpets; then the six Clerks in Chancery, Chaplains ha∣ving Dignities; Aldermen of London, and Masters in Chancery, four a breast: In which Order all the rest of the Pro∣ceeding
follow'd; then Serjeants at Law and others of the Long Robe; Squires of the Body; Gentlemen of the Privy Chamber; Judges and Chief Justices: Then the Children of the Chappel, Quoir of Westminster, Gentlemen of the Chappel; Prebends and Dean of West∣minster; Master of the Jewel House, and Privy Councellors not Peers: Next two Officers at Arms; then Ba∣ronesses, Barons, Bishops: Two other Officers at Arms; Viscountesses, Vis∣counts: Two Heralds at Arms; Coun∣tesses and Earls: Two more Heralds at Arms, then a Marchioness: Heralds at Arms; Dutchesses, Dukes: Next the two Provincial Kings at Arms, after whom the Great Officers and Arch-Bishops; then two Persons in Robes of State, representing the Dukes of A∣quitain and Normandy. Then the Queens Vice Chamberlain, and three Noblemen carrying her Ma∣jesties Regalia; that is to say, the Earl of Dorset carry'd the Ivory Rod; the Earl of Rutland the Scepter, and the Duke of Beaufort the Crown. After them follow'd the Queen her self, assisted by the Bishops of London and
Winchester, under a Rich Canopy sup∣ported by sixteen Barons of the Cinque Ports; the Train being born by the young Dutchess of Norfolk, assisted by four Earls Daughters, attended by two Ladies of the Bedchamber, and two Women of the Bedchamber. After these the Noblemen that bore the King's Regalia; that is to say, the Earl of Alisbury bearing St. Edward's Staff; the Lord Grey the Spurs; the Earl of Peterborough the Scepter with the Cross: Next the Earl of Pembroke bore the third Sword: the Earl of Darby the second, and between them the Earl of Shrewsbury bearing Curtana, or the Pointless Sword: Then Garter, between the Usher of the Black Rod and the Lord Mayor of Lon∣don: Then the Lord Great Chamber∣lain single: Then the Earl of Oxford bear∣ing the Sword of State, between the Duke of Grafton, Lord High Constable, and the Duke of Norfolk Earl Marshall: Then the Duke of Ormond, bearing St. Edward's Crown, between the Duke of Somerset bearing the Globe, and the Duke of Albemarle bearing the Scepter with the Dove.
After these came the King him∣self, assisted by the Bishops of Durham and Bath, under a Rich Canopy, born in like manner by sixteen Barons of the Cinque Ports; the Train born by four Earls Eldest Sons, assisted by the Ma∣ster of the Robes, follow'd by the Duke of Northumberland, Captain of the Horse-Guard in Waiting, between the Earl of Huntington Captain of the Band of Pensioners, and Viscount Gran∣dison Captain of the Yeomen of the Guard, closing the Proceeding. The Serjeants at Arms went in two Classes before their Majesties, and the Gentle∣men Pensioners on each side the Ca∣nopies. In this manner the King and Queen array'd in their Royal Robes furr'd with Ermins, the King with a Velvet Cap, and the Queen with a Rich Circle of Gold on her Head, all the Nobility in Robes of Crimson Velvet, with their Caps and Coronets in their Hands, and the rest who form'd the Proceeding being richly habited, or else wearing their peculiar Robes, proceeded on foot upon blew Cloth, spread from the Steps of the Throne
in Westminster Hall to the Steps of the Theater in the Quoir of Saint Peter's Westminster, the whole Passage being rail'd in, and guarded by His Majesties Horse and Foot Guards. So soon as they enter'd the Church, and that the Nobility and others were all duly plac'd, their Majesties ascend∣ed the Theater, and repair'd to their private Devotions on the East part thereof, and then seated themselves in their Chairs of State. Then follow'd the Recognition; and after an Anthem, the King and Queen came to the Altar and made their first Oblation; at what time the Lords who carried the Regalia presented them at the Altar, to be there deposited. Then was the Litany sung by two Bishops; which being ended, the Bishop of Ely began the Ser∣mon; after the conclusion of which, the King took the accustom'd Oath. And then the Veni Creator being sung, and the King disrob'd of his Mantle and Surcoat, he was Anointed and vested with all the Sacred Habit in King Edward's Chair. Which done, the Crown was put on just at three of the Clock; at what time all the People shouted,
the Drums beat, the Trumpets sounded, the Great Guns in St. James's Park, and at the Tower, were all discharged, and all the Peers put on their Coronets. The King being thus crown'd, and having been farther invested with the Ring, receiv'd both the Scepters, made his second Oblation, and being again refeated in King Edward's Chair, vouch∣safed to kiss the Archbishops and Bi∣shops. After which, Te Deum being sung, he ascended the Royal Throne: and no sooner was he enthron'd, but the Arch∣bishops and Bishops, in token of Homage, kiss'd the King's Cheek, and then all the Lords Temporal pay'd their several Homages by doing the like, and touch∣ing his Crown: during which time the Treasurer of the Houshold threw about the Coronation Medals. Then follow'd the Coronation of the Queen; at which time the Ladies also put on their Coronets, as the Lords had done before at the Kings. And then the Queen having receiv'd into her Hands the Scepter and Ivory Rod, was conducted to her Royal Seat upon the Throne.
The King and Queen being thus en∣thron'd, after the singing of an An∣them, the Archbishop ending with the Benediction, the King and Queen went in state into King Edward's Chappel, where the King being devested of St. Edward's Robes, and attired in his Roy∣al Robes of Purple Velvet, the whole Assembly, except those that belong'd to the Church of Westminster, return'd in the same order as they came, to Westminster-Hall, their Majesties and all the Nobility wearing their Crowns and Coronets on their Heads; and being entred the Hall, were conducted to their several Tables to Dinner. The first Course for their Majesties Table was served up with the usual Ceremo∣ny, the Lord High Steward and the Lord High Constable riding in on Horse∣back before it: And before the second Course was serv'd up, Sir Charles Dym∣mock, the Kings Champion, in compleat Armour, accompany'd by the Lord High Steward and Earl Marshal, all on Horse∣back, perform'd the usual Ceremony of the Challenge. After which, the Offi∣cers of Arms proclaim'd the King's Ti∣tles
in Latin, French, and English after the usual manner. While all the Cities and considerable Towns in England, upon the News of this Coronation, seem'd to be over∣whelm'd with Joy; Feasting, Banquet∣ing, Carousing, and filling the Court with Addresses of their Loyalty; the Parliament sitting down in Scotland the Twenty third of April, which was the day of the Coronation, full of Expecta∣tions of the News, prepared to receive it with all the Devotion imaginable. In order to this, a Letter was read, which had been directed from the King to the Parliament, bearing date the Twenty eighth of March, in the first Year of his Reign, setting forth, That the many Experiences he had of the Loyalty and exemplary forwardness of his Ancient Kingdom, by their Re∣presentatives assembled in Parliament, in the Reign of his Brother, made him desirous to call them together at the beginning of his Reign, to give them an opportunity not only of shewing their Duty, but also to be Exemplary to o∣thers in their Demonstrations of Affection to his Person, and Compliance with
his Desires. But that what he had to propose to them at that time, was this, which was both necessary as well for his safety as service, and had a greater tenden∣cy toward the securing their own Privi∣ledges and Properties, than the aggran∣dizing his Power; which however he was resolv'd to maintain in its greatest Lustre, that he might the better be enabled to protect and defend their Religion Establish'd by Law, their Rights and Properties against Fanatical Con∣trivances, Murtherers and Assassins, who had brought them into such Difficul∣ties, which only the steddy Resolutions of his Brother, and those employ'd by him, could have sav'd them from. That nothing had been left undone by those in∣human Traitors to over-turn their Peace; and therefore he hoped they would be wanting in nothing to secure themselves and Him. Which things being of such Importance, he was resolv'd in Person to have propos'd them the needful Re∣medies; but that being now impossible, he had sent among them the Duke of Queensberry, whom he had instructed in all things relating to his Service, and their own Prosperity, not doubting of
their Compliance and Assistance in all those matters wherein the said Duke was instructed. This Letter being read, the Lord High Commissioners spoke to this effect. In the first place, That by the King's sending to them so soon for their Ad∣vice, they were to be fully convinc'd not only of the great Confidence he had in their Loyalty, and their good Example to his other Dominions, but also how fully he would make good his Royal Word and Declaration to follow the Ex∣ample of his Brother's quiet and peaceful Reign. In the next place he assured them of his Princely Resolutions to protect and maintain the Government of the Church as by Law Establish'd; and that he would take care of the Persons and Concerns of the regular Clergy. That he would maintain their Rights and Properties according to the Establish'd Law of the Kingdom, and would not al∣low of any Arbitrary Oppressions either in Souldiers or others: and that he would condescend as far as justly could be desired or expected from him, in the business of the Excise and Militia.
On the other side, That the King ex∣pected from them to assert the Rights and Prerogatives of the Crown, and to establish the Revenues as amply upon him and his lawful Successors, as it was enjoy'd by his Brother, or any of his Pre∣decessors. In the next place, That effectu∣al means might be fallen upon to destroy that Desparate and Fanatical Party which had brought the Kingdom to the brink of Ruin and Disgrace. After this, the Lord Chancellor put them in mind what Disorders, Divisi∣sions, and Animosities had been among them, before the King, when Duke, was sent into the Kingdom; and by what easie gentle ways he brought about that Unity which the Kingdom was beginning to despair of; and therefore desired them with all the Eloquence he was able to express, to serve his Majesty, and pro∣mote his Interest by destroying a Bastard∣ly Brood of Villainous men, who of late, to the Reproach of Scotland, and of Hu∣man Nature it self, maintain'd Princi∣ples, and ventur'd upon Practices not to be named among any who had ever heard of Government, much less of Re∣ligion.
And to encourage them the more to do all they could toward the Service and Honour of so Glorious a Monarch, he desired them to consider his perso∣nal Advantages, whether in what re∣lated to War or Peace; His Experi∣ence both in Arms and Courts both at home and abroad; his exact Honesty, his Temperance and Sobriety, his inde∣fatigable Diligence, and his undaunted Courage upon all Occasions: Adding withal, that as he gave to Subjects the greatest Example of Loyalty and Obedi∣ence while he was one himself, so he was now an Example to all Kings of his Love, his Clemency, and his Care towards his People. The Parliament having heard these two Speeches, resolv'd not to be out done in Panegyricks, and therefore return'd an Answer to the King's Letter to this effect. That his gracious and kind Remem∣brance of the Service done by his An∣cient Kingdom to his Brother of ever glorious Memory, should rather raise in them ardent desires to exceed what∣ever they had formerly done, than to look upon them as deserving the Esteem
he was pleased to express of them. That the Death of their Excellent Mo∣narch was lamented by them to all the Degrees of Grief, which were consi∣stent with their great Joy for the Suc∣cession of his Most Sacred Majesty, who had not only continued but secured the Happiness which his Brother's Wisdom, Justice, and Clemency had procured them. That being the first Parliament which met by his Authority, he might be confident they would offer such Laws as might best secure his Person, the Royal Family and Government; and that they would be so exemplarily Loyal, as to raise his Honour and Greatness to the utmost of their Power. And lastly, That they would leave nothing undone for the Extirpation of Phanaticism, and for detecting and punishing the late Con∣spirators. Having thus given the King good Words, they proceed to Acts. And first, having two such good Foundations, as the King's Declaration and Promises, they pass an Act, wherein the King is declared to assent with his Estates in Parliament conven'd, to ratifie and con∣firm all Acts and Statutes formerly
pass'd for the Security, Liberty and Freedom of the true Church of God, and the Protestant Religion presently profess'd within the Kingdom, in their whole strength and tenor, as if they were particularly set down and express'd in the Act. By a second Act they annexed, united, and incorporated the Excise of Foreign and In-land Commodities to the Crown of Scotland for ever. By a third Act they ordain'd, That all such Persons as being cited in Cases of Treason, Field or House-Conventi∣cles, or Church-Irregularities, should re∣fuse to give Testimony, should be liable to be punish'd as guilty of those Crimes re∣spectively in which they refus'd to be Witnesses. After which a Proclamation was is∣sued forth for putting the Kingdom of Scotland, into a posture of Defence against the Enemies of the King and Govern∣ment; to that purpose requiring and commanding all and every the Sub∣jects of the Kingdom of Scotland to be in a readiness in their best Arms to assist the King against all Commo∣tions and Insurrections whatever, as
they should be advertiz'd, and to fur∣nish themselves with fourteen days Pro∣vision, every one to march when and where the Privy-Council should order. Requiring also all such as should live near the Sea-Coast, so soon as they should hear of the Arrival of any Ves∣sels at any Ports, Creeks, or Har∣bours, with Men, Arms, or Ammu∣nition, to rise in their best Arms, and beat them off, or seize and secure them, and give immediate notice thereof to the Privy-Council; promising withal, to in∣demnifie and for ever fully pardon them for so doing, whatever Slaughter or Blood∣shed they should commit: Withal, in∣flicting severe Punishments upon all Per∣sons that should harbour or relieve any Traytors or Rebels coming upon their Lands. Which Proclamation was grounded upon the Insurrection of those People that were dispersed by the Duke of Mon∣mouth, whom the Proclamation calls Tray∣terous Conspirators against the life of Charles II. the Destruction of the Ancient British Monarchy, and who still continued the same Fury against K. James and his Roy∣al Government.
And now we come to one or two of the most surprizing Tryals in the World; such a piece of awkard Justice hardly to be parallell'd in Story, to try a Per∣son, who had with the hazard of his Life discover'd a most damnable Popish Plot against the Government and Pro∣testant Religion, for Perjury, under a Popish King, suspected, when Duke of York, to be concern'd in the carrying on of the same Plot, by a pickt Jury, and the Testimony of Popish Partial Witnesses, whose Evidence had already been hiss'd out of Court, under the management of a Partial Judge, who only study'd by Arbitrary Sentences to please and gra∣tifie the humour of a Popish Prince. These were the two Tryals of Doctor Oats upon the Eighth and Ninth of May. At what time being brought to the Bar of the King's Bench, the first Indictment brought against him was, for swearing that there was a Consult of Jesuits held at the White Horse Tavern in the Strand, where Ireland and several other Jesuits were present, and their Business was to consult, how they might murder and destroy the King and subvert the Government, and there they
came to a Resolution, that Pickering and Groves should kill the King; and that he was present at the Debate, and carry'd the Resolution from Chamber to Cham∣ber, where they had separated themselves in lesser numbers, and that there he saw the said Resolution sign'd. To make this a Perjury, they were to prove that Doctor Oats was all that time at St. Omers. Now here was the pleasant sport, or rather topsie turvy Practice of Westminster Hall, to see notorious Papists, full of Malice and Revenge, that had already been twice baf∣fled in open Court, brought in again, and allow'd for lawful Testimony against the Doctor, and cherish'd in a Protestant Court of Justice, by Judges that pretended to be Protestants themselves. To prove that Doctor Oats did give his Testimony in the Court against Ire∣land and the rest, they brought one Foster, who had been upon the Jury, and had given his verdict against the Jesuits, which he then sneakingly, if it may not be ac∣counted knavishly said, was one of his Unhappinesses. To prove he was at St. Omers all the while that the Doctor said he was in London, they brought Hilsley, Dorrel,
Osborn, Bournaby a Jesuite, Pool of the Order of the Virgin Mary, Thornton, Con∣way, Haggerstone a Jesuite, Beeston, Cle∣ment Smith, Price, Doddington, Gerrard a Jesuite, Arundel, Christopher Turber∣vil, Clavering, Copley and others, all notorious Papists, and such as acknow∣ledged themselves for such in open Court, who all swore that the Doctor came to St. Omers in December 77. and was never out of the College but three days till July 78. and indeed they swore it home, but with those many scurrilous Reflections upon the Doctor, as mani∣fested that they swore rather out of Revenge and Embitterment, than Con∣science. In answer to this, the Doctor pro∣duced sufficient Protestant Evidence, who swore they saw him in London both in April and the beginning of May; but they were derided by the Chief Justice. The Doctor farther appeal'd to the Court, whether a Papist, in Case of Re∣ligion, might be believed and receiv'd as a good Witness. The Chief Ju∣stice affirm'd that a Papist, without any other legal Objection, was a good
Witness; and Withen's ask'd the Doctor, whether he thought he came there to Preach? But the Doctor farther insist∣ing upon the Question, demanded it as his right to be heard by Council, as to his exception against his Witnesses, but was still over-rul'd very imperiously by the Chief Justice; upon which the Doctor appeal'd to all the Hearers, whether he had Justice done him or no; which put his Lordship into such a violent Passion, hardly parallel'd, to have proceeded from a Christian Judge upon a Bench, in History. The storm being over, the Do∣ctor cited the Opinion of the Lord Coke, That a Popish Recusant was not to be admitted as a Witness, not so much as between Party and Party. But this would not do. The Doctor farther urg'd, that they were bred up in a Seminary against Law, for which their Friends were to be punish'd. To which the Chief Ju∣stice replying, That so was a Dissenter bred up against Law; and the Doctor returning upon him, That he had not offer'd any Dissenter in Evidence; the Chief Justice derided his Witnesses cal∣ling them Goodwife Mayo and her Com∣panions,
excellent Protestants without all question. Then the Doctor urg'd the Statute of the 27. of Eliz. c. 2. against Jesuits, Seminary Priests, and other such like Disobedient Persons. In answer to which, the Chief Justice ask'd him whether the Witnesses own'd themselves to be Priests and Jesuits. The Doctor would have offer'd the Statute of the third year of Charles the First cap. 2. but that would not be ad∣mitted. The next thing which the Doctor Pleaded, was the Case of the Earl of Shaftsbury, when charg'd with High Trea∣son and committed to the Tower; who upon his acquittal, moving that he might have liberty to bring an Indictment of Perjury against the Witnesses that accus'd him, the Court over-rul'd the Motion, because they would not have the Kings Evidence endicted for Perjury, nor the Popish Plot call'd in Question. But the Chief Justice told him that was nothing to the purpose neither. After this the Doctor argu'd that the Evidence upon which he was Indicted of Perjury, was the same which had
been deliver'd six years before at White∣hread's Tryal, and afterwards at Lang∣horn's, and sixteen Witnesses produc'd against him, which were not then re∣ceiv'd. Therefore if the evidence he then gave was then believ'd, he could not dream what new objection should arise against it, which had not been hinted and answer'd. 'Tis true, he told the Court he had call'd some Noble Lords to testifie for him, but found ei∣ther distance of Time had wrought up∣on their Memories, or the difference of the Season had chang'd their Opinions. So that seeing it was in vain to strive against the Stream of the Chief Justices Passion, (for even Wakeman and Castle-main were admitted as Evidence against him) he concluded, since he had not Li∣berty to argue those things which were most Material for his Defence, with an Ap∣peal to the Great God of Heaven and Earth, the Judge of all, and in his Pre∣sence and before all the Auditory, avow'd his Evidence of the Popish Plot, all, and every part of it, to be nothing but true; expecting from Almighty God the Vindication of his Integrity and In∣nocence.
Thereupon the Jury withdrawing for a quarter of an Hour, return'd and brought the Doctor in Guilty. Nor indeed could the Doctor expect less, if the rest of the Jury were like their Foreman. The second Indictment, which was brought against the Doctor the next day, was for swearing at the Tryal of Ireland, that Ireland was in Town within the Ci∣ties of London and Westminster upon the first or second day of September 78. and upon the eighth and twelfth of August; whereas in truth he was not in Town upon any of these days. For the Proof of which pretended Perjury, the same Methods were us'd as had been done in the Tryal the day before, by bringing in a Crowd of Po∣pish Evidence, Malicious and Revenge∣ful, and as eager to stifle the Villany of their Darling Plot, as the Doctor had been to discover it; and some of them, such whose Testimony at the same Tryal to evince the Doctor's Evidence, had been rejected in the time of Protestan∣tism; but was now conjur'd up again to serve the Popish Cause. The first was Mrs. Ireland, the Jesuits Sister; Mrs. Ireland's Mother; Mrs. Duddle, Mrs.
Quino; the Lord Aston, Sir Edward South∣cot, Mr. John Southcot, Harrison the Lord Aston's Coachman, George Hobson, George North, Andrew Wetton, Mrs. Har∣well, Mrs. Rushton, Mrs. Winford, Mrs. Stanley, Mrs. Purcell, Mr. Stamford, Mrs. Fowler, the two Giffords, Mrs. Keeling, with several others, all Roman Catho∣licks, of whom the Doctor upon his Tryal gave a true Character, that they were all Popish Traitors who would swear any thing, and suborn Witnesses upon Wit∣nesses against him, to stifle the Plot. In answer to this shoal of Witnesses, the Doctor pleaded that it was a hard case, for a Man after six years, to be In∣dicted for a Circumstance of time. After that the Doctor produc'd the Protestation of dying Bedlo, that all he had sworn concerning the Plot was true; and that he was one that swore that Ire∣land was in Town either the beginning of September, or latter end of August; which done the Dr. call'd several Witnes∣ses, but few appear'd, and those such as did him little good; and therefore he laid the stress of his Plea upon the Re∣cords of the Attainder and Execution of Ireland and Whitebread, &c. desiring the
Court and the Jury to consider the hard∣ness of his Case, in regard that his Wit∣nesses either could not be found, or else were such, as considering the Times, durst not appear in his behalf; and therefore hop'd they would not let him be injur'd by a number of false Witnesses, and Papists that were Parties. Upon Munday the Twenty sixth of May, the Dr. was brought up again to the Kings Bench Bar, where the Doctor being ask'd what he could say in arrest of Judgment, he mov'd for longer time to prepare his Council what to say in his behalf; but that being deni'd him, and no Council appearing for him, he put in four Exceptions himself. 1. That a Witness sworn on the behalf of the King, in a Process of High Trea∣son could not be punish'd for Perjury by the King. 2. That it did not appear, that the Indictments of Ireland, found in Middle∣sex, were legally transmitted to London, and consequently that all the Proceed∣ings thereupon were coram non Judice. 3. That the Perjuries assign'd were foreign to the Issue.
4. That it was Resolutio signat in that part of the Indictment, that mentions what the Defendant swore; and that in the Perjury assign'd 'twas Resolutio sig∣nand; which was no good Assignment to the Perjury. But these Exceptions being over-rul'd by the Court, as of no weight or colour, as it was then pretended; Judge Wi∣thens, after the Judges had laid their heads a little while together, proceeded to give Sentence. That the Doctor should pay a Thou∣sand Marks upon each Indictment. That he should be stript of all his Ca∣nonical Habit. That he should stand upon the Pillory and in the Pillory before Westminster Hall Gate, upon the next Munday for an hours time, with a Paper over his Head, after he had walk'd with it about all the Courts in Westminster Hall, declaring his Crimes. That upon the second Indictment, he should stand the next day in the Pillory at the Royal Exchange, for the space of an hour, with the same Inscription. That the next day he should be whipt from Aldgate to Newgate; and upon
Friday from Newgate to Tyburn, by the hands of the Common Hangman. Then the Merciless Judge proceeding, But Mr. Oats, said he, we cannot but re∣member, there were several particular times, about which you swore false; and therefore as Annual Commemorati∣ons, that it may be known to all Peo∣ple as long as you live, we have taken care of you for an Annual Punishment. To which purpose he farther pronounc'd, That upon the 24. of April, every year as long as he liv'd, he should stand in the Pillory at Tyburn, just opposite to the Gallows for the space of an hour. The same, before Westminster Hall Gate, every year upon the Ninth of August, as long as he liv'd. The same, at Charing Cross, every year upon the Tenth of August. The like over against the Temple Gate, upon the Eleventh of August eve∣ry year. And lastly, the same upon the Second of September at the Royal Exchange; and to be committed close Prisoner as long as he liv'd. And as if the Judge himself had been concern'd in the Revenge of the Papists,
for the Doctors Discovery of the Plot; he farther told him openly, that if it had been in his power to have carried it farther, he would have been willing to have given Judgment of Death up∣on him; for he was sure the Doctor de∣served it. All which extremity of Cruelty and Ignominy, the Doctor endured with such a Courage and Fortitude, as did the Papists more mischief than all his Evi∣dence had done before; to the great re∣gret of his Adversaries and shame of his Judges. Upon the Twenty sixth of May 1685. the Parliament met at Westminster. At what time the Commons being sent for up to the House of Lords to attend the King who was seated upon his Throne in his Royal Robes with the usual Solemnity, the Lord Keeper declar'd to them his pleasure, to defer speaking to them, till the Members of both Houses had taken the Oaths appointed to be taken by Act of Parliament; after which the King would declare his mind to them. Farther he acquainted them, that it was the King's Pleasure that the Gentlemen of the House of Commons should go apart, and pro∣ceed
to the choice of their Speaker. Upon which, returning to their House, they u∣nanimously made choice of Sir John Tre∣vor, one of the King's Council at Law, who being the same Afternoon presented to the King in the House of Lords, was confirm'd by Royal Approbation. Some few days after, the King having notice that the Ceremony of taking the Oaths was over, went to the House of Lords, and there delivered himself to both Houses in the following Speech. After it had pleased Almighty God to take to his Mercy the late King, my Dearest Brother, and to bring me to the peaceable Possession of the Throne of my Ancestors, I immediately resolv'd to call a Parliament, as the best means to settle every thing upon those Founda∣tions that might make my Reign both easie and happy to you: toward which I am disposed to contribute all that is fit for me to do. What I said to my Privy-Council at my first coming there, I am desirous to renew to you; where∣in I freely declare my Opinion con∣cerning the Principles of the Church of England, whose Members have shewn
themselves so eminently Loyal in the worst of Times, in defence of my Fa∣ther, and support of my Brother of Blessed Memory, that I will always take care to support and defend it. I will make it my Endeavour to pre∣serve this Government both in Church and State, as it is by Law established. And as I will never depart from the just Rights and Prerogatives of the Crown, so will I never invade any man's Pro∣perty. And you may be sure, that ha∣ving heretofore ventur'd my Life in defence of this Realm, I shall still go as far as any Man in preserving it in all its just Rights and Liberties. And ha∣ving given you this Assurance of the care I will have of your Religion and Property, which I have chosen to do in the same words I used at my first coming to the Crown, the better to evi∣dence to you that I spoke them not by chance, and consequently that you may the more firmly rely upon a Promise so solemnly made, I cannot doubt that I shall fail of suitable Returns from you, with all imaginable Duty and Kind∣ness on your part, and particularly in what relates to the setling my Reve∣nue,
and continuing it during my life, as it was in the time of the King my Brother. I might use many Arguments to enforce this Demand, from the Benefit of Trade, the Support of the Navy, the Necessity of the Crown, and the Well-being of the Government it self, which I must not suf∣fer to be precarious. But I am confi∣dent your own Consideration of what is just and reasonable, will suggest whate∣ver might be enlarg'd upon this occasion. There is one popular Argument which I fore-see may be us'd against what I ask of you, from the Inclinations men may have for frequent Parliaments, which some men think would be the best secu∣red by feeding me from time to time by such Proportions as they shall think con∣venient. And this Argument, it being the first time I speak to you from the Throne, I will answer once for all; That this would be a very improper Method to take with Me; and that the best way to engage Me to meet you often, is al∣ways to use Me well. I expect that you will comply with Me in what I have de∣fired, and that you will do it speedily, that this may be a short Session, and that we may meet again to all our Satisfactions.
I must acquaint you, that I have had News this Morning from Scotland, that Argyle is landed in the West High-lands, with the men he brought with him from Holland; and that there are two Decla∣tions publish'd, one in the name of all those in Arms there, the other in his own. It would be too long for me to report the substance of them; it is suffici∣ent to tell ye that I am charged with U∣surpation and Tyranny. The shorter of them I have directed to be forthwith communicated to you; I will take the best care I can, that this Declaration of their Treason and Rebellion may meet with the Reward it deserves. And I will not doubt but that you all will be the more zealous to support the Government, and give me my Revenue, as I have de∣sir'd it, without delay. These obliging Expressions did so take with the House of Commons at that time, that returning to their House, the first thing they did, was to order the making a return of their most humble and hearty Thanks for his Majesties most gracious Speech and Declaration. And such was the force of those fair Promises, tho' never made to be perform'd, that upon taking
into consideration that part of the Speech which related to the King's Revenue, they unanimously resolv'd, That the Revenue which was granted to the late King, should be setled on his present Ma∣jesty for his Life, and that a Bill should be brought in for that purpose. In the Afternoon of the same day they attended the King in a body in the Ban∣quetting-house, to return their Thanks in pursuance of their Forenoons Resolution. The Lords also resolv'd upon the fol∣lowing Address, That whereas the King had been plea∣sed to in inform them, that the Earl of Argyle, attainted of High Treason, was landed with other Rebels in Scotland, and was there in actual Rebellion, they were resolv'd to stand by his Ma∣jesty with their Lives and Fortunes, for the Suppression of the said Rebels, and all other his Enemies whatsoever. The House of Commons also, after they had read the Declaration mention'd in the King's Speech, resolv'd that they would stand by, and assist the King with Life and Fortune against Archibald Campbel, the pretended Earl of Argile and his Adherents, and all others that
should assist him. And in the Afternoon of the same day (so quick they were at that time with their Complements) both Houses attended the King with their Votes and Addresses. In Scotland the Parliament was no less desirous to ingratiate themselves with their new Soveraign, and therefore pas∣sed two Acts: the one declaring, That whereas the Obstinacy of the Fanatick Party, notwithstanding all the Laws for∣merly made against them, was such, as still to keep their House and Field-Conven∣ticles, which were the Nurseries and Rendevouses of Rebellion; therefore they ordain'd, That whoever should here∣after preach in any Fanatick House or Field-Conventicle, and such as should be Hearers at such Conventicles, should be punished by Death, and Confiscation of Goods. The second Act set forth, That the giving or taking the National Covenant, as explained in the year 1638. or of the League and Covenant commonly so call'd, or write in defence thereof, should incur the Crime and Pains of Treason. They also pass'd an another Act, wherein they made a dutiful offer to the
King of two hundred and sixty thousand Pounds yearly, to begin at Whitsontide, 1685. and to be paid termly at Whitsontide and Martlemas, during the King's Life. However, they were not without some Confusion in the midst of these their brisk Resolutions: For the Earl of Argile setting sail, the second of May, from the Vlye in Holland, upon the fifth of the same Month appear'd before Ork∣ney, where sending his Secretary and Surgeon ashore, they were both seiz'd by the Inhabitants of the Island, and sent up to the Privy Council at Edenburgh. From thence he sail'd for the West Coast of Scotland, and landed at Dunstafnage in Lorn, a ruinous Castle formerly belonging to himself, into which he put a Garri∣son. From thence proceeding farther up into the Country, he published his De∣claration, entitled, The Declaration of the Protestant People, that is to say; of the Noblemen, Barons, Gentlemen, Burgesses, and Commoners of all sorts, in Arms within the Kingdom of Scotland, with the Concur∣rence of the true and faithful Pastors, and of several Gentlemen of the English Nation joyn'd with them in the same Cause. Where∣in they set forth the great Advantages
the Protestant Religion both at home and abroad had had by the success of the War against Charles the First; which Success they ascribed to the Blessing of God, and the Goodness of their Cause. They cry'd up the Loyalty of the Scotch Covenanters; they accused the Parliaments of both Kingdoms for rescinding the Laws which had been made during that War, as al∣so for turning out the Nonconformist Ministers. They accused the Govern∣ment of putting men to death contra∣ry to the Law, and desolating the Chur∣ches, changing the Ordinances of God into the Inventions of Men; for conni∣ving at Papists, keeping up standing For∣ces, which they call'd the Bane of Civil Government. They declared against the King's Surpemacy, and all the Wars a∣gainst the States General of the United Provinces; the Forfeiture of the late Earl of Argile, and the Torture of Spence and Castares, by whom was made so great a Discovery of the late horrid Conspira∣cy. They likewise declared against the Enquiries made into the Insurrection at Bothwel-Bridge, by the Circuit-Courts, which they call'd Tyranny and Popery twist∣ed together: They declar'd against the
King's Ascention to the Throne, calling him barely James Duke of York, as being excluded by the Commons of England. They also declared against the Parliament then sitting in England, as being pack'd, caball'd and return'd by Fraud and In∣justice. For which Reasons it was that they threw off all Bonds of Subjection to the King, by the name of James Duke of York and his Accomplices, whom they stiled their most unnatural and wicked Enemies. Then they set forth the Rea∣sons for their taking up Arms for the Re∣storation and Settlement of the Prote∣stant Religion; the Suppression and utter Exclusion of Popery; the restoring of all who had been Sufferers for adhering to their Party: Declaring withal, That they will never enter into any Treaty, Capi∣tulation, or Conditions with the King, but prosecute the War with all vigor, till they should attain their Ends; and assuring Indempnity to all that should come in and joyn with them against a persecuting Ty∣rant, and an Apostate Party. This was the Substance of the General Declaration, which may be said to be a Declaration of War. The other was in the Earl of Argile's own Name, wherein
he set forth, in reference to himself, That as he had taken up Arms with those who had appointed him to be their Leader, for no private or personal Ends, but on∣ly for those contain'd in the Declaration before-mentioned, so he claim'd no In∣terest but what he had before the pre∣tended Forfeiture of his Family, and had sufficient Right to. He freely forgave all personal Injuries against his Person and Family to those that should not oppose him, but concur with him in his present Undertaking for the Ends before-mentioned; promising farther, upon the Recovery of his Estate, to satisfie both all his own, and his Fa∣ther's Debts. That he had patiently suffered an Ex∣ilement of three years and a half, ac∣cording to a Sentence unjustly pronounc'd against him in the late King's Reign, to whom he had always been truly Loyal; but he being dead, and the Duke of York having taken off his Mask, and in∣vaded the Religion and Liberties of the Kingdom, he thought it not only just, but his Duty to God and his Country to oppose and repress his Tyrannies and Usurpations; inviting and obtesting all
true Protestants to concur with him in his Undertaking. On the other side, the Parliament at Edenburgh, in opposition to the Earl, pass'd an Act, That all the Subjects of Scotland should take the Oath of Allegi∣ance anew, and assert the Royal Prero∣gatives whenever, they should be requir'd by the Privy-Council, upon pain of Ba∣nishment and Imprisonment, or such o∣ther Punishments as should be thought fit to be inflicted upon them. But now to return into England; Up∣on the Eighth of May, T. Dangerfield was tried at the King's Bench Bar, upon an Information for Writing and Publishing a most villanous and scandalous Libel call'd his Narrative, and found Guilty; for that was the necessary; Consequence of any man's being tried at that time, if he had done any thing in opposition to the Popish Interest. He had the same whipping as Doctor Oats; but returning from his last suffering, was run through the Eye into the Brains, as he rode in the Coach, of which would he dy'd in a few days. However the Person that did the Fact was hang'd for it upon the same Gal∣lows to which the other had been whipt.
Upon the same day also in the As∣ternoon, Mr. Richard Baxter, a Learned Divine, and Eminent for his Pious Life and Conversation, was Try'd and Con∣victed at a Nisi Prius at Guild Hall, up∣on an Information for Writing and Publishing Scandalous and Seditious Notes upon the New Testament. A thing very likely to be done by such a Person; but it seems that those Arbitra∣ry times could not swallow his Divi∣nity. The same day the King coming to the House of Lords, and being seated in his Royal Robes, was presented with an Act for settling the Revenue on him for Life, as it had been settl'd upon his Bro∣ther, to which he immediately gave his Royal Assent; and then deliver'd himself in the following Speech. My Lords and Gentlemen, I thank you very heartily for the Bill you have presented me this day; and I assure you the readiness and chearfulness that has atttended the dispatch of it, is as acceptable to me as the Bill it self. Af∣ter so happy a beginning, you may be∣lieve I would not call upon you unne∣cessarily
for an extraordinary Supply. But when I tell you that the Stores of the Navy and Ordinance are extreamly exhausted: That the Anticipations upon several Branches of the Revenue are great and burthensom. That the Debts of the King my Brother to his Servants and Family, are such as deserve Com∣passion. That the Rebellion in Scot∣land, without putting more weight up∣on it than it really deserves, must oblige me to a considerable expence, and extra∣ordinary; I am sure such considerations will move you to give me an Aid to pro∣vide for these things, wherein the Securi∣ty, the Ease and Happiness of my Go∣vernment are so much concern'd. But above all, I must recommend to you the care of the Navy, the Strength and Glo∣ry of this Nation, that you will put it into such a Condition as may make us respected and consider'd abroad. I can∣not express my Concerns upon this Oc∣casion more suitable to my own thoughts of it, than by assuring you, I have a true English Heart, as Jealous of the Honour of the Nation as you can be. And I please my self with the hopes, that, by Gods Blessing and your Assist∣ance,
I may carry the Reputation of it yet higher in the World, than ever it has been in the time of any of my An∣cestors. And as I will not call upon you for Supplies, but when they are of publick use and Advantage; so I pro∣mise you, that what you give me up∣on such Occasions, shall be manag'd with good Husbandry. And I will take care it shall be employ'd to the uses for which I ask them. These Promises so noble to outward Appearance, rais'd such great hopes of future Effects, that the Commons return∣ing to their House, immediately resolv'd to give the King a Supply for the Occasi∣ons mention'd in his Speech. Upon the first of June the Princess Anne of Denmark was deliver'd of a Daughter; which was the next day Christen'd Mary, by the Bishop of Lon∣don; the Earl of Rochester, Lord High-Treasurer of England, being Godfather, and the Princess of Orange (the Countess of Clarendon standing for her Royal High∣ness) and the Dutchess of Grafton being Godmothers. About this time was publish'd an Ad∣vertisement to give notice, That Francis
Charleton Esquire, Major Wildman, John Trenchard Esquire, and Captain Edward Matthews, against whom Warrants had been issued out by the Secretary of State, were fled from their Houses and Lodgings, and absconded themselves, and therefore all People that could give intelligence where they conceal'd themselves, were requi∣red to make discovery of them, either to the Secretaries, or to the next Justice of the Peace, in order to their Appre∣hension. And now comes one of the most re∣markable Transactions upon the Stage which happen'd in this Kings Reign. For upon the Thirteenth of June the King receiv'd an Express from the Mayor of Lime, that the Thursday before, there appear'd three Ships off of that place, and that about seven of the Clock in the Evening, the Duke of Monmouth was landed with about 150 Men; with which he had possess'd himself of the Town, and had sent some of his Num∣ber into the Neighbouring Counties, to raise the People. Upon this a Procla∣mation was issu'd forth immediately, Declaring, that whereas the King had receiv'd certain Information, that the
Duke of Monmouth, the Lord Grey, and several others, were landed at Lime in a ho∣stile manner, and had possess'd themselves of the Town, and had sent several of their Accomplices into the Adjacent Counties, to excite the People to join with them; therefore he declared the said Duke of Monmouth, and all his Adherents and Abbettors, Traytors and Rebels, and requir'd the Deputy Lieutenants and o∣ther Officers to apprehend them as Trai∣tors; which was no more than was to be expected. But that which the Duke was censur'd for, was his Landing so un∣seasonably, at a time when the Parlia∣ment was sitting, and so charm'd with the Great Promises which the King had made. For no sooner had the King imparted his Intelligence to both Houses, but the Lords present him with the following Address. That whereas his Majesty had been pleas'd to impart to them his Intelli∣gence of the Duke of Monmouth's being landed at Lime in Dorset∣shire, and that he had possess'd himself of the Town, they humbly offer'd to assist and stand by him with their
Lives and Fortunes against the said Duke, and all Rebels and Traitors, and all other his Enemies whatsoever. The Commons also, upon the same Intelligence being communicated to them by the Earl of Middleton, assur'd the King that they were, and always would be ready to stand by and assist his Maje∣sty against the Duke of Monmouth and his Adherents, and all others that should assist the Duke or his Accomplices. And farther besought his Majesty to take more than ordinary care of his Royal Person, which they besought God long to preserve. In the mean time, upon the Sixteenth of June, the King repairing to the House of Lords, and being seated in the Throne in his Robes of State, gave his Royal Assent to, An Act for granting him an Imposition upon all Wines and Vinegar, between the Twenty fourth of June 1685. and the Twenty fourth of June 1693. An Act for granting him an Imposition upon all Tobacco and Sugar for the same Term; and an Act to Attaint James Duke of Mon∣mouth of High Treason. And at the same time a Proclamation
was issu'd forth, for the apprehending of all Persons, that should publish, or disperse the Duke of Monmouth's Decla∣ration, Intituled the Declaration of James Duke of Monmouth, and the Noblemen, Gentlemen, and others now in Arms for the Defence and Vindication of the Protestant Religion, and of the Laws, Rights, and Priviledges of England, from the Invasion made upon them, and for delivering the Kingdom from the Ty∣ranny of James Duke of York. And this Proclamation was seconded by another, promising a Reward of Five hundred Pound, to be immediatly paid by the Lord Treasurer, to him that should bring the Body of James Duke of Monmouth, dead or alive. About ten days after William Disney Esq having been taken but a little before in Surrey, with several of the D. of Mon∣mouth's Declarations in his House, where they were Printed, was brought to his Tryal by a special Commission of Over and Terminer before the Lord Chief Iu∣stice Jefferies, and being convicted was soon after drawn hang'd and quarter'd. But now that we may prosecute these two Transactions in their Order, and
bring them to a Conclusion according to the series of Action, we must begin with the Earl of Argile: Who being landed at Dunstaffnage in Scotland, as has been already said, or rather at Lockhead, alias Campbel Town, eight Miles from the Mull-head of Kintire, sent abroad the fol∣lowing Summons through the Country, sign'd with his own Hand. Campleton May 21. 1685. Being by Gods Blessing come safe to this Place, with a Resolution, according to a Declaration set forth for the De∣fence of the Protestant Religion, our Lives and Liberties, against Popery and Arbitrary Government; and all the stout Men of Ila being come thus far, and this Country being together at a Rendevouze, These are to require all the Heritors, Tenants, and others, and all the Fensible Men within this Division of Cowal be∣tween Sixteen and Sixty, with all their useful Arms, and two Weeks Loan, to come to the Tarbut against Tuesday next, being the 26. of May without fail, or sooner if they can. Argyle. To back this Summons, his Son Charles march'd into Cowall, and sent Letters to several Gentlemen to come to him, with∣out
any pretence of excuse, threatning otherwise the utmost Penalties of Mar∣tial Proceedings. From Campleton in Kintire, the Earl march'd with two Troops of Horse and 700. Foot to Tarbut, where he met 300. of the Ila Men, being attended by three Ships, one of 30. another of 12. and a third of six Guns, and twenty small Boats; there he Embarked his Men, and came to the Town of Ross in the Island of Boot, and took from thence a Nights Provision for himself and his Men: Then sayling round the Island, he return'd to Ross, and fir'd seven Guns at his Land∣ing, having with him 2500. Men. Af∣ter this he quitted the Island of Boot, and went over to Cowal, one of the Divisions of Argileshire, and would have brought his Ships and Boats into Lockfine towards En∣verary. But hearing that the Kings Men of War, the King-fisher and Faulcon, were coming up to the entrance of Lockrowan, they fortify'd a little Castle call'd Ellen∣greg, and a Rock that lies neer to it, to se∣cure their Ships in Lockrowan aforesaid. Which done, Argyle march'd away toward the Head of Lockfine, leaving 150 Men to guard his Ships, having first put his great
Guns, Arms, and Ammunition into the said Castle. Upon the 11th. of June a Party of 300. of the Kings Foot, under the Command of the Marquiss of Athol, met with a Party of Argiles, consisting of 400. Foot, and 80. Horse, and defeated them, upon which Argyle march'd back to Ellengreg, where he continu'd till the 15th. of June; at what time Argyle ha∣ving pass'd Locklong, march'd toward Le∣nox, in the Shire of Dunbarton. The same day that Argyle march'd toward Lenox, the Kings Men of War came up to the Castle of Ellengreg, with a Resolution to batter it, and destroy Argyle's Ships. But upon firing the first Gun, two Men went off in a Boat with a white Flag, and told them they might save their labour, for there were none to oppose them, in re∣gard all the Garrison was fled. Whereup∣on they sent a Boat ashore, and finding it to be true, they took Possession of the Castle, Ships, and Boats, with all the Arms, Ammunition and Guns; the whole amounting to Five thousand Arms, Five hunder'd Barrels of Powder, with Ball and other Stores Proportionable. Soon after the Earl of Dunbarton, Commander in Chief of the King's Forces
in Scotland, having notice that Argyle had passed the River Levil above Dunbarton, march'd from Glasgow early in the Morn∣ing after him, Argyle bending his march toward Sterling, and overtook him in the Parish of Killern. The King's Horse and Dragoon's kept up Argyle's Men till the Foot arriv'd; but they were posted in so strong a Piece of Ground, that in regard it was late in the Evening, it was not thought convenient to attack them. So that the King's Men stood Embattl'd all night to be in a readiness, so soon as day∣light appear'd. But then, 'twas found that Argyle was march'd off with great silence in the night toward the River Clyde, which his Horse swam thorough, while the Foot were carry'd over in Boats, and so got without much resistance to Kenfrew. The Kings Forces missing Argyle in the Morning, march'd with all diligence to Glasgow, where after they had rest∣ed two days, the Earl of Dunbarton, with the Horse and Dragoons, march'd after the Enemy, leaving the Foot to follow, with all the haste they could make. At Kenfrew, Sir John Cockram under∣took to provide Guides to Conduct Ar∣gyle
and his Men into Glasgow; but they mistaking the way, carry'd them into a Bog; where having lost their Horses and Baggage; the Foot disper∣sed into small Parties; upon which the Earl of Dunbarton divided the King's Forces to pursue them. Argyle return'd towards Clyde, and was fallen upon by two of Gremock's Servants, but scorning to yield, he fir'd upon them when they call'd out to him. However He re∣ceiv'd a wound in his Head; upon which not trusting to his Horse, he alighted, and ran into the Water. The noise of this Bustle brought out a Country fellow, who ran into the Water after him; where he was almost up to the neck. The Earl presented his Pistol at the Country Man, but it would not go off. Upon which the Country Man gave him a blow on the Head, which stunn'd him, so that he sell, and in his falling, cry'd out, Ʋnfortunate Ar∣gyle. Upon which words they seiz'd him and carry'd him to their Com∣mander. As for Sir John Cockram, who with his Party took the way toward the Sea, so soon as the King's Forces came up to
him, he Posted himself in a small In∣closure, wherein his Men were cover'd Breast high. Nevertheless the Lord Ross charg'd them, but the Ground be∣ing too inaccessible for the Horse, and the Captain of the Dragoons being kill'd at the first Charge, the Lord Ross slight∣ly wounded, Sir Adam Blaire shot through the Neck, and Sir William Wal∣lace of Croigie shot in the side; before the Dragoons had time to come up on foot, Sir John Cockram had time to Post his Men in a Wood just behind the Inclo∣sure, where he maintain'd his Ground for some time, till overpowr'd with Number. Sir John and his Son broke through, but were afterwards taken and sent to Edinburgh. Another Party of the Kings Forces, under the Earl of Arran, took Rumbald the Malster and his Man, who fought desperately; and one Col∣lonel Ayloff, who was brought Prisoner to Glasgow, where he ript up his own Belly with a Penknife. As for the Earl of Argyle, he was sent Prisoner to Edinburgh, and committed to the Castle, from whence upon the last of June he was brought forth to the Market Cross, neer to which he was Be∣headed
upon a Scaffold erected for that purpose. His Head was set up upon the Toll-Booth, and his Body was laid in St. Magdalens Chappel in the Canny Gate. The Earl made no Speech upon the Scaf∣fold, but deliver'd a Paper to the Dean of Edinburgh, to be given to the Lord Chancellor. And thus fell the Earl of Argyle, for his Gallantry and his Love of the Protestant Religion, worthy of Better Fortune. Nor had the Duke of Monmouth more fortunate Success, though he made a stouter Resistance, as having Men of more Courage to assist him. On Sunday June the 14th. about three of the Clock in the Morning, the Duke of Monmouth marched out of Lime with sixty Horse and a hunder'd and twenty Foot, and came to Bridport, where Mr. William Strangeways and Mr. Edward Coker were both unhappily slain by some of his Party, who were greedy to take up Horses for their own Service. From thence he bent his March toward Taunton, greatly encrea∣sing his Numbers as he march'd, consider∣ing how the Duke of Albemarle, the Duke of Somerset, and the Duke of Beaufort, had posted themselves to prevent the Coun∣tries coming in to him.
To repeat the several Marches of the Duke from Place to Place, or the petty Skirmishes between small Parties, will not be Material; but at length it came to this, That the Earl of Feversham, who Commanded the Kings Forces in Chief, being advanc'd from Somerset as far as Weston, within three Miles of Bridgewater, quarter'd his Horse and Dragoons in the said Village, and Encamp'd his Foot in an Advantageous Post near it, fronting toward a spacious Moor, and having a Ditch before them. In the Evening he had notice that the Duke was draw∣ing out of the Town, which made him keep his Troops in a readiness, and send out frequent Parties to observe them. The Duke so order'd his March, and with so great silence, that they found a quiet Passage into the said Moor, and there to∣ward Morning drew up their Foot in order of Battel to the number of between five and 6000. and in that Order, the Duke being at the Head of them, were got with∣in a little way of the Kings Camp. Im∣mediately upon notice of this, the Earl of Feversham put his Men, to the number of 2000. Foot and Five hunder'd Horse, in a Posture to receive them. Thus the Fight
being begun by the Dukes men with loud shouts, and brisk Vollies on both sides, the Dukes Horse were coming to second their Foot, but were hindred by a Party commanded by Colonel Ogle∣thorp, who engaged them till the Earl of Oxford's Regiment, and a Detach∣ment of the Guards came into form the Line. 'Tis true, the resistance made by the Duke's Horse commanded by the Lord Grey was very inconsiderable, as being never drawn up in a Body, but giving way before all that charg'd them, and soon after quitting the Field. But the Foot all this while stood firm on both sides, exchanging Volleys thick and threefold, for the Ditch that was be∣tween the Bodies hindred them from closing. But the Canon coming up, and the King's Horse breaking in upon the Duke's men, they were at last utterly routed, and three Pieces of Can∣non, all they had there taken. About two thousand were kill'd upon the place, and several taken Prisoners. Among the rest Col. Holms, and Perrot his Major, the Constable of Crookhorn, and Willi∣ams, then Servant to the Duke of Mon∣mouth, having 200 Guinies of the Duke's
Money about him. The Coat also which the Duke of Monmouth usually wore, was taken, which occasion'd a report that he was slain. Soon after, the Lord Grey was taken in disguise at Ringwood, upon the Bor∣ders of Dorsetshire, and secur'd by the Lord Lumley; as was also the Duke of Mon∣mouth himself, who was taken soon after hid in a Ditch. Upon the 13th. of July the Duke and the Lord Grey were both brought to London, and committed to the Tower, and upon the 15th. the Duke being attainted of High Treason by Act of Parliament, was Beheaded on Tower-hill. And this End had the Duke of Monmouth, the more unfortunate, if what was reported were true, that he fell by Treachery. And now the King believing the Par∣liament had sat long enough, went to the Lords House, and there gave his Roy∣al Assent to some few Bills more. Among which the most remarkable were, An Act for Granting an Aid to the King by an Imposition upon all French, and East India Linnen, and several other Manufactures of India. Upon all French wrought Silks and Stuffs, and all Bran∣dies,
Imported after the first of July 1685, for five years. An Act against the Importation of Gunpowder, Arms, and other Ammu∣nition and Utinsils of War. And, An Act for finishing and adorning the Cathedral of Pauls. An Act to encourage the Building of Ships in Ireland. And an Act for the Improvement of Tillage. Which done the Lord Keeper signifi∣ed the King's Pleasure to both Houses, that they should adjourn to the fourth of August next, with intimation that it was not the King's intention, that there should be then a Meeting, but that the Session should be continued by Adjourn∣ment till towards Winter, unless his Service should require their sitting soon∣er. In which case the King would give them timely notice by his Royal Procla∣mation. In pursuance of which Intimati∣on both Houses adjourned to the time ap∣pointed. Soon after the Duke of Monmouth was Beheaded, George Speak, Francis Charle∣ton, John Wildman, Esq Col. Danvers, and John Trenchard, Esq were summon'd
to appear within twenty days after the date of the Proclamation, as being sus∣pected of several Trayterous Practices and Conspiracies against the King and his Government; however they were so prudent as to keep out of the way. But the Lord Stamford, the Lord Brandon, and the Lord Delamere, were all three seiz'd and clapt into the Tower. But as some were disgrac'd, others were advanced to Honour; for about this time, the Duke of Norfolk the Earl of Peterborough, and the Earl of Rochester, were all three Install'd at Windsor by the Dukes of Ormond and Beaufort, Commis∣sion'd to that purpose by the Soveraign of the Order. And soon after the same Honour was conferr'd upon the Earl of Feversham for his great Service at Sedge∣more Engagement. And now the sourth of August being come, both Houses met according to their Adjournment, at what time the Lord High Treasurer performing the Lord Keeper's part, they were order'd to ad∣journ again till the ninth of November ensuing. Upon the third of September the Lady Alicia Lisle was convicted of High Trea∣son
at the Sessions of Oyer and Terminer, held at Winchester, for harbouring of one John Hicks, who had sided with the Duke of Monmouth. Though somewhat a hard case, that an ancient Lady could not be spar'd to live out the remainder of her days, for a transgression which might easily have been past over as a sin of Ig∣norance in a woman. At the same time a Proclamation was issued forth for the apprehending the Earl of Macclesfield, requiring also that no person should presume to receive or harbour him upon pain of undergoing the utmost severity of the Law. About the same time died the Right Honourable Francis Lord Guilford, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of En∣gland, at his House at Wroxton in Oxford∣shire; in whose room upon the 28th. of September Sir George Jefferies, Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, for his excel∣lent service on several occasions, and especially the Western Executions was made Lord Chancellor of England. Upon the 11th. of October Sir Edward Herbert was made Chief Justice of the Kings-Bench, and Sir Robert Wright re∣moved out of the Exchequer into the same Court.
Upon the 19th. of October, Henry Cor∣nish, Esq was brought to his Trial at the Old Baily for conspiring the death of Charles the Second, to raise a Rebellion in the Kingdom, and subvert the ancient Government of Monarchy; of which he was found Guilty, and afterwards Exe∣cuted in Cheapside as a Traytor. Yet not long after all this, his Quarters were ordered to be taken down, and delivered to his Relations to be decently Interred; as they were, in St. Lawrence Church by Guildhal. No small blot both to the Judge that Condemned him, and the Jury that found him guilty. At the same time were also try'd Wil∣liam Ring for harbouring and concealing Joseph Kelloway, and Henry Lawrence, who had both taken part with the Duke of Monmouth in the West. One John Fernley was also then try'd for harbouring and concealing James Bur∣ton, a person Outlaw'd for Treason; and Elizabeth Gaunt for succouring the said Burton with Money, and helping him to a Passage in order to his Escape beyond the Seas, and being all found Guilty, were sentenc'd to die as Traytors, the Woman being Burnt at Tyburn.
Upon the 27th. of October, Richard Nelthorp, and John Ayloff were brought from Newgate to the Kings-Bench Bar, where being asked why Execution should not be awarded against them, in regard they stood attainted by Outlawry of High Treason, for Conspiring the Death of Charles the Second, and having no∣thing to say, because they knew that whatever they could say would signifie nothing, they were both hang'd by Rule of Court, the first before Greys-Inn, the other before the Temple Gate. Thus much for Executions at one time. Now let us see how the Soldiers behaved themselves in the Country. For the King having received a Grievous complaint of great disorders alledged to have been committed by four Companies of the Regiment, commanded by Sir Wil∣liam Clifton Baronet, at Wigan in Lanca∣shire, at what time Major Barker comman∣ded in chief; the King ordered a Court Marshal of General and Field-Officers to examine the matter, which meeting about the latter end of October, upon hearing and considering the Informations about the said Disorder, came to this Result, That the difference between the Soldiers
and the Townsmen, was occasion'd by the great number of People resorting thither by reason of a Foot-race the 21st. of September, who pressed upon the Carriages and Ammunition, which for want of a better convenience stood in the Street. For appeasing of which, the Officers then present, especially the Ma∣jor, shewed themselves very active, so that it was through their vigilance and care, that the Hurly Burly lasted not lon∣ger, and was quieted with so little mis∣chief on both sides. They found more∣over that the Loss which the Town sus∣stain'd without paying for what they had call'd for in their Quarters did not amount to quite five Pound; but the sum was ordered to be stopt out of the Soldiers pay; and to be given to such persons as upon Oath should have their Damage certify'd. Upon all which the Court was well satisfy'd, and acquitted the Major. But now the ninth of October being come, being the time appointed by pub∣lick Proclamation for the Parliament to meet the King repair'd to the House of Lords, and there deliver'd himself in these words to both Houses.
My Lords and Gentlemen, AFter the storm which seem'd to be coming upon us when we par∣ted last, I am glad to meet you again in so great peace and quietness. God Almighty be praised, by whose blessing that Rebellion was supprest. But when I reflect what an inconsiderable number of men began it; and how long they carried it on without any opposition, I hope every body will be convinc'd, That the Militia which has hitherto been so much depended upon, is not sufficient for such occasions; and that there is no∣thing but a good force of well Disci∣plin'd Troops in constant pay that can defend us from such, as either at home or abroad are dispos'd to disturb us. And in truth my concern for the peace and quiet of my Subjects, as well as for the safety of my Government, made me think it necessary to increase the number to the proportion I have done.
This I ow'd as well to the Honour as to the security of the Nation, whose Reputa∣tion was so infinitely exposed to all our Neighbours by having lain open to the late wretched attempt, that it is not to be repair'd without keeping such a Body of men on foot, that none may ever have the thought again of finding us so miserably unprovided. It is for the support of this great Charge, which is now more than double to what it was, that I ask your assistance in giving me a supply answerable to the expence it brings along with it. And I cannot doubt but what I have begun so much to the Honour and defence of the Govern∣ment, will be continued by you with all cheerfulness and readiness, which is re∣quisite for a work of so great Importance. Let no man take exception that there are some Officers in the Army not qualified according to the late Tests for their Imployments. The Gen∣tlemen, I must tell you, are most of
them well known to me, and having formerly serv'd with me on several oc∣casions, and always approv'd the Loy∣alty of their Principles by their pra∣ctice, I think them fit now to be em∣ploy'd under me. And I will deal plain∣ly with you, that after having had the benefit of their services in such a time of need and danger, I will neither ex∣pose them to disgrace, nor my self to the want of them, if there should be ano∣ther Rebellion to make them necessary to me. I am afraid some men may be so wicked to hope and expect that a diffe∣rence may happen between you and me. But when you consider what advantages have arisen to us in a few Months by the good understanding we have hitherto had; what wonderful effects it has al∣ready produc'd in the change of the whole Scene of Affairs abroad, so much more to the Honour of the Nation, and the Figure it ought to make in the world,
and that nothing can hinder a farther progress in this way to all our satisfacti∣ons, but fears and jealousies among our selves, I will not apprehend that such a misfortune can befall us as a Division. or but a coldness between me and you, Nor that any thing can shake you in your Steadiness and Loyalty to me, who by Gods blessing will always make you all Returns of Kindness, with a Reso∣lution even to venture my own life, in the defence of the true Interest of this Kingdom. The Speech thus ended, the Commons return'd to their House, and in the Af∣ternoon the Lords attended the King in the Banquetting House to give the King Thanks for his Gracious Harangue, tho nothing could be plainer than the Design of it. But it seems this Hook would not take, and therefore after they had sat a bout ten or eleven days, they were Pro∣rogued till the tenth of February ensuing. And now we must not expect much Domestick News, but of Trials and Exe∣cutions,
and first of all after this Proro∣gation, the Lord Brandon Gerrard was up∣on the 26th. of November, brought to his Trial at the Kings Bench Bar, for endea∣vouring to raise Rebellion, and to de∣pose and destroy Charles the Second; and being found Guilty, within two days after had sentence of death past upon him, but was afterwards pardon'd. The next was Charles Bateman a Chy∣rurgion, who was try'd at the Old Baily, for the same Treason as the Lord Brandon Gerrard, being thought a Branch of the Meal-Tub Plot, and being found Guil∣ty, was soon after Executed at Tyburn. Upon the 15th. of December, the Extra∣ordinary Venetian Embassadors made their publick Entry through the City from the Tower to S. James's Square, and about three days after were conducted to their Publick Audience by the Earl of Darby, and Sir Charles Cotterel, with all the Ho∣nours which are usually given to the Embassadors of Crowned Heads. At the same time the Earl of Claren∣don was sent Lord Deputy of Ireland, and Viscount Teviot, Col. Robert Philips, and Mr. Evelyn of Deptford appointed to exe∣cute
the Office of Lord Privy Seal during his absence. Upon the 30th. of December, John Hambden, Esq was Arraigned at the Old Baily, for the same Meal-Tub Treason as Bateman; who not thinking it worth his while to contend, as having experi∣ence of their Justice once already, plea∣ded Guilty, and casting himself upon the King's mercy, had sentence of death im∣mediately past upon him. The Lord Delamere had the best fortune of them all, for his Lordship being brought to his Trial before the Lord Chancellor Jefferies, Constituted Lord High Steward for the time being, upon an Indictment of High Treason for Con∣spiring to raise a Rebellion against James the Second, was acquitted by his Peers; it manifestly appearing upon the Trial, that Thomas Saxon, who was a Witness against his Lordship, was Perjur'd. For which Perjury he was afterwards tried himself, and being Convicted, suffered according to the Law. The Earl of Stamford likewise, tho' a Prisoner in the Tower for High-Treason, tasted of their Favour upon his humble
Petition, for the Attorny General to al∣low of Bayl for his Appearance at the Lords Bar the first day of the next sitting of the Parliament. So that at length he was brought up by Habeas Corpus into the Court of Kings Bench, where Bail was taken for his Appearance as before mention'd with this Addition, That he was likewise to appear at the Council Board when he should be thereto requi∣red. However at length, at the begin∣ning of the year, 1686. his Lordship was pardon'd, and so his Bayl was dis∣charged. But Philibert Vernatti, tho' Attainted by Outlawry for the Murther of Sir Ed∣mundbury Godfrey was more kindly used than all the rest, being allow'd not only to reverse his Outlawry, but be∣ing Try'd upon the Indictment, was acquitted of the same. For who durst come in against him then, or say that Sir Edmund was Murther'd by the Pa∣pists? And now they went on to per∣fect the Set of Judges: for Jenner was made one of the Barons of the Chequer, in the place of Sir William Gregory, and Sir Henry Bedingfeild, one of the Judges of
the Common Pleas, in the room of Sir Creswel Levens. Towards the beginning of March, came forth a general Pardon, if it might be so called, for it was so full of Exceptions, that there was no laying hold of it for any Man or Wo∣man whatever, unless it were those who had never offended. So that in regard it was then so fruitless, and now quite out of date, it was not thought worth transmitting to Po∣sterity. But now we must return to Scotland, whither the Earl of Murray was sent New High Commissioner toward the latter end of April, that he might be present at the Parliament which was to meet by Adjournment the Twenty ninth of the same Month, which was soon at hand after the Lord Murray's Arrival. At what time the Parliament being Assem∣bled, the High Commissioner took his Place, and delivered himself to this Effect.
In the First place he set forth, how sensible the King was of their Loyalty and Zeal for his Service, and of their signal Affection to his Person and Inte∣rest. In the next place he proceeded to let them understand how graciously His Majesty was resolved, that they should all share in their several Stations of the Effects and Influences of His Royal Care and Protection. In order to which, he assured them, that the King was endeavouring with all imaginable care to open a free Intercourse of Trade between England and Scotland. And, that whereas the King was infor∣med how much the Kingdom of Scotland suffered by the Importation of Irish Cat∣tle and Victual, he was fully instructed to consent to whatever might free them from that Inconvenience. And whereas the King was also informed, that the want of an open Mint was a great pre∣judice to Trade, he had full power to assent to what they should think just and reasonable in that point. He further informed them, that the King did not at that time demand any farther supplies, being fully convinced,
that their Alacrity had prompted them already to give all that was convenient for them to spare. That he had full power to consent to all such Laws and Regulations, as might exact payment to the Country from all his Officers and Souldiers in their Quarters. That he was fully impower'd to con∣sent to an Act of Oblivion, only with some necessary Exceptions. Concluding, That after all these Roy∣al Favours they would send him back to his Great and Royal Master, with the good tydings of the Continued Loyalty of his Ancient Kingdom; by which they would shew themselves the best and most Affectionate Subjects, to the Best, the most Incomparable, and most Heroick Prince in the World. This being done in Scotland, at Lon∣don the French Embassadour by a Memo∣rial complained to the King, that a Book Entitled, The Complaints of the Protestants cruelly oppressed in the Kingdom of France, was Sold and dispersed in this Kingdom; in which Book were many Falsities and Scandalous Reflections upon the most Christian King. Upon which, Order
was given by the King to make Dili∣gent search after the Translator and Printer, that they might be Prosecuted according to Law. And it was farther ordered, That a Printed Copy of the Book in English, and another in French should be publickly burnt by the hand of the Common Hangman; which was accordingly done before the Royal-Ex∣change. Upon the tenth of May, the Parlia∣ment met again at Westminster, and was Prorogu'd till the 22d. of November en∣suing. Upon the fourteenth of May, the King and the Queen, with the whole Court removed to Windsor, where her Royal Highness the Princess Ann of Denmark, was safely brought to Bed of a Daugh∣ter, which was Christen'd by the Bishop of Durham by the Name of Anna Sophia, the Earl of Feversham being God father, and the Lady Roscommon, and the Lady Churchill Godmothers. But she died to∣ward the latter end of the Year, and was Buried in Henry VII's Chappel. The same day at London, Miles Prance being brought to the Kings Bench Bar, an Information was exhibited against
him for wilful and notorious Perjury, as to the Evidence he gave, at the Try∣als of Green, Berry, and Hill relating to the Murder of Sir Edmund Berry-Godfrey. To which Prance, in hopes to mitigate his punishment, for he knew he should be cast, pleaded guilty, to save the Court and the Witnesses further Trouble. However upon the fifteenth of June, he received Sentence to pay a Hundred pound Fine, to be brought to all the Courts in Westminster with a Paper in his Hat declaring his Offence; to stand in the Pillory before Westminster-Hall-Gate, at the Royal-Exchange, and at Charing Cross; to be whipt from New∣gate to Tyburn, and to be committed in Execution till he payd his Fine. Only the whipping from Newgate to Tyburn, was abated him for his Confession. Soon after Samuel Johnson was brought to his Tryal at the Kings Bench Bar, upon an Information of High Misdemeanor, for Writing and Pub∣lishing two Scandalous and Seditious Libels; and being found guilty, as he could not expect otherwise, he receiv'd Judgment to stand in the Pillory at West∣minster, Charing-Cross, and the Royal
Exchange, to pay a Fine of 500 Marks, and to be Whipt from Newgate to Tyburn; with Orders that he should be degraded before the Execution of the Sentence. The Rest of this Summer afforded no∣thing at all remarkable, but only the Kings Progress into the West, the par∣ticular Journal of which is fitter for a Gazet then a History. In the mean while the King Rendez∣vouzes all His Forces upon Hounslow-Heath, and there encamps his Army du∣ring the chief part of the Summer un∣der the Command of the Earl of Fever∣sham in the Quality of Lieutenant Gene∣ral; where among other conveniencies for the Souldiers, care was taken for a Chappel, where the Roman Catholicks had Mass said every Morning, and two Sermons upon the Sunday. The Pro∣testants repaired for the most part to the Generals Tent, where it was reported that twelve Ministers were appointed by Nomination of the Bishop of London to Preach in their turns. The King also took great delight to be there every day in Person; and the shew seem'd grace∣ful to the Eye, tho no way pleasing to the generality of the People. For they
did by no means like this Awe of Armed Force continually hanging over their heads, and therefore afterwards desired the Removal of it, as one of their chief∣est Grievances and Oppressions. All this time the Lord Castlemain was soliciting in the King his Masters name at Rome, for a Cardinals Cap for the Prince of Modena, Rinaldo D'Este. To which the Pope was very averse; tho many wondred that his Holiness should have so little Complyance for so great a Monarch, and so considerable a Con∣vert. However the Consistory were more Civil, and laboured very greatly with the Pope to induce him to a conde∣scention. Insomuch that the Pope being prest with a great deal of importunity, made answer, That the difficulty did not lie in the Person, but only in this, that he was resolved to advance no Man singly, till a General Promotion. Upon which, the the Ambassadour Castlemain going out of the Chamber, could not forbear, saying, That since the Pope was so stiff upon this Particular, he would not trouble him any more about it.
During this Summer it was, that the Twelve Judges of England, having debated for some time together, whe∣ther the King could dispence with any person from taking the Oaths and Test before he were admitted to hold any Office or Place of Trust in the King∣dom, Unanimously concluded, all except one, That the King was an Independent Prince. That the Laws of the Kingdom were the Kings Laws. That the Kings of England might dis∣pence with all Laws that regarded Penal∣ties and Punishments, as oft as necessity required. That they are Judges and Arbitrators, who have power to Judg of the Neces∣sity, which may induce them to make use of those Dispensations. And lastly, That the Kings of Eng∣land could not renounce the Preroga∣tives annexed to the Crown. By Ver∣tue of which Concessions and Opinions of the Judges, a gate was opened to all the Roman Catholicks to enter into all Employments in the Kingdom. Upon which a certain Gentleman was pleased
to make these short Observations upon the change of Laws according to times and places. There is nothing, said he, which goes by the name of just or unjust, which does not change its quality, according to the change of the Climate. Three Degrees of Elevation of the Pole ranverses all Law. The Di∣stance of a Meridian determines of the Right of Possession. Fundamental Law alters, and Property has its Epochs. A pleasant sort of Justice, when a River or a Mountain shall set Bounds and Limits to it; Truth on this side the Pyreneans, and Error beyond it. Not long after this, some turbulent Spirits had rais'd a report that England had made a private agreement with the Algerines without the consent, and to the prejudice of the Hollanders, under pretence that those Pyrates had been ad∣mitted into the Ports of England to sell the Prizes which they had taken from the Dutch. But this report soon vanisht upon a strict prohibition put forth by the King, That no Prizes taken from the Dutch by the Algerines should be sold in any English Harbour, nor that they should be per∣mitted to furnish themselves with Provi∣sions or Ammunition in any Port of his
Dominions. This Summer produced little or nothing else remarkable. But now comes September, in which Month the new Commissioners for Ec∣clesiastical Affairs laid one of the main Foundations for their own downfal, and the ensuing Revolution. In order to which there were certain preliminary, tho great and crying Provocations, which the Nature of all Revolutions requires, to ground the Grand intended Turn of Affairs. To which purpose whether it were, that the Late King professing the Roman Catholick Religion, thought it not fit to Assume to himself to be Supream head of the Church, or whether it were designed to throw the Odium of a Pro∣testant Persecution upon the Protestants themselves. Certain it is, that having in the Month of August Constituted, se∣veral Ecclesiastical Commissioners, of which number were the Lord Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, the Lord Chan∣cellor, the Bishops of Durham and Ro∣chester, the Lord High Treasurer, the Lord Sunderland, and the Lord Chief Justice Herbert, or any three of them, saving that the Lord Chancellour was always to be one, devolv'd the whole
care of Ecclesiastical Affairs upon them, by vertue of a Commission of the lar∣gest Extent for its Power, that had been known in England. For by this Com∣mission they had Power to suppress all sorts of Abuses, or whatever they thought fit to call so; to inform themselves of, and to punish all Adulteries, Incests, Fornications, Unlawful Marriages, and all other Crimes and Offences punishable by the Ecclesiastical Laws. They had also Power to proceed against all that were found Guilty, by Interdiction, Sus∣pension, and Excommunication, and in general by all manner of Ecclesiastical Penalties and Censures. Their Com∣mission Extended over all the Kingdom, and they had farther Power to visit the two Universities, the Cathedrals, all the Collegiate Churches, Parish Churches, Schools, Hospitals, and other Houses under Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction. For the Government of which they had full Authority to make new Laws and Regulations, and to abolish, or reform the Ancient Constitutions, notwithstand∣ing any Priviledges, Rights, Customs, Prerogatives, or Exemptions to the con∣trary whatsoever. And all their Acts
were to pass under a peculiar Seal in the Custody of their Secretary, having this Inscription, Sigillum Regiae Maje∣statis ad Causas Ecclesiasticas. The most Zealous and Vigorous in the Execution of this Commission, as being thought to be the Chiefest Pro∣motor of it, was the Lord Chancellor, for most of the rest as well out of Ho∣nour as Conscience refused to sit or meddle in it. Upon which the Com∣mission was altered, and the Bishop of Chester, Lord Chief Justice Wright, and Baron Jenner were put in their rooms. Therefore, whether it were to exert his power and shew his High Authori∣ty, or whether pushed on by the Re∣venge of his Royal Superiour, he fixes upon one of the Most Noble, Most Emi∣nent and most Worthy Prelates in the Nation; well knowing, that when the Cedars were once fell'd, the Work would be more easie to grub up the more inconsiderable Underwood. And indeed the meanness of the Occasion carried on with so High a Hand against so Noble a Peer and Prelate, was so mean and frivolous, that if nothing else, it had been enough to convince the
World, that it was a Malicious Prose∣cution. For some Court Sycophant had been so doubly Officious to inform the Chan∣cellor, or some other Popish Favourite, that Doctor Sharp, the Minister of St. Giles in the Fields had utter'd in his Pulpit, such and such Seditious words against the Government; or at least they were such Expressions as did not agree with the Times, and that was enough. These words, as they were noted down, were carried to the King, and shewed him through a multi∣plying Glass with those Agravations, that the King incensed, sends away a Letter to the Bishop of London, to let him undestand; That he was fully sa∣tisfied, that Dr. John Sharp, Rector of St. Giles's, contrary to his Royal Com∣mands, and Directions to the Arch Bi∣shops of Canterbury and York, &c. had presum'd to make un-becoming Re∣flections upon Him and His Govern∣ment, on purpose to bring the People into an Ill opinion of Both. And there∣fore he required and Commanded the Bishop to Suspend him forthwith from Preaching in any part of his Diocess,
till Satisfaction given, and the King's Pleasure farther known. In Answer to this my Lord Bishop modestly excuses himself in a Letter directed to the Earl of Sunderland, which he sent to Windsor, where the King then lay, by the Doctor himself. Wherein the Bishop, after he had Expres∣sed his readiness to yield Obedience to the King, in all things that he could do with a safe Conscience, gave his Lordship to understand, that it was im∣possible for him to comply with his Majesties Command, when the proceed∣ing was contrary to Law. Since be∣ing to be a Judge in the case, no Judge could condemn any man before he had knowledge of the cause, and had heard what the Person could say in his own de∣fence. However that he had sent to the Doctor, and inform'd him of the Kings displeasure, and found him ready to give all satisfaction to his Majesty. To which purpose he had made him the Bearer of his Letter; no doubt, in hopes that be∣ing introduced into the Kings presence, the Doctor might have had an Oppor∣tunity to clear himself. But neither could the Doctor obtain Admittance,
nor the Bishop a Return of his Answer to the King's Commands. The Doctor therefore returning re infecta to London, and consulting what might be his best course to take, with∣in a day or two drew up a Petition to the King, with which he hastned again to Court; setting forth his Great Unhappi∣ness to lie under the King's Displeasure, by reason of which, he had ever since notice given him of it, abstain'd from all Publick Exercise of his Functi∣on. In the next place, he declar'd how faithfully he had endeavoured in his Station to serve both his Majesty him∣self, and the late King his Brother: and how he had been so far from venting any thing in his Pulpit, that might tend to the Disturbance of his Majesties Govern∣ment, that he had always set himself against all sorts of Doctrines and Prin∣ciples that tended that way. However, that if any thing had un∣warily slipt from him that might have been capable of giving his Majesty of∣fence, he testified his sorrow for so do∣ing, and his Resolutions for the future to be more careful of his duty; profes∣sing
withal, that he had no ill intenti∣ons in what he had said. And therefore pray'd, That his Ma∣jesty would lay aside his Displeasure conceiv'd against him, and restore him to his Favour. The Doctor would fain have presen∣ted this Petition to the King; but all was labour in vain on his side. And indeed it was no more then what the Doctor might well have foreseen, but that it behoved him to try all means to recover his Reputation from the severe Oppression of such a contumely. All this while the High Commssio∣ners not finding the Doctor Suspended according to the Kings Letter, had what they lookt for, in regard the Peeke was not so much against the Rector of St. Giles's, as their great Eye sore, the Bishop of London. To him therefore the New Commissioners send their Cita∣tion to make his Appearance before them, to answer to such matters as should be Objected against Him. Ac∣cordingly upon the Fourth of August, his Lordship appeared in the Council Chamber at White-Hall, where were present the Lord Chancellor, the Bi∣shops
of Durham and Rochester, the Lord Treasurer, Lord President, and Lord Chief Justice Herbert. And then it was that the Chancellor directing his Speech to the Lord Bishop of London, told him in short, That the Lords there present had received Order to inspect all Ecclesiastical Affairs and Per∣sons, and had commanded him to cite his Lordship before them, and therefore desir'd his Lordship to give a positive and direct Answer to his Question, What the reason was he did not Suspend Dr. Sharp, when the King had sent him Express Orders so to do, and had told him, that it was for Preaching Sediciously, and against the Govern∣ment? To which his Lordship reply'd, That true it was he had received such an Order; and that if he had done contrary to his duty it was his Ignorance, and not a wilful neglect: That he had been always ready to serve his Majesty; but if in this Affair he had not comply'd, it was because he was told he could not legally do it. The Chancellor answered, That his Lordship ought to have known the Law, and that it was a wonder he did not: However that the King was to be obeyed. And
therefore if his Lordship had any thing to say, the Court was ready to hear him. Upon which, his Lordship desired a Copy of the Commission, and of his Charge, and an allowance of time, as one that knew not before what would be laid to his Charge; and consequent∣ly could not be provided for his de∣fence. The Chancellor reply'd, That if by desiring a Copy of the Commission, his Lord∣ship designed to quarrel with the Jurisdicti∣on of the Court, he knew what farther to say: otherwise, That as no Commission could be granted, so it was unreasonable for his Lordship to desire it, since it might be had in every Coffee-House for a Peny; and made no question but his Lordship had seen it. But his Lordship denied that ever he had seen it, or that he desired it with any intent to dispute the Legality of the Court; but because it was a thing altogether new to this Genera∣tion, and therefore something might be found in it to instruct him in his Answer; and then proceeded to de∣sire that he might read the Commission himself, or hear it read.
Which being a request that the Chan∣cellor pretended he could not grant of himself, his Lordship and all the Com∣pany withdrew for a quarter of an Hour, and then returning, the Chan∣cellor told his Lordship, That the Com∣missioners were of Opinion, that his request was unreasonable, since if every one that appeared before them, should challenge a sight of their Commission, it would be too great a waste of their time, and they were men of Business; and so put the question again to his Lordship in short, Why he did not obey the King? To which his Lordship reply'd, That tho it were a short Question, it required more words to Answer; desiring the Court withal to consider, that he was a Peer, a Bishop, and one that had a Publick Trust, and therefore was willing to behave him∣self as became a Person in those Capaci∣ties. After which his Lordship insisting upon time, desired till the first day of the next Term. But that was judgd too unreasoable, in regard the Kings business could not admit of such delays; so that all the time his Lordship could obtain was only a Week; and so
the Court Adjourned till the ninth of Au∣gust. And indeed the reason to be drawn from the Chancellors answer, why he could not grant his Lordship any longer time is easie; that many times Great Men make more haste then good speed. The Ninth of August being soon come, and his Lordship again appearing told the Chancellor, That he could not meet with the Commission, which had been told him, was upon Record and in every Coffee-House, tho he had employ'd a whole week to search for it. But as to that, the Chancellor told his Lordship, That the Court would admit no quarrelling with their Commission, not being such Fools to sit there, if they were not well assured of the Legality of it. Tho in so saying the Chancel∣lors Bolt was too soon shot. But his Lordship told the Chancel∣lor, He had other reasons to desire a sight of the Commission: for that perhaps it might not reach him as a Peer, and a Bishop; or perhaps not to reach the perticular Case, and therefore insisted upon longer time; yet not refusing to give in such an Answer as he had prepared, if there were no other Remedy. His Lordship also further urg'd, that his Counsel, in whom he most con∣fided, were out of Town.
Upon this, his Lordship being de∣sired to withdraw, upon his being call'd in again after a quarter of an Hours debate, the Chancellor harpt again upon the same string of not ad∣mitting any Quarrels with the Juris∣diction of the Court. However being willing, as he pretended, to pay all due respects to his Lordship, the Chancel∣lor put the Question to his Lordship what longer time he desired. Upon which his Lordship desiring no longer then a Fortnight (for he found they were very sparing of their time) it was rea∣dily agreed him by the Court. Which being expired, and the Bishop again appearing, after he had by way of a preparatory Address, desired of the Court, that no Misinterpretations might be put upon his words, he gave the Court to understand that his Coun∣sel had informed him, that their Pro∣ceedings were directly contrary to the Statute Law; which they were ready to make out, if the Court would hear To which, We will not hear Your Lord∣ship, nor Your Counsel neither in this mat∣ter, cry'd the Chancellor. Words that
certainly could not be spoken without a prevayling Passion. Then his Lordship reminded the Court, That he was a Bishop of the Church of En∣gland, and by the particular Law of the Land, was to be Tried by his Metropolitan and Suffragans; and therefore hoped his Lordship would not deny him the Right and Priviledg of Christian Bishops. Which was rub'd off by the Chancellor with a pretence that the Court had Original Jurisdiction. Then his Lordship proceeded in his Plea, That what he was accused of was be∣fore the Date of the Commission, and they were only to censure faults committed afterwards. In answer to which the Chancellour granted the Clause, but cursorily told his Lordship, There were general Clauses that took in things past as well as those that were to come. But then his Lordship protesting in his own Right, as a subject to the Laws of the Realm, and as a Bishop to the Rights and Priviledges of the Church, gave in his Answer, and as he withdrew left upon the Table Dr. Sharp's Petition, which the King had refused to accept. Upon the Bishops return, the Chancel∣lor told him, They were not concern'd in Dr. Sharp's Petition; but that if he desir'd
it, his own Answer should be read. To which his Lordship answer'd in the Affir∣mative. But farther added, That he had consulted his Counsel, and that the Law said, That what was done by advice of Counsel, should not be interpreted to be done maliciously or obstinately. That if a Prince re∣quir'd a Judg to execute a Command not a∣greeable to Law, it was his duty rescribere & reclamare Principi, which he had done in writing back to the Lord President. And in the next place that he had done in effect what the King commanded; for that he advis'd Dr. Sharp to forbear Preaching in his Dio∣cess, which he had done accordingly. After which the Bishops Answer was read, and then his Lordship being ask'd what he had more to say, desired his Counsel might be heard. The conside∣ration of this took up half an hours de∣bate, after which his Lordship being a∣gain call'd in, his Counsel were admit∣ted, viz. Dr. Oldiss, Dr. Hedges, Dr. Price, and Dr. Newton. Dr. Oldiss insisted, that there was no such thing as suspending in their Laws: so that the meaning should have been si∣lencing the Doctor. For that Suspension requir'd Citation, form of Proceeding,
Judgment and Decree, and that to act otherwise was contrary to the Law of God, of Nature, and of all Nations in all Ages. That if it were only Silen∣cing the Doctor, then the Bishop had ex∣ecuted the King's Commands by sending for Dr. Sharp, shewing him the King's Letter, and advising him not to Preach, which the Doctor had not done after that, so that the King's Command was in effect fulfill'd. Dr. Hedges argued, That the Bishop could not Suspend the Doctor, in regard the Act of Suspension was a Judicial Act. And therefore if the Bishop as a Judg, had suspended the Doctor before hearing, he had begun at the wrong end, seeing it had been a Judgment before press'd. Dr. Price pleaded much to the same purpose; but Dr. Newton went farther, and affirm'd that the Bishop was so far from being disobedient, that he was obe∣dient to the King. For that seeing he did rescribere, and heard not the farther plea∣sure of the King return'd, he ought to conclude, that the King was satisfy'd with what he had written, according to his duty, and that the King had al∣tered his Commands.
After the Bishops Counsel had con∣cluded, his Lordship offer'd to the Court, That if through mistake be had err'd in any Circumstances, he was ready to beg his Majesties pardon, and should be as ready to make any reparation of which he was capable. Which said, his Lordship withdrew for half an hour, and then being call'd in again, was told by the Chancellor, That the Court expected his Appearance a∣gain upon the Monday ensuing. At what time the Court being sat, his Lordship was desir'd to sit down and hear his Sentence, which was set down in writing, and read according to the order of the Commissioners by the Re∣gister. Purporting, That Henry Lord Bishop of London, being conven'd before the Commissioners for Ecclesiastical Affairs, for his Disobedience and other Contempts, and being fully heard, upon mature delibe∣ration of the matter was by them declared, de∣creed, and pronounc'd suspended from the Fun∣ction and Execution of his Episcopal Office. In pursuance of the full Execution of which Sentence, an Order was sent by the Messenger's attending the Court, to the Dean of Paul's enjoyning him to cause the said Sentence to be affix'd upon the Door
of the Chapter-House, and the Southdoor of the same Cathedral, that publick no∣tice might be taken of the said Sus∣pension. Upon the eighth of October the Parlia∣ment was again Prorogu'd by Proclama∣tion, till the 15th. of February ensuing; and the same day the Earl of Tyrconnel was sworn of the Privy Council. Tho' when that time came it was farther Pro∣rogued till the 28th. of April following. Toward the middle of February, the Earl of Clarendon Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, sent for the Council to meet him at the Archbishop of Dublin's House, and there resign'd the Sword of State to the Earl of Tyrconnel, to the great de∣triment of the Affairs of Ireland, and soon after the Earl of Clarendon departed out of Ireland much lamented by the Protestants of that Kingdom. Nor did the Popish Game begin thus to play in England and Ireland, but also in Scotland, whether the King sent a Letter to this effect, directed to the Privy Council. That whereas by his Letter of the 21. of August last past he had inform∣ed
them of his designs in order to the ease of his Roman Catholick Subjects, to which he had their dutiful Answer in some days afterwards, he now thought fit to publish these his Royal Intenti∣ons, and to give an Additional ease to those of Tender Consciences, to con∣vince the world of his inclination to Moderation, and evidence that those of the Clergy who have been Regular, were his most particular care; tho he had given some ease to those whose Princi∣ples he could with most safety trust. That he had at the same time exprest his highest indignation against those ene∣mies of Christianity, as well as Go∣vernment and humane Society, the Field Conventiclers, whom he recom∣mended to them to root out with all the Severities of the Law, and the most vigorous prosecution of his Forces, it being his and his People's concern to be rid of them. As for the other par∣ticulars of his Proclamation, he doubted not but they would appear to them as
just and reasonable as they did to him. And that they would assert and defend his Royal Rights and Prerogatives, which he was resolv'd to maintain in that splendor and greatness, which could only make them safe for him, a support to his Friends, and a Terror to his Enemies. That it was evident, he did not mean to encroach upon the Consci∣ences of any, and what he would not do, he was resolv'd he would not suffer in others. And therefore that it was his Will and Pleasure that his Commands should be obey'd, and that in order thereto his Proclamation should be forthwith Printed and Published; and that if any should be so bold as to di∣slike of his Proceedings, he desir'd to be inform'd thereof, to the end he might convince the world he was in earnest. By this Letter it was apparent what the Dissenters in Scotland were to trust to; who were first to be rooted out, and then the Dissenters in England, tho
they were so blind as not to see it. In this Letter was a Proclamation in∣closed much of the same spirit; only as the Letter shewed what he intended, the Proclamation discovered how he design∣ed to go about it. The Prologue of the Proclamation set forth, that he having taken into his Royal consideration the many and great Inconveniencies in his ancient Kingdom through the different perswasions in the Christian Religion, and the great heats and animosities among the Professors thereof, to the decay of Trade, extin∣guishing of Charity, &c. and being re∣solved as much as in him lay to unite the hearts and affections of his Subjects, he thought fit by vertue of his Soveraign Authority, Prerogative Royal, and Ab∣solute power, which all his Subjects were to obey without reserve, did grant his Royal Toleration to the several Pro∣fessors of the Christian Profession here∣after nam'd, viz. the Moderate Presby∣terians, meeting in their Houses, and willing to embrace his Indulgence, and so as they did not build Meeting-Houses, nor make use of Out Houses or Barns. In the next place Quakers, and then Papists,
in favour of whom he did suspend, stop, and disable all Laws or Acts of Parlia∣ment made or executed against them; yet so as they exercised their Religion in Houses or Chappels, and no where else. He did also discharge them of all Oaths whatsoever, by which they were disabled from holding Offices or Imployments in the Kingdom; instead of which, he re∣quir'd them to take the following Oath. I A. B. do acknowledg, testifie and declare, That James the Seventh, &c. is rightful King and Supream Governour of these Realms, and over all persons therein, and that it is unlawful for Subjects upon any pretence whatsoever, to rise in Arms against him, or any Commissionated by him. And that I will never so rise in Arms, nor assist any that shall so do, and that I will never resist his power or authority, nor ever oppose his authority to his person as I shall an∣swer to God, but to the utmost of my power shall resist, defend, and maintain him, his heirs and lawful Successors in the Exercise of their absolute power, against all deadly. So help me God. By the same Proclamation also he In∣demnified the Papists and Quakers for all things by them done contrary to the
Laws or Acts of Parliament made in times past. And for the Encouragement of the Protestant Bishops, and Regular Clergy, he declared that he would protect both them and other Ministers of their Per∣swasion in their Functions, Rights and Properties. In answer to which the Privy Coun∣cil returned, That his Proclamation should be Printed and Published: That they would assert his Prerogative with the hazard of their Lives. And were willing that such who were Loyal and peaceable, what ever were their Pro∣fession, might be at ease and security, conceiving that such as were employed by him were sufficiently secured by his Authority and Commission. And last∣ly, they thanked him for giving them his Royal Word for maintaining the Church and their Religion, as it was by Law Established. But nothing pleased the King so much as to hear that his Protestant Middlesex Justices should be so complaisant as to de∣sire the same dispensation from taking the Oaths as he had granted the Catho∣licks. For such Gentlemen there were
upon the Bench at that time. So preva∣lent is Flattery among some sort of peo∣ple. On the other side, Tyrconnel began more smoothly, and finding as he pre∣tended that many false and malicious Rumours were spread abroad among the people to fill them with fears and jealousies; his Excellency therefore for the quieting the minds of the King's Subjects, and to assure them of the King's Gracious care for their ease and advan∣tage, and protection in their just Rights and Properties, as likewise for preserving the King's Forces in good order and Discipline, and for the suppressing of Tories and Robbers, issued forth a Pro∣clamation and Declaration, in the first of which he set forth, That whereas malicious Rumours were spread abroad, as if the King's Chief Governour inten∣ded to govern otherwise than by the known Laws of Ireland, which Rumours were heightened by some few fiery spi∣rits in their Pulpits, therefore for the re∣moving of such fears and Jealousies, he declared that he would apply all his care and industry to govern in perfect obedi∣ence to the King's Commands, which were to govern his Subjects by Law,
and to protect them in their respective Properties and Priviledges according to Law; and that he would further take care that all the King's Subjects of what perswasion in Religion or degree soever, should be protected in all their just privi∣ledges, and in the free Exercise of their Religion, provided they persevered in their Duty and Allegiance to the King. In his Declaration he set forth that all Soldiers should duly pay their Quarters at the usual and agreed Rates, requiring all Inn-keepers and Sutlers to give them Credit for no more. And if any Soldi∣diers should commit any spoil or disor∣ders, the Superior Commanders were required to cause immediate satisfaction to be made; withal commanding several other things requisite for the regulation of Military Discipline and good Manners. And lastly, requiring the Soldiers to be assisting to the Civil Magistrates in the apprehending of Tories, House-breakers, and Highway Robbers. The usual popu∣lar Flourishes with which Great men usually seek to ingratiate themselves with the people at their first coming to the Government And thus we come to the year 1687.
In which year, towards the begin∣ning of April, the King according to his Resolutions, with which he had ac∣quainted the Council in March before, set forth his Declaration for Liberty of Conscience. Declaring in the first place, That he would protect the Archbishops, Bi∣shops, and all other his Subjects of the Church of England in the free Ex∣ercise of their Religion, as by Law Established. In the next place, suspending the Execution of the Penal Laws against Non-Conformists, and acquitting all persons whatsoever from taking the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, and the several Tests and Declarations mentioned in the Acts of the 25th and 30th year of King Charles the Second. And in the conclusion assuring all his loving Subjects, That he would main∣tain them in all their Properties and Possessions, as well of Church and Abby-Lands, as of all other Properties what∣soever. Though some were of opinion, That it would have been better never to have publish'd this Declaration, un∣less there had been a real intention to have observ'd it more religiously.
However this Declaration occasion'd several Addresses to the King from several of the Dissenting Parties, and first from the Anabaptists, who were very complemental in their Expressi∣ons, telling the King, That the inva∣luable Favour and Benefit which they receiv'd from his Royal Clemency, compell'd them to prostrate themselves at his Feet with the Tender of their humble Thanks for the Peace and Li∣berty, which both they and other Dis∣senters enjoy'd under his gracious Pro∣tection. Whence it may be observ'd, That Anabaptists can dissemble as well as other People. The sixteenth of April, George Duke of Buckingham departed this Life at his House in Yorkshire. A Person not much lamented, nor at all ill spoken of; yet who had been much more Great and Famous, had not his surmounting Ge∣nius been corrupted by the Irregulari∣ties of the Courts he liv'd in. Yet was he a true lover of his Country, and an Enemy to the French Interest. After that of the Anabaptists came several Addresses from the Presbyte∣rians, Quakers, and Independents in several Counties, all in return of thanks
for the King's Indulgence; few per∣ceiving that it was the Bridge over which Popery was to pass into Eng∣land; or as if they did not care with whom they intermix'd, so they might have a little Elbow-room for their Re∣ligion. Thus we are got as far as June 1687. but nothing remarkable hapned all this Summer, the whole Kingdom was so taken up with making Addresses, for the King's Promise of protecting them in their Liberties and Properties, that nothing else was thought upon; and one would have thought that the King had been unremoveable from his Throne, there was such a world of Loyalty pretended. A fair Warning to Princes not to put their confidence in Addresses; for one would have thought such an Host of Addresses had been enough to secure ten Princes. The King also took a long Progress round the North-West part of England, visi∣ting several Towns and Cities of the Kingdom, and touching for the Evil where ever he came, to the number of above five thousand persons. And all the while, for the Security of the Na∣tion, the King's Army lay encamped
upon Hownslow Heath. Upon the Lord Mayor's Day the Pope's Nuncio dined at Guild-Hall, which was a Rarity not seen before in many descents of our Ancestors: and upon the Eleventh of November the Ho∣nourable and Reverend Father Peter, as he was then stiled, was sworn of the Privy-Council, where he managed things, as the Event prov'd, to the great benefit of the Nation. In February the Regulation of the Press was taken into Consideration by the Privy-Council, and to that purpose a Proclamation was issued forth, groun∣ded upon a Statute made in the four∣teenth year of the Reign of King Charles the Second, prohibiting the Sale, or exposing to sale of all unlicen∣sed, seditious and treasonable Pamphlets under the pains and penalties provided by the said Act. Together with ano∣ther Proclamation, That whoever should apprehend any Robber or High∣way-man, and cause him to be brought into custody, should within fifteen days after his Conviction have a reward of Ten pound for every Offender so ap∣prehended. Toward the middle of March, ano∣ther
Proclamation was issued forth, com∣manding the return of all the Kings Sub∣jects, who had taken Arms under, & then were in the Service of the States General of the United Provinces of the Nether∣lands, either by Sea or Land; tho upon no other Allegation, than that the King thought it fit for his Service. This Proclamation caused some Dis∣pute between the States General and the Marquess of Abbeville, the King's Envoy Extraordinary; for that the States General refused to let the Eng∣lish Regiments, then in their Service, return into England. Insomuch that the Marquess, by express Orders from the King, deliver'd in a Memorial to the States about the beginning of April, wherein he set forth, That the King was much surprised to find, by their Lordships Resolutions of the 13th of the last Month, that their Lordships persisted in refusing Leave to his Sub∣jects to return into England. And that whereas their Lord∣ships alledged, That there was no∣thing so agreeable to Nature, as that he who was born free, should have the Right and Liberty to settle
himself where-ever he should think it most advantageous for him— And that it was in his power to be na∣turalized, and become a Subject to Them, under whose Soveraignty he submits his Person—And that the Government receiving him, thereby acquire over him the same Right it has over its own proper and natural Subjects. The Marquess reply'd, That this pretended Natural Liberty could not subsist after that Dominion and Obe∣dience had been introduc'd; so that the Rights of Soveraignty and Obedi∣ence were then only to be considered; and that in virtue of those Rights it had been the common Opinion in all times, That no natural Subject could withdraw himself from the Obedience he ow'd to his Lawful Prince. From whence it was, that the Kings of Great Britain had in all times prohibited their Subjects to engage in any Foreign Ser∣vice, and had recall'd them home from it, when and as often as they thought sit.
The Marquess farther instanc'd a Capitulation made between the Earl of Ossory and his Highness the Prince of Orange, That in case the King of Great Britain should recal his Subjects in the Service of the States, they should be permitted to retire, &c. By virtue of which Capitulation, and his Reasons alledged, the Mar∣quess demanded the Dismission forth∣with of his Masters Subjects who were willing to return. Which Demand, as the King would never depart from, so neither was he willing to doubt of their Lordships compliance with it. But it seems, that very few or none were willing, for very few or none return'd; believing perhaps they could do more service where they were, for the Interest of their Coun∣try, than by fighting in their own Country against their own Country∣men and fellow-Protestants. So that as their unwillingness justify'd the Re∣solution of the States General, so it rendred the Endeavours of the Mar∣quess ineffectual.
And now we are come as far as April in the year 1688. at what time the King, after his giving a short ac∣count to the World, that his Con∣duct had been such in all times as ought to have perswaded the World, that he was firm and constant to his Resolutions; yet that easie people might not be abused by the Malice of crafty wicked men, he thought fit to declare that his Intentions were not changed since the fourth of August, when he issued out his Declaration for Liberty of Conscience; and there∣fore he renew'd the publishing of his said Declaration: which was accord∣ingly done in the same words as be∣fore. But now at the end of it he made an Addition, That ever since that Indulgence, he had made it his principal care to see it preserv'd with∣out distinction, as he was encourag'd to do by the multitude of Addresses, and many other Assurances which he receiv'd from his Subjects of all Per∣swasions, as Testimonies of their satis∣faction and duty: the Effects of which he doubted not but the next Parlia∣ment would plainly shew, and that it
would not be in vain that he had used his utmost endeavours to establish Li∣berty of Conscience on such just Foun∣dations as would render it unalterable, and secure to all People the free Exer∣cise of their Religion for ever. That it was such a Security which he desir'd without the burthen of Oaths and Tests, which have been unhappily made by some Governments, but could never support any; nor could men be advanc'd by such means to Offi∣ces and Employments, which ought to be the reward of Services, Fidelity and Merit. That in pursuance of this he had been forced to make many Changes both of Civil and Military Officers throughout his Dominions, not think∣ing any fit to be employ'd in his Ser∣vice, that would not contribute toward the establishing the Peace and Greatness of their Country. All which he re∣commended to his Subjects, desiring them to consider how far above three years it was, that he had not appear'd that Prince his Enemies would have made the World afraid of; his chief aim having been not to be the Oppres∣sor, but the Father of his People.
Nor did the King stop here, but at the beginning of May made an Or∣der in Council, That his Declaration bearing date the 27th of April, should be read upon the 20th and 27th of May in all Churches and Chappels within the Cities of London and West∣minster and ten miles thereabout, and upon the 3d and 10th of June follow∣ing in all Churches and Chappels throughout the Kingdom: And far∣ther ordered, That the Bishops should cause the said Declaration to be sent and distributed throughout their se∣veral Diocesses to be read accord∣ingly. Upon the tenth of June, a Procla∣mation came forth, appointing a pub∣lick day of Thanksgiving to be solem∣nized upon the first of July throughout the Kingdom, for that it had pleased Almighty God to bless his Majesty and his Royal Consort the Queen with a Son, and these his Kingdoms and Do∣minions with a Prince. But he found in the conclusion that God would not be so mock'd. More particularly the Deputy Go∣vernour of Portsmouth, at that time
was more than usually sedulous to shew his extraordinary Joy, upon the re∣ceipt of the News of this reputed Prince's being born of the Queen's Body. For he not only spread abroad the Tidings by the loud reports of his Cannon and small shot, but allow'd the Souldiers two Jubilee nights, to carouse the Royal Babe's Health in Beer and Ale by the light of numerous Bonfires, while the Magistrates of the Town and himself, with the rest of the Officers, did the same in more potent Liquor. But the generality of the Nation would not be so deluded. For notwithstanding all these Le∣gions of Loyal Addresses, and returns of Thanks to the King for his great Indulgence to tender Consciences, yet the rigorous Proceedings of his Com∣missioners against the Lord Bishop of London last year, and against the Vice-Chancellor of Cambridge, and the Fel∣lows of Magdalen Colledge in Oxford this year, were such evident breaches of the Declaration, that the dissatisfa∣ctions of the Nation becoming so gene∣ral, it was easie to portend, that no∣thing so violent could be diuturnal. For
such was the precipitancy of the Popish Counsels at that time, that they fail'd by their own haste to introduce Popery into England, as some men lose their design by making haste to be rich. These two Prosecutions therefore be∣ing both of the same year, and the vio∣lence of the one, victorious in its U∣surpation, as having put an end to the Contention not far from the time when the Arbitrary Proceedings of the other were first set on foot, it may not be improper to put them both together, for the Series of the Story's sake, in this same vacant part of the year, when there was little else of moment stirring. The first of these two Tempests fell upon the Vice-Chancellour, and Dele∣gates of the University of Cambridge, for refusing to admit one Alban Fran∣cis, a Benedictine Monk, to the de∣gree of Master of Arts, without ta∣king the Oaths. For this Alban Fran∣cis, being for his Religion's sake, a Favourite at Court, had so far pre∣vail'd with those, who were resolv'd to lay violent hands upon all those Priviledges and Properties of the Pro∣testants,
which they had made the King promise to preserve and protect, that he obtain'd a Letter under the King's Signet Manual, the substance whereof was, That hearing much in Commen∣dation of one Alban Francis, a Benedi∣ctin, the King was pleas'd to command the University, that they should admit him to the Degree of Master of Arts, without administring to him any Oath or Oaths whatsoever, notwithstanding any Law or Statute to the contrary, which the King was pleas'd to dispense with, in favour of the said Alban Fran∣cis. This Letter arriv'd at Cambridge the 9th of February; but the Chancellour not being over-hasty, did not read it to the Senate till the 21st of the same month; where it was unanimously a∣greed by the Members, voluntarily to testifie their Concurrence with the Vice-Chancellour, and to advise him to forbear admitting the said Francis, till the King had been petition'd to revoke his Mandate. Upon which the Vice-Chancellour wrote a Letter to the D. of Albemarle, then Chancellour, to beg his Intercession with the King.
To which the Duke return'd, That he had try'd, but without any effect; nevertheless, it was probable, that such a Body as the University concur∣ring and signing a Petition, if it could be admitted, would prove much bet∣ter, and more successful. However, to prevent the inconvenience of being deem'd Tumultuary Petitioners, it was thought more adviseable to send up the Sense of the whole Body by particular Messengers from each House. To which purpose, Mr. Smault, pro∣fessour of Casuistical Divinity, was made choice of by the Non-Regents; and Mr. Norris, Fellow of Trinity-Colledge, by the Regents. The sub∣stance of what they deliver'd was, That the Houses thought the admission of Mr. Francis, without the usual Oaths, illegal and unsafe, and there∣fore advis'd, That the King might be Petition'd; which Opinions were so freely giv'n to the Two Messengers from each House, and the thing so unanimously approv'd of, that the on∣ly persons taking notice of it, were three Papists, and one or two more, running with the Stream of the Times.
In the mean time, the Squire-Beadles and Registers were sent to let Mr. Francis know, That the Senate was ready to admit him, provided he would swear as the Laws appointed. Which he refus'd, insisting upon the King's Dispensation; and immediate∣ly takes Horse for London, to prepos∣sess his Patrons at Whitehall, with the Behaviour of the University. This the Senate understanding, dis∣patch'd after him a Squire Beadle with two Letters; one to the D. of Albe∣marle, and another to the E. of Sun∣derland. He was readily admitted to the D. of Albemarle, but could get no access to the Earl; and therefore sent in his Letter, purporting a most hum∣ble Submission to the King, with no less solemn Protestations, that what was done proceeded from no Principle of Stubbornness or Disobedience, but a Conscientious sense of their Obliga∣tions to Laws and Oaths, and a re∣spectful Intimation that they were ready to Petition the King, that it might be admitted; but not daring to approach him without some significa∣tions, that it would be acceptable,
they apply'd themselves to his Lord∣ship, desiring him to do the Univer∣sity the favour to Mediate for them. But the Officer was dismiss'd without any satisfactory Answer: or rather, instead of an Answer, a second Letter was sent down to the University, ex∣actly the same with the other, only with an additional Clause, to do it at their Peril. Which being read by the Senate, Two Letters were prepar'd, one more large and full, for the D. of Albemarle; and another shorter and less particular, to the E. of Sunder∣land; and Mr. Braddock of Katherine-Hall, and Mr. Stanhop of Kings-Col∣ledge, dispatch'd away to London with the said Letters, and other Instructi∣ons to make the most proper Applica∣tions for the Service of the University. Upon their coming to London, the D. of Albemarle omitted nothing that lay in his power to serve them, though to no purpose. But from the E. of S. they could receive no other Answer, than only this, That the King had seen the Vice-Chancellours Letter, was offended at the Proceeedings of the University, and would take order very
shortly to give a farther Answer. What that Answer was, in a little time appear'd; for not long after, At∣terbury the Messenger arriv'd at Cam∣bridge with a Summons from the Eccle∣siastical Commissioners, commanding the Vice-Chancellour to appear in per∣son before them, and the Senate by themselves and their Deputies, to an∣swer to such things as should be obje∣cted against them on his Majesties be∣half. The Persons deputed by the Senate to represent and act, were, Dr. Peachell, Vice-Chancellour. Dr. Eachard, Master of Katherine-Hall. Dr. Babington. Dr. Smoult. Dr. Cook. Mr. Billers. Mr. Newton. Mr. Smith. Mr. Stanhop, all Fellows of particu∣lar Colledges. Upon their Appearance in the Council-Chamber, where were pre∣sent the Chancellour, Lord President, Lord Mulgrave, Earl of Huntington,
the Bishops of Durham and Rochester, and Lord Chief Justice Herbert, the Vice-Chancellour was ask'd why he had not obey'd the King's Command in behalf of Mr. Francis? To which the Vice-Chancellour desiring time to answer, after three quarters of an hour's debate, the Register was or∣der'd to tell the Vice-Chancellour by word of mouth, that the Lords had granted him a weeks time. The time being come, the Vice-Chancellour put in his Answer in wri∣ting in the Name of the University and Senate of Cambridge, containing a Citation of several Statutes; one made in the first year of Elizabeth, entituled, An Act to restore to the Crown the ancient Jurisdictions over the State Ecclesiastical and Spiritual, and abolish∣ing Foreign Power repugnant to the same. Wherein it was Enacted, That every Person that should be promoted to any degree of Learning in the Ʋniversities, should take the Oath therein mentioned, whereby he should declare and acknowledge the King to be the only Supreme Gover∣nour of this Realm, as well in Spirituals as in Temporals.
A second Act made in the fifth year of the Queen, to the same Ef∣fect. A third Statute made in the third year of King James the First, together with a fourth made in the ninth year of the same King, Entituled, An Act for Administring the Oath of Allegiance; by which it was Enacted, That the said Oath should be taken by the Vice-Chancel∣lour, all the Principals of Houses, and by every other person that should be promoted to any degree, &c. Upon which it was farther insisted, That both himself, as Vice Chancellour, and every Mem∣ber of the Senate had taken the said Oath. That the said Statutes were made for the preservation of the Doctrine professed by the Church of England, and the King's rightful Power and Prerogative, and that they had offer'd the said Oath to Alban Francis, but he refused to take it. That the admitting him without the said Oaths, had been contrary to the said Statutes, and a breach of Trust as well in the Vice-Chancellour as the Senate, and a violation of their
Oaths, and therefore they could not admit him. Leaving it farther to their Lordships Consideration, whether their Case were under their Cognizance or no; since the taking a degree of Ma∣ster of Arts, and the admitting or re∣fusing to admit to such a Degree, was no Ecclesiastical Matter, but of Tem∣poral Cognizance. Lastly, they offer'd to their Lord∣ships, that by the Statute of the 16th year of King Charles the First, there was a Clause, That no new Court should be erected or appointed within the Realm which should have like Power, Jurisdiction, or Authority as the High Commission then had or pre∣tended to have, but that all such Com∣missions and Grants, and all Powers and Authority granted thereby, should be utterly void. The Answer being read, and the Court up, the Register sent to the Vice-Chancellour and Delegates to speak with them in the Council-Chamber, where he acquainted them, That the Commissioners had put off all farther Consideration of their Business till the Saturday come seven-night following,
which would be the 7th of May, at what time the Commissioners expected their Attendance again. In the mean time, there was a Ru∣mour spread about the Town, that the Lords had receiv'd a new Commission, which though it were true, as appear'd by the Alteration of some of the Commissioners, and would have been a good pretence for beginning all a∣gain, and gaining of time, yet, be∣cause the Gentlemen of Cambridge could not prove it, they went on as before. And now Saturday being come, and the Vice-Chancellour and Delegates appearing, the Lord Chancellour started a Question to the Vice-Chan∣cellour, what the Oath was which he had taken? To which the Vice-Chan∣cellour reply'd, after some hesitation, That it was in substance, to Admi∣nister or Execute the Duty or Office of the Vice-Chancellour, which was stated by the Statutes of the Univer∣sity and the Laws of the Land. From hence another Question arose, Whe∣ther he did not remember any Ma∣sters of Arts made without Oaths?
One Doctor Lightfoot was instanc'd. But then Doctor Cook affirm'd, that Doctor Lightfoot did subscribe to the thirty nine Articles, of which, the first was the King's Supremacy; and the Lord Chancellour acknowledg'd that Subscribing was Swearing. Then a third Question was ask'd, Whether the Vice-Chancellour knew any Mandates from the King, refus'd by the University before? In An∣swer to which, the Case of one Tatnel, a Non-Conformist Minister was urg'd, in whose behalf Charles the Second sent his Mandate to the University; but that Tatnel refusing to take the Oaths, and the matter being re∣presented to the King, he recall'd his Mandate. After these and some other trifling Questions put by the Lord Chancellour, he shortned the Business, commanded the Company to withdraw, and after some time, ordering them to be call'd in again, proceeded to pronounce Sentence up∣on the Vice-Chancellour, as being guilty of great Disobedience to the King's Commands, and other Crimes and Contempts. That he should be
deprived of his Office of Vice-Chan∣cellour, and Suspended ab Officio & Be∣neficio of his Headship of Magdalen Col∣ledge; and that he should not presume to meddle with any of the Publick Busi∣ness of the University. Which Sentence was afterwards drawn up in Form, put into Writing, and fix'd upon the Publick School-Doors, and the Gates of Magdalen Colledge, and Doctor Balderson of Emanuel Colledge chosen to succeed in the Office of Vice Chancellour. And thus was the Gravity and Learn∣ing of the University of Cambridge in a fair way to have been tramp∣led down, to let in an Inundation of silly and illiterate Popish Priests and Monks, who lay ready to pop into the Bethesdas of every vacancy, by the assistance of their Angels at Court. The next Religious and Inviola∣ble Observance of the Declaration, was the prosecution of the Gentle∣men of Magdalen Colledge in Oxford, upon a Court-Quarrel of the same Nature. For the Presidentship of Magdalen Colledge in Oxford being
vacant by the Death of Doctor Clerk, the late President; notice was given by the Vice-President for a new Ele∣ction, by fixing a Citation upon the Chappel Door, intimating the Vacan∣cy, together with the Time and Place where it was to be done, as the Statutes of the Colledge directed. However, understanding that the King had granted his Letters Mandatory, in behalf of one Mr. Farmer, they sent a Petition to Court, wherein they represented to the King, that in regard the said Mr. Farmer was in∣capable by their Statutes of being Pre∣sident, they therefore besought him to leave them to a free Election, or to re∣commend to them some other person, who was capable by their Statutes. Soon after the King's Letters arriv'd, and the Fellows were summon'd together, to know of them, whether they would elect Mr. Farmer, in obedience to the King's Mandate. To which they an∣swer'd, That in regard they had a Peti∣tion then lying before the King, they thought it convenient to stay till they receiv'd an Answer. At length, but not before the utmost time appointed by the
Statutes was come, they receiv'd only a short Answer from the Lord President, That the King expected to be obey'd. But then, it being the Sense of the Fel∣lows, that they ought to proceed to the Election of the President; according to the Statutes, Dr. Hough was duely and legally chosen, and pronounc'd President: and after that being pre∣sented to the Visitor, was sworn, ad∣mitted, and took his Seat in the Chappel. In the mean time, to mitigate the King's Displeasure, the Fellows had taken all the care imaginable, by Pe∣tition to the King, and by writing to their Visitor, the Lord Bishop of Win∣chester, and the D. of Ormond, Chan∣cellour of the University, setting forth their deep affliction to find them∣selves reduc'd to that unfortunate Ne∣cessity of either disobeying the King's Will, or violating their Consciences by notorious Perjuries. And all this, after a Gracious Declaration of In∣dulgence, and Liberty to tender Consci∣ences. The News of this Election reaching White-Hall, a Letter is presently sent from the E. of Sunderland to the Col∣ledge,
giving the Fellows to under∣stand, That the King was much sur∣priz'd at their proceedings, and expe∣cted they should send him an account of what had pass'd upon that occasion. Upon which their Case was stated, and sent up to London, setting forth the In∣capacity of the Person recommended, and the Obligation of Oaths which they lay under, not to admit of any Dispen∣sations by whomsoever procured or granted. Upon this a Citation follow'd from the Commissioners for Ecclesiastical Causes, &c. requiring the Fellows, or such as they should depute to appear at White-Hall. The Delegates were Dr. Aldworth Vice President, Dr. Fairfax, Dr. J. Smith, Mr. Hammond, Mr. Dobson, and Mr. Fairer. These Gentlemen appearing at the Time, and being demanded, why they refus'd to obey the King's Mandate, at the end of the time limited by the Commissioners to make their Reply, they put in their Answer in writing to this Effect. That Magdalen Colledge in Oxford was a Body Corporate, govern'd by
Local Statutes granted by Henry the 6th for him, his Heirs and Successors, and confirm'd by several Kings of England. That by the said Statutes, the President was to be a man of good Life and un∣derstanding, and otherwise so and so qualified as to render him fit for such a Charge. That they were bound by Oath not to admit any to that Office, but Fel∣lows of that, or New Colledge. That no Fellow was admitted, but he was first sworn to observe all the Statutes and Ordinances of the Col∣ledge: and that they were farther sworn not to make use of, or consent to any Dispensations by what Autho∣rity soever, or under what Form of Words soever granted. And there∣fore in regard they could not comply with his Majesties Letters for the Election of Mr. Farmer, being a Per∣son no way qualified, as the Statutes of the Colledge required, without a manifest violation of their Oaths, and hazard of their Legal Interest and Property, they had Elected Dr. Hough, a Person every way qualified as the Statutes directed, and according to their indispensable Obligations to ob∣serve
the Founders Laws. Here Dr. Fairfax desired to put in a particular Plea for himself, why he did not sub∣scribe; and farther insisted, that the matter then before the Commissioners did not lye in that Court. To which the Chancellour replyed, He was a Do∣ctor of Divinity, not of Law. But then desiring to know by what Commission they sate, the Chancellour grew into such a heat, that he ask'd the Doctor, what Commission he had to be so impu∣dent in Court? Told him he ought to be kept in a dark Room; asked the Fellows why they suffered him without a Guardian, and why they did not bring him to his Lordship to beg him? And then ordering the Fellows to with∣draw, after a full hours debate, order∣ed the Vice-President and the Delegates to appear upon Wednesday, the second of June. At what time the Fellows deliver'd in their Reasons why they did not elect Mr. Farmer, as being a Person that had misbehaved himself while he was at Trinity Colledge, in Cam∣bridge, where he had receiv'd Admo∣nition from the Master in order to his Expulsion. That he had taught School in Chip∣penham
in Wiltshire under a Nonconfor∣mist Minister, without License. That being enter'd into Magdalen Hall in Oxford, he was of so violent and troublesome a humour, that to preserve the Peace of the Society, he was desired to leave the Hall. After which, being admitted into Magdalen Colledge in Oxford, he decla∣red, that there was no Protestant but would cut the King's Throat. However, that he was really of the Church of England, only he made an Interest with some Roman Catholicks to get Preferment. That at the very time the King's Letters arrived at the Colledge on his behalf, he was at Abbington in very ill Company, drinking to Excess; and was one of those that in the Night-time threw the Stocks into the River. For proof of which, they delivered in Let∣ters and Certificates under the Hands of several persons. These Objections against Mr. Farmer prevailed so far, that he was laid a∣side himself; but the Vice President and Dr. Hough were both suspended; Dr. Hough, under pretence of being unduely Elected; and the Vice Pre∣sident
together with the rest of the De∣legates for contempt of the King's Let∣ters. Notwithstanding all this severity, the King was not thus satisfied; but being at the Instigation of his Po∣pish Counsellours, resolved to clear the Colledge of all the rest, and make that lovely Pile a Seminary of young Priests, an occasion was soon found out whereon to ground a second Quar∣rel with those that remain'd. To which purpose a second Mandate was sent for admitting the Bishop of Oxford to the Presidentship, well knowing that he was a person that would be as certainly rejected as Farmer, being in every respect as uncapable as he, only that the Bishop overtopp'd him in Title. These Letters Mandatory were ac∣companied with a Letter from the E. of Sunderland to the Senior Fellow, to let him know that the King expected a ready Obedience to be payed to his Pleasure, and to desire him to send him a speedy Account of the Fellows Pro∣ceedings. But the Fellows still persisting in their Resolutions to observe the Sta∣tutes
of the Colledge according to their Oaths, nothing was done to the King's satisfaction. So that upon the King's coming in his Progress to Ox∣ford, they were ordered to attend him at Christ-Church, where he then lay. At what time the King told them, they had not dealt with him like Gentle∣men, but had dealt very uncivilly and undutifully by him. Upon which the Fellows falling upon their Knees, pre∣sented a Petition to the King, contain∣ing their Reasons why they could not admit the Bishop, being to the same effect with those which they had gi∣ven for the Refusal of Farmer; but the King refus'd to receive it; ad∣ding withal, That they had been a stubborn and turbulent Colledge: and that he had known them so to be these Six and Twenty Years; tax'd them with their Church of England Loyalty, and bid them get them gone, and know he was their King, and would be obeyed: and still continuing his Passion, bid them be gone, and admit the Bishop of Oxford; threatning that they who refused it, should feel the weight of their Soveraign's Displea∣sure. And after a second acting, upon
their confirming the Election of Mr. Holben after the Royal Inhibition, bid them go and Elect the Bishop of Ox∣on, or else they must expect to feel the weight of his hand. Which Passion in the King for such a person as the then Bishop of Oxford, shew'd, that either he cared very little what Per∣sons he recommended, so they were proper for his turn, or to serve a turn, or else that he did it on purpose to teize and Harrass the Church of Eng∣land. But all these Threats not being of sufficient force to make the Fellows perjure themselves, an Underling sort of Commissioners for Ecclesiasti∣cal Causes and Visitations, &c. The Bishop of Chester, Dr. Cartwright, Sir Robert Wright, C. J. of the Kings-bench, Sir Tho. Jenner one of the Barons of the Chequer, were sent down to Ox∣ford to Visit Magdalen Colledge in par∣ticular. These Commissioners sate in the Colledge Hall, where the Fellows appearing upon Summons before them, desired a Copy of their Commission, which was denied them. After which Dr. Hough being asked whether he would submit to the Visitation or no,
declar'd in his own, and the Name of the greater number of the Fellows, that they did submit to the Visitation, as far as it was consistent with the Laws of the Land, and the Statutes of the Colledge, and no further: and de∣sired it might be Recorded. Upon which the C. J. putting the Question, whether the Dr. thought they came to Act against the Laws? The Dr. plainly told them, that their Com∣mission gave them Authority to change and alter the Statutes, and make new ones as they thought convenient: but that he had sworn to admit neither of any new Statutes, nor Alterations in the Old; and therefore he neither could, nor would admit of any Alte∣rations. Several other Disputes there were at that Appearance, but all con∣cluded in this, That the Bishop of Chester demanded all their Registers, with an account of the Benefactors, what Money every one gave, for what use, and how employ'd; and Thirdly, a Copy of all their Leases they had Let for two years last past, to whom Let, and what Fines they had received. At the next Sitting, Dr. Hough being called in by himself, was ask'd
whether he submitted to the Decree of the Commissioners, by which his Election was declar'd void? who an∣swer'd, That it was a Nullity in it self from the beginning to the end, he having never been cited, nor having ever appear'd before them, and there∣fore could not submit to that Decree. The next Question put to him, was, whether he would deliver up the Keys of the President's Office and Lodgings to the Person appointed by the King to be the President? To which the Dr. reply'd in short, that he had nei∣ther seen nor heard any thing to in∣duce him to it. Whereupon the King's Proctor stood up, and accused the Dr. of Contumacy, and the Bishop of Chester admonished him three times to depart peaceably out of the Lodgings, and to act no longer as President, or pretend∣ed President of the Colledge. Which being done, his Name was struck out of the Buttery-Book, and the Fellows, and the rest of the Society admonished in like manner no longer to submit to his Authority. The next Sitting, the Question was put to all the Fellows in general, whe∣ther
they would assist at the Admission of the Bishop of Oxford to be Installed President by vertue of the King's Man∣date? To which it was answer'd, That they were under Oaths to the contrary, and therefore could not do it. The Sitting after that, the Question being put to several of the Fellows, Man by Man, whether they would admit the Bishop of Oxford President? it was ge∣nerally answered, that without delibe∣rate Perjury they could not do it. But in the midst of this Examination the President came into Court without any Attendance, and applying himself to the Commissioners, protested against all their Proceedings, and against all that they had done, or hereafter should do in prejudice of his Right, as Illegal, Unjust, and Null, and therefore he ap∣peal'd to the King in his Courts of Justice. Upon which the Strangers and Scho∣lars that were in the Hall gave a Hum; which so incensed the Commissioners, that notwithstanding all the Protestati∣ons the President & Fellows could make, the Lord C.J. would not be pacified, but Charging it upon the President, bound him in a Bond of a Thousand Pound, with security to the like value, to ap∣pear at the King's-Bench-Bar.
Upon which, the Commissioners finding the Fellows so resolute in their Determinations, Adjourn'd into the Chappel, and put Mr. Wiggins, the Bishop of Oxford's Chaplain into the President's Stall, (not one of the Fel∣lows being present but only Dr. Char∣nock,) where he took the Oaths which the Statutes enjoyn the President at his Admission; together with the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy. Which done, he was conducted by the Com∣missioners to the Door of the President's Lodgings; where after they had knockt three times, and found that no body open'd the Doors, they return'd to the Publick Room, and order'd a Smith to be sent for to force them open; which being done, they gave Mr. Wiggins Possession of the Lodgings, where he Din'd that day, in token of an abso∣lute Confirmation. After this another Question was put to the Fellows, whether they would submit to the Bishop of Oxford, as then Installed President by vertue of the King's Mandate? To which Dr. Fairfax resolutely made answer, That he neither could nor would obey the Bishop of Oxford:
and being further ask'd, whether he submitted to the Authority of the Court? he deny'd it then, as he for∣merly deny'd it at Whitehall. Upon which his place was immediately decla∣red void, and he commanded quietly to depart the Colledge within Fourteen Days. Dr. Fulham being particularly ask'd whether he would obey the Bishop of Oxford? reply'd, That Dr. Hough be∣ing duely elected and admitted Presi∣dent, and having no way forfeited his Right, he could obey no other Person as President: adding withal, that the Bishop had not possession in due form of Law, nor by proper Officers. Which the C. Justice looking upon as an affront to his abounding Knowledge in the Law, Mr. Fulham was forthwith sus∣pended from the Profits of his Fellow∣ship, during the King's Pleasure. The Commissioners had thought to have cajol'd the rest of the Fellows in∣to an absolute Submission to the King, by acknowledging their contempt to his sacred Person, and his Letters; by promising to behave themselves Loyal for the Future; by owning the proceeding and legality of the Court;
by imploring the King's Pardon, and laying themselves at his Feet. But they finding that a General Submission, with∣out acknowledging themselves to have acted in contempt of his Majesties Au∣thority, would not serve, and being thereupon again demanded, whether they would obey the Bishop of Oxford as their President, all but one or two u∣nanimously answered, that they could not obey the Bishop of Oxford as their President. Thereupon, after the Bishop of Chester had made a long Harangue, setting forth and aggravating to a high Degree, the Quarrelsom and Factious humour of the Society in general, and their particular disobedience and con∣tumacy to the King, in the refusal of Farmer and the Bishop of Oxford, pro∣posed a submission for them to sign, to the same Effect already mention'd. Which when all the Fellows, except Mr. Tho. Smith and Mr. Charnoch, re∣fus'd to sign, they were all, to the num∣ber of six and twenty, pronounced guil∣ty of disobedience to his Majesties Commands, and of persisting in their contempt, and therefore condemn'd to be depriv'd and expell'd from their re∣spective Fellowships.
And as if that had not been enough, by another Order of the Commissioners, they were all made incapable of being receiv'd or admitted into any Ecclesia∣stical Dignity, Benefice or Promotion. And such as were not yet in Holy Or∣ders, were adjudged uncapable of re∣ceiving, or being admitted into the same. An apparent Effect of Popish Inhumanity against abominated Here∣sie, and no less vigorously prosecuted by their Protestant Tools. And thus we come to one of the most Topping Pieces of Malice, carried on by the King's Popish Counsellors, who thinking, like a Torrent, to run down all before them, were now grown so hardy with success, having a Company of corrupt and fawning Judges, and consequently the Law of their side, as to venture to attach no less than seven of the Chiefest Protestant Prelates in the Nation at one time. For the King having made an Order in Council, by which the Bishops were required to cause his Declaration to be distributed through all their Diocesses, and to be read in all Churches and Chappels throughout the whole Nati∣on; which was lookt upon as one of
the pernicious Consequences of the King's assum'd Dispensing Power, the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, toge∣ther with the Bishops of Asaph, Fly, Chi∣chester, Bath and Wells, Peterborough, and Bristol, drew up a Petition in behalf of themselves, and several of their absent Brethren, and others of the Clergy of their respective Diocesses; setting forth that their averseness to the distribution and publishing of the Declaration for Liberty of Conscience, proceeded nei∣ther from want of Duty nor Obedience, nor any want of due Tenderness to Dis∣senters; but because the Declaration was founded upon such a Dispensing Power as had been often declared Ille∣gal in Parliament, and was a matter of so great moment and Consequence to the whole Nation, both in Church and State, that they could neither in Pru∣dence, Honour, or Conscience so far make themselves Parties to it, as the spreading of it all over the Nation, and the Solemn Publication of it, even in God's House, and in the time of Di∣vine Service would amount to, in com∣mon and reasonable Construction. And therefore they besought the King not to insist upon their distributing and reading the said Declaration.
The King, prepossessed by his Popish Counsellours, relish'd but very ill these proceedings of the Bishops, and there∣fore returned them a cold Answer, that he had heard of their Designs before, but did not believe it, nor expect such Usage from the Church of England, es∣pecially from some of them. However, if he changed his Mind, they should hear of him; if not, he expected his Commands should be obey'd. This standing up of the Bishops boil'd in the Stomachs of Peters and the rest of the Gang; so that having the King fast by the Conscience, they resolv'd to push on the business as far as they could. The main matter was how to pick a quarrel with persons in the Bishops station: an occasion for which easily ministred it self from the Inventions of Court-Lawyers. The Petition was adjudged Tumultuary, consequently a Seditious Libel; and therefore liable, if not to a Legal, yet to a Formal Prosecution. In order whereunto, the Bishops were sent for to the Council, and by a War∣rant of the Board committed to the Tower; where the Popish Counsellors thought they had them safe.
Upon the fifteenth of June, being the first day of the Term, they were brought by a Habeas Corpus to the King's Bench Bar, in order to be charg'd with an Information. At what time the Attorney General mov'd, that the Bishops might hear the Informati∣on read, and plead to it. This the Bi∣shops Council withstood; alledging, That if the Prisoners were not regu∣larly before the Court, as not being brought in by the due Process of the Court, then the King's Council had no Power to charge them with an Infor∣mation. And to confirm the Irregula∣rity of the Commitment, it was urg'd, That it did not appear, that at the time of the Commitment, there was any cause to imprison the Bishops, or by the Warrant any cause to detain them; in regard the Return did not say, they were committed by the Lords in Council, but by the Lords of the Council, who had no power unless in Council, to make a Warrant for the Commitment of any Person. So that if the Bishops were committed by those who had no Power to commit them, and so were brought by Writ of Habeas Corpus to the King's
Bench, the Court had no power to com∣mit them. A second Reason why the Bishops were not legally in Court, was this, Because that no Peer of England could be committed to Prison for a Misde∣meanour, especially at the first In∣stance. On the other side, the King's Coun∣cil argued, That the Lieutenant of the Tower could not well make any other Return. That it was well known, that the Lords who sign'd the Warrant, were Lords of the Council, and that it could not be thought otherwise, but that they were in Council when they sign'd the Warrant; and therefore the Return was good; and conse∣quently, the Bishops legally before the Court. To the second Objection, 'twas true, that a Peer could not be committed up∣on a bare Misdemeanour; but if it were such a Misdemeanour as requir'd Sure∣ties for the Peace, he might. And that the Misdemeanour was such, was appa∣rent, because it was for publishing a Li∣bel to the King's Face, and for that there was Vi & Armis in the Informa∣tion.
After a long Dispute on both sides, the Court, one of the Judges being a Papist, over-rul'd it for the King; only Mr. Justice Powel was of Opini∣on, That the Objections of the Bi∣shops Counsel were of more weight, than to be so hastily determin'd. There∣upon the Information was read, set∣ting forth, That the Archbishop of Canterbury, and Bishops, Asaph, Ely, Chichester, Bath and Wells, Peterborough and Bristol, did unlawfully, malici∣ously, seditiously, and scandalously, compose and write a certain false, per∣nicious and seditious Libel, and being so compos'd and written, by Force and Arms did publish the same in the pre∣sence of the King. Which Seditious Libel was the Petition, already menti∣on'd. The Information being read, the Bi∣shops Counsel mov'd for an Imparlance, and to have a Copy of the Informati∣on, that the Bishops might have time to plead. This the King's Counsel oppos'd, and mov'd, That the Bishops might plead forthwith, which occasion'd a long Contest on both sides; but the
Master of the Coroners Office, affirm∣ing, that it had been the practice of the Court for a dozen years, that every person that appear'd upon Recogni∣zance, or was any way in Custody, was to plead presently; the Court o∣ver-rul'd that debate too for the King. Thereupon the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury tender'd a short Plea in Wri∣ting to the Court, desiring it might be admitted; which the King's Council would not consent to, only they were willing it should be read. Which be∣ing done, it appear'd to be no more than what the Bishops Counsel had al∣ready insisted upon, that they the said Bishops were Peers, and Lords of Par∣liament, and therefore ought not to be compell'd to answer instantly to the Misdemeanour mention'd in the In∣formation, but to have reasonable time to imparle and advise with Coun∣sel, &c. This occasion'd another long Dis∣pute between the Counsel, on both sides; but the Chief Justice giving his Opinion, That the Plea contain'd no more than what had been over-rul'd already, and that therefore the Court was not bound to receive it, both his
Grace, and the rest of the Bishops were forc'd to answer to their Titles; and thereupon pleaded severally, Not Guilty. Thereupon the King's Attorney gave notice of a Tryal at Bar the same day fortnight; and the Court took sin∣gle Recognizances from the several Pri∣soners, to appear at the day: the Lord Archbishop being bound in 200 l. and the rest in 100 l. a piece. And now came the Ninth of June, a memorable day to be recorded in Sto∣ry, and which then drew a great Con∣course of People to see one of the great∣est sights that ever had been known in England, to behold seven of the great∣est Prelates, and Pillars of the Reform∣ed Church, arraign'd before two Crea∣tures of a Roman Catholick Prince, at his own Suit, and the third a known Pa∣pist. Upon the Appearance at the Bar, the Names of the Jury sworn to their Immortal Honour, were, Sir Roger Langley. Sir William Hill. Roger Jennings Esquire. Tho. Harriot Esquire.
Jeophery Nitingale. William Withers Esquire. William Avery. Thomas Austin. Nicholas Grice. Michael Arnold. Thomas Done. Richard Shoreditch. The Information being read, the substance of which was the same as has been already recited, several proofs were brought to prove his Grace's Hand, and the Hands of the rest of their Lordship's, by Comparison of Hands; but that Comparison was prov'd in a very uncertain manner. Some cry'd they knew not what to believe. O∣thers, that it was rather such a Lords Hand, and another believ'd, 'twas ra∣ther his Hand than that above, or be∣low. Neither would the Bishops Counsel allow Comparison of Hands to be good Evidence in case of a Mis∣demeanour: And Mr. Justice Powel, and Mr. Justice Holloway were both of O∣pinion, That Comparison of Hands was too slender a proof in Criminal Matters; and more particularly, Mr. Ju∣stice Powel told the Sollicitor, That the
Paper was not sufficiently prov'd to be Subscrib'd by the Lords Bishops. So that when the Petition was offer'd to be read in Court, with the Bishops Names to it, it was rejected, upon the Division of the Judges Opinions. But then one of the Clerks of the Council was produc'd, who swore, That as well his Grace of Canterbury, as the rest of their Lordships, own'd their Subscriptions at the Council-Ta∣ble; and then the Petition was openly read, and urg'd by the King's Council as full Evidence. After this the Bishops Counsel urg'd, That there was no Evidence of the Fact either of writing or publishing the Pe∣tition in Middlesex, as it was laid in the Information: And in the next place, that whereas the Information set forth, that the Lords Bishops, un∣der pretence of a Petition had made a Libel, there was no Petition at all set forth, the Title of Address, and the pe∣titionary part being omitted, which was both disingenious and injurious, in regard the part omitted might alter the sence of the whole.
Then it was not writ in Middlesex, the Bishops Counsel prov'd; for that the Bishop had not been out of Lam∣beth-House not in two months before the Order was made, till he was be∣fore the Council. As to the publish∣ing of it by the Bishops; neither was that prov'd on the Kings side, since the owning of a Paper upon a Que∣stion put by the King himself, could be no publication of a Libel; for that if a Man were asked by Autho∣rity, Whether such a Paper were his Hand, and he acknowledg'd it in answer to the Question; to turn that to a Crime, was a thing that could never be done, nor ever was done. And Sir George Treby was of Opinion, That the Kings Counsel were so far from proving that the Bishops did publish the Paper, that they had ra∣ther prov'd their Lordships did not publish it. And at length the Court it self was of Opinion, That there was not sufficient Evidence of the Bishops publishing the Paper in Mid∣dlesex. And tho Mr. Blaithwait, Mr. Bridgman, and Sir John Nicholas, were all call'd again, to try if they could
have made a publication of it by the Bishops, yet they could make nothing of it, but that the King was rather the publisher of it by bringing it himself to the Council. But after all this, comes the Lord President into Court, and swears that the Bishops of St. Asaph and Chi∣chester came to his Office, and told him, That they came in the Names of the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, and four others of their Brethren, with a Petition, which they desir'd to deliver to the King, and came to him to know which was the best way of doing it, and whether the King would give them leave to do it or no: That they would have had him read the Petition, which he refus'd, as not at all belonging to him to do. However, that he would let the King know their Desires, and bring them an answer immediatly. That accord∣ingly he acquainted the King, who commanded him to let the Bishops know, they might come when they pleas'd. With which Answer he re∣turn'd to the two Bishops; who then went and fetch'd the rest of the Bi∣shops;
and when they came, imme∣diately went into the Bed-chamber, and so into another Room where the King was. This seem'd to turn the Scales of the Evidence very much against the Bishops, but not so much against the Lord Archbishop. So that the busi∣ness was here left to the Jury. Thereupon Sir Robert Sawyer com∣ing to sum up the whole, observ'd to the Jury, that the Petition contain'd nothing of Sedition in it, but that it was only a bare excuse for their Non∣complyance with the Kings Order, and a begging of the King with all hu∣mility and submission, That he would be pleas'd not to insist upon reading his Declaration, because the Dispensing Power upon which it was founded, had been several times in Parliament, declar'd to be against Law; and be∣cause it was a case of that conse∣quence, that they could not in Pru∣dence, Honour and Conscience, con∣cur in it. Which tho Mr. Attorney had charg'd in his Information, to be a false, ma∣litious, and scandalous Libel, yet he
doubted not to make out the contra∣ry. For that if a Subject were com∣manded to do a thing which he thought against the Law and his own Conscience, there was no reason but he might apply himself to the King, and tell him the reason why he could not concur with him in such a Com∣mand. So that the whole amounted to no more; but that the Lords the Bishops being thus aggriev'd, made their Petition to the King in the most private and respectful manner they could. And therefore for the Attor∣ny General to load it with such hor∣rid black Epithets, could not choose but be a great trouble to their Lord∣ships; nor could they take it less amiss that the Attorny General should draw so severe a Charge against them, when he had so little Evidence to make it out. On the other side, that there was no such Falshood and Malice in it as the Attorny General pretended, he argu'd from the Duty incumbent up∣on the Bishops, in reference to the People under their Charge, and their Interest in the Government: And the Reasons they gave, grounded upon
the Illegality of the Kings Suspending Power so declar'd in Parliament. This occasion'd a long and learned Dispute concerning the Kings assum∣ed Power to suspend the Laws and Statutes of the Realm at his pleasure; which the Chief Justice at first seem'd desirous to have wav'd: But Mr. Justice Powel affirming, That it was necessary for them to fall upon that Point; for that if the King had no such Power (as clearly he had not in his Judgment) the natural conse∣quence would be, that the Petition was no diminution of the Kings Re∣gal Power, and so neither Seditious nor Libellous; which satisfy'd the Chief Justice, and so both sides went briskly to work. But the Dispute be∣ing too tedious for an History, the Reader is referr'd for the Informati∣on of his Judgment, to the Tryal of the Bishops at large. Upon the whole, the Lord Chief Justice when he gave his Directi∣ons to the Jury, came to this Point; mov'd thereto more especially by the Lord Sunderland's Evidence; That if they believ'd the Petition pre∣sented
by the Bishops to the King, was the same produc'd in Court, then the Publication was sufficiently prov'd; if they did not think it was the same Petition, then the Lords the Bishops were not guilty of the Publication. The next Point, whether if it were the same Petition, it were a Libel or no? But as to that particular, the Chief Justice gave his Judgment, That any thing which tended to disturb the Go∣vernment, and make mischief among the People, was Libellus famosus; and therefore his Opinion in short was, That it was a Libel. Mr. Justice Holloway declar'd, That the end and intention of every Action was to be consider'd; That the Bi∣shops were charg'd with delivering a Petition, which according as they made their Defence, was done with all the humility and decency imagina∣ble; and that as they were not Men of Evil Lives, or the like, so the De∣livery of a Petition by such, could be no fault, in regard it was the Right of every Subject to Petition. There∣fore, if the Jury were satisfy'd, that they deliver'd the Petition with an ill
intent, then they were to find them Guilty; but if they did it only to save themselves harmless, and to free them∣selves from blame, by shewing the Reasons of their Non-Concurrence with the Kings Command, he could not think it to be a Libel. Mr. Justice Powel more plainly de∣clar'd, That he could not see any thing of Sedition or any other Crime, fixt upon those Reverend Fathers the Lords the Bishops. For that there was nothing offer'd by the Kings Counsel to make the Petition either false or malitious. He farther admonish'd the Jury to consider what was propound∣ed in the Petition; which was only this, That the Bishops apprehend∣ed the Declaration illegal, as be∣ing founded upon a Dispensing Pow∣er, which the King claims, to dis∣pense with the Laws in Ecclesiastical Affairs. But that for his part, he did not re∣member in any case in all the Law, that there was any such Power in the King. So that, if there were no such Power in the King, the Petition could be no Libel, which alledg'd, that the
Declaration being founded upon such a pretended Power, was illegal. But that the Dispensation assum'd in the Kings Declaration, was a Dispensati∣on with a Witness, as amounting to a Repeal & Abrogation of all the Laws; and he knew of no Difference between the Kings Power to dispense with Laws Ecclesiastical, and his Authority to dispense with any other Laws whatsoever; which if it were allow'd, there would be no need of Parlia∣ments, since all the Legislative Pow∣er would be in the King, which was worth their Consideration. Mr. Justice Allibone launch'd out so far in the height of his Popish Zeal, that he run himself into Misquotati∣ons; for which, being corrected by Judge Powel, he was farther inform'd by the Sollicitor General of his Er∣ror, and forc'd to acknowledge it: So that there was little heed given to his words. Thereupon the Jury withdrawing, sate up all that Night, and the next morning brought in the seven re∣nowned Prelates Not Guilty, to the great joy and satisfaction of all the best People in the Nation.
But notwithstanding this fatal Blow to the Popish Intreagues at White-hall, the Commissioners for Ecclesiastical Causes went on, and sent forth their Mandate, bearing date the Sixteenth of August, to the Chancellors, Arch∣deacons, &c. of the several Diocesses throughout England, to make diligent Enquiry, and to send them an exact account where, and by whom, the King's Declaration had not been read, and who had read it, accor∣ding to the King's Order: And there is no doubt to be made, but there would have been a hideous Rout a∣mong the Clergy of England, had not the succeeding Revolution put a Stop to the Fury of that Court. And now most of the Charters be∣ing chopt and chang'd, in order to the Grand Designs at Court, the King declared in Council toward the latter end of August, That in pursuance of his late Declaration, he intended to call a Parliament, to meet in Novem∣ber next; and in order thereunto, di∣rected the Chancellor to cause Writs to be issued forth upon the fifth of September, ensuing.
Upon the 21st. of September, came forth an amusing Declaration, that look'd something like a Lightning be∣fore Death, to this Effect, That where∣as the King had already signify'd his Pleasure, to call a Parliament to meet in November following, and that Writs of Summons were issued out accordingly, lest those whose Right it was to elect Members of Parliament, should be un∣der any Prejudices or Mistakes through the Artifice of disaffected Persons: He thought fit to declare, That it was his Purpose to endeavour a Legal Estab∣lishment of Liberty of Conscience for all his Subjects; and inviolably to preserve the Church of England, by such a Confirmation of the several Acts of Uniformity, that should ne∣ver be alter'd any other way than by repealing the several Clauses which inflict Penalties upon Persons not pro∣moted, or to be promoted to any Ec∣clesiastical Preferment, within the Meaning of the said Acts of Unifor∣mity. And for the farther securing not only the Church of England, but the Protestant Religion in General, He was willing the Roman Catholicks
should remain incapable of being Members of the House of Commons; to remove those Fears and Apprehen∣sions, lest the Legislative Power should be ingross'd by Them, and turn'd a∣gainst the Protestants. He likewise assur'd his loving Sub∣jects, to do every thing else for their Safety and Advantage that became a King, who would be always careful of his People, exhorting them to lay aside all Animosities, and so to dis∣pose themselves, as to think of such Persons to represent them in Parlia∣ment, whose Abilities and Temper render'd them fit for so great and good a Work. But these fair words gain'd little credit with the Generality of the Na∣tion, who could not forget the late Violence offer'd to those Worthy Pre∣lates, which had sufficiently con∣vinc'd them of the Courts Intentions inviolably to preserve the Church of England, and made them suspect the depth of the Popish Designs to be the more profound; because the Stream of the Court Language ran so smooth: And therefore slacken'd nothing of
the Resolutions they had taken to dis∣inthrall themselves, without being be∣holding to their Courtesie, as by the Consequences it appear'd. So hard it is for a Prince, that has once deliver∣ed up himself to the Counsel of the Jesuites, to keep his word to those they account Hereticks: As it was said of Charles IX. of France, that when he made the most Solemn Pro∣testations, his Heart was always the most remote from the Performance. Soon after, such Gentlemen as had been laid saide, were order'd to be a∣gain put into the Commissions of Peace: For now the Cabal at White∣hall, began to see the Storm coming; and that was it which made them be∣gin to be so Supple and good Natur'd. And indeed, after those Outrages of∣fer'd to the Church of England, the most of which happen'd this Year, all the Designs of the Popish Counsel∣lors and the King's Affairs, went to wrack. The Prosecutions of the Bi∣shops stirr'd up the Indignation of the Greatest Men of the Nation, and the manifest Suspition of the pretended Princes Birth, rais'd the Spleens of
the Generality of the People; to see the Gazett every Week so larded with Romantick Addresses: Some to the King, some to the Queen, to Con∣gratulate the Birth of the Young Prince, in his Hereditary Successive Kingdom; whom they call'd the Guard of Peace, and the Security of their Proper∣ty; with many other such Raptures of infatuated Flattery. So that if the Imposture of those Addresses, had not been as well known as the contri∣vance of the Birth, the more dis∣cerning Princes of Europe, might just∣ly have thought the English Nation had been inebriated with the Cup of the Whore in the Revelation. And as the forepart of the Gazett was stuft with English Addresses, so the latter end was fill'd with Stories of Foreign Congra∣tulations. And some there were who affirm'd, That the Dutchess of Bur∣gundy prevaricated less with the World in setting up Perkin Warbeck, for the Son of Edward IV. because the Story asserts him to have been God-Son to that Prince: Whereas our Prince of Wales could not pretend to be either Son, or God-Son, to any of the Royal Family.
But now we are to see what became of all these refin'd Intreigues of the Romish Polititians at White-Hall, and the Trains which they laid to blow up the settl'd Constitutions and esta∣blisht Religion of the Kingdom. For all of a sudden, the Bells began to ring backward at White-Hall; and the first News you hear of their Di∣sturbance, was a Proclamation in the Gazett, by which it was intimated, That the King had receiv'd undoubt∣ed Intelligence, That a great and sudden Invasion from Holland was to be speedily made in a hostile man∣ner upon his Kingdom; and that al∣tho some false Pretences relating to Liberty, Property and Religion, might be given out, yet that an absolute Con∣quest of his Kingdoms, and the subdu∣ing him and his Dominions to a Fo∣reign Power, was the main thing de∣sign'd by some Persons of wicked and restless Spirits, implacable Ma∣lice and desperate Designs; who ha∣ving no sense of former intestine Di∣stractions, and the miseries attending them, nor mov'd by his reiterated Acts of Grace and Mercy, which al∣ways
shew'd themselves in the Titles of his Pardons and Indulgences, did again endeavour to embroil the King∣dom in Blood and Rapine. However, relying upon the Anci∣ent Courage, Faith and Allegiance of his People, as he had formerly ventu∣red his Life for the Honour and safe∣ty of the Nation, so he was now re∣solv'd to live and die in defence there∣of, against all Enemies whatsoever. Moreover, he gave the Nation to understand, That he intended to have had a Parliament in November next, to have fix'd the Roman Catholick Religion in England; but that this In∣vasion, as he call'd it, had quite spoil'd his design, and oblig'd him to recall his Writs directed to the new garbl'd Corporations. However, that he might have one sure prop, if all the rest fail'd, in the midst of these sad Tidings, he creat∣ed his natural Son the D. of Berwick, Knight of the Garter; and presently after that, set forth a General Pardon, excepting only Robert Parsons, Edward Matthews, Sam. Venner, Andrew Fletcher, Coll. Rumsey, Major Manley, Isaac Man∣ley,
Francis Charleton, John Wildman, Titus Otes, Robert Ferguson, Gilbert Bur∣net, Sir Robert Peyton, Lawrence Brad∣don, Samuel Johnson, Tho. Tipping, and Sir Rowland Gwyn, and all others, who had very little or no occasion to lay hold of this Favour. Upon the 2d. of October, the Mayor, Aldermen and Sheriffs of the City of London being sent for, and attending the King at White-Hall, he was pleas'd to tell them, That out of his concern for the peace and welfare of the City, and as a mark of the great confidence he had in them, at a time that the Kingdom was threatned with an In∣vasion, he had resolv'd to restore them their ancient Charter and Pri∣viledges, to put them into the same condition they were, at the time of the Judgment being pronounced a∣gainst them upon the Quo Warranto; that so they might be the better ena∣bled to serve him with that Duty and Loyalty, of which they had given his Brother and himself so many Testi∣monies. A sign he thought himself at a low ebb, when he threw so many kind words upon the City, which all
the world knew to be so far remote from his heart. Much about the same time also, the Lord of Londons Suspension was taken off, and the injur'd Gentlemen both of Oxford and Cambridge, were restor'd to their Properties, of which they had been with such a high hand, and so unjustly depriv'd. A day or two after the King de∣clar'd in Council, That in pursuance of his Resolutions and Intentions to protect the Church of England, and that all Suspitions and Fears might be remov'd, he had thought fit to dissolve the Commission for Causes Ecclesia∣stical, and order'd the Chancellor to cause the same forthwith to be done. The next day the Chancellor, who was beholding for his Exaltation a∣mong other Miscarriages, to the vio∣lence and rape he committed upon the City, in pronouncing Sentence against their Charter, when no other person of Sense or Law would un∣dertake to do it, was forc'd to be the carrier of it back again to the same place from whence it was taken. Upon the 15th. of October ensuing,
A Proclamation was issued forth for restoring the Corporations to their ancient Charters, Liberties, Rights and Franchises, as the Proclamation pretended, out of the Kings Grace and Favour; but all the world knew a better Reason. Nevertheless, such was the Folly of the Popish Party in the midst of this their consternation, that the show of the Prince of Wales still went on, and the Child was christen'd upon the 15th. of October; the Pope represented by his Nuncio, being Godfather, and the Queen Dowager Godmother: And within two days after, the King, that he might not be wanting in his Resolutions, to provide for the Safety and Defence of his Territories, by publick Proclamation, requir'd his Lieutenants and Deputy Lieutenants, and all other Officers concern'd, to cause the Coasts to be strictly guarded; and upon the first approach of the Enemy, to cause all the Horses, Oxen and Cattel, which might be fit for Draught, to be driven and remov'd twenty miles at least, from the place where the Enemy should attempt to Land.
Upon the 22d. of Octob. he command∣ed a particular Assembly of his Privy Council; and having sent for all such Peers of the Realm, both Spiritual and Temporal as were in Town, together with the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of the City of London, the Judges, and several of his Counsel, learned in the Law, deliver'd himself to this effect, That he had call'd them together up∣on a very extraordinary occasion; but that extraordinary Diseases re∣quir'd extraordinary Remedies. That the malitious Endeavours of his Ad∣versaries had so poyson'd the Minds of some of his Subjects, that very many of them did not believe that the Son with which God had blest him, was his, but a supposed Child. However, he could say, that by a particular Pro∣vidence, scarce ever any Prince was born where there were so many Per∣sons present. That he had taken that time to have the matter heard and examin'd, ex∣pecting that the Prince of Orange with the first Easterly Wind would invade the Kingdom. And therefore, as he had often ventur'd his Life for the Na∣tion
before he came to the Crown, so he thought himself more oblig'd to do the same, being King; and did intend to go against him in Person. By which, in regard he might be expos'd to vari∣ous Accidents, he therefore thought it necessary to have this done first, to sa∣tisfie his Subjects, and prevent the Kingdoms being engag'd in Blood and Confusion after his Death. After which solemn piece of Dramatism; the Affidavits of several Ladies were pro∣duc'd; of which some swore, That they saw Milk upon her Maje∣sties Smock, (for they did not think it fit to mince the matter;) others, that they saw the Midwise take the Child out of the Bed; another, that she stood by the Bed-side when her Majesty was deliver'd of the Prince; another swore, that having had the honour to put on her Majesties Smock, she saw the Queens Milk; another de∣pos'd, that she saw the Queen in La∣bour, and heard her cry out much; another swore, that she saw the Mid∣wife give the Prince three drops of the Blood of the Navel-string mixt with black Cherry Water, with a great
deal of other nauseous Stuff, which perhaps might have pass'd well enough in Petronius Arbiter. Then the Affida∣vits of the Lords were produc'd, a∣mong whom there was one that swore, he saw Mrs. Labadie carry the Child into another Room, whither he fol∣low'd her, and saw the Child when she first open'd it, and saw it was black and reeking; another swore, that he saw the Child, and that it had the Marks of being New-born; another swore, that he heard the Queen make three Groans or Squeeks, and that at the last of the three, the Queen was deliver'd of a Child; the Doctors swore what was proper, but not fit to be republish'd. However, the whole being at length publish'd, the Boys and Girls threw away their A∣ristotles Problems, and made that Book of Midwifery the delight of their Candle-light-Studies. And now my Lords, said the King, after all the Depositions were read, although I did not question but that every Person here present was satis∣fy'd before, yet by what you have heard, you will be the better able to
satisfy others. Besides, said he, could I and the Queen have been thought so Wicked, as to endeavour to impose a Child upon the Nation, they saw how impossible it would have been: Neither could he himself have been imposed upon, having constantly been with the Queen during her be∣ing with Child, and the whole time of her Labour: And therefore there was none of them but would easily be∣lieve him, who had Suffer'd so much for Conscience Sake, uncapable of so great a Villany, to the Prejudice of his own Children. Lastly, He thank'd God, That those that knew him, knew well, That it was his Principle to do as he would be done by; and, That he would rather die a Thou∣sand Deaths, than do the least Wrong to any of his Children. However at length, notwithstand∣ing all this Bustle, the Discovery came out; and it was found, that they were not Persons of Wicked and Restless Spirits, that had caused these Alterations, but those most Noble & Worthy Patriots, or at least the greatest number of them now sitting at Westminster-Hall. For
they beholding the deplorable State of the Nation, and foreseeing the Sub∣version of their Ancient Laws and E∣stablish'd Religion, by him who had so largely promis'd the Protection of Both; And at the same time, seeing Popery and Arbitrary Power hovering over their Heads, and ready to seize their Liberties and Properties with their Ravenous Talons; after many Consultations whither to fly for Suc∣cour, at length resolv'd to apply them∣selves to His Highness the Prince of Orange; to whose Illustrious Family, it had been an Inherent Glory for some Ages, to relieve the Distressed. So that they might well be term'd the Modern Hercules's, to whom the Low-Countreys, like Greece of old, had been beholding for so many Signal Benefits. His Highness, they saw, inherited all the Surpassing Qualities of his Ances∣tors; their Matchless Prudence, Justice, Courage; their Truth and Magnanimity: And besides all these rare Endow∣ments, they were well assur'd of the fair Title he had to the Crown it self. To him therefore, The Lords Spiri∣tual and Temporal, with a great
Number of the Chiefest Gentry of the Kingdom, make their Applications. And He with no less Willingness and Generosity, out of his Zeal for the true Protestant Religion, and Com∣passion of the Oppressed, listened to their Complaints: And weighing well the Justness of their Requests, and the Reality of their Grievances, with an unimaginable Secresie and Speed, having prepar'd all things ready for so great an Undertaking, with a Con∣siderable Force of Horse and Foot, in a Fleet of 52 Men of War, with a nu∣merous Attendance of Victualers, and other Ships and Vessels, proper for the Transportation of his Men, toward the Latter end of October, set Sail from the Flatts near the Breill; with the Wind at S. W. and by S. His Highness Embark'd in a Frigat of about 30 Guns, and with Him, Count Nassaw, General of the Horse; the Count de Solms, Colonel of his Foot Guards; the Count de Stirum, the Sieur Benting, and the Sieur Overkerck. Marshal Schom∣berg at the same time going on Board another Frigat much of the same Rate; but meeting with very terrible Storms
for two Days and Nights together, was forc'd to put into Harbor again. Upon his Return, The Prince im∣mediately gave an Account to the States General, of the Condition of the Fleet; which was not so much en∣damag'd as was given out in the English Gazet. Rather it turn'd to the advantage of His Highness, as the Affair was manag'd. For presently to make the English Court more remiss in their Preparations, the Harlem and Amsterdam Gazets, were order'd to make a most lamentable Story of what had hapen'd; by spreading a∣broad, That the Prince was return'd with his Fleet so miserably Torn and Shatter'd, that he had lost 9 of his Men of War, and and several others of lesser Value; That 1000 of his Horse were utterly lost; That a Calenture was got among the Seamen; That Dr. Burnet and several of the Prin∣ces's Chief Ministers were Drown'd; and what an ill Opinion the States General had of the Expedition in General; in a word, That it was a thing almost next to Impossibility, that the Prince should be in Condition to pursue his Design till the Spring: And yet at the same time, all
Hands were at work to repair the Damage which had been sustain'd; which was not so considerable, but that in eight Days they were all refit∣ted. Which being done, and all things in a Readiness, upon a Signal given, the whole Fleet once more set Sail, and stood out at Sea, steering a Course somewhat to the Northward all that Night. But the next Day upon the Tide of Ebb, made a stretch, and sail'd about a League a Watch; and then standing Westward, steer'd on all Night in the same Posture; not making above two Leagues a Watch. About Midnight, an Advice-Boat brought Intelligence, That the English Fleet consisting of 33 Sail, lay to the Westward of the Prince's. Upon which the Prince fir'd a Gun, which caus'd a great Consternation through the whole Fleet. But the small Advice-Boats cruising for more certain Intel∣ligence, brought News, That instead of the English Fleet, which had given the former Alarum, it was only Ad∣miral Herbert, with a part of the Dutch Fleet, which had been for some
Hours separated from the Main Body. In the Morning, the Prince gave a Signal for the Admirals to come A∣board Him, and soon after the Fleet was got into the North Forelands; at what time the Fleet was order'd to close up in a Body, 14 or 15 Foot Deep; His Highness leading the Van in the Ship call'd the Brill, carrying a Flag with English Colours; with this Motto: The Protestant Religion, and Li∣berties of England; and underneath, instead of Dieu est mon Droit, God is thy Right: Jay Maintiendcay; I will Maintain it. In the mean time the Council of War, sent 3 small Frigats into the Mouth of the Thames; who returning, brought News, That the English Fleet lay at the Buoy i'th Oar, about 34 Sail; the Wind contrary, at E. N. E. Upon which the Prince gave Or∣der for stretching the whole Fleet in a Line between Dover and Calis, 75 Deep; so that the whole Fleet extend∣ed within a League of each Place; the Flanks and Rear being Guarded by the Men of War, the Trumpets
sounding, and Drums beating all the while for at least three hours together. At what time the Prince giving a Signet to close the Fleet, sail'd that night as far as Beachy, and the next morning came within view of the Isle of Wight; and then order was given, for the Fleet to extend it self in a Line, as before. About five in the morning they made the start, and so standing fair by Dartmouth, made di∣rectly for Torbay; where the whole Fleet was order'd again into the same posture as between Dover and Calice. Upon his Highnesses arrival at Tor∣bay, the people flocking in great num∣bers to the Shoar, signify'd their Wel∣coms in loud Acclamations of Joy. Soon after the Prince gave two Sig∣nals for the Admirals to come aboard, and then the whole Fleet was ordered to cast Anchor; and preparations were immediately made for Landing, while the Admirals stood out at Sea as a Guard, and the smaller Men at∣tended for the defence of those that Landed; besides six Men of War that were order'd to run in and guard the Bay it self.
And then it was that the Prince put forth a Red Flag at the Mizen-Yards Arm, while Gen Mackay with six Re∣giments of Foot, was the first that set foot on Shoar under the protection of the Little Porpoise, which was or∣der'd to run her self a ground to se∣cure their Landing. [And this upon the 5th. of November, a day memora∣ble to the English before, but now doubly remarkable for a second De∣liverance from the bloody Designs of the Papists.] But the People were so far from making Opposition, that they only stood there to welcom their Guests with all manner of Provisions for their Refreshment. The List of the Regiments of Horse and Foot, which his Highness brought along with him into England, were as follows, according as it was print∣ed in Holland. HORSE. FOOT. The Life Guard. The Regiment of Guards, Command∣ed by the Heer Bent∣ing. Gen. Waldeck's Re∣giment.
Nassaw. Momyellion. Ginckel. Count Vanderlip. The Princes Dra∣goons. Marrowis's Dragoons. Sacavenoer. Sapbroeck. Fluddorp. Syde. Oya. Sulesteine. In all Troops 1683. Life Guard 197. Regiment of Guards under C. Benting, 480. Marrowis's Dragoons 440. 3660
Foot Guards, com∣manded by C. Solmes, 25 Comp. C. Makay, 12. C. Balfort, 12. C. Talmash. 12.
Cmpanies. The Regiment for∣merly Bellises, 12. The Regiment for∣merly Wachops, 12. The Regiment late the E. of Ossories, 10. C. Berkvelt, 10. Holstein, 10. Wirtenbourgh, 12. Hagendorn, 10. Faget, 10. Nassaw, 10. Carelson. 12. Brander, 10. Prince of Berkvelt, 10. In all 164 Compa∣nies, at 53 in a Company. The List of the Fleet. Men of War 65 Flyboats 500 Pinks 60 Fireships 10 635 Guards 8692 2000 10692 Foot 10692 Horse 3660 In all 14352
The News of the Princes being Landed was carried to the E. of Bath at Exeter. Whereupon C. Hicks repair'd to the City, and upon his first Appearance, the People flockt to him in great numbers to list them∣selves in the Service of his Highness the Prince of Orange; of which the Mayor of the City being inform'd, sent for him, to know by what Com∣mission he acted; and because he re∣fus'd to produce any, would have sent him to the Common Goal. But the concourse of the people about the Guild-Hall was so numerous, that they would not suffer him to be car∣ry'd away; so that he was only kept in the Publick Hall under the custo∣dy of two Constables, till the next day. At what time the Lord Mordant with Dr. Burnet, arriving at the City with three or four Troops of Horse, and commanding the Gates to be o∣pen'd, set the Captain at liberty; and the same day going to the Mayor, de∣manded of him if he would meet the Prince at the Gates of the City, and go∣vern the City under him. To which, the Mayor desir'd their excuse, as be∣ing
under the obligation of an Oath to the King, and therefore humbly de∣sir'd the Prince would lay no Com∣mands upon him, to the prejudice of his Conscience: Which being modest∣ly requested, was with no less genero∣sity granted. Upon Friday the Prince with his Guards march'd into the City, and took up his Quarters in the Deans House, where he kept his Court all the time he stay'd in Exeter. Afterwards follow'd the main Body of the Army, which was dispos'd of, the Horse a∣bout Tiverton, Culhampton, Honyton, and parts adjacent, and the Foot encamp∣ing upon Clist Heath. Having thus brought his Highness to Exeter, we are now to return back to London, to see how Affairs were ma∣nag'd there. And indeed the Prepa∣rations were seemingly very great, and the Kings Resolution no less stre∣nuously fix'd to oppose the Prince of Orange in Person. To which purpose, the standing Army was muster'd to∣gether upon Hounslow Heath, to be ready to make Head where ever the Prince should Land; the Drums beat
up in every Street in London, but Men came in but slowly; neither indeed had the King any great confidence in his own Army, unless it were his Irish Regiments; but tho they might be faithful, he consider'd, they were not the stoutest Men in the World; and he had now to do not only with a couragious, but with a prudent and experienc'd Enemy. And therefore in this exigency of Affairs, as the Kings of Israel were wont to consult the Urim and Thummim, he foregoes his false Delphian Oracles, his Priests and Jesuits, and bethinks himself of ha∣ving recourse to those Worthy Pre∣lates of the Church of England, whom so lately he had so contemptuously us'd. 'To this purpose he sent for the Bi∣shops by particular Expresses out of their several Diocesses, and when they attended upon him in a Body to know his pleasure, he not only gave them permission to give him the best and most particular Advice they could, but encouraged them to do it with all the freedom that was necessa∣ry for the present occasion.
Upon this Royal Invitation, their Lordships assembl'd together at his Grace of Canterburys Palace, and pre∣par'd upon the most mature delibera∣tion, such Matters as they judg'd ne∣cessary for his Majesties Knowledge and Consideration. Which when they had completed, they waited up∣on the King in a Body, toward the be∣ginning of October; at what time his Grace in his own, and the name of the rest of the Bishops then present, deliver'd himself to the effect, as fol∣lows. That it was necessary for him to restore all things to the state wherein he found them when he came to the Crown, by committing all Offices of Trust in the Government, to such of the Nobility and Gentry as were qua∣lify'd for them, according to the Laws of the Kingdom; and by redres∣sing such Grievances as were general∣ly complain'd of: That he would put an effectual stop to the issuing forth a∣ny Dispensations, but would call in and cancel those which had since his coming to the Crown, bin obtain'd from him.
That he would dissolve the Eccle∣siastical Commission, and promise to his People never to erect any such Court for the future. That he would restore the Univer∣sities to their Legal State, and to their Statutes and Customs; more particu∣larly, that he should restore the Master of Magdalen Colledge in Cambridge, and the ejected President and Fellows of Magdalen Colledge in Oxford, to their Properties in that Colledge: And that he would not permit any Persons to enjoy the Preferments of the Universities, but such as were qua∣lify'd by the Statutes of the Universi∣ty, the particular Statutes of the seve∣ral Foundations, and the Laws of the Land. That he would suppress the Jesuits Schools open'd in the City or else∣where, and grant no more Licenses for such Schools as were apparently against the Law of the Land and his own Interest. That he would send Inhibitions af∣ter those four Romish Bishops, who under the Title of Apostolick Vicars, presum'd to exercise illegal Jurisdicti∣ons within the Kingdom.
That he would suffer no more Quo Warranto's to be issu'd forth against any Corporations, but restore those Cha∣racters which had bin already taken away. That he would fill up all the vacant Bishopricks both in England and Ire∣land, with Persons duly qualify'd, ac∣cording to the Law. That he would act no more by vir∣tue of a Dispensing Power, nor insist upon it, but permit that Affair to be setl'd by Act of Parliament. That upon the restoration of Cor∣porations to their ancient Charters, he would call a fair and free Parliament, and suffer them to sit to redress Grievances. And lastly, and above all, that he would permit some of his Bishops to lay such Motives and Arguments be∣fore him, as might by the Blessing of God, bring him back to the Commu∣nion of the Church of England, into whose Catholick Faith he had been Baptiz'd. Not long after the Lords Spiritual and Temporal finding his Ears now open to Advice, deliver'd him a Petition to this effect, That con∣sidering
the miseries of a War ready to break forth in the Bowels of his Kingdom, the danger to which his Person was thereby expos'd, as also considering the distractions of his Peo∣ple, it was their opinion, The only visible way to preserve him and his Kingdom, was to call a Parliament regular and free in all its Circum∣stances. And therefore besought him to call such a one with all speed, wherein they should be ready to promote such Counsels and Resolutions of Peace and Settlement in Church and State, as might conduce to his Honour and Safety, and Satisfaction of the People: To which he return'd for answer, That what they ask'd of him, he most passionately desir'd, and promis'd up∣on the Faith of a King, that he would have a Parliament, and such a one as they ask'd for, as soon as ever the Prince of Orange had quitted the Realm; since it was impossible, a Parliament should be free in all its Circumstances, when an Enemy was in the Kingdom. Wherein, as the Lords were plain with him for the general Good, so he dis∣cover'd
his uneasiness upon the Re∣straint which he lay under, and by that let fall an unhappy Intimation of what was most deeply couch'd in his Thoughts. 'Tis true, he had follow'd the Ad∣vice of the Bishops in most of their Proposals; for he knew he could re∣treive those Condescentions again, if ever Fortune favour'd him, with his wonted Power. But it was as plain, that he did not like the awe of his un∣welcom Guest; and therefore finding the Lords unwilling to part with their Protector, he resolv'd to try the ut∣most of his strength, to throw off by force the troublesom Incumbrance of a Controller: and to that purpose, order'd all his Forces to march West∣ward, and to stay for him at Salisbu∣ry, whither he shortly intended to fol∣low them; for by this, it was certain where the Prince was Landed. In the mean time his Highness, as already has bin said, coming to Exeter, had lain there some days, expecting that such Gentlemen as resided near∣est his Court, should have come into him sooner than any of the rest, who
lay at a farther distance; but finding something of an unexpected slowness, he could not choose but signifie his Resentment to the first that join'd him, which he did in short, to this effect. That tho he knew not all their Per∣sons, yet he had a Catalogue of their Names, and remember'd the Cha∣racter of their Worth and Interest in their Country. That they saw he was come, according to their Invitation and his own Promise. That his Duty to God oblig'd him to protect the Pro∣testant Religion, and his love to Man∣kind their Liberties and Properties. That he expected them that dwelt so near the place of his Landing, would have join'd with him sooner; not that it was then too late, or that he wanted their Military Assistance, so much as their Countenance and Pre∣sence, to justifie his declar'd Pretenti∣ons. However, tho he had brought both a good Fleet and a good Army to render these Kingdoms happy, yet he rely'd more upon the goodness of God and the justice of his Cause, than on any Human Force or Power what∣ever.
Yet since it pleas'd God that we should make use of Human Means, and not expect Miracles for our Pre∣servation, he admonish'd them not to neglect this gracious Opportunity, but with prudence and courage to put in execution their Honourable Pur∣poses. And so drawing to a conclusion, he bid them all heartily welcom to his Court and Camp, appealing to all the World to judge, whether his Pretensions were not just, generous and sincere, and above price, since he might have a Bridge of Gold to return back. But that it was his Principle and Resolution, rather to die in a good Cause than live in a bad one, well knowing that Vertue and Ho∣nour is its own Reward, and the Hap∣piness of Mankind his great and only Design. Soon after this, His Highness found the English Nobility and Gentry no less true to him than he had been to them, and that the numbers of his Adherents swell'd according to his expectation. For out of Buckinghamshire the Lord Colchester, and Mr. Wharton with a strong-Party, directing their march
through Oxford, arriv'd without any opposition at his Highnesses Camp. Out of Oxfordshire the Lord Lovelace with another Party got as far as Ciren∣cester, where tho he were unfortunate∣ly oppos'd and taken Prisoner by the County Militia, yet the whole Party that follow'd him, excepting four or five that were either slain or main'd in the Skirmish, cut their way through, and got safe to the Princes Army. Nor was it long after that my Lord himself follow'd them with another Party, being set at liberty from his Confinement in Glocester Prison, (whi∣ther he had been sent into custody) by a Young Gentleman of that County, who took up Arms for the Prince, and drave out all the Popish Crew of Priests and Jesuits, from their warm Nests in that City. In Cheshire the Lord Delamere ha∣ving rais'd a considerable Force, ad∣vanc'd as far as Nottingham, to join with the Gentlemen of that County, who were no less ready to receive him. And there it was, that for their greater Encouragement, he deliver'd himself at the Head of his Follow∣ers,
giving them to understand the Justice of their Cause, wherein every true Protestant and Free-born Eng∣lishman was concern'd, that wish'd well to the Protestant Religion and his Country: And therefore believ∣ing them to be such as would certainly rejoyce to see Religion and Property settl'd, they could not well hope for a better occasion to do it, than by joining with the Prince of Orange, whose Proposals contain'd and spoke the Desires of every Man that lov'd his Religion and Liberty; in defence whereof, he would not put them upon any danger of which he would not take a share himself. Not that he thought there was any plea∣sure in Danger; but when the Questi∣on was, Whether he should be a Slave and a Papist, or a Protestant and a Free-man, he thought he should be untrue to his Country, not to lay hold of this Opportunity. And concluding with a generous promise to his Tenants that should fall in the Service, to make their Leases as good to their Families, as when they went from Home.
Which generous Resolution and Encouragement so enflam'd the Hearts and couragious Zeal of all his Followers, that they assur'd him of their resolutions to stand by him in the defence of their Religion and Li∣berties; so that his Lordship lay still in those parts, to watch the motions of the Papists in Lancashire, who began to take Arms under the Lord Molineux, and for a time assisted to guard Chest∣er for the King; but upon the Sur∣prizal of that Garison for the Prince, were soon after beaten, or rather run away out of Town, and disbanded of themselves. In the North, the Earl of Danby, to∣gether with the Lord Fairfax, and se∣veral other Persons of Quality, seiz'd upon the City of York, and turn'd out the Lord Mayor, and such other of the Magistrates of that City as were either Papists, or that way affected; which greatly chang'd the Face of things in that City. Hull was also surpriz'd by the De∣puty-Governour Coll. Copley, who having seiz'd upon all the Guards, with the Assistance of the Towns∣men
and some Sea-men, made the Lord Lang lale the Governour, and the Lord Montgomery, the Marquess of Powes's Son, both Papists, Prisoners, till he had secured the Castle and Citadel. A piece of Service the more considerable, considering the strength of the Town, and the plentiful Ma∣gazine that was in the Citadel, of Powder and all sorts of Provision, to∣gether with a Train of Artillery ready six'd to be drawn out into the Field. Plymouth also, with the E. of Hun∣tington and all his Popish Officers and Souldiers, was seiz'd by the Earl of Bath for his Highness the Prince of Orange. And at the same time, all the chief Sea-port Towns in Cornwall de∣clar'd for the Prince. So that there was no Enemy behind him to disturb the Rear of his advancing Army. By this time, the Press being open, the Declaration of his Highness had pass'd the Hands of the generality of the Nation, to the signal satis∣faction and consolation of the whole Kingdom, that they had met with so pious and generous a Preserver.
For they found that he spoke nothing but their own sense, and had a true feeling of the Oppressions and Grie∣vances they groan'd under, while he declar'd, That it was certain and e∣vident to all Men, that the Publick Peace and Happiness of any King∣dom or State could not be preserv'd, where the Laws, Liberties and Customs, establish'd by the lawful Authority in it, were openly trans∣gress'd and anull'd. More especial∣ly, where the alteration of Religion was endeavour'd, and a Religion contrary to the Law design'd to be introduc'd; whereas they who were most immediately concern'd therein, were indispensably to preserve the establisht Laws, Liberties & Customs, and above all the Religion and Wor∣ship of God establisht among them; and to take such effectual care, that the Inhabitants of such State or King∣dom might neither be depriv'd of their Religion, nor outed of their Civil Rights. More especially, since the greatness of Kings, Royal Fami∣lies, and of all such as are in Autho∣rity, as well as the happiness of
their Subjects and People, depended in a most especial manner upon the exact observation of those their Laws, Liberties and Customs. Upon these grounds it was, his Highness farther declar'd, That he could no longer forbear to let the World know, how apparently he saw with regret, that they who had then the chief credit with the King, had o∣verturn'd the Religion, Laws and Liberties of these Realms. That they had set on foot a Dis∣pensing Power in the King, to suspend the execution of the Laws, tho en∣acted by Authority of the King and Parliament, for the security and hap∣piness of the Subject; by which means those Laws were render'd of no effect. And that for the better confirmation of the lawfulness of this Dispensing Power, they had ob∣tain'd a Sentence from the Judges, declaring, That the Suspending Pow∣er was a Right belonging to the Crown, as if it were in the power of twelve Judges to offer up the Laws, Liberties, and Rights of the whole Nation to the King, to be by him dis∣pos'd of arbitrarity and at his plea∣sure;
and were expresly contrary to the Laws enacted for the security of the Subjects. To which purpose, that several Persons had bin rais'd to the employments of Judges, who made open profession of the Popish Reli∣gion. And all this, notwithstanding that it had bin enacted among other Securities, for the preservation of the Rights and Liberties of the Subject, and of the Protestant Religion, that no Persons whatsoever should be ad∣mitted to bear any Office, either Civil or Military, but such as should make themselves capable thereof, by taking the customary Protestant Oaths, together with the Test, which had in effect bin anul'd and abolish'd, both in relation to Ecclesiastical as Civil Employments. In the next place, his Highness took notice of the Power granted to a few persons by virtue of an Illegal Commission, by which all the Af∣fairs of the Church of England were put into the hands of those that had executed it contrary to all Law, by suspending the Bishop of London, only for refusing to obey an Order that was sent him to suspend a worthy Di∣vine,
without so much as citing him before him to make his Defence, or observing the common Forms of Pro∣cess: As by turning out a President, chosen duly by the Fellows of Mag∣dalen Colledge, and after that, all the Fellows of the same Colledge, without so much as citing them before any Court, that could take legal Cogniz∣ance of the said Affair, or obtaining a Sentence against them from any com∣petent Judge. Moreover, that contrary to the ex∣press Laws against all Popish Churches and Chapels, Monasteries and Order of Jesuits, divers Churches and Chap∣pels had bin erected, and publickly al∣low'd for the exercise of the Popish Religion; and Colledges of Jesuits, for the corrupting the Youth of the Nation, and particularly that one of the Jesuits Order had bin advanc'd, to the Dignity of a Privy Counsellor, and Chief Minister of State. Moreover, that the same Methods had bin us'd in relation to Civil Affairs, by removing all Lords Lieutenants, De∣puty Lieutenants, Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, &c. from their Employ∣ments, who would not concur with
the King in the Repeal of the Test and Penal-Laws: By seizing upon the Char∣ters, and invading the Privileges of all Towns, that had a Right to be repre∣sented by their Burgesses in Parliament; By which the Magistrates were forced to surrender up their Rights and Pri∣viledges to be disposed of at the Pleasure of the Kings evil Counsellers, who had placed new Magistrates in all the se∣veral City's and Towns, in whom they could more entirely confide. Next to this His Highness takes notice of professed Papists being advanced to Courts of Judicature, notwithstand∣ing their incapacity by Law, and that no regard was due to the Sentences flowing from them. By which means the Administration of Justice was put into the hands of Papists, and all Mat∣ters of Civil Justice brought under great Uncertainties. That they had also disposed of all Military imployments after the same manner: for that tho the Laws not onely excluded Papists from all such employments, but had in particular provided that they should be disarmed; Yet they in contempt of those Laws
had not onely arm'd the Papists, but had raised them to the Greatest mili∣tary trusts both by Sea and Land; and those Strangers as well as Natives, Irish as well as English. By which means they had render'd themselves Masters of the Affairs of the Church, of the Government of the Nation, and of the Course of Justice, and had subjected them all to a Despotic and Arbitrary Power. That the King had been prevail'd with to assume an absolute power over his Subjects in Scotland, and to challenge from them Obedience without Reserve. From hence his Highness inferr's, that these were the great and insuf∣ferable Oppressions, and open con∣temps of Law, together with the sad consequences that must certainly fol∣low them, which put the Subjects un∣der those great and just feares, which made them look after such Lawfull remedies, as were allow'd of in all Nations, tho all had been without effect. Besides that the King's evil Counsel∣lers had endeavour'd to make all Men apprehensive of the loss of their Lives, Liberties, and Estates, if they offered
to preserve themselves by taking no∣tice of their Oppressions by way of Petition, Representation, or other means allowed of and authorized by Law: as they had proceeded with the seven Bishops, for onely offering a most humble Petition to the King in discharge of their Consciences; for which they were brought to Tryal before profes∣sed Papists, as if they had been guilty of some enormous Crime. That His Highness himself, and his most entirely beloved Consort the Princess, had endeavoured to signifie in Terms full of Respect to the King, the just and deep regret which all these Proceedings had given them; and in compliance with his Majesties desires had declared their thoughts touching the Repealing of the Penal-Laws and Test in such a manner, that they hoped they had proposed an Ex∣pedient by which the Peace of those Kingdoms, and a happy agreement among the Subjects of all perswasions might have been settled: But the King's evil Counsellers put such bad constructions upon their good inten∣tions, as if their Royal Highnesses had
designed to disturb the Quiet and Hap∣piness of the Kingdom. His Highness further sets forth that the same evil Counsellers, apprehen∣sive that a Lawful Parliament being once assembled (well knowing it to be the last and only Remedy against Na∣tional evils) they would be brought to an Accompt for all their open vio∣lations of Law, and for their Plots and Conspiracies against the Protestant Re∣ligion, and the Lives and Liberties of the Subjects, they had endeavoured by all ways and means to obstruct the due elections of Members to serve in Parliament; and laboured so to carry Elections either by Fraud or Force, that when a Parliament met it should be composed of such persons only, by whom they were well assured that all things would be carried on, according to their Direction and Interest. But to crown all, that there were great and violent Presumptions which induced His Highness to believe, that those evil Counsellers, in order to the carrying on their evil Designs, had pu∣blished that the Queen had brought forth a Son; tho both during the
Queen's pretended Bigness, and by the Manner in which the Birth was ma∣naged there were so many just and visible grounds of suspicion, that not only their Royal Highnesses themselves, but all the good Subjects of the King∣dom, vehemently suspected that the pre∣tended Prince of Wales, was not born of the Queen. Therefore in consideration of the great Interest which their Royal High∣nesses had in such a matter of conse∣quence, and their known Right to the Succession of the Crown; and in regard of the Great Esteem and particular Af∣fection which the English Nation had ever testified both to her Royal High∣ness and himself, His Highness could not excuse Himself from espousing the Interest of that Nation, in a matter of such high Consequence, and from con∣tributing all that lay in his Power, for the maintaining of the Protestant Re∣ligion, the Laws and Liberties of those Kingdoms. To the doing of which he was earnestly solicited by a Great many Lords, both Spiritual and Tem∣poral, and by many Gentlemen and other Subjects of all Ranks.
Therefore he thought sit to pass over into England, with a force sufficient, by the Blessing of God, to defend him from the violence of those Evil Counsellers before mentioned; de∣claring farther, that the Expedition was for no other design then to have a free and Lawful Parliament assem∣bled, and to sit and meet in full free∣dom, for the securing and maintenance of the Protestant Religion, and make∣ing such Laws as might establish a good agreement between the Church of En∣gland and all Protestant Dissenters, and for the securing all others as would live peaceable under the Government, even Papists themselves. That he would to this Parliament refer the En∣quiry into the Birth of the pretended Prince of Wales, and the Right of Suc∣cession: And concur with them in every thing that might procure the Peace and Happiness of the Nation, &c. Soon after His Highness set forth another short Declaration to this Ef∣fect, That whereas he understood that the Subverters of the Religion and
Laws of the English Dominions, had given out that his Highness intended to Conquer and Enslave the Nation; His Highness was confident that no Persons could have such hard thoughts of Him or his Undertaking. For that as the Forces which he had brought along with him were utterly disproportion'd to such a wicked Design, so the great Numbers of principal Nobility and Gentry, Men of Eminent Quality and Estates, and of known Integrity and Zeal both for the Religion and Govern∣ment of England, who accompany'd him in his Expedition, and earnestly solicited him to it, would cover him from all such Malicious Insinuations. But these Politick Forgers of vain Rumours and Reports were soon refu∣ted, by the Memorial from the Eng∣lish Protestants to their Highnesses the Prince and Princess of Orange, which came forth in publick much about the same time, so soon as the Press could pretend to any Liberty. In that Memo∣rial the intolerable Vexations and Op∣pressions which the Protestants in Eng∣land, that were faithful to the Princi∣ples and Doctrines of their Religion, and
to the Just, Establish'd, Legal Go∣vernment, groan'd under, through the Contrivances of the Papists, and Pra∣ctices of the Priests and Jesuits, cover'd with the Pretences and Name of Au∣thority, were so amply expos'd to all the World, and confirm'd by infalli∣ble Demonstrations, the grounds of Complaint so universal, and the Con∣sequences of the Oppression so mena∣cing to all degrees of Persons in the Na∣tion, that the Application for Relief by the major part of the Nobility and Gen∣try of the Realm, to those Persons who had both Right and Power to redress, could never be styl'd a Design of Con∣quest; & that same Story which in future ages shall give his Highness's passing over into England, the Title of Conquest or Invasion, must be either very much in the Dark, or else, as some of our old Stories are, be written with a very Monkish Impartiality. The Lords and Gentry in the first place set forth the many Illegal Things that were daily imposed upon them, in their several Stations and Places, which they were convinc'd in their Consciences could never be justify'd
unto God or the Kingdom, and yet were press'd upon them without regard to their Consciences, by loss of their Offices and Employments, and many other threaten'd Effects of the King's Displeasure. For Confirmation of this they in∣stance the pressing of the Protestants to declare for a Repeal of all Laws made for the Reformation and Settle∣ment of their Religion. That they were forced to submit to serve and obey those that were no lawful Judges, Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, &c. and all were threatned, vex'd and prosecuted, that durst but say that no such was lawful Authority, as the Lord Lovelace was for words to that purpose. That all Subjects were forc'd to suf∣fer all the Actions and Offences of their Lives, and the Secrets of their Hearts to be search'd into, and their Interests and Freeholds to be Judg'd by a few of the King's Creatures, call'd his Commissioners for Ecclesiastical Affairs, whose Commission was to proceed without and against the Rules of the Law.
That the Ministers were requir'd under grievous Penalties to be the King's Cryers, to proclaim in the Churches the King's Power to Suspend at once the force and use of all the Penal Laws, made in Four Hundred Years past, to Secure the Rights of the Crown, the Freedoms and Properties of the Realm, and the Profession of the Protestant. With several other Grievances and Oppressions no less destructive to the Fundamental Go∣vernment of the Realm. All which In∣stances they farther alledge to be too well known to be denied by their Adver∣saries. Then they proceed to set forth the Illegality of the King's Absolute Power to Dispense with the Penal Laws, and his New Claim set up and maintain'd, that the Subjects had no Right, Pro∣perty, or Security against the Will and Pleasure of their Kings. Of his putting the Military Powers into the hands of persons incapable of them by the express Laws of the Land. Of his maintaining and dispersing through the Kingdom an Army of Papists and Mer∣cenaries in full Peace, to the great
Disquiet and Terror of the Protestants; And of his Controlling the Courts of Law, in the course wherein Justice ought to administred; instancing for that the displacing Judge Holloway and Judge Powel, upon the legal Acquittal of the Seven Bishops. All which and much more of the same nature they made out by Reasons drawn fro mthe English Monarchy's being founded upon Equal Freedom; and for that the Civil Government of England was always of Right truly Free, because no Laws or Authorities ever bound up the Persons and Proper∣ties of the Kingdom but only those, wherein the Kings and all the Subjects freely agreed, every Subject's free Con∣sent being deem'd by the Laws of the Land to be given personally, as by his respective Deputies, to the Enacting and Repealing of every Law. In the next place they complain of the King's Closetting of persons who were interested in the Election of Par∣liament Men, to flatter or terrifie them out of their Freedom in Electing for Parliament: And of his giving power to other of his Creatures to do the same.
From which, and other Arguments de∣duc'd from the Words of the King's Se∣cond Declaration, they infer, that there needed no plainer Proofs that the Axe was laid to the Root of the Civil Go∣vernment, as the most certain way to introduce the Laws and Religion of Rome. And as for the Ecclesiastical Go∣vernment, that it was as plain that the King's avow'd Intent and Endeavours were to free the Emissaries of Rome from Punishments and Penalties of the Penal Laws, that his new erected Popish Col∣leges, his Convents of Monks, his Four Provincial Bishops, and his numerous Priests, might be Authoriz'd by him without force of Laws, to maintain the Church of Romes Canons to be of greater Authority than the Laws of the Realm. By which proceedings and the King's Suspending the execution of the Penal Laws against all high Crimes, some of which were made Capital by the ancient Papists of this Kingdom; and his declaring all such Protestants as will not help to finish them, not to be qualify'd as Christians or Englishmen for any Employments in the Kingdom, and therefore least of all to be Members of
Parliament; that it was apparent that their Popish Enemies did not think it suffi∣cient to seek the Abolition of all the an∣cient Penal Laws, but to destroy the Constitution and Form of the Free Go∣vernment of the Kingdom, from whence arose all those Penal Laws against their Churches proud Domination, and their Usurpation over the Rights of the Crown of the whole Realm. Having after this put his Highness in mind of several Leagues and Confede∣racies of the French King and other Sons of the Romish Church, not only to the Subversion of the Protestants in England, but even of Holland it self; they proceed to give the World a large account of the Birth of the pretended P. of Wales; a Device which the Priests knew to be necessary for supporting the Glory and Terror of the French King, against the growing Reputation of their Highnesses, by the Expectancy of the English Crown, nor yet the first Counterfit of the same Nature, which those Priests had maintain'd to be law∣ful for the Service of their Church. For which they instance the Popish In∣ventions of Lambert Symnel, and Per∣kin
Warbeck; not forgetting to intimate a certain Cheating Trick the Jesuits inven∣ted and practis'd of later Years about procuring an Heir to a Crown that is become their chief Support in Europe. Having thus made out the several intended Invasions upon the Funda∣mental Laws and Constitutions of the Realm, and the particular Injustice done to her Royal Highness, by en∣deavouring to defeat her of her Appa∣rent Right to the Crown; they pro∣pose that the method of Defence a∣gainst the public Injuries should be made according to the known Laws and Customs of England; that is to say, That an open and free demand should be made in the Name of her Royal Highness as Heiress apparent of the Crown, and in behalf of all the peo∣ple of the Realm; That there should be forthwith declar'd and publish'd to the Kingdom a sufficient number for this Case of lawful Witnesses of each Sex, such as the Laws of England and Na∣tural Justice require, to testifie, That according to the usual Practices of their Respective Sexes, at the Birth of Prin∣ces, Heirs to the Crown: That the
Child call'd the Prince of Wales was naturally born of the Queens Body. To which if Satisfaction should not be given by the Maintainers of the Sup∣posed Prince without delay, then natu∣ral Justice, and the Laws dictated, that their Highnesses should demand a Re∣tractation by the King's Publick Mini∣sters in all Christian Kingdoms and States of the salse newes they have Published of the Birth of the Prince of Wales, and their Vindication of her Royal Highnesses Right Apparent to the next Succession to the Crown. Then they farther tell His Highness, that most Catholick Princes could not but have a Prejudice to them in the Rights they claim'd as English Prote∣stants, not knowing the Laws and Li∣berties of the Land, and therefore they had propos'd these two demands to be first in order made by his Hihness in the behalf of her Royal Highness and the Kingdom, that they might convince Catholick Princes, that they had rea∣son and Justice according to their own Laws and Rules of Right, to seek His Highness's Protection, against the King's Practices, in forcing them to stoop to a
pretended Counterfeit Prince, and to change the Succession of the Crown, and the whole Government. Therefore they most humbly fled to their Highnesses to protect them a∣gainst the horrible Destruction made by the King of all their Laws for the Re∣formation of their Christian Religion, and their security against the open pro∣fessed Enemies of their Liberties there∣in, since the King had declared to the World, that those Laws should never hereafter be put in Execution, and to make their case more Desperate, had caus'd his Judges to justifie him in what he had done. They also pray'd His Highnesses Aid against the King's Invasion of their Ci∣vil Rights and Fundamental Liberties, and his utter subversion of the free Go∣vernment by its Ancient Customs and Laws. And then proceeding to inform His Highness, that a King of England ceases to act by the English Kingly Authority, or as a King of England, if he yeild up himself or his Subjects to be bound to any other Laws, Canons, or Juris∣dictions, than such as are made or free∣ly
receiv'd by the mutual Agreement of the King, and the Representative Bo∣dy of the Realm in Parliament: all which they fully make out by the An∣cient, Constitutions of the Kingdom, and the continued practices of Former Parliaments and Kings, even in the Times of Popery it self. They propose to His Highness in Con∣clusion to insist Immoveably, That the Ancient free Government of England by its own customs and Laws only made or approv'd in Parliament, be immediatly restor'd in all the parts of it through the Kingdom. That all the Laws in force, against the Admission of the Canons, and Ju∣risdiction of Rome, and against the Maintainers of them, be forthwith de∣clared to be put in due Execution, and that all suspensions of them, or Dispen∣sations with them, without authority of Parliament be declar'd Null and Void. That the Ancient Customs, Liberties and Priviledges for the City of London, and the whole form and course of its Government be forthwith restor'd. That Legal Officers both Civil and Military be setled in all the Places of
Magistracy, and all Commands throughout the Kingdom. That the Commission for Ecclesiasti∣cal Affairs, with its monstrous Non ob∣stante to all the Laws of the Realm, & all other Commissions of the same na∣ture should be declar'd Null and Void. That the freedom of Elections should be duly vindicated, and all unworthy preingagements to Elect and vote as the King would have them, should be revoked and renounced. Lastly, that the Kingdom might be restor'd to a Capacity of holding a Le∣gal Parliament, in such form and man∣ner as the Laws requir'd, by whose help the Civil Government might be Estab∣lished, and the force of Arbitrary Power therein be utterly Abolish'd. While these things flew about the Nation, it was in vain for the Popish Cabal at Whitehal to amuse the People with Reproaches of Pretended Invasion thrown upon the Prince of Orange, who being by this arriv'd at Exeter, was in a short time surrounded with great Numbers of the English Nobility and Gentry, and by them confirm'd in his generous Enterprise by a Solemn En∣gagement,
both to His Highness, and to one another, to stick firm to the Cause in the defence of it, and never to depart from it till their Religion, Laws and Liberties were so far secu∣red to them in a free Parliament, that they should be no more in danger of falling under popery and Slavery: and that if any Attempts should be made upon His Highness's Person, they would pursue not only those that made them, but all their Adherents, with the ut∣most severity of just Revenge in their Ruin and Destruction. The Prince of Orange also, for his own part, had been no less carefull, as he had fet forth his Declaration to the Nation in General, so to signifie the Reasons of his Coming in a Letter to the King's Army in particular; which were to preserve their Religion, and restore and establish their Religion and properties: giving them farther to understand, that they might plainly see that they were only made use of as Instruments to enslave the Nation, and ruin the Protestant Religion; and that, when that was done, they might judge, what they themselves were like
to expect, both from the Cashiering of all the Protestant and English Officers, and Souldiers in Ireland, and by the Irish Souldiers being brought over to be put in their places, when it should be thought convenient for themselves to be turn'd out: Hoping withall that they would not suffer themselves to be abused by a false notion of Honour, but would consider what they ow'd to God, their Religion, their Country, themselves, and their Posterity, which were to be preferred before all private Considerations and Engagements what∣ever. Of which His Highness soon after found those Effects that truly an∣swered his Expectations. For the King, being as yet in hopes to force his way through all the great Opposition made him by the whole Kingdom, having sent his Army before to Salisbury, there overtakes them. But in the Midst of these surprises, other fresh Intelligence, no less astonishing came, besides that of the Lord Cornbury, who had carried off a considerable Party of Horse to his supposed Enemy some∣time before, that several other Re∣giments of Foot had deserted his Ser∣vice,
and were advanced the same way. Upon his arrival near the City he was met by the Duke of Barwick, the Earl of Feversham, and several others Offi∣cers on Horse-back, and by them at∣tended to the Gates of the Town, where he was met by the Major and Aldermen in their Formalities, and Conducted to the Bishop's Palace. But these Glimpses of flattering spendour soon vanished. For he had not been long in the City before he understood that his English forces were under a general dissatisfaction, as being un∣willing to engage in civil Bloodshed with their own Countrymen, and Pro∣testants professing the same Religion; which was to fight with their Bodies against their Consciences. He saw the general disaffection of the People, to his Souldiers; who so sparingly sup∣plied the Markets, for their sustenance, that their kindness to his own Person might easily be thence discovered. It is also moreover said, that upon his going out one morning to take a view of some Regiments, his nose fell a bleeding, which caused him to return back. So that finding himself so un∣safe
in his Army, and perhaps not al∣together regardless of unlucky prog∣nostic's, upon a false alarum that Count Schombergh was advanced within thirty or twenty miles of him, with the Van∣guard of the Prince's Army, he left Salisbury, and returned back to Windsor and so to London with all the hast he could. But before he left Salisbury he found his Court no less out of Order then his Camp; Prince George, the Lord Church∣hill were both gone to the Prince; and the Princess Ann of Danemark had pri∣vately retired herself another way. The Prince of Danemark and the Lord Churchill left each of them a Letter be∣hind them directed for the King. The former pleading, That he could no longer disguise his just concern for that Religion, in which he had been so happily Educated, and which his judgement throughly convinced him to be the Best: for the Support of which he was so highly Interested in his Na∣tive Country; which England was now become by the most endearing tye. To which his Highness added, that while the Restless spirits of the Ene∣mies
of the Reformed Religion, back'd by the cruel zeal and prevailing power of France, justly alarm'd and united all the protestant Princes of Christen∣dom, and engag'd them in the Support of it, he could not act so degenerous and mean a part, as to deny his con∣currence for such worthy Endeavours, for disabusing his Majesty, by the reinforcement of those Laws, and the Re-establishment of that Government, on which alone depended the Well∣being of his Majesty, and the pro∣testant Religion in Europe. Which was the onely irresistable cause that could come in Competition with his Duty and Obligations to his Majesty. The Lord Churchill excused himself also upon the same inviolable Dictates of Conscience, and a necessary concern for his Religion, with which he was In∣structed that nothing could come in Competition. As for the Princess Ann of Danemark, her Letter was directed for the Queen; Wherein her Royal Highness begged her Majesties pardon for being so deeply af∣fected with the surprising news of her Husbands being gone, as not to be able
to see her, but onely by writing to let her Majesty know that she was not able to bear the King's displeasure either against the Prince her Husband or her∣self. No less sensible of the unhappiness of her Condition so divided between Duty and Affection to a Father and a Husband; and therefore that her High∣ness knew not what to do, but to fol∣low one to preserve the other. Yet notwithstanding all these fatal Desertions, more fatal then the Omens recorded by Livie or Suetonius, preced∣ing the particular Downfalls of the An∣cient Roman Chieftains, still the King continued constant to the Counsels of the Queen and Romish Priests. The Result of which was to send to the Prince by that time advanced as far as Hungerford, certain proposals of Ac∣commodation. Which being consented to, the Marquiss of Hallifax, the Earl of Nottingham, and the Lord Godolphin were by the King appointed his Com∣missioners; who according to their In∣structions attending the Prince at Hun∣gerford, delivered to his Highness a Paper signed with their own hands to this Effect.
That in regard the King observed that all the differences and causes of complaint alledged by his Highness seem'd to be referr'd to a free Parlia∣ment. His Majesty had sent them to at∣tend his Highness for the Adjusting of all Matters that should be agreed ne∣cessary to the Freedom of Elections, and the security of sitting, and was ready immediatly to enter into a Treaty in order to it. However in the mean time His Ma∣jesty proposed that the respective Ar∣mies might be restrained within such Limits, and at such a distance from London, as might prevent the appre∣hensions that the Parliament might be in any kind disturbed. In answer to this, his Highness with the Advice of the Lords assembled a∣bout him made the following propo∣sals, That all persons and other per∣sons not qualified by Law, might be disarmed, disbanded, and dismissed from all Employments Civil and Mili∣tary. That all Proclamations reflecting upon his Highness, or any that came
along with him, or had declared for him should be forthwith set at Liberty. That the Tower of London might be immediatly put into the Hands of the City. That if the King thought fit to be at London during the sitting of the Parliament, his Highness might be there also with an equal number of his Guards: or if at a farther distance, that his Highness might be at some place of the same distance, That the respective Armies should remove thirty miles from London, and that no more For∣raign Forces should be brought into the Kingdom. That Tilbury Fort should be put into the hands of the City of London. That Portsmouth also should be put into such hands as by his Majesty, & his Highness should be agreed upon. That some Sufficient part of the pub∣lick Revenue should be assign'd his High∣ness for maintaining his Forces, till the meeting of a free Parliament. But these Proposals proving of too hard digestion for the Romish Counsel∣lors at Whitehall, the Offer of Accom∣modation was lookt upon as an Abor∣tive
Contrivance to spin out time. So that the King finding that he had to deal with those that were not to be trickt with the Obsolete Stratagems of Dilatory Politicks, began to think of taking other Measures. To that pur∣pose he sent the Queen and her Infant before, with a small train, but a large Proportion, as it was said, of Treasure and Jewels, with which soon after, she safely Landed in France, and then re∣solv'd himself to follow her. Which being done accordingly, he dispatch'd away a Letter to the E. of Feversham to this effect. That things being come to that Ex∣tremity, that he had been forc'd to send away the Queen, and his Son as he call'd him, the Prince of Wales, least they should fall into his Enemies hands, he was resolv'd to secure himself the best he could. That if he could have rely'd on all his Troops, he was resolv'd to have had at least one Blow for it; but that his Lordship knew, that both his Lordship and several of the General Officers of the Army had told him, that it was not safe for him to venture him∣self at the head of his Troops, or to think to fight the Prince of Orange with
them. And therefore it only remain'd for him to thank those Officers and Soldiers that had been truly Loyal to him. Not exspecting they should far∣ther expose themselves in Resisting a Forraign Army, and a poysoned Nation. In pursuance of this Letter, the Earl sent another to his Highness the Prince of Orange, to let him understand, that he had receiv'd a Letter from the King, with orders not to make any farther Opposition against any Body, which he thought convenient to let his High∣ness know, so soon as it was possible, to hinder the Effusion of Blood. After this, according to the Resolu∣tions he had taken, the King being at Whitehall, order'd a Council to attend him, as it might be the next Morning, under pretence of advising upon the Exigency of his Affairs, but more pro∣bably to color his intended flight; for about the middle of the Night preced∣ing, he took water at the Privy-stairs, and passing down the River betook himself, Accompany'd only by two or three persons, in a small Vessel to Sea; but being forc'd by foul Weather up∣on the Coast of Kent near Feversham,
as soon as he came to that Town was seiz'd upon (the report at that time be∣ing very hot, that several persons were Endeavoring to make their Escapes out of the Land) and by the unruly mul∣titude, rifled of what Gold and Jewels he had about him; with other usage, highly unbefitting the Grandeur of his Quality. But at last being known, the Barbarous Rabble became more Sub∣missive, and repenting of the Insolencies they had committed, would have re∣turn'd him again what they had so rudely taken from him. But then the King with a Royal Generosity forgave them the Crime of their Ignorance, and receiving only his Jewels back, left them the underserved Enjoyment of his ready Mony. However his person was de∣tain'd, till the news could be carried to London, where he was. In the mean time the London Rabble, as is frequent in such unusual Disturban∣ces, and Dissolutions of Government, brake out in Numbers, and pretending to Reformation, with such a merciless fu∣ry, fell upon all the new erected Mass-Houses about the Town, pulling down, burning, and destroying all before them,
that where e're they came, they hardly left one stone upon another, consuming the very Innocent Wainscote with fire. While Filou's and common Thieves, mixing with the more harmless Boys, took an occasion from thence to sa∣tiate their greedy Appetites, after spoyl and Rapine; which turn'd even to the open Robbery of some Embassadors Houses. For Redress of these Disorders, se∣veral of the Lords Spiritual and Tem∣poral then in Town, upon notice of the Kings being withdrawn, repair'd to Guild-hall, and sending for Coll. Skelton, then Lieutenant of the Tower, Deman∣ded the Keys; which being by him readily resign'd, they commited the charge of that Important place, to the Custody of the Lord Lucas, a person of known Honor and Integrity to his Country. Nor was their prudence and Vigilance less active in suppressing those Lawless Rioters that made such no∣cturnal Confusions in all parts of the Town; so that in a short time they were all dispierced and quell'd, and the chief Criminals commited to Newgate. But then considering the great and
Dangerous Conjuncture of the Time, in regard of the King's withdrawing him∣self, they drew up a Declaration to this Effect. That they did Reasonably hope that the King having Issued out his Procla∣mation & Writs for calling a free Parlia∣ment, they might have rested securely under the Exspectation of that meeting; but in regard His Majesty had with∣drawn himself, and as they Apprehend∣ed in order to his departure out of the Kingdom, they could not without be∣ing wanting to their duty, be silent un∣der those Calamities wherein the Po∣pish Counsels so long prevailing had Involved the Kingdom. And therefore Unanimously resolved to apply them∣selves to the Prince of Orange. Declaring farther that they would with their utmost endeavors assist his Highness in the speedy obtaining such a Parliament wherein their Lives, Li∣berties and Properties might be secur'd, and the Protestant Religion, and In∣terest over the whole World might be supported and encouraged.
This Declaration was Sign'd W. Cant. Tho Ebor. Pembrook. Dorset. Mulgrave. Thanet. Carlisle. Craven. Ailsbury. Burlington. Sussex. Berkley. Rochester. Newport. Weymouth. P. Winchester. W. Asaph. Fran. Ely. Tho. Roffen. Tho. Peterburg P. VVharton. North and Grey. Chandois. Montague. T. Jermyn. Vaughan Carbery. Colepepper. Crew. Osulston. And at the same time the Earl of Pembrook, the Lord Viscount Weymouth, the Lord Bishop of Ely, and the Lord Colepepper were ordered to attend his Highness with the said Declaration, and to acquaint his Highness with what they had farther done at that Meeting.
The next day the Lord George Jeffe∣ries was discover'd and taken in a Seaman's House in Wapping; where he had conceal'd himself, in order to make his escape, and was sent to the Tower by Order of the Peers Assembled, with some of the Privy Council in the Council Chamber in Whitehall. On the 14th of December, his High∣ness the Prince of Orange arriv'd at Windsor, where he was received with a most profound Respect by the May∣or and Aldermen in their Formalities, and Lodg'd in the Prince of Danemark's Apartment, which was prepar'd for his Reception. By this time the Lds. who first Assem∣bled in the City, being return'd to White∣hall, having Notice of the King's being at Feversham, appointed certain Com∣missioners there to Attend him, with their earnest Desires that he would be pleased to return to his Royal Palace at London: To which, tho' at first he shew'd something of Reluctancy, yet at length he condescended; and upon Sunday the 16th of December arriv'd
at Whitehall, attended by several of the Nobility, and a great Guard of Horse; & from thence sent the Lord Feversham to Invite His Highness to accept of St. James's for the place of his Resi∣dence. A Complement not in the least expected at Windsor. For upon No∣tice of the King's being upon his Re∣turn from Feversham, his Highness being resolv'd to advance with all the haste he could for London, and for several weighty Reasons, not deeming it proper for the King and himself to be in the same place, which might subject the City to the Inconvenience of daily Disputes and Quarrels be∣tween the Soldiers of both Parties, had sent Monsieur Zulestein to meet him by the way, and request his re∣turn to Rochester; which the King would certainly have done, had not Monsieur Zulestein miss'd him by ta∣king another Road. Upon this Disappointment, his High∣ness imparted the Invitation to the Lords at Windsor, who after mature Deliberation upon it, concluded all, That it was not proper for the Prince to accept the Invitation. On the other
side, there being a Necessity that the Prince should be in Town the next day, the Lord Marquis of Hallifax, the Earl of Shrewsbury, and the Lord Delamere, by vertue of a Paper Subscribed by his Highness, were desir'd to tell the King, That it was thought convenient for the greater Safety of his person, that he should remove to Ham, where he should be Attended by Guards that would be ready to preserve his person from any Disturbance. And farther, For the preventing the possibility of any Disturbance, it was resolved that his Highness's Guards should be possest of all the Posts and Avenues about Whitehall, before the Paper was delivered; which because it could not be done till late at Night, was the Reason that the King was in Bed, before their Lordships could At∣tend him. However, being admitted about Twelve a Clock, His Majesty read the Letter, and return'd for An∣swer, That he would readily comply with it; but upon better consideration, desir'd that he might rather return for Rochester: To which his Highness the next Morning readily Consented:
Accordingly Guards and Barges being got ready to Attend him, and his Sumpters and Coaches appointed to follow him: He reached Gravesend that Evening, and from thence in his own Coach hasten'd for Rochester, ma∣king choice of Sir Richard Head's House for his Residence. In the Afternoon of the same day that the King left Whitehall, his Highness, with a very Splendid Equi∣page and a numerous Attendance, Ar∣riv'd at St. James's, and receiv'd the Congratulations of all the Nobility and Persons of Chiefest Quality in the Town. Nor were the People in ge∣neral wanting to signifie their Satis∣faction at so great a Revolution, by Ringing of Bells, the blazing of Bonfires, and all the publick Demonstrations of Joy imaginable. While the Prince lay at Windsor the Body of the Lieutenancy sent Sir Robert Clayton, Sir William Russel, Sir Basil Fire∣brass and Charles Duncumb Esq with a particular Address, returning their just and due acknowledgments for the hap∣py relief he had brought the Kingdom; and inviting him to repair to the City
with all convenient speed, when they had taken care to put themselves in a posture to prevent all ill designs till his happy Arrival. This Address was follow'd by another from the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons of the City of London to the same effect, and withal imploring his Highness's Protection, and beseeching him also to repair to the City, where he should be received with universal joy and satisfaction, and no sooner was his Highness come to Town, but he was again attended by the Aldermen, and a select number of the Common Council. At what Time Sir George Treby, Recorder of the City, delivered him∣self to this Effect: That when both Church and State were over-run by Popery and Arbi∣trary Power, and brought to the point of Destruction, by those that were the true Invaders of both. The only Person under Heaven that could ap∣ply the Remedy, was his Highness: Who was of a Nation, whose Alliances in all times had been agreeable and prosperous to us. Of a Family, so Illustrious Benefactors to Mankind.
For which to have the Title of Sove∣raign Prince, Statholder, and to have worn the Imperial Crown, were a∣mong their lesser Dignities; since they had long enjoy'd a Dignity more Singular and Transcendent, to have been the Champions of the Almighty, to vindicate his Cause upon the great∣est Occasions. That his Highness led by the Hand of Heaven and called by the Voice of the People, had preserved the Dearest Interests of the Nation. Concluding that his Highness had a lasting monument in the Hearts, in the Prayers, and in the praises of all good Men in the Kingdom; and that posterity would celebrate his ever glo∣rious Name. At the same time the High Sheriff, Nobility and Gentry of the County of Cambridge, presented another Ad∣dress to his Highness, wherein they not onely implor'd his protection and his aid to rescue the Nation from Popery and Slavery, but also assured him they would contribute their utmost endea∣vour for the perfecting so glorious a Work; and returned his Highness their
unfeigned thanks for the progress he had made therein with so much Cost, Labour and Hazard, both by Sea and Land. But in the midst of these Tran∣sactions the King, after he had con∣tinu'd for some time at Rochester, took an Occasion totally to withdraw him∣self out of the Kingdom. To which purpose, upon the 22. of December, above twelve a clock at night, the King left Rochester with a small Train; and taking an obscure Road with great Secrecy and Caution hasten'd to the Sea side, where he embarqued, and afterwards landed in France. To make up this Breach and Rup∣ture in the Government, the Lords Spi∣ritual and Temporal immediatly meet in the Lords House, and humbly re∣quested his Highness to take upon him the Administration of the Public Af∣fairs, both Civil and Military, for the preservation of the Protestant Religion, Righs, Laws, Liberties and properties, and the Peace of the Nation. Thereupon his Highness thus invested with the power of a Roman Dictatour, sends for all such Persons as had been
Members of Parliament in the Reign of Charles the II. together with the Aldermen and Common Council of the City of London, and desires them to meet and advise upon the best manner how to pursue the ends of his Decla∣ration, in calling a free Parliament, for the preservation of the Protestant Religion, &c. These Gentlemen repairing to the House of Commons, having chosen Mr. Powle for their Chair-man, in con∣currence with the Lords, upon the 26 of December renew their Address to his Highness to continue the taking upon him the Administration of Affairs, and to issue forth his Circulatory Letters for calling a Convention, to sit at Westminster upon the two and twentieth day of January ensuing. Accordingly, at the time prefixed the Convention met, and after they had once more reiterated their humble desires to his Highness to take upon him the Administration of Affairs, they fell into serious debate about the dange∣rous condition of the Kingdom, & after they had maturely & duly weigh'd the Circumstances of the King's departure,
the lower House in a short time came to this result, That the late King, James the II. having endeavoured to subvert the Constitution of the King∣dom, by breaking the Original Con∣tract between the King and the People; and by Advice of Jesuits and other wicked persons, having violated the Fundamental Laws; And having with∣drawn himself out of this Kingdom, had Abdicated the Government, and that the Throne was thereby Vacant. Which tho at first it met with some Opposition in the House of Lords, yet being soon after carried in the Affirmative, an Instrument in writ∣ing was forthwith agreed on, by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal and Commons, Assembled at West∣minster, for Declaring the Prince and Princess of Orange, King and Queen of England, France, and Ireland, &c. Which being presented to their High∣nesses in the Banquetting-House, upon Wednesday the thirteenth day of February 1688. and their Consent thereto re∣ceived, they were Both, the same day, Proclaimed with a more then usual Solemnity.
And thus ended the short Reign of James the Second: of whom it may be said much like that which was spoken of Richard the Second. That he lost his Kingdom rather by his own ill ma∣nagement and Irregularities, then by the pernicious Counsels or practises of others. FINIS.
Books Newly Printed for and sold by James Knapton, at the Crown in S. Paul's Church-yard, 1689. THE Ambitious Practices of France, or a Relation of the Ways and Methods used by them to attain to that supream Grandeur, as al∣so the secret Intreagues of the French Kings Ministers, at the Courts of most of the Princes and States of Europe, with remarks thereupon, and some reflections on the Interests of those Princes. The Irish Hudibras or Fingalian Prince, taken from the sixth Book of Virgils Aeneids, and adapted to the Present Times. The History of the Plot ana∣tomized,
or the late Sham Fana∣tical Plot, briefly and plainly laid open wherein the Duke of Mon∣mouth, Earl of Essex, Lord Russel, and other worthy Patriots who were charged therewith, are vin∣dicated from the malicious and false aspersions cast upon them by a late Author. A detection of the Actions of Mary Queen of Scots concerning the murther of her Husband, and her Conspiracy, Adultery, and pretended Marriage with the Earl of Bothwell; and a defence of the true Lords maintainers of the Kings Majesties Action and Au∣thority, written in Latin by George Buchanan and now made English. The History of the Inquisition, as it is Exercised at GOA. Written in French, by the Ingenious Mon∣sieur Dellon. Who laboured 5 years under those Severities. With an
account of his Deliverance. Tran∣slated into English. The Wanton Fryar, or the Irish Amour, a new Novel. The Female Prelate; being the History of the Life and Death of Pope Joan: A Tragedy, as it is Acted at the Theatre Royal. Written by a Person of Quality. Bury Fair, a Comedy as it is Acted by their Majesties Servants, Written by Thomas Shadwell Ser∣vant to His Majesty. The Fortune Hunters or Two Fools well met, a Comedy Acted by their Majesties Servants, Writ∣ten by James Carlile Gentleman. The Forced Marriage, or the Jealous Bridegroom, a Tragi-come∣dy, as it is Acted by His Majesties Servants; at the Queens Theatre. Written by A. Behn. The Squire of Alsatia a Come∣dy, as it is Acted by their Majesties
Servants. Written by Tho. Shadwell, servant to their Majesties. The True Widdow, a Comedy, Ac∣ted by their Majesties Servants. Written by Tho. Shadwell, Servant to their Majesties. A Congratulatory Poem: on His Highness the Prince of Orange his coming into England. Written by Tho. Shadwell, Servant to their Majesties. A Congratulatory Poem, To the most Illustrious Queen Mary, upon Her arrival in England. Written by Tho. Shadwell, Servant to their Majesties. A Guide to Eternity: Extracted out of the Holy Fathers, and An∣cient Philosophers. Written Ori∣ginally in Latin, by John Bona: And now done into English, by Sir Roger L'Estrange. The third Edi∣tion. Price 1 s. 6 d. The Second Part of the Weeks Preparation for the Sacrament.
Consisting of Soliloquies, Prayers, Hymns, Ejaculations, Thanksgiving and Examination, for Sunday Even∣ing, after the Celebration of the Holy Communion. As also for Morn∣ing and Evening on every Day of the Week following. Together with directions to lead an Holy Life. The third Edition. Price 1 s. An Earnest Invitation to the Sa∣crament of the Lords Supper. By Joseph Glanvill, Chaplain in Ordi∣nary to His Majesty. The Sixth Edi∣tion, with Additional Prayers, &c. Price 1 s. Method, and means to a true Spiritual Life, Consisting of three Parts. by Mathew Scrivener, Vicar of Haselingfield in Cambrigeshire.
