S419 12376274 60619
A VINDICATION OF AN ESSAY To the Advancement of MUSICK, FROM Mr. MATTHEW LOCK'S OBSERVATIONS. By enquiring into the real Nature, and most convenient Practise of that SCIENCE. By THOMAS SALMON, M. A. of Trin. Col. Oxon. A senis Notis, ah! qualis mutationum mora, confusio clavium, substitutio vocum? videas pleros{que} an in∣digneris, bonam aetatem impendisse huic arti, & exigu∣um tamen profecisse, perfectos annis prius quàm ejus. modi lectione. Erycii Put. Musathena. LONDON: Printed by A. Maxwell, and are to be Sold by John Car at the Middle-Temple-Gate, 1672.
To the READER. MOrefields, or the Bear-Garden are enter∣tainment only for the Rabble: And, should I spend my time in wrangling, scratching, pulling by the hair, and such like; the Reader would have good rea∣son to think himself but rudely treated. I shall therefore (af∣ter I have a little caress'd my good Friend, and old Acquain∣tance, The Observer) enquire into the nature of Musick, that we may a little discern what commerce it maintains
betwixt its Theory and Pra∣ctice; and if we can obtain them both to vote in favour of our Hypothesis, we shall have just Encouragement to engage with the Objections.
To the Eminent and Learned Dr. JOHN WALLIS, Savilian Professor of Geo∣metry in the University of Oxford. SIR, HAving in a Letter (of Feb. 7.) received your Approbation of my Essay, (than whom, none was better able to judg, whether it was agreeable to the true nature of Musick) I was not much sollicitous what the less-learned part of the world thought concerning it. But then, that Learned as well as Royal Society, having in their Tran∣sactions (published Febr. 1671/2 N. 80) upon their Judgments recommended it to publique practise; I must con∣fess it was more than I expected, to be now so killingly convinced, and ut∣terly
destroyed by one single, though he was a very grand Observer. And indeed, Sir, what ruin may I not expect from such a formidable En∣counterer? who, when I hop'd to have obtain'd a little respect by professing my self Graduate of one of the most Noble Universities in the World, at one puff (Observe p. 38.) turns me into a Jack-an-apes, and all those vene∣rable Ancestors we study, into great Bears. Now, Sir, for my part, I had never skill enough in my life, to take a Man in pieces, and make him up into a Monkey: Wherefore I must stand sta∣ring and gazing upon my Antagonist as the Gigantick-Champion of Mu∣sick; to which purpose, he is pleased (P. 30.) to call himself the great Go∣liah; and his small Adversary, little David; though before that (P. 9.) it lay in his way to call me Hercules: And so powerful he is, Sir, in this juggle of converting, that I am confi∣dent, at the same time he is able to turn me into a Mouse, and an Ele∣phant. Well, there are no hopes, but we must be undone: for we may pretend
and expect what we will; 'tis impossi∣ble there should be any dealing with' or resistance made against such a migh∣ty man as this. Wherefore I am resol∣ved humbly to request and entreat all manner of men to believe, That I am and do whatever he would have me; for there is nothing in the world does so spoil an ingenious jest, as for some silly people to get a whimsey in their heads, That I am of a sober conver∣sation: Whereas if they will but be so kind to their own diversion, as to grant me a Sot and a Cox-comb, then would they set Ralpho's Lice and Mag∣gots a wrigling, p. 5. Then we should have Burlesque upon Poetry, and Ver∣ses upon Burlesque; and that so vio∣lently, that if no body will bestow printing them, he'l print them himself; if no body thinks them worth answer∣ing, he'l answer them himself: so very careful he is for the recreation of mankind. But, Sir, I must remember you of one thing, That when I was supposing my self, I was willing to suppose my self one of the least things I could sup∣pose my self; that when this huge De∣stroyer came, I might creep into an
Augur-hole, or behind the Wanscot; but I was afraid even to do that too▪ for if you observ'd how archly he transposes and perverts my words, (p. 8.) you would take him for a living Mouse-trap. However, having timely apprehen∣sions of his coming, I was not out of all hopes to escape, did there not go before him a terrible fellow in Buff, an Epigrammatical Poetaster; this man, Sir, (one would think) dealt only with Pen, Ink, and Paper; but alas! he was arm'd with all the Instruments of Cruelty; and heated with such an implacable Malice, that he sentences me; first, To have my Hide taw'd till it was tender; then to have the fore∣said intimate Garment, my Skin, to be fley'd off whilst I yet remain'd alive: nay further, could he have got a Rime for defunct (which it seems was the word he designed) I must also have been eaten alive with Pepper and Salt, three days after I had been defunct. But 'twas well for us, his Pegasus was jaded; and so, farewel him. Next comes the Observer himself, whose re∣marques were fitter to be contemn'd
than taken notice of; yet their Author being of so great fame and employ∣ment, I shall strictly examine each Page; which trouble I am the more willing to undergo; because after this Observer I suppose none will dare to make Ob∣servations; there being few men of greater Skill; of greater Malice, none. Observ. p. 1. The Essay is, at first dash, found abusive, false, insignificant, contradictory, and (in some parts) im∣possible; which to save himself the la∣bour of proving, he supposes; and ac∣cordingly to save our selves the la∣bour of disproving, we suppose is not; and so far we are even. But indeed, 'tis no great matter which is true; for the business does not lye in pro & con, but the way of propounding. He has (saith the Ob∣server) been liberal to evince the intri∣cate and difficult way of your proceed∣ing, by an Experiment of his. Now, Sir, there is no such rugged uncompliant way of evincing, as that of Experiment; for thereby things will obstinately appear just as they are. And of all other Experiments, those of Arithmetick have lest of congé in them.
Ha Sausebox! Dare you prove, that we require 81 different alterations (Essay p. 33.)? Now, Sir, these Num∣bers are so cross-grain'd, that all the Money and Interest in the world could not bribe 9 times 9 to be 79, they will make 81. And no Musician can de∣ny, but that there may be 9 Cliffs, and that every Cliff sets all the Notes be∣longing to it in different places, which must at the least be more than Nine. (For though G of the Base, and one G upon the Treble, both stand upon the lower line; yet I am confident, he so far abominates my Octaves, that he will scorn to save Nine by that shift). So that proving them to make 81 al∣terations of the Notes, and my Notes always to stand in the same place, this is the abusive rugged way. Whereas the smooth taking way had been to have invited our angry Ob∣server to the Tavern, fill'd his belly with a good Fish-dinner, and made it swim agen; then might a man have drawn forth an Hypothesis with accep∣tance; if so be one had been cautious all the while to have acknowledged that the old way was rare, conveni∣ent, and indeed best; but it would be
an infinite kindness and obligation if they would practise a new one; which the worse it was, the greater kindness it would be to accept it. And this had been the modest way. But now, Sir, you know it is the way of us speculative people, if we can but once demonstrate a thing to be easie and plain, we use to accept it without further charges of entertain∣ment. And if this won't agree with the practical, then without doubt there is something more in it than we know of, and must be put among those things which are good in speculation, but not profitable to practise. And now, Sir, lest my Reader should be a little drowsie, you must give me leave to change the mood, and be more pleasant upon this subject of recreation. P. 2. Do but turn over the leaf, and you will find me indebted to the Observer for a Tale; and indeed, Sir, I was never so indebted to any man in my life; for he hath described himself to be an arrant fool, out of good will to prevent all ventersome young men from being the like. There he stands like a frightful
Scare-crow stuff'd with straw, an old Hat, and a Muckinger, holding forth his arms; See here young men! When I was a School-boy, &c. then was I Lu∣cifer-like; which some wicked people say, was as proud and false as the De∣vil; but I don't believe that was his own meaning of it in this place, though afterwards he tells us plainly, He was wise in his own eyes; that there was more hopes of a fool than of him. Sir, one would long to be acquainted with the Observer, to know what kind of man such an ill-begun boy hath made. But whatsoever he is, we thank him for his good advice, though we cannot admit the force of his Argu∣ment, That if he was a fool when he was a young man, therefore all other young men must be so too. Which is all the pertinent application I can de∣vise P. 3. And now our errant Observer promises, To keep within com∣pass; where (having just finished his own Character and Education) he is pleased to insert mine: Which I will not examine, because I have already professed my self to be, and do, what∣soever he says, except in the busi∣ness
of my forlorn Fssay. I must acquaint you, Sir, That it happened amongst the happenings of my life, to have to do with this Ob∣server, wherein I did my do, civilly and kindly (as he himself confesses, Lin. 17.) and several others also, were the favours he received from our Fa∣mily, which he promises (and we have experienc'd in these Observations) al∣ways to acknowledg. And indeed, such kind inclinations are as natural to him, as 'tis for a stone to tend towards its center. For how can a sweet Musical Ingenuity, be any way tainted with the least Rudeness or Ingratitude? Especially being terrified in the days of School-boy, with that dreadful A∣pothegm of Lycosthenes, Si ingratum dixeris, omnia dixeris. But I did that which was able to cancel all Obligations. Pity! ah pity, Sir, the common fate of Scholars, who are all possessed with one incu∣rable madness, To be ever enquiring into the reasons and nature of things. Hence came the cause of my present ruin! My canting Questions, and my niblings after Solutions. And here, Sir, I am resolved to lay you something in
the blame: for it was you that spoil'd me, by letting me know, That the sa∣tisfaction an Octave created, did pro∣ceed from an exact duple-proportion, which it ever observed, with some o∣ther such like heathenish things. And this, by my reading, got such possessi∣on of my Pericranium, as you can scarce imagine. Particularly, when I was a young trader in Philosophy, Father Galtru∣chius told me in the first Chapter of his Musical Institutions out of old Boe∣tius and Ptolomy, Quod, voces in Musi∣câ neque plures neque pauciores esse pos∣sunt, quam septem, (i. e.) there could be neither more nor less than seven Voices, which are the seven intervals included in eight Notes. Not that Seven were all the variety the Ancients had: for Aristoxenus, who was Contemporary with Alexan∣der the Great, and Scholar to Aristotle, tells us in his first Book, p. 20. Edit. M. Meibomii, . That the Notes then in use, especially for humane voice, reach'd two Eights and a Fifth; which (not counting the
Fifth inclusively) is just twenty Notes, the compass of our modern scale from Gamut to Ela. But then this vile Aristoxenus did so confirm me in my beloved Octaves (the same page) where he thinks that Notes might upon their account proceed ad infinitum, that I have ever since doted upon them. . That an Octave was of such an incomparable good nature, as if you added a greater, or less, or equal consonant to it, it would still be Consonant, which he thought would hold to infinite; but will not come to pass so much as in two Fifths (where the present division of Cliffs is) or any other consonants of the same kind, which being added to∣gether, make a most unpleasing discord. These Learned men, Sir, were those Midsummer-Moons which influenc'd my brains to think an Octave to be a com∣pleat Cycle of Musick; which, in the greatest compass, still enjoyed it self in one and the same Oeconomy. And this, Sir, makes me still so mad as to think, that though my new Scale doth divide it self at every Octave, p. 11.
yet it does not divide confusedly, or Tinker-like, instead of mending one hole, make two. But, Sir, these uncontroulable Pro∣verbs are able to undo any man living. And then for his Poetry, he is altoge∣ther as invincible. From whence you see my misery in dealing with this man of Proverbs! And for Burlesque, if not Twin to Hudibras, yet certainly he is his own younger brother. But I omit these Titles, as (perhaps) only my own private Sentiments. Come therefore (as I. Philips calls thee), Come thou Apollo, thou sign of a Sun-Tavern; come and behold the an∣nual circuit of thy rival Luminary; see the like circulation of the imitating blood.[Here insert the Diagram.] Or like a Bowl, or like a Wheel, Or like the Damask-Rose you see. Fye upon it! Observer, I believe thou observest, that they will not Rime, which is the only thing necessary to Verses. Therefore (good Hudibras) give me leave to retreat to Prose.
A Diagramm For the Uniting of Speculative and Practicall Musick; By rendring the Order and Proportions of the Intervalls▪ into Practick notes upon their own constant lines & spaces.
And here I intend to give an ac∣count of this Whirlegig, because I think it does something turn and hindg Speculative and Practical Knowledg together: so that we will a little look into the grounds of Musick, and steer our course accordingly. Mr. Morley (otherwise than the Ancients did) in his Introduction, p 3. instructs his Scholar Philomathes, That there were in Musick but six Notes, which are called by those several names, Ut. Re, Mi, Fa, Sol La, (And why but Six, I leave the Observer to vindicate.) Now He, and their Nomenclator Guido, being both in a mistake for that, have (as some think) caused a great deal of confusion, by directing men to follow that in practise, which stands upon a false foundation, even against the very nature of the thing. Thus they begin at every Tetra∣chord, and so march up to the Hexa∣chord, and then down to the Tetra∣chord again; whereas the business is not done by Fourths and Sixths, but by a circulating Octave. Which they were something sensible of; and therefore, after the two first Tetrachords, began Ut again at the
next Note; that every Octave. Note might have the same denomination as well by its Syllable, as its Capital Letter. And this the Observer is so exceed∣ingly angry at (because I take some advantage thereby to plead for my Octaves; and therefore seem to have some reason, why men should involve themselves in my perplexities, as he says p 27) that he thinks it rational, for the future, to take the Alphabet end∣wise, even to W, X Y, Z; though he add four more Notes to the Scale above Ela. But 'tis well for me, All men are not so spiteful: Forreigners, who retain Ut and Re, have generally added the seventh Monosyllable Bi; and there∣fore I doubt are something guilty of circulation, which is thereby brought to pass at every Octave. But our own Countrey-men have much out-done all the Musicians in the world not only by pursuing the same circulation, but in so ordering the Mo∣nosyllables, that the same should always signifie an interval of the same pro∣portion. Which, Sir, was first taken notice of
by your self, in your most ingenious Letter of March 20 1664/5, to the R. Society, representing Musical Harmony to the eye, in one of Mr Henry Laws his airs, rendred in Parallelograms. If you please to review my Whirle∣gig, you will find in what order those Monosyllables circulate, and how each of them is assigned to its own propor∣tion: thus to bid one sing from the precedent Note to Sol, is as much as to say, Sing an interval, whose two terms are in the proportion 9/8, and after the same manner to La 10/9 to Fa 16/15, which being repeated, the odd Note Mi 9/8 comes and compleats the Octave; and this was the Note (though in another name) which our good friend Mr. Guido, after he had added together a couple of Tetrachords, wanted to com∣pleat his Octave. Now the Rations of any of those numbers being continued, return the proportion of the Consonant required to be constituted by them: Thus 9/8 × 10/9 the sum 90/72—5/4 which is a Practi∣cal Third major; three Notes inclu∣ding the two intervals, Sol, La; and if all seven were continued, the ag∣gregate
would be 18662400/9331200—2/1 a du∣ple proportion. This Account will be exact for any intermediate Concord; but that 10/9 × 16/15 will not constitute a true Hemi∣ditonus, as is demonstrated by R Des Cartes in his Musical Compendium, p. 32. where he gives an account of that  which will accordingly happen, and is most clearly explain'd by that truly Noble Person of Honour in his Animadversions upon him, p. 76. From whence it comes to pass, as also from the difference of the major and minor Tones▪ that Practical Musicians tune some Notes bearing, that there may be a common respect and intercourse from any one term of the Musick, to ano∣ther. So that we have in that compleat Cycle of an Octave, the Mathematical proportions united to the Practical Notes▪ always signifying Sol La Mi Fa Sol La Fa, &c. /8 10/9 9/8 1/15 9/8 10/9 16/15 o: ma: To: mi: Ton: ma: Hemito: To▪ ma: To: mi: Hemitonium Which do run round, and will run
round (in spite of any man's teeth) according to the foresaid detestable circulation; and this we may call na∣ming the Notes according to their pro∣portions But the Notes are also allotted to so many Letters of the Alphabet, to shew the order of their procession in the Septenary, and the distance of one Note from another, that is more than a single Interval; for from Sol to Sol, may be either a fourth or a fifth wher∣fore the Alphabetical Letters make the distinction from Sol in G, to Sol in D, a fifth; from Sol in D▪ to Sol in G, a fourth. And for this purpose the Letters in the Circle are assigned to the Monosyl∣lables of proportion; which we have in the Diagram conveyed to the Lines and Spaces▪ and rendred in practical Notes, in their most natural posture; the half-Notes being possessed of those Letters, which may properly be called their own homes. Thus they are all possessed of their own lines and spaces; and, if we can but withstand the furious Invasions of our Adversary, shall never change their habitations.
And now, Sir, I can't tell what to think is become of my Observer all this while; either he is fallen asleep by reason of these drowsie Mathematicks, or else he is stamping and staring that ever such things as these should be com∣mitted in the face of the Sun it self; and inded I should hardly have ven∣tur'd it, had it not been lately report∣ed, That the Sun appear'd with a Cir∣cle about it, perhaps in our defence a∣gainst this Apollo, its new Corrival. From whence I take courage to say, That this Circle doth best demonstrate the nature of the Diatonick▪ Scale, ex∣hibits to the eye its half Notes, and shews that two whole ones stand be∣twixt them on one side, and three on the other, which is a Tritonus; and the former Semicircle (which consisted of two whole, and two half-Notes) a Se∣midiapente. These being added toge∣ther, constitute an Octave, as their Ra∣tions also do: 810/576 × 23040/16200 the sum 18662400/9331200—2/1 And were it not, Sir, for making my Opposer stark mad with this canting-Philosophy, I would separate the Mar∣gin
of the Circle from its Radii▪ and by the circular motion thereof demon∣strate, 1. Which are the proper assign∣ments of all regular Flats and Sharps in any position of Mi? 2. Why Mi keeps that order, to be first in B, next in E, A, D &c. And why if there be but one regular sharp, Mi is there situated, and in what order all the rest? 3. To transpose a Lesson from any Key given, to any Key required; and shew which must be the Sharps and Flats in that Key? 4. For accommodation, to bring any Key filled with what regular Sharps and Flats soever, into some Key where all the Notes are natural. Which thing, though long custom, and a laborious computation, have made some men perfect in; yet even to several expert Masters it has been a very pleasant speculation to behold those numerous Rules which a deep experience had wrought into their judgments, now (by one turn of the Circle) clearly represented to their eye, with all the Reasons and Order of the Diatonick Scale.
But these Phaenomena requiring a movable Instrument more than a Dia∣gram, I cannot here any further prose∣cute them; only assuring the Reader, That I am very ready to communi∣cate this or any other small knowledg I have pick'd up, to any ingenious per∣son. I shall only add this one Corollary; That since in natural Keys we may have all the variety of Thirds, and Sixths, and Sevenths, or what ever else a Com∣poser can either desire or invent with all his regular Flats and Sharps; how happy would it be for the ease of Musick, and the exactness of Tuning, if the same proportions were ever fixed to the same places of the Sep∣tenary, i. e. Mi always in B. I know the present Make and Com∣pass of Instruments▪ won't kindly com∣ply with this Proposal; but surely,  were well worth the while for In∣struments to be contriv'd accordingly, both for the excellency of Musick, and advantage of its attainment. For whereas the Keys of an Harpsi∣chord are now tuned in a common dilu∣red proportion, they may hereby be made capable of the most accurate ex∣actness;
and though a vulgar ear may not be able to judg the difference be∣tween a Greater or Lesser Tone; a true lesser Third consisting of 9/8 × 16/15 or a false one of 10/9 × 16/15 yet there will be a dissatisfaction, though it be not evident in what particular to com∣plain, as Practical Musicians have ex∣perience when they play a Lesson in a forc'd unnatural Key; which is the same thing as if the Instrument were out of tune. The eye is pleased with a concur∣rence of proportions, the natural cast∣ing of a shade, and the exactness of some Oriental Colours, whose just li∣mits it can neither distinguish nor de∣termine, but only satisfie it self in that whole accurate heap of enjoyment. It may not be able to descry every dis∣ordered Atome, or give an account of each little unpleasing spot; yet will it have an aversion for that soil'd impu∣rity which is thereby caused. Thus those little inharmonical re∣lations only in general offend the ear, and make a kind of unaccountable resentment; but if remedied by an accurate tuning, which the stability of
proportions would produce, we might justly expect more powerful charms from the more exact harmony. Since therefore Musick consists in Proporti∣ons, and 'tis by them alone that it has an influence upon the soul; I reckon it a most sure consequence, That by how much the more accurate those Pro∣portions are, the stronger must their influence be. But this is only to join Madness to Phrensie: What, add Whimsey to Whirlegig! I am guilty; and if the Observer will but forgive me this one digression, I will pardon him every thing that ever he did in his life, or ever shall do, or any of his posterity, an hundred years after his death. Nay further, I will give him leave at present to ease his stomach with one Objection. Obj. To what purpose are all these Mathematical Contrivances? Will they teach a man to make Air, or maintain the point of a Canon? Ans. We are not now discoursing the power of Phansie, or how far it is capable of direction; which with∣out
doubt ought to be very much left at liberty to the excellent Masters of it: but here we consider the true rea∣son and scientifical foundation accor∣ding to which we ought to proceed. And truly this is the very Objecti∣on I always expected; for our Obser∣ver neither understands nor loves these things, any more than a Horse does Nutmegs (You see, Sir, how he has infected me with an ugly Proverb) But though this be his humour, yet there are a great many inquisitive and (as some say) ingenious people, who desire to know the nature and reason of Musick; the Proportions wherein it consists, and the Arithmetical Laws which it observes. These admire the glorious order of its composure, and the infinite wisdom of him that created it in so great Pro∣portion: To what other purpose does the Astronomer consider the Heavenly Revolutions, and the exact courses of those bright Luminaries? After all his study, he cannot stop the course of the Sun, or add one short day to his fleet∣ing years; yet he looks not upon his time as unprofitably spent, though he only contemplates, and never puts
forwards so far as the compiling of an Almanack. And I know several learned men who value such a Speculative person far beyond a Practical Colctor of Months and Eclipses, &c. who writes himself , or a well willer to the Mathematicks; when perhaps he has scarce positive knowledg enough to determine, whether we have always the same Moon, or every Month a new one. I need not from hence urge, how truly noble it would be for a Practi∣cal Musician, to build upon such a Scientifical and steady foundation: nay farther, there is good reason to think, that it will afterwards be of as great advantage, as it is of accom∣plishment to him. For the promoting of which pur∣pose, I should have begun at the very division of an Octave and have given the Proportions of lesser Concords; have shewn how we came by those as∣signed intervals of Notes and half Notes; but that our Observer is so ex∣ceedingly impatient when he is thus tortur'd with Numbers, that he will not let me tarry so long.
I will therefore take for granted, that 9/8 is the Proportion of a Major Tone; because if you divide a string into nine equal parts, and stop one of them; the other eight to the string open, will (to any Musicians ear) give that sound which is called a whole Note. Which is true of all the other In∣tervals and Concords, thus: If you divide a string into three equal parts; stop one, and the other two, to the string open, will be a practical Fifth; as is more at large exactly described by the acurate Mersennus, from the use of an Instrument called the Har∣monical Canon: Libro primo de Instru∣mentis Har. Propos. 4. as also by Guido himself. This is evident both to the Ear and Eye; but then adding all the Intervals of the Circle together, they composing an aggregate of a duple proportion (as hath been said) no less demon∣strate the just assignment of each of their proportions, according to Ma∣thematical consideration. The proportions of which Notes and half-Notes being most incompaa∣bly by English Musicians distinguished
by particular Names, as Sol always a Major Tone, Fa an Hemitone, &c. (as they are placed in the Cycle of an Octave) and these naturally circula∣ting in a certain order, according as they are assigned to the first seven Letters of the Alphabet; we may by the help of those pointed Segments in the Diagram, unite this Speculative to our Practical knowledg. There I find the Sol, La, &c. the Names of the circulating Proportions in their Alphabetical order landed upon Lines and Spaces; Though ori∣ginally Notes were only planted upon the Lines, (as now the Letters of Ta∣bleture are) but then the number of them did so distract the Eye, that it was thought convenient every space should also signifie the distance of a Note from the Line either above or under it. An account of which we have from the most excellent Gassen∣dus in his Introduction to the Theory of Musick, Tom. 5. where he tells us, that Kircher had found at Messane a Song described upon eight Lines (it seems they had some affection to an Octave) which were begun with the first Letters of the Grecian Alphabet.
But then Guido composing the Scale, did upon the sorementioned reason set the Notes in space also, though even then the time was writ separately over the head of the Notes, as is now in Tableture; and they used the Alpha∣betical Letters, which were significa∣tive of the Notes, instead of them, (as I have in my Essay to the Base of the Lute, for the help of young begin∣ners) till about Three hundred years ago Jean des Murs of Paris found out those Characters which we now use to express Time and Tune together. You may then please to look back upon the foregoing Diagram, and you will find the first Note in the lowest of the four Lines; track him to G, which is our terminus à quo, from whence to the next Note in space, (which is united to A) is the Inter∣val La▪ or 10/9; from which to the Note B transfix'd by the second Line, is the odd Interval Mi, or 9/8; and these two Intervals of the three including-Notes GAB, added together, constitute in their least terms 5/4, the proportion of a Greater Practical Third, as your ear may experiment if you divide the string into five equal parts; stop one,
and the other four, to the string open, will give the sound required. After which manner you may pro∣ceed, till you have compleated an Octave; and then the very reason and nature of the thing will force you to circulate, as my abusive, impertinent, contradictory, impossible Hypothesis doth require; which my Observer doth ra∣ther scold at, than either understand or confute. As these things are true in Specula∣tion, so will every Practical Musician bear witness to them, That the same order of distances comes about agen at every eight Notes, as in a suit of Les∣sons the regular Flats and Sharps are always the same in every Octave. By which discourse I have not only endeavoured to clear my Hypothesis, to vindicate my Reputation for circu∣lating in an impertinent Octave (which, let the Observer say what he will, is the very nature of Musick, both to its di∣vision, and the return of the Similar Notes into the same places) but also attempted to unite the Theory and Practise. From whence those honourable Servants of His Majesty would be
esteemed as truly learned, as they are indeed ingenious, in this Science; when their Judgments are as richly laden with the nature and reasons thereof, as their Phancies and Inventions are, with the ravishing pleasures of its per∣formance. 'Tis impossible to conceive how much so happy an union would con∣duce both to the glory and advance∣ment of Musick, its bonds and fetters would be taken off, when the serious Mathematician could be able to re∣duce his Speculations to practise; and agen the aery composer could render an account of his charms, in a Mathe∣matick Theory. And now Sir, I find my self sunk into the tedious stile of my Essay. But that I may a little recover my self, and consider the sentiments of my Ob∣server: If you please to review the North-corner of Magdalen-Colledg-Quadrangle, there he sets hugging himself and grinning; I thought (says he) how our young man would undo himself by doting upon his Philosophy, and tyring his Readers with a heavy story of Proportions; these are the sad effects of Superparticular and Super∣partient.
Whereas, if he had been at all acquainted with the winning complai∣sance of the Town, he would have en∣tertain'd them with Burlesque and In∣terludes; some tickling raillery inter∣mixt with a sly hint, and a long dash.— This Sir, I must confess my self un∣able to do; and therefore I most ear∣nestly entreat you, as you have any kindness for me, or desire of your own refreshment to read over that awaken∣ing peal, that Poetical alarm, to Ralpho▪ P. 4. Ingenious Ralpho!— And then the Observer's own answer to the same. P. 5. Thou self-denying Ordinancer, Why— And I am the more earnest to obtain this request, hoping hereby absolutely to allay the anger and vengeance wherewith he is inflamed. For truly, Sir, if you will believe me (or any friend please to ask the Observer himself, he will find) I never in my life the least disobliged my in∣cens'd Antagonist; but by this one thing▪ of not suffering those Verses to be printed before my Essay. Of which unkindness I am now so
sensible, that I am endeavouring all the satisfaction I can invent; to which purpose I would feign perswade the Stationers, to print them before all the Books that come out next Term: but they grumble at taking up so much paper. Though I am not out of all hopes to have them set at the begin∣ning of the Catalogue of Books, because they will indifferently serve for all sorts of Books in all Arts and Sciences. And if this won't satisfie him, I be∣lieve there are few people but will think him very unreasonable: but though this may allay him for the fu∣ture; yet we are still engaged in the past attacks of his fury; especially, P. 6. Where he would feign per∣swade you to believe, the encouragement and reception my Essay hath obtain'd, proceeded from my diligence to pro∣mote it; and this, Sir, I must not dis∣pute, because I have promised to sub∣mit to whatsoever he affirms. Yet it does so vex his Spleen, that he cannot but immediately vent him∣self by drolling upon those places of his profess'd Obligations; which, Sir, you are well acquainted with, and know them to be of such vertue and
modesty, that a person of his behavi∣our must needs quit them, as he hath lately done. And this, Sir, I would by no means have written, but to shew you, that the most malicious Page in his Book may justly fly in his own face. However I must always admire his most noble skill in composition, which almost all people have a just value and esteem of; but that he must thence become so tyrannical, as to think all the Musick of the Kingdom depends upon his pleasure, and no man may pre∣tend to be able to write a lesson, other∣wise than he will permit him, is some∣thing more than comes to his share; especially since there are so many in∣genious Gentlemen of this Profession, that never any Prince in the world was served with more than his present Majesty. P. 7. It deserves a smile to see how arrogantly he assaults my Publisher (a person who for his knowledg and in∣dustry in Musick deserved rather his encouragement than envy) for com∣plaining that the ancient and modern Authors were obscure in their Musical writings; so that we ought to believe
they were very easie and plain when our Observer read them; and we may safely believe they were: for there is a cross thing, the restraint of Langua∣ges, that makes  believe they may have layn abed and slept all their days, for any thing the Observer knows; who is capable of reading few more than Mr. Morley, Mr. Simpson, Mr. Gree∣ting's instructions for the Flageolet; and above all, his good friend and hirer, Mr. John Playford (who so learnedly stiles himself) Philo-music. P. 8. Now, Sir, I must acquaint you that our Observer hath two excellent Eyes: one to see things with, that no body else can see; and one, not to see those things which every body else can see. With this later he can look upon a printed page, like a piece of clean white paper; or else the letters will appear so double that he can't read one word. And with this negative eye he read the four first pages of my Essay, where I so largely treated of the divine insti∣tution of Musick: Which (I said) nee∣ded nothing else, nor could have any thing greater to command acceptance, than a challenge of its Institution from
divine Providence it self, who had pro∣vided a peculiar faculty for its reception. (Which I since find the eminent Dr. Willis place in some peculiar Schema∣tismi of the Cerebellum, Anat. Cer. Cap. 17.) the early use of it in holy Writ by Jubal, and that it was a sacred means to allay Saule evil spirit. After all this the Observer comes blinking with his foresaid eye, and admires that, amongst the many advan∣tages of Musick, I should not so much as take notice of its divine Use, notwith∣standing the many commands and ex∣amples recounted in holy Writ to that purpose. Now, Sir, though he admired at me, yet I must entreat you not to admire at him; for there is a private reason (which I omit) why the Observer did not know God, Jubal, and Saul to be Scripture names: And the same reason must deserve your Charity, when he attempts a profane jest in Scripture∣phrase; because you must suppose he did not know it to be holy Writ. But this not-seeing Eye being closed, he opens his other, which is his left eye and that looks something a squint; With this he sees such revelations and
visions as never appear'd. This was but one glance, and then he shuts it; but pri∣vately unites them both into one, which, like Polyphemus's, is placed at the very top of his fore-head. By the advantage whereof, P. 9. He looks beyond Sea, where Musitians have much respect, large re∣wards, (as no body that I know of ever contradicted) and many advan∣tages to enrich themselves (if they please). And at home too &c. I must confess, Sir, within the narrow circuit of my progress (as he says) I was scarce so much acquainted with any, as the Observer himself; and, I know not what was the matter, it never yet pleased him to purchase an Estate Though I have since been acquain∣ted with several that live very nobly and gentilely upon this Profession; as they may well do since his present Majesty hath augmented the revenue to the Gentlemen of his Chappel al∣most double: Yet this being procur'd by one whom our Observer envies, and hath rail'd at in print; 'twas a thing that could not possibly be seen with either of his eyes, though it was the just acknowledgment of his Prince's
most gracious munisicence▪ I must here, Sir, most humbly en∣treat your pardon for troubling you with these late Pages, which are im∣pertinent to my design; and I would not have inserted them, but that I was unwilling to leave any one side unan∣swered; as also to satisfie the Reader, that what I omit of such stuff for the future, may as well proceed from his ungrounded envy and malice, as what I have at present examined. And now after so long an entertain∣ment of his Wit and Drollery, his Bur∣lesque and Battery; The Observer comes to his business and presents you P. 10. With the Old Gamut, Sanca Panca's Pudding (as he likens it): and truly, Sir, I am so much a Scholar as to think it sitter to be eaten than learn'd without Book. Which, if you please to review ac∣cording to the Observer's own deline∣ation, more plainly discovers in every Column that old mistake of making six notes to be the compass of Musick; as also the beginning every sett of Sylla∣ble▪ (when my abusive Octave did not oil their sport) at a Fourth, which s Crs at the end of his 6. Chap.
Mus. comp. unkindly calls, a certain monster, or deficient, imperfect product of an Eight. Neither is there any thing in those names to express the true nature of Musick, but the circulation of the Ca∣pital Letters, which is the only thing the Observer thinks fit to be altered, to escape all suspition of my perplexities. I am sure it is false in our present practice to subscribe (as he there does at the botom of the Scale) B naturalis, when Mi stands in E la mi, which proceeds from that unnatural deducti∣on of Six Notes. And that this is an old obsolete mi∣stake, we have the honoured Mr. Simp∣son of our opinion, Comp. p. 113. For that B naturalis, whose Ut stood in C, being distinguished from B duralis, whose Ut stood in G, (which is an ex∣cellent piece of unuseful knowledg, that I believe few men now trouble themselves with) was called Proper∣chant; so that the six Notes did not reach so high, as to touch B either flat or sharp; but in our modern Musick we acknowledg no such thing as Properchant, every Song being of its own nature either flat or sharp. So he.
Which shews, if the Observer had but any kind compliance with the judgment of him whom he pretends to esteem, that he need not think there is so great vertue in those admirable charming words of the Gamut, which I suppose produce their effects by being seal'd up, and carried in the pocket; though I would entreat him in his next to open them, and shew their operati∣ons; for without doubt, Sir, he intends to do something▪ having resolved in his Conclusion, pag. 39. that he will vindicate this old Scale, except he meet with a better; (which I am sure, Sir, you know to be impossible) so long as there is any Paper or Ink in the world; nay so long as he is able write his own Name. A Champion so faithful, so trusty to his cause, that I believe all Europe is not able to match either his constancy or valour; a subscription, Sir, worthy to be registred in the Chronicles of the most bloody Warriers to subscribe ones self so long as one is able to subscribe ones self, Sir, your Servant is vastly more couragious than barely to subscribe ones self, Sir, yours till Death.
Having duly admired the Observer's so brave resolutions; we next consider the Cliffs, and the Lines upon which those powerful words are placed; concerning which I will give you the best account I can find. That because it would be too di∣stracting to the eye, to have always before it ten or more Lines and spaces, which the whole Scale did require; Musicians did by assigning a certain Note (which they call'd the Cliff-note) to one Line in a Staff, shew by conse∣quence which five or six Lines they had taken out of the Scale for the use of that part, wherein they were con∣cern'd; which caused all those vari∣ations and difficulties I have complain∣ed of, and must still have been endu∣red, had there been no remedy found. But since 'tis the nature of Musick to have a circular as well as progres∣sive motion, which former doth so in∣fluence all composition, that 'tis im∣possible to pass seven Notes without considering the next seven to lie in the same posture; I thought it would be worth my while (that I might save so vast a trouble) to fix them, according
to their own circular nature, always in the same lines and spaces, as you may see in the preceding Diagram, where C returns naturally into the lower line, and the half notes (though you do suppose regular flats and sharps) stand in the same place in all Octaves. And I can at any time take what Notes soever are useful to any part, by those two only Postulata, which you may see are agreeable to the na∣ture of the thing; and in answer to the Objections, will be further evi∣dent. The Objections Answered. Pag. 11. Thus having vindicated my new Scale for confusedly dividing it self at every Octave; I proceed to the Observer's grand Objection. Of making the same note or tone to be in several places at the same time; and this is at∣tended with so great a retinue of Ob∣servations, that the Reader may easily perceive, here lies the stress of the controversie, and that too in the Ob∣server's
own opinion: immediately adding, and from this I make my ex∣ceptions against his whole Book. Now, Sir, do I entirely love the Observer, for pointing out this nick∣ing evidence upon which all our busi∣ness depends: In some loose Writers we might have gone hunting and hawking, and only found some scat∣tering Objections; but here my most kind Antagonist hath brought it to an head. Wherefore stand fast Eassayer! me∣thinks I feel thy pillars tremble, and the whole fabrick of thy Hypothesis shake; But I'le pull down the Observer in my ruin, and crush him with five times the weight of his own Obje∣ction. That way which requires an absur∣dity five times over▪ is much more to be exploded, than that which re∣quires it but once. But the Observer's old way does re∣quire the same (condemning) ab∣surdity, five times, which the Essayer's new one requires but on▪ Therefore the Observ old way  much mo to  the Essayer's new one.
The second Proposition needs only to be proved, which is done in this following Scheam.
A Scheme To demonstrate, that by the movement of the old Cliffs, G sol re ut, Ala mi re, B▪ fa b mi, C sol fa ut; are in five Different Places at the same time The Essay allows them but once Different when thay stand irregularly upon their leiger lines out of their own Octaves as the Observer Sherveth in this following Scheme
Now with all my power I have en∣deavoured rightly to understand the Observer's chief Objection, laid it down in his own words; and if he gets any thing by it, let him save his Lapis ca∣laminaris, and put it in his eye. Here I expected he should have quarrel'd me, for placing G sol re ut, in the line, which he does in space: but that appears so natural in the Diagram, and I had so pleaded the justice of it, Essay p. 45. that he takes not the least notice of it. If he was angry for setting the same G sol re ut, in the Leiger space, which would naturally fall in the line; he must be extraordinarily commended for his kindness, who out of meer love and tenderness would not mention one tittle of that chief dislike. But those Notes upon the Leiger lines being exoticks taken in only stran∣gerwise for their trade, and commerce, (as I answer'd to this almost same Ob∣jection, Essay p. 73.) I suppose he was satisfied 'twas not considerable. And it seems more compliant with the nature of the thing: for a stranger to wear an unusual Garb in a Foreign Country, does not make him less
known but more exposes him to ob∣servation. That we may take things in a little more dependant order than he has laid them down, I must consider his excellent contrivance of a double relish, as having some affinity to the grand objection; but here our Obser∣ver is become inventer, that if he cannot find things ridiculous he may make some. P. 15. Which, whosoever reviews will without doubt think the Observer and all the things in the house stood upon their heads, when he found it out, but the best jest is, it positively contradicts, what he said before, so necessary is it for every man that observes truth, to be ever mindful of what he hath once said; as the learned Lilly of old advised. For if I do allow G sol re ut to stand in two places, why doth he not write the double relish, as 'tis in the Diagram? If I do not, then what becomes of his grand Objecti∣on which supposes it. P. 12, 13, 14, 16. All that remains is but a small Pickaroon with two Guns, which are so far from doing any exe∣cution,
that they do but more clearly discover my method to the Readers apprehensions. These I have described as the two only requisites of my Hypo∣thesis, in the second figure of the Diagram; and are so far from being Objections as that they appear most natural Conveniencies. The first, which he mentions, (p 12. and 13.), you will find to be according to the very nature of Musick; which having concluded one Octave, begins the next, and continues it in the same posture, it did the first. Though there is so great assistance given by the Leiger lines; that as occasion is given but very seldom thus to alter the Octave in Vocal Musick so in in∣strumental, the Octaves (especially upon the Harpsechord) lie so uniform, that 'tis done without any trouble. And as it would be easie to instruct a Scholar, that after he has proceeded to F in the fourth, by the notice of a new Octave letter, he is to go for∣wards with the first line agen, and the notes in their same former distances; so this method would be indeed scien∣tifical, and would make him not only practise according to the right rules,
but also give him to understand the true nature of Musick, which the old Scale of Gam-ut did in no wise sig∣nifie. The Observer hath been pleas'd, in this twelfth page, to write his Notes with two ascititious lines underneath; and he might, if he pleas'd, write them with six: but I never take any more liberty to maintain my Notes in their constant places, than he requires to his alterations, i. e. one line over or under the five, when occasion is. If it be requisite to proceed very far into another Octave, we change the tter, and write (that which he calls) the new-found reformed way, but, according to the Diagram, appears to be the most easie and na∣tural method of Musick. P. 14, 16. The other reputed dif∣ficulty, he hath contriv'd a Canon on purpose to demonstrate (which is no more than I had a particular Cut for to explain Ess. p. 39.); and 'tis this, which you may see in the second figure of the Diagram, that, if I rise or fall eight Notes, I continue the second Note in the same place the first stood, only with a different Octave letter.
And what more natural? than for two Octave notes; which are so much the same, and have the same equivalent respect to all other Notes, should stand in the same place? And what more easie for the Practicioner's eye to ap∣prehend? Certainly 'tis far more easie to be known, when the Octave-Note stands in the same place with the let∣ter prefixt, than when he must count three lines, and three spaces from the first note, where (according to the Observer's way) its-Octave must have been placed. And if he contrive a thousand Ca∣nons, he can bring me to no other ab∣surdity than these two natural requi∣sites, the conveniency whereof I think more self-evident than any thing in the Guidonian Scale. P. 27. For the ten last pages which contained only a Canon to shew the ne∣cessity of that, which might better be done otherwise. The Observer may now be pleased once more to observe, that, As by the Postulata in the Diagram, we comprehend any part of Musick which can be assigned; so by the assistance which the Leiger-lines afford us, it may done without any
great incoustancy to the letters of our beloved Octaves. For, we may ascend six Notes above our Octave, viz. from F fa ut, to D la sol re, and descend four from Gam ut to double D sol re, without altering the letter; as you may see in the third figure of the Diagram, where every five lines are made ca∣pable of two entire Octaves. That any man may satisfie himself (however our Observer would gull his implicite Readers) our Method is, not only most facile, but also agreeable to Musick of the greatest compass; for in the Lute and Organ which require two systemes of lines, we have before us as many lines and spaces as will con∣tain four entire Diapasons, more notes than are in the whole Scale of Gam∣ut. If he still grumbles that Scholars can't tell which is a Contratenor, or Lower mean, or the like; for them that can't understand the nature of the thing, let there be writ over them, This is a Cock, and that is a Bull; which I take to be an easier remedy than to learn all the variety of old Cliffs. And about the consinement of Mi, with
the avoiding regular flats and sharps, I have already delivered my judgment in the description of my whirlegig, which I shall not now repeat. P. 8. The next thing which he confutes, is my argument, for proving the hard names of the Gam ut useless, viz. that they cannot declare any note to be in a different Octave, because those names are not different in every Octave. This is false (saith the Obser∣ver) for the Cliffs and Scale distinguish them, by Capital, Single, and Double Italick Letters. Very good! The Cliffs distinguish them, and therefore we must learn without Book, those names which do not distinguish them. Sir, 'tis as excellently argued as if the Observer should prove that all men must wear different shoos, because they are di∣stinguished by their faces. Now to allay my hopes of the least success, he here insinuates a Question, so very profound and unaccountable, That there be many hungry Gapers, who remain seekers, and I (saith he) with them. The thing is this, that by be∣ginning my Octave with G, I contra∣dict that Classical Horn-book he learn'd, which began (when he was a School∣boy
with great A. Now Sir, though this was haled in, only for an oppor∣tunity to shew his education; yet rather than my worthy neighbour shall suffer for his suggestion of the Domi∣nical Letter, I will insert as much as I know of the matter. The reason why I began my Octave with G, was, because the general pra∣ctice of Musicians is so to do: which I profess'd never to contradict, but when there were very good advantages to be gained thereby. (Ess p 41.) espe∣cially mine being a circular way, it was no matter where I began, so long as the letters went round in their own order. But the Original I suppose was this, that Guido in the year 1024. reco∣vering Musick out of its dark ruins, (which those unhappy times had caus'd) compil'd that Scale which we are now discoursing about: So that the assignment of the Alphabetical letters being altogether in his power, he began the Tamut with the first great letter of his own name, that he might perpetuate his memory to posterity. Which (if we considet the nature of the thing) will appear very reasonable;
for though G have the first sound as∣signed to it, yet A is the first Musical interval; there being nothing of Mu∣sick, without comparing two sounds together; that G is in truth only the term from which the sound A arises, as F to G, &c. which may be easily per∣ceived, by the circle in the Diagram. I was once tempted to think, that G had been imposed by the Greeks them∣selves, because of its sound and figure in which 'tis written; that they having assign'd the Letters to the Notes; as,  to the  to the , which was a long-time their lowest note; did, when they added the , impose  to that, because they would not alter their former assignation. But then Γ being the third letter of their Alphabet, and not the seventh as in ours, could no way suit the Nature and Designes of their Musick. P. 29, 30. The next business is to shew that other design of the Γ am ut words (for he will not now assert them to demonstrate the place of Mi, to which purpose I had prov'd them insufficient), They consist of Syllables purposely chosen as most proper for open∣ing
the mouth, and putting foth the voice, &c. Though there is nothing more known, than that Guido took them accidentally out of the hymn for the service of St. John Baptist: And if Dum queant laxis had begun that Hymn, then the very Dum would have been that widening Syllable to have open'd the mouth for the first grave tone. But to consider them; first of all comes the incomparable Ut; which if I try, abruptly forces my tongue against the roof of my mouth, (as he describes an inconvenient Syllable) but I don't know how 'tis with the Observer; per∣haps his tongue is hung with the wrong side upward. These (Ut and Re) though some have laid them aside, yet some (says he) have not. But I must confess, I hardly know them used by any, but the North-Coun∣try Wagoners, neither do they use them as good to put forth their voice, but to stop their Horses. Foreigners do indeed still use some fictitious words composed of them, but they are so sensible, how unfit ours are for to express the nature of Musick, that they have alter'd the composure,
and writ F ut fa, G re sol ut, A mi Lare, &c. according to Gassendus. Mer∣sennus, and others. But he says, It is not the Name, but the Thing he contends for; and therefore I would have these insignificant hard names laid aside, that we might the sooner come to the en∣joyment of the thing it self. P 31 Some unknown misfortune having spoiled our Observer's eyes; He is now resolved for the future to be guided by his seeing▪ feeling, hearing, and understanding Nostrils, which is a most excellent expression to discover a further advancement of his Learn∣ing: for had he not been promoted from the foresaid Hornbook to his Ac∣cidence, he could never have known those enlightning Epithets of a Noun Substantive. And the first thing his united Senses and Understanding discover, is▪ That I begin to learn the Monosyllables from an Hemitone: Strange! Composition be∣gin or end with half a Base! Something must be said, though I have often told him, That those Syllables are not learn'd for any ary pleasantness in themselves, but as Rudiments, where∣by we may distinguish Notes and half
Notes, both single and united, in grea∣ter Intervals. For which purpose, there is good reason to think they would be the more serviceable by how much they had the less of▪ airiness in them; they would thereby less affect the Fancy, but make a much deeper impression upon the Judgment, when those Notes must be pick'd out of the Book by the Un∣derstanding; which if they were pla∣ced according to his compos'd order, would flow forth like some common Tune from an aery apprehension. Wherefore it seems rational, not only to begin at Mi or Fa, but at any radius of the Circle, that the voice may set loose, and sing an half Note when it pleases, with a flat third, or sharp seventh, or whatsoever comes to pass in the Diatonick Scale: and this will easily be done, if we begin at each Note, and sing the Cycle of an Octave. In doing of which, it would be very advantagious to sing Fa more broad (like the Germans) that it may natural∣ly form the mouth to a flatter sound than La, which is composed of the same Vowel, but is pronounced a whole Note.
But all of a sudden, our Observer is grown so exceeding jovial and merry, one would wonder what happy occur∣rence had so revived the Cockles of his heart; nay, and lest the extasie should overcome his belief, he says, he is as sure on't as two Two-pences make a Groat. Well, the joy is this! Madam Mi is gone a rambling out of her Apartment, and turn'd Quean. And as sure as four Two-pences make two-Groats, let her ram∣ble into all the Apartments about Town▪ she shall never want a Gentle∣man-Usher so long as the Observer continues able to man her. But hear, O ye Pupils! I have re∣ported, you are obliged to learn the distances backwards and forwards. In this (the Observer says) I am so horribly out, that 'tis impossible for any flesh to sing, play, or compose without it. This I said, and this the Observer says with an impossibility it should be o∣therwise: so that there is no difference betwixt us, but only he is resolved that I shall be horribly out, though I say the same thing he does. For with∣out doubt a man must be able to count his distances: but the question here is, Which is the most difficult or easie way,
and which of these two ways is to be chosen and used. P. 32. The Observer can no longer conceal his resentments against any propagating the knowledg of Musick; and because I have but transcribed the 75 page of Mr. Simpson's Compendium (where he carefully assists the Inven∣tion, and provides against the Lapses of young beginners), the Observer says, I abuse that person whose memory is precious among good and knowing men. Whom indeed I greatly honour, for that double accomplishment of his exemplary life, as well as excellent skill; and know nothing more necessary, than to commend the former to my Observer's imitation; who would not have had him stained his credit by in∣structing Novices; which was his crime to do, and my abuse to take notice of. However, I shall still dare to assert, That because the Chords in different Cliffs were intricate to discern, there∣fore he interposed the Figures; which are needless, according to my contri∣vance of Octaves, where all Notes are situated, in all parts, the same. And though some men may, by long
custom and experience, be excused from that trouble; yet even their ap∣prehension would be much more quick and clear, if they always proceeded in the same united method. But should it not, I have as much as I intended, in the place he cites, viz. That it would be very advantagious for young Composers; which is evident, if it may but be granted, That what remains al∣ways the same, is much easier to be known, than what appears in many different positions; as the Notes do according to him, where in every part they are different, and have a differ∣ent Cliff to distinguish them And this is as much to the purpose to per∣swade a beginner to learn my way, as (to use his own comparison) if a Mo∣ther should teach her Child, that a great black B stands for Block-head. And so I leave him and his little four∣legg'd School-fellow together at their Books, one a thumbing, and the other a gnawing them. P. 33. At length he comes to consi∣der the applying my Essay to Instru∣mental-Musick. And here 'tis worth the while to read over the Paragraph, that you may see how he holds his
foot in his hand, without being able to determine which way he should take. Wherefore he once resolves, That I do not understand the French Musick; that I mistake their placing G in the lower line, which is only for dancing. And indeed, if this was not a mistake enough to make me ridiculous to the whole world, the Observer writ his Book to little purpose. O hold my sides! That ever fellow should write an Essay, and mistake Toes for Fingers! Think that intended for the hand, which was only contriv'd for the Po∣licy and Government of the foot! Certainly never any man, but he whose brains were sunk into his heels, would ever like this mad dancing method. And let this be resolv'd upon as the Answer for the Violin, though he thinks it fit to strengthen it with one period more; That though the French Musicians have thus debauch'd their treble-Musick to dancing (as I think our Observer hath done much worse to Ribaldry); yet all other parts they write as we, and the rest of the Musical world. And 'twas well for me this drop'd from him, or else he had prov'd my whole Invention to have been an hundred years old.
Now, Sir, let us caress the loving kindness of our Observer, who be∣thinking the storms and hazards of the Sea, will out of his meer goodness contradict himself, that he may save as the labour of a Voyage into . or that which he just now asserted o be done there only for Dancing, has also (as he says) been done at home by Dr. Tavernor and his Contemporaries, so long ago as the very, very time of King Henry the 8th. And Sir, I am apt to think, that all those were not Dancing-Masters, and composers only for the Cat and Fidle. Wherefore if this won't do, he will revenge himself with such a piece of rusty malice, that my reputation must needs fester, gangren, and be quite cut off after it; for he can produce their compositions with that very individual G in the very same line, where I would make the world believe, I invented it. And this cannot but please him, for so long as an impertinent Scholar, a starter of questions, a nibler at solutions, did not invent it, 'tis no matter who did; all's well, and so well, that I be∣lieve
my Observer can for the future produce some composition in some Cliff, in some King's reign or other, that has any letter of his rational Alphabet in the lowest line. But how little this is to the purpose, any one may perceive, who considers my design was the perpetual fixing the same letters always in the same lines and spaces, whatsoever they were, though I was more willing to place G in the lower line because it was so be∣fore in the Base, and conveniency had perswaded many to use it in the treble. So that this is the invention I pretend to, the dividing of Musical Orthogra∣phy into Octaves, (which was before parted into Cliss of five Notes di∣stance) that all the Notes, in all parts, may stand in the same places, to save the trouble of learning their perplexed variations; and to give every Scholar a propriety in all sorts of Musick, that he may play from the writing of any instrument, as if it were his own; which I have experienc'd before several ju∣dicious persons, by playing mutually from the same common character, either upon the Lute or Harpse∣chord.
And this very thing which our Ob∣server so abominates, I do undertake, he shall (for one Pint of Wine) con∣fess reasonable to be done. For if one that has always learn'd in G sol re ut Cliff, should beg a dispensation to transcribe some of Mr. Playford's Psalms from the unusual C sol fa ut, into his own domestick G; that reduction of Cliffs (as they call it), would without doubt be granted, upon such a valua∣ble consideration. Now all the difference betwixt their reduction of Cliffs and my Essay, is, That my Notes are always ready redu∣ced, and found in the same order, which they are put to the trouble of reducing upon every new occasion; and they grant it to be done, only to help the infirmities of Learners, which I arrogantly deduce from the Princi∣ples of Musick. P. 34. Next comes Madam Viol: for our Observer will needs have her a di∣stressed Lady, and prosesses himself able to play nothing, but John come kiss me now; and if she turn away her head, Fortune my foe. For my part, I cannot help his inclinations; If he should fall in love with the top of a Bedstaff; 'tis nothing to me.
But though he is not able to enlarge his captivated Fancy above those two amorous Ayres; yet I know many per∣sons of good repute, that play excel∣lent suits of Lessons, upon this very same ridiculous, plausible, healthy, sickly tuning, as he is pleased to put a parcel of words and likenesses toge∣ther. And I must tel him, that those foresaid persons play every suit entire of Lessons upon the same key (as I suppose also the Observer does upon every Instrument but the Viol, where he is put beside his byass by the coy Lady) so that there is no need of tuning the strings up and down, as he would make his Children and Underlings believe. But O sad misfortune, in so great an adventure! The Lady is both pinnion'd and fetter'd. Before, she had a fair li∣berty; now, she is confined to One. Just as if she had all on a sudded married, be∣come honest, and shut the Observer out of doors. O sad misfortune indeed! Heretofore you might play upon all keys alike, (i. e.) well upon none: for the strings were all (except one) tuned fourths asunder; and whenever struck open, made a horrible discord and
jumble. Whereas in the Consort-Lyra tuning propos'd, we have the use of those two most eminent Keys G and D; in the former whereof you may natu∣rally have a Greater in the later a Lesser Third, without so much as the least al∣tering any one string; which conspi∣ring harmony will (as I said) with an unstopt freedom, eccho forth at the end of every Lesson, that you may, at the same time, enjoy the melody of the Lyra, as well as the intelligence of Notes. But I wonder our Observer, who ne∣ver durst so much as pretend to the Viol, should so boldly fall upon our Publisher, whom he acknowledges a profess'd Violist, and whom he may justly reverence, both for his years and know∣ledg. But attend his words: 'Tis strange that he should be ignorant of the impos∣sibility, &c. And I think so too, if there had been any: we may assure our selves, that a Master of so long experience would never have commended impossi∣bilities to the world. Well! 'tis no matter for that: here's an argument, Sir, commands attention. The example he sets down was made for Children, therefore (it seems) the Uni∣versal Character can reach no far∣ther.
Though this Argument had one leg in the Parenthesis, and t'other out; yet I am resolv'd it shall not escape our consideration. But now, Sir, we have taken care the Argument do not escape us; our next business is to con∣sider, how we shall escape the Argu∣ment. I first thought to deny the Antece∣dent, because few men play a greater compass than was contained in that Lesson; but then doubting that co∣gent Illative (it seems), I thought the Consequence might be a little lame, especially considering the Observer's foresaid Hornbook, in which are con∣tain'd those very same 24 Letters which constitute the most Learned Books in the World. Which being taken notice of, may save us from any such sudden violent Conclusion, as he would make; That because the Rudiments of Octaves are advantagious to young beginners, therefore ever after they must be use∣less, and an hindrance. The next thing is an Appendix to his Objection Le grand, which I have
answered in a particular Scheme, that demonstrates his way incumbred with five times the same inconveniency. Only at the end of it, he entails a small surmise of his own: for whereas I ne∣ver required or used more than one asci∣titious line over or under the Five; he will have a speedy commission for the raising of three, four, or more; as though he was in all haste making a Ladder to climb the three-square place of preferment. But at last finding he had made only a little wrangle upon the Viol, and being angry the Stationer had already sold more of my Essays, than his durst venture to print Observations upon them; He humbly supposes the Author has bought them all himself. Well said Colonel Coker! But though the Author never bought any of his own Books, yet he has several of the Ob∣servers and given them to his Friends, that they might see what sort of Argu∣ments th great Opposer is forced to use, and how exceeding angry he is, by how much he has the less to say. P. 5. Rattle Bladder rattle. Now co Harpschord, Virginals, Organs; which the Observer asserts to be com∣pleat
Consort if rightly managed. And therefore 'twas, Sir, I suppose the lit∣tle Gentleman-Jack an-apes allowed them two staves of Lines, which con∣tain four whole Octaves and they are able to fill any blew-bladder in the world. But this is only a little Proverbial∣raillery of the Observer's: We will therefore consider the nature of those Instruments. And here I must lay down, That except a man hath been given ve∣ry much to Span farthing, he never em∣braces above eight Notes at a time with one hand, and they may be found in less than the same number of Lines, which the Observer requires. Though by the way I must mention the differ∣ence; that sometime his Lines and Spaces signifie one thing, and some∣times another; and each hand pester'd with a distracting-difference; in mine, they are both and ever the same. Ay! but good Sir (says the Obser∣ver), you can't carry on your Lesson perhaps, without the hopping and skip∣ping of your humble servants BMT up∣on all occasions. Now for the honest BMT, I have commanded them to signifie fopdoodles,
fools-caps, saucinesses, or any thing else the Observer pleases to have them, ex∣cept bawdry; and that, I will in no wise allow them to signifie: which if ever out of compliance with the Observer, I should be perswaded to; yet I charge them that they signifie so only in his own private meditations. Here, Sir, I must acquaint you in fa∣vour of the foresaid honest BMT, that t' other day I met with a curious pair of Phanatical Harpsechords made by that Arch Heretick Charles Haward, which were ready cut out into Octaves, (as I am also told he abusively contrives all his) in so much that by the least hint of BMT, all the Notes were easily found, as lying in the same posture, in every one of their Octaves. And that, Sir, with this advantage, that so soon as the Scholar had learn'd one hand, he understood them both, because the position of the Notes were for both the same. I must confess that by reason of so great a distance, I have not yet recei∣ved my Letters from Rome and Vienna, that I cannot positively assert what Signior roscobaldi, or Froberger have done; but 'tis generally believed that
even their Organs are disposed after the same Heretical manner. But for Monsieur Samboneer, as be∣ing not so far from home, I am fully assured his Harpsechord did comply with the Octavian BMT; insomuch that he could never be perswaded in all his life to put a Sharp between B and C, or E and F; but just, in the same position as our Whirlegig, he runs round with an half-note, and three whole ones; with another half-note, and two whole ones; and then the first circulating half-note again. What a base fellow was this Mon∣sieur Samboneer? I am confident this Monsieur Samboneer shall never agen be put into the Catalogue of Europae∣an Organists, when the Observer next musters them, to give me battle; which alas! Sir, how should a feeble Fssayer withstand, especially when Dr. Bull is plac'd in the front. Yet this the Fssayer resolves to assert, and then betake himself to his heels, that these foresaid great men never made any thing in their lives, but might be writ with a clear facility according to the impossible Fssay.
But perhaps you may look upon this only as a bold assertion; I must therefore acquaint you, that my Stati∣oner, to vindicate us from Mr. Thetcher's childish lessons (as the Observer calls them) does intend this long vacation to print one of the best and most dif∣ficult suits of Lessons he can meet with, according to our contradictory Fssay. Well, but for all this, the Observer knows a thing will do my business for me; and 'tis a thing, Sir, so pertinent to the matter in hand, that it requires your serious consideration; the Essayer is naturally of a rubical complexion, and was it ever known that a man of a rubical Complexion ever writ good Essays? Now, Sir, you see what a malicious Caviller he is, a vile fellow, to endea∣vour to spoil my Marriage! Perhaps my Mistress might never have seen it; for Love (the Poets say) is blind: Or else she might have taken it for a modest blush, but to the very abyss of envy, he tells all the world, I am not capable of blushing. What shall I do in this case? If I
quote Dr. Lower de Sanguine, who says, Such persons, by that errancy of the blood, have a greater confluence of spirits to the brains, and therefore may be capable of writing Essays; perhaps he'l contemn him as too much a Scho∣lar, and too little a Musician. Where∣fore to save a further trouble, he may e'en reflect upon himself, and he'l find good reason to pardon me, since nature is much more excusable, than vice. P. 36. Comes our Imperial Lute; in which the Observer hath no more rea∣son to be positive, than if he had been treating of the Simick or Epigonium; yet thus he enters, Alas poor dumb thing! all that in∣nate sweetness and excellency the Essayer talks of, is but as absolute a tale of a tub as ever wanted bottom. Nay Sir, and this bottom he most maliciously ex∣plains to be the very substantial bottom of Truth: Which is in plain terms to call it a Sounder, a flam, or a Cokerisin, or whatsoever else he pleases to call it, when he begins his calling agen. Now who could expect the poor dumb Lute should receive any kind usage from an Observer that begins so terribly? But let us be content, and
we shall hear more presently; for he will open his budget, and draw you forth, That true excellency which is pe∣culiarly hers, which is the making a compleat consort with the stop of one hand only, which he, (the Essayer) notwith∣standing his gay commendations, has absolutely rob'd her of. O brave Lute! 'Twas well for thee thou was not dead before the Observer was born, and without doubt this new reveal'd excellency shall keep thee alive for ever for the future. We will therefore a little understand this trea∣sure of excellency. A Lutinist hath commonly upon his left hand four fingers; all these four are upon great and eminent occasions made to stop a compleat consort. Hold it fast, here's the excellency, which I doubt is something in danger. For the Harpsechord pretends to stop twice as many Notes with both hands, whilst thou poor dumb thing can use but one hand for that purpose, and the thumb too only becomes an in∣significant supporter. Nay▪ and this prating Harpsechord will pretend to stop and strike these Notes with the same hand, at the same
time▪ which the poor dumb Lute cannot do; but making a compleat Consort with the stop of one hand only, remains a poor dumb thing, till 'tis struck with the other hand; and then it becomes a speaking thing, like its imitating Git∣tar, or like the Viol or Violin: but then, Sir, what think you of the Dulcimer, which is a speaking thing▪ without ever being a stopt dumb thing at all? And if I don't think the dazling glo∣ry of this new reveal'd excellency suffi∣cient to confound all my assignment of the Notes to the Lute, instead of the Tableture, and those incomparable ad∣vantages, which I shew'd to be their consequence (and he hath not the least impeach'd); then must it be imputed to my blind stupidity in not perceiving the worth of a new reveal'd excel∣lency. Now, Sir, the Essayer having a mind to be cross, I'le tell you what he says. That though the Observer did prove the Harpsechord and Organ to be some∣thing a greater compass than the Lute▪ and the Viol or Violin to humour a loud or soft Note▪ which the forr were not capable of, the Sagbuts and Cornets to continue a sound: Yet he
did not prove, that those Excellencies which were separately the credit of other Instruments, were not here uni∣ted into one, to consummate the perfe∣ction of the Lute: which was my as∣sertion from those various passions it does excite (Essay p. 60.). Nay, and that he may be altogether as ill-natur'd as the Observer, he suspects that new∣reveal'd excellency to be only a treache∣rous discovery of its imperfection. P. 37. Whatsoever the Lute gets by the shift, 'tis clear the Master's utterly undone. For by my happening upon the pitiful unmasterly Arrons Gigue, for an example to shew the sailing or rising of an Octave, the two Notes re∣maining in the same place with a differ∣ent Letter (as comes to pass twice in that Lesson). Therefore all people must conclude that same Arrons Gigue to be the supreamest Master-piece which ever the eminent Mr. Rogers plaid or composed for the Lute; and so Mr. Ro∣gers is abused and undone. Well, Sir, but how if people won't conclude so? then I suppose 'tis no abuse, and the Observer concludeth nothing to his purpose.
But I know something a little more to my purpose; That this very emi∣nent Mr. John Rogers can assure the Ob∣server, or any man else, That he hath seen a suit of Lessons excellent and dif∣ficult beyond exception▪ upon that pleasant tuning proposed in the Essay, writ according to the Universal Chara∣cter, and from thence play'd upon the Lute. Which looks a little like that paltry argument whereby Zeno confu∣ted the Philosopher, That there might be such a thing as motion. Thus, Sir▪ I abused Mr. Rogers, abused the precious memory of Mr. Simpson: nay, in the very first line of his Book, the Observer lays down▪ That the whole Universal Character was Abusiveness in the abstract: but I know one lusty Abuse in the concrete▪ for which I would be loath to exchange all the Abuses in my Book. That unparallel'd assront committed by the Observer in his Dedication; where he makes those Gentlemen who are employed in the Sacred Service of His Majesty's Chappel, to be Patrons of his Ribaldry and Railing; whereby he has so far libel'd their Reputations, as to make the world bve thse Ad∣dresses
to be most acceptable to them, which were presented in the basest language. Certainly it had been more proper for him when he found his stomach so foul, and his gall to overflow, rather to have called for his Bason to ease himself, than his Ink horn to make a Present to persons of such Place and Ingenuity. And indeed nothing could have aba∣ted that true respect I bear for any per∣son that pretends the least Service to their S. Majesties, but that necessity which now lies upon me in replying to those Observations in which the Author has so basely abused, not so much me, as his own Royal fellow-servants. P. 38. That which remains, is only a blind business of translating a Greek Alstedius; which I must confess not to understand, no more than our Observer. Does he mean out of Greek, or into Greek? neither of which has ever been done yet, that I ken off; therefore riddle my Riddle. And then for that stinking story that savours of some old Onion-like Fornicator, with his gray∣head and green-tail; I dismiss it as al∣together unanswerable.
But since the Observer hath been so liberal as to bestow two Copies of Verses upon me, I will borrow one to re-pay him, out of that excellent E∣pigrammatist, Val. Martial, lib. 3. Epigr. 43. Mentiris juvenem tinctis, Lentine capillis Tam subitò corvus, qui modo cygnus eras. Non omnes fallis, scit te Proserpina canum, Personam capiti detrahat illa tuo. And therefore how unbecoming such things are, will be an easie consequence; which if I had the least inclination to Poetry, I would translate; but at pre∣sent I shall remit the Observer to his Friend I Philips for construction. P. 39. To conclude (says he), The ex∣perience of those young men (children, long since His Majesty's happy restaura∣tion) who have attained to that emi∣nency in Musick by our Scale▪ will con∣vince him, there is no necessity of ta∣king up a man's whole life in the drud∣gery of that Science.
But Sir, I'le e'en resolve for once, as the Observer resolves, That I won't be convinc'd. For these excellent young men before his Majesty's happy return, did (many of them) perfectly understand the Rudiments of Musick; and have for these dozen years since, been constantly encouraged by the favours of a gracious Prince's Court, as∣sisted by the lively Instructions of the most excellent Masters, but much more by their own natural ingenies, in that continual employment to which they had dedicated themselves: so that I will not be convinc'd, however these persons are indeed excellent and in∣comparable, That therefore Musick hath been always of very easie attain∣ment to such as take it up only for a recreation or pleasure; or that there is no drudgery in the Principles of this Science; which was my Assertion, and ought to have been his Conse∣quence, if he would have made his very concluding Conclusion any thing to the purpose. There is one scrap of his Argument still behind. These Gentlemen attain∣ed to that eminency in Musick by our Scale. Therefore, Sir, I suppose this
Scale is the causa sine quâ non, of their eminency▪ 'Twere pity but this Scale was cut in Aablaster, and shew'd amongst the Tombs. But I am apt to think, they came no more to be eminent for having learn'd this Scale, than the Macedonian conquer∣ed the Eastern world, because his name was Alexander; or that any man whose Name is Alexander, is now able to conquer the world: though 'tis probable, that dreadful Name is still more like to make the Asiaticks run, than the uncouth words of the Gamut are to inspire a man with Musick. Well, Sir, I have staid so long upon this Argument, till I find it has at last calv'd a Parenthesis, and this Parenthe∣sis takes after its Dam, and is argu∣mentative too. This Scale is the only Universal Character, by which all People, all Nations, and Religions converse. Now, Sir, if it were not for the abusiveness of the thing, Experiment; I would lay a suit of Lessons of the eminent Mr. John Rogers, in the Cha∣racter he plays them, before the Obser∣ver, to be performed upon the Organs. But that's, alas, too abusive. 'Tis long since that the Lute hath abandon'd
the difficulties of the Scale, and so lost the Observer's favour and knowledg. But, Sir, if all men learn the Gamut, then the Gamut is an universal thing, and all men have the Gamut. So if all the Nations of Europe learn ABC▪ &c. then the Alphabet is an universal thing; and so all the Nations in Europe have ABC, &c. And so, and so 'tis impos∣sible to prove, that there ever was any confusion at Babel, or need of any pre∣sent agreement, because the rudiments of all Nations are the same both for their Languages and Musick. Now I give the world joy of this happy agreement; for I profess 'twas the first time I was well satisfi'd in it. Though I still doubt, that the differ∣ent Nations spell various syllables with those universal Letters, and have got a confounded trick, to call the same thing by different names, that I can't for my life understand them, unless I put my self to the trouble of learning them all without book. And I am also a little doubtful, that the Musicians do take out of their Universal Scale five different lines for every different part, and so the Notes stand in different places, that though I
should know their scituation in the Mean, yet they would all give me the slip, when I came either to the Base or Treble. So that all the universality the Observer can pretend to, is, that all the world is troubled with universal va∣riations. Let us consider, All men hitherto play in F fa ut cliff for the Base there∣fore F fa ut cliff is an universal Cha∣racter; all men play in C sol fa ut for the Mean, therefore C sol fa ut Cliff is an Universal Character, exactly the same; as, because all English or French-men speak English or French, whether they be in Europe or America, there∣fore English and French are two Uni∣versal Characters. But how absurdly he fetters a differ∣ent Universal Character to each parti∣cular part of Musick, is apparent to any that understand the nature of the thing. As though 'twas no matter how great the difference and confusion were, so long as they were Universal, and all men agreed them to be Uni∣versal. Which is one of the most slippery quirks I ever met with in my life, to prove, That an Universal Difference
would make an Universal Character, as well as an Universal Agreement. That noble design of reconcilin Languages, may something discover our intentions, where to all Nations one thing must have only one and the same Character; that when any person of what speech soever sees it, he may yet apprehend what is intended thereby, though each man will still call it after the custom of his own Countrey. Thus if by one Harmonious wri∣ting we place the Notes of every O∣ctave and Part in the same scituation, each Voice and Instrument will have a propriety therein; and by being able to play or sing any one part, we shall be able to play or sing in all parts, as you may see more at large in my Es∣say. And there is very good reason it should be so: for as a Tune is the same Tune, whether sung in Base, Mean, or Treble; so in each of them the Notes should be all placed upon the same Lines and Spaces. Having now made some particular return to every Argument or Pretence I could find in each page of the Obser∣vations,
I can't but think how he'le wince and fling at Mathematicks for the future, how he'le laugh at the na∣ture and reasons of the thing. But the Theory and Practise of Mu∣sick are fastned together by so strong a Chain of Consequences, that I would advise him to consider these follow∣ing Propositions, before he make him∣self ridiculous. The Five Propositions. I. That Musick consists in Proporti∣ons, and is subject to Arithmetical Laws. Which all learned Musicians in all Ages of the Would have as∣serted. II. That the first and most natural division of Musick is into Octaves, where the Notes and Half-Notes always circu∣late in the same order: As is demon∣strated by Practical Experience as well as Speculative. III. That the Rudiments of learning Musick ought to be agreeable to the nature of the Science. Wherefore we cast a∣way those insignificant hard words of the Gamut, which proceed according to Sixths and Fourths, retaining only
the circular Alphabetical Letters for every Octave, and the Monosyllables Mi, fa, sol, la, to signifie the Propor∣tions. IV. That 'tis most easie, as well as most natural▪ by one perpetual constancy, to place the same Notes of every Octave, in the same lines and spaces, that the numerous variations of Cliffs may be avoided. V. That since in this one Universal Character of Octaves▪ we may compre∣hend all parts of Musick, 'tis needless to engage in those difficulties which en∣crease our trouble, and confine our know∣ledg to a lesser compass. I have exposed these Propositions to the Observer's consideration, out of a grateful requital, because he so ge∣nerously confess'd the one Objection upon which he refused my whole Book; & if he can but confute these Pragmati∣cal propositions, I wil be so well satisfied, that he shall not need to answer one word of my Vindication besides. But I confess, I do not yet think my self confuted, by his alledging an ab∣surdity, which is five times more con∣siderable his own way; or by shewing
that I make use of two natural Phoeno∣mena of Musick; which is all, with a little scurrilous raillery, he pretends to oppose against my whole Essay; where in the Contents I had sum'd up so many advantages, which he could not in the least deny to be consequents of it. Had I, Sir, sooner understood what thoughts the sober and ingenious part of the world entertain'd concerning the Observations, I should not have troubled you to read, nor my self to write a Vindication from them; which I have lately received a much better account of from a more Honourable hand, and beg your permission to ad∣join it. I am, June 1. 1672. SIR, Your most humble and most obliged Servant, THO: SALMON. FINIS.
To Mr. T. S. SIR, HAving received consi∣derable advantages from your Musical Essay, &c. I was much concern'd to see so happy a Design so scurri∣lously traduced. But the a∣busiveness of the Language sufficiently bespeaks his spite to your Person, rather than any sober dislike of your Es∣say; that it is plain his design was not to return an An∣swer, but a Libel; and when
he had bark'd, and grin'd, and shew'd his teeth, his fear kept him at a distance, so that though he wrote an Answer, yet was afraid to meddle with the Controversie. But your Credit is too sacred to be be-spatter'd by all his Ribaldry; and by throwing dirt at a person of so unblemish'd Fame, he only dirty's his own fingers. I hope you will laugh at, and con∣temn his malice, and by no means think him worthy a Reply. I am confident, there are few that have read both, that expect one; I am sure they cannot, if they under∣stand either.
And as for Tapsters and Drawers, the great admirers of your worthy Adversary (who think, he hath utterly bafled all your Musical Essays, out of Hudibras and the Ac∣cidence) you need not much care for satisfying them; especially since there is no question, but that a man of an ordinary capacity might so improve himself in one weeks time at Billingsgate, as to answer sufficiently his most substantial Objecti∣ons. And, really, some of it is so nasty, that a modest man would be afraid to
touch it with a pair of Tongs; and its nothing but use that hath made himself not ashamed of it; you may see the same page divided betwixt Scripture and Ri∣baldry; Lust got into Para∣dise, and the Goat once more upon the Sacred Al∣tar, as if he had meant to droll Religion out of the world, and revive the Wor∣ship of Cotytto's Temple. His 38th page hath words so nasty, one would have thought he had spoken through a Clyster-pipe, and like the Apocryphal Beast, 2 Esdr. 11. 10. the voice had
not come out of his head, but the midst of his body. As for his whole Book, he himself confesseth, p. 27. one third part of it to be no∣thing to the purpose: And of the poor Thirteen Leaves that remain, I find upon just account, That they are stuff'd with II dull Copies of Verses, XXIX merry Proverbs, III Scraps of Latine, IV Sen∣tences of Scripture, A Bawdy Story, A Sacred Anthem, O bone Jesu, &c. mixed in a general heap of Nastiness. Besides many pretty Quiblets and smart Rhithms, that come in as luckily, as if he
would have cap'd Verses with you. He scorns to have one Period depend upon ano∣ther, but will have every Sentence set up for it self; and truly the Book is no∣thing but Thrums and Shreds, which being stitch'd together with blew Thred, look like a Taylor's Apron, or a Fool's Coat. I find his very first Sen∣tence, line 7 (as well as ma∣ny other) to be such pitiful Nonsense and false English, that I should have left him, as a very Dunce, to the correction of the Rod and
Ferula, had he not told me in the next page, that he un∣derstood the degrees of Compa∣rison; yea, and that more∣over he had once learn'd the Syntax; and again, p. 31. that he happily remembred the definition of a Noun, to be either seen, felt, heard, or un∣derstood: which 'tis strange he should pretend to, and yet take falsity, insignificancy, and contradictory, for three Noun Substantives, p. 1. Which truly may well be, since Musick is the only thing, where he can do more than pretend; though here∣in his Objections are so in∣significant,
that, were it not for that genuine malice, wherewith he always writes, I should have thought you had hired him to have credi∣ted your Essay. Some of his Objections only shew the natural ad∣vantages which Musick ob∣tains by your design; others are so contradictory, that they fall together by the ears among themselves, like the fighting-race of Cadmus's Serpent's teeth; and you need only look on, for they naturally destroy one ano∣ther. And really, a short expe∣ctation
is requisite, and will be sufficient: for, though I scarce know any new thing ever proposed, but it always met with some angry Anta∣gonist; yet the true nature of the thing, and the great∣est conveniency, have, in spite of all opposition, at last gain'd a general acceptance. One that has had but a small insight into Musick, may easily perceive, how, ever since the days of Guido, 'tis continually altering into a greater ease, as well as excellency. Musicians have not long cast off those per∣plexed distinctions of Mood,
Time, and Prolation, the Li∣gatures of the long Notes, with the strict observance which way they wagged their tails; and many more trou∣bles they are now unwilling to undergo, which you may read more of in Mr. Morley. But I remember particu∣larly in his Second Part, p. 104, he gives a more per∣spicuous way of pricking Canon: And this (saith he) I thought good to shew you, not for any curiosity which is in it, but the easiness and com∣modity which it hath; because it is better than to prick so, as to make one sit five or six hours
beating his brains to find out the following part. But such hath been our manner in many things heretofore, to do things blindly, and to trouble the wits of Practitioners. As I know Musicians are now more ingenious than those resolute Blades whom the good old man had just cause to be angry at; so I do not know of any Persian Sta∣tute that has be'n since made to forbid them to accept of any thing that shall be proposed for the ease and advancement of Musick, which is the pre∣sent controversie. I am a little more con∣cern'd
in that doughty Ob∣jection, where he destroys your Reputation in Mu∣sick, because you once studi∣ed Physick. Pretty subtle! Packolet's Horse had a wooden Peg in his head, therefore M. L. must needs have a crack in the place where the Peg should have been. I appeal to any sober man, Whether this be not as rational a conclusion, as can be drawn from the o∣ther in disgrace of your Book. For had your Ad∣versary read Plato, or Athe∣naeus, Porphyrie, or Jamblious, the excellent Physician Cel∣sus,
or amongst the Moderns, Paracelsus, &c. he would have met with those that stu∣died Musick upon the very account of curing Diseases; and that both consist in ma∣king and producing Har∣mony. He might have remem∣bred (if he had ever known it) that the Ancients were so sensible of this, as to make the one God Apollo, Patron of both the Sciences. But alas! Don Quixot and Rib∣lais have wrote nothing of the Subject, and therefore I hope you will pardon the mistake.
So that in good earnest, had this Author any such learned design, as I have met with in a Pamphlet that was wrote in our late Warrs, where the Author ingenu∣ously confessed, That he wrote that only to make the number of his Books just Two-dozen; or else had he designed to have begg'd the pity of the World, by dis∣covering his nastiness and ignorance, as Beggars expose their Ulcers to raise compas∣sion; I say, had either of these been his reason, I should have applauded his design: But for a man, when he
raves, to think himself seri∣ous and rational; nay, and to be angry with every body else, that will not think so too, is certainly the grand distemper of Bedlam, and too plainly shews, that the poor man wants trepaning in the Peg-place. But I'le tell you what is a great design of his, and which most about London are sensible of, That he takes upon him to be a ge∣neral Confounder of all Mu∣sical undertakings; in so much as he never wrote any thing in his life, but in contradi∣ction to some other men,
who would fain have known something as well as he; but he resolves they sha'n't, and therefore whoever pretends, must justly suffer. If any man speak of the Theory of Musick, Have at him! In his Epistle to Mr. Simpson's Compend. He is one of our New Lights (of which this Age hath been monstrous fruitful). He is a Speculator how many Hairs-breadths will reach from the top of Paul's Steeple to the Center of a Full-Moon; and demon∣strate, That the thousandth part of a Minute after, there will be so many thousand more Hairs
necessary, by reason of the Earth's or Moon's motion. And hereby he thinks that he has so undone all Mathe∣maticks, as no Gentleman will ever after study a Sci∣ence which is so despised and droll'd upon. And for Practical Musi∣cians, he is also in as great a rage at them too, when ever they lye in his way; witness his Little Consort, and that fury he was in for his unfor∣tunate Musick, April 1. 1666. where he is so severe upon those Gentlemen that were performers of it (however it suited best with his occasi∣ons
to commend them in his Book against you), that he plainly tells them in his print∣ed Vindication, That it was not his business to find Eyes, Ears, or Honesty, for any; or to answer for other mens faults: And then roundly con∣cludes; In fine, this Vindication offers at no more, than denying those to be judges in Science, who are ignorant of its Prin∣ciples. Thus the Dictator. So that whether Specula∣tive, or Practical, no man must judg but himself; though how unfit he is to judg of the nature of Musick, who un∣derstands nothing of a Pro∣portion
wherein it consists, I leave even himself to judg. I must again renew my Entreaties, That since all sorts of persons have hither∣to despised his Raillery, you would not give him occasi∣on to be proud of an An∣swer; or have to do with a person who is of such a de∣filing Fancy, that can turn the bare Letters of the Al∣phabet into Bawdery, and make the most obliging page in your Book to be an abuse of some deceased Patriot. I have read a story of Aga∣memnon, that he kept his (o∣therwise lewd) Queen chast
for ten years together, only by the graveness of the Odes, he enjoyn'd her to sing and play till he return'd. I have nothing to entreat of your Antagonist, but that he would compose some such Odes for his own use; and that you would let him alone in that most necessary employment, since that all persons are satis∣fied, His Design has ever been to discourage Musick, yours to advance it. Norwich, May 28. 1672. Your Friend and Servant, N. E.
