T1026 99832261 36733
LOIMOLOGIA. A Consolatory Advice, And some brief OBSERVATIONS Concerning the Present Pest. By GEO. THOMSON, Dr of Physick. LONDON: Printed for L. Chapman, at his Shop in Exchange-ally. 1665.
To the Ingenious and Industrious IATROCHEMIST, Dr GEORGE THOMSON, In Approbation of this his Work and Designe. SIR, UPon your Communicating to me the substance of a designe you had in hand for the publique good, in offering some things to consideration for the prevention and cure of this Pesti∣lence which God in judgment hath sent upon us, let me assure you, and by these lines I desire to certifie all whom it doth or may concern, that I embrace your designe (utris{que} ulnis) and willingly desire, and God assisting shall endeavour to further it in my practice, and hope all that are true Chemists will be of the same judgement, and confirm it to the world by effectual deeds, that their mind is so resolved and fixed. God prosper your designe, and bless your endea∣vours, preserve your person, and incourage your spirit, and increase the number of able Iatrochemists, of your mind; which is the hearty prayer of Your Cordial friend and Brother, GEORGE STARKEY, M. D. and Philosopher by the fire.
Tria Pharmaca Loimo-Sychaia: OR, A Ternion of Powerful Chymical Remedies AGAINST The present PEST. Scire tuum nihil est, nisi te scire hoc sciat alter: Si sciat hoc alter, scire tuum nihil est. AS it is the duty of the Divine to communicate what he knows to another, otherwise his know∣ledg is given him in vain: so it behoves the Physician to conceal the Mysteries of his Art, and to be cautious how he layes open those Arcana's he possesses, lest they be vilified and disesteemed by the vulgar, who are ready to spurn at, and tread upon the most pretious things: yet withal he is obliged not to put his candle lighted under a Bushel, but to expose it to open view, that it may illuminate those that are in darkness, without Eclipsing the Honour and credit of the noble Science of Pyrotechnical Philosophy. Wherefore seeing Ignoti nulla Cupido, no man can value any thing unless he be acquainted with the worth of it; I have condescended to the persuasive Arguments of my friends, to divulge some Active Chymical Remedies, (yet much inferiour to the best I am Master of) in these Contagious times, which (being duly taken) will
(through a blessing from above) be powerfull in preserving from and curing this Heteroclite and feral disease the Pest, from which (to their infinite shame) the Ablest of the Galenists cowardly and unworthily run away, leaving this great City destitute of their Help, when it most stands in need of it; cau∣sing others through their detestable example to Despond, and to become faint-hearted, who otherwise by confidence and resolved Magnanimity, the best preservative in Nature (forasmuch as none was ever infected by the Pest, but either from an Idaea or Image of Hatred, Terrour and Diffidence in the phantasie of the individual Person, or in the Archeus, the Innate Spirit of every part of the body, as Helmont hath pro∣ved) might withstand, exclude and conquer, so truculent, sell and cruel an Enemy. Needs must the common people, who alwayes look, non qua eundum, sed qua itum est, be possessed with Pannick fear, and precipitately betake themselves to their heels, when their principal Leaders that should stoutly con∣duct and animate them, become Tergiversators and fugitives. If Straglers, Desertors, and Runnawayes in an Army (when they are to go upon service) ought to suffer loss of life and E∣state; I see no reason why these men, whose function obliges them to stand out to the last, should deserve less punishment if they deliver such a vast populous City to the fury of so implacable a Foe, a Sickness , without striking a stroke against the one, or defending the other to the utmost of their power. For my part, although I could enjoy my ease, plea∣sure, and profit in the Country, as well perhaps as any Gale∣nist; yet I would rather chuse to loose my life, then violate in this time of extream necessity, the band of Charity towards my neighbour, and dedecorate that illustrious profession I am called to, in hopes to save my self by a speedy discession, a remote procession, and a leisurely recession, according to that infamous, and infidous advice which Galen hath given his Disciples. Far be it from me: I shall rather follow heroick Helmont, who hath taught me better things; and shall by my personal presence, and best Medicines, put out my self to assist any one whom God shall afflict in this kind. I therefore shall recommend to the world this Ternion of Effectual Chymical
Remedies, in the certain experience of whose singular vertues in malignant Fevers, I am well instructed, and am assured by some late instances, that they are Preservative and Alexi∣pharmacal; and taken in opportune time, Therapeutical and Sanative. The name I appropriate to the liquor, is Tinctura Polyacaea, from the excellent vertue it hath of preventing and healing many Maladies, according to my long observation of it. It Corroborates the Stomack and its ferment; enliveneth and in∣vigorates the Archeus, the vital Spirit, being circulated with the blood into all parts: It mortifies malignant Atoms, ena∣bling nature to profligate and expel the poison of the Plague by sweat, cleansing away the morbifick matter by Expectora∣tion and Urine. It may safely be exhibited at any time, in any place, to per∣sons of whatsoever Age, Sex, and Constitution, according to these instructions following. For prevention, give to Chil∣dren of half a year to two, to the quantity of a spoonful or two: from thence to six years, to two or three spoonfuls; to elder persons three, four, five, six, or more spoonfuls, mor∣ning, noon, and night, or Pro re nata, as as occasion requires. If any find himself discomposed in his body, let him go to bed, and take one paper of this powder, which I call Pulvis Pestifugus, in a spoonful of Beer and Sugar, drinking strait after a third part of the glassful of Tinct. Polya. and another part three hours after, and so the third: let the party sweat being moderately covered, and let him not think much if he be sickish after the taking thereof. A third part or half of this Powder may be given to those that are under ten years. It is to be repeated twice or thrice, or oftner, with Tinct. Polyac. according to the magnitude of the Disease. Let Children infe∣cted take every half hour or an hour a spoonful of Polyacea. The Chymical pills which I call Tutelares, are to be taken a little before a light supper, one, two, or three, according to the age and strength of the person; immediately after, three or four spoonfuls of Tinct. Polyac. and as much the next morning. They are very preservative, opening the Spleen, cleansing the Kidneys, purifying the blood, resisting corruption, Expectora∣ting
and Diaphoretick, causing sometimes a stool or two in twenty four hours; if not, they are very safe and profitable. They are to be taken two, and sometimes three nights together, ceasing two or three dayes, and then repeating them. Whosoever he be that maketh use of these Chymical Reme∣dies to a purpose according to my Rules set down, will I am certain have cause to be Grateful to the most High, and to give that respect to true Chymistry which it deserves. As I find these present Medicines applied to the welfare of mankind without abuse; so I shall be encouraged publickly to expose (Salvo Honore Artis Spagyritae) better things for the benefit of my country-men, whom I plainly see are deceived and wronged on every side, both by Galeno-Chymists, and likewise Pseudo-Chymists. If any desire to be accommodated with these or more noble Chymical preparations in this sad time of Contagion, let him repair to the Place of my Abode without Algate, nigh the Blew Boare Inn. Some Observations made in reference to the present PEST. DIvers of the Learned have narrowly enquired into and descanted upon the cause of this feral truculent Dis∣ease, many accusing the Air, some Mephitical, noxi∣ous, fracedinous odours from the Earth, others condemning our Food; most of the Galenical gang (seduced by Astrolo∣gers) attribute the universal cause of the Pest to the Heavenly bodies the Stars, who (as they say) through their malevolent Aspects, pernicious light and motion, dart an Epidemical poison into the Air, and so infect it with a Tabiferous corrup∣tion; hoping hereby to excuse their fugitive desertion of their
Patients, and gross Ignorance in Physick, from an impossibility of curing this grievous calamity. Wherefore consulting with the Augures Coeli, those uncertain conjectural Progno∣sticotors of our times, they have most of them made good the more certain prediction I made in Galeno-Pale without A∣stroscopie, a good space before this Pelt brake out among us, that they if some Epidemical contagious Disease should reign in the City (according to their Master Galen's dictates) would quickly run out of it. Certainly this last opinion is most absurd and ridiculous, not unlike the Physicians that patro∣nize it: for 'twere in vain for them to shelter themselves in the Country at any time from this raging Disease, if it depen∣ded upon an universal cause, so that the Air were generally conspurcated and defiled by the Stars according to their sense. I grant that the Air is Topically hurtful, by reason of those expirations arising from certain limited places, abounding with corrupt, filthy, foetid matter, which contracting a veno∣mous serment, and exhaling, may very well annoy and infect the Spirits; but to impute this to the innocent Stars, such glorious creatures, is only worthy of such noxious Galenists, who frequently argue a non Causa pro Causa. If I may freely give my judgement, I shall under correction deliver it thus. 'Tis well known to all Physicians that have been strict investigators of the nature of Diseases, that none hath been more frequent and predominant among us, then the Scorbute, being very grassant at this day, omnia trans∣formans sese in miracula mundi, disguised in a thousand forms, counterfeiting any disease, even those that it seems to have very little relation to, as I could instance at large. Now some∣times contemplating the strange diffusive nature and encrease of the Scorbute, the high degree of malignity it did aspire to, and how it crucified and vexed poor Mortals, making a meer mock at the Trivial Medicines of the Dogmatists, I could not be perswaded but that in process of time it would at last cause (upon outward irritating occasions) some Tragical Cata∣strophe among us, and express in a direful manner, the grie∣vous effects of that subtil Poison which lay coached and link∣ing in the body.
Seeing then there hath been in mans body such a previous Scorbutick Malignity, and still is, being now graduated and exalted to a high pitch of virulencie, from several occasional causes from within and without; and sith it is , as it were an Ape imitating most effects, I conceive it no great Paradox or absurdity to assert, that this present Pest hath principally derived its being from this Scorbutical Disease with whose nature it much symbolizes, most of whose symp∣toms are parallel to each other. It is undoubted that they are both Malignant, Poisonous, and Contagious, possessing and affecting the same parts alike, the Duumvirate, that is, the Stomack and Spleen, as appears by the Symptoms and Products common to both, as great op∣pression about those parts, suspitious respiration, Cardialgie, Nauseousness, Vomiting, extream pain in the Head, Vertigo, Swimming, Agrypnie or want of Sleep, Lethargical dulness, profound sleep, Lypothimy, Palpitation of the Heart, Fain∣ting, Sudden debility of the parts, unreasonable fears, terrors, despair, and confusion, Dyspnaea, irregular and difficult brea∣thing▪ a violent flux of the belly, various Tumours, Erysipela's, virulent Ulcers, Sugillations, black and blew stroaks, Spots red, black, and blew; all which Accidents may be distinguished from other diseases, but are so co-incident with the present Pest and Scurvie, that they seem to differ but only secundum magis & minus. These are both Anomalous and Heteroclite from other diseases, arising, (as I said) from an absolute Poi∣son in their kind, which making an Idaea or Character in the Archeus or vital Spirits, play a miserable Tragedie in this Microcosm, now concise and expedite, then Taedious and prolix, according as the venom is wound up to a high or low strain, by a strong or weak preternatural ferment. Now the occasional causes remote and more immediate, are multifarious, that concur to the production of this virulent matter in mans body, initiated, promoted and consummated, by the Archeus irritated, debilitated, and put by its scope through several outward crosse contingents from those things without which we cannot subsist, which as they are mena∣ged, modified, habilitated, and used, so affect us to our pre∣servation
or our ruine. For the Archeus, the principal in∣strument of the Soul, is never idle, but is alwayes acting what may tend to the welfare of the whole, unless it be extimu∣lated, interrupted, and debarred by any thing that is Ho∣stile to it, so that when it cannot bring to pass what it would, it forthwith delineates the figure of that, which a strange Exo∣tick matter endued with a seminal power represents to it: hence emerge and appear the different Idaea's of the Poison of a Mad Dog, Tarantula, and Scorpion, each of which do ex∣press inseparable uniform Symptoms, that any judicious man may discover, and with confidence conclude, that that venom came from one, and this from another kind of Animal. It is well known, that, where there is an Affinity, concordance, and proximity of Substance, there is an easie conversion of one into another. Now since this nearness of Kin plainly appears between the Scorbute and the Pest, we have very good reason to conceive, that the former hath hitherto been in its Mino∣rity, and that now it is come to Majority, or full ripe years, and acts its part with that unwonted celerity, sutable to its Magnitude, disposition of the Air, and season of the year, and may not incongruously be termed Pestis Scorbutica, they being promiscuously joyned with each other; whence come those Phaenomena's & signs that I have observed in this modern Pest, discrete or discernable from the Ancient. 'Tis certain the Pest is Morbus peculiaris suae specii, and had an existence before the Scorbute was known commonly among us; yet we are forced to grant that there is at this day a strange Compli∣cation, Connexion, mutual Contexture, Transmigration, De∣generation, and Transplantation of Diseases, insomuch that the cause of the first eruption of the Lues Gallica revealed in a vision to the Laick Helmont mentions, seems to me not very improbable, that some prodigiously, transcendently le∣cherous Souldier at the siege of Naples, where this disease came first to light, copulated with a farcy Mare, whose very vas Naturae or Vulve was over-run with purulent and carious Ulcers. Hence this holy man conjectures that the reason why this monstrous Plague (that is truly called Flagellum Scorta∣torum) never appeared before, is, because the like portentous
horrid fact (in expressis terminis) was hardly ever committed since the Creation. Now that there is a notable Alliance of Symptoms between the venereal Pox in Man, and the Farcy in a Horse, is well known to those that are acquainted with the nature of them, being both cured by Mercury. Wherefore upon such an unspeakable unkindly Coition, it is no wonder if there was a transition of the virous Contagious ferment of the Mare into Mans body, upon which followed a Gonorrhaea, venereous Bubo's, Nodes, and many stinking Ulcers, quite of another Tribe and Family from those that are Ordinary. Thus may Seeds and ferments of a different kind variously mixt and blended together, produce something of an irregu∣lar, Heteroclite, unusual and Hermaphroditical nature, which afterwards subsisting by themselves, may possibly propagate their like. Thus 'tis not dissonant to reason, that some salacious Seaman, whose sperm was tinged with some foul filthy disease, exercising venery with a nasty Leprous-like Putrilaginous Harlot, did in some short space after, lying with a wholesome woman, infect her; and so grafted upon her Issue that then unknown Plague we call the Scorbute, which in length of time did spread abroad and diffuse its Miasm, or infection, being at first fomented and quickned by Maritime unwholsome exhalations and fogs, and is now Rampant and grassant in all places in these parts remote from the Sea, extending its self like a Gangrene, sending out subtil Aporrhaea's or effluvium's into the Air, that contaminate those that take them in, either by the pores of the skin, or inspiration. One thing is very remarkable, that the Symptoms of the Scorbute at this day are of a discrepant and diverse face from those of former times: and withal it is to be taken notice, that it lies dormant and latitant in the body, not easily to be detected or manife∣sted but by a Physician accurately versed therein. Therefore it ought not to seem strange, if such a Sly, Close, insinuating, Treacherous, Proteus-like disease doth easily shake hands with the present Pest, to which it is so neerly allied. This presupposed, (and I hope I may live to demonstrate it more cleerly) may instruct us, that Scorbutical remedies mixt with anti-pestilential and Alexipharmacal, are very convenient
and effectual in this present Pest, as I have found by some expe∣rience; and that it is a great vanity to trust to those fruitless dull Medicines of the Galenists, as Theriac. Londin. Mithrid. Diascord. Theria. Venet. Elect. de Ovo, &c. if some Active Chy∣mical preparations can be procured, which I perceive some few honest knowing and ingenious Apothecaries labour after, with their own fingers, who are to be trusted and encouraged ten to one before a Sophisticating, ignorant, Dull, Pseudo∣chymist, employed by a company of idle Lurdans, A sort of Men they call Galenochymists. Moreover, I observe that the doctine of Helment hath much truth in it, that never any one had the Pest, but the Soul fra∣med a Character or Idaea thereof in the Archeus, through an Imagination of Hatred, Terror, and Horror, joyned with a strong credulous conceit that it had received the Contagion. Wherefore I infer that the principal preservative and cure of the Pest, is, to fortifie the Archeus or vital Spirits, and to expunge that Idaea of detestation and fear which caused it foolishly, credulously, and timerously, to give way to the Pe∣stilential impression. In this case, all those things that generate Audacity and con∣fidence in the Spirits, are of high concernment and efficacy; but whatsoever diminish, Enervate, and Elumbate them, are to be avoided. Wherefore those Nations are highly to be com∣mended, that forbear to mure up in too severe, solitary and doleful, manner those that are infected; which imprisonment being tristissima mortis Imago, is enough to make one despair, to be out of heart, and to become Heautoutimoroumenos, to destroy that which might otherwise be preserved. To visit, relieve and exhilerate any one whom God hath wounded with this Pestilential Arrow, is the part of a truly∣religious Samaritan; as to flie from him, or keep aloof, when he may preserve or do him good, is onely proper to some distrustful wicked Priests, Levites, and Galenists. The Mahumetans may justly reprove and shame us Christians, who conceive themselves obliged not to omit general acts of Cha∣rity for fear of some particular nocument or damage. I hum∣bly conceive, with submission to the higher Powers, that it
might be more conducible to the body Politick and▪ Natural, if this rigid course of enclosing the Infected so strictly within so narrow a compass were mitigated: for hereby intercourse of Trading might be kept alive, and so miserable Poverty prevented, which hath always an Equipage and Train of sad Calamities and Plagues attending upon it; and magnanimity and undauntedness of spirit procured, which questionless would in some measure both exclude and master this Pestilen∣tial Poison. Certainly none but such an Heathen as Galen would have given his disciples such impious and uncharitable Advice, as to leave poor distressed wretches to a Lord have mercy on them, when their presence ought to comfort, and their Medicines (if they had them) to heal their grievous sore. Well, I hope there will be now a seasonable discovery made how perfidious and miserable Comforters these Galenists are in time of greatest exigence; and hereby the world will be rid of a Plague far worse then this present. For I believe none but those that are stupid, blinde, partial, interested, and wilfully accessary to their own destruction, will ever look up∣on for the future with a favourable eye, such basely▪ pusillani∣mous, and such egregiously-unskilful Physicians. Now it ap∣pears perspicuously, that they are no better then a Crumenae∣mulga natio, a Purse-milking generation, as one says. I wish they were not Sanguini▪mulga, and had not onely exhausted the Purse, but also the Veins of their miserable Patients, lea∣ving them at length in the lurch. It were not amiss for the Magistrate to force these Fugitives to return to do their duty, and compel them to visit the sick, and to take (as well for Cure as Prevention) those unne∣cessary Antidotes they have left behinde according to their wise Directions. Upon my word, if our Governours be so pleased, I will without presumption take any of them by the hand, and draw them to some infected Patients, to feel their Pulses, to peep into Urinals and Close-stools, view their Tongues, as they boldly used to do at other times, when there was least need of them. Yea, and because they boast they are such excellent Anatomists, we will dissect together a Pestilen∣tial
body, that they may (if they can) inform me better where the subject of that Disease is: and for Prevention and Cau∣tion, they shall take their Preservatives and Sanatives, and I mine; and then let the world judge whom God favours most, and who fares best. If they refuse to condescend to this, I hope the sage Magistrate will be pleased hereafter to favour signally the true Artists, and to reject these counterfeit and useless Doctors, making them (as they really deserve) Mundi Iudibrium, a Laughing-stock and a By-word to the world. Which if the Higher powers be pleased to listen to, some o∣ther Chymists and my self will be engaged to convince by un∣deniable Instances of fact, that there is means to be put in practise, which may (through a benediction of the Almighty) be prevalent to preserve many in this vast City from the jaws of this unsatiable Monster, which otherwise are like to be de∣voured by it. Lastly, I cannot but take notice how that effectual means (not to be refused by any wise man, according to Solomon) which the good Creator (who is Philanthropos) hath ordain∣ed, is slightly, superficially, supinely, and perfunctorily exerci∣sed and pursued, both in reference to the Physician, and like∣wise those excellent Medicines that have of late been disco∣vered, in some measure appropriate, sutable and proportiona∣ble to the grand diseases that are regnant among us. Who, but those that are bewitchedly blinde, wilfully cross and contradictory, beyond a most obstinate Jew or Fanatick, would still persist to feed upon husks, achorns, and other trash, when they may be satiated with the finest Wheat-flour, pre∣pared in a most exquisite manner? I think some have in them the perverse Genius of the wild Irish, that would by no admonitions and intreaties whatsoever be disswaded and warned from tying the Plow to the horse∣tail, out of a superstitious observation and reverence to that old Custom of their fore-fathers; although an infinite better way was made appear to them.
I have, I suppose, (if some refined Wits understand any thing) ripped up, and sufficiently anatomized, usque ad Scele∣ton, (so far as a short Treatise would permit) the huge defor∣med bulk of the monstrous, mutilated Galenical body; inso∣much that the most wise and acute Spectators and Auditors of this Nation, (who have taken the freedom to deliver their Judgement as the thing is in it self) have concluded that it was high time for such an unweildy, lazie, cumbersom, good∣for-little, voracious, animal Sarcophagum, Cruorem consumere natum, a devourer of more then Bel and the Dragon, having surfeited himself with bloud and humours, should now expire or breathe out his last, and become food for the birds of dark∣ness. Yet I perceive there are some of the Spawn or Issue of this Polyphemous Gyant left, that (according to the Proverb, Cat to its kinde, What's bred in the bone, will ne'r out of the flesh) are hunting up and down for their prey; and rather then fail of it, will feed upon Pestilential bodies, which they much loathe and detest, being afraid to come nigh them, were they not ne∣cessitated to it. These Minorite Phlebotomists and Cathartists (being the small remainder of those many considerable ones that are vanished and gone I know not whither in a trice, (I wish into Utopia) who are still hankering after the food they were first nurs'd up with, have gone about to perswade the world (some part being so mad to give credit to them) that they are able to do something extraordinary for the Preven∣tion and Cure of this present Infection. Wherefore an in∣considerable number of the inferiour rank, (left behinde that large Drove which is gone to seek out fresh and more whole∣some green Pasture) out of I know not what desperate de∣spiteful humour to the Spagyrists, to keep a little while above water their now-ready-to-sink reputation, will venture to trust to that very wise Directory, a Legacie their learned de∣parted forefathers have left the Citie, included in their last Testament, wherein they manifest they are no longer willing to breathe in this unsanctified impure air, and upon this ac∣count have commended to them some of their Pupils digni∣fied with the title of Honorarii, (how well deserving, let them
look to it.) These, in hope at least to save themselves, if not their Patients, especially if they can but surreptitiously get some Chymical Medicines from us, will at a hazard, upon this pinch, try what a dry fume of Gums will do, a costly Poman∣der, a composition of Figs, Rue, and Walnuts, (a ruful Medi∣cine to trust to, if all were known) Mattbias Plague-water, or Aqua epidemica, (I wonder they forgat S. Luke's Water, for more credits sake) an Electuary of London-Treacle and Wood-Sorrel, (I am perswaded a Leg of Veal and Green-sauce is far better) Bole-Armeniack (no whit better then Tobacco-clay, but that't is dearer, and farther fetched) the eating of Sorrel for a breakfast in the Summer, (for fear of heating) and Bar∣berries in the fall of the leaf, (to keep them upright.) If these avail not, if they light upon rich Families, (let the Poor shift for themselves) then they will provide for them (taking a share with them) Pearls, Hyacinch-stone prepared (after their gross way) Bezoar-stone of the East, Unicorns horn, (equiva∣lent to Harts horn) Lignum-Aloes, (strange they omitted Gold, but that I believe they mean to put that into their own purse) made into a Dredge-powder, (or rather a dreggie powder) or they will make them up into Lozenges, and give them the name of Manus Christi, (though, be it spoken with reverence, he never had the least finger in it, nor without doubt ever allowed or approved the prescription of the fore∣named Concretes for the preservation or cure of the Pest.) If these fail, they have Aq. Theriacalis Stillatitia, (which indeed every Nurse knows is the best thing (though sluggish enough in comparison) they possess;) yea, and Ambergreese dissolved in spirit of Sack (to make them lusty.) Nay, they will ascend one step higher, to Balsamum Sulphuris, Elixir Proprietatis, either of which if they can make perfectly right, I will be bound to kiss their hand, had they a Plague-sore upon it. Had I not spoken of a Sore, I should have forgotten their Fontanels or Issues, by means of which they hope, if the infection enter in at one hole, it will run out at another. Lastly, they tell us they have three great Remedies (to be magnified I am sure only for their mischievous effects) Blee∣ding, Purging, and Vomiting, which rarely (they say) have
plate in the Plague, but are generally dangerous: (that's truth in all diseases whatsoever, menaged by them) and therefore not to be used, but (I assert, not at all) upon some extraordinary urgent indicant or just Occasion (when I pray is that more visible then in the Pest, when a Mans life is most in danger?) and with the greatest caution (equal with catching the Contagion) which only an able Physician (I would fain see such an one a∣mong the Galenists) can judge of. I plainly smell the Reason of that: they would fain have their fees, but they are loath to fetch them, (and truly by my consent they shall never be sent to them) and therefore no Advice in General, (nor in particu∣lar by them) can be given. And what then signifies your three great Remedies? no more to be trusted to then broken Reeds, being so far from relieving and supporting a poor Wretch, (that vacillates and staggers up and down, intoxicated with this venomous Disease) that they penetrate and wound him to the Heart, throwing him quickly flat on the ground. If these your great Remedies, be not to be trusted to, how shall any venture upon your small ones? I wish ye had carried them all along with you, both great and small, and we should have had a fair and happy riddance both of such useless Doctors and the like remedies together. Then perhaps this populous City would have given an ear to those Physicians and reme∣dies, which are neither generally nor particularly dangerous, as they were formerly falsly accused by you. It is one of the greatest Riddles in the world to me, that some men, very perspicacious and knowing in other things, should suffer their lives to be thus trifled and squandred away by these Galenists, the best whereof dare not confide in their own three great Remedies, and withall deter others from the use of them, being conscious to themselves that they are not really worthy of the name of Remedies, or any way to be trusted to for the cure of this fierce Sickness. We supplicate the immense God he would be pleased to give the worthy Magistrates of this City an understanding heart, that they may consult, and forthwith execute, what may be efficacious for the preventing the Depopulation and ruine that is like to be from this Contagion.
Wherefore we shall humbly propose that there may be a competent number of such able Chymical Physicians employ∣ed, that may visit the infected in this City, take them by the hand, cheare them up by couragious Expressions, giving them those Active Medicines, that will (Auspice Den) if the Poison have not too far seized upon the Spirits, mortifie and expel it; using all industry whatsoever to preserve the rest of the family from Contagion; to purifie the Air, to clense the utensils of the house to purpose from any venomous Odour: which we will undertake to perform, depending upon the bounty and free gift of the Magistrate as we may deserve, (only we desire we may have Commission, encouragement and countenance from him) without contracting for a Stipend in a higling manner, as the Galenists of late insisted upon, and a certain Chymist too much a Suffenus postulated, when his Majesty out of his gracious care for the Town of South-Hampton, commanded an election to be made of an able Spagyrist to be dispatched away forthwith for the stopping the ra∣ging infection in that place. The person whose fortune it was to be chosen, could not rest himself satisfied with the Kings royal word and pleasure (which would have been reward enough to a truely-ingenuous man) but he must stand upon stipulation, upon a contract and mercenary terms, with the most potent Prince in Christendome, to the great prejudice and disgrace of this noble Art, and the disrepute of the Lear∣ned professors thereof: which unhandsome Action I for my part declare to the world, utterly to disowne, and shall always renounce the subscription to such dirty things: and to take off any aspersion upon my self in this particular, I openly protest that it was done without my consent or knowledg, having not been at their Convention this half year. For I am resolved ne∣ver to joyne with some men that carry an Enterprise to bring a black cloud upon learning, and a vile estimation upon Schools of sound Education; and shall always defend Decency, Eutaxie, and good Government in the Church and State: although the Galenical Gastri-mytho's, those deluding Whisperers, have otherwise (but falsly) represented me to the world, by the mouth of that paltry fellow Iohnson. Yet thus much I profess▪
that I shall not be wanting to give due Respect to the meanest Chymist whatsoever in his Station, supposed he be Philoma∣thes, a well-wisher to Literature, Industrious, Conscientious, and Honest in his way; and shall also joyn with him (as it be∣comes me) for the promotion of the Spagyrical faculty, and give thanks to him for the least mite of knowledge he shall cast into this vast Philosophical Gazophylacium, wherein are contained profound pyrotechnical Secrets. After this little digression, let's return and address our selves to the prudent Senators of this great City, to whom we hum∣bly tender our service in our Profession for the good of the distressed Nation, not in a precarious manner, for want of Em∣ployment, or a lucriferous design for our own Interest and self∣ends (which we scorn and detest, not unwitting that merx ultro∣nea putet, offered Ware stinks) but really and cordially for the relief principally of our Calamitous Neighbour, whose Skin is daily Sacrificed to Moloch. If we receive an Auspicious and serene Influence from Au∣thority, we shall plainly demonstrate, that (imploring a blessing from the Father of Lights) we are able to save those who would otherwise perish in the hands of the Galenists: and then we doubt not, deserving well herein, our generous Covernours will shew themselves grateful to us, and will in some propor∣tion recompence us according to our merits: if not, ipsa qui∣dem virtus sibimet pulcherrima merces; we shall rest our selves contented that we have done what becomes honest and know∣ing Physicians: and that no Exceptions may be taken at us by a company of meerly Titular Pharisaical Chrysalides or outsides, some of us here nominated do declare without cracking osten∣tation (common to our Antagonists) that we can vindicate our selves Graduates, having taken the degree of Doctors ex con∣dign as in right we deserve it, not as a company of unworthy Medicasters, Asini Phalerati, that have acquired it by Custom, Money, or the intercession of Friends; whose nakedness would become shamefully ridiculous and contemptible to the world, if they were stript of their Doctoral Gowns. For our parts, we had rather be what we ought, then seem to be: and to
this I doubt not but most (if not all the persons here menti∣oned) will subscribe. Chymical Doctors. Chymical Students and Practitioners. Dr Iohn Frier. Mr Thornly. Dr Ios. Dey. Mr Tho. Norton. Dr William Currer. Mr Mar. Nedham. Dr Thomas Troutbeck. Mr Tho. Odowd. Dr Ever. Maynwaring. Mr Tho. Williams. Dr P. Massonet. Mr Iere. Astel. Dr Spranger. Mr Ed. Cooke. Dr Horsington. Mr Horsnel. Dr Geo. Thomson. Mr Febure.   Mr Tho. Smart.   Mr Kefler.   Mr Tho. Tillison.   Mr Wilson.
Elogium Sulphuris: A brief Commendation of the admirable Vertues of SULPHUR. SIth many of our unfavoury Galenists, whom 'twas high time to lay aside, are become on a sudden Mercuries, ('tis strange by what art, considering their Dulness, and corpulent indisposition) and have taken their flight from us, (certainly Timor addidit Alas) we know not whither, perhaps into the New world in the Moon; Farewel Frost: Better lost then found: and we hope we shall never see them more. However, we are very glad they have left us Sulphur be∣hinde: truly no thanks to them; for in promptu causa est, the reason is plain: it is too divine and pure a thing, accord∣ing to the Greek Etymon, for such terrestrial, foeculent Hu∣morists to meddle with. Yet perhaps they would have at∣tempted to have deprived us of it, if their departure had not been velcior Euro, being hurried away in Post-haste: and Needs must be go the devil drives. Withal, I call to minde, they do not much care for fire and brimstone, forasmuch as it is of too hot a temperament, and puts them in minde of another world, where the Causos or Burning Fever much reigns. Thus far Comically. To be serious. We have great cause to magnifie the Pantocrator and wise Disposar of all things, who hath bestowed upon poor unwor∣thy Man so choice and rare a thing as the common Mineral Sulphur in so plentiful a measure. It is deservedly called , divine, from its excellent endowments, and eminent Medicinal properties. There is reckoned two sorts of it.
One (which is the best) is called by Hippoc. , because it hath not gone thorow the torture or trial of the fire: it is named in the Shops, Sulphur vive, Graec. , in that it being set on fire, burneth all away, without leaving any considerable caput niort or dross behinde. The other sort, that is usually made up into Magdaleons of a Cylindrical figure, is extracted out of Pyrytes, the Copper∣stone, and other Marchasites. This is justly counted the wor∣ser sort, having something Arsenical in it, a kinde of poisonous fume arising from the Pyrytes. Now the Sulphur vive was that Hippocrates made use of in∣wardly and outwardly, with which he provoked (as Helment sets down) large Sweats in the Plague, impregnating or filling generous Wine with the Gas or Spiritus Sylvestris, a most spi∣rituous substance of Sulphur, set on fire after this manner: He took an indifferent large narrow-mouth'd Glass, putting in∣to it a Match made with Brimstone, set on fire; with which after he had sufficiently filled the Glass with fumes, he stopped it close, suffering it to stand till such time the foresaid fume fixed to the sides of the Vial; and then poured so much wine into it, that filled about a third part thereof: and stopping the mouth of the Glass very close, he shaked it notably, so long, till it had imbibed or taken up all the Gas, or subtil fume of Brimstone: and this Sulphurated wine did the good old man give often with a little Fluxed Salt, for prevention of the Pest, and promotion of the Cure. Which preparation I cannot but highly commend to the world, being ascertained of the excellent vertue thereof in resisting Contagion and Corrupti∣on, having in it something Antidotal adaequately proportio∣nable to such an Exquisite Poison; being easily mixable with our Archaeus, and thereby mortifying the invisible Atoms of the Pest, it rectifies the pernicious odour thereof. Needs must that which so powerfully preserves bodies from fermen∣tation, acidity, and putrefaction, be a prevalent Remedy a∣gainst this contagious disease. It is very remarkable, that any liquor or juyce well satiated with this fume, will keep fourty times longer then it would do otherwise, as I have often tried in several various humid bodies. Moreover, I know not a
better Antidote against the poyson of a putid Slut; for her nastiness shall hardly offend a man, if the utensils and what she prepares have a sufficient Tang from this purifying flame. It kills most Insects, especially Lice, if the Linnen and Woollen Clothes be throughly and to a purpose sulphurated therewith, that the fume may penetrate them. Now this is not to be done carelesly and slightly, as I generally observe it is ordered. For as good never a whit▪ as never the better. He that desires to reap the benefit of this divine Concrete, ought to put the quantity of a Walnut or more into an earth∣en pint-Poringer, setting it over quick coales till it take fire, placing it in the middle of a room, or the foot of the stairs, that every nook and corner may be delibuted and tinged with its odour, doing thus four or five times a day. For pre∣venting or taking off any infection from Clothes, set this por∣ringer with the Sulphur kindled, into a Paile or Firkin, and lay upon the mouth of it your Garments, turning them with discretion. If any thing be well filled with this Sulphureous spi∣rit, the contagion will hardly take hold of it: if infected, it may easily be carried off by some repetitions of the ascending fume. Take notice that there ought not to be added or mixed with Brimstone any thing extraneous, as Pitch, Tarr, Rosin, or the like; for thereby you do but castrate or geld it of some part of its vertue, as some Adulterators commonly do, that they may the better cover over their imposture of selling it at an excessive rate: thus▪ suffitibus sua Apocrypha annexuit Satan, Most divine things are polluted by humane Inventions; but let it be sincere and pure without fraud. What an excellent Treasury of rich endowment the great Creator hath infused into the Sulphurs of all Concretes, acute Helmont hath plainly discovered: for, saith he, In Sulphure sunt fermenta, fracedines, odores, sapores specifici seminum, ad quasvis transmutationes. These are mysterious Stories to the Galenists, every whit as strange to them, as Regeneration was to Nicodemus: Where∣fore I shall leave them to their wilfully-desired ignorance, without pitie, or further instruction: for I see they are best
affected with a nihil scire, so it be lucriferous in their profes∣sion, and that's to them amabilis Insania, & mentis gratissimus Error. Yet what mundified Sulphurs can perform, I shall in part satisfie the more ingenious, by the benefit that may accrue to Mankinde from the use of the three fore-mentioned Reme∣dies of the inferiour Tribe, which principally consist of Ve∣getal and Mineral Sulphurs well purified. To conclude, my advice is, that who desire to preserve themselves from this present Pest, do drink every morning ei∣ther Sulphurated Wine, Strong Beer, or what Liquor they please, wherein hath been steeped a large quantity of Horse∣Radish-root, with five, six, seven, eight, nine or ten drops of good Spirit of Salt; and no doubt they will finde a far better effect, then from a Galenical Electuary of London-Treacle and Wood-Sorrel. FINIS.
