T1897 11957830 51567
AN ENCOMIASTCK, OR, ELEGIACK ENƲMERATION Of the Noble ATCHIEVEMENTS, and Unparallel'd SERVICES, done at LAND and SEA, BY THAT TRULY HONOURABLE GENERALL, ROBERT BLAKE Esq Late one of his HIGHNES'S GENERALLS at Sea; who after nine yeares Indefatigable SERVICE in that high Employment, Exchanged this Earthly TABERNACLE, for an Eternall HOUSE, Not made with hands, Blessedly dying in the Lord, in Plimouth Sound, September the seventh, 1657. AGED 59. LONDON, Printed by Tho: Roycroft, 1658.
AN ENCOMIASTICK, OR, Elegiack Enumeration of the Noble At∣cheivements, and unparallel'd SERVICES, done at Land and Sea, by that truly Honourable GENERALL. ROBERT BLAKE, Esq REnowned Blake, what Trumpet may be found, That can thy matchlesse Praises duely sound? Or what Seraphick Pen, that can set forth, In fitting measures, thy transcendent Worth? And justly warble forth, in saddest straines, Thy death, and losse thereby the Land sustaines? Is that Sidneian spirit, with his dust, Extinct? or for this mournfull Subject must
Heroick Spencer, and that sweet Divine Dubartas, rais'd be from their resting Shryne? Thy signall unexampled Acts to sing; Of which the whole World doth already ring; Which if in order we must needs recount, Our mean unpolisht Quill they far surmount, That to thy merit we shall in debt remain, So great a sum not able to attain: Leaving a Richer pen the same to pay, Whilst in the Common stock our Mite we lay. When first Bellona did fair Albion greet With dreadfull Larums in the open street, And when that high and Roman-like dispute Of the Militia, did in feild recruit Two Armies, t'wixt the late unhappy King And Parliament, from whence as from a spring, Ran Seas of bloud throughout this Isle, which had Drown'd all, but that Jehovah it forbad. Commissions of Array are issu'd out, Which doth disturb the trembling land throughout Blake now stands up without delay or fear, 'Gainst the Tyrannick Levies doth appear; And with those noble Patriots of the West, A Captain of stout Foot, himself addrest
With their associate Troops to march and face The Royall forces, who with nimble pace Quitting the feild, to Sherborne do retreat, That ancient Castle, Digbies stately Seat: From thence are forc't with tedious March to flye, To the Cornubian Mountains strong and high, And there divided, some away do post, Through swelling Severn, to the Cambrian Coast And fenced Hils of Wales, for shelter where Th' old Brittains by the Romans chased were. So after many signall proofs shew'n forth, Of his Heroick prowesse and true Worth, At Bodmyn, Bristoll, and at Launsdown fight, And at Bridgewater (where he first saw Light) Though by just Providence, and Heavens Decree, We were deny'd a Conquest yet to see, And Royall Charles had subjugate the West, And two full Winters, had the same possest. He now arriveth to the Councill great, Thereof a Member, to consult and treat, Of State-concernments (where sometimes did vote His grave Progenitors, there to promote The common good) and so with great Applause, 'Mongst other Worthies, he that publick cause, Twixt Prince and People then in high Debate, Is call'd with dint of Sword to vindicate.
And speedily on Neptunes Chariot sent, Commander of a valiant Regiment, Rais'd by stout Popham of Illustrious Rank, And timely landing on the Western Bank. I. LYme to releive, that old Maritime Seat By faithfull Celey kept, with hazard great, Near gasping, as beleagur'd strongly by A Rhenish Princes Army strong and high, Form'd of all Nations, who like ravenous Bears, Thirst after English bloud, whilst he prepares Himself for Sallies, and through help divine The bold Assailants slaies like heards of Swine: Prince Maurice still recruits, still is repel'd With losse of thousands, and at last compel'd To quit the Leagure with his Princely Train, Not daring fiery Lyme to face again. II. HE having now payd to Jehovah high, His vows and thanks for this first Victory, In triumph hence doth march, bent to set free, The Neighbouring places that in thraldome be,
(Assisted by stout Pye from Essex sent, That Peer renown'd, in Armes so eminent) To that strong Castle founded by King Ine, Of Saxon Race, seated as t'were on Rhyne, Or rather Eden sweet, a land so blest, Call'd vulgarly, The Garden of the West. And herein yet more happy, that brave Blake, His first breath in this fertile soile did take, Gainst this strong hold, cal'd Taunton, that fair town (By high-born Stawell kept) he sitteth down, Soon forcing the Besieged to submit To his Conditions: They forthwith do quit A Princely Garrison, stor'd plenteously With all Provisions, here he worthily Is now ordained Governour; but he, As born to high atcheivements, will not be Embas't with rest or sloath, but prudently Foresees approaching storms; for suddenly Great Forces under Wyndham are drawn out, This growing Garrison to quell and rout; Whilst with few men, but by him spirited, And by his Fortitude and Wisdome led, With sallies strong, the potent Foe he plies, That with great losse, and greater shame he flies.
III. YEt here the Royall Party will not rest, But fresh alarums do him still infest, On suddain, loe, a formidable Hoast Commanded by the Cheiftains, and the most Stout Greenfeild, Goring, Hopton, breathing out, Nought else but fire & sword the camp throughout Here might you hear the Irish Tories thunder, More hideous threats then Cannon, that asunder The Castle seem'd to rend: Lo like a floud, Great multitudes have broke the Line, now bloud Is like to dye fair Tone, or rather make New Rivers in the streets, all lies at stake; Women and Children, nought but gastly death, Beholding, and half dead, do gasp for breath. Yet here great wonders wrought by those Tauntonian Blades, the over-flowing foes Are bravely checkt, and stopped at a Bay, And forc't to fight at pistoll shot, by day And night, from house to house, untill the Foe Repulst, such fury could not undergoe: Now are made good the words somtimes he spake, By inches they their bloudy way should make, And yet poor Soules, have lost their way at last, As into darknesse and confusion cast.
And when that Goring sent to him in scorne A tatterd drum, (best suting their forlorn Condition) for exchange of prisners, he Them kindly treats, and quickly sets them free, And like himself, or like that Greekish Prince, The falling foe vvith kindness doth convince: This one exchange doth to the other add, Returnes the Nuntio vvith nevv rayment cladd. Yea to their great astonishment, upon Their taking of a neighbouring Garrison, Insulting proudly vvith great threats and jeers, The Churches bells he ringeth in their eares, And thereby quickly checks their pride and rage, Of their ensuing fall a sad presage. Redoubted Welden loe, that man of Kent, VVith seasonable succour hither sent, From th' hills appeares: the harrast foe again Doth raise his seidge, and fairly leaves his slain By thousands to their Mother Earth, to feed The hungry vvormes, vvhich lookt before indeed For other flesh, vvhilst mercy vvith strong hands Out of the raging fire, pulls us as brands.
IV. THe Kingly forces never rest nor cease, From their implacate Wrath, which doth in∣crease, Still hotly thirsting for the bloud of those, Who meerly in their own defence arose Fresh Armies now are levied, to pull down The haughty courage of this sturdy Town, By a third sidge more dreadfull then the rest, Which kindles flames of valour in the breast Of this stout Hector, made for dangers great, Like that great Greek that did Darius beat. Here Goring cheif Commander, vowes to lay His bones, and not retreat or march away, Till that proud Castle were reduc't, just then When Naseby batrell wavering stood, and when He straightly summond was by royall call, To aid his King on that day verticall. The gallant Governour well knowing all These passages, together he doth call His Captains, cheares his warlike boies, who like Lyons fall on, and with amazement strike The Royalists, whose stout heart will not yeild, Till master'd by a stouter in the feild.
Here now that joyfull sound of Naseby fight Was heard, like sweetest musick for delight, After sad thunder-cracks let England sing Still that appealing victory, and bring Fresh Laurells to adorn that glorious field, Whilst to th' Almighty we due praises yield. Now noble Fairfax doth victoriously, March to releeve the Western parts, that lye Opprest; the same at once releives, and meets Another Conquest in brave Taunton streets, Atchiev'd by Blake, who solemn Thanks ordaines, Unto the highest, who for ever raignes. V. ANd now to march forthwith he doth prepare To Dunster, that strong towring castle, where The wasting pestilence of late did rage, Which God was pleas'd on his approach t' asswage, The foes great obstinacy did him move, To spring a Myne: the lofty walls above Mount in the Aire, some dead, some living are, In those great heaps blown up, the fruits of War, At length dear Blake to thee they did resign, This Castle, by rendition now made thine.
Through Heav'ns fair aspect now, auspicious Peace, Begins to spring, and flagrant armes to cease; To that great Senate, he from bloudy fights Returns, there to assert the peoples rights, And he that was a warriour stout of late, Doth now consult of arduous things of State; Well hoping in the end the sword to see, Into a pruning hook might turned be. VI. BUt lo, sad Rumours from the British Mayne, Our Fleet revolted is, which doth a train Of troubles new, and great combustions breed; For our great sins, a just vindictive meed: Now this brave Senator must once again, Harnesse himself, more honour yet to gain For his great merit elected Generall, And as the first fruits of this publick call, Those Princely pyrates from Kingsale doth rout, Rupert and Maurice both, two Princes stout; From thence hee to th' Herculean straights doth chase These German Exiles, who from place to place Pursu'd. Within th' Hetrurian seas (which do The worlds terrestriall Globe divide in two)
Are forced with their winged fleet to fly Unto the Caribean Isles, to lye At mercy of the deep, and on that coast, The greatest part of those great Ships, yea most Of those seduc't soules, with Prince Maurice sinke, As lead in mighty waters, (sad to think) VII. HE now for Yagus banks doth streer his fleet, And with his thundring squadrons Lisbon greet, Which did the English so much wrong of late, And for it must account unto the State; Mean while those rich Brasilian Ships arrive, Which with nine others, outward bound do strive Him to escapein vain, neere all made prize By his successfull fleet, who like a wise, As well as gallant Captain, by his care, For this great spoile, a Convoy doth prepare, With this mellifluous Trophy from Brasill, Which with its sweetnes did all England fill, In triumph homewards he his course doth bend, Where publick service doth him still attend, Yea to his praise, this may recorded be, That as the end of wars is peace, so he (After full reparation by them made To th' English) did restore both peace & trade.
VIII. A Famous Island, and of great import To England, startled with the loud report Of his amazing Actions, trembling stands: To this strong Isle begirt with Rocks and Sands, He sailes, and Greenvil summons, (that stout Knight Then cheif Commander there) the State to right By his surrender, or he must be sure The fury of his valiant arme endure. Whilst Trump then hovering with his Fleet, in vain Solicits with vast summs the same to gain: At length upon Blakes sight he doth retreat, Or rather flye by this Commander great, Now Silly is reduced to the State, And joy of English Merchants, who of late Could not for fear of this new Dunkirk trade, So rich and high, by warlike plundrings made. IX. IMpregnate Dunkirk, once our freind, but now Our foe, if noble, will with homage bow To him, as twere once holding in his hands The scales of France and Spain on either Sands,
As Umpire, he decides and weighes the town, Freely to Spain, for Englands great renown, Though that Ledean Marquesse did him treat▪ And him carrest in vain with presents great; Yet not without a rich and glorious prize As unto them, so to himselfe, whose wise And brave couduct, six warlike Ships did seise, No lesse then Princes stile we two of these; Great Neptune with his triple Scepter dread, Princesse Maria eke with crowned head, All captive led by this great Admirall, VVhich did the conquerd French so much appall. X. NOr can we Jersey Isle in silence passe, So neer an hostile Coast that seated was, And by a mighty Monarch then protected, From his black stormes, yet was by him subjected; VVhich France beholding, from her lofty strand, At such portentous acts, doth trembling stand, And seeing Holland since in humble wise Strike to our Flag, her Peace of England buyes. XI. HE yet engag'd is in more dreadfull fights, Which all the World, on every cost affrights,
New fires of warre betwitx two protestant And neighbour Nations kindled are, which want Not Romes fomenters, which the Brittish, French, And the Batavian sea's, could hardly quench, That thunder striking, and Dutch Admirall, Which Scilly late did court, that Hanniball, With fair pretexts, attempteth to surprize Our Royall Downes, a sore unto his eyes. Our watchfull Scipio, now in the great James, By him made greater, soon appears and tames The Belgick Lyon, vvith his roaring whelps, Though three to one, the Lord of Hosts still helps Such as on him in just appeals depend, And to that righteous Judge their cause commend. XII. OUr nevv made foe hence beaten novv vve see; Whose fate pursues them humbled more to be, The boundless love of trade, transports on post These famous Merchants to th' Orcadian coast, To force our Calidonian fishes there, Of vvhose bones, as they bruit, first founded vvere The vvalls of Amsterdam, that Magazine On Texel Bancks, vvhich to their Fleet hath been. He vvith his Eagle fleet soon them pursues, Their num'rous men of vvar sinks & subdues,
The Busses takes, the one his Justice feels, The other tasts his mercy, hence he wheels His winged frigots, when our ancient right He had restor'd by his unconquer'd might, And so with shoutings homeward sailes, where lo More dismall actions he must undergo. XIII. ANd shall we Portland name, ah Portland fight, Where mortall wound first seiz'd this noble Wight? Yet to his glory, where behold the high And mighty States brought low, he gallantly Triumphing sails through seas of Belgick bloud, Though wounded, whilst the Sun eclipsed stood, Through that black storm, & that tempestuous fight Three winters dayes, (like a continuall night) Which lasted, whilst that he the day to gain, Doth in his grisly wounds on deck remain, As in triumphall chair, would not retire For his more speedy cure, but is on fire, And thereby with new courage doth inflame His English Trojans, to their lasting fame, But terror of the foe, who now orethrown Post homewards, there this fatall blow to moan: But stay my Muse, here noble Monck we must And gallant Dean, salute with honour just,
His brave compeers, whose gallantry shown here, Posterity in leaves of Fame may hear. XIV. ANd after some small intervall of rest, Scarce cur'd, he buckles for the last contest Against the Dutch, though much impaired by His martiall hurts, received formerly; Inducing him to say, he was more fit, For some sick Hospitall, then brave Dewit And valiant Trump to fight, yet he again With mind above his strength, and not in vain Takes Neptunes field, and on the Flemish floud, Releives brave Dan and Monck, engag'd in bloud, Whose valiant Acts, and high atcheivements then In that sharpe fight, deserve a golden pn: The English Standard then by Blake displaid In Lawreat Essex, finds the foe dismaid. Here now in sight of both the Nations, you Great earthquakes on each shore, might sadly view, Made by those horrid thunders which did quell Their Navy, where their cheifest Piller fell, VVith whose dear bloud the greatest victory Was gained by our Fleet, for that hereby
Twixt ancient friends is wrought a lasting peace, For mutuall Commerce, and their joyes encrease: His former wish he now fullfill'd doth see, So often by him mention'd, that as he The Tragick prologue of this warre hath seen, So might a happy period, which hath been Accomplisht in his eyes: Let Spain and Rome Hence read with greif and rage their fatall doome. XV. ANd now we see the seat of gastly warre, Remov'd from home to forraign countries far Unto a wrathfull foe inveterate, Whose Character in bloudy lines bear Date From Eighty eight; and so unwearied Blake Plowes up the Southern seas, his way to make, And in those boistrous flouds, to him well known Before proud Cadiz strand, as on his own, One Winter full did ride, vvhich Drake did never, Nor Hawkins, or brave Forbisher endeavour, Nor yet the hardy Dutch, (vvhose proper seat And Element, is in the Waters great) Did ere assay; though all the World abroad, And both the Indies, be their common Road.
XVI. PRoud Malega, how was thy roaring mouth Muzled by him the terror of the south, When thy strong mould was seiz'd, thy thundring guns Speekt up, and all the town affrighted runs, Thy warlike fleet, though scaping storms & winds Abroad, no harbour in thy Harbour findes; But are destroy'd all in thy smoaking Bay, Unto his fiery Engines made a prey. XVII. HOw suddenly doth Vigo now bemoan The like disaster with a howling tone? When Vulcan, Mars, and Neptune all conspire Her Merchants and her men of Warre by fire And sword to spoile: Whilst he doth leave the Port And Ships, all flaming in prodigious sort. XVIII. YEa Tunis that old punick City quakes, And at great distance strong Allarum takes, As though the Roman Legions on their shore, Appear'd: the Turks are summond to restore
Our English goods and captives but refuse, And therefore must expect no other news Then Cannon peals, whilst he doth seise their port, And charge the Infidels up to their Fort. Twelve stately ships of warre, behold in flames Consuming are, whereby he quickly tames, Their Cham-like spirit by his unconquer'd power, Whilst raging fires the Vessells do devoure. The poor Mahometans do trembling fly, From their strong Holds to Mountaines that were nigh Whence like so many fiends of blackest hue, (With scaring horrid faces) they migh view, In those sulphureous fiery streams below, A new Gehenna, to their greater woe. A day so dark the Ottomanian fear'd A fall, and th' horned Moon in bloud appear'd, That old Republick, and brave Virgin City, Nere ravisht yet by Warlike foe, though pity So Romanized, that Virago stout, Which at Lepanto fight the Turks did rout, Fair Venice novv vvith shouts doth gratulate The English Affrican, who now in state From his late Conquest saileth by their shore, Where loudest trumpets sound, where cannons rore (Leading his ransom'd ones the Christian slaves From Turkish yoke, rescu'd as from their graves)
As if triumphant Caesar vvere in fight, Returning novv from the Pharsalian sight. He leaving these poor Caitiffs to lament This dolefull losse, for more Exploits is bent. XVIII. BUt vvhere vvas novv th' Iberian God, that should Protect those Galleons huge so fraught vvith gold? That the Peruvian mines exhaust vvere neer, The golden age again seem'd to appear: Was Baal journying then, or else asleep, So great a treasure could no better keep? Or did that Babylonish Prince novv hope To be install'd fift Monarck by the Pope? And build a nevv Escuriall for so high A Majesty? Lo all triumphantly, In streams of Spanish bloud neer Cadiz sands, Doth flovv into those still victorious hands Of him and noble Mountague, his dear Colleague, novv honour'd to convoy and steer This Princely Prize, and treasure so immense Bound for th' Elisian Thames, design'd from thence A Present, only for a Soveraign meet, A Conquerour of Kings, vvhom novv vve greet,
A greater then that Macedonian Prince, Or any Heroe, that hath ere been since; For he did mostly barbarous foes defeat, This the most civill, vvarlike, truly great, VVith greatest joy uniting Nations three, By threefold cord, not ever like to be Dissolv'd, ne're yet so firm in any age, One Law, one Faith, one Bloud; vvhich may pre∣sage Fair Halcyon daies, our Brittish Annalls may Cromwell the great, vvell stile him from this day, The midland seas, which many years him knevv, And Tribute to him paid, bids now adiew, To this European Ajax; ne're again The like to see, vvhile Sun and Moon remain. XIX. THe Islands falsly called fortunate, Do trembling gaze, at their approching fate, And vvhere's a Homer novv, that fully may His last stupendious act to life pourtray? A Theam as noble, as the Trojan story, VVhich filld all pens and ages vvith its glory.
He now against this scarlet whoore of Rome, As born to execute the vvritten doome, And as inspired (from all fear exempt) The grand Canarian crosse he doth attempt, Which had the Indian Mynes some few dayes past, Neer drain'd, and now possest those treasures vast: Twice eight great warlike ships he doth assaile, And up unto the Castle▪ walls doth saile, All that great fleet, those mighty Galleons he With golden Argos burneth (sad to see) In those huge Bonfires made a Sacrifice Unto the Bachanalian God: Whose eyes Dim waxed to behold the Ocean wide By those Aetnean fires almost dry'd, To see such flames and unheard thunders heare That Sancta Cruz, and all the Isle did fear On that black day the world would be dissolv'd, And in another Chaos be involv'd. The Dolphins by those flashy clattrings scar'd, From their own proper Region are debar'd, And forc't to fall into a watry hell, Their sad exile, there to bewaile and tell. The frighted foot which from the lined strand, Saw seas of bloud, now will no longer stand,
But from those fenced walls and bulwarks strong, To lofty Tenariff did run, among The craggy rocks and caves, themselves to hide, Such blasting stormes not able to abide. What ailed thee great mountain and proud peeke, That shelter for thy selfe thou now didst seek? Who to thy forlorn fugitives should be A Sanctuary, when they fled to thee. Why didst thou quake, skie-daring mount, so high That into Heaven thou presum'st to pry? From the Creation, seeming to be fixt, Above the middle Region, and there mixt Amongst the starrs, from fiery Meteors free, Or didst thou fear, that now fulfill'd should be That sacred Prophecy? that by the power Of faith remov'd, the Seas should thee devour? Those Indian silver Mynes, and wealth so vast, For Spanish Craesus hither sent, are fast In durance kept, and like to perish here, Made uselesse to their Masters, or in fear Of English Frigots, that perhaps may seize Those golden heaps, if they appear on seas.
XX. HEnce fully fraught with glory, now he steeres His course for Sally (where he soon appears) That little Egipt, and most dolefull Cell, Which held some of our English Israel In bonds; he maketh there a noble peace, And freely doth the Christian slaves release, Whence gone, he takes another glorious spoile, Still providence on his designes doth smile. XXI. A Little army of Canarian Dons, From th Indies come, he taketh, now in bonds Attending this great Victor to performe Their Obsequies to him in solemne forme, Who, after thousand stormes, to which enur'd He was, and noble wounds by him endurd, Of which he languisht, now return'd in peace To English port, did there alass decease, Yet gloriously, where he did sacrifice, For us his dearest bloud, deaths greatest prize, When many hundreds he had tane of late, Now to a Royall Chappell brought in State,
For his devotion ye'rst to him well known, Amongst the Kings interr'd, and neer to one, That Prince of peace, which joyn'd in Hymens band The two divided houses of our Land. If now some Brittish Plutarck kindly prest VVith love of vertue sparkling in his breast, Should in historick stile limme out this brave And English Aristides, and from grave, Redeem his memory, for his Renown, This one thing more, (his worthy Gests to crown) May added be, the glory of them all, That during those long VVarres, wherein the fall Of thousands he beheld, as many rise To fortunes high, (true valours meed and prize) Yet he post poning with heroick zeale, His private interest to the publick weale, Himself would not advance by those vast spoiles, Still him attending from those bloudy broiles, (Though millions seiz'd by his conduct so skil'd In armes and Counsell, the English Coffers fil'd) VVho with his native portion well content, For his dear countries good, was gladly spent. VVhat Marble Pile, what Monument for thee, Great Brittains sheild, Spains scourge, now rais'd shal be?
That may our English Heroes animate, Thy matchles worth (brave Blake) to emulate; And to succeeding times, eternize may Thy name, and thee entitle from this day A Saint devout, for learning Socrates, A Cato just, for valour Hercules. ANd thou great Oliver, thy sword gird on, Ride forth and prosper, Truths great Champi∣on, Against that Romish beast, Jehovah send Such Leaders still, thy high designs t' attend: That so that glorious work advanc't so far, Against proud Babel, by a holy warre, May under thy conduct yet farther thrive, And to perfection in the end arrive, Yea crowned with this Epinicion be Great Babilon is fall'n, and that by thee. FINIS.
