T2847 12684084 65722
TRVE NEVVES FROM YORKE. Consisting of severall Matters of Note, and High Concernment, since the 13. of Iune, concerning these severall heads, viz. CONCERNING 1. Sir Iohn Meldrun. 2. L. Marq. Hamilton. 3. Earle of Newcastle. 4. Earle of Warwick. 5. Lord Willoughbie. 6. Duke of Richmond. 7. L. Marq. Hertford. 8. Earle of Bristoll. 9. Lord Paget. Whereunto is added Newes from Ireland. viz. CONCERNING 1. E. of Antrime. 2. E. of Castlehaven. 3. Lord Conway. 4. Lord Digby. With a Catalogue of the Names of the Lords that Sub∣scribed to Levie Horse to Assist his Majestie in de∣fence of of His Royall person, the two Houses of Parliament, and the Protestant Religion. London Printed for M. T. 1642.
TRVE NEVVES FROM YORKE. Since Monday the thirteenth of Iune. 1642. SIR Iohn Meldrun hath sent a Letter to the King, to advise Him to submit to the Parlia∣ment, and His Maiestie hath given Meldruns place to Ma∣ster Hilliard a Yorkeshire Gentleman that tooke Sir Iohn Hothams Ensigne. The Lord Marquesse Hammiltoun hath
made a speech to the King to vindicate him∣selfe of the Iealousies that are and have been upon him, wherein he protests, not onely his owne loyaltie and fidelitie to His Maie∣stie, but undertakes with the ingagement of his person and Fortunes for all his Countrey men the Scots, that they are His Maiesties undoubted faithfull Subiects and Servants, and are and will be ready to lay downe their lives and fortunes for his Maiesty whenso∣ever he shall be pleased to command them, and they have sent an Admonition to the Parliament to agree and submit to their good King. The Earle of Newcastle is made Gover∣nour of Newcastle, and is now there in the Towne with a Troope of Horse, and a Re∣giment of Foote, consisting of 1200. The Earle of Warwick had a designe with three Ships to have surpized Newcastle and held it for the Pariament The Lord Willoughby of Parham hath committed a Mssenger of the Kings, that was ent with the Kings proclamaton to the Maior of Linclne, and hath sent him
with a Guard to the Parliament, and com∣manded the Maior to attend at Yorke. The King and the Lords declare together the Lords having unanimiously resolved to defend the Kings person, and have there∣unto all of them set their hands, and are readie to raise a great Army, the Duke of Richmond an hundred Horse, the Lord Mar∣quesse Hertford an hundred Horse, and the rest of the Lords each of them forty or fifty Horse, being present above forty Lords at∣tending His Majestie. The Earle of Bristoll is come to Yorke, and the Lord Paget is come and hath begged His pardon, and is now all for the King, and will set forth a Declara∣tion how much he hath been abused. The King hath set forth a Narration, and hath sent Articles of Accomodation of his owne to the parliament, absolutely refusing theirs, he hath offered a generall pardon to all but nine, which are the five Members formerly impeached, and Hotham, Martin, Ludlowe, and worth.
NEWES FROM IRELAND. THat the Earle of Antrim is taken prisoner by the Scots, the Earle of Castlehaven commit∣ted at Dublin and charged with high Trea∣son, The Lord Conway being Martiall of Ireland is reported to be so poore a spirited man, that hee hath ioyned with the Scots, and put himselfe un∣der the command of Colonel Munroe, and it is much feared the English and Scots will fall toge∣ther by the Eares, for the Scots grow so insolent they are not to be endured. The Lord Digby of Ireland is dead, and honest Francis Palmes of a disease in Ireland that they fear is the plague, and our English are in all kind of wants that can be imagined. The Dutchesse of Buckingham is landed at Ches∣ter, and is comming to settle her selfe at a House of hers in Nottinghamshire. The KING in His propositions of Accom∣madations doth declare that he will have the last Remonstarance taken out of the Parliament Rolls and disavowed to be the Act of both, or either, House of Parliament; That he will have the Par∣liament forthwith adjourned either to one of the Vniversities, or the Cities of Yorke, Bristoll, Win∣chester, Salisbury, or Coventry; and then he will sit with them. And that there be a time limited for the dispatch of all Businesse and a concluding
of this Parliament. And His Majesty doth fur∣ther declare in another Declaration assented unto by the Lords here, that whosoever shall furnish the Parliament with Horse, Armes, or Money, they shall be proceeded against with all legall se∣verity, and that whosoever on the contrary shall funish His Majesty with any of them for the per∣forming of the Peace of the Kingdome; His Ma∣jsty will protect them, and repay them what thy shall disburse by assurance out of His Parkes Houses, Lands, &c. A Catalogue of the Names of the Lords that Subscri∣bd to Lvie Horse to asist His Maestie in defence of His Royall Person, the two Houses of Parliament, and the Protestant Religion. Yorke the 22. of June. 1642. VVHereas it may be collected by severall Declarati∣ons printed in the name of both Houses of Parlia∣ment: That the Kings sacred person, the Houses of Parliament, the Protestant Religion, the Lawes of the Land, the Lberty and propriety of the Subject, and the priviledges of Parliament are all in danger. We whose names are under-written doe voluntarily offer and severally ingage our selves, according to the following Subscripti∣ons, to assist his Majesty in defence of his Royall Person, the two Houses of Parliament, the Protestant Religion, the Lawes of the Land, the Liberty and propriety of the Subject, and priviledges of Parliament, when his Majestie shall have given commission under the Great Seale, for levying of Forces for those purposes a∣gainst all power, levies and forces whatsoever, or to be raised, up∣on any pretence whatsoever:
To pay Horses for three Months, thirty dayes to the Month, at two shillings six pence per diem, still advanceing a Months pay, the first payment to begin so soon as the King shall call for it, af∣ter the Commissions shall be issued under the Great Seale. In this number are not to be reckoned the Horses of the Subscribers, or those that shall attend them. Horse THe Prince 200 The Duke of Yorke 120 Lord Keeper 40 Duke of Richmond 100 Lo. Marquesse Hartford 60 Lo. reat Chamberline 30 Earle of Cumberland 50 Earle of Hington 20 Earle of Bath 50 Earle of Southampton 60 Earle of Dorset 60 Eare of Northampton 40 Earle of Deavonshire 60 Earle of Dover 25 Earle of Cambridge 60 Earle of Bristoll 60 Earle of Westmerland 20 E. of Barkshire & L. Andover 30 Earle of Monmouth 30 Earle Rivers 30 Earle of Carnarvon 20 Earle of Newport 50 Lord Mowbray 50 Lord Willoughby 30 Lord Gray of Ruthin 10 Lord Lovelace 40 Lord Paget 30 Lo. Faulconbridge to come Lord Rich 30 Lord Pawlet 40 Lord Newark 30 Lord Mauntague 30 Lord Coventrey 100 Lord Savill 50 Lord Mohun 20 Lord Dunsmor 40 Lord Seymor 20 Lord Capell 100 Lord Faulkland 20 Master Comptroller 20 Master Secretary Nicholas 20 Lo. chief Justice Banks. 20 The Lord Thanet is not here, but one hath undertaken a hun∣dred for him. Sum. total. 1695. FINIS.
