U126 12493387 62441
URANIA's Temple: OR, A SATYR UPON THE Silent-Poets. Carmina nulla canam — Virg. LONDON, Printed by J. M. and B. B. and are to be Sold by Rich. Baldwin, near the Oxford Arms in Warwick-Lane, 1695.
Urania's Temple: OR, A SATYR Upon the SILENT Poets. BEneath the Foot of proud Pernassus Mount, Water'd by the Eternal hallow'd Fount, Whence th' inspir'd Sisters, the whole sacred Nine Deliver all there Oracles Divine: A Pile their stands, stupendious Work, erect Like Theban Tow'rs, Poetick Architect; Spacious the Walls for the large Quire they bear, For the whole Delphick Hierarchy sing there. Eternal Spring on this blest Temple waits, Laurel the verdant Umbrage round the Gates. Garlands of floury Sweets perfume the Ayre, Our fairest British ROSE the sweetest there. How rich, how all magnificently Great The Tow'rs and Pinnacles of this proud Seat, Enough the monumental Fabrick stands Erected by the MUSES Artist-hands; An easy Cost, nor Wealth can want, nor State, Rais'd by those Founders ev'n whole Worlds create.
Around the Columns in fair Tablet-paints Hang the bright Portraits of Translated Saints, Mosaick Faces all; and all enroll'd Are holy Numbers writ in Leaves of Gold. The IO Paeans to the Mighty Dead, Inauguration Songs to th' Heav'n-crown'd Head. Incense is all the Altar-Offrings here, A Vestals fragrant sigh, or Virgins Tear, Or those more rare all Phenix Spices, LOVE; True Turtle Innocence, the Halcion Dove, So seldom seen below, and so high-priz'd above. The pious Rites that tune this peaceful Sphere (For Harmony's the whole Devotion here) Are Anthems, which exalted Raptures raise Or to some GOD, or God's Vicegerents praise, Crown'd Heads; but Crown'd heads only, the True Race Of the Coelestials, where each heavenly Grace, Religion, Piety, dart their brightest Ray, Virtues that light and warm the World they sway; The whole Divinity the represent: Blessings too seldom to poor Mortals lent. True Copies of their Great Original, Our Songs rare Theme, and honour'd Wonders all. One sacred Vault alone the Temple held, A Casket with uncommon Reliques fill'd. To KINGS by their own Fames embalm'd, the Tomb: Peculiar Grace, and which the narrow room To rich Imperial Dust can only spare; Unless sometimes a hallow'd Bard sleeps there: And 'tis but just, to share one Funeral State The Royal Trump the Royal Urn shou'd wait, The Poet lodg'd so near the Dust of Kings, Beneath the Feet of those Great Lives he sings.
The Goddess of this Roof, (for Oh no less Than an Immortal must this Fane Possess) URANIA of the All the most Divine, Does here in her whole Soveraign Glory shine. 'Twas here, (when, lo, the fatal Call was giv'n, That that Fair SOUL, the brightest Spark of Heav'n, Albion's divine Promethean must ascend, And to Eternal Day new Lustre lend:) As the Apollinanry GOD beheld A BEAM which might ev'n his own Chariot gild, A winged Mercury t' Urania's Shrine, He sent to summon the whole sacred Nine. Th' Etherial Pursevant, what though he rod On Lightning as he flew, a posting God; The Musical Divan was sat before: So swift Great MARYs Trump the Eccho bore, From mourning Thames to th' murmuring Helicon-shore. Now all th' Enthusiastick Quire began In Notes that up to Heavens high Ela ran. No poor Lucinas to that easy Muse, No Powrs were call'd that Poetry t' infuse. The great unstudied Theme so well to those Consenting Raptures, willing Numbers rose: MARY alone could their Inspirer be, The very LIFE they sung all HARMONY. Nor was this Royal Hymn to Light all bound T' Urania's Walls alone: Th' ascending Sound Was hear'd above; hear'd and repeated too, Up to her own Third Heav'n the Muses highest Region flew: Both Quires united Song. Nay, and to fill The sacred Chantry with more Voices still; Ev'n the most humble poorest Shepherd Breed Taught by the soft Alexis well-tun'd Reed,
Their Great PASTORA sung; on every Tree A Chorus, the whole Grove one Rapsodie. The mournful Philomel sat warbling there, Nor wants a Thorn to wake to such an Ayre. Around her a whole Nest of chanting Throats. Ev'n the aspiring Lark, with those rich Notes, Above the very Clouds bears her proud Wings, To mount, if possible, up to the Theme she sings. MARIA's Song (to breath her Oracles The Heavenly Truths, her wondrous Story tells) A Theme, that ev'n inanimate Woods might move; Make every Tree a whole Dodona's Grove. But whilst this Universal Quire thus fill'd The Delphick God (that great All-Eye) beheld, Pleas'd with the mighty Rites; as he look'd round, A sullen Knot of Tongue-tied Sons he found: With Rancour choak'd their Muse all speechless lyes: 'Tis true, a spightful Smile begins to rise; For their whole Souls speak only through their Eyes. Apollinary Heads, Medusa-drest, The Grin, the Hiss, whole Gorgon Snakes their Crest. All true Athenian; for the Muses Spring Has those Night-birds that boot, as those that sing. Not that a cloudy Ignorance had veil'd Their shaded Senses, or their Silence seal'd: But obstinately Mutes; and to their shame A murmuring Race, no strangers to that FAME. Thus ENVY, though a Fiend of inmost Hell, Does still Heav'ns ever nearest Borderer dwell: Where Virtue builds her Throne, she digs her Cell. 'Tis true, not one but a true Mussulman, (So high their mad prophetick Phantoms ran,) Waits th' opening Clouds, a Mecha-pilgrims Ape For wondrous Resurrections all a-gape.
To their great Dagon Hecatombs divine Are all too small: But to Maria's Shrine Not their own Brother Cain's lean Sheaf they bring; No, not an empty stubble Offering. To Truth and Honour they're Nonjurants all: Not one bent-knee to those loath'd Names must fall. But to warp'd Laws, strecht Oaths (all Homage due) Th' old Coronation Cobweb-Lawn still true, There with a keen Toads Eye, and a Larks Wing, They only want th' old Maudlin Quire to sing. This Chaos-brood, the Sons of Discontent, Made up of every jarring Element, Asham'd, I dare not say, (that stranger Grace A Blush was never seen in such a Face) With a disdainful Scorn from this bright Quire To their own darker sullen Cells retire. A House there stands where once a Covent stood, A Nursery still to the old Covent-Brood: This ever hospitable Roof of yore The famous Sign of th' old Osiris bore, A fair red Io, hieroglyphick-fair; For all the suckling Wits oth' Town milcht there. This long old Emblematick, that had past Full many a bleak Winters shaking blast, At last with Age fell down, some say, Confusion, Sham'd and quite dasht at the new REVOLUTION; Dropt out of modesty, (as most suppose) Not daring face the new bright ROYAL ROSE. Here in supiner State, twixt reaking Tiff, And fumigating clouds of Funk and Whiff, Snug in a nook, his dusky Tripos, sits A Senjor Delphick 'mongst the minor Wits;
Fear'd like an Indian God, a God indeed True Indian, smoak'd with his own native Weed. From this oped mouth, soft Eloquence rich Mint Steals now and then a keen well hammer'd Hint, Some sharp State-rallery, or politick Squint, Hard-midwiv'd Wit, Births by slow Labours stopt, Sense not profusely showr'd, but only dropt. Sometimes for Oracles yet more profound, A titillating Sonnet's handed round, Some Abdication-Damon Madrigal His own sowr Pens too overflowing Gall. I must confess, in pure poetick Rage, Bowd down to the old Moloch of that Age, His strange bigotted Muse our wonder saw Tun'd to the late great Court-Tarantula. What though worn out in Pleasures, old and stale the reverend Outly sculkt within the Pale: It was enough like the old Mahomet's Pidgeon He lured to Bread, and maskt into Religion. Had that, now silent, Muse been but so kind As to this Funeral Dirge her Numbers join'd, On that great Theme what Wonders had he told: For though the Bard, the Quill is not grown old, Writes young Apollo still, with his whole Rayes Encircled and enricht, though not his Bays. Thus when the WREATH, so long so justly due, The Great MECENAS from those Brows withdrew, With pain he saw such Merit sunk so far, Shame'd that the Dragons-Tail swept down the Star. Not that the Conscience-shackle tied so hard But had he been the Prophet, as the Bard, Prognostick'd the diminitive slender Birth His Sev'n-hill'd Mountain-labour has brought forth,
His fore-seen Precipice; that Thought alone Had stopt his Fall, secur'd him all our own: Free from his Hypocondriack Dreams he had slept, And still his unsold Esau's Birthright kept. 'Tis thus we see him lost, thus mourn his Fall: That single Teint alone has sullied All. So have I in the Muses Garden seen the spreading Rose, or blooming Jassimine; Once from whose Bosome the whole Hybla-train Th' industrious Treasurers of the rich Plain, Those wingred Foragers for their fragrant Prey, On loaded Thighs bore thousand Sweets away; Now shaded by a sullen venom'd Guest Cankerd and sooted o're t' a Spider's Nest. His Sweets thus sowr'd, what melancholy Change, What an ill-natur'd Lour, a Face so strange, His Life one whole long Scene of all Unrest, And airy Hopes his thin Cameleon-Feast; Pleas'd only with the Pride of being preferr'd The ecchoed Voice to his own listning Herd, A Magisterial Belweather Tupe The Lordly Leader of his Bleating Troop. Methinks I hear ev'n his young Pupils cry, We write a Junior MARY's Elegy! For full Third Days, and Claps good store and hearty, Our Work's to trim, not disoblige a Party. What, shall we draw our Pens, engage our Quills In such a Cause; and drink our Dish at Will's! We dare no more hang out, no more display A blazing Rhime that does but light that way, Than he a Candle on a King WILL's Day. For Poetry, alas, on this occasion Is ten times worse than an Illumination:
'Tis downright to bewray our Nests, meer Nonsense; Like Clodpates Fidler sing against our Conscience. 'Tis true, out of meer shame we rig in Blacks, The modish Whitehall Livery on our Backs; But let not that dark Badge make the Court-tools Think they have Converts of us: No poor fools, To tell the truth, we wear this sable Dress, For good old Luxemburgh, not young Queen Bess. But now I talk of Wills, pray do not think That we come there for sober Coffee drink; 'Tis true we sup our Dish: But how! We take The Turkish Liquor for the Turkish sake. Lewis and Mahomet in Leagues Divine Are th' only Gemini in our Zodiack shine. Party per pale alone our Coat adorns, We own no Cross, but what the Crescent horns. However should we feel an Itch of Verse, To hang some Couplets on that Royal Herse; On such a subject: Death! What can we say? You know our Genius lies another way. Religion and grave Sanctity! All Phlegme. Virtue and Piety are not Our Theme. The saturnine dull Features of a SAINT, Are what our airyer Pencils nere can paint. True, we have seen that shining Presence warm The Theatre, and the Spectators charm. The Stage has felt her influencing Pow'r: Nay, some of Us perhaps, at some kind Hour, Have caught the Goddess in a Golden showr. A Royal Grace of that obliging Kind, As leaves us all those vast Arrears behind. But to that Charmer we must stop our Ears, For Gratitude our Rubrick never bears. Besides Great MART in the Box, our Wit Can no more reach—Our Talent lies more fit For little Jenny Cromwel in the Pit;
For Sonnets to some Phyllis of the Grove Convey'd by that kind Vehicle of Love; Some soft She-sinner, melting Miss; ay, marry, Our Pegasus can swoop at such a Quarry. These Doctrines our young Sullenists preach round, The Texts which their poetick Silence found. But why the Doctor of their Chair; why Thou their great Rabbinick Voice thus silent too? Cou'd Noll's once meteor Glories blaze so fair, to make Thee that all-prostrate Zealot there? Strange, that that Fiery Nose cou'd boast that Charm, Thy Muse with those Seraphick-raptures warm! And our fair ALBION Star to shine so bleak, HER radiant Influence so chill, so weak! Gorg'd with His riotous Festival of Fame, Cou'd thy weak stomach pule at MARY's Name! Or was thy Junior pallate more canine, And now in years grows squeamish and more fine! Fy, peivish Niggard, with thy flowing store To play the churl,—Excuse thy shame no more. WIT's a free Denison of the whole World, Claims Pasport every where; with sails unfurld, Like the fam'd Drake's once Universal round, Shoud range the Globe, and know no Check nor Bound. The Muses too woud Meanly be reproacht, By wretched Faction, or poor Spight deboacht. Rowze then, nor let such empty phantoms fright; But take thy generous Pen, sit down, and write. And if the sullen Thing be still too-stout, Play thy own Exorcist, and drive him out. Not that th' unjust imposing World would ask, From thy kind Hands, unreasonable Task. For though Her Altars do not just with thine, thou hast Theme enough besides, and all Divine.
Draw but Her BEAUTY, paint each lovely Grace: There's not one Heretick-Line in that whole FACE: A Face that ev'n All Churches reconciles: No Faith but what must own those Angel-Smiles. From Her bright Eyes, survey Her Brighter MIND, The Leading Virtue of Her whole fair Kind: Her Goodness, Mercy, Charity, Her whole Rich Treasury the Hoard of that Fair Soul: The fragrant perfumes those kind Odours breath; But above All, Her sweeter NUPTIAL Wreath: Her bright Ascendant MORALS; Subjects more Than Wit can reach, Heights where no pen can soar, Those dear Domestick Menials of Her Reign, Abstracted from Her loftier Temple-Train. Nay, not to give thy own dear Rome the Lye; Her warm Devotion, so much Piety, A Piety, though Her mistaken Guide, A Zeal so high, if on the Erring Side, Has Beauties ev'n for whole charm'd Worlds t' admire, A Theme enough the nicest Mose t' inspire, Though SHE knelt only to a Vestal Fire. FINIS.
