W2344 12494275 62460
LETTER FROM His Highness the Prince of Orange, FOR The Summoning of a CONVENTION, to be held at Westminster, the 22th of January, 1688/9. WHEREAS the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses, heretofore Members of the Commons House of Parliament, during the Reign of King CHARLES the Second, residing in and about the City of London, together with the Aldermen, and divers of the Common-Council of the said City, in this extraordinary Conjuncture, at our Request, severally Assembled, to advise Us the best manner how to attain the ends of our DECLARATION in calling a FREE PARLIAMENT for the Preservation of the PROTESTANT RELIGION, and restoring the Rights and Liberties of the Kingdom, and setling the same, that they may not be in danger of being again Subverted, have Advised and Desired Us to cause our Letters to be written and directed; for the Counties, to the Coroners of the respective Counties, or any one of them; and in default of the Coroners, to the Clerks of the Peace of the respective Counties; and for the Universities, to the respective Vice-Chancellors; and for the Cities, Boroughs, and Cinque-Ports, to the chief Magistrate of each respective City, Borough, and Cinque-Port, containing Directions for the choosing in all such Counties, Cities, Universities, Boroughs, and Cinque-Ports, within Ten Days after the receipt of the said respective Letters, such a number of Persons to represent them, as from every such place is, or are of right to be sent to Parliament, of which Elections, and the times and places thereof, the respective Officers shall give notice. The notice for the intended Election in the Counties, to be published in the Market Towns within the respective Counties, by the space of Five Days at the least before the said Election; and for the Universities, Cities, Boroughs, and Cinque-Ports, in every of them respectively, by the space of Three Days at the least before the said Election, the said Letters, and the Execution thereof to be returned by such Officer and Officers, who shall execute the same, to the Clerk of the Crown in the Court of Chancery, so as the Persons so to be Chosen, may Meet and Sit at Westminster the Two and twentieth Day of January next. WE heartily desiring the performance of what We have in our said DECLARATION expressed, in pursuance of the said Advice and Desire, have caused this Our Letter to be written to you, to the intent that you truly and uprightly, without favour or affection to any Person, or indirect practice or proceeding, do and execute what of your part, ought to be done according to the said Advice, for the due Execution thereof. The Elections to be made by such persons only, as, according to the Ancient Laws and Customs, of right ought to choose Members for Parliament; and that you cause a Return to be made by Certificate under your Seal, of the Names of the Persons Elected, Annexed to this Our Letter, to the said Clerk of the Crown, before the said Two and twentieth Day of January. Given at St. James's the Nine and twentieth Day of December, in the Year of our Lord, 1688. LONDON, Printed by J. Starkey, and A. and W. Churchill, MDCLXXXVIII.
