7643 99844811 9656
❧ THE CA∣STEL OF HELTH GATHERED AND MADE BY SYR THO∣mas Elyot knyghte, out of the chiefe Authors of Phy∣syke, wherby euery manne may knowe the state of his owne body, the preserua∣tiō of helth, and how to instructe welle his physytion in sycke∣nes that he be not deceyued. ❧ 1534
❧ TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THOMAS LORDE CRVMVVELL LORDE PRIVIE SEALE Thomas Elyot knyghte wysheth longe lyfe in honour. HE GIVETH twise that gyueth quyckly (sayth Se∣nek.) Bis dat qui cito dat. The griefe, which I had for your lordshyps dis∣ease, with the desyre that ye mought lyue longe with out syckenes, caused suche spede in buyldynge the Ca∣stell of helthe, that therein lacked som part of perfectiō, but yet the prompt∣nes in gyuyng that thynge, whyche I thoughte necessary, to declare myn affection, I doubt not, was no lasse estemed of your good lordshyp, thā afore is rehersed. Not withstandynge, whan I had eftesones pervsed that lyttell fortresse, and founde here and there some thynge that lacked, I toke my penne in the stede of a truelle, and a∣mended the faultes, and added somwhat more, where I thoughte it conuenyent: And yet per∣chance some thynges mought happen to escape, which were as nedeful to be corrected: myne at∣tendence on the parlyament, I being a member of the lower house, withdrawyng from me ley∣sure conuenyente, to fynde in this warke all the
faultes, whithe moughte be amended. Maye  nowe lyke your good lordshyppe to take in good parte, not eftesones the caslle, whiche I all re∣ye haue gyuen you, but my good wyll and dy∣lygente in amendynge or repayrynge the same, whiche is also prynted in a moche better letter, consyderynge that I no lasse do beholde you cō∣tynually with myne eye of remembrance, than they, whiche at dyner and supper do dayly loke on you, the cause I wyll not repete for suspition of flattery. Frendeshyp (as men saye) shulde be requyted, but yet craue I none other thyng, but onely equall beneuolence, and fayth without a∣ny suspition: wherevnto actuall demonstration is so moche requisite, that without if they both, seeme to be drowned, sens amonge vs that be mortall, thynges are moste iudged by outwarde tokens. And yet also in them men be sometyme deceyued, Hypocry hauynge in this worlde soo greate a preemynence: but in amitie is one rule, which seldom faileth. He that lyueth moderatly, doth loue alway faithfully: for ouer hym affec∣tions and passions haue lefte authoritie: and he that standeth iuste in the myddell, standeth most surely. Also in the worlde there is no more foly, than to these frendes of them, whiche do folow Fortune, lyke as swyne do folowe the mayden, whiche beareth on her heed a payle ful of mylke. And yf the payle falle, or happen to be emptye, they wyll folowe no lenger. The moderate per∣son, where bothe authoritie and vertue be in his frende equell, bycause that vertue was the on∣ly cause of his loue, that remaynyng, his mynde is in suche wyse thervnto ioyned, that although
authorytie happen to slyppe, yet that loue and vertue maye neuer be seuered. I haue spoken of frendeshyppe perchaunce more than nedeth, but who wylle not wysshe, (yf it moughte happen) to haue suche a treasour, as neyther the moun∣taynes of Ethiope, nor the ryuers of Inde do conteyne in them, to be therto compared. Cal∣limachus an auncient poete sayth, Puissance is dredefull: Rychesse is honourable: but loue for suretie is moste incomparable, who perceyueth herein more than your good lordshyppe, whyche besydes the aboundaunte knowledge of hysto∣ryes and naturall wytte, also concernynge this matter in your owne sondry experiences, I dare saye without flatterye, are equalle to any noble man lyuynge. Yet this my longe tale is not su∣perfluous, whyche is tolde not to teache you, but onely to renewe your lordeshyppes remem∣braunce, whyche is not alway present, specially where the brayne is choked with worldely mat∣ters of weyghtye importaunce. In suche as I am, hauynge lyttell and lyttell to doo, remem∣braunce standeth more at lybertie, and therfore we may more often thynke on that, whyche we haue bothe herde and sene, and in chesyng fren∣des, be the more circumspecte. But leste I shall make the name of frendshyppe edyouse, by of∣ten rehersalle, I nowe conclude, that I leaue this lyttelle warke a monumente of the longe contynewed affection by me borne towarde your lordeshyppe, and a perpetuall wytnesse, that I haue deserued soo moche of youre fauoure, as in mutuall frendshyppe is of rayson requy∣red; whyche maye be as easylye payed, as it
is graunted, yf in place, where it oughte to be shewed, ye do not forgette it. In the meane tyme I shall pray to God to adde to your good fortune and helth, contynuance with his grace and fauor wherein onely is most per∣fite suertye.
❧ THE TABLE ▴ IT MVST BE remembred, that the noumber in the Table, dothe sygnifye the leafe, and the letter A, dothe sygnifie the fyrst page or syde, the letter B, the se∣conde page or syde. A ANexed to thin¦ges naturall. fol. 1. a. Ages. fo. 10. b. . 40. b Ayre. fol. 12 a Appuls. fol. 21. a Almondes. fo. 22. b Anyse sede. fo. 25. b Ale. fol. 36. b Abstinence. fo. 55. b Affectes of the mynde. folio. 64. a B BLoudde. fol. 8. a Beetes. fo. 24. b Byrdes. 30. a Brayne exceedynge in heate. fol. 3. b Brayn exceedynge in colde. ibidem. Brayne moyst. ibid. Brayne drye. 4. a Brayn hot & moist. ibi. Brayn hot & dry. ibid. Brain cold & moist. 4 b Brayn cold & dry. ibid. Beanes. 25. b Breakefast. 43. a Bloud suckers. 63. a Bourage. 27. a Breadde. 28. b Blacke byrde. 30. b Bustarde. 31. a Byttour. ibid. Brayn of bestis. 32. a Butter. fo. 33. a Biee. fo. 36. b C COnsyderations of thinges belō∣ging to helth. 1. a Complexion of mā. 2. a Colerike body. 2. b Coler. fo. 8. b Coler naturall. fol. 9. a
Coler vnnaturall. ibid. Colour. fo. 11. a Colour of heare. 11. b Custome. 17. b Cucumbers. 19. b Cherics. 21. a Chastnartes. 22. b Capers. 23. a Colewortes and caba∣ges. fol. 23. b Cyhorye. 24. a Cheruyle. 25. a Considerations in ab∣stynence. 55. b Cloues. 28. b Cnyc. 29. b Capons, hennes, and chyckens. 30. a Crane. 31. a Chese. 33. a Cyder. 36. b Confortaryues of the harte. 69. a Cruditit. 75. b D DAtes. fol. 20. a Dueke. 31. a Dyuersytie of meates. 44. a Dygestiues of choler. folio. 59. b Dygestiues of fleume. folio. 60. a Domynyon of condry complexions. 70. a Diete of sanguine per∣sones. 72. b Dtete of cholerike per sones. ibid. Dyete of fleuinatycks persones. 73. b Dyete of melancolyke persones. 74. a Dyete of them, whiche be redye to falle into syckenes. 78. b Diete in tyme of pesti∣lence. 89. a Drynke betwene mea∣les. 43. b Drink at meales. 46. b Dygested. 55. a E ELementes, fol. 1. b Endyue. 24. b Egges. 33. a Exercise. 48. a. . 50. a Euacuation. 54. b Exetementes. ibidm. F FLematih body. 2. b Fleume. 8. a Fleme natural. ib. Fleme vnnaturall. 8. b
Fruites. 19. a Fygges. 20. a Fenell. 25. b Fylberdes. 22. a Flesshe. 29. a Fesaunt. 30. b Fete of beastes. 32. b Fylhe. ibidem. Frytasyes or rubbyn∣ges. folio, 49. a G GEnytours hote. folio 7. a Genytors cold. ibidem. Genitours moist. ibid. Genytours drye. ibidē. Genytours hotte and moyste. 7. b Genytours hotte and drye. ibidē. Genytours colde and moyst. ibidem. Genytoures colde and drye. ibidem. Gourdes. 19. a Grapes. 20. b Garlyke. 26. b Gynger. 28. a Goose. 31. a Gysar of byrdes. 31. b Gestation. 51. b H HArte hot distem∣pered. 4. b Harte colde dy∣stempered. 5. a Harte moyste dystem∣pered. ibidem Harte drye dystempe∣red. ibidem. Hart hot & moyst. ibid. Hart hote and dry. 5. b Hart cold & moist. ibid. Hart cold and dry. ibi. Humours. 8. a Herbes vsed in potage or to eate. 23. b Hate. 29. b Hearon. 31. a Hart of beastis. 32. a Heed of beastis. ibid. Honye. 37. b Hemorroides or pyles. folio. 63. b Heatnes or sorow. 66. a I ¶ Icope. 27. a Joye. 69. b K ¶ kydde. 29. b L LJuer in heate di∣stempred. 6. a Lyuer colde dy∣stempered. ibidem.
Lyuer moyste dystem∣pered. ibidem. Lyuer drye dystempe∣red. ibidem. Letyse. 23. b. Lekes. 27. a Lambe. 29. a Larke. 30. b Lyuers of byrdes and beastes 31. b Lunges of beastes. ibi. Letting of bloud. 61. a Leaches or blouds suc∣kers. 63. a Lassitude. fo. 77. a and 78. a M MElancolike bo∣dye. fol 3. a Melācoly. 9. a Members instrumen∣tall. fol. 9 b Meate and drink. 12. b Meates makyng good iuyce. ibidem. Meates makynge ylle iuyce. 13. a Meates makyng cho∣ler. fol 13. b Meates making fleme ibidem. Meates ingendrynge melancoly. 14 a Meates makyng thick iuyce. ibid. Meates hurtynge the teethe. 14. b Meates hurtynge the eyen. ibidem. Meates makynge op∣pilations. 15. a Meates wyndy. ibid. Melons. 19. b Medlars. 22. a Malowes. 24. b Mutton. 29. b Moderacyon in Dy∣ete. 42. a Meales. 42 b Maces. 28. b Members of byrdes. folio. 31. b Melt or splene. 32. a Marowe. ibid. Mylke. 35. b N ¶ Nutmygges. 28. b. O OFfycyall mem∣bers. 9 b Operatiōs. 10. b Olyues. 22. a
Orenges. ibid. Onyons. 26. b Order in eatynge and drynkynge. 45. b Opilations what they are. fol. 41. a Olde men. 41. b Ordure. 55. a P PRyncypall mem∣bers. fo. 9. b Partes simila∣res. ibid. Powers natural. 10. a Powers spirituall. ibi. Powers animall. ibid. Peaches. 21. a Peares. 22. a Pourselan. 25. a Persely. ibidē. Purgers of coler. 59. b Pourgers of flewme. folio. 60. a Purgers of melanco∣lye. fol. 60. b Preceptes of Diocles folio. 75. b Pomegranates. 21. b Prunes. 22. b Peason. fo. 25. b Parsnepes. 26. a Penyryall. 27. b Pepper. 28. a Partryche. 30. b Plouer. ibidem. Pygeons. 31. a Purgations by siege. 57. b. and. 58. a Precyse dyete. 47. a Q QVantytie of meate. 16. a Qualytie of meate. fo. 17. a and. 18. b Quynce. 21. b Quayle. 30. b R RAysons. 20. b Rapes. 26. b Radysshe. 26. a Rokat. 27. b Rosemary. ibid. Repletion. 53. b S SAnguine body. 2. a Stomak hot. 6. b Stomake cold. ib. Stomak moyst. ibidē. Stomake drye. 7. a Spirite naturall. 10. b
Spirite ttali. ibidem. Spirite animall. ibidē. Sorell. 25. a Sauge. 27. a Stomake in the which mete is corrupted. 88. a Slepe & watche. 47. a Sauerye. 26 b Saffron. 28. b Swynes fleshe. 29. a Sparowes. 30. b Shoueler. 30. a Supper. 43. a Sugar. 38. b Scarifieng. 62. b Sycknesses appropry∣ed to sondrye seasons and ages. 79 a Significations of sic∣kenesses. 80. b T THynges Natu∣rall. fo. 1. a Thinges not na¦turall. ibidem. Thinges agaynste na∣ture. ibidē. Thinges good for the heed. 15. b Thynges good for the harte. ibidem. Thynges good for the iyuer. ibidem. Thynges good for the lunges. ibid. Thynges good for the tyes. 16. a Thynges good for the stomake. ibid. Temperature of mea∣tes. 17. b Turnippes. 26. a Tyme. 27. b Townesresses. ibid. Trypes. 31. b Tung of beastis. 32. a Tyme. 39. a. . 40. a Tymes appropryed to uery humour. 71. a V VVildes. 12. a walnuttes. 22. a Veale. 29. b Venyson. ibid. woodcockes. 31. a Vdder. 32. a water. 33. b wyne. fo 34. b wuaye. 36. b Vociferation. 52. b Vomyte. 56. b Vrines. 84. a Vertu of meates. 88. a ❧ Thus endeth the Table. ❧
THE FYRST BOKE. TO THE CONSERVA¦tion of the body of mankynde, within the limitation of helth, which (as Galene sayth) is the Detuenda sanitate lib. 1. state of the body, wherin we be neyther greued with peyne, nor lette from doyng our necessary busynesse, doth belonge the dy∣lygent consyderation of thre sortes of thinges, that is to say, Thynges Naturall, Thynges not naturall, and Thynges agaynst nature. ¶ Thynges Naturall be .vii. in number. Elementes Complexions. Humours. Membres. Powers. Operations and Spirites. ¶ These be necessary to the beynge of helthe, accordyng to the order of theyr kynde: and be alwaye in the naturall body. ¶ Thynges not naturall be syxe in number. Ayre Meate and drynke. Slepe and watche. Meuyng and rest. Emptynesse and re∣pletion and Affections of the mynde. ¶ Thynges agaynst Nature be thre. Syckenesse. Cause of syckenesse. Iccident, whiche foloweth syckenes. ¶ Annered to thynges naturall. Age. Colour. Fygure, and Diuersitie of kyndes.
¶ The elementes be those originall thynges vn myrt and vncompounde, of whose temperance and myxture all other thynges, hauynge corpo∣rall substance, be compacte: Of them be four, that is to saye, Erthe. Water. Ayre and Fyre. ¶ Erthe is the mooste grosse and pondercuse element, and of her proper nature is colde and drye. ¶ Water, is more subtyll and lyghte thanne erth, but in respect of Ayre and Fyre, it is grosse and heuy, and of hit proper nature is colde and moyste. ¶ Ayre, is more lyght and subtylle thanne the other two, and beynge not altered with any ex∣teriour cause, is properly hote and moyste. ¶ Fyre, is absolutely lyghte and clere, and is the clarifier of other elementes, yf they be vyci∣te o out of theyr naturall temperaunce, and is properly hotte and drye. ¶ This to be remembred, that none of the sayd elementes be commonly ene or felte of mortall men, as they are in theyr originall beynge: but they, whiche by our sences be perceyued, be cor∣rupted with mutuall mixture, and be rather er∣thy, watry, ayry, and fyry, than absolutely erth, water, ayre, and fyre.
Of the complexion of Man. Cap. 2. COmplexion is a combynation of two dy∣uers qualities of the foure elementes in one body, as hotte & drye of the Fyre: hote and moyste of the Ayre, colde and moyste of the Water, colde and drye of the Erth. But although all these complexions be assembled in euery body of man and woman, yet the body ta¦keth his denomination of those qualities, which abounde in hym, more thanne in the other, as hereafter inseweth, ¶ The body, where heate and moysture haue soueraintie, is called Sanguine, wherin the aire hath preeminence, and it is perceyued and kno∣wen by these sygnes, whiche do folowe, San∣guine Carnosite or fleshynesse. The vaynes and arteries large. Heare plentie and redde The visage whyte and ruddy. Sleape moche. Dreames of blouddy thynges or thynges pleasaunt. Pulse great and full. Digestyon perfecte. Angry shortly. Siege, vryne, & sweate abundant. Fallynge shortly into bledynge. The vrine redde and grosse.
¶ Where colde with moysture preuayleth, that body is called Fleumatike, wherin water hath preeminence, and is perceyued by these sygnes. Fleuma∣tike. Fatnes, quauyng and softe. Vaynes narow. Heare moche and playne. Colour whyte. Sleape superfluous. Dremes of thynges watry or of fysshe. Slownes. Dulnes in lernynge. Cowardyse. Busle slowe and lyttell. Dygestyon weake. Spyttell whyte, abundaunt, and thycke. Vrine grosse, white and pale. ¶ Colerike is hote and drie, in whom the fyre hath preeminence, and is discerned by these sy∣gnes folowynge. Chole∣rike Leanes of body. Costyfenesse. Heare blacke or dark aburn curlyd. Visage and skyn redde as fyre, or salowe. Hotte thynges noyfull to hym. Lyttell sleape. Dremes of fyre, fighting or angre. Wytte sharpe and quycke. Hardy and fyghtynge. Pulse swyfte and stronge. Vrine hygh coloured & clere. Voyce sharpe.
¶ Melancolyke is colde and drye, ouer whome the erthe hathe dominion, and is perceyued by these sygnes. Melan∣colyke. Leannesse with hardnes of skynne. Heare playne and thynne. Colour duskyshe, or whyte with nnesse. e watche es fearefull. in opinyons. Digestion slowe and yll. Tymerous and fearefull. Anger longe and frettynge. Pulse lyttell. Seldome laughynge. Vrine watry and thynne. BEsides the sayde complexions of all the hole bodye, there be in the particular mem¦bres, complexions, wherin yf there be any distemperaunce, it bryngeth syckenesse or griefe into the member. Wherfore to knowe the distemperature, these signes folowynge wold be consydered. Foresene, that it be remembred, that some distemperatures be symple and somme be compounde. They whiche be symple, be in sim∣ple qualities, as in heate, colde, moyste, or drye. They whiche be compounde, are in compound or myxt qualyties: as heate and moysture, heate and drythe: colde and moyste, colde and drye. But nowe fyrste we wyll speake of the symple complexions, of euery principal member, begyn∣nynge at the brayne.
The brayne exce∣ding in heate hath, The hedde and vysage ve∣ry redde and hotte. The heare growynge faste blacke and courlyd. The vaynes in the eyen apparant. Superfluo{us} matter in the nosethryls, eien, & eares. The heed annoyed with hotte meates, drynkes, and sauours. Slepe shorte & not sounde. The brayne exce∣ding in colde hath, Moche superfluite run∣nynge oute of the nose, mouthe, eares and eyen. Heare strayght & fine gro∣wing slowly, & flaxen. The headde disposyd by small occasyon to poses and murres. It is soone annoyed with colde. It is colde in touchynge. Vaynes of the eyen not seene. Sleapy somwhat. Moyst in excesse hath, Heares playne. Seldome or neuer balde. Wytte dulle. Moche superfluities. Slepe moche and depe.
The brayn drie hath No su{per}fluites runnyng. Wyttes good and redy. Watchefull. Heares blacke hard and fast growynge. Balde shortly. Complexions compouned. Brayne hote & moyst dystempered hath, The heed akyng & heuy. Full of superfluines in the nose. The southen wynde gre∣uouse. The Northerne wynde holsome. Slepe depe but vnquiete with oftē wakinges & straunge dreames. The senses and wytte vnperfecte. Brayne hote and dry dystempered hath, None abundaunce of su∣perfluities, whiche may be expelled. Senses perfecte. Moche watche. Soner balde than other. Moch heare in childhod and blacke or browne, and courlyd. The heed hot and ruddy
Brayne cold & moyst Dystempered hath, The senses and wyt dul Moche sleape. The hede soone replenis¦shed with superfluous moysture. Distyllations and poses or m. Not  alde. Sone  with colde. Brayn cold and dry dyssempered hath, The heed colde in feling and without colour. The vaines not apering. Soone hurt with colde. Often diserased. wytte perfecte in chylde∣hode, but in age dull. Aged shortly and balde. Of the harte. The hart hote di∣stempered hath Moch blowyng & puffing. Pulse swyfte and busy. Hardines & māhode moch. Promptnes actiuitie and quyckenesse in doynge of thynges. Fury and boldnes. The breaste heary toward the lefte syde. The breste brode with the heed lyttell. The body hote, except the lyuer do let it.
The hart colde di∣stempered hath, The pulse very lyttell. The breth lytell and slow. The brest narow. The body all colde, excepte the lyuer doth inflame it. Fearfulnes, Scrupulosite, & moch care Curiositie. Slownesse in actes. The breaste cleane with∣out heares. The hart moyst di∣stempered hath. The pulse softe. Sone āgry & sone pacified The body al moyst, except the liuer disposith cōtrary. The hart drye di∣stempered hath The pulse harde. Not lyghtly angry, but be∣ynge angry, not soone pa∣cyfied. The body dry, except the li uer doth dispose contrary. The harte hotte and oyst The brest & stomake heary Promptnes in actes. Soone agry. Fiersnes but not so moche as in hote and drye. Pulse softe, swift, & busy. Breth or wind according. Shortely falleth into dis∣eases caused of putry∣faction.
The harte hotte and drye. The harte poulse greatte and swyfte. The breath or wynde ac∣cordynge. The breast and stomacke all heary. Quicke in his doynges. Boldnes and hardynesse. Swift & hasty in mouing Soone styred to anger & ryrannous in maners. The breast brode and all the body hotte & drye. The harte colde and moyste The pulse softe. Fearefull and tymerous. Slowe. The breast clene without heare. Not hastily angre nor re∣faynynge angre. The brest narowe. All the body cold & moyst The harte colde and drye hath, The pulse hard & lyttell. The wynde moderate. Seldom angry, but whā it hapneth, it dureth long The breast cleane with∣out heare and lyttell. All the body cold & drye.
Of the liuer. The lyuer in heate distempered hath. The vaynes great. The blood more hote than temperate. The bealy heary. All the body hote exceding temperaunce. The lyuer cold di∣stempered hath The vaynes small. Abundance of fleum The blood colde. All the body colde in fee∣lynge. The bealy without heare. The lyuer moyste distempered hath The vaynes softe. Moch bloud and thynne. All the bodye moyste in fe∣lynge, except the harte di∣sposeth it contrary. The lyuer drye di∣stempered hath The vaynes harde. The bloudde lyttell and thycke. All the body drye. ¶ The complexions compounde, maye be decer Galenus in arte parua. lib. 2. ned by the sayd symple qualities. And here is to be noted, that the heate of the harte maye van∣quyshe the colde in the lyuer. For heate is in the harte, as in the fountayne or sprynge, and in the Lyuer, as in the Ryuer.
Of the stomake. The stomake hotte distempered. He digesteth well, specy∣ally harde meates, & that wyl not be shortly altred. Lyght mentes and soone altered, be therein cor∣rupted. The appetite lyttell and slowe. He delyteth in Meates and drinkes, whyche be hotte for euery naturall complexiō delyteth in his semblable. The stomake colde dystempered. He hath good appetite. He digesteth ylle and slowely, specyally grosse meates and harde. Colde meates doo waxe soure, beinge in hym vn∣dygested. He delytethe in meates and drynkes, whiche be Colde, and yet of theym he is indamaged. The stomake moyst dystempered He thyrsteth but seldom, yet he desyreth to drynke. with superfluous drink he is hurte. He delyteth in moyste meates.
The stomake drye dystempered He is soone thyrsty. Contente with a lyttelle drynke. Diseased with moche drynke. He deliteth in dry meates ¶ It is to be noted, that the dyspositions of Galenus in arte parua. the stomake naturall, do desyre that whiche is of lyke qualities. The dispositions vnnaturall, do desyre thynges of contrary qualities. ¶ Also not the stomake onely causeth a man to thyrste or not thyrste, but also the lyuer, the lun∣ges, and the harte. Of the genitories or sto∣nes of generation. The genytories hote distempred Great appetite to the acte of generation. Ingendrynge men chyldren. Heare soone growen aboute the membres. The genytories colde distempred Small appetite to the acte of generation. Ingendryng women chyldrē. Slowe growthe of heare a∣bout the membres. The genitories moist distempred Sede abundant but thynne and watrye. The genitoryes drye distempred Sede lyttel but metely thick in substance.
Genytories hot and moyste Lasse appetite to lecherie than in them, whiche be hote and drye. More puissaunce to do it, and without lasse damage. Hurt by absteynyng frō it. Lesse herines thā in hot & dry. The genytories hote and drye The sede thycke. Moche fruitefulnesse of Ge∣neration. Great appetite and redynesse to the acte. Heare about the membres soone growen. Swyftenesse in spedynge o the acte. Soone therwith satisfyed. Damage by vsyng therof. The genytories colde and moyst The sede watry and thynne. Lyttell desyre to the acte, but more puissance than in them whiche be colde and drye. Lyttell heares or none about the membres. The genytories colde and drye Heares none or fewe. Litle apetit or none to lecher Lyttell puissance to do it. Ingendrynge more females than men chyldern. That litle sede that is, is thik¦ker than in colde and moyst.
☞ Of humours. IN the body of Man be foure pryncipal hu¦mours, which continuynge in the propor∣cion, that nature hath lymitted, the body is free frome all syckenesse. Contrary wise by the increase or diminution of any of theym in quantitie or qualitie, ouer or vnder theyr natu∣rall assignement, inequall temperature commeth into the bodye, whiche sickenesse foloweth more or lasse, accordyng to the lapse or decaye of the temperatures of the sayd humours, whiche  these folowynge. Bloudde, Fleume, Choler, Melancholy ¶ Bloudde hath preeminence ouer all other hu¦mours in susteynynge of all lyuynge creatures, for it hath more conformitie with the originalle cause of lyuynge, by reason of temperatenes i heate and moysture, also nouryssheth more the body, and restoreth that which is decayed, being the very treasure of lyfe, by losse wherof, dethe immedyately foloweth. The distemperature of bloud hapneth by one of the other thre humors, by the inordinate or su{per}fluous mixture of them. Of fleume. ¶ Fleume is of two sortes, Naturall and Vnnaturall. ¶ Naturall fleume is a humour colde & moyst, whyte and swete, or without taste ingendred by insufficient decoction in the seconde digestion of the watry or rawe partes of the matter decocte
called Chilus, by the last digestyon made apt to be conuerted into bloud. In this humour, wa∣ter hath dominion most princypall. ¶ Fleume vnnaturall is that, whiche is myxte with other humours, or is altered in his quali∣tie. And therof is .viii. sondry kyndes Fleume. watry, which is founden in spettil of great drinkers, or of them, whi∣che dygeste ylle. Slymy or rawe. Glasy, lyke to whyte glasse, thicke, viscouse lyke byrd lyme and heuye. Plastry, which is very grosse, and as it were chalky, such is found in the ioyntes of theyin, whiche haue the gowte. Salt, which is mingled with coler. Sower, myxt with melancoly, whi¦che cometh of corrupt dygestion. Harshe, thycke and grosse, whiche is seldome founden, whiche tasteth lyke grene crabbes or sloes. oticum. Stiptik or binding, is not so grosse nor cold, as harshe, & hath the taste lyke to greene redde wyne, or other lyke, straynynge the tuge. ¶ Choler doth participate with naturall heate as longe as it is in good temperance. And ther∣of is also two kyndes, Naturall and Vnnaturall.
Choler naturall. ¶ Naturall choler is the fome of bloudde, the colour wherof is redde and clere, or more lyke to an orenge colour, and is hote and drye, wher∣in the fyre hath dominion, & is light and sharpe, and is ingendred of the most subtyll part of matter decocte, or boyled in the stomacke, whose be gynnynge is in the lyuer. ¶ Vnnaturall choler is that which is myxte o corrupted with other humours, wherof be foure kyndes, Citrine or yelowe choler, whiche is of the myxture of natural choler, and wa∣try fleume, and therfore hath lesse heat then pure choler. Yelky, lyke to yelkes of egges, whiche is of the myxture of fleume congeled, and choler naturall, & is yet lasse hotte than the other. Grene lyke to lekes, whose begynnyng is rather of the stomak, thā of the lyuer Grene lyke to grene canker of mettall, and bourneth lyke venym, and is of ex∣cedynge adustion of choler or fleume, & by these two kyndes nature is mor∣tifyed. ¶ Melancoly or blacke coler is de∣uided into two kyndes. Naturall, which is the dregges of pure bloude, and is knowen by the blaknes, whan it issueth eyther downewarde or vpwarde, and is veryly cold and drye. Vnnaturalle, whiche procedeth of the
adustion of cholerike myxture, and is hoter & lygter, hauynge in it vyolence to kyll, with a dangerous disposytion. the members. ¶ There be diuersities of members, that is to saye. Principall members. The brayne. Th harte. The lyuer. The stones of generatiō Officiall members. Synwes whiche doo serue to the brayne. Arteries or pulses, which do serue to the harte. Vayns which do serue to the lyuc. Vessels spermatik, wher in mans sede lyeth, whi∣ch do serue to the son Partes called Simila¦res, for being diuided they remayne in them self like as they were. Bones. Gristell. Calles betwirte the vt∣termooste skynne and the fleshe. Muskles or fylettes. Fatte Fles she. Members in∣strumentall. The stomacke. The raynes. The bowelles. All the great synewes. Those of their vertue do apetite meat & alter it.
O powers Animall. Spiriuall, Naturall. Naturall power whiche do minister. To whome is ministred. Which dothe mynyster. Appetiteth, Retayneth, Digesteth. Expelleth. To whome is mynystred, Ingendreth, Nourysheth, Fedeth, Power spiritual Warkyng, whiche delateth the harte and artes, and ftesones strayneth them. Wrought, which is styred by an exterior cause to wark wherof commeth anger, in∣dygnation, subtilitie, and care. Power animall. That whiche ordeyneth, di∣scerneth, and composet. That moueth by voluntarye motion. That whiche is called sen∣syble, wherof do procede the fyue wyttes.
Of that which or∣deineth do {pro}cede Imagination in the forhed. Reason in the brayne. Remembrance in the nodel. Operations. Apetite by heate and drythe. Digestiō by hete & moisture. Retayning by cold & drythe. Expulsiō by colde & moysre. ¶ Spirite is an ayry substance subtyll, styryng the powers of the body to perfourme their ope∣raions, whiche is dyuyded into Naturalle, whiche taketh his begyn∣nynge of the lyuer, and by the vaynes whiche haue no pulse, spredeth into all the hole body. all which procedeth from the hart, and by the arteries or pulses is sent in∣to all the body. Animalle, whiche is ingendred in the brayne, and is sente by the senewes throughout the body, & maketh sence or feelyng. Annexed to thynges naturall. be. ii. Adolescencye to .xxv. yeres, hotte and moyste, in the whiche tyme the body groweth. Juuentute vnto .xl. yeres, hot and drye, wherin the bodye is in per∣fyte growth. Senectute, vnto .lx. yeres colde & drye, wherin the body begynneth to decreace,
Age decrepite, vntyll the laste tyme of lyfe, accidently moyste, but na∣turally colde and drye, wherin the pdwers and strength of the body be more and more mynished. ☞ Colour. Of inwarde causes. Of outwarde causes. Colour of in∣ward causes Of equalitie of humoures, as he that is redde and whyte. Of inequalitie of humoures, wherof doo procede, blacke, salowe, paale, or whyte onely. Redde, Blacke, do betoben do∣miniō of heate. Salowe, Whyte, colde of fl. Pale, colde of melancholy. Redde abundaunce of bloude. Salow, chole citrine. Blarke, melancholye or choler aduste. Colour of out∣warde causes. Of cold or heate, as englysshe menne be whyte, Moriens  blacke. Of thynges accidentalle, as of feare, of anger, of sorowe, or other lyke mocion.
Colour of heare Blacke, eyther of aboundaunce of choler inflamed, or of moche inten∣dynge or abusyon of bloudde. Redde heare of moche heate not aust. Gray heares of abundaunce of me∣lanch. te heares of the lacke of natu¦rall heare, & by occasyon of fleume pufyed. ¶ All the resydue concernyng thinges naturall  in the Introduction of Joanicius, and in the lyttell crafte of Galene, I purposely  ouer for this tyme, forasmoche as it doth requy a rder hauyng some knowledge in phi∣loophye naturall, or s is  to harde and tdi∣ous to be vndstande. Moreouer this, whiche I  in this fyrste tables, shall be suf∣ficient, to the conseruation of hethe, I meane, with that whiche nowe foloweth in the other Tables. The seconde Table. THynges not naturall be so called, bycause they be no poryon of a naturall body, as they be, wiche be callyd naturall thyn∣ges, but yet by the temperance of theym the body beynge in helthe, so consysteth by the disemptance of them, syckenesse is induced, & the body dessolued. ¶ The fyrste of thynges not naturall is ayre, whiche is proprely of it selfe, or of some mate∣riall
cause or occasion good or yll. ¶ That which is of it selfe good, hath pure va ours, and is ooriferous. ¶ Also it is of it selfe, swyft in alteration from hotte to colde, wherin the body is not moch pro∣uoked to sweate for heate, ne to chylle for vehe∣mency of colde. ¶ Ayre among al thynges not natural is chief∣ly to be obserued, forasmoch as it doth both in∣close vs, & also enter into our bodyes, specially the most noble member, which is the hart, & we can not be separate one howre frome it, for the necessitie of breathyng and fetchyng of wynde, ¶ The causes wherby the ayre is corrupted be specyally foure. Influēces of sondry sterres. Great standynge waters ne∣uer rfreshed. arayne lyenge longe aboue grounde. Moche people in small ome lyuynge vnclenly and slut∣ty shely. wyndes brynging holsom ayre. Northe, whiche prolongeth lyfe by expoulsynge ylle va∣pours. East is temperate and lusty. wyndes brynging ylle ayre. South corrupteth, and ma∣keth ylle vapours. Weste, is very mutable, whi¦che nature doth hate.
Meate and dryne. and drynke we must consyder syxt thynges, Substaunce. Quantitie. Qualitie. Custome. Tyme. Order. Substaunce, some is good, whiche maketh good , and good bloud, some is ylle, and gendith ylle iuyce and ylle bloudde. Meates and drynkes makyng good ce. ¶ Bread of pure floure, of good whete somewhat leuened, welle baked, not to olde nor to stale. Egges of fesauntes, hennes, or patry∣ches newe layd, poched, meane betwene rere and harde. Mylke newe mylked, dronke fastynge, Wherin is sugar, or the leues of mintes. Fesauntes. Pairiches or chykens. Capons or hennes. Byrdes of the feldes. Fyshe of stony ryuers. Veale suckynge. Porke yonge. Biefe not passynge .iii. yeres. Pygeons. Venyson of redde dere. Pease potage with myntes.
Fate of swyne or calues. Fygges rype, before meales. Raysons, Borage. Languedebiefe. Persely. Myntes. Ryce with almonde myshe. Letyse. Cykorye. Grapes rype. Wynes good moderatly takē, wel fined. Ale and biere syxe dayes olde, cleane brewed, and not stronge. Myrthe and gladnesse. The lyuer and braynes of hennes and chykens, and yonge geese. Meates and drynkes makynge ylle iuyce. Olde biefe. Olde mutton. Geese olde. Swanne olde. Duekes of the kanell. Inwarde of beastes. Blacke puddynges. The hart lyuer & kydneys of all bestes. The braynes & mary of the backbone. Wodde culers. Shell fyshe, excepte creuyse deaudoulce Chese harde. Apples and peares moche vsed. Fygges and grapes not rype. All rawe herbes, excepte letyse, borage,
and cykorie. Onyons, Garlyke, immoderatelye vsed, spe∣cyally in Cholericke sto∣mackes. Leekes. Wyne in muste or sowre. Feare, sorowe, and pensyfenesst. Meates ingendrynge choler. Garlyke. Onyons. Rokat, Kersis, Lekes, Mustarde, Pepper, Houye, Wyne moche Dronken. Swete meates. Meates ingendrynge fleume. All slymy and deauynge meates. Chese newe. All fysh, specially in a flematike stoma Inwardes of beastes. Lambes fleshe. The synewe partes of fleshe. Skynnes. Braynes. Lunges. Rapes. Cucumbers. Replecion, Lacke of exercis
Meates ingendrynge melancholy. Biefe, Gotes fleshe, Hares fleshe, Bores fleshe, Salte fleshe, Salte fysshe, Cole wortes, All pulse excepte white peason. Browne breadde course. Thycke wyne, Blacke wyne, Olde chese, Olde fleshe. Greate fyshes of the see. Meates makynge thicke iuyce. Rye breadde, Muste. Breade without leuen. Cake breadde. See fyshe greate. Shelle fyshe. Biefe. The kydneys, The lyuer of a swyne, The stones of beastes. Mylke moche soden. Rapes. All rounde rootes, Cukumbers. Swete wyne. Deepe redde wyne. Garlyke,
Mustarde. Origanum. Hysope. Basylle. Fenell. Chese. Egges fryed or harde. Cheste nuttes. Nauwes. Fygges grene. Appulles not rype. Pepper. Rokat, moche vsed. Leekes. moche vsed. Oynyons moche vsed. Meates whiche do hurte the teeth. ¶ Very hotte meates. Nuttes. Swete meates and dryntkes. Rodysshe rootes. Harde meates. Mylke. Bytter meates. Moche vomyte. Leekes. Fyshe fatte. Lymons. Colewortes. Meates Whiche do hurte the eyes. ¶ .
Lechery. Muste. All poulse. Swete wynes and thycke wynes. Hempe sede. Very salte meates. Garlyke. Oynyons. Colewortes. Radyshe. Readynge after supper immediately. Makynge great oppilations. ¶ Thycke mylke. All swete thynges. Rye breadde. Sweete wynes. Meates inflatynge or Wyndy. ¶ Beanes. Lupynes. Cicer. Mille. Cucumbers. All iuyce of h Fygges drye. Rapes. Nauews rawe. Mylke. Honye not well clarified. Swete wyne. Muste.
Thynges good for the heed ¶ Cububes. Galyngale. Lignum alnes. Maioram. Baulme myntes. Gladen. Nutmygges. Me. Rosemarye. Roses. Pionye. Hissope. Spyke. Camomyll, Mellylote. ewe. akynse. Thynges good for the harte ¶ Cyramome. Saffron. Corall. Clues. Lignum aloes. Perles. Macis. Baulme myntes. Myrabolanes. Muske, Nutmigges. Rosemarye. The bone of the harte of a redde dere. Maioram. Buglosse. Borage. Setuall. Thynges good for the liuer ¶ worme wode. With wynde. Agrymonye. Saffron. Clones. Endyue. Lyuer worte. Cyhorie. Plantayne. Dragons. Raysons greate. Saunders. Fenlle. Violetres. Rose water. Letyse. Thynges good for the lunges ¶ Elycampane. Hysope. Scabiose. Lyko. Raysons. Maydenheare.
Penidies. Almondes. Dates. Pistacis. Thynges good for the eies Eyebryght. Fenyll. Veruyn. Roses. Celandyne. Agrymonye. Cloues. Colde water. Thynges good for the stomake ¶ Myrabolanes Nutmygges. Organum. Pystaces. Ouynces. Olybanum. Wormewode. Saffron. Corall. Agrymonye. Funitorye. Galyngale. Cloues. Lignum aloes. Mastix. Mynt. Spodium. The innermooste skyn of a hennes gysar. Coriander prepared. THE SECOND BOKE, Of quantitie. Cap. 1. THE QVANTITIE of meate must be proporcioned af¦ter the substaunce and qualitie thereof, and accordyng to the complexion of hym that eateth Fyrst it ought to be remēbred, that meates hotte and moyste, whiche are qualities of the bloudde, are soone tourned into bloudde, and therfore moche nou∣rysheth the body. Some meates do nourish but
lyttell, hauynge lyttell conformitie with bloude in theyr qualities. Of them, whiche do neryshe, some are more grosse, some lyghter in digession. The grosse meate ingendreth grosse bloude, but where it is wel concoct in the slomake, and well digested, it maketh the flesshe more firme, and the officiall membres more stronge, thanne fyne metes. wherfore of men, which vse moch labour or exercise, also of them, which haue very cho∣lerike stomakes, hore in England, grosse meates may be eaten in a great quantitie: and in a chole¦rike stomake biefe is better digested than a chy∣kens legge, forasmoche as in a hofe stomacke fyne meates be shortely aduste and corrupted. Contrarywyse in a colde or fleumatike stomake grosse meate abydeth longe vndigested, and ma∣keth putrifyed matter, lyght meates therfore be to suche a stomacke more apte and conuenient. The temperate bodye is best nourysshed with a lyttell quantitie of grosse meates: but of tempe∣cate meates in substance and qualitie, they may safely eate a good quantitie. Foresene alwaye, that they eate without gourmandyse, or leaue with some appetite. And here it wold be remem∣bred, that the cholerike stomake, doth not desyre so moch as he may digeste, the melancholye sto∣make may not digeste so moche as he desyreth: for colde maketh appetyte, but naturall heate concocteth or boyleth. Not withstandynge vn∣naturall or supernaturall heate distroyeth appe∣tyte, and corrupteth digestion, as it appereth in feuers. Moreouer fruytes and herbes, specially rawe, wolde be eaten in a smalle quantitie, all though the persone be very cholerike, forasmoch
as they do ingender thynne watry bloudde, apt to receyue putrifaction, whiche althoughe it be not shortely perceyued of hym that vseth it, at length they fele it by sondry diseases, which are longe in comynge, and shortly sleeth, or be hard∣ly escaped. Fynallye excesse of meates, is to be abhorred. For as it is sayde in the booke called Ecclesiasticus, In moch meate shall be sycknes, Ecclesiasti co. 37. and inordinate appetite shall approche vnto choler. Semblably the quantitie of drynk wold be moderated, that it excede not, nor be equalle vnto the quantitie of meate, specially wine, whi∣che moderately taken, aydeth nature, and com∣forteth her, and as the sayde author of Ecclesi∣asticus Eccl. 31. sayth, wyne is a reioycynge to the soule and body. And Theognes saythe in Galenes Galen. de tuenda sa. warke, A large draught of wyne is ylle. A mo∣derate draught is not onely not ylle, but also cō¦modious or profitable. ☞ Of qualitie of meates. Cap. 2. QValitie is in the complexion, that is to saye, it is the state thereof, as Hotte or cold, moyste or drye. Also some meates be in wynter colde in acte, and in vertue hotte. And it wolde be consydered, that euery cō¦plexion temperate & vntemperate, is cōserued in his state, by that which is lyke therto in fourme and degree. But that whiche excedeth moche in dystemperaunce, must be reduced to his tempe∣raunce, by that whiche is contrarye to hym in fourme or qualitie, but lyke in degre moderatly vsed. By fourme is vnderstande grossenes, fyne∣nesse,
thyckenesse, or thyckenesse, by degree, as the fyrste, the seconde, the thyrde, the fourth, in heate cde, moysture, or drythe. ☞ Of Custome. Cap. 3. CVstome in feedynge is not to be contem∣ned, or lyttell regarded: for those meates, to the whiche a mae hath ben of longe tyme accustomed, though they be not of substāce commendable, yet do they somtyme lasse harme  than better metes, whervnto a man is not vsed. Also the meates and drynkes, whiche do moche delte hym that eateth, or to be preferred before that, whiche is better, but more vnsauery. But if the custome be soo perniciouse, that it nedes  must be lefte, than wolde it be withdrawen by lyttell and lyttell in tyme of helthe, and not of lyckenesse. For yf it shoulde be withdrawen in tyme of syckenesse, Nature shulde susteyne tre∣ble derunent, fyrst by the grefe induced by syck∣nesse, seconde by receyuynge of medicines, third∣ly by forbearyng the thyng, wherin she delyteth. ☞ Of the temperature of meates to be receyued. Cap 4. TO kere the body in good temper: to them whose naturall cōplexion is moyste, ought to be gyuen meates that be moste in ver∣tue or power. Contrarywise to them, whose na∣turalle complexion is drye? oughte to be gyuen meates drye in vertue or power. To bodyes vn∣temperate, suche meates or drinkes are to be gy∣uen,
whiche be in power contrary to the distem∣perance, but the degrees are alway to be consy∣dered, as well of the temperance of the body, as of the meates. For where the meates do moche excede in degree the temperature of the bodye, they anoye the body in causyng distemperance, As hotte wynes, pepper, garlyke, onyons, & salt, be noyfull to them, which be cholerike, bycause they be in the hyghest degre of heate and drieth, aboue the iuste temperance of mannes bodye in that cōplexion. And yet be they oftentymes hol∣some to them, whiche be fleumatike. Contrary wyse, colde water, colde herbes, and cold fruites moderately vsed, be holsom to choleryke bodies, by puttyng awaye the heate, excedyng the natu∣rall temperature: and to theym, whiche be fleu∣matyke, they be vnholsome, and do brynge into them distemperance of colde and moyste. ❧ What distemperance hapneth by the excesse of sondry qualities in meates and drynkes. Cap. 5. Meates. Colde, do congele and mortifye. Moyste, do putrifie and hasten age. Drye, sucketh vp naturall moysture. Clāmy, stoppeth the issue of vapors and vrine, and ingendreth toughe fleume and grauell. Fatte and oyly, swymmeth longe in the stomake, and bryngeth in loth∣somnesse. Bytter, doth not nouryshe. Salte, do frette moche the stomake.
Harrys she, lyke the taste of wylde fruytes, do constipae, and restrayn. Swete, chauffeth the bloudde, and causeth opilations or stoppynges of the pores and cundytes of the body. Sower cooleth nature, and haste∣neth age. ❧ What commoditie happeneth by the moderate vse of the sayd qualities of meates and drynkes. Cap. 6. Meates Colde asswageth the bournynge of choler. Moyste, humecteth that whiche is dryed. Drye, consumeth superfluouse moy∣sture Clammye, thycketh that, whiche is subtyll and percynge. Bytter clenseth and wypeth of, al∣so mollifieth and expelleth fleume. Salt, relenteth fleume clammy, and dryeth it. Fatte and vnctuouse, nourysheth, and maketh soluble. Stiptike or roughe on the toungue vyndeth and comforteth appetite. Sweete dothe clense, dissolue, and nouryshe.
☞ Of fruites. Cap. 7. FOrasmoche as before that tyllage of corne was inuented, and that deuouryng of flesh and fyshe was of mankynde vsed, men vn∣doubtedly lyued by fruites, & Nature was therwith contented & satisfied: but by chaunge of the diete of our progenitours, there is caused to be in our bodies such alteration from the na∣ture, whiche was in men at the begynnyng, that nowe all fruites generally are noyfulle to man, and do ingender ylle humours, and be oftetymes the cause of putrified feuers, yf they be moche and contynually eaten. Not withstandynge vn∣to them, whiche haue aboundaunce of choler, they be somtyme cōuenient, to represse the flame whiche procedeth of choler. And somme fruytes whiche be styptike, or byndynge in taste, eaten before meales, do bynde the bealy, but eaten af∣ter meales, they be rather laxatiue. Nowe shall it not be vnexpedient, to wryte of some fruites particularly, declarynge theyr noyefull quali∣ties in appayrynge of Nature, and howe they may be vsed with leste detriment. ☞ Of Gourdes. GOurdes rawe be vnpleasant in eatynge, Galen. de aliment. 2. yll for the stomacke, and almost neuer di∣gested, therfore he that wylle nedes eate them muste boyle them, toste them, or fry them, euery way they be without sauour or tast, & of theyr proper nature, they gyue to the bodye colde and moyste nouryshement, and that verye
lyttell, but by reason of the slyppernesse of their substaunce, and bycause all meates, whiche be moyste of theyr nature, be not byndynge, they lyghtly passe forth by the bealy. And being well ordred, they wyll be metely concocte, yf corrup∣tion in the stomake do not preuente theym: they be colde and moyste in the seconde degree. ❧ Of Melones and Pepones. MElones and Pepones be almoste of one kinde but that the melone is round like an apple, and the innermoste parte ther∣of, where the seedes are conteyned, is vsed to be eaten. The pepon is muche greatter, and some∣what longe, and the inner parte therof is not to  eaten: They bothe are very colde and moyst, and do make yll yce in the body, yf they be not well digested, but the pepon moche more thanne the melon. they doo leest hurre, yf they be eaten afore meales. All be it yf they do fynde in the sto¦make fleume, they be tourned into fleume, yf they fynde choler, they be tourned into choler. Not withstandyng there is in theym the vertue to clense and to prouoke vrine, they be colde and moysie in the seconde degree. ❧ Cucumbers. CVcumbers do not excede so moche in moi∣sture as melons: and therfore they be not Galen. de alimor. 2. so soone corrupted in the stomake: but in some stomackes, beynge moderatelye vsed, they doo digeste well: but yf they be aboundauntly
eaten, or moche vsed, they ingender a colde and thycke humour in the vaynes, whiche neuer or seldome is tourned into good bloude, and some∣tyme bryngeth in feuers. Also they abate carnall luste. The seedes as well thereof, as of melones and gourdes, beyng dryed, and made clene from the huskes, are very medicinable agaynste syck∣nesses procedynge of heate, also the difficultie or lette in pyssynge, they be colde and moyste in the seconde degree. ❧ Dates. ¶ Be harde to dygeste, therfore beynge moche eaten, and not well dygested, they anoy the hed, and cause gnawynge in the stomacke, and make grosse iuyce, and somtyme cause obstructions or stoppinges in the liuer and splene. And where there is inflammation or hardnesse in the body, they are vnholsome, but beyng wel digested and temperately vsed, they nourysshe and make the fleshe firme, and also bindeth the bealy: olde da∣ies be hotte and drye in the fyrste degree: newe gathered are hotte and moyst in the fyrst degre. ❧ Of fygges. FIgges eaten, do shortly passe out of the sto∣macke, and are sone distrybuted into all the Actius. 1. partes of the bodye, and haue the power to clense, specially grauell, beynge in the raynes of the backe, but they make no substancial nourish¦ment, but rather somewhat lowse and wyndye, but by theyr quycke passage, the wynde is soone dissolued. Therfore yf they be rype, they do leest
harme of any fruytes, or almost none. Drye fig∣ges and olde, are more hotte and moyste thanne newe gathered, but being moch eaten they make yll bloudde and iuyce, and as some do suppose, do ingender lyce, and also anoyeth the lyuer and the splent, if they be inflamed, but hauynge the power to attenuate or make humours currant, they make the bodye soluble, and doo clense the raynes. Also beynge eaten afore dyner with gin∣ger or pepper, or powder of tyme, or penyroyall, they profyte moche to them, whiche haue oppi∣lations or hard congeled matter in the inner par¦tes of the body, or haue distillations or reumes fallynge into the breste and stomake. Newe fyg∣ges are hote and moyste, olde fygges are hote in the fyrste degree, and drye in the seconde. ❧ Of grapes and raysons. GRapes do not nouryshe so moche as fyg∣ges, but beinge type, they make not moch Galen. de aliment. 2. yll iuyce in the body: all be it newely ga∣thered, they trouble the bely, & fylleth the stomake with wynd, therfore yf they be hanged vp a whyle, er they be eaten, they are the lasse noyfull. Sweete grapes, are hottest, and doo lowse somewhat, and make a manne thyrstye, Sowre grapes are colde, and do also lowse, but Diosco. 5. they are harde of digestyon, and yet they do not nouryshe. They which are in taste bytter or har∣ryshe, be lyke to theym that are sowre. Raysons do make the stomake firme and stronge, and do prouoke appetite, and do cōfort weake bodies, being eatē afore meales, they be hote in the first
degre, and moyst in seconde. ❧ Of Cheries. CHeries, yf they be sweete, they do soone slyp downe into the stomake, but yf they be sowre or sharpe, they be more holsom, & do louse, yf they be eatē freshe, & newly gathered, they be cold & moyst in the fyrst degre. ❧ Of peaches. PEaches do lasse harme, and do make bet∣ter iuyce in the bodye, for they are not soo soone corrupted beyng eaten. Of the iuyce of them maye be made a syrope, very hol∣some against the distemperaūce of choler, wher∣of procedeth a stynkynge breathe, they be colde in the fyrst degree, and moyste in the seconde. ❧ Of appulles. AL appulles eaten soone after that they be gathered, are colde, hard to digest, and do make yll and corrupted bloudde, but beynge well kepte vntyll the next wynter, or the yere folowynge, eaten after meales, they are ryght holsom, and do confyrme the stomake, and make good digestion, specially yf they be rosted or baken, moste properly in a cholerike stomake, they are best p̄serued in hony, so that one touche not an other. The rough tasted apples are hol∣some, where the stomake is weake by dystempe∣raunce of heate or moche moysture. The bytter
apples, where that grief is increaced. The soure appuls, where the matter in congeled or made thycke with heate. In distemperature of heate and dryeth by drynkyng moche wyne, they haue ben founde commodiouse: being eaten at nyght, goinge to bedde, withoute drinkynge to theym, they be colde and moyste in the fyrste degre. ❧ Of Quynces. QVynces be colde and drye, eaten afore meale, they bynd & restraine the stomak, that it may not digeste welle the meate, except that they be rosted or sodden, the core taken out and mixte with honye claryfyed, or sugar, than they cause good appetyte, and preserueth the heed from drunkennes: taken af∣ter meate, it closeth and draweth the stomake to gyther, and helpeth it to dygeste, and mollifieth the bealy, yf it be aboundantely taken: they be colde in the fyrste degree, and drye in the begyn∣nynge of the seconde. ❧ Of Pomegranates. POmegranates be of good iuyce, and pro∣fytable to the stomake, specially they, whi∣che are sweete, but in a hotte feuer, they that are sowre be more expedient and holsome. for than the swete do intende heate, and puffe vp the stomake.
❧ Of Peares. PEares are moche of the nature of apples, but they are heuyer, but taken after meate rosted or baken, they are not vnholsome, and do restrayne and knytte the stomake, beyng rype they be colde and moyste in the fyrst degre. ❧ Medlars. MEdlars are colde and drye, and constric∣tiue or straynynge the stomake, and ther∣fore they may be eaten after meales, as a medicine, but not vsed as meate, for they in∣gender melancholye, they be colde and drye in the seconde degree. ☞ Walnuttes VAlnuttes, yf they be blaunched, are sup∣posed to be good for the stomake, & som∣what lowsynge the bealy, myxte with su∣gar, they do nourysshe temperately. Of two drye nuttes, as many fygges, and .xx. leaues of Rewe with a grayne of salte, is wade a medycine, wherof yf one do eate fastynge, nothynge whi∣che is venemous may that day hurte hym, and it also preserueth against the pestilence, and this is the very ryght Mithridate. they be hotte and drie in the seconde degree, after some oppinions hotte in the thyrde degre, drye in the seconde. ☞ Fylberdes and hasylnuttes. ¶ They are more strong in substance than wall
nuttes, wherfore they are not so easily or soone digested. Also they do inflate the stomacke, and cause heed ache, but they ingender fatte. And yf they be rosted, they are good to restrayne rew∣mes. Also eaten with pepper, they are good a∣gaynst tourmentes of the bealye, and the stop∣pynge of vryne. They be hotte and drye in the fyrste degree. ❧ Of Almondes THey do extenuate and clense without any byndynge, wherfore they purge the breste and lunges, specially bytter almondes. Also they do mollifye the bealy, prouoke sleape, and causeth to pysse well, fyue or syx of theym eaten afore meate, kepe a manne from beynge drunke, they be hot and moyst in the fyrst degre. ❧ Of Chestyns ¶ They beinge rosted vnder the ymbers or hot asshes, doo nourysshe the bodye strongely, and eaten with hony fastynge, do helpe a manne of the cowghe. ❧ Prunes OF the gardeyne and type, doo dispose a man to the stoole, but they do brynge noo maner of nouryshement. To this fruyte lyke as to fygges this propertie romay∣neth, that being dryed they do profyte. The da∣mase prune rather byndeth than lowseth, and
is more commodiouse vnto the stomake they be colde and moyste in the seconde degre. ❧ Olyues COndyte in salte lycoure, taken at the be∣gynnynge of a meale doth corroborate the stomake, stireth appetite, and louseth the bealy, beynge eaten with vyneger. They whiche be rype, are temperatly hote, they which be grene, are colde and drye. ❧ Of Capers THey nouryshe nothynge after that they be salted, but yet they make the bely louse and purgeth fleume, whiche is therin con∣teyned. Galen. de alime. 2. Also styrreth appetite to meate and openeth the obstructions or stoppynge of the lyuer and splene, beynge eaten with oximell, before any other meate: they be hotte and drye in the seconde degree. ❧ Orenges ¶ The ryndes taken in a lyttell quantitie, doo comforte the stomake, where it digesteth, speci∣ally condite with sugar, and taken fastynge in a small quantitie. The iuyce of orenges, hauynge a toste of bredde put vnto it, with a lyttell pow∣der of myntes, sugar, and a lyttell cynamome, maketh a very good sauce to prouoke appetite. The iuyce eaten with sugar in a hotte feuer, is not to be discommended. The rynde is hotte in the fyrst degree, and drye in the second: the iuyce of them is colde in the seconde degree, and drye in the fyrste.
☞ Herbes vsed in potage or to eate. Capitulo. 8. GEnerally al herbes rawe, and not sodden, do ingender cold and watry iuyce, yf they be eaten customably, or in abundance: all be it some herbes are more comestyble, & doo lasse harme vnto nature, and moderatelye vsed, maketh inetely good bloudde. ☞ Lettyse. AMonge all herbes, none hath soo good iuyce as letise: for somemen do suppose, that it maketh aboundance of bloude, al be it not very pure or perfyte. It doth set a hote stomake in a very good temper, & maketh good appetite, and eaten in the euennynge, it prouo∣keth slepe, albe it, it neither doth lowse nor bynd the bealye of his owne propertie. It increaseth mylke in a womans breastes, but it abateth car∣nall appetite, and moche vsynge therof, hurteth the eye syghte. It is colde and moyst temperatly ❧ Colewortes and Cabages. BEfore that auarice caused marchantes to fetche out of the easte and south partes of the worlde, the traffyke of spyce and son∣dry droughes, to contente the vnsaciablenesse of wanton appetites, Colewortes for the vertues supposed to be in them, were of such estimation, that they were iudged to be a sufficient medy∣cyne agaynst all diseases, as it maye appere in the booke of wyse Cato, wherein he wryteth of
husbandrye. But now I wyll no more remem∣ber, than shall be requyred, in that whiche shall be vsed as meate and not pure medicyne. The iuyce therof hathe vertue to pourge: the holle leaues beynge halfe sodden, and the water pou∣red out, and they beynge put eftsones into hotte water, and sodden vntyll they be tender, so ea∣ten they do bynde the bealy. Some do suppose, yf they be eaten raw with vineger, before meat, it shall preserue the stomacke from surfettynge, and the heed from drunkennesse: all be it moche vsynge of them dulleth the syght, except the eies be very moyst. Fynally the iuyce that it maketh in the body is not so commendable, as that whi¦che is ingendred of lettyse. It is hote in the first degree, and drye in the seconde. ❧ Of Cikorie or suckorie. IT is lyke in operation to lettyse, & tempe∣reth choler wonderfully, and therfore in all cholerike feuers, the decoctiō of this herbe or the water therof stylled, is ryghte expedient. semblably the herbe and rote boiled with fleshe, that is freshe beyng eaten, kepeth the stomacke and hed in verye good temper. I suppose that Southystell and Dentdelyon, be of lyke quali∣ties, but not so conuenient to be vsed of theym, whiche are hole, bycause they are wylde of na∣ture and more bytter, and therfore causeth fa∣stidiousnesse or lothsomnesse of the stomacke. It is colde and drye in the seconde degree.
☞ Endyue and Scariole BE moche lyke in theyr operation to Cyko∣rie, but they are more conuenient to medi∣cine than to meate. All be if Scariole cal∣lyd whyte Endyue, hauynge the toppes of the leaues tourned in, and layde in the erthe, at the latter ende of sommer, and couered, becommeth whyte and crispe, lyke to the great stalkes of ca bage lettyse, whiche are in wynter taken vp and eaten. And to theym that haue hotte stomakes and drye, they be ryght holsome, but beynge to moche vsed, or in very great quantitie they in∣gender the humour, whiche maketh the cholike▪ they be colde and moyste in the fyrste degree. ☞ Malowes ¶ Are not colde in operacion, but rather some∣what warme, and haue in them a slyppernesse: Gale. 2. de alimentis. wherfore beynge boyled and moderatelye eaten with oyle and vyneger, they make metely good concoction in the stomake, and causeth the su∣perfluous matter therin easily to passe, and clen seth the bealye. It is hotte and moyste in the fyrste degree. ☞ Whyte betis ¶ Are also abstersiue and lowseth the bealy, but moche eaten, annoveth the stomake: but they ar ryght good agaynste obstructions or stoppynge of the lyuer, yf they be eaten with vyneger or mustarde, lykewyse it helpeth the splene. It is colde in the fyrst degre, and moyst in the second.
☞ Pourselan. Doth mitigate the great heate in all the in∣warde partes of the body, semblably of the hed and eies: also it represseth the rage of Venus, but yf it be preserued in salte or bryne, it heateth and pourgeth the stomacke. It is colde in the thirde degre, and moyste in the seconde. ❧ Cheruyle. Is very profytable vnto the stomacke, but it maye not susteyne very moche boylynge, eaten with vineger, it prouoketh appetyte, and also v∣rine. The decoction therof drunke with wyne, clenseth the bladder. ☞ Sorell. Beyng sodden, it louseth the bealy. In a tyme of pestilence, yf one beynge fastynge, do chewe some of the leaues, and sucke downe the iuyce, it meruaylousely preserueth from infections, as a newe practiser called Guainerius, doth wryte. And I my selfe haue proued it in my household. The sedes therof brayed and drunke with wine and water, is very holsome agaynste the cholike Dioscori∣des li. 2. ca pit. 106. and frettynge of the guttes: it stoppeth fluxes, and helpeth the stomake anoyed with replecion. It is colde in the thyrde degree, and drye in the seconde. ❧ Persely. Is very conuenient to the stomake, and com∣forteth appetite, and maketh the breath sweete, the sedes and roote causeth vrine to passe well, and breaketh the stoone, dissolueth wyndes: the rootes boiled in water, and therof oxymel being
made, it dissolueth fleume, and maketh good di∣gestion. It is hotte and drye in the thyrd degre. ❧ Fenell, ¶ Beynge eaten the sede or rote maketh abun∣dance of mylke, lykewyse drunke with ptysane or ale. The sede sommewhat restrayneth fluxe, prouoketh to pysse, and mytigateth frettynges of the stomacke and guttes, specially the decoc∣tion of the rote, yf the matter, causynge fretting be colds, but yf it be of a horte cause, the vse  therof is daungerouse, for inflammation or ex∣ulceation of the raynes or bladder. It is hotte in the thyrde degree, and drye in the fyrste. ❧ Anyse sede. Maketh swete breathe, prouoketh vrine, and dryueth downe thinges, cleauyng to the raynes, or bladder, styrreth vp courage, and causeth a∣bundance of mylke. It is hotte and drye in the thyrde degree. Beanes. They make wynde, howe so euer they be or∣dered: the substance, whiche they doo make, is spungye, and not firme, all be it they be abster∣syue, or clensynge the bodye, they tarye longe, or they be digested, and make grosse iuyce in the body, but yf onyons be sodden with them, they be lasse noyfull. ☞ Peasyn. Are moche of the nature of beanes, but they be lasse wyndy, and passeth faster out of the bo∣dy: they be also abstersyue, or clensyng, specially white peason, and they also cause merely good
nouryshynge, the huskes taken awaye. And the brothe wherin they be sodden, cleuseth ryghte well the raynes and bladder. ☞ Rape rotes and Nauews. Cap. 9. THe iuyce made by them, is very grosse: & therfore beyng moch eaten, if they be not perfytely concocte in the stomake, they do make crude or rawe iuyce in the vaynes. Also yf they be not well boyled, they cause wyndes, and annoye the stomake, & make somtyme frettyn∣ges: If they be well boyled fyrste in cleane wa∣ter, and that beinge caste away, the second tyme with fatte fleshe, they nourys she moche, and do neyther lowse nor bynde the bely. But Nauews do not nouryshe so moche as rapes, but they be euen as wyndy. ❧ Turnepes, Beyng well boyled in water, and after with fatte fleshe, nourysheth moche, augmenteth the sede of man, prouoketh carnall lust. Eaten raw, they styre vp appetite to eate▪ beynge temperatly vsed, and be conuenient vnto them, whiche haue putrifyed matter in theyr brestes or lunges, cau∣synge theym to spytte easly, but beynge moche and often eaten, they make raw iuyce and wyn∣dynesse. ❧ Parsneps and carettes. They do nouryshe with better iuyce than the other rootes, specially carettes, whiche are hote & drye, and erpelleth wynde. Not withstandyng Gal. simp. med. li. 7. moche vsed they ingender yll iuyce: but carettes
lasse than parsnepes, the done and the other ex∣pelleth vrine. ☞ Radysshe rotes. Haue the vertue to extenuate, or make thyn, and also to warme. Also they cause to breake Paulus Ae ginera. Dioscori∣des. Li. 7. de a∣liment. wynde, and to pysse: beyng eaten afore meales, they lette the meate, that it may not descend, but being eaten laste, they make good digestion, and louseth the bealy, thoughe Galenus write con∣trary. For I, amonge dyuers other, by experi∣ence haue proued it: Notwithstandyng they be vnholsome for theym, that haue contynually the goute, or payne in the ioyntes. ❧ Garlyke. It doth extenuate and cutte grosse humours and slymy, dissolueth grosse wyndes, and hea∣teth all the body: also openeth the places, which are stopped, generally where it is well digested in the somake: it is holsom to dyuers purposes, specially in the bodye, wherein is grosse matter, or moche colde inclosed: yf it be sodden vntyll it tosth his artenesse, it somewhat nouryssheth, and yet looseth not his propertie, to extenuate grosse humours: beinge sodden in mylke, it pro∣fyteth moch agaynst distillations from the heed into the stomake. ❧ Onyons. Do also extenuate, but the longe onions more than the rounde, the redde more than the white, the drye more than they whiche be greene: also rawe more than sodden: they styre appetite to meate, and put awaye lothsomnesse, and lowse the bealy, they quycken syght: and beynge eaten in great abundance with meate, they cause one
to sleape soundely. ❧ Leekes. Be of yll iuyce, and do make troublous drea∣mes, but they do extenuate and clense the body. Galen 7. cap. 138. and also make it soluble, and prouoketh vrine. Moreouer it causeth one to spette out easily the fleume, whiche is in the breaste. ❧ Sauge It heateth, and somwhat byndeth, and ther∣with prouoketh vrine, the decoction of the lea∣ues and braunches beinge druncke. Also it stop∣peth bleedynge of woundes, beinge layde vnto them. Moreouer it hath ben proued, that wo∣men, whiche haue ben longe tyme without chil∣derne, and haue drunke. r. ounces of the iuyce of sauge, with a grayne of salte, a quarter of an houre before, that they haue companyed with theyr husbandes, haue conceyued at that tyme. It is hotte and drye in the thyrde degree, the v∣synge therof is good agaynst palseyes. ❧ Isope. Doth heate and extenuate, wherby it dyge∣steth slymye fleume: beynge prepared with fyg∣ges, it pourged fleume downewarde, with ho∣nye and water vpwarde, boyled in vyneger, it helpeth the toth ake, yf the te the be washed ther with: it is hotte and drye in the thyrde degre. ☞ Bourage. Comforteth the harte, and maketh one mery, eaten rawe before meales, or layde in wyne that is drunke: Also mollyfieth the bealye, and pre∣pareth to the stoole. It is hotte and moyst in the myddell of the fyrst degree.
❧ Sauery. Purgeth fleume, helpeth dygestyon, maketh quycke syghte, prouoketh vryne, and styreth car∣nal apetite: It is hot and dry in the thyrd degre. ☞ Rokat. Heateth moche, and increaseth seede of man, ouoketh courage, helpeth digstion, and some∣what louseth. It is hotte and moyste in the se∣conde degree. ❧ Tyme. Dissolueth wyndes, breaketh the stone, expel∣leth vrine, and ceasseth freattynges. It is hote and drye in the thyrde degree. ❧ Penyryall. Dothe ertenuate, heate, and decocte, it refor∣meth the stomake, oppressed with fleume, it doth recomforte the faynte spirire, it expelleth melan∣choly by siege, and is medicinable agaynste ma∣ny diseases, it is hotte & drye in the thyrd degre. ❧ Townecresses. ¶ Paulus dyscommendeth, sayeng, that it resi∣steth Lib. . concoction, and hurteth the stomacke, and maketh yll iuyce in the body, taken as medicine, it helpeth many diseases. It is hotte and drye in the thyrde degree. ❧ Rosemary. Hath the veriue to heate, and therfore it dissol∣ueth humour congeled with colde: It helpeth a∣gaynst palseys, fallyng syckenes, olde diseases of the breaste▪ tourmentes or frettyng, it prouoketh vrine and sweat: it helpeth the cough taken with pepper and hony, it putteth away to the ake. the roote beyng chewed, or the iuyce therof put into
the to the: beinge bourned, the fume therof resy∣steth the pestplence: the rynde therof sodden or burned, & the fume receyueth at the mouth, stop peth the reume, which falleth out of the heed in∣to the chekes or throote: whiche I my selfe haue proued, the grene leaues bruysed, do stoppe the hemorroides, yf they be layde vnto them: this herbe is hotte and drye in the thyrde degree. ☞ Spices growyng out of this realme vsed in meate or drynke. Cap. 10, ❧ Pepper. BLacke pepper is hottest, and mooste drye, whyte pepper is next, longe pepper is most temperate. The generall propertye of all kyndes of pepper is to heate the bodye, but as Galene sayth, it perceth downeward, and dothe not spreade into the vaynes, yf it be grosse bea∣ten. It dissolueth fleume and wynde, it helpethe digestion, expulseth vrine, and it helpeth agaynst the diseases of the breaste, procedynge of colde. It is hot in the fyrste degre, & dry in the second ☞ Gynger. Heateth the stomake, and helpeth dygestyon, but it heateth not so soone as pepper: but after∣warde the heate remayneth longer, and causeth the mouth to be moysre: Beynge grene, or well confectioned in syrope, it comforteth moche the stomake and heed, and quyckneth remembrance. if it be taken in the morowe fastynge. It is hote in the seconde degree, and drye in the fyrste.
❧ Saffron. Somwhat byndeth, heateth, and comforteth the stomake, and the harte specially, and maketh good digestion, being eaten or drunken in a smal quantitie. It is hotte in the seconde degree, and drye in the fyrste. ❧ Cloues. Hath vertue to comforte the synewes, also to consume and dissolue superfluouse humoures, They be hotte and drye in the thyrde degre: sod∣dē with mylk, it cōforteth the debilite of nature. ❧ Mases. Dioscorides commendeth to be drunke against spyttynge of bloudde, and blouddy fluxes, and excessiue laxes. Paulus Jegineta, addeth to it that it helpeth the cholyke: they be hotte in the seconde degree and drye in the thyrde degre. It is to the stomake very commodiouse, taken in a lyttell quantitie. ☞ Nutmigges With theyr swete odour comfote and dissolue, and somtyme comforteth the power of the sight and also the brayn in cold discrasies, and is hote and drye in the second degre. ❧ Of breade. Cap. 11. Breade of fyne floure of wheate, hauynge no uyn, is slewe of digestion, and maketh  nours, but it nouryssheth moche: yf it be lyned, it dygesteth sooner: breade ynge moche branne, fylleth the bealye with excrementes, and nouryssheth lyttell or nothyng, but shortely descendeth from the stomacke: The
meane betwene bothe, suffyciently leuyned, well moulded, and moderately baken, is the most hol some to euery age. The greatest loues do norishe moste faste, for as moch as the fyre hath not ex∣hausted the moysture of theym. Hotte breadde, moche eaten, maketh fulnesse and thyrste, and slowely passeth. Barley bread clenseth the body, and doth not nouryshe so moche as wheate, and maketh colde iuyce in the body. ☞ Of flesshe. Capi. 12. BEfe of Englande to Englyshemen, whi∣che are in helthe, bryngeth stronge nourys∣shynge, but it maketh grosse bloudde, and ingendreth melancoly: but being of yonge oxen, not excedynge the age of foure yeares, to them, which haue cholerike stomakes, it is more conuenient, thanne chykens, and other lyke fine meates. Swynes flesshe. ¶ Aboue all kyndes of fleshe in nouryshyng the body, Galene most cōmendeth porke, not beinge of an olde swyne, and that it be well digested of hym, that eateth it. For it maketh beste iuyce, it is moste conuenient for yong persons, and them, whiche haue susteyned moche labour, and ther∣with are fatigate, and become weake. Yong pig ges are not commended before that they be one moneth olde, for they do brede moche superflu∣ous humours. Lambe. Is very moyste and fleumatyke, wherfore it is not conueniente for aged men, excepte that it be very drye rosted, nor yet for theym whiche haue in theyr stomake moche fleume.
☞ Mutton. ¶ Galene doth not commende it, not withstan∣ding De alimē. . . experience proueth here in this realme, that if it be yonge, it is a ryght temperate meate, and maketh good iuyce: and therfore it is vsed more than any other meate, in all diseases. And yet it is not lyke good in all places, nor the shepe, whi∣che beareth fynest wolle, is not the swetest in ea∣tynge, nor the moste tender. But I haue founde in some countrays mutton, which in whitenes, tendernesse, and swetenesse of the fleshe, mought be well nygh compared to kydde, and in digesti∣on haue proued as holsome. Kydde and veale. Of Galene is cōmended next vnto porke, but some men do suppose, that in helth and sicknesse they be moche better thanne porke, the iuyce of them both beyng more pure. And here it is to be noted, that of all beastes, whiche be dry of theyr nature the yongest be most holsom: of them that are moyste, the eldest are lest hurtfull. Hare, Conye. Maketh grosse bloude, it dryeth and stoppeth, but yet it prouoketh a man to pysse. Conye ma∣keth Hippo. de atione vi us lib. . capit. 19. Plin. 3. better and more pure nouryshement, and is soner digested than hare. It is well proued, that there is no meate more holsome, or that more cleane, firmely, and temperatelye nourysshethe than rabettes. ❧ Dere redde and falowe. Hippocrates affyrmeth the fleshe of hartes and hyndes, to be of yll iuyce, harde of digesti∣on, and drye, but yet it moueth vrine. Of falowe dere, he nor any other olde wryter doth speake
of, as I remember. I suppose, bycause there be not in all the worlde so men, as be in England, where they consume a good part of the best pa∣sture in the realme, and are in nothynge profy∣table, sauynge that of the skynnes of theym is made better lether, than is of calues: the hun∣tyng of them beyng not so pleasant, as the hun∣tynge of other venerye or vermyne, the flesshe moche more vnholsome and vnpleasant, than of a redde dere, ingendrynge melancholy, and ma∣kynge many fearefulle dreames, and disposeth the bodye to a feuer, yf it be moche eaten: not withstandynge the fatte therof (as some lerned menne haue supposed) is better to be dygested, than the leane. Of byrdes. The fleshe of all byrdes, is moche lyghter, thā the fleshe of beastes in comparison, moste specy∣ally of those foules, whiche truste moste to their wynges, and do brede in hygh countreyes. Capons, hennes, and chyckens. The Capon is aboue al other foules praysed, for as moch as it is easily digested, and maketh lyttell ordure, and moch good nouryshement. It is commodiouse to the breste and stomake. Hen∣nes in wynter are almost equall vnto the capon: but they do not make so stronge nouryshement. Auycen sayth, yf they be rosted in the bealy of a kydde or lambe, they wyl be the better. Chikens in sommer, specially yf they be okelles, are ve¦ry conuenyent for a weake stomake, and noury∣sheth a lyttell. The flesshe of a rocke is harde of dyion, but the broth, wherin it is boyled, lou∣seth the bealy, and hauyng sodden in it colewor∣tes,
Polypodium, or Cartamus, it pourgeth yll huinours, and is medicmable agaynste goutes, ioynt aches, and feuers, which come by courses. Fesannt. Excedeth all fowles in swetenesse and hol∣somnesse, and is equall to a capon in nourishing, but he is somwhat dryer, and is of some menne put in comparyson, meane betwene a henne and a patryche. Partriche. Of all foules is moste soonest digested: and hath in hym moche nutriment, comforteth the brayne, and maketh sede of generation, and re∣eth luste, whiche is abated. Quayles. All though they be of some men commended, yet experience proueth theym to increace melan∣choly, and are of a smalle nouryshynge. Larkes. Be as well the fleshe as the brothe, very hol∣some: eaten rosted, they do moche helpe agaynste the cholyke, as Dioscorides sayth. A plouer. Is slowe of digestion, nouryssheth lyttell, and increaseth melancolye. Blacke byrdes or ousyls. Among wylde foule hath the chiefe prayse, for lyghtnes of digestion, and that they make good nouryshement, and lyttell ordure. Sparowes. Be harde to digeste, and are very hotte, and sty∣reth vp Venus, & specyally the braynes of them.
Woodcoces. Are of a good temperaunce, and metely lyghte in dygestyon. Pygeons. Be easily dygested, and are very holsome to them, whiche are fleumatike, or pure melancoly. Goose, Is harde of digestion, but beynge yonge and fatte, the wynges be easy to digest in a hole sto∣make, and nourysheth competently. Ducke, Is hotter than goose, and hard to digest, and maketh warse iuyce, sauyng the branues on the breaste boone, and the necke is better thanne the remnaunt. Crane and bustarde. Crane is harde of digestyon, and maketh yll iuyce, but beyng hanged vp longe in the ayre, he is the lasse vnholsome. Bustarde beinge fat, and kepte without meate a day or two afore that he be kylled, to expulse his ordure, and than dra∣wen, and hanged as the crane is, beynge roosted or baken, is a good meate, and nourysheth well, yf he be well dygested. Hearon, Byttour, Shoular, Beynge yonge and fatte, be lyghtlyer digested than crane: and the byttour sooner than the he∣ron. And the shoular sooner than any of theym, but all these fowles muste be eaten with moche gynger or pepper, and haue good olde wyne drunke after them, and so shall they be more ea∣syly digested, and the iuyce commynge of theym be the lasse noyfull.
❧ The partes and members of byr∣des and beastes, Cap. 13. THe wynges braunes and necke of geese, capons, hennes, fesaunt, partryche, and small byrdes beyng fate, are better than the legges in dygestyon, & lyghter in nou∣ryshyng, of wyldfoule and pygeons beyng fatte the legges are better than the wynges: the brau∣nes of ducke, teale, and wygeon excepte, whiche is better to dygeste than the tesydewe. The gysar or stomake. Of a goose or henne beyng fatte with branne and mylke, beynge well sodden or made in pou∣der, is good for the stomake, in making it strong to digeste, and nourysheth competently. The lyuar. Of a capon, henne, fesaunt, or goose, beynge ade fatte with mylke myxte with theyr meate, is not only easy to digest, but also maketh good iuyce, and nourysheth excellently. But the lyuers of beastes be yll to dygeste, passeth slowely, and maketh grosse blod, but it is strong in norishyng The inwarde of beastes, as trypes and chitterlynges. The fleshe of them is more harde to dygeste. And therfore although they be well digested, yet make they not iuice naturally sanguine, or clene, but rawe iuyce and colde: and requyreth a longe tyme, to be conuerted into bloode. The lunges or lyghtes. Are more easy to dygeste than the lyuer, and lasse nourysheth, but the nouryshement, that it maketh, is fleumatyke: All be it the lunges of a
Foxe, is medicinable for them, which haue syk∣nesse of the lunges. The splene or ylte. Is of yll iuyce, for it is the aber of melancoly. The harte. Is of harde fleshe, and therfore is not soone dygested, nor passeth shortely, but where he is well dygesteth, the iuyce that it maketh, is not to be dyspraysed. The brayne. Is fleumatike, of grosse iuyce, slowe in dige∣stynge, noyouse to the stomacke, but where it is well dygesteth, it nourysheth moche. Marowe. Is more delectable than the brayne, it is yll for the stomacke, but where it is well dygesteth, it nourysheth moche. The stones and vdders, Beyng well digested, do nouryshe moche, but the stones are hotter with theyr moystnesse, the vdders colde and fleumatike, they bothe do in∣crease sede of generation: but the bloudde made of the vdder is better than that, whiche cometh of the stones, excepte it be of calues and lambes. Also the stoones of cockes, maketh commenda∣ble nouryshement. The heed. The fleshe therof nourisheth moch, and aug∣menteth sede: but it is slowe of dygestyon, and noyeth the stomacke, but to theym, whiche vse moche exercyse, it is not discommendable. The tongue. Is of a spoungy and sanguine substance, but
the kernelles and gristell, whiche are in the roo∣tes, yf they be welle dygested, they make good nouryshement, yf they be not well dygested, they make fleume. The feete. Beynge well boyled and tender, in a holle sto∣make, dygesteth well, and maketh good iuyce, and passeth forthe easily. Galene commendeth the fete of swyne. But I haue proued, that the feete of a yonge bullocke tenderly sodden, and layde in souse two dayes or thre, and eaten colde in the euenynge, haue broughte a cholerike sto∣make into a good digestion and slepe, and ther∣with hath also expulsed salte fleume and choler, and this haue I founde in my self by often expe¦rience: alway foresene, that it be eaten before a∣ny other meate, without drynkynge immediatly after it. ❧ Of fysshe generally. Cap. 14. THe best fyshe after the opinion of Galen, is that, whiche swymmeth in the pure see, and is tossed and lyfte vp with windes and sourges. The more calme that the water is, the warse is the fyshe, they which are in muddy waters, do make moche fleume and ordure, ta∣ken in fennes and dyches be warste, beinge in freshe ryuers and swyfte, be somtyme commen∣dable: albeit generally, all kyndes of fyshe ma∣keth more thynner bloudde, than flesshe, so that it doth not moche nouryshe, and it doth sooner passe out by vapours: to a hotte cholerike sto∣make, or in feuers, somtyme they be holsome,
beynge newe, freshe, and not very harde in sub∣stance or slimy, harde fyshe is hard of digestion, but the nourishement therof is more fyrme, than that, whiche is softe: those whiche haue muche grosse humours in them, are best powdred. ❧ Of butter. Cap. 15. BVtter is also nourysshynge, and profiteth to them, whiche haue humours superflu∣ous, in the breste or lunge, and lacketh ry∣pyng & clensynge of them: specyally if it be eaten with sugar or hony. If it be well salted, it heateth and elenseth the more. ❧ Of Chese. Cap. 16. CHese by the hole sentence of all auncyent wryters, letteth digestion, and is enemye vnto the stomacke. Also it ingendreth yll humours, & bredeth the stone. The chese whiche dothe leste harme, is softe chese, reasona¦bly salted, whiche somme men do suppose, nou∣rysheth moche. ☞ Of Egges. Cap. 17 EGges of fesantes, hennes, and partriches, be of all other meates most agreable vnto nature, specially yf they be newe layde: yf they be reere, they do clense the throte and the breaste. If they be harde, they be slowe in di∣gestion: but beynge ones digested, they do nou∣ryshe moche. Mean betwene rere and hard, they dygeste conueniently, and nouryshe quyckely. Egges well poched, ar better thā rosted. If they be fryed harde, they be of yll nouryshement, & do make stynkyng fuines in the stomake, & do cor∣rupt other meates with whom they be mingled. They be moste holsome, whan they be poched,
and most vnholsome, whan they be fryed. Dios∣corides sayth, If they be souped warme, before any other meate, they do heale the griefes of the bladder, and raynes, made with grauelle: alsoo forenesse of the chekes, and throte, and spytting of bloudde: and they be good agaynst eatarres, or styllynge out of the heed, into the stomake. ❧ Of drinkes, and fyrste of Wa∣ter Capit. 18. VNdoubtedly water hath preemynence a∣boue all other lycours, not onely bycause it is an element, that is to say, a pure mat¦ter, wherof all other lycours haue theyr original substance: but also forasmoch, as it was the very naturall and fyrst drynke, to all maner of creatures. wherfore the fayeng of Pindarus the poete, was euer welle allowed, which sayth, water is beste. And one thyng is to be well con∣sydered that from the creation of the world, vn¦tyll the vniuersalle deluge or floudde, durynge whiche tyme, men lyued eyght or nyne hundred yeres, there was none other drink vsed nor kno∣wen, but water. Also the true folowers of Py∣thagoras doctrine, dranke onely water, and yet lyued longe: as Apollonius, and other: and in the serchynge out of secrete and misticall thyn∣ges, their wyttes excelled. More ouer, we haue sene men and women of great age, and stronge of body, whiche neuer, or very seldome, dranke other drynke, than pure water: As by example, in Cornewall, although that the countray be in a very colde quarter, whiche prouethe, that yf menne from their infancye, were accustomed to
none other drynke but to water onely, mode∣rately vsed it shulde be sufficient to kepe natu∣rall moysture, and to cause the meate that is ea∣ten to perce and descende vnto the places of di∣gestion, which are the purposes that drynke ser∣ueth fore. But nowe to the qualities of water, after the sentence of auncient philosophers and phisitions, The rayne water, after the opinion of the most men, yf it be receyued pure & cleane, is moste subtyll and penetratyue, of any other waters: the nexte is that, whiche yssueth out of a sprynge in the easte, and passeth swyftely, a∣monge great stones or rockes: the thyrde is of a cleane ryuer, which rennethe on great harde sto∣nes or pebles. There be dyuers meanes to trye out, whiche is the beste water, for that which is lyghtest in poyse or weyght is beste. Alsoo that, wherof commeth leste skymme or frothe, whan it doth boyle. Also that, whiche wyll soonest be hote. More ouer deape lynnen clothes into sun∣drye waters, and after laye them to drye, & that whiche is soonest drye, the water wherin it was depid is moste subtylle. After a greate surfette, colde water drunken is a generall remedy. Hip∣pocrates affyrmeth, that in sharpe and feruent diseases, none other remedy is to be requyred, than water. And Galene wylle not, that chyl∣derne shulde be lette from drynkynge of water: De ratiōe uictus in mor. acu∣tis li. 3. but that whan they fele them selues very hotte, after meales, and do desyre to drynke water, specially of a cleane fountayn, they shuld be suf∣fred. Also Hippocrates sayth, In suche syknes where as thou fearest, lest the heed shuld be vehe¦mently greued, or the minde peryshed there must
thou gyue eyther water, or whyte wyne alayed with moche water. Not withstandynge there be in water causes of dyuers diseases, as of swellynge of the splene, and the lyuer, it also flyt¦teth and swymmeth, and it is long or it perceth, in as moche, as it is colde and slowe in decor∣tion, it loseth not the bealy, nor prouoketh vrine. Also in this it is vicyous, that of his proper na∣ture, it maketh none ordure. Fynally, alway re∣specte muste be hadde to the persone, that dryn∣keth it, for to yonge men, and them, that be hot of complexion, it doth lasse harme, and somtyme it profyteth: but to them that are feble, olde, fleu matyke, or melancoly, is not conuenient. ❧ Of Wyne. Cap. 19. PLato, the wysest of all phylosophers, doth affirme, that wyne moderatly drunke, no∣rysheth and cōforteth, as well all the body, as the spirites of man. And therfore, god dyde ordeyne it for mankynde, as a remedy a∣gaynste the incommodities of aege: that thereby they shulde seme to retourne vnto youth, & for∣gette heuynes. Vndoubtedly wyne heateth and moysteth the body, which qualities chiefly con∣serueth nature. And Galene of all wynes, com∣mendeth that, which is yelowe and clere, saing, That it is the hotest, and whyte wyne lest hote. And the colour meane betwene bothe, of sembla¦ble temperature. The yelowe wyne, whiche is the proper colour of very hotte wynes, to olde men doth brynge these cōmodites Fyrste it hea∣teth al theyr membres, also it purgeth by vryne,
the watry substaunce of the bloudde. Moreouer the wynes, whiche be pale or yelowe, and full of substance, they do increase bloudde, & nouryshe the body, but for the more parte olde men haue nede of suche wynes, whiche do prouoke vrine: for as moch as in them do abounde watrye ex∣crementes, or superfluities. And they whiche do tary longe in the bealy, be not apt for aged men. Blacke or depe redde wynes and thicke, do bind and congele that which they do fynde in the bo∣dye, and although some of them do not longe a∣byde in the bealy, yet they moue not vrine, but rather withdraweth: but yet they do harme to olde men, for as moche as they do stoppe the eū∣dites of the splene, the lyuer, & the raynes. Alsoo grosse wynes be best for them, whiche desyre to be fatte, but it maketh oppilations: olde wyne and clere is better for them, that be fleumatike. Galene also prohibiteth chyldern to drynke any Lib. 1. de tuenda sa∣nitate. wyne, forasmoch as they be of an hot and moist temperature, and soo is wyne: and therfore it heateth and moysteth to moch theyr bodyes, and fylleth theyr heedes with vapours. More ouer, he wolde, that yonge men shoulde drynke lyttell wyne, for it shall make them prone to fury, and to lechery: and that parte of the soule, whych is called rationable, it shall make troublous and dull: not withstandynge, yet it is sommetyme profytable to mitigate or expell ordure, made of coler or melancolye. Also it profyteth agaynste drythe, whiche hapneth in the substance of the bodye, eyther by to moche labour, or by the pro∣pre temperature of age: for wyne moysteth and nourysheth that, whiche is to drye, also mytiga∣teth
and dissolueth the sharpenes of cholet, and purgeth it also by vrine and sweate: Finally (as Theognes sayth Moch drynkynge of wyne is yll, but moderate drynkyng of wyne is not only not yll, but also commodious and profitable, whiche sentence is confyrmed by Jesus Syrac, in the boke named Ecclesiasticus, sayeng, wyne moderatly drunke, reioyseth bothe the body and Eccle. 3. soule. wherfore to cōclude this chapyter, There is neyther meate nor drynke, in the vse wherof ought to be a more discrete moderation, than in wyne, consyderynge that beynge good & drunke in due tyme and mesure, it not onely conserueth naturall and radicall moysture, wherby lyfe in∣ureth, but also it helpeth the pryneypall mem∣bers, whiche belonge to digestyon, to do they office: On the other parte, beynge yll or corrupt or taken out of order and measure, it doth con∣trarye to all the premysses, besydes that it trans¦formeth a man or womā, makyng them beastly. More of the qualities of wyne, shall be touched hereafter in the order of dyete. ❧ Of Mylke. Cap. 20. MIlke is comparte of three substaunces, creame, whey, and cruddes. The moste excellent mylke is of a womā The milke of a cowe is thyekest, the mylke of a cantlle is moste subtyll, the mylke of a goote is betwene cowe mylke, and camelle mylke. Ewes mylke is betwene cowe mylke and asses mylke. Alsoo the mylke of beastes, fedyng in large pastures, and oute of fennes and marsshes, is better than of
them, whiche be fedde in lyttell closes, or in wa∣try groundes. In springe tyme mylke is mooste subtyll, and milke of yong beastes, is holsomer, than of olde. To chylderne, olde menne, and to them, whiche be oppressed with melancolye, or haue the fleshe consumed with a feuer ethike, mylke is conuenient. And generally to all them, which do not fele the mylke ryse in theyr stomo∣kes, after that they haue eaten it: and in those persones, it dothe easyly pourge that, whiche is in the bealy superfluous. And afterwarde it en∣treth into the vaynes, and bryngeth good nou∣ryshement. Who so euer hath an appetit to eate or drynke mylke, to the entente that it shall not aryse or abrayde in the stomake, lette hym put in to a vessel, out of the whiche he wyll receyue it, a fewe leaues of myntes, sugar, or pure honye. And in to that vessel cause the best to be milked, and so drynke it warme from the vdder: or els lette hym do as Paulus Aegineta teacheth, that is to say, boyle fyrst the mylke with an easy fier, and sethe it after with a hotter fire, and skimme it cleane, and with a spunge deaped in cold wa∣ter, take that cleane away, whiche wold be bur∣ned to the vessell, than put to the mylke salt and Oribasius de confec¦tione cibo¦rum. li. 3. sugar, and stere it often. More ouer mylke taken to pōurge melancolye, wolde be drunke in the mornyng abundantly newe mylked, as is before wrytten. And he that drynketh, shulde absteyne from meate, and exercise, vntyll the mylke be di∣gested, and haue somwhat pourged the bealy. For with labour it becommeth sowre: and ther∣fore it requyreth reste and watche, or to walke very softely. Finally, where men and women
be vsed from their chyldhode, for the more part, to mylke, and do eate none or lyttell other meat, but mylke and butter, they appere to be of good complexion and facion of body, and not so mo∣che vexed with sickenesse, as they whiche drinke wyne or ale: not withstandynge moche vse of mylke in men sanguyne or choleryke, dothe in∣gender the stone. ❧ Of ale, biere, cyder, and whay. I Can neyther here nor rede, that ale is made and vsed for a commen drynke in any other coūtray than England, Scotland, Ireland and Poyle. The latine worde Cereuitia, is in∣different as well to ale as biere, and the onely difference betwene them is, that biere hath hop∣pes sodden in it, ale ought to haue none. If the corne be good, the water holsom and cleane, and the ale or biere well and perfytely brewed and clensed, and by the space of .vi. dayes or more, settled and defecate, it muste nedes be a necessa∣ry and conuenient drynke, as well in syckenesse as in helth: consyderyng that barley corne, wher of it is made, is commended, and vsed in medi∣cine, in all partes of the worlde: and accompted to be of a syngular efficacy, in reducyng the bo∣dy into good temper, specyally which is in a di∣stemperature of heate. For what auncient phi∣sition is there, that in his workes commendeth not ptysane, which is none other than pure bar¦ley, brayed in a morter, and sodden in water, the same thynge is smalle and clene ale or biere, sa∣uynge that perchaunce, the drienge of the malte
is cause of more drythe to be in the ale, than in ptysane. And the hoppes in biere maketh it col∣der in operation. But to say as I thynke, I sup¦pose, that neyther ale nor biere is to be cōpared to wyne, consyderynge, that in theym do lacke the heate and moysture, whiche is in wyne. For that beynge moderately vsed, is most lyke to the naturall heate and moysture of mannes bodye. And also the lykour of ale and biere, beyng more grosse, do ingender more grosse vapours, and corrupte humours, thanne wyne dothe, beynge drunke in lyke excesse of quantitie. ¶ And one thynge is to be noted, whiche was lately wel marked, of a man of excellent lerning, beinge vexed with the syknes of the stone. That in them, which do alway vse to drink ale or bere the stone & grauel ingendred in them, is white of colour: And in them, whiche do vse to drynke wyne for the moste parte, the stones and gra∣uell, whiche be ingendreth in them, be redde of colour. Not withstandyng commonly the colour of the stone foloweth the humour, whiche dothe moste abounde in the pacyent. As coler maketh the grauell more redde, fleume maketh it more whyte. Also some men do suppose, that red gra∣uell is ingendred in the raynes: white grauell in the bladder. More ouer, who so euer vseth in∣gurgitation of ale or bicre, his breathe shall be more lothesome, than the breathes of them, whi∣che do take the excesse of wyne: for the wyne, by the reason of his heate, is soner digesteth, and doth leue behynde hym, fewer dregges. As for Cyder, may not be good in any condicion, consy∣derynge (as I say) that all fruytes do ingender¦yll
humours, & do coole to moch naturall heate: but to them, whiche haue abundaunce of redde¦choler, moderately vsed, it somewhat profiteth in mytigation of excessiue heate. But who that wyll dyly gently marke in the countrays, where syder is vsed for a comon drynke, the men and women haue the colour of their vysage palled, & the skynne of theyr vysage ryueled, although that they be yong. Whay yf it be lefte of the but¦ter, brynge well ordred, and not drunke, vntylle it haue a thycke curde of mylke ouer it lyke to a hatte, is a ryght temperate drinke: forasmoch as by the vntuositie of the butter, wherof the whay retayneth some portion, it is bothe mayste and nouryshynge, and clenseth the breste: and by the subtylnesse of it selfe, it descēdeth sone from the stomacke, and is shortly digested. Also by re∣son of the affinitie, which it hath with mylke, it is conuertible into bloudde and fleshe, specially in those persones, whiche do inhabite the northe partes, in whom natural heate is conglutinate, and therfore is of more puissaunce and vertue in the office of concoction. Also custome frome chylhoode dothe eleuate the power of meates and drynkes in theyr disposition, not withstan∣dynge that the foure humours, sangume, choler, fleume, and melancoly, must also be consydered as it shall apper in dyuers places hereafter, ❧ Of Hony. Cap. 22. HOnye as well in meate as in drinke  of incomparable efficacy, for it not only clen¦seth, altereth, and nourysheth, but also it
longe tyme preserueth that vncorrupted, whiche is put into it. In so moch as Plini sayth, Su∣che is the nature of hony, that it suffred not the bodyes to putrifie. And he affirmeth, that he did Pli. li. 22. see an Hippocentaure (whiche is a beaste halfe man, halfe horse) brought in honye to Claudius the emperour out of Egypte, to Rome. And he telleth also of one Pollio Romulus, who was aboue a hundred yeres olde, of whome Augu∣stus the emperour demaunded, by what meanes he lyued so longe, and retayned styl the vygoure or lyuelynesse of body and mynd, Pollio answe∣red, that he dyd it inward with meade (whiche is drynke made with hony and water) outward with oyle. Which sayeng agreeth with the sen∣tence of Democritus, the greatte philosopher: who beynge demaunded, howe a man moughte lyue longe in helthe, he aunswered, If he wette hym within with hony, without with oyle The same philosopher, whan he was a hūdred yeres olde and nyne, prolonged his lyfe certayne daies with the euaporation of hony, as Aristoxenus writeth. Of this excellent matter, moste won∣derfully wrought and gathered by the lytel bee, as wel of the pure dewe of heuen, as of the most subtyl humour of swete and vertuous herbes & floures, be made likors cōmodious to mankind, as meade, metheglyn, & oxymel. Meade whiche is made with one parte of hony, and foure ty∣mes so moche of pure water, and boyled vntyll no skymme do remayne, is moch commended of Galene, drunke in sommer, for preseruynge of Galen. de tuend. san. lib. 4. elthe. The same author alwaye commendeth the vsynge of hony, eyther rawe eaten with fine
breade somwhat leuened, or sodden, and recey∣ued as drinke. Also meade perfectly made, clen∣seth the breste and lunges, causeth a man to spyt easily, and to pysse abundantly, and purgeth the bealy moderately. Metheglyn, whiche is moste vsed in wales, by reason of hotte herbes boyled with hony, is hotter than meade, and more com∣forteth a colde stomake, if it be perfectely made, and not newe or very stale. Oximell is, where to one parte of vineger is put double so moche of hony, foure tymes as moche of water, and that beynge boyled vnto the thyrde parte, and cleane skymmed with a fether, is vsed to be taken, where in the stomacke is moche fleume or mat∣ter vndygested, so that it be not redde choler, Loke the vse therof in Alexandro Tralliano. Many other good qualities of honye, I omytte to wryte of, vntyll some other occasyon shal hap¦pen, to remember them particularly, where they shall sme to be profytable. ❧ Sugar. Cap. 23. OF sugar, I do fynde none ancient author of grekes or latynes, to wryte by name, but onely Paulus Aegineta, who saythe in this wyse, after that he hath treated of hony, Moreouer sugar, whiche they calle hony, that is brought to vs from Arabia, callid felix, is not so swete as our hony, but is equalle in vertue, and doth not anoy the stomake, nor causeth thyrste. These be the wordes of Paulus. It is nowe in dayely experience, that sugar is a thynge verye temperate and nouryshynge, and where there
is choler in the stomake, or that the stomake ab∣horreth hony, it may be vsed for hony in al thyn¦ges, wherin hony is requyred to be. ❧ Of tyme. Cap. 24. IN the consyderation of tyme, for takynge of meates and drynkes, it is to be remembred, that in wynter meates ought to be taken in great abundance, and of a more grosse substance than in sommer, forasmoch as the exterior aire, whiche compasseth the body beynge colde, cau∣seth the heate to withdrawe into the inner par∣tes, where being inclosed, and contracte togither in the stomake & entrayles, it is of more force to boyle & digest that, which is receiued into it. Al∣so meates rosted, ar thā better than sodden, and fleshe & fishe powdred, is thā better than in som¦mer. Herbes be not than commendable, specially raw, neither fruites, except quynces rosted or ba¦ked, drynk shuld be than taken in lyttel quātitie. Moreouer wines shall nede no water, or very li∣tell, and that to coleryke persons: redde wynes, and they, whiche be thicke & swete, may be than moste surely taken of theym, whiche haue none oppilations, or the stone. Alway remember, that in wynter fleume increaseth by reason of rayne and moystnesse of that season, also the length of nyghtes and moche reste. And therfore in that tyme cholerike persons, are best at ease, sembla∣bly Gal. in cō¦ment. in a∣pho. 2. li. 3. are yonge men, but to olde men wynter is ennemye. It begynneth the .viii. day of Nouem¦ber, & endureth vntyll the .viii. day of February. The spryng tyme doth participate the fyrste
parte with wynter, the latter parte, with som∣mer. Wherfore yf the fyrste parte be colde, than Hipocrat.  humana. shall the diete be accordynge to wynter. If the ende be hotte, than shall the diete be of sommer. If ote partes be temperate, than shulde there be also a temperannce in diete: alwaye consyde∣ryng, that fleume yet remayneth, & bloud than raseth meate wold be lasse in quantitie than ynter, and drynke somwhat more. Sprynge tyme begynneth the .viii. daye of Fe∣bruary,  cōtinueth vntyll the .viii. day of May. In semmer the inward heat is but lytel, & the stomake doth not digest so strongely nor quyk∣ly Gal.  in . . lib . as in wynter, wherfore in that season, eatyng often, and a lyttell at ones, is moste conuenient. And Damascenus saythe, that fastynge in som∣mer drieth the body, maketh the colour salowe, ingendreth melancoly, and hurteth the syght. al∣so boyled meate, breade steped in whyte brothe, Hipocra∣tes de ∣moribus. with sdden lettyse, or cykorie, are than good to be vsed also varietie in meates, but not at oone meale, potages made with colde herbes, drynke in more abundance, wyne alayde with water, to hotte complexions moche, to colde natures lasse. In this season bloudde increaseth, and towarde the ende therof, choler. And therfore they, which Galen in cōment. in aphor. be colde of nature and moyste, are than beste at case, hotte natures and dry waste. More ouer, chyldren, and very yonge men in the begynnyng of sommer, are holest, old folke in the latter end and in haruest somer beginneth the .viii. daye of May, & cōtinueth vntyll the .viii. day of August. Autumne beginneth the .viii. day of August, & endeth the .viii. day of Nouember, that seson of
the yere is variable, & the aire changeable, by oc¦casyō wherof, happen sondry siknessis, & blod de¦creaseth, & melancoly abundeth: wherfore al sū∣mer frutes wold thā be eschewed, forasmoch as they make yll iuyce and windes in the body. In this tyme meate wolde be more abundant than in somer, but somwhat drier: drink must be lasse in quantitie, but lasse myxte with water. This tyme is daungerous to all ages, al natures, and all countrays, but the natures hote and moyste, be leste indamaged. ☞ Diete concerning sondry tymes of the yere wrytten by the olde phisition Docles to kyng Antigonus. FRom the .xii. daye of December, at the whi¦che tyme the day is at the shortest, vntyl the nynthe day of Marche, which do conteyne lxxxx. dayes, reumes and moystures do in∣crease, than meates and drynkes naturally very hotte, wolde be moderately vsed, also to drynke abundantly wyne without alaye or with lyttell water, and to vse lyberally the companye of a woman, is not vnholsome to the body. ¶ FRom the nynth daye of Marche, at whiche tyme is eaquinoctium vernū, vnto the. xxv day of Aprill, swete fleume and bloudde do increase, therfore vse than thynges hauynge moche iuyce and sharpe, exercise the bodye dilygently, than may ye vse safely the company of a woman. ¶ From the xxv. day of Apryll. to the .xiiii. daye of June, Choler increaseth, than vse all thyn∣ges, that are swete, and doo make the bealy so∣luble, forbeare carnall company with women.
¶ From the .xiiii. day of June, at whiche tyme the day is at the lēgest, vnto the .xii. day of Sep¦tember, dothe melancoly reigne, forbeare leche∣ry, or vse it moderately. ¶ From the .xii. daye of September, vnto the xvii. daye of October, doo abounde fleume and thynne humours, than wolde all flures and di∣stillations be prohibited, than all sharpe meates and drynkes and of good iuyce, are to be vsed, and lechery eschewed. ¶ Frome the .xvii. daye of October, to the .xii. daye of December, increaseth grosse fleume, vse therfore all bytter meates, sweete wynes, fatte meate, and moche exercise. ❧ Of ages. Cap. 25. CHyldren wold be nourysheth with meates Gal. de tu. san. li. 1. Chyldern. and drynkes, whiche are moderately hote and moyste, not withstandynge Galene dothe prohibite them the vse of wyne, by∣cause it moysteth and heateth to moche the bo∣dye, and fylleth the heedes of them, whiche are hotte and moyste, with vapours. Also he permit¦teth them in hotte wether to drynke clere water of the fountayne. ¶ A chylde growynge faste in his members to∣warde a man, soo that he semeth well fedde in the bodye, is than to be feared of fulnes of hu∣mours, Oribasins de virtute simpli. li. 1. and if it be perceyued, that he is replete, than muste be withdrawen and minished some parte of that nutriment, and accordynge vnto his age, some euacuation wold be deuised, other while by exercyse, walkynge vp and downe fa∣stynge,
and before that they eate any meate, lette them exercise them selfes with theyr own labors and do theyr own accustomed busynes, and eate the meates wherunto they be moste vsed, so that it be suche, that may not hurte theym. And this nede they not to knowe of phisitions, but by ex∣perience and diligent serche by theyr stoole, theyr norices shall perceyue what dygesteth well, and what doth not. ¶ But yf it appere, that by excessiue feedynge the bealy of the chyld is fuller and greater than it was wonte to be, and that whiche passeth by the bealy, is corrupted, or his sweate stynketh, these thynges knowen, if they eate stronge mea∣tes, gyue them not one kynde of meate, but dy∣uers, that the noueltie of the meate may helpe, that they may go more easily to the stole. For if any haue an vnreasonable appetite, he is sooner recouered, yf he be pourged by a boyle or impo∣stume comen forthe and broken, before that the meate be corrupted: and after that let hym eate fyne meates, and beynge ones hole, retourne by lyttell and lyttell to his olde custome. ¶ Yonge men, excedyng the age of .xiiii. yeres, Yong men shal eate meates more grosse of substance, colder and moyster: also salades of colde herbes, and to drynke seldome wyne, except it be alayd with water. All be it all these thynges muste be tem∣pred, accordyng to their complexions, & exercyse and quietnesse in lyuynge, wherof ye shall reede in theyr proper places hereafter. ¶ Dide men, in whom natural heate & strength Olde men semeth to decay, shuld vse alway meates, which are of qualitie hotte and moyst, and ther with all
easy to be digested, and absteyne vtterly from al meates & drinkes, whiche wyll ingender thicke iuyce and slymy, semblably from wyne, whiche is thicke, swete, and darke redde wynes, and ra∣ther vse them, whiche wyll make thyn humors, and wyll purge well the bloudde by vryne: ther∣fore whyte or yelowe wynes, and perchaunce frenche clarette wynes, are for them very com, Paulus E∣geta. li. 1. cap. 23. mendable. Also wyne prepared with pure hony clarified, wherin rootes of persely or fenelle be steped, specially yf they suspecte any thynge of the stoone, or goute▪ And yf they more desyre to clense theyr raynes and bladder: than is it good to vse small white wine, as racked renishe wine, or other like to it. and sommetyme to stepe ouer nyght therin a persely roote slyt, and somwhat bruysed, and a lyttell lykorice. Fynally, let them beware of all meates, that wyll stoppe the poo∣res, and make obstructions or oppilations, that Opilatiōs what they are. is to saye, with clammy matter stoppe the pla∣ces, where the naturall humours are wroughte and digested, the whyche meates I haue before sette in a table. But if it chaunce theym, to eate any suche meate in abundance, lette them take shortely suche thynges, as do resyste opilations, or resolue theym. As white pepper, bruised and myxte with theyr meates or drynke: garlyke also or onyons, yf they abhorre them not. Alway re∣membre, that aged men shuld eate often, and but lyttell at euery tyme, for it fareth by theym, as it dothe by a lampe, whiche is almooste extincte, whiche by powrynge in of oyle lyttell and lyt∣tell, is longe kept bournynge: and with moche oyle poured in at ones, it is cleane put out. Also
they must forbeare all thynges, whiche doo in∣gender melancolye, wherof ye shall rede in the table before: and breadde cleane without leuen, is to theym vnholsome. Moderation in diet, hauyng respecte to the strength or weakenes of the person. Cap. 26. NOwe here it must be consydered, that all though I haue writen a generall diet for euery age, yet netheles it must be remem∣bred, that some chyldren and yong men, eyther by debilite of nature, or by some accyden∣tall cause, as syckenes, or moch study, happen to gather humours fleumatike or melancoly in the places of digestiō, so that cōcoction or digestion is as weake in them as in those, which are aged Semblably some olde men fynde nature so be∣neficyall vnto them, that theyr stomakes and ly∣uers are more stronge to digeste, than the sayde yonge men, some perchaunce haue moche choler remaynynge in theym. In these cases the sayde yonge men muste vse the diete of olde menne, or nygh vnto it, vntyl the discrasy be remoued, ha∣uynge alwaye respecte to theyr vniuersall com∣plexions, as they, whiche are naturally chole∣rike, to vse hotte thynges in a more temperance than they, whiche be fleumaticke, or melanco∣lye by nature. The same obseruation shall be to Hipocrat. aphor. Galen. in comment. olde menne, sauynge that age, of his owne pro∣pertye is colde and drye, therfore the olde man, that is cholerycke, shall haue more regarde to moysture in meates, than the yonge man beyng
of the same complexion. Foresene alwaye, that where nature is offended or greued, she is curyd by that, whiche is contrarye to that, whiche of∣fendeth or greueth, as colde by heate, heate by colde, drythe by moysture, moysture by drythe. In that wherby nature shulde be nourished in a hole and temperate bodye, thynges muste be ta∣ken, whiche are lyke to the mans nature in qua∣litie and degre. As where one hath his body in a good temper, thynges of the same temperance dothe nourysshe hym. But where he is oute of temper, in heate, cold, moysture, or dryth, tempe∣rate meates or drynkes, nothyng do profyt hym, for beynge out of the meane and perfyte tempe∣rature, nature requyreth to be therto reduced by contraries, remembrynge not only, that contra∣ries are remedye vnto theyr contraries, but also in euery contrary, consideration be hadde of the proporcion in quantitie. ❧ Tymes in day concernynge meales. Cap. 27. BEsydes the tymes of the yere, and ages, there be also other tymes of eatynge and drynkynge to be remembred, as the sondry tymes in the daye, whiche we call meales, whi∣che are in noumber and dystaunce, accordynge to the temperature of the countrey and person: As where the countrey is colde, and the persone lusty, and of a strong nature, there may o mea¦les be vsed, or the lasse distance of tyme betwene them. Contrarywise in contrary countrays and personages, the cause is afore rehersed, where I
haue spoken of the diet of the times of the yere, not withstādyng here must be also consideratiō of exercise and reste, which do augmente or apei¦reth the naturall disposition of bodyes, as shall be more declared herafter in the chapiter of ex∣ercise. But concernyng the general vsage of coū¦treys, & admittyng the bodies to be in {per}fit state of helth. I suppose that in England yong men, vntyll they come to the age of .xl. yeres, may wel eate thre meales in one daye, as at breakefaste, dyner, & supper, so that betwene breakefast and dyner, be the space of foure houres at the leaste, betwene dyner and supper .vi. houres, and the breakefast lasse thā the dyner, and the dyner mo¦derate, that is to say, lasse than saciete or fulnes of bealy, and the drynke thervnto measurable, accordynge to the dryenesse or moystnesse of the meate. For moch abundance of drynk at meale, drowned the meate eaten, and not onely letteth conuenient concoction in the stomake, but also causeth it to passe faster than nature requyreth, and therfore ingendreth moche fleume, and con∣sequently reumes, & crudenes in the vaynes, de∣bilitie and slyppernesse of the stomake, conty∣nuall fluxe, and many other inconueniences to the body and membres. But to retourne to mea∣les, I thynke breakefastes necessary in this re∣alme, as well for the causes before rehersed, as Brekefast. also forasmoche as choler, beyng feruent in the stomake, sendeth vp fumosities vnto the brayn, and causeth heed ache, and somtyme becometh aduste, and smouldreth in the stomake, whereby happeneth peryllous sycknes, and sommetyme sodayn deth, yf the heate inclosed in the stomake
haue nat other conuenient matter to worke on: this dayly experience proueth, and natural reson confirmeth. Therfore men and womē not aged, hauing their stomakes cleane without putrified matter, slepyng moderately and sondely in the nyght, and felynge them selfe lyghte in the mor∣nynge, and swete breathed, lette them on god∣des name breake theyr faste: Coleryke men with grosse meate, men of other complexions with lyghter meate, fore sene, that they labour some∣what before: semblably their dyner and supper, as I haue before written, so that they sleape not incontinent after theyr meales. And here I wyll not recite the sentences of authors, whiche had neuer experience of englysshe mens natures, or of the iuste temperature of this realme of En∣glande, onely this counsell of Hipocrates shall Hipocrat. aphor. 13. lib. 1. Galen. de tuend. san. be sufficient. We ought to graunt somewhat to tyme, to age, and to custome: not withstandynge where great werynesse or drythe, greued the bo¦dy, there oughte the dyner to be the lesse, and the longer distance betwene dyner and supper. alsoo moche reste, excepte a lyttell softe walkyng, that by an vpryght mouyng, the meate beyng styred, may descende. This is alway to be remembred, that where one feleth hym selfe full, and greued with his dyner, or the sauoure of his meate by erurtation ascēdeth or that his stomake is weke by late syckenesse or moche study, than is it most conuenient, to absteyne from supper, and rather prouoke hym selfe to sleape moche, than to eate or drynke any thynge. Also to drynke betweene meales, is not laudable, excepte very great thirst constrayneth, for it interrupteth the office of the
stomake in concoction, and causeth the meate to passe faster than it shulde do, and the drynke be∣inge colde, it rebuketh naturall hete, that is wor∣kyng, and the meate remaynyng rawe, it corru∣pteth dygestyon, and makyth crudenesse in the vaynes, wherfore he that is thyrsty, let hym con∣syder the occasyō. If it be of salt fleume, let him walke fayre and softely, and onely wasshe his mouthe, and his throote with barley water, or small ale, or lye downe and sleape a lyttell, and so the thyrste wyll passe away, or at the leaste be well asswaged. If it happen by extreme heate of the ayre, or by pure choler, or eatynge of hot spi∣ces, lette hym drynke a lyttell iulep made with cleane water and sugar, or a lyttell small biere or ale, so that he drynke not a great glutte, but in a lyttell quantitie, let it styll downe softly into his stomake, as he sytteth, and than let hym not moue sodeynly. If the thyrste be in the euenyng, by eatynge to moche, and drynkynge of wyne, than after the opinion of the beste lerned phisi∣tions, and as I my selfe haue often experienced, the best remedy is, yf there be no feuer, to drinke a good draught of colde water, immediatly, or els yf it be not peynefull for hym to vomyte, to prouoke hym therto with a lyttel warme water, and after to washe his mouth with vineger and water, and so to sleape longe and soundly, yf he can. And yf in the mornyng he fele any fumosi∣ties rysyng, than to drynke iulep of violettes, or for lacke therof, a good draught of very small ale or biere somewhat warmed, without eatyng any thynge after it.
❧ Of dyuersitie of meates eaten wherby helthe is appaired. Cap. 28. NOw let this be a generall rule, that son∣dry meates, beynge dyuers in substance and qualitie, eaten at one meale, is the greatest ennemy to helth, that may be, and that whiche ingendreth most siknesses, for some mea∣tes beyng grosse, and harde to dygeste, some fine & easy to dygest, do requyre diuers operations of nature, and diuers temperatures of the sto∣make, that is to say, moch heate and temperate heate, whiche may not be togyther at one tyme. Therfore whan the fyne meate is suffycientlye boyled in the stomake, the grosse meate is rawe, so both iuyces, thone good and petfite, the other grosse and crude, at one tyme dygested, and sent into the veynes and body, nedes muste helth de∣caye, and sycknesses be ingendred. Lykewyse in diuers meates being diuers qualities, as where some are hotte and moyst, some cold and moyst, some hote and drye, some colde and drie, accor∣dynge ther vnto shall the iuyce be dyuers, which they make in the body. And lyke as betwene the sayd qualities is contrarietie, so therby shall be in the body an vnequall temperature, forasmoch as it is not possible for man to esteme so iuste a proporcyon of the qualities of that, whiche he receyueth, that the one shall not excede the other in quantitie. wherfore of the sayd vnequall mix∣ture, nedes must ensue corruption, & consequētly syknesse. And theofore to a hole man, it were bet¦ter, to fede at one meale competently on very
grosse meate only, so that it be swete, and his na¦ture do not abhorre it, than on diuers fyne mea∣tes, of sondry substance and qualities. I haue knowen and sene olde men, and olde women, whiche eatyng only befe, baken, chese, or curdes, haue continued in good helthe, whome I haue prouyd, that whan they haue eaten sondry fyne meates at one meale, haue sone after felte them selfe greued with frettinges and hed ache, and after that they haue ben hole agayne, there hath ben gyuen to theym one kynde of lyght meate, they haue done as well therwith, as they were wont to do with grosse meates, whan they eate it alone, whiche proueth to be true that whiche I haue rehersed. And it is good reason, for after the generall opinion of philosophers and phisi∣tions, the nature of mankynde is beste contente with thynges most symple and vnmixte, all thin¦ges tendynge to vnitie, wherin is the onely per∣fection. Also it is a generall rule of phisyke, that where a syckenes may be cured with symples, that is to say, with one onely thyng, that is me∣dieinable, there shulde the phisition gyue no cō∣pounde medicyne myxte with many thynges. These thynges consydered, it maye seme to all men, that haue reson, what abuse is here in this realme in the contynuall gourmandyse & dayely fedynge on sondry meates, at one meale, the spi∣rite of gluttony, triumphynge amonge vs is his gloryouse charyot, callyd welfare, dryuynge vs afore hym, as his prysoners, into his dūgcon of Glutony. surfet, where we are turedted with catarres, feuers, goutes, pleuresies, freitynge of the gut∣tes, & many other sycknesses, and fynally cruelly
put to death by them, oftentymes in youth, or in the moste pleasaunt tyme of our lyfe, when we wold most gladly lyue. For the remedy wherof, howe many tymes haue there ben dyuised ordy∣naunces and actes of counsayle, althoughe per∣chaunce bodyly helthe was not the chyefe occa∣syon therof, but rather prouision ageynst vayne and sumptuous expenses of the meane people. For the nobilitie was exempted and had libertie to abyde styll in the dongeon, yf they wolde, and to lyue lasse whyle than other men: But whan, where, and howe longe were the sayd good de∣nyses put in due execution, for all that thereof shuld succede double profite, that is to say, helth of body, and increse of substance, by eschewyng of superfluous expenses in sondry dyshes? Alas how longe wyll men fantasye lawes and good ordynaunces, and neuer determyne them. Fan∣tasy procedeth of wytte, dete, mination of wise∣dome, wytte is in the deuysyng and speakynge, but wysedome is in the performance, whiche re∣steth ouely in execution. Here I had almost for∣gotten, that my purpose was to wryte of the or∣der of diete, and not of lawes, but the feruente loue that I haue to the publyque weale of my countray, constrayned me to digresse somewhat from my matter: but nowe wyll I procede forth to wryte of order, whiche in takynge of meates and drynkes, is not the leste parte of diete. Of order in receiuynge of meate and drynke. Cap. 29. HErbes as welle sodden, as vnsodden, al∣so fruytes, whiche do mollyfye and louse the bealy, oughte to be eaten before any
other meate, excepte that sommetyme for the re∣pressynge of fumosities, rysynge in the heed by moch drynkyng of wyne, rawe lettyse, or a colde appull, or the iuyce of orenges or lymons maye be taken after meales in a lyttel quātitie. More ouer all brothes, mylke, rere egges, and meates, whiche are purposely taken to make the bealye soluble, wolde be fyrste eaten. All fruites and o∣ther meates, that are styptike or byndyng, wold be eaten laste after all other. Fruites confectio∣nate specially with hony, ar not to be eaten with other meates. But here is it to be dylygentelye noted, that where the stomacke is coleryke and strong, grosse meates wold be fyrst eaten; where the stomacke is colde or weake, there wold fyne meates be fyrste eaten: for in a hot stomake, fine meates are bourned, whyle the grosse meate is digesting. Contrary wise in a colde stomake, the lyttel heate is suffocate with grosse meate, & the fyne meate lefte rawe, for lacke of concoction, where if the fyne meat be fyrst taken moderatly, it stereth vp and comforteth naturall heate, and maketh it more able to concoct grosse meates, yf they be eatē afterward: so that it be but in small quantitie. not withstandyng, as I late affirmed, one maner of meate is moste sure to euery com∣plerion. foresene that it be alway most comonly in conformitie of qualities, with the person that eateth. Moreouer take hede, that slipper meates be not first eaten, lest it drawe with it to hastily other meates, or they be digested, nor that stiptik or restraining meatis, be taken at the begynning as quynces, peares, and medlars, leste they may let other meates, that they descende not into the
bottom of the stomake, where they shulde be di∣gested, not withstāding the cōfection made with the iuyce of quynces, callid Dacitonites, taken two houres afore dyner, or supper, is commēded of Galene, and other, for restoryng appetite, and making good concoction. Also cōcernyng drynke at meales, it wolde not be afore, that somwhat were eten. And at the begynnyng the drink wold be strongest, & so toward the end more smal, if it be ale or bere, & if it be wine more & more alaide with water. And after the better opinion of phi∣sicions, the drink wold rather be mixte with the meate by sondry lytle draughtes, than with one great draught at thend of the meale, for the mix¦ture tempreth wel the meate without anoyance, a great draught with moch drink, drowneth the meate, rebuketh natural hete, that than worketh in concoction, & with his weight driueth downe the meate to hastily. Hot wines and swete, or cō¦fectioned with spices, or very strong ale or bere, ar not conuenient at meales, for the meate is by them rather corrupted, thā digested, & they make hot and stinking vapors ascende vp to the bray∣nes. All be it yf the stomake be very wyndy, or so colde and feble, that it can not concoct suche a quantitie of meat, as is requyred to the suffy∣cyent nourishement of the body of hym that ea∣teth, or hath eaten raw herbes or frutes, where by he feleth som anoyance, than may he drynke last incontynent after his meale, a lyttell quanti∣tie of secke, or good aqua vite in smal ale: but yf he haue moche choler in his stomake or a heed full of vapours, it were moch better, that he dyd neyther drynke the one, nor the other, but rather
eate a lyttell colyander sede prepared, or a pece of a quince rosted, or in marmelade, and after reste, to amende the lacke of nature with slepe, moderate exercise, and playsters prouyded for comfortynge of the stomake. And here wyll I leaue to wryte any more of the diete in eatyng & drinkyng, sauynge that I wold, that the reders shuld haue in remembraunce these two counsay∣les. Fyrst, that to an hole man, to precise a rule is not conuenient in diete: & that the diseases, whi∣che do happen by to moche abstinence, are wars to be cured, than they whiche come by replecion. Cor. Ccl. li. l. cap. 1. And as Cornelius Celsus sayth, A man that is hole and wel at ease, and is at his liberte, ought not to bynde hym selfe to rules, or nede a phisi∣tion: but yet where the stomake is feble, as is of Idē, ca. 2. the more parte of citesyns, and wel nigh al they that be studious in lernyng or weighty affayres, there ought to be more circumspection, that the meate may be such, as that eyther in qualitie or quantitie, nature beynge but feble, but not rebu∣ked, or to moche oppressed. ☞ Of sleape and watche. Cap 30. THe commoditie of moderate slepe, appe∣reth by this, that naturall heate, whiche is occupied about the matter, wherof pro∣cedeth nouryshement, is comforted in the places of dygestion, and so digestion is made better, or more perfite by slepe, the body fatter, the mynde more quiete and clere. the humours temperate: and by moche watche all thynges happen cōtra∣rye. The moderacyon of sleape muste be measu∣red
by helthe and syckenesse, by age, by tyme, by emptynesse or fulnesse of the body, and by natu∣rall complexions. Fyrste to a hole man, hauynge no devilitie of nature, and digestynge perfytely the meate that eateth, a lyttell sleape is suffi∣cient: but to them, which haue weake stomakes, and do digeste slowely, it requireth, that sleape be moche lengar. semblable temperance is requi∣red in youth and age, wynter and sommer. The body beinge full of yll humours, very lytel slepe is sufficient, except the humors be crude or raw, for than is slepe necessary, which digesteth them better, than labour. Semblably, where the body is longe empty, by longe sycknesse or abstinence, slepe comforteth nature, as well in the principal membres, as in all the other. Also regarde muste be hadde to the complexion, for they that ar hot and do eate lyttell, and digeste quickely, a lyttell sleape serueth, specyally to choleryke persones, for in them moche slepe augmenteth heate, more than is necessary, whereby hote fumes and infla∣mations are often ingendred, and somtyme the naturall choler is aduste or putryfied, as experi∣ence teacheth. Fleumatike persons at naturallly inclyned to sleape: and bycause they ingender moche humours, they requyre more sleape than sanguine or cholerike. Persons hauyng naturall melancoly, not procedynge of choler aduste, do requyre very moche sleape, whiche in them com∣forteth the powers animal, vitall, and naturall, which ye may find writē in the tables preceding Sleape wolde be taken not immediatelye after meales, and before that the meate is dyscended from the mouthe of the stomake. For thereby is
ingendred paynes and noyse in the bely, and di∣gestion corrupted, and the slepe by yll vapours, ascendyng, made vnquiete and troublous. More ouer immoderate slepe maketh the body apt vn∣to palseys, apoplexis, fallynge sycknes, reumes, & impostumes. Also it maketh the wyttes dull, and the body slowe and vnapte to honeste exer∣cise. Scmblably immoderate watche drieth to moch the body, and doth debilytate the powers animall, letteth digestion, and maketh the bodye apte to consumptions. Wherfore in these two thynges, as well as all other, a diligent tempe∣rance is to be vsed the moderation is best conie∣cted for it is harde perfytely to knowe it) by the sensible lyghtnes of all the body, specially of the brayne, the browes, and the eyes, the passage downe of the meate from the stomake, the wyll to make vrine, and to go to the stoole. Contrary wise, heuines in the body and eyes, and sauor of the mete before eaten, signifieth that the slepe was not sufficient. They that ar hole must slepe first on the right side, bycause the meate may ap¦proche to the lyuer, whiche is to the stomake, as fyre vnder the potte, and by hym is digested. To them, whiche haue feble digestion, it is good to slepe prostrate on their bealyes, or to haue theyr bare hand on theyr stomakes. Lyeng vpright on the backe, is to be vtterly abhorred. The commoditie of exercise, and the tyme whan it shulde be vsed. Cap. 31. EVery menynge is not an exercise, but only that which is vehemēt, the end wherof, is alteration of the breath or wynd of a man
Of exercyse do procede two cōmodities, euacu∣ation of excremētes, and also good habite of the body. for exercyse beyng a vehemēt motion, ther of nedes muste ensue hardnesse of the members, wherby labour shal the lesse greue, and the body be the more stronge to labour. also therof com∣meth augmentation of heate, wherby hapneth the more attraction of thynges to be dygested, also more quycke alteration, and better nourys∣shynge More ouer, that al and syngular partes of the body, be therewith somwhat humected. wherby it hapneth, that thinges harde be molli∣fyed moyst thynges are extenuate, and the pores of the body ar more opened. And by the violence of the breath or wynd, the pores are clensed, and the fylthe in the body naturally expelled. This thing is so necessary to the preseruatiō of helth, that without it, no man may be longe withoute sycknesse, whiche is affyrmed by Lornelius Lel∣sus, Cor. Cel. lib. 1. sayeng, that sluggyshnes dulleth the bodye, labour doth strength it, the fyrst bryngeth the in cōmodities of age shortly, the last maketh a man longe tyme lusty. Not withstandynge in exercyse ought to be foure thinges diligently considered, that is to say, the tyme, the thynges precedyng, the qualitie and the quantitie of exercyse. Fyrst as concernyng the tyme conuenient for exercise, that it be not whan there is in the sto∣make or bowels, great quātitie of meate not suf¦fycyently dygested, or of humours crude or raw, lesse therby peryll mought insue by conueyance of them into all the membres, before those metes Galen. de tuend. san. lib. 1. or humours be concocte or boyled suffyeyently. Galen sayth, that the tyme moste conuenient for
exercise is, whan bothe the fyrst & seconde dige∣styon is complete, as well in the stomake, as in the vaynes, & that the tyme approcheth to eate . For yf ye do exercyse sooner or later, ye shall eyther fyll the body with crude humours, or elles augment yelowe choler. The knowledge of this tyme is perceyued by the colour of the vrine, for that which resēbleth vnto clere water betokeneth, that the iuyce, whiche cometh from the stomake, is crude in the vaynes: that whiche is well colouryd; not to hygh or base, betokeneth that the second digestion is nowe perfyte: where the colour is very hygh or redde, it syghfyet that the concoction is more thanne suffycyent. Wherfore whan the vryne appereth in a tempe¦rate colour, not redde nor pale, but as it were gylt, than shulde exercise haue his begynnyng. ❧ Of fricasies or rubbynges pre∣cedynge exercise. Cap. 32. AS touchynge thynges procedynge exer∣cise, for asmoch as it is to be feared, leste by vehement exercise any of the excremē Galenus. Paulus. Oribasius, Actius. tes of the bealy or bladder, shulde hastely be re∣ceyued into the habyte of the body, by the vyo∣lence of heate, kendled by exercyse: also lest  thynge, whiche is hole, be by heuyness  tes, or vyolent motion, broken or  out of his place, or that the excrementes, by violence of the breathe, shulde stoppe the pores or ∣dytes of the bodye, it shall be necessarye lyttell and lyttell, by chafynge the body, fyrste to molli∣fye the partes consolydate, and to exte or
make thynne the humours, and to lowse and o∣pen the poores, and than shall ensue to hym that exerciseth, no peryll of obstruction or rupture. And to brynge that to passe, it shall be expedient, after that the body is clensed, to rubbe the body with a course lynnen clothe, fyrst softely and ea∣silye, and after to increase more and more, to a harde and swyfte rubbynge, vntyll the flesshe do swelle, and be somwhat ruddy, and that not only downe ryght, but also ouerthwart & round Some do vse fricasies in this forme, in the mor¦nynge, after that they haue ben at the stole, with theyr shirte sleues or bare hande, if theyr flesh be tended, they do fyrst softely, and afterwarde fa∣ster, rubbe theyr breste, and sydes downewarde, and ouerthwarte, not touchyng their stomacke or bealy, and after cause their seruāt semblably to rubbe ouerthwart their shoulders, and backe, begynnyng at their neckbone, and not touchyng the raynes of their backe, excepte they doo fele there moche colde and wynde, and afterwarde their legges frō the knees to the ancle: laste their armes from the elbowe to the hand wreste. And in this forme of fricasy I my selfe haue founded an excellent commoditie. Old men, or they, whi∣che be very drye in their bodyes, yf they put to some swete oyles, as Yrinum, Nardiū, Chame∣melinum, or other lyke, myxte with a lytel swete oyle of rooses, I suppose they do wel. I wyl not here speake of oyntementes vsed in ode tyme a∣monge the Romaynes and Grekes, in frie or rubbynges. For I suppose, that they were neuer here vsed. and in the sayde places, they be also left, onelesse it be in palsies, or apoplexies,
or agaynst the rigour, which hapneth in feuers, onely. I wyll remember the sayeng of Hipocra∣tes, Fricasye hathe power to lowse, to bynde, to increase flesshe, and to mynysshe hit. For harde fryeasies doo bynde or consolidate, softe rubbynge doth lowse or mollyfye, moche dothe mynyshe fleshe, meane rubbynge dothe augment or increase it. He that wyll knowe more aboun∣dantly herof, lette hym rede the boke of Galene of the preseruation of helth, callyd in latyne De¦tuenda sanitate, translated most truely and elo∣quentely, out of Greke into latine, by doctour Linacre, late phisition of moste worthy memory to our soueraygne lorde kynge Henry the eight. The same mattier is written more briefely of Paulus Aegineta, Oribasius, Aetius and some other late wryters, but vnto Galene not to be compared. ¶ The diuersities of exercises. Cap. 33. THe qualitie of exercise, is the dyuersytie therof, forasmoche as therin be many dif∣ferences in mouynge, and also some exer∣cise moueth more one parte of the body, some an¦other. In difference of mouynge, some is slowe or softe, some is swyfte or faste: some is stronge or violent, some be myxte with strength & swift¦nesse. Stronge or violent exercyses be these, del∣uyng (specially in tough clay and heuy) bearyng or susteynynge of heuy burdeynes, clymmyng or walkynge agaynst a stiepe vpright hyll: holding a rope, & clymmyng vp therby, hangyng by the handes on any thynge, aboue a mannes reache,
that his fete touche not the grounde: standynge and holdynge vppe, or spreadynge the armes, with the handes faste closed, and abydynge soo a longe tyme. Also to holde the armes stedfaste, causynge an other man, to assay, to pulle theym out, and not withstandynge he kepeth his arme stedfaste, inforcynge thervnto the synewes and muscles. wrastlynge also with the armes and legges, yf the persones be equall in strengthe, it dothe exercise the one and the other: yf the one be stronger, than is it to the weaker a more vyo¦lent exercise. All these kyndes of exercises, and o∣ther lyke them, do augmente strengthe, and ther∣fore they serue onely for yonge men, whiche be inclyned, or be apte to the warres. Swyfte ex∣ercise without violence is, runnynge, playenge with weapons, tenyse, or throwynge of the balle, trottyng a space of ground forwarde and backewarde, goynge on the toes, and holdynge vppe the handes. Also styrrynge vp and downe his armes, without plummettes. Vehement ex∣ercise is compounde of vyolent exercise, and swyfte, whan they are ioyned togyther at oone tyme, as daunsynge of galyardes, throwynge of the balle, and rounnynge after it: footeballe playe may be in the number therof, throwynge of the longe darte, and contynuynge it many ty∣mes, ronnynge in harneys, and other lyke. The moderate exercyse is longe walkynge or goyng a iourneye. The partes of the body haue sondry exercises appropryed vnto them, as run∣nynge and goynge is the mooste proper for the legges. Mouynge of the armes vp and downe, of stretchynge theym oute, and playenge with
weapons, serueth most for the armes and shul∣ders, stoupynge and rysynge oftentyme, or lyf∣tynge great weightes, takynge vp plummettes or other lyke poyses on the endes of staues, and in lyke wyse, lyftyng vp in euery hande a speare or mortspyke by the endes, specyallye crossynge the handes, and to laye theym downe agayne in theyr places, these do exercyse the backe and loi∣nes. Of the bulke and lunges the proper exer∣cyse is meuynge of the breathe in syngynge or cryenge. The entrayles, whiche be vndernethe the myddreffe, be exercysed by blowynge, eyther by constraynte, or playenge on Shaulmes, or Sackbottes, or other lyke instrumentes, why∣che doo requyre moche wynde. The Musc∣les are best exercysed with holdynge the breath in, a longe tyme, soo that he whiche dothe ex∣ercyse, hath welle dygested his meate, and is not troubled with moche wynde in his bodye. Fynally lowde redynge, counterfayte battayle, tenyse, or throwynge the balle, runnynge, wal∣kynge, Celsus. 1. adde to shotyng, whiche in myn opinion excede all the other, do exercyse the body commo¦diousely. Alwaye remember, that the ende of vi∣olent exercyse, is difficultye in fetchynge of the brethe. Of moderate exercyse, alteratiō of breth onely, or the begynnynge of sweate. More ouer in wynter, runnynge, and wrastlynge, is conue∣nient. In sommer wrastlynge a lyttell, but not runnynge. In very cold wether, moche walking, in hotte wether, reste is more expedyent. They whiche seme to haue moyste bodyes, and lyue in ydelnesse, they haue nede of vyolent exercyse They which at leane and choleryke, must walk
softly, and exercise them selfes very temperatly. The plummettes, callyd of Galen Alteres, whi∣che are nowe moche vsed with great men, being of equall weight, and accordyng to the strength of hym, that exerciseth, are very good to be vsed fastynge, a lyttell before brekefaste or dyner, hol∣dynge in euery hand one plummet, and lyftynge theym on hyghe, and bryngynge theym downe with moche vyolence, and so he maye make the exercise vyolent, or moderate, after the poyse of the plummettes, heuyer or lyghter, and with moche or lyttell labourynge with theym. ☞ Of Gestation, that is to say, where one is caried, and is of an other thynge meued, and not of hym selfe. Cap. 34. THere is also an other kynde of exercyse, which is called Gestation, and is myxte with mouynge and rest. For as moch as Paul. . Actius. the body, syttyng or lyeng, semeth to rest, and not withstandyng it is meued by that, whi∣che beareth it, as lyenge in a bedde, hauynge by cordes or chaynes, or in a cradell, syttinge in a chaire, which is caried on mens shulders with staues, as was the vse of the aūcient Romayns or syttynge in a boote or barge, which is rowed, rydynge on a horse, whiche aumbleth very easi∣lye, or goth a very softe pace. The bedde, cradel, and chayre caried, serueth for theym, that are in longe and continuall syckenesse, or be lately re∣couered of a feuer Also them, whiche haue the frenesye or letarge, or haue a lyghte terciane fe∣uer,
or a cotidiane. This exercise swetely asswa∣geth troubles of the mynd, and prouoketh slepe, as it appereth in chylderne, whiche are rocked. Also it is conuenient for them, whiche haue the palsey, the stoone, or the goute. Gestation in a charyotte or wagon hath in it a shakynge of the body, but some vehement, and some more softe, the softe serueth in dyseases of the heade, and where any matter runneth downe into the sto∣make and entrayles. But the vehement shaking is to be vsed in the griefes of the breste and sto∣macke. Also in swellyng of the body and legges in dropsies, palseys, mygrimes, and scotomies, whiche is an imagination of darkenesse, beynge retōutned, at the ende of his iourneye, he muste sytte vp, and be easily moued. I haue knowen, sayth Aetius, many persons in suche wyse cu∣red without any other helpe. Nauigation or ro∣wynge nigh to the lande, in a clame water, is ex¦pediēt for them that haue dropsies, lepries, pal∣sepes, called of the vulgar people, takynges, and fransies. To be caried on a rough water, it is a vyolent exercise, & induceth sondry affections of the mynde, somtyme feare, somtyme hope, nowe coward harte, nowe hardinesse, one whyle plea¦sure, an nother whyle dyspleasure. These exerci∣ses, yf they be well tempered, they maye put out of the body, all longe durynge syckenesses. For that whiche is myxte with reste and menynge, yf any thynge elles maye, it moste excellently causeth the body to be well nourysshed. Celsus, Celsus. 2. doth prohybite gestation, where the body feleth peyne, & in the begynnyng of feuers, but whan they ceasse, he aloweth it.
Rydynge moderately, and without gryefe, it dothe corroborate the spyrite and bodye aboue other exercyses, specyally the stomake, it clenseth the sences, and maketh theym more quycke: all be it to the breste it is very noyfull. It oughte to be remembred, that as well this, as all other kyndes of exercyse, wold be vsed in a hole coun∣treye, and where the ayre is pure and vncorrup∣ted. Foresene, that he that woll exercyse, do go fyrste to the stoole, for the causes rehersed in the laste chapiter. ❧ Of vociferation. Cap. 35. THe chiefe exercyse of the brest and instru∣mentes of the voyce, is vociferacion, whi¦che is synging, redyng, or crienge, wherof is the propertie, that it purgeth naturall heate, and maketh it also subtyll and stable, and ma∣keth the membres of the body substancyall and stronge, resystynge diseases. This exercyse wold be vsed, of persones shorte wynded, and theym, whiche can not fetche theyr brethe, but holdyng their necke streight vpright. Also of them, whose fleshe is consumed, speciallye about the breaste and shoulders. also which haue had apostume broken in theyr breastes: moreouer of them that are hoorse by the moche moysture. and to them, whiche haue quartene feuers, it is conuenient, it louseth the humour, that stycketh in the brest, and dryeth vp the moystenesse of the stomacke, whiche properly the course of the quartayne is wont to brynge with hym, it also profiteth them whiche haue feble stomakes, or do vomyte con∣tynually,
or do breake vp sowrenesse out of the stomake. It is good also for grefes of the heed. He that intendeth to attempt this exercise, after that he hath ben at the stoole, and softly rubbed the lower partes, and washed his handes. Lette hym speake with as base a voyce as he can, and walkynge, begynne to synge lowder & lowder, but styll in a base voyce, and to take no hede of sweete tunes or armonye. For that nothynge dothe profyte vnto helthe of the body, but to in∣force hym selfe to synge greatte, for therby mo∣che ayre drawen in by fetchyng of breath, thru∣styth forth the breast and stomacke, and openeth and inlargeth the poores. By hygh crienge and lowde readynge, are expellyd superfluouse hu∣mours. Therfore mee and women, hauynge theyr bodyes feeble, and theyr flesshe lowse, and not fyrme, muste reade oftentymes lowde, and in a baase voyce, extendynde oute the wynde pype, and other passages of the breathe. But notwithstandyng, this exercyse is not vsed alway, and of all persons. For they in whome is abundance of humours corrupted, or be moche diseased with crudite in the stomak and vaines, those doo I counsayle, to abstayne from the ex∣ercyse of the voyce, leste moche corrupteth iuyce or vapours, may therby be into all the body dy∣strybuted. And here I conclude to speake of ex∣ercyse, whiche of them, that desyre, to remayne longe in helth, is most diligently, & as I mought say, moste scrupulousely to be obserued.
THE THIRDE BOKE. ❧ Of replecion. Cap. 1. REPLECION IS A superfluous abundance of humours in the body: and that is in two maner of wyse, that is to say in quā∣titie, & in qualitie. In quan∣titie, as where al the foure humours are more in abū∣daunce, that be equalle in proporcion to the body, that conteyneth theym, or where one humour moche excedeth the rem∣naunt in quantitie. In qualytie, as where the bloudde or other humour, is hotter, or colder, thycker or thynner, that is conuenient vnto the body. Fyrste where all the humours, beynge su∣perfluousely increased, fylleth and extendeth the receptories of the body, as the stomake, the vay∣nes, and bowels, and is most properly callid ful∣nesse, in greke Plethora, in latine Plenitudo. The other is where the body is infarced, eyther with choler, yelowe or blacke, or with fleume, or with watry humours, and is properly callyd in greke, Cacochymia, in latin Viciosus succus, in englysh it may be callid corrupt iuyce. I wyl not here write, the subtyl and abundant definitions and descriptions of Galen in his bokes de Ple∣nitudine, and in his commentaries vppon the
aphorssmes of hipocrates. For it shall here suf∣fyse, to shewe the operations of replecion good or yll, rymyttynge them, whiche be curious, and desyre a more ample declaration, to the most ex∣cellent warkes of Galene, where he may be sa∣tisfied, Li. . aph. yf he be not determyned to repougne a∣gaynst reason. Hipocrates saythe, where meate Apho. 15. Vbi cibus praeter na turā plus igestus est hic morbū facit. Galen. in cōmē. lo∣praedicto. is receyued moche aboue nature, that makethe syckenesse. Galene declarynge that place sayth, More meate than accordeth with natures mea∣sure, is named replecion. And afterwarde he ex∣poundeth that worde aboue nature, to signifie to moch and superfluously as who sayth, where the meate is superfluously taken, it maketh sik∣nesse. For meate but a lytell excedynge tempe∣rance, may not forthwith make syckenesse, but maye yet kepe the bodye within the latitude or boundes of helthe, for the meat that shall make syckenes, must not a lyttell excede the exquisite measure. The incommoditie, whiche hapneth therby is, that moystnesse is to moche extended. and naturall heate is debilitate. Also naturalle heate resolueth somewhat of the superfluouse meate and drynke. And of that, whiche is resol∣ued of meate vndigested, procedeth fumosytie grosse and vndygested, whiche ascendynge vp into the heed, and touchynge the ryme, wherin the brayne is wrapped, causeth heed ache, trem∣blyng of the membres, duskyshnes of the syght, and many other sycknesses: also by the sharpnes therof, it prycketh and annoyeth the synewes, whiche make sensibilitie, the rootes of whome, ar in the brayn, and from thense passeth through all the body. Fynally, the sayd fumositie, ingen∣dred
of repletion, percynge the innermost parte of the sayd synewes, callyd sensible, it greuously annoyeth the power animall, there consystynge, by the occasion wherof, vnderstandynge and re∣son, as to the vse of theym, are let and troubled. And also the tongue, whiche is reasons exposy∣tour, is depryued of his office, as it appereth in them, which are drunke, and them, whiche haue greuous paynes in their heed, procedyng of re∣plecion. Sygnes of replecion be these, losse of appetyte, delite in nothynge, slouthfulnesse, dul∣nesse of the wytte, and sences, more sleape, than Oribasius Euporistō lib. . was accustomed to be, crampes in the body, ster tynge or saltion of the membres, fulnesse of the vaynes, and thyckenes of the pulsis, horrour or shrouelynge of the body myxte with heate. The remedyes are abstynence, and all euacuations, whereof I wylle make mencyon in the nexte Chapyter. ☞ Of euacuacion. Cap. 2. THe meates and drynkes receyued into the bodye, if the stomake and lyuer do their naturall office, be altered by con∣coction and digestion, in such wyse that the beste parte therof goth to the nouryshment of the bo∣dy: the warste, beinge separate by the membres officiall, from the residue, are made excrementes in sondry fourmes, and substaunces, whiche ar lyke in qualitie to the naturall humour, whiche than raygneth moste in the bodye. These excre∣mentes Excremen∣tes. be none other, but matter superfluous, and vnsauery, whiche by naturall powers may
not be conuerted into fleshe, but remaynynge in the body corrupt the membres, and therfore na∣ture abhorrynge theym, desyreth to haue theym expelleth. These excrementes be thre in number, ordure, vrine, humour superfluouse. More ouer Ordure. there be two sortes of ordure, that is to say, one digested, whiche passeth by siege, the other vn∣dygested, Dygestyd. whiche is expelled by vomyte. where I saye dygested, I meane, that it is passed the sto∣make, and tourned into an nother fygure. Lyke wyse I calle that vndigested, whiche styll retay∣neth the fygure of meate. Vrine is the watrye Vrine substaunce of the bloudde, lyke as whaye is of mylke, whiche out of the meate that is altered and concocte or boyled in the stomacke, is stray∣ned in the vaynes called Mesaraice, which pro∣cedeth from the holowe parte of the lyuer, and sente by the raynes into the bladder, passethe by the Instrumente, the whiche is ordeyned as welle to that purpose, as for Generation. Humour superfluouse is in thre sortes, eyther Humour su∣perfluous. myxte with any of the foure humours, called na¦turall, or els it is gathered into the brayne, or it is betwene the skynne and the fleshe, or lyeth a∣monge the synewes, Muscules or ioyntes. Of humours some are more grosse and colde, some are subtyll and hotte, and are called vapour. Now for to expelle the sayd excrementes, are .ix. sondry kyndes of euacuation, that is to saye, ab¦stynence, vomyte, purgation by siege, lettynge of bloudde, scarifienge callyd cuppynge, sweating, prouocation of vrine, spyttynge, bledyng at the nose, or by hemorrodes: And in women, their na∣turall purgations. Of these euacuations I wy
briefely declare, with the cōmodities, whiche by the discrets vse of theym do happen vnto the bodye. ☞ Of abstinence. Cap. 3. ABstinence is a forbearynge to receyue a∣ny meate or drynke. For if it be but in part, it is than called rather temperance than abstinence. It ought to be vsed onely after replecion, as the proper remedye therfore. And than if it be moderate, it consumeth superflui∣ties, Cel. lib. . Hipocrat. apho. li. 7. and in consumynge them, it clarifieth the humoures, maketh the body fayre coloured, and not onely kepeth out syckenesse, but also where sychenesse is entred, nothynge more helpeth, yf it be vsed in season. To them, whiche haue verye moyste bodyes, hunger is ryghte expediente, for Considera∣tions in ab∣stinence. it maketh theyin more drye, not withstandynge there ought to be consyderations, in the meate before eaten, in the age of the persone, in the tyme of the yere, and in custome. Fyrste in the meate before eaten, yf it be moche in excesse or very grosse, or not moche excedynge, or lyghte of digestyon, and accordynge therto, wolde absty∣nence more or lasse be proporcioned. Concernyng age, Hipocrates saythe, olde men may susteyne Apho. li. 1. fastynge easilye: nexte vnto them, men of myd∣dell age, yonge men maye wars beare it, chyl∣derne warst of all, specially they that be lustye, not withandynge, here Galene correcteth Hipo∣crates, sayenge, that he shuld haue excepted men Galen. in cōment. very olde, who, as experience declareth, muste eate often and lyttell. As touchynge tyme, it must be remembred, that in wynter and sprynge
tyme, the stomakes be naturally veeye hotte, and sleape is longe, and therfore in that tyme meates wolde be more abundaunt, & all though moch be eaten, it wyll be sooner digested. wher∣fore abstinence woide not be than so moche as in sommer, all be it to absteyne moche in som∣mer, excepte it be after replecion. Damascene sayth, it dryeth the body, it maketh the colour Damasee∣nus apho. salowe, it ingendreth melancoly, and hurteth the syghte. More ouer, custome maye not be forgot∣ten, for they, whiche are vsed from chyldhode, to eate sondry meales in the daye, wolde rather be reduced to fewer meales, and lyttelle meate, than to be compelled to abstaynevtterly, to the intent, that nature, whiche is made by custome, be not rebuked, and the power digestyue therby debilitate. And note well, that by to moche ab∣stinence, the moysture of the body is withdrawē and consequentely the body dryeth, and waxeth leane: naturall heate, by withdrawynge of moi∣sture, is to moche intended, and not findyng hu∣mour to warke in, tourneth his vyolence to the radicall or substantiall moysture of the bodye. and exhaustyng that humour, bryngeth the body into a consumption. wherfore Hipocrates saith, Apho. li.  that to scarse and exquisite an order in meate and drynke, is for the more parte more daunge∣rouse than that, which is more abundant. Con∣trarywyse moderation in abstinence, accordyng to the sayde consyderatyons, is to helthe a sure bulwarke.
❧ Of Vomite. Cap. 4. THe meate or drynke superfluous, or cor∣rupted in the stomake, is best expellyd by vomyte, if it be not very greuous to him whiche is diseased. Also the moderate Aetius. li. 1 vse of it, pourgeth fleume, lighteth the heed, cau¦seth that the excesse of meates or drynkes, shall not anoy or brynge syckenesse. Moreouer it amē¦deth the affectis of the raynes, bladder, and the fundement. It also helpeth agaynst lepries, can∣kers, goutes, dropsies, and also diuers sicknesses procedyng of the stomake. For-yf any grefs hap¦neth of the heade, vomyte is than vncommody∣ous. It is better in winter, than in sommer. Also good for them, whiche are replete, or very cho∣leryke, yf tkey haue not well dygested. but it is yll for theym, that be leane, or haue weake sto∣makes. And therfore where one feleth bytter va¦pours rysynge out of his stomacke, with griefe and weyghtynesse, in the ouer partes of his bo∣dye, lette hym roome forthwith to this remedye. It is also good for him that is hart burned, and harh moche spyttell, or his stomacke wambleth, and for hym that remeueth into sondrye places. Yet I coumsaye sayth Celsus, hym that wyll be Cels. lib. 1. in helthe, and wold not be to soone aged, that he vse not this dayly. And I my selfe haue  men, whiche dayly vsynge it haue brought ther∣by theyr stomakes into such custome, that what so euer they dyd eete, they coulde not longe re∣tayne it, wherby they shorten theyr lyues. wher∣fore it wolde not be vsed, but onely where great surfet, or abundaunce of fleume do requyre it.
He that wyll vomyte after meate, lette hym drynke sondry drynkes myxte togyther, and last of all, warme water: or yf that be to easy, lette hym myxt therwith salte or hony. If he wyl vo∣myte fastynge, lette hym drinke water and hony sodden togyther, or ysope with it, or eate of a radyshe roote, and drynke warme water vppon it. also water wherin radyshe is boyled, and af∣terward prouoke hym selfe to it, Them that wil haue more vyolent pourgations, I remytte to phisitions lerned. But yet I do eftsones warne them, that therin they be circumspecte, and doo not moch vse it. More ouer in vomites, the mat∣ter brought forthe, wolde be consydered, accor∣dynge to the rules of Hipocrates, in his seconde Hipocrat. praesag. 2. cap. 7. boke of pronostications, that is to saye, yf it be myxt with fleume & choler, it is most profitable if it be not in very great quantitie, nor thycke, the lasse myxture it hath, the warse is it. If it be greene, lyke to leeke blaades, thynne or blacke, it is to be iudged ylle. If it haue all coloures, it is extreme peryllous. If it be leady coloured, and sauoureth horribly, it signifieth a short abo∣licion, or dissolution of nature. For as Galene affirmeth there in his comment, suche maner of vomite declareth corruption with extinctinge of nature. Also euery putrifyed and stynckynge sa∣uour in vomyte is yll. These thynges be ryghte Galen. de locis. affe¦ctis. lib. 1. necessary, to be loked for, where one dothe vo∣myte without any difficultie: but to inforce one to vomite, whiche can not, is very odious, and to be abhorred.
wels, griefe in the raynes of the backe or huckle bone, ventosities in the bealy, inflamation or ex∣ulceration in the guttes or bladder. It is a con∣uenient and sure medicine, and lefte hurte dothe ensue of it. The makynge and ordrynge therof, I wyl omytte to wryte in this place, partly that I wolde not, that phisitions shuld to moch note in me presumption, partely that another place may be more apte to that purpose. ☞ The particular commodities of euery purgacion. Cap. 6. IN potions, electuaries, and pylles oughte to be moche more obseruation, than in clysters or suppositories, forasmoch as these do enter no further than into the gutte, where the ordure lyeth, and by that place onely, bringeth forth the matter, whiche causeth disease. But the other entrynge in that way, that meates and drynkes do, cometh into the stomacke, and there is boy∣led, and sente into the places of digestyon, and afterwarde is myxte with the iuyce, wherof the substance of the body is made, and expellynge the aduersarye humours, sommewhat thereof doubtelesse remayneth in the bodye. Wherfore menne haue neede to beware, what medicynes they receyue, that in them be noo venenosytie, malyce or corruption, lest for the expellynge of a superfluous humor, which perchance good diet, or some brothes made of good herbes, or the said euacuation, with suppositorie or clister, mought brynge forthe at leysure. by desyrynge of to ha∣stye remedye, they receyue in medicine that whi∣che
shal ingender a venemous humour, and vn∣euitable destruction vnto all the body. And ther∣fore happye is he, whiche in syckenesse fyndeth a dyscrete and welle lerned phisition, and soo trewe a potycarye, that hath alwaye drowges vncorrupted, and whome the physition maye surely truste, to dispence his thinges trewely. But nowe to retourne to the sayde fourme of pourgation, I wylle nowe sette forthe somme counsayles, concernynge that mattier, whiche I haue collected out of the chiefe authours of phisycke. Bodies hotte and moyste, maye easy∣ly susteyne pourgation by the stoole. They whi∣che be leane or thynne, hauynge the members tender, may take harme by purgations. To men that are cholerike, and theym that eate lyttelle, pourgations are greuouse. In yonge chylderne and olde menne, it is daungerouse to lowse mo∣che the bealye. To theym that are not wonte to it, pourgation is noyfulle. He that lyueth in a good order of diete needeth neyther pourgati∣on nor vomyte. After that the pourgation hathe wroughte, thyrstnes and sounde slepe be sygnes that the bodye is sufficiently pourged. By day∣ly takynge of medicynes, nature is corrupted. whan ye wyll purge any thynge make fyrste the matter flowynge & soluble. Medicyne to pourge Hipocrat aphor. oughe not to be myngled with meate, but to be taken foure houres at the leste before meales, or thre houres after meales, excepte certayne easy pylles made to clense and comforte the stomake, whiche wolde be taken at the begynnynge of supper, or after supper a lyttell before that one goeth to bed, makynge a lyghte supper or none.
After purgation taken, the pacyent shulde reste, & not walke, vntyll the medicyne hath wrought, nor eate or dryncke in the meane space. These thynges haue I remembred, bycause I haue knowen ryght good phisitions, to haue forgot∣ten, to instructe therof their paciētes. Now wyll I sette forthe the table of suche thynges, whi∣che of theyr propertie do digest or pourge super∣fluous humours particularly, whiche I haue gathered out of the bookes of Dioscorides, Ga∣lene, Paulus Egineta, Oribasius, and Aetius, and other late wryters, not withstandynge, I haue not writen all, for as moche as there be di∣uers thynges, whervnto we haue not yet foun∣den any names in englyshe. ¶ Digestiues of choler. ¶ Endyue. Lettyse. Cykorye. Scabiose. Maydenheare. Malowes. Mercury. The iuyce of pome garnades. Pourselane. Popy. Berberies. Roses. Violettes the lefe and flowre. Sorell. Lyuerworte. Sorell de boyse. Whay clarifyed. The great foure colde sedes, that is to say, of gourdes, cucumbers, melones, and citruls. Psilium, Vyneger. Saunders. Barley water. Prunes. Tamaryndes. ¶ Purges of choler. Wylde hoppes.
Wormewode Centorie. Fumytorie. Whay of butter. Violettes. Mercury. Juycs of Roses Prunes. Eupatorye. Tamarindes, halfe an ounce in a decoction. Manna .vi. drammes at the leaste, and so to xxv. in the brothe of a henne or capon. Rebarbarū by it selfe frome two drammes, vnto foure, infused or stiped in lycour, frome iiii. drāmes vnto .viii. ¶ Digestyues of fleume. ¶ Fenell, Persely, the rootes Smallage. Capers. Lawrell. Synuy. Puly. Maioram. Penyroyall. Wylde parsnyp sede. Mynt. Pympepnell. Horemynt. Gladen. Agrymonye. Calamynt. Nep. Betayne. Sauge. Radyshe. Mugworte. Junyper. Hysope. Pyony. Baulme. Honye. Gynger. Squilla. Aristolochia. Cynamome. Pepper. Cumyne. ¶ Pourges of fleume. ¶ Centorie. Nettyll. Agrimonye. Alder. Polypodiū of the oke. Myrabolani kebuli, infused frome halfe an ounce to an ounce,
and two drammes. In substance, frome twoo drammes to halfe an ounce. Agaricus, frō a drāme to two drammes, in∣fused from .ii. drāmes to fyue. Yreos. Maydenheare. Sticados. ¶ Pourges of melancoly. ¶ The brothe of cole∣wortes, lyght boyled. Baulme mynte. Sticados. Tyme. Seene, boyled in white wine, or in the broth of a henne. Lased sauery. Exthimus. Vnwrought sylke. Organum. Calamynt. Borage. Hartis tunge. Quyckbeme. Maydenheare. Wythwynde. Pulyall mountayne. Hony. Sugar. ¶ Melancoly for the thynnesse and subtylnesse of the humour, nedeth no digestiue. ¶ They whiche wyll take sharper purgations, or compounde with dyuers thynges, lette theym take the counsayle of an honest and perfyte phi∣sytion, and not aduenture to myxte thynges to∣gyther, without knowynge the temperaunce of them in degrees, and that he canne proporcion theym to the bodye, that shall receyue theym in symples, as they be wrytten. And so he maye vse theym without peryll, agaynste the humours, whervnto they serue.
☞ Lettynge of bloudde. Cap. 6. THe parte of Euacuation by lettynge of bloudde, is incisyon or cuttynge of the vayne, wherby the bloud, whiche is cause of syckenesse or griefe to the hole bodye, or any partycular parte therof, doth moste aptly passe. The commodities wherof, beyng in a moderate Arnold  de uillano ua. quantitie, and in a due tyme taken, be these that folowe, it clarifieth the wyt, and maketh good memorye, it clenseth the bladder, it dryeth the brayne, it warmeth the marowe, beynge in the bones, it openeth the hearyng, it stoppeth teares or droppynges of the eyen, it taketh awaye loth∣somnesse, and confirmeth the stomake, it nouri∣sheth that, whiche is proper to nature, and the contrarye expelleth. It is thought, that therby lyfe is prolonged, and the matter makyng syck∣nesse shortely consumed. Wherfore lettynge of Oribasi in medici¦ne comp dio. bloudde is not onely expedient for theym, which are fulle of bloudde, or haue aboundaunce of strengthe, but also for theym, in whome, with∣oute plenitude, callyd fulnesse, inflammations begynne to be in theyr bodyes, or by some oute∣warde strooke, the bloudde beynge gathered within, by collection therof, doo feele griefe or disease. Also where there is moche peyne felte, or debylitie of some member, wherof is suppo∣sed to be ingendred some greuous disease. More ouer they, whiche vse excesse of meates and drynkes, may be cured by lettynge of bloudde. But those, whiche be temperate, kepynge good diete, be holpen without lettynge of blode: as by fricasies, vsynge of bathes, exercise, walkynge,
and rydynge moderately. Alsoo vnctions with oyles and oyntementes, called Diaphoretice, whiche by euaporation, do shortly euacuate the fulnesse. All be it, yf the fulnesse be of melancoly bloudde, than alway nedes muste be lettynge of bloudde. Abundaunce of melancoly bloudde is knowen by these sygnes. There is felte in the en¦trayles, or within the boulke of a man or wo∣man, a weyghtynes with tension or thrustynge outwarde and all that parte, whiche is aboue the nauel, is more heuy, than it was wont to be. Also moche vrine and fatty, the residence or bo∣ome, thycke, troublous, and fatte, sommetyme blacke poushes or boyles, with inflamation and moche peyne. These muste be shortly let bloude, and the melancoly humour also purged by siege They, whyche haue crude or rawe humoures, muste be warely lette bloudde, before that syck∣nesse ingender, but hauyng the feuer, in no wise. Concernynge lettynge of blonde, these thynges Aetius. li. 3 folowynge, wolde be had in continuall remem∣brance, and be afore thought on. In abundance of the bloudde, the qualitie and quantitie, the greatnesse of the sycknes, and yf it be presente, or loked for. also the diet precedyng, the age and strength of the person, the naturall fourme of his body, the tyme of the yere, the region or coū∣trey, the present state of the ayre, the disvse of ac¦customed exercyse, the ceassynge of euacuations vsed before. In qualitie consyder, of what hu∣mour the fulnes procedeth. In quantitie the a∣bundance of that, whiche is to be pourged. In syckenesse, if it be dangerous or tollerable: if the sycknesse be present, it requyreth the more dily∣gence:
if it be loked for, it may be the better pro∣porcioned. Cor. Cel∣sus. lib. 2. In diete, the custome in earynge and drinkyng, must be specially noted. In yonge men and women, lettynge of bloudde wolde be more lyberall. In olde menne and yonge chylderne, it wolde be scarser: stronge men maye susteyne ble∣dynge, they whiche are feble, may not endure it: Large bodies haue greatter vesselles, than they, which be litle. leane mē haue more blod, corporat men haue more fleshe. The time of the yere must be specially marked. For in the begynnynge of Oriba. s∣Arnold. de¦uilla noua de flobo∣thomia. Io. Dama∣scenus in arte medi. springe tyme, it is beste lettynge of bloudde, as Oribasius saythe, and so dothe contynue, after the opinion of Arnolde, vnto the eyght calendes of June. Aetius affirmeth, that in wynter, or in a colde countrey, or where the person is of a ve∣ry colde nature, the vaynes shuld not be opened. And Damascene sayth, They whiche in youthe haue vse to be moche lette bloudde, after they be thre score yeres old, their nature waxeth cold, and naturall heate is in them suffocate, specially if they were of a colde complexion. but that is to be vnderstande, where they that are in helth, are often let bloude. For in the lapse from helth, and in dyuers diseases, wherein, the bloudde is corrupted, or where it ingendreth impostumes, or resorteth to any place, where it ought not to be, or passeth by any other cundyte, than nature hath ordeyned, or where it is furyouse or infla∣med, or by any other meanes bredethe greuouse diseases, in all these cases it ought to be practy∣sed, ye sometyme in aged persones, women with childe, and yong infantes. For in extreme neces∣sitie, it were better experience some remedy, than
to do nothynge. All other thynges concernynge this matter, pertayne to the part curatyue, whi∣che treateth of healynge of sycknesse, whereof I wyll not nowe speake, but remytte the reders to the counsayle of discrete phisitions. ❧ Of scarifienge called boxinge or cup¦pynge. Cap. 7. FOr as moche as it is not conuenient, to be lette bloude often tymes in the yere, bicause moch of the vital spirite passeth forth with alenus the bloudde, whiche beynge exhauste, the bodye waxeth colde, and naturall operations become . li. 3 the more feble, I therfore do counsayle (saythe Galene) that the base partes of the body, as the legges, be scarified, whiche is the moste sure re∣medy, as well in conceruynge heithe as in repai∣rynge therof, beynge decayed. For it cureth the eyen beynge anoyed with longe distillations. It profyteth also to the heed, and ouer parte of the body, agaynst sondry diseases. In what member the bloudde is gathered, the body beynge fyrste purged by scarification, the grefe may be cured. Also Oribasius affirmeth the same, and also ad∣deth Oribasius sin medici∣ cōpen. therto, that it helpeth squynances, or quin∣ces in the throte, and dissolueth the constipati∣ons or stoppynges made of all places, if the pla∣ces be scarified: not withstandynge applicacion of boxes about the stomake, in hot feuers, where reason is troubled, are to be eschued, for feare of suffocatiō. Likewise put to the heed vndiscrete∣ly, Aetius. it hurteth bothe the heed & the eies. The late authors do affirme, that scarifieng is in the stede
of lettynge bloudde, where for age, debilitie, or tyme of the yere, or other lyke consyderation, a man maye not susteyne bloudde lettinge, and it bryngeth forth the thynne bloud, whiche is next to the skyn. ☞ Of bloude suckers or leaches. Cap. 8. THere is also an other fourme of euacua∣tion by wormes, founde in waters callyd bloude suckers or leaches, whiche beinge put vnto the body or member, do draw out blode. And their drawynge is more conuenient for ful∣nesse of bloudde than scarifyenge is, forasmoche as they fetche bloud more deper, and is more of the substance of bloud, yet the opinion of some men is, that they do drawe no bloude but that, which is corrupted, and not proporcionable vn∣to our body. And therfore in griefes, which hap∣pen betwene the skynne and the flesshe of blode corrupted, these are more conuenient than scari∣fienge. But before that they be putte vnto any Oribasius in medici∣nae cōpen. parte of the body, they muste be fyrste kepte all one day before, gyuyng vnto them a lyttel blode in freshe flesshe. And than putte theym in cleane water, somwhat warme, and with a spounge wype awaye the slyme, whiche is about theym, and than laye a lyttell bloudde on the place gre∣ued, and putte theym thanne to it, and laye on theym a spounge, than whan they be fulle, they may falle away. or yf pe wyll sooner haue them of, put a horse heare betweene theyr mouthes, and the place, and drawe them awaye, or putte to theyr mouthes salte or ashes, or vyneger, and
heate them, and disturbeth reason, where the bo∣dyes be hote afore, where natural heate is feble, the heate may not be dispersed vnto the extreme partes, and than dothe the extreme membres, that is to saye, whiche are farre from the harte, remayne colde and tremblynge. Of this affecti∣on commeth sometyme feuers, sometyme apo∣plexies, or priuation of sencis, tremblynge, pal∣seys, madnesse, fransies, deformitie of vysage: and that warse is, outragious swearynge, blas∣phemye, desyre of vengeance, losse of charitie, a∣initie, credence, also forgetfulnesse of benefytte precedynge, and of obedience, duytie, and reue∣rence. There also do succede contencion, charge∣able suite, vnquietnes of mynde, lacke of appe∣tite, lacke of slepe, feble digestion, scorne, dys∣dayne, and hatred of other, with peryll of lo∣synge of all good reputation. These incōmodi∣ties of Ire, perfitely had in remembraunce, and at the fyrst motion therof one of them thoughts on, may happen to brynge in his felowes, and therby the flame may be quenched. or lette hym that is angry, euen at the fyrste consyder one of these thynges, that lyke as he is a man, so is al∣so the other, with whome he is angry, and ther∣fore it is as lefulle for the other to be angrye, as vnto hym, and if he so be, than shall that anger be to him displesant, and stere him more to be an¦gry wherby it appereth, that Ire is to him loth∣some. If the other be pactent, than let hym ab∣horre that thyng in him selfe, the lacke wherof, in the other contenteth hym, and asswageth his malice. More ouer, let hym before, that occasion of Ire dothe happen, accustome hym selfe to
beholde, and marke well theym that be angry, with the successe of that anger, and ruminate is in his mynde, a good space after. And in that tyme, let hym remember, howe Christ, the some of god and God, who (as he hym selfe sayde) mought haue had of god his father, yf he wolde haue asked theym, legions of aungels, to haue defended him, ye with lasse thā a winke moughs haue slayne all his aduersaries, yet he not with∣standyng, rebuked, scorned, falsely accused, pluc∣ked hyther and thyder, stryped, bounden with halters, whipped, spytte on, buffettes, crowned with sharpe thorne, laded with a heuye piece of tymber, his owne proper tourmente, halyd, and vryuen forthe lyke a calfe to the slaughter hous, eftesoones beaten and ouerthrowen, retched, forthewith ropes, armes and legges layde on the Crosse, and there vnto with longe yron nay∣les throughe the handes and feete nayled, with manye strookes of hammers, with many pryc∣kynges, or euer the nayles moughte perce by his tender and most blessed fleshe and synewes, quyte throughe the harde tymber, vppe to the heedes of the nayles, and all this beynge done for the offence of mankynde, and not his: yet with the men, which dyd it, his moste vnkynde countreymen, his most vnnaturall kynnesmenne whome he fyrste made of nothynge, preserued by myracles, delyuered from perylles, and cured of dyscases, in all his vexation and trouble, he was neuer seene or perceyued angry. If one wyl say, that anger is naturall, let hyn: also consyder that in Chrystes manhode, were all naturalle pomers. If he wyll saye, that Ire is token of
courage, and in Chryste it lacked not, whome bothe angels and deuyls trembled and feared. The premysses often reuolued, and borne in the mynde, I wyll not say, shall vtterly extincte all motions of wrathe, which is not possyble, but it shall, whan it kyndleth lightly, represse it, and let that it shall not growe into flame. And in spea∣kynge here of wrath, I do not meane that, whi∣che good men haue agaynste vyces: or wyse and discrete gouernours and maysters, agaynste the defautes or negligences of theyr subiectes of ser¦uauntes, vsed in rebukyng them, or moderately punysshyng them. For that is not properly yre, but rather to be callyd displeasure, and is that wherof god speaketh, by his prophete Dauyd sayeng. Be you angry & do not sinne. And that Psal. 4. Genes. 35. Exod. 32. Leuit. 10 Marc. 11. maner of anger, hath ben in dyuers holy menne, prophetes, and other. And it appered in Chryste whan he draue out them, which made their mar¦kette in the holy tēple of god, where there ought to be nothyng but prayer. And in lyke wise whā he rebuked the hypocrites But yf none of these thinges may come so shortly to his remēbraūce, that is meued with anger, at the lest lette hym thynke on the lesson, that Apollodorus the phy∣losopher taught to the Emperoure Octauian, that before he speake or do any thynge in anger he do recite in order, al the letters of the A, B, C, & remoue somwhat out of the place, that he is in, and seke occasyon to be otherwyse occupied. This shal for this tyme suffyse, for the remedies of Ire. And he that wyl know more of this mat¦ter, let hym reade in my warke, called the Gouer¦nour, where I therof do write more abūdantly.
❧ Of dolour or heuinesse of mynde. Capitulo. 12. THere is no thynge more ennemy to lyfe, then sorowe, callyd also heuenesse, for it exhausteth bothe naturall heate and moy∣sture of the body, and dothe extenuate or make the body leane, dulleth the wit, and darkneth the spirites, letteth the vse and iugement of reason, and oppressed memorie. And Salomon saythe, Pro. 17. 25. Ecclesiast 25. 33. that sorowe dryeth vp the bones. And also lyke as the mothe in the garmente, and the wourme in the tree, soo dothe heuynesse annoye the harte of a man. Also in the boke called Ecclesiasticus, Sorowe hathe kylled manye, and in it selfe is founde no commoditie. Also by heuynesse dethe is hastened, it hydeth vertue or strengthe, and heuynesse of harte boweth downe the necke. This is so puissaunt an ennemye to nature and bodyly helthe, that to resyste the malyce and vi∣olence therof, are requyred remedies, as well of the holsome counsayles founde in holy scripture & in the bokes of morall doctrine. As also of cer¦tayne herbes, fruytes, and spyces, hauynge the propertye to expelle melancalyke humours, and to comforte and kepe lyuely the spirites, whiche haue theyr proper habitation in the hart of mā, and moderate nouryshyng of the naturall heate and humour, callyd radical, which is the base or foundation, whervppon the lyfe of manne stan∣deth, and that faylyng, lyfe falleth in ruyne, and the body is dissolued. Nowe fyrste I wylle de∣clare some remedyes agaynste sorowfulnesse of harte, concernynge necessary counsayle.
Somtyme this affecte hapneth of Ingrati∣tude, eyther wherfore benefyte, or specialle loue employed, one receyueth damage, or is abando∣ned in his necessite, or is deceiued of hym, whom he trusted, or fyndeth hym, of whome he hathe great expectation, forgetfull or neglygent in his commoditie, or perceyueth the persone, whome of longe tyme he hath loued, to be estraunged from hym, or to haue one of later acquayntance in more estimation. This affection nyppeth the harte, ye of moste wyse men, for they loue moste hartily, not prouoked by carnalle affection, but rather by good opinion, ingendred by similitude of honest studies, and vertuous maners of long tyme mutually experienced. And it is not onely vnto man greuous, but also vnto god most dis∣pleasant and odiouse, as it is aboundantly de∣clared in scripture. wherfore the persone, which feleth hym selfe touched with this affecte, before that it growe into a passion, and waxeth a syck∣nesse, lette hym calle to remembraunce these ar∣tycles folowynge, or at the leste wayes somme of theym, For eueryche of theym maye case hym, thoughe perchance they can not forthwith perfitely cure hym. ¶ Consyder, that the corruption of mans na∣ture is not so moche declared in any thynge, as Counsailes agaynst in∣gratitude. in Ingratytude, whereby a man is made warse, than dyuers brute beastes. The lyttell ante or emote helpeth vp his felowe, whome he seeth o∣uerthrowen with burdeyn, or by other occasyon. Also whan olyphantes do passe ouer any greate Appianus in uaria hi storia. water, the greattest and moste puissant of them deuyde them selues, and settynge the weakest in
the myddell, parte go before, tryeng the depnesse and perylles, parte come after, succourynge the weakest or leaste, with theyr longe noses, whan they see them in daūger. The same beastes haue ben seene not onely brynge men out of desertes, whiche haue loste theyr wayes, but also reuenge the dyspleasures doone to them, the which gaue them meate, as one that slewe hym, whych had commytted aduoutrye with his maysters wyfe. The terrible Lyons and Panthers, haue bene sene in theyr maner, to render thankes to theyr benefactours, ye and to obiecte their owne bo∣dies and lyues for theyr defence. The same we maye dayely beholde in oure owne dogges. Than in whom thou fyndest the detestable vice of Ingratytude, reputynge hym amonge the warste sorte of creatures, thynke not that thou haste loste a frende, but thynke that thou art delyuered frome a monster of nature, that de∣uoured thy loue, and that thou arte nowe at lybertye, and haste wonne experyence to chese the a better. But yf this maye not suffyse, than Seneca de benefi. 7. eftesoones consyder, that yf thou loke welle on thy selfe, perchaunce thou mayst fynde the faute wherof thou complaynest, within thyne owne bosomme. Calle to thy remembraunce, yf thou haste alwaye rendred vnto euery man condygne thankes or benefytte, of whome thou hast kynd∣nesse receyued, or yf thou hast alway remembred euery one of them, that haue done to the any cō∣moditie or pleasure. Thou shalt well perceyue, that what thyng thou receyuedst in chyldehode, thou forgattest, or dyddest lyttell esteeme, whan thou camest to the state of a man, And what
thou dyddest remember in youthe, in age, thou dydded lyttell thynke on: thy nouryces pappe, her rockynges, her watchynges, thou hast not al waye remembred, or equally recompensed. Thy scoole maysters studye, his labour, his dilygence in a lyke degree, thou haste not requyted. what greatter frendes haste thou had, of whome thou couldest receyue any greatter benefites, than thy nourysshyng and preseruynge of thy lyfe, in thy moste feblenesse, or thyne erudicion, wherby thy nature was made more excellent. Remembrynge this leaue to be angry or sorowful, for so cōmon a vyce: yet yf it cesse not to greue the, comferre the ingratitude that doth vere the, with that in∣gratitude, which was shewed by the Israelytes whome god chase for his owne people, deliuered from seruage, shewed for theym wonders, pre∣serued them fourty yeres in desert, destroied for them kynges, gaue to them the countrey, which flowed mylke and hony, defended them agaynst all outwarde hostylitie, sent vnto them suche a∣bundance of ryches, that syluer was in Hieru∣salem, as stones in the strete, had his tabernacle, and afterwarde his moste holye temple amonge them, whiche he dyd dayely vysite with his dy∣uyne maiestie, made theyr kynges to reigne glo∣riousely, and spake with their prephetes fami∣lyarly, and corrected their errours moste gentil∣ly: and yet for all this, they, imbracyng the pay∣nyms ydolatrie, they lefte soo gracyous and lo∣uynge a lorde, and lyuynge god, and to his great despite, gaue diuine honours, to calfes of brasse, and other monstruouse ymages, and at the laste put to moste cruell deth, the onely sonne of god,
that hadde done so moche for them. And yf we chrysten men, doo loke well on our selues, reuoluynge the incomparable benefite, whiche we haue receyued by Christes passyon, and consyder the circumstance of his mooste ex∣cellent pacience, and moste feruent loue toward vs, with our forgetfulnes, and they dayly breche of our promyse, whiche we made at oure bap∣tysme, conferryng our mutuall vnkyndnes ther∣vnto, there shall appere no ingratitude, that shulde offende vs. Fynally for a conclusyon, be∣holde well aboute the, and thou shalte all daye fynde the chylderne ingrate to theyr parentes, and wyues to theyr husbandes. And wylte thou looke that thy benefyte, or vayne expectation, shuld make the more fre from ingratitude of thy frende, whome chaunce hath sente the, than na∣ture may the parentes towarde theyr chyldern, or the coniunction of bodyes by lefull maryage, take vnkyndnesse from the wyues toward their husbandes. This vyce therfore of Ingratitude, beinge so common a chaunce, make no worldlye frendeshyp so preciouse, that lyfe or helthe ther∣fore shulde be spent or consumed. I haue ben the lenger in this place, bycause I haue had in this griefe sufficient experience. ¶ If death of chylderne be cause of thy heuy∣nesse, Death of chyldren. call to thy remembrance some chyldern (of whome there is no lyttell nomber) whose lyues eyther for vncorrigyble vyces, or infortunate chaunces, haue bene more greuouse vnto theyr parentes, thanne the deathe of thy chylderne ought to be vnto the  consyderynge that death is the discharger of all gryefes, and myseries,
and to theym that dye well, the fyrste entrie into lyfe euerlastynge. ¶ The losse of goodes or authoritie do greene none but fooles, which do not marke dyligently, Losse of goodes. that lyke as neyther the one nor the other dothe alwaye happen to them that are worthye, so we haue in dayely experience, that they fall frome hym sodeynely, who in increasynge or kepynge them semeth moste busy. ¶ Oftentymes the repulse frome promotion is Lacke of promotion. cause of discomforte, but than consyder, why∣ther in the opinion of good men, thou art demed worthy to haue suche aduan̄cement, or in thyne owne expectatiō & fantasy. If good men so inge the, thanke thou god of that felicitie, and laugh at the blyndnesse of theym, that soo haue refu∣sed the. If it procede of thyne owne folye, ab∣horre all arrogance, and inforce thy self to be ad uanced in mennes estimation, before thou canst fynde thy selfe worthy in thy proper opinion. ¶ All other chaunces of fortune esteme as noo Chaunces of fortune. thynge, and that longe before they doo happen. The ofte recordynge of myserye, prepareth the mynde to fele lesse aduersitie. And the contempt of fortune is sure quietnesse and mooste perfyte felycitie. ¶ This nowe shall suffyse concernynge reme∣dies of morall phylosophie. Nowe wyll I write somewhat touchynge the counsayle of physyke, as in relieuynge the bodye, whiche eyther by the sayde occasyons, or by the humoure of melan∣colye is brought out of temper. ¶ The fyrste counsayle is, that durynge the tyme of that passyon, eschewe to be angrye, stu∣dyouse,
or solitarye, and reioyce the with mei∣dye, or els be alwaye in suche company, as beste maye contente the. Auoyde all thynges that be noyouse in syght, smellynge and herynge, and imbrace all thynge that is delectable. Flee darkenesse, moche watche, and busynesse of mynde, moche companieng with women, the vse of thynges very hotte and drye: often pur∣gations, immoderate exercyse, thyrst, moche ab∣stinence, drye wyndes and colde. Absteyn from dayly eatyng of moch old blefe or old mutton, hard chese, hare flesh, bores flesh, venyson, saltefyshe, coolewortes, beanes, and peason, very course breadde, greate fysshes of the see, as thurlepole, porpyse, and sturgeon, and other of lyke natures, wyne redde and thycke, meates beynge very salte or sowre, olde, burned, or fryed, garlyke, onyons, and lekes. Vse meates whiche are temperatelye hotte, and therwith somewhat moyste, boyled rather than rosted, lyght of dygestyon, and ingendryng bloudde clere and fyne. As mylke hotte from the vdder, or at the leste newe mylked, ruen chese, swete almondes, the yelkes of rere egges, lyttell byrdes of the bushes, chyckens, and hennes. wyne whyte or clarette, cleere and feagraunte. Swete sauours in wynter hot, in sommer colde, in the meane tyme temperate. ¶ Confortatiues of the hart hot. ¶ Bourage the floure or leafe. Buglosse. Baulmynte. Elycampane. Cloues. Cardamomu. Rosemary.
Lignum aloes. Muske. Ambergryse. Saffron. The bone of the harte of a redde diere. Myntes. The rynde of Citron. Been. Cububes. Basyle. ¶ Cenfortatyues of the harte colde. Violettes. Perles. Corall. The vnicornes horne. Olde appulles whiche be good. Roses. Saunders. The olyphantes tothe. Water lylies. Coriander prepared. ¶ Comfortatyues temperate. Jacinet. Saphire. Emerauldes. Myrabolanes, called kebuly. Buglosse. Golde, syluer. ❧ Of Ioye. I or gladnesse of harte doth prolonge the lyfe, it fatteth the bodye that is leane with troubles, bytynge the humours to an equall temperance, and drawynge naturall heate out∣warde. But yf it be sodayne & feruent, it often∣tymes sleeth, for as moche as it draweth to so∣deynly and excessyuely naturall heate outward. And therfore dyuers men and women haue ben sene to falle in a sounde, whā they haue sodayn∣lye beholden the persons, whom they feruently loued. A a woman in Rome, herynge fyrste, that her sonne was slayne in battayle. After whan he Ti. Liuius. came to her, she seynge hym alyue, imbracynge
eche other, she dyed in his armes. This welle consydered, agaynst suche inordinate gladnesse, the best prescruatiue is to remember, that the extreme partes of mundayne ioye is sorow and heuynesse: And that nothynge of this worlde, maye so moche reioyce vs: but occasyon maye cause it to be displeasaunt vnto vs. ❧ The dominion of sondry com∣plexions. Cap. 13. IT semeth to me not inconuenient, that I do declare as well the counsayles of ancient & approued authors, as also myne owne opi∣nion gathered by dilygent markynge in dayely experience, concernynge as well the necessarye diet of euery complexion, aege and declinatiō of helthe, as also the meane to resyste discrasies of the body, before syckenesse be therin confyrmed, leauynge the resydue vnto the substancyall ler∣nynge and circumspecte practyse of good phy∣sitions, whiche shall the more easilye cure theyr pacientes, yf theyr pacientes do not dysdayne to beare awaye and folow my counsayle. And first it ought to be consydered, that none of the foure complexions, haue sooly suche dominion in one man or womans body, that no parte of any o∣ther complexion is therwith myxte. For whan we call a man sanguine, choleryke, fleumatyke, or melancoly, we doo not meane, that he hathe bloude onely without any of the other humors, or choler withoute bloudde, or fleume withoute bloudde or melancolye, or melancolye withoute bloudde or coler. And therfore the man, whiche
is sanguine, the more that he draweth into age, wherby naturall moysture decayed, the more is he coleryke, by reason, that heate, surmoun∣tynge moysture, nedes muste remayne heate and drythe. semblably, the colerycke man, the more that he waxeth into age, the more naturall heate in hym is abated, and drythe surmountynge na∣turall moysture, he becommeth melancolyke: but some sanguine man hathe in the proporcion of temperatures, a greatter myxture with choler, than an other hath. Lykewyse the cholerycke or fleumatyke man with the humour of sanguyne or melancolye. And therfore late practysers of physyke are wonte to call men, accordyng to the myxture of theyr complexions, as sanguyne co∣lerike, fleumatike sanguine. &c. Moreouer, be∣syde the naturalle complexions, whiche man re∣ceyueth in his generation, the humours, wherof the same complexions do consyste, beynge aug∣mēted superfluously in the body or members by any of the sayde thynges called not naturall, e∣uery of them do semblably augment the comple¦xion, whiche is proper vnto hym, and bryngeth vnequall temperature vnto the bodye. And for these causes, the sanguine or fleumatike man or woman, felynge and discrasye by choler hapned to them by the sayde thynges, callyd not natu∣rall, they shall vse the diete described hereafter to hym, whiche is naturally coleryke. Sembla∣blye the coleryke or melancolyke manne or wo∣man, hauynge any dyscreasye by fleume, to vse the diete of hym, whiche is naturallye fleuma∣tyke, alwaye remembrynge, that sanguyne and fleumatyke men haue more respecte vnto dryth,
choleryke and melancalyke vnto moysture, and that alway as the accedentall complexion decay eth, to resorte by lyttell and lyttell to the dyete, pertaynynge to his naturall complexion. ☞ The tymes appropried to euery natu∣rall humour. Cap. 14. BVt fyrst it must be consydered, that where the foure humours, be alway in man, and in some man cōmonly one humour is more abundant than an other naturallye, that is to say, from his generation. The sayde humoures haue also peculyar tymes assygned to euery one of them, wherin eche of them is in his moste po∣wer and force, as after ensueth, after the descri∣ption of Soranus. Soranus Ephesius ¶ Fleume hath most puissance in wynter, from the .viii. Idus of Nouember, vnto the .viii. J∣dus of February, whereby are ingendred Ca∣tarres or reumes, the vuula, the cough, and the stytche. This humour is parte in the heed, parte in the stomacke. It hathe dominion frome the thyrde houre of nyght vutyll the nyneth houre of the same nyght. ¶ Bloudde increaseth in spryng tyme from the viii. Idus of Februarye, vnto the .viii. Idus of Maye, whereof are ingendred feuers, and sweete humours, whiche doo shortely putrifye, the power of this humour is aboute the harte, and hath dominion from the .ix. houre of nyght vntyll the .iii. houre of the mornynge. ¶ Redde choler hathe power in sommer frome the .viii. Idus of May, vntyll the .viii. Idus of
Auguste / wherby are ingendred hote and sharpe feuers / this humour is specially in the lyuer / and hath dominion from the thyrde houre of daye vntyll the .ix. houre of the same daye. Yelow choler, wherof is ingendreth the fleume of the stomake / is nouryshed in Autumne, which begynneth the .viii. Idus of Auguste / and du∣reth vnto the .viii. Idus of Nouember / and ma∣keth shakyng feuers and sharpe, the blacke cho∣ler than increaseth / and than foloweth thycknes of the blode in the vaynes. Blacke choler or me∣lancoly moste rayneth in the splene / and it ray∣neth from the .ix. houre of daye vntyll the thyrde houre of nyght. ☞ Peculyar remedyes agaynst the distem perance of euery humour. IF the distēperance be of bloud / helpe it with Soranus arte me∣dendi. thynges colde, sharpe, and drye: for bloude is moyste, hote & swete. If it be of redde choler gyue thynges cold / moyste / and swete / for redde coler is bytter and fyry. If it be of blacke coler / gyue thinges hot moyst & swete / for blacke coler is sharpe & cold. If the disease be of salt fleume gyue thinges swete hot and drie, thus sayth So¦ranus. Notwithstandynge where there is abū∣dance of colde fleume not myxt with coler / there thinges very sharpe and hotte be moste conueni∣ent / as tarte vyneger with hotte rotes and sedes or wynes stronge and rough / hony being sodden in the one and the other / or where choler is myxt with fleume / syrope acetouse made with vineger and sugar boyled / somtyme with herbes / rootes
or sedes / which may dissoule fleume & digest it. ☞ Diete of them, whiche are of san∣guine complexion. Cap. 15. FOr asmoche as in sanguine menne bloudde moste raygneth / whiche is soone corrupted, it shall be necessary for them whiche are of that complexion / to be circumspecte in eatynge meate / that shortely wyll receyue putrifaction / as the more parte of fruites / specyally not being perfitely rype. also meates that be of yl iuyce / as fleshe of beastes to olde / or to yonge / vdders of beastes / braynes excepte of capons and chykens marowe of the backebone / moche vse of onyons lekes / garlyke / moche vse of olde fygges / moche vse of rawe herbes / and all thyng wherin is ex∣cesse of hete / colde / or moysture / meates that be stale / fyshes of the fennes or muddy waters / and to moche slepe / as experyence sheweth. ¶ Dyete of choleryke persons. Ca. 16. TO them which be cholerike / beyng in these naturalle temperature / and hauynge not from theyr youth vsed the contrary / grosse meates moderately taken / be more conue∣nient / than the meates that be fyne, and better shall they dygeste a piece of good biefe / than a chyckens legge. Choler of his propertye rather burnynge than well dygestynge meates of lyght substance / not withstandynge some gentylmen whiche be nycely brought vp in theyr infancy / may not so well susteyne that diet as poore men beyng the more parte vsed to grosse meates. wherfore theyr diet muste be in a temperance / as yonge biefe / olde veale / mutton / and venyson
powdred, yonge geese, and suche lyke, cōseruyng their complexion with meates lyke there vnto in qualitie and degree, accordynge to the counsayle of Hipocrates. And as he perceyueth choler to abounde, so to interlace meates, whiche be colde in a moderate quantitie, and to alay theyr wyne more or lasse with water, eschewynge hotte spi∣ces, hotte wynes, and excessyue labour, wherby the body maye be moche chaufed. Also he maye eate oftener in the day, than any other: foresene, that there be suche distance betwene his meales as the meate before eaten be fully dygested, whi¦che in some persone is more, in some lasse, accor∣dynge to the heate and strength of his stomake, notynge alwaye, that the colerike persone dige∣steth more meate than his appetite desyreth, the melancolyke persone desyreth by false appetite more than his stomacke maye dygeste. And to a cholerike persone, it is ryght daungerous, to vse longe abstynence: for choler, fyndynge nothyng in the stomacke to concocte, it fareth than, as where a lyttell potage or mylke, beynge in a ves∣sell ouer a great fyre, it is burned to the vesselle, and vnsauery fumes and vapours do issue oute therof. Lykewyse in a cholerike stomake, by ab∣stinence, these inconueniences doo happen, hu∣mours adust, consumynge of naturall moysture, fumosities and stynkynge vapours, ascendynge vp to the heed, wherof is ingendred, duskynge of the eyes, heed aches, hot and thynne reumes, after euerye lyttell surfette, and many other in∣conueniences. wherfore besyde the oppinion of beste lerned men, myne owne peynefull expery∣ence, also moueth me, to exhorte them, whche be
of this complexion, to eschewe moche abstinēce. And although they be studyous, and vse lyttell exercyse, yet in the mornynge to eate somewhat in lyttell quantitie, and not to study immediatly, but fyrst to sytte a whyle, and after to stande or walke softely, whiche vsynge these two yeres, I and also other, that haue longe knowen me, haue perceyued in my bodye a great alteration, that is to say, frome ylle astate to better. Alway remember, that yf any other humour do aboūde in the choleryke persone, as fleume, or melanco∣lye, than vntyll that humour be expelled, the di∣ete must be correctiue of that humour, and ther∣fore more hotte and fyne, than the natural dyete before rehersed: but yet there wolde be alwaye respecte hadde to the naturall complexion, some tyme sufferyng the person to eate or drinke that, whiche nature workynge, he feruently desyreth. ❧ Diete of fleumatike persons Capitulo. 17. IT is to be remembred, that pure fleume is properly colde and moyste, and lacketh taste. Salte fleume is myxt with choler, and ther∣fore hath not in hym so moch colde nor humidi∣tie, as pure fleume hath: and therfore it requy∣reth a temperance in thynges hote & drye, wher∣by fleume is digested or expulsed To fleumatike persons all meates are noyfull, whiche are very colde, vyscous or slymy, fatte or sone putrifyed, eatynge moche and often, specially meates in∣gendrynge fleume, whiche be remembred in the table precedynge. All thynges be ggod, whiche
are hote and drye, also meates and drinkes whi∣che be sowre: onyons also, and garlyke, mode∣rately vsed, be very commendable, in pure fleme not myxte with choler, moche vsyng of salt, spe∣cially dryed. Pepper grosse beaten, and eaten with meate, oughte to be with all fleumatycke persons familyar, also gynger is ryght conueni∣ent, but not to be so frequently vsed as pepper, for as moche as the nature of pepper is, that be∣ynge eaten, it passeth through the body, heatyng and comfortynge the stomake, not entrynge into the vaynes, or anoyeng the lyuer, whiche vertue is not in gynger. Gynger condite, the whiche we do call grene gynger, specyallye candyd with su∣gar, yf it may be gotten, and also Mirabolanes, called kebuli condyte in India, be most excellent remedies agaynst fleume, also the herbes which are remembred afore in the table of digestyues of fleume, and the rootes of persely, fenel, yreos, Elycampane, and carettes be very commenda∣ble. Exercyse twyse in a day, the stomacke beyng almoste empty, so that sweate begyn to appere, is very expedient, clensynge of the body from all fylthynes, with rubbynge and wypynge, often∣tymes with washynge, specyally the heed and partis there about moderate sweatynge in hote bathes or stufes be to this complexion necessarie specially whan they haue eaten and drunken ex∣cessyuely. The heed and fete to be kepte frome colde and to dwell hygh and farre from mores and marshes, is a rule ryghte necessary, also to abstayne from eatynge herbes and rootes not boyled, and generally from all meates, whiche wyll not be easyly dygested.
¶ The dyuysion of melancoly, and the diete of persons melancolyke. Cap. 18. MElancoly is of two sortes, the one is cal∣lyd naturall, whiche is onely colde and dry, the other is called adust or bourned. Naturall melancoly is (as Galene saith) the residence or dregges of the bloudde: & there∣fore is colder and thicker than the bloude. Me∣lancoly aduste is in foure kyndes, eyther it is of naturall melancolye aduste, or of the more pure parte of the bloude aduste, or of choler aduste, or of salte fleume aduste. But of all other that melancoly is warst, whiche is ingendred of cho∣ler: fynally all aduste melancolye annoyeth the wytte and iugement of man. for whan that hu∣mour is hette, it maketh men madde, and whan it is extincte, it maketh men fooles, forgetfulle, and dull. The naturall melancolye kepte in his Ex Marci∣lio ficino, de uita sa∣na. temperance, profyteth moche to true iugemente of the wytte, but yet yf it be to thycke, it darke∣neth the spirites, maketh one timorous, and the wytte dulle. If it be myxte with fleume, it mor∣tifieth the bloudde with to moche colde, where∣fore it may not be so lyttell, that the bloude and spirites in theyr feruentnesse, but as it were vn∣brydelyd, whereof do happen vnstablenesse of wytte and slypper remembraunce: nor yet so mo∣che, that by the weight therof (for it is heuy, ap∣prochynge nygh to the erthe) that we seme to be alwaye in sleape, and nede a spurre to prycke vs forwarde. Wherefore it is ryghte expedient, to kepe that humour as thynne as nature wyll suf¦fer it, and not to haue to moche of it.
But nowe to the diete perteynynge to theym, whome this humour annoyeth. The knowlege that melancoly reygneth, is oftentymes heuy∣nesse of mynde, or feare without cause, slepinesse in the membres, many crampes without reple∣cyon or emptynesse, sodayne furye, sodayne in∣contynencye of the tongue, moche solycytude of lyght thynges, with palynesse of the vysage, and fearefull dreames of terryble visyons, dreaming of darkenesse, depe pyttes, or death of frendes or acquayntaunce, & of all thynge that is black. The meates conuenient are they, which be tem∣peratly in heate, but specially they that be moyst meates sone dygested, and they rather boyled thanne rosted, temperately myxte with spyces, mylke hot from the vdder, or late mylked, is ve∣ry conuenient for that complexion, swete almon∣des blaunched, and almond mylke, the yelkes of rere egges, and fynallye all thynges, whiche in∣gender pure bloudde, and all that is wryten in the chapyter of age. All these be yll for theym, wyne thycke or troublous, specyally red wyne, meates harde, dry, very salte, or soure, bourned meate, fryed meate, moche biefe, hares fleshe, beanes, roket, colewortes, mustard, radyshe, gar∣lyke, except there be moche wynde in the body, for than is it very holsome, onyons leekes, fynal¦ly all thynges whiche heateth to moche, keleth to moche, or dryeth to moche, also wrathe, feare, compassyon, sorowe, moche studye or care, moch ydelnesse or reste: all thynge that is greuous to see, to smelle or to heare, but most specyally dar∣kenesse. Moreouer moche dryenge of the body, eyther with longe watche, or with moche care
and tossynge of the mynde, or with moch leche∣rye, or moche eatynge and drynkyng of thynges that be hote and drye, or immoderate euacation, labour, abstinence, thyrst, goyng in the ayre vn∣temperately hotte, colde or drye, all these thyn∣ges do anoy them that be greued with any me∣lancoly. It is to be dylygentely consydered, that where melancolye happeneth of choler adduste, there meates whiche be hotte in warkyng, wold be wysely tempred, and drynkynge of hotte wy∣nes wolde be eschewed: semblable cautele wold be in sauours. Not withstandynge moderate vse of small wynes, clere and well verdured, is herein very commendable, the humour thereby beynge clarifyed, and the spyrytes clensed, but the abuse or excesse thereof dothe as moche da∣mage. Also it is ryghte expedyente, to put into wyne or ale, a gadde of syluer or golde, glowing hotte oute of the fyre, to tempre hotte meates with roses, vyolettes, saunders, rose water, bourage, buglosse, baulme called in latyne Me∣lyssa, or the water of all thre drunken with good wyne, whyte or clarette, or made in a Julep with sugar, is wonderfull holsome, chewyng of lykoryse, or raysons of coraunce is ryght expedy¦ent, but mooste of all other thynges, myrthe, good compauye, gladnesse, moderate exercyse, with moderate feedynge. And thus I leaue to speake of dyetes, aptely belongyng to the foure complexions.
Galene and all other, do agree in this case, Pep¦per bruysed and eaten with meate, is very expe∣dient: And where there is moch wynde in the sto¦make, than to eate all tymes of the daye of the medicyne made of the three kyndes of pepper, tyme, anyse sede, and honye clarified, whiche is callyd Diatrion piperion, or that whiche is cal∣lyd Diaspoliticō, or Diapiganon, which is made Galen. de enda sa. b. 5. of cumyne stieped one day and a nyght, or lenger in tarte vyneger, and after fryed or layde on a bournyng hot stone, and made in powlder. Also pepper and rewe dried somwhat, and made into powder, all in equall porcyons, and myxte with claryfied hony. Galene addeth therto salt peter, called in latyn Nitrum. The confection made with the iuyce of quynces, and is callyd Diacy∣coniten, is very excellent. but it is to be dylygent¦ly noted, that where crudytie is in a choleryke persone, there wold the sayd medicynes be tem∣peratly vsed, and the sayd Diacytonitē, to haue lyttell or no spices in it. And for my parte, beyng the space of foure yeres contynually in this cru∣dytie, I neuer founde any thynge to be compa∣red to fyne Rubarbe, chewed with raysons of corens, which I toke by the coūsayle of the wor¦shypfull & well lerned physitiō, mayster doctour Augustyne, who in his maners declarethe the auneyent gentylnesse of his blode: which medy∣cyne I do not leaue to vse dayly fastynge, whan I fele suche crudytie to begyn. Also syrope ace∣tose, that is to say, sugar sodden in pure vyne∣ger, and lyttell water, vntyl it be thycke as a sy∣rope, is somtyme conuenient, and that as well to choleryke persones, as vnto fleumatyke, and yf
fleume be abundant, than with rootes & seedes of fenell and persely sodden with it. Also in that case Oxymel, that is to say, honye & water sod∣den togyther, with the sayd rotes and sedes, and a quantitie of vyneger put therto in the boyling is very commendable: yf the pacient be very co∣styue, than the medycyne of Galene, callyd Hie∣rapicra, from halfe an ounce to an ounce, taken in water of honye or ale, or taken in pylles the weight of a grote and a halfe, or two grotes, yf the stuffe be good, wyll pourge the bodye suffy∣cyently, without makyng the body weaker. Also that medycine by clensyng the stomake & body, delyuereth a man and woman, from many pe∣ryllous sycknesses. If the humours in the sto∣macke be not putryfyed, but that it is greued with abundance of salte fleume, I haue founde that mylke newe mylked, wherin is put a quan∣titie of good honye or sugar, and thre leaues of good speare myntes, and a lyttell boyled, so be∣ynge drunke warme fastyng, the quantitie of a pynte, and restynge on it, without eatynge or drynkynge any other thynge the space of three houres after, haue abundantly pourged and cō∣forted the stomak: but where there is no fleume but onely choler, it is not so holsome, but rather hurteth, makynge fumosyties in the heed, wher∣of commeth heed ache. ☞ Of lassitude. Cap. 2. LAssitude is a disposition toward sycknes, wherin a man feleth a soorenesse, a swel∣lynge, or an inflammation. Sorenesse hap∣neth of humours sharpe and gnawyng, as
after great exercise and labours which lassitude hapneth to them, whose bodyes are fulle of ylle iuyce, & excrementes. Also after cruditie in them which ar not exercised, or do abyde longe in the A heate of the sonne. It may also be in the bodye, wherin is good wyce, yf he be fatigate with im∣moderate exercise. In them, whiche do feele this lassitude, the skyn appereth thycke and rough, & there is felte a griefe somtyme in the skyn onely, . tyme also in the fleshe, as it were of a soore. The cure therof, is by moch and pleasaunt rub∣bynge, with sweete oyles, whiche haue not the vertue to restrayne or close, and that with many handes, and afterwarde to exercyse moderately, and to be bayned in water swete and temperate in heate. also thā must be gyuen meates of good iuyce, potage but seld, wyne is not to be forbod¦den: for vnto wyne, vneth any thyng may be cō∣pared, that so ell dygesteth crude humours: It also prouoketh sweate & vrine, and maketh one to slepe sundly. But yf this lassitude do abyde the nyght and day folowyng, or waxeth more & more, than yf the pacyent be of good strengthe and yonge, and hath abundaūce of bloude, lette hym be lette bloude, or prouoke the hemoroides or piles to blede, yf they do appere. But yf it pro¦cede of the malyce of any humour, without abū¦dance of bloude, than resorte to purgations apte for the humour that greueth. The tokens wher∣of, shall appere as well by the colour of the skyn and diete precedyng, as by vrine, ordure, sweate, thyrste, and appetyte, as it is rehersed before in the complexions. If the yll bloudde be lyttell in quantitie, and the crude humours aboundant,
than shall he not be lette bloude, nor vehemently pourged, neyther, shal exercyse or moue hymselfe nor be bayned, for all exercyse caryeth humours throughout all the body, & stoppeth the powers. Wherfore these maner of persons shuld be kept in reste, and such meates drynkes and medicyns shuld be gyuen to them, which should attenuate or dissolue the grossenes of the humours, with∣out notable heate, as oximell, barley water, and mulse, yf the pacyent abhorre not hony. And for as, moch as in the sayd persons, comonly there is abundance of wynde about theyr stomakes, therfore pepper specially longe pepper or whyte is very conuenient to be vsed, and the medicine before wrytten, callyd Diaspoliticum, whan the humours are dissolued, than it is good to drinke whyte wyne, or small clarette wyne moderately. Lassitude extensiue. Ca. 3. VVan one thynketh, that he dothe feele a swellyng or bollynge of the body, where in dede there doth not appere in syght or touchynge any swellynge, that is callyd Lassi∣tude extensiue, yf it hapneth without exercise or vehement mouyng. This doth happen of exces∣siue multitude of humours, which do extend the muscules or fyllettes. In this no sorenesse is felt but only an heuynes with extension or thrustyng out of the body. And bycause that there is abun∣dance of bloude in the body, beste remedye is to be letten bloude about the elbowe or ancle, after to be pourged, than to vse softe frycasyes with oyles afore rehersed, afterward moche reste and temperate bathes, and meates lackynge sharpe∣nes, and beynge abstersyue.
¶ Lassytude with the feelynge of infa∣mation. Cap. 4. IF without any mouynge, the muscles and flesh ryse vp in the body, as it swelled with great paynes & excedynge heate, than sone after foloweth most hotest feuers, except it be preuented by lettynge of bloud, and that in a∣bundance, and almoste to sownynge, but it were Actius. more sure to be lette bloud twyse in one day, the fyrst tyme without sownynge, at the nexte tyme sownynge is not to be feared. If the grefe be in t necke or heed, the bloud muste be lette of the bayne called Cephalea, or the shulder vayne. If it be in the bulke or vppermost part of the body than must the vayne be cut, which is callyd Ba∣silica, or the innermost vayne. If all the body be greued thā cut the veyn, which is named Medi∣ana, or the myddel veyn. If a feuer remayne af∣ter bloud lettyng, than order hym, with the dicte of them that haue feuers, whiche ye shall fynde wryten hereafter. If no feuer remayne, thanne vse moderate fricasies, and lyttell eatynge, and that of meates hauynge good iuce, increasynge by lyttell and lyttell to the naturall dyet. ¶ Dyete of them that are redy to fall into syckenesse. Cap. 5. NOwe retourne eftesones to speake of di∣ete, it is to be remembred, that they, whi∣che are redy to fall into diseases, they are prepared thervnto, eyther by replecyon of superfluous humours, or els by eruditie or malyce of humours, which are in them. As tou∣chyng the fyrst, the generall dyete must be such,
as therby the humours maye be attenuate, and by conuenient euacuatiō, brought to a moderate quantitie. As for the seconde muste be corrected with meates and drynkes of contrary qualities, hauyng alway respecte to the age of the person, tyme of the yere, place of habitation, and moste specially the vniuersal complexion, for choler of∣fendyng in an old man, in winter tyme, in a cold countrey, or the person beynge of his naturall complexion fleumatike or melancoly, wolde not be so habundantly expulsed or subdued, as yf it be in one yonge and lusty, in the hote sommer, in the coūtrais, where the sonne feruently burneth or the persone of his proper nature is very cole∣ryke. And in lyke wyse contrary. wherfore euery man, knowynge his owne naturall complexion, with the qualitie of the humour that offendeth, let hym make temperan̄ce his chiefe coke, and re¦membrynge that which I haue before declared, ordeyne to hym selfe such diete, as may reforme the offence with none or lyttell annoyance, to his vniuersall complexion. And yf he can so do, he shal happily escape, not only dyuers syckenesses but also the most pernitious daūger, procedyng of corrupted drowges or spices, wherof some co¦uetous poticaries do make medicines, maugre the heedes of good and well lerned physicyons. ¶ Syckenes moste commune to particular tymes of the yere and ages. Ca. 6. ALthough I do not intēde to write of the cure of egritudes or syckenesses confyr∣med, as well bycause it moughte be re∣puted in me a great presumption, as also foras∣moche
as it were very peryllous to dinulgate that noble science, to cōmune people, not lerned in lyberall sciences and philosophie, whiche be requyred to be suffyciently in a phisition. And more ouer, many bokes of Hipocrates and Ga∣lene ought to be radde, before that one do take vpon hym the generall cure of mens bodies: yet not withstandyng, I truste I may without any note of arrogance write, what diseases do most commonly happen in sondry tymes of the yere & ages of men and women, with some signifyca∣tions, wherby the discrasie or distemperature of the body is perceyued, to the intent that the phi∣sition beinge farre of, maye be truely informed / consideryng that vrines farre caryed, doo often deceyue them / and lyke wyse lacke of the syghte of the pacyent / and inquisition of thinges which do precede or folowe the syckenesse. And with this I truste none honest and charytable phisi∣tion wylle be offended / but rather gyue to me thankes for my dyligence / in the aduaunrynge of theyr estimation, which by lacke of perfite in∣struction hath ben appayred. ¶ Syckenesses of sprynge tyme. ¶ Diseases procedynge of melancoly / as mad∣nesse / fallynge syckenesse / bleedynges / auynses / poses / hoorsenesse / coughes / lepries / scabbes / ache in the ioyntes. ¶ Syckenesses of sommer. ¶ Many of the sayd diseases / also feuers con∣cynuall / hotte feuers / feuers tertiane / quartay∣nes / vomites / flyres / watryng of eies / peynes of the eares / blysters and soores of the mouth / and sweattynges.
¶ Syckenesses of Autumne. ¶ Dyuers of sommer syckenesses / also oppila∣tions of the spleene / dropsies / consumptiōs / strā∣gulyons / costyuenesse / ache in the huckle boones / shortnesse of wynde / frettynge of the bowelles / fallynge syckenesse / and melancoly dyseases. ¶ Syckenesse of wynter. ¶ Stitches and griefes in the sides / inflamatiō of the lunges / reumes / coughes / paynes in the bresle / sydes / and loynes / heed ache / & palseyes. ¶ Sycknesses happenyng to chyldern. ¶ Whan they be newe borne / there do happen to them soores of the mouth called Aphte / vomi∣tynge / coughes / watchyng / fearefulnesse / infla∣mations of the nauyll / moystures of the eares. Wwhan they breede tethe / ytchynge of the gummes / feuers / crampes / and laskes. Whan they ware elder / than be they greeued with kernelles / oppennesse of the moulde of the heed / shortnesse of wynde / the stone of the blad∣der / wourmes of the bealy / wartes / swellynges vnder the chynne / and in Englande commonlye purpyls / measels / and smalle pockes. ¶ Syckenesse happenyng to yonge men from .xiiii. yeres of age. ¶ Feuers cotydiane / tereyane / quarteyne / hotte feuers / spyttynge or vomitynge of bloude / pleu∣resies / diseases of the sydes / inflammation of the lunges / lethargies / fransye / hote syckenesses / cholerik passiōs / costiuenes or vehement laskes. ¶ Syckenesse of age. ¶ Difficultie of breathe / reumes with coughes / strangulyon / and dyfficultie in pyssynge / ache in
the ioyntes, diseases of the raynes, wymmyn∣ges in the heed, palseyes, ytchynge of all the bo∣dy, lacke of slepe, moysture in the eyes and eares dulnesse of syght, hardnes of herynge, tisiknesse or shortnesse of breth. ¶ Although many of the sayd syckenesses doo happen in euery tyme and age, yet bycause they be moste frequent in the sayde tymes and ages, I haue wryten them, to the intent, that in the a∣ges and tymes moste inclyned vnto them, suche thynges mought be than eschewed, whiche are apte to ingendre the sayde diseases. ¶ The generall sygnifications and tokens of syckenes. Cap. 7. IF the bodye be hotter, colder, moyster, drier, leaner, fuller, the colour more pale, or swarte, the eyes more holowe, than is accustomed to be it sygnifieth that the body is disposed to syk∣nes, or alredy sycke. The brayne sycke. Rauynge. Forgetfulnesse. Fantasye. Humours commyng from the roufe of the mouth, the eyes, the nose, or the eares. Watche. Sleape. The harte sycke. Difficultie of breathe. Tremblynge of the harte. Beatynge of the pulse. Feuers. Colde. Diutrsite of colours. Griefe about the harte.
The lyuer sycke. Lacke or abūdaūce of humours. The fourme of the body alteted. Palenes. Concoction. Digestion. Alteration of excrementes accu∣stomed. Peyne in the place of the lyuer. Swellynge. Difficultie of breath. The stomacke sycke. Concoction, slowe or quycke. Appetite of moyste or drye, dull or quycke. Separatiō of excremētes moist or harde with theyr colours. Yexynge. Belkynge. Vometynge with peyne and difficultie of brethe. Vryne moche or lyttel with the colour and substaunce to redde or to pale, to thicke or to thynne The breaste. Difficultie of breathe. Cowgh. Spyttynge. Peyne in the breaste. ¶ This haue I writen, not to gyue iudgemen thereby, but onely for the pacyent to haue in a redynesse, to the intent, that what so euer he fe∣leth or perceyueth in euery of the sayde thynges thereof to instructe his phisition, whervnto he maye adapt his counsayle and remedyes.
¶ Of vrynes. Cap. viii. FOrasmoch as nowe a dayes the most com∣mune iudgement in syckenesse is by vrines, whiche being farre caried or moche meued, or standyng longe after that it is made, the fourme thereof is so altered, that the phisytion shall not perfytely perceyue the naturall colour, nor contentes, although it be neuer so wel chau∣fed at the fyre, as Actuarius and other greatte lerned men do affirme. I wyll therfore somwhat speake of vrines, not soo moche as a physition knoweth, but as moche as is necessarieto euery man for to perceyue the place and cause of his griefe, whereby he maye the better instructe the Physition. ¶ Fyrste in vrine, foure thynges are to be con∣sydered, that is to say, the substance, the colour, the regions or partes of the vrine, and the con∣tentes or thynges therin conteined. Also forasmoch as in the body of man be foure qualities, heate, colde, moysture, and dryth, two of them heat and cold, are causes of the colour, dryth and moysture are causes of the substance. Moreouer in vryne, beinge in a vessell apt ther vnto be sene, are thre regiōs. The lowest region in the bottome of the vrynall, conteynynge the space of two fyngers or lytell more. The myddel region, from whens the lowest ended vnto the cerkele. The hyghest region is the cerkle. The hyghnesse of the colour sygnifyeth heate, the place, blacke, or grene, sygnifyeth coulde. Also the grossenes or thyckenesse of the vryne sygnifieth moysture, the clerenes or thynnes, sy∣gnifieth drithe.
¶ The colours of vrynes. ¶ Colour of bryght goulde. Colour of gylte. Perfyte dy∣gestyon. Red as a red apple or chery. Base redde, lyke to bole ar∣enake, or saffron dry Redde glowynge lyke fyre. Excesse of dygestion. Colour of a beastes lyuer. Colour of darke red wyne. Grene lyke to colewortes. Adustion of humours. Leaddy colour. Blacke as ynke. Blacke as horne. Feblenes or mortifycation of nature, excepte it be in purginge of melancoly. Whyte clere as water. Gray as a horne. Whyte as whay. Colour of a camels heare. Lacke of dy∣gestyon. Pale lyke to brothe of fleshe sodden. The beginnynge of digestyon. Citrine Colour or yelowe. Subcitrine or paler. The myddell of dygestyon. Whyte and thinne betokeneth melancolye to haue domynyon. Whyte and thycke, sygnifieth fleume. Redde and thycke betokeneth sangnuine. Redde and thinne betokenethe choler to haue the souerayntie.
The substance of the vrine. Cap. ix. AT the first pissyng, all vrines well nigh do appere thyn, as longe as they abide warme, for naturall heate, duryng the tyme that it preuaileth, suffreth not that the ly∣cour, which is the substance of the vrine, to con∣le or be thycke for any occasion: but after that heate is gone, some vrines shortly, some a lōger time after, waxe thyck, lyke wise somtime, some apissed thicker, & after waxe clere, some remain stylle as they were made, some be metely thycke, as they were troubled, some very thick & grosse. Thoi that waxe clere, sone do gather that, which is thick into the bottome of the vrinal, some re∣mayn troubled, the grossenes not withstandynge gathered in the bottome. Sēblably the diuersitie of thyn or subtyl vrines, must be perceiued, that is to saye, that some are very subtyll, as water, some lasse subtyll, some in a meane betwene thycke and thynne. ¶ Of thynges conteyned in the vrine, some doo discende downe to the bottome, & be callyd in a greke worde Hypostasis, in englysshe some calle it the groūdes, some the resydēce, which yf it be whyte, lyght, risynge vp frō the bottome of the vrinall, lyke a peare, it signifieth helth, if it be of any other fygure or colour, it betokeneth some a noyance. If lyke thynges be sene in the myddell of the vrynall, they be called sublations, if they approche vnto the hyghest region of the vrine, they be named cloudes, in latin Nebule. The groūdes or residēces not perfite, some is lyke lit ele redde vetches, & is callyd in latyn Orobea, some is like to brāne of wheat gron̄de, & seuered
from the meale, and is callyd branny residēce, in latin Furfurea, some be like vnto plates, hauing bredth and length wythout thycknes, & may be named platy residēce, in latine Laminea, some is lyke to meale, wheate, or barley, and may be na∣med mealy residence, in latyn Sunilacea. ¶ There is also seene in the vrine like to white heares, some lengar, some shorter, sōtune lyke to ragges somwhat red, there is also sene in the vp permoste parte of the vrine, sometime a fome or froth somtyme belles or bobles. sometyme there swymmeth in the vrine a thing like a copwebbe otherwhile ther is about the cerkle, as it were the rētyng of clothe, sōtyme there is in the vrine lyke motes of the sonne, sōtyme lyke the matter of a sore, otherwhyle lyke the sede of a man also grauelle or sande. And in these thynges maye be dyuers colours, some whyte, some red, some be∣twene bothe, some yelow, some graye, and some blacke. All this muste be diligently marked, and therof separatly to aduertise the Phisitiō, vnto whome I referre the iudgement of the syckenes, for the cause afore rehersed, and for as moche as the iudgement of them is very subtyll. Sēblably of ordure, whyther it be very thyn or very thicke: what other matter yssueth out with it, what colour it is of the sauour very great, litell or none, yf it were easyly expulsed, or peynefully, how oft or how seldom. Moreouer of sweat, what colour it is of, & of what sauour yf in tasting it be salt, sowre, bitter, or vnsauery. Also the vomite, yf it be of one colour or ma∣ny, yf it do smell horrybly, of what humour it had most habundaunce, yf it were fastynge, or
after meales, yf it were peynefull or easy. Likewise spettil, whether it be thicke or thin or mixt with bloude or matter corrupt, accordin∣gly of the humour issuinge out at the nose, & yf that be bloude, than whyther it be red, watrye or blacke. Moreouer, it may not be forgotten, to aduer∣tyse the Phisition of the dyet vsed by the paci∣ent, aswell afore the syckenesse, as in the tyme of the sychenesse, his age, the strength of his body, his exercyse, and place, where he lengest abode in his youth, whether it were hye or lowe, watry or dry, hotte or colde. This I trust shall be suffycient, to instruct a physition, he that desyreth to knowe more parti∣cularly hereof, let hym rede the bokes of Hypo∣crates, Galene, Cornelyus Celsus, Actuarius, Paulus, and dyuers other late wrytters, for this lytell treatyse may not receyue it. ¶ The preceptis of the auncient physition Dyocles vnto kynge Antigonus. Cap. 10. VVe will nowe diuide the bodye of man into foure partes, the heed, boulke, cal∣led in latin thorax, which conteyneth the brest, the sydes, the stomake, and entray∣les. The bely, called in latyn venter, conteyneth the panche & the bowels. Also the bladder, called in latin vesica, in the whiche name is also con∣teyned the cundites, by the which vryne passeth. Whan any disease approcheth to the heed, these tokens do commonly precede, swymmyng in the hced, heed ache, heuines of the browes, sounding in the eares, pryckynges in the temple, the eyes
in the mornynge do water, or waxe dymme, the smellynge is dulle, the gummes do smelle. Whā thou felest suche tokens forthwith pourge the heed with somwath, not with vehement medeci∣nes, but takinge I sope or Organum, & the crop∣pes of them boyle with whyte or claret wyne half a pynte, & therwith gargarise your mouth fastyng, vntil the fleume be purged oute of your heed, this is the easyest medicine in discrasies of the heed. It is also very holsome to gargaryse the mouth and brest with hony water, wherinto mustarde is put & myngled, but fyrste the heed must be rubbed with a warme clothe, that the fleum maye easyly come out of the heed. And yf these tokens be neglected, these maner of sycke∣nesses do folowe sone after, blared eyes, and hu∣mour lettinge the sight, cleftes in the eares, swel lynges in the necke full of matter, called the kin∣ges euyll, corruption of the brayne, poses, or reu∣mes, heuynesse of the heed, and tooth ache. Whā the boulke is like to suffer any sickenes it is perceiued by these tokens, all the body is in a sweatte, the bulke most specially, the tonge wa xeth thicke, the spettyll is eyther salt or bitter, or cholerycke, the sides and shoulders do ake with∣out any occasyon, the pacient gapeth often, also there dothe happen moche wakynge, suffocati∣ons or lacke of breth, thirst after slepe, the mynd is vexed with heuinesse, also the brest and armes are verye coulde, and the handes do trembele. Against these thyges this remedy may be proui∣ded. After a moderate soupper, assaye to vo∣mite without any medycine, vomyte is also pro∣fytable, whiche meate dothe folowe: He that in
such wyse wyll vomite, let hym eat hastyly small radysshe rootes, townkersis, rokat, synuy, or purslane, and drynke after it a greate quantitie of warme water, and prouoke hym sesfe to vo∣myte. He that setteth lyttell by the sayde to∣kēs, let hym feare these sycknesses folowing, the pleuresie, the syckenes of the lunges, melancolye or madnes, sharpe feuers, the fransye, the letar∣gie, inflamation with yexinge. If any syckenesse be towarde the bealy, they maye be espied by these tokens, the bealye is fyrste wrapped together, and in it selfe is trou∣bled, all meates and drinkes do seeme bytter in tast, he feleth heuynesse in hys knees, a styffenes in hys loynes, a wearynesse in all hys body wit∣hout any occasiō, a slepynesse in his legges, with a lyttell feuer, whan thou feleste these tokens, mollyfie the bealy, not wyth medicyne, but wyth good order of diete, for it is best and most sure, to vse those thynges, wherof lyghtly may ensue none annoyāce, in the number of them are betes boyled in water of hony garlike sodden, ma∣lowes, sorel, mercury, and all thynges condite in hony. Al these do erpel the ordure of the bely: but if any of the sayd signes dothe more and more increase, the lyquour, wherein the sede of Car∣thamus, callid also Cnicus, is boyled, is a plesāt and sure medicine, small colewortes boyled in a good quātitie of water, the licour therof in mea∣sure▪ ii pintes, sauyng the thirde parte of a pint, wyth hon and salt beyng drunken, shall profite moch. Cicer, and the pulse called in lao ernum, in englishe I suppose chittes▪ in water drunk fasting, hath the same essect. To them, which set
littel by the said tokens, these diseases do sodēly happen, Fluxe of the bealy, bluddy fluxe, slyp∣pernes of the bowels, peynes in the guttes, ach in huckle bones the feuer terciane, the gowte, the apoplexie or palsey in the lymmes, hemoroides, aking of ioyntes. Whan the bladder is towarde any sickenes, it is perceyued by these tokēs, fulnesse felt after lytel meat, brekyng winde downwarde and vp∣warde, palenesse of colour in al the body, heuy or troublous sleapes, the vrine pale, and passynge forth peynefully, swellynges about the coddes & priuy members. Whā these tokens appeare, thā is it expedient to hauy remedy of odoriferous thinges, whyche do expell vrine, whyche shall be done without any peryll with the rotes of fenell and persely stieped one or two dayes in good whyte wyne and to drinke therof fastinge euery mornyng thre ounces and two drāmes, wyth the water of wylde carettes, or clycampane, whyche of these is next at hande, euery of thē haue lyke effect. Also water, wherin the peasyn called in latyne Ciceres, are stieped, beynge drunke wyth wyne, is lyke cōmodiouse: he that neglecteth the sayde tokēs, let him loke for these syckenesses fo lowynge, the dropsy, the greatnes of the splene, griefe in the lyuer, the stone, ache of the backe, or peynes in the raynes, the difficultie of vrine, ful∣nes of the bely. In al these thinges that we haue spokē of, we shal gyue to childē most easy medi cines, to mē those, which be strōger in workyng. This diete of Diocles, althought at this time it semeth not moste pleasaunt, nor accordynge to the practise nowe vsed, yet beynge tempred with
that, which I haue before remēbred, some thyng maye be founde in it, which beinge experienced, maye be as commodious for the helth of mans body, as that diete, which is more curyous or pleasaunt. ¶ Of them in wose stomakes meat is corrupted. Cap. 11. THey in whom customably meat is corrup¦ted, let them afore that they eat any meat assaye to vomite, drynkynge swete wine, absteine from meat, that ingender botches inflāmations, fumous ructuations or vapours, and take suche as noryshe good iuyce, & chose them out, which do molyfy the bely, & at sondry tymes take them. It is also good to take tem∣peratly that which lowseth the bely, as the me∣dicyne called picra, and to absteyne from suche thinges, wherby yll iuyre is gathered, & do in∣gender syckenesses, harde to be cured or neuer, as goutes, boneache, peynes of the raynes &c. ¶ Of the vertue of meates. Cap. 12. HE that is studious about the cōseruation of healthe, he nedeth to knowe the vertue ribasius  medici  fimp. 1. of meates. The meat whiche hath vertue to extenuate, or make humours subtylle, it openeth the poores, and bryngeth forthe that whych is faste in the fleshe, it maketh that whi∣che is clammye, subtylle, & doeth extenuate, or relent that which is fatte, it bringeth forthe that which abideth long in the bealy, but that which is eaten, is a superfluitie watry & coleryke, and at length maketh melancolike bloud. Wherfore
moche vsinge of them is prohibited, specially to them, that are colerike, & only serueth for them that ar replete with fleume, crude or vndigested humours, clammi or fatte. The diete of fattinge thinges, dothe nourish aboundantly, so that the stomake & lyuer do digest well: meate of good iuice, maketh good bloud, but yet it stoppeth the lyuer & splene. These do they, whiche make fat humours onely, as the poulse callid Lenticula, & they that are slimy like malowes, some do make fat humors, & be also slimy, as fishes with hard shelles. Finally the diete, whiche doth extenuate & make leane, is more sure for kepyng of helth, than that, whiche fatteth moch. Norishing mea∣tes wold be therfor moderateli vsed, whan a mā perceyueth hym selfe to haue nede therof, it may be most sureli vsed of them that be exercised tem¦porately, & can slepe whan they lust. They that can not slepe by reasō of exercise, lette theim es∣chewe fattinge meates, lette none ydelle persone attempte to vse theim. In the preseruation of helth, sluggardy is the greattest mischiefe. Lyke as the temperate mouing is good, so is the meat which betwene thycke & thynne, is to mannes helth most cōuenient, which ingendreth bloude, according to the competent cōstitution of mans body, & therfore is it to be chifly vsed. Meate of yll iuyce is alway noiful, wherfor it ought to be eschewed. Likewise the varietie of meates is to be obserued diligently, for it is a great thinge to couple wel togither thinges of cōtrarie vertues. for yf they be not well digested, that whiche is receyued, may brynge displeasure.
¶ A diete preseruatiue in the tyme of pestilenee. Capitulo. xiii. THe bodies most apte to be infected, are spe¦cially sanguine, next colerike than fleuma∣tike laste melancolyke, for in them the hu∣mour beyng colde and drie. is moste vnapt to receyue putrifaction, hauynge also strayte passages, by the whyche venim must passe. The larinus cinus. diete cōuenient for that tyme is to abstein from meres inflaming and opening the pores also frō the heat of the sōne, from to moch heate of fire, or garmenus, from very hot herbes, and moche vse of tart thinges, except onions and cikory, or radishe with vineger for they do resist agaynste venim, from wine very furnishe, exercise inconti∣nent after meales, frō swetting, from all thing is that wyll cause oppilations and putrifaction, frō thinges hot and moist, where moisture hath the dominion in degree, specially being not suffi∣ciently boiled: also from milke, except it be in a littel quātite, and that with a litel sugar. Frutis and herbes cold and dry, and ther wyth soure or somwhat bitter, are not prohibited. If ye eate figges, grapes, or swete cheries, eate after them of an orenge wyth salt. If ye eate thinges colde and moyst, as cucūbers, melones, fyshe soft and freshe, or damsyns, eate by and by after some fe∣nell, and orenge wyth salt, drinkinge therwyth a draughte of good wyne. Beware of musherons, moch purslane, gourdis, and all other thynges, whych wyll sone putrifie: not wythstandynge, I wyll not forbyd eatynge of lettyse, wyth a fewe myntes, or myxt wyth cynamom. All thynges sowre ar cōmended, as wel in diete cōseruatiue,
as in that whyche is curatiue or healeth, excepte where there is straytnesse of the breste, or weake¦nes of the stomack, than oughte they to be tem, pred wyth sugar salt, almond milke, cynamom, pepper, fenell, saffron, egges / and some thynge that is fatte or vnctuous. Capers ar good to be vsed wyth vineger. Chese very fatte and salt / is not commended / no more is colewortes / or any kynde of pulse / excepte chittes: greate peason / rapes / nor spynache is good. Also there be for∣boden rokat and mustard / moche wyne and eg∣ges / excepte they be eaten wyth sorell sauce / vy∣neger / or iuyce of orenges: persely and also par∣snepes be good. newe wynes be noyfull / let the meate be somewhat more than drinke. but yet susteyn not to moche hunger nor thyrst. beware of lechery / of a clowdy wether and close / eschew moche resorte or thronge of people / wyndes com mynge from fēnes or mores / from slepe at none: vse with your meate this poulder / sāders redde / halfe an ounce / cynamom thre drammes and a halfe / saffron halfe a dramme. After your meate / eate a lyttell of coriander sede / welle prepared. In the mornynge / at a temperate fyre kembe your herd backwarde / clense your body and heed of all superfluities: vse also moderate fri∣casies / wyth swete perfumes / and odours / washe oftentimes your face and handes with pure vy∣neger mixt with rosewater. In cold wether mixt it with myntes / baulme / rue / or myrtes / and some tyme cloues. In hotte sommer wyth roses or vio lettes. Aboue all thynges vse to take white wine good / white vyneger rosette / water of roses / in e∣qual porciōs / put ther vnto a littell seruale / or of
the rynde of a citron, and drynke therof a lyttell and oftentymes washe therwith your handes and visage. Medicynes preseruatyue agaynste the pesti∣lence, whiche be alwaye most ready, are these, a fygge with rue, and a wall nutte eaten fastyng, also triakle, or mithridate, to old men a dramme weyghte, to yonge men halfe a dramme, or a scruple dissolued in vineger and rose water, or in water of tormentyll, seabiose or balme, yf the plage be in sommer: yf it be in wynter, put to the waters some whyte wyne. Also the pylles called comonly. Pillule Rasis, but in dede they were inuented by Rufus are very excellent, specially yf the al, whiche i it, be washed, and thervn∣to added a lyttell Bolus armenus, & terra sigil∣lata. And yf the person be of hotte completion, a quantitie of sorell sede, and red corall, this con¦fectioned with syrope of citrons, in colde com∣plexions or to old men with wine, vse them eue∣ry thyrde daye one pille at a tyme, thre houres or foure afore dyner or supper. If ye take triakle or Mithridate, absteyne from meate at the leaste syx houres after. A pece of the  of setuall, borne in the mouth preserueth, from infection. In lykewyse doth sorell chewed fastyng, and the iuyce sucked downe. To poore men, Marsilius was wont to grue a toste of bread steped in vi∣neger, with a piece of an onyon or rewe. Al thyn∣ges whiche be cordiall, that is to saye, which do in any wyse comforte the barte, do resyste pesti∣lence, vehement anger, or heuinesse, be very per∣niciouse. Other more exquisite and costly preser∣uatyues, I purposely passe ouer, whiche Mar∣silius,
and othre phisitions, do wryte of abun∣dantly, for as moche as I desyre to be in this warke compendiouse. One thynge I hadde al∣moste forgotten, that there is no better preserua∣tyue, than to flee frome the place corrupted, be∣tyme and farre of, and to let none approche you, that hath made theyr abode, where the plage is feruent. More ouer receyue not into your house any stuffe, that commeth out of a house, wherin any person hath ben infected. For it hath bene sene, that such stuffe lyenge in a cofer shutte by the space of two yeres, after that the coffer hath ben opened, they whiche haue stande nygh to it, haue ben infected, and sone after haue died. But there I alwaye excepte the powre of god, which is wonderfull, and also mercifull, aboue mans reason or coūsell, preseruyng or strykyng whom, whan, and where it shall lyke his maiestie, to whom be glorye and prayse euerlastynge. Amen. ¶ Thus make I an ende of this treatise, de∣syrynge them that shall take profyte therby, to defende it agaynste enuyous dysdayn, on whom I haue set the aduēture for the loue that I bare to my countrey: requyrynge all honest phisitions to remember, that the intent to my labour was that men and women redynge this warke, and obseruynge the counsayles therin, shulde adapte therby their bodyes, to receyue more sure reme∣dye by the medicines prepared by good phisiti∣ons in daūgerous sykenesses, they kepyng good dyet, and infourmynge dilygently the same phi∣sitions, of the maner of theyr affectes, passyōs, and sensyble tokens. And so shall the noble and most necessarye science of phisicke, with the mi∣nisters
therof / escape the sclaunder / whyche they  of longe tyme susteyned / and accordynge to the precepte of the wyse man / be worthely ho∣noured / for asmoche as the hyghest god dyd crea¦te the phisition / for mans necessitie. And of the earth created medicine / and the wyse man shall not abhorre it. Thus fare ye well gentyl reders / and forget me not wyth your good reporte / and praye to God that I be neuer wars occupyed. Londini in aedibus Thomae Ber∣the leti typis impress. Cum priuilegio ad imprimen∣dum solum. ANNO. M. D. XXXIX.
