H3133D 99833929 38407
PRAYERS IN THE CLOSET, For the Use of all DEVOUT CHRISTIANS. Collected out of the BEST COMPA∣NION, by the Author of the same. Matth. 6.6. When thou prayest, enter into thy Closet; and when thou hast shut the door, pray to thy Father which is in se∣cret; and thy Father, which seeth in secret, shall reward thee openly. Imprimatur, Apr. th. JONATH. EDWARDS Vice-Can. OXFORD, Printed by Leon. Lichfield, for John Howell, 1692.
TO THE READER. IN the Preface to the Best Compa∣nion, I gave some Directions how those Prayers which were principally designed for Publick Use, might also be∣come serviceable to any one in his most se∣cret Retirement. And though the Dire∣ctions there given were exemplified after the plainest manner; yet still some, whose capacities are of a lower size, might not understand them: Others again, conceiv∣ing it a trouble too great to follow them, might perhaps be altogether discouraged upon this account from the private use of the Devotions themselves. So much being suggested to me, and a Request withall being made, That for the sake of these I would draw the sub∣stance of the said Prayers into two or three Collects, and make them yet more easily subservient to every ones Closet-Necessities, I readily complied and pro∣mised my Endeavour. 'Tis impossible in∣deed
that the Wisest heads should ever frame such a form of words as shall an∣swer the Wants and Exigences of every ones private Condition. The utmost ad∣vance that can be made in this kind of Essay, will go no farther than the laying down such Generals as ought to be the Matter of every Christian's Requests to Heaven, and the accommodating their ex∣pressions so, that each single Votary may readily apply them to his own particular Concerns. Now both these are most eminently conspicuous in the devout Prayers of our Church: and if they are not equally so in the parts of the same here brought to∣gether in this Performance, the Workman only must be blamed. For true Precious Stones, if artificially cut and rightly pla∣ced, can never fail to shew themselves to the greatest Advantage. However, if these Prayers are truly directed to the same end for which they have been com∣piled, I doubt not but they will bring glory to God, honour to the Church, whose sound and wholsom words they are, and everlast∣ing Comfort to every soul that useth them.
The CONTENTS. PRayers both for Morning and Night, viz. Confession. Page 1 For Pardon and Grace. 3 Intercession. 4 Thanksgiving. 7 A short Prayer for the Morning. 9 A short Prayer for Night. Ib. Prayers for the Married. 10 Prayers for those that have children. 13 Prayers to be said upon days of Fasting and Hu∣miliation. 15 Prayers to be said in any time of Trouble or Af∣fliction. 16 Prayers for your self, or other, being sick. 19 Prayers for your self, or other, being sick beyond hope of Recovery. 20 Prayers for your Child being sick. 22 Prayers for your self, or other, being trou∣bled in Mind or Conscience. 23 Prayers before you to go to Church. 26 Prayers when you are return'd from Church. 27 Prayers on Sacra∣ment-days, to be said in the Morning before you go out. 28 Prayers on Sacra∣ment-days, to be said after you are returned from the Sacra∣ment. 31
PRAYERS In the CLOSET. Prayers both for Morning and Night. CONFESSION. ALmighty God, Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, Maker of all things, Judge of all men: I acknowledg and bewail my manifold sins and wick∣edness, which I from time to time most grievously have committed by thought, word, and deed against thy Di∣vine Majesty, provoking most justly thy wrath and indignation against me. I have followed too much the devices and desires of mine own heart. I have of∣fended against thy holy Laws. I have left undone those things which I ought to have doneHere confess thy particular Sins of Omission.. And I have done those things wch I ought not to have done Here confess thy particular Sins of Commission.. And there is no health in me. But thou, O Lord, have mercy upon me miserable offender. Spare me, O God,
who confess my faults. And grant that I whose Conscience by sin is accused, by thy merciful pardon may be absolved, through Christ our Lord. O create and make in me a new and contrite heart, that I worthily lamenting my sins, and acknowledging my wretchedness, may obtain of thee, the God of all mercy, per∣fect remission and forgiveness, through the same Jesus Christ our Lord; whom of thy tender mercy thou didst give to suffer death upon the Cross for our Re∣demption, and who made there (by that oblation of himself once offered,) a full perfect, and sufficient sacrifice, oblation, and satisfaction for the sins of the whole world. Spare me therefore, good Lord, spare me whom thou hast redeemed. En∣ter not into judgment with thy servant, who am vile earth, a miserable sinner: But so turn thine anger from me, and so make haste to help me in this world, that I may ever live with thee in the World to come. Amen. That you may the better call to mind what particular Sins you have been guilty of before you begin to confess them, you would do well carefully to peruse the Table of Sins at the end of The Best Companion.
For Pardon and Grace. ALmighty and everlasting God, who art always more ready to hear, than we to pray, and art wont to give more than either we desire or deserve; Pour down upon me the abundance of thy Mercy, forgiving me those things whereof my conscience is afraid, and giving me those good things which I am not worthy to ask, but through the Me∣rits and Mediation of Jesus Christ our Lord. For his sake, O Lord, give me true Repentance: Forgive me all my sins, negligences, and ignorances; and endue me with the Grace of thy Holy Spirit, that I may amend my life accord∣ing to thy holy Word. Mortifie and kill all vices in me; and so strengthen me by thy Grace, that by the innocency of my life, and constancy of my Faith even un∣to death, I may glorifie thy holy Name. Grant me grace to withstand the Tem∣ptations of the World, the Flesh, and the Devil; and with a pure heart and mind to follow thee the Only God. Vouchsafe, I beseech thee, to direct, sanctifie, and go∣vern both my heart and body, in the ways of thy Laws, and in the works of
thy Commandments, that through thy most mighty protection both now and ever, I may be preserved in body and and soul; that I may please thee both in will and deed; that I may both perceive and know what things I ought to do, and also may have grace and power faithfully to fulfill them. Graft in my heart the love of thy Name, increase in me true Religion, nourish me with all goodness, and of thy great mercy evermore keep me in the same. O grant that thy grace may always prevent and follow me: and make me continually to be given to all good works, so that in all my works begun, continued, and ended in thee, I may glorifie thy holy Name, and finally by thy mercy obtain everlasting Life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. Intercession. O God the Creator and preserver of all mankind, I humbly beseech thee for all sorts and conditions of men, that thou would be pleased to make thy ways known unto them, thy sa∣ving health unto all Nations. Have mercy upon all Jews, Turks, Infidels,
and Hereticks; and take from them all ignorance, hardness of heart, and con∣tempt of thy Word; and so fetch them home, blessed Lord, to thy Flock, that they may be saved among the remnant of the true Israelites, and be made one fold under one shepherd Jesus Christ our Lord. More especially I pray for the good e∣state of the Catholick Church, that it may be so guided and governed by thy good Spirit, that all who profess and call themselves Christians may be led into the way of Truth, and hold the Faith in Unity of Spirit, in the bond of peace, and in righteousness of Life. I beseech thee, O Lord, for this whole Kingdom in general, and particularly for the King and Queen; that thou wouldst be pleas'd so to dispose and govern their hearts, that in all their thoughts, words, and works, they may ever seek thy honour and glory; and study so to preserve Us that Peace and Happiness, Truth and Justice, Religion and Piety may be esta∣blished among us for all generations. So bless them, O Lord, and all the Royal Family, with the dew of thy heavenly Spirit, that ever trusting in thy Good∣ness protected by thy Power, and crown∣ed
with thy gracious and endless Fa∣vour, may continue before thee in health, peace, joy, and honour, a long and happy Life upon Earth, and after death, obtain everlasting Life and Glory in the Kingdom of Heaven. Be pleased to illuminate all Bishops, Priests, and Deacons with true knowledge and un∣derstanding of thy Word; and grant that both by their Preaching and Living they may set it forth, and shew it ac∣cordingly. Be pleased to endue the Lords of the Council, and all the No∣bility with Grace, Wisdom and Under∣standing. Be pleased to bless and keep the Magistrates, giving them grace to execute Justice, and Maintain Truth. Be pleased to bless and keep all thy people, especially my Relations, Bene∣factors, and Friends: Let thy Fatherly hand, I beseech thee, ever be over them; let thy holy Spirit ever be with them; and so lead them in the knowledge and obedience of thy Word, that in the end they may attain everlasting life. Be pleased to forgive all mine enemies, persecutors, and slanderers, and to turn their hearts. Lastly, I most humbly be∣seech thee of thy goodness, O Lord, to
comfort and succour all them who in this transitory life are in trouble, sor∣row, need, sickness, or any other adver∣sity; to relieve them according to their several necessities, giving them patience under their sufferings, and a happy issue out of all their afflictions. And this I beg for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen. Thanksgiving. ALmighty God, Father of all Mercies, I thine unworthy servant do give thee most humble and hearty thanks for all thy goodness and loving kindness to me, and to all men. I bless thee for our Creation, for my continual Preservation (that of this Day [or Night] in particu∣lar) and all the blessings of this life: But above all for thine inestimable love in in the Redemption of the World by our Lord Jesus Christ; for the means of Grace, and for the hope of Glory. Fur∣thermore, I give thee humble thanks that thou hast incorporated me into thy holy Church, that thou hast vouchsafed to call me to the knowledge of thy Grace and Faith in thee. Increase this knowledge, and confirm this Faith in ermore. Give me a due sense of all  Mercies, that my heart may be un∣feignedly
thankful; and that I may shew forth thy praise not only with my lips, but in my life, by giving up my self to thy service, and by walking before thee in holiness and righteousness all my days, through Jesus Christ our Lord; to whom with thee and the Holy Ghost be all honour and glory, world without end. Amen. OUr Father, which art in Heaven; Hallowed be thy Name. Thy King∣dom come. Thy will be done in Earth as it is in Heaven. Give us this day our daily bread. And forgive us our tres∣passes, as we forgive them that trespass against us. And lead us not into tempta∣tion; but deliver us from evil: For thine is the Kingdom, and the power, and the glory for ever and ever. Amen. UNto thy mercy and protection, O God, I commit my self this day [or Night,] and evermore. O Lord bless and keep me: Lord make thy fac to shine upon me, and be gracious unto  Lord, lift up thy countenance  and give me peace both now and  more. Amen.
If your necessary Business be so great and urgent, that it will not allow you time to use all the Prayers afore-going, then begin with the Thanksgiving, and joyn thereunto the short Prayer for Morning or Night, as followeth. A short Prayer for the Morning. O Lord, Heavenly Father, Almighty and Everlasting God, who hast safely brought me to the beginning of this Day; Defend me in the same with thy mighty Power, and grant that this Day I fall into no sin, neither run into any kind of danger; but that all my do∣ings may be ordered by thy governance, to do always that which is righteous in thy sight, through Jesus Christ our Lord. O defend me with thy Heavenly grace, that I may continue thine for ever; and daily increase in thy Holy Spirit more and more, until I come to thine ever∣lasting Kingdom. Amen. Our Father, &c. A short Prayer for the Night. my darkness, I beseech thee,  And by thy great Mercy  all the perils and dan∣gers
of this Night, for the love of thy only Son, our Saviour Jesus Christ. In his Name, O God, I commit my self to thy Mercy and Protection both this Night and evermore. O Lord, bless and keep me. Lord, make thy face to shine upon me, and be gracious unto me. Lord, lift up the light of thy Countenance up∣on me, and give me peace both now and evermore. Keep me both outwardly in my body, and inwardly in my soul, that I may be defended from all adver∣sities which may happen to the body, and from all evil thoughts which may assault and hurt the Soul, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. Our Father, &c. PRAYERS to be said by those that are Married. O God, who by thy mighty power hast made all things of nothing, who also (after other things set in order) didst appoint, that out of  (created after thine own image ¦militude) Woman should  ¦ginning; and knitting them
didst teach, that it should never be law∣ful to put asunder those whom thou by Matrimony hast made One: O God, who hast consecrated the state of Matrimony to such an excellent Mystery, that in it is signified and represented the Spiritual Marriage and Unity between Christ and his Church; Look merci∣fully upon [Here the Wo∣man may alter it thus; Me and my Husband; and grant, that he may love me (accord∣ing to thy Word (as Christ did love his Spouse the Church, who gave himself for it, loving and cherishing it e∣ven as his own flesh;) and also that I may be lo∣ving and amiable, faithful and obe∣dient to him, and in all quietness, &c. Me and my Wife; and grant that I may love her according to thy Word, (as Christ did love his Spouse the Church, who gave himself for it, loving and cherishing it even as his own flesh;) and also, that she may be loving and amiable, faithful and obe∣dient to me, and in all quiet∣ness, sobriety, and peace, be a follower of holy and godly Matrons.] O Lord, bless us both; and grant us to inherit thy everlasting Kingdom, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Grant, O Lord, that as Isaac and Rebecca lived faithfully toge∣ so we may surely perform and  the ow and Covenant betwixt us
made, and may ever remain in perfect love and peace together, and live accord∣ing to thy Laws, through the same Jesus Christ our Lord. Look, O Lord, merci∣fully upon us from Heaven, and bless us: And as thou didst send thy Blessing upon Abraham and Sarah, to their great com∣fort; so vouchsafe to send thy Blessing upon us, that we obeying thy Will, and always being in safety under thy pro∣tection, may abide in thy love unto our lives end. O God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, bless, pre∣serve, and keep us: O Lord, mercifully with thy favour look upon us; and so fill us with all spiritual Benediction and Grace, that we may so live toge∣ther in this Life, that in the World to come we may have Life everlasting. Amen. If you want and desire Children, (being conscious of no reasonable cause why you may not ask any,) then add as follows: Furthermore I most humbly beseech thee, O merciful Lord and heavenly Fa∣ther, by whose gracious gift Mankind is increased, that thou wouldst be pleas'd (if thou shalt think fit) to assist us with
thy Blessing, that we may both be fruit∣ful in procreation of Children, and also live together so long in godly love and honesty, that we may see our Children Christianly and Vertuously brought up, to thy praise and honour, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. PRAYERS to be said by those that have Children. O Merciful Lord, and heavenly Fa∣ther, by whose gracious gift Man∣kind is increased; I give thee hum∣ble thanks, that thou hast been pleased to assist me with thy Blessing, and to make me the Father [or Mother] of a Child [or Children.] And I beseech thee, give me thy Grace, that I may truly endea∣vour to see him, [or them] Christianly and Vertuously brought up, to thy praise and honour, through Jesus Christ our Lord. And because none can do any thing that is good without thee; grant unto him [or they] thy Spirit, O Lord, to think and do always such things as be rightful, that he [or they] may by thee be enabled to live according to thy Will,
through the same Jesus Christ our Lord. Let thy Fatherly hand, I beseech thee, ever be over him [or them:] Let thy holy Spirit ever be with him [or them,] and so lead him [or them] in the know∣ledg and obedience of thy Word, that in the end he [or they] may obtain ever∣lasting life. Strengthen him [or them] I pray thee, with the holy Ghost the Comforter, and daily increase in him [or them] thy manifold gifts of grace, the spirit of wisdom and understand∣ing; the spirit of Counsel and Ghostly strength; the spirit of Knowledg and true Godliness; and fill him [or them] O Lord, with the spirit of thy holy Fear, now and for ever. O defend him [or them,] with thy heavenly grace, that he [or they] may continue thine for ever: And grant, that being sted∣fast in Faith, joyful through Hope, and rooted in Charity, he [or they] may so pass the waves of this troublesom world: that finally he [or they] may come to the land of everlasting life, there to reign with thee world without end, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. Our Father, &c.
PRAYERS to be said upon days of Fasting and Humiliation for Sin. PSal. 51. 1. Have mercy upon me, O God, after thy great goodness; accord∣ing to the multitude of thy mercies, do away mine offences. 2. Wash me throughly from my wicked∣ness; and cleanse me from my sins. 9. Turn thy face from my sins, and put out all my misdeeds. 10. Make me a clean heart, O God; and renew a right spirit within me. 11. Cast me not away from thy presence; and take not thy holy Spirit from me. 12. O give me the comfort of thy help a∣gain; and stablish me with thy free Spirit. Then say the Confession, Almighty God, Father of, &c. and after that as follows. TUrn thou me, O good Lord, and so shall I be turned. Be favourable, O Lord, be favourable unto me, who turn to thee in weeping, fasting, and praying. For thou art a merciful God, full of com∣passion, long suffering, and of great pity. Thou sparest when we deserve punish∣ment,
and in thy wrath thinkest upon mercy. Spare me, good Lord, spare me; and let me not be brought to confusion. Hear me, O Lord, for thy mercy is great; and after the multitude of thy mercies, look upon me, through the merits and mediation of thy blessed Son Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. Grant, I beseech thee, Almighty God, that I who for mine evil deeds do wor∣thily deserve to be punished, by the com∣fort of thy Grace may mercifully be re∣leiv'd, through our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. Amen. After this say the Prayer for Pardon and Grace, and then conclude with the Lord's Prayer. PRAYERS to be said in any time of Trouble or Affliction. Because Troubles and Afflictions are as well punishments for sin, as tryals of our Faith and Patience; therefore first humble your self before God in the words of the Confession afore-said; and then proceed as follows.
O God, merciful Father, that despi∣sest not the sighing of a contrite heart, nor the desire of such as be sor∣rowful; Mercifully assist my prayers that I make before thee in these my troubles and adversities, which now op∣press me. Grant that by the providence of thy goodness they may be dispersed; and that being hurt by no kind of suf∣ferings, I may evermore give thanks unto thee in thy holy Church, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. I Humbly beseech thee, O Father, mer∣cifully to look upon mine infirmi∣ties; and for the glory of thy Name, turn from me all those evils that I most righteously have deserv'd: and grant that in all my troubles I may put my whole trust and confidence in thy mercy, and evermore serve thee in holiness and pureness of living, to thy honour and glory, through our only Mediatour and Advocate, Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. GRant, O Lord, I beseech thee, that I who am justly punished for mine offences, may be mercifully delivered by thy goodness, for the Glory of thy
Name, through Jesus Christ our Sa∣viour. Amen. ASsist me mercifully, O Lord, in these my supplications and prayers; And so dispose me towards the attain∣ment of everlasting Salvation, that a∣mong all the changes and chances of this mortal Life, I may ever be defend∣ed by thy most gracious and ready Help, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. ALmighty and everlasting God, who of thy tender Love towards Man∣kind hast sent thy Son, our Saviour Je∣sus Christ, to take upon him our Flesh, and to suffer death upon the Cross, that all Mankind should follow the Example of his great Humility; Mercifully grant, that I may both follow the Example of his Patience, and also be made partaker of his Resurrection, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. O God, the King of Glory, who hast exalted thine only Son Jesus Christ with great triumph into thy Kingdom in Heaven; I beseech thee, leave me not comfortless, but send me thine Holy Ghost to comfort me, and exalt me unto the same place whither our Saviour
Christ is gone before; who liveth and reigneth with thee and the Holy Ghost, one God, world without end. Amen. Our Father, &c. PRAYERS for your self, or other, being sick. ALmighty everliving God, Maker of Mankind, who dost correct those whom thou dost love, and chastise eve∣ry one whom thou dost receive; I be∣seech thee, have mercy upon me thy Servant [or thy Servant A. B.] now visi∣ted with thine hand. Grant that I [he] may take my [his] sickness pati∣ently; and so sanctifie this thy fatherly Correction to me, [him,] that the sense of my [his] weakness may add strength to my [his] Faith, and Seriousness to my [his] Repentance. If it shall be thy good pleasure to restore me [him] to my [his] former health, grant that I [he] may lead the residue of my [his] Life in thy fear, and to thy glory: Or else give me [him] grace so to take thy Visitation, that after this Life ended, I [he] may dwell with thee in Life everlasting, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
O Lord, look down from Heaven; be∣hold, visit, and relieve me thy Ser∣vant; [or thy Servant A. B.] Look upon me [him] with the eyes of thy Mercy; give me [him] comfort and sure confi∣dence in thee; defend me [him] from the danger of the Enemy, and keep me [him] in perpetual peace and safety, through Jesus Christ our Lord. For his sake, re∣new in me, [him,] most loving Father, whatsoever hath been decayed by the fraud and malice of the Devil, or by my [his] own carnal will and frailness. Im∣pute not to me [him] my [his] former sins, but strengthen me [him] with thy Blessed Spirit: And whensoever thou shalt be pleased to take me [him] hence, take me [him] into thy favour, through the merits of thy most dearly beloved Son Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. Our Father, &c. PRAYERS for your self, or other, being sick beyond hope of Recovery. O Father of Mercies, and God of all Comfort, our only help in time of need; I beseech thee to succour me [or thy
Servant A.B.] now lying under thy hand in great weakness of Body. Look gra∣ciously upon me, [him,] O Lord; and the more the outward man decayeth, strengthen me, [him,] I beseech thee, so much the more continually with thy Grace and holy Spirit in the inner man. Give me [him] unfeigned Repentance for all the Errors of my [his] Life past, and stedfast Faith in thy Son Jesus, that my [his] sins may be done away by thy Mercy, and my [his] Pardon seal'd in Heaven before I go [he goes] hence, and be no more seen. I know, O Lord that there is no word impossible with thee; and that if thou wilt, thou canst even yet raise me [him] up, and grant me [him] a longer continuance in this World. Yet forasmuch as in all appearance the time of my [his] departure draweth near, so fit and prepare me, [him,] I be∣seech thee, against the hour of Death, that after my [his] departure hence in peace and in thy favour, my [his] Soul may be received into thine everlasting King∣dom. Wash it, I pray thee, in the Blood of that immaculate Lamb, that was slain to take away the sins of the World; that whatsoever defilements it may have
contracted in the midst of this miserable and naughty World through the lusts of the Flesh, or the Wiles of Satan, be∣ing purged and done away, it may be presented pure and without spot before thee; that so at the general Resurrection in the last day, I [he] may be found ac∣ceptable in thy sight, and receive that Blessing which thy Well-beloved Son shall then pronounce to all that love and fear thee, saying, Come ye blessed Chil∣dren of my Father, receive the Kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the World. Grant this, I beseech thee, O merciful Father, through Jesus Christ our Mediatour and Redeemer. Amen. Our Father, &c. Prayers for your Child being sick. O Almighty God, and Merciful Fa∣ther, to whom alone belong the the issues of Life and Death; Look down from Heaven, I beseech thee, with the Eyes of Mercy upon my Child, now ly∣ing on the bed of sickness. Visit him, O Lord, with thy Salvation: Deliver him in thy good appointed time from his bo∣dily pain, and save his Soul for thy Mer∣cies
sake. If it shall be thy good pleasure to prolong his days here on Earth, grant that he may live to thee, and be an In∣strument of thy Glory, by serving thee faithfully, and doing good in his genera∣tion; or else receive him into those Hea∣venly Habitations, where the Souls of them that sleep in the Lord Jesus enjoy perpetual rest and felicity. Grant this, O Lord, for thy Mercies sake, in the same thy Son our Lord Jesus Christ, who liveth and reigneth with thee and the Holy Ghost, ever one God world with∣out end. Amen. DEfend, O Lord, my Child with thy heavenly Grace, that he may con∣tinue thine for ever, and daily increase in thy Holy Spirit more and more, un∣til he come to thine everlasting King∣dom. Amen. Our Father, &c. Prayers for your self, or other, being troubled in Mind or Conscience. O Blessed Lord, the Father of Mer∣cies, and the God of all comforts; I beseech thee, look down in pity and
compassion upon me [or A. B.] thy affli∣cted Servant. Thou writest bitter things against me, [him,] and makest me [him] to possess my [his] former iniquities: Thy wrath lieth hard upon me, [him,] and my [his] Soul is full of trouble. But, O merciful God, who hast written thy holy Word for our learning, that we through patience and comfort of thy holy Scriptures might have hope; Give me [him] a right understanding of my self, [himself,] and of thy Threats and Promises, that I [he] may neither cast away my [his] confidence in thee, nor place it any where else but in thee. give me [him] strength against all my [his] temptations, and heal all my [his] distempers. Break not the bruised Reed, nor quench the smoaking Flax. Shut not up thy tender Mercies in displeasure; but make me [him] to hear of joy and gladness, that the bones which thou hast broken may rejoyce. Deliver me [him] from fear of the Enemy, and lift up the light of thy Countenance upon me, [him] and give me [him] peace, through the Merits and Mediation of Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
ALmighty and everlasting God, who art always more ready to hear than we to pray, and art wont to give more then either we desire, or deserve; Pour down upon me [or thy Servant A. B.] the abundance of thy Mercy, forgiving me [him] those things whereof my [his] conscience is afraid, and giving me [him] those good things which I am not worthy to ask, but through the Merits and Mediation of Jesus Christ thy Son our Lord. Amen. O God, who dost teach the hearts of thy faithful People, by sending to them the light of thy holy Spirit; Grant me [or thy Servant A. B.] by the same Spirit to have a right judgment in all things, and evermore to rejoyce in his holy Comfort, through the merits of Christ Jesus our Saviour, who liveth and reigneth with thee, in the Unity of the same Spirit, one God world without end. Amen. Our Father, &c.
Prayers before you go to Church. ALmighty and Merciful God, of whose only gift it cometh, that thy faithful People do unto thee true and laudable service; Grant, I be∣seech thee, that I may so faithfully serve thee in this Life, that I fail not finally to attain thy Heavenly Promises, through the Merits of Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. O God, forasmuch as without thee we are not able to please thee; Mercifully grant that thy holy Spirit may in all things direct and rule my heart, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. O Almighty God, who by thy Son Je∣sus Christ dost give to the Mini∣sters of thy Church many excellent Gifts, and commandest them earnestly to feed thy Flock; I beseech thee, leave them not destitute of those Gifts, nor yet of Grace to use them always to thy Honour and Glory; but grant that they may both by their Life and Doctrine set forth thy true and lively Word, and rightly and duly administer thy holy
Sacraments: And to me, and all thy Peo∣ple give thy heavenly Grace, that with meek heart and due reverence we may hear and receive thy holy Word, truly serving thee in Holiness and Righteous∣ness all the days of our Life; that so at last we may be all partakers of thy Hea∣venly Kingdom, and receive the Crown of Righteousness, which thou hast pro∣mised in Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. Our Father, &c. Prayers when you are returned from Church. GRant, I beseech thee, Almighty God, that the Words which I have heard this day with my outward Ears, may through thy Grace be so grafted inwardly in my heart, that they may bring forth in me the fruit of good liv∣ing, to the honour and praise of thy Name, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. O Almighty God, whom truly to know is everlasting Life; Grant me perfectly to know thy Son Jesus
Christ to be the Way, the Truth, and the Life; That obeying his Doctrine, and following his steps, I may stedfastly walk in the Way that leadeth to eter∣nal Life, through the same thy Son Je∣sus Christ our Lord. Amen. LOrd of all Power and Might, who art the Author and Giver of all good things; Graft in my heart the love of thy Name, increase in me true Religion, nourish me with all Goodness, and of thy great Mercy keep me in the same, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. LOrd, I pray thee, that thy Grace may always prevent and follow me, and make me continually to be given to all good works, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. Our Father, &c. Prayers on Sacrament Days, before you go out of your House. ALmighty God, who through thine only begotten Son Jesus Christ hast overcome Death, and opened unto us the Gate of everlasting Life; I humbly
beseech thee, that as by thy special Grace preventing me, thou hast put in∣to my Mind good desires, so by thy con∣tinual help, I may bring the same to good effect, through Jesus Christ our Lord, who liveth and reigneth with thee and the holy Ghost, ever one God world without end. Amen. ALmighty Father, who hast given thine only Son to die for our sins, and to rise again for our Justification; Grant me so to put away the leaven of Malice and Wickedness, that I may al∣ways serve thee in pureness of living and truth, through the merits of the same thy Son Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. ALmighty and everlasting God, give unto me the increase of Faith, Hope, and Charity; And that I may obtain that which thou dost promise, make me to love that which thou dost command, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. ALmighty God, heavenly Father, who hast this day called and invi∣ted me to thy Holy Table, where will be administred the most comfortable
Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ, to be received in remembrance of his Meritorious Cross and Passion, whereby alone we obtain Remission of our sins, and are made partakers of the Kingdom of Heaven: I give thee most humble and hearty thanks for that thou hast given thy Son our Saviour Jesus Christ, not only to die for us, but also to be our spiritual Food and Sustenance in that holy Sacrament. Which being so divine and comfortable a thing to them who receive it worthily, and so dangerous to them who presume to re∣ceive it unworthily. I most humbly beseech thee to give me thy Grace, that I may truly consider the dignity of that holy Mystery, and the great peril of the unworthy receiving thereof; as also that I may so search and examine my con∣science, (and that not lightly, or after the manner of Dissemblers with thee, but so) as to come holy and clean to the heavenly Feast, in the Marriage-garment required by thy Blessed Son in holy Scri∣pture, and be received as a worthy par∣taker of that holy Table. Grant this, O Lord, for the sake of the same thy Son Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. Our Father, &c.
If you want a Form of Devotion for your use in the Church at the time of the Celebration of the Sacrament, you may serve your self from The Best Companion. Prayers when you are returned from the Sacrament. ALmighty and everliving God, I most heartily thank thee for that thou hast vouchsafed to feed me this day with the spiritual Food of the most precious Body and Blood of thy Son our Saviour Jesus Christ, whereby thou dost assure the Faithful of thy favour and goodness towards them, as also that they are heirs through hope of thy e∣verlasting Kingdom. And I entirely desire thy fatherly goodness to accept this my Sacrifice of Praise and Thanksgiving, most humbly beseeching thee to grant, that by the Merits and Death of thy Son Jesus Christ, and through Faith in his Blood, I, and all the whole Church may obtain Remission of our sins, and all other Benefits of his Passion. And now again, I offer and present unto thee, O Lord, my self, Soul and Body, to be a
reasonable, holy, and lively Sacrifice unto thee; humbly beseeching thee, that I, and all those who have been par∣takers of thy holy Communion, may be fulfilled with thy heavenly Benediction. Grant this, O Lord, for thy Mercies sake, through Jesus Christ thy dear Son, our Lord. Amen. STrengthen me, I beseech thee, O Lord, with the holy Ghost the Com∣forter; And daily increase in me thy manifold gifts of Grace, the Spirit of Wisdom and Understanding, the Spirit of Counsel and ghostly Strength, the Spirit of Knowledge and true Godliness; and fill me, O Lord, with the Spirit of thy holy Fear, now and for ever. Amen. Our Father, &c. FINIS. ADVERTISEMENT. There is lately published by the Author of this, a Book Intituled, the Word of God the Best Guide, Or the Christians Whole Duty laid down in plain Texts of Scripture.
BOOKS Printed for John Howell Bookseller in OXFORD. THE Common-Prayer-Book, the Best Companion in the House and Closet, as well as in the Temple, &c. The Fifth Edition. Prayers in the Closet, Collected out of the Best Companion, by the Author of the same. The Word of God the best Guide, to all Persons, at all times, and in all places; Or, A Collection of Scripture Texts, plainly shewing such things as are ne∣cessary for every Christian's Knowledge and Practice: By the Author of the Best Companion. Of Education, especially of Young Gentlemen: in Two parts. The Fifth Impression. Globe Notes, by R. Holland. His Notes touching the Parallax. Tozer's Directions to a Godly Life. Grammatica Rationis, sive Institutiones Logicae, Authore Johan. Fell Episc. Oxon. Burgersdicii Metaph. 12o. Idea Philosophiae. 12o. Epictetus & Theophrastus, Gr. & Lat. è Theatro. 12o. M. Foelix, Edit. Wower. 12o.
Praeces Aedis Christi. 12o. Sandersoni Logica. 8o. Stierii Philosophia. 4o. Pliny's Panegyrick, in English. An Account of Mineral Waters, with Directions for Drinking Ilmington Wa∣ters. By Sam. Derham. Bishop Ridley's Disputation at Oxford, with a Treatise of the Sacrament, by the same Author. Epistle of Lysimachus Nicanor to the Covenanters in Scotland. Danger of the Church of England, from a General Assembly of Covenan∣ters in Scotland. A Sermon about Oaths, by H. Hellier Fellow of C.C.C. in Oxon. The 2d Edit. Ecclesiae Anglicanae Politeia in Tabulas digesta, Authore Richardo Cosin, Legum Doctore, olim Dec. Cur. de Arcubies, & Can∣cellario, se Vic. Generali Reverend. Patris Johannis Archiepisc. Cantuariensis. Tabellae Diaelectorum in Gracis Declina∣tionibus, cum Carmine Memoriali in usum Scholae privatae, Authore Joh. Meddens, A. M. è Coll. Exon. Oxon. Tractatus de veroe Christi Deitate, adver∣sus Arii & Socini Haereses, Authore Daniele Whitby, SS. T.D. Eccles. Cath. Sarum Prae∣centre.
