P3297A 8723609 41674
BRIEF DIRECTIONS. FOR True-spelling. Being an Abbreviat of the most usefull Rules, conducible to the promoting That Excellent Knowledge of Writing true English, Much wanted by many, especially such as never well understood the Latin-tongue, And is therefore commended to youth, as a good means for their accomplishment. To which is added. Copies of Letters, Bills of parcels, Bills of Exchange, Bills of Debt, Receipts, with pertinent Rules as Helps thereunto. All prepar'd and methodiz'd by Henry Preston Writing-master, a well-wisher to youths attainment. Licensed March. 17. 1673. Roger L'-Estrange. LONDON, Printed by J.R. and are to be sold by William Bishop at the Fountain at London Wall; near Garpen
To the Reader. Friend, THou hast here presented thee some of the ea∣siest Rules for true spelling, a work very much tending to thy profit, if well under∣stood. The reason of its production hath been my Observation of the want thereof, especially in young people, having been acquainted neer twenty years with their shortnesses and inabilities therein. To write well, and yet not to know how to write true English must needs be a great disparagement, and to my knowledg, hath rendred many uncapable of bu∣siness, that would have been much to their advant∣age, which makes me very urgent with all I am ac∣quainted with, to train up their children in the know∣ledg of Grammar-Rules, upon which the Art of true spelling depends, and without which few do arrive to perfect understanding therein. Yet for such that have not opportunity to learn, or have not improved their season, when they might have learned, 'Tis meet they should not be left without some directions to help them: And although there be many worthy books of that nature extant, that might with the pains of Tutors further the perfecting youth herein; yet know∣ing well their little benefit by some of them (the cause I name not) Have now undertook this little piece, which hath in it such plain rules, that without other help will conduce to the end aforesaid, Preventing the discouragements attending such that are unskil∣ful: Of whom not only most young men in this Na∣
but almost all the female Sex, many of them being very apt and capable of attaining good hands of writing, which had they the knowledg of  Orthography, would much more be encouraged; And the want whereof is daily found to be a means to weaken their minds in their full and compleat accomplishment therein, yea sometimes to their absolute laying aside their pens, as being ashamed of their work, whilst they are sensibly wanting this so excellent Ornamental endowment: Hoping many will find profit in the pe∣rusing and digesting these Rules to the animating themselves to improve their skill in writing; I have not only taken the pains to compile directions for true writing, but also have prepar'd Copies of Letters, Bills, and Receipts, with Bills of parcels, and other need∣full Helps to young beginners. The whole of which is humbly commended to the blessing of God; by him that desires to serve his generation according to his capacity and Talent received. Peti-France, Lond. Feb. 3. 1673. Henry Preston. Thou hast most of this little piece prepar'd in verse by me; To take thy fancy, head and heart, in what thou here dost see. And if it shall be taken well, and profit to thee lend, I shall with pains, and great delight, much more quickly commend.
THese following helps are now produced here The Art of Spelling unto youth to clear; Which when well learn'd will fit him perfectly. To write true English with great certainty. THe needful thing at entrance is to know The Letters in their order as below Which are in number twenty four in all Distinguish'd as we usually them call; Vowels are five, a, e, i, o, and u, The rest are consonants, set here in View b, c, d, f, g, h, k, l, m, n, p, q, r, s, t, w, x, y, z, Yet sometimes j, and v, when sounded be, like consonants, are written as you see, —j, v. The sound of which as each doth signifie, You may see here exprest in this copie Produc'd to shew their force and property; b bee c cee d dee f ef g gee g jee h he j je k ca l el m em n en p pee q cu r ar s es t tee v ve w we x ex y yi z. ze A vowel hath a perfect sound, without the help of another letter; to which five before-mentioned, ad y, a Greek vowel, which sounds like i, and then may be esteemed a vowel, otherwise is a consonant as before; as [A] friend of mine is dead — [I] hope not so. [O!] it is too true. A vowel sounds of it self. A mute, or dum letter is that which gives no sound at all of it self, but is apt by the help of a vowel either before, or after it to sound, and shew its force; as  k p q t
A vowel add unto each mute, then see Whither they will not perfect sounds then be, By co, dy, go, jo, ko, po, quo, ti, xe, yo; Without a vowel, you no sound can make, For proof whereof, these few examples take, grnt, strngth, strng, strng, thmb. which five if any ask us what they spell? We say nothing, there is not a vowel: But if to each a vowel you do take, They will then all a word, with good sound make. Ex. Put a to the first, e to the second, i to the third, o to the fourth, u to the fifth; and they'l spell. grant, strength, string, strong, thumb. Forget not therefore when a sound you'ld make, That you a proper vowel then do take— C Before a, o, u, sounds like to k, But before e, and i, like s alway. Exa. to both can, came, court, custom, con, cunning, cellar, cease, ceive, civility, city, celerity. For spelling right, the syllables you'l find, By parting them in sound within your mind; They being known when they di╌vi╌ded be, Help to teach learners true Or╌tho╌gra╌phy; To know a Syllable you must consider, How many letters you doe spell together, Examples many are here under-set, For you, That knowledg perfectly to get. Af╌ter, sin╌ce╌ri╌ty, pre╌pa╌ra╌ti╌on, ge╌ne╌ra╌ti╌on, Ex╌tra╌or╌di╌na╌ri╌ly, tran╌sub╌stan╌ti╌a╌ti╌on, Re╌con╌ci╌li╌a╌ti╌on, re╌for╌ma╌ti╌on, du╌ra╌ti╌on, Re╌cre╌a╌ti╌on, in╌ter╌est, a╌do╌ra╌ti╌on, a╌mi╌a╌ble. A consonant between two vowels we, To th' latter joyn, as here below you'l see, Re╌gard, re╌course, pre╌pare, de╌clare, pro╌pose, ma∣
Yet some exceptions we in Rules must make, Else in this spelling Art may yet mistake; To this therefore exceptions there are three, Which when produc'd this rule will perfect be. 1. Exception. When ab or x, comes before a vowel, as Ab╌ove, ab╌ound, ab╌undance, ox╌en, ex╌ercise. 2. Exception. In double words, as Ab╌hor, al╌one, un╌armed, un╌usual, en╌able, in╌ure, en╌amour, ad╌orne, without, with╌in, 3d. Exception. When a word of one syllable goes before╌ing, as Speak╌ing, com╌ing, treat╌ing, squeak╌ing. Ti writ before a vowel, commonly, Doth make it self in sound equal to si, As, nation, patience, station, re-lation, proposition, Proportion, petition, relaxation, dictionary, position. To this also there are exceptions two, Which here are put, the difference to shew. 1. Exception. When s goes before ti, as in fustian Combustion, suggestion, question. ti keeps its sound. 2. Exception. VVhen words end in ti, that have a syllable added to them that begins with a vowel, as pitty, pitious, plentious, loftier, mightier, weightier, courtier. Two sorts of syllables there are in kind, A long and short, the difference you'l find, The long is known by its pronouncing so The short likewise, as these Examples show, As, Fir, hug, can, bit, fat, mad, spar, not, hat, on— short Fire, huge, cane, bite, fate, made, spare, note, hate, one long
VVherein you see e doth make the sound long, And all words else that sound with a dipthong. Examples take to make that also clear, By their contrary spelling as is here: Short syllables, made long with a dipthong. Tall, rall, bed, bran, shut, rod, what, chat, Tayl, rayl, bead, brain, shoot, rood, wheat, cheat, Yet sometimes e doth not its full sound make, When unto it we do a vowel take, As, Change╌able, peace╌able, charge╌able And also then when words do end in Ve, You must observe the sound is lost in e. As, above, behove, glove, move, live, have, prov drove, remove, receive, contrive, relieve. VVhich must be written so except you do Add one more syllable, as these below. Having, living, moving, loving, droving, proving. E in them words is left out as you see, And so in these below also may be. Dark, turn, som, run, spark, tun, mar, sum, su not, as usually tis written. Darke, turne, some, runne, sparke, tune, &c. And all words else when it no sound doth make, (Except in these) the e you need not take. In these below you must add e. Chaste, haste, verse, taste, horse, breathe, else, diver waste, false, sense, roste, leave, please, seize, cour sourse, cease, disease, ease, cleave, sense. E at the end of words no sound doth make, Only in these which for Example take; Clo╌e, Phe╌be, E╌pi╌to╌me, Ju╌bi╌le, Ga╌li╌le, E ni╌ce, Jesse, What a dipthong is. two vowels take.
here are twelve proper dipthongs, called so, oth vowels keep their sound, as here below: [ay, ey, oy, ai, ei, oi, au, eu, ou, aw, ew, ow.] he rest are call'd improper, eight they be, One of their vowel-sounds they loose we see, ea, ee, ie, co, oa, oo, ui, ou, As in these, ach, meet, chief, people, goat, good, guide, cousin. spelling Art, there are some letters we, ust surely make, though they not sounded be, he whole of which take as they here do ly, And make them for a copie to write by. these words here below we sound not b, et must be spelt as here you'l plainly see; Dumb, lamb, womb, coxcomb, climb, limb, comb. umb, thumb, doubtless, doubt, debt, subtil, undoubted between a vowel and a k, s not sounded, yet so tis write alway. Example. Sick, thick, black, jack, lick, trick, flock, stick, check, quick, frock, clock, truck, antick, lock, cock, dock, truck, nick, brick, mock, pack, rock. When c is placed after s, as here, hath no sound as by these will appear. Ascent, concupiscence, conscience, disciple, lascivious, cent, sciatica, transcendant, Schism. We write these terminations with a c, And all that follow after as they be. Ance, ence, ince, once, unce, enhance, since, eloquence, abundance, abstinence, advance, assistance,
temperance, sufferance, providence, sub∣stance, pronounce, guidance, experience, essence commence, benevolence. Except in these, wherein an I we make, Only herenam'd for to prevent mistake. Incense, nonsense, dispense, rinse, suspense, recom∣pense, propense, sense, (one of the five senses.) The general rules that yet do follow here, Are as was said the spelling-Art to clear, Observe them well, and good skill gain you may, To fit you for your work another day. A c following x, looseth its sound, As in excel, except excerpt, excess. Ch, sounds like k in these, choler, school, Malachi stomach, Anarchy, Arch-angel, cholick, Chyrurgion Chronicle, Chymicall, Mechanick, Monarchy, Patri∣arch, Eunuch. Gh, through custome are sounded likef, in these Although, rough, draught, laugh, cough, enough, daugh∣ter, bought, brought, ought. Gh, sounds with the breathing hin these, Bough, wrought, high, weigh, might righteous sight naughty, sought, through, sigh. G, doth not sound in these, Phlegm feign, sign, de∣sign, reign, Sovereign, arreign, ensign, assign, resign, signed, weight. U, follows G, and is not sounded in these, guide, tongue, league, disguise, guil guess, guard, guest, rogue Collogue, Catalogue, prorogue, dialogue, Prologue, Epilogue, guardian, guilty, plague. H, sounds not after g or r, as in these, Ghost Rhe∣torick, Rheume, Rhodes, dunghil, (Rhine, a river.)
e l is doubled, as all; ball; bell; bill; boll; bull; fill; hall; hill; still; quill; hell; will; wall; spill; small; call; pills; tell; ell; full; Hill. But after dipthongs single, as in these, bayl; coyl, il; moyl; foil; toyl; soyl. So Poly-sillables, or words of more than one syl∣ble end with a single l, as in Burial, Cathedral, Chan∣el, sinful, usual, tribunal, evil, special, material, quarrel. hough in these words some do not sound the l, et it should sounded be as we it spell; alve; half; Ralph; folk; balk; calf; talk; falcon; falconer; almsey, not, save, haf, Raf, fok, &c. P, is not sounded in these, Psalm; tempt; temptati∣n; Simpson; receipt; Sympton. Ph, sounds like f in Nimph; Phylactery; Cosmo∣aphy; Elephant; Emphasis; Pamphlet; Epitaph; Geo∣raphy; nephew; Orphan; Triumph; Humphrey; E∣raim; Philip; Philemon; Phebe; Phyladelphia; Phea∣nt, Pharisee; Phrase; Phlebotomy; Sphear; Sulphur. But not where Ph, are in two syllables, as ep╌herd; Clap╌ham. er the r or l, e doth rebound, d is true spelt as they are here now found. Lustre; little; sepulchre; Temple; Acre; people; able; gle; bramble; brittle; bubble; buckle; bundle; cable; adle; castle; crackle; humble; juggle; Justle; kindle; re; Maugre; nitre; needle; nettle; tigre; trouble; treble; angle; wrestle; warble; trifle; stradle; spitle; muckle; cle; fable; sadle; bauble; bible-bable. nds no word but where tis sounded I, We do put in the room the letter y; property; reply; study; try; my, reply, cry; dy;
When u at end of any word is sounded, The vowel e is always then propounded; As, in due: sue: true: hue: value: vertue: issue: pur due: blue: construe: retinue: revenue. Ey is writ where i is sounded at the end of a word in these, Abbey: alley: Anglesey: Atturney: burley: causey: chimney: cockney: countrey: eye: Hackney: honey: money: kidney: monkey: pulley: pursley: talley: tansey: Turkey. Ey sounds ay in these, they: obey: convey: survey: key: grey: Surveyer: whey: deign: eight: veins: height: weight: reign: heir. Ei, sounds e long in forfeit: Carreir: either: he fer: conceit: conceive: deceit: enterfeir: leisure: neighbour: receipt: receive: seize. Ew, keeps its sound, as in these, few: lewd: ewe He-brew: brew: chew: drew: embrew: Hew: Gew: gaws: Jewel: knew: fewer: stew: steward. Y, in these words is sounded like to i, And is so writ in Synod, Sympathy, Type: Presbyterian: Martyr: Alchymy: Analysis: Apocalyps: Cymbal: Cypress: Chrystal: Etymo∣logie: Myrrh: mystical: Mystery: hypocrite: Labyrinth: Myriad: Nymph: Satyre: Sycomore Sycophant: Synagogue: Tyrant: syrup, &c. Ea, sounds e drawn long as here you see, Where ea's writ in the room of the e; Appeal: ear: appease: Bean: Bear: Beast: beat: cheat: clean: dream: break: cease: meal: mean: meat: eat: Easter: easie: zeal: year: wear: weal∣treatise: roar: teach: swear: surcease: streak: stream: seamless: Lease: squeak: spread: spear: sheath reach: deal: decease: congeal: head: breast: dead: earth: health: ready: dread: beard: bread: hear
E i, sounds ee, as in believe: relief: pierce: shield: atchieve: pieces: Lievtenant: yield: fierce: priest: chief: besiege: cashier: friend: frontiers: grief: grievance: grievous: hankerchief: view: yield. This dipthong ie, is parted in these words, there∣fore sounds not as before; audi-ence: bri-er: cli-ent: clothi-er: di-et: qui-et: buri-ed: busi-ed: espi-ed: reli-ed: studi-ed: dri-ed: outvi-ed. Oa, sounds the o long, in hoarse: boat: boar: oat: choak: toad: boast: encroach: abroad: goad: stroak: board: broach: coach: cloak: coal: coap: coat: cloak: coast: goat: groanning: groat: Hoary. This dipthong oa, is parted in these, therefore not sounded as before, co-action: co-agulate: Ahino-am: Gilbo-ah: bo-anerges. Oi or oy, is sounded in these words; poison: point: boyl: jointure: voyage: tortoise: coy: boy: oyl: oyntment: poise: void: noysome: noise: employ: ex∣ploit: foyl: moyst: employment: emeroides: em∣broider: cloyster: cloy. Oo, sounds like woo, in these; choose: floor: roof: hoop: broom: brook: food: boon: fool: loose: boot: coop∣er: foot: crook: poor: brood: foord: forsooth: goose: loose: moon: moor: rood: root: stool: stoop: tooth. Oo, sounds short u in these, good: hood: blood: wood: stood: wool: foot. Ow, sounds hard in, Vow: allow: vowel: now sow-pig: Cowards: Cow: (a kine that gives milk.) Ow sounds like o, in bestow: slow: low: window: know: throw: pillow: shadow: sorrow: willow: win∣now: widow: know: barrow: arrow: fallow: morrow follow. Ou sounds like u in, Cousin: double: flourish: young: scourge: nourish: floud: touch: doublet:
Ou founds like o, in vapour, bought brought. ho∣nour. although. wrought. though. solicitour. succour. ri∣gour. gourd. harbour. behaviour. endeavour. manour. nought. colour. Armour. Emperour. clamour. odour. thought. Saviour. humour. Ou, sounds broad in flout. slouch. couch. Ui, sounds like i, in guide. guile. conduit. guise. disguise. beguil. build. buyer. verjuice. buy. Ui sounds like u in recruit. fruit. suit. suitor. bruise. fruitful. juice. pursuit. suitable. This dipthong ui is parted in these words, there∣fore not to be sounded as before, ambigu-ity. frui-tion. genu-ine. pu-issant. perpetu ity. perspicu-ity. ru-ine. J consonant before all vowels, is sounded as G latin before e, or i; and as sounded different from the vowel, so it should be writ and made, as in these words jar. jest. jear. jill. join. june. rejoice. joy. judg. subjoin. Also the v consonant where ever it hath its proper sound of va. ve. vi. vo. vu. it should be so writ as it is in these words, different from u vowel, Vain. ve∣rity. verily. vice. voice. vertue. vicious. revive. con∣nive. vivification. convince. receive. give. vulture. Although no new thing here doth come to hand, Yet you'l by short collections understand, How to write many words that different be, Both sounded, nam'd, and written as you see. The rules here given may to much profit tend If you do read them oft from end' to end, And well improve them as you ought to do, VVith care, delight, and diligence to show; VVhat further is produc'd, is to make plain,
Knowing what yet we have herein to say, Will add to their assistance day by day. The Capital or Great Letters have in the begin∣ning of words their peculiar uses: noting not only proper names of Men, Cities, Callings, as Ambrose, Marcus, London, York, Spain, Turky, England, Mer∣ter, Grocer; but Dignities and Offices, as Highness, Lord Mayor, Your Honour, Worship, Sir, Father, Mother, and names of Arts; as Grammer, Rhetorick, Writing, Musick, Arithmetick, the beginning of every verse, and I, by it self, little i being never made by it self, as I go, I am, I will, &c. Also of things observable, such as is the principal matter handled in  Book, likewise beginnings of sentences, and when words of another are quoted, as Gen. 1.3. And God said, Let there be light; So in Exod. 16.4. Then said the Lord to Moses, Behold I will rain bread from eaven, and in the 9. verse. And Moses spake unto Aaron, Say unto the children of Israel, Come near efore the Lord; there are two such included speeches;  wit the speech of Moses to Aaron, and the speech f Aaron to the People, where you see great letters; also in Emphatical, or remarkable words, as God id to Moses I AM hath sent thee whole senten∣es Emphaticall: as JEHOVAH THE RANCH, KING OF KINGS AND LORD OF LORDS, and such like, often und in the HOLY BIBLE. ll stops and points must be observ'd when you, Would write with credit, and your skill would shew, The Comma(,) stops be small, then Comma you should take, The Semicolon(:) If greater, you must Semicolon take,
The Colon(:) If half a sentence, then the Colon you, The Period, or full point(.) Must plainly make, if out, this point doth shew, The Period is a point of perfect sense, and perfect sentence: at the end of which the tone of the voice falleth below its ordinary tenour, with a long pause.— A great letter alwaies follows, as is before An Apostrophae(') This is a note set o're that place where you, Leave out a vowel, as these words do shew. Penn d, sinn'd, train'd th'other, sav'd, it's, 'twill. Hyphen, a note of connexion, (=) or (—) VVhen you have compound words, or end your line, In parting words, this mark is for a sign, As som-times, through-out, Common-wealth, safe∣guard, miss-like, House-keeping, &c. VVhen end your line you part the word in Syllables, Sir, your business is accom∣plished with much credit, vale. I am glad there∣at, for which I hearti∣ly thank you, vale. An Interrogation point (?) This note is put when any question's made, As doth appear, in what is under said; Quest. VVho made you? Ans. God. Quest. VVho is the author of preservation? An. God. A note of Admiration (!) This mark denotes our suddain admiration, Of what we say, or write, or give relation. As hear O Heavens! give ear O earth! A Parenthesis ( ) This mark a sentence doth inclose, when we, Use, or omit the same, yet sence will be, (that is in my flesh) dwelleth no good thing
A caret, or latin circumflex, (⁁) VVhen words left out are placed o're the line, VVhere they come in this mark is for a sign, An Asterisme, (*) This note of illustration is then made, VVhen to whats writ there might be yet more said; A note of Citation, (") This is then made when Authors quoted are, And doth shew forth what they to us declare; Index, ☞ This note like to a fore-finger is made, To point to what remarkable is said; Obelisk, (†) This is a note alwaies referring to, The Margin, where the meaning you may know; Concerning contractions, or writing one or more letters for words; take these as follow for help in reading, or writing, Agt. against, admrs. administra∣tors, Bp. Bishop, dd. delivered, Dr. Doctor, Esq Esquire, Hd. Honoured, Ld. Lord, Lp. Lordship, lr. letter, md. memorandum, Mr. Master, Mris. Mistris, Obt. obedient, pd. paid, {per} per Sr. Sir, {pre} pre, St. Saint, yn then, yt that, ye the, wt what wn. when, Wp. Worship, Wll. Worshipfull 7br. September, 8br. October, 9br. November, 10br December, Q. Question, A. Answer, R. Reason, U. Use, Dr. debitor, Cr. Creditor, Xpian. Christian, pnts, presents, & and, &c. et caetera, and so forth, (to wit) namely, that is to say, mt. ment, Coll. Colonel, Capt. Captain, Lievt. Lievtenant. Our English words do very much abound,
Some of them we think meet to publish here, The Art of spelling further for to clear. (There) where it points to thing or place must be, Spelt and written as here you plainly see, [Their] when it doth claim some propriety, To any thing, tis written with e, i. Examples. [Their] House, [their] Land, [their] Goods are here, [Their] proper state doth lie just [there.] By [sums] of Money telling [some] do live, [Wait] now on me, you shall just [weight] receive, A [Prophet] true much [profit] brings to men, A [Mill-wright] cannot [write] without a Pen; [Two] men would come [to] me [to] ask a thing, 'Twas [hard] that which I [heard] they had to bring. The Horse doth [neigh;] [nay] twas the voice of men, We [write,] that's [right,] yet differently with Pen. It is good [Air,] where now the [Heir] doth dwell, Some locks of [Hair,] [are] cut, and we them sell; The [Sun] doth shine upon my [Son] to day, 'Tis [one] mans right, 'Twill be his [own] alway; To [bear] a burden on the shoulder [bare] [Rear] up the house, it is a structure [rare.] In this method I should further proceed, only think it more to the profit and help of young beginners, to explain some of our usual English words, that are seldom fully understood by them; therefore have at the end of this small Book annex'd a Table Alphabeti∣cal whereto I refer them, and in which they may not only see the several significations of words, but also the true spelling of them, whether of like sound or otherwise, the whole of which they will do well to peruse and obserue until the have
Copies of Letters now do follow here, Some young beginners therein to prepare, That when they need they may instructed be, To write in form by what they here do see; The matter being heeded, when they write, They may hereby conceive how to endite. All Letters should begin with declaration, Of friendly Titles, as a preparation; Saluting them with love and commendation, As they are in esteem, or in Relation; Then to the matter needfull short and plain, They should proceed in, as being the Maine Of their then writing, which when done to cease, And winde up all, with words of love and peace; Concluding as unto their friends they stand, n humbleness theirs, when they them command, Subscribing those their Letters with their hand, And for their superscription on the side, The name and place where now their friend doth bide First Letter, is a Letter from one at School in London to his father in the Countrey. London January, 10. 1673. Honoured Father, MY Humbly duty unto you presented, giving you all hearty thanks for all your love and indness manifested to me. I make bold at this time  present you with a few lines, being the fruits of my bour, and do hope in time to be better accomplish∣d to give you an accompt of my proceedings. In the ean time crave your acceptance of this it coming om his honoured father your obedient s
Another from one at School, to his friend that hath shewed kindness to him. London, Feb. 12. 1673 Respected Sir, HAving gained some skil in this Art of writing since my being trained therein, think it my duty to present you with some fruits thereof, as an humble gratulation, and thankful remembrance of your great love and respect shewed to me from time to time  hoping it may gain esteem, and acceptation with you do with brevity, yet in all humility Rest, subscribing my self, your obliged friend, Bartholomew Bates For his honoured friend Mr. Bates of Colchester, this A Letter from a young man newly out of his time to his friend for better acquaintance. London, March 5 1673 Respected Sir, HAving finished my seven years Apprentiship, am now entring into the world for imploy for my self, and knowing my Trade depends upon acquaint∣ance make bold to renew former friendship with you hoping if it lies in your power, to do me any kind∣ness therein, you will (for the love you bear to me) do your utmost to help me, and what you shall do there∣in shall be acceptable to your servant to command To his loving friend
A Letter from one to another for Goods which he needeth. London, April 4. 1674. SIR, HEaring by a friend of yours, that you are stored with sundry parcels of such goods which I great∣ly need; make bold to Essay a Trade with you, so as in a small parcel to become your Chapman, my stock is not great, neither do I know what oppertunity I shall have to vend many; therefore intreat your send∣ing but forty or fifty pounds worth, and as they prove shall further deal with you, the lowest price send, as also the time of payment, and I shall be punctual. being your loving friend Emanuel Endeavor. To his honoured friend, Mr. Fra. Friendshipof Famouth this A copie of a letter from a Trader to his Chapman, with his answer thereto. London, January, 27. 1674. Honoured friend, I Sent you last week a parcel of Goods by your Car∣rier, and do hope they are safe come to your hands, also according to your last dated the first in∣stant have prepared the parcel of stuffs, and this day have shipped them in the Hope of London, now bound for Cales, and marked as directed, the Bill of Lading is herein enclosed, the rest you write for shall send as soon as they are made ready for you. I would de∣sire you to remit me one hundred pounds with all speed, No more at present from, your For his honoured friend,
The Answer. Exon, February, 8 1674. Respected Sir, YOurs dated the 27 of January last, I receiv'd, and am glad to hear you have Shipped those goods to Cales: I trust they will come to a good market. Those you sent me came safe, and well conditioned. I have according to your Order remitted one hundred pounds, which will be payable in ten days, the Bill of Exco. is herein enclosed with a letter of advice to Mr. Goodpay from his respondent, hoping the Goods you are preparing will be for my turn, and come timely. I rest, your assured lo: friend, John Lovely. For his respected friend Mr. Zach. Zealet of London. T woul'd swell this Volume too too large, And make this Book of too much charge, To put down Copies in all things, That Trade and friendship daily brings. Therefore a little take and see, And strive for ingenuity, 'Tis matter that will thee and I, Both mind, and heart, and head imploy. And when engag'd with all our might, Our business will teach to endite, The form being design'd only
Here follows now some other things that may, Be helpful unto thee another day, Which take, and well improve, as is intended, By him that hath the whole in love commended, And well remember Traders should be just, In buying, selling, wherein there is trust. For God that sees All doth a blessing bring, To such that do keep faithfull in this thing, Rewarding them in basket and in store, With Riches, and with Credit more and more. Whilst others that herein no conscience make, Have Blasts from God in all they undertake; And are depriv'd of prospering whilst they, Will not just rules of Equity Obey, f you therefore would thrive. Mind honesty what you sell, as well as what you buy, And punctual be in paying that thats due, Expecting then others will so pay you. If you a Merchant be, you need know well, To make a Bill of Goods which you doe sell, A form whereof is here prepar'd by me, For Help to young beginners, if need be. Sould July 10. 1673, to Gamaliel Grout these Goods following. 59 ells of Green Bays, at 2s:5d:the ell 055l.:09s.:03d.: 87 ells of Dyed Canvas, at 1s:5d:the ell 069l.:18s.:03d.: 76 ells of Holland Cloth, at 4s:6d:the ell 197l.:02s.:00d.: 0 pieces of Fine Lawns, at 11s:6d:the ps 287l.:10s.:00d.: 9 ells of Linnen Cloth, at 2s:8d the ell 078l.:10s.:08d.: 89 ps of Dyed Fustians at 19s:0d the end 559l.:11s.:00d.: 89 ps of white Ditto, at 17s:6d the end 165l.:07s.:06d.: 9 ells of narrow cloth, at 1s:2d:the ell 015l.:02s.:02d.:
The Merchant when he doeth the money take, He ought the paying man a discharge make, A form thereof in short, yet full is here, Transcribed out, the Buying man to clear, Receiv'd the 14 of July 1673, the full of this Bill, Isay rec'd, By me Hugh Humes. Both Shop-keepers, and Merchants do when they, Their goods transport, put off, or truck away, Plain Bills of parcels make, that all may see, What Goods they are, and what their prizes be. A Shop-keepers Bill. Sould to Henry Halfgood of Harwich these. April 1. 1673, One small box of Cynamon, 8l.:8s.:8d. May 2—One barrel of New Raisons—3l.:3s.:3d. June 3—Two small parcels of Pepper—2l.:5s.:7d. Ditto 19—Two Rolls of Virginia Tobacco—1l.:8s.:6d. July 13-Five Frails of Mallago Raisons—3l.:3s.:2d. 19—A box of Sugar-Candy weight 98 l. ½—4l.:10s.:0d. Total Sum—22l.:19s.:2d. The Shop-keeper for so much he doth take, Doth to the Chapman a discharge now make, A Copie here now follows, writ by me, Some skill for you to gain, at least to see. Receiv'd the 20 of July 1673, the sum of eleve pounds ten shillings, which is in part of payment fo the Bill abovesaid, I say rec'd.
With men of Trade, sometimes need doth require, The selling man of Chapmen to desire, A bill, or bond, wherein they fix a day, The money that is owing for to pay; A form of both may very helpful be, Therefore are made to be improv'd by thee. A short Bill of Debt. BE it remembred by these presents that I Kimbolton Kindheart of Kingston Haberdasher, do owe and am indebted unto Leonard Lawless of the same, Merchant, the sum of ninety pounds of Lawfull mo∣ney of England. All which I doe promise to pay to him, or his Order, on the tenth day of July next, In testimony whereof I have hereunto put my hand and Seal the seventh of May, Anno Domini; 1674. Sealed and delivered in the presence of VVill. Knaveless. John Earle. Kimbolton Kindheart. Another of the same. BOrrow'd and receiv'd the 23 of June 1674, of Moses Manibates, the sum of One hundred pounds of Lawfull money of England, which I pro∣mise to pay upon demand. Witness my hand and Seal the day abovesaid. Testis Nath. Namis.
THe Bill thats last is good and will avail, VVHen unto it there is both hand and Seal, And 'tis much better, if to what is done, You have some it to witness, at least one; Receipts to them both looked for may be, Therefore their copies follow as you see. A receipt to the first Bill. Receiv'd the tenth day of July 1674, of Kimbol∣ton Kindheart, the sum of ninety pounds; being for so much due by a Bill of debt bearing date the seventh of May last. I say receiv'd. By me Leo. Lawless. A receipt to the second. Receiv'd the first of August 1674, of Nath. Nam the sum of one hundred pounds, which was due by  Bill of Debt, bearing date the 23 of June last, I say receiv'd. By me Moses Mani-bate Now next that doth present it self to thee, Is an example how a Bond should be, Made so Authentick, as that binding may, Enforce the Debtor, the just Sum to pay. Most Obligations are in Latin made; And so should this, but that it will be said, This little Book is made for such chiefly, That can the English tongue only apply; Therefore in English it is made for thee,
KNow all men by these presents that I Oliver Owen of Oldstreet in the County of Midle∣sex Oyl-man, am holden, and firmly doe stand bound unto Peter Pierce of Pembrook Painter, in ninety pounds of good and lawful money of England, to be paid unto the said Peter Pierce, his certain Attorney, his Executors, or Admini∣strators. To the which payment well and truly to be made, I binde my self, my Executors, and Administrators firmly by these presents, sealed with my Seal, dated the tenth of September, 1674. THe condition of this Obligation is such that if the above bounden Oliver Owen, his Executors, Ad∣ministrators, or any of them, doe well and truly pay or cause to be paid unto the above named Petor Pierce, his Executors, Administrators, or Assigns the just sum of forty five pounds of like lawfull money, at, or on the tenth day of October next coming; at, or in the now dwelling-house of the said Peter Pierce, scituate in Pembrook aforesaid, without fraudor deceit, then this Obligation shall be void, else the same to stand, and remain in full force effect and vertue. Sealed and delivered in the presence of Zachariah Ving Ambrose Pain, Scr. Oliver Owen. When Bond, or Bill, is sign'd and seal'd, it must be delivered as his Act and deed, to the party whom tis made, or to some other for his use, And all in the sight and view of the witnesses.
Now you have seen a form of Bond, and Bill, You may accept from Debtor what you will, But in my judgment a Bond is most sure, Seal'd before witness that may long endure; For Bonds with double penalty are made, VVhen nothing in a Bill of that is said, And by a Bond thy suit charge shalt recover, But nothing of thy charges by the other. VVherefore if Debtor may uncertain be, In paying when tis due, if thou can'st see, Before hand what thy lot in this case may, Chuse and accept a Bond without delay; In all thou doest deal with an honest man, And hee I pay on the day if that he can, And when the money due by Bond is paid, It is most sure a discharge then be made, A copy therefore is now writ below, The paying man at that time for to show. REceiv'd the 10th. of October 1674, of Oliver Owen the sum of forty five pounds, being for so much due by a bond Obligatory, bearing date the tenth of September last, wherein the said Oliver Owen became bound to me in penalty of ninety pounds con∣ditioned for the true payment of forty five pounds the day abovesaid; I say recd. in full satisfaction of the aforesaid bond. By me Peter Pierce. In commerce and in trade men use this way, By Exchange Bills much money for to pay, Some copies therefore here are, for thee made, VVhich may be useful in the way of Trade.
A copie of an Inland Bill. London October, 28. 1674. AT ten days sight of this my onely Bill of Exco. Pay to Mr. Richard Ruley of Rutland, or his order, the sum of one hundred pounds currant money, for the value here receiv'd of Mr. Jonathan Bates: Make good payment thereof, and put it to the accompt of your obliged friend, Simon Simson. To his honoured Mr. Quintilian Quelch of Rutland this VVhen this Bill comes to hand, he doth it show, Unto the paying man his mind to know, Which if he likes, he then acceptance makes, And when tis paid, he a discharge then takes, VVithout side of the Bill him for to clear, The form thereof, doth plainly here appear. Receiv'd the 10. of November 1674, the full of the within Bill of Exchange, I say receiv'd. By me Richard Rules. Here follows others which may inform thee, How Outland Bills also may written be. The discharge to that may shew thee how to make one to any other Bill of Exco. they be∣ing all to that effect, and writ on the back-side of the Bill, as before is said.
An Outland Bill, the first sent. London November, 3. 1674. for 500 crowns at 60 sols per crown. AT double usance, Pay this my first Bill of Ex∣change, unto Mr. Isaac Delawn, or order five hundred crowns at sixty sols per crown, for the value receiv'd of Mr. John King, and place it to accompt as per advice from yours, Will. Walwin. To Mr. John Ducayn Merchant inParis Prima. The Second Bill. London November 14. 1674, for 500 crowns at 60 sols per crown. AT double usance, pay this my second Bill of Ex∣change, my first not paid, unto Mr. Isaac De∣lawn, or order, five hundred crowns, at sixty sols per crown, for the value received here of Mr. John King, and place it to accompt as per advice, from yours, Will. Walwin. For Mr. John Ducayn Merchant in Paris. Secunda
Another Bill of Exchange for Amsterdam. A copie of the first Bill. London March 27. 1674. for 200 l. sterl. at 34 s. 4 d. fl. per l. st. AT double usance, Pay this my first Bill of Ex∣change unto Mr. Roger Rumpe, or order, two hundred pounds sterling, at thirty four shillings four pence fle. per pound st. for the value of William Wills, and place it to accompt as per advice from yours Henry Hills. To Mr. John Jones Merchant in Amsterdam Prima A copie of the second Bill of Exchange. London March 27. 1674. for 200 l. sterl. at 34 s. 4 d. fl. per l. st. AT double usance, Pay this my second Bill of Ex∣change, my first not paid, unto Mr. Roger Rumpe, or order, two hundred pounds sterling, at thirty four shillings four pence fl. per l. st. for the value of William Wills, and place it to accompt as per advice from yours Henry Hills. To Mr. John Jones Merchant in Amsterdam
Another copie of a Bill of Exchange for Livorne. The first Bill, London adii  the 25th. March 1674, for 500 l. at 53 d. ¼. st. per doller. THree moneths after date, pay this my first Bill of Exchange, unto Mr. John Jakes, or order, five hundred Dollers Exco. at fifty three pence ¼ ster∣ling per doller, for the value of himself, and place it to accompt as per advice from yours Peter Pimpillon. To Mr. William Jednings Merchant in Livorne. Pma The second Bill. London adii  the 25 March, 1674 THree Moneths after date, pay this my second bill of Exchange, my first not paid, unto Mr. John Jakes, or order, five hundred dollers Exco. at fifty three pence ¼ sterling per doller, for the value of him∣self, and place it to accompt as per advice from, yours Peter Pimpillon. To Mr. William Jednings Merchant in Livorne
Some men of Handicrafts, may this book see Therefore for them some Bills prepared be. A Carpenters Bill. Mr. William Liberal Dr. for work and materials. FOr 17 load of Oaken timber at 42 s. the Load 35l.:14s.:00d.: For 28 load of Fur-timber at 35 s. the load, 49l.:00s.:00d.: For 180 feet of Oaken Plank two—inches thick at 3d. the foot 02l.:05s.:00d.: For 17 thous. of 10 d nails at 6 s. the thous. 05l.:02s.:00d.: For 700 ½ of deals, at 6 l. 5 s. the hundred, 46l.:17s.:06d.: For 19 thous. of 6 d. nails, at 4 s. 4 d. the th. 04l.:02s.:04d.: For 7½ thous. of dou. tens, at 10 s. the thous. 03l.:15s.:00d.: For 700 of ten-groat nails, at 3 s. 4 d. the 100 01l.:03s.:04d.: For 28 pound of large spikes, at 4 d. the l. 00l.:09s.:04d.: For 8 ½ weeks work for my self, at 3 s. the day 07l.:13s.:00d.: For 8 weeks 2 days work for my man, at 2 s. 6 d. the day 06l.:05s.:00d.: Sum is 162l.:06s.:06d.: VVhen this Bill's paid, the Carpenter must make, A full discharge for what he then doth take, It being his good hap all to receive, He doth with thanks a full discharge then give, A copie here you'l find prepar'd by me, For to teach you how a discharge should be.
Receiv'd the 7 of January 1674, of Mr. William Liberal the sum of one hundred sixty two pounds and six shillings, which is in full of the Bill aforesaid, I say receiv'd. by me Xeno Xanthos. A Bricklayers Bill. Mr. Yelverton Yewel of London Dr. for work and materials. For 12 thous. of bricks at 12 s. 6 d. the th. 07l.:10s.:00d.: For 8 thousand of Tiles, at 18 s. 6 d. the th. 07l.:08s.:00d.: For 17 hund. of Lyme, at 14 s. 6 d. the hun. 12l.:06s.:06d.: For 15 load of Sand, at 4 s. 8 d. the load, 03l.:10s.:00d.: For 1000 of Nine-inch Tiles, at 10 s. 6 d. the hundred 5l.:05s.:00d.: For 40 ridge-Tiles, at 1 d. ¾ the peice, 00l.:05s.:10d.: For 3 weeks 3 dayes work for my self, at 3 s. the day 03l.:03s.:00d.: For 27 dayes ½ for my man at 2 s. 6 d. the day 03l.:08s.:09d.: For a labourer 27 days ¼ at 1 s. 8 d. the day 02l.:05s.:05d.: Sum is 45l.:02s.:06d.: The Bricklayer doth also his whole Bill take, Therefore a full discharge he doth then make, No copie here is needed, but the same, the sum and name
A Smiths Bill may thus be made. Mr. Zach. Zinthos of London his Bill. Feb. 21. 1674, Two great Bars for the Chimney, 01l.:18s.:08d.: 26. Three great bolts for the doors, 00l.:05s.:10d.: Mar. 19, One stock-lock for the outw. door, 0l.:12s.:06d.: the 27, 1675. Four pair of large hinges, 01l.:18s.:00d.: the 30, For mending the Jack 00l.:03s.:06d.: For one Fire-shovel with Grates 00l.:11s.:06d.: April 13. For one very large fire-fork 00l.:08s.:00d.: 19. For 3 spits and a pair of Ranges 01l.:10s.:00d.: 23. For 30 large Hooks & 10 staples, 00l.:05s.:00d.: 07l.:13s.:08d.: The Smiths bad fortune is but half to take, And therefore a discharge in part doth make, The which because it differs from the other, We do a copie for it here discover. An acquittance on the back-side of the bill. Receiv'd May 29 1675, of Mr. Zacheus Zinthos, the sum of three pounds sixteen shillings, being in part of payment of the within written Bill, I say receiv'd. By me William Smith. When he the rest receives he then doth make, A full discharge, a copie you may take. Receiv'd the last of March 1676, of Mr. Zinthos, the sum of three pounds seventeen shillings, being for work done for him in 74, and 75, as per bill, I say receiv'd in full of that Bill.
The Tailors use is thus a Bill to make, Therefore their form I shall not strive to break. Mr. James Nichols his Bill. For 4 yards of Broad-cloth at 13s. 6 d. the yard, 2l.:14s.:00d.: For making your suit and Coat 0l.:12s.:06d.: For Canvis, for staies, and stiffening, 0l.:02s.:00d.: For Silk and Galloon 0l.:02s.:00d.: For 16 dozen of Buttons, at 5 s. the dozen & loop-lace 4l.:00s.:02d.: For Body & sleeve linings for your doublet, 0l.:02s.:00d.: For Cottening for the Hose and Pockets 0l.:03s.:00d.: For Belly-pieces, Collar, hooks, eyes,—and stay Tape 0l.:01s.:06d.: For Tabby for lining the Coat, 1l.:02s.:00d.: For fine drawing the Coat 0l.:02s.:00d.: For making your Brussel Camlet Cloak 0l.:06s.:00d.: For Silk and Canvis for the Cape 0l.:01s.:00d.: For 6 yards of shalloon to line the Cloak at 2 s. the yard comes to 0l.:12s.:00d.: For a set of Silver and Gold buttons of the best sort 1l.:04s.:00d.: For a neck loop for the Cloak 0l.:00s.:06d.: For scizing the Flap 0l.:00s.:06d.: Total sum 11l.:05s.:02d.: Receiv'd the 21 of November 1673, the sum o eleven pounds in full of this Bill, I say receiv'd. By me Geo. Slow.
Another Taylors Bill. Mris. Sarah Phoach her Bill. For making your Silk-gown laced 00l.:15s.:00d.: For stayes for the same 00l.:05s.:06d.: For Silk and Galloon 00l.:01s.:06d.: For sleeve and body linings 00l.:01s.:06d.: For black Callico to lay under the body and sleeves 00l.:01s.:00d.: For Ribboning to the Gown 00l.:01s.:06d.: For making your Petticoat richly laced 00l.:05s.:00d.: For Bordering, binding, silk and Pockets l.:s.: d.: Total sum 01l.:13s.:06d.: Receiv'd the 4 of December 1674 of Mris Sarch Phoach, by the hands of her maid servant, Elizabeth Goodworker, the sum of twenty nine shillings in full of this bill, I say receiv'd 01l.;09s.;00d.; By me William Nimble. You there may see two Taylors bills at large, Both paid, and therefore to each a discharge, VVhich may teach you how a receipt to make, Although you should not all the whole sum take.
Here follows a Shoemakers bill. Mr. Lowmer Lowns his bill Novemb, 30. 1674, For 3 pair of Mens shoes, at 4s.:4d. the pair, 00l.:13s.:00d.: For 4 pair of womens shoes, at 2s.:8d. the pair, 0l.:10s.:08d.: For one pair of large waxed boots, 01l.:04s.:00d.: For 1 pair of womens laced shoes & slaps 00l.:09s.:06d.: For one pair of cloth shoes and goloshes with ferry boats 00l.:09s.:00d.: For vamping and waxing a pair of boots 00l.:06s.:06d.: For 13 dozen of wooden heel shoes, at 30 s. the dozen 19l.:10s.:00d.: For a pair of shashoons for boots 00l.:01s.:08d.: Sum is 23l.:05s.:04d.: Receiv'd the 19 of January 1674 of Mr. Lowns the full of this bill, I say receiv'd 23l.:05s.:04d.: By me John Cordwainer, One thing yet follows more that needful is, That all should carefull be they it not miss, And that is true discharges for their rent, VVhen a full quarter is run out and spent, Least they do pay to such that tis not due, And so the rightful landlord do them sue, There being many times much trouble when, The claiming Landlords are not honest men.
VVherefore when you your rent do pay, See that you keep this rule alway, To take discharge from Landlords sure, And in such sort that may endure; If to the quarter day you have, Clear'd all that the Landlord doth crave; See that he make his writing so, As is the form of this below. Receiv'd the 3 of December 1675; of Valentine Vease, the sum of fifty five hillings, which is for a quarters rent for his dwelling-house, due at Michaelmas last, I say receiv'd, in full to that day. LV. s. by me William Wilson. A receipt for Rent in part. Receiv'd the 12 of January 1673 of VViddow Lamey ten shillings, which is n part of payment for a quarters rent or her dwelling-house, due at Christmas ast, I say receiv'd 10 s. By me Zachariah Zanthos. If for house and land thus. Receiv'd the 22 of August 1673, of A. B. the sum of nineteen pounds, be∣ing for a quarters rent for his dwelling-ouse, with sundry parcels of land there∣nto adjoining, which he now holds by ase from me, due at Midsummer day st past. I say receiv'd 19 l.
An acquittance from one that receives rent by vertue of an order from the Landlord. Receiv'd the 28 of April 1674, of Richard Rowls the sum of ten pounds, which is for a years rent for his dwell∣ing house, due last Lady day, I say rec'd for the use, and by the special order and appointment of my Mr. John Peaceable Esquire — 10 l. By me John Yoman. It is contentment to most men, accompts oft for to clear, And with exactness by their pen, The sum to make appear; And when the Balance 'tween them both, is fully satisfied, They do a full discharge then make, that they long friends may bide, True copies therefore here are made, for both of them to make; And to prevent all future claims, each from the other take. A copie of a full discharge. Receiv'd the ninth day of October, 1674, of Mr. Leonard Fair-dealer, the sum of ninety pounds thirteen shillings, being for so much due upon accompt, & is in full of all reckonings, dues, debts, ac∣compts and demands whatsoever to the day abovesaid — 90: l. 13. s. 0 d.
Another of the same. October, 9 1674. Receiv'd then of Mr. James Peaceable upon accompt, two hundred pounds, be∣ing for goods sold him at sundry times, And is in full of all accompts, reckonings Bonds, Bills, Debts, Dues and Demands whatsoever, from the beginning of the world unto the day abovesaid, I say rec'd the sum aforesaid — 200 l. By me Leo. Fair-dealer. For to confirm a full discharge we do, Advise, a seal may be put thereunto, And if a witness may be gain'd t'would be, Much more authentick to Posterity. When troubles and Law suits arise, Betwixt men in their Trade, And by the Law or Equity, good friends again are made; The safest way to keep them so, is such Writings to make; As may non suit the claiming man, when he a course doth take; A general discharge therefore, is requisite to be, Made and confirm'd between them both,
A copie of a general Release. KNow all men by these presents, That I Peter Make-bate of Muntham in the County of Kent Mercer, have remised, released, and for ever quit∣claimed; and by these Presents do for me, my heirs; Executors, and Administrators remise, release, and for ever absolutely quit-claim unto John Quiet of the City of Westminster Taylor, his Heirs, Executors, and Adminstrators, all, and all manner of Actions, Cause and causes of Actions, Suits, Bills, Bonds, Writings Obligatory, Debts, Dues, Duties, Accompts, sum, and sums of money, Judgments, Executions, Extents, Quarrels, Controversies, Trespasses, Damages, and demands whatsoever, both in Law and Equity, or otherwise howsoever; which against the said John Quiet, I ever had, now have, or which I, my Heirs, Executors, and Administrators, shall or may have, claim, challenge, or demand, for, or by reason of any matter, cause or thing, from the beginning of the World unto the day of the date of these presents. In witness whereof I have hereunto put my hand and Seal, this first day of April, Anno Domini, 1674. Sealed and delivered in the presence of Ambrose Observer Benja. True-heart, Scr. Peter Make-bait. The like should John Quiet sign, seal, and deliver unto Peter Make-bait, to prevent fu∣ture controversie and trouble.
An Alphabetical Table. ABandon, put away. Abase, bring low. Abet, to maintain. ABel, the second son of Adam. Able, sufficient. absolute, without excep∣tion. Abreviate, to shorten. abortive, a child born be∣fore its time. abrupt, disorder, out of frame. abrupt, disorderly. Absolve, to quit, free, for∣give. absurd, against reason. acute, quick, witty. accurate, exact, curious. Atchieve, to get the up∣perhand. Atchieved, obtain'd the conquest. obsolete, of use. acceptance, entertainment accidence, introduction to Grammar. accident, change. incident, subject to casu∣alty. account, esteem. Achor, a valley. Acorn, that grows on Oaks, Acre of land, 160 Pole. Adage, a proverb, an old saying. Adopt, to make one his heir. addicted, devoted. adult, grown to full years. alias, otherwise. All, all things. Awl the shoe-makers awl. Ale, to drink. ail, some trouble. alley a narrow passage. ally, associate. aloud, when one speaks so. Allowed, approved. Altar, on which they sa∣crifice. alter, to change, annual, yearly. Annal, Chronocle. arrows, to shoot with. arrowse, to stir up. arrass, rich cloth. harrass, to toil.
Astronomy, art of Coele∣stial bodies. ascent, a going upwards. Ass, a dull beast. ash, a tree. ask, to enquire. Asp, a serpent. Hasp, to fasten the door. Ax, to cut with. acts, great deeds. Ant, a pismire. Aunt, mothers sister. arrant, very, errand, business one goes on. attach, to take hold of a body. Athiesme, denying the Godhead. attaint, to corrupt. Attaque, to face about in a sea-fight. austere, a fierce grim man Oyster, a fish. attentive, to give diligent heed. audacity, boldness. augre, a Piercer. augment, encrease. authentick, undoubted au∣thority. awry, to go awry. B. Bable, a toy. Babel confusion Babble, to prate. Batcheler, one unmarried. Bachelour of Arts. bacon, swines flesh dryed. Barrester, a Lawyer that pleads at the bar. Beocon on a hill. beckon, to nod at. beautifie, adorn. badge, a mark. batch, so many loaves as is baked at once. Bailiff, or Sergeant. bail; to put in security, bald, that hath lost his hair ball; to play with. bawl, to cry. Baal, an Idol. baulm, an herb. band; for the neck. bond, for money. Barbara, a womans name Barbary, a part of Africa. Barbarism, cruelty. bark of a tree. Barque, a little ship. Berk-shire. base, dishonourable. Bas-Viol. Bear, a beast. beer, to drink. bier, to carry corps. bellows, to blow with. bellies, paunches.
bewray, discover. beseech, to entreat. besiege to beset souldiers. bin, to keep bread in. been, were; or wast. biggin, to wear. begin, to enter on busi∣ness. bittour, a wild-sowl. bitter, not sweet. Bigamy, Marriage of two wives at once. baudy, obscene, filthy. body, a substance. bodies of a gown. boll, to wash in. bowl, to drink in, or to play with. To blanch, to pull of the rind. To bleach, or whiten clothes. boar, a swine. bore, to pierce a hole. bough of a tree. bow, to bend. bowe to shoot. boy, a lad. Brachygraphy, short∣writing. bread; to eat bred reard up, or brought up. brain; or skull. bran of wheat. breaches, divisions. breeches; men wear. bruite, a rumour. brute, rude. bury, to lay in the earth. berry of rabbets. buy to purchase. by me, or by and by. Burglary, breaking into a house. Bumbast, cotten; wool. C. CAble, a rope. Cabal, private con∣sultation. call, to name. caul, sewet that covers the bowels. capable, fit to receive. Carol, a Song. Coral; for children. carriage, behaviour. Carryer, one that carries. carriere, a horse-race, full∣speed. carrets to eat. Chariots to ride in. casuals that happens by chance. causey, a made-way. A channel; or gutter. A kennel for dogs. cease; to leave of. Celestial; heavenly.
seise, to lay hold on. size, bigness. cellar; to lay drink in. sellar, one that selleth. cement, to fasten together. censure, a judgment. censor, a reformer. centorie, a plant. centurie, a hundred years sentry, a souldier on watch chafe, to fret. chaff of wheat. chattel, all goods; leases. cattel, beasts. chear, to make merry. cheer, good food. A chare woman. chair; to sit in. child-blain, sores from chilness. Cittern, or cithern, an in∣strument of musick. circumspect, wary. Citron; to eat. circumference, a round compass about a centre circumlocution, one word expressed by many. clause, a piece of a sen∣tence. clarifie, to make clear. Claws, nails. To cloath with cloth. Coat, a garment. cote, a plate of inclosed ground. coife, for womens head∣attire could, be able. cogitation, thought. coold; or made cold. collar; for a doublet. choler, a humor. Collier, that carrieth coals Scholar, one that learneth. colour the cloth. colures in the Globe. Comet, a blazing-star. common, free for any. complex, join'd together. commune, to converse. comfort, matter of joy. confects made with Sugar. consumption, a wasting disease. condole, to mourn over. coop for hens. cope, to change. cops of wood. concise; brief. concomitant, that accom∣panies. Colonel over a regiment. compendious, short. Colony, a Plantation. colander; or strainer, Coroner, or Crowner. corroborate, to strengthen
A connexion, a tying to∣gether. consanguinity, kindred by blood. consolidate, to make firm. conserve, to keep. conspicuous; clear; notable A constellation, a compa∣ny of stars. consumate, to finish. counsel, advice. council, to take counsel in course, rough, gross. cormorant, glutton. corse, a dead body. Costarmonger, an apple seller. costive, bound in body. Cousin, a near relation. cousen, to cheat. countermand, to bid con∣trary. current, a stream. currant, passable. corants, plums. cravet to be worn about the neek. crevet, a Goldsmiths mel∣ting-pot. D. DAm a stopping of the water. Damn, to condemn. Damsel, a brave lass. damsin, a black plum. Dandruff, or scurf in the head. A darling, one that's dear. dandeprat, dwarf. dear, beloved. it cost dear. deer, an hart, buck. defer, to delay. differ, to vary. demur, debate, doubt. deambulation, walking abroad. demure, modest. Desart, wildernese. desert, to forsake. descent, genealogie. decent, comly, hansom. dissent, to disagree. devices, tricks. Devizes, a Towns name. diary, a daily calender. dairy, where cheese is made. Dilate, enlarge. discomfit, to make com∣fortless. Dine, to eat a dinner Digest, to set in order. dissolute, debaucht, loose. dissolate, uncomfortable. doer, a maker. door of a house.
Domestick, houshold. dough, unbaked bread. done, finished. dun, a dark colour. Doest thou blow the dust. doller, a Dutch-coine. dolour, grief. drain, to draw ponds dry. drawn, pull'd. draught of drink. drought, driness. driblets, small sums. dray, a Brewers sled. draw, to pull. dew, small drops. due, or owing. dunce, an unapt boy. E. Ear, a mans ear. ere, before. to erre in judgement. Year, 12 moneths. early, betimes. Yearly, year by year, edge, or brim. Hedge, or Fence. Earn, to get money. yern, moved with com∣passion. Yarn, thread. Earth we tread on. hearth, the chimney floor. East, where the sun riseth. Effeminate, woman-like, Egrimony, sickness, grief. Emerauld, a precious∣stone. Emeroids, Piles. Emulate, to strive to ex∣ceed. imminent, hanging over. Elegancy, finenesse in speech. Esther, a Queens name. Easter a times name. Hester, an Idols name. Yesterday, a day past. eyes, to see with. Ice, frozen water. interr, bury. enter, to go in. intire, whole. Endorse, to write on the backside. Epidemical, universal. Etimology, a true expo∣sition. exasperate to make angry Extirpate, to root out. F. FAme, rumour. facility, ease, facile, easie. feign, to counterfeit. fanatick, a distracted per∣
fair, beautiful. fare, to feed on. feat, fine, neat. fell, to hew new timber. A Feoffee, one intrusted in an estate for another. felicity, happiness. fin'd for Alderman. finde, to get again. fiends, evil spirits. fins on fish. fillip with a finger. Philip, a mans name. flea, to pull off the skin. flea, or that breeds in beds. flee, to escape. flitch of Bacon. flagrant, burning, ardent. flour of a chamber. flower of a plant. flower, fine meal. flocks of wool. Bloody-flux. fool, a silly fellow. foal, a young colt. foil, a repulse. fomentation, a warm me∣dicine. foul, dirty. fowl, a bird. fore, before, former. four, a number, or 4 ones. forth, without. fourth day of June. frize, shagged cloth. freeze, to congeal. froise, a sort of pancake. phrase, a quaint expression furres, fine hairy skins. furze, prickly shrubs. frugal, thrifty. G. GAllies, great boats. Gallows, to hang rogues. gard, a great hem of a garment. Guard, a company of men that guard a person. Gargle, to wash the mouth and throat. garden where plants grow Guardian, One trusted with a fatherless child. Garrulity, or vain babling. gentle, mild. Gentile, Heathen. Gestures, the carriage of the body. Jester, one that breaks a jest. Genius, a natural inclina∣tion. Geography, a description of the earth. glister as gold. glyster, given to a sick man. Gay, a fine suit of clothes.
gout, a disease in the joints grass of the earth. grase, to eat grass, Grace infused into the soul Gray, a colour. Grey-hound. groan, to make a doleful cry. grown, thriven. groat, four pence. grot, a cave. a gross, 12 dozen. gross, fat. guess, a conjecture. guest, to conjecture. guest, whom we entertain. guilt, or guilty. guilt, gilded. gun, to shoot. gone, went away. H. HAch, to hach cold meat. hatch for a door. hatch up the chicken. hatches of a ship. hale, to lug Hail-stones hare, we hunt Hair, of the head A haunch of Venison heir, the eldest son an harbinger, one that goes before Halser, that which haleth a hye, to make hast high, lofty hoy, avessel heart in the breast hart, a Deer hear, hearken here, in this place herring, a fish heard, I did hear Herd, a drove of Cattel hard, solid Herse, to lay over the dead Hippocras, a kind of sweet wine compounded. hoarse with a cold Horse, to ride on Hollow, empty hollo, to cry aloud hallow, to make holy holly, a tree holy, devout hole that is bored whole, the total Honny-moon, a proverb applied to som that love well at first, and not so well afterward home at his house whom, that which hoop of a barrel whoop, or cry aloud hoar, a frost whore, a harlot hore-hound a plant
hue, avisage, Physiognomy hu and cry hew, to cut hough, a suddain pet hurly burly, a tumult Hirarchy, Principality in subordination I. Jambs, side posts of a door James, a mans name Idol, a false God idle, slothfull Isle or Island, oyl Olive employ, to set to work Ignominie, infamy Illegitimate, base born incite, to provoke insight, skill in any thing impugne, to stir against, resist impenetrable, that which cannot be pierced impregnable, invincible imprecation, cursing imbecility, weak, infirm ingenuous, free, good na∣tur'd inflexible, not to be mov'd ingenious, good parts Inne, a house of entertain∣ment in, in this place inculcate, to press, to teach by often repetition. interpellation, a let in ones business, an interruption inviolable that cannot be broken Job, a pat ent man jobs, an odd piece of work joul of Salmon Joice, a womans name joist, a little beam jointure, wifes dowry juice, liquor squeezed out iterate, to repeat a thing itch, a humour hitch, entangle jug, a bottle Jurisdiction, power, autho∣rity, mastership, domi∣nion K. kill, to destroy kiln, to dry malt in kailes, nine pins chyle, meat first digested keel, the bottom of a ship keen, or sharp kin, one nearly related knead the dough The nave of a cart wheel knave, a vile fellow L. leger de main, crafty con∣veyance lamb, that a sheep brings lame, one that halts
launch, to put out a ship from harbour lass, a young maid last, to make shoes upon Latin, the latin tongue Latten, tinne line in writing loyn of mutton Leaden, made of Lead Leyden a University in Holland led, was led by another lead, to guide league, a covenant of peace leg, that one goes upon leaper, one that leapeth Leper, one that hath the Leprosie Leopard, a spotted beast lease, to pick up shattered corn a leash of hounds lease, an indenture least, that which is least less, small lessee; he that takes a leas lest; a note of forbidding; Legion; six thousand men legends; Popish fables Leman; a strumpet Lemons, or Oranges lessen; to make less lesson; that Scholars learn Letice, a womans name lettice; an herb lattices; cross barrs in windows lice, filthy vermin lies; false tales lighter of Coals limber; weak; easily bent limner that draws pictures liturgy, the comon prayer lethargy; a drowsie disease loath; to disdain loth; unwilling Lunatick; frantick lustre; shining luxurious; riotous; given to pleasure M. Mail; a coat of mail to pack up things megazine; a store-house for war Maugre; in spight; against ones will Male; the he; or Masculine melancholy; sad; heavy; sullen; solitary major; a commander in the Army metropolitan; chief city or town maior of a city, Lord Major Maturity, ripeness, fulness
mare, that bears colt A mark, two nobles, thir∣teen shillings 4d. main, might, chiefest mane of a horse manchet, fine white bread mansion, a Lords chief house manner, fashion manners, good carriage mannour, a Lordship manure, to dung-ground maranatha, accursed marred, spoiled, corrupted married, joyned in marri∣age marshal, the name of an Officer martial, belonging to war martin, a bird martyr, Christs witness Merton, a Town in Surrey mass, the Popish letany mast, the mast of a ship maste, acorn medlar, a sort of fruit medler, a busie body melon, a kind of pompion million, ten hundred thou∣sand meet, fit, convenient meat, that we eat message, errand messuage, tenement meeter, fitter meter, verse, rhime Methridate; a confection in Physick might, power mile, 1760 yards in length mite, small coine, a worm moat, a pond abouta house mote, the least dust or that which breeds in wool Moore, a mans name more; that exceedeth moor; a fenny ground mortar that we pound in morter; made of lime and sand Moyety, the one half mo. for more mowe; to cut grass mow, a rick of corn muzzle, to stop the mouth muscle, a small shell fish muscle, a moving part of the body N. NAught, bad, wicked. Nought, nothing. Neather, lower. neither, none of them. nesh, tender, effeminate. nice, curious, delicate. Neece, a brother or siders
Nephew, a brothers son. neigh as horses do. nay, not so, or no. nigh, near. A Noble, six shillings 8 d. nose on the face. Noise, stir, clamour. News, report of things. nonnage; one not come to age. notorious, noted for some vice. O. OBscene, filthy. Oar, to row with. Ore, unrefined metal. Oyer and terminer. One, the first number. own, to acknowledg with propriety. Omniscient, All-seeing. ominous, portending good or hurt. Once, one time. One's, of one, as one's body, one's right Ounce in weight. Onion, a plant. Union, agreement. Oh, a note of bemoaning. Opprobrious, reproachful Owe, to be in debt. Oppugne, to assault, to batter. Orthography, true writ∣ing. Ostentation, vain boasting P. A Pace, or step, 2 feet ½. Pail, to cary milk in. pale, or wan. pale, or pales to a garden. Paragraph; that which is contain'd in one sen∣tence. Pair, a pair of hose. pare, to cut off. repair, to mend what is decay'd, or to go to a place. palate, the roof of the mouth. Pallet, a little bed palliate, to cloak a busi∣ness. Pavilion, a tent. pains, labour. panes of glass. pans of Brass. Parson of a Parrish. penetrate, to pierce. person, a man or moman penury, want. partition, as a wall. petition, an humble re∣quest. Permanent, durable. Patent open, as a letter
Patins, that women walk upon. patience, that grace of suffering. Patient, a sick person. Pause, a stop in speaking. paws of a Lion. peice, a peice of cloth. pease, pulse. Pear, a sort of fruit. Peer, a Noble man. pebble, a little stone. people, a multitude of men. pens for writing. pence, as six pence. pestil, wherewith we pound, something. Pessle of Pork. Epistle, a letter. Pistol, a little gun. pizzle of a beast. Phlebotomy, letting blood Pilate, who condemned Christ. Pilot, a guide of a ship. place, room, space. plaice, a flat fish. plat, a parcel of ground. plait, to set the hair in order. play, a game, or comedie. plea, a defence, excuse. To poach an egg. Pottage, or porrage to eat. Portage, carriage. Pole, a long stick. poll the head, or to cut the hair. poor, in want. pore, to fix the eyes on a thing. potion, a parcel or quan∣tity given. portion, a daughters por∣tion. power, might. power out of a vessel. pragmatical, a practitio∣ner in the Law, or one expert in many things. Pray, to put up requests to God. Prey, a spoil, to devour. Pry, to search into. precedent, fore-going. President, chief-ruler, or example. Press of people. Prest-money. Press for books. price, value, worth. prize, taken from an ene∣my, or to value goods Praise, to commend. principal, chief. principle, a fundamental
propensity, towardness, inclination profit, advantage. Profundity, depth. profound, deep. Prophet, one that foretells things. Puissant, mighty, strong. Q. Quadripartite, of four parts Quadruple; four times as much. quarrel, strife, bickering quarie of glass quarrie of stones querie, a question quarter, the fourth part quartan, belonging to the 4th. part quench, to put out fire quince; a fruit quean; a strumpet Queen; the Kings wife R. Raca; empty, silly Rachal; a place Radition; brightness Rachel, Jacobs wife radical; inbred rake-hell; a notorious rogue race; descent; or horse-race rack, to torment men rack, for horses hay wreck, ruin shipwrack, a ship cast a∣way raise, to lift up rays, sun-beams rise, to rise up Razor, to shave with A raiser of taxes rice, a sort of corn rosen, a binding gum read, as to read a book red, a colour reed, that grows real, sincere, in earnest royal, Kingly, noble rear, to lift up rare, something excellent rere, behind as rere-ward reciprocal, mutual reign, to rule as soveraign rain, drops from the sky rain-bow rain of a bridle reins, of the back to rinse linnen recapitulate, to rehearse briefly retch, to stretch reach, to fetch a thing to one wretch, miserable to repugne, to resist
right, equal; just right hand rite, ceremony write with a pen Wright, a mans name rhetorick the art of speak∣ing eloquently roan, reddish colour Rouen, a city in France Rome; a City rome to rage, tear all be∣fore one room; a space, a chamber rough; rugged, course roof of an house ruff; plaited as a ruff band row; of Trees row; in a boat roe; a wild-goat rowel of a spur rule; that we should walk by S. safeguard; sure custody sage; a herb sage; grave, wise; sageness; gravity; weighti∣ness saveguard, that women ride in sale; to be sold sayl of a ship salve; a plaister save; to defend; or deliver saviour, one that saves scarce, hardly scars; cuts healed up scent, smell; that hounds do follow. since; since the time senses; 5 senses; hearing; seeing; smelling; tasting; feeling sent; I did send school; where boys are taught scull; the brain pan scholars; such as do learn scullers; little boats Sea, the Ocean say; to speak see; to behold seal; as to seal a letter ciel; to make a cieling seer; a prophet Seir; a country senior; the elder junior, the younger Seignior; the chief man in Turky seasin; as to make livery, to give the right to a∣nother seisin possession season; opportunity Sex; as male or female sects; factions Surgeon, or Chirurgeon. Sergeant at Mace that Ar∣
Shear, that we cut. sheer quite off. shire, a County. share, part with another. shave, as Barbers do. sheaves of corn. sheathe, to put into the sheath. sheep, that bears wool. Ship, that goes to Sea. sinister, unjust, not equal. shekel of the sanctuary, two shillings. sickle, to reap with. shoot, a young sprig. shoot, bullets, arrows. shout, make a noise. shut the door. Shute, a mans name. Souldier that fights. shoulder of the body. shrew, a field mouse. shrew, a curst woman. shuttle, to weave with. subtile, cunning. sight of the eyes. cite, to quote an author. sign, a mark. sing with the voice. singe, in the flame. sink, a gutter. cinque-port-town. sigh, a mourning. sith, seeing that. sithe; that we mow with. seethe; to boyl. slead; to drag things on. sledge; a huge hammer. slow; not quick. slough; a dirty pool. so; as in that manner. to sow corn; seed. sew; with needle and thread. I saw; or have seen. to saw timber. Soal; of the foot. sole; onely; a fish. soul; or body. soar; to fly higher. sore; painful; tender. sowre, contrary to sweet. some, few; certain; some body. sum; a sum of money. sun; the sun that shines. son; a fathers son. spear; a sharp pointed weapon. sphear; the circle wherein the stars move. stairs; steps to go up. stares; birds. stare, to look stedfastly on. Stars, in the firmament. staple of the door. staple; a firm commodity. stable; for horses.
stopple of a bottle. stature; proportion; big∣ness. Statute; Law made. Statue; an Effigies. stead; room; lieu; in stead of. Steed; a stately horse. bed-stead; that we lye upon. steel; to edge tools with∣all. stile; a faculty in writing. Steer, a Bullock. steer; to guide a Ship. stood; did stand. stud; a small post. straight; even; quickly. streight; distress, strait. succour; aid; relief. sucker; a sprig. Suit in Law suit of clothes Sewet; fat of Beef, or mutton swound; to faint. sound; intire. T. TAber; timbrel, a little drum. taper; a stately wax can∣dle. entail; an inheritance in fee Tail; of a beast. tale, an idle story. tall, high in stature. Teal; a fowl. Tares, weeds in the corn. tears, that we do weep. Taint, to infect. Taunt, to flout; jeer. attaint; to convict by Law Thames, a river. Team, of Horses teem, to be with child. teat, which a child sucks. Tit, a little horse. Tenor; in musick. Tenor, the purport of a thing. Tenure the manner of holding tenements thorow; as to pierce tho∣row through; by means of throw; to cast off Thrush a singing bird truss; to tye up thyme; a herb time; continuation of hours Title of honour; or right to a thing tittle; a point; a speck toe, the toe of the foot too, too much or too little towe; Ockam; combing of
two, two things to; to a place two; to hale a boat tomb; a monument, sepul∣chre tome; a section part of a folio tongue; that we speak with tongs; to take up coals with torn; that torners do make turn; to move to and fro torne; or rent track; footsteps tract; or treatise treaty; parley concerning peace treatment; entertainment tripartite, of three parts trey, a vessel tray, number of three V. vacant, empty vacation, a respite time vocation, calling or im∣ployment vain, empty, foolish vein in the body vail, covering of the face vale, to put off, submit vale, or valley vale, farewell Venice, a great City Venus, the goddess of vial, phial, a wide mouth∣ed pot, or cup Viol, an instrument of mu∣sick vice, wickedness voice, to sing with visage feature in the face vizzard to hide the face with vital spirits wherein life is seated victuals, food, provision Voucher, advocate U. Umbles, of a Deer humble; low, submissive Umpire; that decides a controversie use, custom usury, money upon inter∣est us; we Uz, Jobs Countrey utensils, things necessary for our use vulgar, common W. Wain, declining of the Moon wan, pale, of a sickly look wand, a riding rod waist, ones middle
waste, desolate, useless waits, the City musicians wast, or wert waites, he waiteth weights, as Troy weight 12 ounces to a pound, or Avoir de pois weight 16 ounces to a pound wight, an Island wales a Countrey walls of a City wale, great thread in stuff bewail, to bemoan Wakes, country feasts a wake, to rowse up walk, to go by leisure walks, where people do walk wardship, the guardian∣ship of Orphan worship, an Esquires dig∣nity warp, to chap as boards do warp, yarn; woven woof yarn, that goeth athwart the cloth hoof of a Horse way, that we walk in weigh, to try in a balance wey, a wey of Cheese whey, and butter-milk, wear, to put on were, they were were, a commodity wier, Iron thread weel, to catch fish wee'l, for we will weal, wealth; a pimple weild, to turn a sword a∣bout wild, untame wicked, ill given, debaucht wicket; an half door win, to get a wager wind, that blows wine, squeezed out of grapes witch, that bewitcheth which, that, who woad, dying stuff wood, fewel; timber wo, alass misery woe, to be a suitor wrap, to fold in rap, to give a small blow rape; to force wring, to squeeze hard ring, on the finger wrote; I have written wrought, I did work by rote, without book wrong, to do wrong X. Xpian, Christian, X ten
Y. YEa, yes yet, nevertheless to wit, viz. or videlicet, that is to say yest, barm, to mix with meal for bread it's, for it is tis, for it is you, thou, ye an ewe, or sheep yrksom, tedious yellow of colour year, 12 Months, or 365 dayes, and 6 hours ynkhorn, to put ynk in, to write withal yeeld, to render up, to sub∣mit yew, tree yolk, of eggs yoak, that oxen draw in Oak, a tree yore, in old time ewer, a small necked pot your, as your book Z. ZEdary, wormseed zeal, great love, ar∣dent affection The Zodiack, that of the firmament, underwhich the planets move Zion, or Mount Zion, the Church of God, whom he hath chosen to dwell in for ever.
These proper names, with what they signifie, Are here added, for you to learn thereby. ABel, mourning Abiah, the will of God Abraham, father of a great multitude Adam, man, earthly Abigail, the fathers joy Andrew, strong, or manly Barnabas, the son of con∣solation Baruch, blessed Benjamin, the son of the right hand Bethel, the house of God Caleb, as a Hart Daniel, judgement of God David, beloved Eleazar the help of God Eliezer the help of God Elijah, God the Lord, or a strong Lord Elisha, my God saveth or the health of God Emanuel, God with us Ephraim, fruitful Eunice, good victory Ezekiel, the strength of God Enoch, taught or dedicate Ezra, an helper Gabriel, a man of God Habakuk, a wrestler Hilkiah, the Lords gentle∣ness Jacob, a supplanter James, a maintainer Ichabod, the glory is de∣parted Jedidah, beloved Jehosaphat, the Lord is the judge Jesus a Saviour Job, sorrowful Joseph, encrease Israel, a prince with God Isaac, laughing Lazarus, the help of God Levi, joyned Lot, wrapped, joyned Melchizedek, king of righteousness Mehetabel, how good is God, or God doing well Michael, who is God, or who is like God! Moses, drawn up, or taken out Nehemiah, comfort, or the Rest of the Lord Noah a ceasing or rest Paul, marvellous Peniel, seeing God
Peter, a stone, or rock Phebe, clear, or bright Phinehas; a bold counte∣nance Philip, a warriour Rachel, a sheep Rebecca, fed, or blunt, con∣tention, or contention hindred Sabbath, Rest Samuel, heard of God Sarah, a Lady, or dame Shem, renowned Simon, hearing, or obeying Theophilus, a friend of God Thomas, deepness, without bottom Timothy, the honour of God Titus, honourable Ʋzziel, the strength of God Zabdiel, the dowry of God Zachariah, mindful of the Lord Zephaniah, the hiding of the Lord FINIS
