19165.5 99899190 150717
A most excellent Song of the loue of young Palmus, and faire Sheldra, with their vnfortunate loue. To the tune of Shackley-hay. YOung Palmus was a Ferriman, whom Sheldra faire did loue: At Shackley where her shéep did graze, she there his thoughts did proue. But he vnkindly stole away, and left his loue at Shackley hay. Fa, la la, fa, la la la la. So loud at Shackley did she cry, the woods resound at Shackley-hay. Fa, la la, fa, la la la la. But all in vaine she did complaine, for nothing cauld him moue: Till wind did turne him backe againe, and brought him to his loue. When she saw him thus turnd by safe, She turnd her loue to mortall hate. Fa, la la &c. Then wéeping to her did he say, Ile liue with thée at Shackley-hay. Fa, la la, &c. No, (quoth she) I thée deny, my loue thou once didst scorne: And my prayers wouldst not heare, but left me here forlone: And now being turnd by fate of wind, Thou think'st to win me to thy mind. Fa, la la, &c. Go, go, farewell, I thée denay, Thou shall not liue at Shackley-hay. Fa, la la, &c. If thou dost my loue also , because I liue on seas: Or that I am a Ferry-man, my Sheldra doth displease: I will no more in that estate, Er seruile vnto wind and . Fa, la la, &c. But quite forsake Boate, Dares, & Sea, And liue with thée at Shackley-hay. Fa, la la, &c. My Sheldra's bed shall be my Boat, her armes shall be my Dares, where loue in stead of storms shall float, on pleasant downs and shores: Her swéetest breath my gentle gale, Through sides of loue to driue my saile. Fa, la la, &c. Her looke my praise, and she my ioy, To liue with me at Shackley-hay, Fa, la la, &c. Not Phao shall with me compare, so fortunate to proue: Faire Venus neuer was his fare, Ile beare the Quéene of loue: The working waters neuer feare, For Cupids selfe our Barge shall stéere, Fa, la la, &c. And to the shore I still will cry, My Sheldra comes to Shackley-hey. Fa, la la, &c. To strew my Boate for thy auaile, Ile rob the flowrie shores: And whilst thou guid'st the silkon saile, Ile row with siluer Dares: And as vpon the streames we float, A thousand Swans shal guide our boat. Fa, la la, &c. And to the shore still will I cry, My Sheldra comes to Shackley-hay. Fa, la la, &c. And haue a story painted there, wherein there shall be séene: How Sapho lou'd a Ferriman, being a learned Quéene. In golden letters shall be writ, How well in loue himselfe he quit. Fa, la la, &c. That all the Lasses still shall cry, With Palmus wée'le to Shackley-hay. Fa, la la, &c. And walking dastly to the Strand, wée'le angle in the brooke: And fish with thy white-lilly hand, thou néedst no other hooke: To which the fish shall soone be brough & striue which shall the first be caught Fa, la la, &c. A thousand pleasures will we try, As we doe low to Shackley-hay. Fa, la la, &c. And if we be opprest with heat, in mid-time of the day: Vnder the Willowes tall and great, shall be our quiet bay: Where I will make thée fans of bow From Phoebus beames to shade thy browe Fa, la la, &c. And cause them at the Ferry cry, A boat, a boat to Shackley-hay. Fa, la la, &c. A troupe of dainty neighboring girles shall dance along the strand: Vpon the grauell all of pearles, to wait when thou shalt land, And cast themselues about thée round, Whilst thou with garlands shall be crown Fa, la la, &c. And all the shepheards with ioy shal O Sheldra is come to Shackley-hay. Fa, la la, &c. Although I did my selfe absent, 'twas but to try thy mind: But now thou maist thy selfe repent, for being so vnkind: For now thou art turnd by wind & fa In stead of loue th'hast purchast hate. Fa, la la, &c. Wherefore returne thée to the Sea, And bid farewell to Shackley-hay. Fa, la la, &c.
The second part, to the same tune. THus all in vaine he did complaine, and no remorse could find: Yong Palmus through his own disdaine made Sheldra faire vnkind: And she is from him fled and gone, He laid him in his boat alone, Fa, la la, &c. And so be tooke him to the Sea, And bad farewell to Shackley-hay. Fa, la la, &c. Then from the happy sandy shore, into the floating waues: His vessell fraught with brinish teares, into the maine he laues. But all in vaine, for why, he still With wéeping eyes his boat did fill, Fa, la la, &c. And lancht his boat into the sea, And bade farewell to Shackley-hay. Fa, la la, &c. Now farewell to my Sheldra faire, whom I no more shall sée: I meane to leaue my life at sea, by thy vnconstancy. Come Neptune, come, to thée I cry, With thée Ile liue, with thée Ile dye. Fa, la la, &c. Thus he lancht himselfe into the sea, And bade farewell to Shackley-hay. Fa, la la, &c. But farre from thence he had not gone, ere Sheldra faire returned, Whose heart kind pity made to moue, such passion in her burned: But when she to that place arriu'd, She found the shore from him depriu'd. Fa, la la, &c. And her deare Palmus now at sea, Had bade farewell to Shackley-hay. Fa, la la, &c. She then with bitter sighes complaind, her griefe did so abound: Oft grieuing, that she him disdaind, whom she so louing found: But now (alas) 'twas all in vaine, For he was gone by her disdaine. Fa, la la, &c. Leauing that place to her alone, Who now laments that he is gone. Fa, la la, &c. O wretched Sheldra, then, quoth she, confesse what fond disdaine, Hath wrath caused to fall on thée: could not this long-suffering paine, By thée (alas) so soone forgot, Seru'd to thy loues strange hatefull lot. Fa, la la, &c. And thus to lye, and for him crie, Whom thou so fondly didst deny. Fa, la la, &c. Who once did truely loue, I sée, shall neuer after hate, As doth too well appeare by me, in my forsaken state. Alas, I meant my scorne to proue, By onely tryall of his loue. Fa, la la, &c. Now haplesse me, since I doe sée, He hath forsaken wofull me, Fa, la la, &c. Thus all this while in roughest seas; poore Palmus boat was tost: But more his mind with his disease, because he Sheldra lost. In midst of this, he her forsweares, He rent his boat and tore his haires. Fa, la la, &c. Threw hope away, for he, alas, Could be no more drownd then he was. Fa, la la, &c. Euen as his grief had swallowed him, so stroue the gréedy waues: About his boat, and o're the brim, each lofty billow raues: There is no trust to swelling powers, That what it may, it still deuoures, Fa, la la, &c. But by the breach the seas might sée, The boat felt more the rage then hée. Fa, la la, &c. Thus wrackt & scatterd was their state while he in quiet swomme: Through liquid pathes to Thetis gate, by soft degrées went downe Whom when the Nymphs beheld, the Girles, Soone layd aside their sorting pearles. Fa, la la, &c. And by they heau'd him as a guest, Vnlookt for, now come to their feast. Fa, la la, &c. His case they pittied: but when they beheld his face right faine: For very loue, into the sea they pulld him backe againe: So were they with his beauty mou'd, For what is faire is soone belou'd. Fa, la la, &c. Thus with Nymphs he liues in the sea That left his loue at Shackley-hay. Fa, la la, &c. Then Sheldra faire to Shackley went, to end her wofull dayes, Because young Palmus cast himselfe into the floating Seas. At Shackley-hay did faire Sheldra dye, And Palmus in the sea doth lye, Fa, la la, &c. So as they liued, so did they dye, And bade farewell to Shackley-hay. Pa, la la, &c. FINIS. Printed at London for I. W.
