22775.3 99900637 135771
SIXE SERMONS PREACHED BY MAI∣STER HENRY SMITH AT CLEMENT DANES CHVRCH without Temple barre. VVith tvvo Prayers of the same Author hereunto annexed. Imprinted at London by R. F. for Robert Dexter, dwelling at the Brasen serpent in Paules church-yard. 1592.
The contents. Tvvo Sermons of the song of Simeon. The third, of the calling of Ionah. The fourth and fift, of the rebellion of Io∣nah. The sixt, of the punishment of Ionah. Tvvo Prayers.
TO THE RIGHT NOBLE LORD, THE LORD EDWARD EARLE of Bedford, grace and peace from the Lord. AS the litle bee ga∣thereth not honie for her selfe alone, but for others: so right Honorable, I am bold to present your good Lord∣ship with my Choice, my Care, and the Issue. The first your honorable self, & in The Chie. this, as you are the hope of the reuiuing of your vndoubted noble grand-father and father: so my heartie wel-wishings
(together with the prayers of all the godly) is, that what the Almightie here graced them with, in you may be re∣doubled. The second is, the fountaine The Care. whence the first had his streame, and being in me (as a mēber of the Church) what I wish to the same assured assem∣blie of Gods people, I leaue to the alone determiner of all controuersies whatso∣euer. The last I commend to the onely The Issue. direction of the Lord. Now as the faith∣full disposer of Gods truth, was a man linked vnto me in assured friendship whilest he liued: so I hauing with care long sithens collected these his sermons together, do now with singlenesse of heart present the same vnto your Lord∣ship, and therwith am prest to performe all such duties to your Honor, as God shall enable me vnto, both in prayer for your health▪ and increase of zeale to the maintenance of his poore flocke, which I hope is the onely aime and ende of all your Honorable purposes. Thus with all other graces, I most heartily desire
that father of light to enrich you in this life, and after this, to blesse you with immortalitie in that place of rest for euer. Your Lordships to command W. S.
THE SVVEETE SONG OF OLD FA∣THER SIMEON, IN TWO SERMONS. Luc. 2. verse 29. Lord novv lettest thou thy seruant depart in peace according to thy vvord, for mine eyes haue seene thy saluation, vvhich thou hast prepared before the face of all people, a light to be reuealed to the Gentiles, and the glorie of thy people Israell. THis is the sweet song of old father Simeon, wherein is set forth the ioyfull & peace∣able death of the righteous after that they haue imbraced Christ Iesus with heart and minde vnfainedly as he did. See∣ng
their death is to be the beginning of a better and more ioyfull and pleasant life thē the other. But before we proceede further in it, let vs heare a litle of that which went before. The Euangelist saith and behold. ver. 25. There vvas a man in Ierusalem, vvhose name vvas Simeon: this man vvas iust and feared God & vvaited for the cōsolation of Israell, and the holy Ghost vvas vpon him. And a reuelatiō, &c. Smeon feared God (saith he) Religō may well be called feare, for there is no Religion, Pro. 1. where feare is wanting, for the feare of the Lord, is the beginning of wisdome, and this priuiledge hath God giuen, to them that feare him, that they neede to feare nothing els. Simeon waited for the consolation of Is∣rael, vntil he had imbraced in his armes, him whō he so long lōged for to see, & feele▪ how many waiters be there in the world, yet few waite as Simeon did, but some waite for ho∣nours, some for riches, some for pleasures, some for ease, some for rewardes, some for money, some for a deare yeare, and some for a golden day as they call it, but Simeon wai∣ted and expected with many a long looke vntil he had seen and imbraced Christ Iesus,
the light of the Gentiles, the glorie of Isra∣ell, and the saluation of all that with a faith∣full and zelous affection and loue doth wait for his comming, to the comfort of the affli∣cted and to the terrifying to the wicked, & vngodly, which haue not already waited neither imbraced him, as Simeon did. Faith in all afflictiōs doth lift vp her head waiting in assured hope beyond all hope, & seeing the clouds scattered ouer her head, yet she is euer cōfortable to her selfe, saying anon it will be calme, and although all the friendes in the world do faile yet it neuer faileth nor fain∣teth, but euer keepeth promise in that which by the veritie of the spirit of God it assureth vntill her ioy be filled. All are not Israelites that are borne in Israell. Simeon was an Israe∣lite Rom. 9. indeede, for he waited for the messias frō God with patience, and expectation: so the spirite of God dwelleth alwayes with them which alwayes say thy will be done. The seede Luke . is not cast all on a heape, but it is cast all a∣broade: therfore where be the fruites of the spirit that you haue brought forth? for the spirit of God is not like a dead potiō in the stomach, which worketh not, neither can we haue this spirit in vs and feele it not. For if thou hast it, it will leade thee to the Tem∣ple, and when thou art there, it will lead
thee to Christ, and when thou hast receiued and embraced him, it will possesse thee with godly care to keepe him and to entertaine him, and to be obedient vnto him. But can we care to serue God when he commeth, & cannot care to heare him when he speaketh vnto vs there? If Simeon had not wayted should he haue had this consolation? and cā we receiue comfort by the cōming of Christ when we wayt not nor wish not for it? If we wayt as he did, the spirit will assure vs, that we shall see God before we die: and they that long in faith to see the ioyes of heauen, the spirit assureth and promiseth faithfully vnto them that they shall see it. Now Simeon came into the Temple at this time by the prouidence of God: the worldlings wil call it chaunce, but the Euangelist would not Pro. 16. Mat. 10. chop that in, because it is manifest that all things come to passe by the prouidence of God without which there is nothing done. By this prouidence Rebecca came foorth to Gen. 24. wayt on her fathers cattell when Abrahams sernant prayed & looked for her comming, that he might take her for Isaac to marrie withall. By this prouidence Saule was an∣nointed . Sam. 9. king by Samuel, when he thought he had no such thought in his heart, but wēt about seeking for his fathers asses that were
lost. Happie are they & blessed which see the Mat. 13. things which we see, and the eares that heare the things that we heare saith Christ: but cursed are we, that hearing & seeing do not repent, for we cannot be blessed by hearing and seeing onely, vnlesse we heare and see with profit as we ought. But we will obiect that we are Israelites, and are circumcised, & haue receiued the sacramēt of Christs blood that we might be his people & he our God, but this wil not excuse vs nor make vs seem any thing the better in the sight of God, but rather worse if we haue not cast away the workes of darkenesse and put on the Lord Iesus Christ: for it is sayd, that Christ came Ephes. 6. Rom. 13. Iohn 1. amongest his owne, and his owne receiued him not but despised him, therfore his owne are accursed, so many of them as reect their owne saluation, which being freely offered vnto them, would not stretch foorth their hands to receiue it. And he came by the motion of the spirit into the Temple. &c. Luke 8. If we would thinke that his spirit doth leade vs into the Temple, we would marke verie diligently the motions thereof, when we are there whether it speaketh vnto vs in our owne soules, or by the mouth of the mi∣nister
of God, who is the minister not of the 1. Cor. 3. Lu. 4. letter, but of the spirit & grace of God. The deuill led Christ vnto the top of an high mountaine that he might shew him the glo∣rie of the world, which deceiueth vnstable minds: so would he do you, if you would be led by such a guide, but I would not haue you to marke the vaine motions of such a spirit which leads to nothing but to vanitie and pride: for after he hath led you vp to the top, and allured you by carnall pleasures as much as he can, if you then fall downe to worship Mammon and embrace the world, the same spirit will afterward leade you, nay rather cast you downe from the top of all vnto hell. Therefore I beseech you, & hear∣tily intreate you, that you would be the ser∣uants of God, and the seruants of the spirit of God, to obey it, and do nothing con∣trarie to his will that you can refraine, that you would do all those good things which you would were done by you, and that you would go thither whither you would come, for all would come to heauen, but all will not go to heauen. If you will all heare, I will teach you all, yea I wil vndertake this: heare, and marke my words, & you shalbe conuer∣ted by the power of our Lord Iesus Christ. For I pray vnto the Lord that I may neuer
preach to the condemnation of any among you all, which wisheth that euerie of you were more zelous and more godly then my selfe. But to whom shall I compare you? e∣uen to the vacabond Iewes, of whom Luke Act. 19. 74. mentioneth in the Actes, that they tooke v∣pon them to abiure euill spirits by the name of Iesus whom Paul preached, to whom the euil spirits answered saying, Iesus we know, and Paul we know, but who are ye? & those which had the euill spirits ran vpon them and ouercame them, so that they fled out of that house naked and wounded, and thus the deuill preuailed against them at that time, because they sought to worke with anothers instrument, & preuaile with anothers wea∣pon. If they would haue said in the name of Iesus whō we preach, they might haue pre∣uailed, but they thought it sufficient that Paul preached him though they neuer pro∣fessed him. And so we leane vpon anothers staffe, and thinke to be saued because God saueth others. We shall be dealt withall as were those vacabond Iewes: wherfore he wil answer such I know, and such I know, but who are ye? Therefore it behoueth vs euerie one to pray vnto the Lord, that he would furnish vs with weapons to encounter a∣gainst all the euill motions of the spirit of
Sathan, that we may ouercome and not be ouercome and put to flight like these vaca∣bond Iewes, but that we may haue oyle al∣wayes in our lamps burning, and alwayes armed with watchfulnesse against our ene∣mies, lest Sathan steale vpon vs at vnwares, and spoile vs, and strip vs, and giue vs a fall. Lord now lettst▪ thou thy seruant depart n peace, &c. If Samuell had heard the first time that 1. Sam. 3. God called him, thē God needed not to call him the second or the third, if Peter had Luke 22. marked the crowing of the cocke at the first time as he did at the third, the cocke needed not to crow thrise. Now therefore, when you heare the same sound againe which you haue heard before, remember now that the cocke croweth the second time: for you know what discom∣moditie doth come by negligence, & what commoditie by attention: for if you attend and follow, iustice shall be swallowed vp of mercie. Here is the example, but where be they that follow it? If nine leapers be clean∣sed, yet but one returneth to giue thankes, Luke. 17. then one is all. Vnthankfulnesse is the first guest that sitteth at the table, for some will not sticke to say, that they neuer said grace since they were children, but if they had said
we neuer had grace since they were childrē, I would rather beleeue them. Do they not say, Giue vs this day our dayly bread? If you do, for shame say so no more, beg no more at Gods hands, vntil you be more thankful for that you haue receiued. For behold, the hea∣uens Leit. 26. frown vpon you for your sinnes, & the earth denieth her fruite, and is become bar∣ren because of your vnthankfulnesse. Lord now lettest thou thy seruant depart, &c. Here Simeon prayed & praysed God, yet but a short prayer, for God delighteth not in much babling, like the Pharisies or like the priests of Bal, but Simeon prayed with Mat. 6. 1. Kings 18. Exod. 14. the heart like Moses and was heard. Though you sing all Dauids Psalmes ouer, and not haue Dauids spirit, it profiteth nothing, and though Dauid was heard when he song thē, yet you can not be heard. Therfore let vs pray so, that our prayers may be heard, and let vs heare so, that by hearing we may pro∣fit by it. Let vs not heare still so vnprofita∣bly as we were wont to do, if we do it shall be required at our hands: for do you thinke that you shall neuer be called to account of that which I haue preached vnto you, but as soone as ye are gone out of this place, all is shut vp and all is forgotten, God is exēpted from your minds, our Sauiour Christ saith, Iohn 12. 48
the word that I speake vnto you shall iudge Iohn 12. 48 Luke. 10. you at the last day. Marie is commended, for that she heard our Sauiour very dligent∣ly, laying vp his words in her heart, and Ia∣cob was wiser then all his children, in that he Gen. 37. 11. remembred the dreame of Ioseph vntill he saw it fulfilled. Those that loue the Lord with an vnfayned loue do gladly heare his voyce and become obedient. My sheepe heare my voyce, saith Christ, and they that loue the Iohn 10. 27. Arke as Dauid did, will daunce about the Arke as Dauid did, and that with ioy and 2. Sam. 6. gladnesse. Isaac was a good man, his name signified laughter, wherby was shewed what ioy & laughter there should be about Christ Iesus, for he was the only figure, euē Christ him selfe. The Virgin song when she knew Luke 1. that she should beare him, the Angels song ioyfully when he was borne, and Simeon song Luke 2. when he was brought into the Temple, but as soone as he saw Christ, he desired of God that he might die & depart out of this earth∣ly prison. So soone as a man knoweth God, euer henceforth he crieth with the Apostle, I desire to be dissolued, that he might be with Christ, for Christ is light, & as soone as they Phil. 1. 23. see him they see also them selues, his glorie, and their shame & filthinesse, which maketh them wish for death, that they might liue
with him, and this made the martyrs desire death or any other torment, that their dayes of iniquitie might be ended, and that sinne might cease against God by them: for all sin is blood in their eyes, and all worldly plea∣sures vanities. Simeon desired death, for the feruent loue of God made life irksome vnto him, which naturally is the most pleasant thing of all vnto mā, & death pleasant vnto him, which all men hate naturally, and would giue all the riches in the world if they had it, that they might not die, such loue they beare to life. So I conclude, that no man is willing to die till his conscience be quiet in Christ, for then the loue of the world falleth away, like the mantell of Elias when he was rapt into 2▪ Kings 2. heauen. Simeon had seene many things in his dayes, but when he saw Christ, he was vnwilling to liue any longer to see more, but like the hart which panteth with desiring after the Psal. 42. water brookes: so he longed so long, till he had seene with his eyes the Sauiour of the world, and then he so thirsted for death, that he sought nothing else. And thus they that hunger after righteousnesse are satisfied and Mat. 5. filled. It is enough for me (saith Iacob) that my Gen. 46.
sonne Ioseph liueth: so let vs be satisfied with Gen. 46. this, that our sauiour Christ liueth, & where he is thither shal we come. I would go saith one, through heate and cold, through ehalth and sicknesse, and through all kinde of mi∣series, that I might hunger after God and after his righteousnesse. They that beare the crosse of Christ haue al the marks of Christs Disciples. None are so wel fed as they which went with Christ into the wildernesse, and Iohn. 6. where there was no food, there they all were satisfied and filled with wholsome food. Simeon knew Christ as soone as he sawe him, and embraced him as soone as he knew him▪ and enioyed him as soone as he embra∣ced him. Some know the word of God as soone as they heare it, others heare it as though they heard it not, like deafe adders which stop their eares at the voyce of the charmer. So Pharao would not heare the voyce of Moses, nor Baals priests would not heare the voyce Exod. 5. &c 1. Kings 18. of Elias. Lord now lettest thou thy seruant depart in peace, &c. Christ brings peace with him, not the peace of the world, but that peace which passeth all vnderstanding, my peace I leaue with you: my peace remaine with you, saith
he. Our peace is laid vp in Christ, and all the peace we haue by him, els it is no true peace. Simeon had peace enough, that he depar∣ted Psal. 37. 37 in peace: so marke the ende of the iust and you shall then depart in peace, like the lambe vpon the crosse. Faine would Balaam die the death of the righteous, but Balaam Num. 23. must then liue the life of the righteous, ther∣fore all men looke to this. Happie are they that depart in peace, when death saith feare, and the serpent saith despaire: then saith the spirit to the flesh, crouch, & bids the serpent flie while death openeth the prison doores. If the Papists beleeued that they depart in peace, they wold neuer say, that those which depart go to Purgatorie: & so by their own saying, the worst part is behind. Some say, this Purgatorie is in the earth neare to hell, and other say it is in the aire neare to heauen. Some say, they are punished there by fire, and some say by water, & some say by fire and water, and some say, that if it be in the earth, it is too farre then from heauen to be saued. Others say, that if it be in the aire, it is too farre from hell to be damned. Some say, the good Angelles tor∣ment, and other say, that the euill spirits do it. But we must vnderstand, that it is a pain∣ted sepulcher, made rather for the liuing
then for the dead. For the Locust of Rome . doth liue altogether by such Trentals and by such traditions, and this is the profita∣blest dreame that euer any of thē dreamed, but it is manifest by the word of God, that where the tree falleth, there it lyeth, & shall Eccles. 11. lye for euer. Diues and Lazarus are dead, & Luke 16. where they are, thither shall we all go. Sathā hath many sleightes to deceiue vs, of which this is one of the greatest, to bring vs from the word of God to dreames, and traditions, and things inuented by the braines of mor∣tal men which haue not the spirit of God in them. Lord now lettest thou thy seruant depart in peace, &c. In my last lecture I vnfolded two questi∣ons, the first, whether it be lawfull for a Christian man to wish to die. The second, whether we may pray for the dead, and say, Lord haue mercie vpon them. But all the seed is not fallen into good ground. & ther∣fore some thinke it but a small matter to say so, or as it were a venial sinne, if it be a sinne. But let vs take heed how we make trifles of sinnes, for there is no dalying with God, who is iealous as a consuming fire, when his people make such small accoūt of his words. Heb. 12. Other demaund whether it be not better to
say God be with them, then the deuill be with them, both which are naught and to be eschued. And herein they aske this que∣stion, like a thiefe hauing robbed a man by the high way, and being taken with it, and demāded why he did such a villany, he saith, is it not better to rob him then to kill him? as though he must needes do the one of thē: then what a shamelesse answer is this, for it is manifest, that of two euils none is to be chosen. Some wil say, it is a testimonie of our good Three buck∣lers where∣with some do vse to maintaine prayer for the dead. will. To such we must replie saying, so it is a testimonie of your ignorance: and then af∣ter a litle conference they will graunt, that indeed it doth not profit thē. Then we must replie and say, God hath made all things to profit vs, & hath commanded that nothing be vsed vnprofitably, no not so much as a vaine word speaking, saying, that for euerie idle word we must giue account at the day of iudgement. Then they replie againe say∣ing, Mat. 12. if it do them no good it doth them no harme. But we must reply and say, it were good to beware least it do thy selfe harme. Another sort wil replie and say, I pray God I neuer do worse. But to such we must an∣swer, I pray God you may do better: & you should first know whether you do not harm
before you do it. For in deed it must proceed of harme being spoken, in doubting without faith, for if you beleeued that they were layde vp in peace whome you praye for, what need you pray for them at all? But it shewes an vnbeleeuing heart, and we know that whatsoeuer is not of faith is sinne, and the Lord will say of them, who hath requi∣red those things at your hand? you haue wrought vanities. Now therefore you will not leaue it, because you vsed it: then will you say also, we will not leaue our lying nor our swearing, nor our cursing, because we haue vsed it. It will grieue me if I heare you vse these speeches hereafter, hauing no rea∣son nor proofe of Scripture to maintaine it by, or to be your warrant in it. Therefore I charge you in the name of God, that you vse them not, but rather when you heare this, or ani other sinne condemned, to lay hands vpon it, & see that you put it to death with∣out delay, according to the law of God. Simeon wished to die, and had good cause so to wish, because God promised, that he should be deliuered from this miserable life when he had scene his glorie, and the light of Gentils. The wicked wish to die, that there∣by they might haue deliuerance from their troubles & worldly vexations, as they sup∣pose,
which in deed is rather an increasing and aggrauating thereof. But the faithfull when they wish to die, they do it in great zeale and loue of God, vsing it as the best re∣medie against sinne, that therby they might ceasse frō offending their good God, shew∣ing thereby, that they are as it were weaie of the seruice and bondage of Sathan and sinne. Therfore they desire death, that ther∣in they may glorifie God, as in their liues they haue done, and sought to do. For man was not borne at his owne will, neither shall he die at his owne will, therfore they as it were begge leaue of God for it. Sampson was a figure of Christ, in that he Iudg. 16. glorified God at his death more then all his life, in killing so manie of Gods enemies. I shewed you that they are guiltie that kil∣led themselues with surfets or drunkennesse or intemperat vsing of them selues, yea al∣though they tēder their liues neuer so deere, yet they are in the guilt, because they vse the meanes that dot shorten it. According to thy word. When Sathan hath once possessed  thē profits and pleasures bring vs to our posses∣sion, and though they do so professe religiō and godlinesse, yet they can neuer haue anie comfort by it all their life. For their owne
hearts accuse them for hypocrites, because they wayte not for the consolation of God according to his word, & whatsoeuer is not done according to that word can not be ac∣ceptable: and this word they care not for, neither set it in any estimation. When Adā seeth his nakednesse, the suttle serpent can deceiue no longer, but before he saw his na∣kednesse, he is euer deceiued, and led away with the multitude into innumerable er∣rors. Some say they shall be saued by mercy, and some thinke by good workes, and some by the Popes pardon, others say by Purga∣torie, and these will haue a Masse song for them as long as the world standeth, and all for one sillie soule thinking to be saued by it, & yet see their blindnesse, for they seeme to thinke, that their torment shall not ceasse as long as the world stādeth, else why should they find and hire men to say Masse for thē so long? But these are the fat morsels of Bels priests, & for this cause is the Popish Creed made verie fauourable to the Clergie. Well, say that ignorance is the mother of their de∣uotion, for when the couetousnesse of the priests and the ignorance of the people ioy∣ned together, then they inuented Purgato∣rie, Masses, prayers for the dead, and then all their trinkets. For if they had not held
our fathers in ignorance, they would neuer haue bin Papists. But when they cast a mist before the eyes of men, then the blind fel in∣to the diteh which doth containe so manie grosse corruptions. I shewed vpon this woord seruant, that the godly would not leaue this priuiledge for all the riches in the world, for that they are the seruaunts of God, fellowes to An∣gels and princes: for we serue him whom Salomon serued who is blessed for euer▪ Eue∣rie seruingman beares the cognisance of his maister vpon his sleeue. But what will the Lord say when he commeth and findeth vs marked with the badge of Sathan? surely he will say, giue vnto Sathan that which is Sa∣thans, for all the houses of Israell are sprin∣kled with the blood of the Lambe, and all Exod. 12. Ezech. 9. Reuel. 10. the mourners are marked, and al the chosen are sealed with the seale of the liuing God. Well, was it sayd the poore receiue the Gospell? The young men are more forward in the truth, and more zelous then the aged. Once the younger brother stole away the blessing frō the elder, therefore the elder ha∣ted him euen for his zeale, & whē was Iacob hated more then he is now? when was he so hated and persecuted as he is now by Esau? Yet in the old time men were more zealous
in their age then euer we heare of them to be in their youth, yea they were zealous in the Lords businesse. Age hindered not Noah Gen. 6. from building of the Arke when God com∣maunded him, age hindered not Simon frō reioycing and mirth when he beheld & em∣braced the Lord Iesus Christ. Then old Si∣meon embraced Christ, and he enioyed him with heartie ioy in zeale, but now where is old Simeon? there are but few of them to be seene comming to the Temple to receiue Christ, but now yong men receiue, yong Dan. 1. 1. Sam. 2. 3. 1. Tim. 4. Philemō 10 Simeons, yong Daniels, yong Samuels, yong Timothies, and yong Onesimus, and the yong infants begin to speake againe. The yong haue him, they are zealous, and I hope they wil keepe him though old men neglect him. Sathan thou hast too much for nothing al∣readie. Lord now lettest thou thy seruant depart in peace according to thy word, for mine eyes haue seene thy saluation. He which beginneth to roote out some error or superstition, at the first shall haue much a do, for custome and natural corrup∣tion are the first causers of heresie, and shall crie against her in the maintenance thereof, and withstanders of reformation shall say, great is Diana of Ephesus, and so for a long
time they seeme to wash the Ethiopian or the blacke More, the more they wash him the more they gall him, and yet he is an E∣thiopian still, but in the end the Arke stan∣deth and Dagon falleth downe, & truth tri∣umpheth 1. Sam. 5. ouer falshood, hauing got the vi∣ctorie, & light chaseth away darknesse with the brightnesse thereof. To him that asketh what scripture haue you against it? it is suffi∣cient to answer, what scripture haue you for it? Is not this enough to ouerthrow it, that for euerie idle word you must giue account, as our sauiour Christ saith. And againe saith God, who hath required these things at your hands? They aske, what, shall we not say God be with them? Why should you? I pray Esa. 1. 2. Sam. 12. you what said Dauid of his child? he said no such thing, but thus, he is gone, and will not returne, but I shal follow him. If he be a good man, we say the Lord be thanked for his de∣liuerance, but if he be not, then we say, God graunt we may do better then he hath done, that by his fall we may learne to rise from sinne. Therefore as Iacob said to his wiues Gen. 35. and children, giue me your idols that I may burie them: so say I vnto you, giue me your superstitions that I may burie thē, that they may remaine with you or in you no longer, to the dishonor of God, offending of your
weake brethren, or to my griefe, for I am iealous ouer you, because seeing you are mine and I am yours, ô that my voyce were as the whirlwind, to beate downe, root out, and blow away all your superstitions, that they may no lōger raigne among you. Now to my text. For mine eyes haue seene thy saluation. Because the holy Ghost by inspiration had declared vnto him, that he should not die til he had seene Iesus Christ, therfore the same spirit led him to the temple, & shewed him that which it promised, & hauing seene the same he desireth and wisheth to die, and be released from this earthly prison, that he might liue with God. As idle & euil wishes are vaine, because they are not according to faith, nor grounded vpon the word of God: so though we aske as cunningly as Iacob, and as earnestly as the sonnes of Zebede, yet if we aske not in faith according to knowledge, Mar. 10. we can not obtaine, for we must aske so that we may receiue, that we may not returne emptie. Then we see that the principal cause that moued Simeon to wish for death, was, be∣cause he had seene his sauiour, and the true Messias which was promised by the father, figured by the law, spoken of by the Pro∣phets,
and foretold by the fathers, and poin∣ted at by Iohn Baptist, he embraced. What desire should he haue of life, when life, and ioy, and peace, and the verie brightnesse of the image of God appeared vnto him, for all his life is but a pilgrimage of sorow and of griefe, yea & a continuall combat with sin, therfore what should he feare death. But he might haue sayd, long haue I wayted in pa∣tience, but what is all the time that is past, and the life that is to come to an ende? My kingdome is not of this world, and yet I Iohn 18. haue a kingdome, whereof I am certified now I see thy saluation thou hast promised, and now is thy promise fulfilled, therefore blessed are they that hunger and thirst after Mat. 5. righteousnesse, for none shall haue this food but they that hūger for it. The murmuring Isrraelites died in the wildernesse, & might Num. 11. & 14. and 16. and 21. &c. not so much as see the land of Canaan, be∣cause they murmured against their God. As Moses died on the mount where he saw the land of Canaan: so the godly die in the sight Deut. 34. of God & in the contemplation of his glo∣rie, like Steuen, who at the verie instant of Act. 7. his death saw the heauens open, and Christ Iesus sitting at the right hand of his father, and like Simeon here, which died not till he saw the Lord of life, and till he embraced
him thankfully in his armes. Beloued you are not ignorant that the great day of the Lord is neare at hand, and therfore they that haue not yet seene Christ, they that haue not yet embraced him, but still sleepe without oyle in their lamps, shall suddenly be ouer∣taken without the wedding garment, and shall be cast into eternall torment for euer. Mine eyes haue sene thy saluation &c. Then we see that Christ was no spirit, nei∣ther was his bodie a fantasticall bodie, for if he were a spirit Simeon could not see him, & if his bodie were a fantasticall bodie, then could not he haue embraced him. Therfore we see that the wordes of the Scripture are true, which saith, that Christ was perfect man in all things, sinne onely excepted. For he sometime wept, as at the death of Laza∣rus, and likewise ouer Ierusalem. Sometime Iohn 11. Luke 19. Iohn 4. Luke. 10. Luke 5. he thirsted, as at the well where the woman of Samaria disputed with him: & also some∣time eate, as at Marthaes house, as also amōg Publicans and sinners, which in euery thing shewed him selfe to be perfect man. For mine eyes haue seene thy saluation &c. O Lord saith he, I desire now to be dis∣solued, and free from the bondage of sinne▪ which so long hath inhabited in my mortall bodie, for now he is come, by whom thou
hast promised to free vs and set vs at liberty, he is come by whom thou hast promised to breake the serpents head, and he is come that will heale our infirmities, and giue strength against sinne and Sathan by faith, & peace towards God through loue. And now saith he, I haue embraced him, and thankfully do receiue him, I beleeue and am perswaded that this is the same Messias whom the Fa∣ther promised, and the Prophets oretold, all Israel lōged & expected for, who is the light of the Gentils, the glory of Israel, & the God of the whole world. Simeon was desirous to liue no longer in this mortall life, when he saw perfect life, but like Adam when he Gen. 3. came out of Paradice, was desirous to come in againe, or like the fish which is taken in the net out of the sea struggleth to get in a∣gaine. Seeing now he is come for whom Si∣meon longed, therfore what are the troubles that are past, and the sorowes that are come to an end? So they which loue the trueth of God, and waite with desire to be filled with the knowledge therof, such shal not die vn∣till they haue their hearts desire with contē∣plation thereof. For as Peter was sent to Act. 10. Act. 8. Cornelius, and Philip to the Eunuch: so the Lord will stirre vp such of his sernaunts, as may be fit instruments to minister the same
vnto vs. Mine eyes haue seene thy saluation, &c. Iudas died before the time, and liued not to see Christ crucified, but the Disciples which loued Iesus did see him die like an vndefiled and innocent lambe, and that to their exceeding comfort and ioy, whē they vnderstood, how that he suffered death for loue of them & for their redemption. Now if Christ can not hide him from such as hū∣ger after him through loue, then what shall we say of our fathers which liued in the time of ignorance, that longed to see this light, although they had a mist cast before their eyes? surely such died not til they saw Christ and embraced him in their hearts. And this is our iudgemēt concerning them that died in the time of Poperie, and likewise as con∣cerning the rest, which thought to be saued by Purgatory and Masses after that they are dead, we say that they which sleepe without oyle in their lampes, they die re they are a∣ware of, & ere they wish for it, like the Phi∣listines which sent for Sampson to laugh & Iupg. 16. mocke at him, and to sport them selues, vpō whom the house fel and destroyed them all, or like the Egyptians, which thought that Exod. 14. the waters had made passage for them aswel as for the Israelites, both which died in and
for their securitie, because they were not watchful nor prepared against the Lord cal∣led them. Haue seene &c. There be manie sights of Christ, all go not vp to the mount, as Peter Iames and Iohn, all see not his face with Mo∣ses, Mat. 17. Exod. 33. Iohn 13. 2. o. 12. 2. all sleepe not in his lap with Iohn, all are not taken vp into heauen like Paule, all em∣brace him not in their armes with Simeon. But as pleaseth God, so he sheweth him self vnto vs, and all that loue him both see him and imbrace him. To some he shewes him self as in a glasse, to some generally, to some particularly, some he calleth early, and some he calleth late, and Mat. 20. there is no hower in the day wherein he cal∣leth not some to go labour in his vineyard. To some he sheweth him selfe by Angels, & to other some by visions. Abraham saw three Gen. 18. Gen. 19. Iud. 13. Iohn 8. Angels, Lot saw but two, Manoahs wife saw but one, and yet one was enough. It is sayd that Abraham saw Christ his dayes, but we see him cleerer then Abraham, and cleerer then Iohn, if we beleeue in him as we should. Some see Christ and not his saluation, and some see his saluation, and do not embrace it. We see Christ when we heare his word, and we embrace his saluation when we be∣leeue it, they see him that heare him, they
imbrace him that follow him. Here if they had heard me, I would haue searched Ieru∣salē with lampes, to see who sitteth in dark∣nesse. But how can they beleeue the word of God which heare it not? How can they imbrace Christ which know him not, no not though they see him, and all through igno∣rance, hauing not the meanes to see him, be∣cause their leaders are either blinde guides, sleepie watchmen, or hireling shepheards. And surely it is a woful case, whē shepherds go to taske, and let their owne sheepe alone sommer and winter. They sheare them, but neither sommer nor winter do they feede them. How should those people vnder their charge see Christ & his saluation, when they are so neglected of the wholsome foode, and euen starued to death manie thousands of their soules, because they haue not the food which nourisheth the soule vnto saluation: and how many be there which are as old as Simeon, and yet haue not imbraced Christ Iesus? yea they know him not though they see him, neither do they wayt for his com∣ming, because they haue no desire to imbrace him, and therefore they deferre that, & put it off from their youth to their middle age, from their middle age to their old age, from their old age to death, and so they can haue
no leasure in all their life to imbrace him. But to such as do seeke him, and wayte for him with vnfained diligence, we say as the Angell said to the women at the sepulcher, feare not, you seeke the Lord Iesus. How is Iohn. 21. this world set to deceiue vs? we can find lea∣sure to do euill at anie time, but we can find no leasure in all our life long to do good. I haue somewhat to say to you of this pa∣rish, a daintie was prepared for you, and you let the strangers take it from you. You were required to a fast, and you did feast your selues, you were required to come and pray vnto the Lord, and to humble your selues in his sight, that he may turne away his wrath from you, & you let the temple stand open and emptie for your parts, and your shops were as open, and you were about your mar∣chandise, forsaking God and seeking to win the vniust Mammon, and the vanities of the world. For mine eyes haue seene thy saluation &c. You may see what deepe root sinne takes when custome is added vnto it, therfore you had neede all of you to take my part, for though I and you fight against it neuer so long, yet some of his darts sticke in vs still. He which beleeueth him, doth that which pleaseth him, and he that hath no will to
please him doth that which delites him selfe, and he that offers him selfe to be reformed by the word of God is offred in truth. But what, shall I shake off the dust of my feet as a witnesse against you, and say, let them that will perish, perish? Nay I will rather wash Naaman yet seuen times, that I might make him cleane if he will be cleansed. If you haue no Scripture for it, then thinke frō whence you haue receiued it. If you haue no reason for it, then thinke from whence you haue learned it. If you haue no example for it, thē thinke whence it first came or sprong vnto Frō poperie. you. Thy saluation. Thereby to shew, that he came not by Angels, or by men, or by anie other meanes, but onely from the alone and eternall God. He calleth him thy saluation, for his name was not giuen him by Ioseph nor by Marie, but by the Angell of God, Mat. 1. Luke. 1. signifying that he was come from heauen, the father saw him when he was borne, the spirit came vpon him when he was bapti∣zed, the Angels ministred vnto him in the Luke 3. Luke 4. Mat. 27. Mat. 2. wildernes, his enemies subscribed vnto him vpon the crosse, the Virgine trauelled, the starre walked, the wise men came out of far countreyes to worship him, then is not this Iehouah the mightie God, whose birth is
glorious, whose life is famous, whose death is mritorious. None can take vpon him the authoritie of God, but he, on whose shoul∣ders the Lord layeth it, being sent of God & from God. Then we see that our Sauiour is the true Sauiour sent from God, for all crea∣tures beare witnesse vnto him, yea the verie deuils, with all the euill spirits do obey his voyce, at whose name all knees do bow. He Mar. 1. Phil. 2. came not to bring health, wealth, pleasures, or profits, for the which if he had, then mul∣titudes of worldlings would haue followed him: but he came to bring saluation, righte∣ousnesse, peace, truth and life, therefore few care for him. He came to saue sinners, not all sinners, not euery one that saith Lord Lord, Mat. 7. Luke 5. but he came to saue penitent sinners, which turned vnto God by their repentance, ther∣fore he prayeth in Iohn for those onely that Iohn 17. were giuen vnto him. So soone as the seed is sowen, the stones bruse it, the thornes choke it, and the sunne doth parch it: and what comfort hath the lillie among thornes? ther∣fore wisedome taketh her vnto her wings, & whispereth saying, you shal seeke me before I come, you shall seeke me but shal not find Pro. 1. me, because ye haue refused me when I of∣fred my selfe vnto you. Christ is their saluation that beleeue in
im and make much of him, and thankfully receiue him. The godly he deliuereth from sinne, but the wicked he leaueth bound in the chaines of their iniquitie, to be tormen∣ted of him which had tempted them there∣unto, whose will they alwayes endeuoured to fulfill & not the Lords, he sheweth them a hand vpon the wal writing their condem∣nation, Dan. 5. and another catching them by the hairie scalpe, which maketh all their ioynts to tremble and their heats to despaire, and he saith vnto them, what doest thou here without thy wedding garment? how darest Mat. 20. thou come to steale away the childrēs bread? The spirit of Saule worketh in him in his 1. Sam. 16. bed and euerie where, and he calleth for the harpe of Dauid to comfort his heart which can not be comforted. And this spirit sayth to Iudas, thou hast betrayed thy Lord and Mat. 27. crucified him, therefore go and hang thy self, for it sticketh within thee like the mark of Cain. But the godly heart goeth home re∣ioycing Gen. 4. and chewing the cud like the Apo∣stles, which reioiced in that they were coun∣ted worthie to suffer for his names sake. Act. 5. 41. O what a good banket we haue had this day▪ the bee goeth lodē to the hiue, & goeth longer in the strength thereof then Elias did. 1. Kings 17. Thy saluation. The onely Sauiour is here
called saluation it self, for if he were called a bare Sauiour only, thē you might likly vn∣derstand it by some other sauiour, but here he is called saluation it selfe, to shewe that there is no other: for there be more sauiours but no more saluations, and there is manie wayes to death, and yet but one death. The brasen serpent was a figure of Christ, that Num. 21. Iohn 3. they which are stong by sinne, by fire, and by the serpent which beguiled Euah, may make speede, because there is no remedie but to come to Christ. The Papists haue found out many salua∣tions, they haue found out a saluation by Saints, a saluation by Angels, a saluation by Masses, a saluation by merits, a saluation by Idols, as though Christ had least to do in his owne office, for they haue other saluations to flie vnto. They will haue it, but they wil buy it, and what will they giue for it? whie they will fast so many dayes, go so farre on pilgrimages, hire priestes to say so manie Masses, build so manie Abbeys, and giue so many summes of money to the Monks and Friers. Therfore this scripture goeth against them, & doth dishonor their shamelesnesse, who like Nemrod heaping stone vpō stone, Gen. 11. would haue built vp to heauen: so they heape sinne vpon sinne, and euerie houre
some one heresie or superstition groweth vp from this filthie roote, for what Papist dare say that Simeon thought on any of these or put confidence in anie other Sauiour but only in him whō he embraced in his armes? for saluation is by the promise of God, and all promises are in Christ. And though Ia∣cob 2. Cor. 1. wanted bread, Ioseph wanted not mony, Gen. 42. therefore he gaue them backe againe their money, & likewise he gaue them that corne that they would haue bought with it: so I would wish them to say as Iosephs brethrē, that they haue their corne for nothing, and had their money too, so let them be content to say, that they haue mercie for nothing & their works too. For god careth not for their workes, because they profit not him but thē selues. For there is no water can wash Naa∣man 2. Kings 5. but Iordan, no water can wash the le∣prosie of sinne, but the bloud of the Lambe. By this the Israelites were saued when the Exod. 12. destroyer passed by. By this the Lord know∣eth vs to be his people, and by this the de∣uill knoweth vs to be none of his. As it is proper vnto God to be called goodnesse, so is it proper vnto Iesus Christ to be called saluation He is called the way, the truth and Iohn 14. the life, for that life which we haue is but a sparke and shadow of life, but he is the true
and eternall life. Then seeing Christ is both our righteousnesse, saluation, and also the way, the truth and the life, to leade vs there∣unto. It is as possible for vs without Christ to be righteous or saued, as it is to be wise without wisedome, righteous without righ∣teousnesse, or saued without saluatiō. Ther∣fore let vs not be ashamed to take our water from the fountaine, seeing Christ is the foū∣taine of all wisedome, of all righteousnesse, of all truth, of all knowledge, of all saluation, and briefly of all goodnesse: therefore there is no other Arke to saue vs from the floud, no other ladder to ascend with into heauē, no other Ioseph to feed vs in the famine, no other Moses to lead vs through the wilder∣nesse. But as the riuer Sloa rūneth through all the land of Iudaea, & watereth the whole citie of God: so Christ doth shew him selfe all in all, and all sufficient in mercie to saue and to blesse all his Church with spirituall gifts. If Christ be life, what shall make vs Ephes. 4. 1. Cor. 15. despaire? shall Sathan? No, for he hath o∣uercome Sathan. Shal death? No, for he hath ouercome death. Shall hell? No, for he hath ouercome hell. Shall the Law? No, for he Rom. 5. hath fulfilled the Law. Shall wrath? No, for he hath troden the wine presse of his fathers Esa. 63. wrath. Therefore it was a sweete saying of
one at his death, whē mine iniquitie is grea∣ter then thy mercie ô God then will I feare and despaire. Saluation is borne, therfore we we al in the state of condemnation before: light is come, therfore we sate all in dark∣nesse before: glorie is come, therfore we were all loden with shame before: life is come, to shew that we were all dead in sinne before. Life is come, and light and saluation: life to the dead, light to the blind, and saluation to the damned. For Christ is called saluation, to shew that without him we are all dam∣ned firebrands of hell, heires of condemna∣tion, and forsaken of God. To him that is sicke, it is easie to be thankfull when he is whole, but when he is whole it is harder to be thankfull then to be sicke. I would faine be disproued, that Niniueh might be saued though Ionah would not. Thy saluation. This word saluation is a sweet word, yea the sweetest word in all the Scripture, and yet many despise this worthy iewell, because they knowe not what it is worth, like the dawes which would rather haue a barley corne, then a pearle or a iewell because they know not the value thereof. O Lord what is man that thou art so mindfull Psal. 8. of him? O man what is God that thou art so vnmindfull of him? If a friend had giuen vs
anie thing, we would haue thanked him heartely for it, but to him that hath giuen vs all things, we will not giue so much as thankes. Now therefore let the rocke gush forth water againe, and let our stonie hearts powre foorth streames of teares in vnfayned repentance. We haue all called vpon you, but none regardeth vs, as though God were as Baall, and as though Diues felt no paine, nor Lazarus no ioy, but all forgotten. Ma∣nie times Christ commeth into the Temple and there is scarse a Simeon to embrace him, the babe is here, but where is Simeon? If God had not loued vs better then we loued our selues, we should haue perished long ere this, and yet we embrace not Christ as Simeon, who hath saued vs from tempo∣rall and spirituall punishments. We are in∣uited to a banket, he who calleth vs to it is God. What is the banket? Saluation. Who are the guests? The Angels and the Saints. What is the fare? Ioy, peace, righteousnesse, this is the fare, and we inuite you euery one: yet who will come at our bidding? some for want of faith, some for want of loue, some for want of knowledge, haue despised this holy banket, and vnto this art thou called ô soule vnworthie to be beloued. FINIS.
THE SECOND SERMON OF THE SONG OF OLD FATHER SIMEON. Thy saluation, vvhich thou hast prepared before the face of all the people, a light to be reuealed to the Gentiles, and the glorie of thy people Israell. THY saluation. This woord saluation is a sweet word, & holds me to it like an Ada∣mant, for when I thought to proceede, this word sayd vnto me, stay here, teach this and teach all, learne this and learne all, for it is the pith of all the mercies of God towards his children. Christ is called saluation, because no man
should despaire, and because it is impossibl to be saued without him, for saluation is onely in him, Christ can do any thing but this, he cannot saue him that will not repēt. He is called the saluation of God, because he came not from men, nor from Angels, nor by chance, but from God him selfe, and therefore his name was not giuen him after the maner of men, which was, that euerie father should name his owne child, but so did not Ioseph, for the Angel had giuen him Luke. 1. Luke 1. Mat. 2. Luke 2. Mat. 2. Luke 3. Mar. 1. Luke 4. 15. Iohn. 11. Mat. 27. direction for his name. The Virgine, the o∣racles, the babes, the shepherds, the starre, the wise mē, the voyce of the cryer, the deuils, the leapers, the sicke, the dead, the earthquake, the sunne, the moone, & all the cratures do beare witnesse vnto the sonne of God which is our saluation, he is called the saluation of God, because he is a saluation according to Gods owne minde. He came not to bring ease and libertie, but he came to bring the spirituall sword, and condemnation to all obstinate sinners, yet saluation to the peni∣tent. I shewed you howe many despised this iewell because they knowe not what it is worth▪ how few Simeons there be in the Tē∣ple, how few Nathanaels, how few men that feare God, these plants grow not on euerie
ground. Who would be vnthankfull if he knew what the Lord giues and what he for∣giues, he giues the sonne for the bastard the Lord for the seruant, the righteous for sin∣ners, the innocent for the wicked, and the almightie Lord for the sinfull sonnes of mē. Do you not maruel how you can offend this Lord willingly, which hath done so much for you. Here I reprooue vnthankfulnesse, securitie, and negligence, striuing as it were to crucifie Christ again, as the wicked Iewes did, who neuer prospered since the time that they sayd, his bloud be vpon vs and vpon Mat. 27. 25 our seed. They were not like Simeon, who as soone as he saw him embraced him, and re∣ioyced ouer him. There is no shew of grace in thē which shew no liking of godlinesse, neither in them selues nor in others: for this is the first part of our conuersion, to loue them that loue God, and so they are drawne to the Sonne. No man will build an Arke vntill the loud come, no man will seeke for Gen. 7. corne vntill the famine come, and scarse Lot Gen. 42. Gen. 19 will be gone out of Sodome before the time of execution of Gods wrath do come vpon them. We preach vnto you and call vpon you, we haue euen wearied our selues among you, we haue reproued you for sin, and we must still reproue you vntill you
amend: now therefore if there be anie grace in you, if ye haue anie knowledge, any feare of God in you, if you haue anie goodnesse in you, if you haue anie leasure to be saued, turne backe now from doing euil, come out of hell, and plucke your limbes out of the clouches of the serpent, for verily we haue not done so well in this citie as the Niniuits did for all the preaching and teaching we haue had. For who hath determined in his heart to amend his life? who hath left his pride? who hath restored that which he hath taken by extortion, vsurie, & wrong? surely they that haue done thus are monsters, I can not see him, he walketh inuisible and can not be found. The heauens trembled at the death of Christ, the sunne did hide his face, the earth quaked, the vaile of the Temple Mat. 27. 45 51. 52. 53. rent in sunder, the dead bodies rose out of their graues, and all this was to shew, that the Prince of the world suffered violence, & that the Lord of life suffred death for the rā∣some of vs, and all whatsoeuer throughout the world that do beleeue the Gospell, and liue in obedience, and that he suffering for sinfull and wretched man, was a conquerer ouer hell and all euill, and had ouercome death. The Scribes are against him, the Pha∣risies were against him, the rulers bande
themselues against him, the atheists against him, and all the spitefull and enuious Iewes against him, whose birth was glorious, whose life was famous, and whose death was meritorious, but God was with him and in him, by which power he hath ouercome them all. Which thou hast prepared before the face of all people. &c. I thought when first I began this song to end it in foure or fiue sermons, and I know not what keepes me from it so long, but if it be as pleasant to you as it is to me, you will not be wearie of it though I go forward but like a snaile, but hereafter I will go faster, & take more, and giue you the best thereof. Let vs proceede. Which thou hast prepared before the face of all people. &c. He speakes this to the ende that the eyes of all mankind may be fixed vpon him, as the eyes of all Israell were fixed vpon the Brasen serpent in the wildernesse, that when Num. 21. they be stinged with the sting of that firie serpent which deceiued our forefathers, they may flie vnto him for helpe lest they perish in their sinne, and their bloud be on their owne heads. Dauid being to encounter with Goliah, 1. Sam. 17.
Saule tooke and put on his harnesse, but he could not weare it, it was too heauie for his litle bodie, therefore he tooke nothing but a staffe and a few stones in a scrip, and so Dauid slue the pride of the Philistines & the feare of Israell. And euen thus the Lord set his Sonne to fight with the Prince of this world, not with swords and targets, bowes and billes, but with the word and spirit of God, with the which he hath ouercome, and through him we also haue the victorie, and for this cause hath he bene prepared, that all people might haue cause to reioyce in him. Which thou hast prepared. He was prepared long ago, as it doth most plainly appeare, for the Virgine which bare him, the place of his birth, the poore estate wherein it was, his miracles, his Apostles, his torments, his crosse, his death, his resurre∣ction, & his ascensiō into heauē, al these were foreshewed and foretold long before they came to passe. Therefore some sayd, who is this that is so often spoken of by the Pro∣phets? who is this that can do many mira∣cles that the Scribes and Pharisies cannot do? Luke. 4. 7. Iohn 11. Luke 8. Mat. 27. Iohn 10. Mar. 6. that can raise the dead, that can ceasse the windes, calme the waters, at whose suffering the earth quaked, the sunne hid his face, darkenesse came ouer all, and being dead,
rose againe by his owne power, and ascen∣ded into heauen in the sight of a great mul∣titude. How can it be then but it must be known before the face of all people, which was so manifest by dreames, by visions, by ora∣cles, by power, by authoritie, & euery thing had a tong to speake for God. Euerie thing was prepared for him before he came to be reuealed, he came not in the beginning, nor in the ending, he came not in the ending, that we which come after him might long for his second comming. He came not in the beginning, because that such a Prince as he should haue manie banners and triumphs before him. He came not in the beginning, because the eyes of faith should not be dase∣led in him, and lest they should forget him, and his comming so long since which liued in the latter ages, euen as you forget that which I haue sayd as soone as you are gone hence. He came not in the beginning, be∣cause if he had come before man had sinned, man would haue acknowledged no need of a phisitian, but when man had sinned, that he might feele the smart of sinne, therfore he came not then, for when they were cast out of Paradice, they ran vnto Christ as the Is∣raelites did to the serpent. He came not in the beginning but in the perfect age of
the world, to shewe that he brought with him perfection, perfect ioy, perfect peace, perfect wisedome, perfect righteousnesse, perfect iustice, perfect truth, signifying therby that notwithstanding he came in the perfect age thereof, yet he found all things vnperfect. The Iewes thought that he should come like some great Prince, with pōpe & glorie, which was a carnal conceipt, for herein they were maruelously deceiued, his father was but a poore carpenter, and his mother but a simple woman, and he a sillie babe wrapt in clouts. Then ought not we to reuerence our Lord and to praise his name, for that he be∣came so humble for vs most vile wretches that are worthie of nothing? and yet we see how cruelly they dealt with this blessed one which came to saue them. Ignorance sate in the chaire, deceipt gaue the sentence, and crueltie executed him, with the most pain∣full & shamefull death of the crosse. O that your eyes do not dasell, & your eares tingle, and your hearts maruell at this dealing of theirs to our louing Sauiour which came to saue them if they would, and now see that he will abase him self for our sakes euen to the vttermost, ô wonderfull thing to thinke of. If you would marke I would make you in
loue with him before I haue done with you, I say vnto all those that come hither to be e∣dified, take your fill of pleasure, enter into Paradice, lift vp your eyes, stretch foorth your hands, and eate your fill of the tree of life, and the Lord will go home with you, imbrace him and kisse him, entertaine him well, and he will dwell with you for euer. But you that come hither for fashions sake, either to see or beseene, to finde fault with somewhat, or to make an hypocritical shew of godlinesse where there is none. I tell you that comfort shall shake hands with you at the dore, marke it, and you shall see that my wordes are true. Shewe me what it is that is better then saluation. I would haue none of you to be damned if I might preuent it, nor so much as a peece of you to be giuen to Sa∣than, therefore I would I knew that stone that would kill Goliah, for I would strike it with all my might into his temples. If you will, you may be saued, and the Lord will one day put those words in my mouth that will touch your hearts. Therefore now arise, kisse and imbrace the sweet babe Iesus, and then afterward frame your selues to obey him; for then the Lord will knocke at your hearts, and if ye will let him in, he wil teach you all things. The Lord came not in the
beginning nor in the ending, but he came in the middle age of the world, to shew that if it will not learne now, it will neuer learne to come vnto God by repentance & amēd∣ment, that they may learn to kisse the sonne Psal. 2. lest he be angrie, and so they perish in his wrath like Sodome. He came in the middle age of the world, to shew that he was indif∣ferent for the world, to giue light and life vnto all that returne vnto him, for God re∣specteth Act. 10. no persons, but euerie man of what nation or countrey soeuer he be, that fea∣reth God and worketh righteousnesse is ac∣cepted of him and he will fulfill their ioyes through Christ, yet not when we will, but according to his owne good pleasure, & whē he thinketh good. Therefore stay Daniell, thou shalt haue thy diner anon, the Angell and Habacuc are about it. Stay Helias, anon 1. Kings 17. Exod. 14. the rauens will bring thee meate, and thou shalt haue enough. Anon Moses will deli∣uer Israell. So saluation is alreadie prepared of God, and hath bene long since with ful∣nesse, knowledge, and all excellent gifts, and he will giue them to vs when he seeth good, but we like whining children, that will not stay till their milke be cold, but would haue it though they be scalded with it: so we would haue the knowledge of God and li∣bertie
before we know how to vse it. We would know the high mysteries and deepe counsels of God before we know our selues, we would haue the libertie of the Gospdll, when we know no way how to vse it but in securitie. But the Lord, he will wisely giue vnto vs as it were our bellies full when he seeth it good, and when heseeth vs ready for it, who knoweth our hearts better then we ourselues. A light to be reuealed to the Gentilos, and the glorie of thy people Israell. You haue heard Simeon shewing the cause why the Sonne was sent frō the Father, why he became man which raigned before in Pa∣radice. What moued God to leaue his ioy and his blisse, and suffer more then all the world could suffer together? A great cause it is that would make a king leaue his king∣dome and fal to beggerie. A great and won∣derfull cause it was that made Iehouah to come downe from heauen to suffer miserie vpon the earth. Two causes Simeon sheweth why this Messias came from heauen. The first, that he might enlighten the Gentiles, which sate in darknesse, and the second, that he might be the glorie of Israell, which glo∣ried in their sacrifices & in their ceremonies, and so had no glorie before he came, but
were like the Moone when the Sunne doth shine vpon it, or like Rachel which despised Lea and became barren. And they despised Gen. 19. the Gentils light, like that sonne which was angrie because his lost brother came home Luke 15. againe, or like those labourers which chec∣ked the Lord of the vineyard, because he gaue vnto the other labourers more then he Mat. 20. gaue vnto them. But the Gentiles are like Gen. 29. Lea, who being despised became frutefull. Simeon reioyced in Christ, not onely for that he was the glorie of Israell, but also for that he was the light of the Gentiles. Shall the head be sorowfull because the hand is well? nay rather the hand should be glad because the head is well, and the head because the hand is well. The father should be glad be∣cause his sonne is stronger then himselfe, the mother should be glad because her daughter is wiser then her selfe, the brother should be glad because his brother is richer then him selfe, the mistresse should reioyce because her mayd is a better houswife then her selfe. But we enuie our brethren and our neigh∣bours, because they are better then we, and because God hath blessed them with tem∣porall or spiritual things aboue vs: if we see that they haue learning, then we enuy them for their learning, if he haue more gifts, we
enuie him for his giftes, if he haue more knowledge we enuie him for his know∣ledge, if he haue more zeale we enuie him for his zeale, if he haue more riches we enuy him for his riches, and how can we reioyce when euery bodies good is our euill, and e∣uerie bodies ioy is our sorow? But fixe your eyes vpon Christ alone, and he will fulfill your ioy, if you looke not backe to Sodome like Lots wife. If you loue ioy and gladnesse, Gen. 19. Christ is ioy & gladnesse, if thou loue com∣fort, why Christ is the comforter of all that beare his crosse, if thou loue life, Christ is e∣ternall life, if thou loue peace, Christ is peace, if thou loue riches, Christ is full of heauenly riches, and full of liberalitie to bestow them vpon all such as loue God: so Christ is all in all vnto the godly, & they haue more ioy in Christ alwayes and in all things, then the richest, and glorious, and sumptuous Prince in the world, then Salomō him selfe had in worldly riches, honors, plea∣sures, ease or felicitie. For the wicked which put their trust in riches, & make thē gods of gold and money, ease and pleasures, though they do all that they can to fulfil their lusts, and take neuer so much pleasures, and be ne∣uer so merrie, yet they can haue no true ioy, nor no peace of conscience, for all the peace,
the mirth & sport they haue, is but deceipt, all false and indurable, like the grasse, greene in the morning and withered ere night. But when the Lord doth knocke at their hearts, and strike them with a feeling of their hor∣rible transgressions, as no doubt he wil, then they are all in a maze, and they can haue no Isa 48. and 58. ioy, no peace, no rest, but they may say, in laughter my soule is sorowfull, in ease my soule hath trouble, in mirth mone, in riches pouertie, in glorie shame, in life my soule is euen dead, in plentie my soule wanteth all things wherein it should reioyce, it is desti∣tute of all comfort, and possessed with all slauish feares like Cain, who being Lord of Gen. 4. all the earth, yet had no ioy in it when God had once forsaken him. Likewise Saul whē 1. Sam. 16. God had forsaken him, he had no ioy of all his kingdome nor of all his riches, and then who had more ioy Saule the king or Dauid the subiect? So then we see that perfect ioy can be had in nothing but in God and in Ie∣sus Christ. Wherefore as by the streame you may be led to the fountaine, euen so let the ioy and peace of this life serue to leae vs to God which is perfect ioy and peace, & there rest, like the wise men which were guided by the starre, to come to the true sonne of grace Iesus Christ when he was borne: and
if we rest not in him when we haue found him there is no rest for vs, but like the rest∣lesse doue which fluttereth about & findeth no rest any way til she returned to the Ark, but we seeme as though we sought him and found him, when as we do but play the hy∣pocrite. Salomon saith that the wayes of a whore are prosperitie and welfare, for she euer putteth on a vizard that she might not be knowne to be so vile as she is: so vnder the colour of goodnesse euill is alwayes l∣king. Therefore Christ is called the light, because that we should leaue our foolishnes seeing light is come, and that we should for∣sake all our lights which are but darknesse, and  vnto his light which is the true light indeed. He came to lighten the Gen∣tiles, and they receiued him with thankful∣nesse, of whom there was no hope of good∣nesse left. Who would suppose that the bar∣ren woman should become frutefull, or the prodigall sonne returne home againe? It is like as if an owle should be conuerted to see light, or as if the streame should returne into the fountaine, or as if an old man should be∣come yong againe. A light to be  to the Gentiles. To be reuealed not yet reuealed, the Iewes must first reiect him before the Gentiles re∣ceiue
him and when the Iewes did oppresse him, condemne him, and crucifie him, then were his armes spred vnto the whole world. When the guests would not come, then he sendeth into the high wayes to compell o∣thers that would come willingly vnto it. Luk. 14. 23. Comfort is on foote, and that which will come shall come, &c. The Queene of Saba Mat. 12. came from the vttermost part of the earth to heare Salomons wisedome, and the wise men came from the East to see Iesus Christ, Mat. 2. but we may say, the Lord was here by in the Temple and I was in my shop, selling and buying lying, deceiuing & swearing. Well, when he comes backe againe I will be better acquainted with him: and so we esteeme not of his presence in any reuerent sort. The Sunamite sayd, Let vs build a chamber for 2. Kin. 4. 10. the man of God, then we should build an house. Zacheus did climbe vp into a tree to Luke 19. see his sauiour, and the Lord seeing his dili∣gence called him, Zaoheus come downe, for I will dine at thy house this day, & that was a ioyfull day with Zaoheus, for then saluatiō came into his house and vpon al his family: he gaue the Lord a feast, and the Lord made him a farre better feast of peace, a feast of ioy, a feast of heauenly things, and so for his zeale and indeuor to see Christ bodily, he
shewed him selfe vnto him spiritually, euen to his hearts desire. To be reuealed. Haue an eye to the future tense, that which 1. Kings 3. 12. 11. Iud. 13. & 15. and 16. Luke 6. Act. 1. Act. 9. Mat. 26. Act. 4. Act. 7. is not shall be. As for example, Salomon was wise but he is foolish, Sampson was strong, but he is weake, Iudas was a preacher but he is a reprobate, Paule was a persecu∣tor, but he is a preacher, Peter was a denier of Christ, but now he is a bold professor of Christ, Moses was learned in the wisedome of the Egyptians, but now he is learned in the wisdome of God, by which the wisdome of the Egyptians is made but meere foolish∣nesse in the sight of God. Other wise men, as heathen Philosophers, Plato, Aristotle, Cato, Crates, and such like, these were counted verie wise men in the sight of the world, yet these were Gentiles that wrote so manie ookes full of wisedome, and all so adorned with notable sentences & wittie sayings, that one would thinke all wisdome were buried with them, so famous were they, and so full of earthly vnderstanding, teaching maners, counsels and pollicies: yet for my part I haue neither seene nor heard of any such being wise in worldly things and without the wis∣dome of God, but that they haue committed some notorious foolishnesse in the sight of all men, like Achitophel, of whom we reade 2. Sam. 17.
that he was so wise a counseller, and yet see the end of him, he hanged him selfe, and all for want of the knowledge of God. It were better therefore for him to haue had more wisedome and lesse wit. Crates, Aristotle & Plato & all the rest of the wise Philosophers haue either poysoned, burned, or drowned them selues, and so we see that the ende of worldly wisdome is meere foolishnesse, and 1. Cor. 1. 20 the foolish haue more peace then the wise: for their wisedome without the feare of God doth thē no more good, then the Arke did to the Philistines, which did nothing but Id. 5. torment them, because they knew not how to vse it, and therefore vnreuerently abused it. For if your wisedome consist in eloquēce of words, in profunditie of wit, to gain craf∣tily and spend warily, to inuent lawes, to ex∣pound riddles and interpret dreames, to tell fortunes, and prophecie of matters by lear∣ning, all these without the feare of God do vs no more good then their wit did these Philosophers, which notwithstanding sate in darknes. And I am afrayd though Christ brought light vnto the Gentiles, yet it may be sayd, that the Gentils sit in darknesse stil, sauing a fewe Leuites scattered vpon the mountaines, for whose sake Sodome is spa∣red. And because those had not the know∣ledge
of God, therfore they worshipped Mars & Cupid, sunne and moone, beasts & serpēts: so the Philistines worshipped Dagō, Iud. 5. Act. 19. the Ephesians worshipped Diana, the Assy∣rians Nesroch, the Israelites worshipped a calf, Ieroboā worshipped Belzebub, the Mo∣abites worshipped Chamos, the Samaritanes did worship vnto Baall: so the truth see∣meth falshood, and error seemeth truth. As for example, that the world should be made of nothing, that the word became flesh, that God and man was ioyned together in one bodie, then one man may be righteous in the righteousnes of another which is Christ, and that the dead shall rise againe, these see∣med foolishnesse vnto the Gentiles, neither could they beleeue them. No more can some Gentiles amongst vs at this day, which are but naturall men, therefore they do not be∣leeue them: for when they professed them selues to be wise they became fools, saith the holy Ghost. So then we see nowe what Christ hath Rom. 2. done for vs, he hath bounde that serpent, which hath sowen all the tares, so that the deuill is faine for want of better lodging, to enter into swine. Heretofore, whereas one followed God a thousand folowed Baall, but now kings &
Princes lift vp their heads, desiring Christ to raigne with them and in them. Hereto∣fore we made our selues like the wounded man, we were spoyled, we were stript naked, and we were bathed in our bloud, being full of wounds, but now Christ hath furnished vs, he hath washed vs, he hath clothed vs, & we are now become true Israelites: we which were the vile and wild oliues, he hath grafted vp vpon the true oliue, and planted vs in a frutefull soile. And what cause can we shew for this but onely mercie? For heretofore we were called foolish, but the Lord hath made vs wise according to the wisedome of God in these dayes by his spirit: but if you deserue to be called the foolish nation again, then ye are most vnhappie and most cursed. So now we haue heard that the Lord doth eueale all his counsels vnto his Prophets, and how the glory of Israell is now reuea∣led to be the light of the Gentiles. And you haue heard the cause why: because the Jewes reiected their owne saluation. You haue heard that the cause was onely his mercie & his loue, because mercy can not containe it selfe within Ierusalem. A light to be reuealed to the Gentiles, and the glorie of thy people Israell. You haue heard why Christ is called
light, why he is called the light of the Gen∣tils, why the Lord did change a curse vnto a blessing, & why the Gentils did chāge dark∣nesse for light, and a thousand gods for one true God. Then the Gentiles receiued more grace then they desired, for the Lord came vncalled into their houses, and made a feast vnto them in their owne houses. The light of the Gentiles is our light, your light, and my light: Christ is our grace, your grace, & my grace, and Christ is our saluation, your saluation, and my saluation. He came vnto the Iewes, & for the Iewes, and yet his com∣ming vnto the Gentiles was better then to the Iewes. He came into the world when the world did abound in all wickednesse, and sa∣ued vs when we most deserued wrath. Won∣der at this you that wonder at nothing, that the Lord would come to bring saluation, to redeeme our lost soules, euen as it were a∣gainst our willes: so that now we would not be as we were for a thousand worlds. I shew∣ed the blindnesse of the Iewes, who hauing heard of their reiection, and of our conuer∣sion, & yet vnderstood it not, neither sought to preuēt Gods wrath in reiecting of them. Therefore the rocke which should haue sa∣ued them, did shiuer them in peeces: wherin was shewed their wonderful blockishnesse,
hauing it so oftē foretold by their Ptophets, figured in their Law, shadowed in their sa∣crifices, and read in their churches from Sa∣both to Saboth. Euery thing that commeth to passe in churches, in common weales, in cities, in countreys, in kingdomes, and in prouces, these are all foretold in the scrip∣tures, and yet none do vnderstand it, sauing a few chosen ones whom God loueth. For, the comming of Antichrist, the ouerthrow of kingdomes, the darknesse of Poperie, the light of the Gospell, the conuersion of the Gentiles, and the reiecting of the Iewes, all these are set downe in the scriptures, and yet we can not vnderstand it, though we heare it day by day, because we do not giue our minds to vnderstanding. Such hearers shall stand in a maze before the righteous & ter∣rible throne of God: the dead shall rise, the trumpe shall blow, and all the world shal be in an vprore, and they shall stand quaking, when their hearing without profiting shall be layd to their charge, and they shall say, ô we haue knowne no such things: but surely if the Iewes could come out of hell, they wold admonish vs to take better heed how we heare: for we heare as though we did not heare at all, our minds are otherwise oc∣cupied. Now when we see any thing come
come to passe as it is foretold in the Scrip∣tures, then we must say as Christ sayd, this prophecie is fulfilled, for all things that are written are come to scriptum est & factum est, that is, as sure as it is written, so surely doth it come to passe. It prophecieth no∣thing but that which truely is fulfilled in due time, and the more often it speakes of a thing, the more certaine, the more excel∣lent, and the more to be beleeued it is. Like a iewell that is beset with pearle, so is our calling ordained with scriptures for so doth God tender our calling, which is so often in his mouth, and we so often in his remem∣brance, that he speaketh of vs in euery book throughout the whole scriptures, like a kind spouse whose loue is in a straunge countrey, and he delighteth him selfe with thoughts and meditations of her: so he did long vntil the Gentiles were come to him againe, like the prodigall child, whose father did long Luke 15. vntill he had imbraced him. When shal my prodigall sonne come home againe saith he? I will put my best garment on his backe, & my gold ring vpon his finger, and his fare shall be the daintiest morsel. And thus God longeth for our saluation, and he knocketh at our doores, Is faith here? is loue here? is one called the feare of God in this place?
And as loue maketh louers sometime to speake plainly and familiarly one to ano∣ther, sometime by darke speeches and rid∣dles, sometime by letters, sometime by dumbe shewes and signes, and sometime to hide them selues one from another: so our God speaketh sometimes playnely vnto his Church, sometime darkely and mystically, somtime he turneth his face frō his Church and deare spouse, as though he would not speake vnto her for loue as appeareth in the booke of the Canticles. The first type or figure was Caine and Certain types & figures of the electiō of the Gentiles and the reie∣ction of the Iews, which here he re∣hearsd for the confirma∣tion of this doctrine. Gen. 4. Abell, Caine was the eldest sonne of Adam, and Abell the yonger, yet God loued Abell and accepted his sacrifices, but God reiected Caine for his wickednesse, and he became a reprobate: euen so doth God, he reiecteth the Iewes which were the eldest sonne, the true oliue, and the seede of promise, and Gods deare children if the had continued in obedience, and he taketh vs being but the yongest sonne, the wyld oliue, and ma∣keth vs children by adoption vnto him, on∣ly of his meere mercie without anie other cause. The 2. example was Sem & Iaphet, both Gen. 9. which were Noahs sons, Sem was the first son & Iaphet the third & yōgest, & of this Iaphet
came the Gentiles: of him said Noah, God perswade Iaphet that he may dwell in the tēts of Sem, that is, that they may be vnited together, as we see it is come to passe. Other sheepe I haue saith Christ, which are not of this fold, them also will I bring, & they shal heare my voyce, & there shall be one sheepe fold and one shepherd. Iohn 10. The third type or figure of Christ was Gen. 21. Ismael and Isaac, both the sonnes of Abra∣ham: Ismaell was the eldest, Isaac the yon∣ger yet Isaac was chosen of God & a figure of Christ at that time when he went to haue bene offered as a sweet sacrifice at Gods cō∣mandement. And Ismael his eldest brother was a mocker of his brother, and therfore he was put away, and the Lord was not with Gen. 22. him. The fourth type or figure was Iacob and Gen. 25. Esau, both sonnes to Isaac: Esau was the el∣der brother and Iacob the yonger, yet God loued Iacob and hated Esau, because Esau contemned his birthright, and sold it to Ia∣cob for a messe of pottage, and therefore Ia∣cob stole the blessing from him: so God bles∣sed Iacob, but he cursed Esau, whereby is shewed that the Lord did for the contempt of the Iewes, take away their birthright and their blessing, and hath giuen it vnto vs.
The fift type of figure was Lea, which Gen. 29. was squint eyed, and was despised, because she was not so faire and so well fauoured as her sister Rachell, and yet the Lord made her frutefull and Rachell barren: so we being despised for our barrennesse in all goodnes, yet the Lord in mercie made vs fruteful and reuiued vs. The sixt figure was Manasses & Ephraim Gen. 48. the two sonnes of Ioseph, Manasses was the eldest, and Ephram was the yongest. Both of them Ioseph hauing brought to Iacob his father that he might blesse them, he tooke Manasses and put him towards Iacobs right hand, that he might blesse him first & more plentifully, and he tooke Ephraim and put him towardes Iacobs left hand. But Iacob stretched out his right hand, and layd it on Ephraims head which was the yonger, and his left hand vpon Manasses, directing his hands so of purpose, for Manasses was the elder of them both. Thus the Lord blessed vs when there was no hope left for vs. The seuenth figure was Rahab a harlot Iosua 2. in Iericho, who was a Gentile, yet her heart was touched so, that she receiued and enter∣tained the spies that Israell sent, and in the time of danger hid them, that they should take no harme, signifying thereby, that the
Gentiles should receiue & imbrace the true Israelites and messengers of the Gospel, and keepe them as safely, and defend them as di∣ligently as Rahab did the spies of Israell. The eight figure was Ruth a Moabite, of her Christ Iesus vouchsafed to come as Ruth. 4. concerning the flesh, to shew that he came not onely of the Iewes and for the Iewes, but also of and for the Gentiles, which were the lost sheepe, vnhoped for, being strangers frō the couenant. The ninth figure was Sampson, who be∣ing a Iewe, would needs marrie with a Gen∣tile, Iudg. 14. signifying that Christ Iesus would also marrie with the Gentiles, as he did with the Iewes. The tenth figure was Salomon, who mar∣ried Pharaos daughter which was an Egyp∣tian 1. Kings 11. and Gentile, signifying thereby that Christ would take him a spouse among the Gentiles to marrie with him selfe as Dauid Psal. 45. in the Psalmes declareth. The eleuenth figure was Naaman the Sy∣rian, whose leprosie is turned vpon Gehezie, the leprosie of an heathen and ignorant mā turned vpon an Israelite, and one that had the knowledge of God, being the seruant of a Prophet, signifying that our leprosie of sinne and ignorance should be turned from
vs vpon the Iewes, who had the knowledge of the law of God, but esteemed it not, but were vnthankfull for it. Manie like exam∣ples there are in the new Testament: like as the Cherubins, though seuered in sūder, yet looked one towards another, and both vpon the mercie seate: so the old Testa∣ment and the new looke looke one towards ano∣ther & yet point at one and the same thing. The first type or figure in the new Te∣stament Matt. 2. was the wise men, which were the first fruits of the Gentiles, and came from the East, being guided by a starre: signify∣ing that by the guiding of the worde and spirit of God, the Gentiles should come from all the places of the world to imbrace Christ Iesus with ioy. The second Type or figure was Christ Matt. 2 himselfe, his going into Egypt, signifying thereby that he should go from the Iewes to the Gentiles, because the Iewes refused him through vnbeleefe, abundance of wic∣kednesse, and want of reformation: so we see that nothing can driue awaite Christ but sinne. The third Type was Christ whipping Mat. 21. 12 the Iewes out of the temple, shewing there∣by that the Iewes should be whipped or cast out of the spiritual temple, & the gen∣tiles
should occupie it. This beloued, belon∣geth vnto vs, vnto whom the Lord so won∣derfully hath made his light to shine. The fourth figure is the parable of the vineyard, which was taken from them that Mat. 21. ers. 33. possessed it, and giuen to them that should bring forth the fruits therof, and yeeld bet∣ter increase vnto the Lord of the Vine∣yard. The fift figure was the parable of the two Mat. 22. vers. 18. sonnes that were bidden to go and worke in their fathers vineyard, of whom the first said he would and did not: the second said he would not, and did repent, and went to labor in the vineyard: the first signified the Iewes, which made many vowes with such a shew of godlinesse which was but hypo∣crisie, whom the Lord reiected and cast off, and said, that the publicanes and sinners should stand in iudgement to condemne the greatest of them. The sixt figure, was the feast that the Mat. 22. 2. Lord made vnto the disobedient guestes which the Lord inuited to his banket, and was onely ordained for them, and promised to come vnto it, and yet refused and would not come, but alledged slieght excuses ta∣ken from their loue of earthlie and transi∣torie things aboue God. Therefore the
Lord sent into the hie waies to call and compell the Gentiles to come, which came though they left their wedding garments behind them. The 7. Tipe or figure was the vision of Acts. 10. Peter in Ioppa, when he was on the top of the house, where he saw the vessel come downe that had in it all maner of foure foo∣ted beasts of the earth, and wilde beasts, and foules of the aire, and creeping things, where also the voice said vnto him, Arise Peter, kill and eat: wherein the Lord shewed vnto him, that he should count no man vncleane, although the Gentiles then were counted vncleane, as were the vncleane beasts set downe in the law of God, and therefore when Peter was sent for to Corne∣lius house, he said, Of a truth I perceiue vers. 34. that God hath no respect of persons, but in e∣uerie nation he that feareth God, and worketh righteousnesse is accepted of him. Manie o∣ther examples of our calling, as the straied sheepe, the lost groate, the prodigall sonne, and Christ eating with publicanes and sin∣ners, which when we reade we should cast our figure and saie, of whom is this spoken? of the gentiles? then it is of me, for I am a gentile. But am I conuerted? If I be not thē haue I not fulfilled this prophesie, ther∣fore
let vs striue to do well, and to mortifie and subdue sinne which dwelleth in our mortall bodies: for none but the valiant can enter into the kingdome of hea∣uen. Nowe all these prophecies are fulfilled, the blind see, the lame go, the dumb speake, the deafe heare, the maimed worke, the deade are quickned, the leapers are cleansed, and the poore receiue the Gospel. There∣fore who will dispaire, and say, light is not reuealed vnto me, when as he seeth it to be reuealed vnto whole nations? And so so∣lemne is our calling, as that in so manie pla∣ces of the scripture it is foretold, whereby we see how dearely the Lord tendereth our saluation: like as a kind spouse which was longed for while she was in a strange coun∣trie: so Christ longed for the gentiles, till they came home againe vnto him. There∣fore let vs now consider what he giueth vs, namely righteousnesse, and saluation, first righteousnesse, then saluation: first repen∣tance, and then forgiuenesse of sinnes, the sunne of the gospel, least we should see heauen in hell, and light in darknesse, and ioy in anguishes. Let vs not contemne our light, or grow carelesse of it: let vs not build with one
hand & ouerthrow with the other by pro∣phanesse, like those men which while they surfetted at their gluttonous tables, did call vpon God for health. Christ is not recey∣ued with the hand, if the father offering a gift do see the sonne stretch foorth his left hand, he will withdraw his gift from him. I say let vs not contemne our light as the Iewes contemned their glorie. For what is light to him that will shut his eies against it? What is this light? It is such a glorious light, and such an excellent reuelation, that great and mightie kings haue earnestly de∣sired to see, and princes haue laid downe their crownes to reueale it. Let vs embrace this light, Let vs take & put on the wedding garment, and go to the banket, vnto which a thousand messengers haue inuited vs, and do alledge none excuses, I haue married a wife, I haue bought oxen, I go to see a farme, Mat. 22. &c. and therefore I cannot come, neither will I come. Well do so, if that ye will needes: but remember that thou wast inuited, and ther∣fore the blessing shall be giuen to another. Therefore shall Esau weepe for the blessing but shall not haue it. Heb. 1. But giue me a reason I pray thee, why thou wilt be called the seruāt of God, which doest not serue him, or the child of God,
which dost not loue him, or the disciple of Christ which dost not learne of him: yet his raine falleth vpon all, the iust & vniust, and he giueth thee al things for nothing  the sun doth giue his light for nothing, the dewe doth giue his moisture for nothing, the ∣uers do giue their waters for nothing, and the earth doth giue her fruit for nothing. What shall we do then when the sunne shineth? We must not do as we do in the darke, for then men ought to betake them to their labour. Learne of the sauage beasts, who as soone as the day springs, betake thē to their trauell, and euery bird welcommeth it with many a sweet song. Christ is light, and this light is come, Therefore he that seeth not now is blinde, and he that heares not now is deafe, and he that workes not now is maimed. But we will not worke holy workes according to the word, neither in light nor darkenes: we can see to sin in the darke as well as in the light, for the light discouereth both the har∣lot  the theese, for he is afraid of the light: where light is not, Christ is not: but Christ Iohn. 1. is light, and let none be afraid to seeke this light which is so good, so excellent, and so profitable for vs. For it doth not onelie de∣soe it solfe, but al other things round about
it. Therfore if thou hast this light, thy faith, thy feare, thy loue will shew it selfe, & good things cannot now hide themselues, for he that is light doth delight to please God in the light. It is no maruell though a man stumble in the darke, but he which stum∣bleth in the light is not verie strong, be∣cause he seeth his way before him. Once we stumbled at euerie straw when we walked in darknesse, for then light had a fall, pride had a fall, lust had a fall, drunkennesse had a al, penurie had a fall ignorance had a fall: or if you will, pride rose and we fell, lust rose, and we fell, &c. Were Egypt as light as Goshen, that is, whe∣ther the Iewes haue receiued their glorie or no, yet if thou sin in the darke the light wil bewray thee, and thy conscience will accuse thee, and condemne thee for it. Therefore now giue ouer darknes, and arme thee with light, for your life shineth like the light, therefore now we should be Israel, for Israel is reuolted. But many scrolles may be written of our sinnes, and thus the gentiles are as gentiles still. He that beleeueth not the word, is an infidell, he that beleeueth not God, is an A∣theist, he that worshippeth anie thing more than God, is an idolater: euerie mans con∣science
shall condemne himselfe. Men will leaue godlinesse for riches but they will not leaue their riches for godli∣nesse. The Iewes neuer serued God at any time with such deuotion as they doe now their gold and their riches. Many thee are which could be content neuer to die, but liue here with their riches and pleasures. Is not the godly more despited for his godlinesse than the wicked for his wicked∣nesse? Are not the members of Christ more ha∣ted, and worse entertained by vs then the limmes of Sathan? So dearely doth euerie one loue sinne and drawes sinne vpon sinne like a chain, or monsters drawne in a chain: pride sheweth, drunkennesse sheweth eue∣rie man his sinne. They came vnto vs, and said, your fathers loued vs well, and said vn∣to vs, if you wil be faire, you shall be wise, if you will be drunke, you shall be rich, and so euerie one pointeth at, and sheweth vs the way which leadeth to destruction, and how few are the number of them which shew∣eth vs the way of vertue and godlinesse? And thus we are euen as forward as those Iewes which striue who shall come to hell
first. Who did euer thanke God that he was not borne an hundred yeares ago, when ig∣norance spred ouer all, and all Egypt was smitten with darknesse, or that the Lorde hath not left him to himselfe to become an Atheist, or an Epicure which liues without God in the world? VVe haue all Gods gifts offered vs, but we haue refused them. Christ brought light: but we had rather he had brought darknesse, for we loue darke∣nesse more then light. The Angels, the hea∣uens, the word, the spirit, are light, and we which see it are darknesse, for we can not a∣bide light, but are like an Owle which flieth out of a hae field from the light of the day, such a death is day vnto vs. Faith is flowen away, truth is become a pilgrim, and euerie string is out of tune. He which should weep and bee sorrowfull laughes, and truth is brought to the ground, yea poore truth is e∣uen persecuted to the death, therefore sin∣ners are stubble, and their sentence is, burne them. How fine would be the way of vertue, if you would pare away the rubs that are in it, if you would take away all occasions of sinne, and giue it gall to eate, and when you haue done so, set a crowne of thornes vpon his head, and when you haue thus crow-
you haue condemned it, put it to death, and when you haue put it to death, burie it: and when you haue buried it, oll a great stone vpon the head of it, and set watch men to keepe it, and let your watch-men be fasting and prayer, that it may neuer rise againe to raigne any more, the which the Lord for his mercie sake grant, Amen.
THE CALLING OF IONAH. Ionah 1. 1. 2. 1 The vvord of the Lord came to Ionah the sonne of Amittai saying, 2 Arise, and go to Niniuie that great Citie, and crie against it, for their vvickednesse is come p before me. YOu haue heard the sweet song of old fa∣ther Simeon, like the pleasaunt song of a sweet bird before her death, setting foorth the ioy of the righte∣ous which embrace Christ Iesus. Before Christ Iesus vouchsafed to come vnto vs, we would not come vnto him, but in all our doings we wrought our condemnation, & through the innumerable
heapes of our iniquities, laboured to driue him without all hope of mercie from vs. So we continued like flies which flutter about the candle till they haue consumed them selues. When we had done as much as in vs lay to driue him away from vs, then he sa∣ued, and recompenced good for euill vnto vs. So that if God had loued vs no better thē we loued our selues, we might haue perished in our sinne, and our bloud should be vpon our owne heads. If Christ be the light of the Gentiles, let vs embrace him and let euerie one walke as becommeth the children of light, but many do shut their eyes against it, least they should see, and many do not one∣ly smoother their owne light, but the Sunne sayth vnto the Moone, shine not, and the Moone sayth vnto the Stars, be not bright. And many haue smothered their light so long, that the dampe hath put out the candle and thus they labor to bring the darkenesse of Egypt vpon Goshen: so that their eyes haue forgotten to see, and so ma∣nie goe out of the way, because they would not looke vpon the candle, and the deuill giueth to euerie one that which he wisheth, so it may be for his hurt: to the bramble fire, and who can but pittie that the same Manna which commeth from heauen
should be poysoned with it? The Iewes had no cause to enuie our light, for he gaue thē glorie: he was poore, and yet he gaue them riches: he was coun∣ted base, and yet he made them honourable, he was contemned, and yet he made them beloued: they were full of darknesse, and he brought them light, but they contemned this light, and so procured their owne con∣demnation. And therefore now it is come to passe that they are become vagabonds vpon the earth, and most contemned of all other nations, & euerie people haue a dwel∣ling: but since they prophesied euill vnto themselues, saying his blood be vpon vs and our children, goodnesse hath put on the face of bath fulnesse amongst them. If thou embrace Christ as Simeon did, then Christ is thy glorie, but if thy glorie consist in beautie which fadeth, in gay clothing which weareth, in wealth which wasteth, or in gold which rusteth, then Christ is not thy glorie. We haue gone long with an olde man, and now we haue lost him, but we are loth to part with him he is such a good compa∣nion, neuerthelesse we hope to finde him a∣gaine in Ionah. We haue gone but slowly with him as
with an olde man which is not verie swift on foote, but now we must runne with Io∣nah as with a poste, least Niniuie be de∣stroied. The word of the Lord came vnto Ionah. I neede not shew the authoritie of Pro∣phets, but concerning their sorts and diffe∣rence: there are three sorts of Prophets. The first were such as called vpon the name of the Lord in prayer for the people, and recei∣ued an answer from the Lord in the peoples behalfe, of which sort was Samuell, & these . Sa. 10. 9 were called Seers. A second sort of Prophets were such as God raysed to expoūd the law, and declare the will of God vnto the peo∣ple, when the Priests and such as should do so, were slacke in their callings: of which sort was Esay, Ieremie, Ezechiell, Damell, Hose, Ioell, Aos, Obadiah, Ionah, and the rest of the holy Prophets. A third sort were such as haue beene since Christ, woorking such like effectes, of which sort was the Prophet Agabus, of whome mention is Act. 11, 28. made in the eleuenth of the Acts and the 28. verse. Now in the second sort of these was Io∣nah, whom God sent to declare his wil vnto his people, vnto whom also the Lord did reueale the subuersion of kingdomes, the
ouerthrow of Tribes, the captiuitie of Na∣tions, and calamities that were to come vnto the sonnes of men for iniquitie and rebelli∣on against God. As all wise men were not borne at once, nor liued togither: so these holy Prophets haue not beene at once, but were raised vp by the Lord God, some here, some there, ac∣cording to his pleasure, and as he sawe the people stand in need of them by reason of the corruption of the times. And furthermore, the Lord hath not at any time reuealed vnto one of these, all things that might be reuealed, but as much as was sufficient for them euerie one in their times and places. Neither hath any of them told as much of the will of God as might be, nor the expounding of his lawes. But the Patriarkes haue left some to the Prophets, and the Prophets haue left some to the Apostles, but they haue left none for vs, but they haue all left open the whole will of GOD vnto vs, and euerie one bringeth Golde, and Myrrhe, and Fran∣kensense, like the wise men which came to see our Lord. There are three things which moued me to take this storie in hand aboue al others. First because you know the storie, and therefore
can the better conceiue of the matter as I go forward with it. Secondly because it is brief and doth containe a great deale in a little. Thirdly, because it is most agreeable for the time and state of this sinfull age wherein we liue, and therefore most conuenient for vs. It is manifest that Ionah liued in a very trou∣blesome time, namely in the time of Ierobo∣am a wicked king, of whom it was said, that he not only sinned himself against the Lord, but it is he which is called the Ieroboā that made Israell to sinne. Also this commēdeth the constancie of Ionah, that he in the midst of all the corruptions wherwith all the peo∣ple were ouerflowne, kept him selfe vncor∣rupted and vnspotted amongst them all. And furthermore it layeth open and mag∣nifieth the great loue of God, in that he sent a Prophet to admonish his vngodly people, when as he should haue sent a thunderbolt to terrifie them, or rather vtterly to destroy them: so that there mercy stept before iudg∣ment. His name was Ionah, which signifieth a doue, which admonisheth vs, that as we la∣bour to be as wise as serpents, so we should also desire that we might be as simple as doues. His fathers name was Amittai, which signifieth truth. I would that truth were e∣uerie
preachers father. There are three speciall things contained in this historie. First, the great mercie of God, expressed in this, that he sent a Pro∣phet to Niniuie a Citie of the Gētils, which were strangers from the couenant, from the promise, and straungers from the common wealth of Israell. The second thing was Ionah, who being no Gentile but an Israelite, which knew his maisters will what it was, did yet presump∣tuously neglect the same, not of a sudden desire, for he had time inough to consider what he did, and yet see what mercie did: the Lord prepared a great whale in the bot∣tome of the sea, where there was no hope of life for him: afterwards the Lord hauing de∣liuered him out of the whales bellie, he went and preached at Niniuie so zealously, as though he had neuer bene the man which was so disobedient before. And when he had done, he murmured against God worse thē euer he did, and all because he spared the citie. The third thing was, the mariners which had bene idolaters all their liues, yet now by the great power of God mouing them, cal∣led vpon the true God, of whom they had heard by Ionah, & by whose mightie power
they were saued. But in the meane while, Niniuie set on the score, and had no ho with them in wor∣king wickednesse: but still filling the cup of all abhominations, and running downe to hel with as much speed and force as they could, and no stay but the perill of death. And Ionah, he rebelleth against God, for being sent to Niniuie, he went to Tarshish. There are foure speciall things to be no∣ted in Ionah. First, the daunger of Io∣nah by his disobedience. Secondlie, the be∣hauiour of Ionah in the whales bellie. Thirdlie, the grudging and murmuring of Ionah against the Lord God. And fourth∣lie, the rebuking of Ionah by God for his impietie. He that receiueth a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, shall receyue a Prophets re∣ward. Therefore let vs prepare our eares to heare and receiue the worde of God prea∣ched by his ministers, & let vs think that Io∣nah is come againe to our houses to preach, whether it be fortie dayes, or fortie weekes, or fortie yeares, they that liue like Sodome, shall be punished like Sodome. The word of the Lord came to Ionah the sonne of Amittai saying, Arise &c. We haue seene Ionah a farre off, if we
would we might see him nearer. As our Sauiour said to his disciples, Pray Mat. 24. 20 that your flight be not in the winter, nor on the Sabboth: so say I vnto you, pray that the Lordes comming be not on the weeke dayes therefore: if he did come then, howe should he find you? Therefore I pray you learne now, and giue good eare that ye may heare sufficient for all the weeke. The word of the Lord came, &c. Wherein I obserue that Ionah went not before he was sent: for he going to preach vnto the Gentiles, it was needfull that he should haue a speciall calling and commissi∣on from the Lord himselfe: for it was vn∣meet to cast the childrens bread vnto dogs, vnlesse he had a speciall commaundement from God so to do. None ought to take vpon him the fun∣ction of preaching in the church, vnles they haue their warrant or authoritie from God, Heb. 5. 4. as Aaron had. And although they haue not their authoritie in that forme and maner as Ionah had his, (namely) as it were by word of mouth, euen from God himselfe, Arise and go to Niniuie. Yet they must haue their warrant from him (else their calling is vnlawfull.) But now there is another authoritie crept
into the Church that makes so many idols, which haue eyes and see not, tongues and speake not, eares and heare not, and that is this. When one stalleth vp another into Moses chaire, not hauing Moses rod, nor Moses spirit. And this gall will not holde spurring. Further I obserue, that as the worde of the Lord came to Ionah: so the word of the Pope came to his priests, Iesuits and Seminaries, but so and in such sort ma∣nie times, that they are drawne to Tiburne while Masses are said for them at Rome. The word of the Lord came vnto Ionah. &c. Wherein also I obserue, that which came vnto him was not alwayes with him, but so it was, that when the worde of the Lord came vnto anie of the Prophets, then they were well furnished with abilitie, to teach, to preach, to reproue, or to command who∣soeuer the Lord would haue so handled, as by example: Nathan the Prophet bad Da∣uid the king that he should build a temple. 2. Sam 1. 1. Chron. 11 2. Sam. 1. and 1. Chron. 11. And a little after he came and bad him that he should not build it. Where wee see that when he bad him build it, then the spirite of the Lord came not vnto him to bid him so to do. And therefore the spirit of God came vpon him the verie same night, and bad him that he
should go to Dauid, and bid him that he should not build it. For this is euident, that as God himselfe is constant, so his spirit and his word are constant, and therefore neuer faith and vnsaith one thing. Againe the Prophet Elisha said, 2. Kin. 4. 2. King. 4. that the Sunamites heart was grieued, but the Lord had hid it from him, and had not as then declared the same vnto him: which doth note vnto vs, that the same worde whereby the Lord hath, and doth reueale maruellous things vnto his Prophets, was not now vpon him, neither is alwayes vpon any Prophet, but according to the will of God it comes vnto them, to reueale vnto them what he would haue them to do, and when it pleaseth him. Also Daniel said, that the Lord did not reueale the kings dreame vnto him, for any wisdome that he had more then any liuing, but only for the kings sake, & for the poore people of Gods sake, and so you must think of vs that are the ministers of the Gospell, that the Lord doth not reueale his will vn∣to vs, for any wisdome or worthinesse that is in vs more then other men, but for your sakes, & that we might reueale it vnto you, therefore heare vs euen for that cause, be∣cause the Lord hath reuealed vnto vs these
things for your sakes, and good. From the calling we come to the charge. Arise and go to Niniuie that great &c. God commeth and findeth vs al a sleepe, then he bids vs arise, for they are not fit to conuert others, which are not yet cōuerted themselues, according to that saying of Christ to Peter: When thou art conuerted (sayth he) strengthē thy brethren, teaching Luke 22. 32 them by your experience. Now a dayes men take vpon them to reproue others for com∣mitting such thinges as themselues haue practised, and do practise without amend∣ment, notwithstanding their diligence in teaching others their dutie, they can teach all the doctrine of Christ, sauing three sil∣lables, that is: Follow me, Therefore these are like some Tailers, which are verie busie in decking and tricking vp of others, but go bare & beggerly themselues. They wil not let vs plucke out the moate that is in their eyes vutill we haue plucked out the beame in our owne eyes. Niniuie was the greatest and the auncientest citie in the land of As∣syria, and the name of it signified Beautifull, which name was giuen it rather for the greatnesse and beautie thereof, then for the name of Ashur, which was the builder and first founder therof as we read in the booke
of Genesis. Some thinke it to be built by Ni∣nus, Ge 10. 11. but I am not of that minde. It had a faire name, but foule deeds like this citie. The Iewes would not heare the word of God by Ionah, and therfore the Lord sent to Niniuie, signifying thereby that the Iewes for their contempt and negligence should be reiected, and the Gentiles should be re∣ceyued into the fauour of God, that they might be an holie & sanctified people vn∣to the Lord in their stead. Their sinne is no∣ted in this, that they sinned euen vntill the Prophets were gone from them. Therefore this was as it were to shake off the dust of their feet to witnesse against them for their obstinacie and hardnesse of heart, and to let them see that the wickedest Gentiles were more righteous then they, that they repen∣ted at the voice of one Prophet, yea & with one sermon: whereas they refused & resisted all the holy and worthy Prophets that God sent vnto them. Againe, the calling of the Gentiles is de∣clared in this their submission with all wil∣lingnesse, which they did shewe vnto the words of this prophet wheras: the Iewes re∣iected all the words of God, and would not heare the Prophets, whom God had raysed vp amongst them, which made those Nini∣uits
to proclaime a fast, to put on sackcloth and to humble themselues before the Lord, desiring him to turne away his wrath from their citie? Thus they repented, and repen∣ting were saued with mercie: so they which grieue the spirit, quench the spirit, for the worde of God went from Samaria to Ni∣niuie. The Gospell was in Ephesus, but it went from thence and came to England: and it may go again from England. Let thē which thinke that they stand, take heede least they fall. Niniuie receyued the word of God, and neuer heard it before, and this sheweth that the foolish & simple are more diligent and ready to heare and receiue the word of god, than those that are wise in their owne con∣ceit, & also in the view of the world. What saith Christ, the poore receiue the Gospel: Mat. 11, 5. 1. Cor. 1. 2 6 what saith Paule: not many rich, not many wise. For if we haue knowledge, if this knowledge be like the Pharisies, that is, in shew of sinceritie, in counterfeit holinesse, and hollow-hart friendship through hypo∣crisie, it had beene better for vs that we had beene ignorant, for it will but leaue vs inex∣cusable, it will be found insufficient to saue vs, but sufficient to condemne vs, because
we knowe our maisters will and doe it not: Luk. 12. 4 84. Act. 8. 20. therefore as Peter said to Simon Magus, thy money perish with thee. So will the Lord say vnto such: thy knowledge perish with thee, seeing it is vnprofitable. That great citie, &c. As if hee had saide, Feare it not, for though it were neuer so great I am able to destroy it, and will destroy it if it doth of∣fend me. And moreouer, the greater it is, the more vngodly. For as one man taketh sick∣nesse of another: so one man is infected by ill example of another, and so taught to sinne the more, till the measure of sinne be full. Niniuie had 1500. towers in it, and 120000 little children, as is noted in the end Ion 4. 11 of this storie: therefore it may well be cal∣led a great citie. But yet the greatnesse, the beautie, the strength, and riches of this citie, could not withstand the hand of God, or keep it from destruction, but rather further it and hasten it. For with the more excellent ornaments that it was adorned by the Lord, the more haynous and grieuous in his sight was the abuse of them. Therefore the hugenesse, nor the strength of this or any other Citie, can saue it from the iudgement of God, being sinfull in his sight.
Great Sodom is destroyed: Ierico is de∣stroyed: Gen. 19. Iosh. 6. & 1 in 24. 25 Ru. 18. 2. great Niniuie is destroyed: great Ierusalem is destroyed, and great Rome the roome of all vncleane spirits, stayeth for her destruction, like a whoore that stayeth for her punishment till she be de∣liuered: and all these were punished for vnthankefulnesse and contempt of the worde of God. Yet Ierico, nor Sodome, nor Niniuie, haue had halfe the prea∣ching that we haue: yet we are vnthanke∣full too. When Sodom was burnede, Zoar stoode safe: when Ierusalem was destroyed, Beth∣lehem Gen. 19. Ier. 41. 17. stood still: so the Lord doth alwayes prouide for his people, though he make ne∣uer so great a slaughter and destruction a∣mongst his enemies. Great Sodome is destroyed, great Ni∣niuie is destroyed, great Ierusalem is de∣stroyed, then what haue wee to looke for? Ionah was cast into the sea, swallowed of a fish, and cast vp againe, and after all this, he must go preach at Niniuie, and he must conuert it within fortie dayes, and that without miracles, which wanne great credite among the Gentiles. Within fortie dayes hee must conuert Niniuie, in fortie
dayes the seed sowen, growen, and ripe. Who would haue thought Ionah should haue beene cast out of the sea to conuert Niniuie? They that scorned at Ionah, are conuer∣ted by Ionah, and they that despised the worde, are ouercome by the worde. Though Ionah were cast out of a shippe, swallowed of a fish, and cast out of the sea, yet there is hope of him. Ioseph is in prison, and who knoweth what shall become of him? who would haue thought that Saule should become Paule, or Zacheus a Christian? God woulde not suffer anie people to 2. Pet. 2. 5. Gen. 19. Exod. 4. bee vntaught: therefore hee sent vnto the olde world Noah, Lot to Sodome, Moses to Israell. Thinke no worse of no man though hee were cast out of the sea as Io∣nah, or baselie brought vp, for the Saui∣our of Israell is brought out of the flags, and the saluation of the whole world out of a stall. It is saide that GOD worketh manie things at once. It might well be said, for the mercie of God, the conuersion of the Gen∣tiles, the reiection of the Iewes were al set forth herein, and yet a further matter was contained in it.
And although the Iewes were a wicked & a stiffe necked people, yet there were some good men amōg them whom the Prophets call a remnant, like the gleaning after har∣uest, or like a cluster of grapes on the top of the vine after the vintage. And these must be remembred in mercie, because of the co∣uenant made vnto their fathers. So among them that went into captiuitie, there was Shidrach, Misach, and Abednego. And so all do not kneele to Bell, for they whom the Lord preserueth do not. The Lord because of his couenant doth alwayes prouide for his chosen, although there be neuer so great calamitie or trouble, as we see in the booke of Genesis 45. chapt. Gen. 45. when there was a great time of dearth and scarcitie to come vpon the land where Iacob was, then the Lord sent Ioseph to prouide for his father Iacob, least hee should want bread, he or any of his sonnes, and folks, and so ordered the matter, that Ioseph was trea∣surer ouer all the corne in Egypt. And so a∣mong the Turks and the Spaniards and in∣fidels, the Lord will find meanes to do them good which vnfainedly loue him, and in the dungeon, & in the prison, and in bonds, yea and in death, the godly shall find God. And crie against it.
First God biddeth him, Arise and shake off all impediments, and then to go and call them to the battel, and now he bids him crie out against them, and so terrifie them. Euery Prophet is a crier, as appeareth where the Lorde biddeth Esaie to lift vp his Esay. 48. 1. voyce like a Trumpet. Euerie Prophet must both be plaine and bold, and this ma∣ny times maketh the poore seruants of God to speake their minds as plaine and bold as if they sate in iudgement. Iohn was a voice, a voice would not serue, he was the voice Luke. 3. of a crier, and yet hee could not make the crooked straight, nor the rough plaine. If they were not deafe, they need not to crie one to another, such is the dumbnesse of preachers, the deafnesse of hearers, and the slownesse of followers, that there is but litle good done, and but a few frutes gathered. If ye were not deafe, we neede not to crie: and therefore we crie with mouth, with heart, with hand, with foot, & with all the powers of our bodies vnto you, and yet how little do you regard it But are not ye commanded to heare as well as we to crie? yet the cocke croweth when men are fastest asleepe, yea the cocke croweth, and still Peter denieth Mat. 26. 70. 72, 74. his maister. Before you crie vnto the Lord, heare what
the word crieth vnto you, and let not your woorkes crie for vengeaunce while your tongues crie for mercie. When men heare the preacher speake a∣gainst pride, hypocrisie, couetousnesse, or a∣nie other sinne, then they looke one vpon another, as though it belonged not vnto them: but who can say his hart is cleane? In the second of the Actes, the holy Ghost Acts. 2. came downe in fire & tongs: but this fire is quenched, and the tongues are tied vp: though they cannot speak, they can see; they can see if a great benefice fall though it be an hundred miles off: yet Pharao had more care of his sheepe, then wee haue of our soules. And crie against them: For their wicked∣nesse is come vp. &c. Faire Niniuie, proude Niuiuie must be destroyed: no man sits so high, but destru∣ction sits aboue him. Iustice would haue come against them before it cried agaynst them. But while they heard the crie of God, God heard their cries, and tooke pi∣tie on them. When God cries, then we should weepe, considering wherefore he cries: for there is nothing that can prouoke the Lord to crie, but sinne, and that he euer crieth against.
Do what thou wilt, and say what thou wilt, and the Lord wil not be offended with you vnlesse you sinne. For as an angrie man e∣uer pursueth that which he hateth, vntill he hath destroyed it: so the Lord euer crosseth and hindereth vs in all our wicked actions, vntill he hath slaine sinne in vs. Our sinnes buffet God on euerie side, as the Iewes buffetted Christ: first on the right side, and then on the left side, and ne∣uer leaue till we haue prouoked him to crie against vs. And crie against it, &c. Reproofe is the necessariest office, yet it is least regarded, & least esteemed. For now we thinke if one doth reproue vs, that he hateth vs. But the Lorde sayth Leuit. 19. Thou Leui. 19. 17 shalt not hate thy brother in thy heart, but shalt reprooue him, and suffer him not to sinne: noting thereby, that if wee flatter anie in their sinne, or see them sinne, and not reprooue them for it, that it is a mani∣fest signe that they doe it of hatred, how great loue and good will so euer they pre∣tend toward them, seeing the matter tendes to the hurt of their soules, and the offence of God.
If a preacher reproue sin, he is thoght to do it of hatred, or of some particular grudge: & others as though they were galled, will say, let him keepe his text: or they will say, he is beside his booke, as though no text in scrip∣ture doth reproue sin, and so of al doctrines, the doctrine of reproofe & reprehension of sin is most contemned, and least esteemed. But let a preacher preach darke misteries, or prophane speeches, or vnprofitable fables, or friuolous questions, or curious inuenti∣ons, or od conceits, or brainsicke dreames, & any of these will be more welcome vnto thē then reprehension which is most profitable and necessariest of all. Balaams asse neuer spake but once, and then he reproued. Then Num. 22. 28. if Balaams asse reproued Balaā, how much more ought Balaam to reproue asses, or such as will be no otherwise then beasts in their behauiour. When we reproue you for sins, whether they be vsuall, or priuate, you thinke ill of vs. If a preacher reproue a publike sin, which is vsed and tollerated amongest many, he is hated of many, and thought to be too bu∣sie, or that he is toosharpe and rough. And they say, that whereas hee, should preach Gods loue and mercie, he tels vs of the law, and so doth throw vs downe too low, &c.
And if he reprue a sinne that is done pri∣uatelie he is thought to be enuious, and one that preaches the law, and thereby throwes some to despaire, & so al reproof is thought by them intollerable. But we preach hell to bring you to heauen, we preach the law to lead you to the Gospel, we preach iudge∣ment, that you might find mercie, we threa∣ten, as though we should strike you, we re∣buke as though we were angrie with you, and exclaime as though we did hate you: but we loue you in the dearest blood we haue. The Lord grant vs all to loue the truth to the end.
THE REBELLI∣ON OF IONAH, IN TWO SERMONS. Ionah 1. 2. 3. 2 Arise and go to Niniuie that great Citie, and crie against it, for their vvic∣kednesse is come vp before me. 3 But Ionah rose vp to flie to Tarshish from the presence of the Lord, and vvent dovvne to Iapho, and he found a ship go∣ing to Tarshish, so he paid the fare therof, and vvent dovvne into it that he might go vvith them vnto Tarshish from the presence of the Lord. TO comfort Ionah against all euill temptatiōs which might befall him, God saith that their wickednesse is come vp before him. As if he had said,
feare nothing, but go, for the quarel is mine, I haue sent thee, their sinnes prouoke me thus to stand against them. When God sends criers vnto a people, it is a most manifest signe that their wicked∣nesse is come vp before him, which doth cause him thus to exclaime against them, and then if they wil not repent while Gods criers continue crying amongst them, the Lord of hosts will rise vp in armes against them. I shewed you the Niniuites sinnes in a scroll, to see how they go in rankes vp to heauen, thereby to shew to the daughters of Niniuie, that wealth and wickednesse go together, prosperitie and securitie kisse each other: and yet the world tempts, and the flesh yeelds afore we sinne. To them which aske how our sinnes as∣cend and flie vp vntil they come before the presence of God, I answere, that God here speakes vnto vs after the maner of men, who can not see a thing afore it be brought nigh vnto them, euen where they are. Sin amounts vp on high, like the temp∣ter which led Christ vnto the top of the pi∣nacle to beholde all the pleasures of the world at once, and then when we fal downe before the god of this worlde, the God of
heauen is tempted, whether he be iust or no: therefore wrath speakes out of the fire, now thou hast taken thy pleasure, thou must take also thy punishment. For your wickednesse is come vp before me. As if he had said, O Niniuie, you are like men araigned and your sinnes stand crying at the barre not for mercie and forgiuenes, but for iudgement, wrath, and vengeance to fall vpon you for your outragious swarmes of iniquities. A most heauie and grieuous thing it is if you knew what you are doing here, and what your sinnes are doing at the barre of Gods iust iudgement. For euen now before you came hither, you were seruing the deuil in sinne, but now it is too late to speake of it, and where are they now? flesh and blood could not stay them, nature could not stay them, pleasures could not stay them, riches could not stay them, nor it could not stay it selfe, but it is ascēded vp before the face of the eternall God, to stand at this barre and crie for vengeance to fall vpon vs, for com∣mitting such hainous sinnes against the ma∣iestie of God. An arrow is swift, the Sunne is swifter, but sinne is swifter then all: for in a moment it is iudged in heauen, punished in hell, and
ranging vpon the earth. Nemrod could not reach to heauen, but his sinnes could reach to heauen. Our sinnes ascend like the tower of Nemrod, but they fall to confusion like Gen. 11. Babell. It is like the Eagle which taketh a shel∣fish, and flieth into the skie with it, and then she letteth it fall vpon the rocks, and so da∣sheth it in peeces, and then she deuoues it. My last note was, that that which we cast behind vs, the Lord doth set before him, We fast before him, we pray before him, we giue almes before him, and we do euerie good thing before him, because we do it freely, & as it were, caring not who lookes vpon vs: but we suppose we sinne behinde him, be∣cause at such a time our conscience accusing vs, we fall to hiding and cloking of our sin, thinking if we can hide it from men, that God cannot see it. But let vs not deceyue our selues, for God seeth not as man seeth. Iob. 10. 4. Man cā see but only outward things com∣mitted in action: but God seeth and know∣eth, and searcheth the secrets of the heart, all Pro. 16. 3. Heb. 4. the thoughts and imaginations of it. A man can see but one thing at once, he cannot turne his right eye one way, and left eie another: he cannot see two things at one instant: but God seeth all things at one in∣stant.
Though we, sinne as closely aswe can for feare of hatred, or shame of the world, or for any other respect: yet God saith, your sinne is come vp before me. For though we couer it, and hide it and colour it, yea and as it were burie it as well as lieth in vs, yet all is open vnto him: therfore  saith, your sinne is come vp before me. When we speake euill, he is all eares to heare vs, when we do euill, he is all eyes to behold it, and when we will be obstinate in our wickednesse, then he is all hand to pu∣nish and plague vs, and in the end to root vs out from all our pleasures. But when we re∣pent, he is all mercie and loue, and when we amend our liues, and leaue all our wicked wayes to walke before him in holinesse euer after, then he is all truth and righteousnesse to forgiue vs all our former wicked life, and to wash vs from our vncleannesse & sinne. Therefore ô foolish man, do not thinke that God seeth not that which man seeth not: for when he lookes vp, he sees all be∣low also, and when he lookes downe, he sees all aboue also. Ananias might haue gained by his craft Acts 5. if God had not seene his heart which men saw not, therefore he lost his life, and his goods too.
If God had not seene that which men see 2. King. 5. not, Gehezi might haue gained a bribe for his labour, when he ranne after Naaman the Assyrian, and tolde him a lie for his profite. But God seeing his fetches which men saw not, turned his bribe to a leprosie, & so made him a leper for his lobor. A fear∣full example for such as take bribes: they care not what bribes they take so men see it not. My husband is gone forth saith the har∣lot to her louer, in the Prouerbs, and he shal Pro. 7. 19. 20. Luke 12. not see this. The man that said, Be merrie my soule, and take thy pleasure for manie yeares, might haue done it if God had not seene him, & rewarded him as his meaning deserued: did not my spirit go with thee, said 2. King. 5. Eliseus to Gehezi? did not this eye go with thee? O Lord what is man that thou so wat∣chest him? If God had not seen Achā take vp the peece of gold, he had kept it to himselfe Iosu. 7. for his labor, & no man should haue knowē where he had it. But God seeing it (though closely done) rewarded him with shame and griefe in the sight of all Israel. O Lord what is man that thou so watchest him. Achan would neuer haue stolen if he had knowen that God did see him. Gehezi durst neuer haue takē a bribe, if he had thought that god
beheld his doings. Wilt thou steale, the ow∣ner looking on thee? wilt thou speake trea∣son in the kings hearing? Neither would we lye, nor sweare, nor steale, nor hurt, nor be prophane at any time, if we considered that the Lord seeth vs, and remembred that he watcheth vs: if we would do thus, sin might go begging for want of seruice. Therefore if you will marke but this part of my sermō, that God seeth all, you would refraine from those things secretly, (that are to the offence of god) which you for feare or shame wil not do before men, & you would say euen when your hand is at it, I wil not do it, because the Lord seeth vs Now therefore repent thee of all the euill that thou hast done, runne and ie thee as fast as euer thou canst, and striue who goes fastest, thy sinne or thy prayers. These are the faint spies, that went to see the land of Canaan, which say, that iourney is farther then you are able to go all your life, the way is like a thicket, and the doore like a needels eye, therefore it is impossible for you to come thither. But when you send faith, hope, and loue (those messengers of peace and truth) they will bring you word saying, your ruffes must be ruffled, and your fardingales crusht, and none shall be kept out, but such as loue the world better then
heauen, or such as wil take their sinnes with them: for that it is not the fashion of that countrey; but we must leaue them like the shadow when we go into the doore, and we must shake hands with them, and bid them fare-well. Now it followeth how Ionah fled to Tar∣shish. We can not stand to speake of Tar∣shish, nor what it is to flie from God, but how Ionah was sent to Niniuie, and how he went to Tarshish, this shall be our medita∣tion. Ionah the Prophet was commanded to go to Niniuie, and there to crie out against sinne, to preach against pride, and all kinde of vngodlinesse, therby to reclaime them & stir them vp in laying open their sinne, and the punishment which hanged ouer them, that they might speedily repent, and so turn away from them the wrath of God thereby deserued. What a happie message was this? and what a happie thing for Niniuie, that the Lord would vouchsafe thē so great mer∣cie? O but still one flie or other marres the whole boxe of ointment: as soone as he was Eccles. 10. 1 commanded to go thither, Sathan stood in the gap, and entised him to go to Tarshish, lest the Niniuites kil him or some way hurt him. Ionah was no sooner tempted, and thus entised by Sathan to go to Tarshish, but he
forthwith yeelded, and hauing yeelded, then he to go, and so Ionah made him selfe a run∣away and a disobedient seruant to his God. And thus Sathan is euer entising or crossing vs, when we are addressing our selues to do the will of our God. There is no commaun∣dement of God, but the deuill commaunds the contrarie, and he is euer vnsaying that which God sayth: for our good God sayth vnto Adam, if you eate of the forbidden Gene. 2. 17. fruite you shall die, the deuill came, and he told them, no, you shall not die, but you shal be as Gods if you eate theof. God saith, Gen. 3. 4. submit your selues one to another in bro∣therly 1. Pet. 5. 5. loue, the deuill saith, be proud and lustie, scornfull and ambitious: God sayth, loue thy neighbour as thy selfe, the deuill Mat. 22. saith, be enuious, but loue thy self and none but thy selfe: God saith, labor for the food Iohn. 6. 27. which perisheth not, the deuill bids labour for such food which perisheth, as dainties, and plentie of pleasant things: God sayth, forsake the world, the deuill saith, loue and Rom. 12. 2. 1. Ioh. 3. 18. esteeme the world with the things of the world, and we do it at his commandement. And thus is man led captiue to destruction with the chaines of sin. One said, God spake and it was done, but I say, the deuill spea∣keth Gen. 1. 3. 9. and it is done: for he is such an Orator
that no man can denie him. This made De∣mas to embrace the world, Iudas to betray 2 Tim. 4. 10 Mat. 26. 48. 70. Iud. 14 17. Gen. 4. 8. 2. King. 5. 22. 24. his maister, Peter to denie his Lord, Sampson to reueale his secret, Cain to kill his brother, Gehezi to take a bribe, and there is such har∣ping in the ballance, that constancie is put out of her place. Yet this priuiledge hath God giuē vnto vs, that if we resist the deuill, Iames 5. he wil flie away from vs. But the deuil hath not this promise, that when he resists, we shall flie from him, notwithstanding the de∣uill is euer as busie as if he had such a pro∣mise, yea & full often doth ouercome, which is a sign that we do not resist him any thing throughly: but rather as it should seeme we ioine with him, rather to do his wil thē gods will: and this made foolish Balaam to aske Num. 22. againe and again, till God seeing him bent contrarie to his will, left him vnto himselfe. and so Balaam went on in sin so long til the verie asse wheron he rode was constrained to reproue him, and crie out against him. But Ionah rose vp to go downe to Tarshish, and he went to Iapho. They that should preach at Niniuie, are loytering at Tarshish, and like a drone doth the Nonresident keepe his benefice, but for shame wilt thou keepe it still, either go and preach at Niniuie as you are cōmmanded,
or leaue your priuiledge and benefice. But they stand staggering, ashamed to keepe it, and loath to leaue off, for the sweet mor∣sels of Bels priests are so pleasant vnto them, that they cannot find in their harts to leaue them as long as they are able to keepe it. Io∣nah was sent to Niniuie, but he went to∣ward Tarshish. And so it is alwayes with vs, either we say or do euill, or else we do nothing, or we take one thing for another and so we are euer doing that we should not do. And as Ionah tooke Tarshish for Nini∣uie: so wee take the Deuill for an Angell, light for darknesse: pride for handsomnesse: sinne for godlinesse: and euil for goodnesse. No maruell it was that Ionah fled, least hee should go to Niniuie: for this is a stumbling vocation amōg men, yea hated and reiected by the children of this world, which alway Exod. 18. 4. Iere. 20. 7. kicke against it, and therefore it was that Moses murmured, and Ieremie complai∣ned. If you would aske for a paineful voca∣tion, this is it: if for a contemptible vocati∣on, this is it: for reprouing, we are repro∣ued: & it is as easie to wash a Blackemoore, as to cōuert a sinner, because Sathan is euer crossing men from doing the will of God: and as earnest as the Lord was in stopping the way of Balaam, least he should commit
wickednesse, so earnestly did the deuill stop the way of Ionah, lest he in obedience should do the will of God. But Ionah rose vp to flie vnto Tarshish from the presence of the Lord, and went downe to Ia∣pho, and he found a ship going to Tarshish. So he payed the fare thereof, and went downe into it, that he might go with them vnto Tarshish frō the presence of the Lord. We haue heard how busie Sathā is to hin∣der the course of preaching, by perswading Ionah (with such reasons as seemed strong vnto flesh and blood) that he should not go to preach at Niniuie. I haue long preached vnto the Iewes, which are the chosen people of God, and seeing they will not heare me, it is in vaine to preach vnto these Gentiles, which neuer heard of God or godlines, and therefore will esteeme my words the lesse. Thus Ionah is loath to loose his labour, and puts in a doubt where he needs not, because he considered not the great power of God in mens hearts. The Niniuites are heathen people, & therefore (saith Ionah) why should I venture my selfe among them? for seeing mine owne countrimen kicke against my words, and cannot abide to heare the word, which commeth from the Lord to reproue sinne, then how much more shall I be despi∣sed
by these, and persecuted to death. Thus flesh and blood standeth staggering whē it should do any good: but when it goeth about to do anie mischiefe, it neuer thin∣keth nor considereth why or wherefore it should sin, when as it should be sorie for it before it be committed, euen as soone as it is thought vpon. When God commands vs to do anie thing that is holie and good, then we looke one vpon another as though we cared not who did that, like Peter when he was commanded by our Sauiour to take vp his crosse, he asketh, what shall Iohn do? Iohn. 21. 19. 20. as if he were vnwilling, & wold rather that Iohn should do it then he. If I go and preach vnto these infidels, say∣ing, yet fortie dayes, and Niniuie shall be destroyed, then (saith Ionah) it may be they will repent, and God will haue mercie vpon them, so I shall be counted a false Prophet for my labour. And thus we regard our cre∣dit more then the glorie of God: and rather then we would receiue anie reproch by our doing (in the sight of the world,) we rather chuse to enter into no great action touching the glory of God & the good of the church. If I preach vnto the Gentiles (saith Ionah) I shal bring shame vpon Israel before all peo∣ple, because a Prophet is gone from them for
their obstinacie, chusing rather to preach vnto vncircumcised Gentiles then vnto thē, as if there were more hope of the Gentiles then of them. And further, if these Gentiles do repent at my preaching, & the Lord take pitie vpon them, and receiue them to his fa∣uour, so the Iewes shall be reiected. Thus Ionah loueth the sonne better thē the father. And surely this was a sore temptation, to bid a man (being in reasonable good estate touching his bodie and life) that he should go and preach vnto a sauage heathen peo∣ple that neuer heard of preaching to tell thē that there is but one onely & true God, who will serue a thousand, and cannot abide the Deut. 6. 4. contrarie to be spoken. If a preacher were commanded to go and preach at Rome gates, against Antichrists iurisdiction, and the idolatrie that is so or∣dinarily vsed in that sinagogue of vnclean∣nesse, seeing that is a matter, for which they torment and kill, all that preach it sincerely: then I thinke that it would hardly come to passe at all, that this preacher would go from a reasonable quiet estate touching his bodie, to venter his life among such cruell tyrants, I thinke he would rather flie to Tarshish frō the presence of the Lord, if by anie possibi∣litie he might do it.
But Ionah rose vp to flie vnto Tarshish from the presence of the Lord, and he went downe to Iapho, where he found a ship, and he went downe into it, &c. This is the way to Tarshish, but nowe what need he to rehearse all this? had it not bene enough to say, that he went to flie, and leaue his businesse vndone? But all this is to shew the stubburnnesse and disobedience of Ionah, yet this thing was not done vpon the sudden, but he had time enough to consider what he did, betwixt Samaria and Iapho: he might haue considered what he did before he went into the hauen, and when he came to the hauen, he should not haue payed the fare; & when he had payd the fare, he should not haue entred the ship; and when he came into the ship, he should not haue hoysed vp the sayles to flie from God. But thus sinne runnes on wheeles, as it were downe a hill, in all post hast, and neuer stayes till it ariue euen in hell. Now Ionah thinketh, that be∣cause he came safe to Iapho, therfore he may go to the hauen, therefore he may pay the fare, and because he payed the fare in peace, therfore he may take shipping; and because he entred the ship in safetie therfore he may hoyse vp the sailes to go; and because he hoysed vp the sailes without danger, there∣fore
he may go safely to Tarshish. So sinnes follow one another like linkes of a chaine, till the tempest of destruction breake it in sunder. Therefore one saide, I haue sworne and God did not punish me, therefore I will steale: I haue stollen, and God did not punish me, therefore I will kil: I haue killed and God did not punish me, then why may not I do what I list? I may do this as wel as I haue done other things here∣tofore. Ionah confesseth his sinne, that wee might confesse. First, he confesseth that hee knew his maisters will, and did it not: se∣cōdly, he tooke another course quite cōtra∣ry to that he was commanded; but happie were Ionah if he had gone before he was made to go. If that he had considered with himselfe that God is the Lord, who is allseeing and almightie, from whom nothing can be cō∣cealed, he would neuer haue taken his iourney to Iapho, or when he came to Iapho he would not haue paid the fare, or when he payed the fare, hee would not haue entred the ship, or when he was gone into the ship, he would not haue hoyst the sayles, but ra∣ther would haue leapt out of that ship that should carrie him from his God, but he for∣gets himselfe, thinking that the creatures can hide him from the creator, which is an Heb. 4. 13.
absurd thing to thinke, seeing nothing can be hid from him. And so Niniuie is still like Niniuie, but Ionah is not like Ionah, then sin is crying, and the Prophet is flying, and so all falles to confusion. All those that pitie Ionah, let them pittie themselues, for if we consider our owne estate, we haue as many and as foule sinnes in vs as there were in Io∣nah, yea or in Niniuie. But here marke the subtiltie of the deuill,  he thought that if he could let Ionah from going to Niniuie by these former reasons, thē the goodliest citie in all Samaria should be destroyed, and so the verie angels in heauen should mourne.  Further, that if Ionah would repent & turne backe from going, (being commanded) then Ionah should be counted a false Prophet in Israel, and so a Prophet should be discredi∣ted.  Further, he thought that if Ionah wold repent, he could put such a Prophet out of Gods fauour, & make him be despised, he thought that then he should get well by his labour. So we see that the deuill hath power to tempt vs to sinne, but not to force vs to sinne. Then lo a comfort, that our enemies power is in our fathers hād: therfore our Sa∣uiour saith to Peter, fathā hath desired to sift Luke. 22. 31. 32. thee and winnow thee as wheate, but I haue prayed for thee that thy faith faile thee not.
Who is this whose perill Sathan so earnest∣ly desireth? euen Peters, yea Peter an Apo∣stle. Was not flesh a valiant captaine thinke you, that hath led a Prophet captiue, for who can gainsay him that commeth like an Angell? who can resist him that seeth the whole world? will you resist him, if I shew to you he is an hypocrite? for he saith, If you fall down and worship this world, you shal come to heauen: so he is euer alluring by deceits, stealing our hearts away with a vain hope of much pleasure, because he knoweth mans nature is bent to loue such things: so his baites are pleasures, and his snares are sinnes. Whatsoeuer we do, it commeth from one of these three spirits: the spirit of Sa∣than, the spirit of God, or our owne spirite. The spirit of God is gentle, louing, and meeke, not forcing nor threatning, therfore Mat. 10. 16 Luke. 14. 24. Christ sayth, If you will follow me, then take vp this crosse: and marke his spirite, he sayth not you shall follow, but sayth, if you will follow me. That order is obserued in the Canticles, where he saith, Open vnto me, Cant. 5. 2. my sister, my spouse, &c. And then if she did not open vnto him he went his way mildly, Cant. 5. 5. without any threats. The spirit of Sathan takes another course: for when by lying & deceit he cannot allure vs to sin, he threatens
vs with sinne, griefe, or losse of goods, soli∣tarinesse or losse of pleasure, and sometime by his ministers, lims of his owne likenesse working, he threatneth death and earthly torments, such as they can inflict vpon any. Christ saith, If you will follow me, take vp Mat. 1. 16. this crosse, if you will: but he sayth, I will make you follow me, and do as I bid you, or you shall smart for it, you shal haue fire and fagot, scalding lead and burning pitch, if you will not follow me, I will take all from you, and make you to do as we commaund, and so doth his eldest son Antichrist, which vurpeth an authoritie ouer nations, infli∣cting torments on the saints. Now our own spirit is euermore hard: if it be moued by the spirit of God, it is sad, soft and slow, but if it be mooued by the spirit of Sathan, it is proude, boy sterous and stout. All good mo∣tions that we feele in our selues are the mo∣tions of the spirit of God, although they seem vnto vs as proceeding from our selues, for the spirit of God worketh in, and moo∣ueth our spirits. The spirit of man is always tossed betweene these two spirits which are euer contrarie one to another. The spirit of man when it is alone, is alwayes occupied about worldly things: the spirit of God is alwayes occupied about our saluation. And
the spirit of Sathan is euer occupied in pro∣curing our condemnation &c. But Ionah rose vp to flie vnto Tarshish. &c. Ionah flieth vnto Tarshish before he wold go to Niniuie: and euery one is like the sonne which said he would not before he went: and so sinne is borne first, as Esau was Gen. 15. 25. 26. borne before Iacob. Therefore if euill may compare with goodnesse, euill may say he is the ancienter. If thou feele any euill in thy self, be thou wrath with it, laboring against it, so long by fasting & praier, till it be wea∣rie of thy house, and vntill it say as the euill spirits said, here is no dwelling for vs, Let vs go to yonder herd of swine: I am loath to Mat. 8. 31. hide my treasure in the ground, but you can not heare all at once, and therefore here I end.
THE SECOND SERMON OF THE RE∣BELLION OF IONAH. Ionah. 1. 3. 4. 5. 3 But Ionah rose vp to flie to Tarshish from the presence of the Lord, and vvent dovvne to Iapho, and he found a ship go∣ing to Tarshish, so he paid the fare therof, and vvent dovvne into it, that he might go vvith them vnto Tarshish from the presence of the Lord. 4 But the Lord sent out a great vvind into the sea, and there vvas a mightie tempest in the sea, so that the ship vvas like to be broken. 5 Then the mariners vvere afraid, and cried euerie man vnto his God, and cast the vvares out that vvere in the ship to lighten it thereof: but Ionah vvas gone dovvne into the side of the ship, and he lay dovvne and vvas fast asleepe.
But Ionah rose vp to flie vnto Tarshish from the presence, &c. THe last time you heard how the righteous fall, and now no lesse then a Prophet, yea such a Prophet as was the figure of Christ. But who would haue thought that such a Prophet should flie from the Lord, yea and that when he should do him most seruice, who counteth that wickednesse now, that he neuer thought off while he was among the wicked? A feareful example, therefore let him that thinkes he standeth, take heede lest he fall, for the way is slipperie wherein we are to walke. When thou remembrest the fall of the Prophet, then consider that thou art much weaker then a Prophet, and therefore the easier to be encountered and ouerthrowne, where∣fore thou art likelie to haue a more grie∣uous fall, except the Lord do mightily vp∣hold thee, seeing such a one cannot stand in the sight of his so mortall enemie by his owne strength. Secondly, if thou see Ionah flie, Moses mur∣mure, Ieremie complaining, Esay repining, Dauid fall to adulterie, Salomon to idolatrie, and Peter to forswear, his master, then maist thou learne not to trust vnto thine owne
strength, for it is weaknesse, nor to thine owne flesh, for it is sinfull, but seeke helpe and craue strength at the hands of almigh∣tie God, which giueth to euerie one that as∣keth Iames 5. 5. indifferently, and hitteh no man in the teeth, which doth not bruse the broken Mat. 12. 20. reed, nor quench the smoking flax, but doth rather increase our zeale then diminish it. Thirdly, iudge wisely of the fall of Ionah, not rashly condemning him for his fault, for although Dauid ioyned murther with adulterie, yet he repented, and is the deare child of God. But Ionah rose vp to flie vnto Tarshish. Ionah being sent to Niniuie, he flies to Tarshish, yet he went to Niniuie at last, not of free will, as meaning onely to performe his dutie, but being terrified by the whale, and all the other creatures of God which were bent against him for his disobedience. So we serue God and do his will, when ter∣rors do compell vs by thundering into our eares, & glauncing before our eyes, & mel∣ting our harts for feare. And this is my opi∣niō, that they which come hither to Church onely on the Sabboth, come not of consci∣ence, but for feare of the law, yet let them know, that in so doing they flie from their comfort, yea they flie from God. Now Ionah
went to the hauen, and there he found a ship not going to Niniuie but to Tarshish. As soone he set forward to flye from God, Sathā straight wayes prepared a ship, so that temptation and occasion of sinne do al∣ways go together. Shal Iudas lack money, or Ionah stay for a ship? no (saith Sathan) by the mouth of his ministers, here Iudas take thee money and betray thy master, and Ionah here is a ship for thee, go hast thee away, and flye from the presence of the Lord. There∣fore if any will aske what the deuils occu∣pation is, it is to prouide snares and gins whereinto to entice, and therein to catch thee and me. And he payed the fare thereof. This money was cast into the sea, for it did him much harme, yet it did him small good. There are many which will spend & wast they care not how much vpon cards & dice, an vnlawfull game: this money also is cast into the sea, for it doth thē much more harme then they know of, but it doth thē no good. And so men care not what they pay for vanities and braueries, the most part of which is vnprofitable, & rather hurtfull thē necessary for thē, but onely for the vaine vse of the present time, and for some vayne res∣pect: this also is cast into the sea, and thus
men care not what they pay for vanities, so it do please their minde for the present, without consideration of the end and pur∣pose thereof, but they will giue litle or no∣thing to do good withall: so that Lazarus Luk. 16. 21. 1. Sam. 25. 10. 11. cā get nothing, and Dauid can get no meat. Shall I take my bread and my wine and the flesh which I haue prouided for my shea∣rers, & giue them vnto thee, whom I know not, saith churlish Naball? We can be con∣tent to giue any thing or do any thing to winne the world thereby, but we will giue nothing, nor do nothing, thereby to winne the kingdome of God. But the Lord sent out a great wind into the sea, and there was a mighty tempest, so that the ship was like to be broken. The sinne is past, but the punishment is to come: so after sinne followeth reuenge, the heauiest companion of wickednesse, al∣though she loue not sinne, yet she wilbe al∣wayes where wickednesse is, full of strēgth like a Lyon which will not be tamed. For seeing obedience to the commaundement was wanting, therefore the tempest would beare rule, for vnlesse it be an imperious crosse, we wil not yeeld, so head strong sinne is: therefore it is said that God sent a migh∣tie tempest that sinne might haue the foyle,
and the tempest the victorie: he that sailes to Tarshish whither he is forbidden to go, would haue as good wind as he that sailes to Niniuie, or whither he is commaunded, but he that doth one thing for another, shall receaue one thing for another, like Achab 1. King. 22. 15. 35. which ceased not til Michaiah had said like the other Prophets go vp and prosper, but he went vp and perished. Ionah thought to ariue at Tarshish as surelie as the Spaniards thought to ariue in England, whose destru∣ction their fellowes at home do wonder at, how their inuincible power could be de∣stroyd. But God is strōg inough for thē that kicke against him, & disdaineth to be cros∣sed of dust and ashes. Now Sathan thou hast brought him into the ship, and perswaded him to flye from his defence for his safetie, and made him beleeue that he should come safe to Tarshish, that is, to liue at ease & li∣bertie, enioying all temporall benefites at his pleasure, & now thou hast left him, whē he is in greatest daunger, and rather seekest to drowne him then to saue him. O most wretched and deceiptfull lyer, he that tru∣steth his enemie, and he that beleeueth thee, shall euer be deceaued, for now might Ionah say, beware by me, for thus hath the tempter deceaued me, he hath allured me with flat∣tering
fantasies, and perswaded me that it was but an easie thing to flie from the pre∣sence of the Lord, that seeth alwayes all Pro. 15. 11. Iere. 23. 24. things, and from whom no man, no nor se∣cret lurking in any mans heart can be hid, but all are alwayes in his presence. He made me beleeue that light could be brought out of darknesse, that good may come of euill, for he assured me, that if I would set forth toward Tarshish, I should not onely shun the presence of the Lord, but should liue at ease like one vnknowne, both for my voca∣tiō and also for my behauiour in the execu∣tion therof, and so I might creepe into a fa∣miliaritie with these people, and enioye the benefit of their societie. Otherwise if I went to Niniuie as the Lord commaunded, they would hate and persecute me, yea and so I should end my life in miserie, both because they being Gentiles and I a Iew, they can not abide me, for the one holdeth the other in cōtempt: and also because of my message, namely a Prophecie of destruction, groun∣ded vpon a reproofe of their vile and sinne∣full pleasures. Which message, Sathan per∣swaded me that it would be so hainously ta∣ken, that no death nor torment that they could deuise for me would be thought suf∣ficient, & so I should be sure neuer to escape
their hands aliue if I wēt, as though the eter∣nall and most glorious God which sent me thither, were not able to defend me from all euill when I come thether, as well as he did Damell in the den of Lyons, and Iohn in the Isle of Pathmos among the sauage beastes. And when Sathā had thus perswaded me, I beleeued him, & so tooke my iourney to fly frō the presence of the Lord (if I could haue performed my intētion.) But the Lord who seeing the stubburnesse and disobedience of my heart, followed me with great displea∣sure, sending such a tēpest vpō the sea wher∣on I was, that it had like to ouerwhelmed vs all, and so neare as I was to the water, so neare I was to death by all likelihood. Thus Sathan perswadeth vs as he did Io∣nah, he saith to vs as he said to Christ, if you will fall downe and worship me, I will giue Luke. 4. 7. you all things you would haue: if you will leaue the societie, the exercises, the professiō, and the companie of the children of God, and of the seruice of God, and serue me, and worship me, in preferring your couetous∣nesse, your pride, your enuie, your lust, be∣fore the seruice of God, then you shall grow rich, and you shall not be so scrupulous to sweare for your gaine sometime, or to lye for your pleasure, and to cosin for riches, and
you shall haue good lucke, and shall haue euery thing at your hearts desire. But if we do his will, we shall speede as Ionah did, we shall haue the wrath and vengeance of God vpō our heads: for he hath nothing to giue vs, although he makes vs beleeue we shall haue great kingdomes. Yes we shall haue hell for our reward, which wil make al their hearts to ake which receaue it, other reward he hath none. So the deuill is alwayes a very seruiceable and pleasant deuill to such as fly from God: he can finde occasiōs at all times, and meanes and instrumēts fit for that pur∣pose. If thou wilt fly from God, the deuill will lend you both spurres, and a horse, (yea a post horse) that will carrie you swiftlie & lustilie away vnto all vanitie and vngodlie lusts. But see what Ionah got by his iourney, notwithstanding all the furtherances that Sathan could worke for him, he lost his mo∣ney, lost his ioy, lost his credit, and almost lost his life too. Thus we see in Ionah what it profiteth a man to flye frō God, in obey∣ing and practising the euill motions and tēptations of Sathan in steed of the knowen will of God, for the very dumbe creatures were bent against him for his disobedience: the wind blowes as though it would ouer turne all, the waters roare as though they
will drowne all, the ship reeles and tumbles as though she were wearie of all, & the ma∣riners crie and cast out their wares apace, as though they would loose all: And yet the wind could not ouerthrow him, nor the wa∣ters drowne him, nor the whale eat him; and thus Ionah fled from God but not God from Ionah. But the Lord sent out a great wind into the sea, and there was a great tempest, so that the ship was like to be broken. First God spake gentlie to him, Arise Io∣nah, go to Niniuie: then he would not go, but seeing wordes would not serue, the Lord would take another way, and try whether that could make him obedient to his voice. So the Lord caused a mightie tempest to a∣rise in the sea, which set them all in a maze, and made them examine both whence the tēpest came, & also wherefore, or for whose sake it troubled them so sore, that Ionah might see (at the least) if he would see it, that the vegeāce of God doth alwayes accōpany the stubburne and disobedient whither soe∣uer they go: and for the accōplishment ther∣of, that all the creatures of God are bent a∣gainst them, to molest trouble, and crosse them in their euill wayes. God sent a great wind.
He that made the windes, commaunded Psal. 141. 18 Isa. 13. them, and they obey his voyce: the wind & the waters obey him, but man will not obey him. He saith not, that a wind arose, but saith, The Lord sent a great wind; then it was not by chance, nor yet by witchcraft, for the mariners (notwithstanding they were infidels) were not so grosse as to ascribe it vnto anie such cause, but rather thought it to be sent from some reuenging power, be∣ing prouoked to indignation by some par∣ticular person among them, that had com∣mitted some hainous fact: else why did they cast lots, to know him and find him out that had sinned, and whose sinne did procure the tempest to be sent? Though this tempest had almost drowned Ionah, yet he saith, the Lord sent it: so the Lord sendeth wind to bring ships to land in safetie, and the same Lord sendeth tempests to drown, & breake, and sincke other ships. Therefore Iob sayd when he was bereft of all his substance at once, and left as poore as might be, that the Lord had taken them from him (which also gaue all to him,) adding also a thāksgiuing Iob. 1. 21. euen for the persecuting hād of God, which did so molest him. If some had so much losse by tempest as Iob, and such danger as Ionah, they would surely say with Iob, Blessed be
the name of the Lord for it. Now the wind blowes, the water tosses, the whale swims, & all to meet Ionah which flies from God, to see if they can turne his hart which sleeps in disobedience. The ship goes roundly for a time, the Prophet is slee∣ping, the mariners are sporting, their sailes flaunting, the waters calming, the windes guiding, so merily sinne goes on before the tempest comes. The wind blowes not yet, therfore go on yet a litle, & yet a little more, but yet the tempest rushes vpō them before they be ware of it, and tumbles them vp and downe, & suddenly all is like to be vndone. Now Ionah is in more danger then the Ni∣niuites. And now, ó that he had stayed at home and saued his money, saued his credit, & saued his life from the danger of the furi∣ous & vnmerciful streame. Here we may see what paines a sinner takes, & all to hurt him selfe. He came to the hauen, and payd the fare, and entred the ship, and hoist vp sailes, and went on forward, and all to flie from God, and yet he fled not from him but to him. Therfore Dauid saith, if I take the mor∣ning Psal. 139. 7. 8. 9. wings and flie aloft, lo thou art there, if I go into the neathermost depth, thy hand will find me out: therefore whither shall I flie from thee? so that when we thinke that
we flie from God, in running out of one place into another, we do but run from one hand to the other, for there is no place where Gods hand is not, and whither soeuer a re∣bellious sinner doth run, the hand of God wil meet with him to crosse him, and hinder his good successe, although he prophecieth neuer so much good vnto him selfe in his iourney. The winds could not further Io∣nah, the waters could not beare him, his sleep could not saue him, the ship could not hold him, the mariners could not helpe him, the whale would not spare him, but he poore man must be cast out, lest all through him be cast away. The ship that was full of wares of great value, was readie to sinke when Io∣nah entred into it. He trusted to the winds, and the winds could not further him; he tru∣sted to the waters, and the waters could not beare him; he trusted to the ship, the ship could not hold him; he trusted to the mari∣ners, the mariners could not help him. What had he offended the winds, or the waters, or what had he offended the ship that bare him such enmitie? The winds and the waters, and Iob. 5. 23. all Gods creatures, are to take Gods part a∣gainst Ionah or anie other rebellious sinner. Though God in the beginning gaue power to mā, & authoritie ouer all his crea∣tures
to rule them, yet whē mā sinneth God giueth power & strēgth vnto his creatures to rule & bridle man. Therfore he that euē now was Lord ouer the waters, now the wa∣ters are Lord ouer him. But if Ionah had thought that God would haue brought things thus to passe, he durst not haue been so bold in this enterprise. Therfore we may see that sinne hath no eyes while it is on go∣ing. Tush (saith the foole) it is faire weather yet (while he goeth to the stockes.) Pro. 7. 22. But God sent a mightie tempest into the sea, so that the ship was like to be broken. Such a stirre hath God before he can come by his owne, he must crosse vs, and set him selfe and all his creatures against vs, he must straine our bodies and constraine vs to it before we will yeeld him due obediēce. The tempest must blow, the sea must rage, the ship must reele, the heart must trēble, & all must be in an vprore against vs, & God must crosse vs in all our doings afore we will returne frō our wicked wayes. The bee when she hath once flung doth leese her sting so that she cā sting no more: so is not punishment for it goeth in generall, when one tempest is gone, another comes vpō vs, for if we be sicke, sicknesse is not dead with vs, if we be poore, pouertie endeth not, if we
be in daunger, daunger is not therefore put downe for euer after: and if we be vexed, vexation hath not therefore left his sting in vs but all these things are Gods weapons whereof he hath store, and if thou be diso∣bedient, he will lead thee through them all, Leit. 26. 18. 24. 28. 36. 37. 38. 39. &c. vntill he hath humbled thee, and made thee to glorifie him with obedience or vtterly destroyed thee. God sent a mightie tempest into the sea, so that the ship was like to be broken. This ship which was so faire and goodly euen now, is now like a poore ship tost & readie to be torne in peeces, such strife is al∣wayes betwixt Gods wrath and mans diso∣bedience. When Gods word will not turne vs, Gods sword must spurne vs. I obserue that oftentimes many are puni∣shed for one mans sinne (as all the host of Is∣raell Ios. 7. 5. 12. Many pu∣nished for ones sinne, therefore suffer sinne in none. were punished for the sinne of Achan, and here all the mariners for Ionahs sinne.) &c. To the end that men might learne ther∣by to admonish one another when they see them do amisse, with loue: and not to say with Cain, am I the keeper of my brother? for he that is not carefull to keepe his bro∣ther Gen. 4. 9. from sinne, is not carefull to keepe him selfe from sinne, therefore let vs take heede that a wicked one be not found amōgest vs
vnadmonished. I would there were not ma∣ny worse then Ionah amongest vs. Will you know what I thinke of you? I thinke you are worse thē Infidels, Turkes, or Pagans, that in this wonderfull yeare of wonderful mercies, are not thankefull, do not beleeue in God, nor trust in him, nor glorifie his name: but like Pharoes sorcerers, who seeing the great workes of God which Moses ex∣pressed, Exod. 8. 19. passing their skill, confessed saying, surely this is the finger of God: so you confesse that it is the great worke of God (as you must needs,) but where is the fruites it hath brought forth in you? The Captaine saith, I haue done nothing, the souldier saith, I stur∣red not, but the Lord sent out a mighty tē∣pest vpon thē, & after that they escaped our handes, the Lord stretched out his might  arme against them, and Pharao is drowned in the sea, so that he neuer attained the land of promise which he gaped for, and made full accompt to poesse. Further, herein we Mans ex∣tremitie, Gods opor∣tunitie. may note, that extremitie is Gods oportu∣nitie: for when the wind had almost ouer∣turned all, and the waters had almost drow∣ned all, and destruction had almost deuou∣red all, then, and not afore, was Gods opor∣tunitie, to set forth his glory. While the ship reeled, and the waters flushed, and the mari∣ners
shriked, Ionah slept in securitie and voyde of flying, which should haue admo∣nished all the rest, and repented of his sinne which was the cause thereof. The ship was almost broken, but not al∣together brokē, and Ionah cast into the sea, and then was he not almost drowned, but altogether drowned, had not God prepared a great whale, which saued his life in a mi∣raculous maner, out of which God brought him foorth like Lazarus in his winding sheete, that he might glorifie God once a∣gaine, and see if he could finde the way to Niniuie. The effectes, that this great tempest wrought were these. The ship was like to be brokē & the mariners were sore affrayd. The ship which was so strong that it might haue encountred with instrumēts of warre, and made so strong that it might be able to go many voyages, and indure great tem∣pestes and many waues, was now with one tempest and at one voyage in such a ta∣king, that they which were in it feared that it should haue been torne all to peeces, and so they should loose their ship, their liues, goods & all: & so vehement was the tēpest, that they were fully perswaded it was no cōmō nor ordinarie thing, but extraordina∣rie,
& for some extraordinarie cause sent v∣pon thē by some great diuine power. And the mariners (which liue in the sea almost Marine like the fishes. like the fishes, and haue the waters as their necessariest element) now trēbled for feare, like women which shrike at euery stirre in the boat, & like little childrē when they are frighted. Now these couragious fellowes are brought downe by daunger, which de∣fied daunger, like a young souldier which starteth at the sound of a gunne. Then the mariners were afrayd, and cryed euery man vnto his god, and cast the wares out that were in the ship to lighten it thereof. But Ionah was gone downe into the sides of the ship, and he lay downe, and was fast a sleepe. This verse is deuided into two partes. The first, that the mariners at this sodaine storme were frighted and cast into amaze. The second as touching Ionah his sleeping. After that God had spokē gentlie vnto Io∣nah, & saw that his wordes would not moue him, the Lord sent out a mightie tempest like the messengers which were sent to cō∣pell folkes to come to the banquet: such a Luk. 14. 23. stirre hath God before he can come to his due, he is faine to summon vs by all his crea∣tures afore we will yeeld vnto his voyce. They cryed eueryman vnto his God, and cast
forth their wares into the sea, &c. This is no vsual matter among mariners, vntill they plead for life and death, for now or neuer they must besturre them. Euery one vnto his God: which sheweth that they were of diuers nations, for among the Gentiles euery natiō had a seuerall God whom they worshipped. Chamos was the god of the Moabites, & Belzebub the god of the Ebro∣nites, Dagon the god of the Philistines, and 1. Sam. 5. 5. Act. 19. 35. the Ephesians worshipped Diana. Whē the wicked see that all their inuentions will not bring their enterprises to passe according to their minde, but are in extremitie, and like to be cast away for want of succour, thē they flye vnto God being driuen by com∣pulsion as a beare vnto a stake, and they crouch and kneele, and make great shewes outwardly, of humiliation and pietie, all in hope of helpe from God, & as it were thin∣king to deceaue him by their hypocrisie. In our necessitie we flie euerie one vnto In necessitie euery one flyes to that he hath con∣fidence in. his god (as these mariners) in whom we re∣pose our confidence: euerie one flieth vnto those vanities which most feed their humor, perswading them selues of sufficient releefe from them. Come Phisicke heale me; come musicke cheare me; come dainties seed me; come gold enrich me; come flatterie please
me; come mirth glad me; come honors ad∣uance me; & come all pleasures when I wish for you, come when I need and I will trust in you: so euery man doth flie vnto such va∣nities (in their necessitie) as they take most pleasure in, supposing that they are able of them selues to ease them: so leauing the crea∣tor which is all powerfull in him self, & run∣ning to his creatures, which haue no power saue that they receiue from him. Euerie one vnto his god. That is, in the time of necessi∣tie euerie one doth flie for helpe and ease vn∣to that, wherin he reposeth most confidēce: some run to their coffers, thinking that there it is that is able to procure ease frō any trou∣bles: other some run to their delights and wanton sports, supposing that there is no trouble so great, but it will ease them of it: some to their glorious attires & costly iew∣els, as thinking those can make them accep∣table in the sight of God: some to their dain∣tie meates: some to their soft beds and easie standings, &c. But when they begin to per∣ceiue that these wil not helpe, which they in all the time of their prosperity reposed their confidence in, and made more account off then God, then they begin to crouch and kneele, & to seeke out the true God in hope of releefe. If thou canst heale thy selfe, what
needest thou a phisitian? or if thou canst help thy selfe out of troubles, what neede hast thou of succour? Therefore these mariners seeing that they could not helpe themselues, cried vnto their gods, and laboured with all their strength that they might not be cast a∣way. First they vsed prayer vnto the diuine powers for assistance: then they vsed such ordinarie meanes as they knew best in such a time, by casting out their wares to lighten the ship of them, which rule is necessaire to be vsed of all Christians in their necessitie: In necessitie first pray, thē vse law, full meanes. first to seeke for ayde and assistance at the hands of God, and then to vse all such good meanes to helpe them selues, as God shal en∣able them to do, trusting that of his good∣nesse he will blesse their endeuors, else may they go ouer all the world to seeke helpe & haue none, for there is no other way. God in deed is last refuge, but he is also the first refuge which is to be sought vnto, for he is Alpha and Omega, the first and the last. And cried eueryman vnto his God. They did wel in that they prayed, but they prayed not well, for they prayed euery man vnto his god, that is, vnto fayned gods, gods in name but not in nature, & such gods they were, as could not helpe so much as them selues.
And they cried. Which sheweth that their gods were deafe and could not heare them, no more then they could helpe them. Here is a distinctiō in prayer: the righteous pray when they are in need, but the vngodly rore and crie like beares without their pray, for they dispaire of helpe before they pray for it. Euerie mā vnto his god. They prayed much like the Papists, which in extremitie cry out Papistes to their sundrie Saints. some to one saint, some to another, some to saints some to Angels, for they thinke, if one will not helpe another will. But true prayer hath two wings, betweene which it must be carried vp to heauen, else it cannot ascend at Prayers wings to bring it to heauē: faith and loue. all, namely faith and loue, without which no prayer can be acceptable or amiable before God. These cried and prayed, & their pray∣ers did beate the skie, but could not lay the tempest, yet their prayer is here noted, to shew the custome of naturall men: for the heathen do wel perceiue that there is a God, (nature and experiēce doth teach it them,) who hath made the stately and most glori∣ous frame of the world, with all the excel∣lent creatures therein, yet they know him not. For though the lamps be wasted since Adam cōsulted with the deuil that he might be a God, yet there is a litle light which still dwelleth in darknesse, like a sparke hid in
ashes. They would not haue prayed at all, but that nature taught them that there is a God, whose mightie power they beheld so expresly in all the creatures, that they ima∣gined it to be impossible for one God to worke them all: therfore they thought that there were diuerse gods as there were diuerse seasons, diuerse nations, diuerse trades, di∣uerse languages, diuerse and sundry kinds of all things; and so diuerse nations worship∣ped diuerse gods. Euerie of these mariners did now in their extremitie call vpon his god, euerie one vpon that god which he thought most highly off, and in whom he hath in his prosperitie reposed most confi∣dence. And now while none could help but Seeking to lay the tem∣pest, they in∣crease it. one, they cried to many, and by this meanes while they sought to lay the tempest, they stirred it more: for their prayers being ido∣latrous, were so wicked, that it had bene suf∣ficient to prouoke the Lord vtterly to de∣stroy them, if his mercie were not wonder∣full Psal. 144. 15. ouer all his works, therefore blessed is he that hath the Lord for his God. What trou∣ble soeuer commeth vnto the child of God, yet he hath some consolation, patience, and moderation of mind, to beare it withall, but when the Lord sendeth aduersitie vnto the vngodly, they haue such a guiltie conscience,
that whē they feele the great hand of God, they are euen distracted of their wits, and made as it were senslesse, that they know not what they do: yea when trouble comes, it makes them like a heedlesse bee, which buz∣zeth about she knowes not whither, or like the swallow, which by compulsion of the wind, flyeth backward & forward till it fall into the sea, or like Cain whose head was giddie, that he knew not whither to go, fea∣ring to be slaine of euery one whom he Gen. 4. seeth. And cast the wares out that were in the ship into the sea. Now the mariners are content to cast their wares into the sea, in hope of some furtherance to saue their liues thereby, for though many will venter their liues for riches, yet they rather part with all their riches then their liues. If I regard wicked∣nesse in my heart, saith Dauid, the Lord will Psal. 66. 18 1. Cor. 13. 3. not heare me. And Paule saith, though I cast my life into the fire if I haue no chari∣tie, if I retaine malice in my heart, it profi∣teth me nothing, if I cast not away sinne, I Cast away sinne or tho castest a∣way all. cast away all. Some will giue to the poore, and yet vse extortion and vsurie to get mo∣ney by: but God saith to such, that if they regard wickednesse in their hearts it profi∣teth
nothing. Though they thinke them selues beneficiall to the poore thereby, yet God will accept of them but as hypocrites, he will none of their oblations, vntill they haue humbled them selues and refor∣med their owne hearts before him from such vncleannesse.
THE PVNISH∣MENT OF IONAH. Ionah 1. 5. 6. 7. 5 But Ionah vvent dovvne into the sides of the ship, and he lay dovvne and vvas fast a sleepe. 6 Then the ship-maister came vnto him and said, vvhat meanest thou ô slee∣per? arise and call vpon thy God, if so be he vvill thinke vpon vs that vve perish not. 7 And they said euerie man to his fellovv, come let vs cast lots, that vve may knovv for vvhose sake this euill is come vpon vs: so they cast lots, and the lot fell vpon Ionah. THey prayed vnto their gods, & their gods were now deafe whiles they were tossed, and Ionah is gone to sleepe when he should haue bene better
occupied: we come hither to heare the word, and here we fall a sleepe, but it were farre better we were away, for we sleepe when we should heare, and so we sleepe in sinne: therefore let them now giue eare that are a sleepe, and thinke that the shipmaster doth iogge vs by the elbow as he did Ionah. Now we are come to Ionah his sleeping; not that we should sleepe with him, but by his sleeping to be warned of our securitie, and we shall see him waked, that we may learne to wake with him. By Ionah his sleeping we see the nature of all the sonnes of Adam, whē they listen to the serpēt they are like chāge∣lings. For when they forget God and his word, and bid conscience adew, they sleepe in sinne, and sleepe to death like one sicke of the lethargie. Ionah his name signifieth a doue, as I haue told you, and it may well be compared, for as the doue being gone out of the Arke could finde no rest for the sole of her foote till she returned into the Arke againe: so when Ionah rose vp frō the presence of the Lord, he could finde no rest for his minde, neither by sea nor land, vntill he returned a∣gaine vnto the Lord. The cause of Ionah his going downe to sleepe, was to ease his mind, for it was grie∣uously
troubled. Therefore now, ô that Io∣nah could sleepe till the tempest were past, but it will not be, for the tēpest is sent pur∣posely to waken him. And he was fast a sleepe. See how litle Ionah is ashamed of his sin all the world smarted for it, and yet he sleepes, as if he should say, neither the winds blowing, nor the waters ossing, nor the ship reeling, nor the wares casting, nor the ma∣riners Ionah sleeps whiles all else sturres. crying, with all this sturre, should moue him, waken him from his sleepe, or raise him from his sinne. Now Ionah might say, I was a sleepe, and all might haue peri∣shed for me, if one God had not helpt more then all the rest, for Ionah sleept, but God waked, and called to the windes and the wa∣ters saying, wash him, but you shall not drowne him: feare him, but you shall not kill him: whippe him, and when you haue whipt him, send him to me, that I may send him to Niniuie. It seemeth that Ionah was fast a sleepe, when the windes ouer him blowing, and the water vnder him tossing, the ship about him reeling, the mariners by him crying, the wares ouerboord in ca∣sting, yet Ionah felt nothing, but sleept as if there were no sturring. We go farre beyond Ionah in securitie,
for the Lord causeth the tempest to blow downe houses, the heauens to thunder ouer vs, the earth to quake vnder vs, the water to ouerflow the land, fire to consume vs and all that we haue, frost and snow ready to kil vs with cold, and all things in an vprore round about vs, thereby alwayes crossing vs one way or other, and so to put vs in minde of our dutie, the neglect wherof is the cause of all these troubles which the Lord doth send vs, but we sleep with Ionah in our neg∣ligence, voyde of feeling, because we con∣sider not, nor search out as the mariners did, for whose sake these tempestes or troubles are vpon vs, whereas euery crosse should urre vs vp to amendement of life. Ionah repented of his disobediēce, that we should repent of ours: should we follow his exam∣ple, whē we see it to be so euill that he repē∣ted it? if we do, God will deale more roughly with vs then he did with Ionah, for the Lord caused a whale to swallow him, and afterward to cast him vp againe, but we shal be swallowed of that Serpēt which ne∣uer restoreth againe. He should haue bene their teacher if he were not a sleepe, he should haue taught them to pray aright if he had any good feeling in him. For all this while we read not that Ionah once condē∣ned
his thoughts, not so much as once to say in him self, Ionah take heed what thou doest, thou knowest how God may handle thee vpon the waters; if thou flye, he can ouer∣take thee, or if thou hidest thy selfe, he will finde thee out. How should we be strong if a Prophet, and such a Prophet as was the figure of Christ could not withstand this one temptation, but suffred him selfe to be led away so farre that when he should run, he lay still, and when he should cry, he held his peace, and when he should preach at Niniuie, he is going to loyter at Tarshish? and so Niniuie is in her sinne, yet Niniuie is in better case then Ionah. In Ionah his sleeping we note and ob∣serue In Ionah sleepe two things. I Most secure in greatest daunger. Act. 12. 21. 22. Dan. 4. 27. 30. Dan. 5. 4. 5. Luk. 12. 19. 20. Iudg. 16. 25 30. Suddēly de∣stroyed. two things. The first is, that when we thinke our selues most at rest, then we are in greatest daunger, when the shipwracke is at hand, then Ionah is a sleepe, when He∣rode was vaunting, then he was stricken, when Nebuchadnezzar was in his greatest pride, then he was turned out, when Baltha∣sar was banqueting, the hand wrote his cō∣demnation, when the rich man said vnto his soule, thou hast inough, then his soule was taken frō him and his goods also, when the Philistines were sporting, thē the roofe fell; and thus wrath ouertaketh sinners whē
they least thinke of it, like a Leopard which is taken while he sleepeth, or a byrd when she singeth, therefore suspect thy pleasures like a baite. The second note is the nature of sinne, 2 Sinne plea∣sant whiles it is in doing which is here expressed (while it is a doing) to be not bitter, but sweet, not painfull, but pleasant, like a harlot which sheweth no∣thing but her brauerie and bewtie. Adam swallowed the forbidden fruite with plea∣sure, 2. King. 5. 27. 30. Gehezies briberie. Gene. 9. 21. Noahs wine. Daids a∣dulterie. 2. Sam. 11. 4. Prou. 10. 24. 33. Gehezie lied for gold with delight, Noah dranke his wine with mirth, Dauid committed whoredome with gladnesse, and so sinners go merily, till wrath ouertakes them at vnwares like the foole, I will sit a little longer, and fold my hands together a little, yet a little and a little lōger, so: I haue done it, and I was not espied, but at last it choppes him ouer the eares, & the tempest cōmeth & bloweth him quite away. Where art thou now Ionah? why didst thou not re∣member the end? the Serpents sting is in her taile. Then the ship-maiser came vnto him and said; what meanest thou ô sleeper, arise and call vpon thy God. Here Ionah is taken napping: sinne hath brought him a sleepe, and now the ship∣master wakens him. It may be the mari∣ners
may do him more good then the tem∣pest, it is good to vse all good meanes in extremitie. Whom sinne should waken pe∣rill cannot waken, the windes are not loude enough, not the waters rough enough, therefore the ship-maister must waken him, else all shall be endangered. If the winds wil not waken him, let the waues waken him if the waters will not waken him, let the ma∣riners waken him; if he will not be wake∣ned; let him perish in his sleepe, and die in his sinne. Now marke who is a sleepe, and who wa∣kens A Prophet wakened by a pagan. him, Ionah is a sleepe, and the mariners waken him, an Israelite, an infidell: what a thing is this, that he which is the sonne of Abraham, who is wiser then a thousand ma∣riners, is now wakened and told his dutie by a mariner? this is a shame for Ionah, that he which should teach the Niniuites, the mariners told him his dutie, he that should So God of shames his seruants. waken others, must be wakened by others, and he that should reproue sinners, is often reproued of sinners. And thus the Lord som∣times shameth his seruants, and doth vexe them with a foolish nation, as he reproued Abraham by Abimelech, and Balaam by an Gen. 20. 9. Num. 22. 28. asse. Now one might aske Ionah, saying, why
didst thou write that thou fledst from God, or that when thou hadst most neede to pray, thou didst sleepe? If thou hadst not thus laid open thine owne shame, thou mightest haue bene reckened as one of the best Prophets, therefore why didst thou so? Ionah did it to this end, that in him we may see the reward of disobedience; for as Paule saith, whatsoe∣uer is written, is written for our instructiō, and Ionah would neuer haue written it, had it not bin for our sakes. If he hath done thus much for vs, which way shall we requite him? That which he would haue vs do for him is this, to be warned by him, to sup∣presse all euill motions, not suffering them to take effect as he did. What meanest thou ô sleeper? arise. Now the mariners, waken him, as if they should say, why Ionah dost thou not see how we are enclosed, doest thou not behold our wares cast out? why doest thou not come & labour with vs in this dangerous time? is this a time to sleepe in, when we are all in perill of our liues? shall we crie, & thou be mute? shall we labour and thou rest? shal we fight and thou flie? this is no time to sleepe, it is a time to pray vnto thy god for his assistance, & to vse the meanes that may saue our liues. Now Ionah did not snap like some currish
dogges, and bite him that wakened him, but he ariseth and confesseth his sinne, being content to beare the punishment, and when Ionah remembred him selfe, the windes and the waters remembred them selues, and be∣came quiet. Manie of you come to heare the word, & Against sleepers. here you fall a sleepe when you haue most neede to be waking, but I am glad I haue now gotten a text to waken you, for now I can not reade my text, but I must say, what meanest thou ô sleeper? arise: but I pray you, haue not I wakened you, and yet you sleepe againe? If you marke what is said vnto you, you are a sleepe though your eyes be open, and if you were as wise as Ionah, you would not sleepe here in the sight of all the people, but would rather get you to sleepe in some corner, for Ionah went vnder the hatches to sleepe, and would not sleepe in the sight of the mariners. If you were as wise as Ionah, you would thanke him that wakened you. Salomon saith, that he which reproueth, shall haue more fauor of a wise man, thē he which flattereth. The Lord Iesus saith, wo be vnto that seruant, that when his master commeth he shall find sleeping, canst thou not watch one houre, saith he to Peter cā you not wake while I speake vnto you? You all would be
found in the Church when the Lord com∣meth, but you would not be found sleeping in the Church, you are watched (I see you not below) and none of you can steale a nap & not be spied, but when your eyes be most shut and see least, then most eyes be vpon you, and I can as well stand in this pulpit vnseene, as you can sit and sleepe there and not be espied. I maruell how you can sleepe hauing so many eyes looking on you, so many clamors in your eares, and God him selfe speaking vnto you. Shall I continue iogging till you be wakened? how long shal I preach afore I can conuert the vsurer, the extortioner, the drunkard, or the blasphe∣mer, seeing I speake thus long? for I can not conuert you from your sleeping. What would you do if I read some Homilies vnto you, whereas you cannot waken, while I preach vnto you and speake against you? If you should see a traitour sleepe vpon the hurdle, or if you should see men sleepe with meate in their mouthes, would you not maruell? yet euen so do you while I de∣nounce the great iudgemēts of God against you, and while I am feeding some of you, you fall a sleepe, and so I preach in vayne. There is a countrey whereof it is said, that it is night with them, when it is day with
vs, I thinke that countrey be here, for how manie are here that haue lost their eyes and their eares since they came hither? If all of you were, as manie of you be (I meane a sleepe) the strangers which come hither to heare, would thinke that you were all dead, & that I preach your funerall sermon, ther∣fore for shame leaue your sleeping. What meanest thou ô sleeper? arise, sleep no more, and I will waken you no more. Arise and call vpon thy God, if so be he will thinke vpon vs, that we perish not. After that the ship-maister had wakened Ionah, he bids him call vpon his God, as if he had said, watch and pray; he speakes like a Saint, yet he is an infidell, he sayd not, call vpon our gods, but call vpon thy God, the ship-maister would not call him his God, but (saith he) call vpon thy God, and it may be he will helpe vs: but if he had sayd, call vpon our God, when he sayd call vpon thy God, and if he had said he will helpe vs, whē he sayd if so be he will helpe vs, then he had shewed some sparke of faith. Because he wā∣ted helpe and comfort, he bids him rise, and because he was fearfull, he bids him pray: it may be (saith he) he wil thinke vpon vs, that we perish not, as if he had said, Ionah, we know that thou hast a God as wel as we, and
therefore we say call vpon thy God, for now any god may serue, therefore now if euer thou didst pray in thy life, fall to it now, for if any god do helpe, it is good i∣nough. Thus Sathan leads men a blind way with zeale in hope of some reliefe being in trouble. They called vpon them for helpe, which were neither able to heare nor assist them: and when they perceaued by wofull experience that there was no kinde of su∣cour to be had that way, they flie to God, & then Sathan laboureth to vndermine that confidence and expectation of helpe, and to place in stead therof doubtfulnesse and infi∣delitie. Thus Sathan wil be sure to loose no∣thing by his bargaine any way. That God that layeth the tēpest now shalbe our God, and we will worship him (saith the mari∣ners) now therfore Ionah cal vpon thy God, for we haue tryed all the rest, and if he can not helpe vs, we are all gone and lost, for we haue called vpon all our gods, we haue laboured hard to mend our state, we haue cast away our goods to lighten the ship, but all in vayne, for we are no whit the bet∣ter, like the woman which had spent all Luke. 9. her substance about Phisicke, yet all could not helpe her til Christ came: so the Papists while they are well, they pray vnto euery
Saint, and Angell for succour against the troublesome times, but in extremitie or at the point of death none of them can helpe, so that then they are faine to flye vnto God or be destitute, as like Idolaters as one fly is like another: they are like the heathē which worship Iuno, Venus, Neptune, Pallas, lupi∣ter, and the rest, some hold on the one, and some one the other. Some say if Iohn be with me, I care not for all the pettigods, because I hold him chief: so another saith if S. Gabri∣ell be with me, I care not for the rest, and some raise great disputations whether this Saint, or that Saint, this Angell, or that An∣gell be better, whether our Lady of Bullen, or our Lady of Rome be surest; whether S. Iames of Callis, or S. Iames of Compostella be strongest and so like beggers which run from doore to doore, they run from one Saint to another. If one god will not helpe another will, as though the gods were con∣trary one to another, and where one bids, the other forbids. So some thought that Ve∣nus was a friend to the Troians, and Pallas was not their friend, as fooles thinke of witches, one strikes and another heales. Call vpon thy God. They bid him call vpon his God before Infidels desire the sa full to pr for them. they knew him, but the faithfull would not
worship a false god though they may be helped. By him by the exāple of these ma∣riners, we may learne the substāce of euery temptation that doth vndermine vs, and we shall see that it will bid vs do this euill that this good may come of it: marke when soe∣uer Sinne al∣wayes pro∣mised good. thou art motioned to euill, if it do not promise thee some goodnesse to come of it. But the seruaunts of God ought not to do that which is euill, though they may gayne all things that can be wished by so doing: for they haue learned their lesson, & how to answere Sathan at such times: why temptest thou me Sathan? for it is written thou must Rom. 3. 8. not do euill that good may come of it, and this is the armor called Scriptum est where∣with the Lord ouercame the deuill in the wildernesse: here we may see the difference betweene the faithfull and infidels. Call vpon thy God. The mariners bid Ionah pray to his God The truly faithful de∣sire not infi∣dels to pray for them. in their behalfe, but Ionah saith not to the mariners pray to your gods in my behalfe. And this is also manifest that a Papist will say vnto a zealous Protestant, and one that liues well, pray for me, but a Protestant, if he be any thing zealous, will not say vnto a Pa∣pist pray thou for me, knowing that whē a Papist doth pray he doth it to Idols, Saints,
or Angels, and therefore their prayers are abhominable in the sight of God, and ther∣fore they will not bid them do it, because they will not do euill to the intēt that good may come of it, whereby it is manifest that Exod. 88. 28. &c. Pharao de∣sireth Mo∣ses, Moses not Pha∣raoh. 1. Sam. 15. 25. our Religiō is the true Religion our aduer∣saries thē selues being iudges. And so Pha∣rao said to Moses pray for me, but Moses said not to Pharao pray thou for me. Saul said to Samuell pray for me: but Samuel said not to Saul pray thou for me; therefore the mariners had need of Ionah to pray for thē, & why should not all pray to Ionahs God, and Pharao pray to Moses God, seeing God hath said call vpon me in trouble and I will Psal. 50. 13 heare thee? Call vpō thy God (say they). Whē they saw all the other gods wold not helpe, they ranne to another whom they knew not, yet hoping for to be helped by him, be∣cause they thought some God there was that could do it: so the Papists run frō one god to another, from S. Dominicke to S. Frācis, & why should they run frō S. Domi∣nicke to S. Francis, but that they mistrusted S. Dominicke? and so they go forward, but in the end the vnknowen God is thought to be the best: yet the Lord taught not Peter one prayer and Iohn another, but taught thē all one prayer vnto one onely God.
If per aduenture he will thinke vpon vs that we perish not. This if, perhaps, and peraduenture cost Adam Paradise, thrise three wordes were changed: the first, God said to Adam, if thou doest eate of this tree, thou shalt surely dye, then Euah reported these wordes thus: lest peraduenture we dye, the Serpent seeing her in such a minde, so carelesse or forgetfull of the commaundement, he came and quite changed the matter and said, you shall not dye; thus sinne creeps vpon vs while doubt∣fulnesse remaineth in vs: so God saith you shal be saued, the trēbling flesh saith perad∣uenture I shall, &c. then cōmeth Sathā, & he saith thou shalt dye. So that if you wil aske Sinners faith. what is the faith of sinners, or if you would haue it defined it is this: peraduenture yea peraduēture no, if you wil aske me, whereu∣pon this faith is grounded, it is vpon ifs, & ands: this is the faith of the vngodly, to say, if so be God will helpe vs, for they cānot as∣sure themselues of any helpe. But we may not doubt of our God and say, it may be, or if peraduenture: for we may freely pray to our God with confidence, and may say, our God and the God of Ionah wil surely helpe vs, and hath helped vs, but yet let vs know that we haue sinned like infidels, and do de∣serue
to be punished like the Egyptians. If so be he will &c. This if commeth in, like a little leauen which sowreth the whole lumpe of dow, and like the moth, which eateth the whole wed∣ding garment, and this same litle thiefe hath stolen away all the Papistes faith. Wicked∣nesse lyeth sicke in bed, and calleth to euery one that commeth by, call vpon thy god & pray for me, if so be he will looke vpon vs and helpe vs, and so the best hope when the tempest commeth is present death. If so be he will thinke vpon vs. Our God thought vpon vs in the time of trouble, he thought vpon vs and layd the tempest when our enemies called vpō their gods, Saints, and Angels, but what do we meane beloued, whē mercy is come, to send for iudgement? for though we be saued with Israell, we haue deserued to be plagued with Pharao, because we are not thākfull for this, namely that the Lord hath thought vpon vs in our distresse, for he trauelleth with mer∣cie, and laboureth till he be deliuered, he goeth loden like a bee but wants a hiue. There are two hands, a hand to giue, and a hand to receiue: Gods hand to giue, and mans hand to receiue, the hand of God is a bountifull and a mercifull hand, a hand lodē
with liberalitie, full of gracious gifts, there∣fore let vs stretch foorth the good hand to A good hand. receiue it, (thankfully to embrace it, cheer∣fully to entertaine it, and carefully to keepe it) let vs receiue it by the hand of faith, the hand of loue, and the hand, of prayer, for who so commeth with this hand shall be fil∣led, and who so commeth without it, shall go emptie away, because they haue despised the wayes of God: for when I instructed thē Pro. 1. 24. 25. they would not heare, & what I taught them they would not learne saith the Lord. And they sayd euerie man to his fellow, come let vs cast lots, that we may knowe for whose sake this euill is vpon vs. So they cast lots, and the lot fell vpon Ionah. Now we are come to casting of lots, that we may know who troubles the ship: for the ship is tossed and readie to sinke, but no man will confesse who is the cause thereof, therfore they haue concluded among them selues saying, come let vs cast lots that we may find him out. Danger made them feare, and  feare made them gather together their wits, and droue them into an earnest examination of the cause thereof, and perswaded them to vse such meanes to auoyd these dangers, as were best knowen vnto them,  whereupon they
prayed vnto their gods, & seeing they could not mend them,  then they fall to casting of lots, thereby to find out him that was the cause of all this sturre, for they thought as∣suredly this tempest was sent from some an∣grie god, to molest them all for the sinne of some notorious wretch that was gotten in amongst them, whom now they labour to find out by casting of the lots. They did not vse to cast lots, this was no custome amōgst the mariners, but the tempest was so strange that verie infidels might perceiue therin the mightie power of God. These were like worldlings, which neuer confesse God, but when he commeth in a tempest, they will not see his mercie vntill his iustice appeare, like Pharaos sorcerers, which confessed not Exod. 8. 1. Gods maiestie while they liued at ease, but when the Lord plagued them, then they cried out, this is the finger of God. Let vs cat lots. The lot fell vpon Ionah in the end, not because he was the greatest sinner of thē all, Luke. 13. 1. 2. &c. for so is the opinion of the common people, to censure them worst whom they see most afflicted. If anie one be seene to beare his crosse, then manie will say, this is a wicked man, and so thinke well of them selues, sup∣posing that God is bent against them to
plague them. For he correcteth them as he did his Sonne, but if iudgement begin at the house of God, what shall become of the vn∣godly? . Pet. 4. 17. 18. Then they said euerie man to his fellow, come let vs cast lots, that we may know &c. Euerie man excuseth him selfe, though they be sinners, yet they are not great sin∣ners. They thought that there was but one sinner among them, for euery one of them said it is not I: they were not of Dauids spi∣rite, who when he saw the people plagued, 2. Sam. 24. 10. said, Lord it is I. They had past many tempestes before, but they neuer cast lots, for their casting of lots doth note some speciall danger, suppo∣sing this tempest to be sent from some an∣grie god, and that for some one mans sinne amongst them, therefore they determined to seeke him out by lots: and hauing found him, to sacrifice him vnto the god that, was so offended by him. But if they knewe the angry gods, they should haue taken their sinnes by the throte, and sacrificed them vn∣to them. In that they cast lots, it sheweth that their heads were full of doubts in this time of extremitie, for the wind sayd, I will ouerturne thē, the waters sayd, I wil drowne them, the ship said, I cannot hold them, the
mariners said, we cannot help Ionah nor our selues, for God was gone from them, and Ionah his conscience accused him, within sin was bleeding, and God knocked at the dore of his heart, saying, it is for thee the tempest is come thou fugitiue. It doth not appeare that Ionah doth free him selfe, in that he said nothing but hid him, went to sleepe, and tried it by the lots, for he thought, it may be the lot will fall vpon me, like a thiefe which (notwithstanding) in his owne heart he knowes himselfe guilty of that wherwithall he is charged, yet will not confesse vntil the matter be throughly sifted out and proued to his face, in such sort that he cannot for shame denie it. For euerie man would exte∣nuate Euerie ma shifts off sin vpon others. his sinne and diminish it, and euerie one thinketh his sinne salued, when he ex∣cuseth him selfe. Let Adam be his owne iudge, and he will say the woman tempted Gen. 3. 12. 13. him to sinne, and let the woman be her own iudge, and she will say, yonder serpent per∣swaded her to it, let euerie one be their own iudge, and there will be such posting off of sinne, that neuer a one will be found guiltie. Therefore if God had not sifted out this sin the better, Ionah would not haue confessed. Christ saith, he that breaketh the least com∣mandement, Mat. 5. 19. and teacheth others so, shal be
least in the kingdome of heauen, but none are accounted sinners, vnlesse they be opēly detected of some notable and hainous crime. If they be dicers, swearers, drunkards, braw∣lers, pickers, flatterers, prophaners of the sa∣both, sleepers at Church, and such like, these are counted no sinnes, but rather recreatiōs, for they count them no sinners, vnlesse they be traitors, theeues, open and grosse idola∣ters, and such like capitall crimes, no nor these neither, were it not for feare of the law, for none but Publicanes were counted sin∣ners, all the rest were good fellowes & iust men. There is none that will be so impudēt as to say that he hath no sinne at all, or as the Pope, to say that he can not erre, for he that aduaunceth him selfe shall be as the least in the kingdome of heauen, or as we call it, a Luk. 14. 11. squire of low degree. The Papistes say, that thoughts, words, & such like are but venial sinnes, for there be veniall sinnes and mortal sinnes. Did you euer reade of these veniall sinnes in the Scripture? but you thinke they haue nothing but the Scripture: yes, they haue decrees, they haue decretals, they haue visiōs, & they haue a Pope that cannot erre: and thus they lessen the price of sinnes, and they can buy sinnes, sometimes for money, sometimes for Masses, and sometimes for o∣ther
rewards, & by holy water many sinnes are washed away, because they are veniall: but if the deuill turne good vnto euill, God turneth euill vnto good. The Gentiles had a custome, that in the time of common plague, they sacrificed one for the rest, this custome they tooke by imi∣tation of the Iewes in offering beasts, and of Abraham in offering his sonne. And thus the deuill tooke aduantage to do euil by the seruice of God, in mouing the Gentiles to worke abhomination, by offering men in imitation of the Iewes sacrifices. Then they sayd, come let vs cast lots. The mariners were not so wise to preuent the tempest before it came, as they were to lay the tempest when it might not be layed. Now whether it be lawfull to cast lots, it is not euident by this example, because they were Gentiles, and therfore no president for vs, but so farre may we vse them as the word doth leade vs. There are two goats brought Leuit. 16. to Aarō that he might cast lots, to see which goat should be killed, & which should not, these goats signifie Christ, for as he died, he liued againe, and as he was buried, he rose a∣gaine. Againe the land of Canaan is parted Num. 33. by lots, to see what part each tribe should inhabit. Againe, that theefe Achan is found Iosua 7.
out by lots, first by his tribe, then by his fa∣milie, and lastly by his particular person. Againe, it is sayd that Saule was chosen 1. Sam. 1. king by lots, and lest anie should haue said, that it was his good lucke, his good lot, or chaunce to be king, therefore the Lord ap∣pointed that he should be annointed before we was chosen by lots. Againe Mathias is chosen by lots to the Actes. 2. Apostleship in stead of Iudas, so that it is lawful in some cases to cast lots, and it is not vtterly vnlawfull, so that they do attribute nothing vnto them, for the lot is cast in the lap, but the disposition thereof is from the Pro. 16. 33. Lord: therefore they must not say that it is their chaunce, fortune, or good lucke, for so they make an Idole of it, and robbe God of the honour due vnto him. It was not Saules fortune to be king, but Gods mercy; it was not Ionahs chance to be cast out, but Gods iudgement; lots may be vsed to preuent strife, whē all other meanes haue bene vsed, as sometimes brethren do deuide their inheritance by lots, as the chil∣dren of Israell diuided the land of Chanaan. In the Church of Geneua there is an order that in the time of plague, there should be an house set a part for the sicke to lodge in and lest they should be vncomforted they chuse
out a Minister by lots to do it. Then they said come let vs cast lots. Now we are come to put vp our suits to the Court of Lawyers, to see if they will do any thing for God, for cōscience, or for loue, that they would end their suits quickly, and let the poore clients haue equitie. Some say that Lawyers be good vntill they be coun∣sellers, like Lyons which wilbe gentle vntill their tallants grow: be not offended but a∣mend for malice speakes not. I am perswaded that if the lots were cast to see who troubles the ship it would fall v∣pon the Lawyers, be not offended but amēd for malice speakes not. A poore client com∣meth foorth accusing one, and going home accuseth an hundred, for so many seekes to gaine by him, so few seekes to further him, and so many seekes to hinder him, that all his gaine is but labour and losse. For a small matter many will come to law, to striue for that which with reason might easily be at∣tained without such contention, and others seeke to enrich themselues with contending for a smal matter at the law with their neigh∣bours, yet in the end loose that they sought, and that they had beside: and so they con∣tend and striue about a thing commonly til the Lawyer hath gained more by them then
the thing which is in controuersie is worth. These are like the mouse and the frogge, which stroue so long about marsh grounde till the kite came & tooke it from thē both. Others will come vp to law about a small matter, & therein so intangle thēselues, that they cannot rid their hāds of it, vntil it haue almost vndone them, like a seely sheepe that is hunted of a flie which runneth frō bush to bush, & euery bush catcheth a locke of him, so that the poore sheepe is thredbare ere he hath done and hath not a fleece left him to couer himselfe withall. So he runs frō Court to Court to sue, to plead, till he haue spēt his cloake for his coate, were it not better to haue cast lots for the coate at first? for the law is like a butlers boxe, play still on till it come to the candlesticke. Therefore it is lawfull for to end a controuersie in a hard matter, to vse this meane whē other meanes haue in tried. Now whether it be lawfull to cast dice (if lots may not be vsed as I haue proued but in hard matters & weighty cau∣ses) when the thing is doubtful, and all good meanes are tried before to auoide strife: that question is decided which none but volup∣tuous Arguments against ∣cing. men make question off namely, whe∣ther dice-play be a meet exercise for a Chri∣stian soule. Salomon saith the lot causeth cō∣tētiō Pro. 18.
to cease, therfore lots are to end striffe: but these lots make striffe,  for before thou takest the, dice thou knowest thine own, and no man striueth to take it frō thee, but whē thou castest the dice, thou doest (as it were) aske whether thine owne be thine own, and so makest a strife of no strife.  Art thou not worthy to lose the gifts of God, which ven∣terest to lose them when thou needest not? doest thou not deserue to forfeit thine own, which art so greedy of anothers, that thou wouldest haue his liuing for nothing but for turning of a dye? Esau did not sell his birthright so lightly but he had somewhat for it which refreshed his hunger, but God hath giuen thee a liuing and thou spendest it vainly. But the mariners did cast lots to find out the sinner, they did not cast dice to see who should win, as dicers do, for to whom the lot falls, he takes all which deserues to loose all as well as the others, and hath no right vnto it by any law, for God hath not alowed one man to take an others goods for the tripping of a dye, but either they must be merited, or they must be giuen, or they must be bought, or else it is vnlawfully, vngodly, vncōscionablely to take them.  Be∣sides the brawles, cousinages, the othes an∣nexed to this game, which would not agree
with it vnles it had bene a meete cōpaniō for them, thou takest another mās goods for no∣thing, whereas God hath appointed thee to get thy liuing with the sweat of thy brows, Gene. 3. 19. for thou takest away that which others haue sweat for, & whereas thou shouldest liue by working,  thou seekest to liue by playing, like the ape which liues by oying. Doth a∣ny dicer thinke he doth well, tell me what thinkest thou?  for euery sinner doth cōdēne in his prayer to God that which he excu∣seth before men: if they which are gamsters repent it, how can they which are gamsters defend it?  Thou shouldest do nothing but that thou wouldest haue God find thee do∣ing if he should come to iudgemēt, wouldest thou haue him take thee at dice? I am sure thou wouldst not haue God see thee so vain∣ly occupied:  neither canst thou thinke that Christ or his Prophets or Apostles, or his E∣uāgelists were dicers for no such lots are na∣med in the holy Scriptures, & yet the Lords day is most prophaned with his exercise, & cardes and dice tables, as though they kept all their vanities to celebrate holy dayes.  What hast thou to alledge for dice, now ui∣dence is giuen vp against thē? hast thou any patron to speake for thē, but thy vaine plea∣sure & filthy couetousnes which are condē∣ed
already, and therefore haue no voyce by law? take away these & take away dice. The patron cōdemnes the clients whē one voyce cōdemnes another: if the exercise were law∣full, such patrons as pleasure, & couetousnes would not speake for it.  Take thy pleasure therfore in that which is good, & the angels wil reioyce with thee: if this were good, God would prosper thē better that vse it: but nei∣ther winners nor loosers are gainers. I know not how but there is not so much wonne as lost, as though the deuil did part stakes with them, & draw away with a blacke hand whē no mā seeth, for the winner saith he hath not wonne halfe so much as the looser hath lost.  One would thinke that some of thē should flow, when so many eb: there is neuer an eb without a flowing, neuer one looseth but another winneth but at dice.  What a cur∣sed thing is this that turnes no mā to good, which robbes others & beggers thē selues? the schoole of deceit, the shop of oths, & the field of vanities.  Thou dost not only hazard thy money (in this game) but vētrest thy sal∣uatiō, & castest dice with the deuil, who shal haue thy soule.  For euery thing that cōmeth to a mā he giueth thākes, but that which cō∣meth by dice, he is ashamed to giue thankes: which sheweth that in conscience that gaine
is euill gotten, and that he sought it without God.  Can this be good when wst men vse it most, if it were good the euill would like worse of it then the good, but the more a mā sauoreth of any goodnes, the more he begins to abhorre it, and his conscience doth accuse him for it as for sinne.  They which doubt whether God do allow it, neede but looke how he doth prosper them that vse it, but they trust not in God (as the termes of their occupatiō descries) for they cal all their casts chances, as though they relied not vpō God but vpon chaunce. Therefore if dice make strife without cause, if they take away others goods for nothing, if we may not liue by playing but by labour, if they which haue bene dicers repent it amongst their sinnes, if the holy men neuer vsed this recreation, but the worst most delight in it, if thou would not haue God see thee when thou playest at dice, nor take thee at it when he comes to iudgement, if nothing but pleasure & coue∣tousnes speake for them, if they do not pros∣per which take pleasure in it, if they trust not vpon God but relie vpon chance if thou doest not onely venture thy money but ha∣zard thy soule, then the best cast at dice is to cast them quite away. FINIS.
A PRAYER FOR THE MORNING. O Lord prepare our hearts to prayer. Lord God our heauenly father, we thy poore & wretched crea∣tures, giue thee most humble & heartie thanks for our quiet and safe sleepe, and for raising vs vp from the same. We beseech thee for Iesus Christ his sake, to prosper vs this day in our labor and trauel, that principally it may be to thy glo∣rie, next to the profit of our Maister and the Common-weale, and last of all to the dis∣charging of our dutie in this our vocation. Grant deare father, that we may cheerfully and conscionably do our businesse and la∣bours, not as men-pleasers; but as seruing thee our God, knowing thee to be the chiefe Maister of vs and our Maisters, & that thou seeing and beholding vs with thy fatherly eyes, promising reward to them that faith∣fully and truly walke in their vocation, and threatening euerlasting death and damnatiō to them that deceiptfully and wickedly do their works and labours. We besech thee ô heauenly father, to giue vs the strength of thy spirit, that godly and gladly we may o∣uercome our labours, and that the tedious∣nesse of this irksome labour which thou for
our sins hast powred vpon al mankind, may seeme to vs delectable and sweet. Graunt ô deare Father, that we may chearfully walke in our vocation, and faithfully serue thee in this our seruice, and gladly and ioyfully go foorth in our labors. Fulfill now ô Lord these our requests, for thy son our Sauiours sake, in whose name we pray as he him selfe hath taught vs. Our Father &c. Another Prayer. ETernall God, all mightie and most mer∣cifull, we thy vnworthie seruants pro∣strate before the throne of grace, do yeeld our selues bodie and soule vnto thee, for all thy benefits, which thou from our birth hast heaped vpon vs, as though we had alwayes done thy will, although we occupied about vaine things, neuer marked, neuer loued, neuer serued, neuer thanked thee so heartily for them, as we esteeme a mortall friend for the least curtesie. Therefore we come with shame and sorow to confesse our sinnes, not small but grieuous, not few but infinite, not past but present, not secret but presumptu∣ous against thy expresse word and will, a∣gainst our owne conscience, knowledge and liking if any had done them but our selues. O Lord if thou shouldst require but the least of thē at our hands, Sathan would chalenge
vs for his, and we should neuer see thy face againe, nor the heauens, nor the earth, nor all the goodnesse which thou hast prepared for man: what shall we do then but appeale vnto thy mercie, and humbly desire thy fa∣therly goodnesse to extend that compassion towards vs, which thy beloued sonne our louing Sauiour hath purchased so mightily, so mercifully, so graciously, & so dearely for vs. We beleeue and know, that one drop of his bloud is sufficient to heale our infirmi∣ties, pardon our iniquities, and supplie our necessities, & without thy grace our strēgth, our guide, our life, we are able to do nothing but sinne, as woful experience too long hath taught vs, and the example of those which are voyd thereof, whose life is nothing else but the seruice of the world, the flesh & the deuill: therefore good Father, as thou in es∣peciall fauor hast appointed vs to serue thee like as thou hast ordained all other creatures to serue vs: so may it please thee to send down thine heauenly spirit into this earthly mansion, to illuminate our minds, mollifie our hearts, cleanse our affections, subdue our reason, regenerate our willes, purifie our na∣tures with thy spirit: so shall not thy bene∣fits, nor thy chastisements nor thy word re∣turne void, but accōplish that, for the which
they were sent, vntill we be renued into the image of thy sonne. Good Lord we beseech thee to looke downe in the multitude of thy compassions vpon thy militant church, this sinfull Realme, thy gracious handmaid our dread Soueraigne, her honorable Counsel∣lers, the ciuill magistrats, the painfull mini∣sters, the two Vniuersities, the people that sit in darknesse, and all that beare thy crosse, gather vs into one communion of thy truth, & giue vnto euery one a spirit vnto his cal∣ling, that being mindfull of the account, and that we are called Christians, may firmely resolue, speedily begin, and continually per∣seuere in doing and searching thy most holy will. Good Lord blesse & sanctifie our mee∣ting, that no temptation hinder me in spea∣king, or them in hearing, but that thy word may be heard & spoken as the word of God, which is able to saue our soules in that day: howsoeuer it pleaseth thee by weake & foo∣lish things to magnifie thy selfe, there is no cause ô Lord most iust, why thou shouldest heare sinners, which art displeased with sin, but for his sake which hath suffered for sin and sinned not, in whose name we are bold to lift vp our hearts, hands, and voyces vn∣to thee, saying as he hath taught vs, O our Father &c. FINIS.
